Morals in Evolution, Part II
L. T. Hobhouse (1906)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): L. T. Hobhouse's 'Morals in Evolution: A Study in Comparative Ethics', Part II (New York: Henry Holt, 1906). Scan via Internet Archive (University of Toronto). Library matter trimmed from the front; ends with the edition's index and 'THE END'. This 1906 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

MOEALS  IN  EVOLUTION


A  STUDY  IN  COMPAEATIVE  ETHICS


BY

L.  T.  HOBHOUSE

LATE  FELLOW  AND  ASSISTANT  TUTOR  OF  CORPUS  CHRIST!  COLLEGE,  OXFORD,
FORMERLY  FELLOW  OF MERTOX  COLLEGE


PART  II


NEW  YORK

HENRY  HOLT AND COMPANY

1906


RICHARD  CLAY  &  SONS,  LIMITED

BREAD  STREET  HILL,  E.C.,  AND

BUNGAY,  6UFFOLK.


ANALYSIS OF  CONTENTS

PART  II
THE  BASIS

CHAPTER  I
THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT

^ro'unis^of  mor8  ^  ^  theVstOTV  of.'ideas  concerning  the
other  conceptions  interwoven  there wiS^^)80^!?1^^
charac  eristics  of  Animism.  (3)  The  forms  of  Magic  (4)
The  relation  between  magic  and  animism.  (5)  Both  ar  S

^OrT^111  ?°fUSionS.  incidental  to  primitive  thought
(6)  On  the  whole  animism  and  magic  appear  to  be  the
domma^  beliefs  among  the  lower  races.  ^Spirits  and


fa  the  U


CHAPTER  III

THE  WORLD  AND  THE  SPIRIT


IT


CHAPTER  II
ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT

InexteL^izT  ™Y  ^  magical.Pe*altie's>  (2)' which  are
(3)  Or  they  may  incur  the  resentment  of  spirits11  (41
Transition  from  the  resentful  spirit  to  the  spiritP  [nterested
111  czie  moral  order,  (5)  which  mav  be  idpntifip^  'tii
S'  *J£}  Retribution  in  a  future  life  often  held  by  savages
(7)  But  unTshmenSyS-tematiZed  in  *he  tigher  P01^618™-
)  for  instance,  bv  retmdiati™  nf  =^0  /a^  Emrag^cfS


v  ANALYSIS  OF  CONTENTS

CHAPTER  IV

PAGE

MONOTHEISM 119

(1)  Judaic  monolatry. (2)  The  growth  of  ethical  monotheism.

(3)  The  central  position  of  Monotheism  and  its  difficulties.

(4)  The  problem  of  evil,  (5)  points  to  a  solution  in  which  the
conceptions  of  "  education ' and  evolution  are  fused. (6)
Wrong-doing  as  sin. (7)  Faith  and  penance. (8)  Tendency
to relegate morality  to  a  secondary position. (9)  Uni-
versalism,  love,  and self- suppression. (10)  Opposition  of
flesh  and  spirit. (11)  The  compromise  with  the  world. (12)
The  place  of  Christian  teaching  in  ethics.

CHAPTER  V

ETHICAL  IDEALISM 160

(1)  Ethical  theories  arise  independently  of  religion  from  reflection
on  the  experience  of  human  life.  (2)  The  Ethics  of  Con
fucius  : — the  primacy  of  character.  (3)  The  social  meaning
of  virtue.  (4)  The  doctrine  of  Mencius.  (5)  The  natural"
ness  of  virtue.  (6)  The  whole  duty  of  government.

CHAPTER  VI

PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS 179

(1)  The  philosophic  movement  begins  when  thought  examines  its
own  presuppositions.  This  movement  initiated  by  the
Greeks  both  in  metaphysics  and  ethics.  (2)  The  traditional
morality  of  the  Greeks,  (3)  broken  down  by  the  sceptical
movement  of  the  fifth  century.  (4)  The  reconstruction
began  with  the  Socratic  doctrine  of  the  true  "good"  for
each  man,  (5)  developed  by  Plato's  analysis  of  the  nature
of  the  soul,  (6)  and  the  Aristotelian  definition  of  well-being.

(7)  Wrong-doing  on  this  view  becomes  a  blunder,  which,
however,  may  have  a  moral  as  well  as  an  intellectual  root.

(8)  The standard of conduct — self-development, civic
patriotism  and  the  philosophic  ideal. (9)  Later  thought
emphasizes  the  self-rule  of  the  individual  and  the  unity  of
nature. (10)  The  Law  of  Nature  propounds  an  objective
standard  of  conduct,  but  without  yielding  any  satisfactory
method  of  determining  what  it  should  be.

CHAPTER  VII

MODERN  ETHICS 207

(1)  The  antithesis  of  duty  and  interest  cuts  deeper  in  modern  than
in  ancient  thought.  (2)  Efforts  along  various  lines  towards
a  reconciliation.  (3)  The  problem  is  to  establish  that
morality  is  rational,  and  this  on  analysis  means  that  it  is  a
coherent  whole  of  thought  and  feeling,  (4)  determining  the
relation  of  each  individual  to  the  society  of  which  he  is  a
member.  (5)  The  basis  for  such  a  system  was  sought  in
the  ideas  of  Nature,  and  Natural  Rights,  the  value  of  which
was  that  they  expressed  the  claims  of  personality.  (6)  The


ANALYSIS  OF  CONTENTS  vii


Utilitarian  criticism  of  natural  rights,  (7)  points  by  its  limi
tations  to  the  conception  of  Mind  in  Humanity  developing
towards  a  conscious  realization  of  its  own  powers  of  growth
as  the  central  principle  of  Ethics.  (8)  The  rule  of  life  is
action  along  the  developmental  lines  which  constitutes
permanent  happiness.  (9)  But  the  harmony  of  individual
happiness  and  racial  development  is  imperfect  and  only
approached  by  degrees  as  society  improves.  (10)  Its  attain
ment  implies  the  victory  of  the  "  practical  reason  "  in  man,

(11)  and  in  the  principles  of  conduct  recognized  by  society.

(12)  The  solution  is  given  in  germ  in  Greek  philosophy,
but  for  the  modern  world  involves  a  more  thoroughgoing
analysis  in  which  the  relativity  of  institutions  is  the  central
point. (13)  The  influence  of  humanitarian  ideas  not  to  be
measured  by  the  number  of  those  who  accept  them  as  a
whole.

CHAPTER  VIII

THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 258

(1)  The  intelligent  direction  of  behaviour  begins  in  the  animal
world,  (2)  and  is  extended  in  humanity  by  the  rise  of
general  conceptions,  though  at  first  its  principles  are  still
determined  unreflectingly  by  the  play  of  social  forces.  (3)
The  advance  of  thought  by  successive  stages  to  self-
knowledge,  (4)  paralleled  by  the  advance  of  the  ethical  con
sciousness  to  the  full  understanding  of  its  own  origin  and
function,  (5)  viz.  that  it  has  arisen  out  of  the  conditions
under  which  mind  evolves,  and  that  its  purpose  is  to
further  and  perfect  that  evolution.  (6)  The  movement  of
conceptions  is  roughly  reflected  in  the  actual  development  o*f
Society.  (7)  But  progress  depends  for  its  permanence  not
on  an  automatic  tendency  of  things,  but  on  the  increasing
domination  by  the  Mind  of  the  conditions  of  its  existence.

INDEX .  285


MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION


PART  II
THE BASIS


CHAPTER  I


1.  THE  history  of  law  and  custom  gives  us  one  aspect  of
ethical  evolution.  It  sets  forth  the  standard  of  conduct,  or
rather  the  standards  recognized  by  different  societies  at  different
times.  But  behind  the  question  of  the  moral  standard  is  that  of
the  moral  basis,  the  grounds  on  which  morality  rests,  the  spirit
in  which  it  is  conceived.  For  besides  the  question  what  kind  of
action  is  expected  from  us  by  our  neighbours,  our  rulers,  our
spiritual  pastors  and  masters,  moral  philosophy  has  to  recognize
the  further  question  how  it  is  that  these  expectations  arise.  On
what  grounds  do  rules  of  action  rest,  what  authority  promulgates
them  and  by  what  sanction  are  they  enforced  ?  If  i*  happens  to
be  the  interest  of  any  individual  to  disobey  them,  what  reason,
other  than  physical  compulsion,  can  be  assigned  for  adhering  to
them  ?  What  is  the  penalty  of  disobedience  ?  What,  if  wrong
is  done,  are  the  means  of  reconciliation  ?  In  other  words,
behind  the  question  of  the  moral  standard  there  is  the  philo
sophical  question  of  the  nature  of  moral  obligation,  of  moral
authority,  of  the  moral  sanction,  or,  to  use  one  expression  for
them  all,  there  is  the  question  of  the  basis  of  the  moral  order.

To  understand  how  men  have  conceived  this  question,  and
what  sort  of  answers  they  attempted  to  propound  for  it,  is  the

VOL.  II.  B


2  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

task  that  remains  for  us.  But  to  understand  ethical  evolution
on  this  side  we  have  first  to  turn  to  departments  of  thought  that
are  not  in  their  origin  ethical.  For  men's  views  of  what  is
right  are  necessarily  steeped  in  influences  derived  from  their
whole  outlook  upon  the  world,  the  range  of  their  mental
capacity,  their  conception  of  the  creating,  sustaining,  and  govern
ing  causes  of  things,  their  theories  of  human  life  and  society.
We  cannot  therefore  thoroughly  understand  the  history  of  ethics
without  knowing  something  of  the  general  development  of
thought.  At  the  same  time  we  cannot  here  deal  with  this
devefopment  in  all  its  fulness.  We  must  refer  to  it  only  so  far
as  it  throws  light  upon  our  special  question.  We  shall  have,
that  is,  to  take  account  of  what  men  think  and  of  how  they
think  upon  certain  fundamental  questions  that  affect  practice.

It  follows  that  we  shall  have  to  examine  however  concisely
some  leading  features  of  religious  development.  Indeed,  accord
ing  to  one  usage  of  terms  we  should  have  to  concern  ourselves
with  nothing  else.  For  a  man's  religion  is  sometimes  held  to
include  the  sum  and  substance  of  his  vital  thought,  the  final
meaning  for  him  of  his  total  outlook  upon  the  world,  and  if  so  it
clearly  includes  ethics  as  a  part.  In  a  historical  study,  however,
it  is  more  convenient  to  consider  religious  belief  as  consisting  in
the  conception  of  spiritual  forces  which  control  or  affect  affairs.
In  that  sense  religion  and  ethics,  though  intimately  related,  are
not  identical,  nor  is  the  religious  view  of  the  governance  of  the
world,  though  vastly  important,  the  only  view  with  which  we
shall  have  to  deal.  We  shall  distinguish,  though  we  shall  not
therefore  separate,  the  religious,  the  ethical,  the  scientific  and
other  lines  of  development,  and  follow  each  in  turn  so  far  as  is
necessary  for  our  purpose.

2.  Beginning  our  survey  with  the  lower  grades  of  thought,  we
shall  first  attempt  to  characterize  primitive  conceptions,  religious
or  other,  of  the  forces  with  which  man  has  to  deal.  This  will  be
the  subject  of  the  present  chapter.  The  next  chapter  will  deal
with  the  bearing  of  these  ideas  upon  Ethics.1  To  form  a  just

i  The  relation  of  religion  so  conceived  to  ethics  is  perhaps  the  central
question  both  of  religious  and  of  ethical  development,  and  few  relations
in  sociology  are  harder  to  define  in  general  terms.  We  cannot  say  tha
religion  ifl  the  parent  of  morality,  nor  that  morality  begets  rel]


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT 3

conception  of  the  lowest  order  of  religious  conceptions  is,  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  a  matter  of  great  difficulty.  The  beliefs
held  by  primitive  men  are  by  no  means  uniform,  nor  have  they
always  been  clearly  understood  by  those  who  report  them.  With
out  dogmatizing  as  to  questions  of  origin  we  may  begin  our
account  with  the  undoubtedly  rude  and  early  conception  to  which
the  name  of  Animism  has  been  given  by  anthropologists.
Animism  is  in  the  broadest  sense  the  theory  of  spirits,  and  the
name  and  the  definition  are  so  far  open  to  criticism  that  the
theory  of  a  single  Creator  might  be  said  to  be  covered  by  the
general  term.  But  when  we  look  a  little  further  into  the  matter
we  find  that  the  kind  of  spirits  intended  where  the  term
Animism  is  used  have  certain  distinguishing  characteristics.
To  begin  with,  Animism  sees  spirits  everywhere,  not  one  spirit
that  underlies  all  things,  but  separate  spirits  underlying  all
manner  of  things  as  the  efficient  causes  of  their  qualities  and
actions.  This  feature  of  Animism  maybe  said  to  be  a  pre
dominant  form  of  belief  throughout  the  savage  world.1  A  stone,

Nor  are  they  _  intrinsically  independent  factors  which  occasionally
interact,  for  at  times  they  fuse  with  one  another  and  move  forward  in  a
single  stream.  At  other  times  they  part,  yet  they  retain  their  influence
upon  one  another  and  seem  destined  to  reunion  at  a  later  stage.

1  While  the  belief  in  the  soul  of  man  is  probably  universal,  and  the
human  soul  is,  as  Professor  Tylor  says,  the  model  on  which  the  souls  of
animals  and  inanimate  things  are  formed,  the  question  how  far  the
conception  is  extended  by  primitive  races  is  one  to  which  it  would  be
hazardous  to  give  any  general  answer.  If  the  tendency  to  attribute  all
actions  to  a  spirit  were  erected  into  an  avowed  principle,  and  consistently
applied,  everything  capable  of  being  conceived  as  a  distinct  object  would
become  also  the  seat  of  a  spirit.  That  this  would  involve  much  duplica
tion,  _  and,  so  to  say,  overlapping  would  present  no  difficulty  to  the
animistic  mode  of  thought,  which  does  in  fact  frequently  conceive  a
greater  object  as  animated  by  one  spirit,  while  the  lesser  objects  which
form  its  parts  have  each  a  spirit  of  its  own.  Thus  among  the  Chinese
one  of  man's  chief  gods  is  the  Shen  pervading  the  Earth  as  a  single
entity  :  and  those  which  dwell  in  its  several  parts,  its  mountains,  hills
rivers,  meres,  rocks  and  stones,  are  likewise  his  divinities."  (De  Groot,
f.  ,1V<»  P-  325>)  The  conception,  if  we  try  to  think  it  out,  raises  questions
ot  identity  and  of  individuality  which  might  puzzle  us,  but  probably  do
not  puzzle  primitive  man.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  tendency  to  people  things
with  spirits  with  indiscriminate  profusion  is  widespread  if  not  universal  in
the  primitive  world.  For  numerous  instances  see  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,
vol.  111.,  p.  43  seq.  E.  g.  "  The  Mantras,  an  aboriginal  race  of  the  Malay
Peninsula,  '  find  or  put  a  spirit  everywhere,  in  the  air  they  breathe,  in
the  land  they  cultivate,  in  the  forests  they  inhabit,  in  the  trees  they  cut
down,  in  the  caves  of  the  rocks.  According  to  them  the  demon  is  the
cause  of  everything  that  turns  out  ill.  If  they  are  sick,  a  demon  is  at


4  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

a  tree,  a  blade  of  grass,  the  wind,  an  animal,  a  human  being,  a
mountain,  a  river,  the  sea,  the  sky,  the  sun,  the  rain,  an
epidemic  disease — any  or  all  of  these  may  be  conceived  by  the
savage  mind  as  the  dwelling-place  or  the  manifestation,  as  the
case  may  be,  of  a  spiritual  agency  which  controls  their  behaviour ;
and  this  spiritual  agency  may  be  the  object  of  fear  or  worship,  of
prayer  and  supplication,  possibly  of  cajolement  or  abuse,  finally
of  actual  physical  violence.  Naturally  not  all  spirits  move  men
alike.  Harmless  inanimate  things  are  seldom  at  this  stage  the
objects  of  much  solicitude,  unless  by  some  accident  of  belief  they
are  associated  with  a  powerful  spirit  for  some  special  reason.
Thus,  among  the  Tshi  of  the  West  African  coast  everything  is
supposed  to  be  animated  by  indwelling  spirits,  but  little  atten
tion  is  paid  to  the  spirits  of  bushes,  grasses,  stones.  More
dangerous  ones,  as  the  spirits  of  the  rivers  and  lagoons,  the  sea,
the  mountains,  are  the  objects  to  which  the  Tshi  cult  devotes
attention.1  Nevertheless,  spirits  may  inhabit  the  most  un
promising  exterior ;  thus  an  essential  part  of  Australian  belief  is
the  indwelling  of  spirits  in  certain  objects,  generally  oblong
pebbles  2  called  "  churinga."  But  these  fall  within  the  explan-

the  bottom  of  it ;  if  an  accident  happens,  it  is  still  the  spirit  who  is  at
work  ;  thereupon  the  demon  takes  the  name  of  the  particular  evil  of
which  he  is  supposed  to  be  the  cause.'  "  (Frazer,  iii.  48.)

1  Ellis,  Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  p.  276.

2  Stone-worship  must  be  ranked  among  the  most  paradoxical  develop
ments  of  animism — a  stone being to  our  minds the  very type of  the
inanimate. Jevons (History of Religion, pp. 131-144) inclines to
think  that  it  is  in  most  cases  derivative,  the  stone  having  been  originally
an  altar,  but  admits  (p.  137)  that  the  worship  of  remarkably  shaped  rocks
would  belong  to  primitive  animism. Sir  A.  Lyall  (Asiatic  Studies,  First
Series,  p.  12)  ascribes  the  primitive  worship  of  stones  in  India  to  "that
simple  awe  of  the  unusual  which  belongs  to  no  particular  religion." We
have  here  something  simpler  and  more  primitive  than  animism  itself,  to
which  further  reference  will  be  made  later. The  next  stage  is  that  the
stone  is  the  dwelling-place  of  a  spirit. At  a  higher  stage  it  is  connected  by
a  myth  with  some  "saint,  demi-god,  or  full-blown  deity." Finally  it  may
remain  in  a  spiritual  religion  as  a  mere  symbol. Sir  A.  Lyall  "  knew  a
Hindu  officer  of  great  shrewdness  and  very  fair  education,  who  devoted
several  hours  daily  to  the  elaborate  worship  of  five  round  pebbles,  which
he  had  appointed  to  be  his  symbol  of  omnipotence. Although  his  general
belief  was  in  one  all-pervading  Divinity,  he  must  have  something  symbolic
to  handle  and  address."  (Asiatic  Studies,  First  Series,  p.  13.)  For  a  discussion
of  the  fetichistic  and  symbolic  views  of  stone-worship, see  also  Tylor,
Primitive  Culture  (ed.  1903),  vol.  ii.,  p.  160. Whatever  its  character  stone-
worship  as  an  element  in  early  religion  is  widespread. De  la  Saussaye
(Manual  of  the  Science  of  Relujion,  Eng.  Trsl.  i.,  p.  85  ff.)  finds  it  among


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT 5

ation  hinted  above,  for  they  were  stones  carried  about  by  the
men  of  the  Alclicringa,  the  ancestors  of  the  "great  long-ago,"
who  deposited  their  souls  in  them  and  left  them  by  some  tree  or
cave,  from  whence  at  times  they  pass  into  the  children  of  the
present  generation.  For  the  spirit — and  that  takes  us  to  the
second  point  in  the  theory  of  Animism — as  in  some  sort  it  dwells
in  the  material  thing,  so  it  is  also  almost  invariably  separable
from  it.  The  spirit  of  man  goes  out  in  dreams,  and  appears  to
other  people.  Sometimes  it  leaves  him  temporarily  when  he
sneezes,  and  hence  it  is  well  to  pray  for  a  blessing  on  him  in  such
a  moment,  as  we  do  unto  this  day.  It  quits  him  in  trances  ;  it
leaves  him  finally  at  death.  Since  the  spirit  is  a  mere  attenuated
double  of  the  man  himself,  it  appears  also  in  his  shadow,1  and
can  be  seen  mocking  him  when  he  stands  by  the  side  of  a  pool.

These  different  appearances  of  the  double,  or  spirit,  have
not  escaped  savage  man,  and  have  led  him  in  many  cases  to
an  almost  bewildering  multiplication  of  souls.2  With  that
multiplication  we  need  not  now  concern  ourselves,  we  attend
only  to  the  fact  of  the  soul's  transmigrations.  This  impalpable
entity  is  itself,  it  may  be,  transferred  from  one  dwelling-place
to  auother,  leaving  the  outer  seeming  unaltered.  The  souls  of
the  dead  may  pass  into  tigers  as  among  the  Malays,  and
often  also  in  India,  and  in  that  form  they  may  take  vengeance
on  those  who  harm  them  in  this  life.  And  sometimes,  the
tiger  is  not  killed  if  possible,  for  fear  of  injuring  a  dead  relative,3
but  is  greatly  feared  for  his  supernatural  even  more  than  his
physical  prowess.  The  soul  may  wander  away  voluntarily  in

the  South  Sea  Islanders,  in  Central  Asia,  among  the  Finns,  Laps,  Negroes,
ancient  Peruvians,  Hindoos,  ancient  Hebrews,  ancient  Arabs,  Greeks,
Komans,  in  the  Hebrides  and  in  mediaeval  Europe,  and  while  recognizing
the  blend,  hard  to  distinguish,  of  the  altar,  the  fetich  and  the  symbol,  is
inclined  to  conclude  that  the  safest  explanation  of  the  cult  is  the  Tacitean
"  ratio  in  obscuro."

1  For  instances  of  the  shadow  or  reflection  as  the  soul,  see  Tylor,  i.,  p.
430  ;  Golden  Bough,  vol.  i.,  p.  285. With  this  idea  we  may  connect  the  use
of  a  picture  as  a  supplementary  home  or  body  for  the  soul  of  the  deceased,
which  so  often  plays  a  prominent  part  in  the  cult  of  the  dead,  e.  g.  in
ancient  Egypt  and  in  China. (De  Groot,  i.,  p.  113.) The  distinction  between
regarding  the  picture  (1)  as  a  receptacle  for  the  dead  man's  soul,  and  (2)  aa
the  dead  man  himself  in  a  new  form,  is  one  which  on  animistic  principles
cannot  be  drawn  with  any  clearness  or  consistency.

2  For  illustrations,  see  Tylor,  Primitive  Ckdtwe,  i.  434.

3  Waitz,  v.  i.  166.


G  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

a  dream,  and  then  sometimes  may  lose  its  way,  or  be  prevented
from  returning.  It  may  be  extracted  by  sorcery  or  carried  off
by  ghosts,  whence  come  illnesses,  madness,  and  death.  It  may
be  trapped  while  on  its  journeys,  but  it  may  also  be  recovered  for
a  consideration  by  one  who  knows  the  proper  charms  to  catch
a  soul.  It  may  even  be  swallowed  inadvertently  by  a  doctor.
If  irretrievably  lost  it  may  be  replaced — so  loosely  is  it  con
nected  with  the  real  personality  of  the  man — by  another  soul
purchasable  at  a  price.1  Finally  at  death  it  still  hovers  in  the
neighbourhood,  and  may  perchance  be  recalled  if  the  mourners
raise  their  voices  and  entice  it  with  good  things.2

We  are  thus  brought  to  a  third  point  in  the  animistic  theory,
the  material  view  of  the  spirit.  Though  the  soul  of  things
is  as  impalpable  and  subtle  as  we  have  seen,  so  subtle  and
impalpable  that  it  can  transfer  itself  without  difficulty,  or
without  betraying  the  change  through  any  physical  or  outward
modifications,  it  is  nevertheless  capable  of  being  dealt  with  as
we  deal  with  visible  and  tangible  objects.  It  may  be  tied
with  cords,  or  driven  away  with  weapons,  or,  since  after  all
it  has  a  modicum  of  intelligence,  frightened  away  with  shouts
and  threats.  When  an  Australian  war  party  loses  a  man  the
spirit  of  the  dead  follows  them  back  in  the  form  of  a  bird,
and  is  frightened  off  when  they  get  home.  A  part  of  the
ceremony  of  mourning  is  to  beat  the  air — not  as  a  symbol  of
the  futility  of  human  grief — but  for  the  purposeful  object  of
driving  the  ghost  away,  and  the  funeral  is  not  complete  till
the  spirit  is  frightened  out  of  the  camp  and  into  the  grave
where  it  should  lie.3  Half  the  world  away  we  find  the
Guaycurus  of  Paraguay  sallying  forth  with  clubs  to  repel  the
storm  spirit,4  and  we  know  from  Herodotus  that  the  Caunians,
being  disgusted  with  their  gods,  took  bows  and  spears  and

1  For  a  summary  of  the  evidence,  see  Golden  Bough,  vol.  i.,  pp.  251-285.

2  That  this  is  the  meaning  of  ceremonial  wailing  for  the  dead  in  China
is  shown  by  De  Groot  (vol.  i.,  pp.  244,  etc.). De  Groot  compares  the  Roman
conclamatio, and corresponding customs in Picardy, California, the
Caribbean  Islands  etc. Religion  has  here,  as  so  often,  merely  stereotyped
and  given  inner  meaning  to  a  natural  impulse.

3  Spencer  and  Gillen,  i.  493-506.

4  Payne,  i.,  p.  390. Among  the  Haytians  the  gods  would  shamelessly
quit  the  tribe  in  case  of  misfortune,  and  were  therefore  secured  by  cotton
ropes. (Ib.,  p.  319.)


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT 7

drove  them  bodily  out  of  the  land  with  execrations  and  insults.
As  late  as  the  conquest  by  the  Spaniards,  bad  spirits  were
driven  annually  out  of  Cuzco,  in  Peru,  by  armed  warriors.1
Demons  may  be  caught  and  imprisoned,  as  among  the  hill
tribes  of  Bengal,2  or  they  may  be  expelled  by  charms,  as  when
the  llama's  blood  is  sprinkled  to  this  day  in  Peru  on  a  doorway
to  keep  them  out  of  the  hut.  The  soul  may  be  put  away  for
safety  into  a  tree,3  as  in  the  famous  case  of  the  Golden  Bough,
or  as  it  leaves  the  dead  man,  it  may  be  induced  to  come  back
and  re-incarnate  itself  in  some  child  of  the  family.  When  the
West  African  negro  wakes  with  a  headache  or  sickness  he
sends,  Miss  Kingsley  tells  us,  for  a  doctor,  who,  promptly
diagnosing  his  case  as  a  loss  of  soul,  proceeds  to  institute  a
search.  In  process  of  time  the  soul  is  duly  caught,  by  methods
best  known  to  the  doctor,  brought  in  a  box  to  the  sick  man's
bed,  and  duly  blown  into  him,  to  his  mental  comfort,  and
thereby,  through  the  power  of  faith-healing,  possibly  to  his
physical  restoration.4

But  the  commonest  evidence  of  the  material  character  of  the
spirit  is  its  power  of  eating  and  drinking  like  an  ordinary  man.
The  gods  of  the  Babylonians  came  about  the  sacrifice  like  flies ;
the  ghosts  in  Hades  lapped  the  blood  which  Odysseus  brought
for  them.  The  spirit  of  the  place  partakes  of  the  drops  of
wine  which  are  poured  out  from  a  cup.  The  dead  man  is  a
participant  in  the  funeral  feast.  The  only  doubt  here  is
whether  the  ghost  eats  the  food  or  the  ghost  of  the  food;5
Since  the  food  does  not  actually  disappear  the  savage  mind  is
put  to  some  trouble  on  the  point,  and  sometimes  the  difficulty
seems  to  have  been  the  cause  of  scepticism.  The  question

1  Payne,  i.,  p.  391.  2  Reclus,  Primitive  FoZfc,  301-303.

3  De  Groot  (iv.,  p.  106)  has  a  good  story  of  a  Chinese  criminal  who  cotU
not  be  put  to  death,  because  he  had  put  his  soul  into  a  bottle. Three  days
after  being  decapitated  his  trunk  and  head  had  re-united  themselves. ±5ut
his  mother,  whom  he  had  beaten,  betrayed  his  secret,  and  on  her  advice  the
vase  was  broken,  and  after  this  the  criminal  was  successfully  flogged  to


death.

4  Miss  Kingsley,  West  African  Studies,  p.  200.


• IVilSS  iVliiLiftit;^, rr  t»n  -ci/ 1  n/i*«  <«»  r .  • it  *

5  Strictly  speaking  there  is  a  third  alternative— the  corpse  itselt  may  eat
the  food  This  appears  to  have  been  the  primitive  Chinese  conception
which  by  the  time  of  Confucius  had  yielded  to  the  somewhat  more  refim
view  that  the  food  placed  on  the  grave  was  destined  for  the-; soul.  Hence
arose  the  custom  of  placing  the  offerings  upon  the  tomb  instead  of  within  it.
(De  Groot,  vol.  ii.,  p.  384.)


MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

was  put  by  a  young  Zulu  in  this  way :  "When  we  ask,  '  What

do  the  other  Amadhlozi  do,  for  in  the  morning  we  see  all  the

meat?'  the  old  men  say, 'The  Amatongo  lick  it/ and  we  are

unable  to  contradict  them  and  are  silent,  for  they  are  older

than  we  are  and  tell  us  all  things;  we  listen,  for  we  are  told

all  things,  and  assent  without  seeing  clearly  whether  they  are

true  or  not." » Such  difficulties  could  be  resolved  by  the  theory

that  it  was  the  soul  of  the  sacrifice  that  went  to  the  gods,  as

the  Fijians  hold,  and  so  at  a  cannibal  feast  among  them  there

is  a  double  advantage,  for  while  the  men  eat  the  body  the  gods

eat  the  soul,  and  both  are  benefited  alike. The  dead  wife  of

Periander  told her  husband that she  was  cold because her

clothes  had  not  been  burnt,  and  she  was  only  warm  when  he

had made  a holocaust  of  the wardrobes of  the Corinthian

women. The  dead  man's  horse  is  slain  at  his  grave  that  the

ghost  of  the  one  may  ride  the  ghost  of  the  other. The  wife  is

sacrificed  to  a  similar  order  of  ideas,  and  sometimes,  the  principle

being  logically  carried through,  the  weapons  and  implements

of  the  deceased  are  broken  before  they  are  laid  beside  him.

The spirit being thus materialized appears to enjoy an
independent  existence  of  its  own. Here  we  touch  the  central
contradiction  of  Animism. What  at first  appears  as  merely
the  animating  principle  of  a  material  body  turns  out  to  be
itself  quasi-substantial  and  capable  of  existence  apart  from  that
body. We  must  not  press  Animism  for  a  logical  solution  of
the  question  how  this  can  be,  for  Animism  remains  Animism
precisely  because  the  difficulty  has  not  been  faced. The  "  soul "
of  Animism  is  clearly  a  conception  formed  to  unify  and  in  a
manner  explain  the  visible  functions  and  processes  of  the  body.
It  underlies  the  sensible  and  material,  and  sets  out  to  explain
them. But  it  turns  out  to  be  itself  just  such  another  visible
and  material thing— only  thinner  and  less  palpable— a  mere
"double"  of  the  appearances  which  it should  explain. For
the  primitive  mind  cannot  grasp  an  object  of  thought  with
out transforming it into an object of  sense. It needs a
principle,  connecting  things  that  it  can  see  or  hear,  and  by  a
confusion  of  categories  it  makes  of  it  merely  another  thing  that
it  can  see  and  hear.

1  Tylor,  ii.  387.


The  spirit  being  the  double  of  the  object,  Animism  wavers
between  the  conception  of  the  spirit  as  belonging  to  the  object,
and  that  of  the  object  as  possessed  and  inhabited  by  the  spirit,1
and  in  as  far  as  the  spirit  has  a  measure  of  independence  so
that  it  can  leave  its  ordinary  house  and  betake  itself  for  a  while
at  least  to  another,  the  transition  from  the  one  view  to  the  other
is  easy  enough.2 We  may  indeed  regard  the  independent  spirit
as  arising  by  gradations. In  its  first  stages  it  is  so  closely
united  to  the  object  which  it  occupies  that  it  is  a  question
whether  any  distinction  of  material  and  spiritual  has  arisen,
and  we  ought  perhaps  to  suppose  a  pre-animistic  religion  in
which  worship  is  addressed  to  the  material  object  itself  without
any  question  of  a  spirit  which  inhabits  it,  in  which  sun  and
moon,  earth  and sky,  fire  and  water,  or  stock  and  stone,  are
worshipped  as  such,  without  any  conception  of  spirits  that  dwell
in  them  being  formed.3 But  though  we  can  readily  conceive
a  cult  arising  without  any  explicit  conception  of  a  spirit  to
which  it  is  addressed,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  very
fact  that  prayers  or  incantations  are  addressed  to  a  being,  is
proof  that he is regarded as understanding them: that if
sacrifices  are  offered  him  he  is  held  capable  of  receiving  them
and  enjoying  them — in  a  word,  that  he  is to  that  extent  a
living  being  and  manlike. The essence  of  Animism  is the
"  confusion  of  categories,"  wherein  not  only  the  grades  of  mind
but  the  whole  distinction  of  mind  and  matter  disappear,  and
to  prove  that  original  Mazdaism  sacrificed  butter  to  Fire  without
conceiving it as anything but the material fire that its
worshippers  saw,  would  only  be  to  show  that  the  cult  carried
this  confusion  to  its  furthest  possible  point. This  "implicit"
animism  would  then  be  merely  the  lowest  stage  of  the  develop
ment,  and  would  grow  into  animism proper as soon as its
implications  became  realized,  so  that  in  sacrificing  to  Fire  men
began  avowedly  to  treat  Fire  as  a  living  thing.

1  This  tendency  is  pushed  to  the  extreme  point,  when  the  soul,  whose
original  function  is  to  vitalize  the  body  and  explain  its  actions,  becomes  so
"  self-subsistent "  that  it  actually  frames  for  itself  another  body,  the
duplicate  of  the  first,  in  form  and  substance.  It  may  even  appear  to  the
original  owner,  much  to  his  alarm,  and  probably  by  no  means  to  his  future
weal.  (De  Groot,  iv.  97  seq.)  2  Cf.  Tylor,  ii.  153.

3  De  la  Saussaye,  Manual  of  the  Science  of  Religion,  i.,  p.  104,  seems  to
lean  to  this  view.


10  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Granted  that  the  object  is  animated  by  a  spirit,  we  return  to
the  question  :  What  is  the  precise  relation  between  them  ? Is
the  spirit  bound  to  the  object  and  dependent  on  it,  or  does  the
object  rather  belong  to  the  spirit,  which  enters  it  from  without
and  merely  uses  it  for  a  convenient  dwelling? It  would  be
hopeless  to  expect  a  consistent  answer  to  these  questions  from
animism. Its conceptions fluctuate  between  the  two  ideas.1
But  this  very  elasticity  helps  animism  to  deal  with  many  of
the  facts. Disease,  for  example,  may  be  possession  by  a  tem
porary  demon.2 The  inspired  soothsayer,  the  raving  madman,
are  momentarily  possessed  by  God  or  demon. The  quick-witted
plan,  the  impulsive  crime,  are  stimulated  by  Pallas  Athene,  or
by  the  Erinnys,3  which  is  impelling  a  man  to  his  own  destruc
tion. Animism,  in  short,  has  a  ready  explanation  for  all  the
cases  in  which  we  seem  to  suffer  or  to  act  not  wholly  by  and
with  our  own  will. But  what  of  our  own  spirits? Are  they
dependent  upon  the  body  or  not? Clearly  not  altogether  so,
or  they  would  not  wander  away  in  dreams,  nor  would  the  soul
escape  at  death  with  the  last  breath,  nor  live  on  while  the  body
manifestly decays. Yet  animism  is  far  from  being  satisfied
that  the  soul  can  do  without  some  bodily  support. Sometimes
the  corpse  itself  is  necessary  to  the  soul's  life,  and  is  accordingly
preserved  with  jealous  care. The  corpse  remains  quasi-animated.
It  can  eat  and  drink. Its  mutilation  injures  the  spirit. If
unburied  it  suffers  from  exposure  and  its  spirit  will  cause  a
drought  to  protect  it  from  the  rain.4 It  is  as  far  as  possible
protected  and  preserved  that  the  spirit  may  at  the  proper  time
rejoin  it. But  since  in  reality  the  corpse  decays,  what  is  the
soul  to  do  ? Apparently  it  needs  a  body  of  one  kind  or  another.
The  Australian  ancestor  of  the  Alcheringa  deposited  his  soul  in
a  pebble  or  oblong  piece  of  wood. The  Egyptian  made  like-

1  See  Tylor,  loc.  cit.

2  With  equal  facility  in  connection  with  the  opposite  pole  of  animism,
disease  becomes  a  quasi-material  object,  magic  stones  or  pointing  sticks,
driven  into  a  man  by  spirits,  which  can  be  extracted  by  a  doctor,  and
perhaps  transferred  to  another  person,  or  walled  up  in  a  tree. (Golden
Bough,  iii.  29,  etc  ; Tylor,  ii.  148.)

3  The  &TT>I  which  is  responsible  for  an  act  of  folly  or  crime,  is  implanted
in  the  soul  by  the  Fury  which  will  avenge  it. (See  e.g.  Od.,  xv.  233.) Cf.
Leist,  pp.  320,  321 ;  Tylor,  ii.  126-131.

4  De  Groot,  i.  57,  342  ;  iii.  918,  etc.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT 11

nesses  of  the  deceased,  statues  and  bas-reliefs,  which  the  soul
could  inhabit. The  Chinese  make  a  tablet  specially  fitted  for
the  dead  man's  habitation  by  the  accurate  inscription  of  his
name  and  all  his  titles. Among  other  peoples  quite  a  different
view  is  taken  of  the  soul's  needs. Dimly  conceived  as  a  thin
aerial  substance,  it  is  thought  to  require  that  the  body,  together
with  its  food  and  raiment,  should  be  reduced  to  the  same  form.
So  the  corpse  is  burnt,  and  with  it  all  that  is  devoted  to^  the
service  of  the  dead. In  all  these  cases,  whether  with  the  aid  of
the  corpse  or  without  it,  whether  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
grave  or  in  another  world,  or  in  both  places  at  once,  the  soul  is
held  to  maintain  a  semi-independent  existence,  its  happiness  or
misery  being  determined  largely  by  the  amount  of  attention
paid  to  it  by  its  descendants  upon  earth. There  remains  one
other  alternative  frequently  adopted  and  finally  becoming  the
basis  of  a  great  religious  system— that  it  should  find  itself  a
new  home  by  passing  into  another  being. It  then  belongs  for
life  to  the  body  which  it  inhabits,  but  it  existed  before  the  body
and  will  survive  it. There  is  a  limited  or  partial  interdependence.
This  limited  interdependence  we  may  take  as  the  central  idea
around  which  animistic  theories  radiate. Soul  and  body  are
two  things,  not  one. But  without  soul,  body  decays,  and  with
out  some  sort  of  body,  real  or  fictitious,  the  soul  appears  to  be,
at  best,  enfeebled  and  miserable.

The  spirit,  though  material,  is  also  intelligent  and  capable  of
being  influenced  by  prayers,  exhortations,  bribes,  threats,  cajol
eries. This  brings  us  to  a  further  point  of  cardinal  importance.
To  our  minds  worship  can  be  paid  only  to  a  being  higher  than
ourselves,  and  the  "spiritual"  expresses  that  higher  sphere  of
being  into  which  man  enters  by  virtue  of  what  is  best  in  him
and  what  is  most  removed  from  the  material  and  the  animal.
Such  conceptions  as  these  underlie  all  the  higher  religions,  but
they  are  wholly  foreign  to  animism. Essentially  the  cult  of
animism  is  not  an  adoration  of  a  being  higher  than  man,  but
a  mode  of  influencing  beings  conceived  as  possessing  powers
which  may  be  useful  or  harmful  to  the  believer. And  spirit,  as
animism  conceives  it,  though  certainly  implying  enough  of  in
telligence  to  comprehend  the  meaning  of  a  promise  or  threat,  is
far  from  implying  a  higher  type  of  moral  or  mental  power  than


12  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

that  of  the  human  "  worshipper."  We  are  accustomed  to  think
of  the  rudest  religions  as  anthropomorphic,  and  to  say  that  man
first  framed  gods  in  his  own  image.  But  in  truth  the  majority
of  the  beings  worshipped  by  primitive  man  are  not  human,  but
something  less  than  human.  The  distinctly  evil  agencies  are
more  prominent  than  the  good,  for  why  should  savage  man
trouble  himself  to  please  great  spirits  who  are  naturally  benevo
lent  ?  It  is  the  bad  spirit  who  will  otherwise  make  himself
troublesome  that  the  savage  is  anxious  to  conciliate  with  the
best  of  his  store.1  And  the  intellectual  level  is  as  low  as
the  moral.  The  savage  is  confident  in  his  power  to  deceive
the  spirit  whom  he  addresses  by  methods  which  could  hardly
take  in  the  savage  man  himself.  The  Naga  propitiates  a
malignant  deity  by  setting  out  for  him  a  small  fowl  in  a  large
basket.  The  god  is  deceived  by  the  size  of  the  basket,  and
distributes  favours  accordingly.2  The  ghost  of  a  mother  who
would  carry  off  her  child  is  deceived  in  the  Banks  Islands  by  a
piece  of  banana  trunk  which  is  laid  on  her  bosom  in  her  grave.3
Disease  demons  may  be  diverted  by  similar  methods.  Thus  in
an  epidemic  the  Dyaks  set  up  wooden  images  at  the  doors  of
their  dwellings,  that  the  disease  may  carry  them  off  instead
of  the  living  people.4  When  the  Kaffir  is  hunting  an  elephant,
he  begs  the  elephant  not  to  tread  on  him — surely  as  curious  a
confusion  of  ideas  as  is  to  be  found  in  primitive  thought — for,
on  the  one  hand,  the  elephant's  soul  is  held  to  have  intelligence
enough  to  understand  the  petition,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
supposed  to  be  so  stupid  as  to  be  taken  in  by  the  request  when
the  petitioner  is  all  the  while  seeking  to  take  his  life.  The
Samoyeds  are  more  crafty,  for  they  tell  the  bear  that  it  was  the
Russians  who  killed  him;  and  the  North  American  Indians
spare  the  rattlesnake,  risking  the  physical  evils  which  they
know,  in  dread  of  the  vengeance  which  the  rattlesnake's  spirit
would  take  on  them,  and  which  they  do  not  know  and  cannot

1  For  illustrations,  see  below,  p  31.  2  Goddeii,  J.  A,  I.,  xxvi.  187.

3  Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii.,  p.  345,  where  numerous  instances  of  the  same
kind  are  given.  The  widespread  substitution  of  models  for  real  food,
implements,  etc.,  in  sacrifices  to  the  dead  is  hardly  to  be  regarded  as  a
deception — or  if  so  rather  as  a  form  of  self-deception — the  model,  pardonably
enough  on  animistic  grounds,  being  held  as  good  a  vehicle  for  soul-food,
soul-money,  etc.,  as  a  real  loaf  or  a  gold  piece.

*  Ib.,  348.


THE  EARLY PHASES  OF THOUGHT  13

measure.1 The  crude  conception  of  the  spiritual  which  these
cases  vividly  illustrate,  goes  far  to  determine  both  the  objects
and  the  methods  of  animistic  cults. Animal-gods  and  man-
gods  belong  to  the  animistic  level  of  religion,  because  it  is  only
at  this  level  that  animals  or  men  can  be  the  objects  of  a  cult
without  being  regarded  as  the  representations  or  embodiments
of  something  far  higher  than  themselves. Animism  does  indeed
regard  them  as  embodiments  of  a  spirit,  but  this  spirit  is  not
essentially superior, either  morally or intellectually, to the
animal  or  man  in  which  it  dwells. The  Toda  addresses  a  cow,
chosen  by  descent  or  by  consecration  to  be  the  head  of  the  herd,
as  being  herself  a  goddess,  "  How  fair  was  thy  mother !  how
much  milk  she  gave ! Be  not  less  generous ! Henceforth  thou
shalt  be  a  divinity  among  us.  ...  Bear  a  thousand  calves ! "
So  sacred  is  this  divinity  that  the  chief  milkman  is  himself  a
man-god. Yet  the  animal  which  is  worshipped  is  also  unhesi
tatingly  turned  to  human  uses. Often  the  god  may,  with  due
observance  of  the  proper  solemnities,  be  killed  and  eaten  by
his  votaries. Thus  among  the  Australians  at  the  Intichiuma
ceremonies  a  man  not  only  may,  but  must,  eat  his  totem,  or  the
supply  would  fail.3 The  Gilyaks  of  Eastern  Siberia  bring  up  a
bear  cub  with  divine  honours. Fish,  brandy  and  other  things
are  offered  to  him  in  every  house. People  prostrate  themselves
before  him,  and  his  entrance  into  a  house  confers  a  blessing,
but  he  is  also  teased  and  worried. After  visiting  every  house  in
the  village,  he  is  shot  dead  with  arrows  and  eaten.4 In  such
practicesrillustrations  of  which  might  be  indefinitely  multiplied,
the  savage  is  in  his  way  getting  the  best  of  both  worlds. He

1  Tylor,  vol.  i.,  p.  467  ;  School  craft-Drake,  vol.  i.,  p.  232. Similarly  the
Western  Esquimaux  before  setting  to  upon  the  stranded  whale,  would
receive  him  with  divine  honours,  harangue  and  compliment  him. (Eeclus,
p.  52.)

2  Reclus,  p.  218.  .

s  Spencer  and  Gillen,  vol.  i.,  p.  168.  When  the  Australian  does  not  eat
the  totem  himself,  it  is  by  his  permission  that  others  do  so.  In  fact  he  is
held  responsible  for  maintaining  the  supply  of  his  totem  for  the  benefit  ol
other  totem -groups.  (Spencer  and  Gillen,  vol.  ii.,  p.  160.)  Strictly  the  totem
should  not  ba  spoken  of  as  a  god,  the  conception  being  magical  rather  than
religious,  but  the  point  here  is  the  ceremonial  eating  of  that  which  is
ordinarily  sacred.

4  Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii.,  p.  380.  For  many  other  instances  ol  killing  and
eating  the  divine  or  sacred  animal,  see  the  same  work,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  302,  366,
396,  435.


14  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

needs  the  animal's  flesh  and  is  afraid  of  his  spirit.  Not  only
may  the  particular  bear  which  he  has  killed  have  its  avenging
ghost,  but  all  the  bears  may  stand  together  in  the  blood  feud
and  take  vengeance  on  the  murderer  of  their  kinsman.  So  he
pays  honour  to  the  individual  bear  slain,  and  through  him  to
his  fellow-bears.  He  comforts  himself,  in  short,  with  a  con
ception  of  the  bear  spirit  which  is  intelligent  enough  to  under
stand  the  show  of  honours  and  the  words  of  cajolery,  and  stupid
enough  to  let  these  make  up  to  it  for  the  hard  facts  of  being
killed  and  eaten.1

The  worship  of  men  might  seem  intrinsically  higher  than
that  of  animals.  But  in  point  of  fact  no  distinction  of  principle
severs  the  cult  of  man-gods  in  many  primitive  religions  from
that  of  animals  as  just  described.  The  man-god  of  this  stage
must  not  be  confused  with  the  anthropomorphic  deity  of  poly
theism  and  the  cruder  monotheism.  This  deity  is  a  spirit
conceived  as  clad  with  human  attributes.  The  man-god  is  an
ordinary  human  being  conceived  as  the  incarnation  of  a  powerful
spirit  or  as  possessed  of  magical  powers.  In  the  lowest  grade
he  is  merely  a  sorcerer,  whose  power  is  due  to  his  relations  with
ghosts  and  other  spirits.  At  a  further  stage  of  development
he  has  marvellous  powers  of  his  own  whereby  he  controls  rain
and  sunshine,  the  winds  and  the  crops.2  Owing  to  this  occult
influence  emanating  from  him,  this  mighty  being  becomes  so
full  of  danger  to  his  people  that  his  movements  and  actions  have
to  be  closely  restricted.  To  drink  of  his  cup  or  eat  the  remnants
of  his  food  is  fatal.  His  touch  and  his  glance  are  deadly.  His
misbehaviour  may  involve  his  whole  people  in  ruin.  In  con
sequence  he  is  surrounded  with  all  kinds  of  precautions,  and  he
ends  by  being  a  mere  puppet  in  the  hands  of  priests.  Thus
the  Egyptian  Pharaoh,  a  typical  man-god,  is  described  by
Diodorus  3  as  hedged  round  both  in  his  public  and  private  life  by
watchful  sacerdotal  control  which  minutely  prescribed  to  him

1  The  slain  animal  if  properly  treated  may  even  invite  others  to  come  and
be  killed. The  Orinoco  Indians  having  killed  an  animal,  pour  a  little
liquor  into  its  mouth,  "  that  the  soul  of  the  dead  beast  may  inform  its
fellows  of  the  welcome  it  has  met  with,  and  that  they,  too,  cheered  by  the
prospect  of  the  same  kind  reception,  may  come  with  alacrity  to  be  killed."
(Golden  Sough,  vol.  ii.,  p.  402.) Many  similar  instances  are  given  by  Mr.
Frazer.

2  For  instances  see  Golden  Bouyh,  i.  139,  etc.  3  Diodorus,  i.  70,  71.


15

the  order  of  his  actions.  Similarly  at  Babylon,  though  the  king
was  not  strictly  a  god,  the  whole  country  suffered  for  his  faults
and  he  had  to  observe  taboos — e.g.  avoiding  meat  on  the
seventh  day — which  apparently  concerned  no  one  else.1

Lastly,  the  man- god  may  be  the  incarnation  of  a  spirit  which
lives  independently  of  him.  Of  such  a  type  the  most  familiar
instance  to  us  is  the  everlasting  -Buddha  of  the  Thibetans.  In
this  idea  of  incarnation  death  and  rebirth  necessarily  play  an
important  part.  The  gods  themselves  die  in  the  philosophy  of
Animism,  for  death  is  only  the  migration  of  a  spirit.  Some
times  it  is  its  migration  to  better  quarters,  and  when  this  flesh
that  is  now  the  spirit's  habitation  becomes  old  and  weak  or  is
doing  its  work  ill,  the  worshippers  of  the  god  facilitate  his
migration  by  the  destruction  of  his  temporary  tabernacle.  The
man-god  in  fact  may  be  killed  and  even  eaten  like  any  ordinary
human  being.2

This  unceremonious  treatment  of  the  object  of  worship  is
partly  due  to  the  conception  that  the  body  in  which  the  spirit
is  incarnate  is  not  the  spirit  itself.  But  the  condition  under
which  alone  it  can  arise  is  that  the  object  of  a  religious  cult  is
not  yet  an  object  of  worship  as  we  understand  the  term.  The
spirit  of  the  sacred  animal  does  not  rise  above  the  animal.  The
god  in  man  has  powers  which  ordinary  men  have  not,  but  he  is
not  spiritually  (as  we  use  that  term)  a  higher  being.  The  spirits
of  early  religion  may  be  abused  or  coerced  if  they  do  not  do
their  duty.  The  Greek  youths  whipped  the  statue  of  Pan  if
he  did  not  give  them  good  hunting.  The  Chinese  emperor  is
supreme  over  all  spirits  except  that  of  heaven,  and  regularly
promotes  or  degrades  them  in  rank  according  to  their  perform
ances.3  The  Ainu  abuse  their  household  gods  when  a  death

1  Jastrow,  Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  pp. 375-8. For  many
similar  instances  see  Golden  Bough,  i.  313,  314.

2  See  Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii.,  p.  6,  etc. A  special  case  is  the  selection  of
a  prisoner,  criminal  or  slave  to  act  as  the  incarnation  of  a  deity. He  then
becomes  a  temporary  man-god, receives  honours  and  sacrifices,  and  is
finally  slain  and  perhaps  eaten. The  idea  is  apparently  to  strengthen  the
spirit — who  is  here  some  nature-god — by  sacrifices,  perhaps  to  bind  him
more  closely  to  his  worshippers  by  the  partaking  of  his  flesh,  and  finally  by
slaying  him  to  give  him  a  new  and  more  vigorous  life. The  subject  is
exhaustively treated by Mr. Frazer. See the  places quoted, and  in
particular,  vol.  iii.,  p.  134,  for  the  killing  of  the  god  in  Mexico.

3  For  examples  see  Douglas,  Society  in  China,  pp.  5-7. The  honours
paid  to  ancestors  for  the  exploits  of  their  descendants  depend  on  the  same


16  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

occurs,  as  is  shown  in  a  vivid  description  by  Mr.  Batchelor  of
the  scene  in  a  house  on  the  death  of  a  child.

"  One  old  man  was  calling  on  the  goddess  of  Fire  to  help,  and
threatening  never  to  worship  her  again  if  she  did  not  keep  warmth
in  the  child's  body.  Another  person  was  looking  out  of  the  east
window  and  accusing  the  goddess  of  Fire  to  the  Creator,  of  not
attending  to  her  duty.  A  third  was  in  a  towering  rage,  and,  facing
the  south-east  corner  of  the  hut,  was  telling  the  guardian  gods  that
they  were  an  extremely  bad  lot,  and  deserved  never  to  be  worshipped
again."  J

It  is  not  necessary  to  multiply  instances.  The  quasi-material
spirit  of  animistic  worship,  whether  incarnate  in  stocks  and
stones,  in  trees,  animals  or  men,  or  roaming  disembodied  as  a
ghost,  demon,  or  genius,  is  not  intrinsically  a  higher  being
before  whom  man  must  prostrate  himself,  but  more  often  if
anything  a  being  of  a  lower  order,  and  in  any  case  one  who  is
to  be  managed  as  occasion  serves,  by  prayer,  entreaty,  deception,
threats,  or  force  applied  as  we  apply  them  to  actual  men  and
animals,  so  that  when  one  fails  another  is  tried.

Such  then  is  the  character  of  the  primitive  conception  of
spirit.  It  is  a  double  of  the  common  objects  of  perception,  con
ceived  on  the  one  hand  as  a  material  substance  capable  of
exerting  force  and  having  force  applied  to  it,  and  on  the  other
hand  as  feeling  and  thinking  like  a  rather  stupid  man,  and  open
like  him  to  supplication,  exhortation,  or  intimidation — a  standing
contradiction  in  which  the  categories  of  mental  and  material
are  hopelessly  intertwined,  in  which  mere  functions  and  qualities
become  substantial  beings,  and  finally  by  a  crude  induction  the
same  spiritual  agency  by  which  men  explain  their  own  behaviour
and  that  of  their  fellows  is  imputed  also  to  animals,  plants,
and  inanimate  nature — to  the  wind  and  waves — the  stocks  and
stones.

3.  But  the  appeal  to  spirits  is  not  the  only  way  of  influencing
events  known  to  primitive  man.  Ho  has  a  more  direct  method,
resting  on  the  interconnection  of  things  as  he  conceives  it,  the
primitive  theory,  if  we  may  use  the  term,  of  cause  and  effect.

conception,  since  it  is  the  business  of  an  ancestral  spirit  to  watch  over  his
family  and  guard  its  fortunes.

1  Batchelor,  The  Ainu  of  Japan,  p.  217.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  17

The  practices  growing  out  of  these  conceptions  are  grouped
together  under  the  name  of  Magic,  and  by  recent  writers  have
been  thrown  into  strong  contrast  with  Religion — Religion  being
conceived  as  essentially  an  appeal  to  a  spiritual  agency,  Magic
as  an  attempt  to  control  nature  without  resort  to  a  spiritual
agency.  In  the  operations  of  magic  three  main  conceptions
appear  to  be  traceable.  The  first  of  these  is  termed  sympathetic
magic  in  the  narrower  sense.  Its  principle  may  be  roughly
formulated,  "  What  is  done  to  my  belongings  is  done  to  me  " —
or  more  precisely,  if  two  things  are  closely  connected  (as  e.  g.  by
being  parts  of  one  object)  they  will  even  when  dissevered  remain
so  allied,  so  much  in  "  sympathy  "  that  to  affect  one  of  them  is
to  affect  the  others.1  The  most  familiar  instance  is  the  use  of
hair-clippings  and  nail-parings  to  work  evil  on  the  man  to
whom  they  belonged.  Another  is  the  practice  of  heating  a
weapon  which  has  made  a  wound  in  order  that  the  wound  may
remain  inflamed,  or  conversely  of  keeping  the  weapon  clean
that  the  wound  may  not  fester.  A  third  is  to  operate  on  the
food  left  by  a  man.2  A  fourth  is  to  attack  his  shadow.  It  is
impossible  to  say  how  primitive  man  actually  conceives  the
connection  in  these  cases,  for  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the  matter
that  he  has  no  clear  conception  at  all.  But  if  we  analyze  out
the  principle  implied — that  is  to  say,  the  principle  which,  if  it
were  true,  would  justify  the  procedure,  and  which  being  in  fact
false  makes  the  procedure  void — it  is  this — that  the  continuous
identity  which  once  connected  the  two  things  still  in  some  sort
persists.  The  clipped  hair  was  once  part  of  the  man  and  his
identity  persists  in  it.  The  sword  and  the  wound  were  two
aspects  of  the  same  fact  and  their  union  remains.  If  this  were
true,  sympathetic  magic  would  be  a  genuine  art,  and  because  it
is  not  true,  sympathetic  magic  is  a  spurious  art.  In  this  sense
the  doctrine  of  a  persistent  unreal  identity  is  the  implied  principle
of  sympathetic  magic.

A  second  form  of  magic  rests  on  another  distortion  of  the
principle  of  identity.  If  you  cannot  get  hold  of  any  belongings
of  your  enemy  you  can  at  least  make  a  likeness  of  him.  You
may  destroy  him,  for  instance,  by  melting  or  sticking  pins  into

1  See  Golden  Bough,  i.  9,  49.
a  Or  an  excrement. (Spencer  and  Gillen,  i.  547.)
VOL.  II.  0


18  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

a  wax  image  of  him.  With  very  different  intent,  though  by
essentially  the  same  method,  primitive  people  in  many  parts  of
the  world  seek  to  make  rain  by  squirting  water,  or  to  produce
sunshine  by  kindling  fires,  or  fertility  by  a  representation  of  the
processes  of  growth.1  Here  the  implied  principle — understand
ing  the  term  once  again  as  above — is  that  like  things  or  like
processes  are  the  same.  In  making  rain  on  a  small  scale  we  are
setting  up  a  process  which  extends  further  and  has  to  do  with
the  production  of  rain  generally,  or  at  any  rate  on  a  greater
scale.  In  slaying  one  bear,  again,  or  in  honouring  one  bear,  we
are  slaying  or  honouring  Bear — the  bear  that  is  in  all  bears ;
we  are  incurring  or  averting  a  feud  with  bears  in  general.  It
will  help  us  to  understand  this  sort  of  identification  if  we  revert
for  a  moment  to  the  creed  of  Totemisni,  the  idea  at  the  base  of
which  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  there  is  an  occult  connection
between  an  animal  or  plant  and  the  human  beings  of  a  clan  or
tribe,  such  that  what  they  act  or  perform  ceremonially  the
Totem  will  do  likewise  in  real  earnest.  The  Totem  is  in  some
sense — in  what  sense  they  certainly  could  not  tell,  and  if  we  try
to  define  the  conception  we  shall  modify  it  by  the  very  process
of  making  it  definite — but  it  is  in  some  sense  incarnate  in  them.
The  Bear  is  in  all  bears,  all  four-footed  bears  and  all  human
bears.  But  what  is  the  Bear  itself  ?  To  the  North  American
Indian  it  is  often  a  Big  Brother  of  the  Bears ;  another  individual
in  short,  and  something  on  its  way  to  becoming  a  god.  But  in
a  lower  stage  the  Totem  has  no  need  of  so  much  individuality,
for  the  savage  has  not  got  so  far  in  the  endeavour  to  think  out
the  problem  of  Identity  in  Difference.  Every  individual  bear,
two-footed  or  four-footed,  is  alike  the  Bear,  and  what  one  does
or  suffers  all  do  or  suffer.  Further  the  identity  may  be  fortified,
as  it  were,  by  introducing  the  other  principle  of  connection.
For  since  things  that  are  once  joined  are  always  connected  an
exchange  of  blood  makes  two  men  brothers.  Joining  in  the
same  meal  has  a  similar  effect,  and  therefore  what  one  suffers
the  others  too  will  feel,  not  through  moral  sympathy  but  through
a  purely  physical  causation.  Applying  this  to  the  Totem,  how

1  Cf.  the  symbolic  processes  combined  with  invitations  to  the  animal  in
the  totemic  ceremonies  whereby  the  Australians  secure  a  full  supply  of  the
Witchetty  grub.  (Spencer  and  Gillen,  voL  i.,  pp.  172  seq.  and  206.)


THE  EARLY  PHASES OF  THOUGHT  19

can  we  identify  ourselves  with  him  better  than  by  killing  him.
We  eat  the  flesh  of  the  bear  and  the  Bear  is  within  us.  Yet  we
have  not  injured  the  Totem,  for  the  Bear  still  lives — in  other
bears  and  in  us.  The  species  survives,  though  one  individual  is
sacrificed.

These  two  forms  of  magic,  distinguished  by  the  best  authorities
as  Sympathetic  and  Imitative,  are  also  quite  rightly,  if  with
some  verbal  confusion,  grouped  together  as  being  both  alike
Sympathetic  in  the  wider  sense.  That  is,  they  both  depend  on
an  occult  Sympathy — in  other  words,  a  very  crudely  conceived
identity  between  things  and  processes  that  are  really  distinct.
The  third  set  of  magical  ideas  are  simpler,  and  turn  on  a
primitive  conception  of  the  qualities  of  things.  Powers  and
influences  exist  in  things,  and  are  the  basis  of  their  qualities
and  behaviour.  Like  spirits,  they  are  separable  from  the  things
to  which  they  belong.  They  can  be  withdrawn  by  charms ;
they  can  be  transferred  to  other  things.  A  barren  fruit-tree
must  be  a  male.  A  woman's  petticoat  placed  upon  it  transfers
to  it  the  feminine  quality,  and  it  becomes  fruitful.  Chinese
people,  when  advancing  in  years,  have  their,  grave-clothes
prepared  by  young  girls,  because  part  of  their  capacity  to  live
long  must  pass  into  the  clothes  and  so  put  off  the  moment  when
they  will  be  required.1  Conversely,  when  the  coffin  is  being
nailed  down  the  hammer  is  bound  up  in  red  cloth  to  prevent
bad  influences  passing  into  the  hand.2  Now  conceptions  of  this
sort  seem  in  the  first  place  to  be  merely  generalizations,  which
are  too  extensive  and  therefore  faulty,  from  an  ordinary
experience.  Some  qualities  or  characteristics  of  things  are  in  a
sense  transmissible.  Death  as  such  is  not  infectious,  but
smallpox  is.  The  touch  of  a  pregnant  woman  will  not  impart
her  fertility,  but  her  warm  hand  will  impart  warmth.  But  there
is  probably  a  little  more  in  the  matter  than  a  too  hasty
generalization.  There  is  the  conception  of  a  quality  as  some
thing  quasi-substantial,  something  in  short  bearing  a  family
resemblance  to  the  spirit  from  which  we  have  to  distinguish  it.
When  sins  are  loaded  upon  a  scapegoat  and  driven  away  into
the  wilderness,  when  a  toothache  is  nailed  into  a  tree,  when  a
disease  is  extracted  in  the  form  of  a  magic  stone,  or  passed  into
1  De  Groot,  i.,  p.  60.  2  Ib.,  p.  96.


20  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

a  third  person,  when  evil  influences  are  brushed  or  whipped  off
a  man— in  all  such  cases  the  quality  is  treated  as  something
that  you  can  almost  pick  up  and  carry  about.  It  is  at  least  as
substantial  as  vapour,  and  in  some  cases  it  really  becomes  a
spirit.  When  the  Melanesian  regards  a  stone  with  little  discs  in
it  as  "  good  to  bring  in  money,"  it  is  clearly  because  it  has  the
character  of  money  stamped  upon  it.  But  this  character  they
ascribe  themselves  to  an  indwelling  spirit  which  they  conciliate
—the  magical  quality  passes  into  the  spiritual.1  The  third
basis  of  magic  may  in  fact  be  regarded  as  a  spirit  that  has
become  attenuated  into  an  "influence,"  or  as  an  "influence"
that  has  not  developed  into  a  spirit.  It  thus  forms  a  connecting
link  between  magic  and  animism.

4.  The  other  two  forms  grouped  under  Sympathetic  Magic  in
the  wider  sense  are  not  so  closely  connected  with  animism.  Yet
they  belong  in  the  main  to  the  same  mental  level.  We  find  in
the  primitive  mind  when  it  begins  to  theorize  two  tendencies
which  may  be  regarded  as  in  a  measure  complementary.  On
the  one  hand,  it  tends  to  take  the  characters  and  attributes  of
things,  processes  that  go  on  in  things,  thoughts  about  things
and  the  words  in  which  thoughts  are  expressed,  and  to  turn
them  into  objects,  substantial  as  the  things  themselves,  having
in  fact  a  mode  of  existence  very  like  the  things.  The  categories
of  substance  and  attribute  are  not  yet  distinguished.  Of  this
confusion  personification  is  merely  the  extreme  case,  the  living
person  being  simply  the  most  concrete  and  many-sided  of
objects.  In  this  tendency  then  we  have  the  basis  of  the  spirits
of  Animism  and  the  occult  essences  and  powers  of  Magic.  On
the  other  side  the  primitive  mind  equally  fails  to  keep  different
objects  distinct.  One  conception  melts  readily  into  another,
just  as  in  primitive  fancy  a  sorcerer  turns  into  a  dragon,  a
mouse,  a  stone,  and  a  butterfly  without  the  smallest  difficulty.
Hence  similarity  is  treated  as  if  it  were  physical  identity.  The
physical  individuality  of  things  is  not  observed.  The  fact  that
a  thing  was  mine  makes  it  appear  as  though  there  were  some
thing  of  me  in  it,  so  that  by  burning  it  you  make  me  smart.
The  borders  and  limits  of  things  are  not  marked  out,  but  their
1  Golden  Bough,  i.  45.


21

influence  and  their  capacity  to  be  influenced  extends,  as  it  were,
in  a  misty  halo  over  everything  connected  with  them  in  any
fashion.  If  the  attributes  of  things  are  made  too  solid  and
material  in  primitive  thought,  things  themselves  are  too  fluid
and  undefined,  passing  into  each  other  by  loose  and  easy
identifications  which  prevent  all  clear  and  crisp  distinctions  of
thought.  In  a  word,  primitive  thought  has  not  yet  evolved
those  distinctions  of  substance  and  attribute,  quality  and  relation,
cause  and  effect,  identity  and  difference,  which  are  the  common
property  of  civilized  thought.  These  categories  which  among
us  every  child  soon  comes  to  distinguish  in  practice  ]  are  for
primitive  thought  interwoven  in  wild  confusion,  and  this
confusion  is  the  intellectual  basis  of  animism  and  of  magic.

As  they  thus  spring  from  a  common  intellectual  basis,  so  in
their  working  animism  and  magic  find,  especially  in  primitive
times,  many  points  of  contact.  Totemism  is  one  instance,  for,
as  has  been  pointed  out,  the  bond  of  union  which  makes  the
totem  one  with  its  human  worshippers,  or  rather  fellows  and
allies,  is  of  magical  character,  while  the  totem  itself  is  often  a
spirit  or  perhaps  even  a  god.  Again,  the  magic  power  may  come
from  and  be  controlled  by  a  man.  A  Melanesian  wizard  affects
things  at  a  distance,  not  by  a  projection  of  a  spirit,  but  by  his
mana  or  power.  A  chiefs  supremacy  is  due  to  his  mana,  he
may  be  elected  beause  he  has  mana  attributed  to  him.  A  man
may  pass  on  his  mana  by  imposition  of  hands  ;  he  may  throw  it
into  a  material  object,  which  becomes  then  a  source  of  danger.
He  may  use  it,  and  does  habitually  use  it,  to  secure  his  property.
By  this  simple  means,  for  example,  he  solves  the  problem  of
closing  a  public  right  of  way  and  annexing  it  to  himself.  If  the
taboo  is  broken  the  evil  consequences  are  averted  by  a  present
to  the  man  who  put  it  on — the  human  spirit  after  all  controlling
the  magic  influences.  A  dangerous  magical  influence  may
emanate  directly  from  a  deity.  Thus,  when  Uzzah  touches  the
Ark  he  is  immediately  struck  dead,  not  because  he  did  any
thing  wrong,  for  his  intention  was  absolutely  innocent,  but

1  I  do  not  mean  that  the  child  or  the  average  unthinking  man  is  familiar
with  these  conceptions  in  the  abstract,  but  that  his  experience  is  so
organized  under  the  influence  of  tradition,  especially  in  the  form  of
language,  as  to  fall  with  general,  though  not  unvarying,  correctness  into  the
pigeon-holes  to  which  these  terms  correspond.


MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

because  Yahveh  "  broke  forth  "  upon  him.  The  Ark,  being  the
habitation  of  Yahveh,  was  intrinsically  dangerous,  just  like  a
highly  electrified  body.1  Animism  creates  spirits  of  the  dead,
but  the  operation  of  these  spirits  and  of  death  in  general  is  con
ceived  in  terms  of  magic.  The  mourner,  who  may  be  haunted
by  the  dead,  is  infected  by  their  danger  and  has  to  seclude  him
self,  and  this,  rather  than  the  desire  of  supplying  the  deceased
with  comforts,  is  on  some  occasions  probably  the  true  explana
tion  of  the  destruction  of  the  dead  man's  property  and  of  the
mourning  imposed  upon  his  widow.  Again,  a  magic  influence
may  become  a  spirit.  The  curse  which  the  evil-doer  brings
upon  himself  may  be  conceived  magically,  or  it  may  pass  into  a
spirit  which  haunts  the  man  ;  or  finally,  by  a  union  of  both  ideas,
it  may  be  an  evil  which  the  spirit  inflicts  upon  the  man.2

Lastly,  in  the  practice  of  witchcraft,  which  is  everywhere  pre
valent  in  the  savage  world,  the  two  conceptions,  of  a  natural
order  in  the  super-sensible  world,  and  of  the  existence  of  spirits
capable  of  being  influenced  by  human  means,  are  interwoven.
The  idea  of  witchcraft  is  to  control  events  by  super-sensible
means,  and  these  means  are,  on  the  one  hand,  the  use  of  those
occult  influences,  some  of  which  we  have  just  described,  and,  on
the  other,  the  control  of  spirits  by  charms,  incantations  and
prayers.  The  witch  may  make  rain  by  actions  in  which  the
falling  of  rain  is  in  some  way  imitated.  This  is,  as  he  conceives,
a  direct  process  of  cause  and  effect,  no  spirit  intervening.  He
may  injure  an  enemy  by  destroying  his  image  or  burning  locks
of  his  hair  which  he  has  secured.  Or  again,  he  may  have
ghosts  at  his  command.  He  may  trap  and  imprison  souls.  He
knows  the  word  or  the  form  which  binds  a  demon  or  even  a  god.
He  punishes  the  enemy  by  causing  a  spirit  to  haunt  him.3

1  This  magical  conception  seems  at  least  to  underlie  the  anthropomorphic
account  in  2  Sam.  vi.  7  seq.

2  See  some  remarks  by  the  present  writer  in  Sociological  Papers,  vol.  ii.,

3  Recent  authorities  (e.  g.  Sir  A.  Lyall,  Asiatic  Stales,  vol.  i.,  p.  106,
etc. ;  Frazer,  vol.  i.,  pp.  63  and  64,  etc.)  contrast  magic  as  resting  on  a
belief, however  crude,  in  uniform  natural  processes  with  animism,  as
depending  on  the  caprice  of  a  spirit. The  one  is,  they  say,  the  germ  of  science
wlierein  man  seeks  to  control  the  course  of  event;?,  the  other  of  religion
wherein  he  seeks  to  propitiate  the  spirit  who  controls  them. It  must  be

emembered, however,  as  these  writers  freely  admit,  that  in  animistic
spirits  are  often  constrained  and  coerced,  and  generally  speakiu"


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT

All  this  is  possible  as  long  as  the  spirit  is  of  so  low  an  order
as  to  be  subject  to  conjurations  and  coercion,  and  as  long  as  the
spirit  remains  thus  unspiritual  it  is  not  radically  distinguished
from  other  "occult"  influences,  nor  are  magic  and  religion  in
their  working  fundamentally  opposed.  Conversely  it  is  an  im
portant  element  in  the  next  higher  state-  of  religion  to  produce
an  order  of  gods  no  longer  open  to  these  illicit  influences,  above
exhortation  and  intimidation,  and  capable  of  protecting  thei
worshippers  against  the  machinations  of  the  sorcerer.

We  may  conclude  that  in  practice  magic  and  religion  are

closely  interwoven  in  the  life  of  primitive  man. They  also  rest

alike  on  coofusions  which  differ  in  detail  but  agree  in  general

character. They  differ  in  so  far  as  magic  is  the  endeavour  of

man  to  control  events  by  his  own  operations,  and  religion  the

attempt  to  appease  or  manage  spirits  in  whose  power  the  control

of  events  is  held  to  reside. Bringing  them  together  we  may  say

that  the  primitive  conception  of  the  world  and  man's  place  in  it

consists  in  the  belief  that  processes  physical,  vital,  mental  or

whatever  they  may  be,  are  governed  by  invisible  powers  and

agencies,  spiritual  or  otherwise,  capable  of  being  influenced  by

man  and  used  for  his  own  purposes. These  are  not  objects  of

worship  standing  above  the  level  of  humanity. On  the  con

trary  even  the  spirits  that  primitive  man  recognizes  fall  rather

below  the  level  of  humanity  and  are  easily  rendered  subservie

to  its  worst  passions.

5.  The  confusions  on  which  magic  and  animism  rest  find  their
early  religion  operates  on  the  spirit  world  in  accordance  with  ^  conditions

nature Though  this  desire  stimulated  science,  and  its  satifelacti

^^^SMriisr-  —  to

fixed.  Some  writer  seem  to  identify  it  mth  mag.c.


rc^sS

to  affect  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  others,  is  witchcraft.


24  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

general explanation in the stage of  psychological evolution
attained  by  primitive  man. The  generic  function  of  mind  in
life  is  to  establish  articulate  connections  between  the  scattered
portions  of  experience,  and  so  enable  its  possessors  to  learn  from
the  past  how  to  provide  for  the  future. By  its  success  in  per
forming  that  function  the  stage  of  growth  reached  by  the  mind
of  any  given  being  or  group  of  beings  is  to  be  judged. The
higher  animals  have  apparently  reached  so  far  that  they  can  per
ceive  the  objects  that  surround  them  in  their  temporal  and
spatial  order,  and  use  the  result  of  this  perception  in  guiding
their  ^  own  actions  so  as  to  produce  or  avert  particular  effects.
If  this  is  so  they  certainly  in  a  sense  apprehend  many  of  the
attributes,  actions  and  relations  of  things. In  some  sense  my
dog,  when  he  is  thirsty,  knows  that  there  is  water  in  a  jug,  that
I  can  pour  it  out  for  him,  and  that  he  can  get  me  to  do  so  by
attracting  my  attention  and  signifying  his  wants. That  is  to
say,  his  behaviour  is  adapted  to  the  presence  around  him  of
certain  persons  and  things  with  given  attributes,  related  in  a
particular  way,  acting  in  a  particular  way. He  knows  this  after
some  fashion,  but  we  do  not  take  it  to  be  precisely  man's  fashion.
Where  then  do  we  suppose  the  difference  to  lie  ? The  dog  can
in  some  way  differentiate  the  "  solid  "  jug  from  the  "  liquid  "
water,  for  we  see  that  he treats  them  differently. But  we
suppose  it  to  be  peculiar  to  the  man  that  he  interests  himself
in  the  generic  qualities  in  point  of  which  these  things  differ,
and  invents  for  them  the  names  "solid"  and  "liquid," To
discover  and  define  these  qualities the human mind breaks
up  its  experiences  into  their  elements,  and  at  the  same  time
and  in the  same  process brings  widely  separated  experiences
together. The "solid," for instance,  is something common
to the  jug, the house, the  road, and  distinct from the  air
and  the  water,  distinct  also  from  the  shape  and  other  qualities
of  the  jug. This  joint  movement of comparison and dis
crimination  breaks  the  perceptual  world  up  into  its  elements
and  builds  up  out  of  them  an  order  of  ideas. Every  such  idea
is  expressed  in  a  general  term  or  name,  and  as  there  is  a  name
for  each  thing,  so  there  is  a  way  of  expressing  each  of  its  func
tions,  attributes, relations. Our everyday experience thus
translated into ideas falls into certain familiar  categories—


THE  EARLY PHASES OF THOUGHT  25

Things  and  their  Attributes,  Persons  and  their  Actions,  Func
tions,  Relations, Substances,  Causes and  Effects. But  these
categories  do  not  at  once  emerge  into  clear  consciousness. The
mind  uses  them  long  before  it  is  clearly  aware  of  them. Or,
more  strictly,  it  works  by  rules  corresponding  to  these  conceptions,
sorting experiences  in a  manner  which accords  with them,
though  it  knows  them  not. It  recognizes  actual  substances
(stones, hills, men, horses) and their attributes or actions
(hardness,  height,  sagacity,  swift  movement)  before  it  has  ever
heard  of  Substances  or  Attributes  or  Relations  as  general  terms,
and  a  clear-headed  man  who  is  innocent  either  of  grammar  or
logic  may  yet  move  among  the  objects  of  experience  without
confounding  any  of  these  categories. Thus  below  the  stage  at
which  the  mind  is  clearly  aware  of  the  elementary  conceptions
under  which  rational  experience  is  ordered,  there  is  a  stage
where  it  works  according  to  the  rules  to  which  these  conceptions
when  known  are  found  to  lead,  though  without  consciousness  of
the  rules  or  the  conceptions. This  is  the  stage  of  "common
sense." But  below  "common  sense,"  again,  is  a  stage  in  which
the  rules  themselves  are  not  yet  efficient  in  their  operation,  at
which  the  mind  is  not  only  unconscious  of  the  categories,  but
fails  practically  in  sorting  experiences  so  as  to  accord  with  them,
in  which  objects  of  thought  belonging  to  different  categories  are
not  held  apart  but  pass  into  each  other,  what  is  now  a  sub
stance  becoming  at  another  moment  a  relation,  while  a  relation
or  an  attribute  becomes  a  substance,  or  one  relation  is  con
founded  with  another. At  this  stage,  though  "  general "  ideas
are  already  formed,  they  are  loose  in  meaning  and  wavering  in
application. And  this  is  the  natural  result  of  the  methods  by
which they  are formed. Developed thought knows certain
rigorous methods of induction from experience, as well as
certain  definite  principles  of  the  analysis  and  synthesis  of  ideas
whereby  it  forms  new  conceptions  or  checks  those  that  it  has
formed. Primitive  thought  knows  nothing  of  such  safeguards.
In  the  lowest  strata  of  thought-operations  we  form  ideas  by
casual  association,  drifting  where  the  current  of  mental  tendency
leads  us.  Instead  of  the  rigorous  analyses  and  constructions  of  the
logical  mind  we  have  the  unregulated  movement — the  resultant
expression  probably  of  the  unsifted  mass  of  experience — carrying


26  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

us  whithersoever  it  will.  As  to  the  test  of  experience,  if  used  at
all,  it  is  applied  in  the  form  in  which  any  chance  instance  that
appears  to  confirm  the  mental  prepossession  is  taken  for  proof,
and  if  an  instance  to  the  contrary  is  regarded  at  all  it  is  merely
as  the  starting-point  for  some  hypothesis  to  explain  it  away.
Indeed  the  bare  conception  of  truth  or  falsity  scarcely  exists.
The  world  of  ideas  is  largely  a  world  of  make-believe.  If  the
child's  doll  or  the  savage's  ghost  cannot  really  eat  the  food
offered  them,  the  human  playmate  or  worshipper  is  quite  content
to  eat  them  himself  "  for  "  the  other.  The  ideas  make  their
junction,  as  it  were,  in  their  own  world,  and  out  of  this  the
child  savage  derives  the  mental  comfort  he  requires.  As  to
stern  truth,  she  moves  in  a  cold,  hard  world  best  left  untrodden.
In  a  word,  confusion  of  categories,  crude  induction,  uncritical
reasoning,  and  childish  make-believe  go  to  determine  the
character  of  the  general  ideas  formed  in  the  lower  stages  of
human  thought,  and  these  conditions  account  for  animism  and
magic.

6.  Following  what  upon  the  whole  appears  the  best  guidance,
we  have  treated  animism  as  the  lowest  form  in  which  distinct
religious  conceptions  present  themselves,  but  whether  it  is
universally  the  religion  of  the  lowest  races  is  of  course  another
and  even  more  difficult  question.  In  dealing  with  several
branches  of  ethics  we  have  seen  that  the  most  debased  ethical
conceptions  are  not  necessarily  those  which  dominate  the  lowest
strata  of  humanity,  and  we  have  therefore  learnt  to  separate
the  question  what  is  intrinsically  lower  or  higher  from  the
question  what  predominates  at  a  lower  or  higher  stage  of  general
culture.  We  must  therefore  approach  without  prejudice  the
question  whether  the  lowest  form  of  religion  is  universally  or
generally  the  religion  of  the  lowest  grades.  What  answer  then
can  be  given  to  the  question  ?  Whatever  it  be,  it  can  be
couched  in  general  terms  only  and  not  in  universals.  Primitive
beliefs  vary  too  greatly  r.nd  the  evidence  as  to  their  character  is
in  some  cases  too  uncertain  to  admit  of  sweeping  assertions,
particularly  of  sweeping  negatives.  On  the  positive  side  indeed
it  may  be  pretty  confidently  affirmed  (1)  that  the  beliefs  in
either  animism,  magic  or  witchcraft  are  in  one  form  or  another


THE  EARLY PHASES OF  THOUGHT  27

known  to  be  so  general  among  ruder  races  that  we  may  reason
ably  believe  them  to be universal — unless  indeed  there  are
tribes  which  fall  even  below  this  level ; (2)  the  same  beliefs
underlie  the  higher  religions,  and  intermingle  with  them,  only
losing  their  influence  by  slow  degrees  as  the  moral  and  intel
lectual level  rises. These results concur to suggest that
animism  and  magic  are  primitive  beliefs  upon  which  the  higher
religion  and  ethics  are  overlaid. But  if  we  ask  whether  they
make  up  the  total  belief  of  primitive  man  about  the  order  of
nature  and  its  origin,  the  answer  is  not  so  easily  given. The
spirit  of  animism  is  a  rudely  formed  conception  the  function  of
which  is  to  account  for  the  processes  of  life  and  death,  growth
and  decay. It  is  hardly  definite  enough  to  possess  a  personality
and  a  history  of  its  own. It  is  less  than  anthropomorphic  and
in  reality  little  more  than  a  shadowy  double  of  the  facts  to  be
explained. But  from  a  very  early  stage  the  mind  has  another
method  of  explaining  facts  of  nature  or  customs  of  man,  namely
that  of  telling  a  story  about  them  and  how  they  were  set  going
in  the  past,  by  some  personage  of  the  by-gone  times. This
myth-making  is  in  full  vigour  among  the  rude  tribes  of  Central
Australia. Why has the Echidna spines upon  its  body?
Because  in  the  Alcheringa  there  lived  an Echidna  man  who
for  an outrage on sacred ground was pierced with spears.
This  was  the  destruction  of  the  man  himself  and  of  his  totem
kindred,  who  have  never  since  been  re-incarnated  in  man  but
only  in  Echidnas  with  spears  sticking out of  them.1 It is
characteristic  of  these  tales  that  what  happens once  happens
always. The  feature  which  an  animal  acquires  it  hands  on  for
ever  to  its whole species. In fact  the "principle"  of  tale-
telling  as  the  explanation  of  natural  processes  seems  to  be  once
again  that  slippery  identification  of  one  and  all  which  we  found
underlying  imitative  magic  and  totemism. If  so  the  primitive
myth,  so  far  as  it  serves  a  purpose  in  primitive  religion,  still
rests  on  confusions  analogous  to  those  already  examined. It
also  implies  that  capacity  for  freely  imaging  persons,  situations,
and  actions  on  the  analogy  of  experience  which  all  races  and
all  levels  of  culture  share  alike. By  virtue  of  his  myth-making,
the savage can people the world, not merely with spirits
1  Spencer  and  Gillen,  i.  398.


28  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

and  powers,  but  with  persons,  heroes,  or  monsters  with  a  definite
character  and  a  history,  with  wives  and  children,  loves  and  hates,
wars  and  schemes  of  policy,  all  in  a  world  of  their  own  upon  the
mountains,  beneath  the  earth,  or  in  the  sky.

Where  the  mythical  being  comes  into  relation  with  the
origin  and  life  of  nature  or  with  the  customs  and  destinies  of
man  he  may  be  said  to  belong  to  religion,  and  in  quite  the
lowest  levels  we  find  in  fact  creation  myths  connecting  the
origin  of  the  world  with  mythical  beings  of  the  "  Great  Long
Ago."  For  example,  the  Central  Australians  held  that  in  the
Alcheringa  two  beings  arose  out  of  nothing  in  the  western  sky
and  carved  men  out  of  imperfectly  shaped  creatures,  between
animals  and  men.1  According  to  the  Kaitish  tribe  a  spirit-being
named  Atnatu  arose  in  the  sky  before  the  Alcheringa.  He
made  himself  and  has  another  sky  and  sun  which  are  not  ours.
The  stars  are  his  lubras.  He  had  sons  and  daughters  in  the
sky,  but  they  gave  him  no  Churinga,  so  he  threw  them  down  to
earth.  He  is  angry  if  the  bull-roarer  is  not  sounded  at  the
initiation  ceremonies,  and  once  dragged  a  number  of  boys  up
into  the  sky  and  ate  one — but  the  flesh  was  not  good.2

These  creation  myths,  running  down  as  they  do  to  the  lower
strata  of  culture,  raise  at  once  the  question  whether  the
Creators  should  not  be  regarded  as  Supreme  Gods,  and  whether
such  a  belief  is  an  integral  part  of  savage  religions.  Now  the
existence  of  Great  and  Good  Spirits  is  certainly  reported  among
many  primitive  peoples,  but  three  questions  have  to  be  settled
before  we  can  determine  their  place  in  primitive  religion,  viz.  (1)
how  far  are  these  reports  trustworthy,  (2)  how  far,  when  the
Good  Spirit  really  exists,  is  it  an  importation  from  Christianity
or  some  other  civilized  religion,  (3)  how  far  is  the  Good  Spirit,
when  recognized,  an  object  of  worship,  and  therefore  an  integral
part  of  religion.

The  savage  races  among  whom  Great  Spirits  are  principally
found  or  supposed  to  be  found  are  the  Red  Indians  and  the
Australians.  Especial  stress  has  been  laid  by  some  writers  on
the  case  of  the  Australians  on  account  of  their  extremely  low
grade  of  development.  But  recent  research  seems  to  have
established  definitely  that  at  least  among  a  large  proportion  of
1  Spencer  and  Gilleii,  p.  388.  2  lb.,  ii.  498.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT 29

the  tribes  there  is  nothing  comparable  to  the  worship  of  a  Divine
creator  and  sustainer  of  all  things.  With  regard  to  the
natives  of  Central  and  Northern  Australia  Messrs.  Spencer  and
Gillen  have  now  shown  that  while  the  Alcheringa  ancestors  had
superhuman  powers,  there  is  no  instance  of  any  being  regarded
as  a  deity.  There  is  no  idea  of  appealing  to  them  for  protection
nor  of  propitiating  them,  except  in  the  case  of  a  mythic  creature
called  Wollunqua  among  the  Warramunga  tribe  who  is  distinctly
regarded,  not  as  human,  but  as  a  snake.  Further,  the  natives
from  Lake  Eyre  to  the  far  north  and  east  to  the  Gulf  of  Car
pentaria  "  have  no  idea  whatever  of  the  existence  of  any  supreme
being  who  is  pleased  if  they  follow  a  certain  line  of  what
we  call  moral  conduct,  and  displeased  if  they  do  not  do  so."  :
Among  the  tribes  of  South-Eastern  Australia  religious  ideas
as  well  as  social  customs  are  somewhat  more  advanced.  But
here  again,  what  has  sometimes  been  taken  for  a  supreme  god
appears,  when  the  evidence  is  put  together,  rather  as  a
"  venerable,  kindly  headman  of  a  tribe,  full  of  knowledge  and
tribal  wisdom,  and  all-powerful  in  magic,  of  which  he  is  the
source,  with  virtues,  failings,  and  passions  such  as  the  aborigines
regard  them."2  Once  a  chief  on  earth,  he  or  his  spirit  has
now  ascended  with  his  people  to  the  sky  and  rules  them  there,
retaining  some  measure  of  interest  in  the  doings  of  the  tribe
on  earth.  He  is  in  fact  a  spirit  like  the  other  spirits  of  men,
but  greater  and  more  powerful.3

The  other  chief  group  of  primitive  people  who  have  been
held  to  believe  in  a  Divine  Creator  are  the  North  American
Indians.  But  in  this  case  also  investigation  has  rendered  it
probable  that  the  Great  Spirit  is  either  (1)  a  misunderstanding,
or  (2)  borrowed  from  the  whites,  or  (3)  an  anthropomorphic
nature -god.  The  Indian  term  for  spirit,  manitu,  had  a  general
application,  and  was  partly  misunderstood  by  missionaries  and
partly  used  by  them  as  a  stepping-stone  to  the  idea  of  God.4

1  Spencer  and  Gillen,  vol.  ii.,  p.  491.

2  Howitt,  Native  Tribes  of  South-Eastern  Australia,  p.  500.

3  Mr.  Howitt  does  not  regard  such  a  cult  as  equivalent  to  ancestor
worship. The  term  "  father "  used  in  addressing  such  beings  expresses
properly  a  tribal,  not  an  individual  relation,  and  towards  old  men  is  used
as  a  term  of  respect, (ft.,  p.  507.)

4  Tylor,  J.  A.  I.,  xxi.,  pp.  284-8. Good  and  bad  spirits  are  often  found
among  the  South  American  Indians  also,  but  accompanied  with  stories  of


30  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Creation  myths,  however,  are  frequent. The  Sioux  story  of  the
creation  of  man  may  be  taken  as  a  sample.

"Before  the  creation  of  man,  the  Great  Spirit"  (whose  birdlike
tracks  are  yet  to  be  seen)  "  used  to  slay  the  buffaloes  and  eat  them
on  the  ledge  of  the  Red  Rocks.  .  .  .  One  day  when  a  large  snake
had  crawled  into  the  nest  of  the  bird  to  eat  his  eggs,  one  of  the
eggs  hatched  out  in  a  clap  of  thunder,  and  the  Great  Spirit  catching
hold  of  a  piece  of  the  pipe-stone  to  throw  at  the  snake  moulded  it
into  a  man.  This  man's  feet  grew  fast  in  the  ground,  where  he
stood  for  many  ages  like  a  great  tree,  and  therefore  he  grew  very
old  :  he  was  older  than  a  hundred  men  at  the  present  day  ;  and  at
last  another  tree  grew  up  by  the  side  of  him,  when  a  large  snake
ate  them  off  both  at  the  roots,  and  they  wandered  off  together ;
from  these  have  sprung  all  the  people  that  now  inhabit  the  earth." 1

Here  the  Great  Spirit  is  conceived  in  bird  form  and  the  whole
story  is  in  the  crudest  style  of  myth-making.  In  other  cases
the  Great  Spirit  is  merely  the  Sun  or  spirit  of  the  Sun — as  the
following  hymn  shows : —

"At  the  place  of  light,

At  the  end  of  the  sky,

I  (the  Great  Spirit),

Come  and  hang. Bright  Sign.


I  am  the  living  body  of  the  Great  Spirit  above,
(The  Great  Spirit,  the  Everlasting  Spirit  above).


I  illumine  earth,
I  illumine  heaven." 2

Many  of  the  expressions  in  the  hymn  taken  singly  would
appear  to  describe  a  supreme  spiritual  being  comparable  to  the
God  of  civilized  religion,  but,  as  the  context  shows,  they  are  in
fact  applied  to  the  Sun.  So  easy  is  it  for  one  form  of  religion  to
use  for  its  purposes  the  terms  and  expressions  familiar  to  another

the  deluge,  the  creation  of  Eve,  etc.,  which  betray  their  origin.  Professor
Tyler's  view  is  corroborated  for  the  Californian  Indians  by  Major  Powers
(S.  Powers,  Tribes  of  California,  p.  413),  who  writes  that,  except  for  a  few
tribes  in  the  north,  "  I  am  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  great  majority  of
the  California  Indians  had  no  conception  whatever  of  a  Supreme  Being."
Their  real  belief  was  in  the  coyote,  while  the  Great  Man  or  Old  Man  above
was  a  mere  modern  graft  acquired  from  the  whites.

1  Catlin,  North  American,  Indians,  ii.  168.  2  Schoolcraft,  1.  398.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  31

of  quite  different  rank.  Probably  the  very  vagueness  of  the
term  "  Manitu  "  has  lent  itself  to  misinterpretation.  The  Indian
spirits  are  so  little  individualized  that  they  all  seemed  one  to
the  inquirer.  The  marked  individualities  of  Polytheism  were
not  yet  attained — still  less  were  they  overcome  and  merged  in
the  unity  of  a  single  Divine  nature.1

Lastly,  where  great  and  good  spirits  are  recognized  in  savage
religion  we  constantly  find  that  they  are  in  practice  neglected
for  the  active,  present,  and  possibly  dangerous  spirits  of  the
immediate  surroundings  of  man.  The  evidence  on  this  point
comes  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  The  good  spirits,  the  Algon
quin  held,  could  only  do  good.  It  was  the  bad  ones  that  needed
propitiation.2  The  Dakotahs  knew  little  about  what  the  Great
Spirit  would  do.  All  the  fear  they  had  was  of  the  spirits  of  the
departed.3  The  Caribs  recognized  a  higher  spirit,  but  paid  him
no  honours.4  Thus  even  when  the  belief  in  a  greater  god  has,
from  whatever  cause,  arisen,  it  maintains  no  touch  with  the
working  religion  of  the  savage.  It  is  an  exotic,  and  not  the
normal  and  native  expression  of  savage  modes  of  thought.

It  appears  then  upon  the  whole  that  while  animism  and
magic  are  the  dominant  forms  of  the  savage's  beliefs  and
determine  his  attitude  to  nature,  he  also,  by  the  play  of  fancy
acting  upon  his  experience,  by  the  modes  of  linking  thought  to
thought  of  which  he  is  capable,  invents  beings  which  are  not

1  Of.  De  la  Saussaye,  Manual  of  Religion,  vol.  i.,  p.  273. A  race  may
recognize  one  god  because  it  has  not  imagination  enough  to  differentiate
distinct  objects  and  functions,  or  because  it  has attained  a  measure  of
insight  into  the  unity  which  runs  through  all  differences  and  joins  divers
parts  into  one  framework. The  results  would  agree  on  one  point,  but  they
would  belong  to  wholly  different  mental  grades. Some  such  misconception
perhaps  influences  Australian  travellers,  the  vague  statement  of  the  natives
that  some  mystical  being  made  "everything"  being  taken  with  the  fulness
of  connotation  which  the  word  possesses  for  the civilized  mind. The
Australian  means  rather,  "all  the  things  you  see  about  you" — things  gener
ally,  without  any  precise  limit. His  "  everything  "  is  a  mere  vague  gener
ality,  and  the  creator  of  it  far  below  the  distinctly  individualized  deity  of
Polytheism  with  a  definite  province  marked  out  for  him. (See  Spencer  and
Gillen,  vol.  ii.,  p.  492.)

2  Schoolcraft-Drake,  i.  152.  3  Schoolcraft,  ii.  195.

4  Waitz,  vol.  iii.,  p.  385  ;  De  la  Saussaye,  vol.  i.,  p.  262  (Negroes)  ;
Powers,  op.  cit.,  p.  413  (Californian  Indians  recognize  an  Old  Man  above,
but  the  coyote  is  the  most  useful  and  practical  deity)  ;  Waltz,  vol.  iii.,  p.  345
(Tribes  of  the  Interior  of  Oregon);  Godden,  /.  A.  I.,  xxvii.  p.  30
(Angami  Nagas  said  to  have  vague  beliefs  in  a  Supreme  Being,  but  look  on
him  as  too  great  and  good  to  injure  them).


32  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

mere  spirits  behind  the  objects  that  surround  him,  but  are
genuine  mythical  creations.  These  play  a  part  in  the  theory
of  the  world,  explaining  the  origin  of  customs  and  sometimes
accounting  for  the  creation  of  man  or  even  of  the  world  itself.
They  are  conceived  at  any  rate  in  the  lowest  grade — we  shall
speak  of  a  higher  grade  presently — as  animals,  men,  or  monsters
in  the  forms  familiar  to  the  magical  and  animistic  way  of
thought.  Often  they  are  ancestors,  or  men  of  the  Long  Ago.
Though  they  perform  some  of  the  functions  of  a  supreme  God,
that  conception  is  apparently  uncongenial  to  savagery.  That  it
has  ever  arisen  spontaneously  within  its  limits  is  on  the  whole
improbable,  and  when  imported  it  does  not  readily  effect  a
living  union  with  the  practical  religion.  This  religion  is  animism
working  through  magic  and  supplemented  by  magic.

7.  Above  the  spirits  of  Animism  rank  the  greater  gods  of
Polytheism.  It  is  easier  to  feel  than  to  define  the  difference
between  a  "  spirit "  and  a  "  god,"  but  we  get  the  clue  if  we  turn
back  in  mind  to  the  ambiguities  which  we  find  at  a  stratum  of
thought  which  is  a  little  bit  above  the  lowest,  between  the
indwelling  spirit  and  a  spirit  which  directs  or  governs  an  object
in  which  it  dwells  no  longer.  Often  these  are  ambiguities
which  from  the  nature  of  the  case  it  is  not  possible  for  the
civilized  investigator  to  resolve.  The  spirit  which  dwells  in  an
object,  but  which  can  leave  it  and  enter  another,  may  clearly
pass  by  easy  transitions  into  a  spirit  which  does  not  necessarily
dwell  in  any  object  at  all,  but  haunts  it,  or  even,  ceasing  to
haunt  it,  retains  control  over  it.  On  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,
Captain  Ellis  associates  the  transition  with  the  rise  of  images.
The  Tshi,  for  the  most  part,  recognize  indwelling  spirits,  but
when  they  make  an  image  of  the  spirit,  which  must  in  the  early
stages  be  made  of  a  fragment  of  the  thing  in  which
the  spirit  dwells,  the  tie  between  spirit  and  thing  is  weakened.
In  fact  it  is  clear  that,  to  dwell  both  in  the  image  and  in  the
thing,  the  spirit  must  be  in  both  places  at  once.  In  reality  he
becomes  most  identified  with  his  place  of  worship,  and  so
becomes  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  village  in  which  his  shrine
is  placed,  and  this  is,  says  Captain  Ellis,  the  highest  stage
reached  among  the  Tshi,  where  most  of  the  gods  worshipped


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  33

are  simply  the  indwelling  spirits  of  prominent  natural  objects  in
the  neighbourhood.  The  ghost-gods,  who  were  originally  human
spirits,  have  a  separate  origin  but  similar  history.  The  skull
is  brought  into  the  temple,  and  so  imparts  a  guardian  ghost.
Many  such  ghosts,  again,  become  tutelary  deities  and  are  often
blended  with  nature  deities.1

But  the  neighbouring  and  more  advanced  Yoruba-speaking
peoples  have  greater  gods  than  these.  They  have  replaced  the
local  gods  to  a  large  extent  by  the  gods  of  the  whole  people,  and
these  are  the  gods  who  personify  or  direct  the  great  natural
forces.  They  are  distinctly  separate  from  the  natural  objects
which  they,  or  some  of  them,  represent ;  and  here  we  sometimes
seem  to  see  the  transition  going  on  before  our  eyes.  Thus  the
great  god,  Olorun,  is  described  as  the  Deified  Firmament  or
Personal  Sky.  He  is  an  old  god,  and  he  is  too  distant  and
lazy  to  interfere  in  the  world's  affairs,  and  for  this  reason  he
has  dropped  out  of  worship.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  his
sphere  is  strictly  limited ;  he  only  controls  the  sky.  "  A  man,"
runs  one  of  their  proverbs,  "cannot  cause  rain  to  fall,  and
Olorun  cannot  give  you  a  child."  Olorun  made  Obatala,  who
is  also  the  god  of  the  sky  and  of  the  earth  as  well ;  but  he  is
an  anthropomorphic  god ;  he  made  the  first  man  and  woman,
he  creates  each  new-born  child;  he  causes  deformities  as  a
punishment  for  neglect,  and  he  has  an  oracle  by  which  the  guilt
of  accused  people  is  decided.  Similarly,  a  minor  god,  Olokun,
is  not  the  Sea  regarded  as  a  living  being,  but  an  anthropomorphic
deity  who  controls  the  sea.2

The  greater  gods,  then,  are  conceived  as  human,  and  as  being
distinct  from  that  which  they  control  and  out  of  which  the  con
ception  of  them  is  evolved.  As  Mr.  Frazer  points  out,  when  the
tree  ceases  to  be  the  body  of  the  tree-spirit,  and  becomes  simply
its  abode,  the  tree  becomes  "  merely  a  lifeless  inert  mass,"  while
the  spirit  tends  to  assume  the  body  of  a  man,  and  "  ceasing  to  be
a  tree-soul,  becomes  a  forest-god."  3  And  just  as  spirits  dwelling
in  trees  are  replaced  by  a  god  on  whom  the  life  of  trees  depends,
so  the  spirits  who  dwell  in  water  give  place  to  a  lord  of  the  sea,
and  the  divine  sky  to  a  God  who  directs  rain  and  snow,  thunder

1  A.  B.  Ellis,  The  Yoruba-speaking  Peoples,  pp.  276-284. 2  /&.,  34-70.
a  Frazer,  i.  188. Numerous  illustrations  are  subjoined.

VOL.  II.  r,


and  lightning,  a  king  who  reigns  over  skyland. Thus  in  Greek
religion  the  worship  of  Ouranos  dies  away  and  yields  to  that  of
Zeus.1 A  place  is  indeed  found  for  the  discarded  Ouranos  m
the  theogonies  which  now  become  a  feature  of  religious  life.
For  the  anthropomorphism,  of  which  the  rudiments  have  already
been  noted  in  savage  myth-making,  now  receives  a  great  ex
tension. The  genealogies,  the  births  and  marriages  of  the  gods,
their  loves  and  hates,  their  deeds  of  prowess,  are  drawn  out  with
exuberant  fancy. Often,  as  we  know,  the  gods  retain  traces  of
their  lowly  origin ;  they  are  associated  with  the  animals  or  spots
or  other  natural  objects  from  which  they  were  originally  derived.
Hence  the  hawk-headed  or  ibis-headed  gods  of  Egypt,  hence  the
animals  sacred  to  gods,  the  clean  and  the  unclean;  hence  many
a  practice  explained  mythically,  but  in  its  origin  simply  a  piece
of  magic  or  animism.2 But  though  the  gods  retain  traces,  more
or  less  marked  as  the  case  may  be,  of  their  not  too  honourable
descent,  they  become,  as  the  religious  life  advances,  more  and
i  I  am  assuming  the  truth  of  the  common  view  that  Zeus  himselfwaa
originally  the  sky,  though  from  Mr.  FarnelTs  account  (Oults  of  the  Greek
States  vol  i chap,  iv.)!  this  would  seem  not  quite  so  clear. In  Arcad  a
he  was  the  thunder^  i.e.  the  thunder  itself  was  the  god  (p.  45) At  O  yinpia
Z^s  Karcu^TT,* Zeus  as  descending  in  the  thunder,  is  worshipped  (p.  46).
lint  in  /Eschvliis  /carat's  is  the  epithet  not  of  Zeus  himseli  but  of  the
hinder see  IV  Prometheus  Vinctus),  and  the  thunder  is  not  Zeus,  but  hi.
"sleepless  dart/' Observe  the  three  stages  here. In  the  first  Zeus  is  the
thunder In  the  third  he  is  a  personal  god  who  wields  it. In  the  second
he  San  ambiguous  condition,  descending  in  the  thunder,  yet j^mmgly
more  than  the  thunder  itself-the  descent  is  one  of  his  epithets ; or s
Oriental  thought  might  conceive  it,  one  of  his  incarnations. The  thunder
itself  is  also  animated  in  ^schylus,  "sleepless"  and  "  breathing  flame
but  we  are  to  take  this  as  conscious  poetry,  not  as  simple  animism. What
ever  the  truth  as  to  the  original  nature  of  Zeus,  this  development  may  stand
a3  typical  of  the  transition  from  animism  to  Polytheism.

In  Latin  the  use  of  Jupiter  for  the  sky  persists  in  literature  of  the
classical  period  (tub  Jove  frigtio).  But  in  act  it  seems  very  doubtful
whether  the  native  Roman  religion  ever  rose  above  the  conception  of  spirits
presiding  over  places,  persons,  and  especially  functions.  (Wl88°wJ>£^?!*
£S  A£U  der  Eomer,  especially  pp.  20-28,  and  Saussaye  LehrM  der
Meligionsgeschichte,  vol.  ii.,  p.  203,  ••  Die  romische  Religion  at^le  m*h  taef
ft  Animismus.")  The  anthropomorphic  impulse  came  from  the  Greeks.

a DrFrazer  even  says  (Golden  Bough,  vol.  ii.,p.  167)  that  "we  may  .con
jecture  that  whenever  a  god  is  described  as  the  eater  of  a  particular  animal,
the  animal  in  question  was  originally  nothing  but  the  god  himself.  In
any  easeVe  association  till  recently  so  unintelligible  of  an  ^ropomf  phic
god  with  animals,  plants,  stones,  and  general  y  with  quasi-feti.  h  objects  an
savage  rites,  is  now  explained  as  referable,  with  very  high  probability,  to  a
form  of  religious  conservatisin-an  old  rite  being  maintained  in  association
with  the  worship  of  a  new  god.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  35

more  distinctively  human,  and  in  becoming  human  they  also
become  superhuman.  They  are  endowed  at  least  with  larger
powers,  with  longer  life,  or  with  immortality,  and  in  many  cases
also  with  physical,  mental,  and  moral  attributes  of  which  more
will  be  said  later.

This  beginning  of  idealism  must  be  regarded  as  the  final
condition  which  the  spirit  must  fulfil  in  order  to  become  a
god.  The  gods  of  Polytheism  are  great  gods,  and  often  have
troops  of  spirits  in  subservience  to  them.  The  typical  relation
indeed  is,  as  Comte  long  ago  pointed  out,  comparable  to  that
between  a  species  and  an  individual.  The  spirit  of  a  tree
strictly  regarded  is  limited  to  that  tree  and  functions  only  in
this  spot.  A  tree-god  controls  all  trees.  Similarly  all  the
great  gods  control  either  large  provinces  of  nature — sea,  earthy
sky  (Zeus,  Poseidon,  Hades),  or  are  protectors  of  the  people,
national  gods  (Yahveh,  Ashur,  Athene),  or  preside  over  one  or
more  of  the  main  human  functions  (Ares,  Aphrodite).  Thus
in  the  conceptions  underlying  them  there  are  beginnings  of  a
higher  unity,  an  approach  to  order  in  the  religious  basis  of
life,  which  is  carried  further  as  by  the  anthropomorphizing
genealogies  and  hierarchies  the  many  gods  are  brought  into
subjection  to  one  father  and  ruler  of  all.1

The  gods  then,  as  opposed  to  the  spirits,  are  clearly  distinct
from  the  natural  objects  which  they  govern,  or  the  functions
which  they  direct.  They  are  anthropomorphic,  and  so  tend  to
be  connected  by  family  and  political  relationships.  They  control
the  great  powers  of  nature  and  the  main  functions  of  life.
And  while  human  they  are  also  superhuman,  and  at  their  best
lend  themselves  to  ideal  forms  of  beauty  and  of  ethical  thought.

1  Inasmuch  as  the  gods  have  personalities  which  have  hardened  into  con
crete  individuals  sharply  opposed  to  one  another,  it  might  seem  rather  that
polytheism  has  carried  us  farther  away  than  animism  from  the  unity  of  nature,
and  that  where  (as  in  the  indigenous  Chinese  religion)  we  have  one  supreme
spirit  of  the  sky  and  one  of  the  earth,  we  are  nearer  to  unity.  But  that  is
misleading.  Such  unity  as  we  find  in  animism  is  the  unity  of  a  blur,  the
unity  which  precedes  differentiation.  The  Chinese  religion— an  exceptional
survival  of  animism  in  a  high  but  very  conservative  civilization— no  doubt
arrives  at  a  systematization  in  which  something  like  the  hierarchy  of  Poly
theism  is  reproduced  ;  but,  if  I  understand  it  aright,  in  a  much  less  articu
late  fashion.  What,  e.  g.,  is  the  relation  between  the  earth  spirit  and  the
countless  spirits  of  hills,  groves,  rivers,  etc.,  upon  the  earth  ?  To  this
Polytheism  would  have  a  definite  answer.  They  would  be  subjects,  or
daughters,  of  the  earth-mother.


36  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

8 If  Animism  is  the  typical  religion  of  savagery,  the  cult  of
the  greater  gods  has  its  central  point  in  the  earlier  civilizations.
Yet  to  describe  the  religion  of  these  civilizations  would  not
be to  describe  polytheism. We  have  defined  polytheism  by
marking  it out sharply  from  animism  on the one  side,  a
(by  implication)  from  monotheism  on  the  other. But  m  t
concrete  development  of  religious  history  these  demarcations
are  precisely  what  we  do  not  find. The  religion  of  the  early
civilizations  is a  mass of  conceptions  in  which,  around the
figures  of  the  greater  gods,  a  surge  of  primitive  animistic  and
mUic  practices  rises  and  falls,  while  here  and  there  through
the°obscurity  there  dimly  looms  the  outline  of  a  higher  principle.
Thus  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  two  most  ancient  civilizations,
we  have  in  Babylonia  and  Egypt,  amid  much  that  is  obscure,
fairly  typical  examples  of  the  stage  of  polytheism  m  which  the
animistic  foundation is plainly  visible,  in  which magic
plays  an  important  part,  in  which  the  conception  of  godhe*
retains  plentiful  traces  of  its  lowly  origin,  while  on  the  oti
hand  there  are  the  beginnings  evident  of  the  stage  of  thought
which  was  destined  to  supersede  polytheism. These  religions
in  fact  have  their  centre  of  gravity  in  the  polytheistic  phase,
while they  put  out ramifications  into the  phases

1  The  greater  gods  of  the  Egyptian  pantheon  are  as  they  stand
in  the  historical  period  impersonations  of  the  greater  forces  that
surrounded  the  Egyptian  and  controlled  his  life-
earth,  the  stars,  the  sun,  the  Nile."  > In  its  early  phase
religious  development  seems  to  have  proceeded  independently
but  on parallel lines  in  the  partially independent  nomes  or
districts  into  which  Egypt  was  divided. Each  of  these  origina  ly
had its  chief  god,  who  very  often  personified  the  same  natura
attributes  under  a  different  name. In  particular "wherever
there  is  some  important  change  in  the  river  (Nile there  t
(these  incarnations  of  the  river)  are  more  especially  ,

ai^h7rtuTof  this  multiplicity,  as  the  different  cults  came

.  Maspero,  2V*  D^  of  OMfMm ,M .-86. Mi  of  Bute  denoted  the
black  vegetable  mould  of  the  valley. (/!>.,  99-)
a  Maspero,  99.


THE  EARLY PHASES OF  THOUGHT  37

into  relation  to  each  other,  was  a  mythology  of  luxuriant
confusions  and  inconsistencies,  which  led  the  Egyptian  priest
hood  to  attempt  a  remarkable  solution.  To  this  we  shall  have
to  refer  a  little  later.  But  let  us  first  notice  that  these  greater
gods  are  in  all  probability  not  the  primary  deities  of  the
Egyptian  religion,  which  has  its  roots  rather  in  primitive
animism.  The  association  of  many  of  the  Egyptian  gods  with
a  special  sacred  animal  has  from  the  days  of  the  Greek  travellers
down  to  the  present  generation  been  a  puzzle  of  the  greatest
difficulty.  Further  research  into  the  earliest  Egyptian  monu
ments  coincides  with  the  results  drawn  from  comparative
religion  in  making  probable  that  the  animal  is  not  the  secondary
figure  in  the  cult,  but,  at  least  in  point  of  time,  the  primary.
The  Egyptians  had  an  animistic  religion  before  they  worshipped
the  greater  gods  Osiris  and  Ptah.  The  hawk-headed  figure  of
Horus  represents  pictorially  a  combination. between  the  worship
of  the  Sun-god  and  the  earlier  worship  of  the  hawk  itself.  The
worship  of  Sekhet  in  the  form  of  a  cat-headed  or  lion-headed
woman,  again,  blends  an  anthropomorphic  cult  with  the  more
primitive  adoration  of  the  cat  tribe.  Like  other  people  in  the
animistic  stage,  in  short,  the  early  Egyptians  worshipped
animals  and  other  natural  objects,  while  the  later  Egyptians
tended  to  conceive  of  the  deities  as  anthropomorphic,  super
human  spirits,  and  the  historical  Egyptian  religion  or  mythology
was  a  compromise  or  blending  of  the  lower  and  the  higher.
Even  the  greater  gods  retained  many  traces  of  their  animistic
origin.  The  Egyptian  deities,  though  great  spirits,  are  by  no
means  necessarily  emancipated  from  either  the  weaknesses
or  the  wickednesses  of  man.1  They  have  their  wives — not  only
goddesses,  but  harems  of  mortal  women,  priestesses  of  the
temples.  Not  only  do  they  marry  and  are  given  in  marriage,
but  they  die  like  men  and  require  burial.  Like  men  they  have
a  composite  nature,  consisting  of  soul  and  body.  The  soul
might  be  an  insect,  a  bird,  a  shadow,  or  a  double — Ka — and
this  latter  was  not  essentially  different  from  the  Ka  of  man.
Gods  in  fact  were  virtually  conceived  as  men  in  their  essential
nature,  having  bones,  flesh  and  blood,  and  a  mysterious  fluid,
Sa,  the  source  of  vigour,  with  which  they  could  impregnate

1  Maspero,  p.  126.


38  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

man.1  The  dead  god,  like  the  dead  man,  required  food  and
a  house — his  temple.  Indeed  he  could  do  with  many  temples,
dividing  his  double  among  them  in  accordance  with  the
accommodating  looseness  of  texture  which  that  entity  everywhere
enjoys.  He  might  be  incorporated  in  a  statue  or  in  a  sacred
animal.2  Some  gods  remained  the  same  after  death,  as  Osiris ;
others  changed  their  names  and  perhaps  their  character.
Maspero  writes:

"Thoir  doubles,  like  those  of  men,  both  dreaded  and  regretted
the  light.  All  sentiment  was  extinguished  by  the  hunger  from
which  they  suffered,  and  gods  who  were  noted  for  their  compassionate
kindness  when  alive,  became  pitiless  and  ferocious  tyrants  in  the
tomb.  When  once  men  were  bidden  to  the  presence  of  Sokarls,
Khontamentit,  or  even  of  Osiris,  'mortals  come,  terrifying  their
hearts  with  fear  of  the  god,  and  none  dareth  to  look  him  in  the
face  either  among  gods  or  men ;  for  him  the  great  are  as  the  small.
He  spareth  not  those  who  love  him;  he  beareth  away  the  child
from  its  mother,  and  the  old  man  who  walketh  on  his  way ;  full  of
fear,  all  creatures  make  supplication  before  him,  but  he  turneth
not  his  face  towards  them.'  Only  by  the  unfailing  payment  of
tribute,  and  by  feeding  him  as  though  he  were  a  simple  human
double,  could  living  or  dead  escape  the  consequences  of  his  furious
temper."  .  .  .

All  offerings  to  the  dead  were  presented  to  him  : —

"  He  was  humbly  prayed  to  transmit  them  to  such  or  such  a  double,
whose  name  and  parentage  were  pointed  out  to  him.  He  took
possession  of  them,  kept  part  for  his  own  use,  and  of  his  bounty
gave  the  remainder  to  its  destined  recipient."3

In  Egypt,  as  among  other  primitive  peoples,  "  men  did  not
die.  They  were  assassinated."  The  murderer  might  belong
to  their  world  and  be  recognized  as  another  man,  an  animal,
an  inanimate  object.  Or  he  might  be  a  spirit,  a  god,  demon,
or  disembodied  soul.4  At  least  in  the  earlier  period  some  of
the  gods  were  cannibals.  Sahu,  i.e.  Orion,  is  represented  on
the  pyramid  of  Unas  in  the  sixth  dynasty  as  a  hunter.  He
hunted  the  gods,  killed  and  devoured  them,  and  by  so  doing,
in  accordance  with  true  cannibal  theory,  assimilated  their

1  Maspero,  108-110.  *  16.,  116-19.

«  Ib.,  117-18.  4  J6.,  111.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  39

virtues.1 But  what  is  even  more  remarkable,  a  man  might  do
the  same thing,  and,  by so doing,  obtain control over the
divinity. King  Unas,  in  his  address  to the deities  of  the
dead,  boasts  that  the  gods  have  been  lassoed  for  Unas  by  one
power,  brought  towards  him  by  another. "  Shosmu  has  cut
them up for Unas and had the pieces cooked in broiling
cauldrons. It  is  Unas  who  devours  their  magical  virtues  and
eats  their  souls,  and  the  great  ones  among  them  are  for  Unas'
feast  in  the  morning,  the  middle  ones  among  them,  male  and
female,  are  for  his  roast  meat,  the  small  ones  for  his  evening
meal. The  old ones,  male  and  female,  are  for  his  furnace."
Again,  "  the  inhabitants  of  the  sky  are  made  his  servants,  and
the  limbs  of  their  womenkind  are  thrown  into  the  cauldrons.
Unas  has  taken  the  hearts  of  the  gods,  has  devoured  the  red
crown,  has  eaten  the  white. His  victuals  are  those  whose  magic
virtues  are  nourished  on  hearts,  he  has  eaten  the  wisdom  of
every  god."  2 It  is  to  us  a  little  bizarre  for  a  man  to  recommend
himself  to  the  heavenly  hjost  on  the  ground  that  he  has  eaten
them,  but  the  animistic  view  of  nature,  with  its  spirits,  that
are  at  once  immaterial  and  material,  that  can  live  by  perishing,
that  may  nourish  man  yet  exist  apart  from  him,  which  are
more  powerful  than  he  and  yet  controllable  by  him,  solves  all
these  contradictions. Unas  controls  the  gods  because  he  has
possessed  himself  of  their  virtues  by  eating  them. Isis  obtained
control  over  Ra  in  his  decrepit  old  age  by  stealing  his  name,
by  the  knowledge  of  which  she  had  over  him  a  magical  control.
In the same  way  men  could control the gods by magical
incantations,  the  use  of  wax  effigies,  etc.3 This  is  in  line  with
the  lowest  ideas  of  witchcraft. Side  by  side  with  it  we  find
the  typical  conceptions  of  anthropomorphic  religion,  e.g.  sacrifice
as  a  contract  between  deity  and  worshipper. The  god  himself
prescribes  the  details,  and  of  course  undertakes  to  fulfil his
side  of  the  bargain. He  abolishes  human  sacrifice,  declaring
that  he  will  be  satisfied  with  an  animal. But  he  is  still  a
stickler  for  form. Any  error  of  detail  would  void  the  contract,
and  this  is  all  to  the  good  of  the  priestly  order.

1  Maspero, The  Dawn  of  Civilization,  97,  98.

a  Maspero,  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  p.  59  ft'.

3  Maspero,  The  Datvn  of  Civilization,  212,  214.


40  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

But  if  on  its  lower  side  the  Egyptian  religion  is  thus  rooted
in  animism  and  magic,  if  the  gods  figure  almost  as  demons  who
destroy  men,  and  are  responsible  for  such  deaths  as  cannot  be
assigned  to  obvious  physical  causes,  if  they  have  human  con
cubines  and  can  be  controlled  by  magic— on  its  other  side  the
esoteric  philosophy  of  the  priests  tends  to  transcend  polytheism,
and  to  conceive  the  ultimate  unity  of  the  Divine.  The  very
multiplicity  of  gods— especially  of  gods  with  similar  functions
and  differing  only  in  name— was  a  stimulus  to  thought,  and
called  for  some  theory  to  explain  so  bewildering  a  confusion.
As  the  unity  of  Egyptian  culture  grew,  the  separate  nome-gods
were  necessarily  united  in  one  pantheon.  In  each  nome  a  local
trinity  or  triad  was  found,  the  nome-god  being  associated  some
times  with  wife  and  son,  sometimes  with  two  goddesses,  "  who
were  at  once  his  sisters  and  his  wives  according  to  the  national
custom."1  Whether  deliberately  introduced  for  the  purpose
or  not,  the  system  of  triads  had  the  effect  of  reconciling  the
supremacy  of  the  old  nome-gods  in  each  locality  with  a  recog
nition  of  gods  originating  in  other  parts.  The  god  who  was
supreme  in  one  nome  would  enter  the  triad  of  another  nome  in
a  subordinate  position.

"  Hathor,  supreme  at  Denderah,  shrank  into  insignificance  before
her  husband,  Haroeris,  at  Edfu.  ...  On  the  other  hand,  Haroeris,
when  at  Denderah  .  .  .  was  nothing  more  than  the  almost  useless
consort  of  the  lady  Hathor."2

But  what  is  principally  to  our  purpose  is  that  in  this  system
of  Triads,  and  of  more  complex  Enneads  of  gods  and  goddesses,
two  processes  of  identification  went  forward.  With  the  slippery
use  of  identity  in  early  thought,  the  personalities  of  father  and
son  within  the  triad  slid  into  one  another.  The  son's  "  being
was  but  a  feeble  reflection  of  his  father's,  and  possessed  neither
life  nor  power  except  as  derived  from  him.  Two  such  contigu
ous  personalities  must  needs  have  been  confused,  and,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  were  so  confused  as  to  become  at  length  nothing
more  than  two  aspects  of  the  same  god,  who  united  in  his  own
person  degrees  of  relationship  mutually  exclusive  of  each  other
in  a  human  family.  Father,  inasmuch  as  he  was  the  first
member  of  the  triad ;  son,  by  virtue  of  being  its  third  member ;
1  Maspero,  The  Daion  of  Civilization,  104.  »  B.,  106.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  41

identical  with  himself  in  both  capacities,  he  was  at  once  his
own  father,  his  own  son,  and  the  husband  of  his  mother." l

Such  identifications  are  not  the  reflective  product  of  a  pro
found  mysticism  which  has  seen  into  the  recesses  of  the  problem
of  identity  and  difference,  but  rather  the  naive  creation  of
shapeless  early  thought  for  which  that  problem  has  not  yet
arisen  because  personality  has  not  yet  hardened  itself  into  the
clear  crystal  of  an  individual  concept.  But  this  blurring  or
merging  of  two  persons  was  followed  by  a  more  thoroughgoing
identification.  Owing  to  the  identity  of  their  position  in  the
triads,  all  the  divine  sons  were  step  by  step  identified  with  one
another  as  sons ;  all  were,  as  it  were,  manifestations  of  divine
sonship.  But  father  and  son  being  already  identified,  this  could
only  lead  to  a  doctrine  that  under  many  names,  in  many  shapes,
at  divers  places,  one  deity  was  the  real  object  of  worship.  But
we  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  was  to  reach  monotheism  as  we
understand  the  term.  The  many  gods  may  be  forms  of  one
God,  yet  each  form  may  be  as  real  as  the  substance.  The
one  god  of  monotheism  is  a  jealous  God,  who  pulls  down  the
temples  of  his  rivals  and  either  expels  them  from  the  domain  of
reality  or  reduces  them  to  the  rank  of  outcasts  under  the  name
of  demons.  But  the  One  Being,  reached  by  the  method  of
slippery  identification,  is  not  distinct  enough  to  be  exclusive.
He  is  as  much  a  Pantheist  as  a  Monotheist  creation.  His  own
personality  is  not  cut  clear  enough  to  exclude  that  of  others.
His  many  forms,  each  in  its  own  locality,  are  more  living  than
his  substance.

"This  conception  of  deity  towards  which  their  ideas  were  con
verging  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  conception  of  the  God
of  our  modern  religions  and  philosophies.  No  god  of  the  Egyptians
was  ever  spoken  of  simply  as  'God.'  Tumu  was  the  'one  and
only  god '— Nutir  tJau  tTMti — at  Hcliopolis ;  Anhuri-Shu  was  also
the  '  one  and  only  god '  at  Scbenny tos  and  at  Thinis.  The  unity  of
Atumu  did  not  interfere  with  that  of  Anhuri-Shu,  but  each  of  these
gods,  although  the  '  sole '  deity  in  his  own  domain,  ceased  to  be  so
in  the  domain  of  the  other.  The  feudal  spirit,  always  alert  and
jealous,  prevented  the  higher  dogma,  which  was  dimly  apprehended
in  the  temples,  from  triumphing  over  local  religions  and  extending

1  Loc.  cit.


42  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

over  the  whole  land.  Egypt  had  as  many  '  sole '  deities  as  she  had
large  cities,  or  even  important  temples.  She  never  accepted  the
idea  of  the  sole  god,  'beside  whom  there  is  none  other.'"1

Thus  Egyptian  religion  is  monotheistic  in  tendency  rather
than  in  achievement,  since  the  thought  which  led  in  that
direction  rested  rather  on  a  reversion  to  primitive  vagueness  of
identification  than  on  the  strengthening  grasp  of  a  clear-cut  con
ception  of  the  divine.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  on  its
higher  side  Egyptian  religion  is  intimately  associated  with
morality.  It  is  here  that  we  first  find  a  judgment  of  the  dead,
a  God  before  whom  every  soul  must  plead,  and  with  whom  the
justified  soul  is  made  one.  To  the  details  of  this  judgment  we
must  return  later.  To  conclude  our  present  account2  of  the
monotheistic  tendency  in  Egypt  with  its  ethical  leanings,  some
hymns  to  Amen  Ra  of  the  period  of  the  new  kingdom  may
suffice.
"  Hearing  the  complaint  of  him  who  is  oppressed,

Kindly  of  heart  when  called  upon,

He  delivereth  the  timid  from  him  who  is  of  a  froward  heart,

He  judgeth  the  cause  of  the  weak  and  the  oppressed.  .  .  .

One  and  only  one,  maker  of  all  that  are,

From  whose  eyes  mankind  issued,

By  whose  mouth  the  gods  were  created,

Who  makest  the  herbage,  and  makest  to  live  the  cattle,  goats,
swine  and  sheep,  etc.,  etc.  .  .  .

Sole  king  is  he  even  in  the  midst  of  the  gods ;

Many  are  his  names,  none  knoweth  their  number,

He  riseth  on  the  horizon  of  the  east,  he  is  laid  to  rest  on  the
horizon  of  the  west.  .  .  .

In  the  morning  he  is  born  each  day ;

Thoth  raiseth  his  eyes,

And  propitiateth  him  with  his  benefits.  .  .  .

Thy  crew  rejoice

When  they  see  the  overthrow  of  the  wicked  one,

Whose  members  taste  the  knife ;

The  flame  devoureth  him ;

His  soul  is  more  punished  than  his  body ;

1  Maspero,  The  Dawn  of  Civilization,  152.

2  I  do  not  speak  here  of  the  exceptional  attempt  of  Amen  Hotep  IV.  to
introduce  Bun-worship,  in  substitution  for  all  other  cults. This,  I  imagine,
was  an  abortive  attempt  at  monolatry  rather  than  monotheism.


THE  EABLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  43

That  Nak  serpent,  ho  is  deprived  of  movement.
Mighty  prince  of  the  gods

.  Making  mankind,  creating  all  that  is."  ]

This  is  not  monotheism.  It  reminds  us  rather  of  the  psalm
that  begins,  "  God  sat  among  the  congregation  of  gods,"  in  which
Jehovah  appears  as  the  chief  figure  of  a  Pantheon.  It  reminds
us  still  more  forcibly  of  the  Vedic  hymns  in  which  each  god  in
turn  is  extolled  as  the  one  and  only  god.  But  though  it  is  not
monotheism,  it  is  a  religious  conception  removed  by  a  very  wide
chasm  from  that  extraordinary  mixture  of  magic,  cannibalism,
and  moral  and  intellectual  crudity,  which  gave  its  character  to
the  popular  cult.

9.  In Babylon, as  in Egypt, primitive animism and the
magic  which  is  correlative  to  it,  underlie  throughout  the  wor
ship  of  the  greater  gods. In  its  progress  to  a  higher  stage  the
Babylonian  religion,  it  would  seem,  worked  by  differentiation.
The  more  important  natural  forces  became  gods,  the  inferior
ones  were,  as  a  general  rule,  relegated  to  the  secondary  position
of  mere  spirits.2 But  at  Babylon  these  inferior  gods  became  in
large measure demons, often malevolent demons,3 and the
Babylonian  magic,  which  was  so  important  a  feature  in  the  life
of  the  people,  had  special  reference  to  these  demons. They  could
be  dealt  with  in  one  of  two  different  ways,  for  the  bewitched  man
might  either  appeal  to  a  sorcerer,  who  could  control  the  spirit
directly,  by potions,  tying  knots  which  would strangle  him,
burning  images,  and  so  on,  or  to  an  exorcist,  who  would  apply
to  the  gods  for  their  help  against  the  demon,  and  if  properly
treated  would  deliver  the  victim  out  of  their  hand. Here  is  a
description  of  the  Storm  Demons  of  Eridu  :—

"  Seven  arc  they,  they  are  seven,
In  the  subterranean  deep  they  are  seven,
Perched  (?)  in  the  sky  they  are  seven,
In  a  section  of  the  subterranean  deep  they  wore  reared,
They  are  neither  male  nor  are  they  female,

1  Griffith,  World's  Literature,  5312,  etc.

2  Jastrow,  Religion  of  Babylon  and  Assyria,  p.  49.

3  As  an  illustration,  Nun-gal  was  by  origin,  probably,  a  lower  god  of
Sippar. He  disappears  as  a  god, and  his  name  becomes  a  collective
designation  for  a  powerful  group  of  demons. (I7>.,  168.)


44  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

They  are  destructive  whirlwinds,

They  have  no  wife  nor  do  they  beget  offspring.

Compassion  and  mercy  they  do  not  know,

Prayer  and  supplication  they  do  not  hear,

Horses  bred  on  the  mountains  are  they.

Hostile  to  Ea  are  they,

Powerful  ones  among  the  gods  are  they.

To  work  mischief  in  the  street  they  settle  themselves  in  the

highway,

Evil  are  they,  they  are  evil,
Seven  are  they,  they  are  seven,  seven,  and  again  seven  are  they." l

Next  hear  how  the  demons  took  possession  of  a  man  and  how
they  were  driven  out : —
"  They  have  used  all  kinds  of  charms,
to  entwine  me  as  with  ropes,  etc.  .  .  .
But  I,  by  command  of  Marduk,  the  lord  of  charms,
by  Marduk,  the  master  of  bewitchment,
both  the  male  and  female  witch,
as  with  ropes  I  will  entwine,
as  in  a  cage  I  will  catch,
as  with  cords  I  will  tie,
as  in  a  net  I  will  overpower,
as  in  a  sling  I  will  twist,
as  a  fabric  I  will  tear,
with  dirty  water  as  from  a  well  I  will  fill,
as  a  wall  throw  them  down."

This  is  declaimed  by  the  exorciser  and  accompanied  by
symbolic  actions.2

Often  the  gods  are  described  in  terms  of  the  crudest  animism.
When  Parnapishtim  sacrifices  after  the  flood,  "  The  gods  inhaled
the  odour,  the  gods  inhaled  the  sweet  odour,  the  gods  gathered
like  flies  around  the  sacrificer."  8  The  finest  hymns  and  prayers
are  associated  with  incantation  rituals.  The  efficacy  of  prayer
depends  on  its  being  uttered  by  the  right  person  and  in  the  right
manner,  for  the  approved  form  of  words  is  of  magical  efficacy.4
The  gods  are  of  limited  power.  They  are  taken  captive,  and
released  by  Marduk,  "  who  showed  mercy  towards  the  captured
gods,  removed  the  yoke  from  the  gods  who  were  hostile  to  him." J

1  Jastrow,  264.  2  Ib.,  272.  3  Ib.,  503.

4  Ib.,  353.  6  Ib.,  438.


THE  EARLY PHASES  OF  THOUGHT  45

They  sanction  the  Flood  and  then  bitterly  regret,  but  cannot
undo  what  they  have  done.  The  gods  wept  with  Ishtar,  "  the
gods  in  their  depression  sat  down  to  weep." l  Bel  alone  was  ruth
less.  He  bitterly  resented  the  preservation  of  Parnapishtim —
"What  person  has  escaped (?)?  No  one  was  to  survive  the
destruction."  The  good  Ea  expostulates  with  him.

"  Punish  the  sinner  for  his  sins,
Punish  the  evil-doer  for  his  evil  deeds.
But  be  merciful  so  as  not  to  root  out  completely,
Be  considerate  not  to  destroy  everything.
Instead  of  bringing  in  a  deluge,
Let  lions  come  and  diminish  mankind.  .  .  .
Let  tigers,  famine,  pestilence,  come  and  waste  the  land."  '2

Thus  adjured  Bel  came  to  his  senses,  took  Parnapishtim  by
the  hand  and  was  reconciled.

Thus,  as  is  natural  on  anthropomorphic  principle,  there  are
among  gods,  as  among  men,  good  and  bad,  kindly  rulers  and
headstrong  tyrants.  We  have  seen  Ea  interceding  for  mankind.
He  is  the  water-god,  the  giver  of  fertility ;  he  teaches  the  arts
of  civilization,  and  his  cult  is  favourable  to  human  feeling.  He
tends  to  be  the  god  of  mankind  generally,  as  dissociated  from
any  particular  spot.  Marduk,  again,  is  a  magnified  king,  the
protector  of  the  weak,  he  releases  the  imprisoned,  and  punishes
the  evil-doer.  But  Shamash  in  the  Assyrian  cult  is  the  centre
of  a  higher  conception  than  any  other  deity.3  While  Ashur  and
Ishtar  are  partial  to  Assyria,  the  favours  of  Shamash  are
bestowed  on  the  kings  for  righteousness,  and  it  is  in  the  presence
of  Shamash  that  Tiglath  Pileser  I.  sets  his  captives  free.  The
following  hymn  to  Shamash  will  illustrate  his  character : —

"  The  law  of  mankind  dost  thou  direct,
Eternally  just  in  the  heavens  art  thou,
Of  faithful  judgment  towards  all  the  world  art  thou."  '

Yet  in  this  hymn,  which  is  a  prayer  for  the  king's  life,  the
later  lines  are  a  distinct  echo  of  the  incantation  formula  : —


l


Jaatrow,  502.  2  •*&•»  504.

3  With  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  Sin. See  the  hymn  to  Sin  quoted  in
Jastrow,  p.  303.

4  J  astro w,  300.


46  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

"  Cleanse  him  like  a  vessel  .  .  .
Illumine  him  like  a  vessel  of  ...
Like  the  copper  of  a  polished  tablet  let  him  bo  bright.
Release  him  from  the  ban."

With this may be compared Nebuchadnezzar's hymn to
Marduk  on  his  accession  : —
"  0,  Eternal  ruler  !  Lord  of  the  Universe  !  .  .  .

It  is  thou  who  hast  created  me,

And  thou  hast  entrusted  to  me  sovereignty  over  mankind.

According  to  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  which  thou  bestowest  upon  all

Cause  me  to  love  thy  supreme  rule.

Implant  the  fear  of  thy  divinity  in  my  heart."  l

In  such  a  conception  of  prayer  there  was  surely  the  potenti
ality  of  a  high  development  of  ethical  religion.  Yet  worship
fails  to  differentiate  itself  wholly  from  magical  incantation,2  and
though  there  are  good  gods  who  love  justice,  they  are  not  fused
into  the  unity  of  one  real  creator  of  things.  In  spite  of  some
occasional  expressions3  the  better  opinion  appears  to  be  that
there  was  no  real  monotheistic  tendency  among  the  Babylonians.

10.  In  the  religion,  or  rather  the  religions,  of  the  Greeks
again,  as  in  the  light  of  modern  research  and  the  comparative
method  we  are  coming  gradually  to  understand  the  subject
anew,  we  see  three  distinct  stages  of  thought  intertwined.  At
the  base  we  have  the  demons  of  animism  and  the  magical  rites
of  "  riddance."  We  have  the  Keres,  not  awful  mysterious  fates
as  they  already  appear  at  times  to  be  in  Homer,  but  flitting
mischievous  demons  bringing  all  manner  of  ills,  driven  away  with
sticks  or  purged  with  strong  scents  and  holy  plants  like  rue  and
buckthorn.4  We  have  the  conception  of  a  quasi-physical  pollution
arising  now  from  breach  of  ceremonial,  now  from  an  outrage  on
the  most  sacred  human  relations,  and  extending  to  physical
objects 5  as  well  as  to  man.  We  have  the  living,  self-avenging
curse,  the  thin  ghost  squealing  like  a  bat,  and  crowding  to
"drink  the  life-blood  in  the  trench  Ulysses  made,"  the  animal
god,  the  bogy,  the  monster  brood.  Above  these  fearsome  shapes

1  Jastrow,  296.  *  Ifc.,  296  seq.,  314.

3  See,  e.g.,  the  hymn  to  Sin,  referred  to  above,  and  cf.  Jastrow,  319.

4  Harrison,  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion,  p.  168.
6  E.g.  the  pollution  of  the  earlli  by  bluod.


THE  EARLY  PHASES  OF  THOUGHT 47

we  have  the  more  gracious,  strong,  beautiful,  and  finally  ideal
human  forms  of  the  Olympian  gods — essentially  mere  men  and
women  in  the  first  instance,  as  every  reader  of  Homer  knows,  but
built  on  a  greater  scale ;  turbulent,  laughter-loving,  now  tender
and  friendly,  now  unreasonably  resentful ;  joining  in  the  rights  of
mortal  men,  and  capable  of  being  wounded  by  them,  prosecuting
the blood feud as  Poseidon  against  Odysseus  with  no  more
regard  to the  inherent  justice of  the  case  than  the  human
avenger  would  show  ;  placated  by  sacrifice  and  trusted  to  perform
their  part  in  the  implied  sacrificial  compact ;  united,  finally,  in
intricate  theogonies,  and  so  affording  a  crude  basis  for  the  frame
work  of  things  and  the  process  of  creation. But  the  Olympian
gods,  though  human  in  their  essence,  were  superhuman  in  the
types  of  their  might,  majesty,  and  beauty. They  have  incarnated
for  all  subsequent  time  the  ideal  types  of  finite  humanity,  the
satisfaction  of  a  mind  reposing  on  the  work  that  it  has  done  and
knowing  that  it  is  good,  not  troubled  as  yet  with  the  infinite
beyond  and  the  poverty  of  man's  power  to  cope  with  it. They
are  "  the  happy  ones,"  glorified  children  of  a  time — not  as  an
older  generation  supposed  when  the  world  was  young,  for  the
world  in  Homer's  day  was  already  old,  but  when  for  a  while  it
seemed to  be  renewing  its  youth  under  fortunate  conditions,
beneath  a  sunny  sky. But  the  Greek  mind  outgrew  anthropo
morphism  and  the  higher  development  took  two  directions. On
the  more  purely  religious  side  in  connection  with  the  Orphic
mysteries  it  followed  a  line  not  unlike  and  greatly  influenced  by
the  esoteric  doctrine  of  the  Egyptian  priests. The  movement
was  in  part  an  advance,  in  part  a  reversion  to  older  methods.
The  initiated  felt  dimly  for  a  higher  religious  conception  by  the
method  of  mystical  identifications,  first  between  the  gods in
their  various  forms: —

"  One  Zeus,  one  Hades,  one  Helios,  one  Dionysos,
Yea  in  all  things  One  God,  his  name  why  speak  I  asunder  ? " l

Secondly  between  the  god  and  the  worshipper  : —
"  I  also  avow  me  that  I  am  of  your  blessed  race."
says  the  initiated,  and  the  reply  is

"  Happy  and  Blessed  one ;  thou  shalt  be  god  instead  of  mortal.'' 2

1  Harrison,  p.  656.  2  from  an  Orphic  hymn,  translated,  ib.,  586.


48  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

Similarly  in  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead,  the  soul  which
passes  the  tests  becomes  itself  Osiris.  But  as  the  Book  of  the
Dead  is  essentially  a  provision  of  magical  formulas,  whereby
admittance  to  the  realms  of  bliss  is  to  be  enforced,  so  it  would
seem  that  the  Orphic  ritual  is  at  bottom  a  ritual  of  magic.1  It  is
the  performance  of  ceremonial  acts  of  occult  efficacy  upon  which
the  soul  is  to  rely.  Here,  as  so  often  in  mysticism,  the  spiritual
consciousness  overleaps  itself  and  falls  back  intellectually  on
primitive  confusions,  morally  on  the  purges  and  quasi-physical
disinfectants  of  savage  religion.  It  is  much  if  purity  of  thought
is  insisted  on  as  a  condition  and  the  worshipper  is  told  that  "  he
who  enters  the  incense-laden  shrine  must  be  pure,  and  purity  is
to  be  of  holy  heart." 2

A  truer  spirituality  is  to  be  found  in  the  reasoned  theism  of
the  philosophers  and  the  philosophic  poets  of  Greece,  whom  the
mob  of  educated  and  uneducated  alike  took  for  atheists,  who
were  aware  that  the  gods  of  the  popular  religion  were  beings
made  by  man  in  his  own  image,  that  ethical  purity  must  be
attained  by  ethical  and  not  by  magic  methods,  and  who  first
taught  the  world,  what  it  has  too  often  forgotten,  that  goodness
and  God  are  identical.  These  are  the  essential  doctrines  of  a
spiritual  religion  ;  they  carry  us  outside  the  region  of  Polytheism,
and  their  consideration  must  be  deferred  to  a  later  place.  For
polytheism  proper  is  outgrown  when  the  stage  of  philosophic
reflection  is  reached.  Its  anthropomorphic  deities  belong  to
the  phase  of  thought  which  intervenes  between  the  primitive
confusion  of  categories  and  the  philosophic  movement  which
establishes  the  leading  conceptions  found  in  experience  as  clear-
cut,  independent  objects  of  thought.  It  is  the  stage  of  the
plastic  imagination  in  which  the  mind  is  fully  capable  of  forming
for  itself  a  concrete  imagery  of  things  unseen  with  all  the
articulateness  and  vividness  of  so  many  objects  of  perception.
Its  fictitious  personalities  are  no  longer  mere  pallid  doubles  of
this  or  that  function.  They  are  many-sided  beings  with
distinctly  conceived  attributes  and  a  regular  life  history.  If
their  origin  is  traceable  to  animistic  confusions,  if  their  birth  is

1  See  Harrison,  pp.  587-9.

2  See  Harrison,  479. "Offia,  rendered  as  holy,  means  the  righteousness
which  the  gods  ordain,  and  is  not  confined  to  matters  of  ceremonial.


49


m  some  primitive  pei  Bonification  of  a  function  or  an  attribute,
their  adult  life  is  passed  on  a  higher  plane. Their  world  is
articulate  in  the  sense  that  its  parts  are  not  only  distinct  but
interconnected. The  gods  are related by  ties of  blood and
political  subordination,  and  in  so  far  as  each  is  responsible  for
some  great  department  of  nature  or  human  life,  the  theogonies
which  form  an  integral  part  of  polytheism  may  be  said  to  form  a
first  attempt,  not  perhaps  at  a  theory  of  the  universe,  but  at  an
imaginative  picture  of  the  agencies  by  which  its  framework  is
maintained. The  thought  of  the  polytheistic  stage  is  wider  in
its  reach,  just  as  it  is  more  distinct  in  its  representation  than
that  of  animism. Its departmental gods represent a  wider
grouping  of  phenomena  in  proportion  as  a  god  of  vegetation  has
a  wider  scope  than  the  spirit  of  this  particular  plant. The
endeavour  to  connect  the  several  gods  represents  an  attempt  at
a  still  wider  interconnection  of  the  parts  of  human  experience.
But  all  these  endeavours  go  on  in  the  form  of  concrete  imagery
and  without  any  critical  test  of  truth  or  any  reflective  examina
tion  of  the  conceptions  used. The world  of  ideas  is  now  a
picture  with  many  clearly-drawn  figures  in  which  the  several
categories:  are  no  longer  hopelessly  interchanged  and  confused,
but  the  thoughts  imbedded  in  this  picture  are  not  yet  separated
out  and  held  before  the  mind  as  objects  of  critical  examination,
.t  is  a  world  whose  parts  exhibit  some  order  and  interconnection,
wherein  a  wider  grouping  of  the  phenomena  of  the  perceptual
world  is  mirrored,  but  this  order  is  built  up  by  imagination  with
the  aid  of  fanciful  analogies  and  ill-understood  myths,  adding
little  to  the  rational  insight  into  the  actual  scheme  of  things.


VOL,  n,


CHAPTER  II

ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS IN EARLY  THOUGHT

1.  IN  the  world  of  thought  dominated  by  Magic,  by  Animism,
or  by  Polytheism,  what  account  do  men  render  to  themselves  of
the  basis  of  conduct  ?  What  reasons  do  they  give  for  the  rules
which  they  acknowledge,  and  what  do  they  suppose  to  be  their
meaning  and  end  ?  How  does  the  violation  of  rule  affect  them,
and  how  do  they  act  when  such  violation  has  occurred  ?  To
these  questions  no  single  and  simple  answer  can  be  given.

No  doubt,  as  was  said  at  the  outset,  custom  is  binding  upon

primitive  man,  and  binding  upon  him  in  truth  because  it  is

custom. But  while  this is  the real moral force  which the

onlooker  recognizes  as  the  essential  point,  primitive  races  have

often  a  definite  conception  of  their  own  as  to  the  reasons^  of

their  obeying  custom. Not  infrequently  its  breach  will  bring

misfortune  upon  the  wrong-doer,  on  some  one  connected  with

him,  or  on  the  community. Thus  the  Aleuts  hold  that  the

whale  avoids  dissolute  tribes,  on  which  account  whalers  must

avoid  women  during  the  fishing-season. But  the  whalers  may

have  to  suffer  for  the  sins  of  others  as  well  as  their  own,  for  the

whale  would  punish  them  if  their  wives  were  unfaithful  during

their  absence,  or  if  their  sisters  were  unchaste  before  marriage.1

Similarly  the  Australians  hold  that  certain  breaches  of  custom

cause  the  Erkincha  disease  and  other  penalties.2 Among  the

Eastern  Esquimaux,  though  abortion  and  infanticide  are  common,

an  opinion  is  growing  against  them  on  the  ground  that  they

1  Keclus,  p.  52  ;  ib.,  p.  67. Among  the  Konyaga loose  behaviour  is
considered  to  be  punished  by  difficult  confinements.  _

2  Spencer  and  Gillen,  vol.  i,  pp.  168,411,  471. Of.  Howitt,  Organisation
of  the  Australian  Tribes,  p.  104,  and  Tribes  of  8.E.  Australia,  p.  296.

50


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 51

bring  misfortune  in  the  village  where the child's wailing is
heard.1

The  process  whereby  breach  of  custom  thus  brings  about  its
own  penalty  is  not  always  easy  to  trace.  The  cases  in  which  we
have  lull  information,  however,  fall  into  two  principal  classes.  In
the  first,  the  connection  is  "direct,"  i.e.  an  evil  influence  is  set
up  by  the  misdeed,  which  like  any  physical  cause  produces

sease  or  whatever  the  bad  result  may  be:  these  cases  are  in
line  with  primitive  magic,  and  in  them  the  sanction  may  be
regarded  as  magical.  In  other  instances  the  trespass  is  held  to

fend  a  certain  spirit,  or  possibly  to  put  the  evil-doer  or  his

lends  into the power of the evil spirit. This conception

•elongs  to  the  department  of  animism,  and  here  the  sanction

may be called religious. Finally,  the two conceptions can

be  blended,  magical  and religious elements being entangled

together.

To  begin  with  magic  influences. When  the  Dakota  violates
a  female  captive  or  breaks  the rule of  continence upon  the
war-path,  he  not  only  displeases  the spirits  of  the  deceased
but  also the  "war-medicine,"  and on both grounds brings
down  misfortunes  on  his  party.* Taboos  on  intercourse  have

en  frequently  mentioned  as  forming  a  large  portion  of
primitive  life,  and  as  influencing  the  marriage  laws  all  over
the  world,  and  the  taboo  acts  like  a  magical  quality.  For
instance,  the  Australian  native  must  not  eat  food  killed  by
certain  relations,  nor  generally  food  into  which  such  persons
'project  their  smell."  Here  the  taboo  is  a  quality  which  affects

•  food,  and  would  directly  injure  the  eater.3 We  have  seen

that  over  a  considerable  part  of  the  savage  world  taboo  is  the

method  of  protecting  property,  e.g.  in  Rotuma  the  natives  are

at,  but  their  honesty  arises  from  the  fear  that  if  one  touches


188 'cra0liv-'P;63- According  to  Schoolcraft-Drake,  vol  i p

^^*ss

Sr^Sffi2&f  a

Spencer  and  Gillen,  vol.  i.,  p.  4G9.


52  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

the  food  of  another  the  owner  might  kill  him  by  its  means.1 In
the  Melanesian  practice  2  the  owner  of  the  property  controls  the
taboo. We  are  expressly  told  that  it  has  no  authority  from  a
spirit'3 The  infectiousness  of  the  taboo  is,  as  we  have  seen,  an
important  element  in  early  criminal  law,  the  offender  who  has
broken  the  taboo  transferring  its  dangerous  character  to  himself,
and  so  not  only  incurring  a  curse,  but  also  involving  himself  in
the  penalty  of  exclusion  from  the  community.4 Thus  the  break-
incr  of  taboo  carries  its  own  punishment. The  process  works
automatically  and  without  need  of  the  intervention  of  a  sprit.
In  a  quite  similar  way  we  have  seen  that  some  forms  of  oath
and  ordeal  provide  automatic  punishments  of  perjury. A  fetish
object  is  laid on  the  stomach  in Great Bassam, a  stone is
powdered  and  drunk  in  water  in  Ashanti. The  operation  in
both  cases  is  magical.5 Often  in  early  society  the  laws  are
protected  by  a  curse  pronounced  by  the  people  as  a  whole  or  by
a  priest  as  their  representative  on  any  one  who  shall
them. Thus  we  have  the  well-known  list  of  curses  m  the  Book
of  Deuteronomy, and a quite analogous set of inscriptions
recording  the  curses  pronounced  against  offenders  in  the  early
Greek  states.6 In  the  same  way,  paternal  authority  is  forti
by  the  power  of  the  parental  curse  and  blessing. This  action  is
automatic,  and  though  we may  say  that  it incorporates an
ethical  idea  it  fails  to  work  in  strict  accordance  with  ethic;
conditions. The  operation  of  the  magical  agency  is,  if  the  term
may  be  coined,  paramoral— working  by  the  side  of  t

Gardiner  J  A  I,  vol.  xxvii.,  p.  409. We  have  referred  above  to  the
E££v£mA  over  the  boundary -stones  by  the  Babylonians
make  the  stone  itself  avenge  any  disturbance  of


__  mt,  though  its  operation  is

magical.  ... „ .  -r-r i •

J  R^"edtoa^/ar^'f  aP"  ^79''  Compare' the' use  of  stones  by
Esquimaux  °(Reclus  p.  110^  and  cf.  Tylor  on  the  mending  of  hedges  by  a
cotton  thread  among  the  Kunama,  Contemp.  Beww,  1873,  p.  704  )

«  See  Jevons,  Introduction  to  the  History  of  Rdigwn,  pp.  70-87.

I  £°eut  Ix^iiVS  sec/.  '  Ct  Harrison,  p.  142,  for  selections  from  the
'Di?aeof  Teos!'"'  "  Whosoever  maketh  baneful  drugs  against  the  Teans,
....  may  he  perish,  both  he  and  his  offspring/'  etc.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 53

principle,  but  not  always  on  the  same  lines.  The  point  is  well
illustrated  in  the  story  of  the  sons  of  Isaac.  Jacob  secures  by
fraud  the  blessing  intended  for  Esau,  and  once  given,  the  blessing
cannot  be  withdrawn.  It  is  quite  comparable  to  a  piece  of  goods
made  over  once  for  all  and  not  to  be  resumed.  The  most  Esau
can  hope  is  that  the  store  may  not  be  exhausted — "  Hast  thou
not  reserved  a  blessing  for  me  ?  "  "  Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,
my  father  ? "  Yet  if  the  blessing  were  the  true  expression  of
the  father's  loving  gratitude  won  by  good  service,  Jacob  should
rather  have  had  a  curse  for  his  deceit.

2.  Grotesque  as  the  magical  doctrine  of  punishment  appears
when  stated  in  set  terms  or  illustrated  in  concrete  practice,
puerile  as  the  whole  machinery  of  magic  stones,  avenging  beans,
and  death-dealing  gibberish  looks  when  viewed  from  behind  the
scenes,  yet  the  conception  of  an  inherent  retribution  following  as
an  automatic  consequence  of  the  wrong  act  lies  close  to  the
permanent  moral  consciousness  of  mankind,  closer  than  the
alternative  theory  of  punishment  ab  extra  inflicted  by  a
vengeful  spirit  or  a  just  God.  For  here  as  elsewhere,  the  magical
doctrine  merely  crystallizes  a  diffused  psychological  state  into  a
material  object  or  a  physical  occurrence.  We  can  all  put
ourselves  without  the  slightest  difficulty  into  the  mental
attitude  of  the  savage  who  breaks  a  taboo.  We  have  many
things  that  are  taboo  to  us  and  we  know  what  it  is  to  handle
them.  Whatever  we  believe  or  disbelieve  in  religion  or  in
morals,  there  remain  for  all  of  us  certain  things  to  do  which
affects  us  with  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  mental  discomfort,
varying  from  uneasiness  to  acute  remorse  or  the  extreme  of  cold
self-horror.  These  are  in  strictness  feelings  attendant  or
consequent  upon  the  action.  Externalize  them,  turn  what  we  feel
about  the  act  into  some  physical  attribute  of  the  thing  or  person
with  which  the  act  is  concerned,  some  noxious  emanation,  some
death-dealing  "  smell,"  and  the  feeling  becomes  a  taboo.  Once
again,  take  away  the  taboo  and  at  first  sight  the  basis  of  the
feeling  seems  to  be  removed,  and  moral  obligation  to  disappear.
But  then  comes  a  rational  consideration  of  the  whole
circumstances  of  the  case— the  deliberate  view  of  the  total  effect
of  the  bad  act  on  our  own  character,  on  the  lives  and  happiness
1  Gen.  xxvii.  36-8.


54


of  others,  on  the  social  order,  on  everything  that  we  hold  in
affection  and  esteem. On  this  view  we  can  see  that  our  horror
has  its  legitimate  function,  that  it  has  grown  up  as  an  integral
part of  the  conditions  which  constitute  us  fit  members  of  a
human  society,  so  that  before  we  can  reason  out  all  that  a  bad
act implies we have a feeling about it in which those
consequences  are  in  a  manner  represented. Now  this  feeling  is
the  great  permanent  fact  of  the  moral  consciousness  persisting
through  all  stages  of  development. The  conceptions  to  which  it
gives rise  vary greatly,  and their variations affect and are
affected  by  the  whole  scope  and  character  of  practical  morality,
so  that  their  history  is  the  history  of  moral  development. The
simplest  of  all  ways  of  conceiving  the  facts  is  that  of  attributing
malefic  quality  to  the  bad  act  itself— the  act,  or  some  person  or
thing  affected  by  it,  taking on  itself  by  the  primitive  mental
process of assimilation the quality of  the mental feeling
which arises in us when  the act is  contemplated in our
minds. So  near  indeed  is  this  to  the  permanent  tendencies  of
the  moral  consciousness  that  language  to  this  day  speaks  of  the
act  as  noble,  base,  or  horrible,  as  if  these  were  qualities  attach
ing  to  a  physical  event,  and  not  expressions  for  feelings  which
the physical event excites and psychological and social
consequences  that  follow  from  it.

We  may  even  go  a  step  further,  and  say  that  in  considerable
measure  wrong-doing  is  still  conceived  rather  magically  than
ethically. Take,  for  example,  the  case  of  sexual  intercourse,
is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  for  the  average  moral  consciousness
this  is  still  held  to  be  sanctified  by  marriage  as  by  the  removal
of  a  taboo,  so  that  neither  the  production  of  children  without
means  to  maintain  them,  nor  the  indulgence  of  physical  passion
without  psychical  love,  is  strongly  condemned  when  covered  by
the  ceremony. On  the  other  hand,  the  woman  who  breaks
taboo  uncovered  by  the  ceremony  is  stamped  once  for  all  with  the
scarlet  letter,  without  regard  to  the  question  whether  she  was
the  experienced  temptress  or  one  whose  fault  was  merely  to  have
loved  and  trusted  too  much. She  is  marked,  tabooed. Though
condemned  most  loudly  by  the  self-styled  "  moralist,"  the  con
demnation  of  her,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  is  not  really  moral,
that  is  to  say,  based  on  a  rational  view  of  her  character  and  :
potentialities  for  good  and  evil,  but  magical,  based  on  a  supposed


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 55

bad  quality,  acquired  once  for  all  by  the  breach  of  a  taboo,  in
view  of  which  she  is  a  piece  of  damaged  goods  in  the  social
market.  And  like  all  magical  qualities  the  taboo  is  eminently
infectious,  and  all  respectable  women  are  seen  gathering  their
skirts  about  them  to  avoid  that  contact  with  the  offender  which
would  communicate  the  stain  to  themselves.

On  the  other  hand,  a  man  may  be  said  to  incur  a  magical
rather  than  an  ethical  condemnation  in  cases  of  cowardice  and
perhaps  of  certain  kinds  of  dishonesty.  The  "  prison-taint  "
hangs  in  a  measure  about  one  who  has  ever  been  convicted  and
degrades  him  below  much  greater  criminals  who  have  kept
within  the  law.  In  all  these  matters  the  function  of  the  ethical
thinker  is  to  plead  for  that  rational  consideration  of  character
and  conduct,  that  a-vyyv^i,  which  is  the  truest  safeguard  against
Pharisaism,  and  which,  making  us  aware  of  the  extreme
fallibility  of  our  judgments  upon  other  people,  bids  us  confine
such  judgments  to  the  minimum  point  requisite  for  regulating
our  dealings  with  prudence  and  justice.  We  must  so  far
"judge"  a  convicted  cheat  as  to  beware  of  trusting  him  for  the
future,  but  as  to  the  intrinsic  worth  of  his  character  when  all  is
summed  up,  and  how  it  compares  with  that  of  many  who  need
no  repentance — of  this,  omniscience  alone  can  judge.  "  Judge
not "  is  a  standing  protest  against  magical  condemnations.

3.  Close  as  the  magical  judgment  stands  to  the  permanent
conditions  of  the  moral  consciousness  it  is  not  the  only  form  in
which  the  primitive  mind  conceives  the  sanction  of  conduct.

As  the  belief  in  spirits  generally  accompanies  that  in  the
efficacy  of  magic,  so  the  magical  conception  of  punishment  very
readily  yields  to  or  blends  with  the  conception  of  spiritual
intervention.  Thus  the  oath  often  takes  the  form  of  invoking
the  vengeance  of  a  spirit.1  In  the  case  of  the  North  American
Indians  we  have  seen  that  the  spirit  and  the  "  war-medicine  "
worked  together  to  secure  self-restraint.  The  Dakotas  attribute
bad  luck  in  hunting  to  an  offence  committed  by  some  of  the
hunter's  family  against  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  The  taboo  on  an
offender  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  spirits  are  wroth  with
him.  Thus  a  murderer  may  be  avoided  because  he  is  pursued

1  Post,  Afrikanische  Jurisprudenz,  ii.,  127.


56  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

by  the  ghost  of  his  victim,  and  again  the  avenger  of  blood  who
fails  to  do  his  duty  may  himself  be  pursued  by  the  indignant
spirit  of  his  slain  relative. We  are  not  indeed  to  suppose  that
the ordinary spirit  of  animism  has a  detached  or  impartial
interest  in  human  conduct;  on  the  contrary,  animism  is  for  the
most  part  non-moral,  and  a  good  deal  of  it  is  immoral. There
is  no  reason  why  the  spirit  of  a  river  should be  any  more
concerned  with  morality  than  the  river  itself,  while,  on the
contrary,  there  is  some  reason  why  the  spirit  of  a  disease  should
be  more  immoral  than  the  disease  itself,  for,  abstracted  from  the
spirit  which  guides  or  animates  it,  smallpox  is  not  a  being  which
bears  ill-will  to  men,  but  the  spirit  of  smallpox  is  a  monster
going  about  seeking  whom  it  may  devour,  and  perhaps  demand
ing  sacrifices  to  appease  it. Hence,  savage  animism  tends  often
to  what,  from  our  point  of  view,  are  cruelties  and  immoralities
which  would  otherwise  not  occur. The  spirits  of  men,  however,
may  be  naturally  expected  to  look  upon  conduct  just  as  men
themselves do,  and  consequently  will  applaud  the good and
reprobate  the  evil  in  the  same  way. Here  is  a  possible  means
of  connecting  religion  with  morality,  which  is  not  left  altogether
unused in the savage world. Thus  the  Manes become  the
natural  guardians  of  morality  in  the  family :  the  son  who  kills
his  father  is  naturally  punished  by  the  ghost  just  as  he  would
be  by  the  living  man  had  his  blow  not  been  fatal.1 It  is  but  a
slight  extension  of  this  idea  that  the  spirit  of  the  father  should
avenge  other  crimes,  or  that  the  spirits  of  remoter  ancestors
should  participate  in  the  vengeance,  so  that  the  boy  who  strikes
his  father  or  mother  "is  devoted"  to  the  Divi  parcntum?  or
that  a  similar  fate  should  punish  other  crimes  in  a  family  such
as  incest  or  cruelty  to  a  mother.3 Again,  when  customs  have
been  first  instituted  by  an  ancestor  or  a  predecessor  of  a  heroic
age  his  spirit  continues  to  take  an  interest  in  their  observance,
and  he  is  angry  with  and  perhaps  punishes  those  who  disregard
them. As  far  down  in  the  scale  as  the  natives  of  South-Eastern
Australia,  we  find  spirits  of  this  kind. The  tribes  north  of  the

1  See  Leist,  p.  314,  who  quotes  Iliad,  xxi.  412  ;  Odyssey,  xi.  280. The
only  doubt  in  such  passages  is  whether  it  is  the  curse  or  the  ghost  of  the
parent  which  operates.

2  Law  of  Servius  Tullius. (Bruns,  p.  14.)

3  Leist,  p.  320,  quoting  Iliad,  ix.  454,  and  Odyssey,  ii.  134.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 57

Herbert  River  recognize  a  being  called  Kohin,  who  once  came
down  to  earth,  but  now  has  his  home  in  the  Milky  Way,  though
he  roams  about  by  night  on  earth,  killing  those  whom  he  meets.
He  is  offended  by  breaches  of  the  marriage  taboos,  by  the  eating
of  forbidden  food,  or  by  neglect  to  wear  mourning  for  the
prescribed  period,  and  sooner  or  later  the  offending  native
dies.1

4.  The  spirit  of  animism,  however,  is  not  as  such  a  moral  being
whom  wickedness  offends :  he  is  concerned  only  with  the  conduct
which  affects  himself,  and  so  animistic  religion  often  presents
itself  in  the  mass  as  wholly  non-moral.2  The  savage  prays  in  the
simplest  and  most  direct  manner  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  desires,
without  the  smallest  regard  to  what  we  should  consider  moral
obligations.  The  warrior  does  not  even  stop  to  explain  the
justice  of  his  cause  to  the  deity  as  more  civilized  men  are  wont
to  do.  "  Great  Quahootze,"  prays  a  Nootka  Indian  in  preparing
for  war,  "  let  me  live,  not  be  sick ;  find  the  enemy,  not  fear  him  ;
find  him  asleep  and  kill  a  great  many  of  him."  3

The  spirit  is  moved  by  the  same  considerations  which  move
the  savage  himself.  An  offering  pleases  him  and  he  will  pay  for

1  Generally  speaking in  South-East  Australia "  a belief  exists  in  an
anthropomorphic  supernatural  being  who  lives  in  the  sky,  and  who  is
supposed  to  have  some  kind  of  influence  on  the  morals  of  the  natives.
(Howitt,  p.  500.)

Mr.  Howitt  adds  that  "  no  such  belief  seems  to  obtain  in  the  remainder
of  Australia  "  ;  and  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  declare  still  more  definitely
that  the  Central  Australian  natives  "have  no  idea  whatever  of  the  existence
of  any  Supreme  Being  who  is  pleased  if  they  follow  a  certain  line  of  what
we  call  moral  conduct,  and  displeased  if  they  do  not  do  so.  They  have  not
the  vaguest  idea  of  a  personal  individual  other  than  an  actual  living
member  of  the  tribe  who  approves  or  disapproves  of  their  conduct,  so  far  as
anything  like  what  we  call  morality  is  concerned."  (Spencer  and  Gillen,
vol.  ii.,  p.  491.)

The  only  possible  exception  is  in  the  case  of  the  Kaitish  tribe,  who
recognize  a  superior  being  called  Atnatu,  who  is  displeased  if  the  bull-
roarer  is  not  sounded  in  the  initiation  ceremony.

1  Thus  Captain  Ellis  denies  broadly  that  there  is  any  connection  between
religion  and  morals  in  any  of  the  three  peoples  of  whom  he  writes  (the
Tshi,  the  Ewe,  and  the  Yoruba),  because,  he  says,  the  savage  only  revenges
what  affects  himself.  (Yorula,  p.  293.)  Compare  Tylor  (Contemporary
Review,  April,  1873,  p.  7 10)  on  the  Papuans  and  Caribs.  Speaking  generally,
Professor  Tylor  considers  that  savage  animism  is  almost  devoid  of  the  ethical
element.  (Primitive  Culture,  vol.  ii.,  p.  360.)

3  Tylor,  vol.  ii.,  p.  366,  where  a  number  of  similar  prayers  for  direct
material  advantages  are  given.


58  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

it.  He  may  be  expected  to  stand  by  his  friends  like  a  primitive
man,  and  hate  his  enemies,  according  to  the  same  model.  For
the  rest,  his  character  is  drawn  from  the  object  which  he
animates,  or  the  process  which  he  personifies,  or  the  function
over  which  he  presides.  Thus  if  he  is  a  disease  spirit  he  is  evil,
and  the  very  living  worship  of  evil  spirits  together  with  the
comparative  neglect  of  those  which  enjoy  a  good  character  is  in
itself  a  strong  mark  of  the  low  ethical  standard  of  animism.  As
an  ancestor  who  cares  for  the  family  welfare,  as  protector  of  a
special  place  or  a  class  of  people,  or  as  the  avenger  who  may  be
called  upon  in  the  formula  of  an  oath,  a  spirit  may  resent
injuries  or  insults  affecting  his  authority.  It  is  only  in  this
indirect  manner  that  the  lower  animism  provides  a  sanction  of
conduct.

A  step  forward  is  taken  when  spirits  arise  which  are  them
selves  personifications  of  the  moral  order,  or  of  some  portions
thereof.  We  can  conceive  such  impersonations  arising  either
on  the  basis  of  animistic  or  of  magical  conceptions.  What  is
essential  is  that  they  should  embody  a  certain  disinterestedness
which  transforms  their  action  from  the  sphere  of  mere  resent
ment  to  that  of  justice.  Thus  as  long  as  the  father's  spirit  is
merely  acting  in  revenge  of  a  personal  injury,  it  is  not  really  a
moral  agency,  but  if  it  is  held  to  supervise  the  family  laws
without  reference  to  its  own  interests,  it  begins  to  be  a  disinter
ested  judge.  Similarly  there  is  nothing  moral  in  the  action  of  a
curse  as  such,  but  if  the  curse,  having  materialized  into  a  quasi-
spirit,  is  set  in  motion  by  certain  specified  breaches  of  morality,
and  by  those  only,  it  has  acquired  a  more  judicial  character.
We  seem  to  see  a  transition  of  this  kind  going  on  in  the  case  of
the  Erinys.  At  first  probably  a  "dark-flitting"  curse  which
can  be  set  in  motion,  for  example,  by  the  angry  parent,  or  the
despised  suppliant,  it  is  already  in  Homer  a  spirit  dwelling  in
Hades,  and  a  hard-smiting  goddess  who  avenges  wrongs.  At
times  it  seems  to  come  without  regard  to  any  other  considera
tions  at  the  bidding  of  those  who  have  the  right  to  call  on  it.
Thus  for  his  unwitting  sin  against  his  mother,  QEdipus  suffers
"all  that  the  Erinyes  of  a  mother  accomplish." l  The  father  of
Phoenix,  though  he  certainly  had  little  right  on  his  side,  called

1  Od.t  xi.  280.


ETHICAL CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 59

on  the  hateful  Erinyes,  and  his  curse  was  accomplished.1 Iris
reminds  Poseidon  that  the  Erinyes  always  wait  upon  an  elder.2
At  times,  too,  the  Erinyes  seem  to  be  carrying  out  a  vicarious
punishment  with  a  certain  blind  and  mechanical  fatality,  as  when
the  Harpies  carry  off  the  daughters  of  Pandareos,  notwithstand
ing  all  the  goddesses  had  done  for  them,  and  give  them  to  the
hateful  Erinyes  to  haunt  them  on  account,  apparently,  of  their
father's  crime.3 At  other  times  the  Erinyes  are  rather  the
avengers  of  certain  wrongs,  of  the  despised  beggar,4  and  of  the
broken  oath—  for  which  "beneath  the  earth  they  punish  men."
Here  they  are  really  protectors  of  certain  branches  of  the  moral
law. Thus  what  is  at  one  point  merely  a  curse  embodying  the
resentment  of  an  injured  party,  becomes  at  another  a  spirit
dwelling  in  Hades,  flitting  in  the  dark  and  smiting  hard  when
set  in  motion  by  those  who  have  the  power  to  do  so,  and  in  yet
others  a  spirit  watching  over  certain  branches  of  morality. In
the  first  case,  where  the  curse  is  a  mere  instrument  of  revengeful
feeling,  there  is  nothing  specifically  moral. In  the  last,  where
the  curse  falls  impartially  on  any  breaker  of  given  laws,  the
moral  element  is  clear. Between  the  two  the  curse  that  can
be  set  in  motion  by  definite  authorities  under  definite  conditions
seems,  at  least  in  the  case  of  the  Erinyes,  to  be  the  link.5

The  Erinys  is  still  the  avenger  of  wrongs  done  to  individuals
and  of  special  cases  of  wrong-doing,6  but  in  the  goddess  Themis,
the  Greeks  of  the  Homeric  age  had  a  more  generalized  con
ception  of  a  patron  of  justice.  Themis  is  distinctly  a  goddess,
she  receives  the  gods  at  their  gathering  for  the  banquet  on
Olympus,7  but  she  has  a  double  relation  to  human  justice—  in
the  first  place,  a  general  oversight  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  a
special  regard  for  the  divine  traditions  which  are  ever  growing
up  through  the  decisions  of  oracles,  the  Upa  /ecu  oo-ia,  and  to  her
sphere  belong  those  customary  rights  which,  in  early  society,


,..  47,

3  Od.,  xx.  60-78.  ,4  Od;  xvii.  475.

5  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  A.  Sidgwick  for  a  valuable  note  in  which  the
above  passages,  with  others,  are  collated.

e  In  later  thought,  as  in  the  well-known  fragment  of  Herachtus,  t
Erinyes  appear  as  guardians  of  "law  in  the  Universe." They  "preserve
the  stars  from  wrong." On  the  whole  subject,  see  Miss  Harrison  s  work,  pp.
213-239,  and  Leist,  pp.  320,  321.

7  Leist,  p.  207  ;  Iliad,  xv.  87.


60  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

men  who  are  unprotected  by  belonging  to  a  family  have  no
human  means  of  enforcing,  and  thus  in  particular  the  stranger
and  the  beggar  and  the  suppliant  are  under  her  care.1

While  the  Erinyes  and  Themis  are  strictly  independent  beings,
their  functions  become  closely  associated  with  the  gods,2  and
especially  with  Zeus,  the  chief  god  of  Olympus. Zeus  acts  in
accordance  with  Themis. In  the  Iliad  he  already  punishes  un
just  decisions  with  storms,3  and  in  his  capacity  of  Zeus  Xenios
is  the  special  protector  of  the  stranger  and  suppliant. In  each
several  capacity  he  appears  under  the  appropriate  name-
as  Zeus  Timoros,  he  is  the  god  of  retribution;
as  Zeus  Hikesios, the  god  to  whom  the  suppliant

flies ;

as  Zeus  Apotropaios, he  is  the  averter  of  ill ;
as  Zeus  Horkios,  the  god  of  the  oath,  who  pun

ishes  perjury,  and  by  whom
the  Athenian  judges  swear.4
The  different  epithets  are  themselves  half  personifications,  and

1  Leist,  p.  211.

2  In  the  case  of  Phoenix,  mentioned  above,  though  the  prayer  is  ad
dressed  to  the  Erinyes,  the  curse  is  carried  out  by  Zeus  of  the  under
world  and  Persephone. Both  Erinyes  and  Gods  attend  on  the  besear
(Od.,  xvn.  475.)

3  Iliad,  xvi.  385,  quoted  by  Leist,  p.  209.

4  On  the  moral  functions  of  Zeua,  see  Farnell,  vol.  i.,  p.  64  ff We  get  a
similar  development  in  the  Roman  religion. Here  the  tendency  to  deify
functions  makes  a  large  portion  of  religion  from  the  first. For  example
we  have  at  an  early  stage  Messor  and  Conditor,  gods,  or  rather  spirits,  pre
siding  over  different  operations  of  the  harvest. These  have  no  moral
interest but  we  also  have  Spes, Concordia,  Pudicitia,  Pietas,  etc ,  who
foster  the  appropriate  qualities. These  are  mere  spiritualized  abstractions
and  bear  the  same  relation  to  Hope,  Concord,  Modesty,  and  Piety  that  the
spirit  of  an  object  does  to  the  object  itself. But  we  also  find  that  the
function-spirit  is  associated  with  one  of  the  greater  gods  as  his  epithet  :
for  instance,  we  have  Fides  associated  closely  with  Jupiter. Fides  is  the
spirit  who  protects  the  oath  ;  Jupiter  as  Deus  Fidius  is  the  god  who
protects  the  oath. Public  acts  of  the  nation  are  sworn  by  Jupiter  Lapis  in
which  there  is  probably  the  blending  of  a  god  with  a  fetish. While  Faith
is  an  attribute  of  Jupiter,  Faith  has  also  her  own  cult  and  temple  close  to
the  Temple  of  Jupiter. In  the  same  way  Victoria  is  worshipped  as  well  as
Jupiter  Victor,  and  Libertas  along  with  Jupiter  Liber. As  the  tendency
to  personify  abstractions  persisted  at  Rome,  some  of  these  epithet-gods  may
even  be  later  in  time  than  the  gods  themselves,  but  be  that  as  it  may  they
illustrate  the  same  ambiguity  between  the  god  and  the  function  which  we
find  m  the  Greek  religion. See  Wissowa,  Religion  dcr  Romer,  especially
pp.  22,  47,  48,  103  ff.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS IN EARLY THOUGHT 61

Zeus  is  in  a  sense  a  different  being  in  each  capacity,  just  as  in
the  mediaeval  world  Our  Lady  of  Embrun  was  and  was  not  the
same  being  as  Our  Lady  of  Paris.  The  function  wavers  be
tween  being  a  god  itself  and  being  only  the  attribute  of  a  god.
But  in  the  most  logical  anthropomorphism,  Zeus  is  one  god  who
supervises  the  moral  order  generally,  and  whose  punishments
are  carried  out  by  the  Erinyes.  The  spirit  of  animism  serves
the  gods  of  the  higher  stage.

5.  In  the  conception  of  a  Supreme  God,  the  protector  of  the
whole  or  of  the  most  essential  part  of  the  moral  order,  we  have
come  to  the  threshold  of  a  spiritual  religion,  but  we  have  not
yet  arrived  at  the  conception  of  a  moral  order  of  the  universe,
nor  at  the  principle  that  God  is  good  of  necessity  because  he  is
God. The  immoralities  attributed  to  the  gods  of  polytheism
are  notorious,  and  though  it  is  fair  to  urge  that  they  belong  to
the  world  of  primitive  conceptions  wherein  the  gods  had  their
birth,  still  the  very  fact  that  they  are  retained  militates,  as  the
Greek  philosophers  knew,  against  a  spiritual  religion. The  gods
themselves  suffered  punishment  for  their  wrong-doing. Apollo
was  compelled  to  become  the  slave  of  a  mortal,  and  a  regular
penalty  of  eight  years  passed  without  Nectar  or  Ambrosia  lay
upon  the  Olympians  who  swore  falsely  by  the  Styx. If  the
gods  are  interested  in  sin,  they  are  appeasable  by  sacrifice,  and
for  occult  reasons  which  the  polytheist  never  made  clear  to  him
self,  but  which  were  associated  with  his  conception  of  vicarious
responsibility,  the  gods  themselves  put  the  impulse  to  sin  into
men's  minds. The  Ate,  which  compels  a  man  to  folly  or  crime,
is  a  curse  implanted  in  his  mind  by  that  same  Erinys  who  will
avenge  the  deed,  and  punish  him  for  following  the  impulse
implanted  by  herself.1

i  Odyssey,  xv.  233,  cited  by  Leist,  p.  321.  Compare  Riad,  xix.  87,  where
Agamemnon  excuses  his  folly  (£yc!>  5'  OVK  atrt6s  ef/xi)  because  "  Zeus  and
Fate  and  dark-flitting  Erinys"  put  a  wild  infatuation  into  his  mind.
The  infatuation  (&TTJ)  three  lines  lower  is  herself  a  goddess  and  daughter
of  Zeus,  "who  moves  through  the  heads  of  men  injuring  them"— a
capital  instance  of  the  interchange  between  magically  conceived  quality
and  spirit.  At  a  later  date,  especially  in  ^schylus,  there  is  an  attempt  to
elaborate  the  theory  of  Ate  upon  the  principle  of  vicarious  justice.  A
father  brings  down  a  curse  which  besets  the  children  and  the  children  s
children,  all  of  whom  add  to  the  guilt  until  the  accumulated  iniquity  is
washed  out  by  a  tremendous  catastrophe.  In  Herodotus  we  have  a  similar


62  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

6.  Meanwhile,  the  connection  of  religion  with  morals  develops
on  another  line ;  the  misfortunes  which  follow  wrong-doing  may
not  be  manifested  in  this  life,  but  whether  conceived  as  the
automatic  consequences  of  the  act,  or  as  due  to  the  wrath  of
the  spirits,  they  may  fall  upon  the  soul  in  its  life  beyond  the
grave.  In  an  elementary  form  the  conception  of  retribution  in
a  future  life  appears  within  the  savage  world,  and  though  in
many  cases  it  is  probably  imported  from  civilized  religions,
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  there  are  uncivilized  peoples
among  whom  it  has  grown  up  spontaneously.  The  normal
theory  of  animism,  however,  conceives  the  soul  as  continuing  to
live  a  life  comparable  to  that  which  it  enjoyed  upon  this  earth,
and  dependent  upon  similar  conditions.  Its  well-being  depends,
not  upon  its  own  actions  in  this  life,  but  upon  its  receiving
proper  care  from  relations  and  descendants  after  death.  It
must  be  suitably  buried,  properly  housed,  and  duly  fed.  And
this  remains  the  dominant  conception  upon  which  notions  of  duty
to  the  dead  depend,  even  when  other  elements  enter  in.  These
elements  appear  in  different  forms  which  are  by  no  means
wholly  ethical  in  character.  Sometimes  the  future  life  is  itself
a  privilege  of  caste  as  among  the  Tongans.1  Sometimes  the  fate
of  the  dead  depends  on  the  manner  of  death.2  Among  the
Nairs  the  childless  woman  will  suffer  in  the  future,  a  conception
which  perhaps  connects  itself  rather  with  the  necessity  of  the
support  of  the  dead  soul  by  children  than  with  retribution
proper.3  Among  the  Western  Esquimaux  the  soul  has  choice
of  two  abodes,  one  above  and  one  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,
which  is  preferred  as  less  inclement.  Here  dwell  heroic  whalers,
men  who  have  committed  suicide  rather  than  burden  their
families,  and  well-tattooed  women  who  have  died  in  child-birth ;
others  get  there  only  by  crossing  a  narrow  bridge,  or  by  other
dangerous  and  hurtful  paths.4  Often  the  two  conceptions  are

order  of  ideas,  but  with  a  special  stress  on  the  overweening  presumption
of  the  individual  which  awakens  the  jealousy  of  God  and  brings  down
punishment.

1  Tylor,  vol.  ii.,  p.  22. Sometimes  the  dead  retain  in  a  future  life  the
social  position  they  held  in  this  :  e.  g.  among  the  Yoruba. (Ellis,  p.  127.)

2  Thus  among  the  Micronesians  those  who  die  in  peace  reach  Paradise
while  others  fall  into  hell. (Waitz,  vol.  v.,  ii.  p.  142.)

»  Reclus,  p.  159.  *  Reclus,  p.  103,


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN EARLY  THOUGHT 63

intertwined. The  Todas,  after  enumerating  all  the  possible  sins
of  the  deceased  and  transferring  them  to  a  calf,  promise  the
soul  that  it  shall  never  lack  milk  to  drink,  and  in  fulfilment  of
the  pledge  kill  cows  near  the  burning  calf,  and  afterwards  burn
the  bones  together  with  implements  useful  for  the  dead,  and
models  of  flutes  and  bows  and  arrows.1 The  Salish  of  Western
America  are  said  to  believe  in  reward  and  punishment  after
death,  but  the  origin  of  the  doctrine  is  not  known.2 The  Ainu
hold  that  while  all  spirits  go  to  Hades,  the  good  pass  on  to  the
place  of  God,  and  the  wicked  to  the  wet  underground  world,  a
message  from  the  Creator  being  sent  through  the  fire-goddess
to  direct  where  the  soul  is  to  go.3 Among  the  Californian
Indians,  the  Wintuns  believe  that  the  dead  go  to  the  happy
western  world,  but  wicked  men's  ghosts  pass  into  the  Grizzly
Bear.4 Yet  the  possessions  of  the  deceased  are  thrown  into  the
grave,  which  implies  a  very  different  theory. The  Yorak  hold
that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  have  to  cross  a  greasy  pole. The
good  achieve  this  more  easily,  and  therefore  do  not  require  the
fire  to  be  burnt  for  so  many  nights  after  their  death  to  light
them,  as  is  necessary  in  the  case  of  the  wicked.5 But  it  may
be  doubted  whether  the  Californian  belief  is  not  an  importation
from  the  white  man. Often  the  warriors  retain  their  supremacy
in  the  world  to  come :  the  primitive  Norseman  continued  to
fight  and  to  feast  in  Walhalla,  and  similarly  the  Tupinambas  of
Brazil  think  that  those  who  have  lived  well — i.  e.  those  who  have
well  avenged  themselves  and  eaten  many  enemies — will  live  in
beautiful  gardens,  while  cowards  will  be  tormented.6 Generally
speaking,  the  savage  view  of  the  future  life,  in  proportion  as  it
deserts  the  strict  theory  of  the  continuance  of  the  present  mode
of  life,  is  ill  defined  and  extremely  confused. The  soul  haunts
the  grave,  and  requires  supplies,  and  yet  it  goes  to  another
world,  or  is  reincarnated  in  another  human  being  or  an  animal.
How  far  it  is  really  the  merits  of  the  deceased  that  determine
his  fate  and  how  he  is  judged,  or  by  what  method  his  sins  are
weighed  against  his  virtues,  it  is  generally  very  difficult  to

1  Reclus,  p.  211,  etc.  2  Waitz,  vol.  iii.,  p.  345.

3  Batchelor,  The  Ainu  of  Japan,  p.  236.  4  Powers,  p.  240.

6  Ib.,  p.  58.

6  Tylor,  vol.  ii.,  p.  86. Other  instances  of  savage  belief  in  retribution
are  quoted  by  Tylor,  p.  93.


64  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

determine.  In  the  higher  stages  of  polytheism,  on  the  other
hand,  the  theory  of  the  future  life  is  often,  though  not  always,
more  precise.  Among  the  Greeks,  one  view  was  that  the
heroes  passed  to  the  Elysian  fields,  while  at  any  rate  the  worst
criminals  were  cast  into  Tartarus.  The  Egyptian  soul  under
went  a  regular  trial  before  Osiris,  and  the  Mexicans  had  a  Book
of  the  Dead,  similar  to  that  of  the  Egyptians,  giving  a  full
account  of  the  dangers  through  which  the  soul  must  pass,  and
in  particular  of  its  trial  before  the  Judgment-seat  of  Tezcat-
lipoca.1  Thus  the  highest  polytheism  shows  a  tendency  to  the
development  and  systematization  of  the  vague  ideas  of  retri
bution  floating  here  and  there  through  early  religious  beliefs,
into  an  elaborate  doctrine  of  future  judgment.  The  develop
ment,  however,  is  very  irregular.  We  find  nothing  of  it,  for
example,  in  the  Babylonish  religion,  nor,  till  Monotheism  was
well  established,  in  that  of  the  Hebrews;  its  place  in  the
regular  Greek  cults  is  secondary,  particularly  in  the  earlier
period,  and  it  is  only  in  connection  with  the  Orphic  mysteries
that  it  comes  to  occupy  a  central  position.  In  India,  as  we
shall  see,  the  rival  doctrine  of  transmigration  tends  to  take  its
place,  though  the  two  theories  are  also  combined.

7.  But  the  imperfect  morality  of  the  doctrine  of  future
retribution  is  most  apparent  when  we  turn  to  the  methods  by
which  sin  is  purged  away  and  future  happiness  is  secured.
This  introduces  us  to  a  group  of  ethical  problems  which  at  every
stage  are  treated  in  close  connection  with  the  prevailing  con
ception  of  the  ethical  basis.  These  problems  centre  upon  the
relation  of  the  imperfect  human  being  to  the  moral  law.  By
what  internal  merit  or  external  grace  preventing  him  does  a
man  come  to  reject  evil  and  choose  good  ?  How  does  he  grow
in  grace  ?  When  he  has  done  wrong  what  means  of  reconcili
ation  are  open  to  him  ?  These  are  questions  of  what  might  be
called  moral  dynamics,  of  the  forces  which  the  prevalent  ideal
of  conduct  can  bring  to  bear  on  the  individual.  As  such  their
character  must  clearly  be  determined  primarily  by  the  nature

1  Payne,  vol.  ii.,  p.  406. In  Yucatan  also  there  was  a  distinction  between
the  Happy  Land,  where  the  good  men  and  virgins  went,  and  the  evil  lot
befell  the  wicked  after  death. (Waitz,  vol.  iv.,  p.  311.)


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 65

of  the  grounds  on  which  morality  is  conceived  to  rest.  At  a
later  stage  these  questions  are  clearly  recognized  as  questions
of  moral  psychology.  We  have  now  to  see  how  they  are  treated
in  the  lower  strata  of  ethical  thought.

In  the  early  stages  of  moral  development -men  have,  broadly
speaking,  two  methods  of  dealing  with  their  sins,  one  affiliating
itself  to  the  magical,  the  other  to  the  religious  conception  of
wrong-doing,  while  as  before  the  two  are  not  infrequently
blended  into  one.  Under  the  magical  conception  sins,  if  we
may  so  call  them,  are  like  other  evils,  things  that  can  by  ap
propriate  methods  be  purged  out  of  a  man  or  a  place  or  a
community.  They  may  be  transferred  to  a  scapegoat,  taken
from  those  who  have  committed  them,  put  into  the  animal  or
man  who  is  to  bear  them,  and  driven  away  into  the  wilderness
or  destroyed.  They  may  be  got  rid  of  by  a  solemn  formula  in
which  the  wrong-doer  repudiates  them,  swears  them  off,  while
magical  ceremonies  are  at  the  same  time  performed  to  complete
their  destruction.  On  the  other  hand,  where  the  wrong-doer  is
held  to  offend  some  spirit,  the  curative  process  would  naturally
consist  in  either  quelling,  subduing,  driving  away  that  spirit,
or  in  appeasing  and  reconciling  it.  The  former  process  will
closely  connect  itself  with  magical  arts,  the  latter  leads  on  to
the  sacrifices  which  form  the  central  feature  of  the  cult  of  the
gods.

The  expulsion  of  evils  by  transferring  them  to  a  man  or  an
animal  is  frequently  performed  on  behalf  of  the  whole  com
munity  ;  it  is  familiar  to  us  from  the  scapegoat  to  whom  the
sins  of  the  Children  of  Israel  were  transferred  on  the  Day  of
Atonement.  Laden  with  these  sins,  the  beast  was  driven  away
into  the  wilderness  and  the  people  were  free.  Among  the
aborigines  of  China  the  ills  and  disasters  of  the  people  during
the  past  year  are  represented  by  stones  and  bits  of  iron  which
are  placed  in  a  jar  and  blown  up.1  It  is  not  necessarily  sin  or
wrong-doing  that  is  thus  destroyed.  Some  Chinese  tribes  pro
tect  themselves  from  pestilences  by  selecting  a  man  to  attract
all  the  evil  influences  into  him  by  certain  rites,  after  which  he
is  driven  away  from  the  village.2  Ghosts  may  be  driven  off

1  Frazer,  vol.  iii.,  p.  106.

2  Ib.,  p.  104.
VOL.  II.


66  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

like  other  evil  influences.1 Thus  the  homicide,  even  the  suc
cessful  warrior,  must  be  washed  to  rid  himself  of  the  ghost  o
the  slain,  and  the  same  process  may  be  applied  to  the  weapon
used  to  commit  the  deed. The  purification  by  which  the  ghos
or  evil  influence  is  expelled  lends  itself  in  our  rmnds  to  an
ethical  interpretation,  but  we  see  from  the  fact  of  its  application
to  actions  which  the  savage  regards  as  not  only  innocent  but
laudable,  that  it  is  rather the supposed physical  influence,
whether  ghostly or magical, that is dreaded and that the
purifying  rites  have  to  remove.2 The  slayer  of  his  own  kindred
who  has  committed  a  moral  offence  will  also  undoubtedly  have
to  undergo  purification. But  in  this  respect  he  is  merely  o
the  level  with  the  lauded  slayer  of  an  enemy. Both  alike  may
be  haunted;  that  the  one  is  haunted  for  an  act  held  immoral  i
an  accident ;  he  is  not  haunted  because  the  act  is  immoral,  nor
is  the  act  immoral because he  is haunted. He  is haunte
because  he  has  angered  a  spirit,  a  thing  which  another  man  may
do  in  the  course  of  his  duty  to  his  friends  or  his  community.
All  that  we  can  say  at  this  stage  is  that  immoral  actions  are
among  those  which  incur  the  wrath  of  spirits  or  the  breaking
of  a  taboo,  but  so  little  is  the  moral  conception  different^
from  the  general  vague  mass  of  doubt  and  fear  with  which  the
primitive  man  views  the  effect  of  his  conduct  upon  the
fluences  that  surround  him,  that  the  righteous  and  the  un-
ricrhteous,  the  good  and  the  bad,  in  so  far  as  they  bring  those
influences  into  play  are  all lumped together  under  the  one
designation  of  that  which  is  tabooed  or  set  apart  from  ordinary
usetnd  from  contact  with  humanity. To  us  the  holy  and  the
unclean  stand  at  opposite  poles  of  thought,  but  in  the  primitive
world  they  are  not  yet  distinct. The  Polynesian  «'  taboo, 1
Latin  "sacer,"  the  Greek  « Logics,"  are  simply  the  things  set
apart  for  the  gods  or  the  spirits,  or  separated  from  the
man,  because  filled  with  dangerous  influences. If  we  transL

'  ^Compare  Frazer,  vol.  i.,  p.  340  and  following.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY THOUGHT 67

"sacer"  by  our  word  "sacred,"  we  must  say  the  parricide  is
sacred.  Of  course  he  was  not  sacred,  but  he  was  set  apart  for
the  vengeance  of  the  family  god.  Similarly  the  city  of  the
idolaters  devoted  to  destruction  by  the  Hebrew  invaders  is  not
sacred  in  our  sense,  nor  were  their  possessions  too  holy  to  touch
as  we  conceive  holiness.  Rather  were  they  unclean  and  ac
cursed.  They  were  like  the  holy  things  only  in  this,  that  they
were  set  apart  for  Jehovah  to  do  what  he  would  with  them.1

The  purification  of  the  community  from  all  ills,  physical  and
moral,  is  often  an  annual  affair,  and  since  it  is  necessary  that
all  transgressions  which  involve  the  possibility  of  calamity  must
be  known  in  order  to  be  got  rid  of,  it  is  sometimes  preceded
by  an  annual  confession  of  sins.2  The  Creek  Indians,  for  ex
ample,  held  a  ceremony  called  the  "Busk"  every  summer,  in
the  course  of  which  "  all  the  men  who  were  not  known  to  have
violated  the  law  of  the  first-fruit  offerings  and  that  of  marriage
during  the  year "  were  summoned  to  hold  a  solemn  fast.  All
impure  people  were  kept  apart,  also  fasting,  and  after  other
ceremonies  a  new  fire  was  kindled  which  was  held  to  atone  for
all  great  crimes  except  murder.3

8.  But  the  simplest  method  for  ridding  oneself  of  sins  is
merely  to  deny  or  repudiate  them  in  the  proper  form  which
the  tradition  of  the  priest  assures  the  sufferer  to  be  efficient  in
ridding  him  of  the  load  of  guilt.  This  method  of  purification
was  highly  developed  in  Babylonia,  and  also  plays  an  important
part  in  the  Egyptian  conceptions  of  the  future  judgment.  In
Babylon  there  seems  to  have  been  no  question  of  reward  or

1  Compare  Frazer,  vol.  i.,  p.  343,  etc.

*  The  tT^es  of  Guatemala  are  said  to  have  made  confessions  of  sins
(Waitz,  vol.  iv.,  p.  265)  in  time  of  calamity.  In  Yucatan  there  was  a
private  confession  followed  by  a  kind  of  baptism,  the  purpose  of  which
was  to  remove  evil  spirits.  (16.,  pp.  306,  307.)  The  Iroquois  practised  a
public  confession  at  their  religious  festivals,  but  Morgan  considers  that

7^d  Perhaps  learnt  this  from  the  Jesuits. (The  League  of  tJie  Iroquois,

p.  1  <  0.) I  he  conception  was  further  developed  in  Mexico,  where  confession

was  demanded  once  m  a  lifetime,  and  penances  were  imposed  including

iood-lettmg  and  fasting,  the  sacrifice  of  a  slave,  and  benevolence  to  the

ick  and  needy  ;  from  our  point  of  view  a  curious  confusion  of  barbarous

and  moral  methods  of  winning  divine  favour. These  penances  might  avert

punishment. (Waitz,  vol.  iv.,  p.  129.)

3  Frazer  vol.  ii  p.  330,  etc.  A  somewhat  similar  festival  is  held  among
the  Semmole  Indians  of  Florida.


68  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

punishment  in  a  future  life,  but  there  was  a  very  strong  con
viction  that  a  god  or  demon  might  be  given  an  opening  for
attack  upon  a  man  by  any  of  his  sins  of  commission  or  omission.
Hence  the  so-called  penitential  psalms  of  the  Babylonians  and
the  incantation  texts  which  throw  so  strong  a  light  upon  their
ethical  ideas.  It  has  been  rightly  pointed  out  that  the  peni
tential  psalms  have  many  of  the  characteristics  of  magical
formula.  "  The  lapse  "  in  them  "  from  the  ethical  strain  to  the
incantation  refrain  is  as  sudden  as  it  is  common."  There  is  no
question  in  them  of  retribution  proper  nor  of  genuine  contrition.
The  psalm  is  an  enumeration  of  possible  causes  of  suffering.
The  mere  mention  of  the  right  cause  goes  a  long  way  to  relieve
it,  especially  if  the  priest  calls  upon  the  right  spirit.  Hence
the  length  of  the  list  of  sins,  which  is  due  to  the  desire  to  make
it  exhaustive.  "Speaking  the  right  words,  and  pronouncing
the  right  name  constituted,  together  with  the  correct  ceremony
and  the  bringing  of  the  right  sacrifice,  the  conditions  upon  which
depends  the  success  of  the  priest  in  the  incantation  ritual." ]
Here  is  an  illustration  : —

"  0  that  the  wrath  of  my  lord's  heart  return  to  its  former  condition,
0  that  the  god  who  is  unknown  be  pacified,
0  that  the  goddess  unknown  be  pacified.
0  that  the  god  known  or  unknown  be  pacified,

0  that  the  goddess  known  or  unknown  be  pacified.  .  .  .
The  sin  I  have  committed,  I  know  not.  .  .  .

The  sin  I  have  committed,  change  to  mercy,

The  wrong  I  have  done,  may  the  wind  carry  off,

Tear  asunder  my  many  trangressions  as  a  garment,

My  god,  my  sins  are  seven  times  seven,  forgive  me  my  sins." :

It  is  in  keeping  with  the  same  line  of  thought  that  the  in
cantation  texts  appear  as  a  list  of  all  possible  sins,  by  which
the  patient  who  is  suffering  from  misfortune,  from  fever  or  from
the  headache  demon,  who  seems  to  have  been  particularly
active  in  the  Babylonian  swamps,  might  have  been  placed  under
the  ban.  The  reciter  of  the  incantation  calls  on  the  great
gods,  "  lords  of  redemption,  on  behalf  of  so  and  so,  who  is  sick,
wretched,  or  in  trouble,  has  offended  his  gods,  spoken  evil,

1  Jastrow,  Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  p.  292. 2  Jfc.,  320.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN EARLY  THOUGHT 69

despised  father  or  mother,"  and  so  forth,1  and  he  demands  on
the  chair,  by  the  bellows,  by  the  writing  table,  by  the  halidom
of  his  lord  and  lady,  that  the  ban  be  taken  off.  He  calls  on
the  gods  of  the  master  of  the  house,  the  god  of  the  sinner,  or
the  great  gods  "  as  many  as  are  present,"  the  "  pan  of  coals —
thou  child  of  Ea,"  to  come  and  extinguish  the  sins,  trangressions
and  bonds  of  so  and  so,  and  banish  his  curse.  The  oddly  placed
invocation  to  the  coal-scuttle  is  a  reference  to  the  ritual  where
the  sin  or  curse  was  burnt  up.2  In  another  process  the  table
of  sins  is  thrown  into  the  water.3

These  incantation  tablets  of  the  Babylonians  help  us  to
understand  the  famous  125th  chapter  of  the  Egyptian  Book
of  the  Dead,  by  far  the  oldest  representation  of  a  Day  of
Judgment.  If  we  look  at  this  account  carefully  we  shall
see  that  here  again  it  is  not  really  a. confession  of  sins,
nor  a  plea  for  forgiveness,  nor  even  in  reality  a  self-
justification  that  is  in  question.  The  dead  man  enumerates
all  possible  sins  that  occur  to  the  Egyptian  mind  as  likely
to  anger  the  gods,  and  he  rejects  them  in  the  appropriate
language.  Whether  he  was  really  and  truly  guilty  of  them
seems  to  have  been  a  secondary  matter.  The  point  is  that  he
rids  himself  of  them  by  repudiating  them  in  the  proper
formula!.  In  fact  the  introduction  to  the  confession  explains
that  this  "  shall  be  said  "  when  the  deceased  "  cometh  forth  into
the  hall  of  Double  Maati,  so  that  he  may  be  separated  from
every  sin  which  he  hath  done."  The  first  thing  that  the
deceased  says  to  Osiris  is,  "  I  know  thee,  and  I  know  thy  name,
and  I  know  the  names  of  the  two-and-forty  gods  .  .  .  who  live
as  wardens  of  sinners  and  who  feed  upon  their  blood."  Knowing
the  names  of  these  cannibal  spirits  he  has  magic  power  over
them,  and  he  addresses  each  one  in  turn,  repudiating  the  sins
which  put  him  in  the  power  of  each  spirit.  "  Hail  thou,  whose
strides  are  long,  who  comest  forth  from  Annu,  I  have  not  done
iniquity.  Hail  thou,  who  art  embraced  by  flames,  who  comest
forth  from  Kher-aha,  I  have  not  robbed  with  violence,"  4  and  so
on  through  a  list  of  forty-two  gods  and  forty-two  sins.  The

1  For  the  list  of  offences,  pee  below.

2  From  the  Incantation  Table  Surpu  (burning). (Zimmern, Beitrage,
pp.  3-9.)

3  11.,  Table  IV.,  p.  23.  4  For  the  full  list  of  sins,  see  below.


70  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

confession  concluded,  he  again  protests  that  he  knows  the  names
of  the  gods,  he  has  "  heard  that  mighty  word  which  the  spiritual
bodies  (v.  I.  the  Ass)  spake  unto  the  cat,"  he  has  purified  his
breast,  his  hinder  parts  and  his  inner  parts,  and  he  opens  the
doors  by  telling  their  names.1  At  every  turn  magical  lore
holds  the  master-key,  and  the  repudiation  of  sins  is  itself
a  magical  formula  for  destroying  them.2

Where  the  religious  element  predominates  wrong-doing  is
held  to  be  an  offence  against  a  spirit.  We  have  seen  that  it  is
still  possible  that  the  means  of  expiation  should  closely  resemble
those  of  magic.  The  spirit  may  be  merely  driven  away,  or
frightened  off,  or  got  rid  of  by  deception.  But  the  commoner
case,  particularly  as  the  spirit  develops  into  a  god,  is  to  appease
him  by  sacrifice.  Just  as  the  sacrifice  may  be  offered  to  secure
a  boon,  so  it  may  be  used  to  avert  wrath,  and  as  primitive
sacrifice  is  held  by  many  modern  authorities  to  be  primarily  a
means  of  communication  between  the  worshipper  and  the  deity,
the  piacular  form  would  tend  to  grow  as  magical  beliefs  gave
way  to  the  divine  governance  of  the  world,  and  calamities  were
held  to  be  the  direct  expression  of  Divine  wrath.  At  this  point
the  value  of  the  sacrifice  became  the  essential  feature,  and  men
gave  to  the  gods  what  they  held  most  dear  to  themselves ;
hence  costly  hecatombs  and  human  sacrifice.3  The  eminently
unspiritual  conception  of  atoning  for  sin  by  these  means  is  one

1  Budge,  Book  of  the  Dead,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  355-377.

2  This interpretation  of  the  Negative  Confession  is  supported  by  the
authority  of  Mr.  Griffith. (Stories  of  the  High  Priests  of  Memphis,  p.  46.)
It  was  impossible,  as  Mr.  Griffith  points  out,  for  a  man  to  be  innocent  of
all  the  sins,  so  exhaustively  enumerated,  but  "  by  denial  of  sin  in  correct
terms,  and  by  magic  adjuration  of  the  heart  not  to  betray  him  in  the  scales,
the  deceased  outwitted  the  gods,"  and  so  the  worst  culprit  could  escape
punishment. Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  the  idea  of  punishment  developed
until  it  seemed  that  no  salvation  was  possible  for  any  one  ;  on  the  other,
"  purely  mechanical  means  were  provided,  which,  as  it  would  seem,  the
greatest  sinner  could  embrace  with  full  assurance  of  bliss."

In  a  description  of  the  Last  Judgment  found  in  the  Tale  of  Khammas,
dating  from  the  first  century  after  Christ,  the  evil  deeds  of  a  man  are
weighed  against  his  good  deeds.  Here  the  magical  element  has  receded  in
favour  of  the  moral.

8  See  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites,  p.  394,  etc.  Of  course
this  is  not  the  sole  origin  of  human  sacrifice,  which  is  common  enough  from
barbaric  times  in  association  with  the  cult  of  the  dead,  but  in  earlier
civilizations  it  had  a  special  tendency  to  crop  out  anew  in  connection  with
national  calamities  ;  e.  g.  among  the  Jews  and  occasionally  at  Rome.  "  A
most  unroman  practice,"  says  Livy.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 71

of  the  points  seized  upon  by  the  advance  guard  of  spiritual
religion.  The  Jahveh  of  the  Prophets  desired  mercy  and  not
sacrifice,  and  the  cultivated  Roman  saw  the  folly  and  the  moral
levity  of  the  belief  that  the  guilt  of  blood  could  be  washed  away
by  water.1

Upon  the  whole,  then,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  moral  develop
ment  the  mode  of  dealing  with  guilt  consists  either  in putting
it  away  or  repudiating  it  by  a  magical  process,  or  in  appeasing
or  conciliating  the  gods  whom  it  has  offended. Neither  of  these
methods  can  be  regarded  as  ethical  in  themselves. They  may
incidentally  involve  elements  of  retributive  justice,  as  where  a
penance  is  imposed  as  part  of  the  means  of  purification,  or  a
costly  sacrifice  is  enjoined  as  necessary  to  buy  off  punishment.
They  may  also,  where  confession  is  exacted,  have  recuperative
moral effect. It is  permissible  to think that these ethical
elements  have  not  been  without  their  influence  in  determining
the  form  which  expiation  takes,  and  particularly  in  a  religion
like  that  of  Mexico,  where  civilized  elements  rub  shoulders  with
the  most  unspeakable  barbarities,  we  seem  to  find  the  moral
element  coining  into  prominence. But  speaking  generally  and
looking at the principle of  the thing, we find  the ethical
element  but  little  developed  on  this  side. The  removal  of  sin
belongs  either  to  the  region  of  magical  mechanism  or  of  spiritual
commerce.

9  In  the  variety  of  customs  and  beliefs  at  which  we  have
o-lanced  we  seem  to  recognize  two  fairly  distinct  stages  of  ethical
development.  In  the  lower,  the  force  behind  custom — apart,  of
course,  from  the  physical  restraints  imposed  by  society  itself— is
the  fear  of  magical  influences  or  of  revengeful  spirits.  Neither
of  these  is  of  essentially  ethical  character.  The  vengeance  of  a
ghost  is  very  different  from  the  judgment  of  a  god.  It  does  not
consider  the  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  case,  but  acts  like  the

1  Prof.  Tylor,  vol.  ii.,  p.  439,  quotes  Ovid  :—

"  Ah,  nimium  facilos  qui  tristia  crimina  caedis
Fluminea  tolli  posse  putetis  aqua."

In  somewhat  similar  strain  Horace  :  —

"  Immunis  arain  si  tetigit  manus
Non  sumptuosa  blandior  hostia
Mollivit  aversos  Penates
Farre  pio  et  saliente  mica."


72  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

vengeance  of  the  savage  himself  on  the  principle  of  retaliation.
The  magical  taboo  may  be  held  to  embody  what  we  call  moral
feelings,  but  it  implies  no  clear  recognition  of  the  distinctive
nature  of  morality. To  many  breaches  of  the  social  order  it
does  not  apply,1  while  it  does  apply  to  many  acts  of  no  moral
significance,  and  in all cases  its  action  as  conceived by  the
savage  is  what  we  should  call  mechanical  rather  than  ethical.
Thus the conceptions which serve as a basis for ethical
conduct are themselves devoid of ethical character, and
the  means taken  for averting  the consequences of  guilt, as
purifications, incantations,  and  the appeasement  of  offended
spirits,  are  of  the  same  nature. A  step  in  advance  is  taken
when  spiritual  agencies  arise  who  take  interest  in  certain  moral
acts  as  such,  protecting  the  helpless  and  suppliant  because  they
are  helpless  or  suppliant,  and  punishing  the  murderer  because
he  is  a  murderer. In  this  way,  certain  departments  of  action
are  marked  out  in  which  a  distinctly  religious  sanction  is  found
for  certain  rules  of  conduct,  and  this  idea  is  generalized in
proportion  as  the avenging  deities become  the  ministers  or
possibly  the  attributes  of  some,  or,  it  may  be,  of  one  of  the
greater  gods,  who  thus  comes  to  be  an  upholder  of  the  moral
order  as  a  whole. Such  a  God  will  be  a  judge  of  men  who
rewards  or  punishes  in  accordance  with  an  impartial  law. Such
a  God  differs  materially  from  a  vengeful  spirit. Unfortunately
the  conception  of  judgment  is  too  often  associated  with  means
of  appeasing  the  divine  wrath  in  which  very  primitive  and  non-
moral  conceptions  are  wont  to  survive. If  the  belief  in  a  future
Judgment represents the ethical conception of  retribution,
means  of  securing  a  favourable  judgment  will  very  probably  be
supplied  by  a  special  application  of  primitive  magic. Bearing
these  limitations  in  mind,  we  may,  nevertheless,  recognize  at
this  second  stage  a  distinctly  ethical  element  in  the  divinely
'  E.  g.  Theft,  homicide,  adultery. Of  course  any  of  these  may  involve  a
taboo,  but  if  so,  it  is  either  a  taboo  imposed  in  self-interest,  e.  g.  on  property
by its owner, or  one involving  nothing  worse than uncleanness e.g.
homicide  has  no  worse  penalty  than  mere  contact  with  death.

While  the  moral  consciousness  would  allow  contact  with  the  dead  to
pollute  only  so  far  as  guilt  is  marked,  the  genuine  magical  or  animistic
point  of  view  is  that  the  guilt  (of  homicide)  pollutes  only  so  far  as
dangerous  contact  with  the  dead  is  involved.  The  failure  to  differentiate
the  holy  and  unclean  which  has  been  noted  above  may  be  taken  as  typical
of  magical  and  animistic  thought.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 73

appointed  sanctions  on  which  the  social  order  rests. Morality
is  based  on  a  partially  moralized  religion.

We  may  fruitfully  compare  this  advance  with  the  development
which  we  found  in  studying  primitive  justice.  In  the  lowest
stages  we  saw  that  the  bulk  of  the  acts  which  infringe  the
rights  of  other  men  are  not,  strictly  speaking,  regarded  as
inherently  wrong,  but  rather  as  legitimate  occasions  for
vengeance  to  be  inflicted  by  the  sufferer  and  his  kinsfolk  if
strong  enough  to  do  so.  It  is  not  my  right  to  my  property
which  is  sacred  at  this  stage,  but  rather  my  right  to  the  protec
tion  of  my  kindred.  The  personal  rights  and  duties  which
constitute  the  elements  of  social  order  are  not  yet  regarded  as
valuable  in  themselves  and  deserving  of  the  general  support  of
impartial  persons.  The  main  categorical  imperative  is  "  Stand
by  thy  kin."  Doubtless  the  organization  of  the  blood  feud  tends
on  the  whole  to  the  maintenance  of  a  certain  order,  and  thus
indirectly  the  elements  of  social  order  are  protected  by  this
same  "  imperative."  But  this  does  not  amount  to  a  direct
recognition  of  the  primary  rights  of  person  and  property.
Putting  these  facts  together  and  taking  them  in  connection
with  what  we  now  see  of  the  basis  of  morality,  we  may  infer  that
moral  feeling  is  not  at  this  stage  disengaged  from  a  prudential
dread  of  human  vengeance  or  of  mysterious  forces  in  which  there
is  nothing  peculiarly  moral.  Nor  conversely  do  the  mass  of
feelings  which  surround  and  sanctify  custom  directly  support
those  rights  and  duties  in  which  to  our  thinking  the  elements  of
the  moral  order  consist,  but  rather  that  mutual  aid  among
kinsfolk  by  which,  as  chance  directs,  the  moral  order  may  be
supported  or  may  be  overridden.  Above  the  stage  of  the
blood  feud  we  saw  the  rise  of  public  justice  and  the  growing
predominance  of  the  view  that  breaches  of  the  social  order  are
wrongs  to  be  punished  rather  than  personal  injuries  to  be
avenged.  We  saw  how  society  became  directly  interested  in
maintaining  the  elements  of  social  peace,  and  safeguarding  the
primary  rights  of  person  and  property  for  members  of  its  body,
so  that  as  far  as  the  social  tie  extends  the  simple  social  obliga
tions  are  recognized  as  binding.  We  seem  to  see  here  the
emergence  of  a  more  distinctly  ethical  consciousness  which
corresponds  with,  and  in  fact  often  finds  embodiment  in,  the


74  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

higher  and  clearer  conceptions  of  distinct  superhuman  person
alities  who  judge  impartially  between  good  and  evil.  In  this
conception,  however  crudely  and  indistinctly  worked  out,  the
"  ethical  basis"  is  no  longer  wholly  "  unethical."  Not  indeed  in
the  form  of  a  coherent  ideal,  or  a  reasoned  truth,  but  as  a
working  rule  ordained  by  a  just  God  the  ethical  begins  to  make
itself  felt  as  a  distinct  element  of  the  human  consciousness.
This  emergence  constitutes  the  first  step  onwards  in  ethical
evolution.

The  same  development  may  be  described  from  a  converse
point  of  view  by  altering  the  question,  and  instead  of  inquiring
into  the  basis  of  early  morality,  asking  what  is  the  ethical
character  of  early  religion.  The  reply  will  be  that  in  the  first
stage  we  find  that  spirits,  as  such,  are  not  concerned  with
morality,  though  some  spirits  by  their  position  may  be  affected
by  certain  kinds  of  conduct  which  they  may  resent.  In  the
second  stage  we  find  spirits1  whose  essential  function  is  to
preside  over  certain  branches  of  the  law,  and  as  development
proceeds  they  become  servants  of  gods,  who  supervise  morals
generally.  Yet  even  at  this  stage,  gods  are  not  always,  or
necessarily,  perfect  beings;  if  there  are  some  who  represent
physical  and  moral  ideals,  there  are  others  who  exhibit  not
only  the  evil  passions  of  contemporary  men,  but  sometimes  also
the  darkest  practices  of  primitive  humanity  which  their  own
worshippers  have  outgrown.  Some  gods  are  good,  but  goodness
is  not  yet  the  essential  attribute  of  God.

10.  In  these  early  stages  the  ethical  consciousness  is  still
struggling  for  distinct  recognition.  It  is  far  as  yet  from  the
position  in  which  it  can  dominate  the  customary  code  or  infuse
its  own  ideal  into  the  mass  of  social  tradition.  The  morals  of
early  society  are  therefore  still  governed  by  the  conditions
under  which  social  life  has  arisen — that  is  to  say,  in  particular
by  the  principles  of  group-morality,  in  which  the  elements  of
hatred  and  revenge,  of  self-assertion  and  domination,  in  a  word,

1  In  themselves  these  spirits,  whether  idealized  ghosts  or  personified
functions  like  Fides,  are  rather  a  special  development  of  animism  than
members  of  the  circle  of  the  gods.  But  though  not  at  first  identical  with
the  gods,  they  are  a  collateral  product  of  growing  religious  thought,  and  in
fact  tend,  as  we  have  seen,  to  fuse  with  them.


ETHICAL CONCEPTIONS IN  EARLY THOUGHT 75

of  all  the  qualities  that  make  for  success  in  strife,  are  at  least
as  prominent  as  the  principles  of  love,  sympathy,  forgiveness,
harmonious  co-operation,  which  make  directly  for  the  peaceable
life of  an ordered society. Early  society,  we might  say, is
founded  on  the  two  complementary  principles  of  attraction  and
repulsion,  and  both  are  represented  in  its  codes. True,  early
societies  differ  greatly  in  character,  and  we  have  noted  instances
in  which,  whether  owing  to  fortunate  surroundings  or  to  a  happy
strain  of  moral  inheritance,  a  simple,  primitive  life  is  lived  in
almost  idyllic  peace  and  harmony. But  these  are  rare,  and
such  a  character  is  hardly  at  this  stage  to  be  found  among  the
peoples  which  make  the  deepest  mark  upon  the  world. The
condition  of  a  low  general  culture  favours  rather  the tribes
which  allow  a  large  sphere  of  operation  to  the  military  instincts.
Especially  in  the  races  which  are  starting  on  a  great  career  of
influence in the civilized world the blend of  militant and
domestic virtues is conspicuous, and  the type that results,
familiar  to  us  from  the  annals  of  early  Greece  and  Rome,  from
Hebrew  history,  and  the  accounts  of  primitive  German  life,  is  in
many  respects  admirable. The  closely-knit  patriarchal  family,
the  loyalty  to  the  chief,  the  mutual  help  of  the  kinsfolk,  the
respect  for  woman  qualifying  the  inferiority  of  her  legal  status,
the  sanctity  of  the  oath,  the  open-handed  hospitality,  the  regard
for  the  suppliant  and  the  stranger — these  are  among  the  virtues
of  primitive  society  to  which  its  descendants  sometimes  look
back  with  regret  for  their  relative  decline  under  the  softening
influences of  culture. The  other  side  of  the  account  is  the
comparative  moral  isolation  of  each  society,  the  ferocity  often
shown  to  enemies,  the  disregard  of  human  rights  where  not
protected  by  equal  membership  of  the  social  group,  the  per
mission  of  piracy  and  slave-dealing,  the  frequent  appearance  of
barbarous  religious  rites.

11.  In  the  early  Oriental  civilizations  there  is  a  certain
blunting  of  the  edges  of  the  barbarian  ideas.  Though  war  and
conquest,  slave-dealing  and  the  imposition  of  tribute,  play  a
large  part  in  national  life  and  political  history,  private  ethics
are  more  concerned  with  quiet  industrial  life  and  the  arts  of
peace.  Political  freedom  is  gone :  the  personal  power  of  the


76


MORALS  IN EVOLUTION


chief  or  the  great  warrior  counts  for  less ;  the  family  pride  of
powerful  groups  of  kinsfolk  is  lowered.  The  ethical  codes  reflect
a  softening  of  manners  along  with  a  certain  loss  of  the  elements
of  chivalrous  idealism  which  mark  the  best  of  the  barbarian
world,  and  which  is  not  yet  replaced  by  the  idealism  of  religion
or  of  humanity.  It  happens  that  both  from  ancient  Babylonia
and  Egypt  we  have  remarkably  full  statements  of  what  were
doubtless  recognized  as  the  principal  moral  obligations  in  the
documents  already  mentioned — the  Babylonian  Incantation
tablets  and  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead.

In  the  second  of  the  Shurpu  Incantation  Tablets,1  already
referred  to,  the  exorcist  asks  on  behalf  of  his  victim —

"  Has  he  offended  his  god  .  .  .  offended  his  goddess  ?
Has  he  uttered  calamitous  things  ?
Has  he  said  evil  things  ?
Has  he  said  impure  things  ?
Has  he  allowed  unjust  things  to  be  said  ?
Has  he  made  a  judge  take  a  bribe  ?
Has  he  oppressed  weakness  ?
Has  he  divided  father  and  son  ?
Has  he  divided  son  and  father  ?
Has  he  divided  mother  and  daughter  ?
Has  he  divided  daughter  and  mother  ? "

And  so  for  several  pairs  of  relations.

"  Has  he  not  set  the  captive  free  ?  .  .  .  loosed  the  bonds  of  the

fettered  ?

Denied  a  prisoner  the  light  of  day  1
Said  of  a  captive  '  Seize  him '  ...  of  one  who  is  bound,  '  Bind

him'?
Is there  any sin against a god  .  .  .  any trespass against  a

goddess  ?
Any  violence  towards  his  forbears  .  .  .  any  hatred  towards  his

elder  brother  ?
Has  he  scorned  father  and  mother  .  .  .  affronted  his  elder  sister  ?

1  Zimmern  (Delitzsch  u.  Haupt,  Bibliothek.),  Beit-rage  zur  Kenntniss
der  Babylonischen  Religion,  1901,  p.  3,  Tables  II.,  III.,  VIII.  Owing  to
their  magical  character,  as  explained  above,  the  tablets  are  full  of  repetitions,
sometimes  with  slight  differences  of  phraseology,  but  the  list  given  in  the
text  covers,  I  believe,  all  the  distinct  causes  of  offence  enumerated.  I  have
let  a  few  repetitions  stand  by  way  of  illustration.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN EARLY  THOUGHT 77

Has  he  given  in  small  things  .  .  .  denied  in  great  things  ?

Has  be  said  '  yes '  f or  '  no '  ?

'  No '  for  '  yes  '  ?

Has  he  used  false  weights  ?

Has  he  taken  bad  money  ...  not  taken  good  money  ?

Disinherited  a  legitimate  son  ...  put  in  an  illegitimate  son  ?

Made  false  boundaries  .  .  .  not  allowed  true  boundaries.

Displaced  boundary,  landmark,  limit  ?

Has  he  set  foot  in  his  neighbour's  house  1

Approached  his  neighbour's  wife,

Shed  his  neighbour's  blood,

Stolen  his  neighbour's  dress  1

Has  he  not  let  a  man  go  out  of  his  power  ?

Driven  a  respectable  man  out  of  his  family,

Divided  a  united  kindred,

Raised  himself  against  his  superior  ?

Was  he  sincere  with  his  lips  .  .  .  false  in  his  heart,

Saying  '  yes '  with  his  lips  .  .  .  '  no '  with  his  heart  1

Is  it  for  all  unrighteousness  that  he  meditated,

To  persecute  the  righteous,  to  repudiate,

To  annihilate,  to  drive  away,  to  destroy,

To  raise  up — to  stir  up  violence,

To  outrage,  to  rob,  to  procure  robbery,

To  engage  in  evil  ?

Is  his  mouth  loose  and  obscene,

(Are)  his  lips  deceitful  and  refractory  ?

Has  he  committed  an  impurity  .  .  .  taught  indecent  things  1

Has  he  engaged  in  magic  and  witchcraft  t

Has  he  made  a  promise  with  heart  and  lips,  but  not  kept  it,

Through  a  present  dishonoured  the  name  of  his  god,

Consecrated  and  vowed  something,  but  kept  it  back,

Presented  something  .  .  .  but  eaten  it  1

Has  he  angered  his  god  and  goddess  against  him  ? "
"Whether  he  has  pointed  to  a  figure  with  his  finger  1
Whether  through  the  figure  of  his  father  and  mother  ...  he  is

cursed,
Through  the  figure  of  his  elder  brother  or  elder  sister  ...  he  is

cursed,  etc."

"  Whether  he  has  wrought  wickedness  to  his  town,
Spread  a  report  about  his  town,
Maligned  the  fair  fame  of  his  town  1


78  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Whether  he  has  approached  an  accursed  one,
Whether  an  accursed  one  has  approached  him,
Whether  he  has  slept  in  an  accursed  one's  bed,
Sat  on  the  accursed  one's  chair  .  .  .
He  demands,  he  demands  " —

^  The  list  may  be  completed  from  the  remaining  tables. Thus
Table  III.  mentions : —
"  A  curse  through  pointing  with  the  finger  at  fire,

Through  taking  fire  and  swearing  by  god,

Through  demanding  due  instead  of  giving  it,

Through  sitting  facing  the  sun,

Through  tearing  up  plants  from  the  field,

Through  bow,  brazen  dagger,  or  spear,

Through  slaying  young  game,

Through  stealing  up  to  a  companion  and  slaying  him,

Through  being  besought  for  a  day  about  a  gutter  and  refusing,

Through  being  besought  for  a  day  about  a  cistern  and  refusing,

Through  taking  a  bucket  and  swearing  by  god,

Through  asking  any  one  about  hunting,  in  the  stable,

Through  swearing  by  god  with  unwashed  hands  upheld,

Through  stopping  a  neighbour's  canal,

Instead  of  being  compliant  to  an  opponent,  remaining  inimical  to
him,

Through  producing  a  weapon  in  an  assembly,

Through  interceding  for  a  sinner."

Further  in  Table  IV.  we  find  a  curse  through

O

"  Abandoning  instead  of  protecting  manservant,  maidservant,  master

or  mistress,
Abandoning  instead  of  protecting  woman,  wife  or  son."

The  list  of  possible  offences  would  doubtless  tend  to  grow  as
fresh  possibilities  of  offences  occurred,  while  people  were  afraid  of
leaving  out  anything  for  fear  of  losing  the  magical  effect.  As
to  the  contents  of  the  Code,  it  will  be  seen  that  tbe  simple
ethical  duties,  respect  for  life,  property,  and  sex,  all  figure;
that  great  stress  is  laid  upon  the  family  tie  and  upon  disturb
ances  of  the  peace  among  relations  and  friends,  that  violence  is
deprecated,  and  that  at  least  in  one  place,  if  not  forgiveness  of
enemies,  at  any  rate  reconciliation  with  enemies  seems  to  be
recommended.  Finally,  the  duties  to  prisoners  and  captives,


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS IN EARLY  THOUGHT 79

the  obligation  to  protect  the  slave  and  the  dependant  are  freely
recognized.  In  mentioning  these  points,  however,  we  have
indicated  the  highest  limit  which  the  Code  touches.

With  the  Babylonian  tablets  we  may  compare  the  well-known
chap.  125  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.1  There  are  two  Confessions.
The  first  runs  as  follows  : —

"  I  have  not  done  injury  to  men.

I  have  not  oppressed  those  beneath  me  (members  of  my  family).
I  have  not  acted  perversely  [prevaricated  ?]  instead  of  straight
forwardly  (wrought  evil  in  the  place  of  right  and  truth).
I  have  not  known  vanity  (worthless  men).
I  have  not  been  a  doer  of  mischief.
(I  have  not  made  to  be  the  first  consideration  of  each  day  that

excessive  labour  should  be  performed  for  me.)
(I  have  not  brought  forward  my  name  for  (exaltation)  to  honours).
(I  have  not  ill-treated  servants.)
(I  have  not  thought  scorn  of  god.)
(I  have  not  defrauded  the  oppressed  one  of  his  property,
or,  '  I  have  not  caused  misery,  I  have  not  caused  affliction.')
I  have  not  done  what  the  gods  abominate.
I  have  not  turned  the  servant  against  his  master  (caused  harm  to

to  be  done  to  the  servant  by  his  chief).
I  have  not  caused  hunger.
I  have  not  caused  weeping.
I  have  not  murdered.
I  have  not  commanded  murder.
I  have  not  caused  suffering  to  men.
I  have  not  cut  short  the  rations  of  the  temple  (defrauded  the

temples  of  their  oblations).
I  have  not  diminished  the  offerings  of  the  gods.
I  have  not  taken  the  provisions  of  the  blessed  dead.
I  have  not  committed  fornication,  nor  impurity  in  what  was  sacred
to  the  god  of  my  city. (I  have  not  polluted  myself  in  the  holy
places  of  the  god  of  my  city.)

I  have  not  added  to,  nor  diminished  the  measures  of  grain.
I  have  not  diminished  the  palm  measure.
I  have  not  falsified  the  cubit  of  land  (added  to  nor  filched  away).

1  Translations  of  this  chapter  vary  greatly.  In  the  text  I  have  followed
that  of  Mr.  LI.  Griffith,  World's  Literature,  p.  5320.  The  variants  in
brackets  are  from  Mr.  Budge's  Book  of  the  Dead.  The  concluding  address
to  the  gods  is  from  Mr.  Budge's  translation.


80  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

[  have  not  added  to  the  weights  of  the  balance.
I  have  not  nullified  the  plummet  of  the  scales.
[  have  not  taken  milk  from  the  mouth  of  babes.
I  have  not  driven  cattle  from  their  herbage.
I  have  not  trapped  birds,  the  bones  of  the  gods  (of  the  preserves  of
the  gods).

I  have  not  caught  fish  in  their  pools  (?)  (with  a  bait  made  of  fish

of  their  kind).

I  have  not  stopped  water  in  its  season.
[  have  not  dammed  running  water  (cut  a  cutting  in  a  canal).
I  have  not  quenched  fire  when  burning.
I  have  not  disturbed  the  cycle  of  gods,  when  at  their  choice  meats

(violated  the  times  of  the  meat-offerings).
[  have  not  driven  off  the  cattle  of  the  sacred  estate.
I  have  not  stopped  a  god  in  his  comings  forth.
(I  am  pure. I  am  pure. I  am  pure.)  "  1

After an adjuration to the gods, the second confession
follows : —

"  I  have  not  done  injustice.
I  have  not  robbed.

I  have  not  coveted  (?)  (done  violence  to  any  man).
I  have  not  stolen.

I  have  not  slain  men  (man  or  woman).
I  have  not  diminished  the  corn  measure.
I  have  not  acted  crookedly.
I  have  not  stolen  the  property  of  the  gods.
I  have  not  spoken  falsehood.
I  have  not  taken  food  away.

I  have  not  been  lazy  (?)  (I  have  not  uttered  evil  words).
I  have  not  trespassed  (attacked  a  man).
I  have  not  slain  a  sacred  animal.
[  have  not  been  niggardly  in  grain  (acted  deceitfully).
I  have  not  stolen  (laid  waste  the  lands  which  have  been  ploughed).
I  have  not  been  a  pilferer  (I  have  never  pried  into  matters  to

make  mischief).
My  mouth  hath  not  run  on  (have  not  set  my  mouth  in  motion

against  any  man).
I  have  not  been  a  tale-bearer  in  business  not  mine  own  (given

way  to  wrath  concerning  myself  without  cause).
I  have  not  committed  adultery  with  another  man's  wife.
1  Griffith,  World's  Literature,  5320.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 81

I  have  not  been  impure.

I  have  not  made  disturbance  (struck  fear).

I  have  not  transgressed  (encroached  upon  sacred  times  and  seasons)

My  mouth  has  not  been  hot  (been  a  man  of  anger).

I  have  not  been  deaf  to  the  words  of  truth.

I  have  not  made  confusion  (stirred  up  strife).

I  have  not  caused  weeping.

I  am  not  given  to  unnatural  lust.

I  have  not  borne  a  grudge  (eaten  my  heart).

I  have  not  quarrelled  (abused  no  man).

I  am  not  of  aggressive  hand  (acted  with  violence).

I  am  not  of  inconstant  mind  (have  not  judged  hastily).

I  have  not  spoiled  the  colour  of  him  Avho  washes  his  god  (?)  (taken

vengeance  upon  the  god).

My  voice  has  not  been  too  voluble  in  my  speech
I  have  not  deceived  nor  done  ill.
I  have  not  cursed  the  king.
(I  have  not  fouled  (?)  water.)
My  voice  is  not  loud  (haughty).
I  have  not  cursed  God.

I  have  not  made  bubbles  (?)  (behaved  with  insolence).
I  have  not  made  (unjust)  preferences  (sought  for  distinctions).
I  have  not  acted  the  rich  man  except  in  my  own  things  (increased

my  wealth  except  with  such  things  as  are  mine  own).
I  have  not  offended  the  god  of  my  city  (thought  scorn  of)." 1

Then  follows  a  further  adjuration.2

"  Homage  to  you,  0  ye  gods  who  dwell  in  your  Hall  of  double
Maati,  I,  even  I,  know  you,  and  I  know  your  names  ...  I  have
not  cursed  God,  and  let  not  evil  hap  come  upon  me  through  the
king  who  dwelleth  in  my  day  ...  I  have  performed  the  command
ments  of  men  (as  well  as)  the  things  whereat  are  gratified  the  gods
...  I  have  given  bread  to  the  hungry  man,  and  water  to  the  thirsty
man,  and  apparel  to  the  naked  man,  and  a  boat  to  the  (shipwrecked)
mariner.  I  have  made  holy  offerings  to  the  gods,  and  sepulchral
meals  to  the  khus.  Be  ye  then  my  deliverers."

Not  only  are  homicide,  violence,  many  forms  of  dishonesty
and  sexual  impurity  3  here  repudiated,  but  what  is  perhaps  most

1  Griffith,  World's  Literature,  5321.

2  Budge,  Book  of  the  Dead,  ii.,  p.  371.

3  The  references  to  impurity  are  not  free  from  ambiguity. Professor
Flinders  Petrie  (Religion  atid  Conscience,  p.  134)  regards  the  repudiation  in

VOL.  II.  G


82  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

remarkable,  there  appears  a  strong  implied  condemnation  of
any  conduct  causing  suffering  to  others,1  a  recognition  of  duty
to  dependents  (though  here  unfortunately  the  translation  is  not
above  doubt),  and  a  claim  to  the  merit  of  positive  beneficence.
There  is  also  a  noteworthy  repudiation  of  undue  self-seeking.

The  skeleton  of  this  Negative  Confession  is  filled  in  for  us
by  such  moralistic  writings  as  the  Precepts  of  Ptah  Hotep,
dating  from  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  the  Maxims  of  Ani
belonging  to  the  New  Kingdom.  Full  of  platitudes  as  these
seem  to  the  modern  reader  wherever  their  meaning  is  not
obscure,  they  appear  to  have  had  a  long  popularity  in  ancient
Egypt,  and  they  are  of  historic  interest  as  perhaps  the  earliest
examples  of  secular  ethics,  the  morals  of  worldly  wisdom  with
little  or  no  reference  to  religious  sanctions ;  indeed  occasionally
with  a  certain  suggestion  in  them  that  this  life  is  all  we  have
and  we  had  best  make  the  most  of  it.  The  tendency  of  both
Ptah  Hotep  and  Ani  is  to  recommend  a  certain  mildness  and
moderation  of  temper,  restraint  in  language  and  in  social  inter
course,  prudence  and  energy  in  the  conduct  of  one's  own  affairs,
a  strenuous  minding  of  one's  own  business,  and  avoidance  of
gossip,  a  prudent  bending  to  superiors,  and  an  equally  wise
moderation  in  dealing  with  those  of  lower  estate,  a  generally
diffused  good-nature  and  reasonableness — all  as  means  whereby
man  prospers  in  this  world,  and,  as  Ani  adds,  in  the  Valley  of
the  Dead  as  well.  "  It  is  the  modest  (?)  that  obtain  wealth ;
never  did  the  greedy  (?)  arrive  at  their  aim,"  says  the  optimistic
Ptah  Hotep.  "  Make  not  terror  among  men.2  God  puuisheth

the  First  Confession  (which  he  considers  to  be  the  older)  as  dealing  only
with  a  violation  of  the  sacred  precinct,  while  in  the  Second  Confession  he
distinguishes  three  repudiations  of  adultery  (19),  of  impurity  (20),  and
unnatural  lust  (27).  Max  Miiller,  however  (Liebespoesie,  p.  17),  understands
the  reference  to  impurity  as  a  repudiation  of  the  use  of  love  philters.  On
the  whole  it  seems  doubtful  whether  fornication  as  such  is  one  of  the  forty-

tw^O  piris,

1  The  references  to  animals  are  obscure  and  can  hardly  be  pressed. They
seem  to  have  magical  or  religious  rather  than  a  humanitarian  purport

2  This  is  taken  by  Mr.  Griffith, World's  Literature,  5332,  as  referring
to  the  occupations  of  brigandage  and  pillage. It  is  rather  a  faint  condem
nation. Ani is stricter,  "  Ne  remplis  pas  ton  cumr  du  bien  d'autrui  :
garde  t'en  :  agissant  dans  ton  intdret,  n'approche  pas  les  choses  d'un  autre.
(Sec.  24,  tr.  Anidlineau.) Ani  specially  protests  against  carrying  off  another
man's  slave. (Sec.  22.) So  Amclincau. Others  understand  it  as  a  counsel
against  associating  with  the  slave  of  another.


ETHICAL  CONCEPTIONS  IN  EARLY  THOUGHT 83

the  like  .  .  .  Never  did  violence  among  men  succeed." l  Again,
"  Beware  of  any  covetous  aim.  That  is  as  the  painful  disease
of  colic.  He  who  entereth  on  it  is  not  successful.  It  embroileth
fathers  and  mothers  with  the  mother's  brothers,  it  separateth
wife  and  husband  ...  A  man  liveth  long  whose  rule  is  justice." 2
In  the  same  spirit  the  pupil  is  to  keep  from  relations  with  the
woman  in  the  house  which  he  enters,3  but  be  kind  to  a  woman
if  he  has  made  her  ashamed.  He  should  avoid  scandal  and
gossip.4  He  should  prefer  gentle  to  violent  methods.  "  Greater
is  the  prayer  to  a  kindly  person  than  force."  *•  He  should
avoid  presumption,  "Raise  not  thy  heart  lest  it  be  cast
down." 6  If  successful  he  should  avoid  niggardliness.  If  a  chief
or  great  officer,  he  should  do  justice,  and  be  considerate  and
attentive  to  suitors.  If  an  inferior,  "  Bend  thy  back  to  thy  chief,
thy  superior  of  the  king's  house,  on  whose  property  thy  house
dependeth  ...  it  is  ill  to  be  at  variance  with  the  chief.  One
liveth  only  while  he  is  gracious." 7  But  to  friends,  "  Let  thy  face
be  shining  the  time  that  thou  hast  .  .  .  The  remembrance  of
a  man  is  of  his  kindliness  in  the  years  after  the  staff  (of
power  ?) " !  Or  as  Ani  puts  it,  "  Eat  not  bread  while  another
standeth  by  ...  The  one  is  rich  and  the  other  poor,  and  bread
remaineth  to  him  who  is  open-handed.  He  who  was  prosperous
last  year  even  in  this  may  be  a  vagrant."9  By  attending  to
Ani's  maxims  you  will  reach  an  honoured  old  age,  and  be  ready
for  death  however  suddenly  it  comes.10

There  is  much  of  kindliness,  much  of  social  good-nature,
much  of  prudent  moderation,  something  of  self-reliance  and
dignity,  but  "there  is  hardly  a  single  splendid  feeling;  there
is  not  one  burst  of  magnanimous  sacrifice;  there  is  not  one

1  Ptah  Hotep,  sec.  6. Trsl.  Griffith,  World's  Literature,  5332.

2  Ib.,  sec.  19.

3  So  Ani  warns  his  reader  against  the  strange  woman. (Ani  sec.  viii.
Amdlineau,  La  Morale  Etjyptienne,  p.  25.

4  Flinders  Petrie,  Religion  and  Conscience,  117  =  Ani.  sec.  16  :  Auie'lineaii,
p.  116,  Ani,  31.

6  Flinders  Petrie,  155  =  Ptah  Hotep,  sec.  20.
0  Flinders  Petrie,  143  =  Ptah  Hotep,  sec.  25.

7  16.,  150,  154  =  Ptah  Hotep,  30,  31.

8  Ib.,  141,  143  =  Ptah  Hotep,  34.

9  Ib.,  154  =  Ani, 41  ; Griffith, World's Literature,  5341  ; AimSlineau,

10  Flinders  Petrie,  129  =  Ani,  15. Cf.  Amelineau,  157.


84  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

heart-felt  self-depreciation  in  any  point  of  all  that  worldly
wisdom." l  The  chivalry  of  barbarism  is  gone,  and  the  idealisms
of  religion  and  of  humanity  have  not  yet  come.  To  the  rise  of
such  idealism  we  must  now  turn.

i  Flinders  Petrie,  162.


CHAPTER  III

THE  WORLD  AND THE  SPIRIT

1.  THE  growth  of  reflection  has  in  many  races  and  under
divers  conditions  of  culture  carried  mankind  beyond  the  stage
of  Polytheism.  The  awakening  reason  demands  a  theory  of  the
universe  and  ceases  to  be  satisfied  with  the  patchwork  schemes
of  mythology.  The  moral  self  coming  to  partial  consciousness
of  its  nature  and  scope  demands  a  higher  rule  of  life  and  a
deeper  understanding  of  its  relation  to  cosmic  forces.  Instead
of  inventing  stories  about  the  beginning  of  things  and  the  origin
of  laws,  the  mind  begins  to  search  for  the  general  truths  under
lying  or  permeating  experience  and  giving  unity  and  meaning
to  human  purposes.  The  forward  step  achieved  by  thought  in
this  movement  may  be  described  by  saying  that  the  imagery
of  its  earlier  stage  is  replaced  by  defined  and  reasoned
conceptions  formed  by  the  analysis  and  reconstruction  of
primitive  ideas.  Though  first  applied  with  positive  success  in
the  special  sciences,  and  particularly  in  the  science  of  number
and  quantity,  the  ambition  of  conceptual  thought  is  always  to
frame  a  theory  of  the  universe  and  an  ideal  of  life  and  character.
And  fail  as  it  may  in  its  attempts  at  final  truth,  a  deeper
religion  and  a  higher  ethics  are  the  outcome  of  each  new
effort.

The  lines  on  which  these  efforts  proceed  are  very  various.
We  have  already  seen  the  beginnings  of  a  tendency  to  trace
the  scheme  of  things  to  a  single  principle,  or  at  any  rate  to  a
first  cause,  in  the  attempts  of  polytheism  to  treat  the  many  god.
as  different  incarnations  or  emanations  of  one  and  the  same
Being.  But  this  tendency  does  not  always  lead  to  monotheisms
On  the  contrary,  great  religious  systems  have  arisen  in  which,

85


86  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

as  in  Brahmanism,  the  movement  is  rather  towards  pantheism
than  to  monotheism,  and  the  unity  of  God  is  an  uncertain  con
ception  waveringly  held  and  admitting  of  compromise  with  the
polytheistic  traditions.  There  are  religions  like  Buddhism,  again,
in  which  the  whole  theological  aspect  of  religion  is  secondary,  and
the  central  conception  is  that  of  a  necessary  law  of  cosmic  life
by  which  human  life  in  particular  is  determined  and  to  which
human  beings  must  adjust  themselves.  Or  finally,  as  in  Taoism,
the  supreme  principle  of  things  may  be  left  undefined  as  some
thing  that  we  experience  in  ourselves  if  we  throw  ourselves
upon  it,  but  which  we  know  rather  by  following  or  living  in  it
than  by  any  process  of  ratiocination.  This  mystical  interpreta
tion  is  not  confined  to  Taoism,  but  in  one  form  or  another  lies
near  at  hand  to  all  spiritual  religions,  and  expresses  one  mode
of  religious  consciousness,  its  aspiration  to  reach  the  heart  of
things  and  its  confidence  that  it  has  done  so  and  found  rest
there.

Widely  as  these  forms  of  religion  differ  from  monotheism,
they  may  for  certain  purposes  be  grouped  along  with  it. All
are  or  are  on  the  way  to  become  spiritual  religions,  resting  on
and involving a certain ethical  idealism,  and  that  power  of
handling  conceptions  which  we  take  to  imply  a  distinct  stage
onward  in  the  growth  of  thought. For  in  the  spiritual  religions
there  is  an  endeavour  to  render  an  articulate  account  of  the
universe,  of  the  world  process  as  a  whole,  of  man's  place  therein
and  the  duties  which  it  imposes  on  him. But  this  attempt
cannot  even  be  entered  upon  seriously  until  certain  fundamental
conceptions  are  formed  with  tolerable  distinctness. The  con
trasts  of  the  permanent  and  the  changing,  of  substance  and
attributes,  of  cause  and  accident,  of  reality  and  appearance,  of
the eternal and the transitory, of  the universal and the
individual,  of  divine  and  human personality— such antitheses
present  themselves  with  greater  or  less articulateness in  all
attempts  to  think  out  the  problem  of  the  universe. What  is
common to all  products  of  this  stage  of  thought  and  what
differentiates  them  from  the  work  of  lower  stages  is  that  in
these  the  fundamental  conceptions  involved  in  any  attempt  to
render  the  whole  scheme  of  things  in  systematic  fashion  have
definitely  been  brought  into consciousness. The  religions  of


THE  WORLD AND  THE  SPIRIT  87

this  stage  are  all  conceptual  religions  rising  above  mere  imagery,
and  handling  as  distinct  objects  of  thought,  categories  which  at
a  lower  stage  are  still  wrapped  up  in  the  experiences  in  which
they  are  given  to  the  senses.1

They  are  also  spiritual  religions,  having  at  their  best  certain
ethical  conceptions  in  common.  We  have  seen  that  the
characteristic  of  the  lowest  religions  is  that  their  "  spirits  "  are
"  unspiritual."  They  arc  not  even  differentiated  from  matter.
They  blur  and  confound  the  distinction  of  good  and  evil,  holy
and  unclean,  intelligent  purpose  and  mechanical  action.  In  the
stage  now  reached  these  confusions  are  in  large  measure  over
come.  The  spiritual  draws  itself  together  and  is  presented  in
antithesis  to  the  sensual  and  the  earthly  as  the  source  of  all
light  within  man  and  without.  The  spiritual  is  opposed  to  the
sensible  world,  the  spirit  in  man  to  his  grosser  elements,  as  the
underlying  spring  of  what  is  good  and  wise  and  beautiful,  and
as  the  bond  that  connects  him  with  the  sources  of  all  that  he
finds  of  goodness  and  wisdom  and  beauty  in  the  order  of  things.
Finally,  with  this  conception  of  spirituality  a  distinct  set  of
ethical  conceptions  is  connected.  The  individual  must  enter
into  relations  with  the  universal  spirit,  and  to  do  so  he  must
put  off  his  individuality.  He  must  subdue  the  senses,  and  not
only  the  senses,  but  all  things  that  make  for  his  own  self-

1  The  emergence  of  these  fundamental  conceptions  into  clear  conscious
ness  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  result  of  a  long  process  of  development.  In
Chapter  I.  we  traced  the  growth  of  the  mind  to  the  point  at  which  concrete
images  or  picture  ideas  could  be  distinctly  formed  and  held  apart.  But
such  ideas  are  not  yet  fitted  for  systematic  thinking.  They  have  to  be
further  broken  up  and  re-combined,  so  as  in  the  first  place  to  become
exact,  and  applied  always  with  the  same  meaning  (as  "  universal "  instead
of  "general").  Next,  the  elements  that  lie  within  an  idea  or  go  to
constitute  its  character  must  be  distinguishable,  so  that  the  differences
which  constitute  a  specific  development  of  a  general  rule,  or  the  blended
identities  and  differences  which  constitute  co-ordinate  genera  can  be
assigned.  When  this  is  done  the  idea  is  transformed  into  the  concept,  and
the  loose  thought-transitions  by  which  images  suggest  one  another  are
superseded  by  systematic  meditation,  reasoning  and  discussion,  whereby
concepts  are  analyzed  or  combined  and  consequences  logically  inferred
from  premises.  Fallacious  and  genuine  methods  are  distinguished,  and
thus  the  old  confusion  of  idea  and  fact  which  made  the  world  of  make-
believe  is  in  principle  overcome.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  early  stages,
the  methods  of  testing  the  original  value  of  the  conceptions  employed  by
a  scientific  analysis  of  experience  is  little  understood,  and  there  is  accord
ingly  a  tendency  to  construct  thought-fabrics  which  nowhere  touch  solid
earth.


88  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

assertion  and  hinder  his  perfect  communion  with  the  spiritual
world.  Pride  must  give  place  to  humility,  resentment  to  for
giveness,  the  narrow  love  of  kinship  to  universal  benevolence,
family  life  to  the  selfless  impersonal  brotherhood  of  monasticism.
For  the  spirit  is  not  yet  of  this  world.  The  first  step  towards
realizing  it  is  to  conceive  it  by  contrast  to  common  workaday
experiences.  To  understand  how  it  may  transform  experience,
to  bring  it  back  to  earth  without  losing  its  warmth  and  glow
upon  the  downward  journey,  is  the  unfulfilled  task  of  a  higher
mode  of  thought.

2.  The  spiritual  religions  have  their  home  in  the  East.
Probably  the  earliest  in  point  of  time — though  dates  are  very
uncertain — is  the  imperfectly  spiritualized  system  of  the  Brah-
mans.  It  is  impossible,  however,  even  to  touch  upon  Brah-
manism  without  saying  one  word  upon  the  preceding  stages  of
Hindu  thought.  The  earliest  phase  of  Hindu  culture  known  to
us,  that  of  the  Vedas,  resembles  in  essentials  the  culture  of  the
Homeric  age,  and,  generally  speaking,  it  has  all  the  character
istics  of  a  barbaric  society,  which  is  destined  to  develop  into
something  higher.  Family  life  is  in  the  patriarchal  stage ;  the
father  is  master  of  wife,  children  and  slaves.  There  is  no  caste
as  yet,1  but  there  is  a  strong  distinction  between  the  fair-
skinned  conquering  Aryans  and  the  subject  dark-skinned  Dasyus.
The  gods  of  the  Vedas  are  great  gods,  controlling  the  forces  of
nature,  who  may  rank  with  any  of  the  leading  deities  of  Poly
theism.  Indra  is  a  man  of  war  like  Jahveh  or  Ashur.  He  is
the  special  protector  of  the  Arya — "wielding  the  thunderbolt,  and
confident  in  his  prowess  he  strode  onwards,  shattering  the  cities
of  the  Dasyus  .  .  .  chastising  the  lawless  he  subjected  the
black  skin  to  Manu  "  (the  white  Aryan).2  Neither  the  power
nor  the  moral  attributes  of  the  deity  are  conceived  with  more
consistency  or  clearness  than  in  other  polytheistic  schemes.
Indra  is  said  to  have  created  or  lighted  up  Ushas.  But  in
other  hymns  he  crushes  her  chariot  with  his  thunderbolt,  and
this  smiting  of  "  a  woman  who  was  bent  on  evil " — elsewhere
the  recipient  of  prayer — is  extolled  as  a  "deed  of  might  and

1  See  above,  Vol.  I.,  Chap.  VII. a  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v.,  p.  1 13.


89

manliness."1  Even  in  the  Mahabharata  and  the  Puranas,
"India,  Varuna  and  other  gods"  are  represented  "as  leading
a  sensual  and  immoral  life,"  and  "the  Apsarases  or  celestial
nymphs  are  expressly  declared  to  be  courtesans  .  .  .  and  are
represented  as  being  sent  by  the  gods  from  time  to  time  to
seduce  austere  sages  into  unchastity."  *<  S'ri  is  described  as
issuing  forth  from  Prajapati.  "Beholding  her  thus  standing
resplendent  and  trembling,  the  gods  were  covetous  of  her  and
proposed  to  Prajapati  that  they  should  be  allowed  to  kill  her
and  appropriate  her  gifts"— a  genuine  magical  conception  of
the  transference  of  powers.  "  He  replied  that  she  was  a  female
and  that  males  did  not  generally  kill  females.  They  should,
therefore,  take  from  her  her  gifts  without  depriving  her  of  life."3
The  chivalry  of  the  gods  did  not  go  beyond  respect  for  life,  it
appears.  The  gods,  it  is  true,  release  from  sin,  but  sin  appears
to  be  conceived  as  a  quasi-magical  bond,  and  the  sin  of  the
father  is  regularly  visited  on  the  children.4  Virtues,  however,
recommend  men  to  the  gods,  and  especially  liberality  conduces
to  prosperity.  "  He  is  the  bountiful  man  who  gives  to  the  lean
beggar  who  comes  to  him  craving  food.  Success  attends  that
man  in  the  sacrifice  and  he  secures  for  himself  a  friend  in  the
future."5  The  conception  of  the  divine  power  fluctuates  no

1  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v.,  p.  192.

2  16..  pp.  323,  4  ;  cf.  also  p.  115.  :!  #>-,  P-  349.

4  See  Max  Miiller,  Rig  Veda  i.,  pp.  244,  245,  etc.  :  "  Absolve  us  from
the sins of our fathers and from those which we have committed
with  our  own  bodies. Kelease  Vasishtha,  0  king,  like  a  thief  who  has
feasted  on  stolen  cattle  ;  release  him  like  a  calf  from  the  rope." Cf.  also
Rig  Veda,  vii.,  p.  86,  quoted  in  Muir,  p.  66,  where  the  poet  naively  explains,
"  It  was  not  our  will,  Varuna,  but  some  seduction  which  led  us  astray—
wine,  anger,  dice,  or  thoughtlessness. The  stronger  perverts  the  weaker.
Even  sleep  occasions  sin."

5  Rig  Veda,  x.  117,  quoted  in  Muir,  pp.  431,  432. The  notion  of  future
reward  appears  in  the  Veda  alongside  of  a  more  primitive  view. He  who
cooks  the  vishtarin  oblation  "goes  to  the  gods,  and  lives  in  blessedness
with  the  Gandharvas,  the  quaffers  of  soma. Yama  does  not  steal  away  the
generative  power  of  those  who  cook  the  vishtarin  oblation." (Ib.,  p.  308.)
Here  the  question  of  oblations  is  most  prominent. Elsewhere  we  read  of
heroic  deeds,  austerities  and  sage  meditations,  as  contributing  to  bliss.

"Let  him  (the  deceased)  depart  to  those  for  whom  the  honied  beverage
flows.  Let  him  depart  to  those  who,  through  rigorous  abstraction,  are
invincible,  who,  through  tapas,  have  gone  to  heaven  ;  to  those  who  have
performed  great  tapas.  Let  him  depart  to  the  combatants  in  battles,  to
the  heroes  who  have  there  sacrificed  their  lives,  or  to  those  who  have


90  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

less  than  in  other  polytheistic  religions.  On  the  one  side,  it
tends  towards  monotheism  in  the  form  of  attributing  supreme
position  to  whichever  deity  is  the  immediate  object  of  worship
— Indra,  Varuna,  or  another.  At  times  with  less  of  naivetj  and
more  of  deliberate  pantheistic  feeling  we  find  it  laid  down  that
one  god  is  or  includes  all  the  rest.  "  Aditi  is  the  sky,  Aditi  is
the  air,  Aditi  is  the  mother  and  father  and  son,  Aditi  is  all  the
gods  and  the  five  classes  of  men.  Aditi  is  whatever  has  been
born,  Aditi  is  whatever  shall  be  born."  l  We  even  get  a  distinct
attempt  at  a  true  speculative  account  of  the  beginning  of  things.

"There  was  then  neither  nonentity  nor  entity;  there  was  no
atmosphere,  nor  sky  above.  What  enveloped  (all)  ?  Where,  in  the
receptacle  of  what  (was  it  contained)  1  Was  it  water,  the  profound
abyss  ?  Death  was  not  then,  nor  immortality  ;  there  was  no  dis
tinction  of  day  or  night.  That  One  breathed  calmly,  self -supported ;
jhere  was  nothing  different  from,  or  above,  it.  In  the  beginning,
darkness  existed,  enveloped  in  darkness.  All  this  was  undistinguish-
able  water.  .  .  .  From  what  this  creation  arose,  and  whether  (any  one)
made  it  or  not, — he  who  in  the  highest  heaven  is  its  ruler,  he  verily
knows,  (or  even)  he  does  not  know.  .  .  .  That  One  which  lay  void,  and
wrapped  in  nothingness,  was  developed  by  the  power  of  fervour."  2

On  the  other  side,  the  divine  power  is  animistically  or  magically
conceived.  The  gods  are  held  to  be  nourished  by  food,  to  be
produced  from  other  beings,  to  sacrifice  and  be  sacrificed.  In
one  hymn  Visvakarman  is  said  to  sacrifice  himself  or  to  himself,
and  he  offers  up  heaven  and  earth.  In  another,  it  appears,  that
the  gods  sacrificed  to  the  supreme  god  or  that  they  offered  him
up.3  Sacrifice  is  still  a  magic  process  from  which  the  gods
derive  strength.  Its  materials  and  implements  themselves
become  deities  and  so  too  do  prayers  and  hymns,  the  Vedas

oestowed  thousands  of  largesses.  Let  him  depart,  Yama,  to  those  austere
ancient  Fathers  who  have  practised  and  promoted  sacred  rites."  (Muir,
Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v.,  p.  310.)

Lastly,  in  Rig  Veda,  iv.,  5.  5,  there  is  a  reference  to  some  sort  of
punishment.  "  This  deep  abys,a  has  been  produced  (for  those  who),  being
sinners,  false,  untrue,  go  about  like  women  without  brothers,  like  wicked
females  hostile  to  their  husbands."  (Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  v.  312.)

1  Muir,  v.,  pp.  351,  354.

2  Rig  Veda,  x.  129,  in  Muir,  vol.  v.,  pp.  356,  357.

3  Muir,  vol.  v.,  p.  372.


THE WORLD  AND  THE SPIRIT  91

themselves,  and  the  priests  who  control  these  powers.1 The
Brahmanic  sage  ranks  with  the  gods.2

3.  Before  tracing  the  outcome  of  the  Vedic  religion  in  India
we  must  glance  at  the  parallel development  in  ancient  Iran.
Springing  from  the  same  stock  as  the  Aryan  invaders  of  India
and  worshipping  the  same  gods,  the  ancient  Persians  developed
a  form  of  religion  which  is  in  one  respect  unique. The  dualism
of  gods  and  demons,  a  frequent  incidental  feature  of  polytheism,
became  the  central  fact  of  their  creed. Originally,  it  would  seem,
one  of  the  great  gods  of  the  common  ancestor  of  the  Persian  and
Indian  peoples,  Ahuramazda  gradually  assumed  a  position  of
predominance  over  the  rest. He  is  already  in  the  time  of  Darius
the  greatest  of  all  gods,  "  who  made  this  earth,  who  made  that
heaven,  who  made  man,  who  made  Darius  king."3 But  this
supremacy  was  not  unquestioned. The  demons  did  not  disappear
or  become  subordinate  as  in  other  religions,  but  maintained  a
perpetual  conflict  with  Ahuramazda  and  his  host,  and  obtained
for  themselves  a  leader,  the  evil  spirit  Augra  Mainyu,  or,  to  give
him  the  name  better  known  to  us,  Ahriman. The  world  of
spirits  is  divided  into  two  hostile  hosts,  who  balance  one  another.
Ahriman  is  the  precise  counterpart  of  Ahura,  the  Daevas  or
demons  are  opposed  to  the  Amesha  Spentas,4  or  good  spirits,
who  assist  Ahura. Human  life  is  in  a  sense  the  arena  of  the
conflict,  since  it  is  the  forces  that  are  held  to  work  for  man's
good  that  are  conceived  as  being  ranged  under  Ahuramazda,  and
the  contrary  that  fight  under  the  banner  of  Ahriman. Yet  the
battle  is  not  essentially  a  moral  conflict  between  good  and  evil.
It  rages  throughout physical  nature,  and  is  fought  in  large

1  Muir,  v.  411,  412. It  seems  out  of  place  to  regard  the  deification  of
the  power  of  prayer  under  the  name  of  the  Brahmanaspati  as  imparting  a
new  and  more  ethical  element  into  religion. Such  personifications  belong
rather  to  the  lower  magico -animistic  stratum  in  polytheism. (See  Muir,
v.  272.)

2  Manu,  xiii.  49. Cf.  ix.  317,  and  xi.  35,  etc.

3  Zend  Avesta,  i.,  Introduction,  p.  61,  by  Darmesteter,  in  Sacred  Books
of  the  East,  vol.  iv. On  the  relation  of  primitive  Mazdaism  to  Vedism,
the  precise  nature  of  which  is  uncertain,  see  ib.  lii.

4  These,  however,  appear  to  belong  to  later  developments  of  the  religion
and  are  probably  importations,  perhaps  Platonic  in  origin.  (16.,  p.  Ivi.  and
Ixi.) The  original  religion  had  a  group  of  nature  gods  surrounding  Ahura
Mazda  (p.  Ixi.)


92  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

measure  by  magical  weapons.  Animals  play  a  large  part  in  the
fight — dogs,  otters,  and  hedgehogs  on  the  side  of  Ahura ;
snakes,  tortoises,  frogs,  and  ants  on  that  of  the  demons.  The
distinction  apparently  depended  on  nothing  so  rational  as  the
utility  of  the  animals,  but  rather,  we  may  conjecture,  on  the
nature  and  rank  of  the  god  whom  they  incarnated  in  an  earlier
stage  of  the  creed.  To  injure  one  of  Ahura's  animal  supporters
was  as  deadly  a  crime l  as  to  kill  one  of  Ahrimaii's  animals  was
meritorious.  Man  also  plays  his  part.  His  prayers  and  sacrifices
assist  the  gods  in  their  struggle.2  Conversely,  any  deviation
from  the  rules  of  ceremonial  functions  brings  evil  upon  the
land.  In  particular,  any  behaviour  which  spreads  the  death  in
fection,  e.  g.  carrying  a  corpse  by  oneself,  which  renders  a  man
peculiarly  liable  to  be  seized  by  the  death  spirit,  or  polluting
the  sacred  element  of  fire  by  burning  a  corpse,  are  unpardon
able  sins.3  They  involve  the  community  in  danger,  they

1  This  has  nothing  to  do  with  humanity  towards  animals,  but  is  con
cerned  purely  with  the  mischievous  effects  supposed  to  ensue. Thus  "  He
who kills a water-dog  (otter) brings about  a  drought that  dries up
pastures." Sweetness  and  fatness  will  not  come  back  to  the  land  till  he  is
smitten  to  death,  and  "the  holy  soul  of  the  dog  has  been  offered  up  a
sacrifice." The  murderer  receives  twice  ten  thousand  stripes,  and  offers  a
great  number  of  gifts  to  priests  ;  among  them,  "  he  shall  godly  and  piously
give  in  marriage  to  a  godly  man,  a  virgin  maid  whom  no  man  has  known
to  redeem  his  own  soul,"  a  sister  or  daughter  of  his. {Zend  A  vesta,  i.,
Sacred  Books,  vol.  iv.,  p.  168  ff.)

The  penalty  of  killing  a  shepherd's  dog  was,  at  least,  nominally,
eight  hundred  stripes.  The  murder  of  a  "water-dog"  was  avenged  by
ten  thousand  stripes.  (Ib.,  Introduction,  p.  84.)  Darmesteter  thinks  that
these  penalties  must  have  had  a  money  compensation.  (Ib.,  pp.  85,  86.)

2  The  gods  also  sacrifice  to  one  another. Not  only  as  an  act  of  worship
and  recognition,  as  e.g.  Ahura  sacrifices  to  the  ancient  gods  (Duncker,  Hist.
Antiq.,  vol.  v.,  p.  136),  but  also  to  one  another  to  add  to  their  strength.
Thus  Tistrya,  worsted  by  Apaosha,  cries  to  Ahura  : — Oh,  Ahura  Mazda  !  .  .  .
men  do  not  worship  me  with  a  sacrifice  ... If  men  had  worshipped
me  with  sacrifice  ...  I  should have taken  to  me  the  strength  of  ten
horses,  ten  bulls,  ten mountains,  ten  rivers. Ahura  offers  him  a  sacri
fice  ;  he  brings  him  thereby  the  strength  of  ten  horses,  ten  camels,  ten
bulls,  ten  mountains,  ten  rivers  ; Tistrya  runs  back  to  the  battle-field,
and  Apaosha  flies  before him. (Zend  Avesta,  ii., Sacred  Books,  xxiii.,
p.  99  ff.

3  Some  specimens  are  worth  giving. "Two  hundred  stripes  are  awarded
if  one  tills  land  in  which  a  corpse  has  been  buried  within  the  year,  if  a
woman  just  delivered  of  child  drinks  water.  .  .  .  Four  hundred  stripes  if
one,  being  in  a  state  of  uncleanness,  touches  water  or  trees.  .  .  .  Five  hundred
stripes  for  killing  a  whelp,  six  hundred  for  killing  a  stray  dog,  seven
hundred  for  a  house  dog,  eight  hundred  for  a  shepherd's  dog,  one  thousand
stripes  for  killing  a  Vanghupara  dog,  ten  thousand  stripes  for  killing  a


93


hamper  the  gods  in  their  conflict  with  the  demons,  and  they
afflict  the  offender  himself  with  a  taboo  of  deadly  import.

But  Ahuramazda  is  the  lord  of  the  moral  as  well  as  the
physical  world,  and  there  are  breaches  of  morality  which  incur
divine  wrath  no  less  than  magical  impurities.  Prominent
among  these  are  falsehood  and  breach  of  faith.  "The  ^ruffian
who  lies  unto  Mithra  brings  death  to  the  whole  country." J  To
ride,  to  shoot  with  the  bow,  and  to  speak  the  truth  were,^  as
Herodotus  tells  us,  the  three  lessons  learnt  by  every  Persian
youth.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  emphasis  laid  on  truthfulness
and  the  honourable  observance  of  obligations.  The  principle
holds  equally,  whether  the  other  party  to  the  bargain  be
believers  or  unbelievers,  fellow-countrymen  or  foreigners.
"  Break  not  the  contract,  O  Spitama,  neither  the  one  that  thou
hast  entered  into  with  one  of  the  unfaithful,  nor  the  one  that
thou  hast  entered  into  with  one  of  the  faithful.  ^.  .  .  For
Mithra  stands  for  both  the  faithful  and  the  unfaithful." 2

Scarcely  less  prominent  is  the  duty  of  succouring  the  faith
ful  with  alms.  Zarathustra's  ideal,  according  to  Mr.  Mills,  was
to  establish  a  kingdom  under  God,  "  whose  first  care  was  to  re
lieve  suffering  and  shelter  the  honest  and  industrious  poor."
However  this  may  be,  the  duty  of  almsgiving  is  prominent.  To
refuse  alms  when  entreated  by  the  faithful  is  one  of  the
offences  which  added  to  the  progeny  of  the  Drug  demon.4
Hospitality  is  rewarded  in  the  next  life,  and  niggardliness

water-do".  Capital  punishment  is  expressly  pronounced  only  against  the
false  cleanser,  and  the  carrier-alone."  Repentance  and  confession  with  the
recital  of  an  appropriate  formula  might  save  the  offender  m  the  next  world
but  not  in  this.  (Zend  Avesta,  Introd.,  p.  84.)

2  !?>'  La.  Lower  down  the  comparative  sacredness  of  different  contracts
is  expressed  numerically  in  the  form  "Mithra  is  20-fold  between  two
friends,"  etc.,  i.  e.  (apparently)  20  times  more  binding  than  between  two
persons  not  connected  by  any  special  tie.  A  list  of  ten  cases  is  given,  the
sequence  of  which  is  curious  enough.  «  Mithra,"  it  appears,  is  50-fold
between  wife  and  husband,  but  90-fold  between  two  bothers  He  is,
however,  1,000-fold  between  two  nations,  and  finally  10,000-fold  when
connected  with  the  law  of  Mazda.  (II.,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  149  150.)  Accord
ing  to  Mr  L.  H.  Mills  (Ib.,  vol.  iii.,  Introduction,  p.  xxi.)  mere  raids  tor
rapine  (as  opposed  to  desolation  inflicted  in  regular  warfare)  were  regarde
as  a  terrible  thing.  ,  ,

s  Op  cit ,  p.  xxii. Darmeateter  (see  vol.  iv.,  p.  Ixvii)  also  places  the
"  ethics  of  labour  "  among  the  original  features  of  Mazdaism.

*  Zend  Avesta,  i.,  p.  801.


94  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

punished.  There  is  a  reward  for  him  who  wields  the  power
Ahura  gave  him  to  relieve  the  poor.1  The  moral  code  as  a
whole  may  be  fairly  represented  by  two  passages.  The  first
gives  injunctions  to  the  faithful.

"  So  be  ye  discreet  from  your  obedience,  most  correctly  faithful  in
your  speech,  most  saintly  from  your  sanctity,  best  ordered  in  your
exercise  of  power,  least  straitened  by  oppressions,  heart-easy  with
rejoicings,  most  merciful  of  givers,  most  helpful  to  the  poor,  fulfilling
most  the  ritual."2  .  .  .

The  second  withholds  a  blessing  and  pronounces  a  curse  on
the  wicked.

"  Let  not  our  waters  be  for  the  man  of  ill-intent,  of  evil  speech,
or  deeds,  or  conscience ;  let  them  not  be  for  the  offender  of  a  friend,
not  for  an  insulter  of  a  Magian,  nor  for  one  who  harms  the  work
men,  nor  for  one  who  hates  his  kindred.  And  let  not  our  good
waters  (which  are  not  only  good),  but  best,  and  Mazda-made,  help
on  the  man  who  strives  to  mar  our  settlements,  which  are  not  to  be
corrupted,  nor  him  who  would  mar  our  bodies,  (our)  uncorrupted
(selves),  nor  the  thief,  or  bludgeon-bearing  ruffian  who  would
slaughter  the  disciples,  nor  a  sorcerer,  nor  a  burier  of  dead  bodies,
nor  the  jealous,  nor  the  niggard,  nor  the  godless  heretic  who  slays
disciples,  nor  the  evil  tyrant  among  men.  Against  these  may  our
waters  come  as  torments."  3

In  sexual  matters  the  magical  and  the  ethical  appear  to  be
blended.  The  courtesan  is  banned  as  one  whose  look  dries  up
more  than  one-third  of  the  mighty  floods — "  Such  creatures
ought  to  be  killed  more  than  gliding  snakes,  than  howlino-
wolves."  *  The  Sodomite  is  a  Daeva,  a  worshipper  of  Daevas,
and  in  his  whole  being  a  Daeva.  The  first  comer  might  kill  him

1  Zend  Avesta,  vol.  ii.,  p.  23.  2  ^  ^  p  368

3  16.,  318.  The  principle  of  group  morality— here  represented  by  the  re
ligious  bond— comes  out  quaintly  in  the  provision  that  a  would-be  doctor  is
to  practise  first  on  Daeva  worshippers.  If  three  of  them  die  under  his  knife,
he  is  never  to  operate  on  Mazdaists,  under  the  same  penalty  as  for  wilful
murder.  If  three  recover,  he  can  practise  on  Mazdaists.  (Ib.,  I,  p.  85.)
Sometimes  the  blessings  of  the  creed  are  jealously  reserved,  as  in  the
following  :— "  Mazda  !  Shall  the  thieving  nomad  share  the  good  creed  .  .  ."
(Ib.,  in.,  46.)  But  elsewhere  there  is  evidence  of  a  more  catholic  spirit
and  even  of  the  conversion  of  a  neighbouring  tribe.
*  16.,  i.,  p.  205.


THE WORLD  AND  THE SPIRIT  95

without  trial,  and  to  do  so  was  a  means  of  redeeming  an  ordinary
capital  crime.1  To  touch  a  woman  during  the  menses  is  an
offence  punishable  with  stripes.2  Abortion  practised  by  an  un
married  girl  brings  the  guilt  of  wilful  murder  both  on  her  and  her
lover.3  Probably  the  fear  of  bringing  a  curse  of  barrenness  on  the
land  is  the  dominating  motive  in  these  ordinances.  The  "  first
wailing  "  of  the  goddess  Ashi  is  over  the  courtesan  who  destroys
her  fruit ;  the  second  is  over  the  courtesan  who  passes  off  a
strange  child  as  her  husband's  ;  the  third  over  "  the  worst  deed
that  men  and  tyrants  do,  namely,  when  they  deprive  maids  that
have  been  barren  for  a  long  time  of  marrying  and  bringing
forth  children."  4  The  procreation  of  legitimate  children  is  the
common  point  of  interest  in  the  three  cases,  and  it  is  quite  in
accordance  with  the  general  tendency  of  the  teaching  of  the
Avesta  that  this  should  be  a  primary  consideration,  and  that
everything  hostile,  or,  on  magical  grounds,  conceived  to  be
hostile  to  it,  should  be  a  deadly  offence.  The  intermixture  of
magical  and  ethical  ideas  is  well  seen  in  the  list  of  evils  created
by  Angra  Mainyu  in  all  the  lands  which  Ahuramazda  made.
They  comprise : —

The  serpent  in  the  river,  winter,  the  locust,  plunder  and  sin,  the
corn-carrying  ants,  the  sin  of  unbelief,  the  stained  mosquito,  the
Pairika  Knathaiti  (idolatry),  the  sin  of  pride,  the  unnatural  sin,
the  burying  of  the  dead,  the  evil  work  of  witchcraft,  the  sin  of  utter
unbelief,  the  cooking  of  corpses,  abnormal  issues  in  women,  and
barbarian  oppression.5

The  tendency  of  the  moral  element  to  predominate,  however,
appears  in  the  account  of  the  circumstances  giving  value  to
prayer.  Recitations  of  the  praise  of  Holiness  is  of  different
value  on  different  occasions.  For  instance,  if  uttered  when  eat
ing  the  gifts  of  Havratat  and  Ameretat,  it  is  worth  ten  others.
If  when  drinking  Haoma  (the  Indian  Soma),  it  is  worth  a
hundred.  The  conception  here  is  primarily  magical— the
quality  of  the  Haoma  intensifying  the  value  of  the  praise,  and
the  fact  of  eating  or  drinking  increasing  its  effect  on  the

1  Zend  Avesta,  i.,  p.  104.  *  Ib.,  p.  188.

3  16,  p.  178.  4  Ib.,  vol.  11.,  p.  281  ff.

5  16.,  i.,  p.  4  ff.


96  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

worshipper.  But  when  finally  the  question  is  asked :  "  What
...  is  worth  all  that  is  between  the  earth,  and  the  heavens,
and  this  earth,  and  that  luminous  space,  and  all  the  good  things
made  by  Mazda,  that  are  the  offspring  of  the  good  principle  in
greatness,  goodness,  and  fairness  ? "  "  Ahura  Mazda  answered  :—
"  It  is  that  one,  O  Holy  Zarathustra,  that  a  man  delivers  to  re
nounce  evil  thoughts,  evil  works,  and  evil  deeds." l  Thus  in  the
end  the  ethical  conception  of  worship  is  made  to  predominate.

Ethical  also  in  essence  is  the  vivid  picture  of  future
retribution.2

"  At  the  end  of  the  third  night,  when  the  dawn  appears,  it  seems
to  the  soul  of  the  faithful  one  as  if  it  were  brought  amidst  plants
and  scents  ;  it  seems  as  if  a  wind  were  blowing  from  the  region  of
the  south,  from  the  regions  of  the  south,  a  sweet-scented  wind,
sweeter-scented  than  any  other  wind  in  the  world."

"And  it  seems  to  the  soul  of  the  faithful  one  as  if  he  were  in
haling  that  wind  with  the  nostrils,  and  he  thinks  :  '  Whence  does
that  wind  blow,  the  sweetest-scented  wind  I  ever  inhaled  with  my
nostrils  ? '

"  And  it  seems  to  him  as  if  his  own  conscience  were  advancing  to
him  in  that  wind,  in  the  shape  of  a  maiden  fair,  bright,  white-
armed,  strong,  tall-formed,  high-standing,  thick-breasted,  beautiful
of  body,  noble,  of  a  glorious  seed,  of  the  size  of  a  maid  in  her
fifteenth  year,  as  fair  as  the  fairest  things  in  the  world.

"  And  the  soul  of  the  faithful  one  addresses  her,  asking :  '  What
maid  art  thou,  who  art  the  fairest  maid  I  have  ever  seen  ? '

"  And  she,  being  his  own  conscience,  answers  him  :  '  O  thou  youth
of  good  thoughts,  good  words,  and  good  deeds,  of  good  religion,  I
am  thine  own  conscience !

' '  Everybody  did  love  thee  for  that  greatness,  goodness,  fairness,
sweet-scentedness,  victorious  strength  and  freedom  from  sorrow,  in
which  thou  dost  appear  to  me ;

"  '  And  so  thou,  0  youth  of  good  thoughts,'  etc.,  '  didst  love  me
for  that  greatness/  etc.,  '  in  which  I  appear  to  thee.

'  When  thou  wouldst  see  a  man  making  derision  and  deeds  of
idolatry,  or  rejecting  (the  poor)  and  shutting  his  door,  then  thou
wouldst  sit  singing  the  Gathas  and  worshipping  the  good  waters  and
Atar,  the  son  of  Ahura  Mazda,  and  rejoicing  the  faithful  that  would
come  from  near  or  from  afar.

1  Zend  Avesta,  ii.,  p.  313.  2  ty.  c^  p  315


THE  WORLD  AND  THE SPIRIT  97

"  '  I  was  lovely,  and  then  madest  me  still  lovelier ;  I  was  fair,  and
thou  madest  me  still  fairer ;  I  was  desirable,  and  thou  madest  me
still  more  desirable;  I  was  sitting  in  a  forward  place,  and  thou
madest  me  sit  in  the  foremost  place,  through  this  good  thought,
through  this  good  speech,  through  this  good  deed  of  thine ;  and  so
henceforth  men  worship  me  for  my  having  long  sacrificed  unto  and
conversed  with  Ahura  Mazda.'  "

In  the  same  third  night  the  conscience  of  the  wicked  appears
to  him  in  the  form  of  a  "  profligate  woman,  naked,  decayed,
gaping,  bandy-legged,  lean-lipped,  and  unlimitedly  spotted,  so
that  spot  was  joined  to  spot,  like  the  most  hideous  noxious
creature,  most  filthy,  and  most  stinking." *

The  creed  of  Zoroaster  is  not  monotheism,  though  it  had
monotheistic  tendencies,  which  developed  in  proportion  as  stress
was  laid  on  the  final  victory  of  Ahuramazda  and  the  destruc
tion  of  Angra  Mainyu.  But  neither  was  it  ordinary  polytheism.
It  was  a  unique  expression  of  the  dualism  of  nature  which  few
other  creeds,  if  any,  have  ever  attempted  to  face.  As  such  it
left  a  legacy  in  the  conception  of  the  devil  to  later  religions.  It
is  deeply  immersed  in  magical  ideas,  which  makes  its  code  with
its  grotesque  offerings  and  horrible  punishments  perhaps  the
most  extraordinary  document  in  the  whole  history  of  Ethics.
Yet  amid  this  it  had  also  firmly  seized  certain  moral  truths —
hardly  yet  the  deeper  truths  of  the  spiritual  religions,  but  the
truths  consonant  to  the  character  of  an  early  civilization — the
purity  of  the  home  life,  truthfulness,  good  faith,  neighbourly
help  and  hospitality.  It  conceived  that  man's  duty  is  to  master
the  earth,  to  tend  the  kine,  to  be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  that
this  was  to  lend  power  to  the  good  spirit  and  aid  its  ultimate
triumph  over  the  demonic  forces  of  Death  and  the  desert.  For
those  who  forwarded  the  work  there  was  a  rich  reward  laid  up
hereafter— and  for  the  evil  that  appalling  meeting  with  their
own  conscience  which  was  the  opening  of  hell.

4.  A  far  greater  advance  on  the  primitive  Indo-Persian
religion  was  made  in  India  itself.  Here,  long  before  the  age
of  Buddha,  at  a  date  quite  unknown  to  us,  the  Vedic  religion
was  developed  into  a  metaphysical  system,  probably  the  first
metaphysical  religion  of  history.  Not  only  had  the  gods
1  Op.  cit.,  ii.,  p.  319,  note.


VOL,  II,


98  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

been  traced  to  emanations  from  a  single  principle—  this
would  not  in  itself,  perhaps,  have  brought  the  Brahman
further  than  the  esoteric  wisdom  of  Egypt—  but,  what  is  for
ethical  purposes  more  important,  this  supreme  principle  was
identified  with  the  true  self  or  personality  of  man,  an  identifica
tion  which  makes  the  spirituality  of  the  Divine  for  the  first
its  essential  feature.

«  The  intelligent,  whose  body  is  spirit,  ...  He  is  myself,  within
the  heart  ;  smaller  than  a  corn  of  rice,  smaller  than  a  corn  of  barley,
smaller than  a  mustard-seed,  smaller  than  a  canary-seed or  the
kernel  of  a  canary-seed. He  also  is  myself  within  the  heart,  greate:
than  the  earth,  greater  than  the  sky,  greater  than  heaven,  greater
than  all  these  worlds. He  from  whom  all  works,  all  desires,  a
sweet  odours  and  tastes  proceed,  who  embraces  all  this,  who  never
speaks,  and  who  is  never  surprised,  he,  myself  within  the  heart,  IE
that  Brahman.  .  .  .  When  I  shall  have  departed  from  hence,  I
obtain  him  (that  Self). He  who  has  this  faith  has  no  doubt."  '

We  have  here  the  first  principle  of  all  mysticism,  that  God
and  the  self  are  one. But  we  have  also  something  greater  than
mysticism,  the  discovery  that  the  true  self  is  something  distinct
from  and  opposed  to  the  material  body  and  the  life  of
senses,  something  that  can  be  smaller  than  a  gram  of  mustard-
seed  because  not  an  object  in  space  at  all,  yet  greater  than  the
universe because  embracing  all things. Matter  is  not  spirit,
nor do  images  and  conceptions  drawn  from  matter  serve
define  the  Spirit,  which  is  known  rather  by  its  opposition  t
them  as  the  self  which  we  find  when  we  get  beneath  the  bodily
shell  and  think  away  the  objects  of  sensuous  knowledge. Inde
the  only  doubt  is  whether  the  self  as  that  which  knows  can  ali
be  known.

«  How  should  he  (the  Self)  know  Him  by  whom  he  knows
this  1  That  self  is  to  be  described  by  No,  No  !  He  is  incompre
hensible,  for  he  cannot  be  comprehended  ;  he  is  imperishable,  for  he
cannot  perish;  he  is  unattached,  for  he  does  not  attach  himself;
unfettered,  he  does  not  suffer,  he  does  not  fail.  How,  0'  beloved,
should  he  know  the  Knower  1  "  2


I  KS'ii.V8^.  Cf.  Upon****,  p.  112,  where  the  dually
(of  suEt  ad  object)  involved  in  knowledge  i.  insisted  on  and  the
difficulty  is  raised  how  the  self  which  is  the  knower  can  also  be  the  known.


THE  WORLD  AND  THE  SPIRIT  99

But  this  sceptical  movement  does  not  prevent  the  triumphant
identification  of  the  self  with  the  universal  Spirit.  The  self  is
the  true  totality  of  things,  and  he  who  has  achieved  this  wisdom,
attaining  to  self-knowledge  and  self-mastery,  attains  also  to  a
lordship  of  all  things.

" Now  follows  the  explanation  of  the  Infinite  as  the  ' I.'  'I  am
below ;  I  am  above,  I  am  behind,  before,  right  and  left— I  am  all
this.'  Next  follows  the  explanation  of  the  Infinite  as  the  Self.
'Self  is  below,  above,  behind,  before,  right  and  left— Self  is  all
'He  who  sees,  perceives,  and  understands  this,  loves  the
Self,  delights  in  the  Self,  revels  in  the  Self,  rejoices  in  the  Self-
he  becomes  a  Svarag  (an  autocrat  or  self-ruler) ;  he  is  lord  and
master  in  all  the  worlds.  But  those  who  think  differently  f rom  this,
live  in  perishable  worlds,  and  have  other  beings  for  their  rulers."  *

Inner  knowledge  is  the  centre  of  mysticism;  through  this
knowledge  man  achieves  self-mastery,  and  self-mastery  is
world-mastery  ;  for  the  true  self,  illusions  thrown  off,  is  the
reality  of  all  that  is.  How  then  do  men  attain  knowledge  ?
Neither  work,  nor  prayer,  nor  much  learning,  nor  penance,  are
sufficient.  But  these,  it  would  appear,  form  a  ladder  whereby
men  escape  from  the  impurity  of  sensual  existence,  and  reach  the
clearer  air  of  self-mastery.  «  By  truthfulness  in  deed,  by  penance,
right  knowledge  and  abstinence  must  that  self  be  gained." 2  The
rules  of  morality  and  religious  ceremonial  are  presupposed.

"  There  are  three  branches  of  the  law— sacrifice,  study  and  charity
are  the  first;  austerity  the  second  ;  and  to  dwell  as  a  Brahmakarin
in  the  house  of  a  tutor,  always  mortifying  the  body  .  .  is  the
third."  3

The  Brahmanic  Code 4  is  naturally  more  explicit  on  this  point

1  Upanishads,  i.  123,  124.

2  Upanishads,  iL,  p.  39. Sometimes  the  Brahmanist  thinker  seems  to  be
stumbling  on  the  brink  of  the  theory  of  Election,  as:-"  That  self  cannot
be  gained  by  the  Veda,  nor  by  understanding,  nor  by  much  learning He
whom  the  belt  chooses,  by  him  the  Self  can  be  gained." (Ib ii p  in
For  abstinence  as  a  condition,  cf.  i.,  p.  130.

3  Upanishads,  i.,  p.  35.

*  In  citing  Manu  as  evidence  for  Brahmanic  teaching,  we  must  bear  in
mind  that  the  code  as  we  have  it  is  a  growth  of  many  centuries  incor
porating  elements  of  various  origin.  To  attempt  to  disentangle  the  sources
ol  different  sections,  or  to  determine  their  chronological  sequence,  would
however,  lead  to  a  special  inquiry  far  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work  For


10o  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

a And  not  only  does  it  make  conduct


k

i^a.«^^t«hT2fflS

for  on  (that)  desire  is  grounded  the  stud  yot  tu  ^  ^

penance  ^"  J^^  l£!  M  -  «-

-1


world  over  a  long  period.
i  Kami,  i.  110.
a  Manu,  xii.  89.
6  tTpanw/iack,  i.,  P-  29<>.


THE  WORLD  AND  THE SPIRIT  101

element  in  conduct  of  vital  importance  being  in  fact  merely  the
self-repression  required  in  order  that  this  inward  state  may  come
into  being. Both  these  features  belong  to  the  first  clear  appre
hension  of  the  spiritual  element  in  man,  and  its  sharp  opposition
to  the  sensual. In  this  early  stage  it  cannot  be  apprehended
that  the  truly  spiritual  is  something  that  forms  and  inspires  the
world  of  perception,  that  fashions  lowly  efforts  to  great  ends
and  transfigures  humble  daily  life  with  the  light  and  glow  of
self-sacrifice  and  love. Become  for  the  first  time  conscious  of
itself,  the  spirit  wants  a  dramatic  display  of  its  independence.
It  must  show  its  utter  contempt  for  the  material  world,  and  in
this  unfortunately  it  includes  those  very  human  relations  which
are  the  true  sphere  of  its  activity. It  knows  self-control  to  be
the  foundation  of  its  existence,  and  it  makes  the  practice  of
self-control  the  one  supreme  and  all-embracing  end  of  conduct.
These  are  common,  and  on  the  whole  distinctive,  features  of  the
first  stage  of  spiritual  religion. True,  the  ascetic  tendency  and
the  cult  of  pain  are  deeply  rooted  in  human  nature,  and  play
an  important  part  even  in  savage  life. Painful  initiations  as  tests
of  virility  are  one  of  the  commonest  of  savage  institutions. Down
to  the  lowest  grades  men  honour  those  who  can  endure. But
it  is  with  the  rise  of  spiritual  religion  that  asceticism  takes
rank  as  the  supreme  law  of  salvation.

Asceticism  links  itself  naturally  to  the  conception  of  penance,
and  here  again  we  come  in  Brahmanism  upon  the  beginnings
of  a  spiritual  theory  of  man's  regeneration.  We  have  seen  that
the  Babylonian  who  sought  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  his
sins  had  no  better  method  than  to  resort  to  an  incantation,
which  was  in  the  first  place  a  form  of  repudiation,  and  in  the
second  place  a  ceremonial  purification,  in  which  the  sins  were
washed  or  scoured  or  thrown  away  or  burnt  out  of  him  by  one
of  the  processes  of  sympathetic  magic.  We  have  also  seen
reasons  for  thinking  that  in  the  Egyptian  Judgment  of  the
Dead,  at  least  in  its  old  form,  the  negative  confession  had  a
similar  significance.  In  the  Brahman's  Code  we  find  a  distinct
advance  towards  an  ethical  conception  of  repentance.

"  By  confession,  by  repentance,  by  austerity  and  by  reciting  (the
Veda)  a  sinner  is  freed  from  guilt,  and  in  case  no  other  course  is
possible,  by  liberality.  In  proportion  as  a  man  who  has  done


102  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

wrong,  himself  confesses  it,  even  so  far  he  is  freed  from  guilt,  as  a
snake  from  its  slough.  In  proportion  as  his  heart  loathes  his  evil
deed,  even  so  far  is  his  body  freed  from  that  guilt."  ]

Higher  and  lower  elements  contend in this  passage. At
times  we  seem  near  to  the  ethical  view  of  purification  through
the  acknowledgment  of  guilt  and  the  ready  acceptance  of  in
evitable  suffering,  as  the  way  and  means  towards  a  true  change
of  heart. At  other  times  we  relapse  into  the  magical  conception
of  the  potency  of  a  formula,  and  learn  that  "even  he  who  has
stolen  gold  instantly  becomes  free  from  guilt  if  he  once  mutters  "
a  certain  hymn.2 The  old  magic  crops  up  by  the  side  of  the
higher  spiritualism,  and  the  veil  of  mystical  imagination  drawn
over  all  forbids  that  clear,  remorseless  scrutiny  by  which  alone
the  doctrine  of  the  spirit  can  be  kept  pure. Apart  from  the
medicinal  effect  of  repentance,  confession,  and  forgiveness,  the
Brahmanistic  religion  took  a  stringent  view  of  the  consequence
of  <milt If  a  man  did  not  suffer  for  guilt  in  this  life,  it  came
upo&n  him  in  the  next. After  passing  through  hell,  he  was  re
incarnated  in  some  loathsome  animal  form. If  the  punishment
did  not  fall  upon  the  sinner, it  might,  by the principle of
vicarious  justice,  fall  upon  his  sons  or  his  descendants  or  1
ancestors. Manu  says,  "If  (the  punishment  falls)  not  on  (the
offender)  himself,  (it  falls)  on  his  sons;  if  not  on  the  sons .(i
least)  on  his  grandsons  "  ;  but  there  is  a  saving  clause  whi
shows  that  vicarious  justice  no  longer  wholly  satisfies.
an  iniquity  (once)  committed  never  fails  to  produce  fruit  to  him
who  wrought  it." 3

The  doctrine  of  transmigration  is  interwoven  with  the  mos
serious  aberration  in  the  Brahmanic  ethics,  since  it  offered,  as
we have  seen,4  a theoretical  justification for  the deepening
divisions  of  caste.5 We  also  saw,  it  is  true,  that  these  divisions
were  the  subject  of  much  questioning  among  thinkers. But  it

'  Manu,  xi.  228,  229,  230.  2  Manu  xi.  251 L ;  cf.  249,  250,  252.

3  Manu  iv  173  Part  I->  Ch-  VI1-  . •, ,

s  The  Sudra,  and  still  more  the  outcast  Kandala,  was  justly  despised  and
kept  apart  from  the  Brahman  because  he  was  the  incarnation  of  a  soul
raftering  for  its  misdeeds  in some  prior  existence. Far  from  bringing
relief  to  the  despised  and  oppressed,  Brahmanism  stamped  caste  dn
with  the  seal  of  religion,  and  if  it  did  not  invent  them  at  least  gave
the  iron  fixity  which  holds  Indian  society  bound  and  fettered  to  this  day.


THE  WORLD  AND THE SPIRIT  103

was  not  the  function  of  Brahmanism  to  ameliorate  social  life.
Life  in  human  society  was  a  life  of  error  in  which  the  true
Brahman  remained  only  to  fulfil  his  duty  to  his  ancestors  by
begetting  a  son  to  continue  their  cult.  His  true  life  was  in  the
forest,  conquering  the  senses  and  coming  to.  the  knowledge  of
his  spiritual  self.  Yet  with  this  contempt  for  worldly  values
Brahmanism  is  able  to  make  some  advance  towards  those  ethical
positions  which  characterize  the  higher  spiritual  religions.

The  Brahman  is  to  avoid  causing  pain  even  within  his  rights.
"  Let  him  not  be  uselessly  active  with  his  hands  and  feet,  or
with  his  eyes,  nor  crooked  (in  his  ways),  nor  talk  idly,  nor
injure  others  by  deeds  or  even  think  of  it."  l  Consideration  for
all  life,  animal  as  well  as  human,  is  in  more  than  one  place
urged,  though  the  rule  is  not  consistently  carried  through.
"  For  that  twice-born  man,  by  whom  not  the  smallest  danger
even  is  caused  to  created  beings,  there  will  be  no  danger  from
any  (quarter)  after  he  is  freed  from  his  body."  2  Malice  is  con
demned,  "  neither  a  man  who  (lives)  unrighteously,  nor  he  who
(acquires)  wealth  (by  telling)  falsehoods,  nor  he  who  always
delights  in  doing  injury,  ever  attain  happiness  in  this  world."  3
If  the  eating  of  meat  except  in  sacrifice 4  is  forbidden,  this  is
perhaps  an  outcome  of  primitive  ideas  which  at  times  verge
upon  zoolatry.  But  a  more  rational  conception  of  the  general
sanctity  of  life  is  implied  in  the  rule,  "  Let  him  never  seek  to
destroy  an  animal  without  a  (lawful)  reason  " ;  and  in  some  places
a  true  consideration  for  animals  is  blended  with  rules  traceable
to  principles  of  magic.  "Let  him  not  travel  with  untrained
beasts  of  burden,  nor  with  (animals)  that  are  tormented  by
hunger  or  disease,  or  whose  horns,  eyes,  and  hoofs  have  been
injured,  or  whose  tails  have  been  disfigured.  Let  him  always
travel  with  beasts  which  are  well  broken  in,  swift,  endowed  with
lucky  marks,  and  perfect  in  form  and  colour,  without  urging  them
too  much  with  the  goad."  5  As  to  enemies,  the  Brahmanistic
Code  does  not  go  so  far  as  Lao  Tsze  in  bidding  us  to  recompense
evil  with  good,6  but  it  preaches  rather  the  ignoring  of  an

1  Maim,  iv.  177.  2  Manu,  vi.  40.  3  Maim,  iv.  170.

4  Manu,  v.  31.  «  Manu,  iv.  67,  68.

6  Yet  in  the  Mahabharata  we  read  the  Buddhist  verse,  "  Let  a  man  over
come  anger  by  kindness,  evil  by  good  ;  let  him  conquer  the  stir.gy  by  a
gilt,  the  liar  by  truth."  (Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism,  p.  130,  note.)


104  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

enemy :  "  Let  him  not  show  particular  attention  to  an  enemy
the  friend  of  an  enemy,  to  a  wicked  man,  to  a  thief,  or  to  the
wife  of  another  man."  l  If  these  words  hardly  suggest  that  it
is  forgiveness  that  is  in  question,  but  rather  the  avoidance  of
strife,  on  the  other  hand  we  read  further  on  that  forgiveness
and  liberality  are  means  to  purification.  "  The  learned  are
purified  by  a  forgiving  disposition ;  those  who  have  committed
forbidden  actions  by  liberality."2  Yet  the  following  clause
seems  to  be  the  Mosaic  law  at  a  little  higher  remove.  "  Making
over  (the  merit  of  his  own)  good  actions  to  his  friends,  and  (the
guilt  of)  his  evil  deeds  to  his  enemies,  he  attains  the  eternal
Brahman  by  the  practice  of  meditation."  3  Lastly,  forgiveness
is  a  maxim  of  kingcraft.  "  A  king  who  desires  his  own  welfare
must  always  forgive  litigants,  infants,  aged  and  sick  men,  who
inveigh  against  him.  He  who  being  abused  by  men  in  pain
pardons  (them),  will  in  reward  of  that  (act)  be  exalted  in
heaven  ;  but  he  who,  (proud)  of  his  kingly  state,  forgives  them
not,  will  for  that  (reason)  sink  into  hell."  4

For  the  rest,  the  Brahmanic  teaching,  as  we  have  seen,
adheres  to  the  Oriental  view  of  women.5  It  lays  down  certain
rules  of  humanity  and  chivalry  in  warfare.6  In  private  inter
course  it  teaches  the  duty  of  truthfulness  combined  with
courtesy.  It  insists  much  upon  the  avoidance  of  low  occupa
tions  and  mean  methods  of  gain,7  and  even  preaches  holding
aloof  from  a  king  who  is  not  of  a  true  kingly  caste.8

1  Manu,  iv.  133.  a  Mann,  v.  107.

3  Manu,  vi.  79.  •  Manu,  viii.  312,  313.

6  See  above. Part  I.,  Ch.  V.  6  Part  I.,  Ch.  VI.

7  Betting  and  gambling  are  declared  equivalent  to  "  open  theft." (Manu,
ix.  222.)

8  "  Let  him  not  accept  presents  from  a  king  who  is  not  descended  from
the  Kshatriya  race,  nor  from  butchers,  oil-manufacturers,  and  publicans,  nor
from  those  who  subsist  by  the  gain  of  prostitutes. One  oil-press  is  as  (bad)
as  ten  slaughter-houses,  one  tavern  as  (bad)  as  ten  oil-presses,  one  brothel
as  (bad  as)  ten  taverns,  one  king  as  (bad  as)  ten  brothels. A  king  is
declared  to  be  equal  (in  wickedness)  to  a  butcher  who  keeps  a  hundred
thousand  slaughter-houses  ;  to  accept  presents  from  him  is  a  terrible  (crime).
He  who  accepts  presents  from  an  avaricious  king,  who  acts  contrary  to  the
Institutes  (of  the  sacred  law),  will  go  in  succession  to  the  following  twenty
one  hells." (Manu,  iv.  84,  etc.) Some  conception  of  the  spirit  of  the
Brahmanic  Code,  and  of  the  very  diverse  elements  entering  into  it,  may  be
obtained  by  comparing  the  lists  of  principal  and  minor  offences. The
following  are  mortal  sins : — "  Killing  a  Brahmana,  drinking  (the  spirituous
liquor  called)  Sura,  stealing  (the  gold  of  a  Brahmana),  adultery  with  a


THE  WORLD  AND  THE  SPIRIT  105

The  Brahmanic  Code  is  not  the  work  of  reformers  or  of  men
inspired  with  a  social  or  humane  ideal. It  is  the  code of  a
society  in  which  barbaric  elements  survive,  but  which  has  made
great  advances  in  civilization,  and  of  a  priesthood  which  has
cn-asped  certain  sides  of  spiritual  truth,  but  has  neither  disen
cumbered  itself  of  primitive  ways  of  thought,  nor  advanced  to  the
point  at  which  the  ethical  and  spiritual  unite. Its  spiritual
interpretation  of  the  divine  unity  was  such  as  readily  to  make
terms  with  polytheism. For  though  all  the  gods  and  all  human
beings  too  were  emanations  from  the  one  spirit,  it  does not
follow  that  the  many  gods  lose  their  reality. On  the  contrary,
the  way  is  prepared  for  the  series  of  emanations— Vishnu,  an
emanation  from  Brahma ;  Krishna,  an  emanation  of  Vishnu  ;  and
Krishna  himself  impersonated  in  many  successive  incarnations,
a  system  which  retains  many  of  the  essentials  of  polytheism,
under  the  shell  of  metaphysical  theory. What  was  worse  was
that its mysticism could make terms with magic, it  could
find  spiritual  efficacy  in  a  formula,  and  conceive  austerity  as
conferring,  not  an  ethical  self-conquest,  but  miraculous  powers
Finally,  at  its  best,  the  Brahmanic  view  of  life  is  pessimistic  anc
its  highest  ideal  is  the  sage  who,  having  performed  his  duties,
has  emancipated  himself  from  human  relations  and  entered  into
the  spiritual  kingdom  of  the  god  within  his  breast. It  contains
no  message  of  comfort  for  the  sufferer,  of  love,  of  forgiveness,  of
humility. Still  less  does  it  proclaim  an  ideal  of  social  justice.
It  leaves  us  with  the  picture  of  the  emaciated  hermit  dreaming,
in  the  trance  of  semi-starvation,  of  himself  as  one  with  the
centre  of  things,  a  God  self-created  by  his  own  afflicted  brain.

5.  The  relation  of  Buddhism  to  Brahmanism  has  sometimes
been  compared  to  that  of  Protestantism  to  the  Catholic  Church.

Guru's  wife,  and  associating  with  such  (offenders)  .  .  .Slaying  a  friend ..  .
stealing  men  .  .  .  carnal  intercourse  with  sisters  by  the  same  mother,  with
unmarried)  maidens,  with  females  of  the  lowest  castes,  with  the  wives  ,
a  friend,  or  of  a  son."  ...  On  the  other  hand  :-«  Adultery,  selling  one
self,  allowing  one's  younger  brother  to  marry  first,  .  .  .  giving  a  daughte:
to.  .  .  (either  brother)  .  ?.  defiling  a  damsel  usury,  .  .  selling  a  tank  a
garden,  one's  wife,  or  child,  .  .  .  living  as  a  V  ratya,  casting  ott  a  relative,
8  superintending  mines,  .  .  .  subsisting  on  (the  earnings  pi)  one's  wife  .
cutting  down  green  trees  for  firewood,  doing  acts  for  one's  own  advantage
only,  .  .  slaying  women,  Sudras,  Vaisyas,  or  Kshatnyas,  and  atheism"  are
all  minor  offences  causing  loss  of  caste.


106  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

It  is  at  any  rate  only  by  appreciating  the  central  doctrines  of
Brahmanism  that  we  can  begin  to  understand  Buddha's  attitude.
The  Brahman  held  life  to  be  on  the  whole  an  evil,  from  which
it was the object of  the higher knowledge to deliver its
possessor. Every  Brahmanic  system  had  its  own  theory  of  the
method  of  escape  from  the  chain  of  existences. Buddha  had  a
new  theory,  and  one  which,  with  the  same  element  of  pessimism
at  its  root,  was  in  closer  touch  alike  with  average  human  nature
and  with  the  higher  ethical  consciousness  of  mankind. Buddha's
great discovery  was  the want of  permanence in the whole
world of phenomena, the whole world of change. What
ever  has  a  beginning must  also  have  an  end. And  so  there
appeared the possibility of an ultimate cessation from  the
wheel of  suffering, an ultimate disentanglement from the
chain  of  earthly  existences. Transmigration  is,  in  a  modified
form,  a  central  doctrine  still,  but  it  is  not  strictly  a  transmigra
tion  of  the  soul,  for  the  soul  according  to  the  strict  Buddhist  is
a  figment. The  constitutive elements of  the human being
come  together  at  birth,  and  are  dissolved  at  death. If  the  good
and  evil  he  does  live  after  him,  it  must  be  very  strictly  main
tained  that  it  is  the  good  and  evil  only  that  live  and  not  he
himself. In  other  words,  every  cause  has  its  effect. Whatever
good  I  do  has  a  permanent,  so  to  say,  spiritual  efficacy,  and
equally  whatever  evil  I do. But the effect is shown in a
peculiar  way. My  personality  does  not  survive,  but  my  good
and  my  evil  works  survive,  and  they determine  the fate  of
another  being,  which  comes  into  existence,  as  it  were,  to  carry
on  my  moral  destiny. This is  the difficult and much  mis
understood  doctrine of  Karma, a doctrine which a modern
metaphysician  might  phrase  somewhat  after  this  fashion :  that
it  destroys the substantiality of  the  soul while leaving its
causality ;  the  stream  of  moral  consequences  becomes  a  stream  of
mere  causation  from  which  the  personality  of  the  moral  subject
is  removed. But,  further,  Karma  has,  as  it  were,  one  central
cause — Desire,  the  will  to  live,  self-assertion. It  is  on  account
of  this  desire  that  I  maintain  my  individuality,  that  I  keep  shut
up  within  my  selfish  interests,  that  I  maintain  myself  as  a  dis
tinct  being  from  the  universe  at  large ;  and  because  this  desire
is,  Karma  is,  and  the  results  of  my  personal  character  are  per-


107

petuated. If  I  would  seek  emancipation  from  the chain  of
earthly  existences  I  must  put  an  end  to  Karma,  and  to  put  an
end  to  Karma  I  must  put  an  end  to  desire ;  and  to  put  an  end
to  desire,  I  must  train  myself  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Buddha
which teach me  the  unreality and the valuelessness of  all
earthly  things,  and  raise  me  to  that  emancipation  from  self,
from  worldly  interests,  from  all care for  the things of  this
transitory  being,  which  is  for  the  Buddhist  the  dream  of  bliss.
I  must,  in  short,  attain  to  the  extinction  of  individuality— that  is,
to  use  'a  technical  and  deeply  misunderstood  term,  to  Nirvana,
for  Nirvana  is  not,  as  is  often  thought,  utter  extinction ;  on  the
contrary,  it  is  a  real  state  of  real  people  in  this  earthly  existence,
it  is  the  state  of  the  Arahat,  a  state  reached  by  those  who  have
trodden  the  path  marked  out  for  them  to  the  end  and  gamed
the  summit  of  the  ascent. Nirvana  means extinction,  but  it
does  not  mean  extinction  of  life,  but  extinction  of  those  desires
and  lusts,  which  war,  not  as  in  Christianity  against  the  soul,
but  rather  for  the  perpetuation  of  individuality,  which  form  a
barrier  between  the  world  and  me,  which  make  me,  in  short,  an
individual,  and  prevent  me  from  reaching  that  state  of  blissful
contemplation, of  perfect benevolence, and total selflessness
which alone  can prevent the law of  Karma from bringing
another  being  into  existence  in  my  place,  when  my  earthly
career  is  ended. We now have before us  the "four noble
truths"  in  which  the  doctrine  of  Buddha  is  summed  up. The
first is the truth about suffering. All transient existence
involves  suffering;  birth and death,  growth and decay, the
frustration  of  desire,  the  longing  that  cannot  be  satisfied,  all
that  belongs  to  our  existence as  individuals— all are  full of
suffering. There  may  be  joy  too,  but  pain  cometh  at  the  end,
and  the  word  is  written  large  over  the  final  balanceinent  of
accounts. The  second  truth  is  the  truth  about  the  cause  of
suffering,  which  is  the  craving  for  the  satisfaction  of  desire,  the
cravmg0that  maintains  life  and  causes  its  renewal. The  third
truth  is  that  suffering  is  brought  to  an  end  by  the  conquest  of
this  craving. And  the  fourth  truth  is  that  the  path  leading  to
the  cessation  of  suffering  is  the  "noble  eight-fold  path,"  by
which  the  craving  of  desire  is  laid  to  rest.1 The  eight-fold  path
1  Buddhist  Suttas,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xi.,  pp.  148,  149.


108  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

therefore  contains  in  little  both  the  ethics  and  the  practical
religion  of  Buddhism,  which  is  on  the  one  hand  opposed  to  the
sensuality  of  this  life,  and  on  the  other  to  the  ascetic  extremes
ol  Brahmanism.

"What  is that  middle  path,  0  Bhikkus,  avoiding  these  two
extremes  discovered  by  the  Tathagata  ? Verily  ! it  is  this  noble

eight-fold  path  ;  that  is  to  say

"  Right  views  ;

Right  aspirations ;

Right  speech ;

Right  conduct ;

Right  livelihood ;

Right  effort ;

Right  mindfulness ;  and

Right  contemplation."1

The  pursuit  of  the  eight-fold  noble  path  liberated  the
follower  of  Buddha  from  the  ten  following  fetters  in  succession
namely:  1.  Delusion  of  self.  2.  Doubt.  3.  Dependence  on
works.  4.  Sensuality.  5.  Hatred.  6.  Love  of  life  on  earth
7  Desire  for  life  in  Heaven.  8.  Pride.  9.  Self-righteousness
10.  Ignorance.  It  is  not  till  the  first  five  fetters  are  destroyed
that  the  Buddhist  becomes  an  Arahat,  and  it  is  not  until  the
remaining  five  are  abolished  that  he  has  finally  put  an  end  to
delusion  and  sorrow.'  It  was  not  impossible  for  a  layman,  livino-
the  ordinary  life  of  a  householder,  to  enter  upon  the  path  and
even  to  attain  to  Nirvana,  but  though  not  impossible,  it  was
extremely  difficult.

"Full  of  hindrances  is  household  life,  a  path  defiled  by  passion  •
free  as  the  air  is  the  life  of  him  who  has  renounced  all  worldly
things  How  difficult  is  it  for  the  man  who  dwells  at  home  to  live
the  higher  life  in  all  its  fulness,  in  all  its  purity,  in  all  its  bright  per
fection  !  Let  me  then  cut  off  my  hair  and  beard,  let  me  clothe
m  the  orange-coloured  robes,  and  let  me  go  forth  from  a
household  life  into  the  homeless  state." 3

Hence  the  order  of  mendicants,  or  Bhikkhus,an  order  of  celi
bates  who  were  to  attain  to  Nirvana,  or  to  tread  the  path  to

1  Op.  cit.,  pp.  146,  147.

See  Rhys  Davids,  Mamud  of  Buddhism,  p.  109,  110,  &c
J  buttas,  pp.  187,  188.


THE WORLD  AND  THE  SPIRIT  109

Nirvana,  as  each  individual's  capacity  would  allow  him,  and  to
reach  it,  not  by  exaggerated  abstinence,  or  extreme  mortification
of  the  flesh,  but  by  simple  adhesion  to  rules  of  life  based  on  the
conception  of  virtue  as  resting  in  selflessness,  the  avoidance  of
desire,  the  avoidance  of  injury  to  others,  the  cultivation  of  love,
and  the  destruction  of  hatred. These  were  the  simple  elements
constituting  the  rules  of  the  Bliikkhu's  life  and  simply  formu
lated  in  the  eight  precepts.
"  One  should  not  destroy  life.
One  should  not  take  that  which  is  not  given.
One  should  not  tell  lies.

One  should  not  become  a  drinker  of  intoxicating  liquors.
One  should  refrain  from  unlawful  sexual  intercourse— an  ignoble

thing.

One  should  not  eat  unseasonable  food  at  nights.
One  should  not  wear  garlands  or  use  perfumes.
One  should  sleep  on  a  mat  spread  on  the  ground."  '
These  eight  precepts  apply  to  all  Buddhists,  including  house
holders.2 Two  more  are  binding on  mendicants,  namely,  to
abstain  from  dancing,  music,  and  stage  plays,  and  from  the  use
of  gold  and  silver. These  form  with  the  first  eight  the  ten
moral  rules  of  the  order. With  these  may  be  compared  the
division  into  ten  sins —

"  Three  of  the  body-
Taking  life,

Theft  (taking  what  has  not  been  given),
Unlawful  sexual  intercourse.
Four  of  speech —
Lying,

Slander  (includes  '  saying  here  what  one  hears  there  ),
Abuse  (swearing),
Vain  conversation.
Three  of  the  mind —
Covetousness,
Malice,
Scepticism."  3
Further,  the  Buddhist  Manual  of  Ethics  classify  moral  duties

1  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism,  p.  139.

2  The  three  last,  however,  are  not  obligatory.

3  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism,  p.  142,


110  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

under  six  heads  :— The  natural  obligations  of  Parents  and  Chil
dren,  of  Pupils  and  Teachers,  of  Husbands  and  Wives,  of  Friends
and  Companions,  of  Masters  and  Servants,  of  Laymen  and  the
Religious.  The  insistence  on  the  duties  of  the  husband  is  note
worthy.

"  The  husband  should  cherish  his  wife

By  treating  her  with  respect.

By  treating  her  with  kindness.

By  being  faithful  to  her.

By  causing  her  to  be  honoured  by  others,

By  giving  her  suitable  ornaments  and  clothes."  *

Still  more  the  injunctions  on  masters.

"  The  master  should  provide  for  the  welfare  of  his  dependants—

By  apportioning  work  to  them  according  to  their  strength.

By  supplying  suitable  food  and  wages.

By  tending  them  in  sickness.

By  sharing  with  them  unusual  delicacies.

By  now  and  then  granting  them  holidays."2

The  Manual  concludes  that  liberality,  courtesy,  kindliness  and
unselfishness—"  these  are  to  the  world  what  the  linchpin  is  to
the  rolling  chariot."

6.  The  character  of  the  true  Buddhist  is  summarized  in  the
short  paragraphs  on  conduct.

"  He  abstains  from  destroying  life  .  .  .  and  full  of  modesty  and
pity,  he  is  compassionate  and  kind  to  all  creatures  that  have  life.
He  abstains  from  taking  anything  not  given.  ...  He  lives  a  life  of
chastity  and  purity,  averse  to  the  low  habit  of  sexual  intercourse.
He  abstains  from  speaking  falsehood.  He  abstains  from  calumny.
What  he  hears  here,  he  repeats  not  elsewhere  to  raise  a  quarrel
against  the  people  here.  Thus  he  lives  as  a  binder  together  of  those
who  are  divided,  a  peace-maker,  a  lover  of  peace,  impassioned  for
peace,  a  speaker  of  words  that  make  for  peace.  ...  He  abstains
from  harsh  language.  Whatever  word  is  humane,  pleasant  to  the
ear,  lovely,  reaching  to  the  heart,  urbane,  pleasing  to  the  people,
beloved  of  the  people— such  are  the  words  he  speaks.  ...  He
abstains  from  vain  conversation.  He  refrains  from  injuring  any
herb  or  any  creature.  He  takes  but  one  meal  a  day.  .  .°.  He
1  Op.  cit.t  p.  145,  2  fat  p.  146t


THE WORLD  AND THE  SPIRIT  111

abstains  from  dancing,  singing,  music,  and  theatrical  shows.  .  .  .
He  abstains  from  the  getting  of  silver  or  gold.  He  abstains  from
the  getting  of  grain  uncooked.  He  abstains  from  the  getting  of
flesh  that  is  raw.  He  abstains  from  the  getting  of  any  woman  or
girl.  He  abstains  from  the  getting  of  bondmen  or  bondwomen.
He  abstains  from  the  getting  of  sheep  or  goats.  ...  He  refrains
from  carrying  out  those  commissions  on  which  messengers  can  be
sent.  He  refrains  from  buying  and  selling.  He  abstains  from
tricks  with  false  weights,  alloyed  metals,  or  false  measures.  He
abstains  from  bribery,  cheating,  fraud,  and  crooked  ways.  He
refrains  from  maiming,  killing,  imprisoning,  highway  robbery,
plundering  villages,  or  obtaining  money  by  threats  of  violence."  ]

These  precepts  are  expanded  in  the  "  middle  "  and  "  long "
paragraphs,  which  further  reprehend  combats  between  animals,
games  of  many  kinds  "  detrimental  to  progress  in  virtue,"  mean
talk,  such  as  "  tales  of  kings,  of  robbers,  or  of  ministers  of  state  :
tales  of  arms,  of  war,  of  terror,  conversation  respecting  women,
warriors,  demi-gods,  ghosts  stories,  empty  tales."  They  depre
cate  wrangling  about  orthodoxy ;  reproach  those  who  perform
"  the  servile  duties  of  a  go-between,"  that  is,  between  kings,
ministers  of  state,  Brahmans,  etc. ;  denounce  hypocrisy,  divina
tion,  magic  ;  reprobate  those  who  make  their  living  by  predict
ing  eclipses,  or  a  rainfall,  "  or  by  drawing  up  deeds,  making  up
accounts,  giving  pills,  making  verses,  or  arguing  points  of
casuistry  "  ;  by  giving  advice  about  marriage,  imparting  magical
formulse,  and  so  forth.  If  some  of  these  prohibitions  appear  to
us  oddly  assorted,  the  general  purport  is  clear  enough.  The
follower  of  Buddha  is  to  hold  aloof,  on  the  one  hand,  from  the
frivolities  and  sensualities  of  the  life  of  pleasure  ;  on  the  other,
from  the  quackery  and  professions2  mixed  up  with  quackery
into  which  the  lower  forms  of  religion  so  easily  slide.  But
underlying  all  this  is  the  ideal  goodness  as  consisting  in
universal  love.

"  And  he  lets  his  mind  pervade  one  quarter  of  the  world  with
thoughts  of  love,  and  so  the  second,  and  so  the  third,  and  so  the

1  Suttas,  p.  189.

2  In  the  Vinaya  Texts,  vol.  iii.,  p. 152,  sacrifices  to  the  gods  are  in
cluded  among  the  "low  arts"  which  a  Bhikkhu  is  not  to  teach. On  the
other  hand,  in  vol.  ii.,  p.  103,  the  prudent  man,  wherever  he  takes  up  his
abode,  is  recommended  "to  make  offerings"  to  all  such,  deities  as  may  be
there.


112  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

fourth.  And  thus  the  whole  wide  world,  above,  below,  around,  and
everywhere,  does  he  continue  to  pervade  with  heart  of  Love,  far-
reaching,  grown  great,  and  beyond  measure.  Just,  Vasettha,  as  a
mighty  trumpeter  makes  himself  heard— and  that  without  difficulty
—in  all  the  four  directions ;  even  so  of  all  things  that  have  shape
or  life,  there  is  not  one  that  he  passes  by  or  leaves  aside,  but  regards
them  all  with  mind  set  free,  and  deep-felt  love." l

With  this  we  may  compare  the  character  of  the  great  King  of
Glory,  the  ideal  Buddhist  ruler,  realized  in  some  measure  in  the
great  King  Asoka  of  Magadha.  The  King  of  Glory's  greatness
depends  on  three  qualities,  those  of  forgiving,  of  self-conquest,
and  self-control.  And  in  this  rule  of  love  the  doctrine  of  Laotse
is  fully  observed.

"  For  never  in  this  world  does  hatred  cease  by  hatred ;

Hatred  ceases  by  love ;  this  is  always  its  nature."
"  Whatever  an  enemy  may  do  to  an  enemy,
Or  an  angry  man  to  an  angry  man,
A  mind  intent  on  what  is  wrong
Works  evil  worse."
"  One  may  conquer  a  thousand  thousand  men  in  battle,

But  he  who  conquers  himself  alone  is  the  greatest  victor."
"  Let  a  man  overcome  anger  by  kindness,  evil  by  good ;

Let  him  conquer  the  stingy  by  a  gift,  the  liar  by  truth."  2
The  Gospel  precepts  of  humility  and  self-knowledge  naturally
find  a  place  here.  "  Not  the  perversities  of  others,  not  their
sins  of  commission  and  omission,  but  his  own  misdeeds  and
negligences  should  a  sage  take  notice  of" ;  and  again,  "  One's  own
self  conquered  is  better  than  all  other  people." 3  Spiritual
perfection  is  the  supreme  object  and  higher  than  all  sacrifice.
"  If  a  man  for  a  hundred  years  sacrifice  month  by  month  with
a  thousand,  and  if  he,  but  for  one  moment,  pay  homage  to  a
man  whose  soul  is  grounded  (in  true  knowledge),  better  is  that

1  Buddhist  Siittas,  p.  201.

2  Rhys  Davids,  p.  128. Compare  the  story  of  King  Dighili  in  the
Vinaya  Texts,  vol.  ii.,  p.  298  ff.

3  Dhammapada,  ch.  iv.,  50. Ib.,  viii.,  104. Compare  the  rule,  "  No
Bhikkhu  who  has  not  given  leave  may  be  reproved  for  an  offence — I
prescribe, O  Bhikkhus, that  you reprove  Bhikkhus  for  an  offence  only
after  having  first  asked  leave  by  saying,  Give  me  leave,  reverend  brother,
I  wish  to  speak  to  you." (Vinaya  Texts,  vol.  i.,  p.  264.)

For  the  mildness  of  penalties  in  the  early  Buddhist  order,  cf.  vol.  iii.,
p,  119,  and  the  translator's  remarks.


113

homage  than  a  sacrifice  for  a  hundred  years." l  The  "  Arahat "
is  as  far  above  earthly  things  as  the  Stoical  wise  man.  "  As
a  solid  rock  is  not  shaken  by  the  wind,  wise  people  falter  not
amidst  blame  and  praise."5  But  by  the  same  consequence
responsibility  and  purification  are  individual.  "  By  oneself  the
evil  is  done,  by  oneself  one  suffers,  by  oneself  evil  is  left  undone,
by  oneself  one  is  purified.  ...  No  one  can  purify  another." 3
And  the  essence  of  purification  is  the  ethical  change  of  heart.
Buddha  accepts  the  confession  and  petition  for  forgiveness  of
Vaddha  the  Tikkhavi.  « For  this,  O  friend  Vaddha,  is  the
advantage  of  the  discipline  of  the  noble  one,  that  he  who  looks
upon  his  sin  as  sin  and  makes  amends  for  it  as  is  meet,  he
becomes  able  in  future  to  restrain  himself  therefrom."  4  The
saint  must  not  look  for  success  in  this  world.  He  finds  his
happiness  in  disregarding  its  hate.  "We  live  happily  indeed,
not  hating  those  who  hate  us." 5  Again,  "  Victory  breeds
hatred,  for  the  conquered  is  unhappy."6  Again,  "Not  to
blame,  not  to  strike  ...  to  be  moderate  in  eating,  to  sleep  and
sit  alone  and  to  dwell  on  the  highest  thoughts,  this  is  the  teach
ing  of  the  Awakened."  7  Hence  the  duty  of  non-resistance  :  "  No
one  should  attack  a  Brahraana,  but  no  Brahmana  (if  attacked)
should  let  himself  fly  at  his  aggressor.  Woe  to  him  who  strikes
a  Brahmana,  more  woe  to  him  who  flies  at  his  aggressor." 8  The
distinctions  of  caste  are  overcome —

"  I  do  not  call  a  man  a  Brahmana  because  of  his  origin,  or  of  his
mother,  but  the  poor  who  is  free  from  all  attachments,  him  I  call  a
Brahmana."  <  "  Him  I  call  indeed  a  Brahmana  who,  though  he  has

1  Dhammapada,  viii.  106.  2  j^  vj  gj

16.,  xii.  165.  «  Vinaya  Texts,  vol.  iii.,  p.  1 23.

5  Dhammapada,  xv.  197.  G  Ib.,  xv.  201.

J  Ib.,  xiv.  185.  s  jk}  xx;i  38'9_

Ordination,  however,  was  forbidden,  not  only  to  criminals  and  debtors
but  to  slaves,  eunuchs,  dwarfs,  hunchbacks,  one-eyed  people,  the  blind'
dumb  and  deaf;  to  a  person  that  gave  offence  (by  depravity)  to  those  who
saw  him,  etc.  (Vinaya  Texts,  vol.  i.,  pp.  199,  224-5.  Of.  p.  215.)  A
quaint  rule  prohibits  the  ordination  of  an  animal  on  the  strength  of  a  story
of  a  serpent  taking  human  shape  and  becoming  ordained  (ib.,  pp  217-19)
and  one  of  the  questions  asked  of  candidates  was,  "  Are  you  a  human
being  ? "  (Vol.  iii.,  p.  349.)

Women  were  admitted  to  ordination,  but  according  to  the  account  in  the
Vinaya  Texts  with  much  reluctance  and  in  an  inferior  position  The
Buddha  at  first  declines  altogether  to  institute  a  female  order  but  is  over-

VOL.  II.


114  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

committed  no  offence,  endures  reproach,  stripes,  and  bonds,  who  has
endurance  for  his  force,  and  strength  for  his  army.  Him  I  call
indeed  a  Brahmana  who  is  tolerant  with  the  intolerant,  mild  with
the  violent,  and  free  from  greed  among  the  greedy.  Him  I  call
indeed  a  Brahmana  from  whom  anger  and  hatred,  pride  and
hypocrisy  have  dropt  like  a  mustard-seed  from  the  point  of  a
needle."  *

This  morality  does  not  rest  on  a  theological  basis ;  though
Buddha  does  not  deny  the  gods,  they  play  no  important  part  in
his  scheme.  It  is  rather  the  inherent  character  and  inevitable
consequences  of  conduct  with  which  he  is  concerned.  The  ideas
of  reward  and  punishment  are  not  indeed  wholly  absent,  for  not
only  is  there  reward  in  a  temporary  heaven  and  punishment  in
a  temporary  hell  for  those  in  the  lower  stages  of  the  path,2  but
those  who  reach  the  highest  are  rewarded  by  the  final  cessation
of  the  circle  of  existences.  But  this  after  all  is  a  very  negative
reward.  The  noblest  prize  that  Buddha  offers  to  man  is  to
attain  in  this  life  and  now  to  inward  perfection.  Such  perfection
has  its  essence  in  the  absence  of  passion  and  desire,  and  its
manifestation  in  universal  love,  in  forgiveness  of  sin,  in  for
bearance  with  the  wrong-doer,  in  humility  and  self-respect.  It
is  an  inward  state  obtainable  by  all  men,  and  also  by  all  women,
independently  of  caste,  nationality,  or  sex.  Love  is  for  all  and
salvation  is  open  to  all.

7.  The  selflessness  of  spiritual  religion  is  carried  to  the  point
of  self-emptying,  the  negation  of  action  along  with  desire,  in
some  forms  of  Mysticism.  Of  such  Quietism  probably  the
earliest  extant  expression  is  to  be  found  in  The  Path  of  Virtue,

persuaded  by  the  faithful  Ananda.  Yet  he  foresees  disaster  as  a  consequence,
wholly  refuses  to  put  Bhikkhunis  and  Bhikkhus  on  an  equality,  forbids  any
censure  of  Bhikkhus  by  Bhikkhunis,  and  ordains  that  a  Bhikkhuni  even
if  a  hundred  years  old,  shall  make  obeisance  to  a  Bhikkhu  even  if  newly
initiated.  On  the  other  hand,  all  confessions  of  women  are  to  be  made  to
women,  and  all  disciplinary  proceedings  to  be  carried  out  in  the  same  way
(Vinaya  Texts,  vol.  iii,  pp.  320-332.)  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark
that  the  ascription  of  these  details  to  Buddha  himself  is  of  no  historical

authority.

1  Dhammapada,  p.  92,  sees.  396,  399,  406,  407.

2  Strictly  speaking,  this  part  of  the  doctrine  would  have  to  be  quahf
by  what  has  been  said  above  as  to  Karma.


THE WORLD  AND  THE  SPIRIT  115

by  Lao  Ts/e,  an  older  contemporary  of  Confucius.  Lao  Tsze  is
no  theologian,  but  his  system  is  historically  connected  with  the
Chinese  conception  of  magical  influences  interpenetrating  the
whole  physical  world.  The  Tao,  which  is  variously  rendered  by
Way,  Path,  Truth,  Reason,1  is  the  course  or  process  of  the
universe,2  or  perhaps,  we  may  say,  it  is  the  one  principle  on
which  all  the  processes  making  up  the  life  of  the  universe  depend,
or  in  which  they  are  expressed.  It  is  a  magical  conception  refined
into  a  metaphysical  principle  and  made  the  basis  of  a  system  of
mystical  ethics.  For  the  leading  idea  of  the  Tao  would  appear
to  be  that  man  should  surrender  himself,  his  individuality,  his
self-assertion,  his  efforts  to  be  positive,  to  rule  others  for  their
good,  to  be  virtuous  and  benevolent — that  he  should  abandon  this
vain  self-assertion,  and  merge  himself  in  the  main  stream  of
being  which,  flowing  on  its  own  course,  sets  all  wrongs  right,
brings  the  proud  to  the  ground,  and  exalts  the  humble  and
meek.  "  The  sage  governs  by  ridding  the  heart  of  its  desires."  3
Going  back  to  one's  origin  is  called  Peace:  it  is  the  giving
oneself  over  to  the  inevitable.4  The  mystical  paradox  is  that
this  excellent  passivity  is  in  reality  the  most  effective  of  all  modes
of  action.  The  sage  "  acts  through  non-action  and  by  this  he
governs  all."5  The  soft  and  the  weak  overcome  the  hard  and
strong.6  To  teach  without  words  and  to  be  useful  without  action —
few  among  men  attain  to  this.7  Even  from  the  personal  point
of  view  it  is  selflessness  and  restraint  that  yield  happiness.
"  The  more  he  (the  wise  man)  gives  to  others,  the  more  he  has
for  his  own."  8  "  (The  woman)  conquers  the  man  by  continual
quietness." 9  This  wisdom  practised  by  each  would  make  virtue
prevail  in  the  community.10  For  coercion  is  no  remedy  for  social
ills.  "When  the  actions  of  the  people  are  controlled  by
prohibited  laws,  the  country  becomes  more  and  more  impover
ished.  The  wise  man  says,  'I  will  design  nothing,  and  the
people  shall  shape  themselves.  I  will  keep  quiet,  and  the  people
will  find  their  rest.  I  will  not  assert  myself,  and  the  people  will
come  forth.  I  will  discountenance  ambition,  and  the  people  will

1  Old,  The  Simple  Way,  p.  20.

2  De  Groot,  Religious  System  of  China,  iv.,  p.  67. 3  Old,  ch.  iii.

4  16.,  ch.  xvi.  5  Xb .,  ch.  iii.  e  16.,  ch.  xxxvi.

7  16.,  ch.  xliii.  «  16.,  ch.  Ixxxi.  9  Ib..  ch.  Ixi.

10  Ib.,  ch.  lix.


116  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

revert  to  their  natural  simplicity.'  "l  But  not  only  is  the  govern
ment  of  the  clever  politician  a  "  scourge."  The  ordinary  virtues
are  really  stumbling-blocks  and  rocks  of  offence.  "  By  giving  up
their  self-righteousness  and  abandoning  their  wisdom  the  people
would  be  immensely  improved.  Forsaking  Charity  and  Duty
to  the  neighbour,  they  might  revert  to  their  natural  relations." 2
That  is  to  say,  each  should  cultivate  inward  perfection  and
entire  restraint — outward  active  virtues  are  a  poor  substitute  for
these.  When  Tao  is  lost  it  gives  place  to  virtue,  similarly  in  a
descending  scale  virtue  yields  to  benevolence,  benevolence  to
justice,  justice  to  expediency.3  In  this  excellent  passivity
certain  virtues  are  inculcated  in  their  most  ideal  form — humility,
universal  charity,  love  of  enemies :  "  The  wise  man  knows  no
distinctions  ;  he  beholds  all  men  as  things  made  for  holy  uses."  4
"  By  governing  the  people  with  love  it  is  possible  to  remain
unknown." 5  "  To  joy  in  conquest  is  to  joy  in  the  loss  of  human
life,"6  and  "whosoever  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted,
and  whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased." 7  The  doctrine
of  forgiveness  is  pushed  to  its  furthest  point:  "I  would  return
good  for  good.  I  would  also  return  good  for  evil.  ...  I  would
likewise  meet  suspicion  with  confidence."  8  And  though  wisdom
prescribes  passivity  this  is  not  from  selfishness,  for  "  the  wise  man
lives  .  .  .  with  modest  restraint,  and  his  heart  goes  out  in
sympathy  to  all  men."  9  He  is  inactive  because  this  is  the
method  of  true  happiness.  For  "  the  wise  man  is  a  constant  and
good  helper  of  his  fellows,"10  and  the  virtuous  man  acts
"  without  hope  of  reward."  n

Such  is  the  first  recorded  expression  of  the  full  doctrine  of
non-resistance — a  doctrine  which,  however  one-sided  and  in
applicable  to  the  affairs  of  men,  enshrines  the  profound  truth
that  moral  influence  is  distinct  from  and  superior  to  physical  com
pulsion;  that  force,  however  necessary  in  immediate  exigencies,
settles  nothing  in  the  end,  but  is  a  menace  to  the  moral  balance
of  the  society  and  of  the  individual  that  employ  it ;  that  men
are  capable  of  being  influenced,  not  only  by  retaliation,  but  also,

1  Old,  ch.  Ivii.  2  Ib.,  ch.  xix.  3  Ib.,  ch.  xxxviii.

*  Ib.,  ch.  v.  6  lh.,  ch.  x.  6  Ib.,  ch.  xxxi.

7  Ib.,  ch.  xxii.  8  16.,  ch.  xlix.  9  Ib.,  ch.  xlix.

10  Ib.,  ch.  xxvii.  ll  •*&•>  c"-  x-


THE  WORLD  AND  THE  SPIRIT  117

and  more  profoundly,  by  the  deliberate  refusal  to  retaliate.  The
system  of  Quietism  gave  an  extreme  expression  to  these  truths.
The  world  will  always  reject  its  ideas,  and  will  always  be
haunted  by  them  until  the  time  comes  when,  disregarding  the
extravagances  of  form  in  which  they  are  uttered,  it  begins  to  ask
itself  in  sober  earnestness  what  truth  they  contain.

Putting  aside  the  idiosyncrasies  of  different  doctrines  and
considering  only  the  ethical  teaching  of  the  spiritual  religions —
what  advances  and  what  limitations  do  we  find  ?  To  begin  with
— a  certain  ideal  of  character  is  preached  as  the  goal  of  man's
endeavours.  To  cultivate  the  best  within  himself  and  to  aid  others
in  the  same  work  is  the  means  to  salvation.  Human  character
which  in  the  lowest  stages  of  moral  thought  is  scarcely  ever
appreciated  as  a  condition  and  cause  of  actions,  is  now  a  distinct
object  of  activity,  an  end  and  aim  of  endeavour.  Next,  this  ideal
of  character  is  conceived  negatively  as  the  destruction  of  selfish
ness,  positively  as  the  exercise  of  universal  love.  Here,  again,
elements  which  exist  in  all  ethics  from  the  lowest  stage  upwards
are  separated  out  and  made  into  principles  ruling  conduct.  For
in  the  most  primitive  sense  of  duty  to  fellow-clansmen  there  is
something  of  love  and  something  of  unselfishness,  and  something
of  the  surrender  of  one's  own  desires  and  ways  of  thinking  and
personal  pride.  But  these  social  centripetal  qualities  that  tend
to  bind  men  together  are  inextricably  intertwined  with  the  fierce
resentments,  the  pride  of  family  or  race,  the  antagonisms  which
break  up  human  fellowship  and  keep  men  apart.  Hence  the
group-morality  of  early  times  that  we  have  described.  Now  in
this  higher  stage  of  religion  and  ethics  we  see  the  socially-con
structive  qualities  distinguished  and  idealized  and  recognized  as
the  source  of  human  salvation.  And  yet  so  roundabout  is  the
path  of  human  advance,  in  the  very  act  and  fact  of  being  so
idealized,  their  character  as  social  qualities,  their  usefulness  in
organizing  society,  are  in  large  measure  annulled.  They  are  con
ceived  as  being  best  cultivated  apart  from  ordinary  human  ties,
and  as  the  foundation  of  a  monastic  brotherhood  rather  than  of
a  living  human  society.  Their  negative  side  is  emphasized.
Self-negation  is  made  more  prominent  than  active  kindness  and
love.  Universal  benevolence  is  held  incompatible  with  the
passionate  personal  love  of  woman  and  of  child.  The  practice


118  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

of  ideal  virtues  seems  too  hard  for  the  householder  and  the  man
of  affairs.  Those  very  qualities  which  should  refine  the  world
are  thought  to  be  soiled  by  the  world.  Self-surrender  and
universal  love — the  two  pillars  of  the  higher  ethics — are  set  up,
but  they  are  left  standing  in  a  void.


CHAPTER  IV

MONOTHEISM

1.  To  the  western  world  spiritual  religion  is  familiar  mainly
in  the  form  of  the  worship  of  one  God,  the.  creator  and  sustainer
of  all  that  is.  If  we  conceive  this  form  of  belief  as  developing
out  of  polytheism  we  may  find  approximations  to  it  by  several
distinct  paths.  There  is,  first,  the  exaltation  of  one  God  as  king
over  the  rest,  which  will  only  lead  to  monotheism  if  the  lesser
deities  become  degraded  to  some  lower  plane  of  being.  There
is,  secondly,  the  identification  of  all  the  gods  with  some  one,  an
example  of  which  has  been  seen  in  the  Vedas.  This  is  a
natural  effect  of  the  feeling  of  worship,  but  it  is  checked
in  its  development  by  the  tendency  to  apply  it  to  each  god
in  turn,  the  result  of  which  is  that  no  single  god  obtains  a
definite  and  permanent  supremacy.  There  is  another  and
more  subtle  variant  of  this  process  wherein  the  several  gods  of
mythology  come  to  be  regarded  as  manifestations  of  an  under
lying  force,  principle,  or  spirit,  which  is  the  sole  reality — a  line
of  development  which  leads  rather  towards  Pantheism  than
towards  Monotheism  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  There  is,
lastly,  the  line  of  development  which  lies  through  the  exclusive
worship  of  one  national  god.  This  is  the  path  through  Mono-
latry  to  Monotheism,  which  was  trodden  in  particular  by  the
Jews.  The  Yahveh  of  early  Judaism  was  not  the  one  God,  as
we  understand  the  term,  but  was  the  only  God  whom  it  was
lawful  for  the  Jews  to  worship.  Yahveh  was  the  God  of  Israel,
just  as  Chemosh  was  the  God  of  Moab.  To  each  people,  in
Jephthah's  view,  their  god  has  given  their  land,  and  this  gift  is

119


120  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

their  title  thereto.1  The  worship  of  Yahveh  is  properly  con
fined  to  the  soil  of  Canaan.  To  be  driven  thence  is  to  be
compelled  to  serve  other  gods.2  Even  in  Deuteronomy,  the
First  Commandment  does  not  deny  the  existence  of  other  gods,
but  forbids  their  being  worshipped  "before  Me"  or  "beside  Me."8
Indeed  the  Hosts  of  Heaven  were  in  reality  gods  appointed  by
Yahveh  Himself  for  the  protection  of  the  nations  of  the  work!.
They  were  Gods,  but  God  Himself  sat  supreme  in  the  congre
gation  of  gods,  and  while  He  had  divided  the  lower  gods  among
all  the  peoples  under  heaven,  He  had  reserved  the  direct  wor
ship  of  Himself  alone  for  the  children  of  Israel.4  Even  when
God  controls  the  whole  upper  earth,  His  writ  does  not  at  first
run  in  the  under  world;  "Shall  the  pit  give  thanks  unto  Thee,
or  shall  it  declare  Thy  truth  ? "  It  is  a  late  Psalm  which  says  :
"  If  I  climb  up  into  heaven  Thou  art  there,  if  I  go  down
into  hell  Thou  art  there  also."5  The  oneness  of  God  and  His
supremacy  over  the  whole  earth  are  ideas  which  arose  compara
tively  late  in  Hebrew  thought,  and  are  consequences  rather  than
causes  of  a  changed  conception  of  His  character.  If  Monotheism
is  taught— though  indeed  the  teaching  is  implied  rather  than
distinctly  avowed— in  the  prophets  before  the  exile,  it  is  because
with  them  the  spirituality  of  Yahveh,  His  indifference  to  sacri
fice  and  His  love  of  righteousness  are  always  first  and  foremost.
It  is  His  unique  character  which  makes  Him  the  one  and  only
God.  God  is  not  the  Ideal  Being  because  He  is  One,  but  is  One
because  He  is  the  Ideal  Being,  the  impersonation  of  the  moral

1  Judges  xi.  24. "Wilt  thou  not  possess  that  which  Chemosh  thy  god
giveth  thee  to  possess  ? So  whomsoever  the  Lord  our  God  hath  dis
possessed  from  before  us,  them  will  we  possess." The  power  of  Chemosh
seems  implicitly  recognized  in  2  Kings  iii.  27. Cf.  Montefiore,  Hibbert
Lectures,  p.  35.

2  Montefiore,  ib. 1  Samuel  xxvi.  19. Apparently  this  is  the  reason  why
Naaman  begs  two  mules'  burdens  of  earth  of  Elisha,  "for  thy  servant  will
henceforth  offer  neither  burnt  offering  nor  sacrifice  unto  other  gods,  but
unto  the  Lord/' (2  Kings  v.  17.)  These  must  be  offered  on  Canaanitish  soil.

1  K.V.  marginal  rendering,  Deut.  v.  7.

«  Deut.  iy.  19.  Cf.  Driver,  Deut.,  pp.  70,  71.  Here  monolatry  fuses  with
the  conception  of  a  chief  god.  Yet  in  the  very  same  chapter  we  find  a
different  thought,  the  thought  achieved  with  difficulty  by  the  prophets.
The  gods  of  the  nations  are  idols,  "the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood
stone,  which  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  eat,  nor  smell."  (Deut  iv.  28  )
Parallel  passages  are  given  by  Driver,  p.  73.

c  The  same  idea,  however,  as  Dr.  Carpenter  points  out  to  me,  is  expressed
by  as  early  a  writer  as  Amos  (ix.  2).


MONOTHEISM  121

law. This  is  widely  removed  from  the  primitive conception.
The earlier  Yahveh had  a well-defined human personality.
He  walks  in  the  garden  of  Eden  in  the  cool  of  the  evening.
He  smells  the  sweet  savour  of  Noah's .  sacrifice  and  declares
that  He  will  never  again  curse  the  ground  for  man's  sake. He
is  not  wholly  without  fear  of  the  men  that  He  has  made. They
may  obtain  too  much  power. Adam  "  is  become  one  of  Us."
When  men  have  all  one  language  they  attempt,  like  the  giants
who  piled  Pelion  on  Ossa,  to  build  a  tower  that  will  reach  to
heaven,  "  and  now  nothing  will  be  withholden  from  them  which
they  purpose  to  do." "  So  the  Lord,"  having  confounded  their
language, "scattered  them  abroad upon  the  face  of  all the
earth."  l He  has  not  always  a  human  shape. He  can  appear
in  a  thick  darkness  or  in  a  burning  bush. Sometimes  He  seems
to dwell among the  cherubims of  the  ark. Sometimes  He
almost  seems  identical  with  the  ark  itself.2 He  is  in  magic
fashion  dangerous  to  His  worshippers. To  touch  the  ark,  or
"  to  break  through  unto  the  Lord  to  gaze  "  3  was  fatal. In  other
accounts  He  lives  on  Mount  Seir  and  comes  forth  thence  to
battle. Afterwards  He  chooses  Mount  Sion  for  His  habitation,
and  from  Sion  the  prophet  Amos  declares  that  He  would  roar
and  utter  His  voice  from  Jerusalem.4

As  a  human  personality  He  is  half  a  barbaric  chief,  half  an
Oriental  despot,  superhuman  like  the  gods  of  Polytheism,
because  greater  and  more  powerful  than  man,  but  no  ideal  as  to
His  moral  attributes ;  a  jealous  God,  as  He  describes  Himself,
capable  of  punishing  the  children  for  the  fathers,  according  to
the  barbaric  principle  of  collective  responsibility ;  frequently  on
the  point  of  doing  rash  things,  from  which  Moses,  His  Grand
Vizier,  with  difficulty  restrains  Him — asking  Him  to  consider
what  people  will  say,  and  representing  that  if  He  destroys  His
nation,  others  will  ascribe  it  not  to  His  want  of  will,  but  to  His
want  of  power  to  preserve  them.5  He  is  certainly  from  the  first

1  Genesis  xi.  6-8.  2  See  Montefiore,  p.  42.

3  Exodus  xix.  21. Of.  Montefiore,  p.  39.  4  Amos  i.  2.

5  See  the  dialogue  between  God  and  Moses,  Numbers  xiv.  11-25.  God
having  declared  that  He  will  smite  the  people,  Moses  replies,  "  Then  the
Egyptians  shall  hear  it "...  and  "  the  nations  which  have  heard  the  fame  of
Thee  will  speak,  saying,  Because  the  Lord  was  not  able  to  bring  this  people
into  the  land  which  He  sware  unto  them,  therefore  He  hath  slain  them  in
the  wilderness."


122  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

the  God  of  Righteousness  in  the  sense  that  He  is  the  source  and
upholder  of  the  law.  But  it  is  the  law  of  a  barbaric  people,  and
a  warlike  race— a  law  with  all  the  features  of  early  group-
morality,  and  with  some  of  them  unpleasingly  exaggerated.
Yahveh  is  a  man  of  war.  He  allows  and  even  insists  on  the
total  destruction  of  the  Canaanites.  Agag  is  put  to  death
before  Him.  His  favoured  David  smites  every  male  in  Edom,
and  puts  the  men  of  Rabbah  under  saws  and  harrows  of  iroo.1
His  code  recognizes  the  blood  feud,  vengeance  for  unintentional
homicide,  and  vicarious  responsibility.  But  if  barbaric,  the  code
has,  as  we  have  seen  in  detail,  many  of  the  best  features  of  early
morality.  A  strong  sense  of  social  solidarity  is  shown  in  the
care  taken  for  the  cause  of  the  poor,  the  fatherless  and  the
widow,  in  the  prohibition  of  usury,  in  the  protection  of  the
Hebrew  slave  and  concubine,  in  the  cities  of  refuge  to  shelter
from  the  fury  of  the  avenger  of  blood.  The  ethics  of  early
Yahvism,  in  fact,  exhibit  group-morality  in  its  typical  form  with
its  best  as  well  as  some  of  its  worst  features  standing  out  in
strong  relief.

2.  Such  was  the  religion  which  was  transformed  by  the
labours  of  the  prophets  from  the  eighth  century  onwards  into  a
spiritual  worship  of  one  God,  the  creator  and  ruler  of  all  things,
the  God  of  social  justice,  of  mercy,  and  finally  of  love.  It  is  not
necessary  for  our  purpose  to  follow  the  steps  by  which  the  new
religious  ideal  was  slowly  and  painfully  acquired,  with  many
backslidings  and  reversions  to  lower  types  of  thought.  It  will
be  sufficient  to  point  out  the  leading  ideas  which  indicate  the
spirituality  of  the  new  religion.  The  first  of  these  both  in
point  of  time  and  perhaps  in  ethical  significance,  was  the  pro
test  against  the  belief  that  sacrifice  could  atone  for  sin.  This  is
the  ever-recurring  theme  of  the  older  prophets.  "  I  hate,  I
despise  your  feasts,  and  I  will  take  no  delight  in  your  solemn
assemblies.  Yea,  though  ye  offer  Me  your  burnt  offerings  and
meal  offerings,  I  will  not  accept  them  :  neither  will  I  regard  the
peace  offerings  of  your  fat  beasts.  .  .  .  But  let  judgment  roll
down  as  waters,  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty  stream." 2  So

1  2  Samuel  xii.  31. On  Yahvism  as  exemplified  in  the  story  of  David,
see  Kuenen,  Religion  of  Israel,  vol.  i.,  p.  326  ff.

2  Amos  v.  21.


MONOTHEISM  123

writes  the  first  of  the prophetic  line. Isaiah takes  up  the
-word — "To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude of  your  sacrifices
unto  Me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of
rams,  and  the  fat  of  fed  beasts ;  and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood
of  bullocks,  or  of  lambs,  or  of  he-goats."  x "  And  when  ye  spread
forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide  Mine  eyes  from  you :  yea,  when  ye
make  many  prayers,  I  will not  hear:  your  hands  are  full  of
blood. Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your
doings  from  before  Mine  eyes  ;  cease  to  do  evil :  learn  to  do  well :
seek  judgment, relieve the oppressed,  judge the fatherless,
plead  for  the  widow."2 This  is  the  first  lesson  of  spiritual
religion  which  finally  culminates  in  the  doctrine  that  God  is  a
Spirit,  and  they  who  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit
and  in  truth. In  the lowest  stage  of  ethical  thought  men
washed  away  their  sins  with  magic  purges  or  swore  them  off
with  incantation  formulas. In  the  next  stage  they  bargained
with  the  gods  and  offered  a  bull  or  ram,  or  in  extremity  their
own  children  to  make  up  for  their  iniquity. The  ethical  stage
proper  begins  when  these  childish  things  are  put  aside,  and  men
conceive God as caring neither  for gifts  nor  for  ceremonial
adulation,  but  for  repentance  and  change  of  heart.

A  spiritual  religion  must  be  a  religion  of  the  inner  man.
The  ceremonies  lose  their  magical  effect.  The  true  religious
mystery  is  found  in  what  passes  within  man's  mind.  "  Circum
cise  therefore  the  foreskin  of  your  heart,"  say  the  prophets  and
the  prophetic  code.3  Yet  in  the  older  prophets  it  is  rather
social  righteousness  and  social  salvation  than  the  justification
of  the  individual  that  occupy  the  first  place.  While  nearly  all
later  religions  have  appealed  in  the  first  instance  to  the  in
dividual  to  come  to  God  and  save  his  soul,  leaving  social
righteousness  to  a  secondary  place,  the  prophets,  innocent  as
yet  of  any  doctrine  of  resurrection,  believing  in  temporal  rewards
and  concerned  above  all  for  the  fate  of  Israel,  put  matters  in  a
different  order.  Their  righteousness  is  emphatically  a  social
righteousness.  We  can  trace  in  it  the  protest  of  a  just  and  wise
conservatism  against  the  so-called  progress  of  a  material  civili
zation  with  its  tendency  to  break  down  the  position  of  the

1  Isaiah  i.  11.  2  Loc.  cit.,  15-17. Cf.  Jer.  vii.  5,  etc.

3  Deut.  x.  16.


124

poorer  free  men  and  enslave  them  to  the  masters  of  wealth.
The  prophets'  teaching  was  hardly  yet  humanitarian.  It  was
rather  an  intensified  form  of  group-morality.  But  it  was  for
justice  and  equality,  forbearance  and  consideration,  as  between
all  members  of  the  group  constituted  as  such  by  God's  choice.
It  is  God's  people  who  are  being  oppressed.  "  What  mean  ye
that  ye  crush  My  people  and  grind  the  face  of  the  poor  ?  saith
the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  l  The  tyranny  of  the  monopolist
is  already  felt  and  denounced  with  a  power  that  has  never  been
surpassed.  "  Woe  unto  them  that  join  house  to  house,  that  lay
field  to  field,  till  there  be  no  room,  and  ye  be  made  to  dwell
alone  in  the  midst  of  the  land."  2  "  The  Lord  will  enter  into
judgment  with  the  elders  of  His  people  and  the  princes  thereof:
it  is  ye  that  have  eaten  up  the  vineyard  :  the  spoil  of  the  poor
is  in  your  houses."  3  All  the  vices  of  material  civilization,  wine-
bibbing  and  luxury,  feminine  vanity  and  ostentation,  are
denounced  in  the  same  strain,4  and  the  women  are  threatened
with  branding  instead  of  beauty,  and  instead  of  a  stomacher  a
girding  of  sackcloth.

These  were  not  empty  denunciations.  The  emancipation  of
slaves  in  the  sabbatical  year G  with  provision  to  enable  them  to
start  as  free  men,  the  prohibition  of  usury  in  dealing  with  fellow
Hebrews,  the  wiping  out  of  debts  in  the  sabbatical  year,  the
abolition  of  vicarious  punishment,  the  limitation  of  blood
revenge,  the  provision  for  the  fatherless  and  widows,  the
inculcation  of  humanity  to  slaves  male  and  female,  are  embodied
in  the  prophetic  code  and  represent  perhaps  the  earliest  conscious
effort  towards  systematic  social  reform,  marred  only  by  the
exclusive  religious  spirit,  which  still  (notwithstanding  the
concern  for  the  stranger  that  is  within  the  gates)  draws  a  deep
line  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  emphasizes  the  necessity  of
exterminating  the  heathen,  and  proscribes  the  heretic.  The
heads  of  the  code  are  summed  up  in  the  chapter  in  which
Ezekiel  repudiates  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  responsibility.

1  Isaiah  iii.  15.  2  isaiah  v.  g.

1  Isaiah  iii.  14.  4  Ib.  16-26  ;  v.  8-12.

6  I  have  referred  above  (Vol.  I.,  Chap  vii.)  to  Jeremiah's  account  of
the  attempts  to  enforce  this  rule  (Jeremiah  xxxiv.  8  ff.).  The  writer  of
Isaiah  Iviii.  6,  insists  on  letting  the  oppressed  go  free,  presumably  meaning
the  emancipation  of  slaves.


MONOTHEISM  125

"  But  if  a  man  be  just,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  and
hath  not  eaten  upon  the  mountains,  neither  hath  lifted  up  his  eyes
to  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  neither  hath  denied  his  neighbour's
wife,  neither  hath  come  near  to  a  woman  in  her  separation ;  and
hath  not  wronged  any,  but  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge,
hath  spoiled  none  by  violence,  hath  given  his  bread  to  the  hungry,
and  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  garment ;  he  that  hath  not
given  forth  upon  usury,  neither  hath  taken  any  increase,  that  hath
withdrawn  his  hand  from  iniquity,  hath  executed  true  judgment
between  man  and  man,  hath  walked  in  My  statutes,  and  hath  kept
My  judgments,  to  deal  truly ;  he  is  just,  he  shall  surely  live,  saith
the  Lord  God."  *

For  a  reformed  and  renovated Israel  the  prophets  at  first

foresaw  a  reward  of  inner  peace  and  prosperity. But  as  troubles

thickened  around  them  they  began  to  feel  that  suffering  might

have  anecessity  and  a  value  of  its  own. God's  servant  is  "  despised

and rejected  of men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with

grief: and as one from  whom  men  hide  their face he was

despised,  and  we  esteemed  him  not." It  is  the  destiny  of  the

teacher  to  bear  the  burden  of  the  world's  folly  and  sin  and  to

bear  it  with  nothing  but  contempt  for  his  reward. '  Surely  he

hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows  :  yet  we  did  esteem

him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But  he was

wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  :

the  chastisement of  our peace  was  upon  him;  and  with  his

stripes  we  are  healed."  2 His  methods  are  those  of  gentleness

and  peace. "  He  shall  not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to

be  heard  in  the  street. A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and

the  smoking  flax  shall he  not  quench  :  he  shall bring  forth

judgment  in  truth."3 He  bears  his  sufferings  in  silence and

humility. "He was oppressed, yet he humbled himself

and opened not his mouth; as  a  lamb  that is  led to  the

slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  that  before  her  shearers  is  dumb ;  yea,

he  opened  not  his  mouth."  4 Thus  by  a  very  different  road  and

with  much  difference  of  implied  meaning,  we  are  reaching  the

Buddhist  doctrine  of  renunciation  and  humility — those  cardinal

points  of  spiritualized  religion.

i  Ezekiel  xviii.  5-9.  2  Isaiah  liii.  4,  5.

3  Isaiah  xlii.  2,  3.  4  Isaiah  liii.  7.


126  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

Further,  in  proportion  as  Yahveh  became  the  God  of  the
whole  earth  the  old  group-morality  was  compelled  to  yield  in  a
measure  to  Universalism.  The  warrior's  song  is  changed  to  a
prophecy  of  peace.  "And  He  shall  judge  between  the°  nations,
and  shall  reprove  many  peoples :  and  they  shall  beat  their  swords
into  plowshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruninghooks :  nation
shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn
war  any  more."  l  In  its  cruder  form  the  idea  was  that  other
nations  should  take  their  teaching  from  Jerusalem.2  Vengeance
moreover  is  still  freely  denounced  on  public  enemies.  "The
Assyrian  .  .  .  shall  flee  from  the  sword  and  his  young  men
shall  become  tributary." 3  The  exilic  writers  declare  that  the
children  of  Babylon  shall  be  dashed  against  the  stones.4  But
though  national  redemption  and  glory  are  still  prominent  we
reach  a  higher  phase  in  the  conception  of  a  redeemed  Israel  which
is  to  evangelize  the  world.5  Unfortunately  the  experiences  of  the
Exile  and  return  were  not  favourable  to  the  further  development
of  thought  along  these  lines,  and  there  is  a  certain  reaction
towards  exclusive  particularism  in  the  Priestly  Code.6  Judaism
feared  to  lose  itself  in  the  great  world  from  which  it  was  separated
by  no  political  barrier,  and  it  sought  safety  in  drawing  its  skirts
closely  round  it,  and  even  avoiding  all  contact  with  the  unclean.
One  of  the  noblest  traits  of  Monotheism  was  thus  corrupted.
Universalism  survived  only  in  kindness  to  the  stranger  and
in  the  effort  to  proselytize,  and  even  this  was  a  matter  of
controversy.7  Nor  was  the  question  finally  determined  within
the  limits  of  Judaism  itself,  nor  until  the  age  of  Paul.

Yet  the  unity  and  omnipresence  and  goodness  of  God  are  by
this  time  established.  The  early  prophets  do  not  hesitate  to
attribute  vengeance  and  even  deceit  to  Yahveh.  "Shall  evil
befall  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  "  Amos  asks.8  In

1  Isaiah  ii.  4. Dr.  Carpenter  informs  me  that  the  passage  is  now  gener
ally  regarded  as  post-exilic.

2  Zech.  viii.  2U-23.  3  Tcain.]i  YYYI S

. T . ,  ...  JLBCUiUl JlAXl. O.

Isaiah  xm.  16. Of.  Psalm  cxxxvii.  9.

5  Montefiore,  pp.  273-277. Yet  Cyrus  is  also  God's  instrument

6  Ib.,  p.  340.

7  That  is  to  say,  so  far  as  the  official  religion  is  concerned The  univer-
sahst  tendency  is  maintained  in  some  of  the  Psalms  and  in  the  Wisdom
literature.

8  Amos  iii.  6.


MONOTHEISM  127

the  second  Isaiah  God  declares  that  it  is  He  who  makes  peace
and  creates  evil.1  This  belongs,  no  doubt,  to  the  conception  of
divine  punishment  for  transgression.  It  is  going  a  step  further,
however,  when  Ezekiel  maintains  that  in  punishment  for  the
idolatry  of  the  people  God  gave  them  statutes  which  were  not
good  and  judgments  wherein  they  should  not  live.  At  a  later
stage,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  the  authorship  of  evil  imputed
to  Satan.  In  the  Chronicles  it  is  he,  not  Yahveh,  who  incites
David  to  the  numbering  of  the  people.  If  in  this  we  trace  the
influence  of  Zoroastrian  ideas  we  may  recognize  also  an  attempt
to  keep  pure  the  notion  of  God's  goodness  and  to  separate  Him
from  all  responsibility  for  sin  and  suffering.  God's  unity  and
omnipresent  power  are  no  less  distinct  than  His  righteousness.
Jeremiah  already  puts  the  question,  "  Am  I  a  God  at  hand  and
not  a  God  afar  off?" — a  question  to  which  more  primitive
worshippers  would  have  returned  a  very  doubtful  answer.  "  Do
I  not  fill  heaven  and  earth  ? " 2  After  the  exile,  though  God
still  in  some  sense,  symbolical  or  other,  dwells  in  Sion  and  is
certainly  in  a  peculiar  sense  the  God  of  Israel,  yet  there  is  no
more  talk  of  separation  from  Him,  whether  by  exile  or  by
death.  "  If  I  climb  up  into  heaven,  Thou  art  there  ;  if  I  go
down  into  hell,  Thou  art  there  also."  God  was  the  creator  and
father  of  all,  though  all  men  were  not  yet  brothers.

Such  was  the  adolescence  of  Monotheism.  We  have  now  to
deal  with  its  full  development  and  endeavour  to  measure  its
main  contributions  to  ethical  thought,  that  is  to  say,  to  the
guidance  of  life.

3.  The  central  idea  of  Ethical  Monotheism  admits  of  a  short
and  simple  statement.  There  is  one  God  only,  the  Maker  of
heaven  and  earth.  He  is  a  Personal  God,  and  in  His  personality
there  is  a  touch  of  kinship  with  our  human  nature.  But  He
does  not,  like  the  gods  of  polytheism,  differ  from  us  merely  in
being  greater,  wiser,  and  more  powerful.  He  is  not — when  the
adolescence  of  Monotheism  is  past — a  mere  magnified  man.

1  Isaiah  xlv.  7.

2  Jeremiah  xxiii.  23-24. Yet  in  Ezekiel's  time,  people  remaining  in
Canaan  still  taunt  the  exiles  with  being  "  far  from  Yahveh,"  and  boast
"unto  us  is  Yahveh's  land  given." (Montefiore,  p.  207,  citing  Ezekiel  xi.  15.)


128

For  man  is  finite  and  He  is  infinite,  eternal,  without  beginning
or  end  of  days,  the  source  and  sustaining  cause  of  all  that  is.
Again,  man  is  of  composite  nature  and  therefore  corrupt.  God
is  pure  Spirit,  and  the  spiritual  is  now  the  comprehensive
expression  for  the  highest  and  best  that  is  known  to  man.  It  is
defined  negatively  by  opposition  to  the  earthly,  positively  by
the  exaltation  of  morality  into  perfect  purity  of  heart.  God  is  a
Spirit,  and  His  communion  with  men  is  spiritual.  They  that
worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit,  and  forms  and  cere
monies  are  naught  without  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace  given
unto  us  in  them.  As  the  Eternal  Spirit  God  is  the  founder  and
sustainer  of  the  Ethical  order,  He  punishes  the  wicked  and
rewards  the  good,  and  yet — again  except  in  the  crassest  appre
hension — goodness  cannot  be  assumed  for  the  sake  of  the
reward,  for  so  it  would  not,  spiritually  considered,  be  goodness.
What  must  win  God  is  the  genuine  turning  of  the  heart  to
Him,  a  faith  in  Him,  which  is  also  in  the  highest  monotheism
a  love  for  Him  from  whom  flows  love  to  man,  and  in  this  love  is
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  human  virtue.  Finally,  though
man's  corruption  separates  him  by  a  great  gulf  from  the  infinite
perfection  of  God,  yet  with  a  mercy  that  equals  His  justice  God
has  Himself  appointed  means  whereby  the  gulf  may  be  spanned
and  forgiveness  of  sins  obtained.

This  comparatively  simple  conception  in  which  the  ethical
and  the  religious  fuse,  which  provides  at  once  for  the  govern
ment  of  the  universe  and  the  entire  direction  of  human  life,
expresses  what  religion  has  in  essence  meant  to  great  numbers
of  devout  souls.  But  the  conception  could  not  maintain  itself
in  so  simple  a  form.  At  every  point  it  bristles  with  theoretical
difficulties,  to  meet  which  great  structures  of  dogma  have  been
erected,  modified,  and  replaced  by  others,  as  the  needs  of  con
troversy  have  determined.  Nor  was  the  shape  taken  by  dogma
determined  by  the  pure  monotheistic  idea  alone,  but  in  large
measure  by  the  particular  contents  of  the  historical  documents
in  which  the  monotheistic  system  was  revealed.  We  have  to
note  the  fundamental  points  in  which  the  building  up  of  dogma
affected  ethics.

First  as  to  the  nature  of  God  and  His  relation  to  the  world,


MONOTHEISM  129

monotheism  in  all  its  forms  appears  to  be  agreed  that  He  is  the
uncreated,  unconditioned  creator  and  sustainer  of  all  things.

"He  is  God  alone  !
God  the  Eternal !

He  begets  not  and  is  not  begotten  !
Nor  is  there  like  unto  Him  any  one  ! " l

But  for  one  clause  this  Mohammedan  hymn  of  unity  might  be
sung  with  equal  fervour  by  the  Christian.  So  again  another
passage : —

"God,  there  is  no  God  but  He,  the  living,  the  self-subsistent.
Slumber  takes  Him  not,  nor  sleep.  He  is  what  is  in  the  heavens
and  what  is  in  the  earth.  Who  is  it  that  intercedes  with  Him,  save
by  His  permission  1  He  knows  what  is  before  them  and  what
behind  them,  and  they  comprehend  not  aught  of  His  knowledge  but
of  what  He  pleases.  His  throne  extends  over  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  and  it  tires  Him  not  to  guard  them  both,  for  He  is  high  and
grand." 2

God  is  the  creator  and  sustainer  of  things.  But  according  as
emphasis  is  laid  on  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  descriptions,
divergent  views  of  His  relation  to  the  world  come  into  being.
As  creator  He  makes  the  world  out  of  nothing,  and  He  makes
man  in  His  image.  He  endows  His  creatures  with  existence  and
they  become  in  a  manner  separate  from  Him.  If  pressed  hard
this  conception  militates  against  God's  infinitude.  Man  and  the
world  are  separate  from  Him,  and  in  so  far  as  they  have  inde
pendent  existences  must  be  held  to  limit  Him.  He  is  no  longer
all  that  is.  Upon  this  line  of  thought  He  becomes  a  Ruler,  all-
powerful  no  doubt,  but  still  an  outside  power  acting  upon  this
earthy  existence.  On  the  other  hand,  as  Sustainer  of  all  that
is  His  relation  to  the  world  becomes  more  intimate.  It  is
only  in  Him  that  things  have  existence.  His  will  alone  is
the  cause  of  all  that  happens.  He  alone  has  independent

1  The  Chapter  of  Unity. The  Koran, vol.  ii.,ch.  112  (Palmer's  Trans.).

8  Koran,  ch.  ii.  (Palmer's  Trans.,  vol.  i.,  p.  40).  These  passages  express
God's  power  rather  than  His  love  and  other  moral  qualities.  But  these
appear  in  their  place.  Palmer  finds  ninety-nine  epithets  of  God  in  the
Koran,  including  The  Merciful,  Ruler,  Holy,  Peace,  Faithful,  Protector,
Mighty,  Creator,  Forgiver,  Provider,  Knowing,  Honourer,  Destroyer,
Hearer,  Seer,  Judge,  Justice,  Subtle,  Aware,  Forgiving,  Exalted,  Generous,
Answerer  of  Prayer,  Comprehensive,  Wise,  Loving,  Glorious,  Truth,  Sub
sisting,  Eternal,  the  First,  the  Last,  Righteousness,  the  Relenting,  Kind,
Lord  of  Majesty  and  Liberality,  Equitable,  Patient.

VOL.  II.  K


130  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

existence  and  the  things  of  the  world  exist  only  by  partici
pation  in  Him.1  This  line  of  thought,  it  is  clear,  is  bringing
us  close  to  Pantheism,  and  though  thinkers  as  orthodox  as
Thomas  Aquinas  have  made  no  small  advances  in  that  direc
tion,  the  centre  of  gravity  of  monotheistic  dogma  lies  nearer  to
the  creationist  conception.  God  made  the  world,  but  He  is  not
the  world  :  He  made  man,  but  is  not  man.  In  so  far  His  Being
is  limited.  He  is  transcendent,  not  immanent.

4.  So  far  the  interest  is  speculative  rather  than  ethical.
Whichever  view  is  taken  the  unconditional  omnipotence  of
God  at  the  outset  is  assumed.  But  with  this  assumption  the
problem  of  evil  at  once  becomes  urgent,  and  we  touch  the  very
heart  of  all  ethico-religious  theory.  The  Platonic  doctrine  that
God  is  good,  and  as  good  can  be  the  author  of  no  evil,  may  be
regarded  as  the  corner-stone  of  all  ethical  religion.  How  was
this  to  be  fitted  in  with  the  dogma  of  omnipotence  which
monotheism  had  accepted  ?  Broadly  speaking,  there  were  two
possible  methods.  The  first  was  to  deny  the  reality  of  evil,  the
second  was  to  insist  on  the  absolute  right  of  the  Creator  to  do
what  He  would  with  His  own.  Both  explanations  have  held  an
important  place  in  dogma.  According  to  Augustine  evil  has  no
positive  and  substantial  existence.  It  is  only  "  a  privation  of
good,"  2  or,  by  a  swift  change  of  thought,  it  is  the  dark  colour
that  throws  up  the  light.  "  For  as  a  picture  with  dark  colour,
set  in  its  proper  place,  is  fair,  so  is  the  universe  of  things,  if  one
can  behold  it,  even  with  its  sinners,  though  they,  considered  by
themselves,  are  stained  by  their  own  ugliness." '  It  is  well  to
remark  that  these  two  views  are  in  essence  quite  opposed.  In
the  one,  evil  has  no  positive  character.  It  is  a  void,  where  good
might  be,  but  is  not.  In  the  other,  there  are  things  or  persons
that  are  evil  in  themselves— evil  is  so  far  positive ;  but  their
badness  when  viewed  in  connection  with  the  whole  scheme  of
things  is  held  to  have  a  good  effect— a  function  to  perform
whereby  the  picture  as  a  whole  is  made  more  fair.

1  "  Participatione  ejus,  qui  solum  per  se  ipsum  est." Thomas  quoted  in
Harnack,  Histoi-y  of  Dogma,  E.  T.,  vol.  vi.,  p.  184.

2  De  CimtateDei^.  xi.,ch.  22.  "Cum  ommno  natura  nulla  sit  malum,
nomenque  hoc.  non  sit  uisi  privationis  boni."

a  Ib.  ch.  23.


MONOTHEISM  131

The  optimistic  doctrine  that  the  evil  of  the  world  is  merely
the  dark  colour  which  serves  to  show  up  the  bright  would  be
tenable  upon  two  hypotheses. If  evil  and  good  were  so  dis
tributed  that  physical  suffering,  external  calamities  and  moral
wrong-doing  played  an  essential  part  in  the  growth  of  each
personality,  and  could  be  shown  to  tend  ultimately  to  its  greater
perfection,  the  existence  of  evil  would  be  reconcilable  with  a
divine  justice  which  should  take  every  personality  into  account
Equally,  if  personality  were  left  wholly  out  of  account,  it  might
beoretically  maintainable  that  the  unequal  distribution  of
evil  in  the  world  was  a  matter  of  no  moment,  provided  that  the
3  scheme  of  things  be  allowed  to  be  sound  at  the  core
The  second  alternative  was  not  possible  for  any  system  which
took  account  of  personality  at  all. In  particular,  so  far as
?ards  moral  evil,  it  was  not  open  to  Christian  apologists,  who
the  one  hand,  maintained  the  infinite  value  of  the  individual
soul,  and,  on  the  other,  visited  the  reprobate  with  the  prospect
)f  eternal  punishment. Evil  which  involves  eternal  suffering  as
! punishment, cannot be dismissed as something  merely
negative,  nor  yet  accepted  as  a  mere  incident  in  the  working
t  of  a  higher  order-that  is  to  say,  it  cannot  be  so  accepted
by those who maintain the inherent worth of  personality
Hence  theologians  are  driven  back  on  a  second  line  of  defence
iey  admit  the  evil  will  to  exist,  but  they  seek  to  exonerate  the
Deity  for  responsibility  for  its  existence. The  simplest  method
of  such  exoneration  is  that  of  Pelagius,  which  makes  the  salva-
lon  of  man  depend  upon  his  own  choice,  that  choice  not  bein«-
conceived  as  predetermined  by  God. Free  will,  thus  under!
stood  however  is  clearly  a  limitation  of  the  divine  omnipotence,
and  theology,  Christian  and  Mohammedan  alike,  has  often  been
riven  to  prefer  the  opposite  alternative  of  limiting  the  responsi
bility  of  man  rather  than  the  knowledge  and  authority  of  God
Yet  this  alternative  raises  many  problems,  some  of  them  of
grave  ethical  import. In  the  first  place,  how  does  the  evil  will
:ome  into  existence? Augustine  is clear  that  a  good  God
cannot  create  a  bad  nature.' The  nature  of  the  wicked  angels
Bfore  was  intrinsically  good,'  and  "we  must believe  the

J  De  Cimtate  Dei,  bk.  xi.,  ch.  22,  23  ;  bk.  xii.,  ch.  1.

»*.,  xii.,  chs.  1  and  3. « Imjuantuin  naturae  sunt,  bonae  aunt."


132  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

providence  of  the  Creator  rather  than  be  so  rash  as  to  condemn
any  part  of  the  world's  fabric  of  any  imperfection."  *  The  nature
of  the  wicked  angels  being  good,  their  fall  arose  from  their  evil
will.  What  then,  we  naturally  ask,  was  the  cause  of  this  evil
will,  seeing  that  evil  was  not  in  their  own  nature  ?  The  answer
is  that  the  evil  will  has  no  cause.

"  Seek  the  cause  of  this  evil  will  and  you  shall  find  just  none,  for
what  can  cause  the  will's  evil,  the  will  being  sole  cause  of  all  evil-
'  Cum  ipsa  (voluntas)  faciat  opus  malum '-  -The  evil  will,  therefore,
causes  evil  works,  but  nothing  causes  the  evil  will." 2

But  at  this  point  we  are  at  once  brought  to  the  free-will

dilemma. Either  the  bad  will  must  have  an  origin  somewhere

in  that  structure  of  things  which  God  has  created,  or  it  must  be

a  force  arising  per  impossible  out  of  nothing,  which  the  Creator

does  not  control. It  may  be  said  that  He  does  not  control  it,

but  only  permits  it. This  does  not  offer  escape  from  the  dilemma,

either  that  it  is  a  force  arising  somehow  independently  of  Him,

or  that  His  permission  is  a  negative  condition  whereby  alone  this

force  can  have  any  effect. No  theory  of  responsibility  can,  from

the  ethical  point  of  view,  draw  any  serious  distinction  between

a  negative  and  a  positive  condition,  and  to  permit  evil,  in  the

plenitude  of  power  that  might  prevent  it,  is  all  one  with  the

doing  of  evil. In  point  of  fact,  Augustine's  own  argument,  when

looked  into,  tends  to  restore  the  omnipotence  of  God  along  with

His  responsibility ;  for  although  he  denies  that  the  evil  will  has

an  origin,  he  is  strenuous  in  maintaining  that  the  good  will  is

created,  and  here  he  refuses  to  make  any  distinction  between

the  will  and  the  being  to  whom  the  will  belongs,  for  he  argues,3

"  Seeing  that  the  angels  themselves  were  created,  how  can  their

wills  but  be  so  also  ? " It  might  be  retorted  that  if  this  argument

applies  to  the  good  angels,  it  applies  also  to  the  bad  ones. But,

further,  Augustine  himself  is  in  the  end  led  to  the  admission

that  the  difference  between  the  bad  and  the  good  will  rests  upon

i  De  Oimtate  Dei,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  4. The  free  rendering  of  the  old  trans
lator  J H The  Latin  is  :— "rectissime  credenda  prsocipitur  providentia
Conditoris  ne  tanti  artificis  opus  in  aliquo  reprehendere  vamtate  human
temeritatis  audeamus." ,„.„,_ T_  iV.  T  „*;„  ,r,e  last  words  are  :—


^

"  malse'autem  v'oluntatis  efficiens  est  nihil."
3  Ib.,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  9.


MONOTHEISM  133

the  choice  of  good,  and  the  choice  of  good  upon  the  grace  of  God.
Those  angels  "  that  were  created  good  and  yet  became  evil  by
their  proper  will  either  received  less  grace  from  the  divine  love
than  they  that  persisted  therein,  or  if  they,  had  equal  good  at
their  creation,  the  one  fell  by  the  evil  wills,  and  the  other,  having
further  help,  attained  that  bliss  from  which  they  were  sure  never
to  fall."1  At  this  point,  then,  the  whole  argument  becomes
consistent,  but  at  the  cost  of  deliberately  accepting  one  horn  of
the  dilemma.  The  good  will  is  good  because  he  who  exercises
it  has  a  greater  measure  of  grace ;  the  bad  will  is  bad  because
grace  does  not  sufficiently  abound.  This  is  in  essence  to  abandon
the  conception  of  the  bad  will  arising  uncaused,  as  a  force  external
to  the  providence  of  God,  and  to  maintain  the  superintendence
of  God  throughout;  but  it  is  also,  by  a  logical  necessity,  to
constitute  God  the  ultimate  author  of  the  moral  depravity  of  the
wicked  angels,  and,  on  the  same  argument,  of  wicked  man.2  In
fact,  the  determination  to  hold  by  the  omnipotence  of  God  at  all
costs  led  inevitably  to  the  doctrine  of  predestination,  for  if  God
knows  all  things  from  the  first,  how  can  He  but  know  the  fate  of
those  whom  He  is  about  to  create  or  whom  He  may  create  at  any
future  time,  and  if  He  creates  them,  knowing  their  fate,  what
theory  of  responsibility  can  be  invented  which  shall  take  the  burden
of  their  fate  off  Him  ?  True,  their  reprobation  may  still  be  regarded
as  the  consequence  of  their  own  wickedness.  But  wickedness  also
is  foreknown  by  God,  and  though  that  wickedness  issues  from  the
will  of  each  individual,  yet  precisely  the  same  argument  applies  to
the  will  itself ;  that  also  is  foreknown  and  foreappointed.  Thus,
though  by  various  dialectical  compromises  theologians  may  still
endeavour  to  attribute  foreknowledge  of  sin  without  responsi
bility  for  sin,  the  far  more  logical  consequence  is  that  drawn  by
Calvin  when  he  declares  that  those  "  whom  God  passes  by  He

1  De  Civitate  Dei,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  9. J.  H.'s  Trans.

2  Augustine  attempts  to  escape  from  the  positive  character  of  the  evil
will  by treating  it  as  a deficiency  in  goodness (xii.  7). The  want  of
sufficiently  good  will  does  not  touch  the  question  of  responsibility. If  one
person's  will  is  adequate  to  maintain  the  goodness  of  his  nature  while
another  person's  will  fails  in  that  respect,  the  difference  must  be  due  to  one
of  two  causes. The  want  of  will  in  the  man  who  becomes  bad  is  either
something  that  arises  independently  without  the  appointment  of  God,  or  it
is  something  which  God  foresees  and  appoints,  and  we  are  back  in  precisely
the  old  dilemma.


134  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

reprobates,  and  from  no  other  cause  than  His  determination  to
exclude  them."  1  And  again,  "I  inquire  again, how  it  came  to  pass
that  the  fall  of  Adam,  independent  of  any  remedy,  should  involve
so  many  nations  with  their  infant  children  in  eternal  death,  but
because  such  was  the  will  of  God.  ...  It  is  an  awful  decree,  I
confess ;  but  no  one  can  deny  that  God  foreknew  the  future  final
fate  of  man  before  He  created  him,  and  that  He  did  foreknow  it
because  it  was  appointed  by  His  own  decree."2  As  to  the  distinc
tion  between  will  and  permission  Calvin  admits  that  it  is  nugatory.
"  What  reason  shall  we  assign  for  His  permitting  it,  but  because
it  is  His  will  ? "  Thus,  the  strict  insistence  upon  the  omnipo
tence  of  God  led  theologians,  in  proportion  to  their  logical
courage,  to  a  doctrine  which  did  not  indeed  abolish  the  human
will,  because  the  will  was  the  instrument  through  which  God
worked,  but  which  did  place  upon  God  the  final  responsibility
for  all  that  exists  in  this  world  and  all  that  man  does  therein,
and  all  that  in  consequence  man  shall  enjoy  or  suffer  hereafter.
And  this,  in  accordance  with  views  held  to  be  derived  from  the
original  revelation — though  utterly  repugnant  to  the  true  spirit
of  Christianity — involved  among  other  things  the  eternal  suffer
ing  in  unspeakable  torments  of  the  vast  majority  of  mankind,  of
that  mankind  for  whose  benefit  in  the  main  God  was  nevertheless
held  to  have  created  the  world.

If  we  would  know  the  ethical  principle  by  which  this  scheme
of  things  can  be  justified,  we  can  again  turn  to  the  logical
Calvin,  in  whom  we  find  the  consequences  most  thoroughly
pushed  home.  We  merit  punishment  because  we  are  corrupted
by  sin,  and  if  it  be  replied  that  God  has  made  us  corrupt,  the
answer  is  that  the  potter  has  power  over  the  vessel.  And  it  is
not  a  question  of  power  alone.  God  is  the  supreme  judge  of  the
world,  and  the  supreme  judge,  from  whom  issue  all  law  and  all
right,  can  do  no  injustice.  That  is  just,  in  short,  which  God
wills,  and  if  He  determined  at  the  outset  upon  the  fall  of  man,
it  was  because  He  foresaw  it  would  tend  to  the  justification  and
glory  of  His  Name.3  With  the  admission  that  in  order  to

1  Calvin,  ii.,  p.  141.  2  Ib.,  p.  147.

8  Ib.,  pp.  142-148.

At  this  point  in  theological  development  we  come  by  a  long  round  to
the  arbitrariness  of  the  Mohammedan  Deity.  "God's  is  what  is  in  Heaven  and
in  the  earth,  and  if  ye  show  what  is  in  your  souls,  or  hide  it,  God  will  call


MONOTHEISM  135

understand  the  justice  of  the  scheme  of  God  we  must  understand
Him  to  constitute  justice  as  suits  Him,  we  have,  in  point  of  fact,
passed  outside  the  range  of  human  ethics.  We  have  admitted  that
ethical  conceptions,  as  we  understand  them;  no  longer  apply,  and
Calvin  himself  allows  that  the  destruction  of  mankind  is  guided  by
an  equity  indubitable,  yet  unknown  to  us.  The  Deity  lays  down
an  ideal  code  for  man,  but  the  code  which  men  ascribe  to  the
Deity  is  not  ideal  and  can  only  be  excused  as  being  unintelligible
to  the  human  mind.1  At  this  stage  the  ethical  and  religious
elements,  the  blending  of  which  was  the  triumph  of  monotheism,
definitely  fall  asunder  once  more ;  and  those  who  will  not  face
this  schism  find  themselves  compelled  to  make  some  room  for
human  responsibility,  and  to  conceive  a  will  which  is  not  a
mere  puppet  of  an  overruling  Providence.

5.  While  limiting  by  implication  the  omnipotence  of  God,  the
doctrine  of  Free  Will  is  not  without  ethical  difficulties  of  its
own.  Will  either  is  or  is  not  an  expression  of  character.  ^  If  it
is  an  expression  of  character,  it  figures  but  as  one  link  in  the
endless  chain  of  causes  and  effects.  We  may  trace  this  chain
back  in  the  first  instance  to  the  original  nature  of  the  individual,
and  whether  we  say  that  this  is  determined  by  heredity  or  was
what  God  made  it,  we  are  equally  throwing  the  responsibility
back  on  to  something  anterior  to  the  individual,  and  on  the
creationist  principle  this  something  must  in  the  end  be  God
Himself.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  deny  that  will  is  an  expression
of  character,  we  not  only  assert  something  which  is  in  itself

you  to  account ;  and  He  forgives  whom  He  will  and  punishes  whom  He
will,  for  God  is  mighty  over  all."  (Koran,  vol.  i.,  ch.  2,  p.  45.)  Compare
page  62,  where,  however,  the  concluding  words  run  :—  '  For  God  is
giving  and  merciful."  Forgiveness  may  be  the  portion  of  any  but  the
idolaters,  but  they  were  created  for  Hell.  «  Had  God  pleased  they  would
not  have  associated  aught  with  Him  "  (Koran,  i.,  ch.  6,  p.  128),  i.  e.  would
not  have  worshipped  false  gods.  But  "  we  have  created  for  hell  many  oi
the  ginn  and  of  mankind.  They  have  hearts  and  they  discern  not  there
with  ;  they  have  eyes  and  they  see  not  therewith  ;  they  have  ears  and  they
hear  not  therewith  ;  they  are  like  cattle,  nay,  they  go  more  astray  ;  these
it  is  who  care  not."  (Ch.  7,  p.  160.)  These  men  God  predestines  to  tt
fire,  and  the  believers  are  not  to  intercede  for  them.  But  as  to  whether  He
will  save  all  believers  who  avoid  sin,  it  does  not  seem  so  clear.  He  is  for
giving  and  merciful,  but  He  is  also  an  oriental  despot  in  whom  there  remains
an  incalculable  element  of  caprice.
1  Calvin,  ii.,  p.  148.


136  MOEALS IN  EVOLUTION

unintelligible,  but  we  in  reality  destroy  the  very  responsibility
which  we  are  seeking  to  maintain.  For  responsibility  ceases
when  identity  of  character  ceases.  A  man  is  justly  rewarded
or  punished  for  what  he  has  done  only  so  far  as 'he  can  recognize
himself  as  the  doer.  If  the  "  I  "  who  did  the  deed  is  the  "  I  "
which  suffers  for  it,  well  and  good.  But  this  "I"  is  the
permanent  self  with  its  abiding  character,  and  punishment  has
full  ethical  justification  only  so  far  as  it  tends  to  purge  and  ennoble
the  character.  Thus  if  the  theory  of  Free  Will  means  that  it  is
not  this  self  that  does  the  deed,  but  a  Will  which  springs  out
of  no  antecedent  cause  and  has  no  fixed  relation  to  what  the
"  I "  has  been  or  will  be,  then  it  is  not  the  "  I  "—the  permanent
self— that  has  sinned,  and  to  punish  it  will  be  of  no  avail.1
Punishment  is  reduced  to  a  blind  retaliation  on  the  body  which
the  Will  possesses,  and  the  Will  itself  is  reduced  to  the  condition
of  an  animistic  spirit  which  enters  a  man  from  without  and
works  its  will  for  a  while  with  his  limbs.

Furthermore,  on  either  conception  of  Free  Will  the  ultimate
responsibility  of  the  Creator  for  evil  remains.  Sorrow  and
suffering  do  not  begin  with  the  Fall,  or  if  any  theologian
attributes  them  to  the  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve  in  the  spirit  of  the
curse  in  Genesis,  he  is  merely  bringing  us  back  to  the  doctrine
of  vicarious  guilt.  Even  if  all  evil  resulted  from  the  wicked  will

1  Thus  the  man  who  is  punished  must  be  essentially  the  same  being  as
he  who  did  the  deed.  That  is  to  say,  justice  and  responsibility  ethically
conceived  imply  the  persistent  identity  of  the  personality.  But  this  per
sistent  identity  is  precisely  that  which  the  Free  Will  doctrine  in  the  stage
now  under  consideration  attempts  to  deny.  It  is  not  the  "  I,"  the  trend  of
continuous  connection  running  through  all  my  conscious  life,  the  subject
which  thinks  and  feels  and  knows— it  is  not  that  "I"  which  acts.  For
this  "  I "  has  its  definite  character,  modifiable  no  doubt  by  circumstances
and  developed  by  its  own  reaction  upon  circumstances,  capable  of  being
appealed  to  by  an  infinite  variety  of  motives  and  often  assimilating  new
purposes,  but  nevertheless  always  the  same  "  I,"  the  character  of  which  at
any  given  moment  arises  out  of  its  previous  state.  It  is  not  this  "  I,"  but  a
Will  that  acts,  a  Will  that  comes  from  nowhere  and  stands  in  no  certain
relation  to  me.  This  Will  is  not  by  the  terms  of  the  argument  what  "  I  "
was  before  the  act  was  done.  Why,  then,  do  "  I  "  take  the  praise  or  bear
the  blame  of  the  deed  ?

The  doctrine  of  the  Undetermined  Will,  in  short,  destroys  the  moral
responsibility  which  it  sets  out  to  establish.  Moral  responsibility  infers  (1)
continuous  identity  of  character,  and  (2)  the  determination  of  action  by
motives  adopted  in  accordance  with  the  character  of  the  agent.  This
implies  "  free  will  "  in  the  sense  that  the  agent  must  be  unconstrained  by
any  force  outside  himself,  never  in  the  sense  that  he  is  free  from  himself.


MONOTHEISM  137

of  man,  yet  it  is  God  who  made  man  and  gave  him  freedom  to
act  as  He  would.  Thus,  though  omnipotence  is  limited,  its
responsibility  is  not  abrogated.1  The  conception  of  Free  Will
alone  could  not  solve  the  difficulty.  But  taken  in  conjunction
with  a  more  rational  theory  of  the  function  of  punishment  it  has
suggested  a  different  method  of  approach.  It  was  above  all  the
doctrine  of  eternal  punishment  which  converted  the  difficulties
arising  from  God's  foreknowledge  and  unlimited  power  into
ethical  impossibilities.  This  doctrine  is  of  course  not  essential
to  Monotheism;  it  conflicts  with  the  moral  teaching  of  the
Gospels  ;  and  with  the  growth  of  a  more  refined  ethics  it  has  in
fact  fallen  into  the  background.  Apologetics  have  then  to  cope
with  the  evils,  moral  and  physical,  of  this  world,  and  their
tendency  would  seem  to  be  towards  an  "  educative  "  conception.
Free  Will  is  higher  than  instinct.  He  only  can  be  a  morally
good  man  who  is  physically  and  psychologically  capable  of  being
morally  bad,  for  "  ought "  implies  "  can,"  and  it  is  only

"when  a  soul  has  seen
By  dint  of  evil  that  good  is  best,"

that  it  can  enter  into  spiritual  rest.  In  no  other  way  could  a
moral  order  come  into  being,  or  could  man  be  made  god-like.
As  with  moral  evil,  so  with  the  pain  and  suffering  inherent  in
the  order  of  nature.  Sorrow  exists  that  man  may  learn  to  bear

1  The  doctrine  of  the  dependence  of  responsibility  upon  character  has
inherent  consequences  which  are  carefully  to  be  marked  off  from  those
which  follow  from  theories  of  creation  or  of  the  nature  of  causation  with
which  it  may  be  associated.  Moral  responsibility  implies  the  dependence
of  action  upon  the  self  with  its  definite  character,  and  since  the  self  does
not  arise  out  of  nothing  its  character,  and  therefore  its  conduct,  must  at  the
next  remove  be  referable  to  the  conditions  out  of  which  the  self  arose.
Following  this  line  of  thought  we  are  forced  to  conceive  of  Reality  as  a
single  system  of  which  all  the  parts  are  interconnected.  The  argument
does  not  imply  that  this  interconnection  is  of  a  mechanical  character.  On
the  contrary — so  far  as  it  consists  in  psychical  operations  working  intel
ligently  towards  clearly-conceived  ends,  as  is  the  case  at  least  in  human
actions — these  are  the  opposite  of  mechanical.  Nor,  again,  does  the  argu
ment  imply  that  any  intelligent  being  foresaw  and  planned  the  whole.
If  either  of  these  creeds  are  held,  they  are  held  on  other  grounds.^  What
the  argument  goes  to  prove  is  that  Reality  is  a  single  system  of  interde
pendent  parts.  What  kind  of  system  it  is  must  be  discovered  from  other
sources.  It  is  only  when  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  belief  in  an  all-
knowing  and  all-powerful  Creator  that  this  doctrine  gives  rise  to  the
ethical  difficulties  of  Predestination,  and  only  when  combined  with  a
materialistic  view  of  the  universe  that  it  destroys  responsibility  and
renders  human  purposes  an  illusion.


138  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

it.  The  happiness  of  childish  innocence  is  sweet,  but  not  so
worthy  as  the  peace  won  for  itself  by  the  strong  soul  resting
upon  God.  To  strive  is  the  law  of  life,  and  its  suffering  is  the
pang  of  travail.  God  might  create  a  happy  paradise  for  children
at  play,  but  He  could  not,  without  implanting  seeds  of  suffering,
produce  the  nobler  race  of  strong  men  to  be  conquerors  of  the
earth.  It  seems  indeed  impossible  to  state  this  explanation
except  in  terms  which  condition  the  creative  power  of  God.  It
may  be  that  to  strive  and  fall,  to  endure  suffering  in  ourselves
and  even  the  sight  of  it  in  those  whom  we  love,  is  an  unavoidable
condition  of  moral  growth,  but  if  this  is  so,  it  is  as  much  as  to
say  that  there  are  laws  and  conditions  in  the  spiritual  world
which  omnipotence  itself  cannot  infringe.  Unconditioned
creation  is  thus  in  principle  denied,  and  we  are  instead  brought
nearer  to  an  evolutionary  conception  of  a  Spirit  striving  in  the
world  of  experience  with  the  inherent  conditions  of  its  own
growth  and  mastering  them  at  the  cost  of  all  the  blood  that
stains  the  pages  of  history,  and  all  the  unremembered  tears  that
bedew  the  lone  desert  places  of  the  heart.

6.  Amid  all  metaphysical  difficulties  monotheism  remains
clear  as  to  the  basis  of  the  ethical  order.  God's  Will  is  the
source  of  moral  obligation,  His  Word  the  revelation  of  the
practical  rule  of  life.  The  fulfilment  of  His  Will  is  the  means
of  salvation,  and  salvation  is  propounded  as  the  supreme  end  of
life  towards  which  every  thought  and  act  must  be  directed.  The
order  of  ethical  ideas  springing  from  this  principle  has  its  own
definite  features,  which  must  now  be  considered.

God  being  on  the  one  hand  a  perfect  Being,  on  the  other  the
all-powerful  Lord  of  all,  all  wrong-doing  takes  upon  itself  the
character  of  a  sin  against  Him.  Sin  is  an  act  of  rebellion  against
a  supreme  authority,  and  it  stamps  the  soul  with  a  stain  of  guilt
which  makes  it  unworthy  to  appear  in  the  Divine  presence.  Sin,
in  fact,  borrows  something  of  the  infinitude  of  the  Bein£  against

•  o o

whom  it  offends  and  puts  a  measureless  gulf  between  Him  and
the  sinner.  But,  in  the  Christian  conception,  man  inherited  from
Adam— whether  through  the  Fall  or  by  a  primaeval  decree  of
which  the  Fall  itself  was  but  the  first  consequence — an  original
inherent  sinfulness,  whereby  even  those  of  the  most  spotless


MONOTHEISM  339

virtue  stood  condemned  in  the  sight  of  God.  Nor  could  any
merit  of  their  own  avail  to  wipe  their  guilt  away,  for  judged  by
the  infinite  excellence  of  the  divine  no  human  virtue  can  be
called  positively  good,  and  our  best  acts,  far  from  yielding  an
overplus  of  merit  which  could,  as  it  were,  be  set  against  our
natural  faults,  are  themselves  but  poor  attempts  to  carry  out
that  rule  of  sublime  perfection  which  alone  could  deserve  the
divine  approval.

In  all  this  the  religious  consciousness  is  expressing  in  its  own
fashion  an  immeasurably  heightened  sense  of  the  gulf  between
right  and  wrong. In  so  doing  it  sets  for  itself  a  problem  which
could  not  be  solved  altogether  by  ethical  means. The  Fathers
of  the  Church,  in  fact,  found  the  solution  in  the  history  of  Christ,
who,  being  at  once  God  and  perfect  man,  gives  His  own  life  for
us.  '  In  its  crudest  forms  this  conception  of  Atonement  implies
the  primitive  doctrines  of  vicarious  justice,  and  the  transfer-
ability  of  guilt,  both  of  which  belong  to  a  relatively  low  stage  of
ethical development.1 But  the  conception was capable  of  a
more  refined  expression,  and  in  Anselm's  hands  the  death  of
Christ  appears  rather  as  a voluntary act redounding to  the
glory  of  God,  and  thereby  meriting  a  recompense  which  Christ,
not  needing  it  for  Himself,  transfers  to  men. He  makes  men
the  "  heirs  "  of  the  "  superabundance  of  His  plenitude  .  .  .  that
what they owe  for  their  sin  may  be  remitted  to  them,  and
what,  by  reason  of  their  sin,  they  lack,  may  be  given  to  them." 2
In  this  treatment  it  is  a  question  rather  of  the  transfer  of  merit
than  of  guilt,  and  this  merit  is  not  passed  on  mechanically  (as
in  the  semi-magical  transfer  of  sins  to  the  scapegoat),  but  only
by  spiritual  means — to  those  who  follow  Christ  according  to  the
rules  which  His  church  has  prescribed. This  reconstruction,
however,  refines,  but  does  not  eliminate,  the  vicarious  principle,
and  leaves  us  with  the  conception  of  a  divine  retribution,  not
as  a  consequence  which  attaches  itself  by  a  moral  necessity  to
the  state  of  the  sinner's  soul,  but  as  capable  of  being  somewhat
arbitrarily  softened  by  a  gracious  consideration  for  the  noble  act
of  another.

1  By  the  prevailing  tradition  down  to  Anselm's  time  it  would  even
appear  that  the  Atonement  was  held  necessary  as  a  meaus  of  satisfying  the
otherwise  imperative  claim  of  the  Devil.  See  Harnack,  vol.  vi.,  p.  70
(E.  T.).  a  B>"  PP-  66'  67'


140  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

The  death  of  Christ,  however,  does  not  win  salvation  for  all
men  at  a  stroke.  There  are  further  conditions  to  be  fulfilled.
The  first  and  greatest  of  these  is  faith  in  Christ  Himself.1  With
out  faith  no  virtue  can  save,  and,  though  they  had  no  means  of
knowing  the  Gospel,  the  best  of  the  heathen  are  irrevocably
lost.  This  may  be  said  to  have  been  common  ground  to  the
churches  down  to  the  modern  period.2  But  further  than  this,
faith  not  merely  in  Christ,  but  in  the  church's  own  scheme  of
salvation  is  too  often  a  necessity,  and  no  virtue,  no  sanctity,  not
even  the  utmost  plenitude  of  the  true  spirit  of  religion,  could
avail  to  make  good  this  flaw.  "  For  any  man  who  does  not  hold
the  unity  of  the  Catholic  Church,  neither  baptism,  nor  alms
however  profuse,  nor  death  met  for  the  name  of  Christ,  can  be
of  benefit  for  his  salvation."  3  To  die  for  Christ  has  become  a

l  Faith  in  God  is  similarly  the  first  condition  of  salvation  with  Mohammed.
So  accursed  are  the  infidels  that  they  do  not  even  deserve  the  prayers  of
the  faithful.  "  It  is  not  for  the  prophet  and  those  who  believe  to  ask  for
giveness  for  the  idolaters,  even  though  they  be  their  kindred,  after  it  has
been  made  manifest  to  them  that  they  are  the  fellows  of  hell."  (Koran,  i.
ch.  ix.,  Palmer,  p.  189.)  Sometimes  the  prophet  casts  his  net  wide.

1  here  is  no  compulsion  in  religion  ;  the  right  way  has  been  distinguished
from  the  wrong,  and  whoso  disbelieves  in  Taghut "  (i.  e.  the  idols  and  demons
of  the  ancient  Arabs)  "  and  believes  in  God,  he  has  got  hold  of  the  firm
handle  in  which  is  no  breaking  off; but  God  both  hears  and knows."
(Koran, i., ch.  ii., Palmer, p. 40.) Elsewhere threats are  denounced
against  the  Christians.

2  Calvin  even  detracts from  the  merits  of  the  heathen  :— The  good
works  of  the  heathen  are  distinguished  from  bad  and  rewarded  in  this  life,
but  Augustine  is  right  in  saying,  "  That  all  who  are  strangers  to  the  religion
of  the  one  true  God,  however  they  may  be  esteemed  worthy  of  admiration
for  their  reputed  virtue,  not  only  merit  no  reward,  but  are  rather  deserving
of  punishment  because  they  contaminate  the  pure  gifts  of  God  with  the
pollution  of  their  own  hearts." They  are  restrained  from  evil  not  by  a
sincere  attachment  to  virtue,  but  by  ambition,  self-love,  or  some  other
irregular  disposition. The  end  of  what  is  right  is  always  to  serve  God,  and
as  they  regard  not  this  end  any  externally  good  act  performed  by  them
becomes  sin.

Luther,  though  of  more  tolerant  disposition,  is  equally  clear  that  outside
Christendom  there  is  no  forgiveness  and  can  be  no  holiness.  (Primary
Works,  ed.  Wace  and  Buchheim,  p.  104.)  The  Anglican  Article  XIII.
denies  that  "  works  done  before  the  grace  of  Christ "  are  pleasant  to  God—
"yea  rather,  for  that  they  are  not  done  as  God  hath  willed  and  commanded
them  to  be  done,  we  doubt  not  but  they  have  the  nature  of  ein."  This
view  is  satisfactorily  anathematized  by  the  Council  of  Trent.  (Corpus
Juris,  p.  14.)

3  Quoted  from  Fulgentius  in the  Deer.  Greg.  Corpm  Juris,  p. 778,
where  however  it  is  attributed  to  Augustine. Augustine  suggests  that  good
works  may  mitigate  damnation  when  they  cannot  procure  salvation,  and


MONOTHEISM  141

small  thing  compared  with  acceptance  of  precisely  the  right
formula  to  express  his  relations  to  the  Deity.  The  ethical  con
sequences  are  double.  Conduct,  and  not  only  conduct,  but  the
whole  ethical  attitude  of  a  man,  his' character,  his  soul  as
expressing  itself  in  his  life  and  in  his  relations  to  other  men,
fall  into  the  second  place  and  are  subordinated  to  the  single
consideration  of  his  attitude  to  the  doctrines  of  the  church-
even  when  that  attitude  can  only  be  expressed  by  saying  that
he  has  never  happened  to  hear  of  them.  Secondly,  the  original
universalism  of  the  world  religions  disappears,  and  for  the  old
circle  of  the  fellow-citizens  marked  off  rigidly  from  the  rest  of
the  world,  is  substituted  the  circle  of  the  true  believers  marked
off,  too  often  by  a  deeper,  redder  line  from  the  rest  of  humanity.

7 But  faith  is  not  necessarily  the  sole  condition  necessary  for
salvation. Faith  admits  to  the  church,  membership  whereof  is
sio-nified  by  baptism. But  what  of  the  baptized  Christian  ? Is
he  sanctified,  "justified,"  once  for  all,  or  may  he  yet  sin  and
fall  from  grace  ? Should  he  fall,  what  means  are  open  to  him  of
regaining  salvation? On  these  questions  deep  cleavage  came
into  being. The  dominant  view  in  the  early  church  was  that
while  baptism  washed  away  all  previous  sins, after baptism
<rrave  sins  could  not,  unless  under some exceptional  circum-
Stances,  obtain  forgiveness.1 The  church  itself  was  to  be  a  com
munity  of  saints,  and down to the beginning of  the thir<
century  expulsion  was  in  fact  the  penalty  for  idolatry,  adultery,
fornication and murder.2 But  during  the latter half  of  the
second  century  the  practice  of  allowing  a  single  penance  for  sm
beo-an  to  grow  up  as  a  "  second  plank  " of  salvation  for  him
who  had  made  shipwreck,  and  from  this  beginning  the  great
Catholic system of  discipline was developed,3 and  the  vast

the  case  of  schismatics  who  endure  martyrdom  is  instanced. (De  Patientia,
c.  26,  quoted  with  approval  by  Gratian,  p.  1228.)

I  O^oA^m.^'^^^  were  threatened  with  the
refnsaf  of  divine  forgiveness.  While  exclusion  was  the  logical  consequence
of  the  concept  of  °a  community  of  Saints,  it  does  not  in  fact  seem  to  have
been  presse cf  home.  Offenders  were  often  dealt  with  in  the  light  of  a  special

re3eThe°new  system  received  a  great  impetus  from  the  numerous  lapses  in
the  Decian  persecution. (16.,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  110-112.)


142  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

structure  of  the  Canon  Law.  If  the  church  was  to  "  come  down
to  earth  "  and  embrace  not  only  the  saints,  but  the  whole  mass
of  sinful,  struggling  humanity,  it  was  clearly  necessary  to  find
some  means  of  dealing  with  sins  after  baptism,  and  means  more
elastic  than  that  of  a  single  penance.  It  was  essential  to  recog
nize  true  contrition  as  shown  in  the  steadfast  purpose  to  lead  a
new  life.  But  the  church  did  more  than  recognize.  It  systema
tized  it,  enjoining  confession  as  a  proof  of  contrition,  and
penance  not  merely  as  an  outpouring  of  the  contrite  heart,  but
as  a  means  of  satisfaction  for  the  offence.  The  theory  is  some
what  crudely  expressed  at  an  early  date  by  Cyprian,  who  held
that  no  one  could  remain  permanently  without  sin  after
baptism,  that  accordingly  God's  wrath  must  be  appeased  by
sacrifices,  or  that  sins  must  be  expunged  by  exceptional  works
of  merit,  among  which  almsgiving  takes  a  conspicuous  place.1
Though  it  is  insisted  that  such  works  can  only  be  efficacious  in
so  far  as  God  is  pleased  to  accept  them,  it  is  clear  that  the
practical  working  out  of  such  a  principle  will  bring  us  peril
ously  near  to  a  systematic  money  composition  for  sins,  quite
comparable  to  the  secular  composition  for  wrongs  in  early  law.
The  theory  itself,  moreover,  contains  the  suggestion  that  special
merits  may  be  weighed  against  sins;  a  consideration  justly
applicable  by  a  divine  judge  summing  up  upon  a  man's  whole
career,  but  deadly  to  the  man  himself.2

The  requisite,  but  perhaps  not  sufficient,  correction  to  this
mechanical  doctrine  of  satisfaction  was  a  strong  insistence  on
the  necessity  of  genuine  contrition  as  evidenced  by  a  change  of
heart.  This  is  in  fact  put  forcibly  by  the  Fathers,3  and  a
full  contrition  remains  the  main  essential  down  to  the  thir
teenth  century.  Gratian  is  even  uncertain  whether  confes-

1  Harnack,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  133,  134.

2  Harnack's  comment  is  not  too  severe. "Eine  Kirche,  die  sich  bei
diesen  Satzen  auf  die  Dauer  beruhigt  hatte,  hatte  den  letzten  Rest  ihrer
Chnsthchkeit  sehr  bald  eingebiisst." (lb.,  p.  135.)

3  Thus  Ambrose,  "  Penitentia  est  et  mala  praoterita  plangere  et  plangenda
iterum  non  committere." (Gratian,  p.  1211.) Again,  «  Satisfactio  pami-
tentuo  est  peccatorum  caosas  excidere  nee  earum  suggestionibus  aditum
indulgere"  (attributed  to  Augustine,  De  Dogm.,  p.  54,  by  Gratian,  but
wrongly  so  according  to  the  editors). This  is  the  change  of  heart,  "  Ubi
dolor  finitur,  deficit  et  paenitentia .  .  .  Hinc  semper  doleat  et  de  dolore
gaudeat. (Augustine,  De  Poentt.,  quoted  ib.,  p.  1212.) This  is  the  doctrine
ot  lasting  remorse.


MONOTHEISM  143

sion  is  strictly  necessary  for  forgiveness,1  and  he  has  some
difficulties  as  to  repeated  confession.  For  the  "  every-day  lesser
and  lighter  sins  without  which  one's  life  is  not  led"  satisfac
tion  is  made  sufficiently  by  the  prayers  of  the  faithful.2  As  to
graver  sins,  Gratian  is  clear  that  they  cannot  be  committed  over
and  over  again  and  still  be  redeemed  by  alms.  Yet  the  church
allows  that  by  penitence  sins  are  remitted,  not  once,  but
saepissime,  and  though  perfect  penitence  would  be  final,  yet
there  are  degrees  in  penitence  as  there  are  in  charity,  and  he
who  has  repented  once  is  cleared  of  his  sins  until  he  falls  again.3
In  all  this  we  see  clearly  enough  the  conflict  of  a  stricter  and  a
laxer  view.4  With  the  growth  of  the  opinion  that  penance  does
not  pre-suppose  full  contrition,  but  only  an  attritio,  which  the
sacrament  of  penance  itself  perfects,  an  impetus  was  given  to
the  less  spiritual  conception,5  and  this  attained  its  full  develop
ment  in  the  doctrine  of  indulgences  whereby  the  treasures  of
merit  stored  up  by  the  faithful  for  the  church,  and  at  her  dis
posal,  could  be  held  to  remit  the  penalties  of  guilt  here  and  in
purgatory  for  her  obedient  children.6  We  have  not  here  to  deal
with  the  abuse  of  indulgences.  It  is  sufficient  for  us  to  note
how  great  is  the  departure  from  an  ethical  theory  of  penitence,
when  the  Council  of  Trent  pronounce  an  anathema,  not  merely
on  those  who  deny  that  the  function  of  the  priest  in  absolution
is  judicial,  but  on  those  who  assert  that  true  repentance  is
shown  in  a  new  life  rather  than  in  performance  of  penance.7

1  See  the  long  discussion  in  Gratian,  Corpus  Juris,  pp.  1159-1190,  and
compare  Harnaek,  vol.  vi.,  pp.  245,  246.

2  Gratian,  p.  1214.  3  Corpus  Juris,  pp.  1213-1215.

4  Or  perhaps  a  formalistic  as  against  an  ethical  view.  The  rules  of  con
fession  became  stricter — the  decretals  of  Gregory  IX.  lay  down  definitely
that  every  adult  must  confess  at  least  once  a  year  (Corpus  Juris,  p.  887) —
while  the  spiritual  meaning  of  penitence  is  watered  down.

6  See  Harnaek,  vol.  vi.,  E.  T.,  pp.  248  ff.

6  The  doctrine  of  indulgence  as  laid  down  by  Clement  VI.  is  a  very  crude
statement  of  the  transfer  of  merit,  and  the  consequent  cancelling  of  sin.
"  Quern  quidem  thesaurum  non  in  sudario  repositum,  non  in  agro  abscon-
ditum,  sed  per  beatum  Petrum  .  .  .  ejusque  successores  suos  in  terris  vicarios
commisit (Dei filius) fidelibus  salubriter  dispensandum,  et propriis  et
rationabilibus  causis ;  nunc  pro  totali,  nunc  pro  partiali  reniissione  pconoe
temporalis  pro  peccatis  debitse,  tarn  generaliter  quam  specialiter  .  .  .  vere
poenitentibus  et  confessis  misericorditer  applieandum  "  (quoted  in  Harnaek,
op.  cit.,  p.  267). This  is  not  much  above  the  level  of  the  sin-eater.

7  Corpus  Juris,  Council  of  Trent,  p.  39.


144  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

The  Indulgences  led  directly  to  the  Reformation,  and  the  abuse
of  "  works  "  went  far  to  determine  the  attitude  of  the  Reformers
to  the  whole  question  of  Justification.  The  moralistic  theory
of  nicely-graduated  penalties  for  sin  and  of  the  cancelling  out  of
sin  against  merit  had  ended  in  ethical  disorder  and  even  scandal.
Luther  went  back  to  the  alternative  principle  of  salvation,  and
justification  by  faith  alone  is  announced  in  statements  that
sometimes  seem  to  sweep  the  whole  ethical  order  aside.

"We  see  then  how  rich  a  Christian,  or  baptized  man  is,  since,
even  if  he  would,  he  cannot  lose  his  salvation  by  any  sins,  however
great,  unless  he  refuses  to  believe;  for  no  sins  whatever  can
condemn  him  but  unbelief  alone.  All  other  sins,  if  faith  in  the
Divine  promise  made  to  the  baptized  man,  stands  firm  or  is  restored,
are  swallowed  up  in  a  moment  through  that  same  faith,  yea,
through  the  truth  of  God,  because  He  cannot  deny  Himself,  if  thou
conf essest  Him,  and  cleavest  believingly  to  His  promise ;  whereas
contrition  and  confession  of  sins,  and  satisfaction  for  sins,  and  every
effort  that  can  be  devised  by  man,  will  desert  thee  at  thy  need,  and
will  make  thee  more  miserable  than  ever,  if  thou  forgettest  this
Divine  truth,  and  puffest  thyself  up  in  such  things  as  these.  For
whatever  work  is  wrought  apart  from  faith  in  the  truth  of  God  is
vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit." 1

This  might  seem  to  open  the  door  to  Antinomianism.  But
Luther  would  maintain  that  instead  of  taking  morals  out  of
religion,  he  had  given  them  their  true  place  within  religion.
They  are  not  a  means  of  grace,  but  a  consequence  of  grace.  "  Good
works  do  not  make  a  good  man,  but  a  good  man  does  good  works." 2
The  servile  theory  of  reward  and  punishment  should  be  banished
from  ethics.  The  Christian  virtues  are  a  free  service  lovingly
rendered  to  God.  "Here  is  the  truly  Christian  life,  here  is
faith  really  working  by  love,  when  a  man  applies  himself  with
joy  and  love  to  the  works  of  that  freest  servitude  in  which  he
serves  others  voluntarily  for  nought,  himself  abundantly  satisfied
in  the  fulness  and  richness  of  his  own  faith."3  Similarly  in
Calvin,  he  who  knows  God  "  restrains  himself  from  sin,  not
merely  from  a  dread  of  vengeance,  but  because  he  loves  and
reveres  God  as  his  Father,  honours  and  worships  Him  as  his

1  Luther,  Christian  Liberty,  p.  343.  2  Ib.,  p.  275.

3  Luther,  op.  cit.,  p.  280.


MONOTHEISM  145

•

Lord,  and,  even  though  there  were  no  hell,  would  shudder  at  the
thought  of  offending  Him." 1

Here  the  ethical  consciousness  has  regained  its  freedom  from
the  bondage  of  a  system  of  rewards  and  punishments.  Yet  the
union  of  the  ethical  and  religious  is  even  more  completely
undone.  It  is  one  thing  to  point  out  that  virtue  ceases  to  be
virtue  when  it  asks  for  a  reward.  It  is  quite  another  to  rele
gate  the  whole  question  of  character  and  conduct  to  the  second
place.  From  this  criticism  the  Counter-Reformation  escaped  by
attempting  an  elaborate  and  extremely  subtle  reconciliation  of
faith  and.  works,  divine  grace  and  the  responsibility  of  the  human
will.  Justification,  the  Council  lays  down,  is  by  Christ  alone,
but  only  for  those  to  whom  the  merit  of  his  passion  is  communi
cated.  The  first  step  in  this  communication  begins  "  A  Dei  per
Christum  Jesum  prseveniente  gratia,"  by  which  people  are  called
by  no  previously  existing  merits  of  their  own  to  their  own
justification.  But  they  must  assent  and  freely  co-operate  with
the  grace  of  God,  so  that  man  is  not  inactive  and  yet  could  not
move  towards  justification  without  God's  grace.  Faith  is  the
beginning  of  salvation,  but  faith  without  works  is  dead,  and  neither
faith  nor  works  merit  justification,  nor  could  they  confer  it  but  for
the  grace  of  God.  Grace  is  lost  by  any  mortal  sin,  but  those  who
fall  away  may  be  restored  by  aid  of  the  Sacrament  of  penance.

The  Council  proceeds  to  pronounce  thirty-three  anathemas
on  any  one  who  falls  away  from  this  narrow  plank  of  truth
whether  to  the  right  or  to  the  left.  It  curses — to  confine  ourselves
to  the  most  important  points — any  one  who  shall  maintain  : —

1  Calvin,  vol.  L,  p.  37  ;  cf.  vol.  ii.,  p.  52,  on  Christian  liberty.  Calvin
explicitly  rejects  the  contention  that  the  works  excluded  from  the  scheme
of  justification  are  merely  the  ceremonial  works  of  the  law.  Moral  works
go  with  them  (vol.  i.,  p.  595).  All  our  best  actions  judged  by  their  in-
tnnsic  merit  are  already  denied  and  polluted  (p.  603),  we  have  therefore
merely  to  humble  ourselves  and  submit  to  the  Divine  mercy  (p.  604),  and
our  hope  must  be  founded,  not  on  our  own  regeneration,  which  is  always
imperfect,  but  on  our  being  engrafted  into  the  body  of  Christ  and  so
gratuitously  accounted  righteous  (pp.  610-11).  Humility  is  here  carried
out  consistently,  but  at  the  cost  in  the  end  of  throwing  an  arbitrary  choice
on  the  Deity.

It  is  important  that  in  Calvin,  regeneration  does  not  complete  itself  at  a
stroke.  Its  end  is  the  restoration  of  the  Divine  image  within  us,  which  is
not  accomplished  in  a  day,  but  by  continual  and  sometimes  tardy  advances.
A  fraction  of  evil  still  remains  within  us  which  produces  irregular  desires
alluring  us  to  sin  (vol.  i.,  p.  479).

VOL.  II.


146  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

(Clauses  1,  2,  3)  That  man  can  be  justified  by  works,  or  by  any
effort  of  his  own  will,  without  grace.  (4)  That  human  will  cannot
co-operate  or  decline  co-operation  with  the  Divine  Spirit,  "  sed  veluti
inanime  quoddam  nihil  agere."  (5  and  6)  That  there  is  no  free  will,
but  that  God  produces  evil  as  well  as  good,  "  non  permissive  solum
sed  etiam  proprie."  (7)  That  all  works  before  justification  are  sins.
(8)  That  the  fear  of  hell  which  restrains  from  sins,  is  a  sin.  (9)  That
justification  is  by  faith  alone.  (11)  That  it  is  by  remission  of  sins
without  grace  and  charity.  (12)  That  justifying  faith  is  nothing
but  trust  in  the  Divine  mercy.  (13)  That  personal  belief  in  our
own  salvation  is  necessary.  (17)  That  grace  is  for  those  pre
destined  to  life  only  while  others  are  called  but  do  not  receive
grace  "  ut  pote  divina  potestate  prsedestinatos  ad  malum."  (18)  That
God's  commandments  are  impossible  even  for  the  justified.  (19)  That
there  is  no  gospel  precept  except  faith.  (20)  That  the  justified  is
bound  not  to  obedience  to  the  commands  of  God  and  the  Church
but  only  to  belief.  (23)  That  man  once  justified  cannot  sin.
(24)  That  works  do  not  increase  justification.  (25  and  26)  That
the  just  earns  no  merit  by  good  works.  (27)  That  there  is  no
mortal  sin  except  unbelief.  (28)  That  through  sin  faith  is  lost
along  with  grace.  (29)  That  the  lapsed  after  baptism  cannot
recover  grace  without  penance.  (30)  That  the  penitent  sinner  may
escape  temporal  punishment.  (31)  That  good  works  done  in  con
templation  of  an  eternal  reward  are  sins.  (32)  That  the  good  works
of  one  who  is  justified  are  gifts  of  God  in  such  a  sense  that  they  are
not  also  merits  of  the  man  himself.1

Here  there  is  at  least  a  stout  attempt  to  reconcile  divine
grace  and  human  responsibility,  and  to  make  morality  along
with  belief  essential  to  salvation.  On  the  other  hand,  will  is
still  second  to  grace — the  prime  mover — and  conduct  to  belief —
the  preliminary  condition,  nor  is  the  fundamental  ethical  point
of  the  Reformers  met,  that  moral  service  must  be  a  service  of
perfect  freedom.

8.  Christianity,  like  Buddhism,  has  an  elaborate  theory  of  the
basis  of  morals,  and  has  applied  it  to  the  moral  and  spiritual
education  of  man.  It  can  teach,  encourage,  admonish,  punish,
forgive,  and  raise  again  to  repentance  and  amendment  of  life.
But  in  applying  its  principles  to  life,  it  has  moved  between  two
1  Council  of  Trent,  Corpus  Juris,  13,  14,  15.


MONOTHEISM  147

poles  of  difficulty,  which  are  perhaps  inherent  in  the  nature  of
the  subject. To  elaborate  a  system  of  rewards  and  punishments
is  to  run  the  risk  of  degrading  morals  into  a  form  of  spiritual
calculation. The  opposite  alternative  of  declaring  that  conduct
follows  truly  and  naturally  from  the  convinced  faith  of  a  Christian
tends  to  degrade  the  ethical  side  of  religion  to  a  secondary
place. On  behalf  of  the  Protestant  theory  it  may  be  urged  that
rewards  and  punishments,  except  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  in
herent  consequences  of  action,  belong  to the legal stage  of
ethical  development. They  are  necessary  for  the  maintenance
of  social  order,  but  are  out  of  place  when  brought  into  relation
to  moral  obligation  proper,  and even  tend to  undermine  the
genuine  ethical  conception. Thus,  it  may  be  said,  Protestantism,
while  seeming  to  give  a  less  important  place  to  ethics,  was
really  restoring  to  the  moral  will  the  "  freedom  "—from  the
bondage  of  external  sanctions— which  it  had  lost,  and  so  has
paved  the  way  for  a  distinctly  ethical  view. But  the  truth  is
that  neither  Protestantism  nor  the  Roman  Church  advanced  to
the  ethical  position  that  it  is  the  good  man  through  his  goodness
who  is  nearest  to  God. Too  intent  on  the  doctrine  of  exclusive
salvation,  with  all  that  it  meant  for  the  dignity  and  importance
of  their  respective  churches,  they  readily  agreed  upon  one  point,
that  God  was  with  them  alone,  and  could  see  no  good  outside
their  respective  bodies. And  they  paid  the  penalty  of  spiritual
pride  by  marring  the  conception  of  righteousness  at  its  source,
and  breaking  up  that  union  of  ethics  and  religion  which  it  was
the  special  function  of  Monotheism  to  achieve  and  maintain.
In  the  theories  underlying  both  the  main  forms  of  Western
Christianity  that  union  is  impaired,  if  not  destroyed,  by  concep
tions  from  which  theologians  have  not  been  able  to  escape  of
the  nature  of  God  and  His  relation  to  the  world  and  to  man.
Not  being  willing  to  surrender  the  conception  of  the  Deity  as
an  omnipotent  Creator  standing  outside  His  world,  they  have
been  compelled  under  whatever  disguises  to  impute  to  Him  its
evil  along  with  its  goodness. To  explain  the  history  of  Christ
they  have  maintained,  with  whatever  refinements,  the  doctrine
of  transferable  merit,  and  in  magnifying  faith  they  have  made
true  lovableness  and  beauty  of  character  secondary  in  God's  eyes.
To  this  extent  ethical  monotheism  has  failed  in  its  intention.


148  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

9 With  regard  to  the  standard,  as  opposed  to  the  basis  of
all  forms  of  monotheism  have  Bometbing .in ^  common.


as  in  becoming  Buddhist,  the  whole  moral  na  tare  of


The  morals  o the  "natural"  man,  as  we  have  seen  them


,
the  m^ten  ance.  his^.s  clan,

oyf  self-denial. But  they  are  in
the  morals  of  the


h  oug' treaent  of  the  Persian  herald. It  »  truer  to  say
thrfhey  are  the  morals  of  men  who  assert  themselves  an
*rith  or  through  themselves  their  family,  their cute,  the>r
country  whose  very  self-denial  is  founded  on  the  pnde  of  Mb,


up  the  world,  they  put  away  the  joy  and  pnde  o  li™* They
lose  their  own  life,  and  in  losing  they  6ud  it.


MONOTHEISM  149

sacrifice,  not  merely,  as  the  older  ethics  taught  them,  life  and
home  and  rank  and  fortune  for  their  country's  good,  but  the
very  pride  of  race  or  family  on  which  that. sacrifice  was  based,
the  very  idea  of  worldly  greatness  to  achieve  which  for  their
city  seemed  the  noblest  duty  of  man.  The  soul  must  not
merely  sacrifice,  it  must  surrender  itself,  abandon  its  pride,
break  down  its  barriers,  and,  in  meekness,  learn  its  duty.  But,
here  the  moral  paradox  begins,  in  this  weakness  lies  its
strength.  Lao  Tsze  had  already  taught  that  as  water  wears
away  the  rock,  so  the  weakest  things  of  this  world  overcome  the
strong.  This  total  self-surrender  to  the  eternal  truth  meanta
complete  spiritual  victory  over  the  lords  of  time.  The  meek
shall  inherit  the  earth,  not  merely  the  heavens.  Because  they
have  humbled  themselves  beyond  all  others  they  are  set  above
all  others.  They  overcome  hatred  with  love.  They  conquer
by  refusing  to  resist,  and  meet  assault  by  turning  the  other
cheek  to  the  smiter.  And  beneath  this  yielding  softness  of
exterior  they  reveal  when  the  right  season  comes  a  firmness
which  is  harder  than  adamant.

In  the  old  moral  order  men  could,  with  a  clear  conscience,  be
equally  good  haters  and  good  lovers.  It  was  said  to  them  of
old  time,  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  and  hate  thine
enemy."  But  the  code  of  self-surrender  has  no  room  for  hate.
Hatred  is  assertion,  and  its  exercise  manifests  the  fallacy  of
assertion,  for  its  open  expression  is  the  blood  feud  which  never
ends,  but  remains  an  open  wound  in  the  vitals  of  society.
Morally  regarded,  revenge  is  a  matter  of  physical  strength  and
a  poor  satisfaction  at  best.  There  is  a  nobler  way  of  dealing
with  an  enemy  which  conquers  him  far  more  effectually.
"  Hatred,"  Buddha  taught,  "  does  not  cease  by  hatred  but  by
love."  If  you  are  in  the  wrong,  it  is  for  you  to  make  amends.
If  it  were  he,  then  pity  him  for  that  he  is  wandering  in  error
and  blind  to  the  truth.  No  doubt  wrong-doing  must  carry  its
punishment.  But  it  is  not  for  finite  intelligence  to  measure  the
guilt  and  assign  the  due  penalty  upon  another  man.  "  Venge
ance  is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  As  for  us,  the  best  of
us  are  sinners  infinitely  far  from  the  Divine  perfection  and
needing  infinite  mercy  for  ourselves.  If  we  judge  others,  shall
not  we  ourselves  bo  judged  ?  And  if  neither  personal  antagon-


150  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

isms  nor  moral  differences  are  to  interfere  with  love,  still  less
can  the  barriers  of  class,  and  race,  and  sex  be  allowed  to  stand.
We  are  all  alike  members  one  of  another,  sons  of  God,  brothers
and  sisters  upon  earth  and  co-heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
Among  us  there  can  be  no  difference  of  Jew  or  Gentile,  bond  or
free,  noble  or  lowly.  He  is  most  noble  who  the  lowliest  duties
on  himself  doth  lay.  The  fallen  woman  becomes  a  saint  and
the  crucified  thief  is  the  first  to  sup  with  the  Saviour  in
Paradise.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  peopled  by  those  who
have  proved  themselves  the  strongest  on  this  earth.  To  their
Father  the  fate  of  the  weakest  and  most  despised  is  of  no  less
moment  than  that  of  those  who  have  many  talents  entrusted  to
them.  The  principle  of  Comprehensiveness — against  the  more
exclusive  view  of  earlier  morals — is  here  pushed  to  its  furthest
point.  Here,  at  least,  Christian  ethics  at  their  best  have  been
determined  and  consistent,  and  here  in  this  resolute  recognition
of  weakness  has  been  their  strength.1

10.  Love,  universal  benevolence,  forgiveness,  humility,  meek
ness,  combined  with  the  extreme  of  resolute  endurance  for  con
science'  sake — such  are  the  necessary  outcome  of  that  emptying
of  self  which  Buddhism  and  Christianity  alike  demanded.  In
them  the  spiritual  order  formed  for  itself  a  new  sphere  detached
from  the  more  elementary  morals  of  the  ordinary  good  citizen.
In  this  detachment,  however,  were  seeds  of  trouble.  We  have
already  seen  that  the  Buddhist  life  could  hardly  be  lived  in  its
perfection  by  the  ordinary  householder.  The  spiritual  and  the

1  Any  one  who  will  compare  St.  Paul's  description  of  Charity,  in  which
term  the  whole  of  the  distinctively  Christian  ethics  is  summed  up,  with
the  Buddhist  description  of  the  true  Brahmana,  with  the  description  of  the
Highminded  or  Great  Souled  man  in  the  Ethics  (bk.  iv.),  and  of  the
Superior  man  in  scattered  passages  of  the  Confucian  Analects  (see
below,  Ch.  V.),  will  form  an  idea  of  the  relation  of  Christianity  to  other
ethical  systems.  I  take  the  description  of  the  Great  Souled  man  as  typical
of  ordinary  Greek  thought,  of  the  pagan  "pride  of  life."  The  Great
Souled  man  "  deems  himself  worthy  of  great  things,  being  in  reality  worthy
of  them."  There  is  an  honesty  in 'his  attitude  to  himself  which  is  by  no
means  to  be  confused  with  arrogance — a  "  proper  pride  "  which  is  the  alter
native  to  the  Christian  humility.  But  for  passages  typical  of  Greek
philosophy  as  opposed  to  pre-philosophic  thought  we  must  look  elsewhere,
e.  g.  in  Aristotle  himself  to  the  description  of  the  philosophic  life  (bk.  x),
to  Plato's  description  of  the  just  man,  and  to  that  of  the  wise  man  in
Epictetus  or  Marcus  Aurelius.


MONOTHEISM  151

human  had  already  fallen  apart.  In  Christianity  the  fissure  is
in  some  respects  deeper.  It  is  in  monotheism  that  there  first
arises  a  clear  distinction  between  the  natural  and  the  super
natural.  In  the  earlier  phases  of  religion  the  intervention  of
gods  and  spirits  was  a  matter  of  course,  a  thing  of  every-day
life.  But  in  proportion  as  the  one  God  absorbs  all  power  into
Himself,  the  course  of  the  world  comes  to  be  thought  of  as
running  smoothly  and  continuously  in  the  line  which  He  has
laid  down  for  it,  and  His  direct  interference  with  its  orderly
movements  becomes  something  marked  and  exceptional,
reserved  for  great  occasions  or  for  the  special  prayers  of  the
faithful.  Thus  a  well-marked  antithesis  arises  between
"  nature  "  conceived  as  the  ordinary  course  of  events,  and  the
"  supernatural "  conceived  as  that  which  belongs  directly  to  the
sphere  of  God.  This  antithesis  dominates  Christian  teaching
from  first  to  last,  and  has  a  profound  influence  upon  ethics.  For
in  proportion  as  nature  is  separated  from  God,  that  which  per
tains  to  nature  is  set  in  antithesis  to  that  which  belongs  to
God,  and  is  apt  accordingly  to  partake  of  the  character  of  sin.
The  great  institutions  of  humanity,  marriage,  fatherhood,
citizenship,  are  things  of  this  world.  The  Christian  must  make
his  account  with  them,  but  they  are  not  of  Christian  origin.  He
is  to  honour  the  king,  because  he  is  not  to  concern  himself  with
worldly  revolutions.  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God,
but  merely  to  regulate  the  secondary  and  profane  affairs  of  this
life.  Christ's  true  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  It  may  be
necessary  for  the  Church  in  the  end  to  come  out  into  the  world
and  regulate  the  affairs  of  men,  for  the  universal  benevolence
taught  us  by  Christ  forbids  us  to  be  indifferent  to  the  happiness
or  misery  of  our  brother-men,  and,  above  all,  we  can  in  no  way
afford  to  neglect  their  spiritual  interests,  to  which  state-laws
ought  in  future  to  accommodate  themselves.  But  the  emergence
of  the  Church  into  affairs  of  this  world  is  like  the  descent  of
Plato's  philosopher  into  the  cave.  The  true  saint  finds  no  joy
in  it.  His  life  is  not  there,  but  hid  with  Christ  in  God.'  And  if
in  the  end  the  Church  became  too  much  a  thing  of  this  world
and  allowed  itself  to  be  by  the  world  corrupted,  that  is  but  the
other  side  of  the  same  shield.  The  detachment  of  what  was
best  in  Christianity  from  the  world's  affairs  made  a  Christian


152  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

body  unfit  to  rule  the  world's  affairs.  Christianity  has,
in  fact,  no  theory  of  society  by  which  to  guide  itself.  Its
doctrine  is  personal.  The  common  life  that  it  contemplates  is
a  life  of  brotherly  love,  a  community  of  saints,  where  all  things
are  in  common  and  lawsuits  are  not,  nor  any  other  mode  of
maintaining  order  by  the  strong  arm.  Hence,  amid  all  the
wonderful  descriptions  of  charity,  of  love,  of  self-surrender,  we
hear  very  little  of  justice.  Indeed,  how  could  it  be  otherwise  ?
What  need  of  justice  when  love  readily  yields  up  all  ?  Why
talk  of  a  fair  division  to  one  who,  if  his  cloak  be  taken,  will  make
that  a  ground  for  giving  up  his  garment  ?  What  need  for  equal
rights  among  men  who  claim  nothing  for  themselves  and  yield
all  they  have  to  all  who  want  ?

11.  The  code  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  appears  to  con
template  what  in  modern  phrase  we  should  call  a  voluntaryist
or  Anarchist  community.  Non-resistance  is  its  central  feature.
There  is  to  be  no  fighting,  no  revenge,  no  lawsuits,  no  oaths,
no  self-defence,  no  insistence  on  private  property,  no  excessive
provision  for  the  future.  If  there  is  to  be  any  marrying  or
giving  in  marriage  at  all,  there  is  to  be  no  divorcing  of  wives
"  save  for  the  cause  of  fornication."  There  is  to  be  unbounded
charity  without  display.  Altogether  a  life  that  might  be  lived
for  a  while  by  a  picked  brotherhood  of  perfect  men  and  women.1
How  were  these  rules  to  be  made  applicable  to  a  world  in  which
men  and  women  are  so  far  from  perfect  ?  In  regard  to  the
general  principle  that  law  and  government  are  necessities  of
human  existence,  the  Church  was  helped  by  those  passages
of  the  Scriptures  prescribing  obedience  to  constituted  authority.
These  sufficed  as  long  as  Christianity  was  the  religion  of  a
persecuted  sect,  but  when  it  became  the  official  creed  of  the
empire  a  further  step  was  necessary,  and  means  had  to  be
found  of  justifying  believers  in  acting  as  judges  and  in  executing
the  law  upon  criminals.  This  was  done  by  drawing  a  distinction
between  the  man  and  his  office.2  Even  the  judicial  act  of

1  In  fact,  the  Christian  life,  far  from  being  a  scheme  of  permanent  social
regeneration,  was  originally  conceived  as  preparatory  to  an  imminent
millennium. There  is  here  an  important  point  of  difference  between  the
primitive  Christian  commonwealth  and  the  Buddhist  order.

2  Augustine,  Epis.  154,  adopted  by  Qratian,  Corpus  Jim's,  p.  932  ;  cf.  924,


MONOTHEISM  153

torture  was  but  faintly  reprobated  or  even  justified  by  the
Fathers.1  The  only  serious  doubt  was  as  to  capital  punishment.
This  was  so  genuine  that  Augustine  begs  Count  Marcellinus
in  punishing  certain  Donatists  who  had  murdered  a  Catholic
priest  to  avoid  inflicting  either  death  or  mutilation.2  For  a
long  period  Christian  clerks  refused  to  enter  death  sentences
in  so  many  words,  and  at  certain  periods,  e.g.  in  England  under
the  Conqueror,  death  sentences  were  wholly  suspended  for  a
time  under  the  influence  of  the  Church.3  In  general,  punish
ment  was  to  be  limited  by  charity,  and  not  to  be  embittered
by  the  spirit  of  vengeance.  The  reproof  administered  to  the
apostles  for  wishing  to  call  fire  down  upon  the  Samaritans  was
a  warning  against  vindictiveness.  Injuries  to  self  should  not
be  punished,  but  only  those  against  God  or  our  neighbour.
Punishment  is  like  a  medicine,  and  the  precept  that  we  should
love  our  enemies  does  not  mean  that  we  should  relax  censure,
or,  if  in  the  end  it  is  required,  punishment,  but  that  we  should  so
carry  out  punishments  as  to  reform  the  criminal  and  console  the
penitent.4  These  were  excellent  precepts,  though  they  bore  singu
larly  little  fruit,  and  for  fifteen  centuries  the  criminal  codes  of  most
Christian  nations  remained  a  standing  reproach  to  civilization.
Recognizing  the  authority  of  the  law  and  the  courts,  the
church  was  also  compelled  to  admit  the  oath.  It  should  be
taken  not  lightly,  but  when  civil  necessities  so  required.5

"  Non  imputatur  fidelibus  qui  ex  officio  aut  tormenta  exercent  aut  capitalem
sententiam  ferunt";  and  see  letter  of  Pope  Innocent  there  quoted.  Cf.
Jerome  super  Hierem.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  22  (Gratian,  p.  939).  "  Homicides  et
sacrileges  et  venenarios  punire  non  eat  effusio  sanguinis  eed  legum  minis-
terium."  Cf.  Gratian,  896,  quoting  or  paraphrasing  (see  note  ib.)
Augustine  on  Psalm  cviii.,  to  the  effect  that  retaliation,  though  it  is  hardly
the  part  of  a  good  man  to  demand  it,  may  rightly  be  inflicted  by  the  judge.
"Hie  enim  malurn  pro  malo  redderet,  judex  vero  non,  sed  delectatione
justitise  justum  injusto  quod  est  bonum  pro  malo,"  an  ingenious  turning  of
the  phrase,  but  surely  a  perversion  of  its  original  meaning.

1  See  preceding  note,  and  Corpus  Juris,  p.  936.  In  Ep.  159,  Augustine
congratulates  Marcellinus  on  getting  at  the  truth  without  the  use  of  any
torture  worse  than  flogging,  "qui  modus  coercionis  .  .  .  ab  ipsis  parentibus
adhibetur,  ut  saepe  etiam  in  judiciis  ab  episcopis  solet  haberi."  (Gratian,
p.  929.)  2  Ep.  159.  Gratian,  p.  928.

3  See  Pollock  and  Maitland,  i.,  88  ;  ii.,  452.

4  Gratian,  Corpus  Jims,  pp.  909-914. Cf.  also  Ambrose,  Sermon  viii.,
quoted  p.  915. Mercy  may  be  unjust. We  should  not  give  unrepentant
robbers  the  opportunity  of  returning  to  their  wickedness.

6  Corpus  Juris,  pp.  861-62.


154  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

It  has  been  left  to  isolated  sects,  like  the  Society  of  Friends,
to  maintain  the  literal  teaching  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount
on  this  point.  There  remained  the  further  question  whether
the  law  should  be  obeyed  when  in  conflict  with  conscience
or  the  dictates  of  religion.  The  powers  that  be  are  or
dained  of  God,  and  that  has  led  many  devout  Christians  to  a
doctrine  of  passive  obedience.  The  Canon  Law,  however,
recognized  that  disobedience  to  secular  authorities  is  often
necessary,  and  if  possibly  it  may  be  right  "per  obedientiam
bonum  deserere,"  yet  it  can  never  be  lawful  positively  to  do
wrong.1  The  doctrine  of  non-resistance  was  destined  to  play
its  part  as  a  moral  support  of  absolutism,  and  it  was  even
accepted  by  Calvin,  though  rejected  with  much  practical  effect
by  so  many  Calvinists.2  It  is  manifestly  appropriate  only  to
a  small  community  which  desires  to  lead  its  own  life  in  the
midst  of  a  great  world  that  it  can  never  hope  to  control.  Hence
its  most  practical  exponent  in  the  modern  world  has  been  the
great  writer,  who,  living  under  the  shadow  of  a  tyranny  of
overwhelming  power,  could  defy  all  efforts  to  silence  him,
primarily  because  he  deprecated  violence  and  confined  the  efforts
of  himself  and  his  school  to  moral  protests.  Yet  this  same  teach
ing,  effective  while  the  tyranny  was  supreme,  is  out-of-date
and  mischievous  from  the  first  moment  at  which  it  is  shaken.

The  principle  of  resistance  admitted  in  the  case  of  resort  to
the  machinery  of  law  is  extended  to  the  more  doubtful  case  of
warfare.  We  have  already  traced  the  outline  of  Christian
teaching  on  this  point,  and  the  somewhat  dismal  tale  need  not
here  be  told  again.  On  this  side  also  the  maintenance  of  the
pure  teaching  of  the  Gospel  has  been  left  to  small  and  isolated  sects-

While  the  doctrine  of  non-resistance  was  frankly  abandoned
by  the  majority  of  the  churches,  the  doctrine  of  communism
had  a  somewhat  different  history.  It  is  accepted  in  the  Canons
as  a  part  of  the  divine  law,  but  as  abrogated  by  the  positive

1  Gratian,  p.  671,  ch.  99. Ch.  101  is  more  stringent,  and  see  ch.  91  and
92. Even  a  bishop  should  not  be  obeyed  if  he  should  enjoin  the  singing  of
a  mass  for  heretics  (p.  669).

2  Inttitutes,  ii.,  pp.  62,  63. However,  Calvin  admits  that  God  sometimes
raises  up  a  servant  as  an  avenger. He  is  also  of  course  quite  clear  that
no  behest  of  a  magistrate  that  is  contrary  to  Divine  law  must  be  obeyed.
Of.  iv.,  ch.  20.


MONOTHEISM  155

law  of  the  empire.1  Instead  of  communism  the  Church  preached
abundance  in  charity,  and  on  this  was  founded  the  great  system
of  poor  relief  which  has  played  so  large  a  part  in  the  mediaeval
and  modern  world.  On  this  side  the  Christian  teaching,  though
in  a  modified  form,  was  incorporated  in  established  institutions.
But  still  the  pure  teaching  of  the  Gospel  was  left  to  a  few
condemned  sectaries  to  preserve,  and  was  put  aside  by  respect
ability  as  being  merely  that  which  "certain  Anabaptists  do
falsely  boast."  Yet  the  ideal  has  never  wholly  died  out,  and  we
owe  to  it  in  our  own  times  all  the  zeal  and  energy  which  Christian
Socialists  have  thrown  into  the  movement  for  reforming  the
conditions  of  industrial  life.  Here  as  elsewhere  it  is  the  few  who
take  the  Gospel  literally  that  leave  their  mark  upon  the  world.

12.  To  attempt  to  trace  the  full  influence  of  Christian  ethics

on  social  morality  is  far  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work. It  is

a  question  of  countless  actions  and  interactions,  nor  are  there

many  questions  of  history  in  which  a  just  verdict  would  be  so

difficult  to  come  at. Christianity,  like other  movements, in

descending  from  the  mount to the plain loses much  of  its

purity,  while  in  turn  gaining  something  from  the  impulse  of

other  movements  and  contact  with  a  wider  life. These  actions

and  reactions  make  up  a  great  part  of  the  history  of  nineteen

centuries,  and  to  deal  with  them  fairly  would  be  a  work for

many  volumes. We  have,  however,  in  the  first  part  of  this

work,  seen  something  of  the  workings  of  Christian  teaching  in

various  departments of  law and morals,  of  its  influence on

marriage  and  the  position  of  women,  on  criminal  justice,  on  war,

on  slavery  and  class  distinctions,  on  the  practice  of  benevolence,

on  the  idea  of  the  State  and  its  functions  in  social  life. This

influence  is  not  one  that  can  be  summed  up  in  a  single  word  as

good or bad, nor is it even  always harmonious in itself.

Naturally  the  different  sects  into  which  Christendom  has  been

1  "Jure  divino  omnia  sunt  communia  omnibus,  jure  vero  constitutionis
hoc  meum  illud  alterius  est."  Gratian,  p.  12.  Of.  p.  2,  where  the  principle
is  referred  distinctly  to  "natural"  law.  Augustine  ingeniously  applies  it
to  justify  the  confiscations  of  the  property  of  the  Donatists  (p.  12,  note)  in
favour  of  the  Catholics.  No  one  holds  any  property  except  by  human  law
as  interpreted  by  the  emperor.  The  emperor  gives  and  the  emperor  may
take  away.  There  is  no  trace  here  of  that  divine  right  of  property  of  which
modern  orthodoxy  sometimes  speaks.


156  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

divided  have  at  times  worked  in  contrary  directions  in  the
ethical  as  in  the  theological  sphere.  If,  for  instance,  we  take
the  question  of  slavery,  we  should  have  to  weigh  the  recognition
of  the  institution  by  the  early  Church  against  the  prohibition  of
the  enslavement  of  Christian  prisoners  and  the  encouragement
of  manumission  :  we  should  have  to  put  the  sanction  of  negro
slavery  in  the  sixteenth  century  in  the  one  scale,  and  all  the
work  of  the  Quakers  and  the  Evangelical  churches  for  its
abolition  in  the  other.  If  we  take  criminal  justice,  we  should
have  to  allow  for  the  spirit  of  clemency  which  arose  from  the
sanctity  attached  by  the  early  Church  to  human  life,  and
equally  to  admit  that  the  religious  persecutions  stand  as
instances  of  what  human  savagery,  pushed  to  its  extreme  limit,
can  achieve.  If  our  example  were  the  position  of  women,  we
should  have  to  weigh  the  loss  of  the  independence  and  dignity
enjoyed  by  the  Roman  matron  and  the  degradation  for  a  long
period  of  the  ideal  of  marriage,  against  a  conception  of  the  moral
and  religious  capabilities  of  womanhood  which  paved  the  way,
first  for  charity,  and  ultimately  for  justice.  In  these  and  so
many  other  cases  "  Christianity  "  is  hardly  to  be  distinguished
from  the  civilization  of  Christendom.  What  is  done  officially,
whether  for  good  or  for  evil,  is  generally  done  in  its  name,  and
that  cause  must,  indeed,  be  desperate,  which  cannot  find  some
Biblical  text  or  patristic  saying  to  twist  to  its  support.  It  would
manifestly  be  unscientific  to  attribute  corruptions  of  this  sort  to
Christianity  as  such.  On  the  other  hand,  if  what  is  bad  finds
support  in  some  distortion  of  religious  teaching,  it  is  equally
true  that  the  churches  claim  credit  for  much  that  is  good  with
which  Christianity  has  no  special  connection,  and  the  epithet
Christian  is  freely  applied  to  virtues  and  moral  principles  that
are  far  older  and  more  universal  than  Christianity.  Lastly,
when  we  are  taking  the  work  of  special  sects  into  account  we
must  remember  that  their  ideas,  though  they  themselves  might
claim  them  as  exclusively  Christian,  may  be  in  greater  or  less
degree  inspired  by  the  general  culture  of  their  age  to  which
elements  not  distinctly  Christian  would  contribute.

Probably  we  shall  be  safe  in  following  the  historian  of  the
period  during  which  Christianity  superseded  Paganism  in  attri
buting  to  Christian  influence  in  the  first  place  a  heightened  sense


MONOTHEISM  157

of  the  sanctity  of  human  life.  We  have  seen  this  at  work  in
the  teaching  of  the  Church  as  to  penal  law.  Mr.  Lecky l  calls
attention  also  to  the  prohibition  of  abortion  and  infanticide
along  with  the  growth  of  public  provision  for  exposed  children
and  for  children  of  destitute  parents.2  In  this  relation  the
action  of  the  Church  was  determined  rather  by  the  belief  in  the
terrible  fate  awaiting  unbaptized  children  than  by  humanitarian
feeling  in  our  sense  of  the  term.3  The  suppression  of  gladia
torial  shows  is  a  more  decisive  instance  of  the  triumph  of
humanity,  and  with  this  we  may  associate  the  efforts,  perhaps
not  very  strenuous  efforts,  of  the  Church  to  suppress  private
fighting.  For  the  rest,  the  historian  lays  stress  on  those  efforts
to  mitigate  slavery  and  warfare,  and  to  extend  and  systematize
works  of  charity,  to  which  reference  has  been  already  made.
Apart  from  these  contributions  to  humanitarian  progress  the
ideals  of  asceticism  and  celibacy  and  the  establishment  of  indis
soluble  monogamous  marriage  (resting,  however,  on  the  free  con
sent  of  both  parties)  were  the  most  noteworthy  contributions  of
organized  Christianity  to  the  ethics  of  the  mediaeval  world.

If,  however,  we  take  the  Christian  teaching  apart  from  all  in
adequacies  of  historical  application  as  a  statement  of  an  ethical
ideal,  and  seek  to  measure  its  value  as  an  ideal,  a  more  decisive
judgment  is  possible.  It  carries  one  side  of  ethics  to  the  highest
possible  pitch  of  perfection,  but  it  leaves  another  side  compara
tively  neglected.  The  conception  of  a  brotherhood  of  love  based
on  the  negation  of  self  is  demonstrably  inadequate  to  the
problem  of  reorganizing  society  and  intelligently  directing
human  efforts.  Even  on  the  personal  side  it  is  deficient,  for
human  progress  depends  on  the  growth  and  perfecting  of
faculty,  and  therefore  requires  that  provision  be  made  for  a  self-
development  which  is  not  selfishness,  but  builds  up  a  better
personality  on  a  basis  of  self-repression.  Equally  on  the  social
side  the  ideal  of  loving  self-surrender  is  beautiful,  but  not
always  right.  Utter  self-sacrifice  is  magnificent,  but  it  is  not
justice,  arid  justice  and  reciprocity  are  even  more  essential

1  European  Morals,  vol.  ii.,  p.  20.

2  16.,  p.  30. Constantino's  law,  however,  provided  for  the  enslavement
of  the  exposed  child  to  its  protector. That  was  repealed  for  the  Eastern
empire  by  Justinian.

3  Hence  in  particular  the  condemnation  of  abortion. Lecky,  vol.  ii.,  p.  23.


158  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

elements  in  any  commonwealth  that  can  survive  and  include
average  humanity  within  it  than  the  readiness  to  resign  all  for
the  sake  of  others — a  willingness  which  can  hardly  be  made  a
universal  rule  without  bringing  action  to  a  standstill. Nor  does
true  love  mean  brotherly  kindness  and  a  diffused  benevolence
alone,  but  legitimately  includes  the  whole gamut of  human
passions — if  the  lust  of  the  eye  be  excepted — and  a  working
ethical  system  must  not  suppress  but  provide  a  place  for  these.
Applying  these  considerations  we  can  see  that  spiritual  religion,
though  it  recognizes  personality,  fails  to  give  it  full  scope  in  all
its  legitimate  developments.  It  exalts  the  common  life,  but  pays
little  attention  to  the  actual  conditions  of  any  social  structure.
It  inculcates  duties,  but  overlooks  rights — a  factor  scarcely  less
essential  to  social  progress. Finally,  having  found  its  ideal  in
the  heavens,  and  invested  it  with  supernatural  authority,  it  leaves
it  to  the  priesthood  to  bring  down  to  earth,  by  that  method  of
exegesis  which  tends  too  often  to  practise  men  in  the  art  of
asserting  principles  without  meaning  them,  and  accepting  ideals
with  readiness  because  they  know  how  to  escape  the  practical
difficulties of their application. Self-suppression, universal
brotherhood,  the  conquest  of  strength  by  silent  endurance,  these
remain  ideals  of  conduct  for  which  every  rational  system  of
ethics  must  find  a  place,  but  they  are  not  the  whole  of  social
morality,  and  some  of  them  are  even  capable  of  being  pressed  to
the  point  of  danger. It  is  not  merely  that,  humanity  being
what  it  is,  the  life  of  the  Gospel  could  only  be  lived  by  a  select
community  of  saints. There  is  another  side  to  the  question.
The  opposition  of  the  natural  to  the  supernatural  degrades  the
ordinary  life  of  men. What  is  of  this  world belongs  to  the
flesh,  and  what  belongs  to  the  flesh  is  of  the  nature  of  sin. In
the  pursuit  of  an  ideal  which  few or none can realize,  the
element  of  the  divine  which  lies  in  our  ordinary  human  nature
is  overlooked,  or  rather  it  is  denied. That  the  love  of  man  and
woman,  of  parent  and  child,  may  be  a  passion  which  can  on
occasion  raise  the  most  ordinary  and  least  saint-like  among  us
to  heights  of  self-negation  which  no  ascetic  can  surpass,  is  a
truth  to  which  common  experience  testifies. Yet  supernatural-
ism which  could paint the mystic love of the cloistered
enthusiast  could  only  conceive  of  sexual  love  as  a  bondage  of


MONOTHEISM  159

the  flesh.1  This  utter  misconception  of  one  side  of  human
nature  is  only  an  extreme  case  of  a  general  tendency.  Super
natural  ethics  fail  in  that  they  do  not  recognize  the  ideal
element  in  the  performance  of  natural  duty.  Love  of  country,
loyalty  to  comrades,  devotion  to  truth  and  justice,  all  serve
earthly  and  temporal  ends,  but  are  in  themselves  to  be  reckoned
among  the  spiritual  forces  that  guide  and  inspire  mankind.
With  this  interpretation  of  the  spiritual,  supernaturalism  is  not
contented.  Its  service  must  be  consciously  dedicated  to  the
glory  of  God.  It  must  eliminate  the  passions  which  retain  in
them  anything  of  an  earthly  element.  It  must  cut  the  ties  that
bind  us  to  this  world  and  extirpate  at  the  root  the  deadly
passions  that  drag  us  into  mortal  sin.  Hence  it  demands  a  life
separated  from  the  world,  which  mixes  with  the  world  from
benevolence  alone,  but  for  its  own  part  is  dead  to  this  natural
existence  and  lives  only  for  Christ.

Fortunately  for  the  Western  world  supernaturalism  was  but
one  side  of  Christianity.  Christ  Himself  was  no  anchorite,  and
His  teaching,  if  exacting,  was  also  tender.  There  have  never
been  wanting  individuals  to  show  the  world  that  it  was  possible
to  follow  in  his  steps,  and  live  externally  the  ordinary  life  of  a
commonplace  citizen  while  their  souls  within  them  are  filled  with
their  Master's  teaching  and  overflowed  in  charity  to  all  mankind.
It  is  here  in  the  simple  personal  following  of  Christ  that  the
strength  of  Christianity  will  always  lie — not  in  the  mazes  of
dogmatic  theology.not  in  the  spiritual  machinery  for  drawing  souls
to  God,  not  in  the  teaching  of  the  churches,  not  in  the  pomp  of
ceremonial,  not  in  the  fervour  of  the  preacher,  not  even  in  the
enthusiasm  of  the  mystic  who  dreams  of  his  oneness  with  God —
not  in  these  does  Christ  live,  but  first  in  the  few  who  live  as  he
did,  shedding  the  light  of  peace  around  them,  and  next  in  the
wider  circle  of  those  who,  dwelling  on  the  borderland  dim  betwixt
vice  and  virtue,  or  in  the  twilight  of  conventional  ideas,  are
irradiated  now  and  then  by  a  gleam  from  the  true  meaning  of
words  with  which  they  have  been  all  their  lives  familiar,  and  for
a  while  see  themselves  as  they  are  and  respond  with  some  effort,
however  faint  and  short,  towards  the  truth  of  things.

1  For  the  revolting  conception  of  womanhood  held  by  many  of  the
Saints,  see  Lecky,  History  of  European  Morals^  vol.  ii.,  pp.  116,  seq.


CHAPTER V

ETHICAL IDEALISM

1.  THE  preceding  chapters  have  illustrated  the  close  connection
between  ethical  and  religious  ideas.  We  have  in  fact  seen
ethics  upon  the  whole  in  a  position  of  dependence  and  subor
dination.  But  we  have  now  to  deal  with  more  independent
forms  of  ethical  thinking.  In  barbaric  society,  indeed,  reflection
of  this  kind  occupies  no  very  important  place;  it  hardly  goes
beyond  some  of  those  proverbial  maxims  of  conduct  which  form
the  simple,  worldly  wisdom  of  uncultivated  peoples  all  the
world  over.  In  the  early  civilizations  we  find  this  proverbial
philosophy  acquiring  a  somewhat  fuller  development  as  exem
plified  in  the  seven  sages  of  ancient  Greece  and  the  gnomic
poetry  which  belongs  to  the  same  period.  We  have  already
mentioned  certain  regular  treatises  on  practical  morals  which
are  a  feature  of  ancient  Egyptian  literature.  Writings  of  this
kind  are  not  without  their  value  for  the  historical  student,  pre
cisely  because  they  do  little  more  than  formulate  the  current
ideas  of  the  age  to  which  they  belong.  Indeed,  the  whole  race
of  proverbial  moralists  through  the  four  thousand  years  that
separate  Ptah  Hotep  and  Martin  Tupper  are  apt  to  degenerate
into  platitud mists.  They  utter  irreproachable  sentiments —
sentiments  at  least  irreproachable  according  to  the  standard  of
their  own  times — but  we  can  hardly  think  that  even  in  their
own  day  men  rose  from  the  perusal  of  them  with  any  deep  feel
ing  of  gratitude  for  heightened  insight  into  the  laws  of  conduct
or  the  relations  of  man  to  man.  In  them  the  ethical  ideal  is
not  yet  born ;  they  take  the  traditional  morality  and  formulate
it  into  neat  and  general  statements.

160


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  161

It  is  far  otherwise  with  the  class  of  thinkers  with  whom  we
have  now  to  deal. We  have  seen  in  the  history  of  religion  a
stage  at  which  the  divine  (which  at  first  is  lower,  and  for  long
ages  is  at  least  no  higher,  than  the  human)  becomes  idealized3,
and  there  arises  a  conception  of  a  spiritual  being  which  is  an
embodiment  of  all  that  man  can  dream  of  perfection. This  is
one  way  in  which  an  ideal  dawns  upon  humanity. The  other
way  is  through  reflection  upon  life  and  man's  place  in  it,  upon
human  nature  and  its  potentialities,  upon  human  action  and  its
ends. Following  this  road  thought  proceeds  by  the  deliberate
examination  of  human  experience,  and  seeks  thereby  to  deter
mine  where  man's  true  purpose  lies. By  this  method,  with
little  or  no  reference  to  supernatural  sanctions  or  even  to  divine
commands,  it  may  make  for  itself  an  ideal  of  conduct,  to  which
it  calls  man  to  conform  simply  because  such  conduct  is  best  for
himself  and  for  humanity. In  such  a  method  we  have  the
beginning  of  an  ethical  system  conceived  as  the  basis  of  a  con
scious  ordering  of  human  life  by  the  deliberate  efforts  of  the
best  and  wisest  members  of  the  human  race  ;  and  we  have  now
to  trace  briefly  the  development  of  this  ideal,  and  to  indicate
the  phases  which  it  has  assumed  and  the  function  which  it  has
performed  in  different  civilizations.

2.  Between  the  sixth  and  the  fourth  centuries  before  Christ
schools  of  thought  following  this  method  arose  in  two  distant
parts  of  the  world— in  China  and  in  Greece.  The  Chinese
thinkers  founded  a  great  system  which  from  that  day  to  this,  in
spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  reactionary  dynasty  which  destroyed
the  classical  books  and  prohibited  their  teaching,  has  guided  the
destiny  of  what  was,  down  almost  to  our  own  times,  by  far  the
greatest  empire  of  the  world  in  point  of  population.  It  has
supplied  the  rule  of  life  for  the  governing  classes  and  maintained
the  essence  of  Chinese  culture  intact  through,  and  in  spite  of,
successive  irruptions  of  semi-barbarous  conquerors ;  and  may
thus,  so  far  as  its  practical  influence  is  concerned,  fairly  claim
respect  as  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  influential  doctrines  of
ethical  conduct  which  the  world  has  known.  What,  then,  were
the  leading  doctrines  of  the  founder  of  this  influential  school  ?

The  first  principle  of  an  ethical  idealism,  which  is  to  rise
VOL.  ii.  M


162  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

above  the  common  morality  of  custom  and  to  depend  on  its  own
excellence  rather  than  upon  any  religious  sanction  to  recom
mend  it  to  mankind,  must  from  the  nature  of  the  case  lay  down
that  for  the  individual  virtue  is  its  own  reward.  It  is  this
which  distinguishes  the  ethical  from  the  supernatural  view  of
morals  on  the  one  hand  and  the  materialistic  or  prudential  on
the  other.  This  principle  is  constantly  insisted  upon  by  Con
fucius  :  "  I  have  not  seen  a  person  who  loved  virtue  or  one  who
hated  what  is  not  virtuous.  He  who  loved  virtue  would
esteem  nothing  above  it;  he  who  hated  what  is  not  virtuous
would  practise  virtue  in  such  a  way  that  he  would  not  allow
anything  that  was  not  virtuous  to  approach  his  person." l  The
sage  whose  conscience  is  clear  and  who  knows  that  his  dealings
are  upright  can  fear  no  punishment  from  the  powers  of  this
world.  "  Heaven  has  produced  the  virtue  that  is  in  me.
Hwan-T'uy — what  can  he  do  to  me  ? "  2  And  again — "  The
determined  scholar  and  the  master  of  virtue  will  not  seek  to
live  at  the  expense  of  injuring  their  virtue.  They  will  even
sacrifice  their  lives  to  preserve  their  virtue  complete."3  Every
man  is  master  of  himself,  and  thus,  as  the  Western  Stoic  taught,
has  a  sovereignty  which  no  one  but  himself  can  take  from  him.
"  The  commander  of  the  forces  of  a  large  state  may  be  carried
off,  but  the  will  of  even  a  common  man  cannot  be  taken  from
him." 4  The  sage  is  not  made  of  adamant  nor  is  he  wholly  un
affected  by  fortune  and  misfortune,  but  he  shows  his  strength
by  rising  superior  to  calamity.  "  With  coarse  rice  to  eat,  with
water  to  drink,  and  my  bended  arm  for  a  pillow,  I  still  have
joy  in  the  midst  of  these  things."5  Even  the  desire  of  post
humous  fame  must  be  banished  from  the  mind.  It  is  true
that  by  a  very  human  weakness  the  superior  man  dislikes  the
thought  of  his  name  not  being  mentioned  after  his  death,6  but
this  motive  is  rejected  as  unworthy.  "  To  live  in  obscurity  and
yet  practise  wonders  in  order  to  be  mentioned  with  honour  in
future  ages,  this  is  what  I  do  not  do."  7  Nor  is  there  any  hint
of  a  divine  reward.  The  current  doctrine  of  universal  animism
is  not  indeed  explicitly  rejected  by  Confucius,  but  he  nowhere

1  Lcgge,  Confucian  Analects,  bk.  iv.,  ch.  6,  sec.  1.  2  Ib.  viL  22.

3  Ib.  xv.,  ch.  8.  4  Ib.,  bk.  ix.,  ch.  26.  6  Ib.,  bk.  vii.,  ch.  15.

0  Ib.,  bk.  xv.,  ch.  19.  7  The  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  ch.  11.


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  163

appeals  to  the  benefits  to  be  gained  from  the  cult  of  spiritual
beings,  but,  on  the  contrary,  warns  his  followers  to  have  as  little
to  do  with  them  as  possible,  and  devote  themselves  instead  to
their  duty  towards  their  neighbours.  "  To  give  oneself  earnestly
to  the  duties  due  to  men  and,  while  respecting  spiritual  beings,
to  keep  aloof  from  them,  may  bo  called  wisdom." 1  Nor  does
Confucius  encourage  thinking  about  the  future  life.  Ke  Loo
asked  about  serving  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  The  Master  said,
"  While  you  are  not  able  to  serve  men,  how  can  you  serve  their
spirits  ?  "  Ke  Loo  added,  "  I  venture  to  ask  about  death."  He
was  answered,  "  While  you  do  not  know  life,  how  can  you  know
about  death  ? "  Only  the  consciousness  that  the  Supreme
spiritual  being  who  inhabits  Heaven  knows  him  through  and
through  remains  a  consolation.  "  Alas !  there  is  no  one  that
knows  me.  .  .  .  But  there  is  Heaven ; — that  knows  me." 3  And
the  appointment  of  Heaven  is  frequently  recognized  and  used
as  a  ground  for  ignoring  the  littleness  of  men  and  the  obstinacy
of  rulers.  "  If  my  principles  are  to  advance,  it  is  so  ordered.  If
they  are  to  fall  to  the  ground,  it  is  so  ordered.  What  can
the  Kung-pih-Leaou  do,  where  such  ordering  is  concerned  ? " 4
Fortified  by  the  favour  of  Heaven,  the  superior  man  rises  above
all  ordinary  human  weaknesses  and  is  completely  master  of  him
self.  "  The  way  of  the  superior  man  is  threefold  .  .  .  Virtuous,
he  is  free  from  anxieties ;  wise,  he  is  free  from  perplexities ;  bold,
he  is  free  from  fear."  5  Upon  the  whole,  Stoicism  itself  has
hardly  drawn  a  bolder  picture  of  the  self-poised,  self-mastering
personality,  lord  of  his  own  bosom  and  therefore  of  all  things
that  affect  him.  But  as  with  Stoicism,  so  with  Confucius  this
self-mastery  is  founded  upon  nature,  and  manifests  itself  in  con
formity  to  the  rules  of  social  life,  in  the  execution  of  justice  and
the  practice  of  benevolence.  "The  doctrine  of  our  master,"
said  Tsang,  "  is  to  be  true  to  the  principles  of  our  nature  and
the  benevolent  exercise  of  them  to  others — this,  and  nothing
more." e  Similarly,  the  Master  said,  "  Man  is  born  to  upright
ness.  If  a  man  lose  his  uprightness  and  yet  live,  his  escape
from  death  is  the  effect  of  mere  good  fortune."  7  This  nature  is

1  Analects,  bk.  vi.,  ch.  20.  2  Ib.,  bk.  xi.,  ch.  11.

3  11).  xiv.,  ch.  37.  4  Ib.  xiv.,  ch.  38.  5  Ib.  xiv.,  ch.  30.

«  Ib.,  bk.  iv.,  ch.  15.  7  jj bk>  vi ch>  17


164  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

conceived  as  common  to  all  men,  the  differences  that  arise  being
due  to  their  own  conduct.  "  By  nature,  men  are  nearly  alike ;  by
practice,  they  get  to  be  wide  apart."  l  Nor  is  virtue  to  be  found
in  deserting  the  common  life  and  going  out  into  the  wilderness
to  seek  for  occasions  on  which  to  manifest  one's  superiority.
"  The  path  is  not  far  from  man.  When  men  try  to  pursue  a
course  which  is  far  from  the  common  indications  of  conscience,
this  course  cannot  be  considered  The  Path." 2  But  instruction
is  often  essential.  Knowledge  of  duties  may  be  inborn,  acquired
by  study,  or  after  a  painful  feeling  of  ignorance.  They  may
come  with  natural  ease,  from  a  desire  for  their  advantages,  or  by
strenuous  effort.3  The  only  distinctions  which  the  teacher
claims  for  himself  are,  first,  that  his  efforts  towards  perfect
virtue,  though  never  successful,  are  constant  and  unceasing —
the  Master  does  not  rank  himself  with  the  sage  and  the  man  of
perfect  virtue,  but  strives  without  satiety  to  become  such4 —
secondly,  that  he  passes  his  life  in  learning.  "  In  a  hamlet  of
ten  families  there  may  be  found  one  honourable  and  sincere  as
I  am,  but  not  so  fond  of  learning."  5  That  is  to  say,  the  funda
mental  moral  qualities  are  widely  diffused,  but  not  the  intel
lectual  attainments  which  direct  them.  On  the  other  hand,
mere  customary  morality  is  sweepingly  condemned,  and  here
breathes  the  true  spirit  of  ethical  idealism.  "  Your  good,  careful
people  of  the  villages  are  the  thieves  of  virtue  " 6 — a  text  which
is  ably  commented  upon  by  the  greatest  of  Confucians  : —

"  Wan  Chang  said,  '  Their  whole  village  styles  those  men  good
and  careful.  In  all  their  conduct  they  are  so.  How  was  it  that
Confucius  considered  them  the  thieves  of  virtue  ? '

"  Mencius  replied,  '  If  you  would  blame  them,  you  find  nothing  to
allege.  If  you  would  criticize  them,  you  have  nothing  to  criticize.
They  agree  with  the  current  customs.  They  consent  with  an  im
pure  age.  Their  principles  have  a  semblance  of  right-heartedness
and  truth.  Their  conduct  has  a  semblance  of  disinterestedness  and
purity.  All  men  are  pleased  with  them,  and  they  think  themselves
right,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  proceed  with  them  to  the  principles

1  Analects,  bk.  xvii.,  ch.  2.  2  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  ch.  13,  sec.  1.

8  Ib.,  ch.  20,  sec.  9.

4  Analects,  bk.  vii.,  ch.  32  and  33.

5  Ib.,  bk.  v.,  ch.  27.  6  Ib.,  bk.  xvii.,  ch.  13.


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  165

of  Yaou  and  Shun. On  this  account  they  are  called  "  The  thieves  of
virtue." '

"  Confucius  said,  '  I  hate  a  semblance  which  is  not  the  reality.  I
hate  the  darnel,  lest  it  be  confounded  with  the  corn.  I  hate  glib-
tonguedness,  lest  it  be  confounded  with  righteousness.  I  hate
sharpness  of  tongue,  lest  it  be  confounded  with  sincerity.  I  hate
the  music  of  Ch'ing,  lest  it  be  confounded  with  the  true  music.  I
hate  the  reddish-blue,  lest  it  be  confounded  with  vermilion.  I  hate
your  good,  careful  men  of  the  villages,  lest  they  be  confounded  with
the  truly  virtuous.' "  l

The  basis  of  morals,  then,  is  the  intrinsic  desirability  of  a  great
ideal  which  accords  with  the  true  principles  of  man's  nature
when  brought  to  their  due  development  by  proper  education.
To  such  an  ideal  man  must  hold  fast  in  spite  of  all  that  fortune
or  his  fellow-men  can  do  to  him,  and  that  will  be  best  for  him  in
that  he  so  remains  lord  of  himself.  In  so  doing  he  keeps  the
appointment  of  Heaven,  yet  his  reward  is  nothing  external  to
the  act  itself,  but  consists  merely  in  the  high  desirability  of  the
life  lived  in  accordance  with  the  best  principles  that  are  in  one.

3.  In  what  outward  conduct  does  this  ideal  show  itself?
Generally  speaking,  in  the  conduct  of  the  good  citizen,  the  dutiful
son,  the  kindly  neighbour  and,  in  particular,  the  upright  official
who  would  resist  to  the  death  the  corrupt  tyrant.  Uprightness
and  benevolence  are  the  two  master-words.  Confucius  accepted
and  re- constituted  the  traditional  standard  of  Chinese  ethics  with
its  closely-linked  family  ties  and  its  patriarchal  relations  of  ruler
and  subject.  He  calls  himself  a  transmitter  and  not  a  maker,
believing  in  and  loving  the  Ancients.2  Hence  he  insists
repeatedly  upon  a  conception  of  filial  devotion  which  to  the
Western  mind  appears  exaggerated.  He  finds  the  standard  of
conduct  frequently  in  those  rules  of  propriety  which  belong  to
ancient  tradition,  and  prescribe  the  requisite  term  of  mourning
for  the  cult  of  the  dead,  the  due  order  of  precedence  among
relations,  a  ceremonial  etiquette  as  between  the  prince  and  his
officers,  and  so  forth.  In  the  Book  of  Rites  he  is,  generally
speaking,  moderate  and  reasonable  in  his  interpretation  of

1  Mencius,  bk.  vii.,  pt.  ii.  ch.  37,  sees.  10,  11,  12.

2  Analects,  vii.,  ch.  1.


166  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

customary  rules ; l  but,  considering  the  incubus  which  the  cult
of  the  dead  has  imposed  upon  industrial  life  in  China,  it  is  to  be
regretted  that  he  did  not  apply  himself  more  resolutely  to
inquiring  into  the  grounds  of  custom,  and  teaching  men  that  its
authority  rests  only  upon  its  value  in  the  social  life  of  mankind.
He  is  very  clear  that  the  requirements  of  virtue  are  not  satisfied
by  mere  outward  conformity.  In  mourning,  for  instance,  the
feeling  of  grief  was  a  far  more  essential  matter  than  the  form  in
which  it  was  expressed,2  and  again,  outward  conformity  to  law
may  be  secured  by  punishment,  but  this  is  not  a  moral  education
of  the  people,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  corrupt  influence"'.  "  If  the
people  be  led  by  laws  and  uniformity  sought  to  be  given  them
by  punishments,  they  will  try  to  avoid  the  punishment  but  have
no  sense  of  shame ;  if  they  be  led  by  virtue,  and  uniformity
sought  to  be  given  them  by  the  rules  of  propriety,  they  will  have
the  sense  of  shame,  and  moreover  will  become  good."  3

Confucius  therefore  held  by  tradition,  and  advanced  no
reasoned  theory  of  the  rules  of  conduct.  Yet  certain  funda
mentals  appear.  Virtue  must  come  from  the  good  will.  While
the  "  rules  of  propriety  "  generally  supply  the  detail,  the  broad
principles  of  conduct  are  those  which  follow  from  the  conception
of  oneself  as  the  servant  of  mankind,  and  of  social  happiness  as
the  supreme  end  of  endeavour  for  the  individual.  For  example
we  are  told  that  Tsze-ch'an  had  four  of  the  characteristics  of  the
superior  man ;  "  in  his  conduct  of  himself  he  was  humble,  in
serving  his  superiors  he  was  respectful,  in  nourishing  the  people
he  was  kind,  in  ordering  the  people  he  was  just."4  Again,
perfect  virtue  is  "  when  you  go  abroad  to  behave  to  every  one  as
if  you  were  receiving  a  great  guest ;  to  employ  the  people  as  if
you  were  assisting  at  a  great  sacrifice ;  not  to  do  to  others  as
you  would  not  wish  done  to  yourself;  to  have  no  murmuring
against  you  in  the  country  and  none  in  the  family."5  The
virtues  of  the  sage  are  acquired  for  the  happiness  of  the  world
at  large.  "  Tsze-loo  asked  what  constituted  the  superior  man."
The  Master  said,  "The  cultivation  of  himself  in  reverential
carefulness."  "  And  is  this  all  ? "  said  Tsze-loo.  "  He  cultivates

1  De  Groot,  ii.,  662,  etc.  2  Analects,  bk.  iii.,  ch.  4.

3  Ib.,  ii.,  ch.  3.  4  Ib.  v.  ch.  15.

6  Ib.,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  2.


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  167

himself  so  as  to  give  rest  to  others."  ... "Is  this  all  ?  "  asked
Tsze-loo. The  Master  said,  "  He  cultivates  himself  so  as  to  give
rest  to  all  the  people."1 In  the  practice  of  benevolence  ^  the
family  relations  come  first. Benevolence  is  the  characteristic
element  of  humanity  and  the  great  exercise  of  it  is  in  loving
relations. Righteousness  is  the  acting  in  accordance  with  what
is  right  and  the  great  exercise  of  it  is  in  honouring  the  worthy.
The  decreasing  measures  of  the  love  due  to  relatives  and  the
steps  in  the  honour  due  to  the  worthy  are  produced  by  the
principles  of  propriety.2 Indeed,  Confucius's  simple  and  some
what  elementary  political  philosophy  rests  on  his  conception  of
the  family  as  the  type  and  exemplar  of  the  State.  "  There  is  filial
piety,  therewith  the  sovereign  should  be  served ;  there  is  fraternal
submission,  therewith  the  elders  and  superiors  should  be  served ;
there  is  kindness,  therewith  the  multitude  should  be  treated." 3
Thus,  the  Confucian  rule  of  benevolence  is  not  a  mere  abstract
principle,  but  one  regulated  in  its  application  by  well-understood
duties  depending  on  a  man's  position  in  his  family  or  in  the
State. It  is  moreover  always  conceived  in  close  connection  with
justice. The  "  golden  rule  "  to  treat  others  as  we  would  have
them  treat  us,  which  Confucius  was  the  first  to  formulate,  is
as  much  a  matter  of  justice  as  of  benevolence. It  is  a  rule  of
impartiality  as  between  self  and  others. Tsze-kung  asked,  "Is
there  one  word  which  may  serve  as  a  rule  of  practice  for  all
one's life  ?  " The Master said, "  Is not  reciprocity  such  a
word  ? What  you  do  not  want  done  to  yourself  do  not  do  to
others." 4 Benevolence,  indeed,  should  be  universal,5  but  there
must  be  a  rule  of  justice  in  applying  it. We  should  forgive
injuries,  but  we  should  not  push  that  principle  to  the  point  of
treating  the  evil  and  the  good  alike. The  philosopher  Lao-tsze
had  urged  that  instead  of  returning evil  for  evil  we  should
recompense  evil  with  kindness. Being  asked  what  he  thought
of  this  principle,  the  Master  said,  "  With  what,  then,  will  you
recompense kindness? Recompense injury with  justice  and
recompense  kindness  with  kindness." 6 But  this  is  not  to  be

1  Analects,  bk.  xiv.,  ch.  45.

8  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  ch.  20,  sec.  5.

3  The  Great  Learning,  ch.  9.  4  Analects,  bk.  xv.,  ch.  M.

*  Ib.,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  22.  6  J6-,  bk.  xiv.,  ch.  36,


168  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

taken  as  justifying  vengeance.  "To  show  forbearance  and
gentleness  in  teaching  others  and  not  to  revenge  unreasonable
conduct,  this  is  the  forcefulness  of  Southern  regions  and  the  good
man  makes  it  his  study."  l

Such  then,  in  brief,  is  the  code  of  private  life.  To  live  in
the  service  of  mankind,  to  respect  parents  and  superiors,  to  be
kind  and  helpful  to  those  in  need,  to  have  no  enemies,  to  for
bear  with  the  offender  and  forgive  him  within  the  limits  of
justice,  to  be  prepared  to  love  all  men,  to  hate  only  those  who
slander  others  and  thrust  themselves  forward  against  all  social
tradition,2  to  serve  a  good  ruler  but  withstand  him  to  his  face
f  he  is  bad,  to  undergo  privation  and,  if  necessary,  death  for  a
moral  principle,  to  be  grieved  and  feel  pity  for  the  criminal
instead  of  triumphing  over  him,3  not  to  withdraw  from  the
world,  to  realize  that  man's  life  is  to  be  lived  in  the  midst  of
humanity  whatever  the  difficulties  and  drawbacks  may  be,  and
in  all  these. things  to  recognize  that  the  beginning  and  the
end  is  sincerity  4— such  is  the  ideal  of  personal  conduct  that
Confucius  taught  to  China.

The  ideal  of  public  conduct  is  like  unto  it.  In  fact,  through
out  Confucius  is  talking  with  officials,  addressing  men  who
hold  office  and  who  are  concerned  with  the  problems  of  con
science  arising  in  connection  with  the  tenure  of  office,  with
the  duties  of  the  King  and  the  relation  of  King  and
officer.  Throughout  he  insists  upon  the  duty  of  prince  to
people.  The  relationship  should  be  that  of  father  to  children.
The  first  duty  of  the  prince  is  to  order  his  own  conduct  aright,
and  to  show  in  his  own  household  those  principles  of  family  life
upon  which  the  structure  of  Chinese  society  was  held  to  de
pend  ;  from  his  example  outwards  the  influence  would  radiate.
When  Ke-K'ang  asked  about  government  Confucius  replied,
"  To  govern  means  to  rectify.  If  you  lead  on  the  people  with
correctness  who  will  dare  not  to  be  correct  ?  "  5  And  when
Ke-K'ang  was  distressed  by  the  number  of  thieves,  Confucius
replied  with  much  directness,  "  If  you,  Sir,  were  not  covetous,
although  you  should  reward  them  to  do  it  they  would  not

1  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  ch.  10.  *  Analects,  bk.  xvii.,  ch.  24.

21.,  bk  xix ch  19.  4  Doctrine  Of  the  M ch  25

6  Analects,  bk.  xu.,  ch.  17.


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  169

steal."1  The  people  are  by  nature  disposed  to  virtue;  they
break  out  into  mutiny  only  in  times  of  distress.  The  duty  of  the
prince  is  to  keep  down  taxation,  avoid  harsh  punishments  and
excessive  forced  labour.2  When  the  people  are  numerous  what
next  is  to  be  done  for  them  ?  The  answer  is,  "  Enrich  them."
"  And  when  they  have  been  enriched  ?  "  "  Teach  them." 3  The
virtuous  and  wise  prince  is  able  to  dispense  with  punishment.
"  Sir,  in  carrying  on  your  government  why  should  you  use
killing  at  all  ?  Let  your  evinced  desires  be  for  what  is  good  and
the  people  will  be  good.  .  .  .  The  grass  must  bend  when  the
wind  blows  over  it."4  A  succession  of  good  governors  lasting
over  a  century  would  be  able  to  transform  the  violently  bad  and
dispense  with  capital  punishment.5  In  accordance  with  the
doctrine  of  universal  benevolence  the  people  are  the  first  object
in  the  State.  The  King  is  their  servant,  and  that  sovereign  is
most  praised  who  takes  upon  himself  the  sins  of  the  people  and
is  responsible  for  them  to  Heaven.6  We  have  here,  in  short,  a
theory  of  conduct  which  is  at  the  same  time  a  theory  of  society,
elementary  no  doubt,  especially  in  its  political  aspect,  yet  the
foundation  of  that  cultivated  class  which  has  for  two  thousand
years  governed  China  and  kept  Chinese  civilization  erect  through
all  its  vicissitudes.

4.  The  teaching  of  Confucius  was  further  developed  by  the
greatest  disciple  of  his  school,  the  philosopher  Mencius  (B.C.
371-288).  Mencius  made  no  entirely  new  departure,  but  put
the  moral  theory  of  Confucius  in  a  more  systematic  form,
stated  many  of  the  Master's  fundamental  positions  with  a
vigour  and  incisiveness  that  were  entirely  his  own,  and  laid
special  stress  on  certain  sides  of  political  morality,  such  as  the
inherent  wickedness  of  militarism,  and  the  right  of  rebellion
against  a  vicious  sovereign.  With  him  again  virtue  is  the
supreme  end  of  life.  Perfect  uprightness  alone  casteth  out  fear.
He  attributes  to  "the  Master  "a  saying,  "If  on  self-examination
I  find  that  I  am  not  upright,  shall  I  not  be  in  fear  even  of  a
poor  man  in  his  loose  garments  of  hair-cloth?  If  on  self-

1  Analects,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  18. 2  Of.  Doctrine  of  the  Mean,  ch.  xx.,  14.

3  Analects,  bk.  xiii.,  ch.  9.  4  lb.,  bk.  xii.,  ch.  19.

5  16.,  bk.  xiii.,  ch.  11.  °  tt.,  bk.  xx.,  ch.  1,  sec.  3.


170  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

examination  I  find  that  I  am  upright,  I  will  go  forward  against
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands." 1  He  who  knows  his  own
nature,  knows  Heaven,  and  "  to  preserve  one's  mental  constitu
tion  and  nourish  one's  nature  is  the  way  to  serve  Heaven."2
Heaven  has  its  appointments  which  we  should  accept  instinct
ively,  but  this  is  not  to  lead  us  into  fatalism.

"  He  who  has  the  true  idea  of  what  is  Heaven's  appointment  will
not  stand  beneath  a  precipitous  wall.

"  Death  sustained  in  the  discharge  of  one's  duties  may  correctly
be  ascribed  to  the  appointment  of  Heaven.

"Death  under  handcuffs  and  fetters  cannot  correctly  be  so
ascribed." 3

The  other  elements  of  happiness  depend  on  virtue.  Being
asked  by  King  Hwuy  whether  wise  and  good  princes  find
pleasure  in  geese  and  deer,  Mencius  replied,  "  Being  wise  and
good  they  have  pleasure  in  these  things.  If  they  are  not  wise
and  good,  though  they  have  these  things,  they  do  not  find
pleasure."  4

"  To  dwell  in  the  wide  house  of  the  world,  to  stand  in  the  correct
seat  of  the  world,  and  to  walk  in  the  great  path  of  the  world ;  when
he  obtains  his  desire  for  office,  to  practise  his  principles  for  the  good
of  the  people;  and  when  that  desire  is  disappointed,  to  practise
them  alone ;  to  be  above  the  power  of  riches  and  honours  to  make
dissipated,  of  poverty  and  mean  condition  to  make  swerve  from
principle,  and  of  power  and  force  to  make  bend," 5  such  in  a  few
words  are  the  life  and  character  of  the  great  man.  His  principles
allow  of  no  compromise.  "  Never  has  a  man  who  has  bent  himself
been  able  to  make  others  straight."  6

5.  Man  must  be  lord  of  himself.  But  in  the  pursuit  of  virtue  he
is  doing  no  violence  to  himself.  He  is  merely  fulfilling,  bringing
to  the  perfection  of  development  the  seeds  of  good  implanted  in
him  by  nature.  Here  the  teaching  of  Mencius  is  more  distinct
than  that  of  his  master,  and  contains  the  germs  of  a  scientific
theory  of  moral  psychology.  The  foundation  of  virtue  is  in  the
"  passion-nature  "  which  occupies  a  position  in  the  soul  some-

1  Mencius,  bk.  ii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  2,  sec.  7. 2  Ib.,  bk.  vii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  1.

3  16.,  bk.  vii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  2.  4  16.,  bk.  i.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  2,  sec.  2.

5  Ib.,  bk.  iii.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  2,  sec.  3.  6  16.,  bk.  iii.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  1,  sec.  5


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  171


what  analogous  to  that  of  the  fo/xoeiSe's  in  Plato's  scheme.  ^  The
"  passion-nature  "  needs  guidance  and  its  natural  leader  is  the
will,1  directed  as  we collect  from  other  passages  by  education
and  the  "  rules  of propriety." But  this  will  must  lead  and
not  force,  just  as  the  ruler  should  not  subdue  men  by  violence
but  win  their  hearts  by  virtue. Or,  in  a  different  metaphor,
the  "  passion-nature  "  must  be  weeded,  not  pulled  up.2 For  the
feelings are  the  foundation  of  the  virtues. "  The  feeling  of
commiseration  is  the  principle  of  benevolence. The  feeling  of
shame  and  dislike  is  the  principle  of  righteousness. The  feeling
of  modesty  and  complaisance  is  the  principle  of  propriety. The
feeling  of  approving  and  disapproving  is  the  principle  of  know
ledge. Men  have  these  four  principles  •  as  they  have  their  four
limbs,"  and  those  who  say  they  cannot  develop  them  play  the
thief  with  themselves.3 "  All  men  have  a  mind  which  cannot
bear  to  see  the  sufferings  of  others."  4 "  Even  nowadays,"  if  we
saw  a  child  about  to  fall  into  a  well,  we  should  experience  alarm
and  distress,  not  from  any  desire  for  the  favour  of  its  parents,
nor  from any love of  praise,  but because commiseration  is
essential  to  man.5 Only  as  we  saw  above  °  in  the  story  of  King
Seuen,  it  is  the  misery  that  we  see  that  affects  us,  and  our
imaginations are  not  vivid  enough  to  make  us  feel  the  pain
that  we  do  not  see. What  is  needed  is  development  of  the
good  material  that  is  in  man. Let  the  four  principles  "  have
their  complete  development  and  they  will  suffice  to  love  and
protect  all  within  the  four seas. Let  them be  denied that
development  and  they  will  not  suffice  for  a  man  to  serve  his
parents  with."  7 These  principles  are  not  infused  into  us  from

i  Mencius,  bk.  ii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  2.  2  16.,  bk.  ii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  2,  sec.  16.

3  16.,  bk.  ii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  6.  4  16.,  bk.  11.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  6.

5  Loc  at  o  Pt.  i.,  ch.  6.

?  Bk.'  ii,'  pt.  i.,  ch.  2. Elsewhere  (Bk.  vi,  pt.  i.,  ch.  1)  a  dialogue
occurs  between  Mcncius  and  Kaou,  which  Kaou  begins  by  suggesting  that
righteousness  is  to  man's  nature  as  a  cup  to  willow  wood. Mencms  objec
that  this  implies  that  violence  must  be  done  to  humanity  to  convert  it
righteousness. Kaou  then  compares  human  nature  to  water,  which  flows
east  or  west  according  as  a  channel  is  opened  for  it. Mencius  replies  that
"the  tendency  of  man's  nature  to  good  is  like  the  tendency  oi  water  to
flow  downwards." Kaou  then  draws  a  distinction  between  Righteousness
as  external  and  Benevolence  as  internal. I  honour  an  old  man  not  becaus
there  is  a  principle  of  reverence  in  men,  but  just  as  when  1  see  a  whi
man  I  consider  him  white. Kaou  is  here  taking  up  a  position  somewhat


172  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

without.  "Seek  and  you  will  find  them.  Neglect  and  you
will  lose  them." *  But  men  differ  much  in  the  cultivation  of
them,  and  what  is  needed  is  to  work  on  the  basis  of  good  which
exists  in  all  and  extend  it 2  so  as  to  cover  the  whole  of  life  and
achieve  that  universal  benevolence  which  is  "  the  most  honour
able  dignity  conferred  by  Heaven."  3

Benevolence  and  righteousness  are  the  leading  notes  of  the
character  that  is  fully  developed.  Not  indeed  that  benevolence
should  be  equally  apportioned  to  all  men.  Natural  ties  have
their  place.  The  philosopher  Mih  taught  that  we  should  love

analogous  to  that  of  the  "  moral  sense"  school.  Mencius's  reply  is  to  the
fleet  that  whiteness  is  a  quality  common  to  a  man  and  a  horse.  We  do
not  honour  an  aged  horse  ;  nor  is  there  any  righteousness  in  the  age  of  a
man,  but  in  our  honouring  it  (i.  e.  righteousness  is  not  a  perceptible  quality
ot  things,  but  lies  in  a  relation  of  ourselves  to  other  persons).  Kaou  then
says  that  he  loves  his  younger  brother,  but  not  the  younger  brother  of  a
man  of  Tsm— the  feeling  is  therefore  determined  by  himself,  internal
(subjective).  On  the  other  hand,  he  honours  an  old  man  whether  of  his
own  people  or  of  Ts'oo.  Therefore  this  (a  point  of  righteousness)  is  external.
Mencius  replies  that  we  enjoy  roast  meat,  whether  roasted  by  ourselves  or
men  of  Tsin.  Would  Kaou  say  that  our  enjoyment  of  roast  meat  is
external  1  The  discussion  is  as  interesting  as  the  examples  are  quaint.
Kaou  is  contending  for  the  objectivity  of  the  moral  standard  as  contrasted
with  the  subjective  variations  of  good  feeling  ;  Mencius  for  the  subjectivity
of  all  morals,  in  the  sense  that  they  proceed  from  and  rest  on  human
nature.  The  solution  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the  Kantian  distinction
between  subjective  as  =  the  necessary  laws  of  a  subject,  i.e.  of  a  rational
being,  and  as  — the  individual  variations  which  make  up  a  man's  idiosyn
crasies.

1  Mencius,  bk.  vi.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  6,  sec.  7.

2  "All  men  have  some  things  which  they  cannot  bear;  extend  that
teelmg  to  what  they  can  bear,  and  benevolence  will  be  the  result. All  men
have  some  things  which  they  will  not  do  ;  extend  that  feeling  to  the  things
which  they  do,  and  righteousness  will  be  the  result.

"If  a  man  can  give  full  development  to  the  feeling  which  makes  him
shrink  from  injuring  others,  his  benevolence  will  be  more  than  can  be
called  into  practice.  If  he  can  give  full  development  to  the  feeling  which
refuses  to  break  through  or  jump  over  a  wall,  his  righteousness  will  be
more  than  can  be  called  into  practice.

"  If  he  can  give  full  development  to  the  real  feeling  of  dislike  with  which
he  receives  the  salutation,  '  Thou,'  '  Thou,'  he  will  act  righteously  in  all
places  and  circumstances."  (Bk.  vii.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  31,  sees.  1-3.)

In  more  modern  phrase,  one  might  say  that  every  man  "  has  his  code."
In  that  code  lie  concealed  impulses  which,  adequately  developed,  would
furnish  a  perfect  character.  By  it  are  inferred  principles  which,  consistently
carried  out,  would  suffice  for  a  saint.  Thieves'  honour  recognizes  a  prin
ciple  which  the  thief  applies  only  to  his  fellow-thieves.  If  he  applies  it
without  any  such  arbitrary  restrictions,  he  must  become  an  honest  man

3  Bk.  ii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  7,  sec.  2.


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  173

all  equally,  which  is  contrary  to  filial  duty,  but  "  To  acknow
ledge  neither  king  nor  father  is  to  be  in  the  state  of  a  beast."  *
Human  excellence  lies  in  the  performance  of  the  social  duties.
The  life  of  the  hermit  is  like  that  of  an  earth-worm.2  The  sage
learns  humbly  from  others.  "  When  any  one  told  Tsze-loo  that
he  had  a  fault,  he  rejoiced,"  and  Shun  "  regarded  virtue  as  the
common  property  of  himself  and  others,  giving  up  his  own  way  to
follow  that  of  others,  and  delighting  to  learn  from  others  to
practise  what  was  good."  3  Though  it  is  the  duty  of  the  sage  to
teach  as  well  as  learn,  yet  there  is  a  pitfall  here.  "  The  evil  of
men  is  that  they  like  to  be  teachers  of  others."4  As  to  the
conventions,  Mencius  holds  by  the  "rules  of  propriety,"  but
sometimes  not  without  symptoms  of  impatience.  A  stickler  for
strict  rule  would  not  touch  a  woman's  hand  even  to  save  her
from  drowning.  Such  a  man,  says  Mencius  curtly,  is  a  "  wolf."  5
The  intrinsic  importance  of  the  rule  must  be  taken  into  account,
and  also  the  urgency  of  the  motive  for  casting  it  aside.6  Had
this  principle  been  developed,  it  would  have  broken  the  crust

1  Mencius,  bk.  iii.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  9,  sec.  9. Mih's  expression  of  the  doctrine
of  universal  benevolence  was  of  the  most  sweeping  kind. "  It  is  this
principle  of  making  distinctions  between  man  and  man  which  gives  rise  to
all  that  is  most  injurious  in  the  empire." (Legge,  ii.,  Prolegomena,  p.  111.)
Mih  seeks  to  turn  the  objection  that  the  doctrine  is  contrary  to  filial  piety  by
urging  that  by  loving  and  serving  others  a  man  will  obtain  their  love  and
benefits  for  his  parents. (Ib.  pp.  105-119.) Mih's  practical  polemic  was
directed  against  the  excessive  burden  thrown  on  Chinese  life  by  the  laws
of  mourning,  and  the  classical  philosophy,  as  De  Groot's  account  clearly
shows,  erred  by  adhering  too  closely  to  the  traditional  observance.

Mencius  follows  closely  the  typical  Chinese  view  in  the  extension  of  the
principle  of  filial  piety  to  cover  all  forms  of  wrong-doing  that  might
indirectly  injure  parents,  and  in  exalting  it  to  the  disparagement  of  duties
to  wife  and  child.  Thus  he  enumerates  five  common  things  which  are
unfilial.  1.  Laziness.  2,  Gambling,  chess-playing  and  wine-bibbing.  3.
Love  of  money  and  selfish  attachment  to  wife  and  child — these  three  when
followed  to  the  point  of  neglect  of  parents.  4.  Following  the  desire  of
eyes  and  ears  so  as  to  bring  parents  into  disgrace.  5.  Being  fond  of
bravery,  fighting  and  quarrelling  so  as  to  endanger  parents.  (Bk.  iv.,
pt.  ii,  ch.  30.)  He  holds  up  for  imitation  the  example  of  Chang,  who,
because  his  father  was  offended,  sent  away  his  wife  and  child,  and  all  his
life  received  no  cherishing  attention  from  them.  (Ib.,  sec.  5.)  There  is  of
course  another  point  of  view — that  of  Chang's  wife  and  child  and  the  atten
tion  that  they  might  expect.  The  Western  world  puts  them  first,  the
Chinese  second  longo  intervallo.

2  Bk.  iii.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  10.  3  Bk.  ii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  8.
4  Bk.  iv.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  23.

6  Ib.,  ch.  17. Cf.  Douglas,  Society  in  China,  p.  189.
6  Bk.  vi.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  1.


174  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

of  Chinese  formalism  and  opened  the  way  for  a  richness  of
spiritual  growth  which,  crusted  over  by  tradition  as  it  has  been
from  the  first,  Confucianism  has  never  brought  forth.

6.  But  it  is  in  its  political  applications  that  the  ethical  teach
ing  of  Mencius  is  most  thoroughgoing.  Here  the  principles  of
justice  and  benevolence  require  that  the  welfare  of  the  people
should  be  the  first  consideration  of  government.  "  The  people
are  the  most  important  element  in  a  nation,  the  spirits  of  the
land  and  grain  are  the  next,  the  sovereign  is  the  lightest." l  The
people's  will  practically  expressed  in  unanimous  support  of,  or
aversion  to,  a  ruler  is  of  divine  authority.  "Heaven  sees
according  as  my  people  see :  Heaven  hears  according  as  my
people  hear."'  The  king  must  care  for  their  prosperity  He
should  refrain  from  interfering  with  husbandry,  spare  the  grow
ing  trees  and  the  young  fish,  plant  mulberry-trees  about  the
homesteads  and  inculcate  filial  and  paternal  duties  in  the
schools.  A  ruler  so  governing  his  state  would  certainly  become
emperor.  Instead  of  this  he  says  severely  to  a  prince—

"Your  dogs  and  swine  eat  the  food  of  men,  and  you  do  not  know
to make any restrictive arrangements. There  are  people  dying
from  famine  on the roads,  and you do not know to  issue  the
stores  of  your  granaries  for them. When  people  die,  you  say
:  not  owing  to  me;  it  is  owing  to  the  year.' In  what  does
his  differ  from  stabbing  a  man  and  killing  him,  and  then  saying

t  was  not  I ;  it  was  the  weapon  ? '  Let  your  Majesty  cease  to  lay
the  blame  on  the  year,  and  instantly  from  all  the  empire  the  people
will  come  to  you.  .  .

"In  your  kitchen  there  is  fat  meat;  in  your  stables  there  are  fat
horses.  But  your  people  have  the  look  of  hunger,  and  on  the  wilds
there  are  those  who  have  died  of  famine.  This  is  leading  on  beasts
to  devour  men."3

Lighter  taxation,  care  for  the  poor  and  childless,  the  punish
ment  of  corrupt  officials,  moderation  in  punishments  avoidina
the  principle  of  collective  responsibility,  attention  to  works  o°f
public  necessity,  and  above  all  aversion  to  warfare,  were  the
marks  of  the  good  ruler.  In  the  good  old  days  of  King  Wan—

1  Mencius>  bk-3v»-'  I*  »•>  ?h.  14.  •  Bk.  v.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  5,  sec.  8.

Bk.  i.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  3,  sec.  5  ;  ch.  4,  sec.  4.


ETHICAL  IDEALISM  175

"  The  husbandmen  cultivated  for  the  government  one-ninth  of  the
land ;  the  descendants  of  officers  were  salaried ;  at  the  passes  and
in  the  markets  strangers  were  inspected,  but  goods  were  not  taxed ;
there  were  no  prohibitions  respecting  the  ponds  and  weirs ;  the
wives  and  children  of  criminals  were  not  involved  in  their  guilt.
There  were  the  old  and  wifeless,  or  widowers ;  the  old  and  husband-
less,  or  widows ;  the  old  and  childless,  or  solitaries  ;  the  young  and
fatherless,  or  orphans  : — these  four  classes  are  the  most  destitute  of
the  people,  and  have  none  to  whom  they  can  tell  their  wants,  and
King  Wan,  in  the  institution  of  his  government  with  its  benevolent
action,  made  them  the  first  objects  of  his  regard." l

1  Mencius,  bk.  i.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  5,  sec.  3.  The  whole  theory  of  government  is
somewhat  more  fully  stated  in  bk.  vi.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  7  :— "  The  five  chiefs  of  the
princes  were  sinners  against  the  three  kings.  The  princes  of  the  present
day  are  sinners  against  the  five  chiefs.  The  great  officers  of  the  present  day
are  sinners  against  the  princes."

"  The  emperor  visited  the  princes,  which  was  called  '  A  tour  of  inspection.'
The  princes  attended  at  the  court  of  the  emperor,  which  was  called
'  Giving  a  report  of  office.'  It  was  a  custom  in  the  spring  to  examine  the
ploughing,  and  supply  any  deficiency  of  seed,  and  in  autumn  to  examine
the  reaping,  and  assist  where  there  was  a  deficiency  of  the  crop.  When  the
emperor  entered  the  boundaries  of  a  State,  if  the  new  ground  was  being
reclaimed,  and  the  old  fields  well  cultivated  ;  if  the  old  were  nourished  and
the  worthy  honoured  ;  and  if  men  of  distinguished  talents  were  placed  in
office  :  then  the  prince  was  rewarded — rewarded  with  an  addition  to  his
territory.  On  the  other  hand,  if,  on  entering  a  State,  the  ground  was
found  left  wild  or  overrun  with  weeds  ;  if  the  old  were  neglected  and  the
worthy  unhonoured  ;  and  if  the  offices  were  filled  with  hard  tax-gatherers  :
then  the  prince  was  reprimanded.  If  a  prince  once  omitted  his  attendance
at  court,  he  was  punished  by  degradation  of  rank  ;  if  he  did  so  a  second
time,  he  was  deprived  of  a  portion  of  his  territory  ;  if  he  did  so  a  third
time,  the  imperial  forces  were  set  in  motion,  and  he  was  removed  from  his
government.  Thus  the  emperor  commanded  the  punishment,  but  did  not
himself  inflict  it,  while  the  princes  inflicted  the  punishment,  but  did  not
command  it.  The  five  chiefs,  however,  dragged  the  princes  to  punish  other
princes,  and  hence  I  say  that  they  were  sinners  against  the  three  kings.

"Of  the  five  chiefs  the  most  powerful  was  the  duke  Hwan.  At  the
assembly  of  the  princes  in  K'wei-k'ew,  he  bound  the  victim  and  placed  the
writing  upon  it,  but  did  not  slay  it  to  smear  their  mouths  with  the  blood.
The  first  injunction  in  their  agreement  was — '  Slay  the  unfilial ;  change
not  the  son  who  has  been  appointed  heir ;  exalt  not  a  concubine  to  the
rank  of  wife.'  The  second  was — '  Honour  the  worthy,  and  maintain  the
talented,  to  give  distinction  to  the  virtuous.'  The  third  was — '  Eespect
the  old,  and  be  kind  to  the  young.  Be  not  forgetful  of  strangers  and
travellers.'  The  fourth  was — '  Let  not  offices  be  hereditary,  nor  let
officers  be  pluralists.  In  the  selection  of  officers  let  the  object  be  to  get  the
proper  men.  Let  not  a  ruler  take  it  on  himself  to  put  to  death  a  great
officer.'  The  fifth  was — 'Follow  no  crooked  policy  in  making  embank
ments.  Impose  no  restrictions  on  the  sale  of  grain.  Let  there  be  no
promotions  without  first  announcing  them  to  the  emperor.'  It  was  then
said,  '  All  we  who  have  united  in  this  agreement  shall  hereafter  maintain


176  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

It  is  on  the  conditions  of  life  that  the  behaviour  of  the  people
depends.  Human  beings  have  a  naturally  good  disposition,  but
not  one  strong  enough  to  resist  the  trials  of  adverse  conditions,
especially  when  these  are  due  to  unjust  laws.  Bad  governments
goad  the  people  to  crime  and  then  punish  them.  "  This  is  to
entrap  the  people." l  If  the  king  failed  in  his  duty  his  chief
ministers  should  remonstrate  with  him,  and  if  repeated  remon
strance  proved  fruitless,  they  should  dethrone  him.  So  Mencius
told  King  Seuen  to  his  face.2  In  the  last  resort  the  minister
should  put  the  king  to  death.3  For  all  this  of  the  duties  of  the
king  is  not  to  be  mere  exhortation  as  in  most  preaching  of  the
kind.  It  was  meant  in  earnest,  and  behind  it  lies  the  sanction
of  just  rebellion.

In  fact  we  feel  throughout  that  Mencius's  sayings  are  the
very  reverse  of  ordinary  moral  platitudes.  They  are  truths
applicable  to  all  time,  but  not  empty  as  such  truths  too  often
are.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  a  sting  which  we  can  feel  even
at  the  present  day,  or  ought  to  feel  if  we  do  not.  The  great
Chinese  classical  writers  in  fact  laid  the  foundation  of  a  distinct
ethical  and  social  ideal,  in  many  ways  analogous  to  the  best
teaching  of  the  founders  of  spiritual  religions,  but  different  in
its  setting.  Chinese  religion  was  at  this  time  and  has  since
remained,  except  in  so  far  as  influenced  by  Buddhism,  a  form
of  animism,  distinguished  first  by  its  systematic  character — a
multitude  of  spirits  dependent  on  those  of  Heaven  and  Earth
respectively  ;  and  secondly,  by  the  remarkable  development  of
ancestor  worship.  This  religion  offered  little  scope  for  ethical
idealism  except  at  two  points — the  idealization  of  family  con
tinuity,  and  the  supremacy  of  Heaven.  Of  both  these  points
Chinese  ethical  writers  took  advantage  ;  of  the  first  to  re-enforce

amicable  relations.'  The  princes  of  the  present  day  all  violate  these  five
prohibitions,  and  therefore  I  say  that  the  princes  of  the  present  day  are
sinners  against  the  five  chiefs."

Note  the  relationship  of  the  emperor  to  the  princes,  a  feudal  relationship
to  which  Mencius  seeks  to  give  an  ideal  ethical  form  ;  the  supervision  by
the  state  of  family  relationship  ;  the  insistence  on  the  distinction  of  chief
wife  and  concubine  ;  and  the  idea  of  purity  and  merit  in  official  life.

1  Mencius,  bk.  i.,  pt.|i.,  ch.  7. If  this  view  sounds  somewhat  materialistic,
we  may  set  against  it  passages  like  bk.  iii.,  pt.  i.,  ch.  4. If  men  "  are  well
fed,  warmly  clad,  and  comfortably  lodged,  without  being  taught  at  the
same  time,  they  become  almost  like  the  beasts."

2  Bk.  v.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  9.  3  Bk.  i.,  pt.  ii.,  ch.  8.


ETHICAL IDEALISM  177

the  doctrine  of  filial  piety  ;  of  the  second  to  insist  on  the  moral
unity  of  the  empire. But  in  the  main  their  concern  was  social
salvation,  and  they  were  deliberately  working  out  an  ethical
theory  to  contribute  to  that  end,  and  appealing  to  the  nature
and  training  of  individuals  to  use  the  means  by  which  the  end
was  to  be  reached. Thus  the  psychological  basis  of  conduct  and
the  conception  of  its  ultimate  end  are  not  those  of  Buddhism  or
of  Monotheism. For  example,  man  is  not  inherently  bad  and
redeemed  from  evil  only by  divine  grace. In himself  he  is
potentially  good,  and  the  germs  of  goodness  in  him  only  need
favourable  circumstances,  teaching,  and  effort  to  come  to  perfec
tion. But  they  are  developed,  not  to  the  greater  glory  of  God,
but  to  the  maintenance  of  human  life,  that  all  along  the  ricli
valleys  with  their  million  homesteads  the husbandman may
reap  the  harvest  he  has  sown  in  fields  unstained  by  blood,  that
he  may  cherish  wife  and  child  and  be  nurtured  by  them  in  age,
and  pass  duly  honoured  to  the  tomb ;  that  worthy  officers  be
found  to  serve  just  and  benevolent  kings ;  that  wars  may  die
away ;  that  crime  may  be  repressed,  not  by  punishment,  but  by
the  example  of  virtue;  in  a  word,  that  peaceful  industry  and
happy  family  life  undisturbed  by  civil  jars,  official  corruption,
royal  avarice,  and  military  ambition,  may  be  the  lot  of  one-third
of  the  human  race. Not  the  glory  of  God,  but  the  peace  of  man
is  the  aim ;  not  good  fortune  here  nor  salvation  hereafter  is  the
lisciple's  reward,  but  merely  his  own  best  self  independent  of
all that comes— righteousness  for  its  own  sake, benevolence
because  it  is  itself  the  best  gift  of  heaven. Not  the  chaining  up
of  human  nature,  but  its  full  and  harmonious  development  i^the
object  of  ethical  training. In  other  respects  the  ethical  and
the religious ideals of character are more remarkable for
their  correspondence  than  for  their  divergence. The  modesty
of  the sage is not perhaps drawn in such bold lines as
the  humility  of  the saint. Forbearance and forgiveness are
upheld as better than  revenge, but the returning of  good
for evil is set aside in favour of a severer  application of
Benevolence  should  be  for  mankind  generally,  but  for
our  own  families  first.1 In  all  this  there  is  some  infusion  of

indeed  is  not  so  prominent  as  in  Mohammedan  and
The  Confucians  were  thinking  and  writing  for  a  homo*


ethics.
VOL. II.


178  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

practical  sense  which  may  not  unfairly  be  set  against  the  loss  of
the  romantic  glow.  Perhaps,  if  we  may  strike  a  balance,  there
was  less  to  stir  the  brain's  blood,  and  so  set  men  thinking  and
working  towards  wider  problems  yet  and  deeper  solutions.  But
there  was  a  definite  theory  of  conduct  appealing  to  the  best  of
man's  nature  and  calling  him  to  the  service  of  his  fellow-men,
and  this  theory  has  for  more  than  two  thousand  years  formed
the  actual  working  basis  of  life  for  a  great  division  of  the  human


race.


oeneous  people  among  whom  the  divisions  were  those  of  a  decaying  feudal
system  They  speak  of  mankind  in  general  terms,  but  they  have  no  sharp
Suctions  of  r<L  to  overcome.  They  refer  occasionally  to  the  outlying
barbarous  tribes  which  will  be  "attracted"  by  good  government  or  in-
fluenceTby  civilized  teaching.  But  the  fate  of  these  peoples  plays  no
important  part  in  their  minds?  Nor  were  class  divisions  a  serious  problem
forPthem.  Confucius  lays  down  that  "there  ^^^JJSS
be  no  distinction  of  classes."  (A^leds,  bk.  xv  ch  38 .)  Undou btedly
they  stand  for  the  Chinese  community  as  one  great  whole  but-
nature  of  their  historical  position-they  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  conceived
Humanity  as  has  been  done  in  Western  thought.


CHAPTER  VI

PHILOSOPHIC ETHICS

1.  THE  profound  conception  of  the  Ethical  basis  taught  by
the  great  Chinese  thinkers  was  arrived  at  independently  by  a
movement  of  thought  arising  at  about  the  same  period  of  time,
but  in  a  distant  part  of  the  world,  and  under  deeply  contrasted
conditions  of  culture.  The  great  Greek  philosophers  from  the
fifth  century  B.C.  onwards,  worked  out  a  theory  of  life  in  which
the  inherent  excellence  of  good  conduct,  the  strength  and  self-
dependence  of  the  disciplined  character,  the  order  and  harmony
of  the  well-governed  state,  were  held  up  as  ends  of  human  action
sufficient  in  themselves  to  inspire  effort  and  justify  self-sacrifice,
worthy  to  be  followed  by  every  man  even  if  in  doing  so  he
"  should  escape  the  notice  of  gods  and  men."  But  in  speaking
of  Greek  thought  and  its  distinctive  message — and  it  is  only
what  is  distinctive  and  that  only  in  the  barest  outline  that  can
be  touched  on  here— we  must  recognize  at  the  outset  that  its
method  was  no  less  important  than  its  results.  The  Chinese
masters  inculcated  some  profound  truths  and  arrived  at  results
often  closely  similar  to  the  best  teaching  of  the  Greeks.  But
they  seem  to  have  laid  them  down  almost  as  dogmatically  and
with  as  little  attempt  at  rational  proof  as  though  they  had  been
dogmas  of  theology.  Certainly  there  is  but  little  trace  of  system
in  Confucius  and  not  much  more  even  in  Mencius.  They  made
little  attempt,  it  would  seem,  to  go  back  to  first  principles  and
ask  the  why  and  wherefore  of  all  moral  rules.  Hence  they  were
moral  teachers  rather  than  philosophers,  and  hence  also  in  the
practical  result  they  accepted  only  too  much  of  Chinese  tradition,
and  left  their  country  after  all  bound  in  the  fetters  of  antiquitv

179  H J


180  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

With  the  Greeks,  on  the  contrary,  moral  philosophy  begins  its
course.  With  the  early  thinkers,  contemporaries  or  perhaps
predecessors  of  Socrates,  who  propounded  the  question  "  What
is  the  Good,  the  end  of  human  life,  the  aim  which  a  thinking
being  should  set  before  him  as  the  goal  of  his  existence  ?  "  there
begins  a  new  epoch  in  moral  development,  the  epoch  in  which
the  ethical  consciousness,  long  dominated  by  the  forces  which
shape  its  conceptions  unawares,  begins  to  re-act  upon  them,  to
turn  round  upon  the  conditions  that  have  hitherto  determined
its  growth  and  inquires  into  their  why  and  wherefore.  This  is
part  of  a  movement  which  extends  far  beyond  the  sphere
of  ethics  and  attacks  the  very  foundations  of  knowledge  and
belief.

Its  own  processes  and  methods,  the  principles  and  pre
suppositions  of  all  its  thinking,  are  the  last  things  of  which  the
mind  becomes  conscious.  In  the  earliest  stages  of  its  development
in  humanity  it  forms  ideas  under  the  stimulus  of  experience  by
methods  which  have  all  the  roughness  and  imperfection  of
hereditary  or  instinctive  reactions  unpolished  by  rational
reflection.  The  ideas  themselves  are  loose  and  slippery.  They
are  linked  one  with  another,  not  by  any  coherent  logic,  but  as
the  vague  impulses  of  casual  association  suggest,  or  as  emotional
conditions  predispose  the  imagination  to  impute  connections
between  events.  It  is  out  of  this  chance-medley  of  mental  forces
that  the  ideas  of  primitive  fancy  are  evolved.

We  have  seen  how  the  advance  of  intelligence  brings  some
order  into  this  chaos,  how  in  the  building  up  of  thought  casual
suggestion  is  replaced  by  systematic  meditation  in  which  trained
reasoning  and  methodical  analysis  play  their  part.  We  have
seen  how  under  these  influences  the  naive  imagery  of  the  childish
mind  yields  to  the  profound  conception  of  the  sage,  in  which
finally  the  structural  categories  underlying  all  experience  are
brought  clearly  before  consciousness,  and  utilized  in  the
construction  of  a  philosophy  of  things.

In  such  a  construction  there  is  undoubtedly  implied  a  certain
criticism  both  of  the  conceptions  formed  and  of  the  methods  by
which  they  are  formed.  Yet  underlying  it  all  are  assumptions
which  are  only  brought  to  light  by  a  still  more  fundamental
criticism,  the  criticism  wherein  thought  seeks  to  determine  its


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  181

own  value  as  a  measure  of  reality.  Consider,  for  example,  the
question  of  logical  method.  Criticism  may  have  shown  some
reasoning  to  be  fallacious,  and  other  reasoning  to  be  apparently
sound.  But  what  is  this  appearance  ?  Is  it,  after  all,  only  an
impression  made  on  us,  which  we  accept  as  convincing  because
we  cannot  resist  it  ?  But  if  so,  what  is  its  worth  ?  The  fallacy
also  impressed  us  till  some  one  pointed  out  the  flaw,  and  perhaps
it  still  impresses  other  minds  and  seems  as  sound  to  them  as  it
appears  absurd  to  us.  Is  there,  then,  any  more  objective  or
absolute  standard  of  sound  logic  which  once  revealed  would
settle  all  doubts,  and  if  so,  how  are  we  to  know  it  ?  Again,
suppose  our  logic  is  sound  so  that  we  may  unerringly  connect
concept  with  concept,  what  precisely  is  the  value  of  it  all  at  the
end  ?  We  may  forge  a  perfect  chain  of  logical  links,  but  what
does  it  hang  from  ?  Is  it  suspended  in  mid-air,  or  are  there  first
principles  fixed  in  the  adamantine  firmament,  or  possibly  solid
supports  reared  on  earth,  from  which  the  chain  may  hang  ?
Does  thought  form  a  world  of  its  own,  or  does  it  relate  to  an
independent  reality,  and  if  so,  how  is  the  relation  established
and  its  validity  guaranteed  ?  Questions  such  as  these,  never
finally  resolved,  but  constantly  renewed  with  deeper  meanings
and  more  subtle  suggestions,  form  the  permanent  content  of
the  philosophic  criticism  of  thought.

This  criticism  being  directed  throughout  to  the  discovery  of
an  "  objective "  standard  which  is  to  rescue  truth  from  the
fallibility  of  ordinary  human  weakness,  must  in  the  first
place  concern  itself  with  method.  It  will  evolve  a  logic  to
justify  the  distinction  of  the  sound  from  the  unsound  in  reason
ing,  and  systematize  valid  argument  on  some  connected  and
coherent  principles.  Secondly,  it  will  inquire  into  the  genesis
of  our  conceptions  and  will  test  them  by  reference  to  the
experience  from  which  they  are  educed.  Then  applying  these
methods,  it  will  seek  to  reconstruct  its  conception  of  Reality.
The  Socratic  Elenchus  (notwithstanding  the  limits  which  Socrates
imposed  on  himself),  the  Platonic  Dialectic,  the  Aristotelian
Logic  and  Metaphysics,  were  successive  attempts  in  this  direction.
The  reconstruction  of  Reality  on  the  basis  of  a  criticism  of  first
principles  was  in  fact  first  seriously  taken  in  hand  by  the  Greeks.
But  in  the  progress  of  criticism  a  problem  emerges  affecting  the


182  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

bare  possibility  of  Reconstruction — a  problem  which  can  hardly
be  said  to  have  come  fully  within  the  purview  of  Greek  thought.
The  mind  itself  may  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  the  Reality
which  it  seeks  to  understand.  Or  conversely  the  world  of
experience  may  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  the  Mind.  Its
sensations,  its  conceptions,  its  methods,  its  principles,  the  very
self-criticism  by  which  it  has  been  seeking  to  rectify  its  principles,
may  all  be  results  of  its  own  growth  and  dependent  for  their
peculiar  shape  on  its  own  development.  If  this  is  so,  must  not  the
ultimate  result  of  the  philosophical  movement,  however  far  it
may  push  its  criticism  of  knowledge,  still  lie  within  the  circle
of  the  mind's  own  making  ?  Will  not  the  truth  that  satisfies  us
still  be  a  truth  for  ourselves  alone,  or  if  it  is  more,  how  can  we
be  assured  of  it  ?  Truth  is  truth,  but  does  it  give  us  Reality  ?
To  determine  this  question  we  must  "  know  ourselves  "  in  a  new
sense.  We  must  ascertain  the  facts  as  to  the  constitution  and
growth  of  the  mind.  We  must  re-examine  the  very  conceptions
of  Truth  and  Reality.  We  must  determine  the  conditions  under
which  knowledge  is  possible,  we  must  ascertain  the  limitations
under  which  thought  arises  and  ask  how  far  those  limitations
are  overcome.  To  attempt  this  more  thoroughgoing  evaluation
of  the  subjective  factor  in  knowledge  has  been  the  special  task
of  modern  philosophy.  To  some  aspects  of  the  problem  we  shall
return  later,  confining  ourselves  in  the  present  chapter  to  the
philosophy  of  the  Greeks,  and  indeed  to  one  branch  of  their
philosophical  development.  Their  reconstruction  of  knowledge
and  reformed  conceptions  of  the  world-order  intimately  affected
their  ethical  thought,  which  was  indeed  merely  a  part  of  the
general  movement  of  critical  reconstruction,  but  it  is  only  the
ethical  side  of  the  movement  which  can  be  outlined  here.

Indeed,  a  philosophical  reconstruction  is  by  no  means  less
necessary  in  the  region  of  conduct  than  is  that  of  knowledge.
On  the  contrary,  rules  of  conduct  have,  as  a  matter  of  history,
grown  up  under  conditions  eminently  unfavourable  to  a  rational
apprehension  of  the  ethical  order  best  suited  to  human  needs.
They  have  arisen  under  the  conditions  of  group-morality,  and
are  tarnished  with  the  brutalities  incident  to  the  struggle  for
existence.  They  have  been  infected  by  gross  conceptions  of
magical  influence  and  spiritual  resentments.  They  have  been


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  183

distorted  by  the  sophistications  with  which  men  hide  their
spiritual  nakedness.  They  have  been  bent  into  weapons  used
for  the  justification  of  class  or  race  supremacy,  of  arbitrary
power,  of  sexual  wrong.  In  no  other  department  are  the  funda
mental  categories  in  such  permanent  need  of  criticism.  Good
and  bad,  right  and  wrong,  virtue  and  vice — all  the  elementary
conceptions  forming  the  pigeon-holes  wherein  we  arrange  our
ideas  about  conduct,  what  at  bottom  do  they  mean  ?  What  is
their  value  and  justification  ?  What  grounds  have  we  in  reason
for  the  judgments  which  we  pass  on  conduct  when  we  use
them  ?  Are  they  anything  more  than  expressions  for  our  feelings,
or  have  they  a  higher  authority  ?  Is  the  standard  by  which  we
apply  them  final,  or,  seeing  that  human  standards  vary,  is  there
any  higher  standard  to  which  a  rational  society  would  conform,
and  if  so,  how  is  it  to  be  ascertained  ?  Such  are  the  questions
of  philosophic  ethics,  and  they  cut  deeper  than  any  simple
ethical  idealism.  We  have  seen  ideals  of  character  arising
under  Buddhist,  Christian,  and  Confucian  influence,  and  the
mere  formation  of  such  ideals  involve  an  immense  advance  in
reflection.  But  such  ideals  are  formed  by  laying  stress  on
certain  elements  of  virtue  and  by  seeking  to  choke  up  certain
sources  of  vice  without  any  systematic  inquiry  into  the  meaning
and  object  of  virtue,  without  any  rational  examination  of  the
ultimate  purpose  and  function  of  human  conduct,  and  therefore
without  any  scientific  determination  of  the  rules  by  which  it
should  be  guided.  Such  ideals  accordingly,  though  they  may
carry  us  far  beyond  the  common  morality  of  the  average  man,
are  not  necessarily  well  adapted  to  the  actual  conduct  of  life
and  the  furtherance  of  human  progress.  They  may  even  lead
us  further  away  from  the  path.  The  ultimate  hope  of  a  rational
reconstruction  of  ethics  must  be  to  bring  us  back  from  the
rules  and  ideals  that  have  grown  up  at  random  and  without  any
thought-out  method  to  the  conditions  of  conduct  which  a  critical
theory  of  what  is  best  for  humanity  may  prove  to  be  required.
The  first  steps  towards  such  a  reconstruction  are  to  be  found  in
Greek  Ethics,  and  the  resulting  movement  of  thought,  maintained
with  many  fluctuations  of  vigour  throughout  the  period  of
classical  antiquity,  interrupted  though  not  wholly  arrested  by
the  revival  of  the  theological  conception  of  ethics,  and  resumed


184  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

in  a  new  shape  in  the  modern  period,  engendered  the  principal
forms  of  ethical  theory  which  it  remains  for  us  to  mention  To
write  the  history  of  the  movement  would  be  incompatible  with
the  scope  of  this  work.  At  best,  the  most  fundamental  features
which  distinguish  this  order  of  ethical  conceptions  from  others
may  be  summarily  mentioned.

2.  So  far  as  he  had  a  theory  at  all,  the  early  Greek,  as  we
have  seen,  held  to  the  magico-religious  basis  of  law  and  morals
1  he  Furies  punished  the  parricide. The  perjurer  or  the  betrayer
of  his  guest  aroused  the  wrath  of  Zeus. The  curse  fell  upon  the
fender,  and  would  work  itself  out  in  the  fate  of  his  children  if
not  m  his  own  life. A  public  offence,  as  in  the  celebrated  case
the  Alcmaeonidae,  might  involve  a  city  in  disaster  and  render
necessary a  public ceremonial of  purgation. The wrath of
Talthybius fell upon the Spartans for their unceremonious
treatment  of  the  heralds  of  Darius,  and  could  only  be  appeased
by  the  devotion  of  two  Spartans  who  voluntarily  surrendered
themselves  to  the  Persian  king  to  deal  with  as  he  pleased But
stronger  perhaps  than  any  explicit  dread  of  divine  punishment
was  the  half  mystical  reverence  for  established  law,  the  customs
writ  en  and  unwritten  of  each  city,  and  the  common  traditions
of  all  Hel  as. With  the  absolute  and  unquestioned  authority
of  established  tradition  was  bound  up,  as  the  Greeks  felt in
articulately  perhaps,  but  none  the  less  vividly,  aU  that  made'  the
free  civic  life  of  Greece  possible. The  Greek  citizen  was  a  free
man  because  he  was  governed  by  law,  and  the  culmination  of
B  charges  against  the  tyrant  was  that  he  overrode  all  laws
written  and  unwritten. To  render  back  to  the  Laws  the  service
due  to  them  was  the  pride  of  the  free  Hellene,  who  contrasted
his  freely-rendered  service  to  a  constitution  supported by  his
own  voluntary  efforts  with  the  slavish  submission  of  the  Oriental
to  the  arbitrary  will  of  his  master. The  attitude  of  the  true
freeman  is  nowhere  more  justly  stated  than  in  the  words  which
Herodotus  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Demaratus,  the  ex-king  of
Sparta  and  an  exile  at  the  Persian  court,  quoted  in  the  first
part  of  this  work. But  perhaps  the  most  complete  expression
off  the  traditional  Greek  view  is  given  in  the  well-known  defence
I  Antigone. Creon  has  tyrannically  forbidden  the  burial  of


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  185

her  brother.  She  tells  him  why  she  has  disregarded  his
proclamation —

"It  Avas  not  Zeus  who  laid  this  ordinance  on  me,  nor  Justice,
housemate  of  the  gods  below,  by  whom  these  laws  were  laid  down
among  men.  Nor  did  I  deem  thy  order  of  such  might  that  thou,  a
mortal  man,  shouldst  override  the  unwritten  and  unshaken  laws  of
gods.  For  these  are  not  things  of  to-day  or  yesterday,  but  live  for
ever,  and  none  know  whence  they  sprang.  For  them  I  was  not
minded — not  in  fear  of  any  man's  pride — to  pay  the  penalty  among
the  gods.  That  I  should  die,  I  knew — how  else  1 — even  hadst  thou
made  no  order,  and  if  before  my  time  I  die,  I  call  it  but  a  gain."

Here  the  dominant  note  of  truth  and  right  for  ever  against
the  petty  tyrant  of  a  day,  who  holds  mere  life  and  death  in
his  hands,  blends  now  with  a  whisper  of  a  judgment  beyond
death,  and  a  justice  that  sits  as  assessor  on  the  judgment-seat
in  Hades,  now  with  a  more  decided  mysticism  which  makes  the
traditional  law  supreme,  not  because  it  comes  from  the  gods,
but  because  it  is  eternal  and  its  source  is  lost  in  the  darkness
out  of  which  things  come.

3.  This  uncritical  acceptance  ol  traditional  morality  was
rudely  shaken  by  the  negative  movement  of  thought  in  the  fifth
century.  The  dialectics  of  Zeno  had  shaken  the  first  principles
of  ordinary  knowledge.  The  metaphysics  of  Heraclitus  had
attacked  the  testimony  of  the  senses.  On  the  speculative  side
the  negative  movement  culminated  in  the  doctrine  of  Protagoras,
that  "  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things,  of  those  which  are  that
they  are,  of  those  which  are  not  that  they  are  not."  The  appli
cation  to  ethics  does  not  appear  to  have  been  made  by  Protagoras
himself,  but  it  lay  ready  to  hand  and  was  freely  used  by  some
of  the  so-called  Sophists,  men  like  the  Polus,  Callicles  and
Thrasymachus  of  the  Platonic  dialogues.  If  there  is  no  rational
ground  for  our  knowledge  of  nature,  how  can  we  expect  to  find
any  for  our  theories  of  the  moral  life  ?  True  there  is  law  in
every  state,  and  he  who  breaks  the  law  will  be  punished  by  law,
but  what  is  the  source  and  authority  of  law  itself?  The  law
which  the  tyrant  makes  rests,  as  all  men  admit,  on  the  strength
of  his  own  arm,  wherewith  he  will  punish  those  who  break  it.
But  in  precisely  the  same  way  the  Law  which  the  ruling  Few


186  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

impose  on  the  subject  Many  rests  on  the  power  of  Fear,  whether
due  to  superior  valour  or  better  organization,  to  enforce  their
will ;  and  by  precisely  the  same  argument  in  a  democracy  the
law  is  simply  what  the  majority  who  are  here  the  stronger
decide  that  it  shall  be.  In  every  case  the  "  ruler,"  whether  an
individual  or  a  class,  frames  the  law  in  his  own  interest  and
enforces  it  by  his  power.  Justice  is  merely  a  name  for  the
"interest  of  the  stronger."  Hence  it  was  that  the  rule  of  justice
differed,  as  the  travelled  Greeks  were  discovering  from  nation  to
nation.  Herodotus  told  of  tribes  who  were  as  scandalized  at  the
Greek  custom  of  burying  the  dead  as  the  Greeks  were  at  them
for  eating  their  dead.  If  right  and  wrong  were  founded  in
nature,  this  would  not  be.  The  same  rules  would  be  in  force
everywhere.  But  depending  on  convention,  they  vary  from
place  to  place  as  it  suits  the  dominant  power  to  conceive  them.
And  so  VO/AOS,  the  law  written  and  unwritten,  is  identified
with  convention,  or  institution  depending  on  the  arbitrary  and
changeable  will  of  men,  and  is  opposed  to  <£uW,  nature,  as  the
temporary  and  variable  to  that  which  is  permanent  and  rooted
in  the  essential  structure  of  things.

The  extent  to  which  this  sceptical  doctrine  had  sunk  into
the  practical  life  of  Greece  may  be  measured  by  any  one  who
will  contrast  with  the  passage  quoted  above,  the  arguments
ascribed  by  Thucydides  to  the  Athenian  delegates  in  the  famous
Melian  Dialogue.

"As  for  the  Gods,  we  expect  to  have  quite  as  much  of  their
favour  as  you.  .  .  .  For  of  the  Gods  we  believe,  and  of  men  we
know,  that  by  a  law  of  their  nature  wherever  they  can  rule  they
will.  ...  As  to  the  Lacedaemonians  ...  of  all  men  whom  we
know  they  are  the  most  notorious  for  identifying  what  is  pleasant
with  what  is  honourable,  and  what  is  expedient  with  what  is  just," l
etc.

4.  Thus,  the  breakdown  of  the  traditional  Greek  theory  of
the  moral  sanctions,  of  the  divine  basis  of  virtue,  and  the
authoritative  supremacy  of  law,  was  not  merely  a  matter  of
speculative  interest.  It  represented  a  change  which  had
sunk  deep  into  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  was  a  cause  of

1  Thuc.,  v.  105. Tr.  Jowett.


PHILOSOPHIC ETHICS  187

anxiety  to  all  thinking  men. Accordingly  the  efforts  of  the
constructive  thinkers  of  Greece  during  the  latter  part  of  the  fifth
century,  and  throughout  the  fourth,  were  devoted  to  the  recon
struction  of  private  morals  and  public  law,  to  find  arguments
in  admitted  principles of  thought or in  the  unimpeachable
evidence  of  experience  to  replace  the  old  supernatural  basis  of
virtue,  and  to  determine,  in  the  phrase  of  the  day,  what  was
natural  in  state  law  as  opposed  to  what  was  merely  a  matter  of
human  agreement. In  this  effort  the  negative  movement  had
already  supplied  a  point  of  departure,  for  it  had  in  essentials
formulated  a  first  principle  of  action ;  that  every  man  aims  at
what  is  good  for  him,  or  at  least  at  what  appears  good  for  him,
was  the  principle  tacitly  or  openly  avowed  to  which  negative
criticism  had  been  brought. This  principle  was  taken  up  by
Socrates and  his  followers  and  made  the  starting  point  of  a
moral  reconstruction. No  Greek  thinker,  whether  constructive
or  negative,  idealist  or  hedonist,  Platonic  or  Aristotelian,  called
this  axiom  itself  in  question,  but  it  was  possible  to  show,  as
Socrates  was  the  first  to  discover,  that,  however  selfish  in  form,
it was capable of  an interpretation which  would not only
reconcile  it  with  the  highest  claims  of  the  moral  consciousness,
but  even  set  these  claims  upon  an apparently  firm  basis  in
reason. For  though  it  may  be  true  that  all  men  aim  at  the
apparent  good,  it  does  not  follow  that  that  good  is  the  interest
of  self,  or  the  satisfaction  of  the  sensual  nature  as  opposed  to
the  fulfilment  of  a  man's  function  as  a  citizen  and  the  cultiva
tion  of  his  higher  faculties. On  the  contrary,  Socrates,  whose
philosophical  method  was  that  of  conversation  at  the  dinner
party  or  in  the  market-place,  was  easily  able  to  appeal  to  the
ordinary  opinion  of  the  average  man,  and  to  elicit  from  him  that
he held courage and  justice, wisdom and temperance, the
ordinary  virtues  of  the  good  citizen,  in  higher  esteem  than  the
pleasures  of  the  senses  or  the  interest  of  money-getting. But
if  this  were  so,  if  it  were  in  reality  best  for  a  man  to  restrain
his  lower  nature  and  to  practise  the  duties  of  a  good  father  and
a  good  citizen,  if  the  higher  good,  however  defined,  lay  in  this
direction,  then  the  principle  that  each  man  chooses  what  appears
to  him  to  be  good  will  inevitably  lead  a  wise  man,  who  has
found  out  where  the  true  good  lies,  in  the  path  of  virtue  and


188  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

good  citizenship ;  and  if  we  find  people  who  are  cowards  and
unjust  and  unbridled  in  their  licence,  it  is  because  they  do  not
know  where  their  true  good  lies.  So  the  critics  who  held
themselves  superior  to  the  ordinary  moral  tradition  found  their
own  weapon  turned  against  them.  Their  principle  that  every  one
must  aim  at  his  own  good  is  freely  adopted,  with  the  rider  that
he  who  knows  his  true  good  finds  it  essentially  in  adherence  to
those  traditions  which  the  sceptic  scorns.  The  abandonment
of  virtue  is  a  proof,  not,  as  had  been  urged,  of  superior  wisdom,
but  of  ignorance  of  the  real  interests  of  human  nature.  Virtue,
in  fact,  might  be  defined  as  a  kind  of  art  of  measuring — the  art
of  measuring  values  aright.  He  who  knows  what  true  pleasure
is  finds  it  in  the  pursuit  of  virtue ;  he  who  finds  it  elsewhere
has  made  a  mistake  in  his  fundamental  principles.1

5.  But  after  all  it  was  open  to  the  critics  to  rejoin  that  the
intrinsic  value  and  goodness  of  the  just  and  virtuous  life  was
assumed  rather  than  proved.  By  what  argument,  it  might  be
asked,  or  by  what  appeal  to  experience  can  it  actually  be  made
clear  to  a  doubter  beyond  any  possibility  of  a  cavil  that  the  man
who  is  sacrificing  some  direct  interest,  some  money-profit,  or
perhaps  his  personal  security,  for  the  sake  of  justice,  is  not
making  a  gross  miscalculation  of  values  ?  In  what  sense  is  it
urged  that  justice  is  in  itself  superior  to  injustice  ?  Do  we  not
admit  that  in,  refraining  from  injustice  we  are  giving  up  some
thing  that  is  useful  to  ourselves  and  seeking  the  gain  of
another,  and  is  this  not  incompatible  with  our  first  principle
that  every  reasonable  man  seeks  his  own  good  ?  It  is  true  that
his  losses  might  be  made  up  to  the  just  man  by  human  rulers
or  by  a  divine  judge,  but  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  position  of
the  just  man  under  a  tyrant  or  a  tyrannous  democracy,  and
what  are  we  to  think  of  the  problem  of  divine  judgment  when
the  whole  framework  of  the  supernatural  is  being  called  in
question  ?  Besides,  if  the  just  man  is  acting  for  the  sake  of  a
reward — indirect  and  remote  it  may  be,  postponed  to  a  future
life  it  may  be — is  he  really  acting  from  a  principle  of  justice  ?

1  This  is  the  position  attributed  to  Socrates  in  the  Protagoras,  and  no
doubt  represents  one  side  of  the  Master's  teaching,  though  the  hedonism  of
the  Dialogue  probably  represents  one  aspect  only  of  the  Socratic  view.


PHILOSOPHIC ETHICS  189

Is  he  not  after  all  seeking  a  reward  for  himself  though  he
calculates  on  a  different  basis  from  the  unjust  man,  and  if  he
miscalculates,  need  we  admire  or  pity  him  ?  In  a  word,  had
any  one  the  ring  of  Gyges  would  he  not,  once  rendered  invisible
arid  so  invulnerable  to  his  fellow-men,  do  as  Gyges  did,  and
practise  against  them  all  manner  of  villainy  that  might  be
necessary  in  the  course  of  satisfying  his  own  desires  ?  These
positions  are  stated  with  extreme  force  and  clearness  in  the
second  book  of  the  Eepublic,  and  the  demand  is  made  upon  the
Socrates  of  the  Dialogue  to  give  an  account  of  justice  which
will  sweep  all  this  network  of  doubts  aside.  Socrates  is  to  show
that  the  just  man  is  happier  and  better  off  than  the  unjust,
even  if  he  escapes  the  notice  of  gods  and  men,  even  if  he  is
misjudged  in  this  world  and  the  next,  even  if  he  suffers  the
penalties  of  injustice  and  the  unjust  man  gets  the  rewards  of
the  innocent.  The  benefits  of  justice  in  itself  are  to  prove
such  as  to  outweigh  every  possible  consideration  of  external
reward  or  penalty.  Never  before  or  since  has  the  claim  of  the
moral  consciousness  to  override  every  other  consideration  been
more  uncompromisingly  stated.  The  method  by  which  Plato
makes  Socrates  set  out  to  answer  the  formidable  difficulties
propounded  to  him  is  that  of  inviting  his  hearers  to  a  deeper
analysis  of  the  nature  of  the  human  being  and  of  the  state.
He  finds  that  human  nature  is  in  itself  a  commonwealth  in
miniature,  in  which  there  is  a  ruling  portion  represented  by
the  reason.  There  is  a  spirited  element  whose  natural  function
it  is  to  assist  the  reason,  as  the  military  element  of  the  state
should  assist  the  philosophical  rulers.  And  lastly,  there  is
within  man  a  many-headed  monster  of  desire  like  the  many-
headed  mob  of  the  Athenian  democracy.  There  are  certain
natural  and  proper  relations  which  these  different  portions  of
the  soul  should  maintain  towards  one  another.  The  reason
should  rule,  the  spirited  element  should  assist  it  in  so  doing,  the
many-headed  monster  should  be  under  control ;  and  when  these
conditions  are  satisfied  a  certain  harmony  results;  it  is  well
with  the  man,  his  inner  man  is  at  peace.  And  in  this  peace
and  harmony  the  cardinal  virtues  which  the  ordinary  Greek
recognizes  have  their  different  parts  to  play.  In  the  due


190  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

exercise  of  the  reason  there  is  wisdom.  In  the  aid  rendered  to
wisdom  by  the  due  cultivation  of  the  emotional  element  which
enables  us  to  withstand  alike  the  temptations  of  danger  and  the
seductions  of  pleasure,  there  is  courage.  For  though  the  weak
man  may  have  implanted  in  him  the  right  opinion  as  to  how  he
should  guide  his  action,  something  more  than  opinion  is
necessary  when  it  comes  to  the  pinch;  there  must  be  that
tenacity  which  enables  us  to  maintain  our  opinion  in  the  face
of  temptation,  and  to  show  that  tenacity  is  to  be  brave.  Again,
there  must  be  an  agreement  among  all  the  three  parts,  a
harmony  stretching  through  the  whole  of  the  soul,  that  reason
should  rule,  and  this  harmony  is  temperance.  Given  these
three  virtues  we  have  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  healthy
functioning  of  each  part  of  the  soul.  This  active  functioning,
which  consists  in  a  perfect  co-operation  of  all  parts  of  the  soul,
each  doing  its  own  work  without  going  outside,  is  Plato's
definition  of  justice.  Justice  then  is,  in  the  first  place,  the
harmonious  healthy  life  of  the  soul  itself.  But  it  is  this  inner
harmony  which  enables  a  man  to  do  his  duty  in  the  world  to
which  he  belongs.  He  plays  the  part  required  of  him  in  the
larger  life  of  the  State,  because  each  element  in  his  own  nature
plays  the  part  required  of  it  within  the  miniature  commonwealth
that  forms  his  soul.  The  outer  harmony  depends  on  the  inner.
A  man  behaves  as  a  good  citizen  because  his  moral  nature  is  in
healthy  working  order,  and  conversely  when  he  fails  in  that
duty  his  own  nature  is  out  of  harmony  with  itself  and  is
corrupted  and  diseased.  Thus,  at  the  end  of  the  argument,
justice  is  above  all  things  valuable  to  its  possessor,  in  so  far  as
the  soul  is  more  valuable  to  itself  than  all  the  rest  of  the  world.
Justice  is  to  the  soul  what  health  is  to  the  body,  it  is  its  active
excellence  and  perfect  life;  without  it,  nothing  that  seems
good  can  be  really  good,  with  it  there  is  no  evil  that  cannot
be  faced.  If  pleasure  be  alleged  as  a  more  rational  end  for
man,  it  may  be  retorted  that  it  is  only  the  pleasure  of  the  soul
which  is  a  real  pleasure.  The  pleasures  of  the  many  are  transi
tory  and  full  of  contradiction.  We  see  them  on  their  holidays,
then  as  now,  filling  the  unreal  part  of  themselves  with  unreal
joys.  The  philosopher  alone  knows  what  reality  is,  and  is


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  191

proved,  with  a  characteristic  bit  of  Platonic  humour,  to  have  at
least  seven  hundred  and  twenty-nine  times  as  much  real
enjoyment  as  the  devotee  of  the  senses.

6.  Thus  justice,  which  is  here  in  reality  the  name  for  virtue,
is  founded  upon  an  explicit  theory  of  the  nature  of  man,  and
both  the  positions  of  the  sceptic  are  met  and  turned  against  him.
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  shown  that  if  a  man  aims  at  what  is  good
for  himself,  he  must,  if  he  is  a  reasonable  and  instructed  being,
endeavour  to  obtain  that  which  is  for  his  soul  what  health  is  for
the  body.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  asked  on  what  laws  or
conditions  of  nature  is  justice  founded,  the  answer  is  that  it  is
founded  on  the  constitution  of  human  nature  itself  and  of  the
societies  which  human  beings  form.  These  positions  are  in  essence
retained  by  Aristotle,  though  with  more  of  that  compromising
spirit  which  belongs  to  Aristotle's  method.  The  good  is  that  at
which  everything  aims,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  performance  of
that  function  which  nature  assigns  to  it  in  the  scheme  of  things.

o  o

In  this  scheme  the  function  of  every  class  of  being  lies  especially
in  the  active  realization  of  its  own  specific  character.  The
specific  character  of  man  is  that  he  is  a  rational  animal,  capable
of  governing  himself  by  reason  in  a  social  life  and  capable  of
exercising  his  reason  in  the  great  department  of  speculation  as  a
philosopher.  In  the  first  direction  his  moral  virtues  are
developed,  in  the  second  his  speculative  powers.  And  so  the
well-being  of  man  consists  in  an  active  realization  of  the  soul-
life  in  accordance  with  what  is  excellent,  and  especially  in
accordance  with  the  best  and  highest  of  excellences.  This  is  the
essence  of  well-being.  But  perhaps  it  would  be  extreme  and
paradoxical  to  maintain  that  external  misfortune  has  no  effect
upon  it.  A  man  is  not  happy  if  the  misfortunes  of  a  Priam
beset  him.  Yet  even  in  such  a  case  the  nobility  of  his  character
will  shine  through.  He  will  never  be  wretched  as  the  caitiff
and  the  sensualist  might  become ;  it  will  still  be  well  for  him  in
that  he  bears  his  misfortunes  better  than  other  people.  But
though  fortune  may  help  to  make  or  mar,  and  though  there  is
an  element  of  chance  in  human  life  which  is  never  wholly
mastered  and  overcome  by  human  reason,  nevertheless,  speaking
generally — and  Aristotle  is  clear  that  we  can  only  speak  gener-


192  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

ally  and  not  universally  in  dealing  with  human  affairs — the  man
who  resolutely  makes  the  best  of  his  own  powers  and  actively
realizes  them,  is  the  happiest.  He  has  no  need  of  the  ordinary
pleasures  as  an  appendage,  so  to  say,  to  his  life,  for  this  realization
of  himself  at  his  best  has  its  own  pleasure  within  itself ;  as  his
life  is  the  best,  so  is  it  also  the  pleasantest.  Bad  fortune  will
hinder  him,  good  fortune  will  aid  him  in  making  the  most  of
himself  and  in  showing  all  that  he  has  it  in  him  to  be.  But  this
is  at  the  utmost  a  not  indispensable  advantage,  and  the  essence
of  his  well-being  is  that  he  himself  does  well.

7.  Thus  upon  the  fundamental  question  of  moral  philosophy
Socrates,  Plato  and  Aristotle  were  essentially  at  one.  That
question  is  by  most  modern  moralists  defined  as  the  question  of
the  nature  of  moral  obligation.  Why  should  I  do  what  is
right,  or  why  should  I  recognize  the  distinction  between  right
and  wrong,  ought  and  ought  not  ?  Is  it  a  matter  of  some
external  reward  or  punishment  befalling  me  according  to  the
character  of  my  conduct,  or  is  it  a  matter  of  some  intrinsic
quality  in  the  conduct  itself  ?  To  the  Greek  philosophers  the
question  took  the  form — What  is  the  character  of  that  which  is
really  good  for  man,  or  in  what  does  human  well-being  consist  ?
The  answer  which  they  gave  to  it  was  essentially  that  it  consists
in  the  practise  of  virtue  as  being  that  wherein  human  nature
finds  its  best,  happiest  and  most  harmonious  expression.  This
method  of  handling  the  problem  leads  at  once  to  the  converse
question — Why  do  the  majority  of  men  at  one  time  or  another
neglect  virtue  and  do  that  which  is  evil  ?  Nothing  could  be
more  characteristic  of  Greek  modes  of  thought  and  of  the  gulf
which  separates  them  from  Christian  and  post-Christian  ethics
than  the  method  of  handling  this  question.  To  the  Christian
theologian  and  to  the  moralist  handling  the  subject  with  theo
logical  conceptions  behind  him,  the  difficulty  is  to  see  how  men
come  to  do  good.  To  the  Greek  thinker  the  paradox  is  rather
that  so  many  men  do  wrong.  From  the  axiom  from  which  all
Greek  thinkers  started,  it  was  clear  that  men  could  only  do
wrong  from  some  mistake  in  their  conception  of  what  was  good.
If,  as  the  three  great  thinkers  whom  we  have  mentioned  were
agreed,  the  good  for  men  lay  essentially  in  the  pursuit  of  virtue,


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  193

then  in  strict  logic  it  could  only  be  from  some  ignorance  of  its
first  principle  that  men  went  astray.  Socrates  in  fact  drew  this
deduction  apparently  without  any  hesitation  or  compromise.
To  him  vice  was  ignorance,  and  if  a  man  were  found  to  be
intemperate,  cowardly  or  unjust,  it  was  only  because  he  did  not
know  what  true  temperance,  courage  and  justice  were,  or  how
to  apply  the  rules  based  upon  them  to  the  circumstances  of  his
own  life.  He  was  a  bad  craftsman  in  the  art  of  life,  a  man  who
did  not  know  how  to  use  his  tools,  and  capable  of  being  im
proved  by  instruction  and  by  instruction  alone.  It  was  easy  to
see  that  the  position  so  uncompromisingly  stated  led  to  para
doxical  results.  It  tended  to  make  all  conduct  a  matter  of  the
intellect  and  not  of  the  character,  and  so  in  a  sense  to  destroy
moral  responsibility.  Accordingly  in  Plato  we  have  an  attempt
at  a  reconstruction  of  the  Socratic  view.  At  any  rate,  in  the
maturer  Dialogues  we  find,  as  has  already  been  remarked,  that
the  emotional  or  spirited  element  in  man  is  called  upon  to  take
its  share  in  the  work  of  governing  the  wild  beast  that  is  within
human  nature.  The  force  of  character  which  enables  a  man  to
maintain  his  opinion  is  recognized  as  something  distinct  from
the  purely  rational  element  in  frim  which  enables  him  origin
ally  to  gain  his  opinion.  In  the  story  of  Leontios  the  son  of
Aglaion,  the  internal  moral  conflict,  the  division  of  the  self  into
factions,  and  the  wrath  of-  the  better  part  of  human  nature  at
the  victory  of  the  lower,  are  dramatically  described.  But  for  a
complete  theory  of  responsibility  as  far  as  Greek  thought  could
take  it,  we  must  turn  to  Aristotle.  Aristotle  does  not  deny  the
major  premiss  from  which  the  Socratic  syllogism  starts.  Every
intelligence,  he  admits,  chooses  what  is  best  for  itself,  but  in
order  that  a  right  understanding  of  what  is  best  may  be
attained,  something  more  than  intelligence  is  required.  It  is
after  all  only  moral  men  who  can  thoroughly  understand  the
nature  of  a  moral  code,  for  in  moral  matters  intellectual
enlightenment  depends  upon  character.  Hence  those  are  mis
taken  who  urge  that  we  cannot  be  responsible  for  wrong-doing
because  the  wrong-doer  acts  in  accordance  with  what  appears  to
him  to  be  good,  and  if  he  is  mistaken,  cannot  be  held  respons
ible  for  his  ignorance.  The  reply  to  this  is  that  ignorance
proceeds  from  and  is  a  mark  of  bad  character,  and  it  is  his  own

o


VOL. II.


194  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

slack  method  of  living  which  has  corrupted  the  bad  man's  views
and  made  him  at  once  remiss  in  his  conduct  and  mistaken  in
his  judgment.  Virtue  does  not  come  purely  by  nature,  nor  can
it  be  taught  in  the  schools  like  an  art,  but  along  with  teaching,
or  rather  antecedent  to  teaching  itself,  the  youth  must  undergo
a  training  in  practice.  This  practical  training  will  produce  the
necessary  character.  The  character  being  formed  will  give  us
the  right  aims,  and  then  a  trained  intelligence  is  necessary  in
the  form  of  Practical  Wisdom  to  reason  from  those  aims  and
apply  the  results  to  practical  affairs.  This,  in  brief,  is  the
psychology  of  the  good  man.  Contrasted  with  him  stands,  in
the  first  place,  the  profligate  who  has  what  Plato  called  "the
lie  in  the  soul,"  who  entertains,  that  is  to  say,  the  radically
false  principle  of  life  that  the  proper  thing  for  a  man  is  always
to  pursue  the  pleasure  of  the  moment.  This  character  is  again
consistent.  Bad  training  has  given  its  possessor  a  bad  principle,
and  he  applies  his  principle  resolutely  in  action.  But  between
the  good  and  the  bad  stands  a  third  character  whose  essence  is
to  be  inconsistent.  This  is  the  incontinent  man  who  has  suffi
cient  moral  enlightenment  to  admit  the  goodness  of  virtue  as  a
general  principle,  but  who  is  so  far  overcome  by  passion  and
appetite  as  to  find  means  of  evading  the  application  of  the
principle  to  the  facts  of  conduct.  He  allows  himself  to  be
deluded  by  self-sophistication,  and  lets  his  desires  represent  the
action  which  he  is  about  in  a  light  which  prevents  it  from  being
seen  to  fall  under  the  general  rule  which  would  forbid  it.  He
does  not  deny  that  the  courageous  man  is  superior  to  the
cowardly,  but  he  is  always  sure  that  the  present  occasion  is  one
which  calls  for  discretion,  and  not  for  an  imprudent  display  of
valour.  He  does  not  uphold  injustice,  but  while  constantly
overreaching  his  neighbour,  is  all  the  time  convinced  that  he  is
only  too  modest  in  maintaining  his  own  rights.1  But  all  this

1  These  illustrations  are  not  Aristotle's,  who  confines  himself  to  the  case  of
the  actual  obliteration  of  rational  reflection  by  sensual  appetite.  But  the
principle  is  the  same.  The  great  mass  of  wrong-doing,  particularly  iu  public
affairs,  seems  to  have  a  measure  of  gelf-sophistication  as  its  necessary  condition.
Few  people  will  admit  nakedly  even  to  themselves  that  what  they  do  is  wrong.
They  must  have  some  specious  terms  in  which  to  cloak  the  deed.  They  must
screen  themselves  from  their  own  inner  consciousness,  and  thus,  though  so
phistication  is  not  the  originating  cause,  it  is  an  essential  condition  of  most
conduct,  public  or  private,  that  conflicts  with  admitted  principle.


PHILOSOPHIC ETHICS  195

intellectual  jugglery  does  not  free  him  from  responsibility.  It  is
the  consequence  and  the  sign  of  an  imperfectly  disciplined  char
acter,  and  each  man  not  only  chooses  his  own  actions,  but,
at  least  at  the  outset,  he  chooses  his  own  character  also,
because  the  character  is  made  by  the  actions.  Human  nature,
upon  this  view,  is  neither  intrinsically  good  nor  intrinsically
bad.  It  needs  no  supernatural  grace  to  lift  it  out  of  the  slough
of  original  sin,  neither  is  it  born  in  a  state  of  innocence  from
which  it  falls  away  as  life  proceeds.  It  has  originally  a  natural
capacity  to  be  influenced  by  training  and  teaching,  and  if  favour
ably  situated  where  the  winds  blow  upon  it  from  healthy  and
salubrious  climes,  it  flourishes  and  grows  up  into  wisdom  and
moral  goodness.  If  it  fails  to  receive  the  right  nutrition,  and  if
no  effort  is  made  to  respond  to  the  training  of  the  spiritual
pastor  and  master,  then  it  falls  away,  possibly  into  the  deliberate
corruption  of  the  principle  of  selfish  pleasure,  perhaps  rather
into  that  twilight  of  the  average  sensual  man  in  which  the  rule
of  right  is  something  seen  and  acknowledged  from  afar,  but  never
allowed  to  shine  unshaded  upon  the  agent's  own  conduct.

8.  From  the  question  why  we  should  concern  ourselves  to  be
virtuous  and  how  we  should  go  about  to  be  virtuous,  we  pass
next  to  the  question  in  what  virtue  consists.  If  by  this  is
meant— What  in  the  modern  sense  is  the  moral  standard  ?  it
must  be  admitted  that  none  of  the  thinkers  we  are  here  con
sidering  have  a  perfectly  definite  answer  to  give.  Even  the
famous  Aristotelian  Doctrine  of  the  Mean  is  not  a  doctrine
laying  down  an  objective  measure  to  which  the  rules  of  conduct
and  the  laws  of  the  state  should  conform.  Nevertheless  the
Socratic  thinkers  have  an  ideal  of  their  own  which  in  many
respects  is  very  clearly  defined.  It  is  by  no  means  identical  with
the  ideal  of  the  more  spiritual  religions  ;  we  may  say  that  it  is
both  more  and  less  than  they  are.  It  is  essentially  an  ideal  for
this  world,  and  it  bids  men  make  the  best  of  their  life  in  this
world.  It  is  an  ideal  made  for  human  nature.  It  is  not  one
which  consists  in  overcoming  human  nature.  It  is  an  ideal  for
the  active  citizens  of  a  free  state,  not  for  men  who  can  only
hope  to  practise  virtue  by  retiring  from  state  affairs.  Though
they  put  the  philosopher's  life  above  the  statesman's,  neither


196

Plato  nor  Aristotle  could  forget  that  they  were  members  of  a
self-governing  community,  owing  their  freedom  and  their  culture
to  the  security  which  their  citizenship  gave  them;  nor  could
they  leave  out  of  their  minds  that  a  great  part  of  the  impulse
which had turned  men's  minds  to  moral  philosophy  was  the
endeavour to  save  the  city  state  from  that  loosening  of  the
bonds  of  political  obligation  which  they  saw  going  on  around
them. Hence  the  first  duty  of  man,  whether  in  the  Republic  or
in  the  Ethics,  is  to  be  a  good  citizen. Whether,  indeed,,  he  can
always  be  a  loyal  citizen  in  a  bad  state,  is  a  point  which  gives
Aristotle  some  difficulty  ;  but  that  the  ideal  arrangement  is  that
he  should  find  a  state  of  society,  in  which  to  be  a  good  man  and
a  good  citizen  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  is  a  matter  about
which  there  is  no  doubt. The  good  citizen  is  one  who  can  both
rule  and  be  ruled. He  has  the  self-discipline  which  enables  him
to  submit  to  others  when  their  turn  comes,  and  the  wisdom
which  enables  him  to  direct,  not  only  his  own  affairs,  but  those
of  the  state  when  his  own  turn  comes. He  must  be  ready  to
fight  for  his  city  in  war  and  to  count  it  the  noblest  of  deaths  to
die  for  her. He  must  be  moderate  in  his  pleasures,  capable  of
restraining  appetite  lest  it  should  get  the  mastery  of  him,  not
given to anger,  but capable of  righteous indignation when
circumstances  require  it,  liberal  without  ostentation  in  money
matters,  and  careful  of  the  rights  of  others  to  the  point  of  being
willing  always  to  take  less  than  his  own  share  rather  than  press
his  interests  too  keenly. He  should  have  an  adequate  measure
of  self-respect,  and  a  great-souled  man,  who  is  in  a  sense  the
perfect  type  of  this  kind  of  character,  being  worthy  of  great
things,  should  deem  himself  worthy  of  great  things. He  should
know  himself  for  what  he  is, and do  nothing  to  belittle or
demean  himself. In  voice,  in  gait  and  in  gesture  his  dignity
should  be  reflected. He  should  feel  a  proper  pride  in  himself,
and  trust  to  that  pride  to  keep  him  from  anything  degrading.
He  is  thus  the  direct  antithesis  of  the  holy  and  humble  man  of
heart  whom  the  Christian  teaching  holds  up  to  esteem. The
antithesis  is  inevitable ; the  Christian  saint  is  conscious  of  a
sinfulness  from  which  the  divine  grace  alone  has  raised  him,  and
which  nevertheless  still  tinges  and  stains  all  that  he  does  when
it  is  matched  against  the  white  radiance  of  infinite  perfection.


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  197

The  great-souled  Greek  has  learnt  to  govern  his  own  nature ;  he
measures  himself  with  his  equals,  and  if  he  owes  a  debt  it  is  to
his  country  and  her  laws,  which  he  repays  in  the  capacity  of
faithful  and  upright  magistrate  and  citizen.  And  thus  the
Greek  ideal  is  cast  rather  in  the  mould  of  the  hero  or  the  states
man  than  in  that  of  the  saint.  Justice  is  far  more  prominent
than  benevolence  ;  in  place  of  the  mortification  of  the  flesh  we
have  a  reasonable  temperance,  a  self-restraint  which  prevents
the  lower  nature  from  usurping  the  place  of  the  higher.1  We
liave  the  conception,  perhaps  not  less  illuminating,  that  justice
being  good  can  only  have  good  as  its  result,  and  therefore  the
punishment  that  is  just,  far  from  doing  harm  to  the  criminal,  is
medicine  that  he  should  welcome  for  his  own  sake.2  Finally
with  the  patriotism  bound  up  with  the  city  state  we  get  the
inevitable  limitation  which  a  purely  civic  morality  entails.  The
rights  and  duties  which  the  Greek  citizen  recognized  were
obligations  existing  in  the  full  sense  only  as  between  a  limited
circle  of  free  men.  Plato  does  not  carry  his  humanitarianism
beyond  the  point  of  urging  that  in  making  war  with  one  another,
the  Greek  states  should  treat  the  conquered  as  they  do  now  in
the  civil  contests  of  factions  within  each  state,  and  that  in
making  war  upon  the  Barbarian,  they  should  treat  the  con
quered  as  they  now  treat  conquered  Greeks.  Aristotle  grades
the  rights  of  human  beings  according  to  the  degree  in  which
personality  is  developed.  The  man  capable  of  full  citizenship  is
the  man  fully  capable  of  directing  affairs,  and  he  is  the  possessor
of  practical  wisdom  in  its  completeness.  The  woman,  the  child
and  the  slave  who  are  not  so  qualified  have  inferior  rights,  and
we  have  seen  how  Aristotle  found  in  this  a  justification  for  the
inequality  of  the  sexes  and  for  slavery.  Yet  the  slave  is  after

1  In  some  of  the  Platonic  Dialogues  this  is  pushed  to  the  point  of
asceticism,  and  this  line  of  the  Platonic  teaching  is  carried  further  by  the
old  Academy  and  revived  in  Neoplatonism.  But  the  maturer  mind  of
Plato  himself,  as  seen,  for  example,  in  the  Republic,  does  not  push
asceticism  beyond  the  limit  of  healthy  self-restraint  in  the  interests  of  the
character  as  a  whole.

a  That  justice,  being  good,  can  never  show  itself  in  doing  harm  either  to
one's  enemy  or  to  a  bad  man,  is  the  gist  of  the  argument  with  Polemarchus
in  Republic,  i.  (see  esp.  p.  335).  So  in  the  Laws  (bk.  ix.,  854)  the  object  of
punishment  is  never  evil,  but  to  make  a  man  better,  or  at  any  rate  less  bad.
Similarly  in  the  Ethics,  only  the  incurable  are  to  be  altogether  "  put  be
yond  the  boundaries."


198  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

all  a  man,  and,  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  man,  he  is  capable  of  friend
ship  and  of  entering  into  and  fulfilling  obligations.  Rights,  as  a
modern  might  put  it,  depend  on  personality.  But  personality
—the  capacity  for  free,  responsible  self-direction — is  not  the
attribute  of  all  human  beings.

Such,  then,  in  brief,  are  the  virtues  and  limitations  of  the
civic  ideal,  but  we  must  always  remember  that  neither  in
Plato  nor  Aristotle  is  this  the  highest  ideal  of  all.  The  idea
of  rising  beyond  human  nature  to  something  beyond  it,
the  idea  of  becoming  citizens  of  a  better  world  than  this,
is  to  both  the  crown  of  their  work ;  and  we  see  in  them  the
way  paved,  not  only  for  the  wise  man  of  the  Stoic  philosophy
who  should  reach  perfection  in  a  state  of  slavery  or  under  a
tyrannical  rule,  but  even  for  the  Christian  saint  who  found  his
highest  bliss  in  withdrawing  from  the  affairs  of  this*  world
altogether.  The  Platonic  philosopher  only  remains  a  statesman
from  his  sense  of  obligation  to  the  city  which  has  nourished  and
trained  him.  We  shall  not  do  him  an  injustice,  says  Plato,  if
we  compel  him  to  return  into  the  cave  where  the  blind  men  of
this  world  dwell,  watching  the  play  of  unreal  things  in  a  dim
and  uncertain  light ;  but  in  his  heart  he  will  always  desire  to
range  abroad  freely  in  the  Elysian  Fields,  where  by  the  purer
light  of  reason  he  can  contemplate  the  essential  goodness  of
things.  So  in  Aristotle's  scheme,  for  the  philosopher  the
ultimate  value  of  practical  wisdom  is  to  so  regulate  the  affairs
of  life  and  bring  the  lower  elements  of  the  mind  into  order  as
to  set  the  speculative  wisdom  free  to  rise  to  those  higher
objects  of  contemplation  in  which  the  Sage  finds  his  true
delight.  The  philosopher  remains  a  man,  partaker  of  a  corrupt
ible  nature,  and,  therefore,  incapable  of  sustaining  a  permanent
conversation  with  high  and  heavenly  things.  Yet  he  must,  as
far  as  possible,  put  off  his  mortality  and  put  on  the  likeness  of
the  divine  intelligence,  which  is  the  centre  of  the  universal
order  about  which  and  towards  which  all  things  move.

If  we  find  this  ideal  lacking  in  some  of  the  graces  of  those
ethical  systems  which  are  associated  with  the  spiritual
religions,  we  must  admit  some  counterbalancing  merits  of  no
less  importance  to  Ethical  growth.  Instead  of  the  rule  of  self-
repression  we  have  the  ideal  of  expansion,  of  harmonious  self-


PHILOSOPHIC ETHICS  199

development,  an  ideal  which  may  on  occasion  involve  in  it  the
necessity  of  extreme  self-sacrifice,  even  to  the  point  of  dying  for
friend  or  for  country,  but  which  in  more  fortunate  circum
stances  blossoms  into  the  full  flower  of  human  excellence  con
ceived  as  the  realization  of  many-sided  capacities,  physical,
moral,  intellectual,  and  spiritual.  Secondly,  we  have  the  con
ception  that  this  ideal  is  to  be  sought,  in  the  first  place,  in
patriotic  devotion  to  the  state  regarded  as  a  community  of  free
citizens  existing  for  the  very  purpose  of  glorifying  common  life
and  bringing  forth  from  it  the  best  it  has  in  it  to  be,  an  associa
tion  that  comes  into  existence  that  men  may  live,  but  continues
to  exist  that  men  may  live  well.  Thirdly,  the  gifted  man  rises
above,  though  never  beyond,  this  civic  ideal.  He  may  never
neglect  the  spiritual  mother  that  has  borne  him,  yet  he  has  his
own  life  apart,  which  is,  in  later  phrase,  hid  with  God,  sharing
with  Him  the  spiritual  joy  of  contemplating  nature  and  seeing
that  it  is  good,  bathed  "  in  that  content  surpassing  thought  the
Sage  in  meditation  found,  and  walked  with  inward  glory
crowned."

9.  While  Plato  and  Aristotle  may  be  said  to  have  continued
and  developed  the  Socratic  condition  in  its  fulness,  different
sides  of  the  Master's  teaching,  taken  by  themselves,  became  the
sources  of  separate  schools.  The  hedonistic  tendency  in  Socrates
was  developed  by  Aristippus,  and  through  him  became  the
source  of  the  Epicurean  philosophy.  The  more  ascetic
tendency,  which,  sprung  from  the  Socratic  teaching  of  self-
containment  and  the  practical  hardihood  and  moderation  of  his
life,  became  the  central  feature  in  the  teaching  of  Antisthenes.
Here  the  doctrine  that  virtue  is  the  essential  condition  of
happiness  is  pushed  to  the  point  from  which,  as  we  have  seen,
Aristotle  drew  back.  Man  is  made  in  a  fuller  sense  the  master
of  his  fate.  To  live  in  accordance  with  virtue  is  laid  down  as
the  end  of  life,  and  it  is  the  object  of  the  wise  man  to  render
himself  independent  of  all  external  conditions  over  which  he
himself  cannot  exercise  control.  Aristotle,  in  defining  self-
sufficiency,  laid  down  that  we  cannot  apply  the  term  to  any
man  considered  by  himself,  but  only  by  taking  into  account  his
family,  his  friends,  and,  indeed,  his  city,  since  man  is  by


200  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

nature  a  political  animal. To  the  Cynic,  virtue  alone  was  self-
sufficient  for  happiness,  needing  nothing  further,  unless  it  were
a Socratic fortitude. He had overcome desire. He would
enter  into  no  hampering  bond  with  other  human  beings. In
particular,  the  city  was  one  of  the  encumbrances  from  which
the  true  philosopher  was  free. For  a  home,  his  tub  sufficed  for
Diogenes,  and  if  asked  of  what  state  he  was  a  citizen,  he  re
plied  that  he  was  a  citizen  of  the  world— a  cosmopolitan. Thus,
a  full-blown  doctrine  of  self-reliance  makes  also  for  universalism!
The particular  and  special ties  by which men are grouped
together  fall  away,  and  with  the  abstract  assertion  of  the  human
personality  as  the  supreme  object  of  life  and  as  ruler  of  its  own
destiny,  there  arises  also  the  conception  of  universal  humanity
as the only community to  which the individual owes  an
allegiance. The  doctrines  of  self-mastery  and  world-citizenship
thus  originating  with  the  Cynics  were  developed  into  the  most
influential  system  of  antiquity  by  the  founders  of  Stoicism.  The
wise  man  of  the  Stoics  was to  live,  in  accordance  with the
first  formula  of  the  school,  consistently. In  accordance  with  the
second  and  better-known  formula  he  was  to  live  consistently
with  Nature. But  what  was  Nature  ? It  was the  universal
order  and  harmony  of  things  where  everything  by  a  divine  over
ruling  providence  had  its  place,  where  everything  which  fulfilled
its  nature  served  the  whole,  where  the  healthy  life  of  every  part
was  a  contribution  to  the  life  of  the  whole  organism. The  wise
man  learnt,  in  the  first  place,  to  contain  himself  and  to  bow  to
the  universal  order  of  things ; to  will,  as  Epictetus  said,  that
each  thing  should  take  place  as  it  does  take  place,  that  is,  "as
the  disposer  of  things  has  disposed  them  ;  and  he  has  ordained
that  there  should  be  summer  and  winter,  plenty  and  scarcity,
virtue  and  vice,  and  all  these contraries  for  the  sake  of  the
harmony  of  the  whole." In  this  universal  scheme  of  Nature
man  must  play  his  part  in  accordance  with  the  natural  capacity
assigned  to  him. He  is  the  child  of  God  in  a  special  sense,  and
he  should  realize, therefore,  that  he  has  no  lowly or  ignoble
birth,  and  realizing that,  he will have no lowly  or  ignoble
thoughts  about  himself. A  god  is  given  to  each  man,  a  deity
(in  the  shape  of  his  own  reason),  to  guard  over  him  ; one  that
is  sleepless  and  incapable  of  being  deceived,  who,  if  you  shut  the


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  201

doors  and  make  it  all  dark,  is  still  there  with  you,  and  with  him,
God  Himself.  "  For  you  are  not  alone,  but  God  is  with  you  and
your  deity."  God,  in  disposing  things,  has  put  certain  things
within  our  power,  or  rather  within  the  power  of  this  controlling
deity  within  us — our  reason.  Our  part  in  life  consists  in  ruling
those  things  well,  and  in  realizing  that  other  things  are  such
as  we  cannot  rule.  And  since  God  is  good  He  has  put  within
our  power  all  things  essential  to  our  own  happiness  to  possess.
It  follows  that  external  things  which  we  cannot  control  are
indifferent  to  us,  and  all  that  matters  to  us  is  to  preserve  our
own  souls  untouched.  Externals  arc  merely  the  material,  in
the  use  of  which  our  own  character  manifests  itself.  "  Good
things  are  the  virtues,  and  what  appertains  to  the
virtues ;  evil  are  the  opposite  to  these ;  indifferent  are  wealth,
health,  and  reputation."  He  whom  these  things  can  disturb
is  not  a  wise  or  virtuous  man,  but  if  you  ask  who  is  the
invincible,  he  is  the  man  who  has  put  the  world  beneath  his
feet,  whom  none  of  those  things  which  are  independent  of  his
will  can  move  from  his  course.

This  self-centred  conception  of  the  wise  man  can  at  times  be
pushed  to  the  point  of  harshness  and  coldness.  For  instance,
in  discussing  suicide,  Epictetus  bids  the  philosopher  remain  in
the  bodily  prison  as  long  as  reason  tells  him,  just  as  Plato  had
already  said,  that  he  is  placed  there  as  a  sentinel  and  must  not
desert  his  post.  God  has  need  of  the  world  and  its  inhabitants,
but  if  He  sounds  the  signal  as  He  did  to  Socrates,  then  the
philosopher  should  obey  the  signaller  as  his  general.  But  in
the  performance  of  duty,  the  feelings  of  his  relations,  even  of
Ids  mother,  are  not  to  be  taken  into  account.  It  is  not  your
action  that  will  grieve  them,  but  just  that  which  grieves  you,
uamely,  their  own  opinion.  "Do  you  take  away  your  own
opinion,  and  if  they  do  well  they  will  take  away  theirs,  and
otherwise  it  will  be  on  their  own  responsibility  that  they  will
lament."  But  Stoicism  has  a  softer  and  more  social  side.
Since  God  is  the  father  of  all,  it  follows  that  all  men  are
brothers ;  the  slave  differs  from  the  emperor  only  by  accident
of  external  position.  If  Epictetus  is  asked  how  one  is  to  refrain
from  anger  with  a  neglectful  slave,  he  will  answer,  "  Slave  your
self,  will  you  not  bear  with  your  own  brother ;  he  has  Zeus  as


202  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

his  forefather,  is  a  son  of  the  same  loins  as  yourself  and  the
same  descent  .  .  .  Do  you  not  remember  who  you  are  and
what  men  you  are  ruling,  that  they  are  kinsmen  and  brothers
by  nature,  that  they  are  descendants  of  Zeus  ? "  Do  you  answer
— I  bought  them  ?  If  so,  you  are  looking  "  into  the  abyss,  into
the  wretched  laws  of  the  dead  and  not  to  those  of  the  gods."
Thus  the  brotherhood  of  the  Stoic  transcends  the  gulf  betwixt
bond  and  free ;  equally  it  obliterates  the  distinction  between
the  fellow-citizen  and  stranger,1  and  the  great  and  supreme
community  is  the  society  of  man  and  gods  from  whom  all  things
come.  "  The  poet  says,  '  Dear  city  of  Cecrops,  will  you  not  say,
dear  city  of  Zeus  ? ' "

Though  hard  witli  himself,  the  Stoic  could  not  be  hard  with
the  offender,  for  vice,  says  the  mild  Emperor  following  Socrates,
is  ignorance  of  the  good,  and  I  who  have  seen  good  could  not  be
angry  with  the  bad  man  who  is  my  kin.  Moreover,  if  your
father  does  wrong,  says  Epictetus,  he  suffers  already  in  character.
Do  not  then  wish  him  to  lose  anything  else  on  that  account.
Even  the  false  judge  can  do  you  no  harm.  The  real  evil  of
punishment  falls  always  upon  the  offender,  and  what  have  you
to  do  with  the  evil  which  belongs  to  another ;  if  the  judge's
decision  is  unjust,  that  is  his  loss.  Men  are  indifferent  to  the
Stoic,  however,  only  in  the  sense  that  their  doings  cannot  affect
his  will,  nor  therefore  what  is  essentially  good  or  evil  to  him.
But,  says  Marcus  Aurelius,  in  so  far  as  I  ought  to  benefit  and
bear  with  them,  they  are  the  nearest  of  things  to  me.  Virtue,
though  springing  from  the  individual  and  resting  on  his  personal
wisdom  and  self-control,  is  eminently  social  in  its  manifestations.
"  Rejoice  in  one  thing  alone  and  rest  in  it,  in  passing  from
one  social  action  to  another  social  action  with  mindfulness  of
God."  If  the  expressions  of  Stoicism  are  often  hard  and  lend
themselves  at  times  to  a  certain  appearance  of  heartlessness  and
isolation,  in  the  gentler  handling  of  a  spirit  like  that  of  Marcus,

1  Similarly  in  social  intercourse,  Epictetus,  who  represents  the  more
rugged  side  of  Stoicism,  bids  us  prefer  goodness  to  every  other  consideration.
"  I  have  nothing  in  common  with  my  father  but  with  the  good  man."
"Are  you  so  hard?"  "Yes,  for  so  I  was  made.  .  .  .  For  this  reason,
if  the  good  is  anything  different  from  the  noble  and  the  just,  father  and
brother  and  country  and  all  things  are  gone."  (Epict,  iii.,  3.  5.)


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  203

the  social  side  becomes  the  dominant  feature,  and  we  learn  that
if  a  man  is  to  ask  nothing  for  himself,  yet  he  is  gratefully  to
acknowledge  every  good  gift  that  he  receives  from  all  around
him,  and  to  be  willing  to  give  his  all  to  others.1

10.  But  it  was  not  so  much  the  gentler  social  virtues  as  the
fundamental  obligations  which  bind  man  to  his  fellows  that
interested  the  Stoics.  Deep  as  was  the  mark  left  on  the  world
by  their  self-containment,  it  was  not  the  greatest  or  most  lasting
effect  of  their  teaching.  It  was  at  the  point  where  moral
philosophy  touches  the  theory  of  law  and  government  that  their
influence  was  widest  and  most  abiding.  For  it  is  to  them  more
than  to  any  other  school  of  thought  that  the  world  owes  the
conception  of  an  ethical  ideal  standing  above  the  wills  of  legis
lators,  whether  despotic  or  popular,  as  a  standard  to  which  they
ought  to  conform.  This  ideal  took  shape  in  the  conception  of
a  Law  of  Nature  which  stood  above  all  human  conventions  and
held  up  a  standard  to  which  state  law  ought  to  conform.  The
conception  of  Nature  was  not  introduced  into  Ethics  by  the
Stoics.  We  have  seen  that  at  the  outset  the  fundamental
problem  of  conduct  was  raised  in  the  form  of  the  question,
"Are  justice  and  the  other  virtues  natural  or  merely  con
ventional  ?  Are  they  founded  on  nature  or  the  products  of
human  agreement,  which  may  be  relegated  at  will  to  the
lumber-room  of  disused  ideas  ? "  We  have  seen  how  Plato
undertook  to  prove  that  they  were  founded  on  nature,  and  did
so  by  showing  that  they  rest  on  the  constitution  of  man  and  of
human  society.  So  far  "  nature  "  appears  as  the  basis  of  morals.
In  Aristotle  it  begins  to  serve  as  a  standard  of  custom.  At
least  in  regard  to  justice,  Aristotle  recognized  that  there  must
be  some  more  ideal  and  scientific  standard  than  that  embodied
in  the  written  and  unwritten  law  and  custom  of  the  Greek
states.  Rules  of  justice  as  embodied  in  law  were  changeable
and  varied  from  place  to  place,  while  that  which  is  natural  is
the  same  everywhere.  But  though  natural  laws  change,  says
Aristotle,  there  must  be  one  state,  one  constitution,  which  is

1  In  the  above  references  to  Epictetus  and  Marcus  Aurelius,  I  have
freely  used  Mr.  Long's  translations,  without,  however,  always  adhering  to
his  words.


204  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

everywhere  natural,  namely,  that  which  is  the  best :  and  there
must  be  one  set  of  laws  everywhere  natural, namely,  those
which  the  best  state  would  adopt. But  the  law  of  nature  after
all  is  an  incident  in  Aristotle's  treatment  of  justice ;  with  the
Stoics  it  becomes  the  central  principle. It  appeared  to  supply,
and  in  its  degree  it  did  supply,  that  systematic  conception  of  a
moral  standard in  which  they  found  earlier  theories  lacking.
For  if  the  older  thinkers  had  taught  that  man's  true  happiness
lies  in  the  practise  of  virtue,  they  had  given  little  attention  to
the  question  why  certain  classes  of  action  are  considered  virtuous.
They  took  over  in  the  main  the  current  ideas  which  they  found
as  to  the  particular  virtues,  idealizing  and  sometimes  supple
menting  and  correcting  them,  no  doubt,  but  not  upon  the  whole
seeking  for  any  first  principle  by  which the  value  of  these
traditional  rules  might  be  tested. Now  such  a  principle  the
Stoics  conceived  that  they  had  found  in  the  law  prescribed  by
Nature  itself  to  man. This  could  be  discovered — such  at  least
seems  to  be  the  implied  process  of  thought — by  considering  how
far  the  rules  of  conduct  which  we  actually  recognize  are  due  to
human  institutions,  and  what  would  remain  if  we  conceive  them
done away with. Proceeding on this line of thought, for
instance,  it is easily  recognized that  such an  institution  as
slavery  is  not  "  natural." It  is  an  institution  of  men,  for  with
out  such  institution  who  would  enslave  himself? So  again  with
all  other  inequality  of  rights. By  law  one  man  may  be  given
privileges over another, but take away the law and what
privilege  could  remain  ? On  the  other  hand,  if  we  consider  such
a  matter  as  the  fulfilment  of  obligations,  the  obligation  itself,
we  may  say,  is  the  result  of  a  compact  made  by  men,  yet  we
feel  in  ourselves  a  "  natural "  impulse  to  fulfil  it,  even  without
legal  compulsion,  and so  to  keep  our  contracts  is  a  part  of
"natural"  law. Reasoning  on  such  lines  as  these,  from  their
conception  of  Nature  as  one  Kosmos,  animated  by  One  God,  the
father  of  all  mankind,  the  Stoics  arrived  at  the  idea  of  a  Law
of  Nature  prescribing  the  freedom,  equality  and  brotherhood  of
mankind,  overriding all distinctions of  class, and race,  and
nation,  prescribing  good  faith  and  mutual  obligation,  even  when
there  was  no  law. This  was  no  empty  theory,  but  an  active
principle, influencing the practical legislation of the  great


PHILOSOPHIC  ETHICS  205

Roman  lawyers.1  The  freedom,  equality  and  brotherhood  of
man,  the  inherent  justice  involved  in  distinctions  of  class  and
of  nationality,  the  original  sanctity  of  contracts,  and,  as  a  conse
quence,  the  recognition  of  moral  obligations  to  those  to  whom
one  is  bound  by  no  law — such  ideas  as  these  originate  with  the
conception  of  a  law  which  Nature  lays  down  for  man,  and  is,
therefore,  independent  of  convention  and  superior  to  the  enact
ments  of  kings.  We  have  already  seen  the  influence  which  this
conception  had  in  mitigating  the  hardships  of  Roman  slavery.
We  trace  it  in  the  successive  extensions  of  the  franchise,  which
broke  down  the  barriers  between  conquering  Rome  and  the
subject  provincials.  We  may  trace  it  once  more  in  the  humane
laws  which  broke  up  the  barbaric  supremacy  of  the  paterfamilias.
Indeed,  "  there  were  few  departments  into  which  the  catholic
and  humane  principles  of  Stoicism  were  not  in  some  degree
carried."  In  the  mind  of  the  best  of  the  emperors,  Stoical
principle  kept  alive  the  ideal  of  a  "  constitution  of  equal  laws
ordered  in  accordance  with  equality  and  equal  freedom  of
speech,  and  a  kingship  honouring  above  all  things  the  freedom
of  those  who  are  ruled."  Such  an  ideal  was  unattainable  in
the  second  century  after  Christ,  but  that  it  should  have  been
placed  on  record  by  the  absolute  master  of  the  Roman  world  as
his  conception  of  the  principle  by  which  he  would  govern  him
self,  is  not  the  least  remarkable  testimony  to  the  strength  of
the  Stoical  creed.  The  law  of  Nature  was  not,  as  we  shall  see
more  fully,  in  the  end  an  adequate  formula  for  the  moral
standard,  but  it  was  a  step  in  that  direction.  It  was  an  assertion
that  such  a  principle  could  be  found,  and  it  recognized  that
actual  codes  deviate  from  the  principle  in  consequence  of  what
is  arbitrary  and  accidental  in  the  laws  of  their  growth.

Greek  ethics  thus  bequeathed  two  great  contributions  to  the
solution  of  the  ethical  problem.  In  its  earlier  stage  it  founded
moral  obligation  on  the  well-being  of  the  individual.  It  taught
that  virtue  was  not  an  emptying  but  a  fulfilment  of  the  person
ality.  It  reconciled  individual  self-development  with  legal,  law-
abiding  citizenship  in  a  free  city  state.  In  its  later  stages,  when
the  qjd  civic  life  was  breaking  up  and  the  problem  taking  new

1  See  quotations  from  the  stoically  trained  jurisconsults  in  Lecky,
History  of  European  Morals,  i.,  pp.  295,  296.


206  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

shape,  it  laid  the  foundations  of  a  universalist  ethics  by  conceiv
ing  an  ideal  standard  of  conduct  applicable  to  all  mankind,  not
subordinate  but  superior  to  state  law,  an  ideal  to  which  social
as  well  as  individual  custom  should  be  made  to  conform.  In
neither  of  these  directions,  however,  was  its  analysis  final.  How
it  was  pushed  further  by  modern  thought,  we  have  now  to
inquire.


CHAPTER  VII

MODERN ETHICS

1.  THE  tradition  of  Greek  ethics  did -not  wholly  disappear
with  the  decay  of  the  classical  civilization.  In  part  it  was
incorporated  in  Roman  law,  and  if  buried  with  it  for  a  time,
shared  in  its  revival  from  the  twelfth  century  onwards.  In
part  it  coalesced  with  the  leading  ideas  of  Christianity,  and
was  made  subservient  to  the  exposition  of  Christian  doctrine.
Particularly,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  later,  the  idea  of  a  Law
of  Nature  has  a  continuous  history  from  the  "  common  reason  "
of  Heraclitus  and  the  "  natural  justice  "  of  Aristotle,  through
the  Roman  jurisprudence  and  the  Canon  Law  to  Grotius  and
Hobbes,  and  from  them  to  Locke  and  Rousseau.  Modern
Moral  Philosophy  starts  with  the  wisdom  of  the  Greeks  as  its
working  capital.  But  from  the  first  it  had  to  deal  with  a  more
complex  situation,  a  more  tangled  conflict  of  claims  upon  the
conscience,  a  wider  apparent  fissure  between  the  individual  life
and  the  social  order.

The  rise  of  a  world  religion,  with  claims  on  the  spiritual  life
which  were  by  no  means  easy  to  reconcile  with  any  political
authority,  resulted  in  mediaeval  Europe  in  a  separation  of  the
Spiritual  and  Temporal  powers  and  the  erection  of  distinct  and
frequently  opposed  authorities,  each  claiming  the  strict  allegi
ance  of  the  individual.  The  Reformation  threw  these  two
powers  in  many  countries  into  prolonged  and  violent  antagonism,
and  the  problem  of  conflicting  duties  to  king  and  country,  on
the  one  hand,  and  to  Christ  and  the  Church,  or  to  God  and
conscience,  on  the  other,  was  raised  in  its  most  acute  form.
Such  a  conflict  could  leave  neither  political  nor  spiritual

207


208  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

authority  unimpaired,  and  where  the  Greek  philosophers  had
something  to  appeal  to  which  all  men  were  in  a  measure  ready
to  recognize  in  the  State  and  the  traditional  laws  and  customs
which  the  State  maintained,  the  first  problem  of  modern
philosophy  was  to  find  a  higher  authority  to  which  either  State
or  Church  might  appeal.  There  could  no  longer  in  thinking
minds  be  any  question  of  accepting  either  of  the  rivals  as
ultimate  and  supreme  arbiter  of  right  and  wrong.  Thus
deprived  of  an  unquestioned  external  authority  men  were
thrown  back  in  the  first  instance  on  their  interpretation  of  the
revealed  Word  of  God,  but  as  the  principal  conflict  had  turned
from  the  first  on  questions  of  interpretation,  and  as  experience
had  shown  how  the  plainest  meaning  could  be  wrested  into  an
ambiguous  sense  or  the  most  categorical  mandate  erected  on
the  basis  of  a  forced  interpretation,  it  was  plain  that  revelation
alone  could  supply  no  single  and  unquestioned  standard  whereby
doubts  might  be  removed.  Hence  the  logic  of  facts  drove  men
to  the  admission  of  private  judgment,  and  the  decay  of  an
universally  recognized  authority  forced  the  thinker  to  fall  back
on  the  individual,  and  to  find  in  his  conscience,  his  instincts,  his
reason,  possibly  in  his  merely  selfish  necessities,  but  at  any
rate  somewhere  in  his  "  nature  "  as  a  human  being,  a  point  of
departure  for  theories  of  moral  conduct  and  the  social  order.

This  was  in  a  sense  to  repeat  what  the  Greek  thinkers  had
done  when  they  found  a  basis  of  political  order  and  social  justice
in  the  moral  nature  common  to  all  human  beings.  But  the
whole  historical  situation  made  it  impossible  for  modern
thought  to  offer  so  simple  a  solution  as  that  which  had  satisfied
the  Greeks.  The  conflict  between  law  and  conscience,  public
authority  and  private  judgment,  had  been  raised  in  too  acute  a
form.  The  Greeks  might  be  satisfied  with  the  proof  that  man
being  a  social  animal,  his  duties  as  a  citizen  were  a  necessary
part  of  the  life  that  was  best  for  himself,  and  so  conclude  to  a
close  identification  of  private  and  public  welfare.  But  to  the
modern  it  was  not  merely  self-interest,  but  conscience  which
often  clashed  with  authority.  While  to  the  Greek  there  was
one  form  of  political  association  which  was  obviously  best,  to  the
modern,  particularly  at  the  period  of  the  rise  of  modern,  ethics
in  the  seventeenth  century,  it  might  be  said  with  more  truth


MODERN ETHICS  209

that  there  was  DO  form  of  political  association  open  at  all,  but
only  submission  to  some  form  of  political  despotism.  The  cor
porate  life  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  everywhere  in  an  advanced
stage  of  decay.  Political  virtue  meant  for  the  many,  not  "  the
capacity  to  rule  and  be  ruled  with  a  view  to  the  best  life  "  but
submission  to  the  powers  that  were.  The  process  of  erecting  a
true  commonwealth  under  modern  conditions  had  not  passed
the  experimental  stage,  nor  had  the  experiments  been  wholly
encouraging.  At  their  best  the  large  kingdoms  of  the  modern
world  were  not  as  close  to  the  hearts  of  their  subjects  as  the
city-state  of  antiquity  was  to  its  citizen.  The  interests  of  state
and  citizen  were  not  so  manifestly  intertwined.  Private  life  had
a  larger,  and  public  life  on  the  whole  a  narrower,  sphere.  It
would  have  been  to  assume  too  much  to  lay  down  that  public
and  private  well-being  were  two  sides  of  the  same  thing.  It
had  to  be  recognized  that  the  individual  might  have  a  life  of
his  own,  and  that  both  from  interest  and  from  conscience  he
might  have  motives  bringing  him  into  conflict  with  the  interests
of  state  as  interpreted  by  the  ruler.

Thus  the  antithesis  of  the  individual  and  society  was  more
deeply  cut  than  in  the  Greek  days,  and  required  a  more  radical
solution,  while  it  was  complicated  by  the  relatively  new  anti
thesis  between  private  judgment  and  authority.  In  a  simpler
society  these  might  both  be  resolved  into  forms  of  the  primary
antithesis  between  duty  and  interest,  and  this  in  turn  might  be
solved  by  an  identification  of  true  interest  witli  duty.  But  this
solution,  again,  was  not  so  easy  to  the  modern  thinker  The
claims  made  on  the  individual  by  the  moral  law  in  modern
times  were  more  exacting  than  in  antiquity,  and  in  some
measure  consisted  in  ideals  to  which  the  mass  of  men  have
never  been  brought  to  render  much  more  than  lip  service  It
was  one  thing  to  agree  that  true  well-being  for  the  individual
lay  in  the  exercise  of  qualities  which  all  really  admired,  and
outside  the  discussions  of  the  sceptic's  lecture-room  treated  in
practice  as  the  essential  equipment  of  a  gentleman.  It  was
quite  another  thing  to  protfer  the  same  justification  for  duties
which  few  in  their  hearts  regarded  as  more  than  formulas  which
might  mean  something  to  an  anchorite,  but  had  little  livino-
relation  to  the  affairs  of  ordinary  life.  The  modern  moral  code


VOL.  II.


210  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

is  harder  than  the  Greek,  partly  because  it  has  incorporated  a
larger  mass  of  ideal  elements,  some  contributed  by  later  Greek
thinkers  themselves,  others  by  Christianity,  others  by  modern
Rationalism,  and  also  because  modern  life  is  more  complex  and
its  ramifications  more  widespread.  Political  duty,  to  instance
a  single  point,  may  impose  on  the  citizen  of  a  great  kingdom,
and  still  more  on  one  of  a  world  empire,  consideration  for  those
whom  he  never  has  seen  or  will  see,  and  the  kind  of  political
virtue  so  called  upon  is  far  more  difficult  to  evolve  and  sustain
in  active  being  than  the  public  spirit  of  a  compact  community
where  every  one  knows  his  neighbours,  and  the  consequence  of
a  public  wrong  falls  at  once  and  manifestly,  if  not  on  the  very
men  who  have  voted  for  it,  then  on  neighbours  whose  sufferings
they  actually  witness.  Thus  it  is  owing  partly  to  an  advance
in  thought,  partly  to  a  change  in  the  ethical  situation,  that  in
modern  philosophy  the  Greek  antithesis  between  the  real  and
the  apparent  good,  the  choice  respectively  of  reason  and  desire,
deepens  into  the  opposition  of  duty  and  interest,  and  morality
presents  itself,  not  so  much  as  a  source  of  happiness  which
every  enlightened  man  must  eagerly  choose  for  himself,  but
rather  as  a  law  imposed  on  human  nature  to  the  cheerful  per
formance  of  which  it  may  by  an  effort  attain,  but  which  compels
by  authority,  rather  than  appeals  by  inherent  attractiveness.
Duty  and  self-sacrifice  become  central  conceptions  of  ethical
theory.  At  the  same  time,  since  conduct  cannot  have  moral
worth  unless  it  is  unconstrained,  the  sanction  of  this  law  had
to  be  found  within  human  nature  itself,  and  even  in  a  sense
within  the  nature  of  each  individual,  who  must  at  least  adopt
of  his  own  choice  the  law  by  which  he  is  compelled  uniformly
to  consider  other  interests  than  his  own  and  may  be  constrained
to  sacrifice  all  that  is  dear  to  him.  Tims  the  modern  world  has
the  ancient  paradox  before  it  in  a  yet  sharper  form.  For  though
it  may  be  said  that  true  well-being  lies  for  us,  as  for  the
ancients,  in  well-doing,  and  though  this  solution  is  occasionally
brought  up  afresh,  yet  it  fails  to  the  modern  mind  to  be  more
than  are-statement  of  the  problem  to  be  solved,  since  that  we!
being  which  was  an  undivided  conception  for  the  Greeks  has
been  analyzed  for  us  into  the  Happiness  which  a  man  experi
ences  within  his  own  consciousness,  and  the  excellence  which


MODERN ETHICS  211

another  may  praise  and  admire  in  him,  but  which  may  have
brought  him  a  heavy  balance  of  sorrow.  For  similar  reasons
the  Greek  axiom  that  every  man  seeks  the  good,  though  useful
m  its  place,  can  hardly  avail  to  solve  an  antithesis  which
derives  its  whole  point  from  the  frequent  conflict  of  moral
goodness  with  the  good  things  for  which  our  nature  craves.

2.  Thus  modern  systems  have  moved  between  the  poles  of  an
authoritative  moral  law  and  an  unconstrained  self-direction  of
human  nature,  and  the  attempt  to  suppress  either  term  of  the
antithesis  brings  about  its  Nemesis  in  the  movement  of  thought.
The  ball  is  set  rolling  by  Hobbes,  in  whose  system  the  element
of  law,  identified  here  with  state  law,  becomes  merely  derivative.
By  the  "  law  of  nature,"  as  we  find  it  at  this  stage,  each  man
seeks  his  own  preservation,  but  since  in  the  correlative  "  state  of
nature  "  where  every  man's  hand  is  against  every  man,  the  life
of  all  is  or  would  be  "  solitary,  poor,  nasty,  brutish,  and  short,"
men  agree  together  tacitly  or  expressly  to  confer  the  plenitude
of  their  natural  rights  upon  a  king  who  shall  rule  over  them  and
keep  them  from  mutual  wrongs. This  is  the  social  contract
which  men  make  and  maintain,  each  for  the  sake  of  his  own
preservation,  since  its  persistent  breach  would  reduce  society  to
primeval  chaos. Thus  in  the  name  of  the  Law  of  Nature  Hobbes
reduced  morality  to  egoism  as  its  ultimate  basis. But  in  so
doing  he  provoked  the  retort  that  his  account  of  our  nature  does
not  correspond  with  the  facts,  and  a  succession  of  writers  lay
stress  on  the  several  social  elements  in  human  nature,  till  Butler,
the  form  of  whose  theory  is  still  determined  by  the  questions
set  by  Hobbes,  elaborates  a  complete  theory of  the natural
constitution  of  man  in  which  conscience  is,  by  the  very  law  of  the
constitution  and  with  the  approval  of  self-love  itself,  established
as  the  authoritative  guide. Yet  Butler  in  the  ends  fails  doubly,
not  only  because  he  has  no  provision  for  the  actual  variations  in
the  deliverance  of  conscience,  but  also  because,  with  a  backwash
of  feeling  from  the  currents  of  the  time,  he  ends  by  admitting
self-love to a  supremacy  which  would  be  fatal  to  his  whole
argument  if  he  had  not  future  rewards  and  punishments  to  fall
back  on. But  to  fall  back  on  the  supernatural  was  in  effect  to


212  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

abandon  the  position  and  leave  the  way  open  for  other  lines  of

thought.

The  most  vigorous  of  these  in  England  was  the  attempt  t
conciliate  the  egoistic  and  social  sentiments  on  the  lines  of  what
was  later  known  as  Utilitarianism. Partly  through  the  analysis  of
moral  judgments  (as  in  Hume's  Enquiry},  partly  by  the  analysis
of  desire  (as  in  Hartley  and  the  Mills),  the  position  was  reached
that  the  good  is  universally  the  pleasurable. But  on  this  at  once
arose  the  fundamental  question— whose  good  and  whose  pleasure
are  to  be  considered  ? Mine  by  me  and  yours  by  you,  or  that  of
all  men  by  both  of  us  ? In  this  statement  of  the  question  the
antithesis  of  duty  and  interest  was  resolved  into  that  between
others  and  self,  and  assumed  a  particularly  acute  form. For  the
psychological  proof  that  pleasure  is  the  object  of  desire  poiute
to  egoism. It  was  my  pleasure  which  my  desire  was  supposed
to  contemplate. But  the  thesis  that  the  pleasurable  is  the  good
once  granted  was  applied  to  society  as  a  whole. The  happiness
of  all  men  was  laid  down  as  the  standard  of  action,  and
promotion  urged  (as  by  the  younger  Mill)  as a duty. The
reconciliation between  these  somewhat  contradictory  positions
was  sought  in  the  sympathy  and social feelings of  mankind
whether  natural  (Adam  Smith)  or  built  up  on  a  more  egoistic
basis by a  process of  association  (Hartley  and  James  Mill).
Through these feelings a man might come to  identify  his
pleasure  and  pain  with  those  of  others,  and  deliberately  sacrifice
all  purely  personal  happiness  for  the  pleasure  of  serving  his
fellow-men,  or  to  avoid  the  pain  of  remorse  consequent  on  a
betrayal. Taken  at  its  best,  however,  this  explanation  gives  no
adequate  account  of  rational  obligation. It  may  be  said  to  show
that  self-sacrifice  is  possible,  and  to  offer  an  account  of  how  the
feeling  of  duty  arises  in  the  individual;  but  it  does  not  make
clear  in  what  precise  sense  we  can  tell  the  man  whose  sympathies
are not sufficiently developed  to  make  him  prefer  another's
happiness  to  his  own,  that  lie  "  ought "  to  do  so,  that  this  is  his
"duty,"  to  perform  which  is  "right  "  and  to  neglect  it  "wrong."
Do  these  terms  simply  mean  that  this  is  the  course  of  conduct
which  we  prefer  and  which,  if  he  felt  as  we  do,  he  would  also
prefer,  or  do  they  mean  that  the  more  social  conduct  is  intrinsic
ally  preferable  whether  he  or  we  happen  to  prefer  it  or  not  ?


MODEBN  ETHICS  213

If  with  the  last  of  the  great  Utilitarians  we  adopt  the  latter
view,  we  impinge  upon  the  line  of  thought  which  in  the  form  at
one  time  of  Intuitionism,  in  another  of  Rationalism,  has  run  its
course  throughout  modern  philosophy  from  the  Cambridge
Platonists  to  our  own  day.  We  need  not  here  refer  to  earlier
phases  of  this  form  of  thought,  for  rationalism  took  upon  itself
a  new  being  in  the  Kantian  theory.  To  the  conception  of
morality  as  a  law  Kant  gave  the  strongest  expression  that  it  has
ever  received.  For  him  the  very  assertion  of  a  moral  judgment
implies  the  existence  of  a  law  binding  on  all  men  as  such,
irrespective  of  persons  and  of  consequences,  and  duty  is  duty
only  when  done  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  law  and  for  no  extraneous
motive.  But  again,  since  in  morality  man  must  be  free,  it  is
only  man  himself  who  can  impose  this  law  upon  himself.  He  is
at  once  sovereign  and  subject,  sovereign  as  a  rational  being,  a
member  of  the  spiritual  world,  which  underlies  phenomena ;
subject  as  a  phenomenon  existing  in  time  and  space,  conditioned
by  those  categories  of  substance  and  causation  by  which  alone  a
phenomenon  can  exist.  As  rational  he  prescribes  to  himself  a
law  which,  as  a  being  in  the  world  of  sense,  he  may  obey  or
disobey.  If  he  were  pure  reason,  he  would  conform  to  law
without  effort  and  be  perfect.  If  he  were  pure  sense,  he  could
know  no  law.  Partaking  of  both  natures,  he  is  a  responsible
being,  the  subject,  but  not  always  the  obedient  subject,  of  a
moral  law.

In  defining  morality  as  law  and  in  making  it  a  law  set  by  man
to  himself,  Kant  is  in  the  centre  of  modern  ethical  thought.
But  the  peculiar  setting  of  his  doctrine  was  in  part  determined
by  the  transitional  character  of  the  Kantian  metaphysics,  and  in
part  by  certain  exaggerations  natural  at  the  outset  in  the
statement  of  all  that  a  law  implies.  Kant's  critics  have  pointed
out,  for  example,  that  a  rational  law  cannot  disregard  circum
stances  or  consequences,  as  Kant  would  have  it  do.  On  the
contrary,  if  the  practical  reason  in  man  meant  anything,  it  meant
a  capacity  to  be  guided  by  ends  and  direct  action  thereto,  and
ends  could  not  be  served  without  taking  changes  of  circumstances
and  all  manner  of  consequences  into  account.  Hence  if  there
was  to  be  a  rational  law  binding  on  all  human  beings  as  such
without  regard  to  any  extraneous  considerations,  it  must  be  a


214  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

law  binding  them  to  permanent  regard  for  some  universal  end.
Again,  those  who  stand  nearest  to  the  direct  line  of  descent  from
Kant  in  modern  Ethics  admit  that  Reason  was  misconceived
when  it  was  placed  in  fundamental  opposition  to  every  emotional
impulse.  Reason  on  its  practical  as  on  its  theoretic  side  is  that
which  makes  for  coherence,  connectedness,  harmony.  It  forms
experience  into  a  connected  whole,  and  it  condemns  as  irrational
only  that  idea  which  will  not  fit  into  the  whole.  On  the  ethical
side  it  is  that  which  makes  for  unity  and  coherence  among  the
different  and  often  jarring  elements  of  our  nature,  and  it  is  to  be
understood  accordingly,  not  as  an  authority  above  and  outside
all  feelings,  emotions,  sentiments  and  whatever  else  may  impel
us  to  action,  but  as  a  principle  working  within  them  towards
harmony.  If  under  the  name  of  feeling  we  include  all  the
interest  we  take  in  action  and  the  ends  and  outcome  of  action,
then  reason  undoubtedly  rests  on  a  basis  of  feeling ;  but  while  as
irrational  beings  we  feel  things  imperfectly,  confusedly  and
inconsistently,  so  as  to  be  led  hither  and  thither  by  the  stress  of
impulse,  the  work  of  reason  is  to  gather  up  all  feelings  into  one
steady  movement  of  will-power,  to  give  them  unity  or  at  least
consistency  of  direction,  and  so  achieve  for  us  a  life  that  is  at  one
with  itself.  Such  an  order  is  a  rational  order,  because  its
component  parts,  instead  of  conflicting,  support  and  further
one  another.

If  the  work  of  reason  could  be  so  completed  that  every  impulse
within  us  fitted  in  of  itself  as  part  of  such  an  order,  we  should
have  what  Kant  called  the  perfect  will  and  the  sense  of  duty
would  cease.  But  because  the  work  of  reason  is  never  complete
our  nature  is  never  wholly  at  one  with  itself,  there  is  strife
within  us.  In  part  our  impulses  are  harmonized  and  set  in  one
definite  direction,  and  it  is  here  that  we  feel  that  our  true  self
lies.  In  part  they  still  rebel  and  chafe  against  their  limits,  and
then  arises  the  feeling  of  constraint  and  of  moral  obligation.
Thus  our  nature  in  a  sense  lays  a  law  upon  itself,  and  this  law  is
a  rational  law,  and  yet  its  foundation  is  in  feeling  and  its  purpose
is  the  satisfaction  of  the  permanent  bent  of  our  nature.  These
and  similar  criticisms  urged  by  the  line  of  Idealist  thinkers  who
claim  descent  from  Kant  fall  into  line  with  the  metaphysical
criticisms  by  which  they  sought  to  overcome  the  dualism  of  the


MODERN ETHICS  215

Critical  philosophy  and  to  depict  the  entire  process  of  things  as
a  working  out  or  realization  of  Spirit.  In  this  way  of  thinking
the  familiar  ethical  antitheses  tend  to  be  regarded  as  apparent
rather  than  real.  The  opposition  between  duty  and  interest  or
reason  and  desire  is  resolved  into  that  between  the  real  and
permanent  self  and  the  illusory  or  temporary  impulse.  The  very
distinction  between  self  and  others  disappears  in  the  conception
of  a  Universal  Self  which  is  the  underlying  reality  of  each,  and
whose  movement  towards  realization  constitutes  the  World
process.

Apart  from  metaphysical  controversies,  the  ethical  rock  lying
always  in  the  track  of  this  movement  of  .thought  is  the  idea  of
Personality.  Idealism  sets  out  to  overcome  the  separateness  of
individuals,  but  often  seems  to  be  only  too  successful,  and  to
destroy  what  it  ought  to  explain.  Philosophy  then  has  still  to
find  a  satisfactory  method  of  stating  the  theory  of  moral  obliga
tion  in  terms  which  do  full  justice  at  once  to  individual
personality  and  to  the  spiritual  unity  which  binds  men  to  the
service  of  the  common  good.  I  will  endeavour  to  state  as  briefly
as  possible  the  conclusion  to  which,  in  my  own  view,  the  course
of  thought,  as  shown  in  the  considerations  here  briefly  touched
upon,  seems  to  point.

3.  As  to  the  general  conditions  of  the  problem,  any  theory
which  recognizes  an  obligation  in  ethics  must  admit  that  there
are  actions  which,  if  a  man  does  not  perform  them  with  his
whole  heart,  he  yet  feels  constrained  to  perform.  So  far  we
have  obligation  as  a  psychological  fact,  explain  it  how  we  may.
But  further,  a  rationalist  theory  of  ethics  maintains  that  this
constraint  to  be  of  a  "  moral  "  nature  must  be  quite  distinct  from
any  pressure  of  external  sanction,  i.  e.  it  must  proceed  from  human
nature,  and  so,  as  Kant  showed,  be  imposed  by  each  man  upon
himself.  But  none  the  less,  thirdly,  if  it  is  to  be  something
more  than  a  psychological  fact — a  mere  expression  for  the
ultimate  preference  for  one  course  of  conduct  over  another — it
must  also  be  "  objective,"  i.  e.  it  must  hold  good  for  you  and  for
me  whether  you  or  I  ultimately  acquiesce  in  it  or  not.  It  is  the
primd  facie  opposition  of  these  two  last  points  which  constitutes
the  apparent  paradox  and  the  real  difficulty  of  moral  obligation.


216

The  moral  law  which  I  recognize  must  be  something  which  I
adopt  as  a  law  binding  on  myself,  and  in  that  sense  subjective.
Yet  it  must  be  a  law  which  binds  me,  even  thougli  I  do  not
adopt  it,  and  in  that  sense  objective.

The  Greeks  formulated  this  problem  in  the  shape  of  the
contrast  between  my  own  good  and  that  of  others  (the  <UA<Jrpiov
dyafloV),  and  solved  it  (Ethics,  ix.,  8)  by  the  thesis  that  my  real
good  was  the  good  of  my  real  self,  that  this  was  the  reason  that
is  in  me,  and  that  reason  might  tell  me  to  sacrifice  the  apparent
good  which  lay  in  the  satisfaction  of  my  lower  desires  and  satisfy
my  real  self  by  serving  others.  In  sum,  in  morals  as  in  all
conduct,  I  seek  my  own  good,  but  as  a  moral  man  I  judge  truly
that  my  good  is  to  secure  the  good  of  others.  The  Kantian
solution  starts  from  a  similar  antithesis  of  reason  and  desire,  but
rests  on  a  profounder  analysis  of  the  moral  judgment  and  of
the  whole  distinction  between  the  objective  and  the  subjective.
To  Kant,  morality  is  subjective  in  that  it  is  a  law  which  I  freely
adopt  as  my  own,  which  proceeds  therefore  from  my  own  nature.

;  is  objective  in  that  it  expresses  a  rational  order  which  I
apprehend  as  a  rational  being,  and  which  I  disobey  only  when
and  in  so  far  as  I  am  also  an  irrational  being.  The  principle
underlying  the  solution  is  the  peculiarly  Kantian  thesis  that  the
objective  is  the  rational,  and  if  this  principle  be  admitted,  the
antithesis  between  subjective  and  objective  disappears,  or  rather
ceases  to  be  an  antithesis  between  something  that  proceeds  from
within  and  something  that  proceeds  from  without.  The  deeper
contrast  which  the  terms  henceforward  express,  lies  between
that  which  rests  on  the  caprice,  the  inclination,  the  erroneous
or  partial  judgment  of  the  individual,  and  that  which  must
commend  itself  to  all  men  in  so  far  as  they  are  guided  by
the  rational  element  within  them.

The  problem  then  being  re-stated,  the  question  whether
morality  can  be  regarded  as  a  matter  of  obligation  resolves  itself
into  the  question  of  finding  rational  grounds  for  the  moral
judgment.  Now  if  we  seek  for  such  ground  outside  the  moral
order  we  are  at  once  convicted  of  the  attempt  to  find  a  non-
moral  justification  for  morality.  The  rationalist  then  who  stands
by  a  moral  obligation  must  seek  it  in  the  content  or  character  of
the  moral  order  itself.  He  must  ask  himself  whether  the  moral


MODERN  ETHICS  217

order  is  a  rational  order,  and  he  must  determine  the  question
by  applying  the  same  tests  of  rationality  which  he  would  use  in
any  other  intellectual  problem.  It  is  indeed  objected  to  this
test  that  the  moral  judgment  does  not,  like  the  judgment
which  relates  to  the  physical  order,  state  a  matter  of  fact,  but
rather  imposes  a  command.  We  might  accept  the  objection
without  fundamentally  altering  the  test  to  be  used.  For  orders
issued  may  be  intelligible  or  unintelligible,  consistent  or
inconsistent.  We  can  compare  them  one  with  another  and  see
how  they  stand  when  regarded  as  a  totality,  and  as  we  shall
clearly  see  when  the  tests  of  rationality  are  passed  in  review,  we
can  apply  these  tests  to  them  as  readily  as  to  any  other  body  of
thought.  But  further,  the  rationalist  will  not  wholly  admit
that  the  moral  judgment  merely  issues  an  order  and  does  not
state  a  truth.  On  the  contrary,  it  either  asserts  or  implies  that
one  course  is  "  right,"  or  "  good  "  or  "  better  "  than  another,  and
in  so  doing  it  appears  to  be  founded  on  real  relations  of  things,
and  as  such  subject  to  the  test  applicable  to  all  judgments
which  claim  to  be  valid  and  to  deal  with  reality.1

Now  the validity  of  any  judgment  can  only  be  tested  or

1  Though  the  moral  judgment  may  bo  thus  taken  as  asserting  something,
the  attitude  of  the  man  who  forms  it  with  sincerity  is  not  purely  intel
lectual,  i.  e.  not  identical  with  that  of  one  who  without  emotion  notes  some
physical  occurrence.  On  the  contrary,  any  bonafide  judgment  of  the  form,
"  This  is  good,  right,  desirable,"  must  be  taken  as  expressing  some  practical
sympathy  or  impulse  of  the  person  judging.  Conversely,  any  desire  or
emotion  that  can  be  rendered  definite  at  all  may '  be  regarded  as
translatable  into  such  a  proposition  as — "This  is  good,  or  bad,"  as  the  case
may  be.  This  will  be  true  not  only  of  moral,  but  of  non-moral  or  immoral
feelings  and  impulses.  The  judgment  uttered  is  (ultimately)  a  judgment
of  the  relation  between  something  under  contemplation  and  the  bent  of  our
own  nature,  and  this  relation  if  expressible  in  intellectual  terms  is  of  an
emotional  or  practical  character.  The  judgment,  then,  when  sincerely
uttered  conveys  our  own  attitude  to  the  subject  of  the  proposition.

Now  so  far  as  we  are  swayed  by  a  single  impulse  the  relation  in  question
will  be  judged  from  one  side  only  (e.  y.  as  satisfying  a  sensual  craving).
The  function  of  reason  is  to  enforce  the  judgment  of  the  total  relation  of
the  object  desired  to  our  whole  nature,  and  in  so  far  as  it  has  its  way,
reason  (in  accordance  with  the  relation  of  reason  and  desire  described
above)  re-moulds  impulse  until  the  different  tendencies  of  the  whole  nature
fall  into  line  with  one  another.  This  is  the  practical  harmony  of  the
rational  life,  and  it  is  translatable  into  a  theoretical  harmony  in  the  form
of  a  coherent  conception  of  the  good.

Of  course  this  implies  the  Aristotelian  view  that  the  "  practical  reason  "
has  its  basis  as  much  in  the  moral  character  as  in  any  logical  reasoning.


218  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

measured  by  another  judgment  independently  formed  but
bearing  on  the  same  point.  If  the  first  judgment  is  corrobo
rated  by  the  second,  we,  so  far,  consider  it  valid.  Now
the  second  judgment  in  turn  may  demand  corroboration.  No
final  test  of  validity  can  be  attained  until  we  have  exhausted  all
the  points  of  view  from  which  a  given  order  of  reality  can  be
approached.  At  this  point,  the  system  of  connected  judgments
so  formed  is  valid,  not  in  view  of  any  further  judgment  founded
on  some  outside  source,  for  ex  hypothesi  no  such  outside  judg
ment  remains  to  be  formed,  but  in  virtue  of  its  internal
coherence.  Thus  the  validity  of  a  single  judgment  depends  on
its  place  within  a  system  of  judgments.  The  validity  of  the
system  on  its  internal  coherence,  the  fact  that  it  is  built  up  of
judgments  which  not  only  do  not  conflict,  but  maintain  and
necessitate  one  another.  Final  truth  in  such  a  system  could
only  be  claimed  with  perfect  assurance,  if  we  knew  that  we  had
exhausted  all  the  points  of  viewing  the  order  of  reality  with
which  we  are  dealing,  and  this  is  why  final  truth  is  not  attain
able  by  man.  But  the  most  complete  truth  which  man  can
reach  lies  in  the  most  comprehensive  system  of  coherent  thought
which  he  can  construct,  and  the  way  of  reason  lies  always  in  the
effort  towards  such  a  system,  and  of  unreason  in  the  adoption  of
beliefs  which  conflict  with  one  another  and  cannot  be  reduced  to
a  harmonious  order.

To  prove  morality  rational,  then,  we  must  be  able  to  exhibit
the  moral  order  as  a  coherent  whole.  Its  manifold  judgments
must  not  merely  tolerate,  but  must  actively  support  one  another,
and  must  similarly  agree  with  any  deduction  from  our  know
ledge  of  the  physical  or  social  order  which  may  bear  upon  them.
Now,  in  the  actual  morality  recognized  by  any  given  society  we
cannot  expect  to  find  such  coherence  in  perfection.  We  have
seen  the  rough  and  ready  way  in  which  de  facto  morality  grows
up,  how  it  is  based  on  human  character  with  all  its  imper
fections,  and  influenced  by  accidents  of  historical  development
and  partial  theories  of  religious  or  quasi-scientific  origin.  The
moral  consciousness  has  all  the  characters  of  mind  in  growth,
not  of  mind  that  has  attained.  But  in  this  growth,  and  amidst
the  mass  of  partial  and  often  inconsistent  truth,  we  may  find  a
tendency,  a  movement,  an  unfolding  of  a  single  idea,  which


MODERN  ETHICS  219

gives  the  coherence  which  we  require  to  all  conduct.  We  may  be
able  to  trace  it  among  the  inconsistencies  which  mar  it,  and
through  the  partial  truths  which  half  illustrate  and  half  obscure
it,  this  truth  of  man  as  by  God  first  spoken  which  the  actual
generations  garble.  If  there  is  such  an  idea,  and  if  it  is  capable
of  coherent  application  to  all  the  aspects  of  life  and  conduct,  it
would  be  possible  to  found  upon  it  an  order  of  moral  truth  in
which  our  manifold  impulses  and  the  judgments  founded  on
them  would  meet  and  be  seen  to  support  one  another  as  equally
necessary  parts  of  the  same  whole.  Such  an  order  could  then
be  justly  called  a  rational  expression  of  the  truth  as  to  what  is
best  for  human  beings.

Now,  the  germ  of  such  an  idea  the  teachers  of  mankind  have
found  with  singular  consistency  in  the  golden  rule  of  Confucius,
which  bids  each  man  treat  others  as  himself. They  may  differ
as  to  the  phrasing  and  as  to  the  application,  but  as  to  the
essence  and  the  principle  itself  all  thinkers  are  at  one,  and
reviewing  all  morality  from  primitive  custom  upwards,  it  is  easy
to  see  that,  in  however  limited  and  halting  a  manner,  the  same
principle  is  implied  in  the  very  recognition  of  rules  of  conduct
of  general  application. That  the  individual  is  member  of  a
spiritual  Avhole  with  a  common  life  and  a  general  interest,  is  the
axiom  which  gives  the  needed  coherence  to  the  multitudinous
sympathies,  susceptibilities,  reluctances,  that  guide  the  moral
life  of  the  unreflecting  man. The  problem  before  rationalism
is  to  carry  this  principle  into  detail,  and  show  how  it  effects  the
harmony  which it  promises. At  this  point the  problem  of
obligation  passes  into  that  of  the  moral  Standard,  and  to  prove
that  the  moral  order  is  rational,  we  must  find  an.  intelligible  ex
pression  for  the  object  which  the  moral  principle  propounds  to
us. Of  the  efforts  made  by  modern  thought  in  this  direction  we
must  speak  later  on. But  assuming  that  a  standard  is  found
whereby  all  the  lines  of  conduct  laid  down  by  the  moral  order
may  be  viewed  as  starting  from  the  same  basis  and  pointing  to
the  same  result,  let  us  see  exactly  what  would  be  gained. First
we  should  have  a  conception  of  "  right "  or  "  good  "  which  would
be  rational  in  the  full  sense  of  satisfying  the  tests  of  the  rational
which we laid down. Secondly, this conception would be
objective ;  i.  e.  it  would  hold  independently  of  the  opinion  of


220  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

any  given  individual  or  of  his  determination  to  ignore  it  in
favour  of  some  preference  of  his  own.

4.  But  in  what  sense  would  it  "  bind  "  him  ? This  is  generally
taken  as  resolvable  into  the  more  precise  question,  "  What  will
befall  him  if  he  ignore  it  ? " Accepting  the  question  in  this
form,  let  us  from  the  outset  insist  that  this  consequence  is  not
essentially  or  universally  a  loss  of  personal  happiness. Admitting
all  that  can  be  said  of  the  pangs  of  remorse  and  the  blessedness
of  martyrdom,  we  should  still be,  to  say  the  least,  unwise  to
stake  anything  on  the  possibility  of  proving  that  a  loss  of  con
scious, realized  happiness attends every  fall  from virtue or
refusal  of  duty. We  may,  if  we  please,  maintain  that  it  is  well
with  the  man  who  does  his  duty  to  his  worldly  loss,  and  ill  with
him  who  rejects  it,  but  in  speaking  confidently  on  the  point,  we
can  only  be  judging  them  from  outside. We  are  measuring
them  by  that  standard  of  merit  to  which  we  think  men  should
conform,  to  which  we  ourselves  wish  to  conform. We  are  not
judging  by  the  conscious  happiness  or  misery  which  the  two  men
experience,  for  we  have  no  means  of  deciding  with  certainty
what  that  consciousness  is. If,  indeed,  we  assume  both  of  them
to  be  animated  alike  by  this  same  desire  to  conform  to  the  rule
of  human  duty  which  our  judgment  on  them  postulates,  then  we
may  impute  those  feelings  of  inward  peace  on  the  one  hand,  and
lasting  remorse  on  the  other,  which  we  know  to  be  in  average
humanity  determining  factors  in  the  balance  of  happiness  and
misery. But  suppose  that  we  have  to  deal  on  the  one  side  with
a  conscientious  soul  much  tried  and  often  sore  bested  in  the
race,  and  on  the  other  with  a  consciousness  which  gradually,
perhaps  half  deliberately,  blunts  its  moral  feelings  and  loses  the
sting  of  shame. We  may  say  with  confidence  that  the  second
is  a  lower  type,  but  we  cannot  with  equal  confidence  assume
that  it  experiences  more  unhappiness. Indeed,  the  probability
lies  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  if  nevertheless  we  persist  that
if  we  had  to  choose,  we  would  prefer  for  ourselves  the  former
character,  we  do  so  on  the  ground  that  something  other  than
our  own  happiness  is  the  motive  which  does  and  should  move
us,  and  that  it  is  better  to  be  half  a  hero  and  miserable  than  a
whole-hearted  brute,  satisfied  with  brutishness. Such  a  con-


MODERN ETHICS  221

elusion  is  in  fact  held  in  germ  in  the  bare  conception  of  a  moral
obligation  that  is  not  merely  a  superior  and  more  exact  calcu
lation  of  the  elements  of  personal  happiness  and  misery.  In
our  thinking  on  this  subject  we  are  too  often  tempted  to  get
the  best  of  both  worlds,  to  claim  superiority  to  all  selfish  con
siderations  when  insisting  boldly  on  the  supremacy  of  the  moral
law,  and  then  by  an  elastic  interpretation  of  happiness  to  make
terms  with  prudence  and  insist  that  even  from  this  point  of
view  the  faithful  servant  of  duty  is  proved  wise  in  his  generation.
We  are  aided  in  this  double  feeling  by  phrases  and  turns  of
thought  which  enable  us  to  identify  Happiness  and  the  Good.
These  terms  are  indeed  closely  related.-  We  find  happiness  in
conscious  realization  of  the  good,  but  we  may  attain  the  good
without  knowing  it,  or  we  may  strive  towards  a  supreme  good
at  the  cost  of  pain  and  misery  which  in  the  actual  measurement
of  conscious  feeling  would  probably  far  outweigh  such  satis
faction  as  our  poor  onward  efforts  may  bring.  Once  admit  and
resolutely  adhere  to  the  admission  that  happiness  is  a  condition
of  our  conscious  life,  and  we  bring  clearly  into  relief  the  truth
that  the  ethical  conception  of  the  good  carries  us  beyond  our
own  conscious  being  and  forbids  us  to  look  for  a  reward  there.

This  deduction  fairly  faced,  we  come  back  to  the  conception
of  obligation  as  resting  on  the  relation  of  self  to  others,  or  more
broadly,  on  the  position  of  each  man  as  a  member  of  the  great
whole,  in  which,  insignificant  part  as  he  is,  he  has  his  function
to  perform.  It  is  that  in  him  which  answers  to  this  position,
which  realizes,  however  dimly,  the  nature  of  the  whole  to  which
he  belongs,  which  drives  him  on  and  impels  him  even  through
the  wreck  of  his  own  happiness  and  the  ruin  of  his  personal
desires  to  play  his  part.  In  a  perfect  human  being  indeed,  all
such  conflicting  desires  would  be  overcome.  If  we  imagine  the
reason  within  a  man  finding  a  perfectly  rational  order  of  ideas
to  guide  it,  and  responding  by  carrying  its  own  work  of  re
moulding  impulse  to  completion,  we  should  have  a  character  in
which  every  impulse  would  of  itself  fit  into  an  ordered  whole.
For  such  a  being  no  satisfaction  could  be  found  outside  the
performance  of  the  duties  falling  to  his  lot,  and  thus  for  him
the  antithesis  of  happiness  and  duty  would  be  overcome.  We
do  not  find  this  perfection  in  real  life,  but  we  find  the  mirror


222  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

of  it,  or  rather  a  fragment  of  it,  wherever  there  is  love.  For
here,  too,  happiness  rests  in  service,  and  there  can  be  no  joy  in
satisfaction  gained  at  the  expense  of  the  loved  object.  Hence
the  few  men  gifted  with  the  genius  of  love  which  enables  them
to  feel  for  mankind  what  ordinary  men  feel  for  wife  or  child,
have  always  stood  forth  as  the  teachers  capable  of  inspiring  the
world  with  a  new  gospel.  Where  love  fails,  colder  duty  takes
its  place,  for  though  there  is  not  the  direct  heart-whole  feeling
instinctively  and  without  let  or  hindrance  prompting  service,
there  is  still  the  bent  of  the  nature  in  the  main,  the  incomplete,
imperfect  impulse  of  the  half-formed  character,  warring  with  the
residue  that  is  untamed,  tending  with  pain  and  grief  thither
where  perfection  lies.  Obligation,  then,  rests  on  the  altruism
of  which  the  love-relation  is  the  perfect  type,  which  presents
itself  as  duty  when  our  natures  are  imperfectly  formed  by  it,
and  is  justified  by  reason  because  its  aims  alone  give  harmonious
and  coherent  meaning  to  our  practical  efforts  and  our  conception
of  the  good.  To  conform  to  it,  is  to  rise  above  considerations  of
personal  happiness  and  to  come  into  relation  to  the  whole.1

Obligation,  then,  cannot  be  resolved  away.  It  remains  stand
ing  with  its  claims  upon  a  nature  which  is  often  recalcitrant,
demanding  at  times  a  sacrifice  of  things  that  a  great  part  of  our
nature  craves.  To  maintain  its  authority  in  such  a  position  it
needs  a  rational  justification.  Seeking  the  direction  in  which
such  justification  could  be  found,  we  have  brought  the  rational
groundwork  of  morals  into  relation  with  that  of  belief.  Thought
is  rational  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  system  of  coherent  or  consilient
judgments,  and  this  internal  cohesion  is  itself  the  ground  and

1  In  admitting  that  a  relatively  greater  happiness  may  be  found  in
perfect  egoism  than  in  imperfect  morality  we  may  seem  to  be  admitting
that  there  are  two  positive  standards  of  rational  action.  It  is,  perhaps^
possible  to  maintain  that  an  internally  consistent  egoism  might  be  thought
out.  But  this  would  be  done  only  by  systematically  ignoring  the  impartial
point  of  view  which  maintains  that  the  happiness  of  another  is  also  a  good.
The  egoist  may  deny  that  this  proposition  interests  him,  but  in  so  doing  he
is  shutting  the  door  upon  the  rational  reflection  that  until  cause  is  shown
to  the  contrary  one  personality  is  of  the  same  value  as  another.  If  the
egoist  can  rebut  this  proposition  he  might  be  taken  to  prove  his  case.  But
merely  to  ignore  it— and  this  seems  to  be  the  practical  attitude  of  egoism —
is  to  purchase  internal  consistency  by  leaving  out  of  account  disturbing
considerations.  This  is  not  rational  in  the  meaning  which  we,  or  any  one
else,  can  give  to  the  term.


MODERN  ETHICS  223

meaning  of  its  validity.  For  conduct  there  is  a  rational  and
objectively  valid  order  in  so  far  as  there  is  a  similarly  coherent
scheme  of  moral  judgments.  The  postulate  of  rational  ethics,
then,  is  that  such  a  coherent  body  of  ethical  thought  is  to  be
found.  Further,  the  idea  underlying  all  ethical  thought  has  been
taken  to  be  expressible  in  the  form  of  the  doctrine  that  each  man
is  member  of  a  spiritual  whole  to  which  he  owes  service.  So  far
at  least  the  Idealist  construction  holds  good.  If  obligation  is
rationally  justified,  man  is  bound  by  spiritual  ties  to  a  com
munity  with  a  life  and  purpose  of  its  own.  But  the  tie  is  not
such  as  to  destroy  his  separate  personality,  but  rather  such  that
like  Love  it  maintains  the  distinctness  of  the  persons  whom  it
binds  together,  and  hence,  though  the  whole  to  which  he
belongs  may  be  called  a  spiritual  whole,  it  is  only  by  metaphor
a  self  or  a  person.  More  strictly  it  should  be  a  Spiritual  whole
in  the  true  conception  of  which  Personality  is  a  subordinate
element.1  If  this  conclusion  is  correct  the  problem  of  finding
the  principles  of  a  rational  moral  order  resolves  itself  into  that
of  formulating  the  nature  and  supreme  purposes  of  the  whole  to
which  man  belongs.  To  the  efforts  made  by  modern  thought  in
this  direction  we  must  now  turn.

5.  Here  once  again  modern  thought  starts  with  the  idea  of
"  nature."  The  conception  of  a  Law  of  Nature  binding  on  man
as  man  had  been  adopted  by  the  Church,  who  extended  the
conception  by  adding  to  the  principles  implanted  in  human
nature  itself  those  revealed  in  Holy  Writ.  These  two  sources
of  law  are  set  forth  at  the  outset  of  the  Decretum  Gratiani  as
together  distinguished  from  the  positive  law  of  States.

"  Humanum  genus  duobus  rcgitur,  naturali  videlicet  jure  et
moribus.  Jus  naturae  est,  quod  in  lege  ct  evangclio  continetur,  quo
quisque  jubctur  alii  facere,  quod  sibi  vult  fieri,  et  prohibetur  alii
inferrc,  quod  sibi  nolit  fieri."2

This  is  an  ethical  rather  than  a  juristic  principle.  What
follows  corresponds  better  both  to  the  ancient  and  modern  idea
of  "  natural  "  laws.

1  Here  the  term  super-personal,  employed  by  some  idealists,  points  in
the  right  direction.

2  Deer.  Grat.,  C.  J.,  I.


224  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

"Jus  naturale  est  commune  omnium  nationum,  eo  quod  ubique
instinctu  nature,  non  constitutione  aliqua  habetur,  ut  viri  et
feminae  conjunctio,  liberorum  successio  et  educatio,  communis
omnium  possessio  et  omnium  una  libertas,  acquisitio  eorum  quee
caelo,  terra-marique  capiuntur ;  item  depositae  rei  vel  commendaUe
pecunise  restitutio,  violentiac  per  vim  repulsio." 1

The  just  supremacy  of  natural  over  state  law  is  asserted  by
Gratian,  and  the  authority  of  Augustine 2  and  other  Fathers
adduced  in  its  favour.  The  same  doctrine  is  maintained  by
St.  Thomas,  and  the  Law  of  Nature,  which  was  destined  to
become  the  associate  and  leader  of  revolutionaries,  entered  upon
the  modern  period  with  all  the  odour  of  sanctity.

But  it  was  not  till  the  decay  of  theological  ethics  had  begun
that  it  assumed  any  real  importance. Monotheism  had  divided
reality  into  the  natural  and  the  supernatural,  and  when  the  one
began  to  lose  authority  men  turned  to  the  other  as  of  course.
The  Law  of  Nature  provided  a  basis  for  morals,  a  standard  for
law,  and  a  rule  of  conduct  where  no  law  was. It  was  in  the
last  capacity  in  particular  that  it  emerged  as  a  working  factor
in thought. The Reformation had torn Western Europe
asunder,  and  so  destroyed  that  spiritual  headship  of  the  Popes
which  had  provided  some  sort  of  common  authority  for  the  rival
powers  which  it  contained. The  belief  grew  up  that  in  inter
national  matters  men  were  bound  by  no  obligations  whatever,
and the belief  was practically exemplified in the amazing
horrors of  sixteenth  and seventeenth  century  warfare. The
thinkers  who  sought  to  remedy  an  evil  which  had  almost  de
stroyed  civilization in  Germany,  turned  to  the  old  antithesis
between  nature  and  human  convention. They  appealed  to  the
conception  of  a  natural  law  which  all  parties  recognized,  and
which,  being  prior  to  political  sovereignty,  could  be  recognized
by warring  States  without prejudice  to their independence.
Confining  ourselves  to Grotius  as  the  most  influential  of  the
school,  it  is  interesting  to  see  how  he  conceives  the  Law  of
Nature. Combating  the  assumption  that  every  animal  seeks


Deer.  Grut.,  C.  J.,  p.  2.
In  the
itural "
Pl>.  13-16).


2  In  the  passages  cited  Augustine  seems  to  have  "  divine  "  ratlier  than
"  natural  "  law  in  view,  but  they  are  treated  a«  the  same  by  Gratian  (see


MODERN  ETHICS  225

its  own  advantage,  he  lays  down  that  there  is  in  man  (and  even
in  some  lower  animals)  an  appetitus  socictatis,  a  desire  for
community,  and  that  not  of  any  kind  but  of  a  tranquil  kind,
ordered  in  a  manner  congruous  to  his  intelligence.  We  find  an
impulse  to  benefit  others  among  certain  of  the  animals  and  in
infants  anterior  to  any  education.  This  social  tendency  is  the
fountain  of  natural  law  to  which  belong  the  obligations  of
"abstaining  from  what  is  another's,  restitution  of  deposits,
fulfilling  contracts,  reparation  for  culpable  injuries  and  ad
ministering  due  punishment."1  Further,  since  fulfilment  of
contracts  is  a  part  of  natural  law,  and  since  a  compact  is  the
foundation  of  society,  natural  law  is  indirectly  the  source  from
which  state  laws  flow.  Lastly,  though  natural  law  would  have
force  even  if  there  were  no  God,  or  if  He  were  indifferent  to
human  things,  in  fact  all  Christians  believe  that  He  will  punish
disobedience  to  His  law,  and  natural  law,  though  it  proceeds
ex  principiis  komini  internis,  is  still  ultimately  ascribable  to
Him  as  the  fashioner  of  human  nature.2  Natural  law,  then,
was  something  based  on  the  nature  of  man  as  such,  independent
therefore  of  the  whims  of  kings,  nobles,  or  majorities,  no  re
specter  of  the  natural  boundaries,  or  of  any  other  differences
that  part  groups  of  men,  binding  even  on  sovereign  powers.

In  elevating  human  personality  above  social  convention  and
making  its  essential  attributes  tacitly,  if  not  expressedly,  the
groundwork  of  political  obligation,  the  law  of  nature  was  one
way  of  formulating  the  most  vital  tendency  in  modern  ethical
thought.  Moreover,  it  appeared  to  provide  the  fixed  standard
which  in  the  decay  of  the  supernatural  was  required  by  the
ethical  thinkers.  But  in  this  respect  its  promises  were  in  large
measure  delusive.  What  precisely  was  natural  was,  and  always
has  been,  hard  to  say.  If  it  was  open  to  Grotius  to  maintain
that  man  was  naturally  social  and  the  fundamental  laws  of
society  were  deductions  from  the  law  of  nature,  it  was  also
possible  for  Hobbes  to  assert  that  man  was  by  nature  selfish,  and
that  no  social  law  could  be  produced  from  human  nature  if  it
were  not  for  the  fear  that  men  entertain  of  one  another.  The
Canon  law  might  lay  down  that  by  nature  all  things  are  in
common,  while  Grotius  and  Locke  would  agree  that  respect  for
1  Grotius,  Prolegomena,  5-9.  2  jj,  gecs>  jj  12

VOL II.


226  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

others'  property  was  a  natural  law. In  one  sense  everything
that  occurs  is  natural  and  everything  that  men  do  arises  out  of
human  nature,  and  if  that  view  is  pressed,  the  whole  difference
between  the  natural  and  conventional  disappears. Government
is  natural,  even  the  freaks  of  a  fashion  are  natural. It  is  cer
tainly  in  human  nature  to  tyrannize  and  domineer  quite  as
much  as  it  is  in  human  nature  to  respect  the  equal  rights  of
another. In  this  sense  clearly  nature  means  too  much  to  be  of
any  value  as  a  term  in  ethics,  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  per
manent  and  fundamental  conditions  of  human  nature  are  meant
the  question  arises  how  the  fundamental  is  to  be  distinguished
from  the  accidental  and  temporary,  and  the  use  of  the  term
natural  itself  provides  no  test. Lastly,  if  natural  means  the
ideal,  the  term  which  is  really  wanted  when  we  speak  of  a
standard  by  which  laws  and  customs  are  to  be  renovated,  then
the  canon  of  what  always  has  been  is  insufficient  for  our  pur
poses  in  so  far  as  the  natural  falls  short  of  the  possible,  and  we
could  only  identify  the  natural  and  the  ideal  by  making  unhis-
torical  assumptions  as  to  a  state  of  nature  in  the  Golden  Age,
which  can  do  nothing  but  mislead.

In  regard  to  the  "  natural  rights  "  of  man,  definiteness  was
given  to  the  doctrine  by  the  complementary  theory  of  social
compact.  Certain  primary  rights  belong  to  a  man  as  a  human
creature,  and  not  merely  as  a  member  of  society.  They  are
regarded  rather  as  attributes  in  individuals  than  as  elements  m
a  social  system.  Society  is  founded  upon  a  contract  whereby
individuals  yield  up  a  portion  of  these  rights  in  order  to  secure
mutual  aid  in  enforcing  those  which  they  retain.  Thus  while
political  or  legal  rights  flow  from  the  constitution  of  society,
natural  rights  are  the  unexhausted  residue  of  the  original  stock
with  which  men  are  endowed.  So  much  is  common  ground  to
upholders  of  the  social  contract  from  Hobbes  to  Rousseau  and
Paine,  though  they  differ  as  to  the  conditions  under  which  the
contract  was  formed,  and  to  the  extent  to  which  and  the  form  in
which  the  barter  of  natural  for  civil  rights  was  effected.  The
general  theory  is  very  clearly  stated  by  Paine.

"  Natural  rights  are  those  which  appertain  to  man  in  right  of  his
existence.  .  .  .  Civil  rights  are  those  which  appertain  to  man  in
right  of  his  being  a  member  of  society.  Every  civil  right  has  for


MODERN  ETHICS  227

its  foundation  some  natural  right  pre-existing  in  the  individual,  but
to  the  enjoyment  of  which  his  individual  power  is  not,  in  all  cases
sufficiently  competent.  Of  this  kind  are  all  those  which  relate  to
security  and  protection."1

From  this  principle  it  follows  that  opposite  deductions  might
be  drawn,  and  in  fact  were  drawn,  as  to  the  sphere  and  functions
of  government. It  might  be  used,  as  with  Hobbes,  to  support
despotism ;  or,  as  by  Locke,  to  prove  that  a  king  who  does  not
keep  an  implied  contract  with  his  people  may  be  dethroned  ;
or, as by  Rousseau, to prove  the  ultimate  and  indefeasible
sovereignty  of  the  people  as  a  whole. This last conception
underlies  a  good  deal  of  modern  political  thought,  and  we  musb
note  what  it  implies. The  conception  of  natural  rights,  then,
leads  in  Rousseau's  argument  to  popular  sovereignty,  because  in
the  compact  upon  which  society  rests  each  man  surrenders  his
own  rights  only  in  return  for  equal  consideration  in  the  decisions
taken  by  the  whole  community. On  the  other  hand,  while  the
absoluteness  of  popular  sovereignty  is  thus  deduced  from  the
doctrine  of  natural  rights,  it  is  limited  by  the  same  doctrine,  for
it  may  be  held  that  in  the  exchange  of  natural  for  civil  rights
men  do  not  part  with  all  their  rights,  but  assign  some  only  to
society,  retaining  those  which  are  necessary  to  the inherent
safety and  dignity  of  the  human  personality. This  point  of
view,  in  fact,  underlies  the  Declaration  of  Rights  by  the  French
National  Assembly. The  theory  is  very  clearly  expressed  by
Paine. It  is —

"First— That  every  civil  right  grows  out  of  a  natural  right ;  or  in
other  words,  is  a  natural  right  exchanged.

"Secondly— That  civil  power,  properly  considered  as  such,  is  made
up  of  the  aggregate  of  that  class  of  the  natural  rights  of  man  which
becomes  defective  in  the  individual  in  point  of  power,  and  answers
not  his  purpose,  but  when  collected  to  a  focus  becomes  competent  to
the  purpose  of  every  one.

"  Thirdly— That  the  power  produced  from  the  aggregate  of  natural
rights,  imperfect  in  power  in  the  individual,  cannot  be  applied  to
invade  the  natural  rights  which  are  retained  in  the  individual,  and
in  which  the  power  to  execute  is  as  perfect  as  the  right  itself. "2

1  Rights  of  Man,  p.  306.  2  pain6j  307


228  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

The  first  six  clauses  of  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man
show  how  the  leaders  of  the  French  Revolution  endeavoured  to
give  practical  shape  to  these  ideas.

"1.  Men  are  born,  and  always  continue,  free  and  equal  in  respect
of  their  rights.  Civil  distinctions,  therefore,  can  he  founded  only  on
public  utility.

"2.  The  end  of  all  political  associations  is  the  preservation  of  the
natural  and  imprescriptible  rights  of  man ;  and  these  rights  are
liberty,  property,  security,  and  resistance  of  oppression.

"3.  The  nation  is  essentially  the  source  of  all  sovereignty ;  nor  can
any  individual,  or  any  body  of  men,  be  entitled  to  any  authority
which  is  not  expressly  derived  from  it.

"  4.  Political  Liberty  consists  in  the  power  of  doing  whatever  does
not  injure  another.  The  exercise  of  the  natural  rights  of  every  man
has  no  other  limits  than  those  which  are  necessary  to  secure  to
every  other  man  the  free  exercise  of  the  same  rights;  and  these
limits  are  determinable  only  by  the  law.

"5.  The  law  ought  to  prohibit  only  actions  hurtful  to  society.  .  .

"6.  The  law  is  an  expression  of  the  will  of  the  community.  All
citizens  have  a  right  to  concur  either  personally  or  by  their  repre
sentatives  in  its  formation.  "  l  .  .  .

We  may  sum  up  in  a  single  sentence  this  expression  of  the
creed  in  which  the  doctrine  of  the  law  of  nature  had  culmin
ated.  Freedom,  equal  rights  and  security  of  person  and  pro
perty,  limited  only  by  considerations  of  public  utility  as
determined  by  a  sovereign  people,  this  is  the  only  moral  basis
of  government.  These  principles  insist  upon  the  claims  of
human  personality  more  fully  than  any  previous  ethical  system
had  done ;  in  so  doing,  and  also,  it  must  be  granted,  in  placing  a
limit  on  the  function  of  the  state,  they  expressed  a  tendency
with  which  the  modern  mind  was  on  the  whole  in  sympathy.

The  State  is  thus  conceived  as  having  a  sphere  carved  out  of
the  original  totality  of  rights  in  accordance  with  the  necessities
of  the  social  compact.  It  figures  as  a  necessary  derogation  from
the  plenitude  of  individual  freedom — a  necessary  evil  which,
whenever  it  passes  these  natural  limits,  becomes  a  positive  evil.
The  good  the  state  can  do  is  negative.  It  is  the  free  individual
on  whom  progress  depends.  In  this  conclusion  yet  another

i  From  Paine's  Rights  of  Man,  pp.  351,  352.


MODERN  ETHICS  229

element  in  the  conception  of  "  nature  "  co-operated — the  tend
ency  to  identify  what  is  natural  with  what  is  best — a  tendency
which  we  find  alike  in  the  Physiocrats  and  in  Adam  Smith,  and
which  was  bequeathed  by  them  to  the  economists  of  the  first
half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Not  only  had  men  a  natural
right  to  freedom  in  industry  and  trade,  but  the  natural  course
of  industry  and  exchange  produced  the  best  economic  results.
The  industrial  and  commercial  mechanism  became  perfect  in
proportion  as  it  was  allowed  to  run  without  interference  from
the  central  government.  Under  "  natural "  conditions,  i.  e.  in
the  absence  of  attempts  at  collective  direction,  rent,  profits,  in
terest,  wages,  find  their  level.  Any  attempt  to  disturb  this
level  produces  a  recoil,  involving  friction,  waste  and  misery.
Under  natural  conditions  production  finds  for  itself  the  course
of  greatest  profit  and  least  waste.  The  need  that  men  have  of
one  another  makes  them  insensibly  find  the  line  of  least  resist
ance  in  their  mutual  dealings,  and  what  that  line  will  be  none
can  tell  for  each  individual  so  well  as  he  himself.  He  moves
precisely  where  his  interest  draws  him,  and  to  deflect  him  from
the  line  of  movement  is  to  inflict  on  him  and  on  others  whose
interests  are  involved  in  free  dealings  with  him  a  net  loss.

Thus  in  various  forms — now  as  a  Universal  Law,  now  as  a
Primitive  State,  now  as  the  source  of  indestructible  right,  and
again  as  a  beneficent  tendency  of  things — the  idea  of  nature
formed  a  setting  for  men's  thoughts  on  social  ethics.  It  lent
itself  with  an  elasticity  that  was  all  its  own  to  the  varying
needs  of  successive  thinkers.  But  so  far  as  it  had  a  fixed
meaning  in  social  philosophy,  it  expressed  the  antithesis  to  the
deliberate  action  of  governments,  and  thus  it  was  well  fitted  to
serve  as  a  rallying  point  for  the  modern  political  movement,  the
object  of  which,  put  in  the  most  general  terms,  was  to  substitute
the  State  based  upon  consent  for  the  regime  of  governmental
authority  based  on  force.  The  conception  of  nature  was  a
useful  lever  in  the  demolition  of  the  old  structure  of  monarchical
absolutism  and  feudal  privilege,  wherein  government  very
readily  appeared  as  something  imposed  on  the  mass  of  the
community  from  outside  instead  of  springing  from  their  own
"nature"  within.  For  the  most  part  it  was  only  too  true  that
the  less  such  governments  meddled  with  affairs,  the  better  it


230  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

was  for  the  people  concerned.  It  was  true  that  the  social
structure  which  they  preserved  was  not  natural  as  resting
either  on  the  fitness  of  things  or  on  permanent  and  insuperable
necessities  of  human  nature.  Nor  was  it  only  the  destructive
side  of  the  movement  that  the  idea  of  nature  expressed.  In  a
dim  and  somewhat  inarticulate  fashion  the  term  stood  for  funda
mental  conditions  of  human  welfare,  and  in  particular  for  the
claims  of  human  personality  as  independent  of  and  superior  to
all  legal  and  political  obligations.  Round  the  central  conception
range,  as  shown  above  (Part  I.,  Summary),  all  the  rights  claimed
by  the  modern  man  and  woman,  and  those  rights  are  one  pole
of  modern  ethics  and  of  the  modern  state.

6.  But  when  the  question  of  the  more  precise  definition  of
these  rights  arises,  the  limitations  of  the  doctrine  become
apparent  and  the  other  pole  of  ethics  comes  into  view.  No
right  can  be  made  absolute  without  threatening  the  destruction
of  society,  and  it  is  impossible  to  discuss  the  adjustment  of  any
claims  of  the  individual  for  many  sentences  without  admitting
a  reference  to  the  common  welfare  or  some  such  principle.
This  is  the  point  of  departure  for  Bentham's  criticism.  The
so-called  Rights  of  man  were,  according  to  him,  so  many
"  anarchical  fallacies."  A  man  had  a  right  to  so  much  as  was
consistent  with  the  general  happiness,  and  no  more.  About  the
cause  of  happiness  and  misery  one  can  inquire  and  debate,  and
finally  prove  an  opinion  or  disprove  it.  But  as  to  rights  men
can  debate  endlessly  and  prove  nothing.

"  To  any  such  word  as  right,  no  other  conception  can  ever  be
attached  but  through  the  medium  of  a  law,  or  something  to  which
the  force  of  law  is  given ;  from  a  real  law  comes  a  real  right ;  from
an  imagined  law  nothing  more  substantial  can  come  than  a  corre-
spondcntly  imagined  right.  Lay  out  of  the  question  the  idea  of  law,
ajid  all  that  you  get  by  the  use  of  the  word  right  is  a  sound  to  dispute
about.  I  say  I  have  a  right ;  I  say  you  have  no  such  right :  men  may
keep  talking  on  at  that  rate  till  they  are  exhausted  in  vociferation  and
rage ;  and,  when  they  have  done,  be  no  nearer  to  the  coming  to  a
mutual  conception  and  agreement  than  they  were  before." 1

The  argument  could  only  be settled by  reference to the

1  Bentham,  Securities  against  Misrule  adapted  to  a  Mohammedan  State,
1822-23,  chap,  i,  Works,  vol.  viii.,  557.


MODERN ETHICS  231

higher  principle  of  the  general  welfare,  which  both  disputants
could  accept.  If  there  is  no  common  good  which  both  admit,
definable  in  terms  which  both  can  recognize,  there  is  nothing
to  limit  the  possible  claims  of  each.  But  the  common  good  is
after  all  a  vague  phrase.  Could  any  means  be  found  of  so
defining  it  as  to  make  it  an  objective  test  of  the  right  and
wrong  of  action  ?  Such  means  the  Utilitarians  (if  the  name
may  be  applied  retrospectively)  conceived  themselves  to  have
discovered  in  the  calculus  of  pleasures  and  of  pains.  The
general  happiness  was  the  supreme  end  of  creation.  Happiness
consisted  positively  in  the  consciousness  of  pleasure,  negatively
in  the  avoidance  of  pain.  The  goodness  of  a  form  of  govern
ment,  a  social  or  political  institution,  a  Law,  or  a  moral  rule,
might  thus  be  submitted  to  a  positive  and  objective  test.  Did
it  on  the  whole  produce  more  happiness  than  misery  ?  If  so,  it
was  good.  Did  it  produce  a  balance  of  pain  ?  If  so,  it  was  bad.
Here  was  an  objective  test  which  a  perfected  sociological  science
(here  the  word  must  be  allowed  prospectively)  might  carry  out
into  detail.  In  point  of  fact  Bentliam  set  himself  to  work  out
a  theory  of  law  and  government  upon  that  basis.  But  the  first
condition  of  any  such  undertaking  was  that  rights  should  be
reduced  from  their  proud  position.  They  were  not  fundamental
and  inviolable  principles,  but  were  means  to  an  end.  If  freedom
in  any  given  direction  promotes  the  general  happiness — well  and
good.  Men  have  a  right  to  that  kind  of  freedom.  Let  it  be  shown,
however,  that  such  freedom  tends  to  produce  a  balance  of  pain,
and  the  right  disappears.  Rights  then  are  related  to  the  happi
ness  of  mankind.  On  the  other  hand,  the  two  most  important
"  rights  of  man  "  are  in  point  of  fact  incorporated  in  Bentham's
scheme.  Equality  in  fact  may  be  said  to  be  its  corner-stone —
"  Everybody  to  count  for  one  and  nobody  for  more  than  one."

"  The  happiness  of  the  most  helpless  pauper  constitutes  as  large
a  portion  of  the  universal  happiness,  as  does  that  of  the  most  power
ful,  the  most  opulent  member  of  the  community.  Therefore  the
happiness  of  the  most  helpless  and  indigent  has  as  much  title  to
regard  at  the  hands  of  the  legislator,  as  that  of  the  most  powerful
and  opulent " l

1  Const.  Code,  Bk.  I.,  chap,  xv.,  sec.  7,  Works,  vol.  ix.,  p.  107.  Ct
Mill's  Utililurianism,  chap,  v.,  p.  92.


MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

The  thought  here  appears  to  be  that  happiness  is  the  sole  end
of  value,  and  that  any  person's  happiness  is  of  equal  value  with
any  other  person's.  As  in  Kant,  impartiality  between  persons
is  the  foundation  of  morality.  Individual  liberty  was  also  well
provided  for.  The  close  relation  of  private  and  general  happi
ness  was  an  essential  part  of  the  scheme.  Whether  by
enlightened  self-interest  or  by  the  cultivation  of  the  social
feelings  men  could  come  to  identify  their  good  with  that  of
other  people's,  and  it  was  to  this  free  choice  rather  than  to  any
form  of  compulsion  that  the  Utilitarians  as  a  whole  mainly
trusted.  On  the  other  hand,  since  power  in  the  hands  of  one
man  or  of  a  few  might  be  used  selfishly,  it  was  necessary  that
each  man  should  have  a  share  in  determining  the  government
of  the  country,  and  so  the  third  of  the  great  "  ideas  of  '89  "  is
reached  by  another  path.  There  must  be  democratic  govern
ment,  not  because  popular  sovereignty  is  a  matter  of  absolute
right  deducible  from  the  imagined  character  of  a  fictitious  social
compact,  but  because  it  is  the  only  way  to  check  the  selfishness
of  rulers  and  so  ensure  the  general  happiness.

In  this  statement  government  is  still  tacitly  conceived  as
essentially  an  infringement  on  the  sphere  of  the  individual,  a
necessary  evil,  the  encroachments  of  which  must  be  carefully
watched.  This  attitude  to  government  is  not  indeed  essential
to  the  Utilitarian  principles,  but  it  is  characteristic  of  the  phase
of  thought  to  which  Utilitarianism  historically  belongs.  In  the
Utilitarian  method,  society  is  still  thought  of  in  terms  of
"  numbers "  of  people  whose  feelings  of  happiness  and  misery
can  be  added  and  subtracted,  rather  than  as  a  whole,  in  which
the  injury  of  any  one  part  is  apt  to  spread  its  bad  influence
through  the  body.  With  the  same  tendency,  an  even  more
vital  defect  is  connected.  To  make  general  happiness  the
standard  of  law  and  morals  was  an  immense  advance  in  the
direction  of  defining  the  moral  idea  upon  the  old  conception  of
nature,  and  in  Bentham's  hands  it  could  initiate  a  valuable  and
far-reaching  series  of  reforms.  Yet  to  make  happiness  the  sole
criterion,  as  though  the  kind  of  objective  life  in  which  men  find
happiness  were  unimportant,  was  a  mistake  which  hampered
Utilitarianism  from  the  outset  in  accounting  for  moral  obliga
tion.  Even  if  happiness  were  in  theory  the  ultimate  end,°it


MODERN  ETHICS  233

was  not  sufficiently  recognized — unless  perhaps  by  the  younger
Mill — that  the  kind  of  life  in  which  happiness  is  found  is  all-
important. The  happiness  of  one  section,  or  of  one  generation,
might  be  purchased  at  the  expense  of  misery  in  the  future,  and
if  this  was  to  be  avoided  and  an  intelligent  view  of  the  per
manent  conditions  of  happiness  for  mankind  at  large  was  to  be
obtained,  it  was  necessary  to  make  the  laws  of  healthy  social
development  the  object  of  study  and the  direct  standard  of
conduct. The direct application of the Greatest  Happiness
principle  might  be  applied  with  success  to  the  flagrant  abuses
with  which  the  men  of  Bentham's  day  had  to  contend,  but  as
more  controversial  questions  arise  and  greater  scientific pre
cision  is  needed,  the  calculus  of  pleasures  and  pains  becomes
inapplicable. We  cannot  think  out  the  value  of  action  in  terms
of  the  indefinitely  large  number  of  persons  affected. We  do  not
know  where  to  stop  in  taking  consequences  into  account,  and
the  thread  of  causation  is  lost  as  we  endeavour  mentally  to
follow  it  into  the  dim  distance. If  we  are  to  trace  social  cause
and  effect  with  any  hope  of  securing  tangible  and  well-grounded
results,  we  must  therefore  start  from  the  other  end. We  must
think  of  the  corporate  life  of  society  and  inquire  whether it
exhibits  any  laws  of  health,  of  growth  or  decay,  and  so  far  as
we  can  ascertain  such  laws  we  may  judge  of  the  broad  effects
of  conduct.

7.  Thus  on  several  sides  the  Utilitarian  method  needed  to  be
supplemented  by  a  conception  of  the  collective  social  life  of
humanity  emerging  and  maturing  under  conditions  which  it  is
the  supreme  object  of  practical  wisdom  to  ascertain  and  under
stand.  Such  a  conception  had  already  entered  into  modern
thought  with  the  work  of  writers  like  Vico  and  Montesquieu,
and  formed  the  basis  of  a  historical  treatment  of  sociology.
From  these  it  passed  through  Condorcet  and  the  St.  Simonians
to  Comte  and  his  disciples.  In  another  incarnation  it  inspired
the  Hegelian  philosophy  of  history.  Amid  great  variations,  not
merely  in  detail  but  in  the  whole  handling  of  the  subject,
historical  sociology  leads  to  certain  fairly  well  marked  views  on
questions  of  ethical  principle.  First  of  all,  it  lays  down  that
neither  duties  nor  rights  can  be  studied  without  a  knowledge


234  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

of  social  conditions,  for  without  society  there  is  neither  duty  nor
right. But  further,  social  conditions  are  not  the  same  every
where  or  at  every  time. The  relations  on  which  the  preacher  of
absolute  right  and  wrong  would  rest  his  moral  laws  are  them
selves  moving  relations. Humanity  is  a  growing  organism,  and
the  problem  of  the  thinker  is  to  understand  the  laws  of  its
growth  and  adjust  the  code  of  conduct  which  his  disciples  are
to  preach  to  the  needs  of  the  present  phase. For  though  there
are  "  laws  "  of  social  growth,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the
result  is  so  determined  as  to  be  wholly  beyond  the  power  of
human  intelligence  to  modify. There  are  "  laws  "  of  health,  yet
there  is  a  use  for  doctors. It  is  so  far  as  we  understand  the
laws  of  social  life  that  we  can  hope  to  affect  it  intelligently,  and
in  point  of  fact  it  is  of  the  essence  of  its  growth  that  humanity
becomes  conscious  of  itself;  that  is  to  say,  more  and  more  aware
of  the  conditions  upon  which  its  happiness  and  progress  depend,
and  so  capable  of  self-direction. In  this  conception  of  a  self-
directing  humanity  lies  the  basis  of  scientific  ethics.

As  conceived  by  Comte,  it  was  more  than  a  basis  of  ethics.
Collective  humanity,  as  a  being  that  never  dies,  but  grows,  learns
and  develops  throughout  the  ages,  was  to  be  the  object  of  a
new  religion,  a  religion  dealing  with  realities  and  based  on
science,  that  should  put  behind  it  for  ever  the  dreams  of  the
theologians  and  the  cobwebs  of  metaphysics. Whatever  there
was  of  spiritual  good  was  to  be  found  in  the  life  of  humanity,
in  the  relations  of  human  beings  to  one  another,  and  nowhere
else  in  the  world. With  regard to  the  ultimate  origin  and
basis  of  things,  men  could  imagine  what  they  pleased,  but  no
absolute  truth  was  obtainable. Throughout  history  schemes  of
theology  had  arisen,  flourished  and  decayed. They  had  come
into  being  to  meet  some  intellectual  or  moral  need  of  mankind.
They  had  flourished  so  long  as  they  satisfied  that  want ;  they
had  perished  when  other  wants  arose,  when  deeper  questions
were asked,  when  they  no  longer  fitted  the  more  developed
character  of  the  race. Their  strength  lay  not  in  their  truth,
but  always  in  their  practical  value. And  while  such  systems
rose  and  foil,  what  was  permanent  was  the  onward  movement  of
the  human  spirit  passing  from  one  stage  to  another  in  its  ascent
towards  a  rational  consciousness  of  the  needs  and  the  purposes


MODERN ETHICS  235

of  its  own  life,  ascending  from  fetishism  to  polytheism,  from
polytheism to  monotheism,  from  monotheism  to  metaphysical
theories  of  the  origin  of  things,  and  finally  from  the  meta
physical  stage  to  the  scientific  conception  of  human  development
as  the  supreme  and  crowning  object  of  human  effort. True
religion  was  a  matter  essentially  concerned  with  human  life,
the  co-ordination  of  human  purpose,  the  regulation  of  human
conduct. It  was  not  a  theory  of  the  origin  of  things  or  the
ultimate  end  of  the  world. Rational  truth  is  only  obtainable
when  men  put  aside  the  very  effort  to  frame  such  a  theory  as
one  of  the  dreams  of  humanity's  youth. We  know  nothing  of
the causes of things. We know only the laws by  which
phenomena  succeed  one  another,  and  the  value  of  this  know
ledge  is  practical,  and its  genuineness  is  measurable  by  the
practical use  which  we can  make of  it. Knowledge  which
enables  us  so  to  act,  so  to  modify  the  sequence  of  events,  as  to
meet  the  needs  of  mankind,  is  true  knowledge,  positive  know
ledge. Everything  beyond  it  is  useless,  and  the  attempt  to
cultivate  such knowledge  merely leads  us off  again to the
dreamland  of  theology  and  metaphysics. To  reach  this  concep
tion  of  knowledge  is  itself  the  most  important  step  in  human
development. Men  began  by  explaining  everything  they  did
not  understand  as  the  action  of  a  spirit. At  first  there  was  a
special  spirit  for  the  action  of  every  special  object ; this  was
the  stage  of  fetishism. Then  there  was  a  greater  spirit,  a  God
presiding  over  great  classes  of  objects; this  was  the  stage  of
polytheism. Finally there  was one spirit ruling the  whole
universe,  which was the stage of  monotheism. The whole
theological  scheme,  however,  fell  before  metaphysical  criticism,
which  showed  the  regression  of  causes  to  be  infinite,  and  the
ultimate  nature  of  reality  to  be  unknowable,  and  yet  in  the
hands  of  most  metaphysicians  endeavoured  most  inconsistently
to  form  theories  of  causation  which  in  essence  merely  replaced
the spirit of  the theological stage by a less concrete,  less
palpable  entity  conceived  as  underlying  phenomena. Abandon
these  entities  and  deal  with  the  phenomena  alone. Study  the
laws  of  their  co-existence  and  sequence  in  such  wise  that  you
may  regulate  them  for  the  good  of  your  kind,  and  you  reach  the
final  stage  of  intellectual  development,  the  positive  method,  the


236  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

method  of  science,  which  gives  you  fact  without  any  hypothesis
and  a  purpose  realizable  in  this  world,  capable  of  being  tested
by  human  experience,  bringing  down  religion  from  the  heists
of  a  theological  and  metaphysical  dream  to  the  practical  realities
)f  daily  life. In  this  conception  all  that  was  best  in  the  religious
and  ethical  systems  of  the  past  was  to  be  incorporated  without
the  errors  of  the  past. For  humanity  had  worked  out  empirically
as  it  were,  in  a  blind,  groping,  unconscious  manner,  both  the
fundamental institutions necessary to its existence,  such as
marriage,  property  and  government,  and  also  the  ethical  and
religious  systems  which  were  suited  to  each  stage  of  its  develop-
But  m  all  cases  there  was  a  large  admixture  of  error
and  it  was  the  problem  for  a  scientific  religion  to  maintain  the
truth,  letting  the  shell  of  error  drop  off. The  Gods  taken  at
their best were incarnations  of  essentially  human  relations
human  feelings,  human  duties. Could  not  these  human  relations'
these  human  duties  be  made  objects  of  reverence  apart  from
the  shell  in  which  they  had  hitherto  lived,  and  would  they  not
be  purer  so  conceived  ? For  the  very  process  of  incarnation  had
robbed  the  spiritual  of  half  its  character. By  transferring  it  to
a  supernatural  world,  it  had  given  ground  for  the  suggestion
that  it  had  no  application  to  this  world,  and  based  it  on  dogmas
which  proved  a  treacherous  support,  instead  of  allowing  It  to
stand  by  its  own  inherent  strength. The  problem  of  positive
religion  was to  restore  virtue  and righteousness,  charity  and
lustice,  to  their  true  dignity,  to  recognize  in  them  a  positive
value  as  integral elements  in the  noblest life  of  humanity
requiring  no  sanction,  theological  or  metaphysical,  to  back  them
up,  but  relying  on  their  own  inherent beauty  and  strength
But  theological  religion  at  its  best,  as  seen  in  the  media3val
Church,  had  provided  a  rule  for  all  life. It  had  presided  over
every  occasion; it had  been  present  at  birth,  marriage  and
death,  m  sickness  and  in  health,  in  good  and  evil  fortune,  en
couraging  samtship,  heroism  and devotion,  comfortino-  misery
and  cheering  the  penitent. In  all  these  directions  the  conception
of  humanity  was  to  fulfil  the  same  function;  it  was  the  focus
and  meeting-point  of  all  good  and  resolute  effort;  the  humblest
devotee  of  science  no  less  than  the  greatest  philosophic  intelli
gence  was  contributing to its  progress. The  statesman the


MODERN ETHICS  237

man  of  affairs,  the  captain  of  industry,  had  their  function,  did
their  service  in  forwarding  the  progressive  organization  of  life.
The  poet,  the  musician,  the  artist  inspired  or  expressed  the
onward  movement  of  the  human  spirit. All  past  history  was
lit  up  by  the  conception  of  this  great  movement  to  which  all
previous  efforts  of  humanity  pointed. A  positive  religion  would
provide  for  a  renovated  worship  of  saints  and  heroes  in  the
persons  of  all  who  had  contributed  to  the  march  bf  the  human
mind. The  light  thus  reflected  on  the  past  shone  even  more
brightly  upon  the  present. Every  social  effort,  every  endeavour
to  the  furtherance  of  knowledge,  art  or  industry  received  a  new
dignity  when  considered  as  contributing,  each  in  its  degree,  to
one  great  all-embracing  cause. Nor  were  the  minor  interests
of  life swamped by  the supreme conception. Religion and
humanity  preached  no  vague  diffused  benevolence  which  should
override  the  more  direct  and  personal  ties  that  bind  us  to  our
family,  our  neighbour  and  our  country. On  the  contrary,  all
these  had  their  place. Each  was  recognized  as  intrinsically  a
worthy  object  of  devotion,  only  it  must  be  a  devotion  limited
by  the  broad  requirements  of  the  human  religion — that  is  to  say,
it  must  be  a  devotion  purged  of  the  elements  of  collective  pride
and  selfishness. We  must  love  our  country,  but  not  so  as  to
wish  it  to  dominate  all  others. Our  chief  pride  in  it  must  lie
in  our  sense  of  the  service  that  it  renders  to  humanity,  just  as
the  only  legitimate  pride  that  we  can  feel  in  our  own  achieve
ments  or  in  the  career  of  those  near  and dear  to  us  should
depend  on  the  extent  to  which those  achievements  or  that
career  has  been  of  service  to  the  world  at  large. Humanity  was
not  to  override  those  fundamental  attachments  which  make  up
the  larger  part  of  practical  life  for  all  of  us. It  was  to  purify
and co-ordinate  them, to  infuse  into  them  a  spirit  of  wider
sympathy,  to  elevate  them  by  a  deeper  sense  of  their  meaning
and  value.

The  peculiar  form  given  to  humanitarianism  by  Comte  has
been  criticized  from  many  points  of  view.  Fundamentally  it  is
objected  that  it  propounds  to  us  the  worship  either  of  a  vague
impalpable  abstraction,  or,  if  we  reduce  humanity  to  concrete
terms,  of  ourselves — weak,  imperfect  beings  as  we  are.  To
this,  one  of  Comte's  ablest  disciples  replies  that  the  conception


238  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

of  humanity  as  the goal  and  basis  of  human effort  is  mis
understood.

"  No  one  thinks  that  when  he  mentions  the  word  England  or  France
or  Germany,  he  is  talking  of  a  ghost  or  a  phantom. Nor  does  he
mean  a  vast  collection  of  so  many  millions  of  men  in  the  abstract ;
so  many  million  ghosts. Man  in  the  abstract  is  of  all  abstractions
the  most  unreal. By  England  we  mean  the  prejudices,  customs,
traditions,  history,  peculiar  to  Englishmen,  summed  up  in  the  present
generation,  in  the  living  representatives  of  the  past  history. So  with
Humanity.  .  .  .  Is  such  a  religion  self -worship  ?  .  .  .  What  explains
the  error  is  the  belief  that  by  Humanity  we  mean  the  same  thing
as  the  human  race. We  mean  something  widely  different. Of  each
man's  life,  one  part  has  been  personal,  the  other  social :  one  part
consists  in  actions  for  the  common  good,  the  other  part  in  actions  of
pure  self-indulgence,  and  even  of  active  hostility  to  the  common
welfare. Such  actions  retard  the  progress  of  Humanity,  though  they
cannot  arrest  it :  they  disappear,  perish,  and  are  finally  forgotten.
There  are  lives  wholly  made  up  of  actions  such  as  these. They  form
no  part  of  Humanity. Humanity  consists  only  of  such  lives,  and
only  of  those  parts  of  each  man's  life,  which  are  impersonal,  which
are  social,  which  have  converged  to  the  common  good."  l

It  would  seem  from  this  that  the  conception  of  Humanity  is
not  so  much  what  logicians  call  a  collective  concept  including  all
men  and  women.  It  is  rather  that  of  a  Spirit  pervading  human
beings  and  their  life,  not  indeed  a  Being  outside  and  over  above
men  and  women,  but  a  Being  that  is  the  best  of  them— the
good  that  is  in  each  working  together— the  spiritual  whole  so
constituted.2

1  J.  H.  Bridges,  Discourses  on  Positive  Religion,  p.  105.

If  it  be  said  that  such  a  unity  of  individual  distinct  minds  can  only
have  a  mystical  meaning,  it  may  be  replied  that  it  is  precisely  the  kind  of
unity  towards  which  the  passage  quoted  above  from  Dr.  Bridges  points
It,  further,  it  is  alleged  that  only  the  individual  minds  are  real  and  that  a
totality  constituted  by  them  is  not  a  real  being,  the  reply  is  that  this  is
a  form  of  the  nominalist  fallacy.  The  totality  is  not  another  individual
similar  to  those  which  compose  it,  but  is  none  the  less  the  real  being  which
together  they  make  up.  All  the  vital  processes  of  the  human  body  pro
ceed  in  separate  cells.  The  body  itself  is  not  another  cell,  but  neither  is  it
a  mystic  creation.  It  is  the  totality  of  the  cells,  and  its  life  the  totality  of
the  cellular  processes.  So  in  all  probability  conscious  life  depends,  not  on
a  process  in  any  one  cell  of  the  brain,  but  in  multitudinous  processes  carried
on  simultaneously  in  cells  that  lie  far  apart  in  the  cerebral  mass  Yet
consciousness  is  one.  So  the  Mind  of  Humanity  is  the  unity  in  process  of


MODERN ETHICS  239

When  stated  in  these  terms  the  conception  of  Humanity
comes  into  close  relation  with  a  conception  towards  which  the
metaphysical  method  which  Comte  rejected  had  made  independ
ent  advances.  The  Hegelian  philosophy,  for  example,  conceived
history  as  a  process  wherein  the  Spirit,  continually  seeking
realization,  arrives  finally  at  self-consciousness.  Allowing  for
difference  of  terminology  and  for  the  more  essential  point  of
divergence  that  Positivism  is  a  theory  of  practice,  Hegelianism
a  theory  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  reality,  this  is  after  all
something  very  close  to  the  idea  of  humanity  as  a  name  for  all
that  makes  for  good  in  men  winning  through  the  long  struggles
of  historical  development  to  consciousness  of  itself  and  the
deliberate  guidance  of  its  own  life.  In  either  case  it  is  at
bottom  the  idea  of  the  development  of  the  divine  in  man  that  is
used  as  a  solution  of  ethical  and  religious  problems.  From  such
opposite  poles  do  we  approach  an  idea  which  would  seem  to  be
at  the  heart  of  modern  thought.  The  God  of  Monotheism,  as
the  ideally  perfect  Being,  became,  as  we  saw,  separated  from  the
world  as  its  Creator  and  Ruler.  From  this  separation  arose
ethical  problems  which  might  be  concealed  under  a  mass  of
optimistic  verbiage,  but  were  incapable  of  any  genuine  solution
on  the  basis  of  an  unconditional  creation  of  things  by  a  Being
Who  is  perfect  in  Himself.  We  have  seen  the  partial  recognition
of  this  impasse,  pointing  religious  thinkers  through  the  theory
of  Free  Will  to  an  educative  conception  of  the  dealings  of  God
with  man.  Idealism,  carrying  this  further,  has  sought  to  over
come  the  cleavage  involved  in  Monotheism,  to  bring  back  the
Divine  Creator  into  the  undivine  created  world.  They  have  thus
been  led  by  a  very  roundabout  road  to  a  transfigured  version  of
that  indwelling  Spirit  with  which  religion  starts,  a  Spirit  which
dwells  in  things  instead  of  controlling  them  without.  When  the
attributes  of  this  Spirit  are  frankly  criticized  they  are  found  to
imply  that  it  is  not  the  whole  of  nature,  but  is  conditioned  by
nature  even  while  shaping  it,  and  strives  with  things,  though  they
are  its  own  flesh;  and  only  through  the  evolutionary  process  which
science,  as  well  as  philosophy,  recognizes,  presses  on  to  that  final

formation  of  multitudinous  minds  of  men.  To  call  it  "  mind  "  may  be
metaphorical  and  inadequate.  But  to  call  it  a  real  agency  is,  I  think,
literal  prose.


240  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

and  complete  domination  of  the  conditions  of  existence  which
the  earlier  theory  attributed  to  it  at  its  point  of  departure  as  the
starting  point  and  origin  of  Creation.

The  conception  of  Development  has  been  applied  and  extended
by  physical  science.  Biology  has  carried  it  far  beyond  the
limits  of  human  history  and  applied  it  to  all  forms  of  life
Contemporary  physics  and  chemistry  are  using  it  to  explain  the
constitution  of  inanimate  matter.  However  little  thinkers  may
agree  about  its  philosophic  interpretation,  the  idea  of  Development
is  the  central  conception  of  modern  thought,  and.  the  idea  of
Humanity  in  development  holds  that  place  in  modern  ethics.1

.f  we  consider  carefully  the  differences  of  interpretation  which
distinguish  different  schools  of  thought,  we  shall  find  that  they
turn  largely  on  the  value  of  this  conception— or  indeed  of  any
conception  derived  from  human  experience  as  an  expression  of
the ultimate nature  of  reality. The  self-conscious  Spirit  of
Hegel,  and  the  self-directing  Humanity  of  Comte,  for  example
differ  primarily  on  this  point. The  Hegelian  would  hold  that
Absolute  Self-Consciousness  can  be  proved  by  a  metaphysical
demonstration  to  express the true  character  of  the  Absolute.
Those  who  at  all  lean  to  Positivism  would  deny  that  such  reality
is  in  any  way  knowable,  and  would  claim  for  their  principle
merely  that  it  formulated  the  results  of  experience  and  would
prove  a  trustworthy  guide  of  life. But  the  doctrine  that  the
ultimate  nature  of  reality  is  unknowable  is  itself  a  metaphysical

. '  It.is  .one  of  the  ironies  incidental  to  the  development  of  thought  that  the
biological  theory  _ of  evolution,  which  was  precisely  the  contribution  re
quired  from  Physical  Science  to  roundoff  and  amplify  the  humanitarian
conception  of  progress,  should,  for  half-a-century,  have  been  the  most  potent
intellectual  weapon  against  humanitarianism.  This  unfortunate  result
appears  attributable  to  a  confusion  between  different  planes  of  thought
When  evolutionists  set  themselves  in  earnest  to  find  a  meaning  for  rach
terms  as  "higher  and  lower,"  "fit  and  unfit,"  which  come  so  readily  to  the
Ivps  they  cannot  well  avoid  the  appeal  to  a  rational  standard  of  ethics.
With  the  introduction  of  such  a  standard  there  arises  the  possibility  of
distinguishing  the  processes  which  make  for  the  evolution  of  a  higher  type
from  those  winch  tend  only  to  differentiation.  The  upward  process,  tie
orthogemc  line  »  as  it  has  elsewhere  been  called,  being  thus  distinguished
t  became  possible  to  define  its  tendency  as  that  which  makes  for  the  ad-
C  of  H?  i  fcj^a  ^-mastery.  But  this  is  again  the  self-conscious
bpint  of  Hegel,  the  self-directing  Humanity  of  Comte

It  is  very  noteworthy  that  Mr.  Kidd,  starting  from  the  biological  point
>i  view,  has  in  his  later  work  (Principles  of  Western  Civilization)  laid  great
tress  on  self-conscious  development  as  the  turning  point  in  Evolution


MODERN  ETHICS  241

proposition  which  is  open  to  question.  It  is  equally  possible  to
hold  that  all  knowledge  is,  so  far  as  it  goes,  knowledge  of  reality.
On  this  view  reality  shows  its  character  in  experience,  though  in
our  limited  experience  it  shows  it  only  in  part.  If,  then,  the
whole  course  of  history,  or  say  rather  of  physical,  biological,  or
social  evolution,  is  to  be  summed  up  in  this — that  it  is  a  process
wherein  mind  grows  from  the  humblest  of  beginnings  to  an  adult
vigour,  in  which  it  can — as  in  the  creed  of  humanity  it  does —
conceive  the  idea  of  directing  its  own  course,  mastering  the
conditions  external  and  internal  of  its  exercise,  if  this  is  a  true
account  of  evolution — and  it  is  the  account  to  which  positive
science  points — then  we  cannot  say  that  this  is  a  mean  and
unimportant  feature  of  reality  that  is  disclosed  to  us.  We  can
hardly  suppose  such  a  process  accidental  or  quite  peculiar  to  the
conditions  of  this  earth.  At  any  rate,  as  far  as  the  widest
synthesis  of  our  experience  goes,  it  shows  us  Reality  neither  as
a  providentially  ruled  order,  nor  as  a  process  of  fortuitous
combinations  and  dissolutions,  but  as  the  movement  towards
self-realization  of  a  mind  appearing  under  rigidly  limited
conditions  of  physical  organization  in  countless  organisms,  and
arriving  for  the  first  time  at  a  partial  unity  in  the  consciousness
of  a  common  humanity  with  a  common  aim.

8.  To  enter  more  fully  into  the  questions  of  historical  fact  and
philosophic  interpretation  raised  by  the  humanitarian  theory
would  be  beyond  our  present  scope.  But  on  the  ethical  question
which  it  suggests  a  word  should  be  said.  To  begin  with,  we  may
remark  that  as  a  standard  of  action  the  conception  of  human
development  requires  some  further  definition.  A  Utilitarian  in
particular  might  ask  whether  it  is  any  and  every  sort  of
development  that  we  seek,  or  only  such  development  as  leads  to
happiness.  If  the  former,  he  will  contend  that  our  standard  is
bad ;  if  the  latter,  he  will  maintain  that  we  are  after  all  Utili
tarians,  taking  Pleasure  as  an  ultimate  end,  though  we  may  call
a  scientific  view  of  the  collective  life  of  Humanity  our  means  to
that  end.  By  introducing  the  idea  of  historical  growth  we  have
not  after  all  evaded  the  philosophic  problem.  How  moral  ideas
have  arisen  and  grown  is  one  question,  how  and  by  what
principle  we,  as  conscious  and  reflective  beings,  ought  to  shape

VOL. II.


242  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

them,  is  another.  We  must  therefore  revert  to  the  question
raised  by  the  Utilitarians,  and  ask  how  the  standard  they  propose
looks  in  the  light  of  the  further  developments  of  thought  which
have  been  traced.

The  Utilitarian  theory,  we  saw,  rested  principally  on  an
analysis  of  Desire.  Now  in  the  controversies  to  which  this
analysis  has  given  rise,  two  opposite  fallacies  have  been  revealed.
On  the  one  hand,  pleasure  has  been  taken  as  the  direct  and
universal  end  of  action.  On  the  other,  those  who  have  refused
to  identify  pleasure  and  the  good,  have  denied  all  relation
between  them,  or  have  reduced  pleasure  to  the  position  of  a
result  supervening  on  the  attainment  of  desire.  Now  inasmuch
as  pleasure  is  distinct  from  happiness,  this  latter  position  has  a
justification  of  its  own,  but  this  has  hardly  been  the  point  of
the  controversy.1  When  we  have  distinguished  Will  and
Happiness  as  having  to  do  with  the  permanent  elements  of  well-

1  To  resolve  happiness  into  pleasure  was  the  initial  mistake  of  the  Utili
tarians.  In  part  it  proceeded  from  the  influence  of  the  Humian  meta
physics,  which  denied  permanent  "  substantiality  "  to  the  ego  and  resolved
it  into  a  series  of  states.  Such  an  ego  could  only  have  a  series  of  feelings,
and  to  such  temporary  feelings  the  name  of  pleasure  and  pain  are  appropri
ate.  But  at  bottom,  I  think,  it  proceeded  from  a  laudable  desire  to  define
a  man's  happiness  as  something  strictly  pertaining  to  his  own  conscious
existence.  Without  such  a  strict  definition  the  fundamental  question  of
modern  ethics  is  not  fairly  faced.  For  the  man  who  sacrifices  happiness  to
duty  admittedly  "  does  well,''  and  from  this  it  is  easy  to  proceed  to  the
proposition  that  "it  is  well  with  him,"  and  that  he  is  accordingly  a
"  happy  "  man.  In  that  way  of  putting  the  argument  (which  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  empirical  fact  that  by  abandoning  apparent  happiness  a  man
may  obtain  real  inward  peace,  which  is  conscious  happiness  in  another
form)  the  old  ambiguity  between  happiness  as  something  felt  and  happiness
as  the  possession  of  admirable  qualities  is  revived,  and  the  question  whether
the  one  should  be  given  up  for  the  other  is  blurred.  The  Utilitarians
deserve  more  credit  than  they  have  received  for  forcing  a  clear  statement
of  the  question  by  resolutely  defining  happiness  in  terms  of  feeling.  On
the  other  hand,  if  the  self  is  more  than  a  series  of  fleeting  states,  happiness
is  more  than  a  succession  of  pleasurable  feelings.  If  the  self  is  the
permanent  constitution  or  psychical  fabric  which  is  the  subject  of  experi
ence,  happiness  is  the  relatively  stable  condition  of  the  structure — the
quality  which  tinges  ordinary  life  and  lends  it  a  roseate  hue,  which  makes
pleasure  joy  and  pain  bearable.  I  say  relatively  stable,  because  though  in
a  measure  dependent  on  our  own  personality — so  that  some  have  a  happy,
others  an  unhappy  temperament — it  is  capable  of  being  temporarily  or  even
permanently  destroyed  by  the  really  great  events  of  life — some  one's  death,
or  the  ruin  of  a  cherished  hope.  It  is  olicti6v  n  in  that  it  belongs  to  our
personality,  and  Svaa.<pa.iptT6v  in  that  no  light  thing  robs  us  of  it.  But
under  the  misfortunes  of  a  Priain  the  most  that  can  be  said  is  "


MODERN  ETHICS  243

being  from  desire  and  pleasure  as  concerned  with  the  temporary,
the  same  question  arises  in  a  new  form.  Is  personal  Happiness
the  direct  object  of  Will,  or  do  we  choose  a  certain  mode  of  life
from  merits  of  its  own,  and  merely  find  happiness  in  the  fact
that  we  are  able  to  realrze  the  results  of  efforts  ?

There  is  a  third  alternative  which  seems  to  accord  best  with
the analysis of effort  and  to  be supported  by comparative
psychology. In  speaking  of  pleasure  we  are  apt  to  forget  in
English  the  Greek  distinction  between  TO  rjbv  and  r/  fjbovri,  the
pleasant  object  or  action,  and  the  pleasure  which  we  feel  in
relation  to  the  object  or  in  performing  the  action. The  normally
constituted  animal  on  the  whole  desires  things  that  are  pleasant.
Were  it  otherwise,  pleasure  and  pain  would  have  no  function.
For they come into existence by serving the function of
regulating  impulse,  encouraging  one  impulse,  and  modifying  or
inhibiting  another. The  impulse  to  eat  nasty  food  is  checked
by  its  nastiness,  the  preference  for  pleasant  food  is  encouraged
by  its  pleasantness. Indeed,  in  the  life  of  the  lower  animals  all
that  we  know  by  direct  observation  is  the  encouragement  and
the  inhibition,  and  the  permanent  effects  thereof. The  pleasure
and  the  pain  we  impute  to  the  animal  on  the  analogy  of  our
own  consciousness. The  value  of  this  machinery  for  the  regu
lation  of  impulse  is  that  it  enables  the  hereditary  structure  to
become  more  elastic. The  animal  which  can  learn  by  pleasure
and  pain  may  have  impulses  which  would  lead  to  its  destruction
if  not  checked  by  the  painful  results,  but  for  this  very  reason
it  is  not  compelled  to  come  into  being  with  all  its  modes  of
behaviour  preordained,  but  may  safely  possess  a  richer  inherit
ance,  enabling  it  to  deal  with  wider  variations  of  circumstances.
The  implication here  is that  the pleasurable on the whole
coincides  with the life-giving,  and the unpleasant with the
harmful.

Impulse  then  is  on  the  whole  regulated  by  pleasure,  and
pleasure  is  on  the  whole  subservient  to  the  needs  of  life.  But
(1)  impulse  is  the  primary  fact.  It  is  directed  to  outer  objects —
to  seizing  prey  or  avoiding  an  enemy — and  when  transformed  by
the  experience  of  pleasure  into  desire,  it  still  retains  this
character.  The  desired  object  is  attractive,  and  the  attraction  is
not  essentially  a  faint  anticipatory  realization  of  the  pleasure  to


244  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

be  derived  from  it.1  (2)  The  adaptation  of  desire  to  pleasure,
and  of  pleasure  to  life-giving,  or  as  we  may  call  them  develop
mental  ends,  is  never  perfect.  Human,  and  even  animal  nature
is  many-sided,  and  a  function  which  on  the  whole  tends  to  pre
serve  the  stock,  may  have  many  harmful  developments  which
natural  selection  fails  to  lop  off.  Thus  the  pleasure  of  eating
and  drinking,  which  on  the  whole  is  necessary,  may  stimulate
over-eating  and  over-drinking,  which  are  pro  tanto  harmful.
Further,  different  impulses  and  different  pleasures  may  conflict
with  another,  and  those  which  are  on  the  whole  most  necessary
to  the  life  of  the  species  may  be  thwarted  by  others  felt  with
greater  immediate  intensity.

Here  is  an  opportunity  for  a  conflict  which  is  already  apparent

at  times  in  the  behaviour  of  the  higher  animals,  but  acquires  far

greater  importance  in  the  life  of  man. The  developmental,

"orthogenic"  line  of  humanity  lies  in  the  direction  of  social

growth,  and  accordingly  man  finds  his  principal  source  of  abiding

satisfaction  in  social  relations. But  the  fulfilment  of  the  social

functions  conflicts  often  enough  with  the  animal  impulses,  and

the  social  relations  themselves  being  from  the  first  complex,  the

claims  of  a  wider  may  be  thwarted  by  those  of  a  narrower  group

— e.  g.  a  civic  duty  by  parental  love. The  larger  life  of  humanity

could  not  have  come  into  existence  but  for  the  psychological

development whereby  men became capable of rising above

desire  for  this  or  that  pleasurable  object  to  broad  conceptions  of

modes  of  life  in  which  abiding  satisfaction  could  be  found. The

permanent  bent  of  the  character  towards  these  wider  ends—

which  we  may  call  generically  the  good  as  conceived  by  men— we

distinguish  from  Desire  and  call  Will,  while  the  satisfaction

found  in  them,  which  is  a  permanent  character  of  feeling  rather

than  feeling  itself,  is  Happiness. We  may  thus  conceive  Will

and  Happiness  to  be  related  on  a  higher  plane,  as  Desire  and

Pleasure  on  a  lower,  and  what  has  been  said  of  these  last  will

apply  mutatis  mutandis  at  this  further  remove. It  results  that

the  Will  must  be  in  the  main  directed  not  towards  Happiness

but  towards  the  objects— possessions,  activities,  modes  of  life,

i  This  appears  most  clearly  in  the  negative instance where  impulse

retains  a  partial  ascendency  over  experience  and  we  are  impelled Awards

a  thing  though  experience  has  shown  a  heavy  balance  of  pain  in  the

fruition  thereof.


MODERN ETHICS  245

human  relationships— in  which  Happiness  is  found ;  that  the
mean  point  of  its  aims  will  lie  upon  the  developmental  line,
but  that  the  aims  of  individuals  will  deflect  from  this  line
in  all  directions  in  greater  or  less  degree,  in  accordance  with  the
imperfect  harmony  between  the  individual  nature  and  the  re
quirements  of  social  development.

9.  It  follows  further,  that  if  moral  obligation  depends  on  a
rational  coherence  in  our  conception  of  what  is  good,  its  standard
must  be  one  in  which  this  conflict  is  overcome.  At  the  same
time  it  is  to  rest  on  human  nature,  and  find  its  support  and
practical  efficacy  in  expressing  the  mean  direction  of  human
endeavour.  We  have  then  to  find  the  element  of  harmony  in
actual  conceptions  of  the  good.  Now  looking  back  on  the
genesis  of  Impulse,  Desire,  Pleasure,  Will  and  Happiness,  we
find  them  related  at  every  point  to  developmental  needs.  The
things  which  support  the  life  of  the  individual  and  of  the  race
are  the  objects  which  at  successive  stages  impel,  excite  desire,
cause  pleasure,  or  are  sources  of  permanent  happiness.  This  is
true  of  the  springs  of  action,  from  hunger  to  romantic  love,  and
from  fear  to  a  patriotic  devotion.  But  we  have  also  seen  how
the  susceptibility  which  is  based  on  a  vital  need  may  either
have  a  morbid  growth  or  may  conflict  with  some  other  need,  it
may  be  of  the  same  individual,  it  may  be  of  another,  it  may  be
of  the  higher  development  which  would  render  possible  a  fuller
life.  Thus  the  line  of  harmony  is  indicated  along  with  the
causes  of  deviation.  Unless  there  is  some  inherent  discrepancy
among  the  vital  needs  of  the  race,  actions  will  harmonize  as  long
as  they  accord  with  those  needs  and  not  otherwise.

Now  the  absence  of  any  inherent  discrepancy  among  vital
needs  is  not  to  be  lightly  assumed.  The  life  of  one  individual
may  be  the  death  of  another,  and  it  is  only  the  establishment
of  social  peace,  involving  much  repression  of  impulse,  which
makes  possible  a  harmony  of  effort  as  between  many  individuals.
Thus  the  function  of  the  social  order— and  its  psychological
counterpart,  the  ethical  order — is  from  the  first  to  form  a  kind
of  synthesis  wherein  the  "  goods  "  of  each  become  the  good  of  all.
But  since  the  "  goods "  of  each  lie  in  realizing  the  objects  to
which  their  natural  bent  leads  them,  that  system  will  provide


246  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  most  complete  harmony  which  admits  of  the  fullest  develop
ment  to  all  its  members,  and  thus  we  rise  beyond  the  conception
of  vital  needs  to  that  of  developmental  possibilities.1  But  the
development  which  is  finally  judged  good  can  only  be  a  social
development— a  development  of  which  the  manifold  sides  on  the
whole  do  not  thwart,  but  subserve  one  another,  which  makes  the
most  therefore  of  all  the  foundation  instincts  of  humanity,  the
impulse  to  love,  to  help,  to  right  the  wrong,  the  thirst  to  know,
and  to  create.  In  this  movement  of  the  human  spirit  towards
the  full  realization  of  its  powers  and  to  the  mastery  of  itself  and
of  the  world,  every  side  of  human  nature  can  find  its  scope,  and
at  the  same  time  its  discipline.  In  such  development  lies  for
each  man  the  only  happiness  that  does  not  ultimately  result  in
the  pain  of  another.  I  emphasize  both  terms,  for  the  end  is  not
happiness— not  even  the  general  and  permanent  happiness  of
the  human  race— abstracted  from  its  spiritual  growth,  nor  its
growth  abstracted  from  its  happiness.  The  end  is  the  spiritual
growth  in  which  happiness  is  found.2

The  analysis  of  Desire  and  Will,  Pleasure  and  Happiness,  has
thus  led  us  by  another  road  to  that  conception  of  a  synthesis  or
harmony  of  Action,  which  we  saw  above  to  be  the  postulate  of  a
rational  theory  of  moral  obligation.  And  this  synthesis  we  have
now  found  in  the  ordering  of  conduct  by  the  needs  of  human
development.  But  if  this  is  so,  it  is,  so  far  as  ethics  are  con
cerned,  a  justification  of  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  evolution  in
humanity  as  providing  a  possible  basis  for  a  consistent  moral
order,  and  therewith  a  rational  ground  of  moral  obligation.

*  Since  every  development  is  a  "  good,"  except  in  so  far  as  it  hinders
other  development,  it  is  clear  that  any  moral  system,  even  though  it  may
establish  a  harmony  of  its  own,  is  inadequate  which  curtails  any  form  of
development  unnecessarily.  Hence  the  /idlest,  as  well  as  the  most
harmonious,  development  is  the  ideal.

•11  An"ljer  wav  of  Fating  the  question  as  between  pleasure  and  desire,
will  and  happiness,  is  to  ask,  e.g.  whether  the  value  of  a  given  object  con
sists  in  the  pleasure  derivable  from  it,  so  that  if  we  imagine  the  pleasure
removed  the  value  would  disappear  also.  If  the  answer  is  affirmative,  the
conclusion  may  be  drawn  that  the  thing  itself  is  indifferent— merely  a
means  to  pleasure.  If  negative,  that  the  pleasure  is,  as  it  were,  adventitious
and  irrelevant.  The  true  answer  rather  is  that  the  pleasure  we  take  in  a
thing  is  merely  another  expression  for  the  value  we  attach  to  it.  But  the
value  is  attached  to  the  thing.  Or  if  we  prefer  the  phrase,  the  pleasure  is
in  the  thing,  related  to  the  thing,  not  a  subsequent  effect  which  the  thing
happens  to  produce  and  which  might  as  well  be  produced  by  anything  else


MODERN  ETHICS  247

10.  Further,  this  conception  of  a  moral  order  is  designated
as  the appropriate outcome of  ethical development  by  the
character  of  that  development  itself. For  if  we  are  right  in  re
garding  the  "practical  reason"  as  the  harmony  of  feeling  and
impulse,  we  may  conceive  all  ethical  development as  a  pro
gressive  realization  of  this  harmony,  the  turning  point  in  which
is  the  recognition  of  the  truth  that  harmony  is  the  end  to  be
obtained. For  such  harmony  does  not  come  of  itself. We  grow
up  with  instincts  and  desires  determined  by  the  conditions  of
our  life  and  that  of  our  ancestors. This  life  is social, but
imperfectly  social. Hence  love,  affection,  generosity,  candour,
honesty,  truthfulness,  modesty,  courage,  are  as  much  a  matter
of  "  natural " instinct,  reacting  on early  surroundings,  as  the
desires  for  personal  gain  and  esteem. These  qualities arise
under  the  conditions  of  existence  which  determine  the  character
of  a  social  animal,  a  character  without  which  man  cannot  exist.
In  the  same  way  the conditions  of  existence determine the
growth  of  the  tiger's  claws  or  the  bird's  wings. But  for  the
same  reason,  since  human  life  is  not  social  through  and  through
but  is  strife  as  well  as  co-operation— strife  of  individuals  within
each social group and of group  with group— the fighting
qualities,  the  self-regarding  centrifugal  characters  develop  in  the
same  measure,  and  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitable-
ness  are  as  «  natural "  as  their  opposites. But  if  the  rational  in
man  is  the  impulse  towards  harmony,  and  if  this  harmony  is  a
social  harmony,  it  follows  that  the  "  practical  reason "  has  its
roots  in  the  first  class  of  qualities,  and  its  main  object  is  to
bring  the  other  class  under  discipline,  reducing  them  to  the
legitimate  measure  of  natural  fire  and  pride  and  self-respect,  by
which  personal  rights  and  individual  freedom  may  be  main
tained,  and  thus  ultimately  serving  a  social  end. The  first  part
of  this  principle was,  as  we  have  seen,  apprehended  by  the
great  religious  teachers,  who  sought  to  banish  the  principle  of
self-assertion  from  the  world,  and  to  erect  an  ideal  of  character
on  the  basis  of  universal  benevolence  and  pure  self-negation.
This  attempt  is  indeed  the  starting  point  of  true  rationalism,
but  its  principle  is  too  narrow. Self-development  is  as  much  a
duty  as  self-negation ;  the  love  for  individuals  is  as  necessary  to
the  healthy  working  of  life  as  general  benevolence ;  the  quiet,


248  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

resolute  maintenance  of  rights  as  useful  to  society  as  the  per
formance  of  duties. A  social  philosophy  which  admits  these
lements  into  ethics,  takes  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  human
tture, and renders possible a wider and more  complete
harmony,  and  therefore  a  more  rational  moral  order.

11.  Shifting our point of  view  from  internal  character  to
codes  of  external  conduct,  we  trace  the  working  of  the  same
influence. We  start  with  custom  growing  up  unconsciously  in
rough  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  life  in  a  rude  society
and modified without regard to any social ideal or any
deliberate  calculation  of  values  as  the  pressure  of  social  forces
intensifies  in  one  direction  or  relaxes  in  another. The  craving
for  some  kind  of  reason  for  the  rules  which  tradition  prescribes
is  satisfied  by  a  reference  to  the  unseen  world,  to  the  working
of  magical  forces,  or  the  will  of  spiritual  beings. At  first  the
will of  the  spirits merely coincides with that of average
humanity,  and  serves  only  to  reinforce  the  code  of  retaliation  to
sanction  group  morality,  and  intensify  the  blood  feud. But 'as
the  movement  of  reflection  begins,  and  the  forces  which  make  for
peace  and  harmony  are  ranged  together  in  contrast  with  those
which  tend  to  disunite  and  destroy,  the  divine  becomes  also  the
ideal,  and  God  appears  as  the  author  of  a  higher  law  than  the
tradition  of  the  ancestors. But  this  crystallization  of  the  moral
code, however  valuable in itself, is an obstacle to further
development,  and  leads  to  a  war,  not  merely  between  the  spirit
and  the  flesh,  but  between  those  spiritual  elements  which  the
divine  code  sanctifies  and  those  which  it  reprobates  and  leaves
out  of  account. Moreover,  the  foundation  which  appears so
secure,  the  existence  and  attributes  of  the  Deity,  the  authen
ticity  of  revelation,  the  title  of  the  divine  word  to  obedience  are
themselves called in question, and reason,  acquiring more
confidence in herself,  demands a basis for  conduct  in  some
principle  by  which  assent  will  be  compelled  as  it  is  compelled
by  science. She  returns  from  the  supernatural  to  nature,  and
declares  that  moral  truths  must  have  their  foundation  there
if  anywhere. Nature  herself  provides  a  code  for  man  anterior  to
all  legislation,  superior  to  social  conventions,  independent  of  the
accidents  of  political  or  social  development,  the  idiosyncrasies


MODERN ETHICS  249

of  race  or  class,  a  standard  to  which  further  legislation  should
seek  to  conform. But  the  work  of  scepticism  is  only  beginning.
The  authority,  indeed  the  very  meaning  of  Nature  itself,  must
stand  an  examination  which  shows  that  its  apparent  definite-
ness  and  authority  are  illusions. Virtue  is  natural,  but  so  also
is  vice. Truth  is  founded  on  nature,  but  it  is  also  in  human
nature  to  err. Life  is  the  scene  of  a  seeming  conflict  between
Orrnuzd  and  Ahriman,  and  how  are  we  to  recognize  the  banner
of  Ormuzd  ? We  need  a  standard  of  value  which  must  prove
its  genuineness  by  the  same  test  which  we  apply  to  speculative
principles. It  must  give  harmony,  order, coherence to our
efforts  and  our  judgments,  while  its  negation  must  leave  them
disordered  and  discordant. This function the humanitarian
would claim as fulfilled  by  his  principle,  which makes  the
furtherance of  the  collective life of  humanity the  supreme
object  of  endeavour,  and  the  standard  by  which  all  secondary
moral  rules  and  all  institutions  of  society  are  to  be  valued  and
determined. This  object,  he  would  say,  includes  all  the  partial
aims  of  man,  all  his  loves  and  joys,  hopes,  ambitions,  tastes,  his
love  of  family  and  fatherland,  his  thirst  for  knowledge  and  for
beauty — all  so  far  as  they  do  not  antagonize  one  another,  but
are  capable of  entering into  a higher synthesis. For  this
capacity  for  harmonization  is  his  test  of  Truth. The  ultimate
principle,  which  is  to  guide  the  collective  mind  on  this  view,  is
nothing  more  nor  less  than  self-knowledge — comprehension  of
the  Purpose  of  its  existence  and  growth,  and  of  the  conditions
upon  which  its  growth  depends. These  conditions  underlie  all
earlier  conceptions  of  ethical and religious  truths,  and  moral
progress is  the  gradual "  conversion "  of  the mind  whereby
their  nature  and  meaning  becomes  apparent.

12.  In  this  development  we  may  be  asked  how  much  may
fairly  be  attributed  to  modern  thought  with  its  peculiar  contri
bution.  May  it  not  be  said  that  the  same  point  of  view  was  in
essence  reached  by  Greek  philosophy  ?  It  may  be  said  that  the
Greeks  from  Socrates  and  Plato  onwards  raised  the  fundamental
issues,  and  in  one  system  or  another  offered  solutions  which  do
not  differ  in  principle  from  any  propounded  in  the  modern
world.  There  is,  however,  a  difference  between  a  principle  in


250  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

germ  and  the  same  principle  in  its  full  development  and  explicit
application,  and  much  of  the  Hellenic  anticipation  of  modern
thought  is  of  this  order.  But  further,  the  Greeks,  as  already
hinted,  had  a  simpler  problem  before  them.  Their  analysis  was
masterly,  but  it  was  the  analysis  of  a  less  developed  ethical  con
sciousness,  and  an  experience  neither  so  long  nor  so  many-sided
as  that  of  the  modern  world,  which  has  absorbed  Asiatic  along
with  Hellenic  ideas  and  those  of  the  fresh  barbarism  of  the
West.  Hence  when-  even  the  same  solution  is  given  in  the
same  words  by  a,  modern  thinker  the  meaning  is  really  different.
The  problem  is  deeper,  the  synthesis  required  of  wider  reach.

It  was  the  achievement  of  the  Greek  thinkers  in  the  classical
period  to  establish  a  harmony  between  the  just  requirements  of
individual  self-development  and  the  life  of  the  city  state.  These
were  the  terms  which  they  had  to  bring  into  relation.  But  at
every  point  these  terms  were  altered  by  social  and  mental
evolution.  The  requirements  of  the  self  were  heightened  and
deepened  as  the  antithesis  between  the  spiritual  life  and  the
bodily  was  more  keenly  felt.  The  notion  of  the  social  order  was
fundamentally  changed  by  the  decay  of  the  city  state  and  the
rise  of  world  empires  and  world  religions,  and  the  required
harmony  could  no  longer  be  sought  by  a  simple  and  direct
identification  of  interests.  Modern  thought  in  its  search  for  a
solution  has  been  driven,  and  is  constantly  being  driven,  deeper
in  its  analysis  of  conceptions,  which  are  at  first  used  as  primary
starting  points,  into  the  experiences  and  modes  of  thinking  from
which  they  are  derived.  Thus  it  has  sought  to  analyze  person
ality  and  find  a  meaning  for  it  in  conscious  experiences  and  the
mode  of  their  interconnection.  Similarly  it  reduces  happiness
to  terms  of  conscious  experience,  and  therefore  distinguishes  it
from  the  "  well-doing  "  with  which  "  well-being  "  might  easily
be  identified.  Again,  it  takes  to  pieces  the  idea  of  the  natural,
and  seeks  to  reconstruct  it  in  terms  of  the  elements  of  order  or
connectedness  in  experience.  Thus  on  the  side  of  the  individual
we  are  brought  down  to  the  sequences  and  correlations  of  con
crete  experience,  and  the  order  and  growth  that  we  can  find
therein.  On  the  side  of  the  social  order  there  is  a  parallel
analysis  and  reconstruction.  The  dc facto  laws,  customs,  institu
tions  and  beliefs  of  society  are  seen  as  growths  arising  from


MODERN ETHICS  251

mental  and  social  conditions  in  which  the  essential  and  the
accidental,  the  rational  and  the  arbitrary  or  the  false,  have  to  be
separated  out  by  getting  back  to  the  fundamental  underlying
conditions  of  social  life  and  building  up  therefrom. Such  a  re
construction  was  already  postulated  in  the  idea  of  the  law  of
Nature,  but  it  could  only  begin  to  be  effective  with  the  genesis
of  the  principle  that  Nature  is  itself  a  growth,  the  products  of
which  are  appropriate  each  to  its  own  stage,  while  the  true
meaning  of  the  whole  is  only  to  be  seized  by  overcoming  the
relative  standpoint  and  viewing  results  in  relation  to  the  con
ditions  from  which  they  issue.  The  function  of  modern  thought,
then,  appears  to  be  to  reduce  ethical  and  social  conceptions  to
the  ultimate  elements  and  conditions  from  which  they  have
grown  up,  and  working  from  this  basis  to  build  up  a  conception
of  a  world  order,  conformity  to  which  is  conceived  as  matter  of
rational obligation. Permeated throughout by the idea of
growth  and  the  dependence  of  belief  and  custom  on  the  phase
which  growth  has  reached,  it  carries  the  conceptions  of  Greek
thought  back  further  towards  the  elements  from  which  they
were  derived,  and  conceives  a  larger  synthesis — a  movement
throughout  the  vast  variety  of  things  that  are  good  towards  the
realization  of  a  comprehensive  purpose — a  synthesis  resting  on
the  totality  of  experience  and  utilizing  it  for  the  working  out  of
a  purpose  comprehending  the  totality  of  human  effort. In  this
synthesis  it  is  not  the  idea  of  humanity  as  such  that  is  the  most
distinctive  element. This  idea  was  possible,  as  we  have  seen,  to
ancient  ethics,  which  culminates  in  the  conception  of  man  as  a
member  of  the  world  state— "dear  city  of  Zeus" — ruled  under
the  providence  of  God  in  accordance  with  the  code  of  Nature.
The  difference  is  that  in  modern  thought  the  principle  of  human
development  under  whatever  name  becomes  in  a  new  sense  the
pivot  upon  which  ethical  conceptions  turn. The  idea  of  rela
tivity  and  development  are  the  distinctively  modern  contribu
tions  to  thought,  and  in  ethics  they  play  an  important  part.
Humanity  is  not  merely  a  community  existing  as part  of  a
Kosmos. It  is  something — a  spirit  or  an  organism  according  to
whatever  inadequate  metaphor  we  choose  for  its  designation —
which  has  come  into  being,  has  grown  and  is  growing  before  the
eyes  of  us  who  are  part  of  it. It  is  not  merely  that  duties  are


252  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

owing  to  it,  but  its  needs  prescribe  what  our  duties  are.  Hence
though  our  argument  has  gone  to  show  that  our  ethics  are
founded  on  deep-lying  instincts,  and  though  the  humanitarian
idea  is  held  to  be  only  the  explicit  recognition  of  a  principle
that  was  all  along  implied  in  the  conscious  moral  judgments  of
mankind,  yet  the  effect  of  this  principle  once  recognized  is  a
Copernican  change  of  attitude.  Hitherto  human  conduct  has
been  conceived  as  bound  by  law — first  by  divine  law,  then  by
natural  law.  But  if  the  humanitarian  principle  is  correct,  man
is  not  made  for  the  law,  but  the  law  for  humanity.  Instead  of
religion  being  the  basis  of  ethics,  ethics  becomes  the  test  to
which  religion  must  submit.  The  relative  value  of  the  creeds  is

O

measured  by  their  ethical  efficacy,  and  the  ethical  consciousness
is  seen  to  be  the  only  firm  point  of  departure  for  any  attempt
at  a  spiritual  interpretation  of  nature.  As  with  religions,  so
with  social  institutions.  Property,  contract,  marriage,  the  posi
tion  of  women,  class  distinctions,  political  obligations,  the  right
of  warfare  and  of  conquest — all  these  in  olden  days  were  founded
on  custom  and  supported  by  divine  authority.  Whoso  would
seek  the  good  of  society  must  work  within  the  limits  thus
rigidly  laid  down  by  the  moral  or  the  religious  tradition.  When
revolts  against  these  limitations  occurred,  they  took  the  form  of
appeals  to  expediency,  and  perhaps  of  a  sweeping  denial  of
moral  obligation,  or  again  of  the  assertion  of  some  counter
principle  of  no  greater  claims  than  that  which  was  called  in
question.  In  a  rationalistic  system  of  morals  the  whole  point  of
view  is  changed.  These  institutions  have  grown  up  in  rough
accordance  with  the  circumstance  of  social  life,  but  they  have  no
value  or  validity  except  in  so  far  as  they  subserve  human  needs.
On  the  other  hand,  they  are  not  to  be  set  aside  on  particular
occasions  when  they  happen  to  be  inconvenient,  as  the  doctrine  of
expediency  suggests,  not  only  because  in  the  long  run  nothing  is  so
inexpedient  as  the  practice  of  unsettling  society,  but  also  because
the  rights  and  duties  recognized  by  the  ordinary  consciousness  when
viewed  genetically  are  seen  to  have  arisen  in  response  to  social
needs,  and  to  contain  elements,  however  roughly  put,  of  ethical
truth.  They  are  like  the  empirical  generalizations  of  common
sense  which  contain  truth,  though  not  accurately  true  as  they
stand,  and  historically  speaking  they  are  seen  to  develop,  to


MODERN  ETHICS  253

expand,  define  themselves,  deepen  and  purify  their  meaning  as
ethical  thought  has  developed.  Thus  they  lie  ready  to  hand  as
a  basis  for  a  scientific  sociology.  Sociology,  therefore,  is  not
compelled  to  start  from  an  empty  slate,  and  consider  what  in
each  case  would  promote  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number.  It  has  rather  to  take  the  institutions  it  finds,  and  aim
at  a  scientific  determination  of  the  function  which  they  fill  in
the  life  of  humanity.1  Take  the  case  of  private  property,  for
example.  Here  is  an  institution  which  from  one  point  of  view
may  be  regarded  as  the  only  method  of  securing  to  the  work
man  the  fruits  of  his  toil.  Under  suitable  conditions  it  may  in
reality  have  that  effect.  Under  other  conditions  it  may  as
easily  become  the  means  of  excluding  the  great  mass  of  the
people  from  the  means  of  earning  an  independent  livelihood.
When  the  right  of  property  is  made  absolute,  whether  as  right
natural  or  right  divine,  there  is  no  ethical  means  of  discrimin
ating  between  the  two  cases.  All  the  wealth  of  the  country
might  fall  into  a  single  hand,  as  in  Mr.  Wells's  romance,  yet  if  it
were  in  the  bond  society  could  do  nothing  but  submit.  Rights
pushed  to  this  point  are  answered  by  rebellion,  and  are  there
fore  justly  stigmatized  by  Bentham  as  anarchical  fallacies.
They  provoke  the  doctrine  of  pure  expediency,  which  denies  that
there  is  any  right  but  the  welfare  of  society.  But  though  this
is  true  in  a  sense,  it  omits  the  important  consideration  that  one
of  the  chief  factors  in  the  welfare  of  society  is  that  its  members
should  know  what  they  are  entitled  to  expect,  and  they  should
be  entitled  to  all  the  freedom  necessary  for  the  development  of
those  faculties  which  makes  them  useful  members  of  society;
and  this  is  only  saying  in  a  more  roundabout  manner  that  they
should  have  the  fullest  rights  compatible  with  the  conditions  of
social  life,  and  should  be  carefully  secured  in  their  enjoyment.

1  The  great  historical  example  of  this  method  is,  of  course,  the  work  of
Bentham.  For  an  estimate  of  the  reforms  achieved  under  his  influence  see
Dicey,  Laiv  and  Opinion  in  England,  pp.  183-209.  Professor  Dicey,  in
whom  after  many  years  Bentham  at  length  finds  a  fair  judge,  does  not
ignore  the  limitations  of  the  Utilitarian  basis.  These,  in  fact,  were  such
as  to  render  sure  going  possible  only  so  far  as  the  means  to  the  general
happiness  were  matter  of  obvious  common  sense.  For  the  more  complex
problems,  economical,  social,  religious,  political,  of  the  modern  world  a
scientific  sociology  is  needed,  and  the  need  is  even  more  urgent  than  in
Bentham's  time.


254  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

In  other  words,  though  it  is  true  that  all  rights  are  conditioned
by  the  public  welfare,  the  public  welfare  on  its  side  depends  on
the  maintenance  of  rights.  The  rationalist  criticism  of  property
would  have  to  meet  all  these  points.  It  would  hare  to  discuss
the  functions  which  the  institution  of  property  performs,  and  so
define  it  as  to  secure  that  it  should  perform  those  functions  and
obstruct  no  other  useful  organ  of  the  social  structure.  It  could
not  be  satisfied  with  upsetting  generally  recognized  rights  wher
ever  they  happen  to  be  inconvenient,  nor  with  the  permanent
maintenance  of  rights  which  can  be  shown  to  entail  a  balance
of  evil  consequences.  It  would  have  to  take  the  institution  of
property  and  examine  it  in  all  its  developments  and  ramifica
tions,  to  consider  inheritance  and  bequest,  the  nature  of  ex
change  and  the  resulting  distribution  of  wealth  under  the  con
ditions  of  modern  industry,  the  effects  of  monopoly  and  the
growth  of  values  arising  from  the  increase  of  population,  the
morality  of  acquiring  wealth  from  occupations  injurious  to  the
people  at  large — these  and  countless  other  details  have  to  come
up  for  judgment  in  a  scientific  reconstruction  of  the  nature  and
measure  of  the  rights  of  property  which  a  rational  scheme  of
ethics  would  recognize  as  suitable  to  be  maintained  in  the
permanent  interests  of  society.

13.  Such  a  reconstruction  is  not  the  work  of  a  day — and  in
social  development,  be  it  remembered,  a  hundred  years  are  but
as  yesterday.  If  we  would  know  the  fruits  which  ethical
rationalism  has  borne  we  must  seek  them,  not  in  the  work  of
any  one  school  which  has  apprehended  the  principle  in  all  its
fulness — for  no  such  finality  is  as  yet,  if  it  is  ever,  possible —
but  scattered  in  the  work  of  different  and  often  opposing
schools,  in  which  the  principle  has  been  apprehended  partially
or  under  different  aspects.  Indeed  the  influence  of  the
humanitarian  spirit  in  the  modern  world  has  been  far  wider
than  that  of  all  the  schools  which  could  be  called  distinctively
humanitarian.1  For  where  there  are  few  who  will  agree  that

1  Still  more  obviously  is  it  wider  than  any  school  or  schools  of  Philosophy.
The  distinctive  ideas  of  the  modern  mind  have  expressed  themselves  in  a
thousand  ways,  in  lyric  poetry  and  in  music,  in  fiction  and  the  drama,  as
well  as  in  avowed  political  and  sociological  or  religious  discussion.  In


MODERN  ETHICS  255

human  ethics  form  the  root  from  which  all  true  knowledge  of
religion springs, there  are  many who will admit that the
relation between religion and  ethics  has been  in  a  manner
reversed in the modern world, so  that  whereas ethics was
formerly  based  on  religion,  religion  is  now  deemed  to  have  its
firmest  root  in  ethics. Many  again  who  would  doubt  or  reject
the conclusions reached above as to the ultimate basis of
obligation,  would  yet  admit  that  humanitarian  ethics,  whether
acting  directly  or  through  a  revivified  religious  consciousness,
has  had  a  large  share  in  the  distinctive  changes  that  have  made
the  modern  state  and  the  civilization  of  the  modern  world. In
this  broader  sense  humanitarianism  has  in  fact  touched  every
department  of  practical  morals — class  and  racial  divisions,  the
position  of  women,  the  law  of  marriage,  the  criminal  law,  the
law  of  war, the  rights  and  duties  of  states, the claims of
nationality, the  right  of  property, the law  of  contract, the
rights of association and of citizenship, the equality of
religions. We  find  the humanitarian spirit in  that recast
ing  of  values  which  makes  the  infliction  of  misery  on man
kind  a  sin  not  to  be  erased  by  any  access  of  national  glory.
We  find  it  in  the  heightened  sympathies  which  begin  to  make
cruelty  a  crime,  and  in  the  calmer  insight  into  human  nature
which  banishes  the  use  of  cruelty  in  the  repression  of  crime.
We  find  it  in  the  heightened  belief  in  the  power  of  reason
which  suggests  that  in  the  end  rational  suasion  and  just  treat
ment  are  better  methods  of  leading  men  to  see  what  is  good
for  them  than  the  shorter  and  sharper  expedients  of  the  drill
sergeant,  that  freedom  to  advocate  error  is  the  best  social  safe
guard  for  truth,  and  to  rule  by  the  consent  of  the  governed  the
surest  road  to  social  stability. Humanitarianism indeed  has
justified  the  Christian  ethics  on  its  positive  side. As  against
those  who  maintained  that  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  had  only

particular,  the  contrast  between  the  realities  of  human  nature  and  the  con
ventional  assumption  of  traditional  ethics  has  been  handled  with  more
boldness  and  far  more  wealth  of  detail  by  the  novelist  and  the  dramatist
than  by  the  professed  philosopher.  If  in  the  text  I  have  confined  myself
to  philosophy,  it  is  because  here  the  movement  of  thought  receives,  not
indeed  its  fullest  expression,  but  its  most  exact  analysis,  and  is  therefore
presented  in  the  form  most  easily  comparable  with  the  thought  of  earlier
stages.


256  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

an  ideal  meaning  applicable  to  a  better  world,  it  has  vindicated
the  practical  application  of  the  Beatitudes  to  this  world  of  ours.
It  has  shown  that  when  we  look  at  matters  from  the  point  of
view  of  common  humanity  it  is  true  that  there  is  none  so  lowly
but  he  must  be  considered  equally  with  the  noblest,  that  the
spirit  of  mild  equity  is  better  even  in  the  interests  of  order  than
that  of  harshness,  that  it  is  a  hard  fact  that  hatred  does  not
cease  by  hatred  but  by  love,  that  the  fundamental  remedy  for
evil  and  for  error  is  not  physical  force  but  spiritual  regeneration.
In  a  similar  spirit  it  has  been  able  to  show  that  in  industry  it
is  not  the  hard  master  but  the  liberal  employer  who  practises
the  best  economy,  that  from  the  mere  point  of  view  of  the
output  free  labour  is  better  than  slavery,  and  highly  organized
labour  than  that  of  the  sweater's  den;  that  in  politics  self-
government  is  a  better  preservative  of  union  than  a  centralized
despotism,  and  that  order  is  best  maintained  when  those  who
have  to  obey  share  in  the  framing  of  the  rules.  In  a  word,  it
has  not  only  reconstructed  ethics,  but  it  has  shown  that  the
ethical  is  valid — that  it  works  as  a  force  to  be  reckoned  with  in
human  affairs.  But  with  no  less  emphasis  ethical  rationalism
has  insisted  on  that  active  development  of  human  qualities
which  supernatural  religions  have  too  often  ignored.  It  has
justified  individuals,  classes,  creeds,  nationalities,  that  have
stood  resolutely  by  their  rights  and  fought  for  their  liberties.
It  has  fostered  the  newer  education  of  the  faculties  and  ridi
culed  the  sentimentalism  which  regarded  all  independent
initiative  in  one  half  of  the  race  as  a  kind  of  indecency.  In
short,  it  has  conceived  the  permanent  elevation  of  both  sexes
and  all  classes  to  a  life  in  which  they  could  enjoy  that  free  and
full  cultivation  of  their  powers,  which  the  best  of  the  older
civilizations  only  imagined  to  be  possible  for  a  narrow  class.

Of  the  future  of  rationalism  it  is  not  our  business  to  speak.
We  are  not  concerned  with  prophecy,  but  with  the  analysis  of
past  and  present  tendencies.  But  one  common  misconception
may  be  guarded  against.  There  is  a  tendency  to  think  of  any
"rational"  system  as  claiming  a  certain  finality,  as  forming  as
it  were  a  closed  circle  from  which  the  world  of  imagination  is
quite  shut  out.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  true  spirit
of  reason,  which  insists  as  a  first  principle  on  the  relativity  of  all


MODERN  ETHICS  257

human  conceptions,  on  the  narrowness  of  the  area  reclaimed  by
knowledge  as  compared  with  the  ocean  of  reality,  and  on  the
unlimited power  of  human  capacity  to expand  and  explore
Nothing  is  more  certain,  if  the  rationalist  doctrine  is  true,  than
that doctrine itself  will grow,  and,  as growth  implies,  will
change. But  precisely because  such  changes are  to  be  ex
pected  any  attempt  to  define  their  outcome  must  be  valueless.
The  rational  ideal  must  be  an  ideal  of  growth  that  can  accept
change,  and  as  it  were  assimilate  it. We  may  hold  the  ex
pansion  of  human  faculty,  the  perfecting  of  social  unity,  the
ascendency  of  mind  over  the  conditions  of  nature  and  its'  own
existence,  for  formulas  which in  different words  express  im
perfectly,  but  in  the  best  way  at  present  attainable,  the  supreme
end  in  which  all  human  interests  are  summed  up. But  whither
this expansion, this  growing  sovereignty will lead us, is  a
question  to  which  we  can  return  no  certain  answer. We 'stand
on  the  edge  of  illimitable,  unexplored  regions,  into  which  our
vision  penetrates  but  a  little  way. But  at  least  we  can  dismiss
as  foolish the fear  that  science  will  exhaust  the  interest of
reality,  or  peace  destroy  the  excitement  of  life,  or  the  reign  of
reason  cramp  imagination. The  conquests  of  mind  have  a  very
different  effect. The  more  territory  that  it brings  under  its
sway,  the  vaster  the  unconquered  world  looms  beyond.


VOL.  II.


CHAPTER  VIII

THE LINE  OF ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT

1.  ETHICS  as  treated  in  the  present  work  is  the  study  of  the
regulation  of  life.  This  regulation,  as  \ve  saw  in  Chapter  I.,
begins  in  the  animal  world.  We  find  it  indeed  in  the  lowest
grades  of  life.  For  while  at  this  level  intelligence  in  the  sense
of  the  purposeful  use  of  the  animals'  own  experience  plays  a
small,  perhaps  at  the  bottom  of  all,  a  vanishing  part  of  the
matter,  action  is  determined  in  almost  every  detail  by  methods
of  response  to  stimulus  (internal  or  external)  which  are  fixed  by
the  structure  inherited  by  each  individual  from  its  ancestors.
There  is  every  probability  that  these  methods,  which  display
a  general,  though  by  no  means  perfect,  adjustment  to  the  re
quirements  of  the  organism  are  in  an  indirect  sense  actually
determined  by  those  requirements.  In  every  generation  in
dividuals  which  gave  the  responses  best  suited  to  preserve
themselves  and  bring  offspring  into  the  world  would  probably
survive  in  the  largest  numbers,  and  by  the  constant  repetition
of  this  process  structures,  fixedly  determining  the  most  suitable
response  to  each  kind  of  stimulus,  would  arise  and  be  handed
on.  In  this  exceedingly  slow,  cumbrous  and  roundabout
method,  some  of  the  experiences  of  the  past  generation  (those,
namely,  which  directly  affect  life,  death,  and  reproduction)
determine  the  behaviour  of  the  present  generation,  and  so
determine  it  as  to  aid  in  assuring  the  future  maintenance  of
the  race.  Thus  from  the  lowest  organic  grades  upwards  we
have  a  rough  correlation  of  the  past,  present,  and  future  ex
perience  of  the  species.

The  simplest  organic  responses  are,  as  we  saw,  of  the  Reflex

258


THE  LINE OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 259

type. These proceed with an  almost  unvarying  mechanical
sameness,  with  little,  if  any,  adaptability  to  varying  needs. But
at a slightly higher stage they pass  into  Instincts which
though  they  are  generically  inherited  modes  of  response  with
essentially  the  same  history  and  function,  are  more  elastic  in
their  operation  and  admit,  as  they  expand,  of  correction  by
experience  and  modification  according  to  varying  requirements.
Such  instincts,  as  has  been  remarked,  are  not  confined  in  their
function  to  the  service  of  the  individual. They  are  directed  to
the  production  of  the  young  as  well  as  to  the  maintenance  of
the  life  of  the  parent. At  a  fairly  low  level  they  are  directed,
further,  to  the  preservation  of  the  young  when  produced. At
first  very  rudimentary,  this  parental  instinct  assumes  more  and
more importance  as  we  ascend  the  scale  and  as  intelligence
anses  to  assist  it,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  its  basis
is  throughout  instinctive. That  instincts  of  this  kind  should
arise  in  the  animal  world  might  indeed  be  expected  from  the
operation  of  those  conditions  under  which  instinct  has  grown
up. What  we  have  supposed  is  that  certain  stocks  have  sur
vived  in  preponderating  proportion  in  so  far  as  the  behaviour  of
their  members  was  well  adapted  for  the  maintenance  of  the
stock, and  the  production and care  for  the  young  by  each
individual  or  each  pair  would  be  as  important  an  element  in  this
process as the  preservation  of  each  individual  itself. Thus
biology  does  not  lead  us  to  assume  an  original  egoism  or  self-
regard  out  of  which  altruism  is  evolved  as  a  secondary  result
Egoism  is  something  at  once  too  deliberate  and  too  limited  to  be
primitive. What  we  infer  alike  from  biological  principles  and
from  observed  facts  is  rather  an  unreflective,  possibly  a  quite
unconscious,  impulse  growing  by  heredity  into  a  determinate
instinct  producing  responses  adapted  to  the  maintenance  of  the
stock  by  means  of  the  maintenance  of  the  life  of  the  agent  and
its  young.

In  the  lowest  stages  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  instinct
ive  actions  are  accompanied  by  any  sense  even  of  the  proximate
end  which  they  are  adapted  to  secure.  Not  only  so,  but  there
re  definite  reasons  for  thinking  the  contrary.  Such  blind
action  we  call  generically  Impulse.  But  far  down  in  the  animal
scale  we  found  cases  in  which  impulses  are  arrested  by  pain  or


260  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

encouraged  by  pleasure.  These  introduced  us  to  a  new  feature
in  the  conditions  affecting  behaviour.  The  act  of  the  individual  is
now  no  longer  fixed  by  the  inherited  structure,  but,  in  these  cases,
modified  by  the  effect  of  the  individual's  own  past  experience.
The  inherited  structure  is  affected  by  experience,  and  the  re
actions  which  it  will  give  are  re-modelled  accordingly,  with  the
result  that  they  are  better  adapted  to  securing  an  immediate
consequence  to  the  animal  in  the  shape  of  a  satisfaction
obtained  or  a  pain  avoided.

It  would  be  premature  to  call  this  modification  of  behaviour
intelligent.  But,  still  within  the  animal  world  and  on  the  plans
of  instinct,  we  get  a  higher  adaptation.  We  find  actions  which
are  modified,  not  because  they  are  felt  as  pleasurable  or  painful,
but  because  they  produce  pleasure  or  pain  in  the  sequel.  That
is,  the  act  and  its  consequences  are  distinct  for  the  animal ;  and
the  relation  between  them  seems  to  be  intelligently  rather  than
mechanically  established  in  its  mind,  since  e.  g.  an  animal  which
has  been  punished  for  some  darling  sin  will  restrain  himself
under  circumstances  which  might  lead  to  detection,  and  enjoy
himself  when  he  feels  secure.  Here,  as  we  find  that  action  is
successfully  varied  according  as  it  does  or  does  not  produce  a
given  effect,  we  may  say  that  the  relation  of  the  act  to  the
effect,  that  is  the  purpose,  is  the  determining  factor.  Impulse
so  modified  becomes  Desire  and  Aversion.  On  the  other  hand,
though  we  should  say  that  it  is  desire  for  things  that  are
pleasant  (TO.  rySe'a)  rather  than  for  pleasure  (^Sov^),  it  is  still
pleasure  (and  pain)  that  are  the  moderators  of  desire.

But  the  same  intelligence  which  transforms  impulse  into
desire  renders  possible  the  concrete  apprehension  of  other
individuals.  To  the  higher  animal,  its  master,  its  young,  its
friends,  and  its  enemies  are  known  apparently  with  some
measure  of  individual  recognition,  and  moreover  their  be
haviour,  what  they  do,  what  they  express,  and  what  is  done  to
them,  are  often  matters  of  lively  concern.  Hence,  though  we
can  no  more  see  inside  a  dog's  mind  than  inside  that  of  another
human  creature,  we  attribute  sympathy  to  the  one  as  to  the
other,  and  if  we  allow  the  dog  intelligent  purpose  in  securing
his  own  pleasure  and  avoiding  his  own  pain  we  must  by  the
same  reasoning  treat  as  purposeful  what  he  does  for  another


THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 261

creature,  human  or  animal. So  we  may  attribute,  not  merely
the  gregarious  instinct,  but  also  the  rudiments  of  a  social  inter
course  to  the  higher  animals,  and  hold  that  their  actions  are
adapted,  not only by instinct,  but  also  in  some  measure  by
conscious  intelligence  to  the  protection,  relief,  or  satisfaction  of
those for whom they feel affection. Thus  we  now find a
considerable  enlargement  of  the  sphere  of  intelligence. We  find
it  aiding  in  the  adaptation  of  actions  not  only  to  the  immediate,
but  to  the  somewhat  more  remote  satisfaction  of  the  agent,  and
also  to  the  satisfaction  of  others  whom  the  agent  loves. But  in
all this  it  must  be  remembered  that the inherited psycho-
physical  structure  is  the  underlying  condition. It  is  that  which
makes  experience  pleasant  or  painful,  and  it  is  this,  for  the  most
part,  which  renders  possible  and  also  limits  the  circle  of  affection.1
The  main  lines  of  behaviour,  social  as  well  as  self-regarding,  are
laid  down  by  inherited  structure  in  accordance  with  the  con
ditions  of  race  maintenance. Only  variations  within  these  lines
are  left  to  the play  of  intelligence. Nevertheless this  play
increases  the  adaptability  of  the  individual,  enlarges  the  part
which  it  plays  in  the  world,  and  enables  it  to  maintain  the  stock
with  a  smaller  number  of  descendants  and  with  less  waste  of
life.

2.  While  animal  purposes,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,
appear  to  be  limited  to  the  concrete  results  of  each  particular
action,  and,  so  far  as  directed  to  the  good  of  another,  to  be
swayed  wholly  by  feeling,  in  man  we  saw  that  the  rise  of
general  conceptions— a  process  which  may  be  regarded  as  at
once  the  effect  and  the  cause  of  the  growth  of  language-
enlarges  the  scope  of  purpose  and  renders  possible  the  laying
down  of  fixed  rules  by  which  action  is  judged  and  the  handing
on  of  these  rules  by  tradition.  Forming  a  concept  of  himself  as
a  permanent  being  with  varied  interests,  of  his  wife  or  children,
his  social  group,  etc.,  in  the  same  manner,  man  re-acts  to  these

1  I  mean  e.g.  that  though  a  mother  cat  may  tend  a  kitten  intelligently
at  times,  yet  the  basis  of  mother  love  is  instinctive.  At  this  stage  "  natural
election  '  would  even  combat  a  wider  love,  since  it  would  interfere  with
the  predominance  of  any  given  stock  which  indulged  it.  So  the  conditions
ol  race  maintenance  appear  both  as  positive  and  negative  determinants  of
social  feeling.


262  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

larger interests  just as the animal does to the immediate
stimulus  of  desire. This  re-action  to  larger  purpose  we  have
called  Will ;  distinguishing  it  from  Desire, because  in  it  the
whole personality  tends  to  be  involved  rather  than  a single
sense  or  a  single  emotion,  and  because  its  object  is  net  that
which  gives  pleasure,  but  those deeper  conditions of  life  in
which  the  more  stable  conditions  of  happiness  are  found. But
the  will  does  not  set  to  work  to  construct  its  ends  in  a  kind  of
vacuum  of  the  pure  reason. It  finds  itself  guided  and  limited
from  the  first  by  rules  containing  the  traditions  of  society,  and
forming  a  standard  by  which  the  conduct  of  each  man  will  be
judged. These  rules  embody  a  tradition,  the  origin  of  which  is
for  primitive man  himself  lost  in myths. We do not, and
probably  never  shall  know  in  detail  the  actual  stages  by  which
the  earliest  customs  originated. On  the other hand,  we  do
know  something  of  the  conditions  by  which  custom  in  general  is
maintained and  of  the forces  by  which  it  is  modified. We
know,  for  instance,  how  customs  change  and  grow  and  disappear
unconsciously  as  an  individual  stretches  a  point  here  or  makes  a
new  application  of  a  precedent  there. We can  see  how  the
interaction of  multitudinous forces  transmutes custom and
produces  a  new  tradition  before  any  one  has  been  aware  of  the
change,  and  we  have  no  difficulty  in  conceiving  the  original
growth  of  custom  out  of  the  inherited  impulses  of  gregarious
man  as  proceeding  along  the  same  general  lines. It  needs  but
that  these  impulses  should  be  formulated  and  generalized,  and
there  is  already  custom  in  germ,  and  the  growth  of  custom  will
be  of  the  highest  value  to  nascent  society  as  enabling  men  to
understand  each  other,  i.e. to  know  what in  given  circum
stances  each  may  expect  from  the  other. The  lines  on  which
custom  is  formed  will,  however,  be  determined  in  each  society
by  no  reasoned  principle, but  by  the  pressures,  the  thousand
interactions  of  those  forces  of  individual  character  and solid
relationship  which never cease re-moulding  what  they  have
made — men's  loves  and  hates,  their  hopes  and  fears  for  them
selves  and  for  their  children,  their  dread  of  unseen  agencies,
their  jealousies, .their resentments, their antipathies, their
sociability  and  dim sense of mutual  dependence — all their
qualities,  good  and  bad,  selfish  and  sympathetic,  social  and  anti-


THE LINE OF  ETHICAL DEVELOPMENT 263

social.  We  were  able,  however,  on  general  grounds  to  lay  down
two  limits  within  which  from  the  first  custom  must  move.
First,  it  must  bear  some  relation  to  the  character  of  primitive
man.  That  is  to  say,  although  custom  doubtless  imposes  upon
him  many  restraints,  nevertheless  those  restraints  in  the  main
fall  into  line  with  his  own  fears,  reluctances,  sympathies,  and
antipathies,  and  do  not  deviate  from  them  to  the  snapping  point.
For  if  this  point  is  frequently  reached,  not  merely  in  exceptional
individuals,  but  in  the  average  member  of  the  tribe,  there  must
either  be  a  change  of  custom  or  anarchy.  This  limitation  will
cut  both  ways,  will  equally  prevent  the  level  of  social  tradition
from  rising  above  or  from  falling  below  the  level  which  in  this
rough  manner  corresponds  to  primitive  character.  The  rule  of
conduct  must  in  effect  be  so  far  adapted  to  the  nature  of
primitive  man  as  to  embody  much  of  what  is  bad  in  him  along
with  much  of  what  is  good — his  limited  sociability,  his  hatred
and  dread  of  strangers,  his  craven  fear  of  the  unknown.  Evil
and  anti-social  impulses,  in  fact,  contribute  to  the  first  formation
of  the  moral  consciousness,  along  with  affections  and  sympathies
and  the  dimly-felt  need  of  co-operation.

In  the  second  place,  the  body  of  custom  must  upon  the  whole
be  suited  to  the  conditions  which  make  for  the  maintenance  of
society,  since  otherwise  they  will  tend  to  its  dissolution.  But
once  again,  the  beneficent  efficacy  of  these  conditions  must  not
be  exaggerated.  In  the  first  place,  particular  customs  may  be
injurious  provided  they  are  not  fatal.  They  may  be  the  conse
quences  of  some  idea  which  upon  the  whole  makes  for  good
order.  Thus  the  taboo  may  be  useful  for  the  preservation  of
property.  It  may,  however,  have  many  useless  or  harmful
applications.  Further,  when  we  speak  of  customs  suited  to  the
maintenance  of  society,  we  really  mean  the  maintenance  of  a
given  social  type.  A  custom  which  is  quite  necessary  at  one
stage  may  block  the  advance  to  a  higher  stage,  and  if  conditions
are  arising  which  make  that  advance  possible,  society  will  gain
by  its  removal.  The  fact  that  custom  rests  on  the  requirements
of  social  life  does  not  render  it  inviolable  in  cases  where  those
requirements  have  altered.  However,  when  all  these  limita
tions  are  allowed  for,  it  remains  that  without  any  reasoned
conception  of  social  welfare  the  broad  conditions  of  stock


264  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

preservation  indirectly  determine  the  main  lines  of  conduct
just  as  they  do  in  the  animal  world,  only  those  conditions  no
longer  operate  merely  by  fashioning  the  physical  structure  of
the  organism.  They  operate  also  through  social  tradition,  and
thereby  once  again  are  rendered  more  elastic,  and  are  able  to
shape  action  over  a  wider  sphere.  The  starting  point,  then,  for
the  development  of  human  ethics  is  custom  arising  and  main
taining  itself,  not  through  any  reflective  thought  as  to  what  is
best,  but  by  the  play  of  human  impulses  within  the  limits  of  a
life  lived  in  social  groups.

3.  From primitive custom as our starting  point,  we can
conceive  ethical  development  as  proceeding  along  three  different
lines. We  may  conceive it as  an  evolution in  ethical con
ceptions,  in  the  character  of  human  beings,  or  in  the  established
relations  of  society. To  consider  first  the  movements  of  ethical
conceptions,  we  have  found  it  closely  bound  up  with  the  develop
ment  of  thought  in  general,  of  ideas  as  to  the  nature  and  origin
of  things  and the destinies  of  man. Now  the  evolution of
thought,  stated  in  general  terms,  consists  on  the  one  hand  in
growing  precision  or  accuracy  of  analysis,  on  the  other  hand  in
the  ever  extending  reach  or  grasp  of  experience,  the  result
being  a  more  and more  articulate  understanding  of  an  ever
larger  segment  of  reality. In  this  development  we  may  dis
tinguish  certain  phases,  though  we  should  regard  them  rather
as  milestones  that  mark  the  advance  in  a  single  journey  than
as  gaps  parting distinct stages from one another. Bearin^
this  caution in  mind,  we  may  briefly  recapitulate  what the
previous  chapters  have  shown. In  the  lowest  stages  of  human
thought,  then,  we  have  seen  reason  to  think  that  the  difficulty
of  forming  any  conceptions  at  all  is  such that the  familiar
categories  of  common  experience  are  blurred  and  intermingled
in  a  manner  which  makes  the  result  to  our  minds  an  almost
bewildering  mass  of  confusions. Attributes  and  relations  become
substances, while distinct individuals melt away into one
another  and  preserve  no  clear-cut  identity. There  is  no  sound
basis  of  generalization,  no  methodical  interconnection  of  ideas,
and  no  adequate  distinction between  the  imaginary  and the'
real, or  between make-believe and earnest. Inferences are


THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 265

formed  by  unconscious  assimilation,  by  fusion  or  confusion  of
ideas,  and  by  the  influence  of  emotional  prepossessions.  Dis
tinctions  that  are  most  elementary  in  the  structure  of  knowledge
are  quite  insufficiently  grasped,  and  the  result  is  seen  in  magic,
witchcraft,  and  the  primitive  doctrine  of  the  quasi-material  spirit.
It  is  a  great  step  forwards  when  the  world  of  ideas  begins  to
be  purged  of  these  confusions,  and  thought  no  longer  blurs  and
obliterates  the  primary  lines  of  distinction,  the  common  categories
into  which  experience  falls.  Persons  now  are  persons,  functions
are  functions,  relations  are  relations.  Concrete  experience  is  re
flected  with  sufficient  distinctness  in  mental  pictures  or  images,
and  the  thought-world,  instead  of  being  a  distorted  and  confused
rendering  of  the  world  of  sense,  is  rather  its  counterpart  and
duplicate.  The  gods  at  this  stage  form  a  second  human  commun
ity  in  another  sphere.  Pure  fancy,  or  fancy  guided  by  crude  ideas
of  physical  causation,  plays  freely  round  them  and  gives  them  a
living  personality,  often  a  really  concrete  character,  with  family,
social  and  political  relationships,  loves,  hates,  joys  and  sorrows,
and  complete  life  histories.  Progress  from  the  inarticulate  to
the  concrete  idea  is  thus  reflected  in  the  transition  from  spirits
(and  occult  forces)  to  gods.

Now  the  gods  are  already  not  only  human,  but  in  varying
degrees  superhuman.  They  preside  over  great  departments  of
nature  or  of  human  life,  thus  embodying  a  wider  and  more  dis
criminating  colligation  of  experience.  But,  further,  they  often
show  traces  of  idealization,  and  in  this  we  get  a  hint  that  the
world  of  ideas  is  destined  to  be  something  more  than  a  mere
reduplication  of  sense  experience.  This  brings  us  to  the  next
step  in  advance  wherein  image-making  develops  into  thinking.
The  "  picture  "  ideas,  loosely  defined  and  uncritically  connected,
are  transformed  into  definite  or  "abstract"  conceptions;  the
"general"  notion  vaguely  applied  into  the  Universal,  which
wherever  used  has  one  constant  meaning.  Such  concepts,  of
which  those  of  number  and  quantity,  Spatial  and  Temporal
order  are  probably  the  first  to  arise,  are  connected,  developed
and  tested  by  systematic  methods  of  analysis  and  synthesis—
the  concept  once  rendered  exact  being  capable  of  methodical
comparison  with  other  concepts.

But  beside  the  minor  "departmental"  conceptions  which  give


266  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

rise  to  special  sciences  or  to  methodical  arts,  the  fundamental
all-embracing  categories  of  experience  also  enter  at  length  into
clear  consciousness.  The  mind  had  learnt  in  its  image-making
to  represent  Persons  and  Attributes,  Relations  and  Functions,  and
to  keep  them  distinct.  It  now  learns  to  recognize  what  it  is
that  distinguishes  them,  and  so  to  form  conceptions  of  Person
ality,  Attribute,  Relation,  Function.  In  so  doing,  it  has  grasped
and  set  before  itself  as  distinct  objects  of  thought  the  structural
principles  of  its  world.  It  is  now  in  a  position  to  attempt
a  theory  of  reality  as  a  whole,  to  deal  with  the  problems
of  permanence  and  change,  of  reality  and  appearance,  of  the
finite  and  the  infinite,  and  all  the  other  antinomies  which
present  themselves  as  soon  as  a  serious  effort  is  made  to
conceive  a  totality  of  things.  Its  theory  of  the  world-process,
its  God,  if  it  finds  the  solution  in  a  God,  is  an  embodiment,  so
to  say,  of  the  categories  which  it  finds  most  satisfactory.  God
is  infinite,  absolute,  unconditioned,  the  First  Cause,  perhaps  the
true  substantial  reality  of  things.  He  is  also — since  a  founda
tion  is  required  for  practice  as  well  as  for  theory — an  incarnation
of  the  moral  ideal.

Here,  then,  we  have  reached  the  level  of  the  philosophical,  or,
as  we  have  called  them,  the  spiritual  religions,  systems  which
seek  to  concentrate  all  experience  in  one  focus  and  to  illuminate
all  reality  from  one  centre, — thought,  as  ever,  becoming  more
comprehensive  as  it  becomes  more  explicit.  But  such  syntheses,
however  formed,  contain  in  themselves  the  germ  of  contra
dictions,1  the  cause  of  which  is  not  fully  understood  till  thought

1  Speaking  generally,  these  arise,  as  appears  further  on,  from  the  mental
attitude  which  takes  the  categories  as  vehicles  of  ultimate  truth,  rather  than
as  modes  of  rendering  experience  and  interconnecting  experiences.  The
more  the  "  metaphysical  stage  "  develops,  i.  e.  the  more  the  mind  disen
gages  itself  from  imagery,  and  insists  on  exactitude  of  conception  and
reasoning,  the  more  clearly  the  inherent  difficulties  of  this  point  of  view
emerge.  The  contrast  between  the  hard  insufficiency,  the  narrow  finiteness
of  the  categories  and  the  subtle  plasticity,  the  boundlessness,  the  variability
of  experience  becomes  almost  disruptive  of  thought.  At  times  it  forces  the
mind  by  a  confusion  of  planes  to  find  reality  in  the  categories  themselves,
and  not  in  metaphysics  alone,  but  in  many  departments  of  ethics,  politics
and  law,  the  lines  of  distinction  and  definition  which  conceptual  thought
draws  become  stones  of  stumbling  when  gradations  of  meaning  and  the
actual  continuity  of  nature  are  to  be  dealt  with.  The  world  of  thought
tends  to  fall  apart  from  the  world  of  experience.  But  thought  is  meaningless
unless  it  illuminates  experience.  This,  as  already  indicated  in  principle  by


267

has  taken  a  fresh  turn  in  which  the  genesis  and  function  of
conception  in  general  is  made  the  subject  of  inquiry.  This  in
its  simplest  form  is  a  return  from  the  ideal  to  the  actual,  and
as  such  is  carried  out  in  miniature  in  every  special  science.
But  the  criticism  of  method  has  a  deeper  implication.  It
involves,  when  pushed  through,  an  inquiry  into  the  ultimate
basis  of  knowledge,  and  the  paradox  of  the  inquiry  is  that  since
to  inquire  and  examine  is  still  to  think,  the  very  processes  that
are  being  examined  have  to  be  used  in  examining  them.  Nor
can  we  who  criticize  place  ourselves  outside  that  which  we  are
criticizing.  The  human  mind  is  a  structure  which  has  grown
up  under  conditions,  and  the  thoughts  which  it  forms  and  the
criticisms  which  it  passes  on  its  thoughts  depend  upon  that
structure.  Not  only  the  thoughts,  but  the  experience  which
they  are  to  interpret  is,  again,  conditioned  by  the  structure  of
the  sense  organs.  We  are  therefore  compelled  to  regard  the
highest  conceptions  which  the  mind  can  reach  as  conditioned
by  the  nature  and  limits  of  the  mind  itself,  and  to  recognize
that  even  though  we  could  frame  a  theory  which  might  com
mend  itself  to  us  as  an  adequate  interpretation  of  our  experience,
it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  it  would  express  the  final
truth  about  reality.  But  further,  when  our  conceptions  are
analyzed  to  the  bottom  they  are  found  not  to  give  an  adequate
interpretation  of  experience  as  a  whole.  On  the  contrary,  it  is
when  we  endeavour  to  grasp  our  world  as  a  totality  that  we  fall
into  contradictions.  Criticism,  therefore,  compels  us  to  realize
the  limitations  of  our  own  thought,  and  to  desist  from  the
endeavour  to  force  the  universe  into  the  narrow  moulds  which
our  experience  has  so  far  enabled  us  to  frame,  when  what  is
needed  is  rather  to  enlarge  our  conceptions  by  taking  in  fresh
experience.  For  it  does  not  follow  that  because  we  find  limits,
these  must  be  limits  fixed  for  ever.  On  the  contrary,  the  study
of  evolution  indicates  the  possibility  of  indefinite  growth.  It
helps  us  to  understand  how  our  mental  structure  has  arisen
from  very  humble  beginnings,  and  how  its  methods,  its  logic
and  its  philosophy  have  grown  up  in  the  continuous  endeavour
to  grasp  and  organize  its  experience,  and  so  direct  and  under-

Aristotle,  is  the  starting  point  of  criticism,  alike  of  the  special  criticism  of
a  particular  science,  and  of  the  general  criticism  of  philosophical  analysis.


268  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

stand  its  own  life.  We  measure  a  sufficiently  great  advance
from  the  first  dawn  of  consciousness  in  an  animal  which  can
just  learn  through  pain,  to  the  synthesis  of  the  sciences  and  the
analysis  of  philosophy,  and  we  can  in  some  degree  judge  thereby
of  the  possibilities  of  further  development.  We  can  understand
that  what  is  readily  intelligible  to  the  highest  human  intelli
gence  should  be  wholly  inconceivable  to  a  savage,  and  we  must
learn  to  understand  that  our  own  thought  is  no  more  final  than
that  of  the  savage,  but  at  best  represents  mental  growth
advanced  by  one  stage.

It  does  not  follow  that  we  are  landed  in  mere  scepticism.
The  thought  which  gives  harmonious,  coherent  interpretation
to  experience  is  true  so  far  as  it  goes.  It  is  only  as  a  final
interpretation  of  Reality  that  it  is  never  the  whole  truth.  In
this  relation  truth  means  for  philosophy  a  necessary  phase  in
the  development  of  the  final  synthesis.  Each  new  interpreta
tion,  provided  it  is  honest  and  intelligent,  carries  us  a  stage
forward.  The  error  is  only  in  taking  the  completion  of  the
stage  for  the  end  of  the  journey.  Truth  is  no  empty  dream.
She  is  a  phantom  only  when  we  think  that  we  grasp  her.  She
is  real  when,  recognizing  that  she  is  a  being  enthroned  above
us,  we  are  content  to  touch  the  hem  of  her  robe.

The  tendency  of  the  critical  movement  which  constitutes
philosophy  is  therefore  to  trace  the  conceptions,  methods,  and
principles  of  thought  to  their  elementary  conditions  in  the
nature  of  mind  and  its  relation  to  reality.  Starting  from  these
conditions  it  re-models  the  whole  idea  of  knowledge  and  of  the
nature  and  test  of  truth.  Reality  is  conceived  as  something
more  than  experience,  and  the  truth  attainable  by  man  is  seen
to  be  only  a  partial  approximation  to  the  final  truth  of  things.
As  a  consequence  thought  is  recognized  as  a  growth,  and  its
conceptions  as  the  products  of  a  given  phase,  having  their
genesis  in  earlier  phases,  and  the  test  and  measure  of  their
validity  in  their  power  to  contribute  to  that  coherent,  systematic
interpretation  of  reality  towards  which  growth  aspires.

Thus  in  dragging  to  light  the  conditions  of  the  cognitive
process  and  the  factors  at  work  in  the  building  up  of  thought,
the  philosophic  movement  renders  the  mind  conscious  of  its  own
nature  and  history.  Here  it  impinges  on  the  results  of  the


THE  LINE  OF ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 269

physical  and  social  sciences  which  have  been  building  up  the
conception  of  evolution,  and  the  effect,  according  to  the  view  of
contemporary  thought  here  taken,  is  to  establish  the  conception
of  mind  in  growth  as  the  central  fact  of  experience  and  the
basis  from  which  we  must  start  in  the  further  interpretation,
alike  of  knowledge  and  of  conduct.

4.  Turning  from  the  movement  of  Thought  in  general  to  the
special  sphere  of  Ethics,  we  have  now  to  summarize  the  evolu
tion  described  in  the  previous  chapters.  .  The  resulting  picture
of  the  phases  of  Ethical  development  will  show  a  rough
parallelism  with  that  of  Thought  in  general.  This  could  hardly
be  otherwise,  since  the  two  movements  are  in  constant  inter
action.  At  the  same  time,  since  other  influences  affect  ethics
the  parallelism  is  not  exact  and  must  not  be  exaggerated,  and
this  caution  must  be  taken  as  qualifying  the  general  descriptions
which  a  summary  statement  can  hardly  avoid.  We  have  to
consider  the  evolution  of  the  ethical  idea,  as  it  were,  in  its  depth
and  breadth;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  degree  of  clearness  and
intensity  with  which  its  distinctively  ethical  character  is
realized,  and  in  the  extent  to  which  it  succeeds  in  directing
conduct  and  organizing  life.  In  this  evolution  we  have  found
several  phases.  Now  the  general  features  of  the  ethical  idea
according  to  our  analysis  in  the  last  chapter  are  that  every
man  as  a  responsible  agent  stands  under  certain  obligations,
whether  to  himself,  to  others,  or  to  society  as  a  whole,  denned
by  the  requirements  of  the  common  good  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that
men  are  deemed  good  or  bad  in  accordance  as  they  do  or  do  not
recognize  certain  rights  and  duties  important  to  the  welfare  of
society  as  a  whole.  Obligation  is  the  general  expression  for  the
relations  in  which  men  accordingly  stand,  and  it  is  (a)  in  the  way
in  which  obligation  is  conceived— and  (5)  in  the  conduct  which
it  covers,  that  ethical  evolution  is  principally  seen.

Now  in  the  lowest  stage  of  customary  ethics  obligations  of  a
social  character  are  undoubtedly  recognized  in  a  certain  sense,
but  (1)  they  are  almost  entirely  limited  to  the  relations  of  men
and  women  in  small  groups,  and  (2)  though  they  tend  to  secure
certain  fundamental  rights,  yet  the  protection  that  they  give
is  in  large  measure  indirect.  For  example,  human  life  is


270  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

protected  by  the  blood  feud,  but  the  custom  of  the  blood  feud  is
not  based  upon  the  principle  that  human  life  is  itself  sacred,  but
on  the  principle  that  I  must  avenge  a  wrong  done  to  a  member
of  my  kindred.  Property  is  protected  by  the  law  of  restitution
or,  within  limits,  of  blood  vengeance,  yet  when  we  look  into  the
matter  more  closely  we  find  that  it  is  not  because  the  thief  ought
to  be  punished,  but  rather  because  a  man  who  has  suffered  theft
may  reasonably  demand  restitution  or  avenge  himself.  Similarly
the  marriage  tie  is  maintained  in  the  sense  that  any  husband
may  reasonably  be  expected  to  kill  a  man  who  violates  it.  The
idea  of  justice  is  not  separated  from  that  of  retaliation.  Thus,
the  elementary  rights  and  duties  on  which  social  life  is  founded
can  hardly  as  yet  be  said  to  be  recognized  as  rights  or  duties,  that
is  to  say  as  matter  of  direct  moral  obligation,  even  in  relation  to
fellow-members  of  the  same  society.1  Nor  again,  is  character  as
yet,  strictly  speaking,  the  subject  of  a  moral  judgment.  So  little
is  this  the  case  that  primitive  justice  draws  a  very  insufficient
distinction  between  the  intentional  and  the  unintentional  or
between  the  agent  and  his  relatives,  and  even  personal  identity
is  not  clearly  conceived  when  the  actions  of  a  man  may  freely  be
attributed  to  a  spirit  which  possesses  him  temporarily.

1  It  may  be  said  (1)  that  after  all  there  are  from  the  first  certain  laws
directly  enforced  by  society,  (2)  that  within  the  innermost  group  the
general  obligations  of  mutual  aid  and  mutual  forbearance  are  often,  if  not
always,  true  "  categorical  imperatives."  Both  objections  are  valid  so  far  as
they  go.  But  (as  shown  in  Part  I.  ch.  iii.)  they  only  cover  a  section  of  the
sphere  of  conduct.  The  principal  obligations  to  the  majority  of  the  com
munity  are  only  recognized  in  the  indirect  sense  explained.

It  may  be  urged  that  it  is  all  a  question  of  group-morality,  that  within
the  innermost  group  obligation  is  directly  enforced,  and  that  the  tribe  or
community  is  merely  to  be  regarded  as  a  wider  group  not  yet  fully  brought
within  the  area  of  obligation.  But  this  account  would  not  comprehend  all
the  facts,  viz.  (1)  that  the  "wider  group  "  here  spoken  of  is  normally  a  true
society,  the  different  members  of  which  meet  and  mix  freely.  The  later
group-morality  leaves  out  the  stranger  or  the  slave,  but  this  earlier  rule  of
custom  does  not  properly  include  the  associate  and  the  equal.  (2)  That  the
"  subjective  "  side  of  morality  as  shown  in  the  text  is  undeveloped.  (3)
That  the  magico-animistic  basis  of  obligation  is  distinctly  non-moral.  We
may  conclude  that  while  there  are  from  the  first  some  direct  social  obli
gations  which  form  a  beginning  of  morality  proper,  considered  as  a  whole
obligation  in  its  lower  stages  is  not  merely  limited  in  its  application,  but
undeveloped  in  its  character.  We  can  hardly  yet  speak  of  a  morality  which
decides  impartially  between  the  claims  of  different  persons,  but  rather  of
the  half- instinctive  recognition  of  the  restraints  rendered  necessary  by  the
solidarity  of  the  group.


THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 271

This  view  of  customary  morality  is  supported  by  what  we
know  of  primitive  ideas  as  to  the  basis  of  custom,  for  in  the
lowest  grades  of  ethical  thought  the  sanction  of  conduct  is  found
in  taboos  and  other  magical  terrors  or  in  the  fear  of  vindictive
and  resentful  spirits.  But  the  powers  of  magic  have  no  moral
purpose,  and  the  spirits  of  animism  are  neither  essentially  moral
nor  immoral.  In  general  they  are  guided,  like  men,  by  the  law
of  retaliation.  But  the  mere  dread  of  vengeance  from  a  spirit
has  no  more  morality  in  it  than  the  corresponding  dread  of  a
man.  On  the  whole,  then,  social  rules  in  this  stage,  though
doubtless  supported  by  ethical  feeling,  are  not  yet  clearly
conceived  as  moral  obligations.

A  step  onwards  is  taken  when  certain  rights  and  duties  are
attached  to  members  of  a  society  as  such,  when,  e.  g.  it  becomes
a  duty  to  protect  life  instead  of  merely  aiding  the  avenger,  to
guard  property  instead  of  only  countenancing  retaliation  upon
the  thief,  to  redress  wrongs  and  yet  in  so  doing  to  entertain
questions  of  responsibility. This  stage  appears  distinctly  in  the
earlier civilizations,  though  remnants  of  cruder barbarism  of
course  survive. The  essential  features of  group-morality  are
still  retained. Obligations  do  not  in  principle  exist  in  relation  to
those  outside  the  group,  and the  moral consciousness  is  still
drenched  through  with  the  old  spirit  of  self-assertion,  the  passions
appropriate  to  the  struggle  for  existence  among  small  and  ill-
organized  groups  of  mankind. On  the  other  hand,  certain  social
duties  are  now  matters  of  direct  obligation. The  basis  of  this
obligation  is  still  in  the  supernatural,  but  with  the  development
of  religious  ideas  it  tends  to  take  a  more  ethical  character. The
deities,  heroes  and  ancestors  of  the  anthropomorphic  religions,
which  on  the  whole  are  dominant  in  the  higher  barbarism  and
the  earlier  civilizations,  are  morally  superior  in  the  main  to  the
animistic  spirit,  and  would  be  still  more  so  but  for  the  persistence
of  myths  dating  from  the  animistic  period. They  are  generally
—though  with some terrible  exceptions  when magical ideas
persist— at  least  as  just  as  a  fairly  good  man,  they  are  opposed  to
demons  and  to  witchcraft,  and  in  some  instances  they  have  an
element  of  the  ideal. Moreover,  some  gods  or  perhaps  some
specially-developed spirits often undertake the  special pro
tection  of  the  moral  law  or  branches  thereof,  and  one  or  more


272  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

of  them  are  often  judges  of  the  dead.  Thus  at  this  stage  it  is
not  uncommon  to  find  that  there  are  some  gods  who  stand  in  an
essential  relation  to  ethics,  and,  though  the  fear  of  punishment
is  not  a  high  motive,  yet  a  god  who  punishes  acts  because  they
are  wrong  is  very  different  from  a  god  who  merely  avenges  an
injury.  His  existence  is  a  recognition  of  the  moral  idea.  But
the  spiritual  needs  imposed  by  the  conception  of  judgment  are
insufficiently  met  at  this  stage  by  sacrifice  or  magical  rites
instead  of  repentance  and  forgiveness,  and  even  if  the  gods  prefer
justice  they  are  hardly  as  yet  incorruptible  judges.  Considering
morality  as  a  whole  at  this  stage  we  may  say  that  certain  social
duties  are  recognized  as  obligations,  and  obligation  is  based  on
human  and  divine  sanctions.  But  just  as  the  social  code  is  a
confusion  of"  love  and  hate,"  so  the  divine  world  is  a  blur  of  the
just  and  the  unjust,  the  righteous  and  the  tyrannically  wicked.
There  is  as  yet  no  thoroughly  worked-out  ethical  ideal,  human
or  superhuman.

It  is  the  emergence  of  such  an  ideal  which  gradually  transforms
the  primitive  code  of  blended  love  and  hate.  In  close  connection
with  the  spiritualized  ideal  of  religion,  an  ideal  of  character  is
set  up  in  which  there  is  no  room  for  the  virtues  of  enmity;
forgiveness  replaces  the  duty  of  revenge,  self-sacrifice  the
exaction  of  one's  due ;  the  humility  of  self-suppression  supplants
the  pride  of  self-assertion.  This  implies  a  profound  modification
of  the  original  moral  consciousness,  which  arising  under  the
influence  of  division  into  groups  has  the  anti-social  or  dis
uniting  blended  with  its  social  or  binding  tendencies.  The
principal  change  that  moral  history  records  is  the  subjection  of
this  side  of  morality  to  the  purely  social  element  in  the  moral
consciousness.  It  is  paralleled  by  a  no  less  revolutionary
change  in  religious  thought.  The  materialistic  deity  disappears.
God  is  spiritual,  and  the  non-spiritual  elements  of  His  worship
are  gradually  eliminated.  True,  the  judgment  of  the  dead  (or  as
an  alternative  certain  automatic  consequences  of  good  and  bad
actions)  hold  a  prominent  place  in  the  spiritual  religions,  but  for
the  best  minds  the  notion  of  retribution  as  a  basis  for  morality
is  already  transcended.  God  rules  by  love,  and  not  by  fear.
On  the  other  hand,  in  so  far  as  the  omnipotence  of  the  Creator
and  the  necessity  of  faith  in  Him  as  the  basis  of  all  goodness  are


THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 273

hard  pressed,  the  ethical  falls  into  the  second  place  and  may
even  be  opposed  to  the  religious  view.  And  the  actual  content  of
ethical  teaching  is  affected  by  the  position  which  it  holds.  Though
the  social  qualities  are  emphasized,  their  social  function  is  often
misunderstood,  and  self-suppression  rather  than  the  service  of
others  is  the  central  point  of  the  ethical  ideal.  And  thus,
though  the  teaching  of  the  world  religions  laid  the  foundations
of  humanitarianism,  it  has  often  tended  paradoxically  enough  to
paralyze  humanitarian  energy,  and  by  holding  up  an  unrealizable
ideal  to  remove  virtue  from  the  world  and  make  it  possible  only
in  the  monastery.

At  this  stage,  then,  moral  rules  have  reference  to  a  distinct
ideal  of  life  and  character.  This  ideal  still  rests  on  some  super
natural  mode  of  being,  but  the  supernatural  is  itself  the  incar
nation  and  expression  of  moral  perfection.  Idealism,  however,
is  not  necessarily  critical  and  a  further  step  is  taken,  according
to  the  view  put  forward  in  the  previous  chapters,  when  the
attempt  is  made  to  set  out  systematically  the  full  implications,
personal  and  social,  of  the  moral  judgment.

The  attempt  to  construct  or  reconstruct  the  ethical  order  upon
the basis  of  a  reasoned theory  of  life  was initiated  by  the
philosophic  movement  of  antiquity,  which,  though  it  appealed
less  strongly  to  feeling and  missed  at  the  outset  some  grace
and  tenderness  of  the  religious  ideal,  left  the  individual  person
ality  standing,  and  made  the  development  of  its  faculties  rather
than  their repression the end of  conduct, recognizing that
individuality  has its claims,  that  even  original  self-assertion
contained  a  kernel  of  truth,  and  that  what  humanity  claims  is
self-devotion  rather  than  self-effacement. But  in  proportion  as
the  idea  of  personality  becomes  the  centre  of  ethical  teaching,
it  must  follow  that  rights  and  duties  are  regarded  as  belonging
to  every  human  being  as  a  responsible  agent,  and  human  char
acter,  the  development  of  faculty  and  the  living  happiness  of
men  and  women  become  the  ends  of  life. A  direct  consequence
of  this  view  is  that  the  duties  and  rights  formerly  dependent
on  membership  of  a  group  are  now  universalized. But  with
this  universalism  all  of  primitive  custom  that  belongs  to  the  law
of  enmity  drops  away,  and  the  law  of  love  is  reached  by  another

road  and  under  another  name. Humanity  becomes  a  single  com-

*


VOL.  ii.


274  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

rnunity,  and  the  Law  of  Nature — an  ideal  by  which  all  positive
law  should  be  judged — prescribes  our  duties  as  members  thereof.

But  we  are  still  only  in  the  first  phase  of  rationalism.  When
modern  thought  returns  from  the  supernatural  to  Nature,  it
learns  from  physical  and  moral  science  alike  that  "  nature "  is
not  fixed  but  changing.  It  has,  then,  still  to  decide  where  in
the  series  of  changes  lies  the  true  upward  path.  We  have  to
recognize  that  the  ideals  and  principles  by  which  we  have  judged
things  are  themselves  of  relative  value,  the  product  of  an
evolution  which  has  reached  a  certain  phase  and  is  destined  to
grow  beyond  it.  Hence  the  problem  for  modern  thought  is
immeasurably  more  complex  than  that  of  the  ancient  world.  It
is  to  be  solved,  if  the  view  taken  in  the  last  chapter  is  correct,
by  tracing  moral  ideas  to  the  conditions  of  racial  life  from  which
they  spring,  and  maintaining  as  valid  those  which  correspond  to
the  permanent  conditions  of  human  progress.

The  ethical  order  being  thus  interpreted,  the  claims  of  duty
are  urged  on  the  ground  that  when  we  thoroughly  understand
its  nature  and  all  its  bearings  on  our  own  life  and  that  of
humanity,  we  are  compelled  as  rational  beings  to  recognize  its
validity,  and  admit  that  the  ends  to  which  it  points  are  wider
and  greater  than  any  private  good  of  our  own  that  may  conflict
with  it.  Thus  for  rationalism  the  moral  basis  lies  in  the  un
folding  of  the  full  meaning  of  the  moral  order,  as  that  through
which  the  human  spirit  grows.

To  summarize  the  whole  evolution  in  the  fewest  possible
words,  it  would  appear  that  at  the  outset  customary  rules  have
not  acquired  the  distinctive  character  of  moral  laws.  Next,
moral  obligations  are  recognized,  but  are  not  yet  founded  on  any
general  ethical  principle.  Up  to  this  point  the  morality  of
primitive  social  tradition  persists,  wherein  "  love  and  hate,"  the
social  and  anti-social  impulses  are  blended.  In  a  third  stage,
moral  principles  and  ideals  of  character  and  conduct  are  formed.
The  anti-social  elements  of  morality  are  in  principle  suppressed.
On  the  other  hand,  neither  the  origin  nor  the  function  of
morality  is  as  yet  understood.  It  remains  for  philosophical
criticism,  beginning  in  classical  antiquity  and  revived  in  the
modern  world,  to  trace  ethical  conceptions  to  their  sources  in
human  nature,  and  re-model  them  in  accordance  with  the


THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT  275

principle  that  every  rule  of  conduct  must  be  based  upon  the

demonstrable  needs  of  human  life. We  may  describe  the  whole

5  as  one  in  which,  by  successive  steps,  the  full  meaning  of

sthical  prmciple  becomes  clear. Obligation  resting  at  first

n  occult  forces  or  the  resentment  of  vindictive  spirits,  and  then

on  the  wrath  of  a  not  unjust  god,  comes  to  be  based  on  the

bier  desire to be at  one  with  God  or  to  realize  a  higher

life,  and,  finally,  extrinsic  consequences  being  dispensed

ith on  the  mherent  goodness  of  the  life  which  it  renders

ble. The  social  bearings  of  morality  emerge  by  a  parallel

Fnc°ulcld NSta!,firSt  indireCtly  gUaranteed  *»™  *W?
Icated. Next  they  are  so  extended  as  to  overleap  the  bounds

of group-morahty  and  destroy the claims of  self-assertion.
sS'f  h6  reaS°n I  thing  SS  reDdered  Clearin  the  «P°-

*fcb  it,  Tmon  g  M  the  source  and  °bJ'ect  °f  duties  «s

*  alike. By  successive  stages  obligation  becomes  first  a  dis-
element  m  consciousness,  and  finally  a  principle,  the  whole
meaning  of  winch  is  gradually  thought  out.

5.  With  the  deepening  consciousness  of  ethical  meanings  goes
a  wider  and  more  coherent  synthesis  of  experience  and  purpose.

.unit  ve  morality  (whether  m  the  first  or  second  stage)  builds
up  bodies  of  custom,  introducing  a  measure  of  order  into  life

hese  rules  are  m  an  indirect  manner  fashioned  by  racial  ex
perience,  since  they  are  handed  on  by  tradition,  and  their  effect
upon  the  socxal  welfare  can  seldom  be  without  an  influence  k
determining  them. To  this  extent  early  morality  may  be  sa
to  dlrect  conduct  towards  social  welfare  on  the  basis  of  past  !x
ponence. On  the  other  hand,  the  rules  of  conduct  are  not
combined  ,nto  a  whole  or  harmonized  by  subordination  to  any

early  understood  prmciple,  whether  an  ideal  of  personal  cou'-
duct  or  of  social  organization. On  the  contrary,  they  are  i
large  measure  such  as  to  justify  social  disharmony


mte T|  tho

"  Ideal  °f  Character'  a


to  n I  ' PrnPe  « gt-

ymg  to  which  all  rules  of  conduct  are  subordinated. And

this,  bemg  a  rule  of  peace  and  love  with  all  the  world  contains


P-

the  other  hand,  there  is  little  disposition  to  take  the


276  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

actual  experience  of  mankind  into  account,  and  in  effect  the
tendency  is  to  idealize  one  side  of  virtue— self-negation— and
leave  no  room  for  the  conception  of  self-development,
social  side  also,  though  many  of  the  best  social  virtues  are
exalted,  there  is  a  tendency  to  disregard  the  actual  working  of
society  as  a  merely  mundane  affair.  Thus,  though  there  is  an
express  and  deliberate  correlation  of  the  conceptions  of  good
conduct,  it  is  of  a  kind  which  leaves  much  that  is  most  valuabl

outside  its  scope.

The  philosophical  movement  by  its  criticism  of  the  conceptions
of  o-ood  and  bad  aims  at  a  fuller  correlation. Greek  philosophy
harmonized  self-development  with  the  common  good  of  the  city
state  but  had  behind  it  less  of  the  spiritual  experience  which
builds  up  the  idea  of  self-negation  and  none  of  the  social  expei
ence  which  could  give  life  to  the  conception  of  a  world  polity
Modern  thought  bringing  ethics  into  relation  to  the  theory  o
development  conceives  a  synthesis  of  which  the  total  recordc
experience  of  the  race-an  experience  always  operative,  thong
in  earlier  stages  less  consciously— should  be  the  basis,  and  the
further  development  of  mind  in  society  the  end-a  coi
of  past  and  future  racial  experience.

It  helps  us  to  understand  the  character  of  ethical  as  of  al
mental  evolution— when  we  observe  that  at  each  stage  the  mind
as  it  expands  brings  within  its  scope  the  conditions  and  influence!
which  have  previously  acted  upon  it  unawares, but  that  m  so  d<
it  rationalizes  and  therefore  modifies  them. Thu^  the  custom  ot
the  blood  feud  is  enforced  because  it  is  custom,  or  nommall
because  it  so  pleases  the  gods. But  the  real  value  of  it  is  tl
it  tends  to  secure  life. This  is  the  latent  or  unconscious  factor
which  fosters  the  institution  in  early  society  as  making
whole for order. In the next stage this  factor  enters  into
consciousness,  and  protection  to  person  becomes  a  right  ,
recognize  it  a  duty  or  a  virtue. But  words  such  as 'right
or "virtue," carry weight only  because men make moral
judgments, approve certain types of  character,  etc and
implication  is  that  a  certain  type  of  character,  or  of  social  or
religious  life,  is  the  guide  and  norm  of  conduct. Accordingly
the  next  step  is  that  this  ideal  enters  consciousness  and  is
before  man  as  his  end. But  lastly,  the  influences  which  determine


THE  LINE OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 277

him  in  his  preference  of  one  character  over  another  are  a  complex
mass  of  traditions,  instincts,  partial  reasonings. What  is  coherent
in  these  appears  to  be  what  makes  for  the  growth  of  mind  in
man,  and  the  final  step  is  to  bring  this  aim  into  consciousness  as
a  rational  principle  and  the  base  of  what  went  before. In  looking
backward  over  the  process  which  has  led  us  to  this  point  we
realize  that  the  same  factors,  though  not  in  the  same  rational
form,  have  been  present  all  along. The  conditions  of  maintaining
a  social  life  operate  in  the  very  formation  of  social  instinct  and
tradition. Custom,  that  is  to  say,  is  fixed  by  certain  psychological
forces  and  inter-relations  of  man  and  man,  which  arise,  and  are
maintained,  and  grow,  because  the  society  which  they  engender
can  support  itself  in  its  environment. These  forces  all  along
underlie  the  work  of  consciousness,  until  bit  by  bit  consciousness
encroaches  on  them  and  takes  them  into  itself. In  so  doing  it
transmutes  them  with  something  from  its  own  quality. It  makes
them  rational  ends,  and  as  such  into  forces  that  make  not  merely
for  life,  but  for  a  good  life,  and  a  life  of  growth  and  development.
Though  the  phases  of  development  here  distinguished  pass
into  one  another  by  such  gentle  transitions  that  the  very  attempt
made to distinguish them may appear artificial,  the total
change  which  they  constitute  is  of  no  small  importance. Taken
as  a  whole  it  forms  a  distinct  stage  onward  in  the  evolution  of
mind,  not  unfairly  comparable  to  that  which  parts  the  mind  of
the  lowest  savage  from  that  of  the  beast  which  he  chases  and
adores. Just  as  mental  evolution  enters  on  a  new  phase — a
change  of  kind  so  far  as  the  phases  of  a  continuous  process  are
ever  changes  of  kind — when  the  nascent  human  intelligence
formulates  for  itself  in  general  ideas  experiences  which  were
already  operating  to  direct  its  inferences,  though  before  it  knew
them  not  nor  named  them,  so  a  gradual  but  not  less  fundamental
revolution  is  effected  as  the  "  eye  of  the  soul  is  turned  "  upon
the  methods  by  which  these  generalizations  are  built  up — that  is
to  say,  from  the  objects  of  thought  to  the  processes  by  which  they
are  formed,  the  conditions  on  which  they  rest,  in  a  word  to  the
mind  itself,  its  nature  and  potentialities.1 At  the  beginning  of

1  For  we  are  dealing  here  with  an  order  of  reality — the  ultimate  con
ditions  of  knowing  and  being — which  underlies  the  simple  general  truths  of
common  sense  just  as  these  underlie  the  concrete  and  practical  relations


278  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

this  revolution  the  thought-world  is  occupied  by  the  fragmentary
and  confused  ideas  of  the  primitive  mind,  moulded  without
criticism  in  accordance  with  mental  predispositions  out  of  the
mass  of  unsifted  experience  and  tradition.  At  its  end,  as  the
result  of  a  movement  which  extends  from  the  first  attempt  to
observe  a  fact  or  define  an  idea  to  the  profoundest  analysis  of
the  conditions  of  the  cognitive  process,  is  the  synthesis  of  racial
experience  in  which  the  mind  grasps  the  conditions  and  possibili
ties  of  its  own  development,  conscious  for  the  first  time  in  the
full  sense  of  its  own  nature  and  growth.  This  movement  has
its  close  parallel  in  ethics.  At  the  beginning  is  custom  with  its
blend  of  the  ethical  and  unethical,  accepted  without  criticism
and  guiding  life  without  system  or  general  plan.  At  the  end  is
the  rational  order  of  conduct  founded  on  the  conditions  of  human
development,  and  directed  to  the  furtherance  of  that  development
as  its  supreme  end.  If  finally  we  put  together  the  results  of
the  intellectual  movement  which  reveal  the  conditions  of
development  and  of  the  ethical  which  make  its  furtherance
the  purpose  of  life,  we  recognize  that  the  evolution  of  mind  in
man  from  being  a  blind,  unconscious,  fitful  process  has  become  a
purposive,  self-directed  movement.  This  is  the  fundamental
change  effected  in  the  course  of  human  history.

6.  So  far  we  have  traced  ethical  evolution  as  an  evolution  of
thought.  But  in  questions  of  morals  it  is  easy,  fatally  easy,  for
thought  to  outstrip  action.  How  far,  then,  does  this  development
of  conceptions  correspond  either  to  an  actual  improvement  in
social  relations,  or  in  the  character  of  human  beings  ?  As  to  the
first  question  we  may  say  that  in  the  social  evolution  from  the
community  based  on  kinship  to  that  which  rests  on  Authority,
and  from  this  again  to  the  State  which  rests  upon  consent,  there
is  a  very  rough  and  irregular  correspondence  with  the  ethical
and  religious  evolution  here  sketched  out.  The  primitive  society
of  the  kindred  is  the  natural  home  for  the  morality  of  custom,
while  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale  the  modern  state  embodies
many  elements  of  humanitarian  morality.  In  the  intervening

recognized  by  the  animal  mind,  and  to  do  so  implies  a  new  turn  to  mental
activity — the  bringing  into  consciousness  of  methods  and  processes — which
is  quite  as  profound  a  change  as  that  involved  in  the  first  attempt  to  draw
out  the  "  universal "  that  lies  in  the  particular.


THE  LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT  279

stages  we  can  recognize  that  social  peace  under  a  strong  authority
made  a  suitable  arena  for  the  work  of  the  spiritual  religions,
while  the  city  state  correlates  itself  with  the  beginnings  of  ethical
philosophy.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  been  compelled  to
admit  that  social  and  ethical  development  do  not  always  advance
together.  Social  changes  are  in  large  measure  unconscious,
uncontrolled  by  any  intelligent  direction,  and  the  more  completely
so  the  further  we  go  back  into  the  beginnings  of  history.  Hence
they  do  not  run  precisely  parallel  with  the  growth  of  mind,  but
at  times  impede,  at  other  times  again  forward  it.  But  as  the
higher  phases  are  reached  the  two  processes  fuse  into  one.  For
the  State  rests  on  a  measure  of  Right  in  the  relations  of  men,
and  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  modifiable  by  the  deliberate  act  of
the  community.  In  the  method  in  which  changes  are  effected
indeed  we  find  a  definite  evolution  from  the  unconscious  and
unnoted  changes  of  custom,  through  the  deliberate  changes
introduced  on  occasion  by  the  fiat  of  authority  to  the  organic
legislation  of  the  modern  world  in  which  at  its  best  there  is  an
effort  to  determine  social  progress  in  accordance  with  a  rational
ideal.  When  this  stage  is  reached  social  and  ethical  evolution
become  one.  This  union  becomes  realized  in  proportion  as  the
mind  attains  that  control  over  its  own  growth  which  it  already
possesses  over  the  processes  of  nature.  Here,  as  Comte  first
made  plain,  lies  the  true  significance  of  the  history  of  science.
Through  science  mind  dominates  nature ;  first  physical  nature,
then  organic  nature,  lastly  the  conditions — physical,  psychological,
social — of  its  own  life  and  growth.  This  movement  goes  on  at
an  ever  accelerating  rate,  and  as  it  proceeds  the  conditions  of  a
rational  guidance  of  social  life  are  one  by  one  being  satisfied.
At  the  basis  of  these  stands  the  mastery  of  external  natural
conditions,  in  which  regard  the  last  hundred  and  fifty  years  have
witnessed  a  complete  revolution,  and  so  far  there  is  every
indication  that  the  changes  of  the  coming  century  will  be  not
less,  but  even  more  sweeping.  Next  come  the  laws  of  life,  the
conditions  of  health,  the  causes  of  disease,  the  factors  of  physical
evolution.  The  scientific  treatment  of  these  subjects  can
scarcely  be  said  to  be  more  than  seventy  years  old,  and  it  may
be  maintained  without  exaggeration  that  little  as  we  know
even  now,  the  sum  of  what  we  have  learnt  in  that  time  as  to  the


280  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

true  causation  of  disease,  as  to  the  nature  of  heredity  and  the
modifiability  of  organisms,  far  outweighs  all  that  had  been
learnt  in  the  previous  two  thousand  years.  There  follow  the
laws  of  mental  growth,  and  here  our  own  time  has  witnessed
the  emergence  of  psychology  as  a  science,  and  education  as  a  true
art  aiming  at  educing  from  the  mind  what  is  in  it,  aiding
natural  development,  and  stimulating  or  correcting  it  at  need,
as  the  physician  follows  the  efforts  of  the  body  towards  the
restoration  of  the  balance  of  health— the  whole  a  conception
still  in  merest  infancy,  but  already  promising  a  vigorous  life.
Here,  then,  we  have  the  conditions  forming  for  development  of
body  and  mind  and  their  maintenance  in  health.  To  these  have
to  be  added  the  scientific  adjustment  of  the  relations  of  man  to
man— sociology.  Here,  again,  we  have  a  science  in  its  infancy,
but  the  mere  attempt  to  deal  with  public  questions  in  the  spirit
of  science  implies  an  advance  ethical  as  well  as  intellectual.
At  any  rate  it  is  on  the  possibility  of  controlling  social  forces  by
the  aid  of  social  science  as  perfectly  as  natural  forces  are
controlled  at  present  by  the  aid  of  physical  science,  that  the
permanent  progress  of  humanity  must  depend.

7.  For  progress  is  not  something  that  goes  on  of  itself  by  an
automatic  law  or  an  inherent  tendency  of  things.  The  struggle
for  existence  is  not  as  such  a  force  that  makes  for  betterment,
and  in  fact  in  human  history  we  find  epochs  of  progress  followed
by  long  ages  of  stagnation  or  retrogression.  If  the  evil  of  the
world  overthrew  the  doctrine  of  unconditioned  creation,  the
disorders  and  reactions  of  history  are  no  less  fatal  to  a  purely
teleological  doctrine  of  the  world  process.  There  remains  the
possibility,  however  difficult  to  conceive  in  concrete  shape,  of  a
spirit  subject  to  conditions  and  achieving  its  full  growth  only
by  mastering  them.  If  this  view  is  correct,  progress  is  made
only  in  so  far  as  the  conditions  of  life  come  more  and  more
under  the  dominion  of  Mind.  There  is  nothing  in  the  scheme
of  organic  evolution  to  determine  that  the  higher  type  should
prevail  except  the  inherent  strength  of  the  type  itself.1  On

*  In  so  far  as  it  bears  on  the  ultimate  question  of  the  element  of  purpose
m  Reality  as  a  whole  (as  distinguished  from  the  scheme  of  organic  evolution)
this  statement  should  be  qualified  by  the  considerations  advanced  in  Miiid
tn  Evolution,  pp.  402-406.


THE LINE  OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 281

the  other  side  of  the  account  let  us  bear  in  mind  that  there  is
no  evidence  of  any  permanent  force  working  against  the  higher
type  as  such,  or  singling  it  out,  as  it  were,  for  destruction.
Evil  is  not  a  positive  force.  There  is  no  real  Ahriman  that  strives
with  Ormuzd.  Evil  is  merely  the  automatic  result  of  the
inorganic.  Physical  evil  results  from  the  impact  on  the
spiritual  order  of  natural  causes  which  intelligence  has  not
been  able  to  subordinate  to  its  ends,  moral  evil  from  the
clashing  of  purpose  in  minds  which  have  not  been  brought  into
an  organic  unity.  Hence  the  working  of  that  retributive  principle
in  history  whereby  whatever  is  evil,  being  inorganic,  conflicts
with  itself  and  perishes  "  by  its  inherent  badness,"  while  the
elements  of  goodness,  of  rational  harmony,  in  the  long  run
support  and  further  one  another,  and  this  upon  the  whole°at  an
accelerating  rate  in  proportion  as  they  have  already  acquired
organic  union.  Here  is  that  internal  inherent  strength  on
which  the  spiritual  order  depends  for  its  ultimate  victory.

Thus  the  principal  method  of  spiritual  progress  lies  in  this—
that  what  is  achieved  at  one  epoch  is  a  starting  point  for  fresh
development.  Hence  progress  is  sure  and  continuous  in  pro
portion  as  it  depends  on  the  principle  of  tradition,  i.e.  in
proportion  as  the  gains  of  the  past  can  be  handed  on  and  form
a  capital  for  advancing  the  operations  of  the  future.  This
method  is  most  readily  applicable  in  the  case  of  positive
knowledge,  wherein  it  is  possible  for  every  student  to  equip
himself  with  all  that  Newton  or  Darwin  have  to  teach.  But
when  something  more  than  mere  learning  is  required,  other
factors  enter  in.  Even  in  the  realm  of  thought  so  far  as  the
deeper  principles  are  concerned,  every  man  must  in  a  measure
go  through  for  himself  the  processes  which  Hume  or  Kant
thought  out,  if  he  would  really  understand  what  Hume  and
Kant  mean.  Still  more  is  this  true  of  moral  thought.  We
must  have  some  spiritual  experience  of  our  own  to  enable  us
to  realize  what  the  message  of  Christ  or  of  Buddha  means.
There  must  at  least  be  an  inward  mirror  to  reflect  the  spiritual
light.  Hence  ethical  truths  have  sometimes  been  lost,  or  at
least  have  lain  dormant  till  new  prophets  have  arisen  to  inspire
them  with  fresh  life.  Nevertheless  tradition,  the  mere  contact
with  great  ideas,  counts  for  much  in  the  ethical  field,  and  there


282  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

is  on  the  whole  a  clear  though  not  an  uninterrupted  advance  of
ethical  teaching.1  But  when  we  corne  to  the  development  of
character,  the  third  point  of  ethical  growth,  the  case  is  altered.
So  far  as  ethical  teaching  affects  character,  tradition  has  its
influence.  But  so  far  as  the  foundation  of  character  is  inherited
by  each  of  us  from  his  parents  wholly  different  conditions
apply,  and  the  question  whether  the  innate  characteristics  of
men  tend  to  improve,  stands  on  a  wholly  different  footing  from
the  question  whether  their  collective  achievements  in  the
realm  of  thought  and  of  conduct  exhibit  growth  and  develop
ment.  The  data  for  deciding  this  question  do  not  appear  as
yet  to  be  sufficient.  The  laws  of  heredity  are  in  large  measure
unknown.  So  far  as  natural  selection  is  concerned,  its  operation
is  known  to  be  extremely  slow,  nor  could  it  be  favourable  to
character  unless  the  conditions  of  life  in  society  were  through
many  generations  such  as  to  eliminate  the  more  selfish,  less
honest,  less  generous  type,  and  preserve  in  greater  degree
those  who  are  more  worthy.  How  far  this  has  been  the  case  I
must  not  here  attempt  to  determine.  We  can  easily  imagine
that  some  virtues,  such  as  parental  love,  have  been  fostered  by
the  better  chances  of  survival  enjoyed  by  the  children  of  loving
parents.  Of  other  virtues  it  is  less  easy  to  speak  with  any
certainty.  At  many  periods  social  institutions  have  directly

1  The  bearing  of  tradition  on  progress  may  be  measured  by  comparing
knowledge,  morals  and  art.  Knowledge — the  whole  collective  achievement
of  thought — takes  the  lead  in  progress  because  each  generation  can  acquire
the  whole  possessions  of  the  past  unimpaired  and  add  to  them  its  own.  In
ethical  theory  this  is  less  easy  in  proportion  as  what  is  required  is
the  deeper  thinking-out  of  principles  rather  than  the  addition  of  past
experiences.  Nevertheless  the  road  once  trodden  is  always  easier  to  tra
verse  anew.  In  ethical  practice  we  have  not  only  to  learn,  but  to  come  to
be,  and  thus  in  large  measure  each  must  accomplish  for  himself,  yet  tra
dition  still  operates  in  that  it  is  incorporated  in  law  and  custom  and  the
spirit  of  a  people.  In  art  there  seems  to  be  epochs  of  progress  in  which
some  new  vein  is  struck  out  by  pioneers.  This  is  worked  by  one  artist
after  another,  each  learning  from  the  last,  till  the  best  that  can  be  done
along  that  line  is  reached.  The  vein  is  then  exhausted,  and  subsequent
work  along  that  line  produces  less  and  less  ore  and  more  and  more  dross.
Tradition  at  this  stage  becomes  a  real  barrier  to  progress.  Meanwhile
other  pioneers  are  striking  out  in  a  fresh  direction,  and  art  revives  in  a  new
place.  The  cause  of  this  brokenness  of  its  history  seems  to  be  that  the
function  of  art  is  to  give  perfect  expression — that  is,  expression  in  which
the  feeling-tone  of  the  sense-symbols  used  precisely  fits  the  thought
expressed — to  whatever  facet  of  experience  the  artist  seeks  to  approach.
When  this  is  once  done  adequately  it  cannot  be  done  again.


THE  LINE OF  ETHICAL  DEVELOPMENT 283

tended  to  eliminate  the  stock  of  those  best  fitted  to  serve
society.  I  think,  for  instance,  of  religious  persecutions,  or
again  of  the  ideal  of  celibacy  which  over  great  tracts  of  the
world  operated  for  centuries  to  deter  many  of  the  best  men  and
women  from  perpetuating  their  stock.  Nor  is  the  question
whether,  morally  considered,  the  human  breed  has  in  fact
improved,  by  any  means  easy  to  settle  empirically.  Considering
the  improvement  of  ethical  conceptions,  is  the  actual  improve
ment  in  our  conduct  as  compared  with  that  of  our  ancestors
greater  than  we  might  expect,  or  even  •  as  much  as  we  might
expect?  He  would  be  a  bold  man  who  would  found  an
argument  for  the  improvement  of  the  human  breed  by  heredity
on  a  dogmatic  affirmation  in  reply  to  this  question.  Upon  the
whole  we  must  be  content  for  the  present  to  leave  this  factor
in  evolution  an  uncertain  quantity.  Ethical  progress  is
essentially  a  progress  in  ethical  conceptions,  acting  through
tradition.

These  conceptions,  as  they  advance,  are,  as  we  have  seen,  in  a
manner  realized  in  law  and  custom.  Here  the  element  of
tradition  plays  its  part.  But  in  so  far  as  the  old  vices  of
character  remain,  the  work  is  always  liable  to  be  undone  and
needs  constantly  to  be  done  over  again.  The  very  growth  of
society  sets  up  new  problems  needing  a  re-thinking  of  old  ethical
ideas,  so  that  here  again  the  ethical  advance  is  fitful  and  un
certain.  As  society  becomes  larger  and  more  complex  many  of
its  obligations  become  more  remote  and  impersonal.  Losing
their  direct  application  to  our  neighbour  whom  we  see,  our
charity  and  our  sense  of  justice  are  diluted  and  lose  their
strength.  Our  sympathies  cease  where  our  imagination  fails  to
reach,  and  the  great  fabric  of  government  is  apt  to  become  an
inhuman  machine  advancing  blindly  over  the  living  flesh  and
blood  that  happens  to  come  in  its  way.  Yet  the  vaster  the
social  organism  the  greater  is  the  triumph  when  justice,  kindled
to  new  life,  has  again  sent  a  purified  blood  through  its  arteries.
Its  successes  are  achieved  for  larger  portions  of  mankind,  and
their  basis  is  wider  and  more  secure.

But  if  our  general  conception  of  evolution  is  correct,  the
further  development  of  society  will  follow  a  very  different  course
from  its  past  history,  in  that  it  is  destined  to  fall  within  the


284  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

scope  of  an  organizing  intelligence,  arid  thereby  to  be  removed
from  the  play  of  blind  force  to  the  sphere  of  rational  order.
Such  a  change  must  be  gradual  and  attended  with  many  set
backs.  The  very  ideas  which  are  to  direct  it  are  yet  in  their
infancy.  Yet  the  social  self-consciousness  which  gives  them
birth,  arrived  at  as  it  is  by  a  blending  of  the  moral,  the
scientific  and  the  religious  spirit,  is  for  us  the  culminating  fact
of  ethical  evolution.  But  such  an  end  can  only  be  a  beginning.
Mind  grasps  the  conditions  of  its  development  that  it  may  master
and  make  use  of  them  in  its  further  growth.  Of  the  nature  of
that  growth,  whither  it  tends  and  what  new  shapes  it  will
evolve,  we  as  yet  know  little.  It  is  enough  for  the  moment  to
reach  the  idea  of  a  self-conscious  evolution  of  humanity,  and  to
find  therein  a  meaning  and  an  element  of  purpose  for  the
historical  process  which  has  led  up  to  it.  It  is  at  any  rate  some
thing  to  learn — as,  if  our  present  conclusion  is  sound,  we  do
learn — that  this  slowly  wrought  out  dominance  of  mind  in  things
is  the  central  fact  of  evolution.  For  if  this  is  true  it  is  the  germ
of  a  religion  and  an  ethics  which  are  as  far  removed  from
materialism  as  from  the  optimistic  teleology  of  the  metaphysician,
or  the  half  naive  creeds  of  the  churches.  It  gives  a  meaning  to
human  effort,  as  neither  the  pawn  of  an  overruling  Providence,
nor  the  sport  of  blind  force.  It  is  a  message  of  hope  to  the
world,  of  suffering  lessened  and  strife  assuaged,  not  by  fleeing
from  reason  to  the  bosom  of  faith,  but  by  the  increasing  rational
control  of  things  by  that  collective  wisdom,  the  ets  £wus  Ao'yoy,
which  is  all  that  we  directly  know  of  the  Divine.


INDEX


ABORTION,  II.  95,  157

Act  of  Settlement,  I.  323,  360

Adoption —

of  prisoners,  I.  246,  253,  254
Adultery,  I.  186;  II.  72

Punishment  of,  I.  82,  85,  87,  106,
131,  137,  153,  175,  180,  188,  195,
196,  197,  205,  208,  214,  228
^Eschyhis,  II.  61

Aged,  treatment  of,  I.  346,  349,  352
Ainu,  II.  15,  16
Alabaster,  E.,  I.  56,  96,  97,  106,  197,

198,  200

Aliens,  I.  268.  269,  310,  346,  347
Altruism,  II.  221,  222
Ambrose,  I.  218,  220; II.  141  seq.,

153
Amttincau,  I.  187, 188,  255,  351,  352  ;

II.  82,  83
America —

British  Colonies  in,  I.  114
United  States  of,  I.  116,  144
Amos,  II.  120,  121
Anabaptists,  II.  155
Angels,  II.  131-133
Ani,  I.  188
Animals —

Duties  to,  II.  103

in  human  form,  II.  113

Intelligence among, I. 8-11  ; II.

258-261

Parental  affection  among,  I.  6,  11
Punishment  of,  I.  95,  96
Regulation  of  behaviour  among, I.

2-11

Social  life  of,  I.  1,  6,  7,  11
Worship  of,  II.  37
Animism, II.  26,  27,  31,  32,  35,  271,

272
in  early  civilization,  II.  12-14,  16,

37,  40
in  relation  to  morality,  II.  49,  51-

61

Anselm,  II.  139

Anthropomorphism,  II.  33-35,  37-39,
45,  47,  57


Apasiamba,  I.  192,  353

Arabs,  II:  4

Arbitration,  I.  267,  277-279

Aristippus,  II.  199

Aristotle,  t.  73,  208,  209, 266, 268  ;

II.  150,  191,  seq.,  203
Asceticism,  II.  101,  108,  157
Asoka,  II.  112

Association,  right  of,  I.  372-375
Assyrians,  I.  257
Atonement,  II.  70,  71,  139
Augustine,  I.  272,  273  ;  II.  130-133,

140-142,  153,  155,  224
Australians,  I.  242,  248,  349 ;  II.  4,  6,

13,  18,  27-29,  51,  57
Exogamy  among,  I.  49,  50,  138,  145
Justice  among,  I.  82,  98,  122-131,

166,  175

Totemism  among,  I.  49
Tribal  structure  of, I. 49, 50, 56,

138-140,  167,  175,  337
Authority,  principle  of,  I.  48,  61-67

BABYLON,  Ancient,  I.  135,  256,  257,

292,  293,  338,  352  ;  II.  36,  43-46,

67,  68,  76-78,  178
Barbarians,  I.  39,  141
Batchdor,  J.,  I.  166,  252,  348 ;  II.  16,

63,  66

Enudhayana,  I.  192,  353
Benefit  of  clergy,  I.  112,  323
Benefit  societies,  I.  357,  358
Benevolence,  I.  352  ;  II.  110-112,  117,

141,  171,  172,  177
and  Justice,  II.  167
Bcntham,  J.,  I.  114  ;  II.  230-232,  253
Biot,  I.  262
Birth-rate,  I.  6
Blaclcstonc,  I.  225-228,  322
Blessing,  II.  53
Blood-feud, I. 84  seq., 98  seq., 123

seq.  ;  II.  73
and  composition  for  injuries, I.  86,

127,  128
and  retaliation, I. 84, 85, 91,123


285


seq.


286


INDEX


Blood-feud,  gradual  suppression  of,  I.

105-108,  128

Mitigation  of,  I.  98  seq.,  123  seq.
Look  of  the  Dead,  I. 186,  187,  350  ;

II.  69,  70,  76,  79-81
Brahmanism,  II.  86,  88,  98  seq.,  152
Doctrine  of  austerity,  II.  99
of  charity,  II.  99
of  penance,  II.  99
Ethical  conceptions,  II.  99-105
Theory  of  reality,  II.  105
Theory  of  the  self,  II.  98,  99
Bridges,  J.  H.,II.  238
British  Empire,  I.  234,  235
Bnins,  C.  J.,  I.  83,  210-213,  243  ;  II.

56

Bryce,  «/.,  I.  201,  212,  214,  222,  236
Buddhism, I. 116; II. 86, 105  seq.,

148-151

Doctrine  of  Karma,  II.  106,  107
Doctrine  of  Nirvana,  II.  107
Ethical conceptions, II. 103, 108

seq.
Buddhist Suttas,  II. 107, 108, 111,

112

Budge,  E.  A.,  I.  187,  350  ;  II.  70,  79
L'usolt, G.,  I.  58,  208,  209,  266-268,

307-310,  349
Butler,  Bishop,  II.  211

Calvin, II.  133-135, 140, 144, 145,

154
Cambridge Expedition, I. 152, 156,

174

Cambridge  Natural  Histoiy,  I.  4
Cannibalism,  I.  246,  247,  252-254

and  human  sacrifice,  II.  38,  39,  90
Canon  law,  I.  107,  108,  146,  150,  217
seq.,  272,  273;  II.  140,  141,  143,
146,  153-155,  223,  224
Carpenter,  Dr.  J.  E.,  II.  120,  126
Caste, I.  64,  282,  283  ; II.  81, 102,

113,  114

Criticism  of,  I.  303,  304
in  India,  I.  301-304,  353
in  modern  civilization,  I.  321,  322,

329,  330

in  the  uncivilized  world,  I.  285,  286
Categories,  II.  180,  264-266
Catlin,  &.,  1.  32,  167,  243,  246,  247,

347,  349,  350  ;  II.  30
Charity,  I.  350  ;  II.  89,  93,  94
Chastity,  I.  173,  174,  195,  196,  251  ;

II.  110,  111

Children,  I.  258,  26rt,  269,  346,  348
China-
Ethical conceptions, I. 65,  95-97,
106,  116,  135,  262  seq. ;  II.  ch.  v.
Family,  I.  196-200


China —

Law  and  custom,  I.  304,  305,  352

Magical  conceptions,  II.  19

lleligious  conceptions,  II.  6,  15
Christianity, I. 226, 272-274, 290,
314 seq., 325-327, 358. See
Monotheism

Chronicles,  Book  of,  I.  259
Church —

and  state,  II.  207,  208

and  the  world,  II.  153  seq.

Influence  of,  I.  217  seq.,  272,  273,
314

Primitive,  II.  152
Cicero,  I.  214
Citizenship —

Principle  of,  I.  48,  67  seq.  ;  II.  196,

198

Clan  system,  I.  51,  52,  53,  59
Class  distinctions,  I.  ch.  vii.

in  modern  Europe, I.  321  seq.  ;  II.

178
Classification —

Difficulties  of,  I.  35  seq.
CoMcn,  I.  278
Codes —

Multiplicity  of,  I.  26,  27
Codrington,  I.  163  ;  II.  52
Common  good,  II.  174
Communism,  I.  337  seq.
Comparative  ethics —

Difficulties  of,  I.  28  seq.

Methods  of,  I.  28  seq.,  40,  41

Scope  of,  I.  20,  21,  25-28,  40,  41
Compurgation,  I.  102,  104
Concubinage, I. 135, 179, 181, 184,
186,  188,  190,  197,  201,  207,  209,
211,  306

Confession,  II.  67,  101
Confiu-im,  I. 116  ; II.  150,  162-169,

178
Conquered  communities,  treatment  of,

I.  270,  271
Conscience,  II.  211
Conservatism,  II.  123
Constant inc,  I.  221  ;  II.  157
Contract,  in  early  law,  I.  340,  341
Contract  labour,  I.  329
Comish,  C.  /.,  I.  7

Council  of  Trent,  II.  141,  145,  146
Criticism,  II.  180,  181

Philosophic,  II.  267
Curses,  magical  effect  of,  II.  52,  58
Custom,  I.  1  ;  II.  173,  277,  278

and  hahit,  I.  13

and  law,  I.  68

and  tradition,  I.  14

Factors  in  growth  of,  I.  13-16,  34  ;

II.  32,  71,  262,  263


INDEX


287


Custom,  sanctity  of, among  primitive

men,  I.  20

Penalty  for  breach  of,  II.  51  sen.
Cynics,  II.  200

Dalton,  E.,  I.  171

Danka,  I.  145,  161

Darcste,  K.,  I.  95,  206,  293

Debt,  punishment  for,  I.  85,  91

De  Oroot,  J.  J.  //.,  I.  199  :  II. 5,  6,

7,  9,  10,  19,  115,  173
Deity,  conception  of,  I.  256-258,  260.

Sec  Monotheism  and  Polytheism
Democracy,  I.  74
Demons,  II.  43,  91-93
Desire,  II.  243,  244,  246,  260
Determinism,  II.  135-137
Deuteronomy, I. 201-203,  244, 258,

260,  299,  354  ;  II.  120
Dhammapada,  II.  112-114
Dicey,  Prof.,  II.  253
Dill,  Prof.,  I.  215,  216,  357
Diodorus,  I.  183,  294,  305,  334
Dionysius,  1.  210,  211
Divorce. See  Marriage
Douglas,  Ji.  K.,  I. 197-199  :  II. 15

173

Driver,  S.  It.,  I.  102;  II.  120
Dualism,  II.  97
Duel,  judicial,  I.  102,  103,  107,  125

non-judicial,  J.  107

of  abuse,  I.  126
Dunckcr,  M.,  I.  116.  190,  191,261,  262

303

Duty,  II.  210
Dyaks,  I.  29  ;  II.  12

ECOLESIASTICUS,  Book  of,  I.  203,  300

301

Egoism,  II.  222
Egyptians,  I.  146

Ethical  conceptions,  I.  32,  65,  350

351,  352 ;  II.  79-83,  160
Family,  I.  182  seq.
Law  and  custom,  I.  178,  294-297,  334
Religious  conceptions,  II.  11,  36-43

64,  67,  69,  70
Warfare  among,  I.  254-256
Ellis,  A.  B.,  I.  92,  144,  153,  166  ;  II.

4,  33,  57,  62
Elmira  system,  I.  116
Endogamy,  I.  143  sen.,  200
England,  II.  140
Family  in,  I.  234
Justice  in  Anglo-Saxon,  I.  91,  95
Justice  in  mediaeval,  I.  86  seq 95
100  seq.,  108-110,  112,  335,  336*,
359


England,  modern law, I. 112 sen

146,  360,  361

Epictctus,  II.  150,  201,  203
Equality,  II.  231
Erinnys,  II.  10,  58-61
Erman,  A.,  I.  189,  190,  256,  294,  295,

351

Esmein,  A.,  I.  108,  110
Ethical  conceptions —

Development  of,  II.  264  seq.
Difficulties  of  comparing,  I.  30,  31
in early  culture, II. 72,  269-271,

281-283
in oriental  civilization, II. 75-84

88-96

Rationalist,  II.  177
Ethical  consciousness,  II.  74
Ethics  as  regulation  of  life,  II.  258
Evangelicals,  I.  114
Evil, I. 36; II. 126,  127, 130-135,

281

Evolution,  self-conscious,  II.  284
Exodus,  Book  of,  I.  298,  335,  354  ;  II.

121

Exogamy,  I.  54,  89,  138,  143  seq.
Experience,  II.  24-26
Animals  learning  by,  II.  158  seq.
Correlation  of,  II.  158  seq.,  278
Ezekiel,  II.  124,  125

FACTOEY  ACTS,  I.  343
Faith,  II.  140,  145-147,  272
Family,  I.  229,  232
Joint,  I.  52,  53

Patriarchal,  I.  52,  53,  5<5.  See  Father-
right,  Marriage,  Mother-right
Farnell,  L.  R.,  II.  34,  60
Father-right,  I.  51,  59,  144,  160  seq.,

169,  176-178
Fetichism,  II.  235
Feudalism,  I.  62,  63,  240
Flinders  Pctric, W.  M.,  I. 186, 187

188,  255,  256,  294  ;  II.  81-84
Food-
Magic  influence  on,  II.  17
Forgiveness, II. 112, 113, 150, 167,

168,  272

Fornication,  I.  186,  187  ;  II.  105
forbidden,  I.  205,  218,  220
Punishment of, I. 197, 214, 220,

228

Fowle,  T.  W.,  I.  359,  360,  361
France —

The  family,  I.  229,  231,  232
Law and  custom, I. 97,  108,  109,

110,  114,  115,  319,  324
Fmnciscus  it  Victoria,  I.  273,  297,  357
Frazcr,  J.  G.,  I.  249  ; II.  3,  5,  6,  12-
15,  17 20,  22,  23,  33,  34,  65-67


288


INDEX


Free  Will,  II.  131  seq.
French  Revolution,  II.  227,  228
Fricdtimder,  L.,  I.  215,  216,  357,  358
Friends —

Society  of,  I.  114,  327  ;  II.  156
Future  Judgment,  II.  272
Future  Life,  II.  62  seq.,  68,  97,  102

GAINS,  I.  213
Gambling,  II.  173
Gautama,  I.  195
General  Will,  II.  174
Genesis,  Book  of,  I.  201  ;  II.  121
Germans,  I.  83,  86,  87,  97,  100,  109,
110,  144,  162,  166,  177,  217,  223,
232,  233,  313,  325,  349
Girard,  P.  F.,  I.  57, 107,  211,  213,  214,

311,  312,  336,  339,  341
Goddcn,  Gertrude,  1.  89,  144,  154,  249,

250,  285,  334;  II.  31
Golden  Rule,  II.  167
Good— Conception  of,  I.  21  ;  II.  180,

187  seq.

affected  by  non-moral  causes,  I.  21
affected  by  religious  ideas,  I.  22
affected  by  social  changes,  I.  23-25
The  common,  I.  68,  70,  71
Government,  I.  68,  75  seq.

Duties  of,  II.  174,  175
Grace,  II.  141,  145,  146,  147
Gratian. Sec  Canon  Law
Great  Man,  The,  II.  163,  170
Great  Spirit,  II.  30
Greek  Church,  I.  231
Greeks,  Ancient,  I.  107,  137,  161,  355,

356

Ethical  conceptions,  II.  148
Family  among,  I.  206-209
Law  and custom  of, I. 265,  268,

307-309

Magical  conceptions  of,  II.  52
Philosophy  of,  I.  267,  268,  311,  312  ;

II.  48,  179  seq.,  208,  216,  249
Religious  conceptions  of,  II.  4,  46-

48,  58-61,  64
Griffith,  F.  LL,  1.  187,  189,  190,  297,

352  ;  II.  43,  70,  79,  80,  82,  83
Grote,  G.,  I.  137

Grotius,  I.  269-274,  277,  315  ;  II.  224
Group —

Marriage. See  Marriage.
Morality,  I.  chs.  vi.,  vii.,  366  ;  II.

182,  269-272
organization  and  government,  I.  49,

51,  52
relationship,  f.  51

HADES,  II.  35

Hall,  W.  E.,  I.  273,  275


Hammurabi,  I.  52,  85,  87,  88,  92,  95,

106,  179-182,  292,  293,  299,  336,

338
Happiness, II. 191, 201, 210, 212,

220,  241,  246

Harnack,  II.  130,  139,  141,  142
Harrison,  J.  E.,  II,  46-48,  52,  59
Hartley,  II.  212

Head-hunting,  I.  29,  249,  250,  253
Hebrew Prophets,  I. 260, 300, 354  ;

II.  120  seq.
Hebrews —

Ethical  development,  II.  122  seq.

Family  life,  I.  200-203

Law and custom, I. 82, 83, 85,

297-301, 335, 339,  354  ;  II.  93-

95,  97,  100,  105, 146, 151,  157,

168,  258-260
Religious  development, I. 82, 83,

258-260  ;  II.  119  seq.
Hedonism,  II.  199
Hegel,  II.  233,  239,  240
Hcraclitus,  II.  185
Heredity —

Effect  upon  behaviour,  I.  3,  6,  7,  8,

9  ;  II.  259,  260,  282,  283
and  character,  I.  12,  13
in  man,  I.  12
Hcrodotm,  I.  73,  140,  208,  209,  243,

266,  267,  307  ;  II.  61
Hcsiod,  I.  355
Hobbcs,  II.  211,  225
Homer, I. 33, 45, 207, 265, 307,

308
Homicide,  I.  85,  86,  93-95,  106,  107,

123  seq.  ;  II.  72
Hospitality,  I.  47,  244,  333,  346-348,

351,  353
Howard,  G.  E.,  I.  112-114,  136,  138,

150,  152-156,  217,  218,  220,  222,

227,  228,  237
Howitt,  A.  W,, I. 49, r.O, 123,  127,

129,  131,  138  ;  II.  29,  50,  57
HngJics,  T.  P.,  I.  204,  205,  306,  307
Hinnanitariauism,  II.  254-257
Humanity,  I.  278,  279,  330,  331,  366,

371,  375  ;  II. 178,  233  seq.,  249-

252,  273,  274

Human  Sacrifice,  I.  248,  249,  255,  286
Hume,  II.  212
Humility,  II.  112,  148
Huth,  A.  H.,  I.  146,  147
Hyaclcs  and  Dcniker,  MM.,  I.  45,  158,

348

IDEALISM,  II.  160  seq.,  214,  273
Ideals-
Varying  effect  of,  upon  conduct,  I.
26-23


INDEX


289


Iheriny,  E.  von,  I.  56,  83,  107
Impulse  and  desire,  I.  10  ;  II.  243-245,

259

India —
Family  life,  I.  52,  53,  137,  144,  162,

190-196
Law  and  custom,  I.  261,  301,  339,

353

Religious  conceptions,  II.  88,  97  seq.
Individual  aud  society,  II.  208,  209
Indulgences,  II.  143,  144
Infanticide,  I.  47,  210,  223,  348
Ingram,  J.  K.,  I.  312,  313,  324,  325,

327,  328
Inquest,  I.  107
Instinct,  I.  5,  6,  7,  147,  148

in  man,  I.  12.  16
Intelligence,  growth  of,  II.  259  seq.

Human,  II.  261
International  law,  I.  267,  274,  275

right,  I.  276-280
Intuitionism,  II.  213
Isaiah,  Book  of,  I.  260  ;  II.  123-125,

127
Islam,  I.  204-206,  305-307

JAPAX,  I.  95,  97,  106,  136,  169

Jastrow,  M.,  II.  43-46,  68

Jenks,  E.,  I.  105

Jeremiah, Book  of,  I. 300; II. 123,

124,  127
Jerome,  II.  153
Jeune,  SirF.,  I.  213
Jevons,  F.  £.,  II.  4,  23,  52
Johns,  C.  H.  W.,  I.  180,  181
Joint  family,  I.  52,  53
Judges,  Book  oi,  I.  259  ;  II.  120
Justice, phases in the development
of,  I.  79  seq.  ;  II. 185,  186,  188
seq.

among  savages,  I.  80-83,  132-133
Blood-feud,  the,  I.  84  seq.,  97  seq.,

120,  122  seq.

Composition,  I.  86  seq.,  97  seq.,  120
Early  procedure,  I.  101  seq.
Execution  of  sentence,  I.  105
Growth  of  public  justice,  I.  97  seq.,

122-133,  364,  365
Influence  of  central  authority,  I.  99

seq.,  127,  128,  130
Influence  of  rank,  I.  87,  88
inside  the  clan,  I.  89,  90,  124,  125
inside  the  family,  I.  89,  90
in  the  modern  state,  I.  113  seq.
outside  the  clan,  I.  89,  90,  123  seq.
Period  of  severity,  I.  111-113
Principle  of  collective  responsibility,

I.  91-93,  96,  97
Justinian,  II.  157

VOL.  II.


Kant,  II.  213  seq.

Kidd,  £.,  II.  240

Kings,  Book  of,  I.  259,  298  ;  II.  120

Kingsley,  Mary,  II.  7

Kinship —

Affinity  as  basis  of,  I.  145
Classificatory,  I.  139,  144,  145
Society  based  on,  I.  48,  50,  57,  58,

162
KoUer,  I.  82,  83,88,  91,  99  seq.,  106,

128,  129,  136,  137,  141,  152,  165,

168,  172,  175,  179,  253,  285,  293,

305,  337,  338

KoUer  and  Peiscr,  I.  52,  182
Koran,  I.  206,  271,  348,  355  ;  II.  129,

140 .

Kovalcvsky,  M.,  I.  60,  140,  339
Kropotkin,  Prince,  I.  221
Kuenen,  II.  122

LABOURER,  position  of,  in  England,  I.

321-324, 359-361
Laffitt,  P.,  I.  352
Lao-Tszc,  II.  103,  115,  149
Lavaleye,  E.  de,  I.  60,  61
Law,  I.  68

Basis  of,  II.  185,  187. See  Justice
Lecky,  W.  E.  H.,  I.  226  ;  II.  157
Legge, G.,  I. 197,  262, 305,  352;  II.

173
Leist,  B.  W.,  I.  107,  207,  208  ;  II.  56,

59,  60,  61
Letourneau,  C.,  I.  136,  153,  154,  158,

171, 174, 208, 242, 249, 252,

253,  269,  270,  285-287,  290,  291,

312

Levirate,  The,  I.  150,  158,  196
Leviticus,  Book  of,  I.  202,  300,  354
Liberty,  I. 75,  76,  369-371  ;  II.  228,

seq.

Life,  sanctity  of,  II.  103-110
Lloyd-Morgan,  C.,  I.  2,  7
Loch,  C.  S.,  I.  354-357,  359,  360
Locke,  II.  225
Luther,  II.  140,  144
Lyall,  A.,  II.  4,  22,  23

MAGIO,  I.  50,  131  ;  II.  17,  19,  23,  31,

34,  38,  39
and  Morals,  I.  251,  332,  333,  336  ;

II.  50-55,  71,  94,  102
and  mysticism,  II.  115
and  religion,  II.  55,  65,  70,  71,  95,

121 123

Maine,  H.  S.,  I.  60,  162,  341,  342
Malays,  I.  51-53,  88,  90,  99,  154,  166,

168,  169,  173  ;  II.  5
Man,  E.  H.,  I.  81,  144,  246,  349
Mana,  I.  250  ;  II.  21


290


INDEX


Man-gods,  I.  62  ;  II.  14,  15
Manu, I.  52, 56, 106,  162,  191-196,
261,  301,  303,  342,  353  ;  II. 100,
102-105

Marcus  Aurelius,  II.  150,  202,  203
Marriage,  by  capture,  1. 154,  155,  164,

165,  192
by  consent, I. 154,  157, 158,  192,

197,  201,  213,  218,  220,  221
by  go-betweens,  I.  197
by  purchase,  I. 152,  154,  156,  164,

165,  179,  183,  190,  192,  201
by  service,  I.  154,  156,  157,  201
contracts,  I.  181,  183
Dissolution  of  (Law  of  divorce)
in  European civilization,  I.  208,
211, 212, 214-216, 219-222,
227, 231

in oriental  civilization, I. 152,
179, 180, 183-185, 190, 193,
194,.  198,  200,  202
in uncivilized world, 141, 150

seq.,  173,  179,  180
under varying  conditions,  I.  150

seq.,  230,  237
Group,  I.  137,  140
Law  and  custom  relating  to,  I.

chapters  iv.,  v.

Monogamous,  I.,  135,  142,  143,  186
Polyandrous,  I.  136, 137,  143,  176,

177

Polygamous,  I.  135,  142,  143,  173,
177,  181,  185,  186,  190,  197,  198,
204,  205

Polygynous,  I.  135
Promiscuous,  I.  140,  177
Questions  concerning,  I.  135
Religious  conception  of,  I.  160
Restrictions  on,  1.56,57,143,  144  seq.
Varying  relations of  husband  and
wife,  I.  159,  173,  179  seq.,  192-
194, 197-199,  207,  209,  212-214,
224,  225
Married  Women's Property  Acts, I.

228,  229
Maspcro,  G.,  I.  32,  186,  188,  293-297,

333,  351  ;  II.  36-42,  52
Materialism,  II.  123,  124
Matriarchy,  I.  51,  160,  183,  189
Max  Mutter,  F.,  I.  146
Max  Mutter, W., I. 183-185, 187,

189,  282,  295
Mayne,  J.  D.,  I.  52,  53,  56,  137,  162,

192,  338,  339

Mazdaism,  II.  9,  91,  94,  95,  96
Meissner,  B.,  I.  52,  181,  199,  292,  293
Melanesians,  II.  20,  21,  51,  52
Mentius, I. 263-265; II. 164, 165,
169-176


Middle  Ages, I. 107-110, 217 seq.  ;

313-321,  324,  325
Influence  of  church  in,  I.  109,  116

117,  120,  146  ;  II.  207.
Mill,  J.,  II.  212
Mill,  John  Stuart,  II.  212,  231
Modern  Ethics,  II.  207  seq.
Mohammed,  I.  90,  204-206
Mohammedanism.  I.  271,  272,  290  ;  II.

129,  134,  135,  140,  148
Monammedan  law, I. 91, 95, 106,

135,  146

Mommsen,  T.,  I.  56,  270
Monogamy,  II.  157

in  early  civilization,  I.  186

in  European  civilization,  I.  220

in  oriental  civilization,  I.  202

in  uncivilized  world,  I.  43,  47,  135,

141-143
Monotheism —
Approaches  to,  II.  119
Conception  of  the  deity,  II.  127  seq.
Effect  of  ethical  teaching,  II.  154
Ethical,  II.  127  seq.
Ethical  conceptions  of,  II.  128,  138

seq.,  148  seq.

Exclusive  salvation,  II.  140,  141
in  early  Judaism,  II.  119  seq.
Tendency  to,  in  early  religions, II.
28-32,  41-43,  46,  86,  90,  119  seq.,
235

Montefiorc,  C.  G.,  I.  203
Morality —
Conditions  of  advance  in,  I.  20,  36,

37

Instinctive  element  in,  I.  16
Relation  of,  to  sympathy,  I.  17
Moral  sanctions  in  early  thought,  I.

50  seq.,  182,  184

Moral  standard,  I.  35  ;  II.  195  seq.
affected  by  reciprocity,  I.  18

,,  ,, self-interest,  I.  18

based  on  human  character,  I.  16-18
Fundamental  uniformity  of,  I.  32
related  to  social  conditions,  I.  18-20,

25,  35,  37,  38

Varying  effectiveness  of,  I.  26-28
Morgan,  L.  E.,  I.  52,  54,  88,  143,  171,

337,  338,  347,  348,  349  ;  II.  67
Mother,  respect  for,  I.  189
Mother-right,  I.  51,  54,  58,  59, 160-162,

167  seq.,  178,  188-190,  200
Muir,  T.,  1.  191,  302,  304  ;  II.  88,  91
Mutilation,  as  ceremony  of  mourning,  I.

46

Mysticism,  II.  47,  48,  98-101,  114  seq.
Myth-making,  II.  27  seq.

NATURAL  rights,  II.  226  seq.


INDEX


291


Natural  selection,  I.  6

Nature,  II.  151,  186

as  foundation  of  virtue,  II.  163,  164,
170-172,  177,  189  seq.,  195,  200,
208,  211,  225,  248,  249
Law  of,  I.  274  ;  II.  200  seq., 211,
223  seq.,  274

Nationalism,  I.  373

Niyoga,  custom  of,  I.  195,  196

Non-resistance,  I.  272,  277

North  American  Indians,  I.  53,  54,  82,
83,  85,  99, 128,  136,  137,  140,  141,
143,  144,  152,  158,  167,  168,  170-
173,  1"5,  243,  248-252,  286,  333,
336-35  3,  347-350  ;  II.  12,  51,  55,
67

Numbers,  Book  of,  I.  202,  258,  339  ;  II.
121

OATH,  I.  102-104,  120

Obligation,  II.  191,  192,  215  seq,  269,

275

Old,  W.  <?.,!!.  115,  116
Omnipotence,  II.  130-135,  272
Oppcrt,  0.,  I.  293
Ordeals,  I. 102-104, 108, 109, 120,

123,  124

Orthogenic  evolution,  II.  244
Owen,  R.,  I.  219

Paine,  Tom,  II.  226-228
Palmer,  E.  H.,  I.  90  ;  II.  129,  140
Pantheism,  II.  41,  86,  130
Parents,  duty  to,  II.  173

Rights  of,  I.  182
Paternity,  I.  163,  164
Patriarchate,  I.  51,  52,  152,  160,  182.

190,  198,  199.  200,  207,  208,  210J

211,  217;  II.  88,  178
Payne,  K  J.,  I.  37,  249  ;  II.  6,  64
Peace, Ideal  of,  I.  260  seq.,  277:  II.

126

Peasantry  in  modern  Europe,  I.  325
Pelagius,  II.  131
Penance,  II.  141  seq.
Perfection,  II.  112,  114
Personality,  I.  196,  369  seq.,  II.  198

Transference  of,  I.  245
Phariseeism,  II.  54,  55
Philosophic  life,  II.  198
Pike,  L.  0.,  I.  112,  113,  115
Plato,  I.  18,  209,  267,  268,  309;  II.

150,  189  seq.,  193,  194,  203
Pleasure  and  pain,  I.  9  ;  II.  212,  241,

245,  246
Pollock  and  Maitland,  I.  85,  87,  91,  95,

100-102,  105,  107,  109,  117,  223,

224,  314,  320,  334,  335  ;  II.  153
Polyandry,  I.  136,  137,  208


Polygamy,  I.  37,  38, 135-137,  141-143,
177,  181,  182,  185,  186,  190,  191,
194,  201,  204,  205,  217
in  European  civilization,  I.  220
Polytheism,  II.  31,  32,  35-37,  40,  41

47-49,  59-61,  85,  120,  235
Poor —

in  classical  civilizations,  I.  355-358
in  Middle  Ages,  I.  358-360
in  modern  Europe,  I.  360-363
in  oriental  civilizations,  I.  350-355
Popular  sovereignty,  I.  371
Post,  A.  H.,  I.  52,  54,  57,  60,  82,  85,
87,  89-93,  95,  97,  100,  103,  107,
136,  140,  143-145,  150,  151,  153,
157,  158,  166-168,  172-175,  247,
253,  285,  289,  290,  305,  334,  335,
337,  338,  341,  342  ;  II.  52,  55
Powers,  S.,  I.  140, 141,  152,  175,  246  ;

II.  30,  31,  63
Practical  reason,  II.  247
Prayer,  II.  43-46,  57,  68,  69,  76-78,

95

Predestination,  II.  131  seq.
Primitive  thought,  I.  30
Prisoners,  treatment  of,  I.  244  seq.
Private  judgment,  II.  209
Progress,  I.  33,  34,  40 ;  II.  280  seq.
Promiscuity,  I.  140,  173
Property,  I.  ch.  viii ;  II.  73,  155,  253,

254
Protestantism, I.  146,  227,  228. See

Calvin  and  Luther
Proverbs,  Book  of,  I.  202
Ptah-Hotep,  I.  187  ;  II.  160
Punishment  by  branding,  I.  114
by  imprisonment,  I.  115,  116
by  mutilation,  I.  116,  117
by  transportation,  I.  115
Capital,  I.  114-117  ;  II.  169
Eternal,  II.  131  seq.
Future,  II.  272

Growth  of  severity  in,  I.  111-113
Public,  I.  82,  83,  104-106
Reform  of,  in  modern  times,  I.  113

seq.
Rational  conception  of,  I.  113  seq.  :

II.  136-138,  197
Purification,  II.  104
Purpose,  I.  2-4

QUARTER,  I.  253,  254,  257,  261,  26  ,

269 271 272

refused,  1/244,  246,  252-255,  257,
262,  265,  266,  269,  271,  272

RANSOM,  I.  266

Rationalism, II. 210, 213  seq.,  251 ,
252,  273,  274


292


INDEX


Rationalists,  I.  114

Ratzcl,  I.  29,  154,  167,  173,  286,  336

Reality,  II.  181,  182,  241,  268

Reason  and  desire,  II.  213  seq.

Redus,  E.,  I.  98,  136,  137,  145,  154,
170,  172,  241,  244,  251,  287,  349,
350  ;  II.  7,  13,  50-52,  62,  63

Reflex  action,  I.  2,  3  ;  II.  258,  259

Regicide,  II.  176

Relativity,  II.  251-254

Religion,  II.  23,  86,  87

as  ground  of  social  union,  I.  48,  49
Development  of,  II.  265  seq.
Relation  to  ethics,  II.  235  seq.,  248.
See  Animism,  Polytheism,  Mono
theism,  etc.

Remorse,  II.  53,  54

Repentance,  II.  101,  123

Responsibility,  I.  93  seq.

Collective,  I.  90,  92,  123,  124
Individual,  I.  117-119.
Vicarious,  I.  90

Retaliation. See  Justice

Retribution,  II.  96

Revillout,  E.,  I.  183-185,  190

Ehys Davids,  T.  W.,  II.  103,  108-110,
112

Rightlessness,  I.  285,  287,  296,  297,
308,  310,  311

Rights-
Gradation  of,  I.  283,  288-291,  302,

303,  313,  318,  322
in  modern  state,  I.  119-121
in  primitive  and  advanced  thought,

I.  33,  67
Personal,  I. 68  seq.,  75,  172

Rivers,  W.  H.  II.,  I.  54

Robertson  Smith,  I.  354  ;  II.  70

Roman  jurists,  I.  311,  312  ;  II.  205

Rome —

Early  conditions,  I.  66,  268,  271
Family  life, I.  150, 177,  210-216,

349

Government, I.  83,  107,  110
Law  and  Custom,  I.  310,  313,  336,

339,  356-358
Religious  conceptions,  II.  4,  60

Roth,  I.  125

Roumania,  I.  231

Rousseau,  II.  226,  227

Russia,  I.  231,  325,  329


SACRIFICE,  I.  46  ;  II.  39,  70,  90,  122,

123

Samuel,  Book  of,  II.  120,  122
Sarasin,  F.  and  P.,  I.  44,  145
Satan,  II.  127
Saussaye,  P.  de  la,  II.  4,  9,  31,  34


How far comparable to  primitive

men,  I.  28,  29,  48
Moral  qualities  of,  I.  29,  32,  33
Sayce,  A.  H.,  I.  256,  257,  351
Scandinavia,  I.  233
Scape-goat,  II.  65
Schmidt, I.  141, 145, 152, 166, 253,

287,  337,  349
Schoolcra/t,  I.  88,  143,  152,  158,  245,

251,  348-350  ;  II.  31,  51
Schoolcraft- Drake, I. 152, 246, 251,

336,  347

Schroder,  R.,  I.  83,  87,  100,  102,  109,
110,  313,  314,  315,  318,  319,  349
Science,  II.  279
Scotland,  I.  234
Self,  II.  98,  99

assertion,  II.  148,  271
denial,  II.  157,  159
development,  II.  198,  199,  276
interest,  I.  18
sacrifice,  II.  210
suppression,  II.  198,  272,  296
Serfdom,  I.  64,  283,  289,  290,  295,  296,
308,  309,  311,  312,  317  seq.,  360
Servia,  I.  231
She  King, I.  197-200,  262,  263,  305,

352

Shoo  King,  I.  263,  352
Sidgwick,  A.,  II.  59
Sidgwick,  H.,  I.  73
Sin,  II.  138

Purging,  II.  65,  67
Slavery,  I.  110,  124,  156,  202;  II.  110,

124,  156,  201,  202
Abolition  of,  I.  328
and  forced  labour,  I.  329
Conditions  of, I. 64, 66, 74, 252,

284

Criticism  of,  I.  311
for  debt,  I.  288,  292,  293,  308,  311
General  conception  of,  I,  282,  283
Grades  of,  I.  288,  289
Hereditary,  I.  288
in  oriental  civilization,  I.  291-307
in  uncivilized  world,  I.  285-291
Modern  negro,  I.  326-329
of  co-religionists  forbidden,  I.  305,

306

Question  of,  I.  268
Slaves —

Domestic  and  foreign,  I.  298-300

Duty  to,  I.  353

Manumission  of,  encouraged,  I.  306,

324

Position  of,  in  England,  I.  322
Prohibition  to  recruit  from  captives,
I.  271-273,  314-315


INDEX


293


Slaves — contd.

Protection  of,  I.  201,  288-292,  297-

301,  305,  308,  309
recruited  from  captives,  I.  246,  252
seq.,  258,  265,  266,  269-271,  284,
285,  288,  294,  298,  305,  307,  308
Slave  trade,  I.  291,  305,  315

Abolition  of, I.  328
Social  changes,  I.  23-25,  40
Socialists,  II.  155
Social organization,  I.  42, 43,  47-50,

77,  78

Social  reform,  II.  123,  278,  279
Socrates,  II.  180,  187
Sophists,  II.  185,  186
Sorcerers,  I.  46

Punishment  of,  I.  82,  91
Soul,  II.  3,  5,  17,  22,  37,  39
Spencer,  H.,  I.  169

Speiicer  mid  Gillen,  Messrs.,  I.  49,  50,
82,  138,  139, 158,  163,  175,  242,
248,  337 ;  II.  6,  13,  17,  18,  27-29,
31,  50,  51,  57
Spirit,  II.  99,  100
in  evolution,  II.  137,  138,  239  seq.,

267,  268,  276  seq.

Spirits,  II.  15,  31-33,  56,  74,  87,  91.
Appeasing,  II.  70
punish  immoral  actions,  II.  66-67
Spiritual  religion,  II.  117,  118,  275
Starcke,  C.  N.,  I,  145,  173,  188
State,  I.  68  seq.,  97
The  city,  I.  72  seq.
The  modern,  I. 75  seq.,  119,  120,

367  seq.

Theory  of,  II.  228  seq.
Steinmetz,  M.t  I.  39,  48,  81,  128-131,

167

Stoics,  I.  316  ;  II.  200  seq.
Supernatural,  II.  151
Sutherland,  A.,  I.  97,  348
Sympathy,  I.  17

TABOO,  I.  62,  81  seq.,  148,  149,  332  ;

II.  14,  15,  21,  51-53,  55,  66,  72
Tacitus,  I.  269
Taoism,  II.  86
Theft-
Punishment  of,  I.  86,  334  seq.
Thomas  Aquinas,  I.  359  ;  II.  130
T-hucydides,  I.  265-267, 308  ;  II.  186
Torture,  I. 109-111, 245, 247, 257,

262
Totemism,  I.  49,  50,  59, 145 ;  II.  13,  18,

Trade  guilds,  I.  357,  358

Trade  unionism,  I.  372

Tradition,  I. 13-16;  II.  262,  263,  281

seq.


Traditional  morality,  II.  182,  183,  185,

263,  274

Transmigration,  II.  11,  102
Treaties,  I.  256
Tribal  union,  I.  55,  56
Tribute,  I.  259
Truth,  II.  93,  104
Tylor,  E.B.,  I.  39,  91,  145,  155,  164,

165,  333  ;  II.  3-5, 8-10, 13,  29,

30

Ulpian,  I.  213,  214,  311
United  States,  I.  235,  236
Universalism,  I. 271, 316,  330, 331

II.  126,  150,  177,  202
Upanishads,  I.  353  ;  II.  98,  99,  110
Usury,  I.  354,  355  ;  II.  105
Utilitarianism,  I. 114; II.  212,213,

231  seq.

VALIDITY,  II.  217,  218

Vedas,  I.  260  ;  II.  88,  89,  97

Veddahs,  I.  43-45,  47

Vendidad,  The,  II.  92

Vengeance,  I.  105,  334

Vice,  II.  192-194

Village  community,  I.  59-61

Vinaya  texts,  II.  Ill,  113

Vinogradoff,  Prof.,  I.  56,  162,  221,  316,

320,  321
Viollet,  P.,  I.  213,  219-221,  223,  224,

226,  229,  313,  315,  326,  327,  339
Virtue  for  its  own  sake,  II.  114,  162,

187  seq.

Wace  and  Biwhheim,  II.  140
Wailing  for  the  dead,  II.  6
Waitz,G.,  I.  86,  92,  217
Waitz,  T.,  I.  52,  82,  85,  88,  90-93,  99,
139,  144,  146,  154,  167-169,  171,
173,  241-253,  285-287,  289,  291,
315,  333,  334,  347-350  ;  II.  5,  31,
62-64,  67

Wallace,  A.  R.,  I.  5
"War,  I.  241  seq.

between  white  men  and  savages.  I.

274,  276

Chivalry  in,  I.  243,  261,  273
Ethics  of,  II.  104
in  classical  civilization,  I.  265-271
in  early  civilization,  I.  254  seq.
in  uncivilized  world,  I.  81,  242
in  Western  Europe,  I.  272  seq.
Just  and  unjust,  I.  272,  276,  277
Private,  I.  277
unknown  among  some savages, I

Wergild,  I.  87,  88,  91,  313


294


INDEX


Weslerfnurck,  E.,  I. 56,  96,  122-133,
136,  137,  140,  141,  143,  144,  146,
150,  156-158,  166,  167,  172-176,
347,  348  ;  II.  51
Widow,  position  of,  I.  191,  199
Wilcox,  I.  236
Will,  II.  244-246,  262
Wines,  F.  H.,  I.  114-116
Wisdom  literature,  II.  126
Wissowa,  II.  34,  60
Witchcraft,  I.  82, 83,  93, 104,  131  ;

II.  22,  39,  44

Wottestonccraft,  Mary,  I.  228
Women,  II.  104,  110,  113,  114
Attitude  to,  I. 203,  206,  207,  209,

215,  216,  226,  227,  238
Equality  with  men,  I.  183,184,  188-

190
Position  of,  I.  36,  134  seq.,  207  seq.,

223,  224,  365

among  uncivilized  races,  I.  81, 164
seq.


Women, positionof,  in  English  law,  1.112
in  oriental  civilization,  I.  179  seq.,

197-200,  203-206
in  relation  to  marriage  law,  I.  134,

159  seq.
Rights  of  unmarried  in  middle  ages,

I.  224
Eights of unmarried in modern

period,  I.  226

Treatment  of,  in  war, I,  250-252,
256,  258,  260,  261,  265,  266,  269

Xenophon,  I.  209,  266

YAHGANS,  I.  45-47
Yahveh,  II.  22,  35,  119  seq.

Zechariah,  II.  126

Zend  Avesta,  I.  95 ;  II.  91-97

Zeiw,  II.  185

Zeus,  II.  34,  35

Zimmern,  H.,  II.  69,  76

Zulus,  II,  8


THE  END


