Morals in Evolution, Part I
L. T. Hobhouse (1906)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): L. T. Hobhouse's 'Morals in Evolution: A Study in Comparative Ethics', Part I (New York: Henry Holt, 1906). Scan via Internet Archive (University of Toronto). Library matter trimmed from the front; printer's imprint trimmed from the back. This 1906 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION


A  STUDY  IN  COMPARATIVE  ETHICS


L.  T.  HOBHOUSE


I. ATE FELLOW AND ASSISTANT TfTOR OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD,
FORMERLY FELLOW OF MKRTOS COLLEGE


PART  I


NEW  YORK

HENRY  HOLT AND COMPANY

1906


RICHARD  CLAY  &  SONS,  LIMITED,

BBEAD  STREET  HILL,  E.C.,  AND

BUNGAY,  SUFFOLK.


PREFACE

THE  purpose  of  the  present  work  is  to  approach  the  theory
of  ethical  evolution  through  a  comparative  study  of  rules  of
conduct  and  ideals  of  life.  In  this  branch  of  evolutionary
science  theory  arid  fact  sometimes  tend  to  fall  apart.  Hypo
theses  may  be  formed  by  the  method  of  brilliant  conjecture
without  any  firm  basis  in  the  actual  history  of  the  moral  con
sciousness,  while  that  history  as  revealed  in  the  mass  of  recorded
customs  and  doctrines  concerning  conduct  sometimes  tends  to  be
lost  in  a  mass  of  anthropological  detail  wherein  it  is  impossible
to  see  the  wood  for  the  trees.  The  attempt  made  in  these
volumes  is  to  ascertain  the  main  features  of  development,  and  by
piecing  them  together  to  present  a  sketch  in  which  the  essentials
of  the  whole  process  will  be  depicted  in  outline.

In  this  method  of  handling  the  subject,  no  hypothesis  as  to
the  causes  of  evolution  is  required.  Even  the  hypothesis  of
evolution  itself  is  not  strictly  necessary.  Our  object  is  to
distinguish  and  classify  different  forms  of  ethical  ideas — a
morphology  of  ethics  comparable  to  the  physical  morphology
of  animals  and  plants.  The  results  of  such  a  comparative
study,  if  firmly  based  on  recorded  facts,  would  remain  standing
if  the  theory  of  evolution  were  shattered.  At  the  same  time,
here  as  elsewhere,  the  results  of  classification  when  seen  in
the  light  of  evolutionary  theory  acquire  a  wholly  new  signifi
cance  and  value.  They  furnish  us  with  a  conception  of  the
trend  of  human  development  based  not  on  any  assumption
as  to  the  underlying  causes  at  work,  but  on  a  matter-of-fact
comparison  of  the  achievements  reached  at  different  stages
of  the  process  itself.


vi  PREFACE

Little,  therefore,  will  be  said  here  of  the  psychological  forces
which  underlie  the  ethical  consciousness;  little  of  the  socio
logical  and  other  factors  which  accelerate  or  retard  development.
These  lie  for  the  most  part  outside  our  immediate  province.
It  is  the  essential  facts  of  development  itself  that  we  are
seeking  to  ascertain.  Such  an  inquiry  encounters  many  diffi
culties  of  its  own.  Vast  and  complex  subjects  must  be  handled
with  a  brevity  which  to  one  specially  interested  in  them  will
appear  quite  inadequate.  The  conclusions  of  a  hundred  special
isms  must  be  used  by  one  who  from  the  nature  of  the  case
cannot  himself  be  a  specialist  in  any  of  them.  Hence  the
openings  alike  for  error  of  detail  and  for  disproportion  of  general
handling  are  great.  Nor  is  it  possible  to  avoid  subjects  of
controversy.  For  the  study  of  development,  the  ethics  of
civilization  are  not  less,  but,  if  anything,  more  important  than
those  of  savagery,  and  have  therefore  received  closer  attention
in  this  work.  But  the  complexities  of  civilized  ethics,  inter
woven  as  they  are  with  religious  and  political  doctrines,  can
only  be  treated  within  the  limits  of  a  general  sketch  by  keeping
strictly  to  what  is  distinctive  and  fundamental  in  each  system,
and  of  this  only  so  much  is  selected  for  discussion  as  is  deemed
to  have  a  bearing  on  ethical  development.  In  such  selection
the  general  philosophic  bias  of  the  inquirer  is  only  too  apt  to
have  an  influence.  Further,  it  is  a  part  of  the  plan  of  the  work
to  estimate  critically  the  position  of  each  system  in  the  line  of
ethical  development,  and  in  such  criticism  it  is  still  harder  to
put  aside  all  preconceived  opinions.  The  alternative  would  be
to  omit  the  ethics  of  Christendom  and  the  problems  of  modern
thought  altogether.  This  I  felt  would  mutilate  the  inquiry,
and  I  have  accordingly  endeavoured  to  treat  these  subjects
precisely  on  the  same  footing  and  in  the  same  spirit  as  others,
that  is  to  say,  as  phases  of  development  to  be  critically  but  quite
impartially  examined.  In  the  sketch  of  modern  philosophy,
however,  I  have  briefly  set  forth  the  analysis  of  the  fundamental
problems  which  expresses  my  own  views,  and  in  the  final  chapter
I  have  drawn  some  broad  conclusions  from  the  general  trend
of  ethical  development.

My obligations to other  writers are, I hope, adequately
acknowledged in detail. Dr.  Westermarck's  important  work


PREFACE  vii

on  the  Orif/in  and  Growth  of  the  Moral  Ideas  would  have  been
of  immense  value  to  me  had  it  appeared  a  little  earlier. It  is
particularly  satisfactory  to  me  to  find  that  so  far  as  we  cover
the  same  field  my  results  generally  harmonize  with  his,  and
this  notwithstanding  a  material  divergence  in  ethical  theory.
On  almost  every  page  of  some  of  my  chapters  references  to  his
volume might be added  to my footnotes, and with certain
questions  raised  by  his  inquiry  I  have  dealt  in  an  appendix.
I have  to  thank  many  friends  for advice as  to reading  on
special subjects. Among  them I should like to name Mr.
Hat'berg  Wright  of  the  London  Library,  Mr. LI.  Griffith,  and
the  late  Mr.  W.  T.  Arnold. Prof.  VinogradorF  and  Dr.  Estlin
Carpenter  have most  kindly  read large portions of  the  MS.,
and  suggested  many  valuable  criticisms,  though  of  course  neither
of  them is  to  be held  responsible for  anything  that  is  here
printed. Lastly,  I  have  to  thank  Dr.  Slaughter,  Secretary  of
the  Sociological  Society,  and  Miss  M.  Harris,  for  undertaking
the  heavy  and  responsible  task  of  verifying  the  references.

L.  T.  HOBHOUSE.

Wimbledon,  June  1906.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS

PART I
THE STAXDAlil)

CHAPTER I

I'A'.E

THE  SCOPE  AND  METHOD  OF  COMPARATIVE  ETHICS .  1

(1)  The  guidance  of  life  by  acknowledged  principles  is  peculiar
to  humanity  ;  (2)  Yet  throughout  the  organic  world  action
is  regulated — in  the  lowest  stages  by  hereditary  structure  ;

(3)  As  such  it  takes  the  form  of  Reflex  Action,  or  of  Instinct.

(4)  Among  the  higher  animals  instinctive  action  is  modified
by  the intelligent  use  of  experience. (5)  In  man  instinct
appears  as  hereditary  character,  the  operation  of  which  is
largely  shaped  by  tradition. (6)  Traditional  custom  arises
from  the  interaction  of  personal  forces  ;  (7)  and  the  morality
which  it  embodies  is  imperfect ;  (8)  but  must  from  the  tir>t
correspond  roughly  with  the  essential  conditions  of  social
life,  and  as  intelligence  grows is  re-modelled by a  more
distinct  conception of  the good. (9)  The history  of  the
conception  of  the  good  is  the  proper  subject  of  Comparative
Ethics. Religious  and  social  developments  must  be  traced  so
far  as  they  affect  this  conception  ;  (10)  and  without  writing
a  history  of  conduct  we  must distinguish  between  ideals
and  \vork-a-day  rules  of  action. (11)  Dilliculties  in  applying
the  Comparative  Method  due  to  the  blending  of  similarity
with  difference  in  ethical  conceptions. (12;  Our  first  aim
must be  a  classification  of  ethical  types  which we  must,
next,  compare  with  different  stages  of  general  development  ;
(13)  dealing  first  with  the  Standard  of  action  and  then  with
the  Basis  we  may  finally  approach  the  question  whether
there  is  or  is  not  a  discernible  line  of  Ethical  development.

CHAPTER II

FORMS  OF  SOCIAL  ORGANIZATION 42

(1)  Social  organization  if  never  wholly  lacking,  is  in  some  cases
very  rudimentary  ;  (2)  as  among  the  Veddahs  (3)  and  the
Yahgans.  (4)  Forms  of  Social  organization  may  be  classified
in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  union  which  lies  at  their
base.  In  early  societies  kinship  is  the  most  important
principle  ;  (5)  The  development  of  the  clan  and  tribe  ;
ix


PAGE


x  ANALYSIS OF  CONTENTS

(6)  resting  on  the  double  tie  of  kinship  through  descent  and
intermarriage ;  (7)  Character  of  the  Commune ;  (8)  The
principle  of  authority  blending  the  right  of  the  stranger
with  certain  ethical  conceptions ;  (9)  The  principle  of
citizenship,  personal  rights  and  the  common  good  ;  (10)  ine
city  state  and  its  limitations;  (IV  The  modern  state  and
its  relation  to  Humanity.

CHAPTER  III

70

LAW  AND  JUSTICE • • • ; T '

(1)  Civilized  justice  is  the  result  of  a  long  evolution ;  (S)  H
primitive  societies  public  punishments  are  in  the  main  limited
to  certain  actions  held  dangerous  to  the  community,
(3)  while  private  wrongs  are  redressed  by  vengeance  leading
to  the  blood  feud.  Vengeance  at  first  takes  the  form  oi
retaliation,  (4)  which  gives  way  to  composition  ;  (5)  The
blood  feud  (a)  ignores  wrongs  to  outsiders,  and  (6)  tends
to  hold  the  whole  group  responsible  for  each  member ;
(6)  and  as  a  consequence  tends  to  ignore  questions  of  moral
responsibility  ;  (7)  The  growth  of  public  justice ;  (8)  The
oath  and  the  ordeal;  (9)  The  substitution  of  justice  for
vengeance,  (10)  accompanied  at  first  by  severity  in  inquir
ing  into,  (11)  and  punishing  crime  ;  (12)  The  reform  of
the  criminal  law.

CHAPTER IV

MARRIAGE  AND  THE  POSITION  OF  WOMEN  • 134

(1)  The  position  of  women  mainly  turns  on  the  conception  of
marriage  ;  (2)  Types  of  marriage— monogamy,  polygamy,
polyandry ;  (3)  The  question  of  group-marriage ;  (4)  The
looser  forms  of  union  commoner  among  uncivilized  peoples  ;
(5)  Restrictions  on  marriage,  complex  and  extensive  in  early
society,  tend  to  be  simplified  and  reduced  in  the  civilized
world  ;  (6)  They  are  to  be  explained  as  serving  certain
social  and  ethical  functions  ;  (7)  The  stability  of  marriage
varies  in  every  possible  degree.  Among  uncivilized  peoples
the  looser  forms  on  the  whole  predominate  ;  (8)  Marriage
by  capture,  purchase,  service  and  consent ;  (9)  All  the  fore
going  variations  are  closely  connected  with  the  evolution  of
the  family  as  an  ethical  union.  Stages  in  this  development.
(10)  The  growth  of  father-right  and  the  consolidation  of  the
family  are  not  favourable  to  the  position  of  women  ;  (11)  Yet
it  is  a  mistake  to  imagine  a  golden  age  of  woman  under
mother-right ;  (12)  The  position  of  women  in  early  society
varies  from  many  causes,  but  on  the  whole  is  one  of  inferior
rights.

CHAPTER  V

WOMEN  IN  THE  CIVILIZED  WORLD 178

(1)  Women  in  the  early  Oriental  civilizations — Babylonia ;
(2)  Their  relatively  good  position  in  Egypt  ;  (3)  Their  sub
jection  in  India,  (4)  China,  (5)  among  the  Hebrews,


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS  xi


PAGE


(6)  under  Islam,  and  (7)  in  ancient  Greece  ;  (ft)  Their
subject  condition  in  early  Roman  Law,  (9)  fundamentally
changed  by  the  new  form  of  marriage  ;  (10)  Later  Roman
law  modiii'ed  by  Germanic  custom  and  the  attitude  of  the
Church.  Free  consent,  indissoluble  marriage,  and  (11)  the
subjection  of  the  wife.  (12)  Changes  produced  by  the
modern  conception  of  personal  rights;  (13)  Effect  on  the
stability  of  marriage— divorce  in  Europe,  (14)  in  the
British  Empire,  and  (15)  in  the  United  States.  (1C)  Changes
in  the  conception  of  marriage  and  the  position  of  women.

CHAPTER VI

THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  COMMUNITIES  .

(1)  The  lower  stages  of  development  dominated  by  group-
morality,  i.e.  the  restriction  of  obligations  ;  (2)  Hence  the
prevalence  of  warfare,  which,  however,  even  among  savages,
has  its  rules  ;  (3)  The  treatment  of  prisoners  varies,  but
generally  implies  a  denial  of  human  rights;  (4)  Develop
ment  of  captive-slavery  in  early  civilization  ;  (5)  Growth
of  ideal  of  peace  among"  the  Hebrews;  (6)  Practices  of  war
fare  and  ideals  of  peace  in  India  and  China  ;  (7)  The
advance  towards  civilized  methods  in  Greece  and  Rome  ;
(8)  The  effect  of  the  world-religions  in  generalizing  the
conception  of  personal  rights;  (<J)  These  more  explicitly
maintained  in  modem  international  law  ;  (10)  The  con
ception  of  national  rights  and  duties  forms  an  integral  part
of  modern  ethics.

CHAPTER VII

CLASS  RELATIONS

(1)  Group-morality  within  the  community  takes  the  form  pi
partial  or  complete  denial  of  rights  to  certain  classes.  Of  this,
slavery  is  the  principal  example  ;  (2)  Irregular  development
of  slavery  in  the  uncivilized  world  and  its  tendency  to
increase  along  with  the  first  advances  in  culture  ;  (3)  Varying
degrees  of  protection  enjoyed  by  the  slave  at  this  stage  ;
(4)  Slavery  in  the  early  Oriental  civilizations  ;  (5)  among
the  Hebrews  ;  (6)  Slavery  and  caste  in  India  ;  (7)  The  law
of  China  ;  (8)  of  Islam  ;  (9)  of  ancient  Greece  ;  (10)  The
development  under  Roman  law  ;  (11)  Decay  of  white  slavery
during  the  Middle  Ages  ;  (12)  The  rise,  character,  and
decline  of  serfdom  ;  (13)  Rise  and  suppression  of  negro
slavery  ;  (14)  Present  position  of  the  question — the  conflict
between  humanitarianism  and  group-morality.

CHAPTER  VIII

PROPERTY  AND  POVERTY ... 332

(1)  Rights  of  property  not  uniformly  developed  in  early  society  ;
(2)  Late  development  of  private  ownership  of  land:  (3)
Corresponding  development  of  contract  ;  (4)  Modern  limita
tions  of  private  property  and  free  contract ;  (5)  Treatment  of


PAGE


xii  ANALYSIS  OF  CONTENTS

the  poor  and  helpless varies  greatly  in  early  societies  ;

(6)  Insistence  on  almsgiving  in  the  Oriental  civilizations  ;

(7)  Provision  for  the  poor  in  Greece  and  Rome  ;  (8)  Mediaeval
charity  and  modern  poor  la\vs.

SUMMARY 364

The  two  sides  of  development,  social  duty  and  personal  right
at  times  appear  to  conflict,  but  in  their  full  development
are  mutually  dependent.  Their  reconciliation  the  principle
of  the  highest  social  organization.


PRINCIPAL AUTHORITIES  AND
ABBREVIATIONS.

THE  principal  authorities  used  in  this  work  are  given  in  the  following
list.  Foot-note  references  in  most  cases  give  the  name  of  the  author  only,
together  with  the  volume  and  page  cited,  but  the  full  title  of  each  work
and  the  edition  used  is  given  in  the  appended  li>t.  Wherever  any  other
form  of  abbreviation  is  used  than  that  of  the  author's  name,  it  will  be
found  following  the  full  title  in  square  brackets.

ALABASTER,  E.  :  Notes  and  Commentaries  on  Chinese  Criminal  Law. 1899.

Chiefly  founded  on  the  writings  of  the  late  Sir  C.  Alabaster.
AMELINEAU  :  La  Morale  Kgyptienne  quiuze  siecles  avant  notre  ere  :  Etude

sur  le  papyrus  de  Bnulaq. 1892.
APASTAMBA  :  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in  the  schools  of

Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasishtha,  Baudhayana. Translated  by  Georg

Buhler. Part I.  Apastamba and  Gautama. Sacred Books  of  the

East,  vol.  ii.

BATCHELOR,  .T.  :  The  Ainu  of  Japan. The religion, superstitions,  and

general  history  of  the  hairy  aborigines  of  Japan. 1892.
BAUDHAYANA  : The  Sacred Laws of  the  Aryas. Translated by Georg

Buhk-r. Part  II. Vasishtha  and  Baudhayana. Sacred  Books  of  the

East,  vol.  xiv.
BENTHAM,  J.,  The  Works  of:  Published  under  the  superintendence  of  his

executor,  John  Bowring. 1843.

BLACKSTONE  :  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England. 17G5-G9.
BRIDGES.  J.  II.  :  Discourses  on  the  Positive  Religion. 1891.
BRUNS,  C.  G.  :  Fontes  Juris  Komani  Antiqui  (4th  ed.).
BRYCE,  RT.  HON.  J.  : Studies  in  History  and  Jurisprudence. 1901.
BUDGE,  E.  A.  W.  :  Book  of  the  Dead. An  English  translation  of  the  chapters,

hymns,  etc.,  of  the  Theban  recension. 1901.
BUDDHIST  SUTTAS  :  Translated  from  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids. Sacred

Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xi.
BUSOLT,  G.  : Die  Griechischen  Staats-  u.  Rechtsaltertiimer. In I. E. P.

von  Mailer's  Handbuch  der  klassischen  Altertumswissenschaft,  Bd.  iv.

1891.

CALVIN,  J.  :  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion. Translated  by  J.  Allen.

1838.

CAMBRIDGE  Expedition  to  the  Torres  Straits. 1904.
CATLIN,  G.  :  Letters  and  Notes  on  the  manners,  customs,  and  conditions  of

the  North  American  Indians. 1841.

xiii


xiv AUTHORITIES  AND  ABBREVIATIONS

COENISH,  C.  J.  :  Animals  at  Work  and  Play  :  their  activities  and  emotions.

1896.
CORPUS  JURIS  :  Ed.  Richter. 1879-81. Note.— References  to  the  Council

of  Trent  are  taken  from  the  earlier  edition,  1839.

DALTON,  E.  :  Descriptive  Ethnology  of  Bengal. 1872.

DAEESTE,  R. :  Etudes  d'histoire  du  droit. 1889.

DE  GROOT,  J.  J.  H.  :  The  Religious  System  of  China ;  its  ancient  forms,

evolution,  history,  and  present  aspects,  etc. 1892.
DHAMMAPADA  :  Translated  from  the  Pali  by  F.  Max  Miiller. Sacred  Books

of  the  East,  vol.  x.
DICEY,  PROF.  A.  V. : Lectures  on  the  relation  between  Law  and  Opinion

in  England  during  the  Nineteenth  Century. 1905.
DOUGLAS,  SIR  R.  K.  :  Society  in  China. 1894.

DRAKE,  F.  S.  :  The  Indian  Tribes  of  the  United  States. Based  on  School-
craft's "Archives of Aboriginal Knowledge,"  [Schoolcraft-Drake.]
DRIVER,  S.  R.  :  A  Critical  and  Exegetical  Commentary  on  Deuteronomy.

1895.

An  Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament. 1897.

DUNCKER,  M. : The  History  of  Antiquity, Translated  by  M.  E.  Abbott.

1877-83.

ELLIS,  A.  B.  :  The  Tshi-speaking  Peoples  of  the Gold Coast  of  West

Africa. 1887.
The  Yoruba-speaking  Peoples  of  the Slave  Coast  of  West  Africa.

1894.

ERMAN,  A.  :  Life  in  Ancient  Egypt. Translated  by  H.  M.  Tirard. 1894.
ESMEIN,  A.  :  Histoire  de  la  procedure  criminelle  en  France,  et  speciale-

ment  de  la  procedure  inquisitoire  depuis  la  xiii*.  siecle  jusqu'&  nos

jours. 1882.

FARNELL,  L.  R.  :  The  Cults  of  the  Greek  States. 1896.

FOWLE,  T.  W. :  The  Poor  Law. 1881.

FRAZER,  J.  G.  :  The  Golden  Bough,  a  study  in  Comparative Religion.

1900.
FRIEDLANDER,  L.  :  Darstellungen  aus  der  Sittengeschichte  Roms  in  der

Zeit  von  August  bis  zum  Ausgang  der  Antonine. 1888-90.

GIRARD,  P.  F.  :  Manuel  Elementaire  de  Droit  Romain. 1896.
GRIFFITH,  F.  LI.  :  Stories  of  the  High  Priests  of  Memphis. 1900.
GROTIUS,  HUGO  DE  :  De  Jure  Pacis  ac  Belli.

HALL,  W.  E. :  A  Treatise  on  International  Law. 1904.

HARNACK,  A.  :  Outlines  of  the  History  of  Dogma. Translated  from  the

third  German  edition  by  J.  Millar. 1894-99.

•  Lehrbuch  der  Dogmengeschichte. 1894.

HARRISON,  J.  E.  :  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion,  with  a

critical  appendix  on  the  Orphic  Tablets  by  Gilbert  Murray. 1903.
HOWARD,  G.  E.  :  History  of  Matrimonial  Institutions. 1904.
HOWITT,  A.  W.  :  The  Native  Tribes  of  S.E.  Australia. 1904.
On  the  Organization  of  the  Australian  Tribes. Transactions  of  the

Royal  Society  of  Victoria. 1888.
HUGHES,  T.  P.  :  A  Dictionary  of  Islam. 1896.


AUTHORITIES  AXD  ABBREVIATIONS  xv

HUTH,  A.  H.  :  The  Marriage  of  Near  Kin,  considered  with  respect  to  the
Laws  of  Nations,  the  results  of  experience,  etc.  1887.

HYADES  AND  DENIKER  :  Mission  Scientifique  du  Cap  Horn.  Anthropologie,
Ethnographic,  par  P.  Hyades.  1891.

IHEEIXG,  R.  VON  :  Evolution  of  the  Aryan. Translated  from  the  German

by  A.  Drucker.  1897.
Geist  des  rb'mischen  Rechts,  auf  den  verschiedenen  Stufen  seiner

Entwickelung.  1891.
INGRAM,  J.  K.  :  A  History  of  Slavery  and  Serfdom.  1895.

JASTROW,  MORRIS  :  The  Religion  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria. 1895.

JENKS,  E.  :  Law  and  Politics  in  the  Middle  Ages. 1898.

JEVONS,  F.  1-5.  :  An  Introduction  to  the  History  of  Religion. 1902.

JOHNS,  C.  H.  W.  :  The  Oldest  Code  of  Laws  in  the  World. [Hammurabi.]

JOURNAL  DES  SAVANTS.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE. [J.  A.  I.]

KINOSLEY,  M.  II.  :  West  African  Studies. 1899.

KOHLER  u.  PEISER:  Aus  dem  Babylonischen  Rechtsleben. 1890.

— -Hammurabi's  Gesetz. 1904.

KORAN  :  Parts  I.  and  II. Translated  by  E.  H.  Palmer. Sacred  Books  of

the  East,  vols.  vi.  and  ix.
KUENEN,  A.  :  The Religion of  Israel to  the  Fall  of  the  Jewish  State.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  A.  II.  May. 1873.

LAFFITTE,  P.  :  A  general  view  of  Chinese  civilization  and  of  the  relations
of  the  West  with  China.  Translated  by  J.  C.  Hall.  1887.

LECKY,  W.  E.  H.  :  History  of  European  Morals  from  Augustus  to  Charle
magne.  1877.

LEGGE,  J.  :  The  Chinese  Classics,  with  a  translation,  critical  and  exegetical
notes,  prolegomena  and  copious  indexes.  1861-72.  Vol.  i.,  Confucian
Analects,  etc.  ;  vol.  ii.,  Works  of  Mencius  ;  vol.  iii.,  The  Shoo  King
(Two  Parts)  ;  vol.  iv.,  The  She-King  (Two  Parts).

LEIST,  B.  W.  :  Grseco-italische  Rechtsgeschichte. 1884.

LETOURNEAU,  C.  :  La  Condition  de  la  Femme  dans  les  diverses  races  et
civilisations.  1903.  [La  Femme.]

La  Guerre  dans  les  diverses  races  humaines. 1895. [La  Guerre.]

-  devolution  de  1'Esclavage  dans  les  diverses  races  humaines. 1885.
[L'Esclava^e.]

LOCH,  C.  S.  :  Encyclopaedia  Britannica.  Ed.  x.  Article,  "Charity  and
Charities."

LUTHER,  MARTIN  :  Luther's  Primary  Works,  together  with  his  shorter  and
larger  catechism?.  Translated  into  English.  Edited,  with  theological
and  historical  essays,  by  Wace  and  Buchheim.  1896.

LYALL,  RT.  HON.  SIR"  A.  :  Asiatic  Studies,  Religious  and  Social.  First
Series.  1882.

MAINE,  SIR  II. : Ancient  Law. 1885.

— —  Village  Communities. 1871.

MANU,  LAWS  OF. Translated  by  Georg  Biihler. Sacred  Books  of  the  East.,

vol.  xxv.
MASPERO,  G.  :  The  Dawn  of  Civilization  : Egvpt  and  Chaldaea. Edited

by  A.  H.  Sayce. Translated  by  M.  L.  McClure. 1901.


xvi AUTHORITIES  AND  ABBREVIATIONS

MASPERO,  G.  :  Eecueil  de  Travaux,  relatifs  a  la  pMlologie  et  a  1'archeologie

Egyptienne  et  Assyrienne. Public  sous  la  direction  de  G.  Maspero.

1870.

MAYNE,  J.  D.  :  A  Treatise  on  Hindu  Law  and  Usage. 1888.
MEISSNER,  B.  :  Beitrage  zum  Altbabylonischen  Privatrecht. 1893.

De  Servitute  Babylonico-Assyriaca. 1882.

MOMMSEN  :  The  History  of  Rome. Translated  by  W.  P.  Dickson. 1894.
MONTEFIORE,  C.  G. :  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Religion  as

illustrated  by  the  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews. Hibbert  Lectures.

1892.
MORGAN,  L.  H.  :  Houses  and  Houselife  of  the  American  Aborigines. 1877.

The  League  of  the  Ho-de-no-sau-nee,  or  Iroquois. 1851. [Iroquois.]

MUIR,  J.  :  Original  Sanscrit  Texts  on  the  Origin  and  History  of  the  people

of  India. 1868-84. 5  vols.
MULLER,  W.  MAX  :  Die  Liebespoesie  der  Alten  Aegypter,  collected  and

translated  into  German  verse. 1897.

OLD,  W.  G.  :  The  Book  of  the  Simple  Way  of  Laotze,  with  Introduction

and  Commentary  by  W.  G.  Old. 1904.
OPPERT,  J.  : La Condition des Esclaves  a Babylone et un contrat

rappelant  la  legende  de  Sardanapale  .  .  .  Extrait  des  comptes  rendus

de  l'Acade"mie  des  Inscriptions. 1888.
OWEN,  R.  :  Institutes  of  Canon  Law. 1884.

PAINE,  T.  :  The  Rights  of  Man.

PAYNE,  E.  J.  :  History  of  the  New  World  called  America. 1892.

PETRIE,  W.  M.  FLINDERS:  Religion  and  Conscience  in Ancient  Egypt.

Lectures  delivered  at  University  College,  London. 1898.
PIKE, L. O.  :  History  of  Crime  in  England,  illustrating  the  changes of

the  Laws  in  the  Progress  of  Civilization. 1873-76.
POLLOCK,  SIR  FREDERICK,  AND  F.  W.  MAITLAND  :  The  History  of  English

Law  before  the  time  of  Edward  I. 1898.

POST,  A.  H.  :  Afrikanische  Jurisprudenz.  Ethnologisch-juristische  Bei
trage  zur  Kenntniss  der  einheimischen  Rechte  Afrikas.  1887.  [Post.

A.  J.]

• Grundriss  der  Ethnologischen  Jurisprudenz. 1894.

POWERS,  S.  :  Tribes  of  California. Geographical  and  Geological  Survey  of

the Rocky Mountain  Region. Contributions  to  N.  A. Ethnology.

Vol.  iii. 1877.

RATZEL  :  History  of  Mankind.  Translated  from  the  second  German
edition  by  A.  J.  Butler,  with  introduction  by  E.  B.  Tylor.  1891.

RECLUS,  E.  :  Primitive  Folk. Studies  in  Comparative  Ethnology. 1889.

REVILLOUT,  E.  :  Precis  du  Droit  Egyptien,  compare  aux  autres"  droits  de
Pantiquite.  1903.

RHYS  DAVIDS,  PROF.  T.  W.  :  Buddhism. 1899.

SARASIN,  F.  AND  P.  :  Ergebnisse  naturwissenschaftlicher  Forschungen  auf

Ceylon  in  den  Jahren  1884-86. 1887-93.
SAUSSAYE,  P.  C.  DE  LA  :  Manual  of  the  Science  of  Religion. Translated

from  the  German  by  B.  S.  Colyer-Fergusson.
SAYCE,  A.  H.  :  Records  of  the  Past,  being  English  Translations,  by  A.  H.

Sayce  and  others,  of  the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian  Monuments 1873.

New  Series,  1890.


AUTHORITIES  AND  ABBREVIATIONS xvii

SCHOOLCRAFT  :  Historical  and  Statistical  Information  respecting  the
history,  condition  and  prospects  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of  the  United
States.  Collected  and  prepared  under  the  direction  of  the  bureau  of
Indian  Affairs,  per  Act  of  Congress  of  March  3rd,  1847.  1851-60.

SCHRODER,  II.  :  Lehrbuch  der  deutschen  Rechtsgeschichte. 1898.

SMITH,  ROBERTSON  :  The  Age  of  the  Semites. 1894.
—  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church. 1881.

SPENCER,  H.  :  Descriptive  Sociology. 1871-80.

SPENCER  AND  GILLEN  :  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia. 1899. [I.]

-  Northern  Tribes  of  Central  Australia. 1904. [II.]

STARCKK,  C.  N.  :  The  Primitive  Family  in  its  Origin  and  Development.

1889.
STEINMETZ,  M.  :  Classification  des  Types  Sociaux  et  catalogue  des  peuples.

Annee  Sociologique. 1898-99.

STEPHKN,  J.  F.,  SIR  :  A  Digest  of  the  Criminal  Law. 1883.
SUTHERLAND  :  The  Origin  and  Growth  of  the  Moral  Instinct. 1898.

TYLOR,  E.  B.  :  Primitive  Culture. 1903.

UPANISHADS  :  Translated  by  F.  Max  Miiller.  Parts  I.  and  II.  Sacred  Books
of  the  East,  vols.  i.  and  xv.

VIXOGRADOFF,  P.  :  Villeinage  in  England. Essays  in  English  Medieval

History. 1891.
VIOLLET,  P.  :  Histoire  du  droit  civil  francais. 1893.

WAITZ,  fr.  :  Deutsche  Verfassungsgeschichte. 1880.
WAIT/,  T.  :  Anthropologie  der  Naturvolker. 1859-72.
WALLACE,  A.  R.  :  Natural  Selection  and  Tropical  Nature. 1871.
WESTERMARCK,  E.  :  History  of  Human  Marriage. 1901.

-  Origin  and  Growth  of  the  Moral  Ideas. 1906.

WINES,  F.  H.  :  Punishment  and  Reformation. A  historical  sketch  of  the

rise  of  the  penitentiary  system. 1895.
WISSOWA  :  Religion  und  Kultus  der  Rb'mer. 1902. In  I.  E.  P.  von  Midler's

Handbuch  der  Klassischen  Altertumswissenschaft,  Bd.  5.

ZEITSCHRIFT  FCR  VERGLEICHKNDE  RECHTSWISSENSCHAFT. [Z.  f.  V.  R.]
ZEND  AVESTA  [Z.A.] :  Part  I. Translated  by  James  Darmesteter. The
Vendidfid. Part  II.  Translated  by  James  Darmesteter. The  Sirozahs,
etc. Part  III. Translated  by  L.  II.  Mills. The  Yasna,  etc. Sacred
Books  of  the  East,  vols.  iv.,  xxiii.,  xxxi.

ZIMMERN,  H.  :  Beitriige  zur  Kenntniss  der  babylonischcn  Religion :
Die  Beschworungstafeln  Sur]>u.  Ritualtafeln  fur  den  Wahrsager,
Beschworer  und  Sa'nger :  Delit/.«ch  u.  Haupt  Bibliothek.  189G.


MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

CHAPTER  I

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF ETHICAL EVOLUTION

1.  THE  object  of  the  present  work  is  to  trace  the  evolution  of
the  ethical  consciousness  as  displayed  in  the  habits  and  customs,
rules  and  principles,  which  have  arisen  in  the  course  of  human
history  for  the  regulation  of  human  conduct.  In  no  part  of  the
world,  and  at  no  period  of  time,  do  we  find  the  behaviour  of
men  left  to  unchartered  freedom.  Everywhere  human  life  is  in
a  measure  organized  and  directed  by  customs,  laws,  beliefs,  ideals,
which  shape  its  ends  and  guide  its  activities.  As  this  guidance
of  life  by  rule  is  universal  in  human  society,  so  upon  the  whole
it  is  peculiar  to  humanity.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  any
animal  except  man  can  enunciate  or  apply  general  rules  of  con
duct.  Nevertheless  there  is  not  wanting  something  that  we  can
call  an  organization  of  life  in  the  animal  world.  How  much  of
intelligence  underlies  the  social  life  of  the  higher  animals  is
indeed  extremely  hard  to  determine.  In  the  aid  which  they  often
render  to  one  another,  in  their  combined  hunting,  in  their  play,
in  the  use  of  warning  cries,  and  the  employment  of  "  sentinels,"
which  is  so  frequent  among  birds  and  mammals,  it  would  appear
at  first  sight,  that  a  considerable  measure  of  mutual  understand
ing  is  implied,  that  we  find  at  least  an  analogue  to  human  custom,
to  the  assignment  of  functions,  the  division  of  labour,  which
mutual  reliance  renders  possible.  How  far  the  analogy  may  be
pressed,  and  whether  terms  like  "  custom  "  and  "  mutual  under
standing,"  drawn  from  human  experience,  are  rightly  applicable
to  animal  societies,  are  questions  on  which  we  shall  touch  pre
sently.  Let  us  observe  first  that  as  we  descend  the  animal  scale

VOL.  I.


2  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  sphere  of  intelligent  activity  is  gradually  narrowed  down,
and  yet  behaviour  is  still  regulated.  The  lowest  organisms  have
their  definite  methods  of  action  under  given  conditions.  The
Amceba  shrinks  into  itself  at  a  touch,  withdraws  the  pseudo-
podium  that  is  roughly  handled,  or  makes  its  way  round  the  small
object  which  will  serve  it  as  food.  Given  the  conditions,  it  acts
in  the  way  best  suited  to  avoid  danger,  or  to  secure  nourishment.
We  are  a  long  way  from  the  intelligent  regulation  of  conduct
by  a  general  principle,  but  we  still  find  action  adapted  to  the
requirements  of  organic  life.

2.  Thus  in  the  lowest  grades  of  the  organic  world  behaviour
is  already  regulated,  and  regulated  to  some  purpose.  It  will
repay  us  to  consider  very  briefly  the  method  of  this  regulation,  and
to  observe  how  it  changes  as  we  ascend  the  organic  scale.  In
the  lowest  grades  of  life,  then,  whether  plant  or  animal,  we  find
behaviour  pretty  rigidly  determined  by  the  structure  of  the
organism  itself.  The  sensitive  plant  or  the  protozoon  does  not
act  at  random,  but  it  is  so  constructed  that  when  stimulated  in
a  particular  way  by  some  outer  object  it  responds  to  this
stimulus  by  some  definite  motion.  In  this  way,  for  example,
the  tentacles  of  the  Venus'  Flytrap  close  over  the  luckless
insect  which  has  settled  upon  its  leaf,  a  touch  on  any  one  of
the  spines  of  the  leaf  causing  the  two  halves  of  the  leaf-end  to
fold  inward  as  on  a  hinge.  The  insect  is  thus  enclosed,  and
certain  glands  upon  the  leaf  secrete  the  digestive  juice  to  aid
in  its  assimilation.1  In  the  same  apparently  mechanical
manner  the  tentacles  of  a  sea-anemone  close  over  a  small
object  which  lodges  among  them.  Actions  of  this  kind,  which
may  generically  be  called  reflexes,  for  the  most  part  serve  a
function  which  we  can  readily  discover  and  assign  in  the  life  of
the  organism ;  for  example,  in  the  instances  mentioned  they
secure  its  food.  But  though  they  serve  this  purpose  it  is
almost  certain  that  we  should  be  mistaken  in  regarding  them
as  purposeful  or  intelligent  in  character.  Reflexes  of  this  type

1  Lloyd  Morgan,  Animal  Intelligence,  p.  26.  Observe  that  innutritions
objects,  such  as  particles  of  sand,  do  not  cause  a  regular  contraction  of  the
tentacles,  though  their  impact  is  followed  by  a  secretion.  In  other  words,
the  re-action  only  follows  in  its  completeness  in  cases  where  it  serves  a
purpose.


proceed  with  equal  certainty  and  regularity, whether in  the
particular  case  they  happen  to  be  good  or  bad  for  the  organism.
We  can  most  easily  understand  their  character  by  considering
any  one  of  the  numerous  reflex  actions  which  we  ourselves
perform. If  a  small  foreign  object — a  speck  of  dust  or  a  crumb
of  food — gets  into  our  windpipe,  we  cough ;  that  is  to  say,  a
series  of  muscular  contractions  is  set  up  whereby  the  foreign
body  is  expelled. This  serves  a  purpose  which  is  very  useful
to  us,  but  it  is  not  done  by  the  aid  of  our  intelligence. It  is
done  by  our  nerves  and  muscles  upon  their  own  account  without
the  aid  of  our  will,  and  even,  as  we  know,  sometimes  against  our
will. Similarly,  if  an  object  comes  straight  at  our eyes,  we
blink,  and  we  do  so  even  though  we  know  we  are  not  going  to
be  hit. The  blink  normally  serves  the  purpose  of  protecting
the  eyes,  but  the  number  of  people  who  can  refrain  from  blink
ing  when  it  is  known  to  be  useless  is  comparatively  small. We
blink  on  any  given  occasion,  not  because  as  intelligent  persons
we  wish  to  protect  our  eyes,  but  because  a  certain  structure  of
nerves  and  muscles  exists  in  us,  which,  being  touched  as  it  were
by  the  stimulus  of  something  coming  straight  at  the  eyes,  is
brought  into operation  automatically. This  structure  is  ordi
narily  useful  to  us. Similarly,  it  was  useful  to  our  ancestors,
and  the  biological  theory  is  that  it  has  grown  up  and  been
perpetuated  in  us  because  from  generation  to  generation  it  has
on  the  balance  been  found  useful. Those  in  whom  it  failed  would
be  likely  to  lose  their  sight,  and  with  their  sight  they  might  well
lose  their  lives,  and  losing  their  lives  they  would  fail  to  leave  de
scendants,  and  so  their  stock  would  become  blotted  out.  Conversely,
the  same  conditions  would  favour  the  perpetuation  and  increase  of
a  stock  in  which  the  structure  was  well  developed. This  ex
planation  may  be  applied  to  all  the  simplest  methods  of  adjust
ing  responses  to  stimulus. In  every  generation  those  individuals
who  best  responded  to  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were
placed  from  time  to  time  would  tend  to  survive  in  the  largest
numbers. The  physical  structure  best  suited  to give  these
responses  would  thus  be  perpetuated,  and  while  the  variations
for  the  worse  would  be  eliminated  the  variations  for  the  better
would  be  preserved. In  this  way,  according  to  the  biological
theory,  physical  structures  arise  which  fixedly  determine  the


4  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

most  suitable  kind  of  response  to  the  kind  of  stimuli  which
most  frequently  affect  organisms  of  any  given  species.  Thus,
without  the  exercise  of  any  intelligence  on  the  part  of  any
individual  organism,  without  the  formation  of  the  idea  of  a
purpose  at  any  single  point  in  the  whole  history,  certain  funda
mental  purposes  are,  nevertheless,  served,  and  the  conditions
which  secure  that  they  should  be  served  are  perpetuated.  Here,
then,  we  have  a  form  of  the  regulation  of  behaviour  proceeding
without  the  intervention  of  any  intelligent  agency.1

3.  As  judged  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  efficiency  in
preserving  the  race,  this  method  of  regulating  conduct  has
many  defects.  It  is  excessively  rigid  and  excessively  narrow.
If  a  given  contraction  must  follow  a  given  touch,  the  results
may  upon  the  whole  be  good,  but  they  may  also  in  many  in
stances  be  bad.  Poisonous  substances  may  be  swallowed  instead
of  nutritious  food ;  dangerous  enemies  may  be  approached  as
though  they  were  prey.  Observation  of  young  animals  reveals
many  instances  of  this  want  of  adaptation,  and  many  of  the
actions,  which  at  first  sight  so  wonderfully  dovetail  into  one
another  as  to  suggest  a  marvellous  foresight  of  what  the  animal
will  require,  turn  out  on  further  investigation  to  be  blind  re
sponses  to  a  physical  stimulus  which  very  often  lead  to  fatal
results.  One  instance  may  suffice  here : — The  larva  of  the
Sitaris  beetle  provides  for  its  future  career  by  attaching  itself
to  a  bee  which  finds  it  in  all  necessaries.  But  it  is  not  any
knowledge  of  the  bee  and  what  the  bee  will  do  for  it  which
impels  the  larva,  for  it  will  similarly  attach  itself  to  any  hairy
object  which  may  come  near — for  example,  to  any  other  hairy
insect ;  and  probably  a  large  number  perish  in  this  manner.2
The  larva  is  so  constructed,  in  fact,  that  contact  with,  or
proximity  to,  a  hairy  insect  sets  up  the  motions  requisite  for
attaching  the  larva  to  that  insect.  In  a  sufficiently  large  pro
portion  of  cases  the  insect  thus  clung  to  is  a  bee,  and  by  this
means  this  particular  structure  enables  the  Sitaris  beetle  to
perpetuate  itself.  But  it  can  easily  be  seen  that  action  will  be

1  I.  e. in  the  evolving organisms themselves. Whether the whole
"  plan " of  evolution  implies  a "  planning "  Mind  is  a  deeper  question
which  I  do  not  raise  here. I  touch  on  it  below ;  Part  II.  ch.  8.

2  Cambridge,  Natural  History,  vi.  p.  272.


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  5

far  more  efficiently  regulated  if  the  inherited  structure  can  make
some  allowance  for  the  difference  of  circumstances,  if  some  plas
ticity,  some  capacity  for  modification  should  arise,  and  this  in
point  of  fact  we  find  when  we  pass  from  the  mechanical  reflexes
which  we  have  hitherto  considered  to  the  instincts  of  higher
animals.

Instinct  is  a  relatively  permanent  condition  of  an  animal,
which  will  set  it  upon  a  train  of  actions,  and  in  carrying  out
these  actions,  considerable  variations  may  be  possible  according
to  the  particular  circumstances  in  which  the  animal  finds
itself  placed.  Thus  in  the  springtime  it  is  the  instinct  of  birds
to  pair,  to  build  nests,  to  tend  their  eggs  and  feed  their  young.
There  is  no  doubt  at  all  on  a  survey  of  the  whole  evidence  that
the  impulse  to  build  nests  and,  broadly  speaking,  the  method
of  building  them  are  hereditary.  But  though  hereditary,  they
are  also  modifiable.  The  method  of  nest-building  is  varied,  the
materials  used  are  varied.  The  old  bird  builds  his  nest  better
than  the  young  one,  showing  that  even  here  practice  makes
perfect.  The  oriole,  which  usually  conceals  its  nests  from  snakes
and  hawks,  builds  quite  openly  in  villages  where  these  enemies
arc  not  to  be  feared.1  The  orchard  oriole  builds  a  shallow  nest
on  stiff  branches,  but  on  the  slender  twigs  of  the  weeping
willow  builds  deep,  so  that  the  young  are  not  thrown  out  by
the  swaying  of  the  nest.  Even  in  the  feeding  of  the  young,
cases  are  recorded  in  which  apparently  intelligent  adaptation  of
the  ordinary  practice  through  some  special  circumstances  proves
to  be  well  within  the  power  of  the  bird.

As  opposed  to  reflex  actions,  and  as  opposed  to  the  popular
idea  of  instinct,  the  facts  show  that,  particularly  as  we  ascend
the  animal  scale,  instincts  are  not  perfect  at  birth,  but  are
improved  by  practice.  They  are  not  rigid,  but  are  capable  of
adaptation  to  varying  circumstances ;  they  are  not,  as  it  were,
planned  out  by  the  inherited  nature  of  the  individual  in  all
their  detail.  Yet  nevertheless  they  rest  upon  a  hereditary
basis  which  has  grown  up  under  those  same  conditions  which
we  have  already  seen  laying  down  and  fixing  the  structure
which  determines  reflex  action.  It  is  important  here  to  observe
closely  what  these  conditions  are.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that
1  A.  R.  Wallace,  Natural  Selection,  p.  114,  etc.


6  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

it  is  not  the  survival  of  the  individual  which,  upon  the
principles  laid  down  by  the  biologists,  will  determine  the  growth
of  that  structure  upon  which  reflex  action  and  instinct  alike
depend.  If  we  personify  Natural  Selection,  we  may  say  that
what  it  has  in  view  is  not  the  individual  but  the  stock,  or  if  we
avoid  personification  and  thereby  lengthen  our  statement,  we
must  say  that  the  conditions  which  determine  the  growth  and
perpetuation  of  a  given  structure  are  not  that  that  structure
should  preserve  the  life  of  each  individual  in  which  it  exists,
but  that  it  should  tend  to  preserve  the  breed  of  that  individual.
In  the  main  these  two  objects  fall  into  one,  since  it  is  only  by
having  its  own  life  preserved  for  a  certain  time  that  an  individual
can  bring  young  ones  into  existence ;  but  where  they  diverge,
the  young  should,  according  to  the  logic  of  the  argument,  get
the  preference  from  natural  selection,  and  so,  in  point  of
fact,  the  act  of  procreation  is  in  some  instances  fatal,  and
throughout  the  animal  world  the  actions  necessary  for  repro
duction  are  as  important  and  as  closely  determined  by  the
structure  of  the  individual  as  the  actions  necessary  for  the
maintenance  of  its  own  life.  But  on  this  point  a  very  important
difference  emerges  as  we  ascend  the  animal  scale.  In  the  lower
layers  of  organic  creation,  the  maintenance  of  the  stock  is
principally  secured  by  the  vast  numbers,  running  up  even  to
millions,  of  individuals  which  may  spring  from  a  single  individual
in  the  course  of  one  season.  In  the  higher  ranks  of  animal  life
the  birth-rate  rapidly  diminishes.  Each  individual  produces  a
few,  or,  in  the  end,  a  single  young  one  annually,  or  perhaps  not
even  annually,  and  makes  up  for  its  infertility  by  the  care
which  it  devotes  to  the  rearing  of  its  more  limited  family.
There  is  every  reason  to  regard  this  parental  affection,  which
begins  in  such  elementary  methods  as  the  attachment  of  eggs
to  a  suitable  object  and  proceeds  from  the  very  rough  nest-
building  found  among  a  few  species  of  fish  and  among  the  lower
birds  to  the  high  degree  of  parental  affection  shown  by  the
most  intelligent  birds  and  mammals,  as  instinctive  in  character
and  based  upon  hereditary  impulses.  The  cat  tends  its  young
by  instinct  just  as  truly  as  it  hunts  mice  by  instinct,  and,
broadly  speaking,  the  conditions  under  which  each  instinct  has
arisen  are  the  same.  Each  fulfils  the  requirements  of  race


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  7

maintenance  and  enables  the  animal  to  leave  behind  it  progeny
like  itself.

Precisely  the  same  account  may  be  given  of  the  gregarious
tendencies  -which  become  more  developed  and  more  useful  to
the  species  as  we  ascend  the  animal  scale.  Not  only  the  social
insects  whose  case  presents  peculiar  difficulties,  but  many  of  the
higher  birds  and  mammals  live  in  societies  which  are  much  larger
than  the  natural  family,  and  these  societies  are  in  a  rudimentary
way  organized,  that  is  to  say,  the  members  help  one  another.
They  play  together,  sometimes  they  hunt  together ;  in  a  large
number  of  interesting  cases  they  employ  sentinels  who  warn
them  of  danger  by  an  alarm  note.  "Ibex,  marmots  and  moun
tain  sheep  whistle,  prairie  dogs  bark,  elephants  trumpet,  wild
geese  and  swans  have  a  kind  of  bugle-call,  rabbits  stamp  on  the
ground,  sheep  do  the  same,  and  wild  ducks,  as  the  writer  has
noticed,  utter  a  very  low  caution  quack  to  signify  the  enemy  in
sif-lit."  1  Here  ao-ain  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  basis

O  O

of  behaviour  is  instinctive,  but  the  instinct  is  modified  as  life
proceeds.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  young  animals  have  no
special  instinct  which  bids  them  follow  their  own  mothers.
They  will  follow  any  large  animal  moving  as  their  mothers  do.
They  do  not  even  know  by  instinct  how  to  suck.  A  young
lamb,  for  instance,  will  take  whatever  comes  nearest  into  its
mouth,  say,  a  tuft  of  wool  on  its  dam's  neck,  and  it  is  only  by
degrees,  guided  perhaps  by  smell,  that  it  acquires  the  right
method  of  feeding  itself.2

4.  Thus,  though  the  basis  of  the  family  and  social  life  of  the
hio-her  animals  is  laid  in  certain  tendencies  or  characteristics

O

inherited  from  their  forbears,  these  tendencies  do  not  set  down
rigid  lines  of  behaviour  which  are  perfect  from  the  outset,  but
rather  supply  a  kind  of  basis  upon  which  the  experience  of  the
individual  itself  may  operate.  This  brings  us  accordingly  to  a
new  factor  in  the  regulation  of  behaviour.  When  a  young  chick
has  emerged  from  the  egg  it  will  peck  readily,  and  on  the  whole
with  surprising  accuracy,  at  any  small  object  lying  on  the  ground
that  catches  its  eye.  Some  of  the  things  that  it  pecks  at  it  will

1  Cornish,  Animals  at  Work  and  I'ltty,  p-  48.

2  Lloyd  Morgan,  Habit  and  Instinct,  pp.  114,  116.


8  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

swallow — yolk  of  egg,  for  example,  gratifies  its  cannibal  tastes,
and  having  once  swallowed  a  bit  of  yolk  it  will  peck  at  another
with  increased  avidity. This  pecking  we  may  regard  as  a  reflex
and  ascribe  to  an  inherited  mechanism  which  is  set  going  by  the
stimulus  administered  to  the  eye  by  the  sight  of the  object.
But  if  instead  of  yolk  of  egg  the  chick  happens  to  peck  at  a
piece of  orange-peel,  or at a  certain caterpillar which has
apparently  an  unpleasant  taste,  it  will  check  itself  in  mid-career,
or,  if  too  late  to  do  so,  will  swallow  the  object  with  gestures
which  we  take  as  signs  of  disgust,  and  we  have  some  ground  for
this  interpretation  because  after  a  very  few  experiences — some
times  indeed  a  single  instance — the  chick  learns  to  avoid  objects
of  that  kind ;  it  continues  to  peck  at  the  yolk,  but  rejects  the
caterpillar. Here,  then,  a  new  factor  has  intervened. The  chick
started  with  its  hereditary  mechanism  wound  up,  as  it  were,  for
the  purpose  of  pecking  at  any  small  object  that  it  came  across,
but  its  own  experience  has  an  effect  upon  this  mechanism. It
stops  its  working  in  relation  to  certain  objects  while  it  permits
or  even  encourages  and  perfects  it  in  relation  to  others. On  the
strength  of  our  human  experience  we  attribute  to  the  chick
pleasurable  and  painful  feelings. We  assume  that  the  taste  of
the  one  object  was  pleasant  and  that  of  the  other  disgusting.
Whether  we  have  a  right  to  draw  this  inference  is  a  question
which  need  not  be  argued  here. Our  main  point  for  the  present
is  that  experience  modifies  an  inherited  mode  of  reaction,  and  it
will  be  convenient  to  call  this  experience  pleasurable  or  painful
according  as  it  tends  to  encourage  and  perfect  the  reaction,  or  to
discourage  and  finally  put  a  stop  to  it. Clearly,  the  power  of
thus  learning  by  experience  will  be  of  immense  advantage  to  a
species  in  the  way  of  making  its  behaviour  more  plastic  and
adapting  it  more  closely  to  the  requirements  of  its  life. But  the
utility  of  this  new  mode  of  regulating  conduct  will  depend  upon
one  condition — the  feelings  of  the  animal  must  in  the  main
correspond  with  the  actual  requirements  of  its  life. If  all  the
distasteful  food  were  nutritious  and  all  the  pleasant  food  poison,
the  only  result  of  the  operation  of  experience  would  be  to  bring
the  chick  to  a  premature  grave. But  the  feeling  which  the
chick experiences is as much determined by  the inherited
structure  of  its  brain  and  nerve  organism  as  was  the  original


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  9

tendency  to  peck.  This  inherited  structure  has  grown  up  under
precisely  similar  conditions,  that  is  to  say,  it  must  upon  the
balance  have  assisted  the  ancestors  of  the  chick  in  maintaining
their  stock  and  not  tended  to  their  destruction.  What  has
happened,  therefore,  is  that,  in  addition  to  a  mere  tendency  to  peck,
the  chick  also  inherits  the  structure  which  enables  it  to  feel,  and
to  feel  in  the  main  in  a  way  that  accords  with  the  requirements
of  its  life.  The  feelings  of  the  individual,  then,  become  the
means  by  which  within  certain  limits  the  behaviour  of  that
individual  is  regulated,  and  thus  far  greater  plasticity  is  gained
for  the  behaviour  itself.  The  animal  which  can  thus  learn  by
experience  can  afford  to  make  its  mistakes,  and  the  more  so  as
it  has  the  fostering  care  of  a  mother  to  protect  it  from  those
mistakes  which  would  be  fatal.

Thus  the  range  of  adaptation  has  increased.  In  place  of  the
direct  response  coming  mechanically,  whether  well  or  ill  suited
to  circumstances,  in  reply  to  some  direct  physical  stimulus  and
persisting  without  variation  through  the  life  of  the  organism,
there  is  room  for  a  variation  of  behaviour  according  to  the
nature  of  the  object  with  which  the  animal  is  brought  into
contact,  as  revealed  by  the  experience  of  previous  dealings  with
similar  objects.  The  result  is  that  a  larger  class  of  objects  can
be  dealt  with,  and  behaviour  can  be  adequately  adapted  to  the
needs  of  the  organism  over  a  wider  field.  It  is  easy  to  see  how
this  greater  adaptability,  arising  from  the  power  of  the  animal
to  utilize  its  own  experiences,  will  work  in  with  that  plasticity
of  adaptation  which  we  saw  in  the  higher  instincts.  Instinct
is  always  pressing  the  animal  along  the  course  which  will  satisfy
it.  If  it  can  learn  by  experience  what  things  satisfy  and  what
things  do  not,  it  will  be  so  much  the  better  able  to  choose  that
course.

Now  the  kind  of  experience  thus  far  described  does  not  carry
the  animal  beyond  the  direct  and  immediate  results  of  a  given
reaction.  One  kind  of  act  gives  pleasure  and  another  pain,  and
these  pleasures  and  pains  must,  it  would  seem,  be  feelings  of
the  agent  itself;  and  though  the  act  is  suited  to  the  feeling  so
as  to  secure  the  pleasure  or  avoid  the  pain,  we  cannot  yet  say
that  the  animal  acts  with  the  intelligent  purpose  of  securing
the  pleasurable  or  avoiding  the  painful  experience.  The  full


10  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

reasons  for  this  caution  need  not  be  given  here.  It  is  sufficient
to  say  that  this  method  of  learning  by  experience  retains  many
of  the  features  of  a  mechanical  process,  and  where  an  animal
can  learn  so  much  and  no  more,  we  are  to  regard  its  behaviour
rather  as  determined  by  the  results  of  its  past  experience
operating  upon  its  brain  structure  than  by  an  intelligent  appre
hension  of  the  future  experiences  which  its  action  will  secure
for  it.  We  shall  best  regard  acts  of  this  kind  as  still  within  the
region  of  impulse,  and  as  only  one  step  upon  the  way  to
behaviour  regulated  by  an  idea  of  what  is  to  happen  in  "the
future,  and  by  desire  or  aversion  for  that  happening.  But  we
should  remark  that,  still  within  the  animal  world,  the  capacity
for  learning  by  experience  reaches  a  higher  level.  The  dog,
for  example,  which  is  scolded  or  beaten,  let  us  say,  for  lying
with  its  dirty  paws  upon  a  sofa,  learns  to  avoid  that  sofa  in  the
presence  of  its  master  for  the  future.  But,  in  so  doing,  the  dog
will  show  a  somewhat  higher  grade  of  intelligence  than  we  find
in  the  chick,  for,  as  we  know  only  too  well,  it  will,  if  possessed
of  an  ordinary  measure  of  canine  obstinacy,  avail  itself  of  the
sofa  if  nobody  is  looking  on,  and  make  a  hurried  descent  if  it
hears  somebody  coming.  There  is  in  this  an  element  of  intelli
gence  which,  when  all  the  evidence  is  put  together,  appears  to
carry  us  beyond  that  simple  modification  of  an  inherited  method
of  action  which  we  find  in  the  case  of  the  chick.  The  dog  does
not  simply  avoid  the  sofa,  he  does  not  merely  and  stupidly
associate  a  sofa  with  the  beating,  he  continues  to  like  the  sofa
and  to  get  what  he  can  out  of  it ;  he  knows  that  it  is  some
particular  person  who  will  punish  him,  and  he  may  even  dis
regard  the  presence  of  those  members  of  the  household  whom
experience  has  shown  him  to  be  less  strict.  In  a  word,  his
action  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  intelligently  adapted  to
obtaining  one  result  and  avoiding  another.  He  seems  to  project
himself  into  the  future  by  however  short  a  distance,  and  to
know  what  will  happen  to  him  under  certain  conditions;  and
thus,  as  the  result  which  he  achieves  appears  to  be  the  deter
mining  factor  in  his  action,  we  may  admit  that  action  to  be
definitely  purposive.  He  not  merely  learns  to  prefer  what  is
pleasurable  in  itself,  and  avoid  what  is  painful  in  itself,  but  to
do  things  which  experience  shows  would  have  pleasurable


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  11

results  in  the  future,  and  avoid  things  which  have  painful
results.  We  may  say  that  he  desires  the  one  and  has  aversion
for  the  other,  and  though  it  would  not  be  strictly  accurate  to
say  that  he  desires  pleasure,  it  is  true  to  say  that  he  desires
what  is  pleasant  and  has  an  aversion  for  what  is  painful,  and  in
this  sense  pleasurable  and  painful  feelings  are  still  the  guides,
or  indirectly  the  guides,  of  his  action.

But  the  dog's  behaviour  is  not  determined  by  his  own  feel
ings  alone.  The  same  intelligence  which  enables  him  to  make
this  "modest  forecast  of  the  future,  also  endows  him  with
the  power  to  recognize  the  individuals  about  him.  Ho
knows  his  master  and  his  mistress ;  he  distinguishes  friends  and
enemies,  human  or  animal,  and,  as  we  know,  he  is  ready  to  fly
to  the  assistance  of  the  one  or  to  the  destruction  of  the  other.
He  has  every  appearance  of  entering  into  the  moods,  as  far
as  he  can  appreciate  them,  of  those  around  him,  and  if  we
are  sometimes  inclined  to  an  uncritical  over-estimate  of  the
dog's  understanding,  still  a  fair  consideration  of  the  whole  of
the  facts  leaves  no  reason  to  doubt  that  substantially  we  are
correct  in  attributing  to  him  knowledge  of  other  individuals,
and  interest  in  what  they  do  or  suffer.

It  is  by  no  accident  that  the  evidence  of  attachment  and
affection  to  other  individuals  and  of  attention  to  the  mate  arid
the  young  in  its  higher  developments,  belongs  almost  exclusively
to  animals  of  the  grade  at  which  this  higher  form  of  intelligence
begins  to  appear.  Though  the  love  for  the  young  and  the
attachment  to  comrades  have  instinct  for  their  basis,  yet,  as  we
have  already  seen,  that  instinct  is  highly  plastic  in  its  methods
of  effecting  its  ends,  and  in  that  plasticity  evidences  of  intelli
gence  frequently  appear.  Thus  we  shall  not  go  wrong  in
attributing  to  the  higher  animals  in  their  simple  social  life,  not
only  the  elementary  feelings,  the  loves  and  hates,  sympathies
and  jealousies  which  underlie  all  forms  of  society,  but  also  in  a
rudimentary  stage  the  intelligence  which  enables  those  feelings
to  direct  the  operations  of  the  animal  so  as  best  to  gratify
them.

5.  Thus,  when  we  come  to  human  society  we  find  the  basis
for  a  social  organization  of  life  already  laid  in  the  animal  nature


12  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

of  man.  Like  others  of  the  higher  animals,  man  is  a  gregarious
beast.  His  interests  lie  in  his  relations  to  his  fellows,  in  his
love  for  wife  and  children,  in  his  companionship,  possibly  in  his
rivalry  and  striving  with  his  fellow-men.  His  loves  and  hates,
his  joys  and  sorrows,  his  pride,  his  wrath,  his  gentleness,  his
boldness,  his  timidity — all  these  permanent  qualities,  which  run
through  humanity  and  vary  only  in  degree,  belong  to  his  in
herited  structure.  Broadly  speaking,  they  are  of  the  nature  of
instincts,  but  instincts  which  have  become  highly  plastic  in
their  mode  of  operation,  and  which  need  the  stimulus  of
experience  to  call  them  forth  and  give  them  definite  shape.

The  mechanical  methods  of  reaction  which  are  so  prominent
low  down  in  the  animal  scale  fill  quite  a  minor  place  in  human
life.  The  ordinary  operations  of  the  body,  indeed,  go  upon  their
way  mechanically  enough.  In  walking  or  in  running,  in  saving
ourselves  from  a  fall,  in  coughing,  sneezing  or  swallowing,  we
re-act  as  mechanically  as  do  the  lower  animals ;  but  in  the  dis
tinctly  human  modes  of  behaviour,  the  place  taken  by  the
inherited  structure  is  very  different.  Hunger  and  thirst  no
doubt  are  of  the  nature  of  instincts,  but  the  methods  of  satis
fying  hunger  and  thirst  are  acquired  by  experience  or  by
teaching.  Love  and  the  whole  family  life  have  an  instinctive
basis,  that  is  to  say,  they  rest  upon  tendencies  inherited  with
the  brain  and  nerve  structure ;  but  everything  that  has  to  do
with  the  satisfaction  of  these  impulses  is  determined  by  the
experience  of  the  individual,  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  society
in  which  he  lives,  the  woman  whom  he  meets,  the  accidents  of
their  intercourse,  and  so  forth.  Instinct,  already  plastic  and
modifiable  in  the  higher  animals,  becomes  in  man  a  basis  of
character  which  determines  how  he  will  take  his  experience,  but
without  experience  is  a  mere  blank  form  upon  which  nothing  is
yet  written.

For  example,  it  is  an  ingrained  tendency  of  average  human
nature  to  be  moved  by  the  opinion  of  our  neighbours.  This
is  a  powerful  motive  in  conduct,  but  the  kind  of  conduct  to
which  it  will  incite  clearly  depends  on  the  kind  of  thing  that
our  neighbours  approve.  In  some  parts  of  the  world  ambition
for  renown  will  prompt  a  man  to  lie  in  wait  for  a  woman  or
child  in  order  to  add  a  fresh  skull  to  his  collection.  In  other


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  13

parts  he  may  be  urged  by  similar  motives  to  pursue  a  science
or  paint  a  picture. In  all  these  cases  the  same  hereditary  or
instinctive  element  is  at  work,  that  quality  of  character  which
makes  a  man  respond  sensitively  to  the  feelings  which  others
manifest  towards  him. But  the  kind  of  conduct which  this  •
\  \  sensitiveness  may  dictate  depends  wholly  on  the  social  environ-
'jment  in  which  the  man  finds  himself. Similarly  it  is,  as  the  '
ordinary  phrase  quite  justly  puts  it,  "in  human  nature" to
stand  up  for  one's  rights. A  man  will  strive,  that  is,  to  secure
that  which  he  has  counted  on  as  his  due. But  as  to  what  he
counts  upon,  as  to  the  actual  treatment  which  he  expects  under
given  circumstances,  his  views  are  determined  by  the  "  custom
of  the  country,"  by  what  he  sees  others  insisting  on  and  obtain
ing,  by  what  has  been  promised  him,  and  so  forth. Even  such
an  emotion  as  sexual  jealousy,  which  seems  deeply  rooted  in  the
animal  nature,  is  largely  limited  in  its  exercise  and  determined
in  the  form  it  takes  by  custom. A  hospitable  savage,  who  will
lend  his  wife  to  a  guest,  would  kill  her  for  acting  in  the  same
way  on  her  own  motion. In  the  one  case  he  exercises  his  rights
of  proprietorship ;  in  the  other,  she  transgresses  them. It  is  the
maintenance  of  a  claim  which  jealousy  concerns  itself  with,  and
the  standard  determining  the  claim  is  the  custom  of  the  country.
In  human  society,  then,  the  conditions  regulating  conduct  are
from  the  first  greatly  modified. Instinct,  becoming  vague  and
more  general,  has  evolved  into  "character,"  while  intelligence
finds  itself  confronted  with  customs,  to  which  itvhas  to  accom
modate  conduct. But  how  does  custom  arise  ? Let  us  first
consider  what  custom  is. It  is  not  merely  a  habit  of  action ;
but  it  implies  also  a  judgment  upon  action,  and  a  judgment
stated  in  general  and  impersonal  terms. It  would  seem  to
imply  a  bystander  or  third  party. If  A  hits  B,  B  probably  hits
back. It  is  his  "habit"  so  to do. But  if  C,  looking on,
pronounces  that  it  was  or  was  not  a  fair  blow,  he  will  probably
appeal  to  the  "  custom  "  of  the  country— the  traditional  rules  of
fighting,  for  instance,— as  the  ground  of  his  judgment. That  is,
he  will  lay  down  a  rule  which  is  general  in  the  sense  that  it
would  apply  to  other  individuals  under  similar  conditions,  and
by  it  he  will,  as  an  impartial  third  person,  appraise  the  conduct
of  the  contending  parties. The  formation  of  such  rules,  resting


14  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

as  it  does  on  the  power  of  framing  and  applying  general  concep
tions,  is  the  prime  differentia  of  human  morality  from  animal  be
haviour.1  The  fact  that  they  arise  and  are  handed  on  from  genera
tion  to  generation  makes  social  tradition  at  once  the  dominating
factor  in  the  regulation  of  human  conduct.  Without  such  rules
we  can  scarcely  conceive  society  to  exist,  since  it  is  only  through
the  general  conformity  to  custom  that  men  can  understand  each
other,  that  each  can  know  how  the  other  will  act  under  given
circumstances,  and  without  this  amount  of  understanding  the
reciprocity,  which  is  the  vital  principle  of  society,  disappears.

6.  How  custom  grows  and  how  it  is  related  to  individual
character  may  in  a  general  way  be  understood  by  considering
how  the  process  goes  on  amongst  ourselves.  Consider  for  a
moment  the  judgments  that  we  pass  on  our  neighbours  or  on
public  men,  and  see  how  they  are  formed  and  how  they  operate.
Many,  indeed  it  is  to  be  feared  by  far  the  larger  portion,  are
made  parrot  fashion  by  the  application  of  the  first  rough  and
ready  rule,  the  simplest  and  shortest  formula  that  leaps  to  our
lips.  We  approve  and  condemn — generally  condemn — in  the
patter  of  the  tram-car  or  the  railway  carriage,  fitting  on  modes
of  judgment  that  are  flying  about  from  mouth  to  mouth  and
scarcely  obtain  a  lodgment  in  the  brain.  In  these  cases  we  are
at  best  accepting  and  passing  on  what  we  find  ready  made  for
us  by  society.  But  how  did  it  come  to  be  made,  since  society
is  after  all  ourselves  and  those,  not  so  greatly  differing  from  us,
who  went  before  ?  This  points  us  to  a  deeper,  more  original
source  of  the  moral  judgment,  and  this,  in  fact,  we  find  in  our
selves  in  that  smaller  number  of  cases  in  which  the  subject  of

1  It  implies  all  the  growth  that  is  involved  in  the  formation  of  general
rules  of  conduct  as  opposed  to  memories  or  anticipation  of  particular  events,
and  on  the  moral  side  is  the  growth  of  will  as  opposed  to  desire,  and  the
formation  of  objects  of  permanent  interest — relatively  stable  sources  of
happiness — as  opposed  to  objects  of  temporary  pleasure.  By  desire  we  are
to  understand  impulse  informed  by  the  anticipation  of  an  event.  By  will,
a  reaction  of  character  to  ends  in  which  a  relatively  stable  and  permanent
satisfaction  is  found.  Its  authority  over  desire  we  call  self-control,  but  it
is  rather  control  by  the  self  as  a  whole  of  one  or  other  of  the  impulses
which  conflict  with  its  permanent  tendency.  It  is  only  when  this  relatively
stable  and  balanced  adoption  of  permanent  ends  or  abiding  principles  is
psychologically  possible  that  the  inculcation  of  general  rules  could  have
any  meaning.


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  15

discussion  stirs  some  impulse  within  us,  touches  some  spring  of
our  own  nature,  moves  some  hidden  sympathy  or  antipathy  that
dissipates  the  patter  of  the  street  and  speaks  out  for  itself.
Whenever  this  happens  we  ourselves  originate  a  moral  judgment,
and  we  do  not  need  to  be  told  that  this  judgment  has  its  imme
diate  source  in  some  feature  of  our  own  character,  our  sense  of
justice,  our  love  of  our  country,  our  hatred  of  meanness  or
cruelty,  or  whatever  it  may  be.  According  as  one  or  another  of
these  elements  is  strong  in  us,  so  do  we  become,  as  it  were,
centres  from  which  judgments  of  one  kind  or  another  radiate,
from  which  they  pass  forth  to  fill  the  atmosphere  of  opinion,  and
take  their  place  among  the  influences  that  mould  the  judgments
of  other  men.  For  no  sooner  has  the  judgment  escaped  us — a
winged  word  from  our  own  lips — than  it  impinges  on  the  judg
ment  similarly  flying  forth  to  do  its  work  from  our  next-door
neighbour,  and  if  the  subject  is  an  exciting  one  the  air  is  soon
full  of  the  winged  forces  clashing,  deflecting  or  reinforcing  one
another  as  the  case  may  be,  and  generally  settling  down  towards
some  preponderating  opinion  which  is  society's  judgment  on  the
case.  But  in  the  course  of  the  conflict  many  of  the  original
judgments  are  modified.  Discussion,  further  consideration,  above
all  the  mere  influence  of  our  neighbour's  opinion  re-acts  on  each
of  us,  with  a  stress,  that  is  proportioned  to  various  mental  and
moral  characteristics  of  our  own,  our  clearness  of  vision,  our
firmness  or,  perhaps,  obstinacy  of  character,  our  self-confidence,
and  so  forth.  Thus,  the  controversy  will  tend  to  leave  its  mark,
small  or  great,  on  those  who  took  part  in  it.  It  will  tend  to
modify  their  modes  of  judgment,  confirming  one,  perhaps,  in  his
former  ways,  shaking  the  confidence  of  another,  opening  the
eyes  of  a  third.  Similarly,  it  will  tend  to  set  a  precedent  for
future  judgments.  It  will  affect  what  men  say  and  think  on
the  next  question  that  turns  up.  It  adds  its  weight,  of  one  grain
it  may  be,  to  some  force  that  is  turning  the  scale  of  opinion  and
preparing  society  for  some  new  departure.  In  any  case,  we
have  here  in  miniature  at  work  every  day  before  our  eyes  the
essential  process  by  which  moral  judgments  arise  and  grow.
Here  we  have  the  individual  with  his  spontaneous  utterance
springing  from  his  own  character,  guided  by  what  lights  he  has.
Here  again  we  have  the  clash  of  judgments  so  delivered,  the


16  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

war  of  ideas,  the  resultant  opinion  of  society,  the  consequent
re-modelling  of  their  first  judgment  in  individuals,  the  growth
in  society  of  a  certain  way  of  looking  at  things,  in  short,  of  a
tradition.  Individual  impulse  and  social  tradition  are  thus  the
two  poles  between  which  we  move.

Deep  as  are  the  contrasts  between  modern  society  and  primitive
life,  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  there  too  the  same  forces  were
at  work.  The  process  would  be  far  slower,  thought  infinitely
less  mobile,  and  custom  once  formed  far  more  set  and  crystallized.
But  the  prime  factors  are  the  same.  There  is  always  the
character  of  each  individual  as  it  has  grown  up  under  the  con
ditions  of  heredity,  with  its  sympathies  and  antipathies,  its
impulses  social  and  selfish,  its  susceptibilities  and  feelings  in
which  the  relations  of  human  being  to  human  being  play  so
prominent  a  part,  uttering  itself  in  judgments  which  praise  or
condemn  conduct,  forming  conceptions  of  good  and  bad,  right
and  wrong,  as  things  jump  with  its  feelings  or  displease  them.
There  is  always  the  influence  of  the  society  in  which  each  man
is  born,  the  interaction  between  mind  and  mind  and  the  shaping
of  individual  opinions  into  a  social  standard,  the  modelling  of
each  new  generation  by  the  heavy  hand  of  the  past.

7.  That  the  moral  standard  of  man  is  based  on  the  character
of  man,  though  it  sounds  like  a  truism,  is  a  principle  which  has
been  but  little  understood  in  modern  ethics.  It  has  generally
been  assumed  that  the  alternative  lay  between  resolving  the
moral  code  into  something  essentially  non-moral,  e.g.  self-interest,
or  admitting  an  authoritative  mode  of  judgment,  intuitive  or
rational,  the  deliverance  of  which  could  admit  of  no  further
analysis.  Even  the  admission  that  morality  has  an  instinctive
basis  might  seem  to  remove  it  from  criticism,  in  view  of  the
common  conception  of  instinct  as  universal,  infallible,  and  essenti
ally  non-rational.  A  juster  conception  of  instinct  as  something
which  throughout  the  animal  world  is  found  to  vary  greatly  in
individuals,  to  be  quite  fallible,  often  imperfect  and  capable  from
an  early  stage  of  employing  elementary  reasoning  in  its  service,
enables  us  to  see  the  genesis  of  morality  in  a  different  light.  The
instinctive  element  in  human  morality  is  by  no  means  an  un
failing  power  implanted  by  nature  in  all  men  to  distinguish


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  17

right  from  wrong. It  is  a  name  for  human  character  as  it  grows  -
up  under  the  conditions  of  heredity,  and  it  is  from  this  character,
with  all  the  faults  and  foibles  along  with  the  virtues  thereof  that
the  moral  judgment  issues. Human  morality  is  as  blind  and
imperfect  as  man  himself.

With  some  writers  the  view  has  found  favour  that  sympathy  1
is  the  basis  of  morality  and  of  society.  There  is  an  element  of  '
truth  in  this,  but  it  is  too  simple  a  statement.  First,  it  is  not
sympathy  alone  that  draws  men  together.  Men  have  need  of
each  other,  physical  need,  and  also  a  moral  need  for  which
sympathy  is  too  simple  an  expression.  Men  may  bo  drawn
together  by  hate,  by  the  passions  of  pride,  by  the  love  of  com
petition — by  a  thousand  motives  which  are  far  from  being  purely
sympathetic  or  wholly  good.  Even  love  and  affection,  though  at
their  best  they  imply  sympathy,  are  not  as  such  the  same  thing —
otherwise  passionate  love  would  not  so  often  be  selfish.  Secondly,
if  we  take  the  actual  as  opposed  to  the  ideal  codes  of  mankind
pure  sympathy  is  certainly  not  their  sole  basis.  It  is  a  factor  in
them.  They  enjoin  mutual  support,  mutual  forbearance,  they
express  in  some  degree  the  desire  of  the  impartial  on-looker  to
side  with  the  man  who  is  wronged.  Yet  in  average  morality
there  is  a  very  strong  dose  of  the  opposite  quality.  The  work-a-day
rules  of  conduct  belong  to  the  morals  of  strife,  of  actual  warfare
it  may  be,  or  it  may  be  of  peaceful  but  not  less  deadly  competition.
In  the  mere  apportionment  of  praise  and  blame  the  blame  is  apt
to  be  by  far  the  more  interesting  part  of  the  matter  and  the
exercise  of  censorship  has  made  the  very  name  of  moralist  one
to  flee  from.  The  rude  mind  thoroughly  enjoyed  the  time  when
"  the  villain  had  his  flogging  at  the  gangway  and  we  cheered."
To  the  more  cultivated  a  moral  flagellation  is  no  less  acceptable.
It  is  only  the  highest  ethical  thought  which  rises  above  the  cate
gories  of  praise  and  blame  to  the  clear-eyed  vision  of  humanity
wherein  to  "judge  "  men  means  merely  to  learn  how  to  deal  with  |
them  so  that  they  may  serve  and  not  mar  the  common  good.

Let  us,  then,  understand  that  human  morality  from  the  first
rests  on  the  antagonisms  as  well  as  the  sympathies,  the  corrup
tions  and  foibles  as  well  as  the  excellences  of  human  nature.  It
does  not  follow  that  it  is  a  form  of  selfishness  based  on  the

desire  for  reciprocal  benefits. Such  a  genesis  would  be  out  of
VOL.  i.  o


18  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

keeping  not  only  with  the  content  of  morality  itself,  but' with  all
that  we  know  of  the  origin  of  instinct.  Reciprocity  undoubtedly
has  a  weighty  influence  in  the  shaping  of  conduct.  It  tends  to
set  the  average  standard.  A  upon  the  whole  will  be  content  to
do  for  B  what  B  has  done  for  him,  and  moreover  C  will  expect  as
much  of  A.  If  he  does  less  he  is  mean,  if  more  he  is  generous.
In  the  absence  of  selfish  motives,  again,  the  standard  is  apt  to
run  down.  Men  do  not  become  dead  to  obligation,  but  they
interpret  it  laxly,  and  in  the  absence  of  criticism  give  all  the
doubtful  points  in  their  own  favour.  Where  there  is  no  compul-
I  sion  to  give  anything,  the  donor  of  a  penny  may  swear  that  he
has  done  more  than  was  required  of  him.  Hence  (incidentally)
the  importance  in  many  matters  of  public  ethics  of  substituting
legal  obligation  for  the  good-will  of  individuals.  The  best  men
do  their  duty  already  of  their  own  motion.  True — but  make
what  they  do  the  law.  The  result  is  to  raise  the  whole  stan
dard.  The  worst  are  worked  up  to  it,  the  best  find  still  better
things  to  do.  All  this  may  prove  that  selfish  considerations
sway  mankind,  but  of  the  doctrine  of  self-interest  as  the  primary
and  only  genuine  human  motive,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  it
bears  no  relation  to  the  facts  of  human  nature,  and  implies  an
incorrect  view  of  the  origin  of  instinct.

8.  Instinct  we  saw  arose  under  the  conditions  of  animal  life,
and  is  therefore  bound  in  the  main  to  subserve  and  not  to  hinder
the  needs  of  the  living  animal.  There  is  an  analogous  condition
limiting,  and  indirectly  shaping,  the  moral  judgment,  for  if  the
{  standard  of  conduct  were  so  perversely  formed  as  to  favour
i  actions  tending  to  the  dissolution  of  the  social  bond,  it  would  in
the  end  be  self-destructive.  The  society  which  should  habitu
ally  favour  such  conduct  would  perish  by  its  inherent  vices,  and
thus,  as  Plato  urges,  the  saying  that  there  must  be  honour  even
among  thieves  expresses  a  very  important  truth.  But  the  limit
thus  imposed  is  a  very  elastic  one,  and  this  factor  by  no  means
works  so  uniformly  for  good  as  might  be  supposed.  To  begin
with,  society's  shoulders  are  broad,  and  they  can  bear  many  a
burden  imposed  by  human  perversity  without  breaking  down.
Many  injurious  customs  may  arise  and  flourish  as  long  as  they
.'  do  not  touch  the  social  life  in  a  vital  spot.  Secondly,  the  prin-


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  10

ciple  cuts  both  ways,  as  the  example  of  the  thieves  itself  suggests.
If  the  thieves  become  too  honourable  they  would  give  up  thieving
and  their  particular  form  of  society  would  break  down. This
same  consideration  holds  of  all  class  morality. The  members  of
a  privileged  class  must,  if  they  are  to  remain  a  privileged  class,
carefully  resist  the  encroachment  of  wider  conceptions  of  the
public  good. They  must  combat  such  conceptions  not  only  in
principle  but  in  their  detailed  application. They  must  extirpate
any  mode  of  thought  which  they  find  rising  among  their  mem
bers  in  which  a  dangerous  implication  may  be  detected. Or
failing  to  extirpate  it  they  must  employ  some  of  those  methods
of  interpretation  which  long  experience  has  proved  useful  in
drawing  the  sting  out  of  higher  ethical  truth. The  study  of
these  methods,  however,  is  not  our  immediate  purpose. All  we
have  to  remark  is  that  while  the  requirements  of  the  social
union  are  an  underlying  condition  limiting  the  movement  of
the  ethical  consciousness,  these  requirements  themselves  vary
according  to  the  nature  of  each  society,  and  while  there  are  some
changes  which  would  destroy  society  altogether — as  e.g.  if  a
doctrine  of  universal  celibacy  were  to  prevail — there  are  others
which  would merely  destroy  the  existing  form  of  society  by
transmuting  it  into  something  different,  perhaps  worse,  perhaps
better. Historically both the fundamental requirements of
the social order and the more  occasional  requirements  of  a
given  stage  in  social  evolution  have  deeply  influenced  ethical
growth. But  the  influence  is  for  the  most  part  unconscious.
Men  feel  in  that  dim  fashion  which  is  popularly  called  instinctive
that  a  given  change  is  pregnant  with  consequences  that  would
deeply  affect  the  social  order,  and  without  thinking  the  matter
out,  they  are  prejudiced  for  or  against  the  change,  according  as
they  are  dissatisfied  or  contented  with  things  as  they  are. The
bearings  of  any  new  judgment  on  the?  general  framework  of
social  life  must  therefore  be  set  down  as  a  most  important  factor
in  determining  its  acceptance  or  rejection,  though  the  working
of  this  factor  may  be  obscure  and  indirect,  and  may  indeed  be
fully  accomplished  without  the  deliberate  agency  of  any  single
individual  who  has  thought  the  whole  matter  out.

But,  in  fact,  as  human  intelligence  expands,  these  underlying
conditions  of  ethical  movement  are  no  longer  left  to  work  out


20

their  effects  slowly  and  indirectly  in  the  sphere  of  the  uncon
scious.  On  the  contrary,  the  requirements  of  social  welfare  are
deliberately  taken  into  account  in  dealing  with  new  questions,
and  even  established  customs  and  traditions  are  criticized  in  the
light  of  experience.  Here  emerge  some  of  the  broad  differences
between  primitive  and  more  advanced  societies.

To  Primitive  Man  custom,  as  such,  is  sacred. It  is  true  that
;  it  often  has  some  theory  to  back  it. It  may  be  that  it  was  a
rule  received  from  the  heroes  of  old,  or  brought  down  graven  on
stone  from  Sinai,  that  its  violation  would,  as  the  Australians
hold,  produce  a  variety  of  bodily  ailments,  or,  as  the  ancient
Babylonians  held,  expose  the  offender  to  the  malevolence  of
witch  or  demon. But,  in  reality,  the  customary  is  sacred  because
it  is  customary,  and  Sophocles  is  nearer  the  true  feeling  of  the
ordinary  mind  when  he  makes  Antigone  declare  that  the  moral
law  is  sacred,  "  because  it  is  not  of  to-day  or  yesterday,  but  lives
for  ever,  and  none  knows  whence  it  sprang." To  the  primitive
mind — and  in  all  of  us  there  is  a  good  deal  of  the  primitive — it
is  only  the  mysterious  that  is  impressive,  and  custom  would
lose  half  its  force  if  its  origin  and  meaning  could  be  rationally
explained  and  logically  justified. But  thought  does  not  remain
permanently  at  this  level. As  we  follow  the  ethical  movement
in  its  advance,  we  shall  find  more  and  more  that  the  interest
shifts  from  the  tradition  which  men  follow  half  mechanically  to
the  deliberate  attempt  to  re-organize  conduct  on  the  basis  of
some  distinct  theory  of  life. A  religious  movement,  a  new  con
ception  of  God  or  the  future  life,  a  philosophical  theory  of  man's
place  in  nature,  a  fresh  analysis  of  human  society,  shifts  the
basis  and  so  affects  the  standard  of  conduct. At  the  same  time
the  converse  truth  must  never  be  lost  sight  of. The  existing
structure  of  society,  the  character  of  physical  environment,  and
the  views  current  in  his  surroundings  of  the  duties  of man,
insensibly affect the thought of  the profoundest and most
original  prophet  or  thinker. Nowhere  is  the  feat  of  escaping
from  one's  own  shadow  harder  than  in  the  world  of  ethical  and
religious  thought. Thus  in  ethics  custom  and theory  are  in
constant  and  close  interaction,  and  our  subject,  the  comparative
study  of  ethics,  must  embrace  them  both. It  would  include,
were  it  within  one  man's  power  to  treat  it  exhaustively,  at  the


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  21

one  extreme  the  quasi-instinctive  judgment  based  on  the  un
thinking  acceptance  of  tradition,  on  the  other  the  profoundest
theory  of  the  thinker  seeking  a  rational  basis  of  conduct  and  an
intelligible  formula  to  express  the  end  of  life,  and  between  these
two  the  influences  rational  and  half  rational  which  are  at  work
with  increased  assiduity  as  civilization  advances,  re-modelling
custom  and  substituting  deliberately-accepted  principle,  whether
true,  half  true,  or  false,  for  blind  tradition.  The  one  thing
common  to  both  extremes  and  all  the  intermediate  region,  is
that  there  are  things  that  men  approve  and  disapprove—
conduct,  character,  purposes,  results— that  they  judge  "good"
or  "bad."  The  subject  of  ethics  may  therefore  be  defined  in]
the  broadest  "terms  as  thoTnquiry  into  the  Conception  of  the
Good,  and  the  business  of  comparative  ethics  is  to  determine
lire  generic  character  and  principal  specific  variations  of  this
conception  as  actually  held  by  men  in  different  places  at  different
times.  Finally  it  must  inquire  whether  among  these  concep
tions  there  is  anything  that  can  be  called  development.

9.  Thus  the  conception  of  the  Good  is  the  central  point  of
ethics,  and  whatever  belongs  essentially  to  this  conception  we  call
ethical.  Variations  in  the  conception  of  the  good,  for  instance,
we  call  ethical  variations ;  development  in  it,  if  such  there  be,
ethical  development.  The  essential  conditions,  such  as  human
character,  on  which  the  conception  depends,  are  the  "  ethical "
factors  in  life.

Now  the  conception  of  the  Good  is  the  logical  founda
tion  of  every  rule  of  action,  that  is  of  the  whole  standard  of
conduct.  But  it  is  important  to  observe  from  the  outset,  as
bearing  on  the  limits  of  our  inquiry,  that  the  standard  of  conduct
may  be  affected  by  causes  which  are  not  ethical  in  origin  though
they  may  come  to  have  ethical  consequences.  On  one  and  the
same  conception  of  the  good,  for  example,  the  same  conduct
may  be  differently  judged,  merely  because  its  results  were  once
believed  to  be  good,  and  are  shown  by  a  later  experience  to  be
other  than  was  at  first  supposed.  For  example,  a  magical  rite
may  be  prescribed  as  a  duty  because  it  is  believed  to  be  effica
cious  in  averting  a  calamity  to  one's  self,  one's  family,  one's
society,  as  the  case  may  be.  If  the  belief  in  magic  disappears,


22  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

the  performance  of  the  rite  will  cease  to  be  obligatory,  although
there  may  be  no  change  in  the  current  conception  of  the  duties
to  society,  family  or  self. From  this  simple  example  we  can
understand  that  rules  of  conduct  are  affected  by  the  general
I1  level  of  intelligence  and  knowledge. The  whole  character  of
man's  outlook  on  the  world,  the  degree  in  which  he  understands
the forces which  surround  him,  will  naturally  affect  his  be
haviour  in  many  directions. It  may  be  said that this  has
nothing  to  do  with  ethics,  but  turns  on  the  obvious  distinction
between  means  and  ends. The  end,  which  is  what  men  really
conceive  as "  good,"  is  the  same,  only  advancing  knowledge
alters  their  view  as  to  the  means  of  securing  it. But the
relationship  is  in  reality  far  more  intricate  and  subtle  than  this.
Not  merely  the  working  rules  of  behaviour,  but  the  actual  con
ception  of  what  is  good  or  bad  is  profoundly  influenced  by  the
ideas  current  of  man's  place  in  nature  and  of  the  forces  which
surround  him,  while  conversely  the  conception  of  the  good  that
he  has  formed  influences  man's  ideas  about  the  world  and  the
,  agencies  which  control  it. What  the  gods  ordain  comes  to  be
thought  right,  and  so  to  influence  character  ;  while,  again,  if  men
come  to  see  that  what  the  gods  have  ordained  is  wrong,  their
conception  of  the  gods  is  altered  and  a  religious  revolution  is
brought  about. Here  even  the  silence  of  the  ethical  conscious
ness  is  instructive. If  a  barbarous  practice, such  as  human
sacrifice,  is  tolerated  as  a  part  of  religion,  the  mere  fact  that  the
moral  sense  does  not  rise  in  revolt  against  it  is  painful  evidence
of  the  stunted  growth  of  that  side  of  human  nature.  But  though
ethical  conceptions  thus  influence  and  are  influenced  by  the
general  condition  of  knowledge  and  the  conception  that  man
forms  of  the  world  in  which  he  lives,  we  cannot  say  that  ethical,
intellectual  and religious development are the same thing.
Many  advances  in  knowledge  may  be  made  without  affecting
the  conception  of  the  good  in  the  smallest  degree. Many  re
ligious  conceptions  have  no  bearing  for  good  or  evil  upon  ethics.
It  is  best  to  regard  these  factors  of  development  not  as  iden
tical but. as closely correlated. In particular, ethical and
religious  evolution  are  closely  intertwined,  and  we  shall  have  to
trace  the  second  in  so  far  as  it  is  essential  to  the  first.

Again,  individual  conduct  may  be  determined  not  by  a  con-


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  23

ception  of  the  good  but  by  the  compulsion  of  law. Here  there
is  at  first  sight  another  non-ethical  influence,  controlling  be
haviour,  but  here,  again,  when  we  look  further,  we  see  that  the
relation  is  more  intimate. Not  only  are  laws  founded  upon
some  one's  conception  of  the  good  (though  not  always  that  of  the
subject  who  obeys  the  law),  but  law  in  turn  affects  the  concep
tion  of  the  good  itself,  and  as  with  law  so  with  changes  of  the
social  structure  generally. Now  such  social  changes  take  place
for  the  most  part  without  any  planning  or  designing  on  the  part
of  the  society  which  experiences  them. Just  as  the  individual
grows  with  no  effort  on  his  own  part,  and  with  only  a  very
limited  power  of  regulating  his  physical  development,  so  society
grows,  changes,  and  it  may  be  decays,  in  ways  and  from  causes
of  which  it  is  for  the  most  part  quite  unaware. It  is  only  in  the
later  stages  of  culture  that  men  begin  to  study  systematically
the  nature  of  social  forces  and  the  conditions  of  growth,  arrest
and  decay. No  doubt  the  efforts  of  the  teacher  or  the  statesman
to  resist  glaring  evils  or  develop beneficent  tendencies  have
their  effect,  and  the  part  played  by  deliberate  reform  increases
as  culture  develops. Yet  the  forces  which  move  society  and  are
ever  changing  the  mutual  relations  of  its  members  are  so  vast
and  so  intricate  that  they  still  in  great  measure  elude  the  grasp
of  the  wisest  minds,  and,  as  every  one  knows,  the  reforms  most
deliberately  planned  and  most  carefully  thought  out have  a
hundred  unexpected  reactions  over  and  above  the  direct  effect
which  they  were  designed  to  produce. Now  these  slojt^and_
silent changes  of  society are always modifying the ethical
standard as expressed in the customs of society. Purely
economic  changes,  for  example,  will  tend  to  raise  one  class  and
depress  another. A  community  in  which  comparative  equality
has  reigned  may  give way  to  one  divided  between  rich  and
poor,  and  from  such  a  division  some  form  of  class  morality  is
almost  certain  to  arise. That  is  to  say,  the  difference  in  social
power  will  be  represented  by  a  differentiation  in  the  social  code
between  the  behaviour  due  to  a  member  of  the  more  powerful
class  and  that  due  to  "  inferiors." Such  causes  as  the  accumula
tion  of  capital  and  the  rise  of  large  urban  markets  have  at  times
made  slave  labour  especially  profitable,  and  slavery  has  accord
ingly  received  a  great  extension,  while  the  class  of  free  citizens


24  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

has  declined.  In  such  cases  the  society  affected  appears  to  the
on-looker  to  have  undergone  a  distinct  moral  deterioration.  So
perhaps  it  has,  but  it  is  important  to  observe  that  the  origin  of
the  decline  is  not  moral  but  economic.  The  true  account  of  the
change  in  most  of  these  cases  is  probably  that  a  lowered  sense
.  of  the  value  of  human  life  or  a  degradation  of  the  ideal  of
citizenship  has  come  about  from  the  rise  or  extension  of  slavery,
not  that  slavery  has  come  about  from  a  lowered  sense  of  the
value  of  human  life.  For  what  we  call  practical  purposes,
which  too  often  mean  simply  for  unscientific  purposes,  the  dis
tinction  may  seem  unimportant.  But  let  us  look  a  little  further.
We  have  assumed  a  case  in  which  the  deterioration  proceeds
unchecked.  Suppose,  instead,  that  it  awakes  a  protest,  as
among  the  Hebrews  the  sharpening  contrasts  of  wealth  and
poverty  awoke  the  prophets.  Suppose  the  protest  successful
and  the  deterioration  arrested.  Here  a  distinctly  ethical  ideal,
a  judgment  of  right  and  wrong,  an  expression  of  character,  has
prevailed,  and,  instead  of  being  passively  shaped  by  the  social
tendencies,  has  subdued  the  social  tendencies  to  itself.  How
should  we  account  for  the  difference  between  this  case  and  the
last  ?  We  should  have  to  admit  that  though  at  the  outset  both
communities  held  the  same  standard  of  social  justice,  yet  they
held  it  after  a  very  different  fashion.  To  one  it  was  a  principle,
or  at  any  rate  was  capable,  when  challenged,  of  becoming  a
principle.  To  the  other  it  was  a  custom  merely,  due  rather
to  the  favour  of  circumstances  than  to  the  wisdom  or  moral
qualities  of  the  citizens — it  was  the  innocence  preserved  only
through  the  want  of  temptation.  Thus  it  is  not  difficult  to
see  that  it  may  make  a  great  difference,  "practical"  as  well
as  scientific,  whether  a  good  custom  owes  its  existence  to
social  circumstances  or  to  a  deliberate  acceptance  of  it  as  wise
and  right.

Thus,  sociological  development  is  not  the  same  thing  as
ethical  development.  Social  growth  may  produce  a  set  of
institutions  of  a  certain  value  which  no  brain  created,  no  human
being  planned,  and  which  even  those  who  enjoy  them  do  not
sufficiently  appreciate  to  maintain  them  against  attack.  This  is
the  element  of  the  unconscious  in  social  life.  On  the  other
hand,  changes  may  arise  from  the  growth  of  character  or  of  a


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  25

reasoned  conception  of  the  good,  and  so  far  they  are  due  to  an
ethical  development.  From  the  ethical  point  of  view  institu
tions  depending  on  a  certain  degree  of  ethical  advance  are  of
much  more  value  than  precisely  similar  institutions  reached  by
another  road,  and  the  difference  is  likely  to  emerge  in  their
subsequent  history.  For  as  the  non-ethical  changes  of  society
affect  the  standard  of  conduct,  HO  ethical  ideas  may  in  their
turn  re-act  upon  social  organization.  Such  a  re-action  has  made
a  large  part  of  the  history  of  the  modern  world,  and  analogies
can  be  traced  in  ancient  times,  particularly  when,  as  in  the
instance  quoted  among  the  Hebrews,  a  tenacious  tribe  adheres,
amid  the  growth  of  civilization,  to  the  ideals  of  a  simpler  life
and  a  primitive  social  equality.  An  interaction  of  this  kind  is
the  chemistry  out  of  which  come  great  explosions — social,
religious  and  ethical.

Thus  the  whole  mass  of  rules  and  regulations  whereby
humanity  seeks  to  guide  its  life  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  interesting
to  the  inquirer  into  comparative  ethics.  These  rules  are  not  all
necessarily  ethical  in  origin,  nor  do  all  those  which  arc  recognized
in  any  given  society  necessarily  express  the  living  character  of
human  beings  in  that  society  at  the  moment.  But  as  showing
both  what  the  ethical  consciousness  has  done,  and  what  it  has
failed  to  do,  they  are  full  of  interest  and  significance  for  com
parative  ethics.  Social  changes  proceeding  insensibly  through
the  strengthening  offerees  in  one  direction,  and  their  weakening
in  another,  affect  the  moral  standard  for  good  or  evil.  Beliefs
concerning  the  agencies  underlying  nature's  operations  supply
grounds  good  or  bad  for  many  judgments.  These  are  the  main
forces  which  impinge  on  the  conception  of  the  good,  shaping  and
shaped  by  it  in  accordance  with  the  degree  of  intelligence  with
which  it  has  been  formed,  and  the  firmness  with  which  it  is
held.  We  shall  accordingly  have  to  deal  not  only  with  custom
and  law,  but  also  with  the  principal  forms  of  social  organization
on  the  one  hand,  and  of  religious  thought  upon  the  other.  Only
with  these  before  us  shall  we  be  in  a  position  to  trace  the  out
line  of  ethical  evolution.

10.  We  have  defined  our  subject  as  the  study  of  ethical  con
ceptions.  It  might  be  suggested  that  ethics  should  rather  study


26  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

the  history  of  conduct  itself.  Such  an  inquiry,  however,  would
be  as  unfruitful  as  it  would  be  limitless.  We  may  hope  with
very  considerable  difficulty  to  present  a  fair  comparison  of  the
different  moral  codes  that  have  been  accepted  at  sundry  times
and  divers  places.  But  to  attempt  to  estimate  how  far  the
conduct  of  men  has  conformed  to  those  codes  would  be  quite
another  thing.  There  is  no  social  measuring  rod  by  which  we
could  compare  degrees  of  obedience  to  law.  Civilized  societies,
with  their  records  of  criminal  statistics,  might  indeed  repay
investigation  from  this  point  of  view,  though  there  is  no  depart
ment  in  which  statistics  are  more  apt  to  mislead,  and  that  is
saying  a  good  deal.  But  if  we  were  to  take  ruder  societies  into
account,  the  means  of  investigation  would  wholly  fail.  All  that
we  can  hope  to  do  in  comparing  different  stages  of  growth  is  to
deal  with  recognized  customs,  accepted  maxims,  and  ideas  ex
pressed  in  mythology,  in  literature,  or  in  art.  In  other  words,
we  could  only  hope  to  give  the  history  of  those  ethical  concep
tions  which  are  recognized  as  rules  of  conduct,  and  we  must  give
up  as  wholly  beyond  our  power  the  investigation  of  the  degree
in  which  conduct  itself  conforms  to  those  rules.

But  this  is  not  so  much  as  to  say  that  we  are  dealing  with
ideas  only,  and  not  with  practice  at  all.  In  Ethics  there  are
principles  and  principles,  and  the  distinction  between  them  is
often  clear  enough.  A  rule  of  conduct  may  be  a  genuine
expression  of  what  people  actually  feel  and  think,  or  it  may  be
an  ideal  bearing  as  little  relation  to  common  practice  as  the
Sermon  on  the  Mount  to  the  code  of  the  Stock  Exchange.  In
other  words,  there  is  a  difference  between  the  rule  to  which
society  expects  you  to  conform  and  the  rule  which  it  keeps  for
Sunday  use  only.  Both  are  rules  and  both  may  be  broken.
Hence  to  record  either  of  them  is  to  record  not  what  conduct
always  is,  but  what  it  is  thought  it  ought  to  be.  But  there  is
this  immense  difference  that  one  rule  has  behind  it  the  forces
of  society,  and  so  becomes  in  fact  the  normal  conduct  of  the
average  man,  while  the  other  rests  on  the  teaching  of  the
idealist  and  is  perhaps  practised  only  by  the  best  men  in  their
best  moments.  This  broad  distinction  we  must  keep  in  mind,
if  we  would  not  immensely  over-rate  the  morals  of  the  civilized
world,  which,  unlike  the  savage  and  barbarian  world,  has  almost


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  27

invariably  a  double  code,  one  for  use  and  the  other — as  a  cynic
would  say — for  ornament.

Indeed  the  modern  European  has  not  one  or  two,  but  many
codes  claiming  his  allegiance — the  code  of  religion,  the  code  of
honour,  the  code  of  his  profession,  perhaps  the  code  of  his  class,  \
and  it  may  be  the  theories  and  ideals  which  he  has  imbibed
from  his  own  favourite  teachers.  All  these  codes  may,  and  not
infrequently  do,  conflict.  The  comparative  student  has  no  baro
meter  to  measure  adequately  their  relative  efficacy.  All  he  can
do  is  to  apply  his  broad  test  and  ask  whether  they  are  or  are
not  working  codes,  i.  e.  rules  expressing  the  average  conduct
which  society  expects  and  enforces,  or  rules  which  it  is  safer  to
disregard  than  to  deny.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  when
he  has  applied  the  test  he  may  proceed  to  leave  the  highest
ideals,  "  the  high  which  proved  too  high,  the  heroic  for  earth  too
hard,"  altogether  out  of  his  account.  That  men  have  held  these

O

views  is  a  fact  of  great  significance  for  ethical  science.  It  is
also  a  fact  of  scarcely  less  significance,  that  society  which  cannot
practise  them  is  yet  forced  to  do  lip-service  to  them.  The
historian's  point  of  view  is  here  quite  opposed  to  the  cynic's.
If  indeed  we  were  to  look  at  the  conduct  of  modern  society  in
some  relations,  and  in  those  relations  only,  we  should  be  apt  to
say  that  it  cloaked  under  fine  words  actions  not  less  savage  than
those  of  our  rude  and  barbarous  ancestors.  But  let  us  be  quite
fair  to  ourselves,  and  admit  that  the  necessity  which  we  feel  for ;
clothing  base  actions  in  the  language  of  high  principles  is  after
all  a  proof  that  those  principles  have  begun  to  germinate  and
take  root.  The  Assyrian  king  surveys  Avith  complacency  the  !
number  of  prisoners  he  has  flayed,  impaled,  or  burnt,  and  takes
it  all  as  a  proof  of  the  special  goodness  of  Ashur  to  him  and  his
house.  We  could  hardly  do  the  thing  so  baldly.  The  white  man
has  no  doubt  committed  great  barbarities  upon  the  savage,  but
he  does  not  like  to  speak  of  them,  and  when  necessity  compels
a  reference  he  has  always  something  to  say  of  manifest  destiny,
the  advance  of  civilization,  and  the  duty  of  shouldering  the
white  man's  burden,  in  which  he  pays  his  tribute  to  a  higher
ethical  conscience.  It  may  be  said  that  the  amalgam  is  a  degree
more  detestable,  and  that  Sargon  or  Assur-Natsir-Pal  had  at
least  the  merit  of  frankness.  But  this  would  be  historically


28  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

false.  There  was  not  the  smallest  merit  in  the  Assyrian  king's
frankness,  because  he  saw  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of.  The  white
man's  hypocrisy  is  more  revolting  in  itself,  but,  historically  con
sidered,  is  a  hint  of  better  things.  The  ethical  conception  has
a  certain  value  in  itself,  and  the  fact  that  it  commands  even  a
theoretical  allegiance  is  not  without  its  encouraging  side.  What
men  already  know  to  be  true  will  go  near  to  be  thought  shortly.
Our  subject,  then,  must  include  the  ideal  of  the  apostle  as  well
as  the  working  rule  of  the  lawyer.  Its  lower  limit  is  the  tradi
tional  custom  followed  by  the  half-unconscious  savage.  Its
upper  limit  is  the  philosopher's  reasoned  and  rounded  theory  of
life.  Between  these  extremes  all  the  judgments  that  men
form  about  conduct  fall  within  its  scope.  Only  we  must  bear
in  mind,  that  there  are  maxims  and  laws  which  state  what
average  men  do,  and  expect  others  to  do,  and  there  are  maxims
which  lay  down  what,  on  the  basis  of  some  ideal  doctrine,  they
ought  to  do.  Both  alike  belong  to  our  subject,  but  of  any  given
law  we  must  know  to  which  class  it  belongs,  and  so  far  as  this
distinction  carries  us — but  only  so  far — we  are  dealing  not
merely  with  ethical  conceptions  but  also  with  the  facts  of  human
conduct.

11.  So  far  for  the  limits  of  our  subject.  A  word  must  now
be  said  as  to  methods.  The  nature  of  the  evidence  at  the  dis
posal  of  the  historian  of  Ethics  is  fragmentary,  and  often  most
unsatisfactory.  The  difficulty  is  at  its  height  in  relation  to
primitive  and  savage  tribes.  Our  object  is  to  deal  with  ethical
evolution,  and  to  do  this  in  fulness,  we  should  naturally  desire
to  have  a  continuous  ethical  history  of  mankind  throughout  the
ages.  This  of  course  is  not  available,  and  the  anthropologist
seeks  to  eke  out  the  gaps  in  his  knowledge  of  the  past  by  com
parison  with  the  present,  the  assumption  being  that  in  the
existing  savage  and  barbarous  tribes  we  have  survivals  of  the
state  of  things  common  to  the  ancestors  of  civilized  man.  How
far  that  assumption  holds  good  it  is  not  possible  to  say  with
certainty.  It  is  well  to  remember  that  a  contemporary  savage
has  been  the  subject  of  an  evolution  neither  longer  nor  shorter
than  that  which  our  own  race  has  gone  through.  Although  the
rate  of  change  has  been  presumably  slower,  it  is  not  certain  that


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  29

there  has  been  DO  change  at  all.  But  without  being  hyper
critical  upon  this  point,  and  admitting  that  by  comparison
between  what  we  know  of  the  contemporary  savage  and
what  we  know  of  the  ancestors  of  civilization  we  get  the
most  probable  view  attainable  of  the  earlier  epochs  of  man
kind,  we  have  still  to  deplore  the  fact  that  our  information
about  the  contemporary  savage  is  itself  in  a  fragmentary,  ob
scure,  and  sometimes  contradictory  condition.  These  defects
arise  in  part  from  difficulties  which  are  readily  intelligible  in
obtaining  accurate  information  from  people  speaking  a  foreign
language  as  to  modes  of  life  differing  greatly  from  any  of  those
with  which  the  observer  is  familiar.  There  are,  however,  cer
tain  special  difficulties  in  the  use  of  the  material,  arising  from
the  nature  of  ethical  evolution,  which  deserve  mention  here.

When  we  compare  very  different  stages  of  culture  we  are  apt
to  find  a  bewildering  mixture  of  sameness  and  difference.  We
find  some  tribe  like  the  Dyaks  of  Borneo  with  whom  the
traveller  tells  us  it  is  a  delight  to  dwell,  so  courteous  are  they,
so  hospitable,  so  full  of  brotherly  kindliness.  We  begin  to
think  there  is  truth  in  the  idyllic  picture  of  savage  life  so
popular  in  the  days  of  our  great-grandfathers,  until  we  stumble
upon  the  fact  that  these  same  Dyaks  are  inveterate  head-
hunters,  and  make  a  practice  of  murdering  not  men  only,  but
women  and  children  in  satisfaction  of  the  duty  of  blood-
vengeance,  and  to  obtain  the  magic  virtues  inherent  in  an
enemy's  skull.1  At  once  the  demon  picture  takes  the  place  of
the  angel,  and  the  savage  world  is  seen  as  a  Gehenna  rather
than  a  Paradise.  We  forget  the  inconsistencies  of  our  own
civilized  codes,  and  can  hardly  believe  that  men  capable  of  acts
so  fiendish  can  have  any  trace  of  genuine  humanity  about
them.  The  fairer  view  about  them  is  that  the  Dyaks  have  a
morality  of  their  own,  for  many  purposes  as  good  as  ours,  but
limited  by  the  conditions  of  their  life  and  coloured  by  their
rdeas  of  the  supernatural.  To  be  judged  fairly,  in  short,  both
their  virtues  and  their  vices  must  be  taken  in  connection  with
their  life  as  a  whole.  What  are  at  first  sight  the  same  ideas,
the  same  institutions,  are  in  reality  of  different  value  and

1  See  Eatzel,  History  of  Mankind,  i.  448.


30  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

meaning  in  different  surroundings,  and  this  possible  source  of
error  must  always  be  allowed  for  in  drawing  comparisons.

In  particular  we  must  guard  against  misunderstandings  arising
from  the  obscurity,  the  inarticulateness,  of  primitive  thought.
Ideas  quite  familiar  to  us  are  often  unintelligible  to  the  savage,
and  for  the  words  which  we  use  to  express  them  no  precise
equivalent  can  be  found  in  his  language,  but  it  is  a  mistake  to
infer  at  once  that  nothing  corresponding  to  our  idea  exists  in
the  savage  mind.  If  we  look  at  his  actions  we  may  find  reason
to  think  differently.  He  acts  as  though  he  had  the  idea,  and
yet,  it  may  be,  he  can  give  no  intelligible  account  of  it.  Hence
at  one  moment  we  are  tempted  to  assert  that  he  holds  the  idea
just  as  we  hold  it,  at  another  we  begin  to  deny  that  he  holds  it
at  all.  Now  this  is  a  difficulty  which  we  find  all  along  the  line
in  the  study  of  mental  evolution.  It  is  felt  even  more  acutely
in  animal  psychology.  Here  we  are  constantly  tempted  to
believe  that  an  animal  is  guided  by  clear  ideas,  while  the
evidence  when  all  put  together  goes  to  prove  that  it  is  moving
towards  an  end  without  clearly  and  fully  apprehending  what
that  end  is.  And  when  we  have  once  grasped  the  possibility  of
this  pseudo-purposive  action,  we  are  tempted  to  generalize  it
and  deny  intelligent  purpose  in  all  cases.  As  in  animals,  so  at
!,'  a  higher  remove  in  man  the  primitive  mind  is  guided  by
;  feelings,  by  impulses,  by  necessities,  which  it  can  but  vaguely
'  understand  or  formulate.  Under  their  influence  it  builds  up
customs  which  to  the  inquirer  seem  logically  to  imply  certain
ideas  and  rules  of  conduct,  but  the  savage  himself  when  tested
fails  to  understand  these  ideas.  He  practises  them,  yet,  to  the
bewilderment  of  the  observer,  he  knows  not  what  they  are.

This  difference  between  rude  and  developed  thought  has  an
important  application  to  Ethics.  For  example,  statements  are
sometimes  met  with  that  this  or  that  tribe  is  destitute  of  any
conception  of  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  and  such
statements  are  made  by  men  who  by  experience  should  be  well
qualified  to  speak.  Allegations  of  this  kind  arise,  I  think,  from
the  kind  of  confusion  just  mentioned.  It  may  be  difficult  or
impossible  to  bring  a  savage  to  understand  the  meanings  of  the
terms  which  we  use  to  express  right  or  wrong,  virtue  or  vice,
good  or  evil.  Indeed,  if  we  take  highly  civilized  races  at


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  31

different  periods  from  our  own,  we  find  a  certain  difficulty  in
fitting  their  ethical  terms  to  ours. There  is  no  word  in  Plato

O

or  Aristotle  by  which  we  could  translate  the  English  term
"  duty/'  for  instance,  but  it  would  be  an  extremely  unfair  and
unwarranted  inference  that  the  Greeks  of  Plato's  or  Aristotle's
time  were  destitute  of  the  sense  of  duty  in  practice.  Aristotle
has  no  word  to  use  corresponding  to  our  term  "  rights "  and
the  Roman  "jura,"  but  he  desiderates  such  a  word,  showing
thereby  how  far  developing  thought  may  outrun  language.
When  we  come  to  the  savage  we  can  well  understand  that  even
the  simplest  ethical  conceptions  may  be  beyond  his  power  to
grasp  as  ethical  conceptions,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is
without  a  practical  sense  of  right  and  wrong.  In  point  of  fact,
although  very  few  generalizations  indeed  may  be  hazarded  in
the  whole  of  our  subject,  we  were,  I  think,  justified  in  assuming
above  that  no  society  can  maintain  itself,  unless  certain  lines  of
conduct  are  laid  down  as  binding  by  prevailing  custom.  If
men  are  to  live  together  at  all  they  must  know  what  they  may
expect  and  what  is  expected  of  them  under  given  conditions.
The  merest  game  cannot  be  carried  on  without  some  degree  of
mutual  understanding,  still  less  the  more  complicated  business
of  social  life.  We  shall  meet  a  little  later  with  certain  primitive
tribes,  which  are  to  all  appearance  wholly  destitute  of  any
regularly  established  means  of  maintaining  order  or  enforcing
penalties.  13ut  even  in  these  tribes  there  is  nevertheless  a
certain  body  of  custom,  and  something  corresponding  to  what
we  should  call  "  public  opinion "  tending  to  enforce  these
customs.  For  example,  the  sentiment  of  the  neighbours  or  of
the  tribe  backs  a  man  who  avenges  a  murder  and  frowns  upon
a  breach  of  the  marriage  laws.  It  is  probably  true,  as  a
generalization,  that  there  is  no  existing  tribe  without  some
belief  in  unseen  powers,  but  it  is,  I  think,  a  more  certain
generalization  that  there  is  no  existing  tribe  without  rules  of
conduct  backed  by  the  general  approval  of  the  community.

We  may,  I  think,  go  a  step  further,  and  say  that,  generally
speaking,  the  effect  of  these  rules  is  to  extend  a  certain  measure
of  protection  to  what  we  ourselves  regard  as  the  fundamental
rights  both  of  person  and  property,  to  encourage  mutual  aid
and  maintain  something  of  a  social  life.  In  these  broad  outlines


32  MOKALS IN EVOLUTION

ethical  principles  do  not  greatly  vary.  Indeed  the  comparative
study  of  Ethics,  which  is  apt  in  its  earlier  stages  to  impress  the
student  with  a  bewildering  sense  of  the  diversity  of  moral
judgments,  ends  rather  by  impressing  him  with  a  more  funda
mental  and  far-reaching  uniformity.  Through  the  greatest
extent  of  time  and  space  over  which  we  have  records,  we  find
a  recurrence  of  the  common  features  of  ordinary  morality
which,  to  my  mind  at  least,  is  not  less  impressive  than  the
variations  which  also  appear.  Some  of  the  earliest  funeral
inscriptions  in  existence  might  well  bear  comparison  with  those
eulogies  which  were  popular  a  generation  or  two  ago  among
ourselves.  Thus  upon  some  of  the  Memphite  tombs  of  the
earliest  Egyptian  dynasties,  we  find  it  recorded  that  the  deceased
had  been  "  the  friend  of  his  father,  beloved  of  his  mother,  sweet
to  those  who  lived  with  him,  gracious  to  his  brethren,  loved  of
his  servants,  and  that  he  had  never  sought  wrongful  quarrel  with
any  man ;  briefly,  that  he  spoke  and  did  that  which  was  right
here  below."  Let  us  hope  that  it  was  so.  At  any  rate  the  pious
record  of  the  dead  man's  relations  testifies  to  the  virtues  which
they  considered  it  appropriate  to  mention.

Again,  if  from  remote  but  civilized  antiquity  we  pass  to
contemporary  savage  races,  we  find  observers  praising,  sometimes
no  doubt  with  undue  partiality,  those  fundamental  qualities
without  which  society  hardly  holds  together.  Of  the  North
American  Indians,  for  example,  so  experienced  an  observer  as
Catlin  was  able  to  write,  "  It  would  be  untrue,  and  doing  an
injustice  to  the  Indians,  to  say  they  were  in  the  least  behind
us  in  conjugal,  in  filial,  or  in  paternal  affection."  1  Other  writers
in  this  case  no  doubt  give  less  favourable  judgments,  and  we
must  allow  something  for  individual  bias,  but  when  all  is  said
and  done,  we  can  hardly  deny  to  any  race  of  men  or  any  period
of  time  the  possession  of  the  primary  characteristics  out  of
which  the  most  advanced  moral  code  is  constructed.  Nor  is
primitive  morality  merely  negative  morality.  Primitive  man
is  free  in  giving,  ready  to  share  the  little  he  has  with  his  friend
and  neighbour,  while  of  hospitality  he  makes  a  superstition.
The  duty  of  charity  in  the  sense  of  sharing  one's  goods  with
others  is  in  no  sense  pre-eminently  a  modern  or  a  civilized  virtue.

1  Catlin,  i.  121.


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  33

Yet  with  this  identity  there  is  a  far-reaching  difference  not
only  in  the  actual  rules  of  conduct,  but  in  the  way  in  which
those  rules  are  understood  and  applied,  their  mental  framework,
the  basis  of  thought  on  which  they  repose. We  have  spoken  of
the  protection  given  in  primitive  custom  to  rights  of  person  and
property. But  we  must  understand  that  in  primitive  thought
these  are  not  regarded  as  "  rights  "  in  our  sense  of  the  term.
They  do  not  hold  unconditionally,  nor  is  it  necessarily  "  wrong  "
to violate them. But  there  are conditions, to our  thinking
perhaps quite irrelevant conditions, under which they arc
generally  respected,  and  the  neighbours  will  sympathize  with,
and  perhaps  actively  support,  an  injured  man  who  is  avenging
their  violation. Take  as  an  illustration  the  case  of  property.
In  many  peoples  it  is  honourable  to  steal,  but  not  honourable
to  steal  from  a  guest. We  all  know  the  story  of  "  the  divine
Autolycus"  in  Homer,  who  excelled  all  men  in  thieving  and
false  swearing,  an  excellence  which,  as  the  bard  is  careful  to
relate,  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the  special  grace  of  Hermes.
But  I  have  no  doubt  that  Autolycus'  thieving  and  false  swearing
were  all  in  accordance  with  rule. Probably  he  observed the
oath  when  duly  taken,  and  cheated under  certain prescribed
forms  which  would  avert  the  vengeance  of  the  gods,  and  it  was
no  doubt  his  special  excellence  that  he  knew  those  forms  to
a  nicety. He  was  evidently  a  man  in  good  repute,  and  was
doubtless  honourable  to  those  to  whom  he  considered  himself
to  owe  a  duty. There arc  tribes  to this  day  in which the
robbing  of  a  guest  is  prohibited  as  long  as  he  remains  in  the
house,  but  if,  after  speeding  him  upon  his  journey,  you  can
catch  him  up  in  the  field,  his  belongings  are  lawfully  at  your
disposal. These  instances  may  serve  to  illustrate  some  of  the
difficulties  which  confront  the  student  of  comparative  Ethics.
He  meets  with  the  familiar  ideas  of  civilized  morality  in  early
ethics,  but  he  recognizes  them with  difficulty; they  are  the
same,  yet  not  the  same. The  broad  explanation  is  that  he  is
dealing  with  the  unfolding  of  a  germ,  and  not  with  an  accretion
of  new  elements.

If,  that  is  to  say,  there  is  ethical  progress  (and  whether  there
is  such  is  after  all  our  main  question),  it  is  to  be  found,  not  in
the  development  of  new  instincts  or  impulses  of  mankind  or  in


VOL.  I.


34  MOEALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  disappearance  of  instincts  that  are  old  and  bad,  but  rather
in  the  rationalization  of  the  moral  code  which,  as  society  ad
vances,  becomes  more  clearly  thought  out  and  more  consistently
and  comprehensively  applied. For  as  mental  evolution  advances,
the  spiritual  consciousness deepens,  and  the  ethical  order  is
purged  of  inconsistencies  and  extended  in  scope. The  deity,
who  is  at  first  much  less  than  a  man,  becomes  progressively
human  and  then,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  superhuman.
Blind  adherence  to  custom  is  modified  by  an  intelligent  per
ception  of  the  welfare  of  society,  and  moral  obligation  is  set
upon  a  rational  basis. These  changes  re-act  upon  the  actual
contents  of  the  moral  law  itself,  what  is  just  and  good  in  custom
being  sifted  out  from  what  is  indifferent  or  bad,  and  the  purified
moral  code  re-acts  in  turn  on  the  legislation  by  which  more
advanced  societies  re-model  their  structure. The  psychological
equipment  of  human beings  on  the  one  side  and the  actual
needs  of  social life  on the  other  are  the  underlying  factors
determining  rules  of  conduct  from  the  lowest  stage  upwards,
but  it  is  only  at  the highest  grade  of  reflection  that their
operation  enters  fully  into  consciousness  so  that  the  mind  can
understand the  grounds  and  value  of  the  laws  which  it  has
itself  laid  down. The  true  meaning  of  ethical  obligations —
their  bearing  on  human  purposes,  their  function  in  social  life —
only  emerges  by  slow  degrees. The  on-looker,  investigating  a
primitive  custom,  can  see  that  moral  elements  have  helped  to
build  it  up,  so  that  it  embodies  something  of  moral  truth. Yet
these  elements  of  moral  truth  were  perhaps  never  present  to
the  minds  of  those  who  built  it. Instead  thereof  we  are  likely
to  find  some  obscure  reference  to  magic  or  to  the  world  of  spirits.
The  custom  which  we  can  see  perhaps  to  be  excellently  devised
in  the  interests  of  social  order  or  for  the  promotion  of  mutual
aid  is  by  those  who  practise  it  based  on  some  taboo,  or  preserved
from  violation  from  fear  of  the  resentment  of  somebody's  ghost.
The  ghost  or  the  taboo in  that  case  is  in  a  sense  the  form
which  moral  obligation  takes  at  a  certain  stage. It  supplies
the  savage  with  a  theory  of  the  moral  basis,  an  explanation
of  custom  and a sanction. How far it really determines
custom,  or  how  far  it  arises  as  it  were  ex  post  facto  to  justify
modes  of  conduct  to  which  the  savage  feels  himself  impelled


ETHICAL EVOLUTION  35

without  knowing  why,  are  questions  of  extreme  intricacy,  and
the  answer  would  probably  be  different  in  different  cases.  At
this  stage  it  may  suffice  to  remark  that  in  order  to  understand
ethical  development,  we  must  not  only  know  what  men  are
bidden  to  do  by  law  and  custom  at  each  stage,  but  also  the
reasons  which  they  themselves  assign  for  doing  it.  We  must
investigate  the  basis  as  well  as  the  standard  of  morale.  It  will
be  convenient  to  take  the  standard  first,  to  trace  the  actual
rules  of  conduct  laid  down  by  different  peoples  at  different
stages  of  culture,  and  proceed  from  the  practice  to  the  theories
of  conduct.  When  both  aspects  of  development  are  before  us,
we  may  hope  to  form  a  just  if  an  imperfect  conception  of
ethical  evolution.

12.  If  our  data  are  to  throw  any  light  on  this  evolution,  it
must  be  through  the  adoption  of  some  methods  of  classification
distinguishing  the  more  from  the  less  undeveloped  ethical
conceptions.  But  here  we  touch  our  greatest  difficulty.  Moral
progress  (to  assume  provisionally  that  it  is  a  reality)  does  not
proceed  continuously  in  a  straight  line.  It  does  not  affect  all
branches  of  the  moral  law  simultaneously,  nor  does  it  advance
step  by  step  with  the  growth  of  civilization.  Though  it  may
be  true  that  the  highest  civilization  possesses  the  highest  ethical
code,  it  is  certainly  not  true  of  every  intervening  stage  in  the
growth  of  civilization  that  it  witnesses  a  corresponding  moral
advance.  On  the  contrary,  as  has  been  already  hinted,  the
very  conditions  of  the  development  of  society  have  in  some
cases  been  hostile  to  moral  development  for  the  time  being.
An  advance  in  the  arts  of  life  may  well  work  retrogression  in
the  ethical  sphere.  Were  we  to  take  some  of  the  tests  which
are  often  put  forward  as  the  special  characteristics  of  civilized
morality,  we  should  be  surprised  to  find  how  often  a  ruder
society  comes  well  out  of  the  comparison  when  measured
against  one  that  is  more  advanced.  Take,  for  example,  the
position  of  women.  We  are  often  told  that  this  is  a  true  test
of  civilized  morality,  yet  in  point  of  fact  it  would  be  by  no
means  true  to  allege  that  the  status  of  woman  varies  in  all
cases  directly  as  the  civilization  of  the  society  to  which  she
belongs.  In  the  English  law  of  Blackstone's  day,  for  example,


36  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

a  married  woman  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  had  a  legal
personality,  so  great  is  the  number  of  her  disqualifications  as
to  the  holding  of  property,  as  to  capacity  to  give  evidence,  as  to
the  custody  of  her  children,  even  as  to  her  legal  responsibility
for  crimes ;  and  many  of  these  disqualifications  lasted  on  down
to  the  present  generation.  If  we  turn  to  the  oldest  code  of  laws
in  the  world,  the  recently-discovered  laws  of  Hammurabi,  we
shall  find  that  few  of  these  disqualifications  applied  to  married
women  in  Babylonia  some  2000  years  before  Christ;  yet  it
would  be  unfair  to  infer  that  the  civilization  of  England  in  the
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries  was  on  the  whole  inferior
to  that  of  Babylonia  in  the  third  millennium  before  Christ.
Among  many  tribes  of  the  lowest  savagery,  the  position  of
women  is  relatively  good,  whereas  a  step  higher  in  development
the  family  becomes  more  consolidated,  and  concurrently  the
position  of  the  husband  becomes  supreme,  while  that  of  the  wife
deteriorates  into  a  state  little  removed  from  complete  slavery.
The  closer  organization  of  the  family,  in  short,  tended  for  a
long  while  to  a  deterioration  in  the  legal  position  of  the  wife
and  children.  In  the  same  way  slavery,  the  most  direct  denial
of  those  elementary  rights  which  form  the  central  point  of
civilized  ethics,  is  an  institution  which  scarcely  begins  to  flourish
except  with  the  rudiments  of  civilization.  Below  the  level  of
slavery  we  come  to  a  stage  in  which  the  conquering  tribe  seizes
its  prisoners,  not  for  the  sake  of  their  labour,  but  for  the
purposes  of  commissariat,  while  even  cannibalism  itself,  which
to  our  ideas  may  be  said  to  mark  the  lowest  abyss  of  inhumanity,
does  not  flourish  among  the  lower  savages.  In  some  cases  it  is
entirely  absent,  in  others  its  presence  is  doubtful.  In  no  case
does  it  reach  the  development  which  it  achieves  as  we  pass
from  the  lower  savagery  to  the  intermediate  stage  of  barbarism.
There  is  an  evolution  of  evil  as  well  as  of  good,  a  veritable
fall  of  man,  not  accomplished  at  a  stroke  by  the  eating  of  an
apple,  but  working  itself  out  progressively  through  the  develop
ment  of  forces  which  bring  out  what  is  worst  in  human  nature
among  the  germs  of  what  is  better.  It  would  be  hardly  too
much  to  say  that  the  ethical  codes  which  are  most  shocking  to
us,  looking  back  upon  the  whole  progress,  are  to  be  found  by  no
means  at  the  beginning  of  tilings,  but  perhaps  one-third  of  the


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  37

way  up  the  ladder.  I  may  quote  in  confirmation  the  words  of
the  able  historian  of  the  indigenous  American  civilization, —
"  We  follow  with  a  sense  of  shame  and  horror  man's  advance
through  the  middle  and  higher  barbarism  to  the  threshold  of
civilization,  looking  back  almost  with  regret  to  the  period  of
savagery  when  human  progress  exhibited  a  comparatively  mild
and  beneficent  aspect."  l

The  study  of  moral  advancement,  therefore,  is  no  tracing  out
of  a  single  straight  line,  but  rather  the  following  of  a  very  I
winding  curve.  But  even  that  does  not  express  the  full  diffi
culty  for  the  student,  for  it  is  no  simple  or  single  curve  that  we
have  to  follow.  We  have  not  to  deal  with  one  development
only,  but  with  many ;  nor  with  a  uniform  evolution,  but  with  a
luxuriant  diversity ;  nor  even  with  evolution  alone,  but  with
dissolution  and  decay  as  well.

How,  then,  are  we  to  arrange  our  data  ?  In  the  first  place,  we
must  try  to  analyze  and  classify  the  conceptions  or  institutions
which  we  find.  For  example,  we  can  take  the  multitudinous
forms  of  the  marriage  tie  and  we  can  show  that  there  are  certain
types  about  which  those  various  forms  group  themselves,  as
though  radiating  from  so  many  distinct  centres.  And  so  with
other  institutions.  There  are  distinct  types  by  describing  which
we  can  mark  out  the  main  lines  of  classification.  Actual  insti
tutions  conform  to  these  types  in  varying  degree,  and  the
gradations  when  completely  filled  in  form  a  chain  connecting
one  type  with  another.  This  sort  of  classification  is  the  first
step.

Our  next  task  will  be  to  consider  whether  the  types  of  each
institution  tend  to  correspond  with  any  particular  stage  in  the
development  of  social  culture.  We  shall  by  no  means  find  this
an  easy  matter  to  determine.  It  may  as  well  be  said  at  the  out
set  that  the  cases  in  which  we  can  say  universally  that  a  certain
institution  belongs  to  a  certain  stage  of  social  culture  are  very
rare.  On  the  other  hand,  we  shall  find  that  certain  types  of
institutions  do  predominate  at  successive  stages,  while  above
and  below  that  stage  they  grow  rarer  till  they  finally  disappear.
What  is  meant  will  perhaps  be  best  explained  by  an  example.
The  permission  of  polygamy  is  a  general  characteristic  of  races
1  E.  J.  Payne,  History  of  the  New  World  called  America,  ii.  344.


38  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

which  fall  below  the  standard  of  European  civilization.  In  such
races  the  custom  that  allows  it  is  predominant  over  the  cus
tom  which  forbids  it.  Yet  of  such  races  there  are  many  in
which  polygamy  is  rare.  There  are  some  in  which  it  is  replaced
by  polyandry.  There  are  not  a  few  which  are  monogamous.
There  are  some,  and  these  some  of  the  lowest,  in  which  mono
gamy  is  as  strict  and  binding  as  in  Catholic  Europe.  Neverthe
less  throughout  savagery,  barbarism  and  semi-civilization,  the
permission  of  polygamy  is  the  ordinary  rule,  while  in  the  higher
civilization  monogamy  is  the  rule.  In  this  limited  and  re
stricted  sense  it  is  true,  after  all  exceptions  are  allowed  for,  to
say  that  the  tendency  of  the  lower  culture  is  to  allow,  and  of
the  higher  to  prohibit,  the  plurality  of  wives.  We  may  carry
the  matter  a  step  further  and  say  that  polygamy  is  the  special
characteristic  of  peoples  above  the  lowest  and  below  the  highest
levels  of  civilization,  for  though  it  occurs  among  lower  savages
it  is  less  frequent,  and  does  not  reach  so  extreme  a  development ;
and  though  monogamy  occurs  within  the  zone  marked  out,  it  is
rarer  within  that  zone  than  elsewhere.  Now  this  predominance
of  given  types  of  institutions  at  given  levels  of  general  culture
has  its  significance.  The  forces  economic,  ethical,  social,  intel
lectual,  which  tend  to  shape  any  institution  are  multitudinous.
Some  pull  in  one  direction,  others  the  contrary  way.  In  such
cases  we  seldom  obtain  generalizations  which  hold  without
exception.  The  matter  is  like  any  other  which  comes  under
the  general  Law  of  Probabilities.  There  are  typical  cases
representing  the  normal  balance  of  forces,  and  round  these  as  a
centre  radiate  deviating  cases  where  the  ever  varying  forces
have  gathered  strength  in  one  direction  or  another.  Further,  if
there  is  any  influence  at  work  which  alters  the  distribution  of
forces,  there  may  be  several  such  centres  corresponding  to
different  degrees  in  the  working  out  of  that  influence.  This  is
what  we  shall  find  in  ethical  institutions.  At  successive  stages
of  general  culture  certain  types  predominate  without  being
universal ;  that  is  to  say,  the  forces  making  for  a  given  type  are
apparently  favoured  by  the  general  conditions  of  one  stage  and
depressed  by  those  of  another.1

1  Certain  difficulties  in  applying  this  method  should  be  noticed  here.
The  first  is  the  vagueness  of  the  conception  of  general  culture. It  may  be


ETHICAL EVOLUTION

13.  Jn  following  this  method  we  are  deserting  the  order  of
time,'  We  are  seeking  only  to  classify  on  a  certain  basis.
Whether  the  actual  advance  of  society  tends  to  move  along  the
stages  which  we  make  to  succeed  one  another  in  our  scheme  is
a  separate  question.  And  there  is  yet  another  question  which
is  distinct  from  all  of  them.  Are  we  to  allow  the  terms  higher
or  lower  in  our  classification,  and  if  so,  on  what  principles
are  we  to  justify  thorn  ?  In  relation  to  the  conception  of
general  culture,  I  fear  the  terms  have  already  slipped  mto  the
text.  They  are  implied  when  we  speak  of  grades  and  levels.
But  it  is  clear  that  in  applying  them  without  analysis,  we  run
the  risk  of  arguing  in  a  circle.  We  are  so  ready  to  take  the
ideas  of  our  own  time  as  necessarily  the  highest,  and  since  these
are  also  the  latest— at  least  there  are  none  later— we  may  argue
that  the  movement  of  society  has  on  the  whole  been  towards
the  best.  To  avoid  intolerable  prolixity  of  description,  however,
I  must  be  allowed  to  use  the  terms  provisionally.  I  shall

asked  whether  in  the  term  moral  culture  is  not  included,  and  if  so  whether
we  are  not  arguing  in  a  circle  when  we  ascribe  a  cortam  stage  m  the  one  to
a  corresponding  s^age  in  the  other. The  reply  to  this  objection  is  (1)  that
as  has  already  been  pointed  out,  morality  does  not  m  point  of  fact  advance
Sep  by  step  with  the  other  aspects  of  culture,  and  (2)  that  though  the  term
needs  much  further  definition,  it  appears  in  the  ordinary  usage  of  anthro
pologists  to  contemplate  principally  the  state  of  the  arts  of  1  te  and the
degree  in  which  social  order  (outward  order,  a  very  different  thing  from
morality)  is  maintained. A  more  serious  objection  i.  that  no  sat  factory
method  of  distinguishing  grades  of  culture  has  yet  been  carried  through.
(See  for  a  brief  critique  of  successive  attempts,  Stemmetz,  LAnnee  Sociolo-
qiaue,  vol.  iii.  137.) But  though  the  accurate  grading  of  culture  leaves
much  to  be  desired,  broad  distinctions  (as  ot  uncivilized  and  civilized  or
a-  'ain  of  certain  types  of  civilization)  are  generally  admitted,  and,  for  on
main  argument,  only  these  will  be  utilized Steinmetz  recognizes  the
necessity  of  these  classes  (vogues  maisjustes  et  frls  pratiques,  p.  137).
adds  the  class  of  Barbarian  as  intermediate,  and  the  term  will  be  so  use
hi his  work,  though  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  limits  of  its  application
are  ill  denned. Anthropology  has  still  to  wait  for  the  completed  system  of
classification  which  alone  can  place  its  generalizations  on  a  farm  basis A
further  difficulty  is  that  no  statistical  method  exists  or  can  be  de vised  for
determining  accurately  the  percentage  of  cases  in  which  a  given  institution
is  found  at  a  certain  level. In  this  respect  it  is  much  to  be  regret te  I  that
no systematic attempt  has  been made  to  follow  the  lead  ot I 10  e
Tylor  in  his  method  of  Investigating  the Development  of  Institution,
(J A vol xviii ) but the initial  difficulty  of  determining  what  is
Se  else ^  proved  too  great  for  Anthropology. This  difficulty ^restricts
the  positive  argument  from  predominance  to  cases  where  the  exceptions  are
very  rare In  other  cases,  i.  e.  where  '«  exceptions  "  are  frequent,  we  must
content  ourselves  with  a  negative  and  allow  no  conclusion  to  be  drawn.


40  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

endeavour  to  justify  their  use  in  the  course  of  a  final  inquiry
into  the  broad  trend  of  ethical  evolution.  If  then  these  terms
are  provisionally  admitted,  our  classification  will  show  us  the
lines  of  possible  evolution  from  lowest  to  highest.  How  far  in
the  order  of  time  societies  have  moved  along  these  lines,  what
has  furthered,  and  what  so  often  arrested  or  even  reversed  their
course  are  further  questions.  Whether  there  is  any  broad  and
general  tendency  in  historical  evolution  giving  meaning  and
value  to  the  long  tragedy  of  human  development,  is  the  final
and  vital  question  which  our  investigation  of  all  these  points
may  help  us  to  approach.  But  it  will  hardly  be  possible  within
the  limits  of  this  work  to  deal  fully  with  those  questions  of  the
causation  of  social  change  which  suggest  themselves  here.  The
utmost  that  we  can  hope  is  to  determine  the  question  of  fact.
Has  the  actual  course  of  human  evolution  on  the  whole  been
from  lower  to  higher,  and  if  so,  is  this  movement  based  on
something  permanent  in  the  nature  of  things,  or  in  the  forces
which  move  the  human  mind  ?  On  the  answer  to  this  question,
in  which  as  it  were  all  the  results  of  science,  of  morals,  of  states
manship,  are  summed  up  and  weighed  in  the  balance,  our  whole
attitude  to  life,  to  social  affairs,  I  would  add  to  ethics  and  to
religion,  must  very  largely  depend.  It  is  on  the  impartial  in
vestigation  of  the  facts  of  mental  and  moral  life  that  the  answer
must  ultimately  rest,  and  this  consideration  gives  to  the
most  tedious  and  minute  investigation  in  these  fields  an  inestim
able  value  in  the  sight  of  those  who  determine  their  attitude  to
these  great  issues  not  by  guess  work,  but  by  science.

To  sum  up.  Ethical  evolution,  which  is  our  subject,  is  not
the  same  thing  as  Social  evolution,  but  it  is  intimately  con
nected  with  it.  The  strictly  ethical  element  is  the  conception
of  the  good,  whereby  man  seeks  deliberately  to  regulate  his
conduct.  The  modifications  of  this  conception  are  connected
by  countless  actions  and  re-actions  on  the  one  hand,  with  the
economic  and  political  development  of  society,  and  on  the  other
with  the  development  of  religion,  or  more  generally,  of  thought
concerning  the  nature  of  the  world  and  man's  place  therein.
The  object  of  comparative  ethics  is  to  distinguish  the  main
types  of  ethical  conception,  and  classify  them  in  such  wise  as  to
throw  the  greatest  light  on  the  conditions  and  character  of  their


ETHICAL  EVOLUTION  41

development.  Among  ethical  conceptions  we  distinguish  broadly
between  the  rule  of  action,  and  the  reason  given  for  obeying  it.
The  first  is  embodied  in  custom  and  law,  and  with  these  our
investigation  begins.  Our  object  will  be  to  describe  and  classify
the  leading  types  and  customs  that  we  find  in  each  great
department  of  social  life.  Further,  with  a  view  to  obtaining
what  light  we  can  on  the  general  character  of  human  develop
ment  we  shall  not  only  distinguish  the  various  forms  which
custom  assumes,  but  shall  endeavour,  as  far  as  possible,  to  set
forth,  with  due  note  of  exceptions,  the  type  of  institution  which
predominates  at  each  stage  of  social  evolution.

This  comparative  study  of  institutions  forms  the  first  part  of
our  work.  Upon  this  follows  the  study  of  the  ideas  underlying
the  social  or  ethical  order,  the  reasons  which  men  render  to
themselves  for  making  and  obeying  laws  of  conduct.  This  will
draw  us  to  the  comparative  study  of  religion,  and  of  the  great
ethical  systems  of  history.  These  ideas  we  shall  have  to
examine  and  classify  in  the  same  manner.  From  this  classifica
tion  it  may  in  some  degree  appear  how  far  there  is  evidence  of
an  advance  from  lower  to  higher  conceptions,  and  if  so,  how  far
the  higher  ethical  and  religious  ideas  have  actually  moulded
the  practice  of  men.  These  I  take  to  be  the  main  problems  of
Comparative  Ethics.

Our  first  business,  then,  will  be  with  the  ethical  institutions,
that  is  to  say,  those  customs  and  laws  which  are  most  directly
related  to  ethical  ideas.  We  have  to  take  these  institutions
under  their  main  heads,  and  distinguish  and  classify  what  we  find.
Lastly,  we  have  to  arrange  them  in  the  scale  of  the  general
evolution  of  society.  For  this  latter  purpose  it  will  be  necessary
to  form  some  outline  conception  of  the  social  framework  to  which
all  institutions  belong,  and  in  the  next  chapter  I  shall  therefore
attempt  to  distinguish  the  main  types  of  social  organization.


CHAPTER TI

FORMS  OF  SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

1.  WHEN  we  set  out  to  classify  types  of  social  organization  the
first  question  that  arises  is  whether  any  organization  at  all  is  a
universal  characteristic  of  all  races  of  men.  I  do  not  mean  to
suggest  that  there  ever  was  or  could  have  been  a  time  in  which
individuals  lived  in  complete  isolation — the  relation  of  mother
and  child,  to  go  no  further,  would  always  involve  the  rudiments
of  family  organization,  and  the  necessities  of  defence  have  always
no  doubt  secured  some  more  extended  co-operation.  But  from
this  to  anything  like  a  regular,  permanent,  social  structure,
resting  upon  any  distinct  customs  and  ideas,  there  is  a  consider
able  step ;  and  it  is  simply  a  question  for  history  and  observation
to  decide  whether  there  have  or  have  not  existed  any  races  of
men  which  have  failed  to  make  this  primary  move  in  advance.
As  to  this,  contemporary,  or  nearly  contemporary,  observation
has  to  tell  us  that  there  are  certain  tribes  the  organization  of
which  is,  to  say  the  least,  in  a  very  rudimentary  condition,  and
before  turning  to  the  somewhat  complex  structure  which  will
encounter  us  in  dealing  with  the  mass  of  savage  races,  it  may  be
well  to  consider  some  of  these.  To  do  so  will  guard  us  against
the  rash  assumption  that  those  institutions  which  we  find
generally  prevalent  among  savages  are  necessarily  universal  or
necessarily  primitive.  Further,  to  have  on  starting  an  outline
picture  of  what  man  is  in  the  lowest  grade  of  culture  known  to
us  will,  I  think,  assist  our  comparative  judgments  all  along  the
line,  and  I  will  therefore  allow  myself  a  little  latitude  and  give
a  summary  from  what  our  authorities  tell  us,  not  only  of  the
social  life,  but  of  the  ideas  and  beliefs  of  a  couple  of  peoples  who
stand  very  low  in  the  scale,  and  of  whose  life  we  have  clear,
consistent,  and  authoritative  accounts.

42


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  43

2.  I  will  take,  first,  the  Rock  Vcddalis  of  Ceylon,  as  described
by  the  Herrn  Sarasin.

The  Veddahs  consist  of  a  mere  handful  of  scattered  families
living  sometimes  in  trees,  in  the  rainy  season  often  in  caves,
though they  are capable of  making  primitive  huts. They
are  hunters,  and  each  Veddah,  with  his  wife  and  family,  keeps
his  hunting  ground  for  the  most  part  scrupulously  to  himself.
These  very primitive  folk, we read with some surprise,  are
strictly  monogamous,  and have the  saying  that nothing  but
death  parts husband  and wife. Infidelity  among  them  is,  in
fact,  rare,  and is generally avenged upon the  paramour  by
assassination  at  the  hands  of  the  husband. The  looseness  of
morals  which  prevails  apart  from  marriage  among  most  savages
also  appears  to  be  rare  among  these  people ;  and  though  the
husband  is  master  in  his  own  cave,  his  wife  is  well  treated  and
is  in  no  sense  a  slave. The  Veddahs  arc  credited  with  affection
for  their  children,  and  the children  with  attachment  to  their
parents after  they have grown up. There is no sufficient
evidence  of  the  prevalence  of  infanticide  among  them,  in  which
they are also honourably distinguished from many higher
savages. The  strict  monogamy  and  well-united  family  life  of
the  Veddahs  is  partly  explained  by  the  fact  that  they  live  in
great  measure  in  isolation. In  the  dry  season  they  pass  their
time  on  their  hunting  ground ;  in  the  wet  season  small  groups
of  families  will  resort  to  some  hillock  which  is  the  centre  of  two
or  three  hunting  grounds,  and  sometimes  two  or  three  families
will  reside  together  for  a  time  in  one  cave. This  little  group  of
families  forms  a  clan  or  "warg,"  but  the  "warg"  appears  to
be small, and to have but the slightest organization and
very  few  functions. There  appears  to  be  a  certain  common
property in  the  hill  on  which  they meet,  and  in  the  honey
to  be  found  thereon. Sometimes  also  the  leading  men,  or  it
might  be  an  influential  old  woman,  in  the  clan  will  intervene
to  compose  disputes. Most  clans  have  only  a  dim  idea  of  the
bare  existence  of  others,  and  in  consequence  there  is  no  ques
tion  of  marriage  outsido  the  clan  which  is  so  common  a  feature
of  the  next  higher  stage  of  development. There  is  no  slavery,
of  course no  class distinctions,  and no regular war, though
sometimes  there  will  be  fighting  over  the  boundaries  of  hunt-


44

ing  grounds.  In  short,  if  we  put  all  these  points  together,  it
appears  that  beyond  the  narrow  circle  of  the  family  there  is
scarcely  any  organized  common  life.  The  family  group  is
isolated.  It  is,  perhaps,  in  consequence  of  this  fact  that
marriage  with  the  younger  sister  is  not  only  tolerated,  but
apparently  common.  In  all  probability,  the  restriction  of  the
Veddah  to  a  single  wife  is  partly  due  to  the  same  isolation.  A
contributory  cause  is,  perhaps,  a  deficiency  in  the  number  of
women.  In  several  settlements  the  Sarasin  brothers  found  53
adults,  composed  of  30  males  and  23  women.  In  the  caves  of
the  Danigala  they  found  4  men  and  2  women;  in  other  caves
3  and  3,  and  in  yet  others  10  and  8.  The  census  of  the  whole
population  in  1881  gave  1177  males  and  1051  females.  When
we  compare  this  with  many  savage  tribes  in  which  polygamy
prevails  we  shall  find  an  instructive  contrast  in  the  relative
numbers  of  the  sexes.

Of  the  religious  conceptions  of  the  Veddah  very  little  is  known.
The  corpse  is,  or  used  to  be,  left  where  the  man  died  with  a  stone
or  sticks  put  over  it.  If  his  death  occurred  in  a  cave  the  family
would  leave  the  cave  for  a  season,  letting  the  skeleton  remain.
No  fear,  however,  is  shown  of  skeletons,  and  funeral  offerings  and
feasts  are  only  found  among  the  village  Veddahs  who  have  come
under  the  influence  of  the  Singalese.  There  is  no  evidence  of  any
conception  of  a  Creative  God,  but  there  are  traces  of  the  universal
savage  belief  in  the  power  of  killing  men  and  animals  by  witch
craft.  The  most  striking  and  distinctive  ceremony  is  a  dance
round  an  arrow,  of  the  nature  and  meaning  of  which  little  seems
to  be  known.

The  description  which  the  Sarasins  give  of  the  intellectual
powers  of  the  Veddahs  is  not  without  interest.  Their  intelli
gence,  they  say,  is  normally  developed,  but  in  scope  far  below
that  of  the  European.  Their  outlook,  and  therefore  the  scope  of
their  thought,  is  extraordinarily  limited,  but  within  those  limits
the  Veddah  moves  with  ease.  A  Veddah  untouched  by  foreign
influences,  they  declare,  has  no  power  of  counting,  and  they
mention  it  as  something  of  a  feat  that  one  Veddah  succeeded
in  dividing  nine  potatoes  equally  between  three  individuals.
They  have  no  names  for  days  or  months,  but  distinguish  the
full  moon.  They  do  not  know  the  year.  They  express  size  and


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  45

height  by  gestures.  They  have  no  medicine,  but  have  acquired
some  knowledge  of  surgery  and  the  binding  of  wounds  from  the
Singalese.  They  are  contented,  and  we  are  not  surprised  to
learn  that  they  combine  a  certain  instinctive  fear  of  strangers
with  some  contempt  for  them.  For  the  rest,  they  are  said  to
be  irritable  and  liable  to  be  infuriated  by  laughter.  On  the
other  hand,  they  have  no  delight  in  bloodshed  and  never  kill
except  as  a  punishment ;  they  are  not  cruel  even  to  animals,
and  are  said  to  appear  annoyed  at  the  unnecessary  slaughter  of
an  animal.  They  are  truthful,  unaggressive,  hospitable  and
sympathetic  to  strangers  in  need,  grateful,  and  plucky  in  fight
ing.  They  respect  the  property  even  of  strangers,  and  would
not  even  take  a  few  leaves  from  a  banana  tree  without  coming
to  ask  leave.  The  property  of  others  is  to  them,  our  authors
say,  as  a  matter  of  course  inviolable.

Such  in  brief  are  the  character,  attainments  and  social  life
of  the  Veddahs,  in  many  respects  not  what  one  would  have  ex
pected  of  one  of  the  most  primitive  races  of  men,  almost  without
social  organization  but  with  a  strongly-developed  family  life,  far
from  deficient  in  the  moral  qualities  upon  which  higher  forms  of
social  life  are  built  up,  but  wanting  in  the  power  or  the  stimulus,
or  both,  to  unite  in  larger  numbers,  and  in  the  more  complex
and  far-reaching  purposes  upon  which  regular  societies  are
founded.  In  them  among  existing  savages  we  perhaps  come
nearest  to  the  idea  of  the  Homeric  Cyclopes,  of  whom
"  each  rules  his  wife  ami  children,  nor  do  they  care  for  one
another."

3.  Not  much  more  highly  developed  are  the  Yahgans  of  Tierra
del  Fuego,  as  described  by  Messrs.  Hyades  and  Deniker.  Here
the  family  is  less  isolated,  and  perhaps  in  consequence  we  have
neither  the  monogamy  nor  the  strict  fidelity  which  are  char
acteristic  of  the  Veddahs.  The  girl  is  given  in  marriage  by  her
parents,  as  is  usual  in  savage  society,  without  the  form  of  her
consent,  and  though  a  single  wife  is  the  more  ordinary  rule,
two,  three,  or  four  are  common.  Generally  the  newly-married
couple  live  with  the  wife's  parents,  to  whom  the  husband  is  for
the  time  a  servant ;  and  here  we  have  the  germ  of  marriage  by
service  which  we  shall  find  a  common  characteristic  of  a  slightly


46  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

higher  stage.  Apart  from  marriage  there  are  no  restrictions
upon  either  sex,  and  the  enforcement  of  the  marriage  tie  itself
is  left  to  the  husband,  who  may,  however,  count  upon  a  certain
support  from  the  neighbours  and  kinsfolk  in  avenging  his
wrongs.  This,  indeed,  is  much  the  same  with  all  questions  of
crime.  A  man  who  kills  his  wife  will  be  pursued  by  her  family,
or  perhaps  by  a  group  of  families,  and  killed,  it  may  be  a  year
or  two  later.  No  doubt  he  can  resist  in  fight,  but  he  will  obtain
no  sympathy  or  support.  Justice  is  entirely  a  matter  which  the
individual  must  vindicate  for  himself.  "Every  man,"  say  our
authors,  "  is  a  redresser  of  wrongs,  and  does  justice  for  himself,
without  knowing  any  law."  The  quarrels  of  a  few  families  can
scarcely  be  dignified  by  the  name  of  wars,  and  indeed  there  is
an  absence  of  the  organization  necessary  for  any  operation
worthy  of  that  name.  There  are  no  chiefs,  just  as  there  are  no
ranks  and  no  slaves.

Our  authors  deny  to  the  Yahgans  any  sign  of  the  possession
of  religion  except  a  belief  in  ghosts  or  phantoms,  from  whom
they  fear  injuries  in  this  life.  In  particular  they  are  subject  to
recurring  panics  due  to  cannibal  ghosts,  "  oualapatou,"  who  make
night  attacks  upon  them  and  eat  men  and  children.  Other
injurious  spirits  are  met  with  in  the  forests.  There  are  among
them  sorcerers,  "  yakamouch,"  who  appear  to  address  incanta
tions  to  a  mysterious  being  called  "  Aiapakal,"  and  to  hold  from
a  spirit  named  "  Hoakils "  a  supernatural  power  of  life  and
death.  The  yakamouch  narrates  that  he  has  eaten  some  one
in  a  dream,  and  this  bodes  ill-luck  and  even  death  for  the
person  dreamed  of.  Some  sorcerers,  however,  act  as  medicine
men,  and  draw  out  the  causes  of  the  disease  from  the  body  in
the  form  of  arrow  heads.

Like  the  ancient  Hebrews,  they  "  cut  themselves  for  the
dead,"  and  the  name  of  the  dead  man  becomes — to  use  a  phrase
taken  from  another  part  of  the  world — tabooed.  It  would  not
be  applied,  for  example,  to  any  place  or  person  which  bears  it.
The  dead  man's  hut  is  burnt  down,  and  his  effects,  such  as  they
are,  given  away — usages  which  rather  represent  fear  of  death
and  all  that  pertains  to  it  than  any  definite  religious  belief,
though  mutilation  as  a  ceremony  of  mourning  may  be  a  survival
of  a  more  terrible  sacrifice  at  an  earlier  stage.


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  47

Notwithstanding  their  superstitious  character,  cannibalism  is
not  imputed  to  the  Yahgans,  and  in  other  respects  their  moral
qualities  do  not  appear  to  be  particularly  low.  They  hold
human  life  sacred  with  the  exception,  common  among  savages,
that  they  allow  infanticide.  This,  however,  does  not  prevent
the  existence  of  strong  affection  for  the  children  who  are  allowed
to  survive,  or  of  a  similar  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  children
towards  their  parents.  Property  is  not  held  in  common,  but
they  are  free  in  giving  and  hold  hospitality  a  duty.  They  are
neither  cruel  nor  malicious,  but  they  do  not  regard  lying  as
being  in  any  way  disgraceful.

In  the  Yahgans  we  have,  to  sum  up,  another  example  of  a
small  number  of  people — the  whole  population  is  less  than  one
thousand — living  in  small  groups  of  three  or  four  families,
without  any  regular  clan  organization,  though  with  fairly  well
established  customs  to  which  the  feeling  of  the  community  lends
support,  a  support  which  is  frequently  vindicated  by  force  of
arms.  The  conception  of  the  supernatural  among  this  people  is
scarcely  more  definite  than  their  social  order,  but  again  shows
the  germ  of  beliefs  which  we  shall  sec  reaching  a  high
development  at  a  further  stage.

It  will  be  seen  that  these  two  peoples  differ  in  several  im
portant  respects.  But  they  have  one  thing  in  common — the
very  rudimentary  character  of  their  social  organization.  Their
communities  are  small ;  in  the  case  of  the  Veddahs  there  seems
to  be  scarcely  any  common  life  beyond  that  of  the  family.  They
have  no  regular  organization  for  enforcing  order  or  maintaining
the  customs  which  they  severally  follow.  Even  their  beliefs  are
indefinite ;  and  if  some  of  this  indefiniteness  may  be  due  to
difficulties  in  the  way  of  understanding  them,  there  is  no  reason
to  set  it  all  down  to  that  cause.  The  one  thing  that  is  strongly
marked  among  the  Veddahs,  their  monogamy,  seems  correlated
with  the  absence  of  a  wider  clan  life.  Now  it  is  for  the  sake  of
this  elementary,  inorganic  character  that  I  have  dwelt  on  these
people  here.  Through  the  greater  part  of  the  savage  world  we
find  institutions,  ideas,  an  organization  in  short,  which  is  not
ours,  but  which  is  nevertheless  definite  and  often  complicated.
It  is  perhaps  a  natural  tendency  on  the  part  of  anthropologists
to  take  the  institutions  which  they  find  strongly  marked  in


48  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

these  low  grades  of  culture  and  assume  them  to  be  primitive,1
treating  the  numerous  cases  in  which  such  institutions  are  but
partially  developed  as  cases  of  "  survival,"  explaining  them,  that
is,  as  due  to  the  partial  break  up  of  those  which  they  assume  to
be  original.  But  another  alternative  is  at  least  equally  possible.
It  may  be  that  in  the  lowest  grade  of  culture  no  institution,  and
no  belief — not  even  that  in  witchcraft — is  very  strongly
developed ;  that  the  elaborate  institutions  which  we  find  in  a
great  part  of  the  savage  world  are  in  their  most  distinct  and
characteristic  form  the  products  of  a  special  evolution,  and  that
the  less  distinct,  less  marked,  forms  frequently  found,  which  are
generally  treated  as  survivals,  are  to  be  regarded  rather  as  incom
plete  developments.  This  possibility  should  be  borne  in  mind
when  we  are  discussing  forms  of  social  organization,  and  when  we
find  that  each  type  is  realized  in  many  different  grades  of  perfec
tion  and  is  often  crossed  perplexingly  enough  by  tendencies  that
set  towards  a  quite  different  type.  Bearing  this  in  mind  we  may
now  proceed  to  pass  in  review  the  leading  generic  types  of  social
organization.

4.  The  deepest  distinction  between  different  forms  of  human
society  turns  on  the  nature  of  the  social  bond  itself — the  tie
which  keeps  the  members  of  a  society  together  while  separating
them  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  Not
that  the  bond  of  union  is  ever  simple  or  single.  The  motives
that  make  men  live  and  act  together  are  diverse.  But  among
the  conditions  which  keep  society  at  one  and  maintain  its  con
stitution  in  vigour  certain  leading  forces  may  be  distinguished,
and  at  different  stages  of  development  one  or  other  of  these  is
often  so  prominent  as  to  dominate  the  remainder  and  give  its
character  to  the  society  as  a  whole.  These  forces  may,  I  think,
be  usefully  grouped  into  three  which,  we  may  say,  constitute  the
leading  principles  of  social  union.  I  will  call  them : —

(A)  The  principle  of  Kinship.

(B)  The  principle  of  Authority.

(C)  The  principle  of  Citizenship.

It  might  be  expected  that  I  should  add  religion  as  a  fourth,

1  In  particular,  it  is  natural  to  take  institutions  which  stand  in  strong
contrast  to  our  own,  as  primitive.  This  is  well  pointed  out  by  Steinmetz,
Annde  Sociologique,  1898-99,  pp.  50-51.


FORMS OF  SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  49

but  it  is  better  to  say  that  the  religious  factor  works  all  along
the  line,  strengthening  each  of  these  three  in  turn  with  its
authority,  though  there  are  some  cases  in  which  it  becomes  so
dominant  as  to  give  a  special  character  to  the  bond,  and  these
must  be  noted  in  their  place.

(A)  Kinship,  as  a  bond  of  Social  Union.

Now  primitive  and  savage  society  appears  to  rest  generally
on  kinship.  Thus,  the  one  form  of  social  union  which  may
with  entire  confidence  be  called  natural  and  universal  is  the
relationship  of  mother  and  child.  But  as  the  children  grow  up
and  form  families  of  their  own  the  old  relationship  is  not  neces
sarily  broken.  They  may  remain  together,  combining  for  the  chase
or  for  mutual  defence,  so  forming  themselves  into  something  of
the  nature  of  a  clan.  Or,  though  wandering  away,  they  may
retain  memories  of  kinship  and  preserve  certain  common  bonds,
so  forming  a  tribe.  The  clan,  or  group,  organization,  with
generally  something  of  a  wider  tribal  unity,  forms  the  normal
society  of  the  primitive  world.  Let  us  consider  some  repre
sentative  forms  of  such  a  social  organization.

In  Australia  a  tribe  such  as  the  Wakelbura,  which  is  typical
of  many,  occupies  exclusively  a  certain  well-defined  area,  This
is  divided  into  lesser  areas  occupied  by  divisions  of  the  tribe,  and
the  subdivision  may  be  followed  till  we  come  to  the  local  unit
consisting  of  men  who  are  nearly  related  to  one  another,  along
with  their  wives  who  are  "  brought  from  other  localities." ]
This  is  one  way  in  which  the  tribe  is  divided.  But  there  is  a
cross  division  dependent  upon  the  marriage  customs.  The
whole  tribe  is  divided  into  two  moieties  which  are  "exogamous"
— that  is  to  say,  people  must  marry  outside  their  own  moiety.
These  moieties  again  are  divided  into  sub-classes,  and  the  sub
classes  into  totems.  The  totem  is  a  class  of  objects,  e.g.  animals
or  plants,  with  which  certain  human  beings  have  a  mysterious
affinity.  The  animal  has  an  influence  over  the  human  being,
the  human  being  can  control  or  affect  the  procreation  of  the
animal.2  Among  the  Wakelbura  we  find  such  totem  names  as

1  A.  W.  Ilowitt,  The  Organization  of  Australian  Tribes,  vol.  i.  part  2,
1888,  p.  101.

2  At  least  among  the  Central  Australians  (Spencer  and  Gillen,  i.  ch.  6).
I  do  not  know  whether  this  holds  of  the  Wakelbura.

VOL.  I.  E


50  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  Plain  Turkey,  Small  Bee,  Opossum,  Kangaroo,  Emu,
Carpet  Snake,  etc.  The  totems  are  also  exogamous.

Now  the  moiety  and  totem  divisions  go  by  "  mother-right,"  i.  e.
they  are  inherited  through  the  mother,  and  it  will  be  seen  to
follow  that  the  women  and  children  of  any  local  group  belong  to
different  totems  and  the  opposite  moieties  to  their  husbands  and
fathers.  For  example,  a  man  of  the  Plain  Turkey  totem  cannot
marry  a  Plain  Turkey  woman.  His  wife  will  be,  say,  an  Emu.
Her  children,  male  or  female,  will  also  be  Emus.  Hence  any
single  local  group  must  contain  members  of  the  two  moieties  and
of  different  totems.  It  follows  further  that  when  the  men  of  a
group  are  nearly  related  and  are  therefore  of  one  totem,  to  find
wives  they  must  go  to  another  totem,  that  is  to  another  locality.
The  moieties  and  totems  will  accordingly  be  scattered  among
the  different  local  divisions  of  the  tribe.  In  other  words  the  two
kinds  of  division  will  cross  one  another.  On  the  one  hand  we
have  the  local  division  corresponding  to  the  actual  grouping  of
men  in  their  daily  life.  On  the  other  we  have  a  cross  division
into  classes  and  totems  which  spread  all  over  the  tribe.  The
magical  bond  of  totemism  and  the  practice  of  intermarriage
connected  with  it l  constitute  a  strand  of  connection  holding  the
district  local  groups  together.

Considering  the  social  structure  as  a  whole,  we  find  a  smaller
unit — the  local  group — based  on  near  kinship  and  maintained
by  descent  from  parent  to  child,  and  a  wider  unity — the  tribe —
the  parts  of  which  are  kept  in  close  relationship  by  intermarriage,
the  whole  structure  being  permeated  by  what  at  a  higher  stage
we  should  call  common  religious  beliefs,  though  here  the  beliefs
are  really  not  so  much  religious  as  magical.2  These  appear  to
be  the  typical  elements  in  early  society.

5.  But  these  elements  admit  of  further  evolution.  The  Austra
lian  tribe  takes  its  peculiar  character  from  the  matrimonial
institutions  of  the  peoples  which  admit  of  very  little  develop-

1  Members  of  the  same  totem  are  also  in  many  tribes  bound  to  mutual
defence — not,  however,  among  the  Arunta  (Spencer  and  Gillen,  i.  211).

2  Howitt,  op.  cit.,  pp.  98-103. With  other  forms  of  Australian  social
organization  and  the  stages  of  transition  to  a  higher  type  I  need  not  deal
here. See  Howitt,  I.  c.,  p.  102,  and  Tribes  of  South  East  Australia,  ch.  ii.


51

ment  for  the  family.1  In  other  peoples  we  find  groups  corre
sponding  more  to  our  idea  of  a  clan — that  is  to  say,  a  kind  of
enlarged  family.  In  the  clan  most  familiar  to  us  where  kinship
is  based  on  ''father-right" — that  is,  where  the  child  inherits  its
father's  name  and  status — the  government  rests  on  the  eldest
male  ascendant.  A  man  and  his  wife,  their  sons  with  their  wives,
their  grandchildren  and  great-grandchildren,  may  dwell  together
or  near  at  hand,  all  ruled  by  the  common  progenitor.  This  is
the  familiar  patriarchate  of  Genesis.  But  the  clan-structure  may
also  be  built  up  on  mother-right,  in  which  case  the  organization
is  a  degree  more  complex  and  less  compact.  Here  the  centre  of
the  family  is  the  mother,  and  all  her  children  and  daughters'
children  belong  to  it.  But  her  husband  is  not  a  member  of  it,
neither  are  her  daughters'  husbands.  They  are  strangers  and
sojourners  in  the  abode  of  their  wives,  and  often  have  to  visit
them  in  secret  and  avoid  all  communication  with  their  wives'
relatives.  This  is  the  form  of  society  known  formerly  as  the
matriarch  ate,  but  the  term  was  a  misnomer,  since  the  cases  in
which,  the  eldest  woman  rules  are  extremely  rare,  if  they  exist  at
all,  while  mother-right  is  common.  The  headship  of  such  a
clan  is  ordinarily  inherited  through  the  mother,  but  not  by  the
mother,  passing  from  her  brother  to  her  son  and  from  her  son  to
her  daughter's  son.

The  clan,  whether  maternal  or  paternal,  has  certain  character
istic  features.  Take  for  example  the  Malay  Suku,  the  unit  of
the  original  Malay  Society.  Here  membership  of  the  Sukus
goes  by  female  descent,  the  headship  is  partly  inherited  through
the  mother  but  in  part  elective,  and  the  head  dispenses  justice
except  in  the  grave  cases  for  which  an  assembly  of  heads  are
gathered  together.  The  clan  owns  all  the  land  which  its
members  occupy.  The  men  who  marry  into  it  cannot  touch
their  wives'  property  without  the  consent  of  her  family.  It
protects  and  avenges  its  members  and  is  collectively  answerable

1  The  relationships  are  all  group  relationships,  i.  e.  no  distinction  in
name  or  in  tribal  custom  is  drawn  between  the  blood  brother  and  the  tribal
brother.  A  group  of  tribal  brothers  (a)  intermarrying  with  a  group  of  sisters
(b)  will  have,  as  children,  brothers  and  sisters  of  a  third  group  (c).  This
group  relationship  clearly  does  not  lend  itself  to  the  family  structure  which
hinges  on  the  central  position  of  the  common  ancestor  or  eldest  male
ascendant  as  representing  him.


52  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

for  their  misdeeds.  These  are  ordinary  features  of  clan-life,  though
naturally  they  are  worked  out  with  many  differences  of  detail.1

As  to  government,  for  example,  there  are  many  variations  in
the  power  of  the  head  and  the  mode  of  his  appointment.  He
may  have  absolute  powers  of  life  and  death  like  the  Roman
father,  or,  to  take  an  example  from  the  domain  of  mother-
right,  like  the  maternal  uncle  or  grandfather  among  some  African
people,  such  as  the  Barea  and  Kunama.2  Or  he  may  have  little
power  to  act  without  the  consent  of  the  clan.  Thus  in  the
Indian  law  books  his  position  fluctuates  between  that  of  a
patriarch  and  the  manager  of  a  joint  stock.3  He  may  have  the
right  at  will  to  expel  his  son  from  the  family  as  apparently  in
the  older  Babylonian  law,  or  this  right  may  be  expressly  limited
as  in  Hammurabi's  code.4  Finally  he  may  himself  be  set  aside
for  incompetence,  as  is  possible  at  the  present  day  in  the  joint
family  of  the  Deccan  and  of  Montenegro,  and  could  be  done  by
the  Phratry  under  Athenian  law.5

Again,  the  extent  of  the  clan  may  vary  greatly.  Under  father-
rio-ht,  for  example,  it  may  hold  together  only  while  the  common
ancestor  lives,  or  it  may  continue  in  being  after  his  death,  his
eldest  son,  or  next  brother,  succeeding  him,  or  the  succession
perhaps  being  determined  by  free  choice.  Some  writers  dis
tinguish  the  two  forms  as  the  Patriarchal  Family  and  Joint  Family

1  Waltz,  Anthropologie,  5,  i.  pp.  139-142.

2  The  theory  of  Manu,  Bk.  8,  416,  is  that  all  the  property  is  the  father's.
Among  the  Kondhs,  too,  the  father  is  absolute,  the  sons  having  no  property,
but  with  their  wives  and  children  sharing  the  common  meal. (J.  D.  Mayne,
A Treatise  on  Hindu  Law,  p.  231  ; Post,  Grundriss  der  Ethnologischen
Jurisprudenz,  i.  p.  136.)

3  Mayne,  255-298.

4  I  assume  in  the  text,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  "  Sumerian
Laws  "  do  represent  actual  custom  of  early  date. According  to  the  third  of
these  "  laws,"  the  father,  by  disowning  his  son,  could  expel  him  from  house
and  "  wall."  (?) The  mother  could  deprive  him  of  the  house  and  its  furni
ture. On  the  other  hand,  the  son,  for  disowning  his father, could be
thrown  into  chains  and  sold,  and  for  disowning  his  mother,  he  could  be
driven  out  of  house  and  town. (Meissner,  Beitrage  zum  Altbabylonischen
Privatrecht,  p.  14.) In  Hammurabi  (sections  168  and  169),  the  father  can
only  disinherit  for  a  second  offence,  confirmed  by  the  judgment  of  a  court.
In  contracts of  the  period,  both  the  older  and  newer  usages  are  found.
(Kohler  and  Peiser,  Hammurabi's  Gesetz,  p.  134  ff.) If  the  Sumerian  Laws
form  a  real  code,  they  are,  as  Kohler  and  Peiser  have  pointed  out,  distinctly
more  archaic  than  Hammurabi.

6  Post,  op.  tit.,  1.  pp.  137,  138,


53

respectively,  and  both  are  common  enough  in  modern  India. l
There  is  no  necessary  limit  at  which  the  family  must  break  tip,
though  naturally  the  disruptive  tendencies  increase  with  its  size.
In  India  the  presumption  of  the  law  is  that  the  family  is  un
divided,  but  this  presumption  is  naturally  weaker  in  proportion
as  the  relationship  is  more  remote.  Often,  as  in  parts  of  the
Malay  world,  among  the  Nairs  of  the  Malabar  coast,  and  among
the  North  American  Indians,  a  vigorous  joint  family  system  grows
up  on  the  basis  of  mother-right.  The  clan  occupies  a  single
Long  House  in  which  each  constituent  family  has  its  own
apartments.  Among  the  Iroquois  the  members  of  the  Long
House  carried  out  their  harvest  in  common  and  had  a  common
store  administered  by  the  elder  women  arid  distributed  by  them
among  the  different  apartments."

6.  But  how  docs  the  clan  grow  beyond  the  family  group,  and
how  are  we  to  consider  it  as  linked  to  other  clans  so  as  to  form  a
tribe,  a  community,  or  a  state  ?  In  the  first  place,  there  is  mere
natural  growth  to  consider.  If  the  clan  is  fruitful  and  multiplies
it  will  send  forth  branches  which  may  be  partially  independent
and  yet  retain  a  sense  of  connection  with  the  parent  stock.  So
far  common  descent  is  the  principle  of  union.  Secondly,  as
already  seen  in  the  case  of  Australian  groups,  there  are  the
connections  formed  by  intermarriage.  Sometimes  these  con
nections  serve  to  bind  the  smaller  family  groups  into  the  clan ;
sometimes,  the  whole  clan  being  sufficiently  held  together  by  the
ties  of  common  descent,  to  bind  one  clan  to  another,  and  so
build  up  a  tribe  or  community.  Lastly,  the  social  unity,  what
ever  it  be,  finds  expression  and  consecration  in  some  form  of
magic  or  religion.

It  is  important  to  remark  that  the  effects  of  intermarriage  on
the  social  structure  differ  materially  according  as  mother-right
or  father-right  prevails.  Under  mother-right  the  result  of
marriage  outside  the  clan — "  clan  exogamy  " — is  that  the  man
will  always  belong  to  a  different  clan  from  that  of  his  wife  and

1  Mayne,  223-32. The  ruler,  after  the  father's  death,  may  be  the  eldest
male— the  eldest  brother,  "by  consent,"  according  to  Narada,  or  he  may  be
chosen,  as  among  the  Todas.

2  Morgan,  Houselife,  pp.  03,  GO.


54  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

children,  who  are  accordingly  more  closely  dependent  on  the  wife's
brother  than  on  her  husband.1  The  result  is  to  introduce  a  cross
division,  a  cleavage  that  cuts  through  family  and  clan  life.  We
have  seen  this  cross  division  at  work  among  the  Australians,  but
there  we  thought  of  it  mainly  as  a  bond  of  union  between  little
groups  of  low  organization.  In  relation  to  a  more  developed
system  of  kinship,  however,  its  other  effects  become  important.
The  bond  that  unites  separate  clans  mars  the  unity  of  the
family  itself.  This  is  very  apparent  where,  as  among  the  North
American  Indians,  exogamy  is  based  on  Totemism.  The  members
of  the  totem  are  bound  to  mutual  defence,  and,  as  the  same  totem
may  be  found  in  quite  remote  parts — as  e.  g.  there  will  be  Bears
or  Beavers  all  over  North  America,  there  is  a  potential  bond  of
union  over  a  wide  district.  But  equally,  since  the  totem  is
exogamous,  no  one  totem  by  itself  can  form  a  society.  In  some
cases  two  totems  are,  one  may  say,  married  collectively,  i.  e.  the
men  of  one  must  take  wives  only  from  the  women  of  another.
More  generally  there  is  no  such  restriction,  but  two  or  more
totems  live  together  and  intermarry.  Thus  among  the  Iroquois
there  were  eight  totems — the  Wolf,  Bear,  Beaver,  Turtle,  Deer,
Snipe,  Heron  and  Hawk.2  All  or  most  of  these  were  found  in  each
of  the  five  "  nations  "  or  local  communities  into  which  the  Iroquois
were  divided.  In  each  "  nation  "  or  local  community  there  would
be  Beaver  men  with  Bear  wives  and  children,  Bear  men  with
Beaver  wives  and  children,  the  totem  bond  cutting  clean  across
the  family  and  local  divisions.

This  dual  relationship  became  a  means  of  achieving  a  higher
political  Union. The  famous  League  of  the  Five  Nations  was

1  Thus  the  uncle  (or  whatever  other  relation  the  particular  constitution
of  the  clan  may  designate)  will  have  the  right  of  protecting  or  punishing
the  children,  giving  the  girls  in  marriage,  etc. The  children  will  inherit
from  him,  and  in  case  of  divorce,  they  remain  in  the  mother's  clan. (For  ex
amples,  see  Post,  i.  pp.  72-78.) The  uncle  may  even  have  the  right  to
protect  the  child  against  its  own  father,  e.  g.  among  the  Barea,  Bazen,  and
Kunama. Of.  Rivers,  in  The  Cambridge  Expedition,  p.  151. In  the  Torres
Straits  a  fight  would  be  stopped,  if  one  of  the  combatants  saw  his  mother's
brother  on  the  other  side. The  father  also  had  power  to  stop  a  fight,  but
it  was  less  absolute. (Ib.,  144,  145.)

2  Originally  these  formed  two  exogamous  groups,  i.  e.  Wolf,  Bear,  Turtle
and  Beaver  could  not  intermarry,  but  must  take  a  partner  from  one  of  the
other  four  totems. But  this  restriction  broke  down. (Morgan,  League  of  the
Iroquois,  p.  83.)


FORMS  OF  SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  55

founded  on  the  fact  that  each  nation  contained  the  eight  totemic
groups  enumerated  above,  and  that  the  totem  tie  was  held  as
strong  as  the  local  tie — so  that  two  Hawks  of  different  nations

O

would  have  stood  together  against  a  Heron  or  a  Bear  of  their
own  nation.  This  cross  division  formed  a  natural  basis  for
union,  and  its  strength  was  attested  by  the  success  and  dura
bility  of  the  League.  What  was  done  consciously  by  the
Iroquois  was  perhaps  done  unconsciously  at  a  lower  stage,  and
has  probably  contributed  in  large  measure  to  the  formation  of
organized  society.  The  practice  of  marrying  outside  the  family
group  would  cause  many  local  aggregations  of  peoples  to  consist
of  individuals  belonging  to  two  family  groups  or  more,  and  while
the  physical  tie  bound  the  husband  to  his  wife's  children  the
totemic  tie  bound  both  him  and  them  to  other  families.  In  this
we  may  perhaps  find  an  explanation  both  of  the  wide  prevalence  of
varying  rules  of  exogamy  and  of  the  horrors  attending  its  breach.
If  the  structure  of  any  society  were  bound  up  with  its  mainten
ance  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  normal  processes  of  social
evolution  that  a  strongly-felt  tradition  should  assist  to  safeguard
the  practice  and  to  condemn  and  destroy  those  who  break  it.1

Be  this  as  it  may,  let  us  note  the  form  of  social  union  arrived
at  under  mother-right  and  totemism.  We  have  (1)  the  clan,
the  enlarged  family,  living  together  and  connected  by  ties  of
descent  through  the  female.  (2)  The  totem  cutting  across  the
clans  and  with  the  rule  of  exogamy  grafting  the  sons  and
brothers  of  one  clan  on  to  another  as  husbands  and  fathers.  On
the  basis  of  this  connection  we  may  have  (3)  the  local  community
of  several  intermarrying  clans  living  side  by  side,  and  (4)  a
wider  tribal  union  so  far  as  the  unity  of  the  totem  extends.
There  is  here  a  possible  basis  for  an  extensive  but  somewhat
loose  organization,  the  totem  bond  tending  to  weaken  rather
than  to  strengthen  that  of  the  clan.

Under  father-right  the  development  is  simpler.  So  far  as
exogamy  prevails  this  will  still  form  a  bond  of  connection
between  separate  stocks,  but  the  wife  now  passes  out  of  her
family  into  that  of  her  husband,  and  her  children  are  his.
Hence  the  division  cutting  across  the  family  is  no  longer  to  be

1  On  the  instinctive  element  underlying  exogamy,  see  below,  chapter  iv.


56  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

found.1  Without  it  the  family  group  is  more  closely  knit.  Yet
the  tie  formed  by  intermarriage,  though  less  strong  than  under
the  other  system,  would  still  be  very  real.  The  wife  becomes  a
member  of  the  family  into  which  she  marries,  but  she  still
retains  relationship  with  her  blood  kindred,  and  cognatio —
relationship  through  either  parent — is  generally  recognized  by  the
side  of  agnatio,  strict  male  kinship  alone.2  A  group  of  such
intermarrying  families  therefore  forms  a  community  united  by
countless  interwoven  strands  of  affinity  and  blood  relationship,
while  the  component  units  would  be  more  compact  than  under
mother-right.3

1  Among  the  Australian  tribes  indeed  the  totem  (or  class)  divides  the
family  as  much  under  father-right  as  under  mother-right. In  either  case,
one  parent  is  separated  from  the  children. But  "  father- right "  at  a  stage
when  the  family  is  so  little  developed,  means  much  less  than  the  father-
right  of  the  clan  system.

2  As  e.  g.  among  the  Celts  (Vinogradoff,  Growth  of  the  Manor,  pp.  10-1 2),
and  still  more  strongly  among  the  primitive  Germans  (Ib.,  135,  136).

3  It  is  probably  owing  to  the  importance  of  intermarriage  as  a  bond  of
union  in  early  society that  prohibitions  of marriage generally  extend
over  a  wider  circle  of  relationships  in  primitive  than  in  advanced  peoples
(Westermarek,  297  ff.),  and  that  they  are  often  highly  developed  under  the
paternal,  no  less  than  under  the  maternal  system. Thus,  in  early  Rome,
marriage  was  forbidden  within  the  sixth  degree  of  cognatio  ;  (Westermarek,
308)  in  Mann,  between  all  Sapindas,  i.e.  to  the  seventh  degree. Manu
further  opposes  marriage  between  all  relations  through  the  male  (Manu  iii.
section  5. The  law  is  not  stated  very  stringently — a  damsel  fulfilling  these
conditions  is  recommended  to  twice-born  men). The  law  re-appears  in  the
minor  codes. Apastamba,  ii.  v.  11,  15-16  ;  Gautama,  iv.  2-5  ; Vasishtha
viii.  1,  2 ;  Vishnu  xxiv.  §  9,  10. According  to  J.  D.  Mayne,  pp.  87,  88,
though  Manu  applies  the  rule  to  twice-born  men  only,  it  is  also  observed  by
the  Kurumbas,  Meenas,  Kondhs  of  Orissa.  and  Dravidian  tribes  of  S.  India.
In  China,  marriage  is  forbidden  to  all  of  the  same  name  (Alabaster,  177).

Such  prohibitions  may  of  course  be  combined  with  clan  or  race  or  caste
endogamy  (prohibitions  to  marry  outside  the  group  concerned).  The  union
of  exogamy  in  one  relation  with  endogamy  in  another  leads  to  much  con
fusion  in  the  discussion  of  the  subject,  and  obscures  the  functions  and
tendencies  of  each  rule.  Thus,  the  suggestion  that  the  clan  is  built  up  by
exogamy  may  be  countered  by  the  production  of  endogamous  clans.  This
would  be  fallacious,  since  the  exogamy  which  helps  to  build  the  clan  is  the
prohibition  of  marriage  between  near  kin,  not  that  of  marriage  within  the
clan  itself.  But  the  working  of  endogamy  illustrates  by  contrast  the
uniting  effects  of  intermarriage.  In  the  history  of  Rome,  each  step  towards
a  wider  union  seems  to  have  been  accompanied  by  a  break-down  of  endo-
gamous  rules.  Originally  marriage  seems  to  have  been  limited  to  the
"  gens  "  (Westermarek,  quoting  Mommsen  and  Marquardt,  368),  or  perhaps
the  "curia"  (see  Ihering,  Evolution  of  the  Aryan,  p.  334).  Then  the
patrician  gentes  formed  a  circle  of  intermarrying  clans.  The  plebs
obtained  the  jus  connubii  in  B.C.  445  (Mommsen,  I.  p.  297),  and
henceforward  the  distinction  of  patrician  and  plebeian  faded  away.


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  57

Of  course  even  in  early  society  the  principle  of  kinship  is
not  as  rigid  in  practice  as  it  is  in  theory.  It  admits  of  an
element  of  fiction,  since  the  inclusion  of  strangers  and  slaves,
which  is  seldom  wholly  unknown,  makes  the  community  of
blood  in  part  at  least  imaginary.  But  it  is  altogether  in
accordance  with  primitive  ideas  that  the  make-believe — if  the
belief  is  properly  made  with  all  due  rites  and  conditions  fulfilled
— is  just  as  good  as  the  reality,  and  so  the  adopted  son  fills  the

Further  the  Latini  Prisci  had  the  jtis  conmdii  from  an  early  period  (Momm-
sen  I.  p.  100  ;  Girard,  104),  and  the  extension  of  this  form  of  Latinitas  and
still  more  of  Roman  citizenship,  meant  at  every  stage  a  widening  of  the
circle  within  which  marriage  was  possible,  till  it  embraced  the  whole  free
population  of  the  empire.  At  each  remove  endogamy  is  the  separator,
intermarriage  the  bond  of  union.

The  line  of  thought  developed  in  the  text  points  to  the  conclusion  that
it  is  the  combination  of  the  tie  of  intermarriage  with  that  of  descent  that
forms  the  basis  of  primitive  society.  But  to  lay  this  down  as  our  positive
conclusion  would  be  to  go  beyond"  the  evidence.  There  are  rude  societies
in  existence,  in  which  no  rule  of  exogamy  holds,  so  that  even  the  union  of
parent  and  child  is  permitted.  (Several  instances  are  given  in  Wcstermarck,
pp.  290,  291.)  On  the  other  hand,  Post  (Grundriss,  I.  p.  33)  justly  remarks
that  close  unions  are  scarcely  ever  enjoined,  unless  to  preserve  the  purity
of  blood  (as  among  the  Pharaohs  and  the  Incas),  or  possibly  to  preserve  the
family  property.  Such  reasons  imply  a  society  that  is  already  well  estab
lished,  from  which  the  need  of  intermarriage  to  maintain  the  social  bond
has  already  fallen  away.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  primitive  people  where
the  social  order  was  only  in  the  making,  it  is  certainly  reasonable  to  sup
pose  that  the  objection  to  marriage  between  those  of  the  same  stock  (on
whatever  principle  kinship  be  reckoned)  would  tend  to  keep  society  to
gether,  while  a  preference  for  such  marriages  would  tend  to  break  it  up.

The  difference  may  be  illustrated  by  contrasting  the  sociable  group  life
of  the  Andamanese,  a  people  of  exceedingly  low  culture,  who  forbid  marri
age  within  the  known  kindred  (reckoned  moreover  on  the  classificatory
principle),  and  the  unsocial  life  of  the  Veddahs,  where  men  frequently  marry
their  sisters.  The  forces  binding  men  together  are  in  reality  complex,  but
if  we  imagine  kinship  to  be  the  only  one,  and  then  conceive  two  families
living  in  proximity,  first  with  an  exuganious,  and  then  with  an  endogarnous
rule,  we  shall  be  able  to  understand  the  function  of  exogamy.  The  two
intermarrying  families  will  form  in  all  essentials  the  nucleus  of  a  com
munity.  The  two  which  do  not  intermarry  must  remain  permanently
separate.  Each  may  grow,  but  if  the  in-and-in  tendency  persists,  kinship
still  being  assumed  to  remain  the  sole  basis  of  union,  they  will  tend  con
stantly  to  split  up,  the  ties  between  each  section  being  so  much  closer  than
those  between  more  distant  kin.  Now  we  cannot  say  with  certainty  that
some  measure  of  exogamy  was  essential  to  the  formation  of  society,  for  we
find  societies  in  which  exogamic  rules  almost  wholly  fail,  and  to  assume  that
these  are  cases  of  decadence,  the  normal  principle  having  prevailed  in  the
buil  ding  of  the  society,  would  be  to  go  beyond  our  evidence.  But  we  can  say
with  some  certainty,  that  exogamy  is  a  principle  of  union  between  other
wise  distinct  groups,  just  as  endogamy  tends  to  cement  the  group  within
which  it  prevails  while  isolating  it  from  the  rest  of  the  world.


58  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

place  of  a  real  son.  But  though  he  is  not  really  bound  by  the
blood  tie,  the  fictions  used  to  constitute  him  one  of  the  family
are  an  evidence  to  us  showing  how  strong  the  sense  of  the
blood  tie  is.  This  sense  finds  its  expression  in  the  family
worship,  the  funeral  feast  to  the  dead  kindred,  and  the  belief
that  none  but  the  actual  kin  or  those  who  have  with  due
formality  been  made  such,  may  lawfully  do  this  service  to  the
dead.  Hence  the  fear  of  calamities,  of  troubles  from  unfed  and
unpropitiated  ghosts,  if  the  family  should  ever  die  out.  Hence,
again,  the  duty  of  maintaining  the  family  succession,  the  intense
desire  for  male  descendants,  and  the  community  of  property
out  of  which  the  funeral  feasts  are  served.  The  patriarchal
family  is  in  ideal  an  undying  unity.  Unencumbered  by  the
cross  currents  of  feeling  set  in  motion  by  mother-right,  it  carries
the  tie  of  kinship  and  the  affections  of  the  household  to  their
highest  development,  while  it  is  none  the  less  capable  of  utiliz
ing  intermarriage  or  the  ramifications  of  descent  to  extend  the
bonds  of  kinship,  and  so  build  up  a  wider  union.  Thus,  as  in
the  case  of  the  Roman  gens,  the  clan  may  be  a  much  wider
society  than  any  family  group  connected  by  a  known  common
descent.  Again,  distinct  clans  may  be  parts  of  a  still  wider,  if
looser  union,  bound  by  a  sense  of  kinship.  Thus  beyond  the
Greek  yeVos  we  have  the  QpaTpta,  and  beyond  that  the  <f>vkov,
each  maintaining  a  certain  bond  between  its  members  resting
on  real  or  supposed  kinship.1

Accordingly  the  paternal  clan  has  very  naturally  formed  the
; ;  starting  point  for  the  development  of  the  civilized  races,  Aryan,
Semitic  and  Mongol,  in  all  of  which  the  earlier  Totemism  and
mother-right  have  left  the  merest  vestiges,  while  the  paternal
clan  remains  in  many  cases  in  full  vigour,  and  in  all  has  left  its
marks  deep  in  the  life  of  the  great  nations  which  have  arisen
out  of  it.

To  sum  up — Early  society  is  based  upon  the  blood  tie,  real  or
fictitious.  This  tie  takes  the  two  forms  of  common  descent  and
intermarriage.  Descent  may  be  reckoned  through  the  mother
only,  or  through  the  father  only,  or  through  both  parents.
Those  closely  related  form  groups  which  keep  together  for
mutual  defence  and  other  common  purposes,  and,  when  organized
1  Busolt,  Staats  und  Eechtsaltertumer,  p.  21  ff.


FORMS OF  SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  59

like  an  extended  family  under  the  eldest  male  or  some  one
chosen  in  his  place,  form  a  clan.  The  clan  is  connected  with
other  clans  in  part  by  multiplication  which  causes  subdivision,
in  part  by  intermarriage,  so  as  to  form  a  tribal  or  quasi-national
union.  Under  mother-right  the  ties  formed  by  intermarriage
cross  and  conflict  with  those  of  the  family.  Under  father-right
they  rather  supplement  one  another.  Both  forms  of  society
are  consecrated  by  religious  or  magical  beliefs,  totemism  being
specially  associated  with  the  maternal  clan,  and  father-right
havino-  formed  a  basis  for  the  strong  development  of  ancestor
worship.

7.  A  primitive  group  of  nomads  will  have  a  territory  of  its
own,  over  which  it  ranges  freely,  while  jealously  guarding  the
boundaries  from  infraction  by  other  groups.  If  advancing  in
internal  order  and  in  the  arts  of  life  the  people  build  fixed
habitations  for  themselves,  and  begin  to  till  the  ground  and  to
acquire  flocks  and  herds,  they  will  form  a  village  community.1
Whether  indeed  this  is  the  sole  origin  of  the  village  community
is  of  course  another  question,  and  it  is  again  a  separate  question
whether  all  the  institutions,  for  example,  in  ancient  Germany
or  in  medieval  and  modern  Europe,  which  are  interpreted  by
many  authorities  as  pointing  to  a  communal  origin,  are  rightly
so  interpreted.  Into  the  voluminous  controversies  surrounding
this  question  we  have  not  to  enter.  We  have  only  to  state  in
briefest  outline  what  form  of  social  organization  the  village
community  constitutes,  and  how  it  is  related  to  other  forms.
This  admits  of  statement  in  a  few  words.  The  village  com
munity  is  a  group  governing  itself  in  accordance  with  ancestral
custom  through  its  own  headman,  councils  or  meetings,  and
exercising  an  eminent  ownership  over  the  land  within  its

1  In  so  far  as  membership  of  the  village  community  is  obtained  by  ad
mission  to  a  share  in  the  common  property,  and  this  may  be  given  to
strangers,  the  principle  of  the  blood  tie  yields  in  strictness  to  that  of  pro
perty  or  neighbourhood.  But  since  adoption  is  also  possible  in  the  clan,
we  need  hardly  erect  community  of  property  or  neighbourhood  into  a
distinct  principle  of  social  union,  separate  from  the  blood  tie.  Ihe  blood
tie  gives  us  a  group  of  intermarrying  families  which  may  wander  over  a
tract  of  land  as  nomads,  or  settle  down  on  it  as  agriculturists.  In  the  latter
case,  as  long  as  they  retain  self-government  and  common  property  in  the  land,
they  form  a  village  community.


borders  on  a  portion  of  which  the  village  lies.1  This  community
may  be  organized  as  a  clan,2  and  its  members  related  by  real  or
supposed  descent  from  a  common  stock,  or  it  may  consist  of
a  number  of  family  stocks,  which,  however,  we  may  suppose  to
be  for  the  most  part  related  by  intermarriages.  The  family
;  rather  than  the  individual  is  the  unit  of  which  such  a  com-
!  munity  is  composed,3  and  each  family  as  a  rule  possesses  certain
definite  rights  upon  the  common  property,  its  own  house,  its
share  in  the  arable  land,  its  rights  upon  the  pasture  and  the
woodland.  As  to  the  nature  of  these  shares  and  the  extent  to
which  division  is  carried,  there  is  every  sort  of  variation.  The
arable  land  may  be  farmed  in  common  and  the  harvest
divided  when  reaped.4  More  often  the  arable  land  is  divided
into  lots  which  are  assigned  to  separate  families,  while  the
waste  land  and  perhaps  the  meadows  after  the  hay  has  been
got  in  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  community.  The  "  lots  "  of
the  arable  land  may  be  periodically  changed  as  in  the  Eussian
Mir,5  in  Java,6  in  ancient  Peru  and  in  old  Japan.7  In  other
cases  the  lots  have  become  hereditary,  as  generally  in  the  Aryan
communes  of  India,8  but  the  cultivation  is  still  subjected  to
minute  rules  prescribed  by  ancient  custom.  The  lot,  however,
is  inalienable,  or  alienable  only  with  the  consent  of  the  com
munity  as  a  whole,  which  on  this  point  still  exercises  its
rights  of  eminent  ownership.  Such  alienation  may  introduce
strangers  9  into  the  community,  and  these  may  also  be  admitted
under  the  common  protection.

\ Lastly  the  commune,  though  self-governing,  may  enter  into

j  relation,  whether  through  ties  of  kinship  or  alliance,  with  other

1  communes,  and  so  build  up  a  somewhat  larger  society. Further

tit  maintains  itself  with  much  tenacity  under  the  great  empires

into  which  it  is  often  incorporated,  and  the  rulers  of  which

1  Of.  Kovalevsky,  p.  92. Maine's  Village  Communities,  p.  107,  etc.  Post,
i.  p.  327,  seq.

2  As  apparently  the  Peruvian  Marca. (Post,  I.e.)

3  See  Post,  p.  333.

4  Instances  in  de  Laveleye,  p.  327,  and  Post,  i.  335,  336.

5  Kovalevsky,  pp.  106,  110,  etc.  6  Laveleye,  p.  50.
7  Post,  ib.  336. 8  Maine,  p.  112.

9  But  in  some  cases  land  can  only  pass  to  another  member  of  the  com
munity  (see  Post,  i.  345).  Institutions  like  the  sabbatical  year  and  the
later  year  of  Jubilee,  by  which  laud  passes  back  to  its  original  owners,  are
attempts  to  prevent  alienation.


FORMS  OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  Gl

generally  find  it  necessary  to  make  terms  with  communal
institutions  and  deal  with  the  village  through  its  own  head
men  or  elders.  Thus  in  great  regions  of  the  East,  while  empires
have  come  and  gone,  the  self-governing  village  has  maintained
itself,  not  indeed  unchanged,1  but  undestroyed,  and  has  pre
served  civilization  through  all  the  catastrophes  of  wars,
invasions,  governmental  decay  and  dynastic  change.

Such  in  briefest  outline  is  the  village  community,  a  simple
and  spontaneous  form  of  social  organization,  belonging  essen
tially  to  the  earlier  stages  of  agricultural  development,  flourish
ing  to  this  day  throughout  Eastern  Europe,  civilized  Asia  and
portions  of  Africa,  and  forming  in  all  probability  an  important
stage  in  the  development  of  western  civilization.

8.  (B)  The  Principle  of  Authority.

The  types  of  social  organization  hitherto  described  may
be  looked  upon  as  spontaneous  growths  resting  on  the
natural  ties  of  blood  relationship,  intermarriage  and  neigh
bourhood.  By  consequence  they  are  suited  to  small  societies.
It  is  true  that  they  widen  out  into  broader  organizations;
many  clans  form  one  tribal  union;  a  number  of  communes
form  a  district,  and  perhaps  own  a  common  chief.  Sometimes
even,  as  in  the  League  of  the  Iroquois,  these  unions  are  the
deliberate  work  of  barbarian  statesmen,  so  that  something
more  than  mere  spontaneous  semi-instinctive  social  forces  come
into  play.  But  these  wider  ramifications  have  as  a  rule  been
loosely  and  feebly  connected.  The  living  energy  remains  with
the  small,  concentrated  unit.  How,  then,  are  larger  aggregations
built  into  compact  societies  ?  The  most  direct  method  is  that  of
forcible  subjection  to  a  single  chief  or  a  ruling  class.  In  the
primitive  tribe  the  power  of  the  chief  is  seldom  great  or  even
assured.  In  the  commune  the  headman  is  little  more  than  a
chairman  of  the  folkmoot.  But  when  a  people  begin  a  career  of
conquest  two  things  happen.  They  themselves  must  have  dis
cipline,  arid  they  need  a  war-chief  with  unlimited  powers.  The
war-chief  surrounds  himself  with  his  following,  his  comites,  who
attach  themselves  to  his  fortunes,  and  is  a  simpleton  if  he

1  In  China,  though  private  property  began  to  come  in  before  the
Christian  era  (Laveleye,  p.  454),  the  commune  as  a  self-governing-  body
is  still  the  most  living  part  of  the  social  order.


62  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

cannot  make  the  state  of  war  or  the  fear  of  war  so  permanent
that  his  own  absolute  authority  becomes  indefinitely  prolonged.
On  the  other  hand,  captive  prisoners  form  for  the  first  time  an
important  slave  class,  or  perhaps  the  lands  of  conquered  peoples
are  left  to  them  to  till  as  serfs  under  the  lordship  of  favoured
individuals  from  the  comitatus  of  the  war-chief.  Hence  on  the

•  one  hand  the  decay  of  free  institutions  among  the  conquerors,
and  on  the  other  the  growth  of  classes  within  society.  All  the
great  civilizations,  those  of  western  Europe,  of  the  far  East,  of
Mexico  and  Peru,  of  ancient  Egypt  and  Babylonia,  seem  to  have
experienced  this  stage  of  development.  But  it  should  be  noted
that  the  despotic  system  arises,  and  in  some  respects  finds  its
most  extreme  developments,  among  people  still  in  the  stage  of
barbarism.  For  example,  in  West  Africa,  as  in  Dahomey  and
Ashanti,  we  find  the  principle  pushed  to  the  point  that  the
king  is  absolute  master  of  the  persons  and  property  of  every  one
of  his  subjects.  He  can  put  any  one  to  death  at  pleasure,  any
man  may  be  his  slave,  any  woman  taken  to  his  harem.  The
political  exaltation  of  the  monarch  is  often  accentuated  by  a
certain  phase  in  the  growth  of  religious  conceptions.  He  be
comes  a  man-god  like  the  Pharaohs ;  his  person  is  sacred ;  no
one  may  look  on  him  and  live — finally  he  becomes  taboo  and  so
full  of  danger  to  his  subjects  that  he  has  to  be  secluded,  and  the
almighty  being  ends  in  becoming  a  helpless  puppet  in  the
hands  of  his  priests.  Perhaps  he  becomes  responsible  for  good
and  evil  fortune,  for  sunshine  and  rain,  and  if  he  manages  the
weather  badly,  his  absolute  power  will  avail  him  little  and  his
spirit  stands  in  imminent  danger  of  a  compulsory  migration  to
another  representative  of  the  royal  line.  Where  religion  is  too

\  advanced  for  the  actual  deification  of  the  king,  as  in  western

:  Europe,  he  may  yet  be  God's  representative,  and  so,  e.  g.  the
theory  of  divine  right  arose  in  England  when  feudalism  passed

''  into  absolutism  and  the  king  who  could  not  be  God  Himself
proclaimed  himself  at  least  God's  vicegerent.

The  personal  power  of  the  king,  whatever  the  theory  of  abso
lutism  may  be,  is  limited  by  hard  facts  of  human  nature;
monarchs,  whatever  their  courtier  priests  may  say,  are  not  gods,
and  therefore  can  in  fact  rule  in  person  only  as  much  as  they
can  themselves  oversee  and  understand.  Hence  personal  abso-


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  63

lutism  is  for  the  most  part  limited  to  a  narrow  circle.  A  Caesar
or  Napoleon  may  really  supervise  the  affairs  of  a  great  empire,
but  as  a  general  rule  the  absolute  monarchy  which  I  have
described  has  effective  existence  only  over  a  comparatively
small  area.  A  conqueror  of  a  wider  territory  has  after  all  to
divest  himself  of  most  of  his  real  authority  over  it.  To  retain  a
nominal  supremacy  he  must  parcel  it  out  among  his  followers,
or  perhaps  leave  the  native  chiefs  in  possession  as  tributaries.
In  either  case  the  ruler  of  the  subject  province  will  probably
have  much  real  independence.  Where  the  native  prince
remains  things  will  go  on  very  much  as  they  did  before.  The
distant  great  king  will  be  known  as  one  who  exacts  a  tribute,
but  in  no  other  capacity.  Where  the  king  institutes  one  of  his
own  followers  or  a  great  noble  of  the  conquering  people  as  the
local  Governor,  he  retains  at  first  a  more  direct  control.  But
where  the  territory  is  large  and  the  means  of  communication
rude,  the  position  of  the  man  on  the  spot  is  the  stronger.  The
great  officer  acquires  much  practical  independence,  and  often
succeeds  in  making  his  position  hereditary,  and  a  feudal  system
replaces  absolute  monarchy.

The  conflicts  between  the  two  principles  of  local  and  central
authority  make  up  a  large  part  of  political  history.  At  the
one  extreme  the  monarch  succeeds  in  governing  his  people
through  officials  wholly  dependent  on  his  favour.  At  the
other  he  sinks  into  the  position  of  being  merely  the  first
in  rank  in  an  order  of  practically  equal  and  independent
nobles.  The  latter  alternative  is  apt  to  be  the  more  depress
ing  to  the  general  condition  of  the  people.  But  in  any  case
the  masses  find  themselves  at  the  base  of  the  social  hierarchy
which  has  now  arisen  to  replace  the  simpler  and  comparatively
equal  conditions  of  the  earlier  social  order.  The  best  they  can
hope  for  is  to  be  let  alone,  and  in  fact  throughout  the  East  the
later  despotism  is  merely  superimposed  on  the  older  organiza
tions  which  persist  beneath  its  sway  comparatively  undisturbed,
and  maintain  their  vitality  while  empires  rise  and  fall.  Such  a
state  of  civilization  may,  as  Egypt,  Babylonia  and  China  have
shown,  persist  for  thousands  of  years  without  essential  change  in
the  customs  of  the  people,  who  in  reality  take  too  small  a  part  in
the  life  of  the  greater  community  to  which  they  belong  to  affect


64  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

or  be  gravely  affected  by  its  vicissitudes.  But  naturally  the
tendency  of  despotic  organization  is  upon  the  whole  to  depress
the  condition  of  the  masses  :  in  some  cases  large  slave  popula
tions  are  formed  ;  in  others  a  caste  system  arises  ;  in  others  the
tillers  of  the  soil  sink  into  one  or  other  of  the  many  forms  of
serfdom,  while  the  conquering  race  are  the  lords  of  the  land.
All  these  forms  of  class  subordination  should  be  reckoned  as
expressions  of  the  despotic  principle  in  social  organization ;  it  is
not  only  the  form  of  government  but  the  whole  social  structure
which  is  infused  with  this  dominating  influence.

We  are  not,  of  course,  to  suppose  that  any  society  rests  upon
force  undiluted.  In  the  first  place,  as  already  remarked,  the
old  forms  of  organization  generally  retain  a  measure  of  their
vitality  in  spite  of  conquest.  The  conquerors  themselves  are
united  by  ties  of  blood  by  the  Gentile,  the  tribal,  or  the  com
munal  bond,  they  have  their  own  law  and  customs,  resting  not
on  force  but  upon  the  deep-lying  social  principles  which  have
bound  them  together  from  of  old,  and  which  guide  them  by
some  principle  of  justice,  if  it  be  but  in  the  division  of  the
booty.  In  the  second  place  they  find  similar  institutions  flour
ishing  among  the  conquered  and  have  to  make  their  account
with  these;  but  further,  and  in  the  third  place,  both  from
enlightened  self-interest  and  from  the  inextinguishable  element

o  o

of  self- judgment  in  man  which  makes  him  cling  to  the  sem
blance  of  right  most  of  all  when  he  is  rejecting  the  reality,  the
conqueror  cannot  bear  to  rest  his  title  permanently  on  force
alone.  He  seeks  to  transmute  force  into  authority.  For  this
he  will  find  a  means  in  religion  and  an  instrument  in  the  priest
hood.  But  at  the  same  time  the  ethical  element  has  its  oppor
tunity,  and  insists  with  varying  degrees  of  clearness  and  emphasis
that  the  real  authority  of  the  ruler  must  be  derived  from  his
power  to  govern  for  the  good  of  the  people.  The  simple  but
comprehensive  code  of  despotism  merely  lays  down  that  one
man  is  divinely  appointed  to  determine  what  is  best  for  all
others,  and  therewith  transmutes  arbitrary  power  into  righteous
authority  and  slavish  subjection  into  loyal  service.

As  to  the  way  in  which  the  duties  of  a  ruler  are  conceived,
we  find,  of  course,  every  shade  of  difference  in  the  empires  and
kingdoms  of  history.  Thus  a  military  tribe  of  barbarians  will


FORMS  OF  SOCIAL  ORGANIZATION  G5

merely  raid  their  neighbours  for  slaves  or  for  human  sacrifice,  or
they  will  conquer  them  for  the  sake  of  tribute.  But  where  a
more  civilized  morality  prevails,  and  particularly  in  so  far  as
conquest  ends  in  an  amalgamation  of  races,  and  a  kingdom
comes  to  be  a  unity,  the  ethical  principle  of  the  common  "good
asserts  itself,  and  is  enforced  by  religious  sanctions.  The  lord
has  duties  to  his  serfs,  the  feudal  superior  to  his  vassals,  the
king  to  all  his  subjects.  Such  duties  are  by  no  means  peculiar
to  modern  and  Christian  communities.  We  find  them  hardly
less  prominent  in  the  earliest  civilizations.  The  feudal  rulers  of
Egypt,  for  example,  the  princes  of  the  Nornes,  always  take  a
special  credit  for  their  uprightness  as  governors,  their  goodness
to  the  poor,  their  mercifulness  to  the  weak.  A  deceased  governor
under  the  12th  dynasty  asserts  that  he  was  "  the  staff  of  sup
port  to  the  aged,  the  foster-father  of  the  children,  the  counsellor
of  the  unfortunate,  the  refuge  in  which  those  who  suffer  from
the  cold  in  Thebes  may  warm  themselves,  the  bread  of  the
afflicted  which  never  failed  in  the  city  of  the  South."  l  The
Chinese  Empire,  though  in  form  an  absolute  despotism,  is  in
ethical  principle  an  empire  administered  by  a  divine  race  for
the  good  of  the  governed.  The  duty  of  the  prince  to  his  people

the  constant  theme  of  the  classical  moralists,  and  their  teach
ing  takes  tangible  shape  in  the  right  of  freely  criticizing  the
emperor  maintained  by  the  censors  chosen  from  the  educated
class.^  Thus  in  the  settled  and  homogeneous  kingdom  we  have
a  regime  in  which  government  originating  in  force  is  tempered
by  moral  considerations  and  evolves  into  some  form  of  recognized
hierarchical  authority.  The  law  emanates  not  from  society  as  a
whole,  but  from  its  central  figure  and  chief  ruler.  It  expresses
not  the  natural  conditions  of  social  life,  but  the  will  of  the
supreme  lord,  the  representative  it  may  be  of  the  deity.  Or  it

the  possession  of  a  priestly  caste  to  whom  it  has  been  en
trusted  by  the  powers  that  rule  the  Universe.  The  essential  point
is  that  law  is  imposed  by  the  ruler  upon  the  ruled,  it  is  a  com
mand  from  a  superior  to  a  subordinate,  it  is  not  any  longer  con
ceived  as  a  custom  arising  out  of  the  conditions  of  life  among
those  who  have  to  conform  to  it,  neither  is  it  a  rule  of  action
voluntarily  adopted  for  the  common  good.

1  Masperu,  The  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  338


VOL. I.


66  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

When  consolidated  by  history,  by  the  gradual  blending  of
races,  and  perhaps  by  common  defence  against  the  foreigner,
the  kingdom  gains  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  free  com
munity.  Having  done  so  it  may,  and  if  it  has  the  opportunity,
probably  will,  start  afresh  on  a  career  of  conquest  beyond  its
borders.  If  successful,  it  will  build  up  an  empire,  and  here,
again,  there  will  be  many  gradations  in  the  tempering  of  force
with  higher  social  and  moral  considerations.  Outside  their
:  borders  the  great  kingdoms  of  the  ancient  East  appear  to  have
|  conquered  largely  to  obtain  slaves  or  tribute,  and  the  principal
duty  of  the  local  governor  was  to  collect  taxes,  and  forward  the
produce  to  the  supreme  lord  at  Thebes,  Babylon  or  Nineveh.
In  the  Persian  Empire  we  seem  to  recognize  the  beginning  of  a
higher  stage.  At  least  its  kings  interested  themselves  in  the
pure  administration  of  justice,  and  Cambyses  flays  the  corrupt
judge  and  covers  the  judgment  seat  with  his  skin  to  be  a
memento  and  a  warning  to  his  successor.1  The  Romans  went
much  further,  and  developed  their  conquests  into  something
more  nearly  resembling  a  commonwealth  by  developing  local
institutions  and  throwing  down  barriers  between  conqueror  and
conquered.  And  in  proportion  as  supernatural  sanctions  have
lost  strength  the  modern  empire-states  have  still  more  distinctly
felt  the  necessity  for  some  other  bond  than  that  of  naked  force
or  self-constituted  authority  to  link  the  scattered  parts  together.
Thus  the  furthest  development  of  the  principle  of  authority
points  to  the  necessity  for  that  remaining  bond  of  social  union
which  has  yet  to  be  described.

To  sum  up  the  results  which  the  despotic  principle — whether
we  regard  it  as  authority  resting  ultimately  on  force  or  as  force
transmuted  into  authority — has  given  us  :—
1st. — As  to  the  forms  of  Society,  we  have

(a)  The  Absolute  Monarchy,  where  the  king  is  divine  and

lord  without  restraint  of  the  persons  and  properties
of  his  subjects.  This  form  has  most  vitality  in
relatively  small  and  barbaric  communities.

(b)  The  Feudal  Monarchy,  suited  to  wider areas where

power  is  delegated,  and  the  governing  class  form  a
hierarchy.

1  Herodotus,  Bk.  v.  ch.  25.


FORMS  OF  SOCIAL  ORGANIZATION  G7

(c)  The  Empire,  formed  by  the  aggregation  of  kingdoms,

overstepping  national  boundaries  and  exhibiting  very

varying  degrees  of  unity  and  of  local  freedom.

2nd. — As  to  the  nature  of  Government,  the  conception  of  a

moral  duty  to  the  governed  develops  in  proportion  to  the  degree

of  unity  achieved,  but  throughout  law  is  conceived as  based

upon  authority  and  the  social  system  on  the  subordination  of

class to class. For  this  order  a  religious  sanction  is  found,

generally  in  the  special  association  of  the  ruler  with  the  deity,

often  also  in  the  semi-divine  character  of  the  rulinor race  or

O

caste,  or  finally  in  the  belief  in  their  conquering  and  civilizing
mission.

If,  finally,  we  may  endeavour  to  sum  up  in  a  sentence  the
function  of  this  principle  in  human  evolution,  we  may  say  that
it  belongs  to  epochs  of  expansion  in  culture  and  improvements
in  the  arts  of  life.  It  is  one  method  by  which  large  communities
can  be  formed  with  greater  facilities  for  self-preservation  and
for  the  maintenance  of  internal  order  than  the  primitive  clan  or
village  commune  can  enjoy.  We  shall  also  find  that  on  certain
sides  the  order  it  imposes  is  not  only  more  adequate  but
ethically  higher  than  that  attained  by  the  clan.  On  the  other
hand,  it  tends  to  perpetuate,  and  in  some  respects  to  deepen
those  distinctions  between  man  and  man  which,  as  we  shall
see,  it  is  a  main  function  of  the  ethical  spirit  to  overcome.  It
avoids  this  error  in  as  far  as  it  embodies  or  makes  room  for
something  of  the  third  principle  with  which  we  now  have  to
deal.

9.  (C)  The  Principle  of  Citizenship — Personal  Rights  and
the  Common  Good.

A  paternal  government  resting  ultimately  on  force,  but
justifying  its  position  in  its  own  eyes  by  kindly  consideration
for  the  good  of  its  subjects,  is  not  the  last  word  of  civilized
society.  A  type  of  social  organization  exists  in  which  the  rela
tions  of  government  and  governed  are  in  a  manner  inverted.
Government  is  conceived  not  as  itself  the  source  of  unquestioned
authority,  but  as  a  function  which  certain  individuals  are  dele
gated  to  perform  as  servants,  "ministers"  of  the  public  as  a
whole.  The  structure  of  the  laws,  the  acts  of  executive  govern-


68  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

ment,  are  not  so  many  commands  issued  by  a  superior  and
obeyed  by  the  people,  but  are  customs  and  decisions  expressing
the  character  and  depending  on  the  resolves  of  the  people  them
selves.  The  subjects  of  a  government  have  become  citizens  of  a
state,  and  the  citizen  has  rights  which  are  no  less  important
than  his  duties.  These  rights  hold  good  as  against  the  govern
ment  just  as  they  hold  against  other  individuals,  for  it  is  a
prime  characteristic  of  the  state  based  on  citizenship  that  it
establishes  the  reign  of  law,  and  subjects  its  own  officers  to  this
impersonal  sovereign.

On  this  side,  then,  the  state  stands  in  strong  contrast  with
the  despotic  empire.  Its  government  rests  not  so  much  on  the
authority  of  a  superior  as  on  the  consent  of  the  bulk  of  its
members.  Compulsion,  of  course,  is  still  necessary  in  the  en
forcement  of  law,  but  its  methods  are  less  violent  and  at  the
same  time  more  effective.  The  severity  of  punishment
diminishes,  political  offences  become  rarer,  and  free  discussion
and  criticism  are  no  longer  found  incompatible  with  social
order.  In  the  societies  which  have  advanced  furthest  in  this
direction  all  classes  are  admitted  finally  to  a  share  or  a  voice  in
the  government.  In  some  respects  this  description  recalls  the
earlier  commune.  For  there,  too,  law  or  custom  was  the  direct
expression  of  the  will,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  the  character  and
traditions  of  the  people.  It  came  from  them  and  was  not  im
posed  on  them.  So  it  is  not  wholly  without  reason  that  reformers
struggling  with  the  weight  of  the  bureaucratic  machinery  under
an  arbitrary  government  have  looked  back  on  primitive  life  as
an  ideal  state  of  liberty  and  freedom  from  which  civilization  was
a  luckless  departure.  But  this  is  only  a  half  truth — hardly
even  so  much.  There  is  very  little  really  in  common  between
the  "  liberty "  of  the  rude  commune  and  that  which  the  law
secures  to  the  citizen  in  a  civilized  state.  For,  if  on  one  side
the  state  rests  on  the  general  will,1  on  the  other  side  its  constitu-

1  Even  under  this  aspect,  the,  state  does  not  really  resemble  the  primitive
community  as  closely  as  it  appears  to  do.  la  the  latter,  custom  has  a
magical  or  religious  sanction,  and  in  its  main  lines  is  unalterable.  In  the
state  it  is  freely  modifiable  by  legislation.  Thus  in  the  primitive  tribe,
though  the  social  structure  doubtless  rests  ultimately  on  the  character  of
the  people,  it  does  not  express  their  free  deliberate  choice,  for  this  freedom
of  the  general  will  is  not  yet  a  part  of  their  character.


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  60

tion  is  rooted  in  the  personal  rights  of  its  citizens.  Its  com
ponent  members  or  units  are  not  groups,  but  individuals.  In
the  clan  and  the  commune,  as  will  appear  more  fully  in  sub
sequent  chapters,  the  individual  has  no  legal  position,  scarcely
even  the  possibility  of  existence,  apart  from  the  body  to  which
he  belongs.  The  family,  the  clan,  or  the  commune,  or  perhaps
all  three,  are  responsible  to  him  for  his  safety,  responsible  to
others  for  his  wrong-doing,  responsible,  we  may  almost  say,  for
his  maintenance.  His  life  is  laid  down  by  his  place  in  them,
his  property  is  in  the  main  a  share  in  their  property,  his  gods
are  their  gods.  He  cannot  leave  them,  nor  can  he  enter  into
obligations  which  will  have  the  effect  of  binding  them.  His
position  in  the  group  is,  as  it  were,  an  exhaustive  account  of  his
existence,  and  he  has  little  personal  life  apart  from  it.  In  the
state  all  this  is  greatly  changed.  The  individual  is  now  a
responsible  agent.  As  soon  as  he  comes  to  mature  years  he
stands  or  falls  by  himself.  He  and  no  one  else  is  punished  if
he  does  wrong,  and  his  engagements  place  no  liability  on  any
one  except  those  who  are  directly  or  indirectly  parties  to  them.
He  is  free  to  alienate  his  property,  to  enter  into  contracts  with
whom  he  will,  to  quit  his  home,  and  even  to  emigrate  and
abandon  his  allegiance  to  the  state  itself.  The  minor  groups  to
which  he  belongs  are  either  mere  local  bodies  created  afresh  by
the  state  which  delegates  to  them  some  of  its  rights  and  duties,
or  they  are  voluntary  associations  which  the  citizen  himself
forms  by  agreement  with  others,  and  which  fill  an  ever  larger
part  in  public  and  private  life.  He  even  forms  his  own  church
and  holds  his  own  creed,  and  his  gods  need  not  be  those  of
the  state.  At  the  same  time,  the  responsibilities  of  the  old
''natural"  groups  are  taken  over  and  are  even  amplified
by  the  state,  which  owes  its  members  protection  in  the  exercise
of  all  rights  which  it  recognizes,  and,  generally  speaking,  holds
itself  bound  at  need  to  stand  between  them  and  sheer
starvation.  In  a  word,  the  state,  and  particularly  the  modern
state,  recognizes  the  claims  of  human  personality  as  neither
the  commune  nor  the  monarchy  can  afford  to  do.  It  exists
for  a  common  good,  but  its  function  is  to  maintain  private
rig  1  its.

There  lies  in  this  statement,  however,  a  speculative  as  well


70  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

as  a  practical  difficulty,  to  pause  upon  which  for  a  moment  will
help  us  to  understand  the  nature  and  development  of  the  state.
For  if  government  is  circumscribed  in  its  action  by  the  rights
of  citizens,  it  would  seem  that  a  standard  of  conduct  is  being  set
up  which  is  alien  in  origin,  and  may  at  any  time  be  opposed
in  practice  to  the  common  good.  The  solution  is  found  by
considering  in  what  the  common  good  consists,  and  what  is  the
foundation  of  an  individual  right.  The  community  consists  of
men  and  women,  who  find  their  happiness  in  the  life  which
makes  the  most  of  their  capacities  as  thinking,  feeling,  active
beings.  In  other  words,  the  "good  "  for  each  man  lies  in  the
realization  of  what  is  in  him,  the  development  of  his  personality.
Now  since  this  is  an  imperfect  world,  the  growth  of  one  per
sonality  may  be  the  cramping  of  another.  But  fortunately
there  is  another  possibility,  since  by  developing  certain  sides
of  ourselves,  far  from  injuring  or  cramping,  we  stimulate  and
assist  the  similar  development  of  others.  Now  what  form  of
development  is  best  for  the  individual  is  a  question  of  the
ultimate  basis  of  morals,  as  to  which  we  shall  have  something
to  say  at  a  later  stage.  But  if  we  judge  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  common  good,  as  we  are  now  doing,  our  choice  is  clear.
We  can  see  that  one  kind  of  self-development  if  attempted
by  everybody  will  be  eventually  destructive,  while  another  kind
will  harmonize  with  itself  and  grow.  In  this  alone  is  there  the
possibility  of  a  good  for  each  which  is  also  a  good  for  all — a
common  good.  Calling  the  ba.sis  of  this  kind  of  self-develop
ment  the  social  personality,  we  may  define  the  common  good  as
consisting  in  the  development  of  the  social  personality,  and  in
its  name  every  member  of  society  has  a  right  to  the  conditions
requisite  for  such  a  development,  so  far  as  they  are  generally
attainable  by  social  action.  On  the  other  hand,  no  rights  exist
but  those  which  the  common  good  prescribes.  For  a  right  is  a
claim  which  one  man  makes  on  the  actions  or  forbearance  of
others,  and  which  is  sustained  by  an  impartial  judgment.  But
an  impartial  judgment  is  one  which  looks  beyond  the  individual,
and  recognizes  that  the  right  claimed  by  one  must  be  maintained
for  all.  But  no  right  could  be  practically  maintained  for  all
which  was  incompatible  with  the  safety  of  the  community,  nor
could  any  right  be  desirable  for  all  which  inflicted  net  loss  on


71

the  community. Hence  the  rights  of  each  are  such  as  it  is  for
the  good  of  all  to  maintain.1

The  generic  character  of  the  state,  then,  is  that  of  a  community
whose  structure  and  character  depend  on  the  good-will  of  the
bulk  of  its  members,  and  whose  welfare  rests  accordingly  on
their  loyalty  and  public  feeling,  while  it  is  for  them  the  source
and  guarantee  of  the  free  exercise  of  their  rights  as  citizens.
Thus  the  citizen  is  a  fully  responsible  agent  with  assignable
rights  and  duties  as  member  of  a  community.  So  far  as  the
idea  of  the  community  is  carried  through,  i.e.  so  far  as  the
common  good  really  is  common  to  all  belonging  to  it,  the
rights  and  duties  must  fall  to  all  members  alike,  excepting  only
as  the  needs  of  the  common  welfare  demand  a  difference.  That
is  to  say,  privileges  of  whatever  kind  must  depend  on  the
exercise  of  functions  which  they  encourage  or  render  possible,
and  the  taking  up  of  such  functions  must  be  open  to  all  who
are  capable  of  them.  Such  is  the  general  character,  in  the
baldest  statement,  of  the  type  of  civic  community  or  state,  with
its  two  main  features,  the  responsible  individual  fully  seized  of
civic  rights  and  obligations,  and  the  responsible  government  ex
pressing  the  will  of  the  whole  society  in  law  and  administration.
Thus  security  under  law  and  the  power  of  the  community  to
make  and  modify  the  law  express  the  bare  essentials  of  the  state.

10.  How  far  the  idea  of  citizenship  is  pushed  is  a  question  of
degree  on  which  a  great  deal  turns.  The  actual  number  of
citizens  may  be  but  a  fraction  of  the  whole  number  of  people
dwelling  in  a  given  territory,  and  while  as  between  these  there
may  be  a  regime  of  perfect  legality  and  perfect  equality,  their
relations  to  the  mass  of  the  people  may  be  as  frankly  based  on
force  as  those  of  any  monarchical  despotism.  Again,  within
the  circle  of  citizens  there  may  be  degrees  of  civic  rights.  These
differences  can  only  be  justified  ethically  by  the  belief  in  an
innate  and  ineradicable  difference  in  capacity  to  meet  civic
responsibility  on  the  part  of  members  of  different  classes.  In
proportion  as  this  belief  is  dissolved  by  experience  the  obligations

1  That  is,  for  the  good  in  the  long  run.  There  may  often  be  a  conflict
between  expediency  and  right  in  the  particular  case,  and  hence  it  is  that
the  opposition  arises.


72  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

of  citizenship  become  universal,  and  the  idea  of  citizenship
as  an  exclusive  right  merges  in  that  of  personality,  with  rights
and  capacities  which  all  may  share  simply  as  human  beings.
According  to  this  conception,  which  must  be  understood  from
what  has  been  said  above  of  the  social  personality,  what  is  good
in  life  consists  in  the  bringing  out  into  full  bloom  of  those
capacities  of  each  individual  which  help  to  maintain  the  common
life.  In  this  development  lies  a  form  of  happiness  for  each,
which  does  not  conflict,  but  fits  in  with  and  promotes  that  of
others,  and  does  not  tend  to  arrest,  but  to  maintain  and  carry
forward  what  may  be  called  the  growth  of  the  collective  mind —
the  expansion  of  faculty,  the  growth  of  achievement.  Every
human  being  in  proportion  as  he  is  normally  developed  is  able
to  enter  into  and  contribute  to  the  good  life  so  conceived,  and
that  he  should  do  so  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  his  duties
to  society  and  all  the  duties  of  society  to  him.  But  this  same
principle  once  pushed  through,  annuls,  ethically  speaking,  the
distinction  between  citizen  and  foreigner,  for  the  foreigner  may
be  quite  equally  capable  of  the  same  life,  and  if  so,  is  morally
seized  of  the  same  rights  and  duties,  and  if,  through  difference
of  race,  he  is  not  always  equally  capable,  still  his  rights  and
duties  cannot  fall  to  zero,  but  vary  only  with  the  degree  of  his
incapacity.  Hence  the  fully-developed  state  in  which  the
principle  of  personality  is  rigorously  carried  through,  must  also
find  itself  in  definite  ethical  relation  to  humanity  as  a  whole.

The  principles  thus  summarized  are  applied  with  greater  or
less  of  thoroughness  in  the  forms  of  state  which  under  varying
conditions  and  on  a  very  varying  scale  have  come  into  existence  at
different  periods  of  history.  We  find  the  conception  of  a  govern
ment  resting  on  civic  rights  in  the  city-state  of  ancient  Greece
and  Italy  and  of  mediaeval  Europe ;  we  find  it  on  a  larger  scale
in  the  country-state  of  the  modern  world.  The  Grasco-Italian
city  was  more  than  a  clan,  a  tribe  or  a  village  community ;  it
was  an  organized  political  society,  with  a  regular  government
administering  written  laws.  But  the  government  was  not,  in
relation  to  the  free  citizens,  in  any  way  despotic  ;  law  reigned,
not  the  ruler,  and  sovereign  law  was  not  imposed  upon  the
people  from  without,  but  expressed  their  own  traditional
character  and  laid  down  rules  to  which  they  adhered  of  their


FORMS OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION  73

own  free  choice.1  The  obedience  of  the  Greek  to  law  was  a
moral  obedience,  the  loyalty  of  free  men  to  an  authority  which
they  recognized  as  a  moral  authority.  "Though  the  Lace-
djEinonians  are  free,"  says  Demaratus  to  Xerxes,  "  yet  they  are
not  free  in  all  things,  for  over  them  is  set  Law  as  a  master,
whom  they  fear  much  more  even  than  thy  people  fear  thec.
It  is  certain  at  least  that  they  do  whatsoever  that  master  com
mands  ;  and  he  commands  ever  the  same  thing,  that  is  to  say,
he  bids  them  not  flee  out  of  battle  from  any  multitude  of  men,
but  stay  in  their  post  and  win  the  victory  or  lose  their  life." 2

Thus  law  in  the  Greek  state  expressed  not  the  will  of  a
superior  but  a  moral  authority,  freely  recognized  by  free  men,
and  equally  binding  on  the  ruler  and  the  ruled.  On  this  side
the  city  state  was  contrasted,  as  the  Greeks  were  fully  conscious,
with  oriental  despotism.  On  the  other  hand,  in  its  many-sided
development  of  judicial,  executive  and  legislative  organs,  it
stood  far  removed  from  the  primitive  community.  The  archaic
institutions  of  early  society — the  clan,  the  phratry  and  the
tribe — gradually  lost  their  functions.  They  ceased  to  be  re
sponsible  for  their  members,  and  the  entire  execution  of  justice
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  state.  In  the  most  advanced  cities
new  divisions  were  formed  on  a  territorial  basis  to  replace  the
old  spontaneous  associations.  The  individual  was  responsible
before  the  law  for  his  own  acts,  and — at  least  as  far  as  he  was
a  free  citizen — could  carve  out  his  own  career.  He  was  eligible
for  the  highest  office,  and  Aristotle  justly  defined  the  good
citizen  as  the  man  who  could  both  rule  and  be  ruled  with  a  view
to  life  at  its  best;  indeed,  in  no  other  political  system  have
public  institutions  offered  greater  scope  for  individual  initiative,
nor  have  collective  duties  been  more  generously  conceived  to
meet  human  needs.  Aristotle  could  define  a  Greek  state  as  an
association  for  maintaining  a  good  life  for  its  citizens.  The

1  It  is  an  interesting  point,  as  illustrating  the  transition  from  the  primi
tive  subjection  of  the  popular  will  to  tradition  to  the  later  stage  of  civic  free
dom,  that  throughout  the  best  period  of  Greece  the  established  law  retained
much  of  the  primitive  sanctity  attaching  to  old  custom,  so  that,  even  at
Athens,  the  Assembly  could  not  finally  decide  upon  changes  in  the  law,
but  had  to  refer  such  innovations  to  a  body  selected  from  the  sworn  jurymen
for  the  year,  while  the  proposer  of  a  law,  held  by  them  to  be  unjustifiable,
was  liable  to  prosecution. (See  Sidgwick,  European  Polity,  pp.  175,  176.)

2  Ilerodt.  7,  ch.  104  (Macauhiy  Tr.).


74  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

object  of  political  institutions  was  frankly  declared  to  be  "  that
we  may  make  the  citizens  good."  Untroubled  by  any  conflict
between  the  secular  and  the  spiritual  power,  the  Greeks  could
readily  conceive  a  political  society  as  an  association  for  all  the
principal  purposes  of  life  that  are  not  covered  by  the  smaller
association  of  the  household.  On  this  side  their  ideal  of  the
state  has  never  since  been  equalled.

On  the  other  hand,  the  idea  of  association  was  not  pushed
through.  The  state  was  limited  to  the  narrow  circle  of  the
freemen,  and  even  within  the  freemen  the  oligarchies  drew
sharp  distinctions.  Of  the  true  society  which  formed  the
Spartan  state,  only  a  few  thousand  Spartiates  were  really
members ;  the  Perioeci  and  Helots  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
Spartan  constitution  except  to  conform  to  its  ordinances.  The
democracies  opened  citizenship  to  a  wider  circle,  but  here  again
the  great  fissure  between  freeman  and  slave  was  maintained.
But  so  far  as  the  non-free  were  concerned  the  distinctive
character  of  the  state  disappears.  The  free  Athenian  demos
rules  the  enslaved  mass ; l  the  Spartiate  rules  the  Perioecus  and
the  Helot  no  more  by  a  principle  of  right  than  the  Great  King
his  motley  crowd  of  subjects.  So  far  as  the  state  includes  an
unenfranchised  population,  it  abandons  the  principle  of  right
and  falls  back  on  that  of  force.  But  this  was  not  the  only
drawback  to  the  Greek  Tro'At?.  Its  limited  scale  and  the
incapacity  of  the  Greeks  for  a  higher  form  of  union  proved  the
opportunity  of  Macedon  and  the  destruction  of  Greek  freedom.
At  Rome  the  incapacity  of  the  city  state  to  extend  its  borders
and  yet  maintain  the  vigour  of  its  free  constitution  led  to  the
extinction  of  the  Republic ;  the  Empire  could  only  be  consoli
dated  by  a  bureaucracy.  The  medieval  cities  escaped  slavery.
Indeed  as  providing  a  refuge  for  the  fugitive  serf  they  played  a
part  in  the  movement  towards  general  freedom.  But  in  other
respects  they  repeated  many  of  the  features  of  the  Greek  TTO'AIS.
We  find  similar  conflicts  between  oligarchic  and  democratic
tendencies.  There  is  the  struggle  of  the  crafts  as  against  the
merchants,  and  the  counter  tendency  of  the  crafts  in  their  turn

1  It  is  not,  however,  always  sufficiently  recognized  that  the  Athenian
democracy  did  tend  to  make  the  position  of  slaves  more  tolerable.  (See
below,  chapter  vii.)


FORMS  OF  SOCIAL  ORGANIZATION  75

when  once  fully  enfranchised  to  become  exclusive  corporations.
There  are  difficulties  with  feudal  nobles  and  with  king  or
emperor  from  which  the  Greek  state  was  free,  and  a  consequent
exaggeration  of  the  troubles  of  faction  and  an  even  greater  tend
ency  than  in  Greece  to  have  resort  to  the  plenary  powers  of  a
tyrannis.  There  is  the  same  limitation  of  area,  and  the  same
difficulty  of  combined  action — witness  the  inertness  of  the
Dutch  cities  in  rendering  aid  to  one  another  against  Philip  as
compared  with  the  determination  shown  in  the  defence  of  each
city  individually.  Internal  faction  and  external  exclusiveness
together  wrote  the  doom  of  the  mediaeval  city.

11.  The  experiment  of  founding  a  state  was  to  be  tried  over
again  in  the  modern  world  on  a  larger  scale,  when  the  concen
tration  of  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  monarch  had  consolidated
the  more  advanced  nations,  while  personal  freedom  had  on  the
whole  been  secured  for  the  mass  of  the  people  and  the  religious
schism  had  undermined  the  structure  of  ecclesiastical  authority.
This  concentration  meant  in  the  first  instance  a  period  of  abso
lutism,  and  the  re-action  against  absolutism  has  filled  the
greater  part  of  the  modern  period.  Ethically  considered,  this
re-action  has  two  sides.  On  the  one  hand,  the  government  comes
to  recognize  that  its  position  is  only  justified  by  its  function  in
serving  public  order  and  the  general  happiness.  The  doctrine
of  the  plenary  power  of  the  king,  emerging  though  it  did  readily
enough  from  the  feudal  conception  of  the  supreme  over-lord
when  the  feudal  checks  were  removed,  was  nevertheless  alien
to  the  temper  of  Europe  and  the  spirit  of  modern  Ethics.  The
doctrine  of  the  ultimate  supremacy  of  the  people  and  the  dele
gated  power  of  the  supreme  ruler  had  held  its  place  in  the  civil
law  and  had  never  wholly  disappeared  from  the  academic  world,
and  in  the  eighteenth  century  the  world  of  thought  was  fully
ready  to  accept  the  doctrine  that  a  government  holds  power  only
by  its  capacity  to  serve  the  people's  needs.  On  the  other  side,  the
principle  of  personality  won  the  successive  recognition  of  one
right  after  another — right  to  the  protection  of  the  tribunals  or
immunity  from  arbitrary  punishment,  freedom  in  religious
matters,  first  freedom  of  conscience,  afterwards  freedom  of  ex
pression  and  of  public  worship,  the  right  to  discuss  and  criticize


76  MOEALS  IN  EVOLUTION

acts  of  government,  the  right  of  meeting  and  association,  ulti
mately  the  political  right  to  secure  these  liberties  by  an  indirect
share  in  the  government  of  the  country— all  the  rights  which,
taken  together,  make  the  modern  state  what  it  is.

In  so  far  as  it  rests  on  these  and  similar  rights,  while  they  in
turn  depend  on  the  guarantees  which  orderly  government  can
give,  the  modern  state  depends  not  on  forcible  control,  but  on
the  assent  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  governed. Its  principle,
needless  to  say,  is  not  always  consistently  carried  through. In
particular,  governments  have  almost  everywhere  waged  war  with
the  spirit  of  nationality  where  it  has  come  in  their  way,  and  have
preferred  to  wander  far  from  the  principles  of  equal  political
freedom rather than seek some method of  accommodating
themselves to an inconvenient but very hardy sentiment.
Otherwise  there  is  no  such  permanent  cause  of  internal  division
as  marred  the  life  of  the  Greek  states. Nor  has  faction  ever
shown  itself  so  serious  in  our  world. The  larger  scale  of  the
modern  state  gives  it  more  prospect  of  permanence. But  here,
again,  its ultimate fate must depend  on  the  conduct  of  its
external  relations. The  internecine  feuds  which  ravaged  Hellas
have  at  times  repeated  themselves  on  the  larger  scale  of  Europe,
and  threaten  now  to  take  in  the  whole  civilized  world. And  in
modern,  as  in  ancient,  times  military  ambitions and  internal
liberty  are  hard  to  reconcile. The  future  of  the  State  is  bound
up  with  Internationalism. If  the  rivalries  and  jealousies  of  the
civilized  nations  can  be  so  far  overcome  as  to  admit  of  combined
action  in  the  cause  of  peace,  there  is  every  reason  to  expect  that
within  each  nation  the  rule  of  right  will  be  maintained  and
developed. If,  on  the  contrary,  wars  are  to  give  way  only  to
periods  of  armed  peace,  each  country  alike  must  gradually  relapse
into  the  rule  of  a  dictatorship. The  country  state,  therefore,  can
hardly  be  the  final  word  of  politics,  but  if  progress  continues  it
must  consist  in  the  quickening  into  active  life  of  those  germs  of
internationalism  which  the  best  statesmen  of  the  nineteenth
century  helped  to  bring  into  a  precarious  existence.

We  have  thus  distinguished  three  principles  of  social  union,
each  tending  to  work  itself  out  in  more  than  one  form  of  social
organization,  according  to  the  varying  conditions  upon  which  it
operates.  We  have  had  : —


FORMS  OF  SOCIAL  ORGANIZATION  77

(1)  The  Blood  Tie,  Kinship,  and  Intermarriage,  from  which

sprang  the  Clan  and  the  Tribe. Of  these  there  were
two  great  divisions  :

(ci)  The  Maternal  Clan  and  its  child  the  Totem.
(li)  The  Paternal  Clan,  the  Patriarchate.
In  both  classes  we  find  the  Joint  Household,  which  may
be  regarded  as  at  once  a  clan  and  a  family.

(c)  The  Village  Community — the  union  of  inter
marrying  family  groups  settled  in  joint  owner
ship  of  a  piece  of  land.

(2)  Despotism — the  Principle  of  Force  and  Authority.

(«)  Personal — Military  or  Bureaucratic  Despotism.

(6)  Feudal  Monarchy.

(c)  The  International  Empire.

(o)  The Principle  of  Citizenship,  the Common Good  and
Personal  Right,  from  which  spring

(a)  The  City  State.

(6) The  National  State.

The  types  of  social  organization  that  have  been  sketched
are  not  mutually  exclusive.  A  despotic  oriental  monarchy  may
rule  over  a  hundred  thousand  village  communities,  each  consist
ing  of  a  dozen  or  a  score  of  patriarchal  households  in  which
some  residual  traces  of  mother-right  and  toternism  may  still  be
found.  An  independent  commune  may  rest  on  a  clan  system
founded  on  mother-right,  and  such  clans  may,  like  the
Iroquois,  build  up  a  federation  resting  on  assent  rather  than
force,  and  so  correspond  rather  to  a  state  than  to  a  despotic
kingdom.  What  we  have  distinguished  are  (1)  certain  principles
of  organization  which  when  they  work  out  unencumbered  by
other  principles  form  (2)  distinguishable  types  of  social  structure
—types  which  we  may  take  as  landmarks  by  reference  to  which
we  may  place  other  social  forms.  These  types  may  co-exist  as
constituent  parts  of  a  larger  order,  or  may  be  blended  with  one
another  in  various  ways.  It  follows  that  we  cannot  say  that
one  of  these  forms  succeeds  another  in  serial  order  as  we  ascend
the  scale  of  culture.  The  history  of  society  unfortunately  is
not  so  simple.  All  that  we  can  say  with  some  confidence  is
that  the  three  principles  distinguished  and  the  forms  of  social
union  arising  out  of  them  preponderate  at  successive  stages  in


78  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  order  named.  That  is  to  say,  that  the  lowest  form  of  social
organization  tends  to  fall  mainly  into  the  lines  of  the  maternal
tribe;  that  the  paternal  clan  occupies  in  the  main  a  higher
stage  and  in  turn  is  the  natural  foundation  of  the  commune,
and  so  on.  There  is,  as  it  were,  a  mean  point  in  the  scale  of
social  advance  belonging  to  each  principle,  and  though  it  ex
tends  far  above  and  far  below  we  place  the  principle  in  the
series  by  referring  it  to  this  point.


CHAPTER III

LAW AND JUSTICE

1.  To  the  civilized  man  it  seems  the  merest  truism  to  say  that
the  business  of  Government  is  to  make  and  execute  laws,  to  see
that  crime  is  suppressed,  and  that  its  subjects  are  maintained  in
possession  of  their  just  rights.  Not  only  so,  but  the  broad  lines
upon  which  justice  is  administered  are  to  him  so  familiar  and
seem  so  clearly  marked  out  by  reason  and  common  sense  that  if
he  were  to  think  of  their  origin  at  all  he  would  naturally  imagine
that  here,  if  anywhere,  we  had  to  do  with  simple  and  elementary
moral  ideas,  implanted  in  men  by  nature,  and  needing  no  training
nor  experience  to  perfect  them.  Thus,  what  could  be  more
obvious  to  begin  with  than  the  distinction  of  civil  and  criminal
justice  ?  A  may  trespass  upon  the  rights  of  B,  but  he  may  do
so  without  fraud,  violence,  or  any  criminal  intent.  In  such
cases  the  loss  suffered  by  B  must  be  made  good,  but  no  further
punishment  should  fall  upon  A.  That  is,  there  is  ground  for  a
civil  action.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  in  injuring  B,  A  may  have
committed  an  offence  against  the  social  order.  In  that  case  he
must  be  punished  as  a  criminal,  and  is  not  to  escape  merely  by
making  good  the  loss  inflicted  on  B.  He  has  offended  society,
and  society  insists  on  punishing  him.  But,  further,  if  A  is  a
wrong-doer,  it  must  be  proved  that  he  is  a  responsible  agent.
He  must  have  done  wrong  with  intention,  and,  if  so,  he  alone
ought  to  suffer.  Socially,  no  doubt,  his  fall  must  affect  his
innocent  wife  and  children,  but  this  is  a  regrettable  result,  not
a  consequence  which  the  law  goes  about  to  inflict.  Lastly,
whether  in  a  civil  or  criminal  case,  the  function  of  the  law  is  to
set  up  an  impartial  authority,  before  whom  the  question  is
argued.  Both  sides  are  heard.  Evidence  is  cited,  and  witnesses

79


80  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

called,  whose  testimony  the  court  is  free  to  sift  and  weigh.
Formalities  and  rules  have  to  be  observed,  but  apart,  perhaps,
from  some  which  are  archaic,  they  are  devised  mainly  as  safe
guards  against  wrongful  decisions,  and  the  real  business  of  the
inquiry  is  to  get  at  truth  as  to  the  material  facts.  In  the  end,
the  decision  being  given,  the  court  can  freely  use  the  executive
power  of  Government  to  enforce  it.

Elementary  as  all  this  sounds,  it  is,  historically  speaking,  the
result  of  a  long  evolution.  The  distinctjjMi.Jjfitwepji  jcivil-and
criminal  law,  the  principle  of  strictlyTndividual  responsibility,
the  distinction  between  the  intentional  and  the  unintentional,
the  conception  of  tha  ™?nrt  ft*  W  impartial  authority  to  try
the  merits  of  the  case,  the  exclusive  reliance  an~TvT(lence  and
testimony,  the  preference  of  material  to  formal  rectitude,  the
execution  of  the  court's  decision  _bj  a  public  force — all  are
matters  very  imperFectIy~un3erstood  by  primitive  peoples,  and
their  definite  establishment  is  the  result  of  a  slow  historical
process.  Perhaps  no  other  department  of  comparative  ethics
gives  so  vivid  an  idea  of  the  difficulty  which  humanity  has
found  in  establishing  the  simple  elements  of  a  just  social  order.

2.  The  growth  of  law  and  justice  is  pretty  closely  connected  in
its  several  stages  with  the  forms  of  social  organization  that  have
been  described.  In  quite  the  lowest  races  there  is,  as  we  have
seen,  scarcely  anything  that  is  strictly  to  be  called  the  adminis
tration  of  justice.  Private  wrongs  are  revenged  by  private
individuals,  and  any  one  whom  they  can  get  to  help  them.  The
neighbours  interfere  in  the  least  possible  degree,  and  how  far  a
man's  family,  or  the  wider  group  to  which  he  belongs,  will  stand
by  him,  is  a  question  which  is  decided  in  each  particular  case
as  its  own  merits,  or  the  inclinations  of  those  concerned,  direct.1
But  even  at  a  very  low  stage  this  uncertain  and  fitful  action

1  See  the  account  of  the  Veddahs  and  Fuegians  above,  ch.  ii.  pp.  43-48.
With  these  may  be  joined  the  Andamanese,  who  live  in  small  communities
numbering  from  twenty  to  fifty  individuals,  and  have  no  distinct  institu
tions  for  the  maintenance  of  order  or  the  settlement  of  disputes.  Each
group,  indeed,  has  a  chief,  but  his  powers  are  extremely  limited,  extending
to  little  beyond  the  right  of  calling  the  people  together  and  exercising  over
them  what  influence  he  can.  There  is  no  form  of  covenant,  no  oath,  no
form  of  trial,  no  ordeal.  Justice  is  left  altogether  to  the  aggrieved  party,
who  shoots  an  arrow  at  his  enemy  or  throws  a  burning  faggot  at  him,  the


LAW AND JUSTICE  81

begins  to  take  a  more  definite  shape. We  find  something  that
corresponds  roughly  to  our  own  administration  of  justice,  and
from  the  outset  we  find  it  in  two  broadly  distinct  cases. There
are  occasions  upon  which  a  whole  community  will  turn  upon  an
offender and expel him,  or  put him  to  death. Sometimes,
indeed,  this  is  merely  a  kind  of  lynch  law  directed  against  a
man  who  makes  himself  unbearable,  or  commits  some  crime
which  touches  a  general  feeling  of  resentment  into  life. But
beyond  this  there  are  at  almost,  if  not  quite,  the  lowest  stages
certain  actions  which  are  resented  as  involving  the  community
as  a  whole  in  misfortune  and  danger. These  include,  besides
actual  treason,  conduct  which  brings  upon  the  people  the  wrath
of  God,  or  of  certain  spirits,  or  which  violates  some  mighty  and
mysterious  taboo. The  actions  most  frequently  regarded  in  this
liirht  are  certain  breaches  of  the  marriage  laws  and  witchcraft.1


neighbours  playing  their  part  in  the  matter  by  running  away  until  the
quarrel  is  over,  which  at  any  rate  prevents  the  spread  of  the  mischief. The
law  of  vengeance  is  not  developed. A  relative  may  avenge  the  death  of  a
murdered  man,  but  it  is  not  necessary  that  anything  should  happen. The
neighbours  are  afraid  of  the  murderer,  and  he  finds  it  desirable  to  absent
himself  for  a  while. Not  uncommonly  a  man  will  show  his  resentment,
not  by  punishing  the  wrong-doer,  but  by  destroying  all  the  property  that
he  can  lay  hands  upon,  including  his  own. The  chiefs  property  alone  will
be  respected. In  other  words,  the  Andaman  Islander,  like  the  Malay,  is
apt  to  run  amok,  and  such  men  are  not  resisted  because  they  are  held  to  be
possessed. Conjugal  fidelity  among  this  monogamous  people  is  enforced
by  the  husband,  but  in  punishing  the  guilty  party  he  runs the  risk  of
retaliation. There  appears,  however,  says  Mr.  Man,  feo  lie  an  understanding
that  the  greater  the  provocation  offered,  the  less  is  the  risk  incurred  by  the
injured  person  or  his  friends,  in  avenging  the  wrong — a  sentiment  which
very  aptly  characterizes  the  degree  in  which  justice  is  'recognized  as  a  public
matter  at  this  stage  of  social  development. There  is  no  definite  redress,
but  an  injured  man  may  hope  to  carry  the  support  of  the  neighbours  with
him  in  rough  proportion  to  the  strength  of  his  case. Injuries  done  by  a
member  of  another  tribe  lead  to  more  regular  feuds  and  are  avenged  if
possible  by  a  night  attack  upon  the  neighbouring  camp,  which,  if  successful,
results  in  the  slaughter  of  the  males  and  the  destruction  or  appropriation
of  the  property  of  the  vanquished. The  women  of  the  enemy,  it  may  be
noted,  are  not  deliberately  killed  ;  at  any  rate  their  death  is  not,  as  among
some  more  advanced  peoples,  a  matter  for  boasting  ;  and  the  child  captive
would  be  treated  kindly  with  a  view  to  its  adoption  by  the  captors'  tribe.
Cannibalism,  the  frequent  concomitant  of  savage  warfare,  is  held  in  horror,
but  is  attributed  by  the  southern  Andamanese  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
northern  island. (E.  H.  Man,  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,
vol.  xii.  108,  seq.)

1  Cf.  Steinmetz,  Ethnologisclie  Stwlien  %ur  errien  .Entwickeluny  der  Strafe,
ii.  pp.  328-341).

VOL.  I,  «


82  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

The  breaches  of  the  marriage  law  which  come  in  question  here
are  confined  to  those  transgressions  of  the  prohibitions  of  inter
marriage,  upon  which  primitive  races  lay  such  extraordinary
stress.  A  mere  violation  of  the  marriage  tie  is  generally  in
savage  society  a  private  matter,  avenged  by  the  husband  alone,
or  by  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  help  him ;  but  a  breach  of  the
rules  of  exogamy,  a  marriage  within  the  totem,  for  example,  or  a
marriage  outside  the  permissible  class,  is  regarded  as  an  offence
endangering  the  community  herself,  and  only  to  be  wiped  out
by  the  extinction  of  the  offender.  A  Central  Australian  tribe,
for  instance,  which  has  no  regular  means  of  enforcing  any  law,
will  make  up  a  war  party  to  spear  the  man  and  woman  who
have  married  in  defiance  of  these  customs.1  Similarly  common
action  will  often  be  taken  to  protect  the  community  from  witch
craft,  obviously  a  terrible  offence  in  a  society  which  firmly
believes  in  it.  Among  the  North  American  Indians  a  public
sentence  was  often  pronounced  and  carried  out  by  the  chiefs  in
cases  of  sorcery,  and  sometimes  also  in  cases  of  cowardice  or
breaches  of  the  marriage  customs.2  The  punishment  of  witch
craft  is  as  widespread  as  the  fear  of  it,  and,  prompted  as  it  is  by
the  sense  of  a  danger  to  the  whole  community,  is  often  peculiarly
ferocious,  and  directed  to  the  destruction  of  every  one  connected
with  the  offender.3

The  object  of  the  community  in  exterminating  the  criminal  is
not  so  much  to  punish  the  wicked  man  as  to  protect  itself  from
a  danger,  or  purge  itself  from  a  curse.  Achau  takes  the  accursed
thing,  the  thing  which  had  been  devoted  to  Jahveh.  The  taboo
on  the  thing  devoted  is  at  once  communicated  to  Achan  himself
as  though  it  were  a  poison  or  an  infection,  or,  to  take  another
metaphor,  a  charge  of  electricity.  It  passes  from  the  spoil
appropriated  to  the  appropriator,  and  no  resource  remains  but
to  devote  Achan  with  all  his  family  and  belongings,  everything,

1  Sometimes  the  old  men  of  the  tribe  will  invite  a  neighbouring  group  to
execute  the  criminal. Cutting  and  burning  are  sometimes  substitutes  for
death. (Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  p.  495.)

2  Kohler,  Zeitschrift  fur  vergleichende  Rechtswissenschaft,  1897,  pp.  412-
416. For  the  punishment  of  sorcery,  see  Waitz,  iii.  p.  128.

3  "The  punishments  affecting  sorcerers  can  scarcely  be  called  punish
ments. They  are  acts  of  annihilation."— Post,  ii.  p.  395,  where  numerous
instances  are  given  from  all  parts  of  the  world. In  some  cases,  the  whole
family  of  the  offender  perishes  with  him.


LAW AND JUSTICE  83

in  fact,  which  the  accursed  thing  had  infected.  The  Roman
criminal,  if  his  offence  bore  a  religious  character,  was  "  sacer  "-
separated  from  men,  made  over  to  the  offended  deities.1  His
goods  were  set  apart  (consecratio  bonorum),  for  they  were  involved
in  his  impurity.  He  was  banished,  so  that  none  might  come
into  contact  with  his  accursed  person.  He  was  cut  off  from  fire
and  water,  not  primarily  because  fire  and  water  were  necessary
to  his  life,  so  that  he  was  sentenced  to  death  by  being  deprived
of  them,  but  rather  for  fear  that  his  accursed  touch  should  pollute
the  sacred  elements  and  convey  the  pollution  to  others.  That
the  criminal  suffered  in  consequence  was  a  satisfactory  collateral
effect,  but  the  main  thing  was  to  secure  the  fire  and  water  from
pollution.2

Thus  far,  then,  public  punishments,  where  they  are  any  more
than  an  explosion  of  indignant  feeling,  may  be  regarded  as  public
action  taken  for  the  sake  of  public  safety.  The  community  is
threatened  with  palpable  treason,  or  with  occult  magic  influence,
or  by  the  wrath  of  the  gods.3  It  protects  itself  by  destroying
the  traitor,  or  sacrificing,  or,  at  any  rate,  getting  rid  of,  the  witch.
It  is  a  kind  of  public  hygiene  rather  than  a  dispensation  of
justice  which  is  in  question.

3.  Witli  the  redress  of  wrongs,  the  maintenance  of  private
ights,  and  the  punishment  of  the  bulk  of  ordinary  offences,  it  is
ifferent. For  these  purposes  primitive  society  has  no  adequate

1  Thus  the  luulutiful  son  is  "  .sacred  "  to  the  parental  deities. "  Si  paren-
tein  puer  verberit,  ast  olle plorassit,  puer divis parcntum sacer  esto."
(Bruns,  Fontes  Juris  Hotwini  Antiqui,  p. 14.) Treason  to  a  client,  or
ploughing  up  a  neighbour's  landmark  would  also  render  a  man  "sacer."
Cf.  the  curses  in  Deut.  xxvii. At  bottom  the  idea  of  some  North  American
Indians  is  similar,  among  whom  the  murderer  is  taboo,  because  haunted  by
the  ghost  of  the  victim. (Kohlcr,  Z.  f.  vyl.  liccMstrst.,  1897,  p.  408.)

2  Ihering,  Geisi  des  Romischen  Iteclits,  i.  pp.  275-277,  etc.

3  Among  the  German  tribes  the  worst  offenders  were  sacrificed  to  the
gods,  unless  the  latter  showed  signs  of  grace,  in  which  case  the  offender
became  a  slave  of  the  gods,  or  was  sold  into  slaver}-,  or  became  an  exile.
The  great  ott'ences  were  :  —  breach  of  the  peace  of  the  temple,  the  army,  or
the  meeting,  of  a  special  festival,  or  finally  of  the  house  ;  grave-robbing,
treason, raising an army  in rebellion, arson, black  magic  ; anti-social
crimes  of  peculiar  depravity,  such  as  breach  of  a  sworn  peace,  unnatural
desire,  and  acts  of  cowardice,  such  as  desertion  from  the  army  ;  concealed
murder  and  theft,  in  opposition  to  open  murder  and  robbery. (Schroder,
Lehrbuch  der  Deutschen  Rechtsgeschichte,  pp.  74  and  76.)


84  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

organization.  Administration  of  justice  in  this  sense  is  in  the
main  a  private  matter.  It  is  for  the  sufferer  to  obtain  redress
or  to  revenge  himself,  and  in  the  lowest  stages  of  all  the  ven
geance  is,  as  we  have  seen,  casual,  arbitrary  and  unsystematized.
But  as  the  family  and  the  clan  acquire  definite  and  coherent
structure  a  systematic  method  of  redress  grows  up.  The  leading
characteristics  of  this  method  are  two — (1)  that  redress  is
obtained  by  retaliation,  and  (2)  that  owing  to  the  solidarity  of  the
family  the  sufferer  will  find  support  in  obtaining  the  redress  that
he  seeks.  The  individual  man,  woman  or  child  no  longer  stands
by  himself  or  herself,  but  can  count  with  considerable  certainty
on  the  protection  of  his  relatives,  who  are  bound  to  avenge  a
wrong  done  to  him,  or  to  stand  by  him  in  exacting  vengeance  by
every  tie  of  honour  and  religion.  In  other  words,  this  is  the
stage  of  the  blood  feud.  "  He  that  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by
man  shall  his  blood  be  shed,"  is  the  earliest  law  given  in  the
Old  Testament,  and  on  this  point  the  Old  Testament  may  be
said  to  be  a  faithful  reflection  of  the  historical  facts.

Though  the  blood  feud  is  an  expression  of  vengeance,  this
vengeance  is  by  no  means  wholly  without  regulations  and  rules
of  its  own.  There  is  a  rough  justice  recognizable  in  its  working,
though  it  is  not  the  justice  of  an  impartial  third  person  surveying
the  facts  as  a  whole.  There  is  no  question  of  a  just  judge
rendering  each  man  his  due,  but  rather  of  a  united  kin  sympa
thizing  with  the  resentment  of  an  injured  relation  when  expressing
itself  in  certain  traditional  forms.  Justice  as  we  understand
it — the  rendering  to  each  man  his  due  as  judged  by  an  impartial
authority — is  not  distinctly  conceived  as  a  social  duty  in  primitive
ethics,  and  that  is  what,  morally  speaking,  differentiates  the
primitive  ethical  consciousness  from  the  ethical  consciousness  at
a  higher  stage  of  development.  Yet  primitive  ethics  works  upon
rules  in  which  a  certain  measure  of  justice  is  embodied.  Thus
in  the  first  place  custom  prescribes  certain  rules  of  retaliation
which  are  recognized  as  right  and  proper  and  have  the  approval
of  the  neighbours  and  clansmen.  The  simplest  and  earliest  of
these  rules  is  the  famous  Lex  Talionis,  "  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and
a  tooth  for  a  tooth,"  familiar  to  us  from  the  chapter  of  Exodus,
but  far  earlier  than  Exodus  in  its  first  formulation.  We  find  it,
like  many  other  primitive  rules  of  law,  in  the  recently- discovered


LAW AND JUSTICE  85

code  of  King  Hammurabi,1  which  is  earlier  than  the  Book  of  the
Covenant  perhaps  by  1300  years,  and  we  find  it  at  the  present
day  among  people  sociologically  at  an  earlier  stage  of  develop
ment  than  the  Babylonians  of  the  third  millennium  before  Christ.
We  find  it  applicable  to  bodily  injuries,2  to  breaches  of  the
marriage  law,3  and  perhaps  we  may  say  in  the  rules  of  the  two
fold  restitution  for  theft  and  in  the  symbolic  form  of  mutilating
the  offending  member  even  to  the  case  of  offences  against
property.4  In  some  cases  the  idea  of  exact  retaliation  is  carried
out  with  the  utmost  literalncss — a  grotesque  literalness  some
times,  as  when  a  man  who  has  killed  another  by  falling  on  him
from  a  tree  is  himself  put  to  death  by  exactly  the  same  method—
a  relation  of  the  deceased  solemnly  mounting  the  tree  and,  much
one  would  say  at  his  own  risk,  descending  upon  the  offender.5
More  often,  of  course,  vengeance  is  simpler.  Stripes,  mutilation
or  death  are  inflicted  without  any  attempt  to  imitate  the  original
offence,  though  there  may  very  well  be  a  grading  of  the  vengeance
in  proportion  to  the  original  wrong.  The  homicide  is  slain,  the
adulterer  speared,  beaten,  or  mutilated,  the  thief  slain,  enslaved
or  forced  to  make  restitution,  the  defaulting  debtor  enslaved  or


1  Hammurabi,  §  195. If  a  man  has  struck  his  father,  his  hands  one
shall  cut  otf.

196.  If  a  man  has  caused  the  loss  of  a  gentleman's  eye,  his  eye  one  shall
cause  to  be  lost.

197.  If he has shattered  a  gentleman's limb, one shall  shatter  his
limb.

200.  If  a  man  has  made  the  tooth  of  a  man  that  is  his  equal  to  fall  out,
one  shall  make  his  tooth  fall  out,  etc.

2  See  instances  in  Post,  ii.  pp.  240,  241.

3  The  adulterer  has  to  yield  his  own  wife  to  the  injured  husband  (loc.
cit.,  cf.  Waitz,  iv.  361).

4  The  thief  loses  eye  or  hand. Similarly  the  adulterer  or  ravisher  may
be  castrated — and  with  this  we  may  perhaps  compare  the  punishment  of
the  unchaste  wife  by  prostitution. The  perjurer  loses  his  tongue  or  the
"  Bchwurfinger." (Post,  I.e.)

6  In  the  Leycs  Henrici,  Pollock  and  Maitland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  470,  471.
Mutilation  is  punished  by  retaliation  among  the  Barea  and  Kunama,  the
VVhyclah,  Bogos,  and  Congo  people.  (Post  ii.  211.)

K  E.  <j.  among  the  Cherokees  the  defaulting  debtor  was  tied  to  a  tree  and
Hogged.  (Waitz,  iii.  p.  131.)  In  other  tribes  disputes  as  to  money  matters
were  regulated  by  arbitrators  chosen  by  the  conflicting  parties.  Those
who  were  prevented  by  illness  or  any  real  obstacle  from  paying  their
debts,  were  not  compelled  to  do  so,  but  those  who  could  pay  and  did  not
fell  into  general  contempt.


86  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

4.  But  at  a  fairly  early  stage  in  the  growth  of  social  order  a
fresh  principle  is  introduced  tending  to  mitigate  the  blood  feud
and  so  maintain  peace  and  harmony.  For  the  special  vice  of  the
system  of  retaliation  is  that  it  provides  no  machinery  for  bring
ing  the  quarrel  to  an  end.  If  one  of  the  Bear  totem  is  killed  by
a  Hawk,  the  Hawk  must  be  killed  by  one  of  the  Bears,  but  it  by
no  means  follows  that  this  will  end  the  matter,  for  the  Hawks
may  now  stand  by  their  murdered  clansmen  and  take  the  life  of
a  second  Bear  in  revenge,  and  so  the  game  goes  on,  and  we  have
a  true  course  of  vendetta.  Accordingly  peaceable  souls  with  a
view  to  the  welfare  of  both  families,  perhaps  with  the  broader
view  of  happiness  and  harmony  within  the  community,  intervene
with  a  suggestion  of  peace.  Let  the  injured  Bears  take  com
pensation  in  another  form,  let  them  take  cattle  or  other  things
to  make  good  the  loss  of  the  pair  of  hands  which  served  them.
In  a  word,  let  the  payment  of  damages  be  a  salve  to  vindictive
feelings.  In  that  way  the  incident  may  come  to  an  end  and
peace  will  reign.  When  such  a  practice  becomes  a  customary
institution  we  enter  upon  the  stage  of  composition  for  offences,
a  stage  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  settling  down  of  barbarous
tribes  into  a  peaceable  and  relatively  civilized  state,  and  especially
of  the  growth  of  the  power  of  a  chief  whose  influence  is  often
exerted  to  enforce  the  expedient  of  composition  upon  a  reluctant
and  revengeful  family.  As  the  institution  takes  shape  a  regular
tariff  is  introduced,  so  much  for  an  injury,  so  much  for  the  loss
of  an  eye,  so  much  for  a  life.  Often  a  distinction  between  classes
of  crime  appears.  For  some  it  is  the  rule  that  composition
should  be  accepted.  Others  are  recognized  as  too  grave  to  be
washed  out  except  by  blood.  Thus  among  the  German  tribes
murder  and  rape  excited  blood  revenge,  while  other  injuries  were
punishable  by  fine,  and  the  fine  is  significantly  called  "faida,"
as  being  the  feud  commuted  for  money.1  The  distinction
lasted  into  the  Middle  Ages,  even  in  a  period  when  the  fine  or  a
part  of  it  went  to  the  king.  Our  Leges  Henrici  still  distinguish
emend  able  offences,  in  which  sacrilege  and  wilful  homicide  with
out  treachery  are  included,  from  unemendable  offences  such  as
housebreaking,  arson,  open  theft,  aggravated  homicide,  treason

1  Waitz,  Deutsche  Verfassungsgeschichte,  i.  p.  437,  who,  however,  denies
that  the  fine  was  a  merely  buying  off  of  revenge.


LAW AND JUSTICE  87

against  one's  lord  and  breach  of  the  church's  or  the  king's  peace.1
These  are  crimes  which  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  term  had  no  hot —
no  hot  or  money  payment  atoned  for  them — they  were  bot-less,
boot-less.  Even  when  the  bot  was  payable  it  stood  at  first  at
the  discretion  of  the  injured  family  to  accept  or  reject  it,  and  we
find  the  Germanic  codes  in  the  early  Middle  Ages  setting  them
selves  to  insist  on  its  acceptance  as  a  means  of  keeping  the  peace.2
If  the  fine  is  not  forthcoming  of  course  the  feud  holds.

But  when  injuries  are  being  assessed,  not  only  must  there  be
a  distinction  between  the  injuries  themselves,  but  also  between
the  persons  injured.  There  must  be  a  distinction  of  rank,  age,
sex;  a  free-born  man  is  worth  more  than  a  slave,  a  grown-up
person  than  a  child,  generally  speaking  a  man  than  a  woman,
a  chief  or  person  of  rank  than  a  free  man.  And  so  we  have
the  system  of  "  wergilds  "  familiar  to  us  in  the  early  stages  of  our
own  history,3  and  again  recognizable  in  the  code  of  Hammurabi.1

1  Post,  Afrikanische  Jurisprudent, ii.  30,  gives  a  list  of  ten  African
peoples  iu  which  composition  is  allowed  for  all  offences. In  three  others
it  is  allowed  for  all  cases  except  the  gravest,  such  as  murder  ;  among  the
Kimbundas,  for  all  except  sorcery  and  treason  ;  among  the  Barolong  for
all  except  rebellion,  and  among  the  Kaffirs  for  all  except  treason,  sorcery,
and  sometimes  murder. In mediaeval England there was much local
variation  in  the  fines. At Lewes  the  fine for  bloodshed was 7/4,  for
adultery  8/4,  the  man  paying  the  King,  the  woman  the  Archbishop. In
Shropshire  the  fine  for  bloodshed  was  40/-. In  Worcestershire  rape  was
not  ernendable. (Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  p.  457.)

2  Charlemagne's  capitulary  of  802  forbids  the  kin  to  increase  the  evil
by  refusing  peace  to  the  manslayer  who  craves  it. (J  enks,  Law  and  Politics,
p.  102.) In  England,  down  to  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  the  aggressor
might  elect  to  bear  the  blood  feud,  but  by  an  ordinance  of  Alfred,  the
injured  party  might  have  the  help  of  the  ealdorman  to  enforce  payment.
(Pollock  and  Maitland,  i.  47.)

3  Among  the Germanic peoples, in the  early medieval  period, the
wergild  of  a  noble  was  generally  double  that  of  a  free  man. A  post  in
the  King's  service  trebled  the  wergild of  the  official's  hereditary  rank.
The  Liti  (Horige)  had  as a  rule  half  the  wer  of  free  men,  whilst  slaves
according  to  strict  principle  had  none,  but  only  a valuation. In  fact,
however,  some  barbarian  codes  assigned  them  half the  wer of  a  litus.
(Schroder,  pp.  345,  346.)

4  Hammurabi  illustrates  two  subsidiary  points. (1)  An  offence  against
a  man  of  higher  rank  may  be  unemendable  (i.  e.  punished  by  retaliation),
while  the  same  offence  against  a  man  of  lower  rank  is  commutable. (2)  The
rank  of  the  aggressor  may  influence  the  punishment  as  well  as  that  of  the
sufferer. Injuries  to  eye  or  limb  of  a  "gentleman"  are  punished  by  retali
ation  (sections  196,  197),  but  in  section  198,:  '  If  he  has  caused  a  poor  man
to  lose  his  eye  or  shattered  a  poor  man's  limb,  he  shall  pay  one  mina  of
silver." Further,  by  section  199,  the  slave  has  no  wer — for  the  same  injury


88  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

In  one  form  or  another  the  system  of  composition  prevails  or
has  prevailed  almost  to  this  day  over  a  great  part  of  the
barbaric  world,  among  the  North  American  Indians,1  in  the
Malay  Archipelago,2  in  New  Guinea,  among  the  Indian  hill
tribes,  among  the  Calmucks  and  Kirghis  of  the  steppes  of  Asia,

the  aggressor  "  shall  pay  half  his  price."  Similarly  for  the  loss  of  a  tooth
(sections  200,  201).  The  provisions  for  assault  and  homicide  are  as  follows :

202.  If  a  man  has  struck  the  strength  of  a  man  who  is  great  above
him,  he  shall  be  struck  in  the  assembly  with  sixty  strokes  of  a  cow-hide
whip.

203.  If  a  man  of  gentle  birth  has  struck  the  strength  of  a  man  of  gentle
birth,  who  is  like  himself,  he  shall  pay  one  mina  of  silver.

204.  If  a  poor  man  has  struck  the  strength  of  a  poor  man,  he  shall  pay
ten  shekels  of  silver.

205.  If  a  gentleman's  servant  has  struck  the  strength  of  a  free  man,  one
shall  cut  off  his  ear.

206.  If  a  man  has  struck  a  man  in  a  quarrel,  and  has  caused  him  a
wound,  that  man  shall  swear,  "  I  do  not  strike  him  knowing,"  and  shall
answer  for  the  doctor.

207.  If  he  has  died  of  his  blows,  he  shall  swear,  and  if  he  be  of  gentle
birth  he  shall  pay  half  a  mina  of  silver.

208.  If  he  be  the  son  of  a  poor  man,  he  shall  pay  one-third  of  a  mina
of  silver.

209.  If  a  man  has  struck  a  gentleman's  daughter  and  caused  her  to  drop
what  is  in  her  womb,  he  shall  pay  ten  shekels  of  silver  for  what  was  in
her  womb.

210.  If  that  woman  has  died,  one  shall  put  to  death  his  daughter.

211.  If  the  daughter  of  a  poor  man  through  his  blows  he  has  caused  to
drop  that  which  is  in  her  womb,  he  shall  pay  five  shekels  of  silver.

212.  If  that  woman  has  died,  he  shall  pay  half  a  mina  of  silver.

213.  If  he  has  struck  a  gentleman's  maidservant  and  caused  her  to  drop
that  which  is  in  her  womb,  he  shall  pay  two  shekels  of  silver.

214.  If  that  maidservant  has  died,  he  shall  pay  one-third  of  a  mina  of
silver.

218.  If  the  doctor  has  treated  a  gentleman  for  a  severe  wound  with  a
lancet  of  bronze  and  has  caused  that  gentleman  to  die,  or  has  opened  an
abscess  of  the  eye  for  a  gentleman  with  the  bronze  lancet  and  has  caused
the  loss  of  the  gentleman  s  eye,  one  shall  cut  off  his  hands.

219.  If  a  doctor  has  treated  the  severe  wound  of  a  slave  of  a  poor  man
with  a  bronze  lancet  and  has caused  his  death,  he  shall  render  slave  for
slave.

220.  If  he  has  opened  his  abscess  with  a  bronze  lancet  and  has  made  him
lose  his  eye,  he  shall  pay  money,  half  his  price.

1  Kohler,  Zeitschrift  fiir  vergl.  EechtsivissenscJtaft,  1897,  pp.  406,  407  ;
Alvord  in  Schoolcraft,  v.  653  ;  Morgan,  League  of  the  Iroquois,  331,  332.
(Failing  a  present  of  a  belt  of  white  wampum  the  family  of  the  deceased
appointed  an  avenger.)

2  Waitz,  v.,  p.  i.  143. The  wergild  varies  from  200  to  1000  gulden,
according  to  the  rank  of  the  dead  man. In  case  of  poison,  the  poisoner
becomes  the  slave  of  the  family. A  paramour  may  be  enslaved  by  the
husband  if  taken  in  the  act,  but  if  the  matter  is  brought  before  a  court,
money  compensation  must  be  accepted.


LAW AND JUSTICE  89

among  the  rude  tribes  of  the  Caucasus,  the  Bedouins  of  the
Arabian  desert,  the  Somali  of  East  Africa,  the  negroes  of  the
West  Coast,  the  Congo  folk  of  the  interior,  the  Kaffirs  and
Basutos  of  the  South.1

5.  Primitive  vengeance,  then,  may  be  exacted  by  retaliation  or
compounded  by  money  payments. In  either  method  a  rough
justice  is  embodied,  but  it  is  justice  enforced  by  the  strong  hand.
Even graver differences separating barbaric vengeance  from
civilized  justice  have  now  to  be  mentioned. These  differences  are
inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  social  organization  upon  which  the
blood  feud  rests. For  the  blood  feud  is  retribution  exercised  by
a  family  upon  a  family ;  it  rests  upon  the  support  which  each
individual  can  count  upon  from  his  own  immediate  relations,
possibly  from  his  whole  clan;  it rests,  in a  word,  upon  the
solidarity  of  the  kindred. But  the  effect  of  this  solidarity  upon
the  working  of  retributive  justice  is  by  no  means  wholly  favour
able. In the first place  it  has  the  effect  that  the  lives  of
members  of  other  clans  are  held  indifferent. A  perfect  illustra
tion  is  afforded  by  the  Ungani  Nagas,  a  tribe  of  the  North-East
frontier  of  India  who  live  in  villages  composed  of  two  or  more
"  khels,"  as  their  clans  are  called,  which,  though  living  side  by
side  and  intermarrying,2  are  for  purposes  of  defence  independent
communities. A  hostile  tribe may  descend  upon  the  village
and  massacre  all  the  members  of  one  "  khel "  while  the  other
"  khels  "  sleep  peacefully  in  their  beds  and  do  not  raise  hand  or
foot  to  protect  their  neighbours. This  is  cold-blooded,  but  it  is
not  without  a  certain  reason. The  exterminated  "khel"  has
incurred  a  feud  from  which  the  others  are  free. If  they  rise  in
its  defence  they  not  only  incur  the  danger  of  the  present  fight,
but  they  also  involve  themselves  in  the  permanent  feud.3 Next,
in  so  far  as  justice  rests  on  the  blood  feud,  and  the  blood  feud  is
of  the  nature  of  a  private  war  between  distinct  families  or  clans,
it  follows  that  public  justice  will  not  deal  with  offences  committed
within  the  family. These  do  not  excite  the  blood  feud. In

1  Post,  ii.  pp.  256,  257.  2  The  khel  is  exogamous.  _

3  Godden,  J  A.  I.,  xxvi.  p.  167.  Similarly  in  contemporary  Africa,  sc
far  as  blood  revenge  holds,  the  slaying  of  any  one  outside  the  clan  is  no
more  regarded  as  wrong  than  the  killing  of  an  enemy  in  battle  among  us.
(Post,  Afrikanische  Jurisprudent,  i.  60.)


90  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

some  cases  no  fixed  punishment  appears  to  be  assigned  for
them,  but  this  may  happen  not  only  because  they  do  not
belong  to  the  province  of  public  custom,  but  also,  perhaps,
because  they  are  too  rare  for  any  definite  custom  to  have  arisen
for  dealing  with  them.  Like  parricide  among  the  Romans,  they
represent  the  absolute  ultimate  of  human  wickedness.  ^Further,
generally  speaking,  there  is  no  need  for  any  recognizable  general
rule,  because  offences  within  the  family  are  dealt  with  by  the
arbitrary  justice  of  the  paterfamilias  or  of  the  kin  collectively,
who,  even  if  other  means  of  enforcing  authority  failed,  have
always  the  ready  remedy  of  outlawry,  which  puts  the  offender  at
the  mercy  of  the  firstcomer.1  Outlawry  from  tire  clan  is  the
most  effective  of  all  weapons,  because  in  primitive  society  the
exclusion  of  a  man  from  his  kinsfolk  means  that  he  is  delivered
over  to  the  firstcomer  absolutely  without  protection.  An
illustration  may  be  drawn  from  the  early  history  of  Mahommed's
teaching,  when  the  Korais,  who  found  that  Mahommed's  gospel
was  very  inimical  to  their  gains,  wanted  above  all  things  to  put
him  out  of  the  way  and  made  the  most  strenuous  efforts  to
induce  Mahommed's  uncle,  who  was  head  of  the  clan,  to  disown
him.  Had  the  uncle  consented,  Mahommed  would  have  been
left  without  protection  and  might  have  been  dispatched  by
any  one  without  fear  of  consequences,  but  till  the  death  of  the
uncle  the  clan  stood  by  him ;  and  the  leading  men  of  Mecca,
powerful  as  they  were,  were  not  bold  enough  to  take  upon  them
selves  a  blood  feud  with  Mahommed's  family.2  The  fear  of  the
blood  feud  is  the  great  restraint  upon  disorder  in  primitive
society,  and  conversely  he  whose  death  will  excite  no  blood  feud
has  no  legal  protection.

1  Among  African  peoples  there is,  generally  speaking,  no  blood  feud
for  homipide  within  the  clan. But  among  the  South -Western  Arabs  the
parricide  is  put  to  death,  and  for  fratricide  the  father  may  put  the  offender
to  death  or  demand  the  blood  price. (Post,  A.  J.,  i.  63.)  Among  the  Bogos
the  slayer  of  brother  or  father  would  be  killed  on  the  spot  if  taken. But
if  he  escapes,  his  fate  will  depend  011  the  question  whether  his  victim  has
or  has  not  left  children. If  so  they  will  take  up  the  feud. If  not  he  can
make  his  peace  without  payment,  and  then  inherit  his  brother's  property
and  widow. (Ib.,  ii.  60.) In  the  Malay  region  the  murder  of  a  relative
is  dishonouring,  but  has  no  money  penalty. (Waitz,  v.  i.  149.) For  illus
trations  of  the  variety  of  customs  under  this  head,  see  Steimnetz  ii.  153-
176.

2  Palmer,  Introduction  to  tJie  Koran,  pp.  24,  25.


LAW AND JUSTICE  91

So  far  the  negative  side  of  clau  justice. The  positive  side  has
peculiarities  not  less  startling  to  the  modern  mind,  for  since  it
is  a  member  of  one  body  who  has  done  a  wrong  to  a  member
of  another  body,  the  whole  body  to  which  the  offending  member
belongs  is  held  responsible  by  the  whole  body  to  which  the  in
jured  member  belongs ;  and  it  is  not  merely  the  original  criminal
who  may  be  punished,  but  logically  any  member  of  his  family
may  serve  as a  substitute. Responsibility  is collective,  and
therefore  also  vicarious. Sometimes  the  whole  family  of  the
offender  is  destroyed  with  him.1 Sometimes  any  relation  of  the
offender  may  suffer  for  him  vicariously. John,  who  has  done
the deed,  being out of  reach,  primitive vengeance is quite
satisfied  with  the  life  of  Thomas,  his  son,  or  brother,  or  cousin.
Just  as  in  the  blindness  of  warfare  the  treacherous  act  of  an
enemy  is  generalized  and  perhaps  avenged  in  the  next  battle
by  a  retaliation  which  does  not  stay  to  ask  whether  it  is  falling
ou  the  innocent  or  the  guilty,  so  in  the  primitive  blood  feud.
The  wrong  done  is  the  act  of  the  family  or  clan  to  which  the
aggressor  belongs,  and  may  be  avenged  on  any  member  of  that
family  or  clan.2  Sometimes  the  retaliation  is  made  more  specific

1  E.  y.  among  the  Kaffirs,  at  Loango,  and  among  the  Barolong,  the  relatives
are  held  responsible  for  payment  by  the  accusers,  and  on  the  Gold  Coast
the  relatives  of  the  sorcerer  are  slain  or  enslaved  along  with  him.  (Post,
A.  J.,  i.  46.)  Among  the  North  American  Indians  the  family  and  the
whole  tribe  were  held  responsible  for  a  murder  committed  by  one  of
them.  (Wait/,  iii.  132.)  In  Anglo-Saxon  law  it  was  possible  for  a  tanuly
to  be  enslaved  for  a  theft  by  the  father.  (Pollock  and  Maitland,  i.  56.)

2  For  instances,  see  Post,  Grundnss,  i.  230  if. Professor  Tylor  instances
the  Bedouins,  Australians,  South  Sea  Islanders,  and  Kaffirs,  as  peoples
amon.L,'  whom  the  blood  feud  involved  the  whole  clan. (Contemp.  Review,
1873  °p.  59  ) In  some  cases  the  wergild  involved  the  slaying  of  several
persons for one. Thus by Anglo-Saxon law, six ceorls must die  lor
one thecm. (Pollock and Maitland, ii. 450.) Edmund set  himself  to
suppress  feuds,  forbidding  attacks  on  the  kindred  unless  they  harbour  the
homicide Mahometan  law,  while  admitting  retaliation,  restricts  it  to  the
offender. (Post,  loc.  cit.) But  the  kin  are  liable  for  money  composition
(l)areste,  p.  64.) In  many  African  tribes  a  creditor  will  sei/.e  and  ;
as  a  slave  any  relation  of  the  debtor's  whom  he  can  find,  or  even  any
member  of  the  same  town. It  is  not  surprising  to  learn  that  this  method
of  distraint  is  a  fruitful  source  of war. (Post,  A.  J".,  ii.  140.) A  still
wilder  development  of  vicarious  revenge  is  found  in  the  Gazelle  I  enirisul
amom'  the  Papuas,  where  the  husband  whose  wife  has  been  stolen,  goes  into
the  bush  and  kills  the  first  man  he  meets. This  man's  kindred  do  the  same
thing,  and  the  process  is  repeated  till  the  stroke  lights  upon  the  original
offender,  whose  goods  have  to  pay  all  the  damage. (Kohler,  Z.  d.  ml.  ttecktsw.,
1900,  p.  381.) Gf.  a  similar  practice  in  S.  Guinea. (Post,  A.  J.,  11.  22.)


92  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

by  a  fresh  application  of  the  Lex  Talionis,  and  to  the  rule  "  eye
for  eye,"  there  is  the  pendant ' '  son  for  son,  daughter  for  daughter,
slave  for  slave,  ox  for  ox."  You  have  slain  my  son  ?  Then  the
true  and  just  retribution  is  that  I  should  slay  yours.1  It  is  my
daughter  who  is  slain  ?  Then  it  is  with  your  daughter  that  you
must  pay  for  her.  Sometimes  vengeance  is  specially  directed
against  the  chief  as  representing  the  clan.  Sometimes  it  may
be  visited  on  any  male,  or  even  on  any  adult  member  of  the
clan,  children  alone  being  excluded.  Sometimes  this  last  shred
of  humanity  is  torn  away.  The  principle  is  pushed  to  its  furthest
and  most  revolting  development  among  the  head-hunting  tribes
common  in  South-East  Asia,  in  which  magical  ideas  combine
with  those  of  revenge,  and  the  skull  of  the  enemy  has  a  potency
of  its  own  which  makes  its  possession  desirable  in  itself.  The
head  of  a  child  or  woman  of  the  hostile  body  is  no  less  coveted
an  object  than  that  of  the  fighting  warrior,  and  is  probably  easier
to  obtain.  When  the  principle  of  composition  arises  collective
responsibility  is  reduced,  by  a  less  barbarous  logic,  to  a  common
pecuniary  liability.  The  clan  are  collectively  responsible  for  the
blood  money  due  from  a  member,  and  by  the  same  logic  they
are  the  collective  recipients  of  blood  money  due  to  any  member.2
And  as  with  blood  money  so  with  other  debts.3  There  is  a  col
lective  liability — a  conception  which  in  this  softened  form  has
its  uses  in  the  social  order,  and  is  in  fact  enforced  and  applied

1  The  most  astonishing  case  is  in  the  treatment  of  the  "builder  in  the
code  of  Hammurabi,  229  : — "  If  a  builder  has  built  a  house  for  a  man  and
has  not  made  strong  his  work,  and  the  house  he  built  has  fallen,  and  he
has  caused  the  death  of  the  owner  of  the  house,  that  builder  shall  be  put
to  death.

230.  If  he  has  caused  the  son  of  the  owner  of  the  house  to  die,  one  shall
put  to  death  the  son  of  that  builder.

231.  If  he  has  caused  the slave of  the  owner  of  the  house  to  die,
he  shall  give  slave  for  slave to  the  owner  of the  house." Though
barbaric,  these  sections  might  have  a  use  if  suitably  posted  in  modern
suburbs.

8  E.  g.  among  the  Bogos  and  Bedouins  (Post,  i.  253),  and  compare  Post,
A.  J.,  i.  45  and  ii.  35.  For  collective  claims  on  the  blood  money,  cf.
Tacitus,  Germania  (ap.  G.  Waitz,  Deutsche  Verfassungsgeschichte,  i.  32),
"recipitque  satisfactionem  uni versa  domus."

3  E.g.  at  Great  Bassam.  (Post,  A.  J".,  i.  45.)  Among  the  Yoruba,  Tshi,
and  Ewe  speaking  peoples,  collective  responsibility  which  formerly  applied
generally  is  now  restricted  to  debts.  (Ellis,  Yoruba- speaking  Peoples,  299.)
Of.  Waitz,  iv.  306. — In  Yucatan  the  whole  family  is  responsible  for
debt.


LAW AND  JUSTICE  93

to  the  commune— though  in  right  it  belongs  rather  to  the  clan
—by  many  Oriental  Governments.1

6.  Further,  with  the  theory  of  collective  responsibility  goes
almost  necessarily  the  failure  to  distinguish  between  accident
and  design. In  primitive  society  the  real  gravamen  of  a  charge
against  an  aggressor  is  that  he  has  done  an  injury. How  he  did
the  injury,  whether  of  set  purpose  or  by  accident,  is  a  matter  of
less  moment. My  son,  or  brother,  or  cousin,  or  clansman,  is
killed;  that  is  enough  for  me;  I  must  have  some  satisfaction  out
of  the  man  who  did  it,  and,  what  is  more,  my  family  must  have
some  satisfaction  out  of  his  family. Furthermore,  the  whole
distinction  between  design  and  accident  is  by  no  means  so  clear
to  primitive  man  as  it  is  to  us,  for  though  it  needs  little  reflec
tion  and  a  very  moderate  amount  of  self-knowledge  to  distinguish
between  what  one  has  done  one's  self  by  accident  or  by  design,
and  a  very  moderate  degree  of  reasoning  power  to  apply  the
distinction  to  other  men— still,  the nascent reflection  of  the
savage  is  strangled  at  birth  by  the  prevailing  theory  of  witch
craft  and  possession. If  a  tree  falls  upon  a  man's  head  the
savage  holds  that  a  spirit  guided  it. If  a  man,  cutting  a  branch
from a tree,  dropped  his  axe  on to another's  head, it may
not  have  been  the  man's  own  soul  which  guided  the  axe,  but  it
was  another  soul  which possessed him  temporarily  ; he  was
possessed  by  some  spirit,  and  as  possessed  he  should  be  put  out
of  the  way.2 The  treatment  of  the  subject  in  the  Hebrew  codes
illustrates  the  difficulty  which  is  experienced  even  at  a  higher
stage  in  strictly  distinguishing  between  the  two  spheres  of  de
sign  and  accident. Each  code  assigns  a  city  of  refuge  for  the
excusable  homicide,  but  none  make  it  perfectly  clear  whether
it  is  unintentional  or  unpremeditated man-slaying  that  is  m
view. The  Book  of  the  Covenant  simply  says,  "  If  a  man  lie
not  in  wait,  but  God  deliver  him  (the  victim)  into  his  hand,

1  And  elsewhere  ;  e.  g.  at  Sierra  Leone  and  in  several  other  parts  of
Africa,  responsibility  for  debt  extends  to  the  Commune. (Post,  A.  J.,  i.  75.)
In  the  Malay  constitution  the  family  is  responsible  for  its  members,  the
snku  (clan)  for  its  families,  the  village  for  its  sukus,  the  district  tor  its
villages. (Waitz,  v.,  i.  141.)

2  Post,  A  J.,  ii.  29. In  West  Equatoria  the  man  who  injures  another  in
cutting  down  a  tree  is  held  the  agent  of  an  indwelling  magical  power,  and
must  submit  to  the  ordeal  of  Mbimdu  drinking. (16.)


94,  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

then  I  will  appoint  thee  a  place  whither  he  shall  flee.  And  if
a  man  come  presumptuously  upon  his  neighbour  to  slay  him
with  guile,  thou  shalt  take  him  from  mine  altar  that  he  may
die." l  In  Deuteronomy  there  is  an  attempt  to  define  accident.
The  city  of  refuge  is  appointed  for  "  whoso  killeth  his  neighbour
unawares  and  hated  him  not  in  times  past."  The  first  qualifi
cation  would  be  true  of  unintentional,  the  second  of  unpremedi
tated  homicide.  Then  follows  a  somewhat  elaborate  illustration
of  a  case  of  pure  accident.2  "  As  when  a  man  goeth  into  the
forest  with  his  neighbour  to  hew  wood,  and  his  hand  fetcheth
a  stroke  with  the  axe  to  cut  down  the  tree,  and  the  head  slippeth
from  the  helve,  and  lighteth  upon  his  neighbour,  that  he  die,
he  shall  flee  unto  one  of  these  cities  and  live  : "  and  then  it  is
once  more  stated  that  the  slayer  ought  not  to  die,  "  inasmuch
as  he  hated  him  not  in  time  past,"  which  would  be  true  of  any
want  of  premeditation.  Furthermore,  even  in  this  relatively
enlightened  code  the  unintentional  slayer  is  not  fully  protected.
It  is  clearly  anticipated  that  the  "  avenger  of  blood  "  will  pursue
him  "  while  his  heart  is  hot,  and  overtake  him  because  the  way
is  long,"  and  smite  him  mortally,  and  there  is  no  hint  that  the
avenger  will  be  punished.  Nor  was  the  alternative,  exile  to  the
city  of  refuge,  a  merely  nominal  penalty.  Finally,  in  the  Priestly
Code  there  is  an  elaborate  attempt  to  distinguish  different  cases.
The  cities  of  refuge  are  appointed  for  every  one  that  "  killeth
any  person  unwittingly,"  or,  as  the  margin  renders  it,  "  through
error."  (An  attempt  is  made  to  render  the  meaning  clearer  by
specifying  the  implements  used,  of  iron,  wood  or  stone.)  On  the
other  hand,  he  who  has  killed  another,  "lying  in  wait"  or  "in
enmity,".  A  to  be  put  to  death  by  the  avenger  of  blood  "  when
he  meeteth  him."  In  intermediate  cases  the  congregation  shall
judge.  "  But  if  he  thrust  him  suddenly  without  enmity,  or
hurled  upon  him  anything  without  lying  in  wait,  or  with  any
stone,  whereby  a  man  may  die,  seeing  him  not,  and  cast  it  upon
him,  so  that  he  died,  and  he  was  not  his  enemy,  neither  sought
his  harm:  then  the  congregation  shall  judge  between  the  smiter
and  the  avenger  of  blood  according  to  these  judgments."  3  Even
here,  then,  the  three  cases  of  accident  ("  seeing  him  not "),  assault

1  Exodus  xxi.  13,  14.  2  Deut.  xix.  4-6.

3  Numbers  xxxv.  15,  20,  21,  22-24.


LAW AND JUSTICE  05

without  intent  to  kill  ("  thrust  him  suddenly  ")  and  unpremedi
tated  homicide  ("  without  lying  in  wait ")  seem  to  be  in  a
measure  confused.  And  even  in  this  code  the  avenger  may
slay  the  man-slayer  anywhere  outside  the  borders  of  the  city  of
refuge  until  the  death  of  the  high  priest.

Not  infrequently  in  early  law  we  find  the  distinction  that
unintentional  homicide  is  atonable  by  paying  the  wergild,  while
deliberate  murder  gives  rise  to  the  blood  feud.  Thus  in  the
code  of  Hammurabi l  the  homicide  might  swear  that  the  blow
was  unintentional  and  escape  with  a  fine.  So,  again,  though
Germanic  law  begins  by  holding  a  man  equally  imputablo
for  all  that  he  has  done,  it  is  an  ancient  mitigation  that  for
unintentional  homicide  the  wcr  is  due,  and  the  blood  feud
should  not  be  waged.'2  The  disentanglement  of  innocent  from
culpable  homicide  was  a  very  gradual  achievement  in  mediaBval
Europe  though  aided  by  the  Civil  and  Canon  Law,  and  the
forfeiture  of  goods — the  direct  survival  of  the  wergild — remained
in  theory  in  English  law  down  to  1828. 3

It  is  a  natural,  though,  to  our  minds,  a  bizarre  consequence
that  in  early  justice  animals  arid  even  inanimate  objects  may
be  regarded  as  appropriate  subjects  of  punishment.  The  slaying
of  oifending  animals  is  provided  for  in  the  Book  of  Exodus.
Many  cruel  punishments  were  inflicted  upon  animals  in  the
code  of  the  Zendavesta,4  and  the  same  thing  occurred  in  medi-

*  Hammurabi,  200-208,  cited  above,  p.  88.

-  Pollock  and  Maitland.  ii.  470  and  471. In  many  cases,  however,  tlu:
innocent  homicide  can  only  escape  by  a  recommendation  to  mercy. In  the
Anglo-Saxon  law  the  distinction  is  not  so  much  between  intentional  and
unintentional  as  between  open  and  secret  slaying. (Ib.,  i.  52.) This  recalls
the  difficulties  in  D^ut,  and  Numbers. Generally  speaking,  abiding  to
Post,  A.  J.,  ii.  28,  the  responsibility  of  the  a.geut  is  not  presumed  as  a
ground  of  his  punishment  in  Africa. P>ut  in  some  cases,  as  in  Aquapin  and
Ashanti,  the  penalty  for  an  accidental  offence  is  reduced,  and  later  (in
contradistinction  to  earlier),  Kaffir  law  imposes,  as  a  rule,  no  penalty  on
accidental  homicide.

3  Blackstone,  iv.  p.  ]  88. In  practice  "  as  far  back  as  our  records  reach,"
the  defendant  could  obtain  a  pardon  and  writ  of  restitution. The  clear
demarcation  of  individual responsibility  is  far  from  being  universal  in
civilized  law. In  the  Mahometan  world,  a  man's  family  is  collectively
responsible  even  for  damage  done  by  him  involuntarily. (Post,  Gnmdriss,
u.  216,  cf.  Dareste,  p.  64.) In  China  involuntary  offences  are  punished,
though  on  a  reduced  scale. In  the  Japanese  code  of  1871  accidental  injury
to  parents  is  heavily  punished. (Post,  ii.  p.  218.)

4  Entirely,  no  doubt,  under  the  influence  of  magical  ideas.


96  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

seval  Europe,  where,  perhaps  under  the  influence  of  the  Mosaic
legislation,  it  even  survived  in  isolated  cases  to  the  sixteenth  or
seventeenth  century.1  The  punishment  of  animals  and  inanimate
objects  was  no  mere  wreaking  of  blind  fury  on  innocent
creatures.  Probably  to  the  primitive  mind  the  ox  that  gored
a  man,  the  sword  that  slew,  and  the  murderer  that  wielded  it,
were  much  more  on  one  level  than  they  can  be  to  us.  The
animal  or  tool,  if  not  conscious  themselves,  might  be  endued
with  a  magic  power  or  possessed  with  an  evil  spirit.  It  was
well  to  get  rid  of  them  before  they  did  more  harm.  If  not
destroyed  they  might  be  purified.  Thus  in  the  English  law  of
Deodand,  which  was  not  abolished  till  the  middle  of  the  last
century,  there  is  a  survival  of  the  view  that  anything  that  has
killed  a  man  must  undergo  a  kind  of  religious  purification  ;  a
cart,  for  instance,  which  ran  over  a  man,  or  a  tree  which  fell  on
him,  was  confiscated  and  sold  for  charity — at  bottom  merely  a
somewhat  humanized  version  of  the  ancient  Athenian  process
whereby  the  axe  that  had  slain  a  man  was  brought  to  trial,  and,
if  found  guilty,  solemnly  thrown  over  the  boundary.  It  need
hardly  be  added  that  where  responsibility  is  extended  to  animals
and  inanimate  objects,  it  is  apt  to  be  inadequately  defined  in
the  case  of  idiots,  lunatics,  and  minors.2

The  principle  of  collective  responsibility  does  not  necessarily
disappear  with  the  rise  of  public  justice  under  central  authority.
It  lingers  on,  partly  through  sheer  conservatism,  but  also  in
many  cases  for  political  reasons,  to  a  late  date.  Thus  it  is  par
ticularly  common  to  find  that  in  political  offences  the  family  of
the  offender  suffers  with  him.  The  principle  of  collective
responsibility  has  always  been  maintained  in  the  Far  East,  in
China,3  in  the  Korea,  and,  under  the  influence  of  Chinese

1  For  other  instances,  see  Post,  ii.  231.

2  See  Post,  ii.  219,  and,  for  the  variation  of  custom  under  this  head,
Westermarck,  Moral  Ideas,  pp.  265-277.

3  Post,  ii.  p.  226. With  this  is  associated  punishment  for  unintentional
offences. (16.,  217.) In  Chinese  law,  accidental  parricide  is  still  capital,
though  the  older  law  appears  to  have  been  mitigated. A  man  who  acci
dentally  killed  his  mother  in  attempting  to  defend  her,  was  sentenced  to
the  lingering  death,  commuted  by  special  decree  to  decapitation,  subject
to  the  Empress's  pleasure. See,  for  various  instances,  Alabaster,  p.  159,  ff.
A  wife  killing  her  husband  unintentionally  is  sentenced  to  decapitation.
(It.,  192.) A  misdeed  which  however  indirectly  caused  the  death  of  a
senior  relation  is  also  punished,  if  the  relative  be  a  parent,  by  death. (J6.,


LAW AND JUSTICE  97

civilization,  in  Japan,  while  it  is  noteworthy  that  for  political
offences  the  parents  and  children  might  be  punished  under
French  law  right  down  to  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  Parallels
could  be  found  in  the  laws  of  the  ancient  East,  of  ancient
Persia,1  and  of  many  states  of  mediaeval  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,
only  the  decay  of  the  joint  family  system  and  the  rise  of  the
free  individual  as  the  basis  of  the  modern  State  which  definitely
does  away  with  this  principle,  so  fundamentally  irreconcilable
with  the  strictly  ethical  notion  of  justice.  An  interesting
transitional  phase  is  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  where
the  visiting  of  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  is  very
definitely  laid  down  as  a  piece  of  Divine  justice  in  the  earlier
legislation  (I  mean  in  the  second  Commandment),  whereas  in
the  time  of  Ezekiel  it  was  strongly  maintained  to  be  an  injustice
that  when  the  fathers  had  eaten  sour  grapes  the  children's
teeth  should  be  set  on  edge.  It  was,  in  fact,  part  of  the  ethical
revolution  introduced  by  the  later  prophets  to  establish  morally
for  the  Jewish  code  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility.2

7.  With  the  evolution  of  social  order,  and  in  particular  with
the  growth  of  central  authority,  the  redress  of  wrongs  begins  to
take  the  form  of  an  independent  and  impartial  administration  of
justice.  Let  us  trace  this  growth  in  outline  from  its  beginnings.

320,  seq.)  A  senior  relative  is  punishable  for  a  junior's  offence,  even  if  he
knows  nothing  of  it.  E.  g,  a  father  was  sentenced  to  one  hundred  blows
because  (unknoAvn  to  him)  his  son  had  abducted  a  girl.  (Alabaster,  p.  152.)
A  junior  relation  is  still  more  heavily  punishable  for  the  offence  of  a  senior.
If  a  man  murders  four  members  of  one  family  he  suffers  the  lingering
process,  and  his  male  children,  irrespective  of  age,  die  with  him  in  equal
number  to  those  murdered.  In  the  case  of  Wang  Chih-pin  a  child  of  ten
was  condemned  to  death  for  murders  by  his  father.  In  another  instance,
the  children  were  condemned  to  be  castrated,  the  father  having  killed  three
persons.  (Ib.,  164.)  The  motive  is  partly  to  punish  the  murderer's  spirit
by  cutting  off  his  male  descendants,  on  whose  offerings  he  depends  in  the
new  life.  (Ib.,  58.)

1  Post,  ii.  227.

2  Ezek.  xviii.  2  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  29. The  result  is  embodied  in  Deut.  xxiv.  1C.
"  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for  the  children,  neither  shall  the
children  be  put  to  death  for  the  fathers  :  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death
for  his  own  sin." The  same  transition  is  found  in  the  law  of  the  Visigoths.
"  Let  not  father  for  son,  nor  son  for  father,  nor  brother  for  brother  fear  any
accusation,  but  he  alone shall  be  indicted  as  culpable  who  shall  have
committed the  fault." (Sutherland, Origin  and Growth of  the Moral
Instinct,  ii.  168.) By  Salic  law  a  man  might  cut  himself  off  from  his  family,
but  then,  of  course,  he  also  lost  its  protection. ( Ib.,  167.)

VOL.  I.  H


98

The  blood  feud  proper  is  revenge  guided  and  limited  by
custom.  It  is  not  justice.  It  is  waged  by  two  conflicting
parties,  and  there  is  no  impartial  third  party  to  judge  between
them.  But  even  in  barbaric  society  the  blood  feud  does  not  rage
wholly  without  check.  The  public  opinion  of  the  group  is  always
a  force  to  be  reckoned  with.  Every  man's  rights  and  obligations
are  fixed  by  custom.  The  very  vengeance  taken  on  those  who
infringe  them  is  a  custom,  and  directed  in  all  its  details  by
tradition.  The  headman  or  the  elders  of  the  clan  or  village  are
prepared  to  listen  to  complaints,  to  decide  whether  a  wrong  has
been  done,  and,  if  so,  what  the  reparation  ought  to  be.  The
injured  party  may  appeal  to  them  if  he  pleases,  and  it  may  be
that  the  aggressor  will  abide  by  their  decision.  If  so,  the  affair
is  arranged  perhaps  by  composition,  perhaps  by  a  stated  penalty.
Otherwise  the  parties  will  fight  it  out  or  it  will  come  to  a  feud.1
In  short,  there  is  an  effort  on  the  part  of  the  leading  men  to
keep  the  peace  and  adjust  the  quarrel.  Sometimes  they  will
intervene  of  themselves  if  a  feud  becomes  serious  and  threatens
the  general  peace.2

The  "  court,"  if  so  it  may  be  called,  appears  at  this  stage
rather  as  peacemaker  than  judge.3  The  disputants  may  ignore  it,
preferring  to  trust  to  their  own  strength  and  that  of  their  friends.
Yet  it  is  from  the  first  the  avenger's  interest  to  have  public
opinion  with  him.  He  relies  on  the  countenance  and  practical
help  of  his  kindred  and  fellow-tribesmen.  At  least  he  must
avert  their  opposition.  If  the  facts  are  peculiarly  flagrant  the
neighbours  will  be  with  him  and  he  will  have  the  less  difficulty
in  executing  vengeance.4  Perhaps  even  the  kindred  of  the

1  For  illustrations,  see  Appendix  to  this  chapter,  p.  125,  etc.

2  Thus  among  the  Esquimaux,  according  to  Reclus,  murder  was  avenged
by  the  nearest  relative,  but if  fresh  retaliation  ensued,  several  villages
intervened  and  the  chief  men  pronounced  sentence,  otherwise  public  inter
vention  was  very  rare. (Primitive  Folk,  p.  85.)

3  Thus  among  the  Kondhs  we  read  that  society  intervenes  to  prevent
revenge  by  composition,  "  which  has  in  view  exclusively  the  private  satis
faction  of  individuals,  not  the  vindication  of  any  civil  or  moral  rules  of
right." Hence,  notwithstanding  this  intervention,  retaliation  is  generally
the  sole  remedy  for  wrongs  of  whatever  order. (Macpherson,  Memorials  of
Service  in  India,  p.  81.) Cf.  Appendix  to  this  chapter,  p.  127.

4  There  may  be  no  trial  and  no  set  form  of  justice,  but  merely,  as  among
the  Central  Australians,  a  meeting  convened  by  the  elder  men  to  carry  out
the  act  of  vengeance. (See  Spencer  and  Gillen,  ii.  556-568.)


LAW AND JUSTICE  99

wrong-doer  will  refuse  to  stand  by  him.  Thus  it  becomes  the
interest  of  the  avenger  to  make  his  case  plain  to  the  neighbours,
and  they  in  turn  wish  to  hear  what  the  accused  party  has  to
say.  A  palaver  is  held.  The  avenger  comes  with  his  kinsmen
and  friends.  They  state  their  case  and  announce  their  in
tention  of  seeking  revenge.  The  accused  is  also  present,  backed
by  his  kin,  and  repels  the  demands  made  on  him.  It  may  be
that  the  matter  is  settled  between  the  groups  concerned.  It
may  be  that  the  neighbours  or  the  chief  give  sentence,  but
even  so  it  does  not  follow  that  they  enforce  it.  They  may  give
the  appellant  their  moral  support,1  and  leave  it  to  him  to  obtain
satisfaction  as  best  he  can.  But  of  course  their  decision  helps
him  to  get  the  opinion  of  the  tribe  on  his  side,  and  their  moral
force  will  be  translatable  into  physical  force.  It  will  mean  so
many  more  backers  for  him,  and  so  many  less  for  his  opponents.
This  support  may  be  disdained  by  the  strong,  but  it  will  be
valued  by  the  weak,  and  will  be  upheld  by  those  who  desire
internal  peace.  Thus  even  under  the  clan  and  tribal  organiza
tion  of  society  some  form  of  public  intervention  may  arise
alongside  of  private  redress.  Feuds  are  averted  by  the  adjust
ment  of  disputes,  or,  if  a  wrong  has  been  done,  by  getting  the
complainant  to  accept  composition,  and  the  aggressor  to  undergo
some  penalty  which  will  be  a  mitigated  form  of  revenge,  or  by
bringing  the  two  parties  to  fight  it  out  under  the  regular  forms
of  a  duel.

Such  methods  of  mitigating  the  blood  feud  are  stimulated  by
the  growth  of  the  kingly  power — that  is  to  say,  of  an  organized
force  outside  the  contending  families  or  clans,  which  can
summon  them  before  its  bar,  decide  their  cause,  and  require  them
to  keep  the  peace.  The  king,  whose  duty  and  interest  it  is  to
maintain  public  order,  treats  crime — or  certain  kinds  of  crime —
no  longer  as  an  offence  against  the  individual  whom  it  primarily
affects,  but  as  a  menace  to  public  tranquillity,  a  breach  of  his

1  Thus  among  the  North  American  Indiana,  the  Ojibways  and  the
Wyandots  and  other  tribes  have  a  council  before  which  the  avenger  gets  a
judgment  in  his  favour.  He  then  demands  compensation,  and  that  failing
takes  revenge.  (Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  K,  1897,  p.  407.)  So  again  in  the  Malay
region_  cases  come  before  the  chief  of  the  sukn,  or,  if  grave,  before  a
gathering  of  chiefs,  but  the  execution  of  the  murderer  falls  to  the  nephew  of
the  deceased.  (Waitz,  v.  i.  143.)  See  further,  Appendix,  pp.  124-7.


100  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

"  peace."  l  This,  if  he  is  strong  enough,  he  will  punish  directly ;
if  not  sufficiently  strong,  he  will  deprive  the  offender  of  his
protection,  put  him  outside  the  king's  peace,  and  compel  him  by
fine  to  buy  back  what  he  has  lost.  Thus  we  find  crime  punish
able  by  wite  as  well  as  by  bot — a  fine  to  the  king  side  by  side
:  with  compensation  to  the  kinsfolk.

But  from  moral  assistance  the  transition  to  physical  assist
ance  is  not  very  difficult  in  idea,  however  slow  and  cumbrous  it
may  have  been  in  practice.  There  is  more  than  one  method  of
transition.  Sometimes  we  find  the  public  authority,  the  elders
or  the  whole  body  of  the  neighbours,  or  later  the  regular
magistrate,  exerting  themselves  to  arrest  the  offender  and  hand
ing  him  over  to  the  avenger  of  blood  for  execution,  or  judging
between  the  avenger  of  blood  and  the  man-slayer,  whose  act  was
"  unwitting."  Thus  in  Deuteronomy,  if  the  deliberate  murderer
flies  to  a  city  of  refuge,  "  then  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  send
and  fetch  him  thence,  and  deliver  him  into  the  hand  of  the
avenger  of  blood  that  he  may  die." 2  But  without  taking  an
active  part  in  the  pursuit  and  capture  of  the  offender  the
it  court  had  an  effective  weapon  in  the  power  of  outlawry.  Since
in  accordance  with  early  ideas  all  personal  rights  depend  upon
membership  of  a  society  united  for  mutual  protection,  it  follows
that  the  man  excluded  from  the  group  is  in  the  position  of  a
stranger  and  an  enemy ;  he  is  a  wolf's  head,  a  wild  animal  whom
the  firstcomer  may  put  to  death  at  sight,  with  whom  nobody

1  Common  in  Germanic  law. See,  for  England,  Pollock  and  Maitland,
ii.  451. The  Kaffirs  distinguish  (1)  offences  against  the  king,  which  consist
in  infringements  upon  his  property  or  the  number  of  his  subjects. In
these  they  include  treason,  sorcery,  murder,  cruelty,  rape,  and  abortion.
(2)  Offences  against  private  people,  which  include  adultery,  immorality,
theft,  injury  to  a  garden,  etc. A  similar  distinction  is  found  among  the
Kimbunda. (Post,  A.  J".,  ii.  54. ) This  is  in  effect  a  rudimentary  distinction
between  civil  and  criminal  justice,  and  shows  at  least  one  avenue  of  transition
to  the  conception  of  public  crime. The  notion  of  injury  to  an  individual
is  applied  to  the  king,  but  owing  to  the  king's  special  relation  to  the  com
munity,  the  notion  in  being  applied  to  him  is  unavoidably  extended  and
modified. In  fact,  potentially  it  covers  all  anti-social  action.

2  Deut.  xix.  12. So  still  in  the  priestly  code,  Numbers  xxxv.  12-25.
The  law  of  the  Germanic  peoples  in  the  Frankish  period,  appears  in  a
transitional stage. The Eastern Goths, Burgundians, Bavarians,  and
Anglo-Saxons  left  execution  to  the  complainant. The  law  of  the  Western
Goths  excluded  private  execution  ;  the  Salic  law  gave  the  complainant  the
choice. (Schroder,  p.  371.)


LAW  AND  JUSTICE  101

may  associate,  to  whom  nobody  may  give  food  or  lodging.
Outlawry  can  therefore  be  applied  either  as  a  punishment  or  as
a  process — as  a  method  of  bringing  the  accused  into  court.
What  more  reasonable  than  that  if  he  will  not  submit  to  law  he
shall  lose  the  protection  of  the  law  ?  With  this  weapon,  potent
in  proportion  as  the  social  order  is  developed,  the  court  of  early
law  consolidates  its  authority,  and  from  being  a  casual  institu
tion  of  voluntary  resort  for  those  who  wish  the  sympathy  of
their  neighbours  in  avenging  their  wrongs,  becomes  an  estab
lished  authority  with  compulsory  powers  before  which  either
party  can  be  summoned  to  appear  at  the  instance  of  his
opponent.

8.  But  we  are  still  a  long  way  from  a  modern  Court  of  Justice.
The  primary  function  of  a  court  thus  established  is  not  so  much
to  discover  the  merits  of  the  case  and  make  an  equitable  award,
as  to  keep  the  peace  and  prevent  the  extension  of  wild  and
irregular  blood  feuds.  What  the  court  has  to  deal  with  is  the
fact  that  a  feud  exists.  A  comes  before  it  with  a  complaint
against  B  of  having  killed  his  kinsman,  or  stolen  his  cattle,  or
carried  off  his  daughter.  Here  is  a  feud  which,  in  the  absence
of  a  court,  A  will  prosecute  with  his  own  right-arm  and  that  of
his  kinsmen  if  he  can  get  them  to  help  him.  B,  again,  will
resist  with  the  help  of  his  kinsmen,  and  so  there  will  be  a
vendetta.  The  court,  whose  primary  object  is  to  secure  a
settlement,  does  not  go  into  nice  questions  as  to  the  precise
merits  and  demerits  of  A  and  B,  but  it  can  prescribe  certain
tests  whereby  the  appellant  or  the  defendant  may  establish
his  case.  It  sets  the  litigant  "a  task  that  he  must  attempt.
If  he  performs  it,  he  has  won  his  cause." 1  The  performance  of
this  task  is  not,  to  our  minds,  proof  of  the  justice  of  his  cause.
It  is  rather  the  compliance  with  a  legal  and  orderly  method  of
establishing  a  case,  but  at  the  stage  we  are  considering  it  was
probably  regarded  as  satisfying  justice,  at  least,  as  far  as  justice
claimed  to  be  satisfied.

What  task,  then,  would  the  court  award  ? It  might  be  that
the litigant  should maintain  his  cause  with his  body. The
parties  would  then  have  to  fight  it  out  in  person or  by  their
1  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  602.


102  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

champions.  Here  we  have  the  method  of  the  blood  feud,  but
regularized,  limited,  and  transformed  into  the  judicial  duel.
Again,  the  court  might  put  one  or  both  parties  to  the  oath.
But  this  is  not  the  oath  of  the  modern  Law  Court — that
is  to  say,  it  is  not  a  solemn  asseveration  of  the  truth  of  certain
evidence  of  fact,  but  an  assertion  of  the  general  justice  of  the
claim  alleged,  or  of  its  injustice,  as  the  case  may  be.  And  as
the  feud  will  not  be  waged  by  the  individual  claimant  alone,
but  with  the  aid  of  all  his  kindred,  so  the  court  will  expect  the
kindred  to  come  and  take  the  oath  along  with  him.  Hence  the
institution  of  oath-helpers,  the  compurgators,  who  are  in  point
of  fact  the  fellow-clansmen,  all  bound  to  the  duty  at  this
stage  of  swearing  their  friend  out  of  the  difficulty,  just  as  before
they  were  bound  to  help  him  out  of  it  by  arms.  The
compurgators  are  simply  the  clansmen  fighting  with  spiritual
weapons  instead  of  carnal  ones.  Success  in  the  cause  will
depend  not  on  the  opinion  formed  by  the  court  as  to  the  veracity
•  of  one  side  or  the  perjury  of  the  other,  but  on  the  ability  of
the  parties  to  get  the  full  number  of  compurgators  required,
on  formal  correctness  in  taking  the  oath,  and  if  both  parties
fulfil  all  conditions  and  no  further  means  are  available  for
deciding  between  them,  on  certain  rules  as  to  the  burden  of
proof.1

The  provision  of  such  further  means  of  deciding  between  the
parties  is  logically  the  next  step.  So  far,  the  judicial  process
has  appeared  merely  as  a  regularization  of  the  blood  feud,  but
both  the  oath  and  the  judicial  combat  point  the  way  to  a  higher
ideal.  The  court  itself  is  not  in  a  position  to  try  the  merits  of  the
case  unless  it  be  some  very  simple  matter  of  the  criminal  caught
red-handed,  but  it  may  refer  the  decision  to  the  Unseen  Powers,
to  the  Gods,  or  to  the  magical  qualities  inherent  in  certain  things.

1  Which  oath  prevailed  in  case  of  a  conflict,  would  be  decided  according
to  the  custom  ruling  the  case.  One  party  would  be  "  nearer  to  the  oath  "
than  the  other.  For  instance,  where  the  criminal  is  caught  in  the  act,  the
oath  of  the  prosecutor  with  his  oath-helpers  is  conclusive  proof  and  the
offender  has  no  opportunity  of  self-defence.  (Schroder,  p.  363  ;  cf.  Pollock
and  Maitland,  ii.  579.)  Iiithe  Frankish  period  the  complainant  might  also,
if  the  circumstances  allowed,  demand  the  ordeal ;  in  other  cases,  with  a
few  exceptions,  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the  opposite  side.  (Schroder,
op.  cit.,  pp.  363-3(36.)  Where  the  oath  is  not  decisive,  the  parties  go  to  the
duel  or  to  the  ordeal.


LAW AND JUSTICE  103

Thus  the  judicial  duel,  instead  of  being  a  mere  carnal  fight
regularized  and  limited  by  certain  rules,  may  be  conceived  rather
as  an  appeal  to  the  judgment  of  God,  and  the  victory  as  His
sentence  which  the  court"  hesitates  to  pronounce  on  the  basis  of
its  merely  human  wisdom.  Similarly  the  oath— though^  less
than  evidence  as  we  conceive  evidence— is  also  more,  for  it  is  an
appeal  to  powers  in  which  primitive  man  implicitly  believes,  to
take  vengeance  on  him  who  swears,  if  his  cause  be  not
just.  Hence  the  form  of  the  oath  is  everything,  for  the
Unknown  Powers  are  great  sticklers  for  form.  The  oath-
taker  calls  down  their  punishment  on  himself  and  his  family
by  a  set  formula  which  they  will  rigidly  obey.  If  in  the
formula  he  can  leave  himself  any  loophole  of  escape  the  oath  is
void  :  it  is'no  true  summoning  of  the  vengeful  powers,  ^and  the
court  will  disregard  it,  but  if  it  is  complete  and  sound  in  point
of  form,  then  there  is  no  escape.  One  of  two  things  must
happen :  either  the  oath  was  true  or  the  curse  will  fall,  and  thus
perjury  brings  its  own  punishment.1

Hence  it  is  that  for  any  given  charge  the  law  may  call  upon
a  man  to  purge  himself  by  oath,  or  perhaps  to  purge  himself
along  with  a  specified  number  of  oath-helpers  who  will  suffer
with  him  if  the  oath  is  false,  and  the  oath-helpers  required  may
be  increased  according  to  the  seriousness  of  the  crime.  If  the
oath  fails  the  prescribed  punishment  follows.  If  it  ^is  duly
taken,  then  either  the  accused  was  innocent,  or  he  has  inflicted
the  punishment  entailed  by  the  broken  oath  on  himself  and  his
oath-helpers.

But  the  consequences  of  a  false  oath  were  not  immediately
apparent,  If  the  court  wished  to  have  the  judgment  of  the
Unseen  Powers  before  it  some  more  summary  process  was  neces
sary.  This  was  found  in  the  Ordeal,  a  test  to  which  both  parties
could  be  submitted  if  necessary,  and  of  which  the  results  were
immediate  and  manifest.  Probably  no  institution  is  more
universal  at  a  certain  stage  of  civilization  than  that  of  testing
the  truth  or  falsity  of  a  case  by  a  certain  magico-religious

1  Thus  the  subsequent  misfortune  is  taken  as  proof  of  perjury,  and
sometimes  with  a  certain  inconsistency  the  secular  arm  is  then  called  in  tc
increase  the  penalty.  Thus  among  the  Kondhs  of  Orissa,  and  also  among
the  Conjro  people,  if  the  curse  falls,  the  oath-taker  is  banished  along  with
his  family.  (Post,  ii.  493.)


104  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

process — the  eating  of  a  piece  of  bread,  the  handling  of  burning
iron  or  boiling  oil,  jumping  into  water,  walking  through  fire,
exposure  to  wild  beasts,  and  so  forth.  The  details  vary,  though
even  in  detail  resemblances  crop  up  at  the  most  remote  periods
and  in  the  most  remote  places,  but  the  general  principle  is  still
more  clearly  constant  through  the  ages  and  the  climes.  Truth
cannot  at  this  stage  be  tested  by  human  evidence.  At  most  the
criminal  caught  red-handed  may  be  summarily  dispatched  upon
the  evidence  of  eye-witnesses  given  there  and  then,  but  the
complicated  civil  or  criminal  processes  of  the  civilized  world
imply  an  intellectual  as  well  as  a  moral  development  which
makes  them  impossible  at  an  early  stage.  It  is  the  gods  who
judge ;  the  man  who  can  handle  hot  iron  is  proved  by  heaven  to
be  innocent ;  the  woman  whom  the  holy  river  rejects  is  a  witch  ;
he  whom  the  bread  chokes  is  a  perjurer.  Nor  are  these  tests
wholly  devoid  of  rational  basis ;  it  is  not  so  difficult  to  under
stand  that  the  guilty  man  would  be  more  liable  to  choke  than
the  innocent,  not  because  bread  is  holy,  but  because  his  nerves
are  shaken.  It  is  quite  intelligible  that  in  a  credulous  age  the
false  oath  would  bring  its  curse  in  the  form  of  a  will  paralyzed
by  terror,  just  as  we  know  that  amongst  many  savages  witch
craft  really  kills  through  the  sufferer's  intense  fear  of  it.  Lastly,
if  the  criminal  may  be  ready  to  take  his  chances  of  the  curse  in
preference  to  the  certainties  of  the  scaffold,  he  may  find  it
difficult  to  get  compurgators  to  stand  by  him,  and  in  the  face  of
their  plain  knowledge  involve  themselves  in  the  same  risk.

9.  Thus  particularly  in  the  institution  of  compurgation  we  find
the  beginnings  of  a  new  conception,  the  conception  that  it  is  the
duty  of  the  court  to  try  the  case,  to  obtain  proof  of  facts,  to  give
its  own  verdict  based  on  its  own  judgment,  and  execute  its  own
sentence  by  its  own  officers.  The  steps  by  which  this  change  is
achieved  belong  rather  to  the  history  of  jurisprudence  than  to
that  of  Comparative  Ethics.  Only  certain  broad  features  of  the
new  phase  concern  us.  Its  primary  condition  is  perhaps  not  so
much  a  new  growth  of  moral  ideas  as  the  formation  of  an
effective  organ  of  government.  The  elders  or  the  petty  chief  of
the  village  community  hesitate  to  carry  out  a  death  sentence  or
inflict  corporal  punishment  for  fear  of  involving  themselves  in


LAW AND  JUSTICE  105

the  blood  feud.1  There  must  be  an  executive  power  with
sufficient  force  behind  it  to  raise  its  officers  above  the  fear  of
revenge  before  a  public  system  of  justice,  in  the  full  sense,  can
arise.  Hence  the  decay  of  blood  revenge  and  the  rise  of  public
justice  are  frequently  associated  with  the  growth  of  kingly
power.  For  example,  in  Europe  in  the  early  MidtTfiTAges  we
have  seen  that  certain  offences  were  treated  as  breaches  of  the
king's  peace.  This  peace  was  a  protection  afforded  in  the  first
instance  to  certain  places  and  times,  but  it  was  gradually
extended,  largely  it  would  seem  through  the  king's  protection  of
the  roads — "  the  king's  highway  " — to  all  places  and  all  times.
Thus  the  act  which  had  been  a  breach  of  the  king's  peace,
punished  by  the  withdrawal  of  his  protection  only  when  com
mitted  at  certain  times  and  places,  now  became  an  offence
against  him  at  all  times  and  places.  Its  punishment  was  still
outlawry.  But  as  outlawry  deprived  a  man  of  all  rights,  it
enabled  the  king  to  inflict  what  penalty  he  chose.  The  criminal,
in  fact,  was  at  his  mercy :  any  penalty  short  of  death  with  for
feiture  of  all  goods  would  be  an  indulgence,  and  hence  the  Royal
Courts  could  fix  a  scale  of  punishments  at  their  pleasure.2

With  the  growth  of  public  justice  the  function  of  the  courts  is
changed  :  they  have  no  longer  to  supervise  the  feuds  of  hostile  It
families,  but  to  maintain  public  order,  to  detect  and  punish  crime,
and  to  uphold  innocent  people  in  their  rights.  This  involves
numerous  changes.  In  the  first  place,  self-help,  the  obtaining
of  satisfaction  by  the  strong  hand,  is  no  longer  necessary.  The
injured  man  can  get  a  remedy  from  the  court,  and  vengeance  is
forbidden.  The  victory  is  not  immediate,  and  often  the  State
has  to  come  to  some  compromise  with  the  old  system.  _  For
example,  vengeance  may  be  allowed  in  flayrante  delicto,  or  within
a  certain  period  after  the  offence.  Where  state  justice  is  very
weak,  an  asylum  may  be  granted  within  which  revenge  must
not  be  executed;  in  other  cases  where  the  process  is  further

1  So Prof. Kobertson Smith remarks  on  the  appearance  of  corporal
punishment  in Deuteronomy,  that  it  is  evidence of  the  comparatively
settled  state  of  the  country  and  the  growth  of  the  social  order  since  the
time  of  the  Book  of  the  Covenant. No  Arab  Sheik  would  inflict  corporal
punishment  on  a  tribesman  for  fear  of  revenge. (Deut.  xxv.  3. Robertson
Smith,  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church,  p.  3G8.)

2  Jenks,  LOAD  and  Politics,  pp.  109-117  ;  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.,  pp.
453,  463,  etc.


106  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

advanced  and  justice  is  getting  the  upper  hand,  revenge  is
allowed  only  with  the  consent  of  a  court.1  Or  lastly,  excluded
from  all  ordinary  cases,  revenge  is  tolerated  as  a  concession  to
human  weakness  in  cases  where  strong  passions  are  excited — for
example,  in  breaches  of  the  marriage  law  to  this  day  in  many
civilized  countries.2  The  transition  was  the  harder  because  it
involved  a  fundamental  ethical  change.  From  its  beginning,  as
we  have  seen,  social  order  rested  on  the  readiness  of  every  man
to  stand  by  his  kinsmen  in  their  quarrels.  Hence  the  duty  of
avenging  the  injured  kinsman,  and  therefore  of  loving  one's
neighbour  in  this  sense  and  hating  one's  enemy,  was  the  most
sacred  of  primitive  principles,  bound  up  with  everything  that
made  a  common  life  possible.  Public  justice  bade  men  lay  aside
this  principle,  and  its  triumph  constitutes  one  of  the  greatest  of
social  revolutions.3

1  This, in  strictness,  is  Mahometan  law.  (Kohler,  quoted  in  Post,i.  p.  260.)

2  For  instances  see  Post,  i.  pp.  260,  261. Post  quotes  the  Japanese  Law
Book of  1873, which  treats  premeditated blood  revenue  as  murder,  but
excuses  the  son  who  strikes  down  the  murderer  of  his  father  on  the  spot.

3  The  existence  of  authoritative  public  courts  with  executive  powers,
dealing  with  the  bulk  of  disputes,  may  be  taken  as  a  general  feature  of
civilized  society,  but  in  the  lower  stages  of  civilization  we  find  more  or  less
of  compromise  with  the  principles  of  private  vengeance. In  the  code  of
Hammurabi,  courts  exist  and  witnesses  are  mentioned,  but  that  punish
ments  were  always  public,  except in  the case of  the  erring wife,  does
not  seem so clear as  Kohler  and Peiser  think. ( Hammurabfs Gesetz,
§  126.) Certainly  the  provisions  for  punishment  are  saturated  with  the
ideas  of  the  blood  feud  (cf.  above,  -pp.  85-88). In  Manu  a  list  is  given
of  eighteen  cases  with  which  the  courts  deal  (viii. 4-7),  but  self-help  is
countenanced,  and  homicide  is  justifiable, "  in  a  strife  for  the fees  of
officiating  priests,  and  in  order to  protect  women  and  Brahmanas." "  By
killing  an  assassin  the  slayer  incurs  no  guilt,  whether  he  does  it  publicly  or
secretly." (Manu,  viii.  348-51  ;  cf.  Vasishtha,  iii.  15-18,  24,  who  among
six  kinds  of  assassins  reckons  an  incendiary  and  the  abductor  of  another's
wife.) Chinese  tradition  places  the  first  public  execution  in  the  reign  of
Huang- ti,  B.C.  2601,  before  which  time  chiefs  had  fought  with  one  another
and  taken  no  prisoners. (Alabaster,  52.) In  the  present  law  vengeance
and  composition  are  in  general  forbidden  (ib.,pp.  5,  6),  but  a  son  is  justified
in  killing  his  father's  murderer  on  the  spot  (ib.,  165),  and  if  he  kills  him
afterwards  will  only  be  bambooed. Similarly  the  husband  may  kill  his
wife's  lover  on  the  spot,  and  the  wife  herself  with  a  relatively  light  penalty.
(Ib.,  251.) In  Mahometan  law  retaliation  still  plays  a  considerable  part. In
Mahomet's  time  the  blood  feud  was  in  full  vigour. Mahomet  imposed  the
death  penalty  by  law  for  wilful  murder  and enforced composition  for
involuntary  homicide,  the  wer  being  ^  for  a  woman  and  T\  for  a  pagan,  all
the  kin  bein^  responsible  for  it. (Dareste,  p.  64.) Wounds  are  also  punish
able  by  retaliation  or  composition. (Ib.,  and  Hughes,  Dictionary  of  Islam,
p.  481.) The  retaliation  is  executed  by  the  next  of  kin  (Hughes,  481),  but,


LAW AND  JUSTICE  107

But  if  the  kindred  be  no  longer  allowed  to  avenge  themselves,
the  corresponding  right  of  the  offender  to  make  peace  with  the
kin  is  also  withdrawn.1  A  crime  is  now  a  public  affair,  and  in
varying  degrees  according  to  time  and  country  the  public
authority  takes  upon  itself  the  function  of  maintaining  order
and  of  discovering  as  well  as  punishing  offenders.2  The  trial

if  legitimate,  only,  it  would  seem,  with  the  judgment  of  a  court,  Private
revenge  without  sanction  is,  however,  not  entirely  excluded.  (Post,  i.  260.)
In  Rome,  while  the  earlier  system  of  retaliation  was  already  undergoing
disintegration  at  the  period  of  the  Twelve  Tables  (Girard,  381),  in  the  form
of  private  execution  self-help  lasted  long,  and  was  not  made  criminal  in
principle  till  the  close  of  the  Republic,  by  the  Letjes  Juliae  de  ViPrivata  et
PuUlca.  (Ihering,  Geint  ties  Bomischen  Rechts,  p.  166.)  The  full  substitution
of  public  punishments  for  private  vengeance  was  completed  in  Attica
between  the  Homeric  period  and  that  of  Draco.  Sparta  and  the  other  Greek
States  went  through  a  similar  transition.  (Leist,  381.)  Nothing  marks  the
re-barbarization  of  Europe  in  the  Early  Middle  Ages  so  strongly  as  the  fact
that  the  system  of  public  justice  built  up  in  the  Grteco-Roman  civiliza
tion  gave  way  to  the  barbaric  system.  On  the  other  hand,  the  services  of
the  Mediaeval  Church  in  deprecating  vengeance  and  upholding  social  peace
ought  not  to  be  forgotten.  So  great  a  change  as  the  suppression  of
vengeance  by  justice  is  not  accomplished  but  by  slow  degrees,  and  in
Europe  the  old  system  left  its  legacy  to  the  modern  world  in  the  form
of  the  duel.  The  peculiar  notions  of  honour  engendered  by  militarism
maintained  in  the  classes  wlio.se  trade  was  fighting  the  belief  _that  the
stain  of  a  disgraceful  deed  could  be  wiped  out  by  superior  skill  in  sword-
play,  while  it  was  the  bounden  duty  of  a  man  who  had  suffered  a  mortal
injury  to  give  his  traducer  or  assailant  the  opportunity  of  also  killing  him.
Such  beliefs,  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  habits  of  a  military  caste,  long  survived
the  prohibitions  of  the  Church  and  the  edicts  of  kings.  (See  Decret.  Grat.
G.  J.,  464,  referring  to  the  judicial  duel.)  In  the  Decret.  Grey.,  805,  a
clerk  is  to  be  deposed  for  duelling,  and  tournaments  are  forbidden
(p.  804).  The  latter,  however,  were  legalized  by  John  XXII.  (p.  1215).  The
Council  of  Trent  threatened  not  only  duellists,  but  kings  or  feudal  lords
who  allowed  duelling  in  their  territories  with  excommunication.  (C.J.,  pp.
98.  99.)  In  England  the  duel  succumbed  to  the  cool  common  sense  of
middle  class  juries.  On.  the  Continent,  though  undergoing  a  continual
process  of  attrition,  it  is  maintained  in  a  dishonoured  old  age  among
such  other  perquisites  of  the  military  class  as  the  right  to  run  unarmed
citizens  through  the  body  for  an  alleged  insulting  word.

We  cannot'  say  that  public  justice  with  individual  responsibility  and
rational  procedure  is  confined  to  civilized,  or  the  blood  feud  to  barbaric
society.  For  traces  more  or  less  important  of  the  blood  feud  remain  in
civilized  justice,  and  in  barbaric  societies  in  which  a  strong  military  ruler
has  arisen  the  king  acquires  judicial  powers.  But  we  can  say  that  public
justice  is  predominant  in  the  one  case  and  private  vengeance  in  the  other,
and  on  the  whole  the  transition  from  barbarism  to  civilization  appears  to
be  more  closely  connected  with  the  rise  of  authoritative  tribunals  for  the
redress  of  wrongs  than  with  any  other  single  change  of  institutions.

1  See  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  485.

2  The  rise  of  impartial public  justice  in  Europe  connects  itself  with
"  Trial  by  Inquest." Early  in  tho  Middle  Ages  the  Bishops  made  dioce,-an


108  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

ceases  to  be  a  milder  form  of  the  blood  feud.  The  complainant
no  longer  exposes  himself  to  equal  punishment  by  way  of  retali
ation  in  case  he  loses  his  suit.  What  was  previously  accusation
now  becomes  denunciation.1  Again,  though  the  injured  party
may  set  the  whole  process  in  motion,  the  result  will  differ  vitally
according  to  the  nature  of  the  act  of  which  he  complains.
.j  1  'Justice,  having  public  interests  in  view,  will  count  not  only  the
1  magnitude  of  the  injury  suffered,  but  the  degree  of  culpability
in  the  man  who  inflicted  it.  Vengeance,  the  object  of  the  older
process,  breaks  up  into  the  two  distinct  ideas  of  punishment
inflicted  by  the  judge,  and  restitution  assigned  to  the  com
plainant.  Civil  and  criminal  justice  are  distinct.2

10.  Once  become  serious  in  its  determination  to  investigate

||  the  case  before  giving  sentence,  public  justice  could  not  long  be

',  satisfied  with  the  older  supernatural  machinery. In  mediceval

Europe  it  was  early  a  matter  of  remark  that  the  battle  was  not

always  to  the  just. "  We  are,"  says  the  Lombard  King,  Luit-

prand,  "uncertain  about  the  judgment  of  God,  and  have  heard

that  many  through  the  battle  lose  their  cause  without  justice ;

tours  and  held  inquests  into  public  morals,  and  in  the  ninth  century  they
employed  a  "  jurie  d'accusation,"  who  indicated  delinquents.  These  were
at  first  allowed  to  purge  themselves  by  oath,  but  this  right  was  withdrawn
under  Innocent  III.,  and  the  court  was  allowed  to  proceed  per  inquisitionem,
holding  an  inquiry,  and  requiring  not  purgation  but  defence.  The  accuser
at  this  stage  is  a  public  authority,  not  merely  a  private  enemy  prosecuting
a  feud.  A  corresponding  development  occurs  in  England  when  the  Grand
Jury,  as  representing  the  common  knowledge  of  a  neighbourhood,  present  a
list  of  criminals  for  trial.  The  accusation  could  not  any  longer  be  submitted
to  trial  by  battle,  as  the  accused  could  not  fight  the  whole  Grand  Jury
(Stephen,  i.  254),  and  as  ordeals  were  falling  into  discredit  the  only  resource
was  the  Inquest.  This  was  a  method,  already  in  use  in  Norman  law,  of
establishing  facts  by  the  sworn  judgment  of  a  number  of  men  (petty  jury)
representing  "  the  verdict  of  the  country."  Thus  our  system,  though  'it
has  retained  much  of  the  accusatory  character,  has  been  deeply  influenced
by  the  Inquisition,  or,  as  we  call  it,  "  Inquest."

1  Esmein,  p.  84. The  "  accusatory  "  method  fell  into  disuse  in  France  in
the  fourteenth  century. But  the  penalty  of  retaliation  was  retained,  though
softened  in  application. (Ib.,  108.) Denunciation  was  readily  concededm
the  case  of  commoners,  while  nobles  still  retained  the  right  of  combat.
(Ib.,  85.)

2  The  distinction  is  not  affected  by  the  fact  that  both  results  may  be
sought  by  a  single  process. E.  g.  in  French  law  a  criminal  may  be  con
demned  to  pay  damages  to  the  injured  party  by  the  same  sentence  which
consigns  him  to  prison.


LAW AND JUSTICE  //

but  the  Law  itself,  on  account  of  the  custom  of  our  race  of
Lombards,  we  cannot  forbid."1

It  was  therefore  a  great  step  in  advance  when  ordeals,  which
had  been  adopted  by  the  Church  after  the  barbarian  invasions,
were  condemned  by  the  Lateran  Council  of  1215.  As  a  conse
quence  they  disappear  in  England  after  the  reign  of  John,2  while
the  oath  of  compurgators  is  gradually  converted  into  evidence  to
character.  The  ordeal  by  battle  3  remained,  but  an  alternative
was  offered  in  the  form  of  a  judicial  inquiry  with  witnesses  and
evidence.  The  accused  might,  in  English  phrase,  "  put  himself
upon  his  country,"  i.  e.  let  his  case  go  before  a  jury,  men  of  his
neighbourhood  knowing  the  facts  and  prepared  to  testify  to
them,  or  in  French  phrase  the  accused  could  be  offered  the
"  eriqueste  du  pais."  And  this  alternative,  if  at  first  optional,
soon  manifested  its  vast  superiority,  and  the  settlement  of  all
disputes  and  all  accusations  by  an  impartial  tribunal,  which  has
heard  what  both  sides  have  to  say,  becomes  an  integral  part  of
the  civilized  order.4  But  even-handed  justice  is  not  reached  at
one  stride.  The  public  authority  having  once  taken  up  the
function  of  repressing  crime  are  more  bent  on  efficiency  in  the
maintenance  of  order  than  on  nice  considerations  of  justice  to

1  Charlemagne,  011  the other  hand, ordered  all men  to believe  the
judgment  of  God  without  any  doubt. (Schroder,  367.)

2  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  599. In  France,  computation  and  unilateral
ordeals  almost  completely  disappeared in  the  thirteenth  century. The
oath  with  oath -helpers  was  still  not  uncommon  in  England,  but  the  view
"  that  you  cannot  wage  your law about  facts that are manifest " was
beginning  to  prevail. (Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  634.)

3  It  was  forbidden  in  France  by  St.  Louis  in  1260. "  Nous  defendons  a
tons  batailles  par  nostre  domengne  et  au  lieu  de  batailles,  nous  mettons
preuves  de  tesmoins,"  but  this  ordinance  could  not  be  imposed  in  a  day  upon
the  Signorial  courts. Before  the  accession  of  Edward  I.  judicial  combats
were limited to felony,  but one of  the parties might  prefer a  jury.
Champions  for  hire  still  existed. (Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii. 632,  633.)

4  For  a  long  while  the  alternative  was  treated  as  optional  in  English
law. The  oath  and  the  ordeal  had  been  the  old  legal  methods  of  proof,  and
"  no  one,"  say  the  Leges  Ilenrici,  with  the  air  of  resisting  a  monstrous  and
novel  injustice,  "is to be  convicted of  a  capital  crime  by  testimony."
(Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  650.) But urged  by  manifest  necessity  the
lawyers  found  indirect  methods  of  compulsion  ;  a  man  cannot  be  hanged
for  murder  merely  because  he  is  proved  by  witnesses  to  have  committed
it,  unless  he  first  agrees  to  stand  or  fall  by  what  they  say,  and  forego  his
right  to  the  ordeal. But  though  he'  cannot  be  compelled,  he  can  be  rigidly
imprisoned  until  he  gives  his  consent,  and,  finally,  he  can  be  pressed  to
death  by  the  "  peine  forte  et  dure."


110  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

individuals.  Their  tendency  is  to  treat  the  accused  man  as
guilty,  and  means  of  proving  his  innocence  are  somewhat
grudgingly  meted  out  to  him  as  privileges  rather  than  as  rights,
while  deficiencies  of  evidence  are  boldly  supplemented  by  the
use  of  torture.  In  English  law,  indeed,  torture  (except  in  the
case  of  the  peine  forte,  et  dure)  never  seems  to  have  been  fully
recognized  :  if  used  by  the  absolute  monarchy  it  was  as  a  political
instrument  rather  than  as  part  of  the  ordinary  machinery  of  law.
On  the  Continent,  on  the  other  hand,  owing  partly  perhaps  to  a
stricter  theory  of  the  amount  of  evidence  necessary  for  proof,
partly  to  the  fact  that  the  authorities  were  more  determined  to
suppress  crime  than  to  protect  individuals  from  the  possibility  of
undeserved  suffering,  torture  became  a  recognized  method  of
supplementing  defective  evidence.  The  judicial  conscience  was
easier  if  it  extorted  a  confession  from  a  man  before  condemning
him,  than  if  it  acted  solely  on  evidence  undistorted  by  physical
suffering.1  Even  where  torture  was  not  allowed  the  accused  was
not  always  put  on  a  level  with  the  prosecution  as  to  the  right  of
giving  evidence,  calling  witnesses  and  employing  counsel.  It  is
not  until  all  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  that  a  Court  of  Justice
can  be  said  to  come  up  to  the  ideal  of  a  place  in  which  the  full
merits  of  the  case  are  investigated  before  a  verdict  is  given.
Even  now  it  must  be  remarked  that  an  English  trial  preserves
much  of  the  form  of  the  old  judicial  combat.  Its  method  of
obtaining  a  verdict  is  still  that  of  pitting  attack  and  defence
against  one  another.  It  may  be  that  this  is  the  best  method  of

1  Torture  was  originally  applied  only  to  slaves  in  Roman  law,  but  was
extended  to  freemen  in  cases  of  treason  and  afterwards  in  other  cases  as
well.  It  was  originally  unknown  to  the  barbarians,  but  under  Roman
influence  it  was  introduced  into  the  Salic,  Burgundian  and  other  laws  in
application  to  slaves.  (Esmein,  p.  93  ;  Schroder,  p.  3G9.)  Fostered  by  the
need  for  evidence  in  the  procedure  by  inquest,  and  by  the  determination
to  repress  crimes,  it  gradually  became,  especially  in  Germany  and  Italy
(Esmein,  p.  284),  a  flagrant  abuse.  All  the  guarantees  which  the  accused
had  were  taken  from  him  by  degrees.  The  procedure  became  secret,  he
was  not  allowed  to  employ  counsel  or  to  cite  witnesses.  In  this  direction
the  inquisitorial  process  was  pushed  further  in  France  than  elsewhere  ;
England  was  apparently  saved  from  it  by  the  gradual  change  which
converted  the  jury  from  witnesses  into  judges  of  the  case.  It  is  noteworthy
that  the  severity  of  the  French  procedure  was  accepted  by  the  public  and
was  even  popular.  (Op.  cit.,  p.  158.)  The  public  feeling  of  the  period
went  with  the  authorities  in  concerning  itself  more  for  the  suppression  of
crime  than  for  supporting  the  rights  of  accused  individuals.


LAW AND JUSTICE  111

obtaining  truth  where  human  interests  and  passions  are  at  stake,
and  that  the  advocate  must  always  retain  a  place  beside  the
judge :  but  what  seems  clear  is  that  the  power  of  the  purse  in
retaining  the  best  legal  skill  is  a  make-weight,  especially  in  civil
cases,  of  no  slight  practical  importance ;  and  it  is  possible  that
our  descendants  will  look  back  upon  a  system  which  allowed
wealth  to  count  for  so  much  before  what  should  be  an  absolutely
impartial  tribunal,  as  not  differing  so  much  as  we  should  like  to
think  from  the  old  ordeal  by  battle.  The  fight  with  the  purse
is  not  the  ideal  substitute  for  the  fight  with  the  person.

11.  We  have  seen  that  public  justice  often  led  to  severity  in
the  process  of  obtaining  truth ;  still  more  was  this  the  case  in
the  punishment  of  crime.  Accompanying  the  growth  of  order
in  a  barbarian  society  there  is,  as  has  been  remarked  above,  a
tendency  to  substitute  a  system  of  composition  for  blood
vengeance  by  a  money  payment.  This  system  made  for  social
peace,  but,  particularly  with  the  increase  of  wealth  and  differ
ence  of  rank,  it  lent  itself  to  frightful  abuses.  Crimes,  punished
perhaps  too  fiercely  in  early  society,  became  for  the  well-to-do
too  lightly  and  easily  atonable,  and  it  is  riot  surprising  that  at
the  next  stage  of  social  development,  in  which  the  central
power  has  consolidated  itself  and  the  executive  has  become
strong  enough  to  dismiss  any  fear  of  the  blood  feud,  a  period  of
severer  punishment  should  set  in.  Crime  now  becomes  a  revolt
against  authority,  a  challenge  to  the  powers  that  be,  civil  and
perhaps  ecclesiastical  as  well,  to  put  forth  all  their  strength  to
subdue  it.  Moreover,  the  central  authority  at  its  best  acts  in
the  interests  of  public  order,  and  on  the  whole  represents  the
principle  of  impartial  judgment  as  between  disputants,  and  of
progress  towards  internal  peace  and  the  reign  of  law.  On  the
other  hand,  order  is  still  difficult  to  maintain  and  powerful
families  are  recalcitrant.  From  such  causes  as  these  acting  in
combination  the  criminal  law  now  reaches  the  acme  of  its
rigour.  Death  penalties  or  savage  mutilations  are  inflicted  for
offences  of  the  second  and  third  order,  torture  is  freely  used  to
extort  confession,  and  the  brutality  of  the  mob  is  called  in  to
supplement  that  of  the  executioner.

As  to  the  severity,  or  rather  barbarity,  of  the  criminal  law  in


112  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Europe  down  to  the  nineteenth  century  little  need  be  said,  as  the
broad  facts  are  well  known.  In  England  death  was  theoretically
the  penalty  for  all  felonies  except  petty  larceny  and  mayhem,
from  the  Middle  Ages  down  to  1826.  This  rule  was  subject
to  the  exceptions  based  on  "benefit  of  clergy,"  which  originally
meant  the  right  of  a  clerk  to  be  tried  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts;
then,  being  extended  to  all  who  could  read,  became  something  of
the  nature  of  a  class  privilege,  and  finally  in  1705,  the  necessity
for  reading l  being  abolished,  was  converted  into  a  means  of  grace.
The  punishment  for  a  "  clergyable  "  offence  was  to  be  branded
in  the  hand  and  imprisoned  for  not  more  than  one  year,  except
in  the  case  of  larceny,  which  by  the  law  of  1717  was  punishable
by  transportation  for  seven  years.2  From  the  fifteenth  century
onwards  a  succession  of  statutes  excluded  more  and  more  offences
from  benefit  of  clergy,  and  thus  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth
century  such  offences  as  arson,  burglary,  horse-stealing,  stealing
from  the  person  above  the  value  of  a  shilling,  rape  and  abduction
with  intent  to  marry,  were  all  capital  "  whether  the  offender  could
read  or  not."  3  In  the  eighteenth  century  the  list  was  lengthened,
but  transportation  was  often  substituted  for  the  death  penalty.
Women  were  still  burnt  alive  for  the  murder  of  a  husband  or
master,  or  for  coining.4  Both  men  and  women  were  whipped,
the  men  publicly  through  the  streets,  the  women  as  a  rule
privately,  for  petty  thefts.5  The  pillory  was  still  in  use  for
perjury  and  other  offences.6  Meanwhile  the  state  of  the
prisons,  where  innocent  and  guilty,  debtors  (often  with  their
families)  and  convicted  criminals  were  all  huddled  together
without  discrimination,  was,  when  Howard  began  his  work,  a
scandal  of  the  first  magnitude.  Gaol-fever  raged,  prisons
were  still  private  property,  and  the  prisoner,  innocent  or  guilty,
had  to  fee  his  gaoler  and  pay  for  every  comfort  and  even
for  necessaries.  In  the  Bishop  of  Ely's  prison  the  gaoler  pre
vented  escapes  by  chaining  his  prisoners  on  their  backs  on  the

1  Peers,  and  clerks  in  holy  orders,  however,  retained  special  privileges.

2  Stephen,  i.  463,  etc.  3  Op.  tit.,  467.

4  In  practice  they  were  generally  strangled  first,  but  this  depended  on
the  executioner.  Even  the  torture  of  the  flames  did  not  prevent  an
eighteenth  century  mob  from  pelting  and  jeering  at  the  victim.  See  the
account  of  the  burning  of  Barbara  Spencer  for  coining  in  1721.  (Pike,  ii.
287,  288.)

6  16.,  380.  6  Till  1816. For  perjury  till  1837. (Ib.,  377.)


LAW AND JUSTICE  113

floor,  and  fastening  a  spiked  iron  collar  about  their  necks.
"  Even  when  re-constructed  it  had  no  free  ward,  no  infirmary
and  no  straw ;  and  debtors  and  felons  were  confined  together."  1

12.  But  even  before  Howard's  time  a  new  order  of  ideas  was
slowly  emerging.  As  society  becomes  more  confident  in  its
power  to  maintain  order,  the  cruelty  and  callousness  that  are
born  of  fear  are  seen  in  a  new  light.  More  humane  influences
make  themselves  felt,  and  from  that  moment  excessive  severity
begins  to  militate  against  the  proper  execution  of  the  law,
especially  under  a  jury  system  like  ours.  With  the  advance  of
civil  and  religious  liberty,  political  or  ecclesiastical  offences
grow  rare,  and  a  breach  of  the  law  becomes  more  and  more
synonymous  with  a  grave  moral  offence  against  society.  The
whole  problem  of  criminal  justice  is  thus  transferred  to  the
ethical  plane,  but  the  change  raises  problems  which  a  century
has  been  too  short  a  time  to  solve.  The  general  right  to  punish
may  be  derived  from  the  right  of  society  to  protect  itself.
This  principle  taken  by  itself 2  might  be  held  to  justify  the
barbarities  of  the  old  law,  had  not  experience  shown  that
extreme  severity  was  not  in  reality  an  effective  instrument  of
discipline,  while  it  undoubtedly  tended  to  harden  manners  and
accustom  people  to  witness  suffering  with  indifference.  Its
dealings  with  the  criminal  mark,  one  may  say,  the  zero  point
in  the  scale  of  treatment  which  society  conceives  to  be  the  due
of  its  various  members.  If  we  raise  this  point  we  raise  the
standard  all  along  the  scale,  The  pauper  may  justly  expect
something  better  than  the  criminal,  the  self-supporting  poor
man  or  woman  than  the  pauper.  Thus  if  it  is  the  aim  of  good'
civilization  to  raise  the  general  standard  of  life,  this  is  a
tendency  which  a  savage  criminal  law  will  hinder  and  a  humane
one  assist.  Moreover,  the  old  rigour,  so  far  as  it  rested  on
reason  at  all,  was  based  on  a  very  crude  psychology.  People

1  16.,  355.

2  So  taken  it  is  a  one-sided  account. Punishment,  like  other  actions,  can
only  be  justified  as  doing  the  maximum  of  good  and  the  minimum  of  evil
admitted  by  the  circumstances  to  all  concerned. If  any  evil  (suffering  or
loss  of  character)  is  inflicted  on  the criminal which is not absolutely
necessitated  _  by  social  security,  or  the  ultimate  welfare  of  the criminal
himself,  it  is  evil  inflicted  for  its  own  sake,  which  is  the  essence  of
immorality.

YOL.  I.


114  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

are  not  deterred  from  murder  by  the  sight  of  the  murderer
dangling  from  a  gibbet. On  the  contrary,  what  there  is  in  them
of  lust  for  blood  is  tickled  and  excited,  their  sensuality  or  ferocity
is aroused,  and the  counteracting impulses,  the aversion  to
bloodshed,  the  compunction  for  suffering,  are  arrested. Fear,  on
which  the  principle  of  severity  wholly  relies,  is  a  master  motive
only  with  the  weak,  and  only  while  it  is  very  present. As
soon  as  there  is  a  chance  of  escaping  detection  it  evaporates,
and,  it  would  seem,  the  more  completely  in  proportion  as  the
very  magnitude  of  the  penalty  makes  it  difficult  for  a  man  really
to  imagine  himself  as  the  central  figure  in  so  terrible  a  drama.
Finally,  the  infliction  of  heavy  penalties  for  secondary  crimes
may  induce  a  reckless  despair,  and  the  saying  about  the  sheep
and  the  lamb  was  but  too  apt  a  comment  on  the  working  of
the  criminal  law  at  the  time. Thus  the  first  step  of  reform
was  to  abolish  the  ferocious  penalties  of  the  old  law. In  this
direction a long list of well-known and honoured names,
Beccaria,  Howard,  Bentham,  Romilly,  Fowell  Buxton,  Elizabeth
Fry,  indicate  roughly  the  intellectual  and  moral  influences  at
work. The  Society  of  Friends,1  French  Rationalists,  English
Utilitarians  and  the  Evangelicals  played  their  part  in  this,  as  in
so  many  of  the  changes  that  have  made  the  modern  world. The
movement  was  under  weigh  by  the  second  third  of  the  eighteenth
century. Beccaria's  book  was  published  in  1764  and  had  an
immediate  success,  bearing  early  fruit  in  the  abolition  of  torture
on  the  Continent. Branding  was  abolished  in  England  in  1779.
Capital  punishment  had  been  abolished  for  a  time  in  Russia  in
1753,  and  the  purchase  of  prisoners  as  galley-slaves  was  forbidden
by  Maria  Theresa  in  1762. In  England  the  peine  forte  et  dure
was  abolished in 1772, and  in 1770  a House  of  Commons
Committee  even  reported that  there  were  some  offences  for
which  the  death  penalty  might  with  advantage  be  exchanged
for  some  other  punishment. These  few  indications  show  that
the  tide  was  beginning  to  turn. In  France  the  movement  was
hastened by  the Revolution. The  Declaration  of  Rights  in
1789  laid  down  the  controlling  principle  of  the  modern  theory

1  Already  in  founding  Pennsylvania,  Penn  had  allowed  capital  punish
ment  for  murder  alone.  The  Philadelphia  society  for  relieving  distressed
prisoners  was  formed  in  1776.  (Wines,  142.)


LAW AND JUSTICE  115

that  "  the  right  to  punish  is  limited  by  the  law  of  necessity,"
and  this  was  supplemented  in  1791  by  the  declaration  of  the
Assembly  that  "  penalties  should  be  proportioned  to  the  crimes
for  which  they  are  inflicted,  and  that  they  are  intended  not
merely  to  punish,  but  to  reform  the  culprit." l  In  accordance
with  this  principle  the  Assembly  made  imprisonment  the  chief
method  of  punishment,  and  founded  the  penitentiary  system  of
France.  In  England  the  great  re-action  produced  by  the
Revolution  retarded  the  reform  of  the  criminal  law,  but  through
out  the  time  of  the  Revolutionary  Wars,  men  like  Romilly
fought  an  uphill  fight.  He  succeeded  in  suppressing  the  death
penalty  for  pocket-picking  in  1808,  but  his  subsequent  efforts
to  abolish  capital  punishment  for  stealing  goods  of  the  value  of
five  shillings  from  shops  were  frustrated  by  the  House  of  Lords.2
Little  progress,  in  fact,  was  made  till  1832,  when  horse  arid  sheep
stealing  ceased  to  be  capital,  and  from  this  time  onwards  the
list  of  capital  offences  was  steadily  reduced,  till  in  18G1  murder
was  for  all  practical  purposes  the  only  one  that  remained.3

Meanwhile,  as  substitutes  for  the  old  savagery,  there  o-rew
up  first  the  transportation  and  then  the  penitentiary  system.
Regarded  as  a  means  of  giving  the  offender  a  fresh  start  in  life
in  new  surroundings  remote  from  his  old  bad  associates  and  the
memory  of  his  crimes,  transportation  has  much  to  recommend  it,
but  it  was  clearly  incompatible  with  colonial  development.  It  was
necessary  to  fall  back  on  the  prison  system,  and  the  efforts  of
reformers  have  been  devoted  to  the  task  of  making  confinement
—a  thing  soul-destructive  in  itself— as  nearly  compatible  as  may
be  with  the  regeneration  of  the  prisoner.  These  efforts  have  hardly
passed  the  experimental  stage,  yet  certain  results  have  emerged.
The  necessity  for  a  classification  which  prevents  the  first  offender
from  being  contaminated  by  the  hardened  gaol-bird,  the  benefits
of  action  and  practical  employment,  the  superiority  of  hope  to
fear  as  a  stimulus  to  good  conduct  and  the  consequent  advan
tages  to  be  found  in  allowing  the  convict  means  of  improving
his  position  and  even  shortening  his  sentence  by  good  behaviour^


p., -.f  -.  ">.e,  450.

_  rike,  ib.  ;  Stephen,  i.  474.  Together  with  murder,  treason,  piracy
with  violence,  and  setting  fire  to  dockyards  and  arsenals  remain  nominally
capital  offences.  It  will  be  remembered  that  a  case  of  treason  was  recently
tried  and  the  death  sentence  formally  passed,  but  very  shortly  commuted


116  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

are  matters  of  general  agreement.  But  it  is  clearly  necessary
to  go  further  than  this.  The  plan  of  imprisoning  a  man  for
a  longer  or  shorter  term,  and  then,  without  asking  what  effect
his  experience  is  likely  to  have  had  on  him,  turning  him  loose
again  upon  society,  a  broken  human  being  less  capable  than
ever  of  earning  an  honest  living,  cannot  stand.  The  old  way
of  hanging  at  least  rid  society  of  the  criminal.  It  stood  con
demned  for  its  utter  barbarity,  which  was  indirectly  as  harmful
to  society  as  it  was  cruel  to  the  sufferer.  The  modern  method
is  still  a  terrible  penalty,  at  least  to  the  better  sort  of  criminals,
and  far  from  relieving  society  of  their  presence,  tends  to  harden
and  degrade  them  further.  Hence  judicious  thinkers  like
Frederick  Hill,  in  his  report  of  1839,  soon  recognized  that  a
more  thorough  system  was  required.  The  offender  must  be
reformed,  and  at  need  he  must  even  be  detained  until  he  has
given  good  promise  of  reformation,  and  society  must  help  him
back  into  honest  ways.1  The  most  thoroughgoing  attempt  in
this  direction  is  that  of  the  Elmira  system,  followed  now  in
several  American  states,  in  which,  the  sentence  being  wholly  or
within  limits  indeterminate,  the  fate  of  the  convict  depends  on
his  own  exertions.  He  can  raise  himself  from  a  lower  to  a
higher  grade  by  continued  good  behaviour,  and  finally  can  obtain
liberation  on  parole.2

13.  Whatever  the  outcome  of  these  experiments,  the  modern
state  stands  committed  to  the  humane  method  of  criminal
treatment,  and  could  not  revert  to  the  old  plan  save  at  the  risk
of  a  general  re-barbarization.3  That  being  so,  it  is  necessary  to

1  For  the  views  of  Frederick  and  Matthew  Davenport  Hill,  see  Wines,
217,  etc.

2  Wines,  p.  220,  etc.

3  The  modern  reform  of  the  criminal  law  is  not  the  first  attempt  known
to  history  at  a  mitigation  of  punishment. The  Classical  Chinese books
condemn  excessive  corporal  punishment  as  an  innovation  (Shoo  King,  xxvii.
3),  and  represent  the  practice  of  composition  as  a  measure  of  mercy. It
has,  unfortunately,  a  darker  side. (See  Legge,  note,  pp.  608-9.) Confucius
continually protests  against governing the  people  by  punishment,  and
declares  that  within  100  years  a  series  of  good  rulers  would  be  able  to
dispense  with capital punishment. Under Buddhist influences King
Asoka of Magadha  abolished capital punishment, at first  for  certain
crimes,  and  by  the  thirty-first  year  of  his  reign,  altogether. (Duncker,
iv.  535.) In  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  a  wave  of  feeling  against
capital  punishment  passed  over  Europe,  but  the  feeling  was  religious  rather


LAW  AND  JUSTICE  117

push  the  now  method  through  and  to  treat  the  criminal  through
out  as  a  "  case  "  to  be  understood  and  cured.  We  touch  here
the  scientific  conception  underlying  the  modern  theory  of  punish
ment.  Crime,  like  everything  else  that  men  do  or  suffer,  is  the
outcome  of  definite  conditions.  Tlie.se  conditions  may  bo  psycho
logical  or  physical,  persona,!  or  social.  They  arise  in  the  character
of  the  agent  as  it  has  grown  up  in  him  from  birth  in  interaction
with  the  circumstances  of  his  life.  We  may  recognize  them  in
social  surroundings,  in  overcrowding  or  underfeeding,  in  the
sense  of  despair  produced  by  the  denial  of  justice,  or  in  the
overweening  insolence  of  social  superiority.  But  whatever  they
may  be,  if  we  wish  to  prevent  crime,  we  must  discover  the
conditions  operating  to  produce  crime  and  act  upon  them.
This  does  not  destroy,  but  defines  personal  responsibility.  The
last  link  in  the  chain  of  causation  which  produces  any  act  is
always  the  disposition  of  the  agent  at  the  time  of  action,  and
unless  dominated  by  ungovernable  impulse,1  this  disposition  is
always  modifiable  by  the  introduction  of  a  fresh  motive  as  a
weight  in  the  scale.  But  though  not  destroyed,  responsibility
is  transformed  by  science,  and  with  it  the  whole  conception  of
punishment.2  When  a  wicked  act  was  held  to  be  something

than  humanitarian,  and  allowed  the  substitution  of  savage  mutilations.
Henr-e  the  Conqueror's  edict,  "  Interdico  etiam  ne  quis  oceidatur  aut
suspendatur  pro  aliqua  culpa,  sed  eruantur  oculi  et  testiculi  abscidantur."
(Pollock  and  Maitland,  i.  88,  ii.  461.)  The  exchange  was  doubtful  gain,  and
without  legislation  death  resumed  its  place  as  the  penalty  for  felony  by
the  thirteenth  century.  Clerks  continued  to  have  difficulties  of  conscience  as
to  drawing  up  capital  sentences  and  avoided  writing  the  decisive  words,  and
the  tradition,  as  every  one  knows,  persisted  through  the  great  days  of  the
religious  Inquisition.  What  distinguishes  the  modern  movement  ia  that  it
rests  neither  on  the  mere  sentiment  of  mercy,  nor  on  any  theory  of  the
intrinsic  wickedness  of  the  taking  of  life,  but  on  an  attempt,  however
imperfect  as  yet,  to  render  a  scientific  account  of  the  causes  of  crime  and
the  effects  of  punishment,  both  on  the  criminal  and  on  society  at  large.

1  This  makes  no  exception  to  the  general  statement  that  character  is  the
cause  of  action,  since  that  paralysis  of  the  will  which  leaves  a  man  the  sport
of  impulse  is  itself  a  matter  of  character. As  to  control  of  man's  conduct
by  heredity  much  nonsense  is  talked. Heredity  is  not  a  force  controlling  a
man  from  without,  but  a  short  expression  for  the  supposed  antecedent
causes  of  the  qualities  which  make  him  what  he  is,  and  by  what  he  is,  he  is
to  be  judged,  so  far  as  he  is  judged  at  all.

2  Responsibility,  properly  understood,  is  definable  as  the  capacity  to  be
determined  by  an  adequate  motive. A  man  is  responsible  who  knows  what  ,•
is expected of  him,  understands  the  consequences  of  his  action,  and  is  j
determined  therein  by  that  knowledge. Reward  and  punishment,  praise


118  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

arising  in  a  spontaneous  arbitrary  manner  from  the  unmotived
evil  choice  of  a  man,  the  vindictive  retribution  which  is  founded
on  instinct  and  fostered  by  the  needs  of  early  society  seemed
amply  justified.  When  good  and  evil  alike  are  seen  to  grow
out  of  assignable  antecedents  by  processes  which  calmly  judging
i  men  can  pretty  closely  foretell,  to  rest  on  laws  of  growth  and
disease  which  apply  to  character  as  other  laws  apply  to  the
physical  organism,  to  express  the  lack  of  imagination  or  low
power  of  reasoning  which  makes  men  hard,  cruel  and  unjust,
or  to  flow  from  the  over-excitement  or  insufficient  satisfaction
of  physical  impulses  that  makes  them  a  prey  to  lust  or  alcohol,
then  every  thinking  man  is  made  to  feel  in  a  new  sense  that
but  for  the  grace  of  conditions  which  he  has  only  very  partially
and  imperfectly  controlled,  there  where  the  criminal  passes  to
disgrace  and  misery  goes  he  himself,  the  juryman,  the  judge,
the  newspaper  reader  who  explodes  in  satisfaction  over  the
\j  swinging  sentence.  No  one  can  fully  face  the  problem  of
•  responsibility  and  become,  however  dimly,  aware  of  the  multi
tudinous  roots  from  which  character  and  conduct  spring,  without
i  feeling  the  utter  inadequacy  of  the  retributive  theory  of  punish-
\ment.  Vindictiveness  has  its  natural  sphere  in  the  stage  at
which  crime  is  only  known  as  an  injury  to  be  revenged.  As
soon  as  it  becomes  a  wrong  act  to  be  punished,  the  nature  of
wrong  and  the  meaning  of  punishment  have  to  be  re-considered.
If  the  first  principle  of  rational  ethics  is  that  action  can  only  be
'  justified  by  doing  good  to  those  whom  it  affects,  this  principle
receives  a  striking  confirmation  from  the  one  quarter  in  which
its  application  might  seem  doubtful.  For  a  natural  impulse  makes
us  desire  to  harm  the  wicked,  bat  the  history  of  criminal  law
and  the  philosophical  analysis  of  responsibility  combine  to  prove
to  us  that  this  is  the  impulse  of  the  old  Adam  and  not  warranted
by  reason  or  justice.  Justice,  in  punishment  as  in  other  things,
seeks  the  good  of  all  whom  it  affects,  of  the  criminal  as  of  the
injured  party.  Yet  all  true  punishment  inflicts  pain,  for  precisely
the  truest  punishment  consists  in  the  full  realization  of  the
character  of  what  one  has  done.  This  realization,  with  all  the

and  blame,  are  therefore  justly  awarded  in  so  far  as  they  affect  action.
Beyond  this,  retribution  is  inapplicable,  and  praise  and  blame  pass  into
admiration  and  pity.


LAW AND  JUSTICE  119

mental  misery  that  it  involves,  we  may  justly  wish  to  be  the
lot  of  every  criminal,  whether  convicted  or  unconvicted,  whether
despised  or,  like  the  greatest  offenders,  honoured  by  the  world.
So  far  pain  is  rightly  attached  to  wrong-doing  as,  ethically
speaking,  its  inevitable  consequence.  But  any  other  sort  of
pain,  any  physical  suffering  that  has  no  such  healing  moral
effect,  may  gratify  an  animal  thirst  for  vengeance,  but  has  no
solace  for  our  moral  thirst  for  the  triumph,  even  in  the  mii^l
of  the  wrong-doer,  of  the  righteousness  which  he  has  set  at
naught.

The  modern  state  upholds  its  members  in  the  enjoyment  of
their  rights  and  gives  them  redress  for  injuries  to  themselves  in
the  civil  courts.  It  also  intervenes  on  its  own  motion  to  main
tain  public  order  by  the  punishment  of  law-breakers.  Religious
and  political  offences  falling  into  the  background,  legal  offences
tend  to  be  restricted  to  criminal  acts,  and  punishment  to  be
proportioned  to  the  imputed  degree  of  moral  guilt.1  But  this
ethical  view  of  punishment,  when  pushed  home,  compels  the
admission  that  the  individual  theory  of  responsibility  is  no
more  final  than  the  old  collective  theory,  and  punishment  is
compelled  to  justify  itself  by  its  actual  effect  on  society  in
maintaining  order  without  legalizing  brutality,  on  the  criminal
in  deterring  him  or  in  aiding  his  reform,  in  both  relations  as
doing  good,  not  as  doing  harm.  The  criminal,  too,  has  his
rights — the  right  to  be  punished,  but  so  punished  that  he  may
be  helped  in  the  path  of  reform.

Briefly  to  resume  the  main  phases  in  the  evolution  of  public
justice,  we  find  that  at  the  outset  the  community  interferes  mainly
on  what  we  may  call  supernatural  grounds  only  with  actions
which  are  regarded  as  endangering  its  own  existence.  Other
wise  justice,  as  we  know  it,  in  the  sense  of  an  impartial  uphold
ing  of  rights  and  an  impartial  punishment  of  wrong-doing,  is

1  The  converse  proposition  that  wicked  acts  are  all  treated  as  legal
offences  does  not  follow,  nor  is  it  true  of  the  modern  state.  The  questions
as  to  the  sphere  of  the  state  which  arise  here  cannot  be  dealt  with  on  this
occasion.

Offences  against  the  public  order  do  not  constitute  an  exception  to  the
statement  in  the  text.  In  themselves  they  are  slight  offences,  and  the
penalty  is  always  light,  but  the  deliberate  defiance  of  the  public  order  is
of  course  an  immoral  act  unless  justified  by  some  bad  end  which  that
order  may  be  made  to  serve.


120  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

unknown.  In  place  of  that  we  have  at  the  outset  purely  private
and  personal  retaliation.  This  develops  into  the  systematized
blood  feuds  of  consolidated  families  and  clans.  At  this  stage
responsibility  is  collective,  redress  is  collective,  intention  is
ignored,  and  there  is  no  question  of  assessing  punishment
according  to  the  merit  of  the  individual.  When  retaliation  is
mitigated  by  the  introduction  of  money  payments  no  change  in
ethical  principle  occurs.  It  is  only  as  social  order  evolves  an
independent  organ  for  the  adjustment  of  disputes  and  the  pre
vention  of  crime,  that  the  ethical  idea  becomes  separated  out
from  the  conflicting  passions  which  are  its  earlier  husk,  and
step  by  step  the  individual  is  separated  from  his  family,  his
intentions  are  taken  into  account,  his  formal  rectitude  or  want
of  rectitude  is  thrown  into  the  background  by  the  essential
justice  of  the  case,  appeals  to  magical  processes  are  abandoned,
and  the  law  sets  before  itself  the  aim  of  discovering  the  facts
and  maintaining  right  or  punishing  wrong  accordingly.

The  rise  of  public  justice  proper  necessitates  the  gradual
abandonment  of  the  whole  conception  of  the  trial  as  a  struggle
between  two  parties,  and  substitutes  the  idea  of  ascertaining  the
actual  truth  in  order  that  justice  may  be  done.  That  is  at  first
carried  out  by  supernatural  means,  viz.  by  the  Ordeal  and  the
Oath.  These  in  turn  give  way  to  a  true  judicial  inquiry  by
evidence  and  rational  proof.  The  transition  occurred  in  England
mainly  during  the  thirteenth  century,  the  turning  point  being
marked  by  the  prohibition  of  the  Ordeal  by  Innocent  III.  in
1215.  The  early  stages  of  public  justice  administered  by  the
recently-developed  central  power  led  to  excessive  barbarity  in
the  discovery  and  punishment  of  crime.  It  took  some  more
centuries  to  prove  to  the  world  that  efficacy  in  these  relations
could  be  reconciled  with  humanity  and  a  rational  consideration
of  the  best  means  of  getting  at  truth.  By  so  long  and  round
about  a  process  is  a  result,  so  simple  and  obvious  to  our  minds,
attained.

We  have  thus  dealt  briefly  with  the  development  of  the  state
organization  for  the  maintenance  of  rights  and  the  suppression
of  wrong-doing.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  development  of
the  principal  rights  to  be  maintained.  In  a  large  measure  these


LAW AND  JUSTICE  121

group  themselves  in  accordance  with  the  main  divisions  into
which  human  beings  fall — divisions  of  sex,  of  community,  of
class,  and  so  forth — and  these  divisions  will  guide  us  in  the
chapters  now  to  come.  Nothing  so  intimately  affects  the
standard  of  obligation  or  throws  so  much  light  on  the  manner
in  which  rights  and  duties  are  conceived  as  the  degree  in  which
they  are  affected  by  such  distinctions.  These  will  accordingly
form  the  subjects  of  the  three  following  chapters.  There  will
remain  certain  general  obligations,  principally  those  arising  out
of  rights  of  property,  which  will  require  separate  treatment.


PUBLIC  JUSTICE  IN  PRIMITIVE  SOCIETY

THE  question  how  far  anything  of  the  nature  of  public  justice  as
opposed  to  vengeance  is  to  be  found  in  primitive  society  is  carried  a
step  further  by  the  recent  investigations  of  Dr.  Westermarck  (Origin
and  Development  of  the  Moral  Ideas,  vol.  i.  pp.  170-175,  etc.).  A
large  number  of  peoples  are  instanced  among  whom  in  one  form  or
another  the  community  or  its  representatives  are  concerned  in  the
maintenance  of  order  and  the  punishment  of  wrongs.  Dr.  Wester-
marck's  researches  are  so  exhaustive  that  when  we  have  examined
his  instances  we  may  be  pretty  confident  that  very  few  will  remain
in  extant  works  on  anthropology  to  take  into  account.  It  is  there
fore  of  interest  to  look  into  the  cases  which  he  adduces  and  examine
how  far  in  each  public  justice  has  grown,  how  far  the  opposite
principle  of  private  redress  persists,  and  how  the  two  principles  are
affected  by  the  political  constitution  of  the  tribe  and  its  position  in
the  scale  of  culture.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  much  of  the  information  which  we
derive  from  travellers  consists  of  very  casual  observations  by  men
familiar  with  European  justice,  but  with  no  knowledge  of  primitive
custom.  To  such  observers  any  collective  action  might  appear  as
an  execution  of  public  justice,  though  in  reality  it  might  be  taken
by  a  family  or  clan  in  prosecution  of  a  feud  ;  conversely  the  slaying
of  a  man  in  revenge  might  appear  to  them  merely  as  a  murder,  and
fail  to  draw  their  attention  to  the  existence  of  a  regular  custom  of
blood  revenge  ;  while  lastly  they  may  easily  state  that  "  offences  "  are
punished  by  the  tribe  without  drawing  those  distinctions  between
public  offences  endangering  the  community  and  private  wrongs
which  more  thorough  observers  find  to  be  of  importance.

Thus  among  the  Narrinyeri  of  Australia  "  all  cases  of  infraction
of  law  or  custom  were  tried  by  the  Tendi,"  a  meeting  of  the  elder

122


PUBLIC JUSTICE IN PRIMITIVE SOCIETY 123

natives  of  the  clan  or  group.  This  we  learn  from  Mr.  Taplin.1
Mr.  Howitt  (Tribes  of  S.E.  Australia,  p.  341)  states  on  Mr.  Taplin's
authority  that  public  offences  were  punished  by  blows  on  the  head,
but  he  adds  "  I  was  not  informed  by  Mr.  Taplin  what  he  included
in  the  term  public  offences."  Unfortunately  this  is  precisely  the
point  on  which  we  require  information.  We  are  fully  prepared  to
find  that  the  Narrinyeri  treat  such  offences  as  incest  and  killing  by
magic  as  punishable  by  the  group  collectively.  The  question  is
whether  they  include  other  forms  of  homicide  and  personal  injuries
in  the  same  category.  In  the  instance  which  Mr.  Taplin  gives  of  a
combined  Tendi,  it  appears  that  one  clan  was  accusing  a  member  of
another  of  homicide,  and  a  palaver  ensued  which  finally  ended  with
out  any  decision.2  This  is  clearly  not  an  instance  of  impartial
public  justice,  but  of  an  accusation  brought  by  the  group  of  the
sufferer  against  that  of  the  alleged  aggressor,  resulting  in  a  palaver
instead  of  in  a  battle.  That  is  to  say,  it  appears  as  one  of  the
various  forms  of  mitigated  blood  feud.3

Sometimes  blood  vengeance  is  satisfied  by  submission  to  an  ordeal
of  spear-throwing.  Thus  among  the  Wotzobaluk  in  case  of  an
offence  by  a  member  of  another  local  group  the  man  is  summoned
to  the  ordeal.  The  two  groups  confront  each  other  and  the  ceremony
may  end  in  a  general  fight.  (Howitt,  p.  334.)  A  similar  ceremony
is  in  use  in  S.  W.  Victoria  (ib.,  p.  335),  and  with  this  we  may
connect  the  statement  of  Dawson  (Australian  Aborigines,  p.  76)
that  "  persons  accused  of  wrong-doing  get  a  month's  notice  to  appeal-
before  the  assembled  tribes  and  be  tried,  on  pain  of  being  outlawed  and
killed."  If  found  guilty  of  a  private  wrong,  we  are  told,  the  accused
"is  painted  white,"  and  along  Avith  one  of  his  brothers — this,  of
course,  on  the  principle  of  collective  responsibility — undergoes  the
ordeal  of  spear-throwing.  "  As  blood  must  be  spilt  to  satisfy  the
injured  party  the  trial  ends  on  his  being  hit  "...  "If  the  accused

1  "Wood?,  Native  Tribes  of  S.  Australia,  p.  34  ;  Westermarck,  pp.  175,  294.

2  Taplin speaks  of  a distinction being drawn between murder and
manslaughter,  but  he  also  says,  "  I  cannot  give  the  natives  credit  for  much
order.  .  .  . There  was  a  tremendous  amount  of  talk. Sometimes  one  would
speak,  then  half-a-dozen  would  speak  together.  ... I  could  not  make  out
the  drift of  the discussion." This being  so  we  can  hardly  quote this
evidence  as  proof  of  a  nice  discrimination  of  degrees  of  responsibility  among
the  Narrinyeri.

3  The  tribe  or  group  whose  member  is  accused,  of  course  run  the  risk
of  a  feud  if  they  stand  by  him. They  may  accordingly  discuss  the  case
among  themselves  or  in  palaver  with  the  aggrieved  tribe. Out  of  such
discussions  a  trial  might  be  evolved,  but  in  themselves  they  are  motived  by
and  subordinate  to  the  exercise  of  vengeance  by  another  group.


124  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

person  refuses  to  appear  to  be  tried,  he  is  outlawed  and  may  be
killed ;  and  his  brother  or  nearest  relative  is  held  responsible  and
must  submit  to  be  attacked  with  boomerangs. If  it  turns  out  that
the  man  was  innocent,  the  relatives  have  a  right  to  retaliate  on  the
family  of  the  accuser  on  the  first  opportunity." Clearly  in  all  this
we  have  another  ceremonial  mitigation  of  the  blood  feud,  with  the
characteristics  of  vicarious  responsibility,  satisfaction  by  bloodshed
and  retaliation.1 Mr.  Dawson  goes  on  to  say  that  "  should  a  person,
through  bad  conduct,  become  a  constant  anxiety  and  trouble  to  the
tribe,  a  consultation  is  held  and  he  is  put  to  death." Here  again,
unfortunately,  the  precise  grounds  are  not  stated. But  by  the  tribe
Mr.  Dawson  appears  to  mean  what  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  call
the  local  group. (Its  numbers  in  former  days  averaged  probably
120,  but  now  consist  of  a  few  individuals.) The  justice  which  it
executes  on  its  own  members  is  therefore  comparable  rather  to  the
domestic  justice  of  the  enlarged  family  or  small  clan  than  to  the
public justice  of  a  tribe  or  political  community. Mr. Dawson's
expressions  would  seem  to  indicate  merely  that  individuals  involving
the  group  in  trouble  are  liable  to  be  thus  dealt  with,  and  a  similar
idea  is  implied  in  his  account  of  the  thrashing  of  liars  who  get  others
into  trouble  (p.  76). On  the  Avhole  in  this  case  we  appear  to  have
(1)  some  sort  of  rough  justice  within  the  local  group,  and  (2)  as
between  the  groups,  the  blood  feud,  for  which  a  ceremonial  spear-
throwing  may  be  substituted.

The  ordeal  of  spear-throwing  in  the  arm  to  expiate  death  is  also
mentioned  in  an  account  of  the  tribes  of  Adelaide  and  of  the  Murray
River  by  Eyre,2  who  says  that  otherwise  he  is  not  aware  of  any
stated  punishments,  and  that  vengeance  is  executed  by  the  friends
of  the  injured  party.  He  contrasts  this  with  the  practice  in  W.
Australia,  where  he  says,  quoting  from  Captain  Grey,  that  crimes
may  be  compounded  by  the  spear-throwing  ordeal.3

This  same  ordeal  of  spear-throwing  appears  in  Collins's  account
of  the  New  South  Wales  natives  in  yet  another  light,  as  a  ceremony
to  which  the  relatives  of  a  dead  man  were  subjected  apparently  in
satisfaction  to  the  spirit.4

1  In  fact,  on  p.  70,  Mr.  Dawson,  after  describing  the  blood  feud  which  is
in  full  swing  among  these  people,  explicitly  states  that  if  the  murderer
escapes  he  is  cited  as  above  described.

2  Central  Australia,  ii.  p.  388,  referred  to  in  Westermarck,  p.  171.

3  He  also  speaks  of  having  heard  from  the  natives  of  New  South  Wales
of  a  similar  practice.

4  "  On  the  death  of  a  person  male  or  female,  old  or  young,  the  friends
of  the  deceased  must  be  punished,  as  if  the  death  were  occasioned  by  their


PUBLIC JUSTICE IN PRIMITIVE SOCIETY 125

Another  form  of  mitigated  vengeance  is  the  duel  regulated  by  the
tribe  or  group.  This  plan  was  found  among  the  natives  of  North-
West  Central  Queensland  by  Roth.  Here  if  the  victor  kills  his
man  and  is  held  to  be  in  the  wrong,  he  may  be  slain,  unless  indeed
the  (tribal)  "  brothers "  on  each  side  take  up  the  quarrel,  when  a
general  mel6e  ensues.  Moreover,  if  the  deceased  is  not  a  member  of
the  "  tribe  "  (which  again  means  the  local  group  numbering  anything
from  a  score  or  two  to  200),  the  homicide  will  not  be  punished  till
the  tribe  of  the  deceased  demands  vengeance.  In  that  case  the  man
may  be  delivered  up  to  the  spear-throwing  ordeal,  and  a  second
victim  may  be  demanded  along  with  him.  In  this  case  we  trace
(1)  the  attempt  in  the  regulated  duel  to  mitigate  quarrels,  (2)  the
definite  distinction  between  the  smaller  and  larger  group.  The  small
group  is  not  concerned  with  the  killing  of  any  member  of  another
group,  though  they  are  in  constant  intercourse,  except  so  far  as  it
may  expose  them  to  hostile  action.1

Even  within  the  smaller  group  private  wrongs  are  not  always
righted  by  the  direct  coercive  authority  of  the  group.  Thus,  speaking
of  the  Bangerang  tribe,  Mr.  Curr  notes  the  absence  of  any  authority
outside  the  family  circle.  The  ruling  male  was,  however,  submissive
to  the  custom  of  the  tribe,  and  Mr.  Curr  distinguishes  the  two  cases
of  transgression— those  which  had  a  "  foreign  aspect "  and  involved
the  "  tribe  "  in  wars,  and  those  within  the  tribe.  For  Avrongs  within
the  "  tribe,"  custom  appointed  penalties ;  the  injured  party  could
appeal  to  his  fellow  tribes-men  and  women.  The  camp  would  express
its  view,  and  the  accused  would  accept  the  penalty.2  Yet  we  are
not  dealing  with  a  court  possessed  of  executive  powers,  for  Mr.  Curr
adds,  "  Had  an  offender  refused  satisfaction,  he  would  probably  have
been  murdered  by  the  injured  party  and  no  one  would  have  avenged
his  death."  That  is  to  say,  even  within  the  group  public  justice
•roes  no  further  than  to  countenance  the  avenger.3

O  . __

neglect."  (Collins,  New  South  Wales,  p.  586,  ref.  Westermarck,  171.)
That  the  motive  is  not  punishment  in  our  sense,  but  to  give  the  deceased
blood  for  blood,  is  evident  from  the  remark  of  a  native,  Bennilong,  when  his
wife  died,  that  lie  should  not  be  satisfied  till  he  had  sacrificed  some  one  to
her  manes  ;  this  also  appears  in  the  vicarious  vengeance  described  by  Collins.

1  Roth,  North-West  Queensland,  p.  141  ;  Westermarck,  171. In  this  ewe,
however,  there  is  also  distinct  collective  action  for  the  maintenance  of  order
in  the  camp  by  the  assembled  groups— murder,  incest,  and  the  use  of  weapons
within  the  camp  being  punishable.

2  Sqnattinq  in  Victoria,  244,  215  (referred  to  in  "\\estermarck,  1<1).

3  When  Mr.  Curr  states  elsewhere  (Australian  Races,  p.  61)  that  if  a
man  persisted 'in  disregarding  custom  he  would  be  put  to  death  or  have
to  exile  himself,  a  more  direct  collective  action  is  indicated,  but  its  limits


126  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

A  quite  distinctive  mitigation  of  the  blood  feud  in  a  peaceably-
disposed  people  is  seen  in  the  nith  songs  of  the  Greenlanders.  A  man
would  challenge  any  one  who  had  injured  him  to  a  contest  of  song  at
a  meeting  of  the  tribe.  "  The  litigants  stood  face  to  face  with  each
other  in  the  midst  of  a  circle  of  on-lookers,  both  men  and  women,  and
beating  a  tambourine  or  drum,  each  in  turn  sang  satirical  songs
about  the  other.  .  .  .  They  related  all  the  misdeeds  of  their  opponent
and  tried  in  every  possible  way  to  make  him  ridiculous.  The  one
who  got  the  audience  to  laugh  most  at  his  gibes  or  inventions  was
the  conqueror."  (Nansen,  Eskimo  Life,  p.  186,  etc.)  This  is  not
the  description  of  a  trial,  but  of  a  regulated  duel,  only  a  duel  of  wits,
a  substitute  for  the  serious  blood  vengeance  which  persists,  though
in  a  mild  form.  For  murder,  we  are  told,  is  regarded  as  a  purely
private  affair  for  the  murdered  man's  nearest  relatives  to  take  up.
There  are,  however,  cases  of  extreme  atrocity  in  which  a  village  has
been  known  to  make  common  cause  against  a  murderer  and  put
him  to  death,  and,  as  usual,  we  learn  that  to  kill  old  witches  and
wizards  is  not  considered  criminal.  (76.,  p.  162.)  The  normal  blood
feud  is  varied  by  occasional  outbursts  of  public  resentment.

In  many  cases  where  a  settlement  of  disputes  by  a  council  of
elders,  or  a  chief,  is  spoken  of,  we  find  on  further  examination  that
this  method  is  merely  subsidiary  to  that  of  self-help  and  private
vengeance.  Thus  among  the  Nagas,  Stewart  (Journal  As.  Soc.  of
Bengal,  p.  609,  Westermarck  174)  certainly  tells  us  that  petty  disputes
and  disagreements  about  property  are  settled  by  a  council  of  elders,
the  litigants  voluntarily  submitting  to  their  arbitration.  But  he
goes  on  to  say  that,  correctly  speaking,  there  is  not  a  shadow  of
constituted  authority.  It  is  true  there  is  general  peace.  But  this
is  founded  on  revenge,  and  the  prosecution  of  it  to  the  extremcst
lengths  for  the  most  trifling  offences — and  this  not  only  as  between
different  villages,  but  as  between  two  members  of  the  same  village.

are  left  very  vague.  One  reason  for  such  action  is  suggested  by  the  remark
that  a  man  would  be  prevented  from  killing  his  wife  on  the  ground  that
her  brothers  would  kill  the  first  of  his  blood  whom  they  might  get  hold  of.
This  is  the  "foreign"  consideration  again.  Mr.  Curr  notes  at  the  same
time  a  great  indisposition  to  any  interference.  Direct  public  punishment  of
a  private  wrong  is  more  distinctly  indicated  among  the  Victorian  tribes  by
Le  Souet  (Brough  Smith,  Aborigines  of  Victoria,  p.  295),  who  says  that  any
theft  or  breach  of  tribal  usage  is  generally  inquired  into  and  punished  by
the  leading  men  of  the  "  tribe  " — by  which  he  seems  to  mean  the  local
group,  as  he  speaks  of  each  tribe  as  confined  to  its  own  territory  and  mentions
two  tribes  with  thirty  men  in  each.  He  also  (it  should  be  noted)  describes
persistent  blood  revenge  (p.  289  ff.).


PUBLIC JUSTICE IN PRIMITIVE SOCIETY 127

In  the  rare  event  of  a  quarrel  breaking  out  between  two  men  of  the
same  village,  each  has  his  party  who  "takes  up  his  quarrel  not  by
any  means  from  a  sense  of  justice,  but  from  relationship— and  a
civil  Avar  ensues  which  is  disgusting  to  contemplate."  In  such  cases
as  this  it  would  be  very  misleading  to  speak  of  justice  as  ad
ministered  by  a  court  as  we  conceive  it.  The  function  of  the  council
is  clearly  to  maintain  the  peace  if  possible,  but  the  real  basis  of
order  is  the  blood  feud  and  the  fear  of  it.

The  "  justice  "  of  a  chief  is  often  of  the  same  subsidiary  kind ;  thus
among  the  Brazilians,  von  Martins  tells  us  (Beitrdge  zur  Etlmographie
Amerikas,  i.  p.  59,  etc.)  that  the  chief  hears  the  rare  cases  of  dispute,
associating  with  himself  the  sorcerer  and  medicine-man  ;  that  in  grave
cases  whole  families  with  their  supporters  come  before  him,  that  he
tracks  a  thief  and  enforces  restitution,  and  perhaps  the  punishment
of  wounding  in  addition  (p.  81,  W.  173).  But  looking  further  we
find  that  in  these  tribes  blood  revenge  is  in  full  swing.  There  is
no  punishment  for  killing  a  man  in  a  quarrel.  Revenge  is  purely
an  affair  of  the  family.  It  is  only  when  death  or  injury  is  inflicted
by  a  member  of  another  tribe  that  the  community  takes  the  matter
up.  Vengeance  is  collective  and  spares  neither  children  nor  the
aged.  Where,  then,  is  the  chief  in  all  this  1  He  seldom  meddled,
we  are  told,  in  cases  of  homicide  within  the  community,  but  there
was  no  rule  in  the  matter,  lie  might  seek  to  appease  the  fetid
by  getting  the  parties  to  accept  composition,  but  probably  this
would  only  be  accepted  in  the  case  of  somewhat  distant  relatives
(pp.  130,  131).  Smaller  quarrels  were  generally  fought  out,  and  it
was  thought  discreditable  to  bring  them  to  the  chief.

In  this  case,  then,  the  public  authority  as  focussed  in  the  chief  is
seen  acting  intermittently  for  the  appeasement  of  strife  by  the  well-
known  expedient  of  "  composition."  But  in  the  background  as,
before,  lies  the  blood  feud.1

Higher  up  in  the  scale  we  find  numerous  instances  in  which  the
function  of  the  court  is  to  enforce  composition.  Blood  revenge  may
be  formally  prohibited,  but  is  still  a  custom  regulated  by  recognized
rules  (e.g.  the  Ondonga.)  It  is  perhaps  confined  to  cases  of  homicide

1  In  the  category  of  cases  where  "  public  justice  "  is  distinctly  subsidiary
to  the  blood  feud  I  should  rank  the  Bangerang  (p.  125  above),  probably  the
Narrinyeri  (p.  122),  the  Brazilians  (above),  the  Nagas  (above,  pp.  126, 127),
Kondhs  (Macpherson,  Service  in  India,  p.  81,  etc.),  Teda  (Nachtigal,
Sahara  and  Soudan,  i.  448,  449),  Yuin  (Howitt,  S.E.  Australia,  p.  342),  and
probably  the  Wanika  (Burton,  Zanzibar,  ii.  p.  94),  though  the  account  is
somewhat  confusing.


128  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

(e.  g.  the  Bakwiri),  or  to  deliberate  murder,  accidental  homicide
being  compoundable  (Banaka  and  Bapuku).  It  persists  side  by  side
with  public  justice,  the  practice  of  composition  being  the  mediating
term.  (Marshall  Islanders,  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  R.,  xiv.  p.  448  ;  Herero,
ib.,  p.  316.)  l  The  conception  of  crime  as  essentially  an  offence
against  property  (whereby  e.  g.  the  essence  of  homicide  is  that  it
deprives  a  father  or  widow  of  a  protector  or  helper)  is  apparently
an  offshoot  from  the  same  stock  of  ideas  as  the  practice  of  composition.
We  find  this  principle  among  the  Basutos  (Casalis,  p.  224),  and  in
large  measure  it  determines  the  form  of  public  justice  among  the
Kaffir  peoples  generally,  though  to  understand  its  operation  we
must  add  that  the  persons  of  the  tribesmen  are  generally  considered
as  the  property  of  the  chief.2

In  some  cases  where  courts  now  exist,  or  existed  at  the  time  at
which  our  witness  wrote,  there  is  direct  evidence  of  an  earlier
system  of  revenge.  E.g.  among  the  Creek  Indians  we  read  in
Schoolcraft  (i.  277)  that  formerly  a  homicide  was  avenged  by  the
nearest  relative,  but  now  the  accused  undergoes  a  regular  trial
before  the  chiefs.  We  are  therefore  fully  justified  in  regarding
cases  like  that  of  the  Iroquois  (Morgan,  League,  p.  330),  where  the
murderer  is  given  up  to  the  vengeance  of  the  family,  as  indicating
a  survival  of  the  regular  blood  feud.3

1  Among  cases  where  the  public  intervention  may  be  regarded  as a
mitigation  of  vengeance  I  would  place  the  Queenslanders,  New  South  Wales
Tribes,  Western  Australians,  Western  Victorians  (above,  pp.  123-5),  Eskimo
(above,  p.  126),  Murray  Islanders  (Hunt,  J.  A.  L,  28.  6),  Rejangs  (Marsden,
pp.  217,  246),  Waganda  (Steinmetz,  Rechtsverhaltnisse,  pp.  193-200),  Herero
(Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  R.,  xiv.  316),  Wagogo  (Steinmetz,  214),  Baronga  (Junod,
157, 158),  Basutos  (Casalis,  p.  224),  Kita  district  (Steinmetz,  174, 175),  Washa-
mbala  (Steinmetz,  253-261),  Msalala  (ib.,  279,  280),  Bataks  (von  Brenner,
211-213), Wyandots (Powell,  Bur.  Eth.,  66,  67), Ondonga (Steinmetz,
340-2). I  would  include  in  this  class  all  cases  in  which  composition  is  a
prominent  institution. The  boundary  line  between  this  and  the  last  class,
however,  is  not  always  clear. We  may  perhaps  add  tribes  of  Victoria
(above,  p.  125)  and  New  South  Wales  (Fraser,  Aborigines  of  N.S.  Wales,
pp.  38,  39).

2  On  this  basis  the  Kaffir  peoples  built  up  a  classification  of  offences
roughly  corresponding  to  the  civilized  distinction  between  criminal  and
civil  law. (See  above,  p.  100,  note).

3  Among  the  Ainu,  the  power  of  chief  and  elders  appears  to  have  super
seded  an  early  stage  in  which  each  family  chief  was  independent.  (Batchelor,
p.  278.) In  the  Caroline  Islands,  the  chief  is  said  to  administer  justice
according  to  the  strictest  principles  of  relation. (Von  Kotzebue,  Voyage  of
Discovery,  iii.  p.  207). The  Sonthals  formally  had  a  system  of  single
combats. (Man,  Sonthalia,  90.) Among  the  Mishmees,  a  council  of  chief
hands  over  the  homicide  to  the  nearest  male  relative. (T.  Cooper,  Mishmee
HiUs,  p.  238.)


PUBLIC JUSTICE IN PRIMITIVE SOCIETY 120

Thus  in  a  variety  of  ways  public  intervention  in  the  cases  before
us  stands  in  close  relation  to  the  system  of  private  vengeance.
Further,  the  pivot  on  which  it  turns  is  in  a  large  proportion  of
peoples  the  authority  of  the  chief.  The  relatively  high  development
of  this  authority  enables  the  chief  to  maintain  order  and  enforce
punishment  in  some  further  cases  where  the  authorities  cited  by  Dr.
Westermarck  do  not  speak  of  any  system  of  revenge.  Some  of  the
peoples  cited  in  this  connection  are  almost  to  be  called  semi-civilized
— e.  g.  the  Mandingos  and  other  negro  states.  There  are,  however,
some  of  lower  grade — e.  y.  the  Aleuts,  the  Hottentots,1  and  even
one  or  two  Australian  tribes.2

There  remain  a  few  cases  in  which  in  the  absence  of  an  authorita
tive  chief  a  primitive  court  is  said  to  administer  justice.  Some  of
the  statements,  however,  are  so  vague  that  after  Avhat  has  been  seen
of  the  misunderstandings  incident  to  this  question  they  must  be
regarded  as  of  very  little  value  if  taken  as  proof  of  the  supremacy
of  public  justice  and  its  independence  of  a  system  of  revenge.  For
example,  of  the  Kubus  of  Sumatra,  Forbes  writes  : —

"  Leading  so  nomadic  a  life  the  jurisdiction  that  can  be  exercised
by  any  one  over  them  can  be  but  very  slight.  Such  as  it  is,  it  is
wielded  by  the  elders  of  the  party,  who  settle  disputes  that  arise
between  man  and  man  and  inflict  punishment  for  offences."

This  summary  statement  does  not  answer  ,any  of  the  questions
suggested  by  the  analysis  that  we  have  m^de  of  other  instances  of
"public  justice."  For  all  that  appears  to  the  contrary  the  case
may  resemble  that  of  the  Nagas.  Indeed  it  might  fall  into  almost
any  of  the  categories  which  have  been  distinguished.3

1  Here,  however,  according  to  Koliler,  there  are  evidences  of  an  earlier
period  of  blood  revenge.

2  E.  g.  The  Gounditch  Mara  (Fison  and  Howitt,  p.  177). Here  the  chief's
office  was  hereditary  ; besides  settling  disputes,  he  could  compel  all  the
tribesmen  to  follow  him  in  war,  and  they  were  under  obligation  to  make
presents  to  him. Other  cases  in  which  justice  depends  on  the  powrer  of  the
chief  are  the  Kukis  (Dalton,  Ethnology  of  Benr/al,  p.  45),  Solomon  Islands
(Codrington,  Mdanesians,  p.  345),  Bowditch  Islands  (Lister,  J.  A.  I.,  xxi.
53),  some  of  the  Marshall  Islands  (Kubary,  Museum  Godeffroy.  I.,  i.  37),
Pelew Islands (16.,  I.,  iv.  42),  Waganda  (Steinmetz, 193-200), Barotse
(Decle,  Three  Years  in  Savage  Africa,  pp.  70-74),  Marutse  (Holub,  Seven
Years  in  S. Africa,  ii.  p.  314),  Bechuana  (Koliler,  xv.  p.  333),  Shilluk
(Beltrame,  Fiume  Bianco,  p.  77),  Ovambo  (Andersson,  Lake  Nyami,  p.  197),
Mambuttu  (Casati, Ten Years  in  Equatoria, i.  p. 163),  Fida  (Bosnian,
Coast  of  Guinea,  p.  331). To  these  may  be  added  the  Soulimana  (Laing,
Travels,  p.  365),  and  Mandingos  (Mungo  Park,  p.  22,  in  Cassell's  edition).
These  are  peoples  of  relatively  high  social  organization.

3  Much  the  same  maybe  said  of  Casati's  account  (op.  cit.p.  158)  of  the  Akkas.

VOL.  i.  K


130  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

There  remain  a  few  cases  in  which  the  decisions  of  a  council
appear  to  be  taken  as  final.  Thus  among  the  Todas,  a  pastoral
tribe  of  peaceful  habits  carrying  no  weapons,  questions  of  right  and
wrong  are  settled  by  a  "Punchayet"  or  council  of  five,  whose
decisions  are  considered  binding.  We  are  told  that  this  system  of
adjudication  obtains  in  all  parts  of  Southern  India.  Among  another
hill  tribe,  the  Bygas,  serious  crime  is  almost  unheard  of,  and  nearly
all  disputes  are  settled  by  the  elders  without  appeal,  and  this
though  they  are  "  certainly  the  wildest "  of  all  the  races  mentioned
by  our  authority.  (Forsyth,  Highlands  of  Central  India,  p.  361.)
Even  in  these  cases,  however,  it  is  possible  that  contact  with  civilized
rule  has  made  some  difference,  for  of  the  Sonthals,  another  hill
tribe,  we  learn  that  they  too  take  all  disputes  before  the  elders ;
that  if  redress  is  refused  they  go  before  the  District  Commission ;
that  they  have  the  tradition,  that  formerly  disputes  between  males
were  settled  by  single  combat,  which  was  always  fatal  to  one  party.
The  custom,  we  are  told,  has  disappeared  as  equitable  methods  of
settlement  have  been  brought  to  them.  In  fact,  the  British  court
now  supplies  the  coercive  power,  for  which  formerly  each  man  had
to  rely  on  his  own  right-arm.

Besides  the  Todas  and  Bygas,  the  Tagbuana  (Philippine  Islands),
Old  Kukis  and  Wakamba  are  peoples  among  whom  public  justice
is  exercised  by  some  sort  of  court.  These  seem  to  be  the  only  cases
in  which,  in  the  absence  of  an  authoritative  chief,  we  find  a  system
of  the  public  punishment  of  private  wrongs,  unentangled  with  the
custom  of  private  vengeance,1  and  of  these  the  Wakamba  are  some
what  advanced  people  who  have,  exceptionally,  avoided  the  despotic
form  of  chieftainship  (Dech,  op.  cit.,  p.  485,  etc.),  and  the  Tagbuana
are  thought  to  be  degenerate  from  a  higher  civilization.  (Worcester,
Philippine  Is.,  pp.  991,  100.)

The  cases  of  public  intervention,  then,  appear  to  fall  into  the
following  categories.  We  have —

(1)  The  punishment  of  offences  held  to  constitute  a  public  danger.

(2)  Public  intervention  in  anticipation  or  mitigation  of  private
redress.

(3)  The  maintenance  of  order  by  a  chief.

(4)  Public  justice  independent  of  any  of  these  conditions.

1  To  these  should  perhaps  be  added  the  instances  of  the  Queensland  and
New  South  Wales  tribes  (above,  p.  125,  note  1;  and  p.  128,  note  1),  in  which
some  private  wrongs  are  punished  collectively,  and  the  collective  punish
ment  stands  side  by  .side  with  the  blood  feud,  without  being  demonstrably
connected  with  it.  On  the  case  of  the  Victorians  see  next  note.


PUBLIC JUSTICE IN PRIMITIVE SOCIETY 131

Cases  of  this  last  kind  appear  to  be  very  rare  in  primitive
society.

In  saying  this  we  are  not  taking  the  domestic  justice  of  the
enlarged  family  or  little  clan,  constituting  the  smallest  social  unit,
into  account.  Unfortunately  the  study  of  savage  custom  yields
somewhat  vague  information  on  this  head,  but  from  what  evidence
we  possess,  we  may  infer  that  this  form  of  justice  is  somewhat
irregularly  developed.1  Nevertheless  we  can  conceive  of  it  as
flourishing  Avithin  each  social  unit,  while  the  relations  of  the  units,
though  for  many  purposes  they  act  together  and  form  one  society,
are  still  regulated  by  the  custom  of  vengeance.2

To  the  Australian  tribes  in  which  there  is  some  sort  of  public
intervention  in  mitigation  of  the  blood  feud,  could  be  added  a
considerable  list  from  Mr.  Hewitt's  work — the  Dieri,  Southern
Kamilaroi,  Wiradjuri,  tribes  of  Maryborough,  Turrbal,  Wotjobaluk,
South  West  Victorians,  Wurunjerri,  Bunurong,  Gea-wegal,  Kurnai.
Among  many  of  these  there  are  public  punishments  for  public
offences  only.  Mr.  Howitt  sums  up  the  evidence  for  the  large
number  of  tribes  which  he  surveys  as  follows : —

"  It  will  be  evident  that  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  offences
which  merely  affect  the  individual,  and  are  therefore  left  for  him
to  redress,  and  those  which  may  be  called  tribal  offences,  such  as
murder  by  evil  magic,  breaches  of  the  exogamous  law,  or  reveal
ing  the  secrets  of  the  initiation  ceremonies.  Such  offences  were
dealt  with  by  the  elders  and  their  leaders,  the  Headmen  of  the
tribe."

This  account,  in  which  Mr.  Howitt  has  taken  into  consideration
much  of  the  Australian  evidence  given  above,  closely  corroborates
the  classification  of  public  offences  given  by  Steinmetz — witchcraft,
incest,  treason,  sacrilege.3  To  these  normal  cases  Steinmetz  adds
a  few  sporadic  instances  in  which  particular  offences  are  visited
with  public  punishment,  though  private  vengeance  is  otherwise
the  rule.4

1  See  Steinmetz,  ii.  pp.  165,  166.

2  A  case  like  that  of  the  Victorian  tribes,  where  crimes  within  the  local
group  are  punished,  may perhaps  be  classed  as  instances  of  "domestic
justice." In  Australian  society,  the  petty  local  group  corresponds  rather  to
the  enlarged  family  or  petty  clans  of  other  peoples,  than  to  the  tribe  or
community  as  a  whole.

3  Steinmetz,  pp.  327-340.

4  It  is  remarkable  that  adultery  and  seduction,  etc.,  which  generally  tend
so  strongly  to  remain  in  the  sphere  of  vengeance,  are  the  offences  mentioned
in  three  or  four  cases. (Caribs,  Caledonians,  etc.,  op,  cit.)


132  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

Our  conclusions  on  the  whole  question  of  the  development  of
public  justice  in  primitive  society  will  depend  on  what  we  mean
by  "public  "  and  what  we  mean  by  "justice."  If  by  "justice  "  we
mean  any  sort  of  action  taken  for  the  adjustment  of  disputes  or  the
punishment  of  offences,  we  give  the  conception  a  relatively  large
extension.  If  we  mean  the  impartial  and  coercive  action  of  a
constituted  authority,  acting  upon  rational  investigation  for  the
maintenance  of  all  members  of  society  in  their  rights,  and  the
punishment  of  wrong-doers  in  accordance  with  the  degree  of  their
responsibility,  we  shall  find  our  conception  realized  far  more  rarely.
By  "  public,"  again,  we  may  mean  the  combined  action  of  any  body
whatever,  or  we  may  distinguish  as  informal  or  domestic  the  action
of  the  smallest  unit  of  society,  such  as  the  enlarged  family,  and
regard  as  "  public  "  only  the  concerted  action  of  the  whole  body  of
those  who,  living  in  regular,  permanent  or  recurrent  social  relations
(like  those  between  different  clans  in  a  village  or  the  groups  in  an
Australian  tribe),  may  be  considered  as  forming  one  society.

Having  these  distinctions  in  mind,  we  may  conclude  from  our
evidence  that  while  domestic  justice  may  flourish  at  very  early
stages,  though  its  development,  in  fact,  appears  to  be  irregular,
public  justice  in  any  wider  sense  appears  to  develop  independently
in  relation  to  offences  which  either  on  magical  or  political  grounds
are  held  to  constitute  a  public  danger ;  that  in  other  relations  it
takes  the  form  of  an  endeavour  to  adjust  in  a  friendly  manner
disputes  that  will  otherwise  lead  to  a  quarrel,  and  gains  importance
and  coercive  power,  generally  speaking,  with  the  advance  of  society
and  the  growing  authority  of  the  chief ;  that  it  is  very  rare  in
savage  society  for  public  justice  to  be  found  to  the  exclusion  of
vengeance,  and  that  in  the  majority  of  cases  where  it  is  alleged  to
be  found,  it  depends  on  the  authority  of  the  chief.  The  cases  in
which  the  public  maintenance  of  order  has  succeeded  in  extruding
private  vengeance  except  through  a  chieftain's  powers,  appear  to  be
very  rare  indeed  in  the  savage  world.

This  does  not  imply  that  justice  grows  out  of  vengeance.  On
the  contrary,  an  element  of  public  feeling  is  found  in  more  than  one
relation  from  the  beginning.  Probably  its  growth  is  due  as  much
to  the  extension  of  the  conception  of  public  offences,  as  to  the
mitigation  of  the  blood  feud,  and  at  a  certain  stage  of  advance  the
two  ideas  become  blended  together.  But  at  the  lowest  stages  the
collective  intervention  is  limited  to  a  few  acts  held  in  horror,  and
conceived  as  dangerous  to  the  common  weal,  while  private  rights


PUBLIC JUSTICE IN PRIMITIVE SOCIETY 133

are  left  to  private  protection,  and  neither  public  nor  private
vengeance  regards  the  moral  responsibility  of  the  individual.  It
is  the  binding  together  of  these  three  elements,  the  common  good,
private  rights,  and  moral  responsibility,  which  determines  the  rise
of  public  justice.


CHAPTER IV

MARRIAGE  AND THE POSITION OF  WOMEN

1.  THE  division  of  the  sexes  affects  the  standard  of  conduct  in
two  ways.  First,  it  gives  rise  to  special  relations,  carrying  with
them  special  rights  and  duties.  Secondly,  it  cuts  every  people
into  two  portions,  and  the  legal  and  ethical  position  of  these  two
portions  is  never  wholly  the  same.  In  greater  or  less  degree  the
rights  and  the  duties  of  men  and  women  differ,  and  the  diver
gence  is  not  confined  to  matters  arising  directly  from  the  sex
relation  itself.  Important  as  these  differences  are  for  an  under
standing  of  ethical  conceptions,  they  are  themselves  extremely
difficult  to  ascertain  and  interpret.  In  no  other  department  of
ethics  are  the  types  of  custom  strewn  in  such  disarray  over  the
various  stages  of  culture.  Nowhere  else  is  it  so  difficult  to
classify  without  bewildering  ourselves  by  cross  divisions.  No
where  else  is  a  bald  statement  of  the  law  so  likely  to  mislead  as
to  actual  practice  or  living  sentiment.  For  no  other  human
relation  is  at  once  so  personal,  and  so  bound  up  by  multitudin
ous  threads  with  the  forces  and  ideas,  economic,  religious  and
even  political,  which  go  to  determine  the  structure  of  any
society.

The  position  of  woman  is  not  wholly  to  be  judged  by  her
condition  as  wife  and  mother.  Often  the  unmarried  woman  has
important  rights  which  marriage  takes  away ;  often  also  the
married  woman  acquires  a  degree  of  freedom  and  dignity  which
her  unmarried  sister  lacks.  Nor  conversely  is  the  position  of
the  wife  the  sole  question  of  importance  in  the  law  of  marriage.
Nevertheless  the  two  questions  are  too  nearly  allied  for  separate
treatment,  and  in  order  to  understand  the  position  of  women

134


MARRIAGE  AND THE POSITION OF  WOMEN 135

we  must  pass  at  once  to  a  general  consideration  of  the  law  and
customs  relating  to  marriage.

It  will  help  us  to  begin  by  distinguishing  the  principal  ques
tions  to  be  asked  about  the  marriage  customs  of  any  society.
Thus  we  may  classify  marriage  :

(1)  According  to  the  number  of  parties  to  the  union  (mono
gamy,  polygamy,  etc.).

(2)  According  to  tho  restrictions  on  marriage  (exogamy  and
endogamy).

(3)  According  to  its  stability  (law  of  divorce).

(4)  By  the  methods  of  obtaining  a  husband  or wife (e.  g.
capture,  purchase,  contract).

(5)  By the relations between husband  and wife (in the
family) .

The  two  last  questions  are  closely  related,  and  both  have  an
important  bearing  on  the  general  position  of  women.  Under
each  head  we  shall  see  what  are  the  principal  forms  of  mar
riage  customs  that  exist,  and  which  are  the  prevalent  types  in
the  savage  and  barbaric  world.  We  shall  then  briefly  trace
the  history  of  marriage  and  of  the  position  of  women  among
civilized  peoples.

2.  I.  We  have  to  ask  first  in  any  community,  who,  or  rather
how  many,  are  the  possible  parties  to  a  marriage.  Is  it  (a)  a
union  of  one  man  with  one  woman,  or  (6)  of  one  man  with  two  or
more  women,  or  (c)  of  two  or  more  men  with  one  woman,  or  (d)  of
a  group  of  men  with  a  group  of  women,  or  (c)  is  it  wholly  irregular,
the  negation  of  union,  promiscuity  ?  All  these  are  types  of  mar
riage  which  exist  or  have  existed,  or  at  least  have  been  alleged
to  exist.  Further  they  split  up  into  sub-types.  Polygyny,  for
example,  the  union  of  one  man  with  two  or  more  women,  is
found  in  the  two  fairly  distinguishable  types  of  polygamy
proper,  in  which  several  women  are  alike  wives,  and  concu
binage,  in  which  there  is  one  chief  and  fully  legitimate  wife,  and
one  or  more  in  a  subordinate  and  perhaps  servile  position.1  The

1  In  China  there  is  only  one  chief  wife.  The  others  are  secondary,  but
legitimate  wives.  The  old  Babylonian  law  recognizes  one  wife  (allowing  a
second  in  case  of  her  being  invalided),  with  concubines  who  were  to
recognize  the  wife  as  mistress.  The  case  of  Leah  and  Rachel  illustrates  a
family  in  which  there  were  two  legitimate  wives  as  well  as  concubines.
Mussulman  law  allows  four  legitimate  wives  and  an  indefinite  number  of


13G  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

one  type,  moreover,  shades  off  into  the  other  by  gradations
according  as  the  chief  wife's  position  is  more  or  less  fully
defined,1  and  as  that  of  the  secondary  wives  is  more  or  less
servile.  Polyandry,  again,  though  far  less  common  than  poly
gamy,  has  many  varieties.  The  several  husbands  may,  and  in
the  commonest  case  do,  form  a  definite  group.  Generally,  as  in
the  well-known  case  of  Thibetan  marriage,  they  are  all  brothers.2
But  this  is  not  always  so.  Polyandry  may  merely  take  the  form
of  permitting  a  woman  to  have  many  husbands  without  specify
ing  any  particular  relationship  between  them  except  such  as
may  follow  indirectly  from  the  other  marriage  regulations  of
the  community.  This  is  the  case  among  the  Nairs  of  the
Malabar  coast.  The  same  people  illustrate  a  still  further
variety,  the  combination  of  polyandry  and  polygamy.  For  as  the
Nair  woman  may  have  many  husbands,  so  the  Nair  husband  may
have  many  wives.3  Again,  in  the  relations  between  the  husbands

concubines.  The  old  Japanese  law  recognized  polygamy  with  a  head- wife.
(Post,  i.  62  ;  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  E.  vi.  p.  369.)  For  instances  among  iin-
civilized  peoples,  see  Howard,  i.  pp.  143-4,  and  Westermarck,  p.  442,  etc.,
and  Cambridge  Anthropological  Expedition  to  the  Torres  Straits,  p.  230.

1  In  some  cases  a  second  wife  may  only  be  taken  if  the  first  is  childless,
e.  g.  among  peoples  of  the  Punjab  and  the  Dekkan,  the  Santals  in  Bengal,
some  Bombay  tribes. (Post,  I.e.) Post  also  refers to Bulgarian  and
Montenegrin  customs.

Among  the  Malays,  under  the  Semando  form  of  marriage,  the  taking  of  a
second  wife  is  a  ground  of  divorce,  and  at  Mokomoko  the  husband  must
pay  her  a  fine,  40  gulden.  (Waitz,  v.  145,  146.)  Among  the  Khonds  the
wife's  consent  is  required.  (Reclus,  Primitive  Folk,  p.  281.)  Post  gives
similar  instances  among  the  Khyengs,  the  Tamils  of  Ceylon,  and  Punjab
peoples  (Post,  i.  63,  from  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  E.,  vi.  p.  192),  and  Howard
(i.  p.  144)  quotes  a  case  among  the  North  American  Indians.  Among  the
Touaregs  the  taking  of  a  second  wife  is  a  ground  of  divorce.  (Letourneau,
La  Femme,  p.  308.)

2  Among  the Todas  the  wife  belongs  to  the  elder  brother,  but  the
younger  brothers  also  have  rights  over  her  as  they  grow  up,  and  an  extra
lover  is  permitted  as  well.  (Reclus,  p.  196.) Polyandry  is,  however,  dis
appearing  except  among  the  indigent. According  to  Westermarck  (p.  453)
there  are  only  three  cases  in  Asia  in  which  polyandry  is  not  limited  to
brothers — viz.  the  Nairs,  Khasias,  and  certain  Cossacks,  but  Letourneau
(La  Femme,  p.  216)  denies  that  it  is  strictly  limited  to  brothers  in  Thibet.

3  Compare Csesar's account  of  the  ancient  Britons  : "  Uxores  habent
deni  duodenique inter  se  communes,  et  maxime fratres cum fratribus
parentesque cum  liberis  ;  sed,  si  qui  sunt  ex  his  nati,  eorum  habentur
liberi,  a  quibus  primum  virgines  quaeque  deductae  sunt."  (B.  G.,  v.  14.)
That  is,  there  was  a  chief  husband  and  the  rest  were  secondary. Among
the  polyandrous  tribes  of  primitive  Arabia  the  wife,  according  to  Strabo,
passed  the  night  with  the  elder  brother,  but  the  others  had  access  to  her.
(Starcke,  p.  137.) For  the  Nairs,  see  Reclus,  162.


MARRIAGE  AND  THE POSITION OF  WOMEN 137

there  are  differences  quite  parallel  to  those  which  distinguish
polygamy  from  concubinage.  All  the  husbands,  that  is,  may
have  equal  rights,  or  there  may  be  one  chief  husband  and  others
inferior  and  secondary  to  him.  Of  such  a  character  is  the
secondary  husband  who  assumes  both  the  rights  and  the  duties
of  the  proper  husband  in  his  absence  among  the  Aleuts.1  Some
peoples  have  the  punishment — to  our  eyes  the  very  paradoxical
punishment — for  adultery  that  the  paramour  on  detection  is
compelled  to  become  a  secondary  husband  and  contribute  to  the
maintenance  of  the  family.'2

3.  Of  group  marriage,  again,  more  than  one  variety  is
abstractly  possible,  though  as  here  the  evidence  becomes  scantier
it  is  not  so  easy  to  say  which  types,  if  any,  have  been  actually
represented  in  history.  Indeed  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  certain
that  any  such  institution  as  the  actual  marriage  of  two  groups,  as
distinct  from  a  combination  of  poly  gamy '  and  polyandry  with
certain  marriage  taboos,  has  ever  existed.  As  the  whole  subject
is  involved  in  controversy,  it  will  be  well  to  summarize  what  is

1  Keclus,  p.  66-67.  Among  the  Thlinkeets  and  Koloshes  a  younger  brother
is  preferred  for  this  purpose.  Secondary  husbands  occur  among  the  Papua?.
(Kohler,  Z.f.  V.  B.,  1900,  p.  334.)

-  Among  the  Konyagas,  if  the  paramour  is  a  member  of  the  husband  s
family  the  latter  may  compel  him  to  obey  his  orders  and  those  of  the  wife,
with  whom  henceforth  the  association  is  legitimate.  (Reclus,  p.  67.)
Altogether  Westermarck  enumerates  some  thirty-six  instances  of  tribes
practising  polyandry  (p.  450).  To  these  must  be  added  the  people  of
Langerote  and  Portaventura  in  the  Canary  Islands  in  the  sixteenth  century
(Letourueau,  p.  303),  and  in  antiquity  the  Arabs  and  British  (Westermarck,
p.  454).  The  case  of  the  primitive  Aryans  in  India  is  doubtful.  The  two
Aswins  in  the  Rig  Veda  win  one  damsel  as  the  prize  of  a  chariot  race,  and
she  acknowledges  their  "  husbandship."  In  the  Mahabharata  Draupadi  is
won  by  the  eldest  of  five  Pandava  princes  and  becomes  the  wife  of  them


cohabited  with  ten  brothers  "  whose  souls  had  been  purified  with  penance."
Mayne  (Hindu  Laic  and  Usage,  p.  64)  points  out  that  these  were  bad
precedents,  being  cases  of  saints  who  were  above  ordinary  laws.  He  adds
that  in  the  Eamayana  polyandry  is  mentioned  with  abhorrence,  and  sums
up  in  favour  of  the  view  that  sexual  looseness  rather  than  recognized
polyandry  is  indicated.  (Mayne,  p.  65,  4th  ed.)

In  Sparta  a  secondary  husband  was  sometimes  tolerated  for  the  sake  of
increasing  the  family — of  &v5pes  (fiovKovrai)  aSeA^ous  rois  iraiffl  irpoff\a/j.f}dveiv
o*  TOV  juei/  yevovs  Kal  TTJS  Swa/uecos  KOLVcavovffi,  TWV  8e  xp'7jtl*TaJI/  °"/c  o-vrnroiovvrat,

(Xenophon,  Hep.  Lac.,  i.  9,  quoted  in  Grote,  Part  II.,  chap.  vi.  p.  520.)


138  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

actually  found  in  a  leading  case.  Among  the  Central  Australian
tribes  two  types  of  marriage  custom  have  been  distinguished  by
Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen.  The  first  which  specially  concerns
us  is  that  practised  among  the  Urabunna.  The  tribe  is  divided
into  two  classes,  and  these  classes  are  exogamous — that  is  to
say,  a  man  must  not  marry  within  his  class,  but  must  choose  his
wife  from  the  other.  Secondly,  there  are  distinct  totems  within
the  tribe,  and  these  are  similarly  exogamous.  Thirdly,  each  of
the  two  classes  is  divided  into  four  groups,  and  in  choosing  a
wife  a  man  is  restricted  to  one  of  these  groups.  How  the  group
division  is  arrived  at  need  not  concern  us  for  the  present.  The
point  is  merely  that  there  exists  for  any  given  group  of  men  a
definite  group  of  women  with  whom  they  may  marry,  and  who
are  called  their  Nupas.  So  far,  then,  our  result  is  that  there  are
in  the  tribe  a  group  of  men  and  of  women  who  are  Nupa  to
each  other — that  is,  potential  husbands  and  wives.  To  come  now
to  the  actual  marriage,  a  man  will  have  one  or  more  of  his
Nupas  assigned  to  him  as  his  wives.  He  will  also  have  others
to  whom  he  is  Piriaungaru — that,  is  he  has  access  to  them  under
certain  conditions.  Similarly  a  woman  may  be  Piriaungaru  to
several  men,  and  lastly  a  man  may  lend  his  wife  to  any  of  her
Nupas,  and  on  the  occasion  of  a  visit,  for  example,  is  expected
as  a  matter  of  courtesy  and  good  feeling  to  do  so.  Thus  the
husband  has  only,  so  to  say,  a  preferential  right  in  his  wife,  and
the  wife  in  the  husband.  The  husband  will  have  a  secondary
right  to  other  women  as  his  Piriaungaru,  while  his  wives  are  in
turn  Piriaungaru  to  other  men.1

1  In  the  Dieri  tribe  there  is  both  individual  and  group  marriage.  In
the  latter  case  the  headman  allots  certain  men  and  women  (subject  to  the
clan  or  totem  restriction)  to  one  another  as  Pirauru,  but  their  rights,  as  the
different  husbands  and  wives  are  often  members  of  different  local  groups,
are  exercised  mainly  when  the  groups  meet.  When  they  separate  the  right
of  the  Noa  or  principal  husband  predominates.  (A.  W.  Howitt,  The  Organiz
ation  of  Aiistralian  Tribes,  Transactions  of  Royal  Society  of  Victoria,  vol.  i.,
pt.  ii.,  pp.  124-7.)

The  custom  of  the  Arunta  and  other  Central  Australian  tribes  is  still
further  removed  from  a  true  group  marriage,  as  here  there  are  no
Piriaungaru.  A  woman  is  restricted  to  one  man  unless  he  lends  her.
What  suggests  group  marriage,  apart  from  the  nomenclature  of  relationships,
is  (1)  that  the  name  for  wife  is  the  group  name  Unawa,  the  term  (corre
sponding  to  Nupa)  applied  to  all  women  of  the  class  with  whom  the  man
may  lawfully  marry  ;  (2)  that  wives  are  freely  lent  within  the  group  and
enjoyed  promiscuously  at  festivals.  How  much  stress  is  to  be  laid  on  this


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 139

Now  as  it  stands  this  scheme  of  marriage  may  be  classified  as
a  form  of  polyandry  combined  with  polygamy,  such  as  we  have
already  met  with  among  the  Nairs,  only  complicated  by  the
taboos  which  limit  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  to  the  two

is  not  easy  to  determine.  It  is  certain  that  the  class  restrictions  on  marriage
are  held  much  more  vital  by  most  savages  (whatever  their  marriage
customs)  than  the  marriage  tie  itself.  Among  the  Australians  Messrs.
Spencer  and  Gillen  remark"  that  jealousy  is  little  developed,  adultery  is  at
most  an  infringement  of  rights  of  property  (so  also  among  North  American
Indians,  see  Wait/,,  iii.  p.  131),  wife  lending  is  habitual,  and  divorce  is  easy.
Under  these  circumstances  the  very  use  of  the  term  marriage  can  only  be
justified  by  the  difficulty  of  finding  any  other.  It  is  not  marriage  as  we
'understand  the  relation,  and  the  tie,  whatever  we  call  it,  is  exceedingly  looso.
On  the  other  hand,  the  taboos  which  mark  out  special  classes  for  each  other
are  among  the  most  sacred  laws  of  the  tribe.  Generally  speaking,  these
restrictions  are  of  a  negative  character — a  man  must  not  marry  within  his
totem,  or  his  clan,  but  sometimes,  owing  to  the  multiplication  of  restrictions,
particularly  in  the  form  of  classificatory  relationships  (of  which  the
Australian  class  divisions  are  really  a  case),  the  result  is  to  confine  the
intending  spouse  to  a  specific  group.  This  group  will  then  consist  of  his
Nupa  or  Unawa.  and  so  it  is  easy  for  him  to  change  his  wife  within  the
group  and  impossible  for  him  to  take  one  outside  it  ;  and  as  this  applies  to
all  the  men  and  all  the  women  we  may  say  that  the  two  groups  are  more
strictly  bound  together  than  any  individuals  within  it,  and  this  we  may,  if
we  please,  term  group  marriage.  But  the  expression  is  undesirable  unless
deliberately  intended  to  suggest  the  theory  of  an  earlier  form  in  which  men
and  women  were  actually  united  by  groups.

The  real  importance  of  these  isolated  and  partial  illustrations  of  group
marriage  lies  in  their  association  with  the  classificatory  system  of  counting
kinship.  In  name,  an  Australian  has  not  one  father,  but  a  group  of  fathers,
i.  e.  all  the  potential  husbands  of  his  mother  ;  not  one  brother,  but  a  group
of  brothers,  i.  e.  all  the  sons  of  his  potential  fathers,  and  so  on.  This
system  of  naming  is  widely  spread  in  parts  of  the  world  where  there  is
little  or  no  trace  of  group  marriage.  Those  who  uphold  group  marriage
argue  (1)  that  this  method  of  reckoning  kinship  is  the  only  possible  method
where  group  marriage  exists,  (2)  that  no  other  satisfactory  explanation  of
its  origin  and  meaning  has  ever  been  put  forward,  (3)  that  we  can  under
stand  its  existence  where  individual  marriage  now  prevails  if  we  suppose
group  marriage  to  have  existed  previously.  If  this  is  granted  it  is
tempting  to  argue  further  to  a  general  theory  of  the  origin  of  marriage,
according  to  which  its  history  would  begin  (1)  with  the  temporary  mating
of  a  man  and  woman.  This  would  be  restricted  (2)  by  a  taboo  on  all
women  recognized  as  of  the  same  blood  or  of  the  same  totem— the  concep
tion  of  unity  being  in  any  case  magical — as  the  man.  This  would  yield
group  marriage  with  such  imperfect  individual  appropriation  as  we  find
among  the  Urabunna,  and  then  would  develop  (3)  into  a  more  permanent
appropriation  of  certain  women  to  a  man  or  men.  But  these  considerations
lead  into  a  region  of  hypothesis  which  lies  outside  the  plan  of  the  present
work,  the  object  of  which  is  to  analyze  and  compare  institutions  which  we
find,  not  to  postulate  institutions  which  we  do  not  find.

Cases  in  which  a  man  marries  his  wife's  sisters  or  possibly  certain  other
relatives  along  \vith  her  are  partial  developments  of  polygamy  rather  than


140  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

groups  which  are  Nupa  to  each  other.  It  is  possible  to  explain
the  system  as  the  relic  of  earlier  customs  where  the  two  Nupa
groups  were  actually  married  to  each  other,  so  that  intercourse
between  them  would  be  promiscuous.  This,  however,  is  an
inference  as  to  the  probability  of  which  others  must  determine.
What  we  actually  find  is  not  this  marriage  of  two  groups,  but
exceedingly  loose  relations,  polygamous  and  polyandrous,  within
|  the  groups  combined  with  strict  taboo  outside  them.

Where  the  marital  relation  becomes  very  loose  we  approach
promiscuity,  or  the  sheer  negation  of  marriage,  as  between  all
who  are  not  separated  from  each  other  by  any  taboo.  If  such
taboos  also  fail,  we  get  complete  promiscuity.  Does  this  exist  ?
Dr.  Westermarck1  enumerates  some  thirty-one  cases  in  which
it  has  been  alleged.  But  in  the  majority  of  these  it  is  also
denied  by  other  authorities,  and  in  several  the  allegation  is
known  to  be  false.  There  remain  a  number  of  cases  in  which
the  marital  relation  is  so  loose  that  the  husband  sinks  into  the
position  of  a  lover,  temporarily  visiting  the  woman's  house  and
readily  dismissed  at  will.  Sheer  promiscuity  is  probably  to  be
regarded  rather  as  the  extreme  of  looseness  in  the  sexual
relation  than  as  a  positive  institution  supported  by  social
sanctions.2

group  marriages,  and  the  institution  of  the  Omaha,  quoted  by  Kohler  (Z.  f.
V.  E.,  1897,  p.  320)  as  a  case  of  group  marriage,  where  a  man  marries  the
aunt  and  sister  or  niece  of  his  wife,  while  on  his  death  the  widows  pass  to
his  brothers,  is  a  combination  of  this  form  of  polygamy  with  the  levirate.

1  Westermarck,  pp.  52-55.

2  The  statement  of  Herodotus  about  the  Massagetae  (Bk.  i.  chap.  216)  and
of  Cosmas  of  Prague  (eleventh  century  A.D.)  about  the  ancient  Bohemians
are  reducible  to  this. Cosmas  writes,  "  Connubia  erant  communia. Naru
more  pecudum  singulas  ad  noctes  novos  probant  hymenaeos,  et  surgente
aurora  .  .^ .  ferrea  amoris  rumpunt  vincula." (Kovalevsky,  Modern  Customs
and  Ancient  Laws  of  Russia,  p.  10.) Post  gives  as  instances  of  peoples
among  whom  "  marriage  relations  are  almost  unrecognizable,"  tribes  of  Cali
fornia  and  the  coast  of  Venezuela,  aborigines  of  Brazil  and  some  Peruvian
tribes,  six  instances  in  Oceania,  three  in  India,  and  four  in  Africa. (Etlvn.
Jurisprudent,  i.  52.) He  adds  further  instances,  making  seven  in  all  for
Africa. (Afrifc. Jurisp.,  p. 301.) Among  the  Wintuns  of  California,
according  to  Powers,  a  man  generally  pays  nothing  for  his  wife,  but  merely
"  takes  up  with  her." If  (not  being  a  headman)  he  takes  a  second  wife,
the  two  wives  fight  till  one  is  driven  out,  while  the  husband  looks  on  and
abides  in  the  lodge  of  the conqueror  or  follows the  vanquished  as  he
chooses. (Tribes  of  California, p. 238.) Can this  relation  be called
marriage  1


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 141

4.  The  looser  types  of  marriage are  almost,  if  not  entirely,
confined  to  savage  and  barbarous  races. It  is  here  if  anywhere
that we find promiscuity and group marriage. It is here,
certainly,  that  we  find  the  marital  relationship  so  loose  as  to
approach  promiscuity  and  group  marriage. It  is  here  also  that
we  find  polyandry — a  custom  practised  by  no  people  with  any
pretension  to  civilization  except  the  Thibetans  and  the  ancient
"Spartans. Polygamy,  on  the  other  hand,  while  also  very  common
among  uncivilized  peoples,  may  be  said  to  dominate  the  middle
civilizations,  and  monogamy  the  higher. But  here  we  must
guard against too sweeping statements. Monogamy, and a
strict  monogamy  too,  is  found  in  several  quite  savage  peoples,
including  among  them  some  of  the  very  lowest. The  Veddahs
and  Andamanese  have  been mentioned. Elsewhere  it  occurs
sporadically,  it is impossible  to  see  for  what  specific  reason,
among races which are generally polygamous. Thus poly
gamy  and  easy  divorce  are  both  general l  throughout  Oceania,
but  among  the  Dorians  of  New  Guinea  there  is  neither  poly
gamy  nor  concubinage. Among the  Indian hill  tribes  there
are several  instances. Some of  the Naga  tribes  are  mono
gamous,  some  polygamous. The  Karens  have  only  one  wife  ;
the Santals take a second  only if necessary  to  obtain an
heir;  but  in  all  these  cases  divorce  is  allowed. The  Kukis  are
polygamous,  but  the  people  called  the  Old  Kukis  keep  to  one

i-»  i  1  "R  f" 7

wife.  Monogamy  occurs  among  some  of  the  ruder  Malayan
tribes.  Of  the  Central  Asian  peoples  the  Kara  Tangut  nomads
are  mentioned  by  Ratzel  as  monogamous.  Monogamy  is  rare
among  the  North  American  Indians,2  but  it  occurs  in  a  few
tribes  of  South  America,3  Polygamy  is  the  general  rule  among
the  Negro  and  Bantu  races,  but  instances  of  monogamy  are
found  among  peoples  of  Northern  Africa  as  the  Touaregs  and
the  Beni  Mzab.

1  Kohler  states,  however,  that  among  Papuan  tribes  polygamy  is  some
times  permitted  only  with  the  consent  of  the  first  wife.  (Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.
Rwt.,  1900,  p.  349.)

a  Instances  are  the  Yuroks  of  California,  and  the  Karoks— among
whom  bigamy  is  not  tolerated  even  in  a  chief,  and,  what  is  still  rarer,  a  man
may  own  as  many  women  for  slaves  as  he  can  purchase,  but  cohabitation
with  more  than  one  brings  obloquy  (Powers,  p.  22)— and  the  Klamaths
(ib.,  p.  405.)  For  other  cases  see  Westermarck,  p.  435.

3  Schmidt,  Z.  f.  V.  E.,  1898,  p.  304,  enumerates  five  instances.


142  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

We  shall  understand  the  occurrence  of  such  exceptions  better,
if  we  bear  in  mind  what  precisely  is  meant  both  by  monogamy
and  by  polygamy  when  these  institutions  are  attributed  to  a
!  rude  tribe.  Whether  monogamous  or  polygamous,  savage  tribes
'  usually  tolerate  divorce  on  very  easy  terms,  especially  for  the
;  husband.  But  the  division  between  a  form  of  monogamy  which
easily  admits  a  change  of  wives  and  sheer  polygamy  is  no  very
.deep  one.  On  the  other  side,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  though
polygamy  in  one  form  or  another  is  ordinarily  permitted  in
uncivilized  races,  it  must  not  be  supposed  to  be  the  rule  among
many  peoples.  Generally  speaking,  the  numbers  of  the  sexes  aio
approximately  equal.  There  are  exceptions  to  this  in  certain
races  which  partly  account  for  the  abnormal  development  of
polygamy  among  them,  but  where  the  relative  numbers  are
normal  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  arithmetic  that  either  monogamy
must  be  the  prevalent  practice,  or  a  great  number  of  men  must
,,  go  without  wives.  In  point  of  fact,  poverty,  as  well  as  law  or
'•'  custom,  fights  on  behalf  of  monogamy.  It  is  in  most  cases  only
the  comparatively  rich  and  powerful  who  have  a  large  harem,
and  this  is  one  reason  among  others  why  polygamy  is  less
developed  in  the  lowest  races,  and  the  possession  of  many  wives
comes  about  when  wealth  and  population  are  alike  growing.
When  we  speak  of  polygamy  being  the  normal  custom  of  un
civilized  races,  therefore,  we  mean  the  permission  of  polygamy,
and  it  is  this  permission  that  exists  almost  everywhere  through
out  the  savage  and  barbaric  world  and  among  the  lower  civiliza
tions.  We  should,  then,  distinguish  between  an  ethical  monogamy,
based  on  the  belief  that  it  is  wrong  to  have  more  than  one  wife,
and  an  habitual  monogamy,  based  on  the  practical  difficulty  of
obtaining  and  maintaining  more  than  one  wife.  Where,  owing
to  general  poverty  and  the  equality  of  conditions — which  would
bar  the  making  of  exceptions  in  favour  of  rich  men  or  chiefs —
the  practice  of  monogamy  has  become  universal,  and  as  such  is
of  long  standing,  it  would  harden  into  a  custom  (sustained  by
whatever  sanctions  are  recognized)  without  implying  any
very  great  advance  in  the  ethical  conception  of  marriage.
And  this  may  account  for  some  of  the  cases  mentioned,
and  in  particular  for  the  point  often  noted,  that  it  is  the
ruder  tribe  which  is  monogamous,  while  the  growth  of  wealth


MARRIAGE  AND  THE  POSITION  OF  WOMEN 143

in  neighbouring  peoples  enables  richer  individuals  to  indulge
in  a  harem.1  We  shall  not,  then,  be  far  wrong  in  concluding
that  polygamy,  limited,  often  very  narrowly,  by  poverty
and  the  relative  numbers  of  the  sexes,  is  the  prevalent
typo  of  marriage  in  uncivilized  society.2  Of  the  development
in  the  civilized  world  we  shall  speak  more  in  detail  later  on.
Polyandry,  on  the  other  hand,  is  by  comparison  an  exceptional
practice,  the  principal  causes  of  which  are  most  probably  poverty
and  a  deficiency  in  the  number  of  women.  On  the  evidence
before  us  it  is  hardly  to  be  described  as  an  institution  belonging
to  one  of  the  great  types  of  social  organization.

5.  II.  Impediments  to  Marriage.

A  quite  distinct  classification  of  marriage  systems  could  be
made  on  the  basis  of  the  prohibitions  which  almost  everywhere
restrict,  in  greater  or  less  decree,  the  choice  of  a  husband  or

O  O

wife.  These  prohibitions  exhibit  a  rich  variety  of  differences,
and  their  meaning  and  origin  are  extremely  obscure.  We  have
already  noted  that  they  fall  into  two  great  divisions.  On  the
one  hand,  there  are  restrictions  forbidding  marriage  within  a
certain  group — laws  of  exogamy ;  on  the  other,  and  quite
possibly  among  the  same  people,  there  are  rules  forbidding
it  outside  a  certain  group — laws  of  endogamy.  Both  kinds
of  restriction  appear  in  a  great  variety  of  forms.  Thus
endogamy  may  take  the  form  of  prohibition  to  marry  outside

1  Travellers  and  ethnologists  sometimes  describe  people  as  monogamous
who  in  fact  are  so  only  by  prevailing  habit.  The  Iroquois,  for  instance,always
figure  among  monogamous  peoples,  ami  no  doubt  that  form  of  marriage  pre
vailed  with  them  and  became  the  strict  rule. Thus  Morgan  (Leaf/we  of  the
Iroquois,  p.  324)  states  that  polygamy  was  forbidden  and  never  became  a
practice,  but  from  Coldan's  account  given  in  Schoolcraft's  work,  i.  221,  it
appears  that  it  existed,  though  rarely  practised,  in  his  time. Repeatedly  we
hear  that  the  mass  of  the  people  are  monogamous,  but  that  the  chiefs  or  the
wealthier  tribesmen  have  several  wives  or  concubines. This  was  the  case
with  the  ancient  Germans. Polygamy  was  rare  in  practice,  but  was  legal.

2  Dr.  Westermarck  (p.  435)  enumerates  in  all  between  forty  and  fifty  cases
of  savage  and  barbarian  tribes  which  are  monogamous. Many  of  these  are
single  tribes,  which  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  among  their  kindred
and  compatriots. It  seems  to  be  only  among  the  Hill  Tribes  of  India  and
the  Malay  region,  which  are  rich  in  varieties  of  marriage  customs,  that  any
number  of  monogamous  tribes  are  found. Post  (Eth.  Juris.,  i.  58,  59),  after
pointing  out  that  innumerable  peoples  live  in  practical  monogamy,  adds,
"  Eine  wirkliche Zwangsmonogamie  ist eine verhaltnissmassig seltene
Erscheinung."


144  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

the  clan,  as  in  old  days  among  the  gypsies,1  or  the  caste  as  in
India,  or  even  the  family.  In  the  ancient  world  foreigners
could  rarely  intermarry  unless  their  respective  states  had  the  jus
connubii,  and  there  were  generally  barriers  on  the  intermarriage
of  slave  or  serf  with  free  men  or  women,  and  a  social,  if  not  a
legal,  bar  on  the  marriage  of  noble  and  commoner.  In  the
modern  world  legal  barriers  have  for  the  most  part  disappeared,
,''  and,  socially  speaking,  equality  in  education  alone  is  exacted.2
Far  more  various  and  difficult  to  understand  are  the  rules  of
exogamy.  Marriage  may  be  forbidden  within  the  totem,  as
among  many  North  American  Indians  and  some  Australian
tribes ;  within  the  clan,  as  among  the  Nagas  3  and  Somali,4  etc. ;
within  the  village,  as  among  the  Battas5;  or  the  tribe,  as  in
Rotuma.6  It  may  also  be  prohibited  within  the  kindred,  and
here  again  great  differences  appear.  All  the  kindred,  so  far  as
relationship  is  traceable,  may  be  prohibited,  as  among  the
Andamanese  and  the  Yoruba.7  Or  the  prohibition  may  be
applied  to  all  the  kin  on  that  side  to  which  the  greater  im
portance  ,is  attached,  as  in  the  Brahmanic  and  Chinese  pro
hibitions.8  Where  relationships  are  of  the  "  classificatory  "  type
e.  g.  where  the  mother  and  all  her  sisters  are  addressed  by  the
same  name,  while  the  daughters  of  all  that  group  of  women
again  have  one  form  of  address  in  common,  the  prohibition  of

1  Post,  Grundriss,  i.  33. See  ib.  for  several  instances  in  which  it  is  the
duty  of  relations  to  marry. I  am  not  clear  that  it  is  distinctly  forbidden
to  marry  another  than  a  relation.

2  There  are  exceptions,  such  as  the  prohibition  of  marriage  with  negroes
in twenty-two  of  the  United  States,  with Indians  in  four  states,  with
Mongolians  four  states. (Parly.  Papers,  Miscell.,  No. 2,  1894,  p.  155.)
Otherwise  the  intermarrying  of  royal  families  is  the  principal  exception.  In
the  German  code  the  marriage  of  a  high  noble  with  a  commoner  involves
certain  disabilities. (Westermarck,  373.)

3  Godden,  J.  A.  I.,  xxvi.  173.  4  Post,  A.  J.,  i.  383.

5  Waitz,  v.  i.  186.

6  Gardiner,  J.  A.  I.,  xxvii.  478. There  appear  to  be  sporadic  cases  of
prohibition  within  the  same  caste,  or  the  same  religious  division. See  Post,
Grundriss,  i.  41.

7  Man,  J.  A.  I.,  xii.  126. Ellis,  Yoruba- speaking  Peoples,  p.  176. The
Andamanese  recognize  adoption  and  affinity  as  bars,  but,  through  want  of
records,  fail  to  trace  kinship  beyond  the  third  generation. (Man,  J.  A.  L,
xii.  127.)

8  See  Chapter  ii.  p.  56. If  the  clan  is  based  on  father-right,  it  will  be
seen  that the  prohibition  to  marry  an agnate is, at least  in theory,
equivalent  to  prohibition  of  marriage  within  the  clan. Identity  of  name,
again,  is  taken  as  equivalent  to  common  membership  of  a  putative  clan.


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 145

marriage  may  extend  to  all  members  of  the  group,  and  society
will  divide  itself  into  classes  within  which  a  man  may  marry,
and  classes  within  which  the  women  are  strictly  taboo  to  him.
This  class  division  of  society  runs  through  the  Australian  peoples.1
Again,  kinship  may  be  reckoned  by  degrees,  as  among  ourselves,
and  exogamy  may  be  enjoined  for  certain  degrees  only,  while
beyond  them  marriage  is  permitted. In  point  of  fact,  under
one  rule  or  another,  prohibition  of  marriage  within  the  first  and
second  degrees  (parent  and  child,  or  brother  and  sister)  is  almost
universal,  if  we  take  account  only  of  the  basis  of  relationship
recognized  by  any  given  people. Thus,  if  the  totem  is  exogamous,
and  passes  by  mother-right,  all  kindred  through  the  mother  will
be  excluded  from  marriage,  but  brother  and  sister  by  the  same
father  will  be  no  relations,  and  may  intermarry. Indeed,  if  the
principle  is  carried  to  its  logical  conclusion,  the  same  will  be
true  of  father  and  daughter. On  the  other  hand,  the  totemic
prohibition  may  be  eked  out  by  a  custom  forbidding  or  dis
couraging  the marriage of  near  relations  as  such. Thus,  in
New  Britain  we  are  told  that  though  legally  a  man  may  marry
his  brother's  daughter,  since  she  is  not  of  his  totem,  yet  in  point
of  fact  such  unions  excite  great  repugnance.2 Apart  from  cases
in  which  kinship  is  only  reckoned  on  one  side,  so  that  inter
marriage  is  allowed  within  the  half-blood,  the permission of
incest  within the nearest  degree  appears  very  rare. Indeed,
with  this  reservation  we  may  say  that  the  nearer  the  relation
ship  (counting  that  of  the  son  to  his  mother  as  closer  than  that
of  daughter  to  father),  the  rarer  is  the  failure  to  prohibit.3 Such
failure  probably  occurs  most  often  in  consequence  of  a  strongly
endogamous  tendency,  in  the  form  of  a  desire  to  maintain  purity
of  blood. Hence  we  find  cases  of  in-and-in breeding  among

1  Among  53  peoples  examined  by  Tylor,  who  count  relationship  on  the
classificatory  system,  33  are  at  present  exogamous. (J.  A.  I.,  xviii.  264 )

2  Danks,  J.  A.  I.,  xviii.  283.

3  The  marriage  of  father  and  daughter,  as  well  as  that  of  brother  and
sister,  is  said  to  be  allowed  among  the  Aleuts. (Reclus,  65.) According  to
Post,  A.  J.,  i.  382,  there  is  no  case  in  which  incest  with  a  mother  is  allowed
in  Africa,  but  among  the  Wanyoro,  sister  and  even  daughter  marriage
occur. Incest  between  parents  and  children  is  also  found  in  some  South
American tribes. (Starcke, The Primitive Family,  224. Cf. Schmidt,
Z.  f.  V.  E.,  1898,  p.  304.) Among  some  of  the  Veddahs  the  younger  sister
is the regular wife. (Sarasin, Enjebnisse naturivissenschaftUcher
Forschungen  auf  Ceylon,  iii. 465, quoting Bailey.)

VOL. I.


146  MOEALS  IN  EVOLUTION

royal  families,  e.  g.  in  ancient  Persia  and  Egypt,  and  among
high  castes  as  the  Ulitaos  of  Micronesia.1  But  the  prohibitions
may  be  carried  far  beyond  the  first  and  second  degrees.  The
Koman  Church  still  forbids  marriage  to  third  cousins,  and  the
attempt  was  made  to  carry  it  much  further.  Again,  relationship
may  or  may  not  be  constituted  by  marriage.  In  many  cases  a
son  inherits  his  father's  wives,  with  the  exception  of  his  own
mother,  along  with  the  rest  of  the  family  property.  We  find
the  Jewish  legislators,  and,  later,  Mohammed,  setting  themselves
against  this  practice.  On  the  other  side,  rules  of  affinity  may
be  construed  as  severely  as  those  of  blood  relationship.  On  this
method  an  immense  extension  of  the  forbidden  degrees  was
effected  by  the  mediasval  church,2  which  was  still  further
widened  by  the  creation  of  a  spiritual  affinity  between  god
parents  of  the  same  child.  The  effect  of  this  complex  mass  of
prohibitions  was  such  that  hardly  any  marriage  was  clearly
valid,  while  dispensations  were  and  still  are  attainable  allowing
unions  even  between  uncle  and  niece.  Protestantism  swept
away  this  mass  of  prohibitions,  and  for  the  most  part  allowed
marriage  of  first  cousins,  and  confined  the  restrictions  of  affinity
to  the  direct  line.3

Of  these  very  various  rules  it  seems  possible  to  say  three
things  generally.  The  first  is  that  they  tend  to  bar  marriage
between  people  who  are  bound  together  by  some  other  import
ant  relation.  Thus  the  totem  or  the  clan,  which  is  exogamous,  is
also  as  a  rule  bound  in  a  kind  of  brotherhood  to  mutual  assistance.
Secondly,  the  particular  relation  which  is  the  commonest  bar
is  that  based  on  blood  kinship.  Thirdly,  the  violation  of  the
rules  of  exogamy,  whatever  they  are,  is  generally  regarded  with
peculiar  horror.  It  is  often  an  object  of  public  vengeance  when
no  other  crimes,  except  perhaps  that  of  witchcraft,  have  been

1  Sister  marriage  was  common  in  ancient  Egypt. (W.  Max  Mliller,
Liebespoesie  der  alien  ^Egypten,  pp.  7-8,  and  Waitz,  v.  ii.  111.) For  other
instances  see  Westermarck,  290.

2  See  Huth,  Marriage  of  Near  Kin,  117. Huth  (op.  cit.,  120)  instances
the  repudiation  of  Ingeburga  of  Denmark  by  Philip  Augustus,  on  the  ground
that  she  belonged  to  a  family  which  had  previously  intermarried  with  the
family  of  Philip's  first  wife. It  is  fair  to  say  that  in  this  instance  the  Pope
procured  Ingeburga's  restoration.

3  The  English  prohibition  of  marriage  with  the  wife  s  sister  is  the  most
conspicuous  exception.


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 147

raised  to  that  dignity,  and  in  the  civilized  world  the  intensity  of
feeling  which  it  excites  in  no  way  diminishes.

G.  Notwithstanding  the  great  variation  in  the  forms  which  it
takes,  the  exogamic  impulse  seems  to  perform  certain  functions
which  are  fairly  constant.  Thus  (1)  it  checks  in-and-in  breed
ing,  both  intermarriage  with  near  kin,  and  often  in  the  lower
races  marriage  within  the  narrow  limits  of  the  clan  or  village,
which  in  their  isolation  would  otherwise  become  entirely  filled
with  people  related  to  one  another  by  a  network  of  cousinship.
What  precisely  are  the  physical  disadvantages  of  in-and-in
breeding  or  the  advantages  of  crossing  are,  however,  harder  to
say  than  is  popularly  supposed,  and  it  is  probable  that  this  bio
logical  side  of  the  matter  is  the  least  important  of  the  functions
served  by  exogamy.1  But  (2),  as  indicated  above  (Chap.  II.),
it  has  the  important  sociological  function  of  binding  distinct
groups  together.  (3)  A  third  function  of  more  importance  in
the  civilized  world  is  of  a  distinctively  ethical  character.  For
us  the  prohibition  of  incest  is  the  only  form  of  exogamy  which
persists,  and  incest  is  a  crime  which  affects  us  with  a  horror,  of
the  kind  we  call  instinctive,  and  which  is  certainly  not  weaker
in  civilized  than  in' barbarous  humanity.  What  is  the  meaning
of  this  horror  ?  It  is  too  real  and  deeply  rooted  to  be  explained
as  a  survival.  It  is  not  based  on  tradition  and  convention,  for  it
is  not  felt  in  relation  to  many  crimes  which  the  laws  forbid.
Thus,  among  peoples  who  accept  the  law  of  the  Roman  Church
the  marriage  of  cousins  is  forbidden,  but  frequently  occurs.  In
our  own  country  men  may  approve  or  condemn  marriage  with  a
deceased  wife's  sister,  but  any  one  who  should  put  it  on  a  par
with  incest  with  a  blood-sister  would  be  a  very  abnormally  con
stituted  person.  Is  the  horror,  then,  of  incest  instinctive  ?  The
usual  objections  to  this  view  are  based  on  a  misunderstanding  of
instinct.  It  is  said  that  the  horror  is  not  universal,  and  that
the  objects  to  which  it  is  directed  differ  widely  in  different
peoples.  But  many  instincts  in  the  animal  kingdom  fail  in
universality  and  are  modifiable  in  their  application.  And,  as
we  have  seen,  what  is  instinctive  or  hereditary  in  human  nature

1  See  the  evidence,  especially  that  of  Mr.  G.  H.  Darwin,  collected  in
Huth's  Marriage  of  Near  Kin,  chap.  viii.


148  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

becomes  more  and  more  a  feature  of  character,  a  tendency  or
disposition  to  feel  or  act  which  obtains  its  actual  direction  from
experience,  and  especially  from  education  and  social  tradition.
Hence,  to  say  that  the  horror  of  incest  is  instinctive  is  merely
to  say  that  there  is  in  it  something  rooted  in  the  character  which
the  average  man  inherits,  but  it  still  remains  to  determine  what
that  something  is  and  to  understand  how  it  can  be  developed  in
such  a  variety  of  ways.  Analysis  of  the  feeling  itself  seems  to
justify  the  view  of  Lotze  that  it  is  the  mind's  protest  against  the
blending  of  two  distinct  attitudes  towards  the  same  person.
Sexual  love  and  parental  love  have  an  element  in  common,  or
we  should  not  use  the  term  love  of  them  both,  but  in  other  re
spects  they  are  as  incompatible  as  oil  and  vinegar.  Even  love
and  hate  have  something  in  common,  an  intense  magnetized
interest  in  the  personality  of  another.  But  love  and  hate  cannot
fuse.  The  one  is  the  enemy  of  the  other,  and  so  is  it  also  with
the  two  fundamentally  opposed  forms  of  attachment.  That  this
is  so  is  a  truth  about  human  relationships  based  on  human
nature,  and  in  that  sense  the  outcome  of  an  instinct.  But  like
other  truths  of  the  same  kind  it  is  not  to  be  explained  by  calling
it  an  instinct,  but  by  analyzing  its  nature  and  explaining  its
function.  That  function  has  been,  in  earlier  stages,  to  draw
families  together  into  society,  and  at  all  stages  to  keep  distinct,
and  therefore  in  healthy  development,  the  deepest  affections  of
mankind.  The  earlier  function  being  now  superfluous,  laws  of
exogamy  tend  to  confine  themselves  to  restraint  on  the  marriage
of  that  near  kindred  between  whom  strong  relations  and  affec
tions — incompatible  with  sex  feeling — arise.  This  account
enables  us  to  understand  in  a  general  way  the  fluctuations  in
the  rules  of  exogamy  and  their  gradual  reduction  in  the  civilized
world  to  the  familiar  prohibitions.  In  the  first  place,  the  feel
ing  against  the  marriage  of  kindred  will  only  extend  to  the
kindred  recognized.  Hence,  where  mother-right  holds  we  shall
find  inadequate  provisions  against  marriage  with  the  paternal
kin.  The  relation  of  the  child  to  its  mother  is  the  first  strongly
realized,  and  remains  the  most  sacred  of  all  human  relations,
and  cases  where  the  breach  of  that  relation  is  tolerated  are  the
rarest  of  all.  We  may  take  this  relation  as  the  starting  point
of  the  prohibitions,  and  then  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  all  in


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 149

accordance  with  the  ways  of  primitive  thought  to  extend  them
to  everything  indirectly  or  remotely  associated  with  the  tabooed
relation — e.  g.  to  the  mother's  children,  her  relatives,  all  of  her
totem  or  her  name.  The  father  may  come  into  the  account  in
dependently  through  the  recognition  of  paternity  or  through
contact  with  the  mother,  and  starting  from  the  paternal  relation
the  taboo  may  be  extended  in  the  same  way.  The  eccentricities
of  exogamy,  then,  are  explained  as  arising  (1)  from  an  unduly
extended  taboo,  (2)  from  an  insufficiently  felt  recognition  of
natural  relations.  These  are  the  ordinary  faults  of  excess  and
defect  which  characterize  rude  morality,  and  are  on  the  whole
removed  as  civilization  advances.

Thus,  in  earlier  customs  we  find  rules  of  endogamy  restricting
marriage  by  clan  or  caste  exclusiveness,  and  of  exogamy  restrict
ing  it  by  rules  bearing  an  indirect  or  irregular  relation  to  the
natural  feeling  which  we  are  led  to  conceive  as  their  starting
point.  In  more  civilized  ethics  we  find  the  first  set  of  restric
tions  nearly  annihilated,  and  the  latter  reduced  to  a  simple
expression  of  the  permanent  feelings  from  which  we  suppose
them  to  emanate.  In  both  directions  the  more  civilized  ethics
tends  to  discard  rules  which  hamper  the  free  exercise  of  choice
in  accordance  with  normal  human  feeling.

7.  III.  The  Stability  of  the  Marriage  Relation.

Not  less  important  than  the  number  of  parties  to  the  union
is  the  permanence  of  the  marriage  tie,  and  on  this  basis  it
would  be  easy  to  make  a  classification  cutting  right  across  all
others.  In  many  of  the  lower  races,  as  we  have  already  seen,
the  dissolution  of  marriage  is  so  easy  and  frequent  that  it
becomes  a  question  whether  the  term  marriage  is  at  all  ap
plicable.  In  other  cases  the  marriage  bond  is  as  strictly
regarded  as  in  the  Roman  Church.  Here,  again,  we  cannot
find  a  continuous  and  unbroken  development  in  any  single
direction,  but  once  more  we  can  with  tolerable  accuracy  lay
down  that  certain  tendencies  predominate  at  given  stages  of
culture.  This  will  be  clear  if  once  again  we  begin  by  distin
guishing  the  different  possibilities,  and  then  briefly  indicate  the
stage  of  culture  at  which  each  is  or  has  been  most  frequently
realized.


150  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Divorce  may  (1)  be  perfectly  free  to  either  party ;  (2)  it  may
be  free  to  both  by  mutual  consent ;  (3)  it  may  be  absolutely  at
the  will  of  the  husband  or  (4)  of  the  wife.  Next,  (5)  it  may  be
free  to  one  party  or  both  on  obtaining  the  consent  of  the  family,
the  clan,  or  a  court ;  (6)  it  may  be  open  to  either  party  on  certain
conditions.  These  conditions  are  infinitely  various,  but  we  ought
to  distinguish  as  cases  differing  in  principle  (a)  those  in  which
the  only  condition  is  of  the  nature  of  a  fine,  usually  taking
the  form  of  forfeiture  of  dowry  or  the  restoration  of  the  bride
price,  and  (5)  those  in  which  the  essential  condition  is  some
fault  or  defect  in  the  other  party  to  the  marriage.  Further,  (c)
it  may  be  open  on  the  same  conditions  to  man  and  wife,  or  (d~)
on  different  conditions.  Very  often,  in  fact,  it  is  free  to  the
husband  and  allowed  under  conditions  to  the  wife.  (7)  It  may
be  wholly  forbidden,  marriage  being  indissoluble.  In  this  latter
case  a  separation  a  mensa  ct  toro  is  usually  allowed,  but  some
times  this  too  is  forbidden.

Marriage  is  indissoluble  among  the  Andamans,  some  Papuans
of  New  Guinea,  at  Watubela,  at  Lampong  in  Sumatra,  among
the  Igorrotes  and  Italones  of  the  Philippines,  the  Veddahs  of
Ceylon,1  and  in  the  Romish  Church.

Ordinarily,  however,  both  in  the  civilized  and  uncivilized
world  marriage  may  be  dissolved  either  at  pleasure  or  under
certain  conditions.  Among  uncivilized  peoples  divorce  is  not
infrequently  free  to  either  party.  The  man  dismisses  his  wife
without  ceremony,  or  the  discontented  or  injured  woman
leaves  her  husband's  house  without  more  ado  and  runs  back
to  her  own  relations,2  or  they  part  by  mutual  agreement.3  In
the  higher  stages  of  barbarism  and  in  primitive  civilization  the
consolidation  of  the  family  under  the  growing  power  of  the
husband  tends  to  make  divorce  rarer  and  more  difficult.  Some
times  it  drops  almost  entirely  out  of  use.  Thus  it  was  a  Roman
boast  that  though  divorce  was  not  legally  impossible  before  the
case  of  Sp.  Carvilius  Ruga  in  B.C.  231,  no  instance  had  been

1  I  take  the  foregoing  from  Dr.  Westermarck's  list,  p.  517. He  quotes
Wilken's  opinion  that  the  same  held  good  of  the  Niasians  and  Bataks.

2  Sometimes  it  is  a  condition  that  she  returns  the  price  paid  for  her,  e.  g.
in  Soulimana  and  frequently  in  Africa. (Howard,  i.  226.)

3  This  Post  considers  to  be the  rule  under  the  clan  organization  of
society. (Post,  Grundriss,  ii.  117.)


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 151

known  since  the  foundation  of  the  city.  Sometimes,  with  less
justice,  the  power  of  divorce  is  left  to  the  husband  and  withheld
from  the  wife.  It  may  even  remain  entirely  at  the  husband's
pleasure  to  send  back  the  chattel  which  he  has  bought.  Thus  the
Hebrew  who  found  anything  unseemly  in  his  wife  merely  gave
her  a  writing  of  divorcement  and  had  done  with  her.  In  other
cases  there  was  at  least  a  pecuniary  deterrent.  The  divorcing
husband  forfeited  the  dowry,  or,  if  the  fault  was  his,  could  not
regain  the  bride  price.  He  had  to  leave  his  wife  all  the  gifts
he  had  made  to  her,  or,  finally,  if  she  had  no  such  property  of
her  own,  he  had  to  pay  a  definite  sum.  Again,  if  there  were
children,  provision  might  be  made  for  their  maintenance,  or
the  right  of  divorce  itself  might  in  this  case  bo  withdrawn.1
Similarly,  where  the  wife  lias  the  right  of  divorce,  she  may
incur  pecuniary  forfeits,  losing  her  dowry,  or  having  to  repay
the  bride  price  and  return  the  presents  made  at  or  during
marriage.

Such  pecuniary  penalties  render  marriage  relatively  stable;
but  a  further  step  is  taken  when  it  is  dissoluble  only  under
assigned  conditions.  These  again  show  extraordinary  variations.
The  husband  is  generally  able  to  divorce  the  wife  for  unfaithful
ness,  very  often  for  sterility,  and  sometimes  2  because  she  bears
no  sons  ;  often,  too,  for  disobedience,  bodily  defects,  or  what  are
considered  moral  failings.  The  wife,  again,  often  has  the  right
of  leaving  the  husband  in  case  of  neglect,  desertion,  impotence,
or  cruelty — more  rarely  in  case  of  unfaithfulness.  As  a  rule,
the  divorced  husband  may  marry  again,  but  it  is  not  always  that
the  divorced  wife  lias  this  right,  especially  under  the  system
of  marriage  by  purchase.  Sometimes  she  is  wholly  prohibited
from  marrying ;  sometimes  she  must  refrain  till  she  lias  the
leave  of  her  former  lord  and  master.

The  customs  of  savage  and  uncivilized  peoples  as  to  divorce
vary  in  such  wild  profusion  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  make  any
general  statement  with  regard  to  them.  It  may,  however,  be
said  that,  with  the  few  exceptions  mentioned,  divorce  is  allowed ;
that  it  is  generally  free  to  the  husband  on  easy  terms,  and  very

1  E.  g. According to  Post, A. J., i.  434,  among  the  Moorish tribes
of  the  Sahara  and  the  Hottentots.

2  E.  <j.  in  Buriiiuh. (Post,  Grundriss,  ii.  114.)


152  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

often  also  to  the  wife,  or  to  the  two  parties  by  mutual  agree
ment,1  but  is  sometimes  restricted  to  special  cases,  and  that  the
development  of  the  patriarchate,  and  particularly  of  marriage
by  purchase,2  tended  to  increase  the  privileges  of  the  husband
as  compared  with  those  of  the  wife  in  this  relation.3  In  the

1  In  comparing  the  position  of  husband  and  wife,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind
that  divorce  almost  universally  sets  the  husband  free  to  marry  again,  while
the  wife,  in  a  large  number  of  cases,  especially  under  marriage  by  purchase,
is  more  or  less  narrowly  restricted  in  this  respect,  so  that  for  her,  divorce
rather  corresponds  to  what  we  call  separation. (Howard,  A  History  of
Matrimonial  Institutions,  i.  244,  245.)

2  Howard,  i.  231,  notes  the  influence  of  wife-purchase  in  this  direction.

3  Divorce  among  Savages. — Divorce  is  apparently  either  quite  free  or
open  on  very  easy  terms to either  party  among  many  North  American
Indians (Columbians, Howard, i. 238  ; Iroquois, Schoolcraft — Drake,
i.  p.  221  ;  Upper  Californians  and  Innuit,  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  K,  1897,  p.  368.)
Among  the  Yuroks  divorce  is  very  easily  accomplished  at  the  will  of  the  hus
band. (Powers,  p.  56.) In  this  last  case  the  husband  regains  the  bride  price.
It  is  free  to  both  parties  among  the  Eskimo  of  Point  Barrow  and  of  Behring
Straits  and  Pawnees.  (Howard,  i.  pp.  227, 228.)  Among  other  tribes  it  is  at  the
pleasure  of  the  husband  ;  [so  stated  of  the  North  American  Indian  generally
(Schoolcraft,  i.  171)  ; of  the  Oregons  (ib.,  v.  654)  ;  of  the  Hupa  (Powers,  p.
85)  ;  here  the  displeased  husband  gets  back  the  bride  price  ;  of  the  Dakota
(Howard,  i.  232)  ;  and  the  Abipones  (ib.). In  the  last  case,  however,  it  may
lead  to  a  feud]. Among  other  peoples  the  man  must  lose  the  bride  price
if  he  divorces  without  good  cause. (Thlinkeets,  Kohler,  Lc.) In  some  the
wife  can  leave  at  pleasure. The  Navajo  women  are  said  by  Colonel  Eaton
(Schoolcraft, iv. 217)  to  leave  their  husbands  on the  slightest  pretext.
Among  the  Digger  Indians  the  wife  leaves  the  husband  at  pleasure.  (16.,
223.) Among  the  Cegiha  the  wife's  relations  take  her  away  if  ill-treated
(Howard,  228),  and  the  Sioux  and  Dakota  women  leave  their  husbands  for
unfaithfulness  or  other  causes.  Among  the  Upper  Californians  the  deserted
husband  demands  the  return  of  the  bride  price. In  the  later  form  of
marriage  among  the  Creeks  the  bond  holds  for  a  year  only.

Among  the  tribes  of  tropical  South  America  the  power  of  the  husband  is
more  developed,  and  he  can  lend,  give,  prostitute,  sell,  or  exchange  his  wife
at  pleasure.  (Schmidt,  I.  c.,  1898,  p.  297.)  In  Brazil,  according  to  Anchieta
(quoted  in  Howard,  p.  228),  the  wife  may  leave  at  pleasure.  So  among  the
Moxos  (Ib.,  239).  The  Bonak,  Guanan,  and  Guatamalan  women  have
similar  freedom  (authorities  cited  by  Howard,  p.  239).

In  Oceania  divorce  is  generally  easy,  though  there  are  one  or  two  cases  in
which  it  appears  to  be  unknown.  In  Polynesia  divorce  by  mutual  consent
is  lawful.  (Howard,  p.  230.)  A  Tongan  husband  divorces  his  wife  by  simply
telling  her  to  go.  (Ib.,  p.  231.)  In  Micronesia  divorce  is  at  the  man's
pleasure,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  Papuan  peoples,  among  whom  the
woman,  if  she  flies,  must  return  the  bride  price,  while  the  husband,  if  in
earnest  about  it,  can  generally  reclaim  her  from  her  relatives  by  the  terrors
of  witchcraft  (Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  R,  1900,  p.  347.)  In  the  Torres  Straits
divorce  appears  to  have  been  rare.  Infidelity  and  sterility  were  the  chief
causes,  but  incompatibility  of  temper  appears  to  have  been  recognized  as
sufficient.  (Cambridge  Expedition,  p.  246.)  Among  the  Australians  the
husband  can  dismiss  his  wife  at  pleasure.  If  she  runs  away  she  belongs  to


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 153

Oriental  civilizations,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  the  inequality
has  been  pushed  still  further,  as  we  shall  presently  see  in  detail.

any  one  who  may  re-capture  her.  (Letourneau,  pp.  13  and  18.)  In  Western
Victoria  couples  may  separate  by  mutual  consent,  but  the  husband  wishing
to  divorce  his  wife  must  obtain  the  consent  of  the  chief  men  of  his  own  and
his  wife's  tribe.  She  may  also  complain  of  his  unfaithfulness  and  get  him
sent  away  for  two  or  three  moons.  (Dawson,  Australian  Aborigines,  quoted
by  Howard,  pp.  229,  230.)

In  Africa  divorce  at  the  will  of  the  husband  is  general  (Post,  A.  J.,  i.  433.)
The  corresponding  right  of  the  wife  is  rarer,  but  not  infrequent.  Some  16
cases  are  enumerated  by  Post  (Afrik.  Jurisp.,  p.  436),  but  some  of  them  are
doubtful,  or  depend  on  special  conditions.  Among  the  Fantis,  Foulahs,  and
Kaffirs  (Post.  A.  J.,  p.  438),  and  in  Kordofan  and  Baka  (Post,  A.  ,/.,  p.  439)
the  neglect  or  ill-treatment  of  the  wife  are  good  grounds  of  divorce.  Among
the  Bogosher  third  flight  is  taken  as  final.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  437.)  In  many
tribes  the  wife  can  be  divorced  for  sterility  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  439),  and  among
the  Kimbundas  the  husband  can  be  divorced  for  impotence.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.
441.)  In  many  cases  compensation  must  be  given  by  the  party  which
dissolves  the  marriage,  e.  y.  among  the  Foulahs  and  the  Kaffirs  for
groundless  repudiation.  In  Bornu  the  wife  retains  her  dowry.  (Post,
A.  J.,  pp.  442-3.)  Among  the  Banyars  she  receives  a  small  sum  and  re
tains  all  the  presents  she  has  received.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  442.)  Among  the
Basutos,  unless  guilty  of  an  offence,  she  is  entitled  to  support.  (Post,  A.J.,
p.  442.)  In  Egypt  she  can  also  claim  a  certain  provision,  and  in  Abyssinia
she  can  claim  her  dowry  as  well.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  442.)  Among  the  Bogos
she  takes  the  household  utensils  with  her,  among  the  Barea  and  Kunama
she  has  half  the  joint  property,  and  in  Morocco  a  sum  awarded  by  the
judge.  (Post,  A.  J.,  pp.  442,  443.)  If  the  woman  leaves  the  man  her  family
must  return  the  bride  price,  and  perhaps  more.  But  the  question  of
compensation  is  very  naturally  affected  by  the  circumstances  of  the  divorce.
If  the  divorcing  party  has  good  grounds  he  or  she  pays  less,  or  perhaps
pays  nothing.  Tnus  among  the  Kaffirs,  Foulahs,  Fantis,  and  in  Kordofan
the  wife  does  not  restore  the  bride  price  if  she  has  good  grounds  for
leaving  her  husband.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  445.)  Among  the  Beni  Amer,  if  it  is
the  man  who  divorces,  the  woman's  property  is  divided,  the  husband  taking
his  weapons,  and  the  wife  the  house  and  contents.  If  the  woman  divorces
the  man  for  ill-treatment  or  infidelity,  she  gets  only  one-third  of  the
common  stock  ;  if  impotence  is  the  cause  she  gets  half.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  446.)
Among  the  Yoruba  (where  father-right  holds)  the  husband  can  divorce
the  wife  and  reclaim  the  bride  price  if  she  is  unfaithful ;  otherwise  he
loses  the  price.  If  he  neglects  the  wife,  she  summons  a  palaver  of  her
relatives,  and  if  he  persists,  she  may  leave  him.  If  he  is  of  inferior  rank
he  is  liable  to  be  flogged  by  her  relations.  (Ellis,  Yorultt  Peoples,  p.  187.)
Under  mother-right,  where  the  woman  is  not  bought  out  of  her  family,
the  children  often  follow  the  mother  in  case  of  divorce.  But  this  is  not
always  the  case,  and  sometimes  the  circumstances  of  the  divorce  determine
the  children's  future.  (Post,  A.  J.,  p.  447.)

No  obstacle  is  offered  to  the  re-marriage  of  the  man,  but  under  marriage
by  purchase  the  husband  generally  retains  some  control  over  the  divorced
wife.  Among  the  Hottentots  and  Ashantis  she  cannot  re-marry  ;  among
the  Banguns,  not  in  the  same  village  ;  among  the  Kaffirs,  only  if  she  had
good  grounds  for  leaving  her  husband  ;  among  the  Marea  and  the  Habub,
not  till  her  husband  declares  her  free.  But  in  many  cases  (Post,  A.  ./.


154  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

In  the  West  the  changes  of  law  and  opinion  as  to  divorce  have
been  numerous  and  sweeping,  as  will  appear  fully  when  we  deal
with  marriage  among  civilized  peoples.  For  the  present,  we
content  ourselves  with  noting  the  prevalence  of  a  loose  and
easily  dissolved  marriage  tie  in  the  lower  stages  of  culture,
which  gives  way  to  a  binding  form  of  marriage  with  decided
privileges  for  the  husband  at  the  next  grade.  We  shall  find
this  to  be  in  line  with  a  more  general  movement.

8.  IV.  To  understand  this  movement,  we  deal  first  with  Methods
of  Marriage.  The  principal  methods  by  which  a  wife  is  obtained
in  the  uncivilized  world  come  under  four  heads  : —

a.  Capture.

b.  Purchase.

c.  Service.

d.  Consent.

p.  450,  enumerates  8)  apparently  after  a  certain  interval  she  is  free  to
re-marry.

On  the  whole,  throughout  Africa,  marriage  by  purchase  prevails,  and  the
position  of  the  wife  is  accordingly  less  favourable.

Among  the  Indian  Hill  tribes  the  variations  are  great.  The  Nair  wife
may  not  only  dismiss  any  of  her  twelve  husbands  at  pleasure,  but  may  even
let  him  be  sold  into  slavery  for  debt.  (Reclus,  Primitive  Folk,  p.  158.)
Often  divorce  is  free  to  either  party.  Instances  are  the  Todas,  Bodo
and  Dhimals  (but  here  an  adulteress  must  refund  the  bride  price),
and  the  Karens.  Among  the  Badagas  the  wife  may  leave  if  she
pleases,  but  the  husband  retains  the  children.  He  is  also  free  to  divorce
her.  (Reclus,  op.  cit.,  p.  195.)  Among  the  Nagas  there  is  a  fine  according  to
the  cause  of  the  divorce.  (Godden,  J.  A.  I.,  xxvi.  p.  177.)  Among  the  Santals
divorce  is  rare,  but  is  permitted  to  either  party  on  obtaining  the  consent
of  the  husband's  clan.  Among  the  Khonds  the  wife  may  leave  the
husband  on  repaying  the  bride  price.  (In  some  tribes  this  privilege  is
restricted  to  the  childless.)  On  the  other  hand,  she  can  be  divorced  only
for  adultery  or  prolonged  misconduct,  and  her  consent  is  required  if  the
husband  wishes  to  take  a  concubine  (Reclus,  p.  280) ;  and,  a  rare  note  in
the  savage  world,  infidelity  on  the  part  of  the  man  is  held  dishonourable.

Among  the  peoples  of  Central  Asia  divorce  appears  to  be  open  to  the
man  at  pleasure  and  to  the  woman  for  persistent  ill-treatment.  (Ratzel,
vol.  iii.  p.  342  ;  Letourneau,  La  Femme,  p.  210.)

Among  the  Malays,  divorce  is  greatly  influenced  by  the  form  of  marriage.
In  the  Ambil  Anak  marriage  the  wife  may  divorce  the  husband.  In  the
Djudjur  marriage  all  the  advantage  is  on  his  side,  but  she  can  generally
escape  from  him  if  ill-treated.  In  the  Semando  form  of  marriage  (see
Waitz,  v.  p.  145)  the  taking  of  a  second  wife  or  concubine  is  a
ground  of  divorce,  and  in  one  place  (Mokomoko)  this  is  the  only
form  recognized.  (Waitz,  v.  145,  etc.)  Among  the  Battaks  of  East
Sumatra  there  is  no  one-sided  divorce,  except  for  attempt  to  murder,  and
mutual  agreement  is  required.  (Howard,  p.  229.)


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 155

A  few  words  may  be  said  here  of  the  general  character  of  these
four  methods,  while  their  bearing  upon  the  marriage  relation
will  be  further  discussed  in  the  following  Section.

a.  Marriage  by  capture  is  a  somewhat  ambiguous  term.  The
practice  of  taking  women  captives  in  war  or  in  petty  raids  is
widely  diffused  over  the  savage  world.  In  the  genuine  and
unadulterated  form  of  carrying  off  a  bride  from  a  strange  tribe
against  her  will  and  that  of  her  relations,  it  occurs,  according  to

&  ,

Professor  Tylor,  in  some  forty  cases.1  From  this  genuine  capture
Professor  Tylor  distinguishes  connubial  and  formal  capture.
Connubial  capture  is  not  a  mere  form,  but  is  a  recognized
method  of  obtaining  a  bride  between  families  living  at  peace
with  one  another,  and  is  not  regarded  as  a  sufficient  ground  of
quarrel.  Of  this  Professor  Tylor  finds  forty-six  cases.  Finally,
he  enumerates  forty-four  cases  in  which  the  form  of  capture  is
retained  without  the  reality  as  part  of  the  wedding  ceremony.
One  illustration  will  suffice  : — "  Among  the  Bedouins  of  Sinai
the  bridegroom  seizes  the  woman  whom  he  has  legally  pur
chased,  drags  her  into  his  father's  tent,  lifts  her,  violently
struo-o-lino-,  upon  his  camel,  holds  her  fast  while  he  bears  her

Ot?  OJ 1

away,  and  finally  pulls  her  forcibly  into  his  house,  though  her
powerful  resistance  may  be  the  occasion  of  serious  wounds."2
In  other  cases  the  resistance  is  less  determined,  and  the  form
of  capture  is  reduced  to  a  mere  symbolical  act.  The  wide
prevalence  of  these  forms  led  McLennan  and  others  to  the
belief  that  capture  was  originally  universal;  but  this  opinion
is  now  abandoned.  Capture,  as  we  shall  see  further,  is  incom
patible  in  principle  with  the  widely-diffused  primitive  system
of  mother-right,  and  its  existence  as  a  form  may  be  explained
in  many  instances  by  the  necessity  of  a  symbolic  act  to  express
appropriation.  The  symbol,  in  fact,  is  not  necessarily  a  survival
of  something  more  real,  but  may  be  rather  a  legal  expression  of
the  character  of  the  act  performed.

1  As  an  incident  of  savage  warfare  it  is  probably  more  frequent.  A  long
list  of  instances  of  the  practice  is  given  in  Howard,  vol.  i.  p.  158.  From
Cape  Horn  to  Hudson's  Bay  women  are  regarded  as  legitimate  booty.  The
practice  of  capture  prevails  throughout  Melanesia,  has  existed  throughout
Tasmania,  New  Zealand,  Samoa,  New  Guinea,  among  the  Fiji  Islanders,
the  Indian  Archipelago,  and  to  a  limited  extent  in  Australia  ;  it  is  found
occasionally  in  Africa,  and  in  various  ancient  nations.

*  Howard,  i.  165, 166.


156  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

~b.  Purchase.  A  far  commoner  method  of  obtaining  a  wife  is
that  of  purchase.  Where  this  method  is  fully  developed  the
unmarried  girl  is  not  her  own  mistress.  She  is  one  of  the
family ;  more,  she  is  the  property  of  the  family  or  of  the
family's  representative — the  governing  male,  her  father,  brother,
guardian,  whoever  he  may  be.  She  is  an  asset  of  a  certain
value  to  the  family,  the  amount  depending  partly  on  her  at
tractiveness,  partly  on  her  labour,  partly  on  the  scarcity  of  the
article.  This  article  can  be  sold  for  so  much,  and  the  purchaser
naturally  becomes  wholly  possessed  of  what  he  buys.

We  shall  see,  accordingly,  that  this  form  of  marriage  is  inti
mately  associated  with  the  extension  of  marital  power,  but  the
extent  of  this  power  and  the  subjection  alike  of  the  unmarried
woman  and  the  wife  vary  very  greatly  in  different  cases.  The
nature  of  the  purchase  also  varies.  Very  frequently  there  is  a
return  gift  from  the  bride's  parents,  and  in  some  cases  the
return  gifts  equal,  or  even  surpass,  the  price  originally  paid.1
It  is  generally  assumed  that  this  exchange  is  a  modification  of
purchase,  and  that  it  is  through  the  increase  of  the  return  gift
that  the  opposite  practice  of  the  dowry  arises.  It  is  also  pos
sible  that  the  exchange  of  presents  arises  independently  in  con
nection  with  marriage  by  free  consent  of  the  parties  as  a  method
of  cementing  the  union  of  the  two  families.  However,  when
gifts  of  serious  value  are  exchanged,  we  must  admit  that  the
whole  proceeding  bears  the  character  of  a  commercial  transac
tion  in  which  the  girl,  so  to  say,  is  an  item  on  one  side  of  the
account.2

c.  Service. Where the  husband  is  not able to  pay  for  the
wife  he  sometimes  receives  her  on  credit,  and  in  default  of  the

1  E.g.  in  Columbia  (Howard,  vol.  i.  192). In  the  Torres  Straits,  apparently
the  gifts  are  ultimately  balanced  by  return  presents,  yet  the  transaction
seems  to  retain  a  commercial  character. The  chief  Maino  told  Dr.  Haddon
that  he  paid  for  his  wife  a  camphor-wood  chest  with  7  bolts  of  calico,  one
dozen  shirts,  one  dozen  singlets,  one  dozen  trousers,  one  dozen  handker
chiefs,  two  dozen  tomahawks,  one  dozen  hooks,  two  fish-lines,  one  long  fish
spear,  one  pound  of  tobacco,  two  pearl  shells,  and  "  by  golly,  he  too  dear  ! "
(Cambridge  Expedition,  p.  231.)

2  Very  often  the  girl  purchased  is  balanced  by  another  girl  upon  the
other  side  of  the account ; in other  words,  A,  wishing to marry B's
daughter,  gives  B's  son  his  own  sister  in  exchange. (For  instances,  see
Howard  i.  185  ;  Westermarck,  390.) We  might,  indeed,  make  a  separate
type  of  this  practice  and  call  it  marriage  by  exchange.


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 157

possibility  of  payment  may  work  out  his  debt  in  the  form  of
service.  This  practice  is  familiar  to  us  from  the  case  of  Jacob,
and  is  found  to  this  day  in  many  parts  of  the  world.1  In  this  case
the  husband  enters  the  wife's  family  for  the  period  of  his  service,
which  being  concluded  he  returns  to  his  own  people  and  sets  up
a  house  on  his  own  account.  But  while  residing  with  his  wife's
relations  the  husband  is  rather  a  tolerated  visitor  than  the  lord
and  master  of  his  own  family.  Indeed,  he  is  but  partially
tolerated,  for  this  residence  in  the  wife's  home  is  frequently
associated  with  the  taboo  separating  the  husband  from  the
wife's  relations.  They  are  bound  to  mutual  avoidance  because,
as  being  generally  members  of  separate  totems  or  clans,  they
are  in  theory  enemies.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  service  is
completed  and  Jacob  has  led  Leah  and  Rachel  to  his  own  home,
his  authority  is  vindicated  and  he  has  whatever  rights  the  cus
tom  of  the  tribe  allows.  The  sustaining  cause  of  this  form  of
marriage  appears  to  be  principally  economic.  The  man  serves
because  he  has  not  the  property  to  buy  a  wife,  and  so  we  find
marriage  by  service  existing  side  by  side  with  marriage  by
purchase.

d.  Consent.  In  all  grades  of  culture  the  human  factor  has  its
say  in  the  arrangement  of  marriage,  and  probably  in  the  lowest
grades  of  all  the  agreement  of  the  parties  is  often  sufficient  to
determine  a  union.  Even  where  capture  or  purchase  is  de
veloped,  this  factor  cannot  be  wholly  eliminated.  A  pair  who
are  determined  on  having  each  other  will  settle  all  questions  of
right,  in  the  savage  as  in  the  civilized  world,  by  elopement.
The  actual  influence  of  the  woman's  wishes  is,  of  course,  often  a
question  of  fact  rather  than  of  right.  If,  confining  ourselves  to
the  latter  point,  we  put  together  the  numerous  cases  of  child
betrothal,  the  instances  in  which  women  are  acquired  by  pur
chase  or  exchange,  or  by  hostile  capture,  and  finally,  cases  in
which,  though  the  consent  of  the  woman  is  asked,  that  of  her

1  In  Africa,  among  the  Quoja,  Fantis,  Banyai,  Edeyahs,  and  in  Futatoro,
also  among  the  Zulus  and  Basuto.  It  is  found  in  N.  America  among  the
Aleuts  and  other  Indian  tribes ;  in  S.  America  among  the  Brazilians  ;
and  in  the  backward  tribes  of  Asia  among  the  Nagas  of  Assam,  the  Kookis,
and  among  other  hill  tribes,  also  among  the  Tunguses,  the  Ainu,  the
Kamchadeles,  and  the  aborigines  of  China  ;  among  the  Dyaks  and  some  of
the  Philippines,  and  here  and  there  in  Oceania,  (Westermarck,  Human
Marriaije,  390  ;  and  Post,  A.  J.,  i.  378.)


158  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

guardian  is  also  necessary,  we  shall  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that
the  explicit  recognition  of  a  woman's  free  power  to  dispose  of
herself  is  upon  the  whole  the  exception  in  the  uncivilized  world.1
In  practice  her  liberty  is  greatest  where  the  family  organization
is  lowest,  and  the  authority  of  the  father  least  developed.

1  Westermarck  (p.  215)  makes  a  fairly  long  list  of  cases  in  which  the
bride's  consent  is  of  greater  or  less  importance.  But  from  the  nature  of
the  case  it  is  difficult  to  [classify  the  customs  of  different  peoples  on  this
head.  It  does  not  need  arguing  that  a  woman  may  find  means  of
making  her  own  views  felt  whatever  the  customs  of  the  tribe.  Of  the
Fuegians,  who  are  referred  to  by  Dr.  Westermarck,  Messrs.  Hyades  and
Deniker  say  distinctly  that  the  parents  give  the  girl  in  marriage  without
asking  her  consent.  We  can  accept  this  statement  and  still  believe  that  if
she  is  resolute  enough  to  leave  her  husband  and  persist  in  her  aversion  she
will  get  her  parents  to  give  her  to  some  one  whom  she  likes.  (Westermarck,
I.e.)  Among  the  Hottentots  and  Kaffirs  distinct  compulsion  is  exercised
according  to  Post,  Afrik.  Jurisp.,  i.  p.  363.  But,  no  doubt,  the  woman's
choice  also  has  influence  among  these  peoples.  Often  the  most  opposite
customs  occur  in  the  same  tribe,  e.  g.  capture,  purchase  and  choice  by
the  woman  among  the  Digger  Indians  (Schoolcraft,  iv.  p.  223),  and  this
is  merely  what  the  facts  of  human  nature  would  lead  us  to  anticipate.
Elopement  and  a  peculiar  form  of  child  betrothal  co-exist  among  the
Central  Australians,  and  by  way  of  exception  they  also  have  marriage  by
capture.  (Spencer  and  Gillen,  p.  104.)  In  the  Marquesas  Islands
Letourneau  remarks  that  the  parents'  objections  are  often  overcome
by  the  pair  decamping  together.  (La  Pemme,  p.  106.)  This  is  a
remedy  known  to  the  civilized  world  as  well,  but  it  proves  nothing  as
to  law  or  custom.  Matters  are  more  strictly  denned  among  the  Oregon
Indians,  where  marriage  is  by  purchase,  or  if,  as  will  happen,  a  runaway
match  occurs,  the  woman  is  looked  down  on  as  a  prostitute.  (Schoolcraft,
v.  p.  655.)

In  many  cases  child  betrothal  co-exists  with  the  right  of  choice  by  the
grown  up  woman.  Thus,  among  the  Yoruba,  according  to  Captain  A.  B.
Ellis  (The  Yorula- speaking  Peoples,  pp.  183-185),  there  is  child  betrothal,
but  a  woman  cannot  be  forced  into  marriage  though  she  may  be  prevented
from  it.  Among  the  Ainu,  Batchelor  (p.  141)  notes  child  betrothal  as  an
occasional  practice  now  extinct,  marriage  going  now  in  the  main  by  the
consent  of  the  parties.

Post  {Afrik.  Jurisp.,  i.  pp.  364  and  371),  who  notes  eight  cases  in  Africa
where  the  bride's  consent  is  required,  remarks  that  practically  the  consent
of  the  guardians  is  also  necessary,  but  information  is  scanty.  The  Yoruba,
quoted  above,  would  be  a  case  in  point.

The  means  of  securing  consent  are  often  sufficiently  savage.  E.  g.  accord
ing  to  Post  (I.e.,  p.  363)  the  reluctant  Hottentot  maiden  must  pass  a  night
with  the  lover  and  become  his  wife  if  he  succeeds  in  ravishing  her.
Among  the  Mandingos  the  girl  has  the  option  of  remaining  unmarried,  and
if  ever  given  to  another,  her  first  lover  may  make  her  his  slave.

A  variant  to  the  ordinary  case  of  the  disposal  of  a  girl  by  her  parents
occurs  when  a  man  acquires  a  right  to  a  woman  by  his  position.  This
appears  under  the  Levirate  and  also  in  cases  like  that  of  the  Oregon
Indians,  where  marrying  an  eldest  daughter  entitles  a  man  to  all  her  sisters,
even  if  one  of  them  be  already  the  wife  of  another  (Schoolcraft,  v.  p.  654.)


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 159

9.  V.  The  Relation  of  Husband  and  Wife.

To  understand  the  ethical  import  of  this  bewildering  variety
of  customs  we  must  look  to  the  conception  of  the  family  and  of
the  relations  of  its  members  to  one  another.  The  specific  ex
planation  of  the  rise  of  particular  forms  at  particular  times  and
places  may  be  unattainable,  but  by  taking  the  conception  of  the
family  as  our  starting  point  we  shall,  I  think,  be  able  to  under
stand  how  it  is  that  abnormal  forms  like  polyandry  and  partial
promiscuity  are  possible  in  primitive  society,  why  they  disappear
at  a  later  stage,  why  polygamy  existing  in  the  lowest  culture  is
extended  and  reaches  an  abnormal  development  in  the  middle
civilization,  and  why  in  the  West  it  has  given  place  to  monogamy.
Here,  if  anywhere,  again  we  may  hope  to  gain  some  insight  into
the  causes  affecting  the  permanence  of  marriage,  and  to  trace  out
the  devious  and  tangled  laws  by  which  this  varies  in  different
stages_of  culture,  to  understand  finally  the  conditions  under  which
the  methods  of  marriage  just  enumerated  arise  in  early  society,
and  how  the  first  three  forms  gradually  yield  to  marriage  by  con
sent.  In  tracing  this  evolution  we  have  to  deal  not  with  any  single
cause  or  with  any  single  and  continuous  development,  but  with
a  blending  of  ethical  conceptions,  themselves  various,  confused
and  even  conflicting,  with  religious  principles,  and  economic  and
social  forces.

The  result  which  emerges  from  all  this  confusion  may,  how
ever,  as  I  think,  be  briefly  stated,  and  it  will  conduce  to  clear
ness  if  it  is  set  out  beforehand.  Broadly,  the  family  may  be
said  to  have  gone  through  three  stages  of  development.  In  its
first  form  the  natural  family,  by  which  I  mean  husband,  wife
and  children,  is  not  yet  complete ;  husband  and  wife  are  not  as
yet  united  in  the  sense  in  which  they  become  legally  and  morally
one  flesh  in  the  higher  forms  of  marriage.  This  form  of  marriage,
of  course,  corresponds  to  the  maternal  clan  system.  In  the
second  form  of  marriage  the  natural  family  is  complete,  and  the
husband  is  the  head;  but  it  is  completed  at  the  cost  of  the
greater  subjection  of  the  wife,  who,  in  passing  into  the  husband's
family,  merges  her  personality  in  his,  often  almost  like  a  slave.
In  the  third  form  of  marriage  the  union  of  the  family  is  main
tained  by  the  closest  moral  bond,  but  the  full  legal  and  moral
personality  of  the  wife,  as  well  as  of  the  husband,  is  preserved.


160  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

This  third  form  of  marriage  must  be  regarded  as  a  type  or  as  an
ideal  rather  than  as  an  actuality.1  To  achieve  it  is  a  problem
which  civilization  has  yet  to  solve,  since  the  solution  involves  a
certain  reconciliation  of  contradictories  ;  and  if  we  wish  to  recog
nize  any  types  of  marriage  as  belonging  to  this  class  we  must
exercise  a  little  liberality  and  admit  all  such  as  make  a  bona  fide
effort  towards  the  solution.  These  efforts  belong,  in  the  main,
to  the  story  of  civilized  marriage.  We  have  first  to  consider  the
two  lower  forms,  which  together  dominate  the  uncivilized  world.
In  the  early  stages  of  historical  investigation  into  the  beginnings
of  civilization  it  was  thought  that  society  arose  out  of  the  patri
archal  family,  and  that  in  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  or  again
in  the  Roman  paterfamilias,  as  we  reconstruct  him  from  the  laws
of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  what  we  know  of  earlier  Roman  law,
we  have  a  type  of  primitive  human  government.  The  re
searches  of  Bachofen,  McLennan,  Morgan,  and  others  opened  up
an  entirely  new  field  of  speculation.  It  was  shown  that  the
lower  we  go  in  the  scale  of  civilization  the  more  prevalent  we
find  a  type  of  organization  which  is  in  many  ways  the  opposite
of  patriarchal,  putting  the  mother  for  many  purposes  into  the
father's  position.  Amongst  civilized  nations  which  have  passed
out  of  this  stage  we  find  indubitable  traces  of  their  having  gone
through  it  at  an  earlier  period.  These  observations  led  to  the
setting  up  a  matriarchal,  as  opposed  to  the  patriarchal,  theory,
and  to  the  belief  that  in  the  dim  red  dawn  of  man  there  was  a
golden  age  of  woman,  which  later  on  passed  into  the  iron  age  of
male  despotism.  The  facts  were  sound,  but  the  inference  drawn
from  them  was  precarious,  for  it  was  not  sufficiently  recognized
that  there  was  a  distinction  between  matriarchy,  the  rule  of  the
mother,  and  what  I  have  spoken  of  already  as  mother-right,  rule
going  through  the  mother  and  dependent  on  the  mother.  What
is  really  common  among  the  lower  savages,  and  may  even  have
been  universal  at  a  certain  stage,  is  not  matriarchy,  but  mother-

1  I  do  not  add  the  religious  conception  of  marriage  (as  a  sacrament)  as
a  fourth  type,  because  the  religious  (or  magical)  conception  is  present  at
each  stage  as  a  basis  or  framework  for  law  or  custom  rather  than  as  an
independent  form  of  the  marriage  relation.  At  the  same  time  these
religious  conceptions,  particularly  under  Christianity,  have  deeply  affected
the  actual  contents  of  the  law,  and  in  relation  to  the  permanence  of  the
union  may  be  said  to  have  constituted  a  special  type.


MARRIAGE  AND  THE POSITION OF WOMEN 161

right,  and  along  with  mother-right,  and  where  it  most  flourishes,
it  is  perfectly  possible  for  the  position  of  women  to  be  as  low
as  the  greatest  misogynist  could  desire.  The  actual  number  of
cases  in  which  the  woman  has  a  controlling  or  even  an  equal
position  are  very  few.  I  will  mention  one  or  two  of  them  later
on.  As  a  general  rule,  where  the  father  is  not  head  of  the
household  that  place  is  taken  by  the  wife's  brother,  and  the
maternally  organized  clan  consists  of  units  composed  each  of  a
woman,  her  brothers,  and  her  children.  The  woman  is  not
necessarily  any  better  off  because  she  is  ruled  by  a  brother  in
place  of  a  husband.

Let  us  set  the  two  types  of  family  in  contrast.  Under
mother-right  the  wife,  under  father-right  the  husband,  is  the
pivot  on  which  the  family  relationships  turn.  Under  mother-
right  the  wife  remains  a  member  of  her  own  family.  Under
father-right  she  passes  out  of  her  family  altogether,  she  is  even
separated  from  the  family  cult  and  family  gods,  her  husband's
people  are  her  people  and  his  gods  her  gods.  Under  mother-
right  the  children  take  the  mother's  name  and  belong  to  her

o  O

kindred.  In  cases  of  divorce  they  follow  the  mother.  It  is  the
mother's  family  who  protects  them.  Her  brother  is  their
natural  guardian,  and  exercises  all  the  rights  and  duties  which
may  belong  to  that  position.  The  maternal  kinsfolk  stand
together  in  the  blood  feud,  they  and  not  the  husband  protect  or
avenge  the  wife  and  her  children.  They  may  even  protect  her
and  them  from  the  husband  himself.  In  extreme  cases  the
children  are  not  held  to  be  related  to  their  father  or  to  their
father's  family  at  oil,  whence  in  some  peoples,  half-brother  and
half-sister  may  intermarry  as  in  the  well-known  case  of  Abraham
and  Sarah.1  Under  father-right,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  relation
ship  through  the  male  which  counts.  The  father  is  the  natural
guardian  and  protector  of  the  children  and  in  case  of  divorce
retains  them.  It  is  to  him  and  his  kin  that  wife  and  children

1  Similarly  among  the  Spartans  children  of  the  same  mother  might
marry,  but  not  those  of  the  same  father.  The  Samoyedes  had  a  similar
rule.  (Post,  ii.  p.  60.)  But  these  logical  consequences  are  by  no  means  always
pressed.  The  actual  facts  of  kinship  have  their  weight.  Thus,  to  take  a
single  instance,  in  New  Britain  a  man  may  legally  marry  his  brother's
daughter,  but  in  practice  is  restrained  by  the  general  feeling  of  repugnance
to  such  unions.  (Banks,  J.  A.  I.,  xviii.  p.  283.)

VOL.  I.  M


162  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

look  for  protection.  In  extreme  cases  it  is  only  such  relation
ship  that  is  regarded.  The  wife  and  her  children  cease  to  have
claims  on  her  family,  while  relationship  to  the  male  ancestors
and  descendants  is  traced  to  the  remotest  degrees.  These  con
sequences  of  the  strict  principle  of  father-right,  however,  are
seldom  pushed  to  the  full  length.  Relationship  through  the
mother  is  generally  a  bar  to  marriage,  though  the  degrees  are
not  carried  so  far  as  upon  the  masculine  side ;  1  nor  is  the  wife
often  so  cut  off  from  her  relations  as  the  strict  consequences  of
the  paternal  theory  might  lead  us  to  expect.  Her  family  as  a
rule  retains  a  right  of  protecting  her  if  she  is  ill-treated ;  ske
will  fly  to  them  for  succour,  and  their  right  to  guard  her  is
recognized.2  Lastly,  under  mother-right  the  property  passes
through  the  woman,  if  not  to  the  woman.  Under  father-right
it  goes  from  father  to  son.

10.  How  father-right  arose  in  history  we  do  not  know,  we
cannot  even  say  with  certainty  that  the  alternative  form  of
mother-right  in  all  cases  preceded  it.  We  do  know,  however,  that
mother-right  extends  over  a  great  part  of  the  savage  world  of
to-day,  in  some  cases  in  a  pure  and  typical  form,  in  other  cases
blended  with  foreign  institutions  belonging  in  logic  to  the
opposite  principle.  Pure  or  mixed,  it  prevails  over  a  great
part  of  the  Indian  population  of  North  and  South  America,
among  the  Oceanic  peoples,  and  among  many  Negro  peoples.
It  is  so  common  as  almost  to  deserve  the  name  of  the
dominant  form  of  family  life  among  many  of  the  lowest
races  of  the  world.  This  is  not  all.  Among  almost  all  races
are  to  be  found  traces  of  the  same  institution,  so  that,  if  not

1  Tims  a  Hindu  must  not  marry  within  the  seventh  degree  on  the
father's,  or  the  fifth  on  the  mother's  side.  (Mayne,  Hindu  Law,  p.  87,  4th
ed.)  Manu  makes  a  deeper  distinction:  "a  damsel  who  is  neither  a
Sapinda  on  the  mother's  side  nor  belongs  to  the  same  family  on  the  father's
side  is  recommended  to  twice-born  men."  (Manu,  iii.  5.)  Sapindas  are
relations  whose  common  ancestor,  if  a  male  is  not  more  than  six,  if  a  female
not  more  than  four  degrees,  removed  from  either  of  them.  Manu  thus
insists  on  complete  exogamy  to  the  male  line,  while  forbidding  the  female
kin  only  to  certain  degrees.

In  Roman  law  the  praetors  early  began  to  recognize  the  full  right  of
blood  (cognatio)  as  against  the  strict  agnatio  of  the  patriarchate.  (Maine,
Ancient  Law,  p.  151.)

a  Of.  Vinogradoff,  Growth  of  the  Manor,  pp.  11,  12  (the  Celts)  ;  136  (the
Germans).


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 1G3

certain,  it  is  still  probable,  that  mother-right  was  once  universal,
and  represents  the  primitive  form  of  the  family.  On  the  other
hand,  father-right  is  the  prevailing  system  in  all  Indo-Germanic
peoples,  among  the  Semites  and  Mongolians.  It  appears  in  some
cases  among  the  Red  Indians,  and  more  often  among  the  South
American  tribes.  In  Oceania  it  is  rare  ;  throughout  Africa  it
is  intermingled  with  the  opposite  system.

If  we  do  not  know  how  or  when  it  arose,  we  can  with  some
certainty  specify  certain  conditions  under  which  it  arises.  The
first  of  these  is  the  recognition  of  paternity,  the  second  is  the
rise  of  certain  forms  of  marriage  involving  the  appropriation  of
a  woman  by  her  husband.1  As  to  the  first  point,  paradoxical
and  almost  incredible  as  it  may  appear  to  us,  there  are  cases  in
which  primitive  men  find  a  difficulty  in  understanding  that  a
man  is  responsible  for  the  birth  of  a  child,  and  attribute  it
to  the  action  of  a  spirit  or  an  inanimate  object.2  It  is  clear
that  the  recognition  or  non-recognition  of  fatherhood  must
make  all  the  difference  to  the  position  of  the  husband  in  the
family,  and  in  fact  we  find  the  transition  to  father-right
frequently  associated  with  the  curious  custom  of  the  couvade,
which,  however  it  is  to  be  understood,  is  clearly  a  recognition  of
the  relation  of  the  father  to  the  new-born  son.  The  essence  of
the  couvade  is  that  the  father  has  to  take  certain  precautions  at
the  time  of  birth.  Whatever  the  precise  meaning  of  these  pre
cautions — whether  they  are  to  protect  the  father,  a  portion  of
whose  soul  is  passing  into  the  child,  or  the  child  in  whom  the
soul  is  finding  a  new  lodgment — they  represent  a  recognition  of
paternity,  and  apparently  recognition  in  a  crude  and  early  form
in  which  it  is  conceived  as  a  passage  of  the  father's  soul  into  the
child's  body.  Hence  it  is  very  natural  that  the  custom  should
flourish  at  the  stage  at  which  father-right  begins  to  assert
itself,  and  this  is  what  we  find.  Among  the  Melauesians,  for

1  Both  of  these  I  take to be  essential  to  the  full  development  of  the
paternal  system,  but  either  by  itself  may  engender  some  of  the  consequences
of  father-right. E.  g.  in  some  Central  Australian  tribes  the  son  follows  the
father's  totem,  though  paternity  is  not  understood. It  suffices  that  the
husband  is  master  of  the  mother. (Spencer  and  Gillen,  ii.  145,  175.)

2  This  is  the  theory  of  the  Central  Australians. (Spencer  and  Gillen,
i. 265  and  ii.  330.) Some Melanesians  hold  that  paternity  is  due  to  a
cocoa-nut,  bread-fruit,  or  something  similar. (Codrington,  J.  A.  1.,  xviii.
310.)


164  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

example,  there  are  islands  where  mother-right  prevails,  but  the
husband  has  begun  to  assert  himself,  taking  the  wife  to  his
father's  house  or  to  his  own,  if  he  has  one  ready,  where  he  re
mains  undoubted  master.  Here  there  is  a  mild  couvade,  the
father  refraining  from  exertion,  and  from  certain  foods.  But  in
the  South-Eastern  Solomon  group,  where  father-right  is  more
developed,  the  couvade  is  also  more  conspicuous.1  So  again  in
quite  another  part  of  the  world,  among  the  South  Americans,  we
find  it  just  at  the  turning  point  where  mother-right  passes  into
father-right.  Where  the  position  of  the  father  has  long  been
recognized  and  is  thoroughly  established,  the  custom  disappears.
Its  flourishing  time  is  at  the  period  when  the  one  system  is
beginning  to  give  way  to  the  other.2

If  the  first  condition  of  the  paternal  system  is  the  recognition
of  the  man's  relation  to  his  children,  the  second  condition  is
that  he  should  appropriate  the  wife  as  his  own.  This  he  clearly
does  not  do  as  long  as  she  remains  in  her  own  family,  retaining
her  property  as  a  member  of  that  family  and  having  her  children
in  turn  reckoned  as  members  of  it.  But  there  are  two  pro
cesses  known  to  primitive  man  by  which  a  man  can  make  a
woman  his  own  property  and  transfer  her  to  his  own  family,  viz.
the  methods  of  marriage  described  as  capture  or  purchase.
Professor  Tylor  justly  points  out  that  the  practice  of  capture
must  tend  to  break  up  the  whole  system  of  mother-right.
When  the  woman  is  carried  off  from  her  own  clan  to  her
husband's  house  the  physical  facts  conflict  with  any  custom  or
law  regarding  her  and  her  children  as  still  belonging  to  her
family  rather  than  to  his.  Hence  out  of  forty  cases  of  genuine
or  "  hostile  "  capture  Prof.  Tylor  finds  that  six  only  occur  in  the
maternal  stage.  Of  "  connubial "  capture  he  places  twenty-one
instances  in  the  stage  of  transition  from  the  maternal  to  the
paternal  system,  and  twenty-five  in  the  paternal  system  proper.
There  are  no  instances  under  pure  mother-right.  Finally  he
enumerates  forty-four  cases  in  which  the  form  of  capture  is

1  Codrington,  J".  A.  L,  xviii.  309-11.  Of.  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  R.,  1900,  p.  355,
on  the  couvade  in  Papuan  custom.

2  Schmidt,  Z.  f.  V.  R,  1898,  297. "  Sie  (i.  e.  the  customs  connected  with
the  couvade)  werden  sich  also  am  ausgepriigtesten  gerade  wahrend  jene
Uebergangszeit  zeigen  wo  das  eine  Princip  (i.e.  Vater-recht)  das  Andere
abzulosen  beginnt."


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 165

retained  without  the  reality  as  part  of  the  wedding  ceremony
Of  these  he  finds  no  instances  under  mother-right,  but  twenty-
one  in  the  transitional  stage  and  twenty-three  under  the
paternal  system.1

Now  though,  as  we  have  scon,  there  is  no  reason  to  think
that  capture  was  ever  universal  or  that  it  was  the  original  form
of  marriage,  it  is  beyond  doubt  one  very  primitive  way  of
compassing  that  type  of  marriage  which  involves  ownership  of
the  woman,  and  it  is  quite  intelligible  that  in  a  tribe  where
mother-right  prevailed  those  men  who  by  their  own  bow  and
spear  could  obtain  women  from  a  neighbouring  clan  should  treat
those  women  as  their  own  property,  and  so  establish  a  working
model  of  the  patriarchate.  It  is  also  readily  credible  that  the
new  type  should  be  more  popular  than  the  old — at  any  rate
among  the  men — and  that  they  should  seek  to  extend  it  to
cases  in  which  the  wife  belonged  to  their  own  clan,  and  so
establish  universal  father-right.  But  to  lay  down  that  this  was
the  actual  process  by  which  father-right  came  to  prevail  would
be  to  go  far  beyond  our  evidence.  There  is  no  proof  that  all
patriarchal  societies  have  gone  through  the  stage  of  marriage
by  capture,  and  its  frequent  appearance  as  a  form  is  not
conclusive.  The  explanation  may  be  that  some  form  was
necessary  to  assert  definite  ownership,  and  that  the  natural  form
of  asserting  definite  ownership  was  the  form  of  capture.

The  alternative  and  in  reality  commoner  method  of  appropriat
ing  a  wife  is  that  of  purchase,  and  the  fact  of  purchase  is  closely
associated  with  the  whole  position  of  women  in  cases  where  the
patriarchate  is  strongly  developed.  We  are  moving  here  in  a
region  permeated  with  ideas  of  slavery,  the  ownership  of  one
human  being  by  another,  permeated  also  by  the  idea  of  a  family
as  a  unit  to  which  each  member  belongs  as  a  limb.  The  bride
purchased  from  her  own  family  passes  out  of  it  and  into  that  of  her
husband.2  Where  the  consequences  are  pressed  to  their  furthest
extent  her  family  lose  the  power  of  protecting  her,  and,  since  in

1  Tylor,  J.  A.  I.,  xviii.  259.

2  It  must  not be assumed  that  marriage  by  purchase  always  implies
father-right. Under  mother-right  a  man  may  pay  a  bride  price  for  the
usufruct  of  a  woman  (e.y.  among  the  Papuas,  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  E., 1900,
pp.  347,  ,348). But it is  easy  to  see  that out and  out  purchase goes
naturally  with,  and  may  be  said  logically  to  necessitate  a  thorough-going
paternal  system  (see  below,  pp.  168,  169).


166  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

barbaric  society  there  is  no  law  except  the  protection  of  one's
family,  the  wife  is  at  the  mercy  of  her  husband  as  to  life  and
limb.  He  may  dispose  of  her  at  pleasure,  he  may  sell  her,  give
her  away,  or  lend  her  ;  and  she  has  no  right  of  redress  against
him.1  At  best  she  may  escape  from  him  if  her  family  return
her  price  and  buy  her  back.  Also,  there  is  nothing  in  this  order
of  ideas  to  prevent  the  husband  buying  as  many  women  as  he
wishes.  This  extreme  form  must  not  be  taken  as  the  normal
case.  Natural  feeling  after  all  has  its  way  everywhere  in  the
world,  affection  and  the  sense  of  kinship  survive  the  technical
exclusion  from  the  family,  and  so  we  more  often  find  that  by  a
kind  of  compromise  the  wife's  relations  retain  certain  powers  of
protecting  her.  Her  murder  would  in  many  cases  excite  the
blood  feud,  and  if  she  runs  away  from  her  husband,  and  can
satisfy  her  relations  that  she  had  good  cause  in  his  ill-treatment,
they  will  in  many  instances  stand  by  her  and  give  her  protec
tion.2  Still,  her  position,  even  in  such  cases,  is  rather  that  of  a

1  Post  (i. p. 171)  instances  former customs among Parthians and
Armenians, the  Gypsies, Tscherkessen, Maravis of South  Africa, and
ancient  Germans,  and  quotes  Ccesar  on  the  Gauls  :  "  Viri  in  uxores  sicuti  in
liberos  vitae  necisque  habent  potestatem." Among  South  American  Indians
the  father  can  lend,  sell,  or  exchange  the  wife. (Schmidt,  1.  c.,  p.  298.) The
right  of  the  husband  to  kill  the  wife  taken  in  adultery  is  general  —  Post,  i.
p.  172,  says  "ganzlich  universell."

2  See  above, p. 162. Among  the Somali and  in  the  Gaboon the
husband  who  kills  his  wife  must  pay  a  fine  to  her  family. (Post,  Afrik.
Jurisp.,  p.  62.) This,  I  suppose,  is  a  composition  for  blood  vengeance. So
too  among  the  Kaffirs. (Ib.,  p.  401.) Among  the  Ainu,  Batchelor  (The
Ainu  of  Japan,  p.  138)  notes  a  change. Formerly  the  head  of  a  family
had  absolute  powers  to  divorce,  disinherit  or  punish. Now  little  can  be
done  without  consulting  neighbours. Among  the  Australians,  the  clan
will  protect  the  wife from excessive  cruelty. (Letourneau,  La  Femme,
p. 13  ;  Post,  i.  c.,  p.  173.) Among  the  Mandingos  the  wife  is  protected
by  the  judge. (Post,  Afrik. Jnrisp.,  p.  402.) Among  the Yoruba  by
her  family. (Ellis,  op.  cit.,  187.) Among  the  Malays  in  the  "djudjur"
marriage  the  wife  passes  by  purchase  into  the  husband's  family,  yet  the  wife's
parents  can  interfere  to  protect  her  in  case  of  cruel  treatment. (Waitz,  v.
p. 144.) According to  Dr.  Westermarck  (Position  of  Women  in  Early
Civilization,  Sociological  Papers,  p.  155),  "there  are  peoples  among  whom
the  husband's  authority  is  almost  nil,  although  he  has  had  to  pay  for
his  wife." But  no  instances  are  given,  and  I  imagine  them  to  be  rare.
An  interesting  trace  of  the  feeling  that  it  is  the  duty  'of  a  wife's  relations  to
avenge  her,  is  found  in  the  Alcestis,  vv.  731-3,  where Admetus'  father
threatens  him  with  the  vengeance  of  Alcestis'  brother,  though  Alcestis  has
chosen  voluntarily  to  die  on  Admetus'  behalf.


ixas  Tf  Swcreis  <roi<n  /oySearais  eri.
1}  r'ap  "AKOKJTOS  ouKeV  COT'  tv  av&pacnv,
ti  ft-jf  <7'a8eA</)iijS  at^a  Tijawp^CTcrai.


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 167

protected  dependent  than  of  a  free  woman.  Slavery  is  still
slavery  though  the  position  of  the  slave  may  be  mitigated  by
law,  and  such  mitigation  is  in  reality  no  rare  occurrence  even
for  the  actual  slave  at  the  level  of  civilization  which  we  are
considering.1

The  appropriation  of  the  wife  consolidates  the  "  natural  "
family,  but  at  the  cost  of  a  more  or  less  complete  subordination
of  the  wife.  Hence  the  position  of  the  woman  seems,  if  any
thing,  to  change  for  the  worse  as  society  takes  its  first  step  in
advance.  This  deterioration,  however,  is  perhaps  less  severe
than  appears  at  first  sight.

11.  The  Position  of  Woman  in  Early  Society.

Favourable  as  the  position  of  woman  under  mother-right
appears  on  the  surface,  the  truth  is  that  it  is  no  bar  whatever  to
complete  legal  subjection.  Among  the  Caribs,  where  descent
goes  through  the  female  only,  the  women  were  nevertheless  in
an  inferior  position.  The  husband  alone  had  the  right  of
divorce  and  he  could  exercise  it  at  will,  the  only  effect  of
mother-right  being  that  in  case  of  divorce  the  wife  would  retain
the  children.  Among  the  North  American  Indians  generally,
notwithstanding  the  tendency  to  mother-right,  the  position  of
women  is  on  the  whole  admitted  to  be  low.2  In  Melanesia,
where  there  is  strict  mother-right,  the  mother  is  in  no  way  head
of  the  family.  The  family  house  is  the  father's,  the  garden  is
his,  the  rule  and  government  are  his.3  In  Oceania  generally,

Naturally,  however,  the  right  of  protection  by  her  relations  is  more  effective
when  the  wife  is  still  regarded  as  a  member  of  their  family.  (Post,  i.
p.  173.)

1  For  instances  see  Post.  i.  171-177.

2  See  Waitz,  iii.  101,  382  ;  Catlin,  N.  A.  Indians,  i.  23  and  226. Ratzel
puts  it  that  the  position  of  the  women  is  not  in  all  cases  one  of  oppression
(ii.  128).

3  Codrington,  J.  A.  L,  xviii.  309. Dr.  Westermarck,  who  on  the  whole
takes  a  favourable  view  of  the  position  of  women  among  savages,  declines  to
attribute  any  influence  in this direction to  mother-right. (Sociological
Papers,  p.  157  ; Moral  Ideas,  655-7.) Herein  he  is  opposed  to  Steinmet/,
and  to  Ratzel. (See  e.  g.  Ratzel,  The  History  of  Mankind,  ii.  334.)  _  The
argument  that  (e.  g.  among  the  Australians)  the  position  of  women  is  not
sensibly  affected  by  the  system  of  descent,  is  not  very  forcible,  since  the
importance  of  the  family  is  so  small  as  compared  with  that  of  the  local
group  and  its  divisions,  that  the  mode of  reckoning  descent  naturally
counts  for  little.


168  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

where  mother-right  is  common,  the  two  sexes  are  in  large
measure  separated  in  their  lives  through  the  complex  mass  of
taboos  which  prohibit  their  intercourse.1  The  head  of  the
maternal  family  may  have  the  same  despotic  power  as  the
patriarch— thus  among  the  Barea  and  Kunama  he  has  the
power  of  life  and  death ;  among  the  Bangala,  the  Kimbunda,
and  on  the  Loango  coast  the  right  of  selling  any  member  of
the  family ;  and  in  general  under  the  maternal  as  under  the
paternal  system  the  head  is  a  male.2

Apart  from  the  general  tendency  to  overlook  the  masculine
headship  of  the  maternal  family,  and  so  confuse  mother-right  and
matriarchy,  mistaken  views  have  arisen  from  the  identification
of  marriage  by  service  with  the  subordination  of  the  husband  to
the  wife. The  man  who  cannot  buy  a  wife  becomes  a  servant
to  her  family,  but  not  to  her. Jacob  did  not  serve  Rachel,  but
Laban,  and  when  the  term  of  service  was  complete  both  Leah
and Rachel  remark  that  they  have now passed  out  of  their
father's  family. They identify themselves with  Jacob,  and
Rachel  steals  Laban's  household  gods  on  his  behalf. At  the
same time marriage by service does fairly  illustrate some
of the conditions which modify the relation of husband
and  wife,  and  may  even  affect  the  question  whether  mother-
or father-right is to prevail. The man serves because
he has not the property wherewith to buy him a wife,
and so we not infrequently find that the two kinds of
marriage  subsist  side  by  side. Thus  among  some  Californian
tribes  purchase  is  the  rule,  but  if  a  man  can  only  pay  half  the
bride  price  he  enters  the  wife's  house  in  a  servile  position.3
Similarly  among  the  Micronesians  of  Mariana  the  husband  must
serve  if  he  has  not  wealth  enough  to  support  the  wife. The
best  instance  may  be  drawn  from  the  Malay  Archipelago,  where
the  two  opposed  types  of  marriage  are  found  fully  developed
with special names. In one, Ambil  anak, the husband is
purchased  by  the  wife's  family ; he  enters  it  as  a  rule  in  a
dependent position, the children  all  belong  to  the  mother's

1  In  some  instances,  however,  the  position  of  women  is,  or  has  been,
favourable  in  Oceania,  e.  g.  in  Micronesia,  and  in  New  Zealand. (Ratzel,  i.
273-274,  and  Waitz,  iii.  101.)

2  Post,  Grundriss,  i.  134-6. Post  notes  that  there  are  exceptions.

3  Kohler,  Z.f.  V.  £.,  1897,  p.  383.


MARRIAGE  AND  THE POSITION OF  WOMEN 169

family,  and  the  wife  has  the  right  of  divorce.  In  the  other  form,
Djudjur,  the  husband  or  the  husband's  family  has  to  purchase
the  wife ;  she  becomes  his  property,  the  children  are  his,  and  he
has  the  right  of  divorce.  Her  parents  only  retain  a  certain
right  of  intervention  in  case  of  cruel  treatment.1  In  such  cases
at  least  it  is  clear  that  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife  are
determined  not  by  any  prevalent  custom  or  opinion  prescribing
what  such  relations  ought  to  be,  but  by  the  actual  success  or
failure  of  the  man  in  finding  means  whereby  to  appropriate  a
woman  to  himself.2  Thus  the  difference  between  the  maternal
and  paternal  systems  do  not  turn  on  divergencies  of  principle  as
to  the  rights  of  women,  nor  does  the  superior  position  of  the
wife's  family  necessarily  imply  any  similar  superiority  in  ^the
wife  herself.  No  doubt  under  mother-right  the  woman  derives
some  advantages  from  her  position,  such  as  the  retention  of  her
children  in  case  of  divorce,  but  the  cases  in  which  it  has  given
her  real  equality  or  superiority  prove  on  examination  to  be  very
rare.  Among  the  Nairs,  who  are  sometimes  quoted  in  this
connection,  and  who,  as  has  been  mentioned,  combine  polygamy
and  polyandry,  the  woman  chooses  her  husband  and  brings  him
to  her  home.  Possessions  pass  from  mother  to  daughter.  The
woman  may  divorce  her  husband,  or  rather  any  of  her  husbands,

1  Waitz,  v.  i.  144  ff. Cf.  Marsden,  History  of  Sumatra,  p.  220, etc.,
cited  iu  Spencer's  Descriptive  Sociology.

2  We  may  note  in  this  connection  that  among  civilized  peoples  whicJ
have completely developed the patriarchal system, and perhaps even
passed  beyond  its  extreme  phases,  there  is  a  tendency  to  the  subjugation  oi
the  husband,  in  cases  where women are  allowed control  of  their  own
property,  if  the  wife  is  the  wealthy  one. I  am  not  speaking  from  the  point
of view  of  the  humorist  or  the  novelist,  but  of  the  lawyer. Thus,  lew
peoples  have  pushed  the  right  of  the  father  to  a  more  extreme  point  than
the  Japanese  in  the  Far  East,  or  the  ancient  Romans  m  the  West. Yet
among  the  Romans,  when  women acquired by  the  Lex  Juha  complete
control  over  their  dowry,  the  result  was  that  the  husband frequently
passed  into  practical  subjugation  to  a  rich  wife. In  Japan  it  is  astonishing
to  find  the  recrudescence  of  the  primitive  custom  of  the  husband  coming  tc
live  with  the  wife,  and  taking her  name  in  the  case  where  the  eldest
daughter  inherits  an  estate,  or  where  the  bride's  father  supplies  the  house.
From  instances  like  these,  drawn  from  cases  where  the  patriarchate  had  its
most  extreme  development,  we  can  understand  the  full  strength  of  the
economic  factor  in  determining  marital  relations,  and  we  may  draw  the
inference  that  where  in  the  uncivilized  world  we  find  the  husband  passing
into  the  wife's  family,  even  in  an  inferior  position,  it  does  not  follow  that
any  favourable  inference  is  to  be  drawn  as  to  the  prevalence  of  an  ethical
conception  of  women's  rights.


170  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

at  pleasure.  Among  some  of  the  tribes,  e.  g.  the  Pani  Kotche,  the
husband  goes  to  live  with  his  mother-in-law,  who  is  head  of  the
house,  and  may  incur  no  expense  without  her  authority  or  else
he  is  personally  responsible.  It  sometimes  happens  that  for
this  reason  he  is  sold  as  a  slave.1  Often  a  brother  and  sister
set  up  house  together,  the  tie  between  them  being  held  closer
than  that  between  husband  and  wife,  and  if  in  such  a  case  the
wife  goes  to  live  with  a  husband  she  will  be  subject  to  the
sister.  It  follows  also  that  the  child  is  attached  to  the  uncle
rather  than  the  father.  In  such  an  organization  the  family,  as
we  understand  it,  is  of  course  completely  broken  up,  and  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  position  of  the  woman  makes  her  in  a  way
the  centre  of  the  whole  organization.  There  is  equally  no  doubt
that  in  this  case  she  acquires  from  this  position  a  considerable
authority.  But  we  are  also  told  that,  although  she  inherits  the
property,  her  brother  or  maternal  uncle  administers  it,  and,
again,  it  ir  administered  rather  on  behalf  of  the  whole  group  of
kinsfolk — that  is  to  say,  as  collective  property — than  as  belonging
to  any  individual  owner,  so  that  after  all  we  are  not  very  far
removed  from  the  normal  state  of  things  under  mother-right,
where  the  woman  is  subject  to  her  brothers  instead  of  to  her
husband.

Somewhat  similar  cases  may  be  cited  from  among  the  North
American  Indians.  Here  the  women  had  occasionally  a  certain
measure  of  political  importance ;  for  example,  they  might  be
represented  by  a  spokesman,  either  male  or  female,  at  the  men's
council,  and  they  sometimes  originated  warlike  expeditions
with  the  object  of  replacing,  by  a  raid  and  the  capture  of  a
prisoner,  the  loss  of  a  warrior  of  the  clan.  To  them,  also,  as  we
shall  see  later  on,  was  referred  in  many  cases  the  fate  of  the
prisoners  taken.  They  decided  whether  prisoners  should  be
tortured  or  adopted,  and,  moreover,  took  a  special  part,  with  a
peculiar  zest,  in  the  execution  of  the  tortures  when  a  decision
was  taken  in  that  direction.

Among  the  Iroquois,  where  we  have  some  of  the  most  detailed

accounts,  we  are  told  that  the  women  occupied  a  dominant

position  in the Long House where the  joint family lived.

"  Usually  the  female  portion  ruled  the  house,  and  were  doubt-

1  See  Keclus,  Primitive  Folk,  pp.  156-8.


MARRIAGE  AND THE  POSITION OF WOMEN 171

less  clannish  enough  about  it.  Stores  were  in  common,  and
woe  to  the  luckless  husband  or  lover  who  was  too  shiftless  to
do  his  share  of  the  providing.  No  matter  how  many  children
or  whatever  goods  he  might  have  in  the  house,  he  might  at  any
time  be  ordered  to  take  up  his  blanket  and  budge.  .  .  .  The
house  would  be  too  hot  lor  him,  and  unless  saved  by  the  inter
cession  of  some  aunt  or  grandmother,  he  must  retreat  to  his
own  clan,  or,  as  was  often  done,  go  and  start  a  matrimonial
alliance  in  some  other."  ]  The  women,  .says  Morgan,  were  the
great  power  in  the  clans.  They  could  "knock  off  the  horns  "  of
a  chief,  and  of  certain  chiefs  they  had  the  nomination.  Yet
even  among  the  Iroquois  we  do  not  find  that  the  position  of
women  was  altogether  good.  On  the  contrary,  they  did  all  the
drudgery  of  house  and  field.  They  were  socially  separate  from
the  man,  and  the  conquered  Delaware  were  named  women  as  a
term  of  reproach,  and  compelled  to  forego  arms  as  a  mark  of
contempt.'2  Of  the  North  American  Indians  generally,  Waitz  3
makes  a  remark  which  goes  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  that
though  property  passed  by  the  women  they  seem  to  have  had
little  or  none  of  their  own.  There  remain  a  few  scattered  cases
in  which  the  wife — not  merely  the  wife's  family — is  said  to
enjoy  superiority  or  even  authority.  Among  the  Koochs  of
Bengal  it  is  stated  by  Dalton  that  the  husband  goes  to  live  in

&  J  O

the  wife's  clan,  and  that  his  property  passes  to  her  daughters
only,  and  not  only  this,  but  he  has  to  obey  his  wife,  and  what  is,
perhaps,  more  extreme,  her  mother  as  well.1  According  to
Herrera,  men  in  Nicaragua  in  his  day  become  slaves  to  their

O  */

wives,5  and  among  the  tribes  of  Esquimaux  at  Nootka  Sound
and  at  Cross  Sound,  women  are  somewhat  vaguely  said  to  have
a  superior  position  to  men."  Other  cases  7  in  which  a  higher
position  is  attributed  to  the  wife  either  depend  on  her  superior
social  or  economic  position,  or  on  the  failure  of  the  husband  to

1  Fnnu  a  letter  by  the  Eev.  A.  Wright,  a  missionary  among  the  Senecas,
written  in  1873,  and  given  in  Morgan's  Souses  and  Hoitsdife  of  the  American
Aborigines,  p.  65. It  is  worth  noting  that  Mr.  Wright  appears  to  be  de
scribing  a  past  state  rather  than  that  which  he  actually  saw.

2  Schoolcraft — Drake,  i.  277,  388. Morgan,  Lmyiie  of  the  Iroquois,  323.

3  Wait/,  iii.  129.  4  Letourneau,  La  Femme,  p.  384.
5  16.,  175.  fi  Wait/,  iii.  327-333.

T  The  well-known  statement  of  Diodorus  as  to  the  supremacy  of  Egyptian
wivea  will  be  dealt  with  below,  chap.  v.


172  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

pay  her  price.1 They  do  not  indicate  that  the  position  of  the
woman  is  as  such  equal  or  superior  to  that  of  the  man.2

A  handful  of  exceptions  such  as  these,  however  interesting  as

disproving  sweeping  generalizations,  do  not  alter  the  fact  that

in  the  great  majority  of  uncivilized peoples  the  position of

]  women  is  in  greater  or  less  degree  inferior  to  that  of  man  in

j  point  of  personal  rights.3 Apart  from  a  sufficiently  frequent

1  In  one  or  two  other  rare  cases  the  law  of  divorce  favours  the  wife.
For  instance,  among  the  Klionds  of  Orissa  she  may  leave  her  husband  on
repaying  her  price,  but  may  only  be  divorced  for  adultery  or  misconduct.
(Dr.  Westermarck  states  that  constancy  is  not  required  from  the  wife,  and
that  the  husband  maybe  punished  for  adultery. Sociol.  Papers,]).  152.)
The  husband  may  not  strike  the  wife  taken  in  adultery — a  very  exceptional
rule. (Reclus,  p.  281.) These  liberties  appear  to  be  connected  with  a  scarcity
of  wives,  and  with  the  relics  of  polyandry. (Reclus,  ib.)

2  In  addition  to  the  above  list,  Post,  A.  J.,  400,  considers  that  the  position
of  the  wife  among  the  Sarae  is  equal  to  that  of  the  husband,  and  even
superior  among  the  Beni  Amer  and  the  Galla. But  among  the  last-named
he  adds  that  if  the  husband  has  once  brought  home  the  trophies  of  a  de
parted  enemy,  he  becomes  absolute  master. According  to  Hahn  (quoted  by
Westermarck,  op.  cit.,  p.  154),  the  Khoikhoi  (Hottentot)  wife  is  mistress
within  the  house,  but  according  to  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  E.,  1902,  pt.  iii.  344,
355 (speaking of the Hottentots generally), though the  wife has a
fairly  independent  position,  the  husband  has  the  right  to  chastise  her  in
moderation.

3  Dr.  Westermarck,  who  objects  to  the  term  "subjection"  as  a  general
description  of  the  position  of  women  in  the  lower  races,  writes  :  "  Among
many  of  them  the  married  woman,  although  in  the  power  of  the  husband,
is  known  to  enjoy  a  remarkable  degree  of  independence,  to  be  treated  by
him  with  great  consideration,  and  to  exercise  no  small  influence  upon  him.
In  several  cases  she  is  even  stated  to  be  his  equal,  and  in  a  few  his  superior."
(Soc.  Papers,  p.  151.) Admitting  this  to  be  the  case,  we  shall  clearly  be  right
in  persisting  that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  women's  legal  position  is
inferior. It  may  be  added  that  considerate  treatment  is  a  totally  different
thing  from  equality  of  rights. In  his  new  work  on  The  Origin  and  De
velopment  of  the  Moral  Ideas,  Dr.  Westermarck  gives  a  long  list  of  cases  in
which  the  wife's  position  is  more  or  less  favoured. But  in  comparatively
few  of  them  is  equality  of  rights  asserted,  and  in  etill  fewer  superiority.
Even  where  equal  rights  are  mentioned,  the  statements  with  two  or  three
exceptions  lack  precision. Dr.  Westermarck  himself  says  :  "All  these  state
ments  certainly  do  not  imply  that  the  husband  has  no  recognized  power
over  his  wife,  but  they  prove  that  his  power  is  by  no  means  unlimited. It
is  true  that  many  of  our  authorities  speak  rather  of  liberties  that  the  woman
takes  herself  than  of  privileges  granted  her  by  custom;  but,  as  we  have  seen
before,  customary  rights  are  always  more  or  less  influenced  by  habitual
practice.'' (P.  646,  the  italics  are  mine.) The  distinction  here  admitted
cuts  deeper  than  Dr.  Westermarck  seems  to  admit. In  a  relationship  so
personal  and  subtle  as  that  between  men  and  women,  de  facto  influence
and  power  may  develop  to  the  highest  pitch,  without  in  the  least  affecting
the  recognized  rights  or  status  of  the  sex. A  favourite  of  the  harem  may
sway  an  empire  and  yet  remain  a  slave. The  frequent  statement  of


MARRIAGE  AND THE POSITION OF  WOMEN 173

inferiority  in  her  right  to  property  or  to  the  mere  protection  of
life  and  limb,  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  drudgery  of  life  so
often  falls  on  her  while  the  men  hunt  or  fight,1  the  prevalence
of  the  capture,  purchase  and  exchange  of  wives  testifies  strongly
in  this  direction.  The  common  facility  of  divorce,  even  where
the  conditions  are  equal  to  the  two  parties,  tells  against  the
woman,  who  is  the  more  interested  of  the  two  in  the  per
manence  of  the  tie.  And  very  often  the  conditions  are  not
equal,  but  favourable  to  the  man.  The  general  permission  of
polygamy  points  in  the  same  direction.  Lastly,  the  woman's
person  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  her  own  property,  but  that  of
her  husband  or  guardian,  and  it  is  in  this  sense  in  the  great
preponderance  of  cases  that  chastity  and  respect  for  women  are
understood  in  the  savage  and  barbaric  world.  This  peculiarity
makes  itself  felt  in  many  directions.  In  the  first  place,  wife
lending  is  an  extremely  common  custom  among  savages.  The
husband  who  would  kill  or  mutilate  the  wife  whom  he  dis
covered  in  clandestine  intercourse  with  a  lover  will  also  lend
her  as  a  matter  of  courtesy  to  a  guest.2  In  the  one  case  she
infringes  his  right  of  property,  in  the  other  case  it  is  as  his


travellers  that  the  wife  rules  the  household,  or  that  the  husband  does
nothing  without  consulting  her,  might  have  been  made  of  this  country  in
the  days  when  the  legal  position  of  the  wife  was  most  abject.  The  power-
to  influence  and  recognized  ethical  equality  are  not  only  different,  but  have
no  necessary  tendency  to  pass  into  one  another.

1  The  extent  to  which  women  iill  the  place  of  slaves  in  the  rudest
societies  has  perhaps  been  exaggerated  by  some  writers. Dr.  Westermarck
(Socid.  Papers,  p. 150)  points  out  that  for  the  men  to  fight  while  the
women  toil,  is  a  natural  division  of  labour  in  a  world  where  fighting  is  a
frequent  necessity. But  this,  though  it  explains,  hardly  alters  the  fact  that
an  occupation  recognized  as  inferior  falls  to  the  women. (Of.  Westermarck,
Moral  Ideas,  pp.  633-G37.) There  are  many  variations,  and  it  would  be
easy  to  multiply  quotations  on  either  side,  but  on  the  whole  it  seems  clear
that  the  more  toilsome  and  least  esteemed  work  tends  to  fall  on  the  women.
See  the  general  statements  in  Ratzel,  as  to  Oceania,  vol.  i.  p.  273  ;  the
Malay  Region,  ib.  p.  441  ;  North  America,  ii.  p.  129  ; the  Arctic  races,  p.
225  -the  Negroes,  p.  334  ;  Kaffirs,  pp.  432,  433  ;  and  the  Mongols  m.  p.  341.
The  position  in  the  two  first-named  regions  is  the  most  favourable,  particu
larly  among  the  more  developed  peoples.

2  Numerous  instances  are  given  by  Starcke  (p.  122)  and  Westermarck
(pp  73,  74). The  custom  is  pretty  general  among  the  North  American
Indians. (Waltz,  iii.  p.  111. He  excepts  only  the  Sioux  and  the  Chippe-
wav  ) Cf.  Schoolcraft,  v.  p.  684. Post,  Afrik.  Jurisp.,  i.  pp.  471,472,  gives
numerous  instances  in  Africa. Wait/,  v.  ii.  p.  105,  attributes  the  practice
to  the  Micronesians  generally.


174  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

property  that  she  is  acting.1  She  is  not  in  our  modern  phrase
a  person  with  the  full  rights  of  self-respect  and  respect  from
others  attaching  to  personality.  Secondly,  where  the  obligations
of  marriage  are  binding  the  rules  for  the  unmarried  are  often
very  lax.  Further,  the  principal  exception  to  this  laxity
is  constituted  by  the  system  of  child  betrothal,  whereby
the  unwedded  girl  is  already  the  husband's  property.2
Generally  speaking,  the  requirement  of  chastity  depends
on  the  developed  power  of  the  guardian.3  Thirdly,  the
claim  to  fidelity  is  usually  one-sided.  While  any  offence
on  the  wife's  part  exposes  her  to  punishment,  and  while

1  In  the  Torres  .Straits  any  irregular  intercourse  was  called  "stealing  a
woman,''  and  there  seems  to  have  been  no  word  for  fornication  or  adultery
apart  from  theft  (puru). (Cambridge  Expedition,  275.)

2  Where  the  young  girls  are  guarded,  precautions  are  sometimes  pushed
to  disagreeable  lengths,  as  in  New  Britain,  where,  between  eight  and  ten,
they  are  put  into  cages  and  kept  there  till  they  are  married.

3  Post  i., pp. 21-23. The first step towards insistence on the
chastity  of  unmarried  and  unbetrothed  girls,  is  taken  when  the  hus
band expects virginity at the time of marriage. Unchastity may
then become a breach  of  the proprietary rights of the guardian.
Hence it is often punishable, especially if  it results in pregnancy.
Thus  among  the Takue, the Marea and  the  Beni  Amer, the seducer
who makes  an unmarried girl pregnant excites the blood feud, and
among  the  Bogos  the  full  blood  price  is  demanded  in  such  a  case. (Post,
Afrik.  Jurisp.,  i.  pp.  61  and  70.) Among  the  Wanyamwesi  the lover
must  marry  the  pregnant  girl  under  a  penalty  of  a  fine  (Post,  A.  J.,  i.  p.
458),  and  in  Unyoro  she  is  taken  to  his  house,  and,  by  a  characteristic
piece  of  primitive  reasoning,  he  must  pay  for  her  if  she  dies,  while  if  she
lives  she  returns  to  her  father  unless  the  lover  pays  the  bride  price. (For
other  instances in Africa, see Post,  ib., p. 459,  ii. p. 70, and cf.
Letourneau,  La  Femme,  p.  48.)

Westerinarck  (pp.  61-04)  enumerates  over  thirty  cases  among  uncivilized
races  where  urichastity  out  of  wedlock  is  condemned — but  to  some  of  these
there  are  qualifications,  e.  g.  among  the  Gypsies  and  Kalmucks  unchastity
is  tolerated  and  it  is  only  the  birth  of  a  child  that  is  a  disgrace.

In  some  instances,  the  unchastity  of  an  unmarried  woman  is  regarded  as
bringing  a  curse  or  some  misfortune  on  the  family  or  the  tribe.  Thus  the
Aleuts  fear  that  the  whale  would  punish  them  if  their  wives  were  unfaith
ful  in  their  absence,  or  if  their  sisters  were  unchaste  before  marriage.  (Reclus,
p.  52.)  Similarly  in  Loango,  the  unchastity  of  a  girl  is  held  to  bring  a
curse  on  the  country  (Westerinarck,  p.  61),  and  a  similar  idea  seems
to  underlie  the  punishment  of  a  pregnant  maiden  on  the  Gold  Coast,
where  she  is  chased  by  the  women  to  the  sea,  covered  with  dirt  and  ducked,
after  which  she  receives  charms  from  the  fetishman.  (Post,  A.  J.,  i.
p.  460.)  Apparently  this  is  not  so  much  by  way  of  punishment  as  to  avert
evil.

With  a  few  exceptions  such  as  these,  we  may  say  that  among  uncivil  ized  races
unchastity  is  regarded  universally  as  an  infringement  of  rights  of  property,
and  that  generally  only  the  rights  of  the  husband  present  or  future  are


MARRIAGE  AND  THE  POSITION OF WOMEN 175

an  outraged  husband  may  lawfully  avenge  himself  on  the  man
Avho  has  trespassed  on  his  property,  the  unfaithfulness  of  the
husband  to  the  wife  is  but  seldom  regarded  as  an  offence.1
Finally,  it  is  often  open  to  fathers  to  devote  their  daughters
to  prostitution.  This  is  not  infrequently  a  religious  duty,
and  in  many  cases  there  are  recurring  religious  festivals  of  which
promiscuous  intercourse  is  a  feature.2

considered,  but  that  in  some  cases  the  value  of  a  woman  is  depreciated  by
the  loss  of  virginity,  and  this  is  accordingly  regarded  as  the  infringement  of
the  rights  of  her  guardian.  The  man  is  of  course  punished,  often  with
death,  for  the  infringement  of  these  rights.  We  may  find  the  germ  of  a
different  conception  in  the  belief  that  the  unchastity  of  a  man  under  certain
conditions  will  cause  misfortune.  Thus  the  Aleuts  above  quoted  believe
that  the  whale  will  punish  them,  not  only  if  their  wives  are  unfaithful,
but  if  they  are  unfaithful,  while  on^a  fishing  expedition,  to  their  wives.  It
is  a  widely-diffused  belief  among  the  North  American  Indians  that  un-
chastity  on  the  war  path  would  bring  defeat,  and  hence  captive  women  are
generally  spared.  For  the  rare  cases  in  which  a  husband  incurs  penalties
to  his  wife  for  unfaithfulness  see  next  note.

1  Authorities  give  one  instance  to  the  contrary  among  African  peoples,
viz.  in  Great  Bassam. Here  the  husband  pays  a  fine  to  the  wife  if  un
faithful  to  her  while  she  is  with  the  prince. (Post,  Afril;.  Jurisp.,  ii.  p.  72.)

Among  the  Hottentots  the  husband  as  well  as  the  wife  may  be  flogged  for
adultery,  and  except  for  ill-treatment  there  is  no  divorce  without  the  con
sent  of  the  council.  But  these  observations  refer  to  Christianized  tribes.
(Kohler,  Das  Reclit  dcr  Jlottenlotten,  Z.  f.  V.  Jl.,  1902,  pp.  344  and  .354.)

Among  the  Mariana  the  husband  could  kill  an  adulteress,  but  if  he  on
his  side  were  unfaithful,  he  would  be  set  upon  and  would  be  glad  to  escape
with  a  whole  skin.  ( \Yait /,  v.,  ii.  p.  10(5.)

The  Sioux  and  Santal  (Dakota)  women  are  said  to  beat  their  husbands
for  unfaithfulness.  (Howard  i.  p.  23!).)

According  to  Dr.  Westermarck,  among  the  Shans  of  Eurmali  the  wife
may  divorce  the  husband  for  drinking  or  other  misconduct,  retaining  the
common  property.  (Westermarck,  tiuciol.  Papers,^.  154.)  Hut  Col.  Wood-
thorpe  (J.  A.  L,  xxvi.  p.  21)  states  that  the  .Shans  of  the  Upper  Mekong
follow  the  law  of  Manu  as  to  divorce,  -i.  c.  the  wife  has  no  powers  of  divorce
at  all.  In  W.  Victoria,  as  mentioned  above  (Howard,  i.  p.  229),  a  wife  may
get  a  slight  punishment  inflicted  on  an  unfaithful  husband,  and  in  some
Queensland  tribes  the  women  take  advantage  of  the  initiation  ceremonies  to
punish  men  who  have  ill-treated  them.  (Westermarck,  ISociol.  Papers,
p.  148.)  The  case  of  the  Khonds  has  been  mentioned  above,  p.  172,  note  1.

As  mentioned  above,  Powers  states  that  among  the  Karoks  of  California
cohabitation  even  with  a  female  slave  is  considered  disgraceful.  Two  or
three  more  similar  instances  are  found  among  the  North  American  Indians.

We  could  prolong  the  above  list  if  we  were  to  add  cases  in  which
bringing  a  second  wife  or  a  concubine  into  the  house  is  a  ground  of  divorce.
Broadly  speaking,  however,  in  the  savage  world,  under  mother-right  or
father-right,  the  husband  is  master  of  the  wife's  person.

2  For  instance  in  Africa,  see  Post,  Afrik.  Juris.,  p.  465. In  several
Australian  tribes  the  women  are  common  at  the  corroboree,  except  to  their
fathers,  brothers  or  sons  by  blood. (Spencer  and  Gillen,  p.  97.)


176  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

12.  All  the  world  over  certain  forces,  ethical,  political,  economic,
and  perhaps  religious,  act  from  either  side  upon  the  relations  of
men  and  women.  On  the  whole,  apart  from  a  sufficiently  strong
development  of  the  ethical  factors,  those  which  fight  for  the
man,  as  physically  the  stronger,  have  the  upper  hand.  But
when  there  are  always  forces  tending  the  other  way,  favourable
circumstances  will  occur  here  and  there  to  give  them  peculiar
strength.  For  example,  the  circumstances  attending  marriage
by  service,  especially  when  we  compare  it  with  marriage  by
purchase  or  capture,  have  shown  us  how  much  the  relations  of
husband  and  wife  are  determined  by  what  in  the  modern  world
we  should  call  the  economic  factor.  The  savage  woman's  price
— if  by  price  we  mean  the  difficulty  of  appropriating  her — may
be  high  or  low.  Where  it  is  always  possible  to  organize  a  raid
and  carry  her  off  it  is  decidedly  low,  and  she  becomes  the
captor's  property.  Where  this  is  not  countenanced,  it  is  pos
sible  to  buy  her  from  her  guardian,  and  then  presumably  her
price,  like  that  of  other  things,  is  a  matter  of  supply  and
demand.  The  actual  number  of  girls  born  and  the  practice
as  to  infanticide  must  affect  their  value,  and  we  can  understand
that  better  treatment  of  a  wife  becomes  necessary  to  the
husband  who  wishes  to  retain  her.1  In  other  cases  the
economic  value  of  the  woman  may  be  high — for  example,  where
agriculture  is  becoming  important  and  is  still  regarded  as
women's  work.  In  yet  other  cases  women  are  the  repositories
of  magical  lore,  and  men  fear  them.2  These  and  doubtless
other  disturbing  causes  considerably  modify  the  status,  nominal
or  real,  of  women  in  the  uncivilized  world,  but  the  fluctuations
which  they  cause  are  fluctuations  about  a  centre  of  gravity
which  is  sufficiently  low.

To  sum  up  our  account  of  marriage  in  the  uncivilized  world.
We  have  found  two  distinct  forms  of  the  family,  the  one  based
on  mother-right,  the  other  on  father-right.  Under  mother-right

1  Hence  probably  the  favourable  position  often  enjoyed  by  women  in
polyandrous  communities. To  us  polyandry  seems  necessarily  degrading
to  a  woman. To  the  women  of  the  polyandrous  tribe  it  means  that  they
are  sought  after,  and  therefore  prized.

2  This  important  suggestion  is  due  to  Dr.  Westermarck  (8oc.  Papers,  p.
159),  who  is  also  inclined  to  lay  stress  on  the  economic  factor. (On  this
point  cf.  Batzel,  ii.  130.)


MARRIAGE AND THE POSITION OF WOMEN 177

the  woman  is  undoubtedly  the  legal  centre  of  the  family.  From
this  she  sometimes  derives  certain  advantages,  such  as  the
power  to  leave  or  dismiss  a  bad  husband,  or  the  right  to  retain
her  children.  But,  as  a  rule,  when  looked  into,  her  position  is
found  to  be  inferior.  She  is  hold  in  little  respect,  and  is  seldom
the  owner  of  the  property  which  passes  in  her  name.  The  cases
111  which  she  enjoys  a  real  equality  with  men  prove  on  examina
tion  to  be  exceedingly  rare.  The  characteristic  of  the  lower
savage  life  is  rather  that  the  family  is  as  yet  incompletely
organized.  Hence  the  facility  of  divorce,  which  is  often  so
great  that  marriage  can  scarcely  be  said  to  exist,  hence  also  the
sporadic  appearance  of  polyandry  and  partial  promiscuity.  The
advent  of  father-right  implies  on  the  whole  a  firmer  organiza
tion.  The  wife  now  passes  out  of  the  hands  of  her  own  kindred,
and  is  appropriated  by  her  husband,  whether  as  the  result  of
capture,  purchase  or  service.  Her  legal  position  often  becomes
semi-servile  or  worse,  and  though  socially,  as  among  the  ancient
Germans  and  the  early  Romans,  she  is  often  held  in  high  re
spect,  her  incorporation  in  her  husband's  family  is  often  pushed
to  such  an  extreme  that  her  subordination  does  not  end  with
his  death.  In  some  instances  she  follows  him  to  the  grave.  In
others,  where  she  belongs  to  the  family  rather  than  to  the
individual,  she  becomes  the  property  of  his  brother,  or  of  the
male  head  of  the  clan.

Under  both  forms  of  marriage  the  permission  of  polygamy  is
the  rule,  and  divorce  is  easy  for  the  husband.  Under  the
second  form  it  is  generally  less  easy  for  the  wife.  Under  both,
moreover,  it  is  not  merely  the  wii'e  but  the  woman  that  is  under
tutelage.  The  civilized  conception  of  the  sanctity  of  woman
exists  only  in  germ ;  her  destinies,  her  freedom  and  often  her
life  are  in  many  cases  at  the  disposal  of  her  legal  guardians.
In  what  ways  and  by  what  stages  this  conception  of  women
and  of  marriage  has  been  modified  by  civilized  peoples  is  the
question  to  which  we  must  now  turn.


VOL.  i.


CHAPTER V

WOMAN AND MARRIAGE UNDER  CIVILIZATION

1.  IT  is  with  the  Patriarchal  type  of  Family  organization,  it
would  seem,  that  most  of  the  civilized  races  have  started  their
career  in  history.  The  stage  of  Mother-right  is  clearly  left  behind
when  their  history  begins.  Traces  of  it  remain,  like  the  right
of  the  Mother's  Brother  in  the  German  Law,  but  they  are  mere
traces  which  would  be  unintelligible  if  we  had  not  a  mass  of
customs  among  other  peoples  by  which  to  interpret  them.
Whether  we  look  at  the  ancient  laws  and  customs  of  India,
Persia,  Greece  or  Rome,  of  the  early  Celtic  and  German  tribes
or  the  ancient  Slavs,  or  turn  to  the  Semitic  and  Mongolian
civilizations  and  trace  back  the  Family  through  Islam  to  the
Arabia  of  Mohammed's  time,  through  the  Old  Testament  to  the
days  of  the  Patriarchs,  through  Babylonian  civilization  to  the
Code  of  Hammurabi,  through  Chinese  literature  to  the  ancient
classical  books,  we  find  that  where  civilization  is  beginning  the
Family  is  in  some  form  or  other  already  organized  under  the  rule
of  the  Father.1  The  type  of  marriage  law,  of  family  structure,
and  for  the  most  part  the  attitude  to  woman  appropriate  to  the
Patriarchal  stage  underlie  the  social  history  of  civilization  and
are  deeply  imbedded  in  its  structure.  The  strongly  knit  family
life,  the  close  personal  relations  of  father,  mother  and  child  have
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  stronger  and  greater  social  growths.
Over  a  large  part  of  the  civilized  world  the  extension  of  these
relations  by  the  family  cult  and  the  worship  of  ancestors,  has
proved  to  be  a  social  bond  of  marvellous  strength  and  endurance.
Yet  this  unity  may  be  purchased  dearly  by  the  loss  of  independ
ence  on  the  part  of  the  individual  members  of  the  family,  and
we  have  seen  how  far  this  is  often  carried  in  the  barbaric  world.

1  The  Egyptian  family  is  perhaps  an  exception. (See  below,  p.  188.)

178


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  179

We  have  now  to  see  how  civilization  starting  in  the  great
majority  of  cases  with  this  type  of  family  has  dealt  with  the
social  and  ethical  problems  involved.

In  the  early  civilization  of  Asia,  the  position  of  women,  and
particularly  of  married  women,  was  not  worse,  but  on  the  whole
better  than  one  would  expect  on  the  analogy  of  later  times  and
of  contemporary  civilizations.  In  ancient  Babylon  in  the  time
of  Hammurabi,  i.  c.  probably  between  B.C.  2250  and  1950,
marriage  was  arranged  with  the  parents  without  reference  to  the
wishes  of  the  bride  l  by  a  form  of  purchase.  It  was,  however,  a
modified  form  approaching  more  nearly  to  the  exchange  of  gifts
which  we  find  in  many  primitive  races.  A  sum  was  given,  it
appears  from  the  code,  to  the  wife's  father  as  well  as  to  the  bride
herself,  but  this  payment2  was  not  universal,  and  on  the  other
side  of  the  account  the  father  made  over  to  his  daughter  on  her
marriage  a  dowry  which  remained  her  own  property  in  the  sense
that  it  was  returned  to  her  in  the  case  of  divorce  or  on  the  death
of  her  husband,  that  it  passed  to  her  children,  and  failing  them
to  her  father.3  Thus  the  method  of  marriage  appears  as  a  quasi-
commercial  transaction,  and  the  decision  thereon  belongs  to  the
parents  of  the  parties.1  Similar  commercial  considerations
dominate  the  law  of  divorce,  the  leading  points  of  which  may  be
given  in  the  words  of  Hammurabi's  code.

"  137.  If  a  man  has  set  his  face  to  put  away  his  concubine  Avho
has  borne  him  children  or  his  wife  who  has  granted  him  children,  to
that  woman  he  shall  return  her  her  marriage  portion  and  shall  give
her  the  usufruct  of  field,  garden,  and  goods,  and  she  shall  bring  up
.her  children.  From  the  time  that  her  children  are  grown  up,
from  whatever  is  given  to  her  children  they  shall  give  her  a  share
like  that  of  one  son,  and  she  shall  marry  the  husband  of  her  choice.

"138.  If  a  man  has  put  away  his  bride  who  has  not  borne  him
children,  he  shall  give  her  money  as  much  as  her  bride  price,  and  shall

*  Meissner,  Beitriiye  zum  altbabylonischen  Privatrecht,  13.

2  The  case  of  marriage  without  a  bride  price  is  contemplated  in  Ham
murabi,  section  139  (Kohler,  118),  that  is  to  say,  if  bride  price  is  the  right
translation,  and  if  it  is  not  rather  the  sum  which,  in  the  regular  contract
forms,  the  husband  agrees  to  give  the  wife  in  case  of  divorce.
^  3  The  dowry  might  exceed  the  bride  price  (section  164).  On  the  other
nand,  it  remained  in  a  sense  in  the  wife's  family,  as,  if  children  failed,  her
father  regained  it  on  re-paying  the  bride  price  (section  163).

4  See  sections  163-6,  159-161.


180  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

pay  her  the  marriage  portion  which  she  brought  from  her  father's
house,  and  shall  put  her  away.

"  139.  If  there  was  no  bride  price,  he  shall  give  her  one  mina  of
silver  for  a  divorce.

"  140.  If  he  is  a  poor  man,  he  shall  give  her  one-third  of  a  mina
of  silver."1

On  the  other  hand,  the  woman  who  "  has  set  her  face  to  go
out  and  has  acted  the  fool,  has  wasted  her  house,  has  belittled
her  husband,"  may  either  be  divorced  without  compensation,  or
retained  in  the  house  as  slave  of  a  new  wife.  The  wife  may  also
claim  a  divorce  (or  separation)  2  "  if  she  has  been  economical  and
has  no  vice,  and  her  husband  has  gone  out  and  greatly  belittled
her,"  but  she  acts  at  some  risk,  for  if  on  investigation  it  turns
out  that  she  had  been  uneconomical  or  a  goer  about,  "that
woman  one  shall  throw  her  into  the  waters."  3  Thus  the  wife  has
certain  pecuniary  guarantees  against  arbitrary  divorce,  while  if
ill-treated  she  may  leave  her  husband,  but  her  position  as  his
subject  is  marked  by  the  manner  in  which  infidelity  is  treated.
The  law  provides  that  both  parties  should  be  put  to  death  unless
the  king  pardons  his  servant  or  the  "owner"  his  wife.4
The  lordship  of  the  husband  is  seen  also  in  his  power  to
dispose  of  his  wife  as  well  as  her  children  for  debt.5

1  I  quote  Mr.  Johns'  translation,  but  following  Kohler,  liave  twice  sub
stituted bride price for "dowry." It is clearly intended that the
unoffending  wife  shall  have  not  only  her  dowry,  which  is  really  her  own
property  or  that  of  her  family  (section  162),  but  either  the  bride  price,
which  represents,  so  to  say,  the  worth  of  her  own  person,  or,  what  I  cannot
help  suspecting  to  be  the  meaning,  the  amount  which  at  the  time  of  the
marriage the  husband  contracted  to  give  her  in  the  event  of  a  divorce.
In  the  contracts  of  the  period,  the  sum  is  specified. In  one  case  it  is  a
mina,  in  another  ten  shekels. The  wife  also  states  explicitly  that  if  she
repudiates  her  husband  she  shall  be  drowned,  strangled  or  sold,  as  the  case
may  be.

2  Nothing  is  said  of  her  being  allowed  to  marry  again, bhe  i

to  her  father's  house.  Observe  above  that  when  a  divorced  woman  has
children  it  seems  to  be  implied  that  she  will  at  any  rate  remain  unmarried
till  they  are  grown  up.

3  The  translations  differ  here. I  follow  Mr.  Johns. Hammurabi,  sections
341,  142,  143.

4  Hammurabi,  section  129. On  the  other  hand,  she  is  allowed  to  purge
herself  by  oath,  from  an  unproved  accusation ;  if  it  is  made  by  her  hus
band,  "she  shall  swear  by  God  and  return  to  her  house"  ;  if  it  is  made
by  some  one  else,  she  shall  plunge  into  the  holy  river. (131,  132.)

6  The  period  of  debt  slavery  was,  however,  limited  to  three  years.
Hammurabi,  117.


WOMAN  AND  MAERIAGE  181

Polygamy  appears,  not  in  the  rich  luxuriance  of  later  Asiatic
civilization,  but  in  a  restricted  form.  A  man  might  marry  a
second  wife  if  a  "  sickness  has  seized  "  his  first  wife,  but  the  first
is  not  to  be  put  away.1  Apparently  tins  is  the  only  case  in
which  two  fully  equal  wives  are  contemplated  by  the  code,  but
it  was  also  possible  for  a  man  to  take  a  secondary  wife  or
concubine,  who  was  to  be  subordinate  to  the  chief  wife.  This
was  a  common  practice  when  the  wife  was  childless,  but  was
apparently  legal  even  when  she  had  children.2

1  Hammurabi,  148.

2  The  provisions  of  the code  are  not  perfectly  clear. The  relevant
sections  run  as  follows  :— 144.  "If  a  man  has  espoused  a  woman,  and  that
woman  has  given  a  maul  to  her  husband  and  has  brought  up  children,  that
man  has  set  his  face  to  take  a  concubine,  one  shall  not  countenance  that
man,  he  shall  not  take  a  concubine. 145.  If  a  man  has  espoused  a  woman
and  she  has  not  granted  him  children  and  he  has  set  his  face  to  take  a
concubine,  jthat man shall take a concubine, he  shall cause her to
enter into his house. That concubine he shall not put on an
equality  with his  wife." (I have  followed  Mr.  Johns'  translation,  but
substituted "woman"  for "votary" in accordance with the  views of
other  translators.) It  is not  clear  from  this,  as it stands, whether a
man  could  compel  his  wife  to give him  a  concubine,  in  case  the  wife
had  children,  but  elsewhere  the  case  of  a  man  having  children  by  both
wife  and  concubine is  clearly  contemplated,  and  in  the  contracts  there
are  cases  of  a  man  marrying  two  wives,  of  whom  one  is  to  be  subject  to
the  other. Thus  Arad  Samoa  takes  Iltani,  the  sister  of  Taramka,  as  his
wife. He  promises  to  care  for  her  well-being,  and  to  carry  her  chair  to
the  temple  of  Marduk  ;  he  is  already  married  to  Taramka,  but  Taramka  is
placed  by  the  contract  in  an  inferior  position  to  Iltani. "All  children,"
the  contract  reads,  "  as  many  as  there  are,  and  as  many  as  shall  be  born,
are  Iltani's." If  Taramka  says  to  Iltani,  "  You  are  not  my  sister,"  some
thing  terrible  happens,  as  to  the  nature  of  which  a  hiatus  in  the  inscription
leaves  us  in  ignorance. If  either  wife  says  to  Arad  Samas,  "  You  are  not
my  husband,'''  she  is  to  be  branded  and  sold  for  money  ;  if  they  both  do  it
(presumably  if  they  conspire  to  do so),  they  are  to  be  thrown into  the
river. If  Arad  Samas  repudiates  either  of  them,  he  is  to  pay  a  mina  of
silver. (Meissner,  ib.,  p.  71.) In  this  contract,  essentially  the  same  law  as
that  of  Hammurabi  is  seen  in  active  operation,  and  it  is  clear  that  a  cer
tain  form  of  polygamy  or  concubinage  is  contemplated,  although  there  are
children  in  existence  by  the  first  wife. Apparently  the  object  of  the  code
is  to  maintain  the  supremacy  of  the  chief  wife,  while  imposing  on  her,  if
childless,  the  duty  of  granting  children  to  her  husband. The  concubine
should  be  provided  by  her. If  she  failed  to  give  him  one,  the  man  might
take  one,  but  must  still  treat  his  wife  as  mistress  of  the  home. There  is
no  prohibition  of  concubinage  merely  on  the  ground  that  the  legitimate  wife
has  children  of  her  own. Further  it  is  only  the  regular  concubinage  with
a  fixed  status,  determined  by  contract,  which  is  thus  limited. There  is
nothing  said  to  limit  intercourse  with  a  female  slave,  whose  children  might
be  adopted  at  will  by  the  father,  and  thus  share  in  the  inheritance  with
the  legitimate  children. (Hammurabi,  170,  171.) On  the  whole  we  gather


182  MOKALS  IN EVOLUTION

To  sum  up,  the  early  Babylonian  marriage  law  contemplates
marriage  by  purchase  or  exchange  of  gifts  with  a  restricted
polygamy  and  considerable  authority  and  privileges  for  the
husband,  moderated  by  certain  provisions  for  the  protection  and
maintenance  of  the  wife.  But  in  relation  to  other  persons  the
wife  is  a  much  more  free  agent  than  in  many  civilized  countries
at  the  present,  or  at  any  rate  in  recent  times.  She  could  already
conduct  business  and  in  certain  cases  dispose  of  property,  and,
at  any  rate  in  later  Babylonian  times,  she  appears  as  possessed
of  full  legal  personality,  carrying  on  processes  of  law  and  appear
ing  as  a  qualified  witness.1  In  this  later  period  moreover — that
of  the  last  centuries  of  the  independent  Babylonian  civilization —
it  appears  from  the  contracts  that  a  woman  could  protect  herself
against  the  advent  of  a  second  wife  by  pecuniary  penalties  in
the  marriage  contract.2  On  the  other  hand,  her  marriage  still
appears  to  be  at  the  disposal  of  her  male  relations,  her  brothers,
for  instance,  when  the  father  was  dead.  Indeed,  even  the  son
required  the  father's  consent  to  his  marriage.  To  this  extent
the  patriarchal  power  had  endured.3

2.  In  ancient  Egypt  a  good  deal  of  obscurity  surrounds  the
position  of  women.  We  have  to  re-construct  it  partly  from
marriage  contracts  which  perhaps  do  not  show  us  all  the
conditions  of  the  bargain,  partly  from  incidents  in  stories,  partly
from  passages  in  the  moralists,  partly  from  the  descriptions  of

(1)  that,  in  case  of  sickness,  there  might  be  two  regular  wives ;  (2)  there
might  be  in  case  of  childlessness,  and  perhaps  in  other  cases  also,  a  regular
concubine,  subordinate  to  [the  wife  ;  (3)  a  slave  concubine  unprotected
by  contract,  whose  children  might  or  might  not  be  recognized,  and  inherit.

1  Kohler and  Peiser,  Aus  dem  Babylonischen Rechtsleben,  iii. p. 8,
etc. The  marriage  law  had  also  improved  in  the  wife's  favour. Contracts
of  marriage  by  purchase  are  very  rare,  though  one  exists  of  the  thirteenth
year  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  which  the  wife  is  bought  for  a  slave  for  1J
gold  minas. (Ib.,  vol.  i.  p.  8.)

2  The  husband  promises  if  he  takes  another  wife  to  give  her  a  mina
and  send  her  home. This  seems  to  have  been  a  common  protection  against
polygamy. The  wife  still  engages  to  be  put  to  death,  if  unfaithful  (Kohler
and  Peiser,  i.  7,  8. Cf.  Victor  Marx,  Die  Stdlung  der  Frauen  in  Baby-
lonien ;  Beitrcige  zur  Assyriologie.  bd.  4,  lift.  i.  p.  5,  seq.)

3  Kohler  and  Peiser,  i.  p.  9,  and  ii.  p. 7. The  right  of  the  father  is
limited  in  Hammurabi. He  might  only  disinherit  a  son  for  a  serious
crime,  and  then  only  for  a  second  offence,  and  with  the  approval  of  a  judge.
(168,  169.) In  other  words,  the  property  was  the  family's,  and  the  father
had  only  limited  rights  over  it.


183

Greek  travellers.  We  have  no  precise  and  certain  information
as  to  the  structure  of  the  family,  on  which  everything  turns ;  and
we  are  dealing  with  a  period  of  four  thousand  years  or  more,  in  the
course  of  which  there  is  time  even  in  the  slow-moving  East  for
many  things  to  change.  In  fact,  our  fullest  information  relates  to
the  very  latest  period  of  independent  Egyptian  history,  and  to  the
time  of  the  subjection  to  Persians,  Greeks  and  Romans.  This
information  is  derived  from  numerous  marriage  contracts,  a  few
of  which  are  as  early  as  the  time  of  King  Bocchoris  (circa  B.C.
730),  while  the  greater  number  are  of  Persian  and  Ptolemaic
times.  In  this  period  there  was  no  sale  by  the  parents,1  but  the
bride  gift  went  to  the  bride  herself,  and  the  husband  in  the
contract  further  stipulates  how  much  he  will  give  for  her  support,
and  promises  that  the  children  shall  be  his  heirs.  The  woman's
own  property  remains  generally  at  her  disposal,  and  she  retains
the  right  in  the  contracts  of  leaving  her  husband  and  keeping
her  property  together  with  the  bride  gift.  She  also  can  secure
herself  against  divorce  by  a  fictitious  dowry  which  the  husband
is  to  pay  back 2  to  her  in  case  he  sends  her  away.

Such  contracts  appear  to  be  wholly  in  favour  of  the  woman,
and  in  the  light  of  them  we  can  understand  the  statement  of
Diodorus  that  among  the  Egyptians  the  wife  ruled  the  husband,
though  he  clearly  exaggerates  when  he  says  that  in  the  marriage
contract  there  was  a  specific  agreement  that  the  husband  should  in
all  things  obey  the  wife.3  This,  however,  gives  us  one  side  of  the
shield  only.  The  very  fact  that  the  wife  protected  herself  from
divorce  or  from  the  marriage  of  a  second  wife  by  special  clauses  in
the  marriage  contract  goes  to  prove  that  she  was  not  so  pro-

1  Nor  do  they  appear  in  the  contract. Yet  probably  their  authority
was  or  had  been  at  least  in  theory  absolute,  even  over  the  son. (Revillout,
Precis  du  droit  figyptien,  p.  1102.) In  the  story  of  the  enchanted  princess,
the  daughter  only  gets  her  own  way  by  threatening  suicide. (W.  Jttax
Mtiller,  p.  3.)

2  W.  Max  Mtiller,  Liebespoesie  dcr  alien  Aegypter,  p.  4  11.  ^  , „ _

3  Diodorus,  i.  27. ?rapa  TO?S  iSicorais Kvpteveiv  TT)V  yvvaixa.  ravSpos,  ev  TTJ  TTJS
TrpoiKbs ffvyypaQfi irpoffo^o\oyo6vruv ruv ya^vruv a-rrarra veiQapX^v *?
yafi.ovfi.evri. Some  instances  are,  however,  quoted  of  post-nuptial  gilts  in
which  the  husband  makes  over  all  his  possessions  to  his  wife,  on  condition
that  she  is  responsible  for  his  maintenance  throughout  life  and  ior  his
tomb. (Revillout,  1092.) Of.  also  the  contract  of  Panofre,  in  which,  seem
ingly,  full  power  is  given  to  the  wife  and  none  to  the  husband. (16.,  1005.)
M.  Revillout  regards  this  as  a  compensation  for  seduction.


184  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

toctod  by  the  general  law,  mid  in  point,  of  fact  Micro  is  evidence
in  the  monuments  nnd  in  the  popular  stories  both  lor  polygamy
and  for  looser  unions  admitting  arbitrary  divorce.  Tltns  in  the
•tory  of  the  Squinting  Woman  wo  read  that  "she  was  twenty
years  in  the  house  of  her  husband.  When  ho  found  another
woniivn  ho  said  to  her,  'I  divorce  you,  yon  squint.'"1  Pre
sumably  the  poor  l-vdy  had  not  taken  the  precaution  to  protect
herself  by  ;i.  marriage  contract,  or  perhap*  she  I,.-,, I  not,  the
means  to  do  so,  for  naturally  conjugal  rights  resting  npon
considerations  of  property  could  only  be  milbrced  among  the
propertied  classes,  and  probably  only  there  in  eases  where  the
wifo's  dower  was  a  mibstii.nt.inl  consideration.  And  if,  as  good
authorities  2  hold,  this  pecuniary  security  against  tint  possibility
that  ^the  husband  "should  be  averse  to  her  and  seek  another
wife"  formed  the  chief  difference  between  the  wife  and  the
mistress,  we  can  easily  nnderMtand  how  it  was  that  much  looser
relations  remained  the  rule  both  in  the  highest  elassoa  and
amonjr  t,|,o  mass  of  the  people.  The  privileged  position  which
the  wife  occupies  in  the  contracts  would  seem,  then,  to  arise
largely  from  considerations  of  property  and  inheritance,  though
based  also  on  the  freedom  of  the  Ujrypfian  woman  to  carry  on
commerce  and  industry  and  I,,  make  contracts  for  her  own
benefit.  With  this  freedom,  which  is  very  possibly  associated
with  a  genera]  breakdown  of  an  older  joint  family  system  about
the  epoch  of  P.oeehoris,  she  or  her  father  on  her  behalf— is
enabled  to  bargain  either  for  the  fidelity  of  her  husband  or  for
freedom  for  herself  to  leave  him  in  some  eases  even  for  both
together 8— her  property  being  leoured  to  her  and  the  children
of  the  marriage.  Apart  from  such  a  bargain,  if  this  view  in
accurate,  her  position  would  bo  a  very  different  ono.4

1  W.  Max  Miillnr,  U.,  p.  ft.

"How  complexly  Mm  tcrriiH  of  tlm  cont.nic.t  wero  dHonninoil  l.y  tlin

poiitlon  of  the  partiM  un<l  tli»  oonditioni  «>f  tlm  l.urj/iiin  in  H|K»WII  \ly  MM.

net,  Mint,  from  (he  very  HIIIIU>  jKirioii  wo  Kl't  contmcU  in  wliic.li  Mio  wife

band!  hertelf  over  tw  n.  Hluvo,  with  all  her  lx>toiiKitiKH  down  to  tho  dothcM

her hack. Tim man nmrcly ]iroiiiiwM nut to  tako a cotiniliinc.

trvillont,  |>.  !>})(!.) In  HomiMioiitrnriH,  n^iin,  the  wife  pledyen  lieiw.lf  if  Hho

1MVM  the  hiuband,  to  rcHlore  all  IIJM  ^iftH  tenfold. (//».,  1002.)

BeeEevillout,  Pr^ududroit  AV/;/;>/,im,  p.  1021),  and  rf.  Mullor,  p.  -1.
In  tin!  inte.rpnilal.ioii  of  the.  contract  ovury tiling  really  tnniH  on  tlio
1  thil  IH  rc«l  the  wholo  poHilion JH njadily intollidhlo. Tlio
baud  rocnivoB  (as  Iho  oontructH  rocite)  m>  much  IVom  tho  wifo. Hut,  ho


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  185

Polygamy  appears  to  liave  been  allowed  from  tlio  first,,  though
an  in  almost  .'ill  polygamous  countries  it  was  lor  tlio  mosl/  part
confined  to  tlio  rich.  Tlio  kin^  has  ;i,  lar^o  li.'irom  in  which
there  is  ono  olnof  wife,  tlio  "  <^real,  spouse,"  vvlio  accompanies
the  luri";  in  his  pnblie  aota  find  particularly  in  his  religions
worship,  wlio  is  always  a  princess  of  tlio  roy;il  blood,  and  prob
ably  a  sister  of  tlio  kin;r,  who  has  lior  own  household  and  her
own  servants,  and  ini^lil  on  tlio  kind's  death  obtain  practical

holds  il,  ill  I  nil  for  her,  to  |>:i,y  her  ;i  lived  income  from  il,  while  sin:  is
his  wife,  or,  il'  she  leaves  liini,  In  refund  it,.  She  keeps  I, In;  property  in
caso  of  divorce  beca.u:  <•  il,  was  originally  hers,  and  has  throughout,  been
held  fur  her.  Moreover,  the  |n-u|)rrl  y  i.i  fettled  on  the  children  of  I  lie.
marriage,  and  it  appears  to  be  in  their  inleivl  as  much  aB  the  wife's  that
thn  con  tract,  in  made.  So  far  (lie  only  important  right  of  the  wife  is
that  of  free  separation.  If,  Im\ve\ cr,  as  seems  ID  he  lidd  by  Jlevillout,  p.
107'.),  and  Muller,  the  dowry  was  often  lic.tit  ioiin,  the.  liar^'ain  was  certainly
favuiiralile  to  (he :  woman  in  a  remarkal'lr  derive.  I  n  that  c.asi;  we  iniint
Hii]t|>oHe  that,  a-i  a  eondiliun  uf  marriage,  she  cxaded  (lie,  M(-t,|.|c.iiient  of  a
man's  wliole.  jiroperty  <>n  liersell'  and  diildrc!!),  7'etainin^  full  liberty  of
leaving  him  at  will,  and  (akin;'  the  property  with  her.  Is  thin  credible '(
Such  a  settlement  occurs1  in  the  Sctne  story.  Ta-biihue  makes  her  would-be
Reducer  first  execute  a  deed  in  her  favour  :  she  then  calls  in  his  children
to  witness  if,  mid  dually  makes  him  kill  them.  This,  however,  belongs  to
lite  region  of  fairytale.  It  seem::  far  more  probable  that  in  (he.  normal
case,  the  free  position  uf  the  wife  was  (us  later  in  IJume)  simply  purchased
by  the  dowry.  In  the  Thcban  contracts  there  is  no  dowry,  and  nothing
is  said  of  divopv  |,y  the  woman.  <)n  the  other  hand,  the.  man  makes  a
nuptial  ,%rift  and  agrees  to  increase  it  live,  ten  or  1  \venfv  fold  if  he  takes
another  wife.  The  property  is  settled  on  the  children  in  the  name  uf  the
eldest  KOII.  (Itovillollt,  ]>|>.  1031,  K):J!>,  If.)  b'evillollt,  ivco-lli/.es  (p.  lO'JC)

that  the  interests  of  Urn  children  were  the  prime  object  of  the  Hettlement,
ami  il  so  the  contract  merely  enforces  by  agreement  what  would  have
occurred  automatically  under  a  joint  family  Hysfem  with  maternal  kin
ship.  The  daiiidiler  inheriting  properly  from  her  parent  marries.  The
husband  becomes  its  administrator,  but  not  its  owner.  K  passes  auto
matically  to  I  heir  children  with  the  eldest,  as  administrator.  If  the  wile
dismissed  (he  husband  (as  under  this  system  .she  often  may)  sho  would  of
course  retain  the  family  properly.  Now  if  this  .system  was  breaking  down
iu  the  age  of  ISocc.horis  in  favour  of  individual  ownership,  it  would  bo
necessary  to  sot1. tire  the  passage  of  the  property  to  the  woman's  children  by
a  compact.  This  was  done  by  making  it  over  to  the  nominal  ownership
(and  perhaps  real  administration)  of  t  he  husband,  who  agreed  that  it  should
return  to  the  wife  in  ca.se  ol'divone,  and  in  any  case  pass  to  their  children.
Thus  (hi!  old  system  o|  inheritance  would  be  maintained  by  the  new
method  of  contract.  It  is,  of  course,  possibh>  that  where  the  woman  had
the  man  in  her  power,  like  the  wilch-wil'e  in  the  story  of  Seine,  she  would
uso  Ibis  form  for  gelling  hold  of  all  his  worldly  goods.  The  Theban  form
of  contract  is  less  archaic.  1 1  ore  there  is  a  iMorgen-gabo  to  the  bride,  but
only  an  earnest  of  it  is  actually  paid  over.  The  remainder  is  to  be  given
if  the  husband  is  unfaithful,  and  so  acts  a.s  a  guarantee  lor  her.


186  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

royal  authority  as  regent.  Under  her  there  are  secondary
wives  taking  rank  according  to  their  birth,  and  being  probably
more  or  less  secluded,  and  beneath  them  again  are  a  troop
of  concubines  and  foreign  slaves.1  The  court  of  Pharaoh
was  imitated  by  the  feudal  chief  of  every  nome,  who  also
had  his  harem,  "where  the  legitimate  wife — often  a  princess
of  solar  rank — played  the  role  of  Queen  surrounded  by
concubines,  dancers  and  slaves."  :  Thus  a  frank  development
of  polygamy,  though  apparently  in  that  form  in  which
the  position  of  the  chief  wife  is  clearly  distinguished,  was
practised  by  the  highest  classes  of  Egypt,  and  it  is  seldom,  if
ever,  that  polygamy  on  a  large  scale  goes  much  further.  It
would  seem,  however,  that  the  position  of  women  gradually
improved  through  Egyptian  history,  and  that  in  practice
polygamy  died  out.  In  the  Middle  Kingdom  it  appears
frequently  among  the  middle  classes,  but  by  B.C.  1100  it  had
become  rare,  and  later  on  it  died  away  except  among  the  higher
officials.3  While  it  was  still  clearly  legal  in  the  New  Kingdom
and  in  the  Classical  Period  the  contracts  enable  us  to  understand
how  through  the  opposition  of  the  women  it  would  gradually
disappear.  But  meanwhile  the  whole  attitude  to  women  must
have  improved.  In  the  early  dynasties  the  king  boasts  of
having  carried  off  the  wives  of  other  men,  and  these  outrages
are  alleged  in  proof  of  his  truly  royal  nature.4  Now  though  in
theory  Pharaoh  may  have  remained  the  absolute  master  of  all  his
subjects  and  their  wives,  yet  rape  and  adultery  did  not  continue
to  be  a  matter  for  boasting.  For  the  ordinary  man,  at  any  rate,
they  were  recognized  as  sins  from  which  he  had  to  clear  himself
in  the  next  world. 5

1  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  270,  271  ff.

2  Maspero,  op.  cit.,  298.

s  Thus  as  late  as  B.C.  40  a  high  priest,  recounting  the  advantages  which
he  had  enjoyed  in  this  life,  says  :  "  I  had  beautiful  concubines."  (W.  Max
M  tiller,  p.  5,  note  11.)

4  Maspero,  Recueil  de  Travcmx,  vol.  iv.  ;  Pyramide  du  roi  Ounas,  p.  76.

6  Thus,  in  the  Negative  Confession  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  of  the  18th
Dynasty,  violations  of  the  marriage  law  figure  as  mortal  sins.  The  Negative
Confession  (Flinders  Petrie,  Religion  and  Conscience  in  Ancient  JEyypt,
pp.  134,  135)  consists  of  a  long  series  of  offences  which  the  dead  man
repudiates.  The  19th  reads :  "  I  have  not  committed  adultery  with
another  man's  wife."  The  next  is  by  some  translated  :  "  I  have  not  been
impure,"  which  would  look  like  a  general  repudiation  of  unchastity  rare  in


WOMAN AND  MARRIAGE  187

On  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife  the  moralists  of  the
Middle  and  New  Kingdom  throw  some  light.  They  very
properly  enjoin  kind  treatment  of  the  wife  upon  the  husband.
To  this  effect  run  the  precepts  of  Ptah  Hotep :  "  If  thou  art
successful  and  hast  furnished  thy  house  and  lovest  the  wife  of  thy
bosom,  then  fill  her  stomach,  and  clothe  her  back.  The  medicine
for  her  body  is  oil.  Make  glad  her  heart  during  the  time  that
thou  hast.  She  is  a  field  profitable  to  its  owner."  *  These  are  most
proper  sentiments,  blended,  as  they  are,  with  that  simple  worldly
wisdom  and  gentle  appeal  to  self-interest  which  characterize
the  utterances  of  the  excellent  Ptah  Hotep,  first  of  all  the  race
of  platitudinarians ;  but  excellent  as  the  sentiment  is,  it  does
not  imply  the  subjection  of  the  husband  to  the  wife,  but  rather
the  contrary.2  The  maxims  of  Ani,  some  six  dynasties  later,  are
a  little  more  detailed :  "Do  not  treat  rudely  a  woman  in  her  house
when  you  know  her  perfectly  ;  do  not  say  to  her, '  Where  is  that  ?
bring  it  to  us,'  when  she  has  set  it  perfectly  in  its  place  which
your  eye  sees,  and  when  you  are  silent  you  know  her  qualities.
It  is  a  joy  that  your  hand  should  be  with  her.  The  man  who
is  firm  of  heart  is  quickly  master  in  his  house.  " 3  All  this  is  in

early  ethics.  But  Miiller  (p.  17)  renders  it:  "I  have  not  stimulated
sensuality," -I.  e.  l>y  drugs.  In  the  earlier  lists  of  repudiations  (there  are  two
in  the  Book  of  the  Dead)  is  one  translated  by  Mr.  Budge  (Book  of  the
Dead,  ii.  p.  301) :  "  I  have  not  committed  fornication,"  but  other  renderings
seem  to  limit  the  offence  to  cases  where  it  was  committed  in  a  sacred  place.
(Griffith,  p.  5321.)  As  to  women  Miiller  (p.  7)  thinks  that  pre-nuptial
chastity  was  little  regarded,  and  this  would  certainly  fall  in  with  the
abnormal  permission  of  brother  and  sister  marriage.  He  adds  that  in  the
marriage  contract  no  stress  was  laid  on  virginity,  and  that,  at  least  in
Roman  times,  there  was  no  prejudice  against  bastards.  The  unspeakable
corruption  of  the  Egyptian  Pantheon  to  which  lie  refers  would  reflect  the
manners  of  the  earliest  period.

1  Flinders Petrie,  p. 132. F. L. Griffith, TJie World's  Literature,
p.  5335.

2  There  is  a  little  more  point  in  a  further  maxim  of  Ptah  Hotep,  "  If
thou  makest  a  woman  ashamed,  wanton  of  heart,  whom  her  fellow-towns
people  know  to  be  under  two  laws  (explained  by  Mr.  Griffith  as  meaning
in  an  ambiguous  position),  be  kind  to  her  a  season  ; send  her  not  away,  let
her  have  food  to  eat. The  wantonness  of  her  heart  appreciateth  guidance."
(Griffith,  World's  Literature,  p.  5337.) Apparently  this  is  a  recommend
ation,  couched,  it  must  be  admitted,  in  mild  terms,  to  a  man  who  has
seduced  a  woman  to  treat  her  with  consideration. There  is  clearly no
question  of  any  obligation.

a  The  Boulak  Papyrus,  in  Amulineau,  La  Morale  Egyptienne,  p.  188.
Brugsch  translates  the  first  words  :  "  Do  not  strike  your  wife."  With  the
above  compare  the  Ptolemaic  precept,  "  May  it  not  happen  to  thee  to  mal-


188  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  approved  Oriental  style,  and  so  also  is  Ani's  recommend
ation  to  the  wife  :  "  What  does  one  speak  of  day  by  day  ?  Let
the  professions  speak  of  their  duties,  the  wife  of  her  husband,
and  every  man  about  his  business."  *

In  what  sense,  then,  was  the  wife  called  "  mistress  of  the
house  "  ?  Possibly  this  was  merely  the  title  of  the  legitimate
wife  as  opposed  to  the  concubines.  Possibly  the  true  explanation
is  that  advanced  by  Maspero,2  that,  as  in  some  contemporary
tribes  of  Northern  Africa,  the  practice  of  polygamy  took  the
form  that  each  wife  had  her  own  house  in  which  she  was
mistress,  and  "  where  she  performed  all  a  woman's  duties,  feeding
the  fire,  grinding  the  corn,  occupying  herself  in  cooking  and
weaving,  making  cloth  and  perfumes,  nursing  and  teaching  her
children.  When  her  husband  visited  her,  he  was  a  guest  whom
she  received  on  an  equal  footing.  It  appears  that  at  the  outset
these  various  wives  were  placed  under  the  authority  of  an  older
woman,  whom  they  looked  on  as  their  mother,  and  who  defended
their  rights  and  interests  against  their  master,  but  this  custom
gradually  disappeared,  and  in  historic  times  we  read  of  it  as
existing  only  in  the  families  of  the  gods."  3

With  this  system  probably  survivals  of  primitive  mother-right
were  conjoined.  Descent  was  reckoned  through  the  mother  down

treat  thy  wife  whose  strength  is  less  than  thine,  but  may  she  find  in  thee  a
protector."  (Flinders  Petrie,  p.  133.)  We  have  also  the  lament  of  a
widower  who  is  persecuted  by  his  wife's  ghost,  and  who  points  out  that  he
never  left  her  when  he  obtained  promotion,  but  shared  everything  with  her,
and  never  acted  the  master,  (llevillout,  p.  984.)  This  implies  that  he
might  have  done  so.  On  the  other  hand,  it  points  to  another  possible  source
of  respect  for  women,  the  fear  of  the  ghost  or  of  their  magic  power.  This
last  was  strongly  felt.  (Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  271.)

1  Maxims  of  Ani,  §  30.  Amelineau,  La  Morale  Eyyptienne,  113.
It  should  be  added  that  the  husband  could  apparently  put  the  unfaithful
wife  to  death.  In  the  story  of  the  "  Two  Brothers  "  it  is  narrated  without
comment,  and  rather  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  the  husband  slew  his  wife
and  cast  her  to  the  dogs.  (Griffith,  World's  Literature,  5257.)  According
to  Diodorus,  in  cases  of  adultery,  the  paramour  was  pxinished  with  1  000
blows,  the  wife  by  having  her  nose  cut  off.  (I.  78.  4.)

z  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  51  ff.

3  The  same  practice  is  found  among  Columbian  tribes  where  the  husband
goes  to  live  in  the  wife's  tribe.  She  takes  charge  of  the  house  and  the  pro
visions,  and  there  may  be  several  wives,  each  with  her  separate  fire.
(Starcke,  The  Primitive  Family,  p.  34.)  The  contracts  of  the  classical
period  appear  to  contemplate  the  separate  life  of  the  parties,  pursuing  their
several  avocations,  and  the  husband  agreeing  to  allow  so  much  for  his  wife's
maintenance.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  189

to  late  times,  and  guardianship  was  exercised  by  the  mother's
brother.1  That  being  so,  it  is  intelligible  that  the  family  property
should  pass  through  the  female  and  be  retained  by  her  in  case
of  divorce.  Honour  to  the  mother  is  strongly  insisted  on.

"  Thou  shalt  never  forget  thy  mother,  and  what  she  has  done
for  thee,  that  she  bore  thee,  and  nurtured  thec  in  all  ways.  Wert
thou  to  forget  her  then  she  might  blame  thec,  lifting  up  her  arms
unto  God,  and  He  would  hearken  unto  her  complaint.  For  she
carried  thce  long  beneath  her  heart  as  a  heavy  burden,  and  after
thy  months  were  accomplished  she  bore  thec.  Three  long  years
she  carried  thce  upon  her  shoulder  and  gave  thee  her  breast  to  thy
mouth.  She  nurtured  thee  nor  knew  offence  for  thy  uncleanness.
And  when  thou  didst  enter  school  and  wast  instructed  in  the
writings,  daily  she  stood  by  the  master  with  bread  and  beer  from
the  house."2

Thus  it  is  very  possible  that  the  preservation  of  relics  of
mother-right  was  among  the  forces  tending  to  the  better
condition  of  women  in  Egypt,  These  were  augmented  towards
the  close  of  the  independent  history  of  Egypt  by  the  rise  of  free
contract  and  the  important  part  taken  by  women  in  industrial
arid  commercial  life.  In  these  relations  arid  in  social  intercourse
generally  it  is  allowed  on  all  hands  that  their  position  was
remarkably  free.  Little  restraint  was  placed  on  their  inter
course  with  men,  they  appear  on  the  monuments  eating
and  drinking  freely — sometimes  too  freely — in  masculine  com
pany,  and  they  surprised  the  Greek  travellers  by  going  out
without  restraint  to  work  at  their  trade  or  manual  labour  while
the  men  often  worked  at  homo.3  Of  this  position  women  in

1  W.  Max  Muller,  Liebespoesie,  p.  G.

-  From  the  Boulak  Papyrus,  translated  by  Griffith,  op.  cik.,  p.  5340,
from  the  German  of  Professor  Erman.

3  W.  Max  Muller,  loc.  cit.,  points  out  that  this  freedom  would  not  apply
to  the  bondwomen  of  the  peasantry,  who  were  under  the  arbitrary  power  of
royal  or  priestly  officials,  and  wove  for  them  shut  up  in  a  work-house.
Here,  however,  we  touch  the  general  (question  of  slavery  rather  than  the
special  position  of  women.  It  is  more  to  the  point,,that  to  have  refrained
from  pressing  a  widow  remained  a  matter  for  boasting,  and  that  education  m
reading  and  writing  was  not  often  extended  to  girls.  It  is  perhaps  going  a
little  too  far  to  say  with  this  writer  that  no  ancient  or  foreign  people,  ex
cept  those  of  New  Zealand,  have  given  women  so  high  a  legal  position.  The
attitude  to  women  in  Egyptian  literature  is  not  particularly  respectful.
Often  she  is  represented  as  the  temptress,  for  instance  in  the  Boulak  Papyrus.

"  Keep  thyself  from  the  strange  woman  who  is  not  known  m  her  city.


190  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

the  commercial  and  propertied  classes  availed  themselves  to
improve  their  condition  as  wives.  But  apart  from  marriage
contracts  which  were  perhaps  restricted  to  a  limited  class  for  a
limited  period,  the  position  of  the  Egyptian  woman  was  probably,
save  for  the  remainders  of  mother-right,  much  what  it  has  been
elsewhere  in  the  East — subject  to  her  guardian's  choice  of  a
husband,1  liable  to  be  slain  for  unfaithfulness,  subject  to  divorce
at  pleasure,  and  to  have  other  wives  or  concubines  associated
with  her.  Out  of  this  condition  the  women  of  Egypt  at  the
close  of  its  independent  civilization  were  raising  themselves  by
the  marriage  contract,  and  one  class  had  so  far  succeeded  as  to
achieve  a  position  equal  to  that  of  the  Roman  matron  at  a  later
day.

3.  Both  in  Egypt  and  Babylonia  the  position  of  women  was
in  some  respects  better  than  our  traditional  conception  of  the
Oriental  woman  would  lead  us  to  expect.  In  other  cases  that
conception  accords  only  too  closely  \\ith  the  facts.  Each  civiliza
tion  has  had  its  own  peculiarities,  but  they  have  been  variations
upon  one  type.  In  India  tradition  starts  with  the  heroic  age  of
the  Vedas,  in  which  the  paternal  power  is  already  fully  developed.
The  father  is  master  and  indeed  owner  of  the  family ;  wife,  sons,
daughters  and  slaves  have  no  property  of  their  own,  but  are
rather  his  property.  On  his  death,  his  place  is  taken  by  the
eldest  son,  into  whose  tutelage  the  widow  passes.  The  daughter
might  be  sold  to  an  intending  husband,2  and  it  is  not  probable

Look  not  upon  her  when  she  cometh  and  know  her  not.  She  is  like  a
whirlpool  in  deep  waters,  the  whirling  vortex  of  which  is  not  known.  The
woman  whose  husband  is  afar  writeth  unto  thee  daily.  When  none  is  there
to  see  she  standeth  up  and  spreadeth  her  snare.  Sin  unto  death  is  it  to
hearken  thereto."  (Griffith's  tr.  following  Erman,  World's  Literature,
p.  5340.)

The  general  tendency  of  the  passage,  which  recalls  the  well-known
chapter  in  Proverbs,  is  plain  enough,  but  whether  the  warning  is
principally  directed  against  the  harlot  or  the  adulteress  is  not  wholly  clear.

1  In  the  12th  dynasty  women  were  definitely  part  of  the  family  property,
a  man's  widow  being  counted  among  the  possessions  inherited  by  the  son.
(Revillout,  Precis  du  Droit  Sgyptien,  p.  990.) Here  there  was  apparently
a  decided  change  by  the  time  of  Bocchoris,  a  change  which  naturally
accompanies  the  break-up  of  the  joint  family.

2  The  purchase  of  brides  is  mentioned  in  the  Epic  Poems.  Thus  Bhishma
purchased  the  daughter  of  the  Prince  of  Madras  for  Pandu,  with  gold  and
precious  stones. (Duncker,  History  of  Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  pp.  255-266.)
Capture  was  probably  an  alternative  to  purchase,  I.  c.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  191

that  her  conseut  was  a  material  condition.1  The  widow  passed
to  her  husband's  brother  until  a  son  was  born  :  she  did  not  in  this
age  follow  her  husband  to  the  grave,  though  the  funeral  cere
mony  strongly  suggests  the  previous  existence  of  such  a  custom.2
Finally  the  Vedas  contain  distinct  traces  of  polygamy,  though
it  was  doubtless  an  exception.3  Thus  Indian  family  life  begins
with  a  typical  Patriarchate.  To  this  system  a  religious  turn  was
given  by  the  Brahman  law.  In  some  respects  the  Brahmans
endeavoured  to  purify  the  marriage  relationship  and  to  provide
for  the  protection  of  the  wife.  This  appears  especially  in  the
attempt  to  prohibit  marriage  by  purchase.  This  form  of  marriage
is  recognized,  but  figures  along  with  marriage  by  capture  as  one
of  the  four  blamable  kinds,  and  "  no  father  who  knows  the  law
must  take  even  the  smallest  gratuity  for  his  daughter."  He  that
does  so  is  "  a  seller  of  his  offspring."  4  Purchase  is  reduced  to

1  Muir, Sanscrit Texts, v. 459, quotes a passage from the Vedas,
which  suggests  that  some  freedom  of  choice  was  exercised  by  women  under
favourable  conditions. "  Happy  is  the  female  that  is  handsome. She  her
self  loves  (or  chooses)  her  friend  among  the  people." In  the  Mahabharata
the King's daughters appear to choose their  husbands,  but this  is a
prerogative  of  Koyalty.

2  When  the  widow  has  led  her  husband  to  the  place  of  burial,  _  she  is
exhorted  to  "  elevate  herself  to  the  world  of  life,"  for  her  marriage  is  at  an
end. (Duncker,  op.  cit.,  iv.  511.)

'•'  In  one  hymn  the  poet  prays  that  Piishan  will  protect  him  and  pro
vide  him  with  a  supply  of  damsels.  (Muir,  v.  457,  4(51.)

;  Manu's  eight  forms  of  maniage  and  his  comments  on  them  are  full  of
instruction  for  the  transition  from  barbaric  to  civilized  marriage  laws.
The  gift  of  a  daughter,  after  decking  her,  to  a  man  learned  in  the  Veda  and
of  good  conduct  ...  is  called  the  Brahma  rite.  The  gift  of  a  daughter  who
has  been  decked  with  ornaments  to  a  priest  .  .  .  they  call  the  Uaiva  rite.
When  (the  father)  gives  away  his  daughter  according  to  the  rule  after
receiving  from  the  bridegroom,  for  (the  fu]tilment  of)  the  sacred  law,  a  cow
and  a  bull  or  two  pairs,  that  is  named  the  Arsha  rite.  The  gift  of  a  daughter

xt  Ma  both


(the  bridegroom)  receives  a  maiden  after  having
as  he  can  afford,  to  the  kinsmen  and  to  the  bride  herself,  according  to  his  own
will,  that  is  called  the  Asura  rite.  The  voluntary  union  of  a  maiden  and
her  lover  one  must  know  (to  be)  the  Gandharva  rite,  which  springs  from
desire,  and  has  sexual  intercourse  for  its  purpose.  The  forcible  abduction
of  a  maiden  from  her  home,  while  she  cries  out  and  weeps,  after  (her  kins
men)  have  been  slain  or  wounded  and  (their  houses)  broken  open,  is  called^the
Eakshasa  rite.  When  (a  man)  by  stealth  seduces  a  girl  who  is  sleeping,
intoxicated,  or  disordered  in  intellect,  that  is  the  eighth,  the  most  base  and
sinful  rite  of  the  Pisakas.  (Mann,  iii.  27-34.)  Of  these,  the  first  four  are
allowed  to  Brahmans.  They  are  all  in  effect  religious  marriages,  the  gift  in
the  third  or  Arsha  form  being  of  a  ceremonial  character,  as  it  is  to  be  "ior


192  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

the  form  of  a  fee  given  to  the  Brahman  for  the  fulfilment  of  the
sacred  law,  and  this  fee  is  not  to  be  appropriated  by  the  relatives
themselves.  Yet  notwithstanding  Manu's  discouragement  of  the
practice,  marriage  by  purchase  persisted  in  a  modified  form,  the
final  compromise  being  that  the  present  given  by  the  suitor  was
assigned  to  the  benefit  of  the  bride  and  became  her  dowry,  pass
ing  back  to  her  own  family  on  her  death.  The  barbaric  form  of
marriage  by  capture  or  abduction,  which  is  morally  condemned
by  Manu  but  legally  sanctioned  for  the  Kshatriya  caste,  became
obsolete,  being  forbidden  in  Narada's  code,  and  the  two  forms  of
marriage  which  persist  in  India  to  this  day  are  the  Brahma,  the
gift  of  a  daughter  decked  and  honoured  with  jewels  to  a  man
learned  in  the  Veda  whom  the  father  himself  invites,  and  the
Asura,  or  purchase  in  the  modified  form  described.1

Only  in  one  case,  moreover,  does  Manu  recognize  the  free-will
of  the  maiden  in  the  matter  of  her  own  marriage.  If  her  father
fails  to  provide  her  with  a  husband  within  three  years  of  her
attaining  maturity  she  may  marry  whom  she  will.2  In  all  other
cases  her  guardian  disposes  of  her  hand.  The  woman  who  is
thus  passed  from  the  absolute  control  of  her  father  into  the
absolute  control  of  her  husband  must  honour,  obey  and  merge
herself  in  him.  "  Though  destitute  of  virtue,  or  seeking  pleasure
(elsewhere),  or  devoid  of  good  qualities,  (yet)  a  husband  must  be
constantly  worshipped  as  a  god  by  a  faithful  wife."3  "She
must  always  be  cheerful,  clever  in  (the  management  of  her)
household  affairs,  careful  in  cleaning  her  utensils,  and  economical
in  expenditure." 4  On  his  side  the  husband  is  commanded  to
show  her  respect.  "  Women  must  be  honoured  and  adorned  by

the  fulfilment  of  the  sacred  law,"  not  a  price  for  the  daughter.  A  variant
appears  in  the  code  of  Apastaniba  (II.,  vi.  12,  13,  Mayne,  p.  82),  wherein  a
gift  of  value  was  made  to  the  bride's  parents,  but  returned  by  them.  The
four  blamable  rites  are  purchase,  capture,  voluntary  union,  and  treacherous
seduction.  Of  these,  the  two  iirst,  as  we  have  seen,  are  allowed  to  the
warrior  caste.  The  fifth  and  eighth,  the  law  book  of  Bauddhayana  allows  to
Vaisyas  and  Sudras,  since  they  "are  not  particular  about  their  wives."
(Baud.,  I.,  ii.  13,  14.)  These  are  in  the  main  relics  of  barbarism,  yet  a
higher  conception  appears  when  Bauddhayana  remarks  that  "  some  recom
mend  the  Gandharva  rite  (i.  e.  voluntary  union)  for  all  castes,  because  it  is
based  on  mutual  affection."  (Ib.)  But  this  germ  of  a  true  marriage  by
mutual  consent  was  not  allowed  to  fructify.

1  J.  D.  Mayne,  Hindu  Laiu  and  Usage,  pp.  79-85.

2  Manu,  ix.  90  ff.  3  Manu,  v.  154.  4  Manu,  v.  150.


WOMAN AND MAURI  AGE  193

tlieir  fathers,  brothers,  husbands,  and  brothers-in-law,  who  desire
(their  own)  welfare."1  He  is  to  be  faithful  to  her,  "being
constantly  satisfied  with  her  alone."  Her  son  is  even  to  respect
her  more  than  his  father.  "  The  teacher  is  ten  times  more
venerable  than  a  sub-teacher,  the  father  a  hundred  times  more
than  the  teacher,  but  the  mother  a  thousand  times  more  than
the  father."  2  And  so  Vasishtha  says,  "  A  father  who  has  com
mitted  a  crime  causing  loss  of  caste  must  be  cut  off.  But  a
mother  does  not  become  an  outcast  for  her  son." 3  But  though
respected  if  virtuous,  she  is  to  be  chastised  if  the  husband  thinks
her  otherwise.  The  chastisement,  however,  is  strictly  limited.  "  A
wife,  a  son,  a  slave,  a  pupil,  and  a  younger  brother  of  the  full
blood,  who  have  committed  faults,  may  be  beaten  with  a  rope  or
split  bamboo,  but  on  the  back  part  of  the  body  (only),  never  on  a
noble  part;  he  who  strikes  them  otherwise  will  incur  the  same
guilt  as  a  thief." 4  Here,  as  elsewhere,  fluctuations  of  opinion
show  through  Manu's  text.  In  one  place  we  read,  "  Day  and
night  women  must  be  kept  in  dependence  by  the  males  of  their
families," 5  yet  a  few  sections  on  the  appeal  is  to  women  them
selves  :  "  Women  confined  in  the  house  under  trustworthy  and
obedient  servants  are  not  (well)  guarded ;  but  those  who  of  their
own  accord  keep  guard  over  themselves  are  well  guarded."6
But  this  higher  note  is  seldom  struck.  The  Brahmans  are  far
too  much  impressed  with  the  evil  disposition  of  women,7  and  the
husband  is  recommended  to  keep  his  wife  well  employed  about
the  house  keeping  things  clean  and  preparing  his  food,  as  an
expedient  for  guarding  her.

On  the  strict  theory  of  Manu  a  wife  could  have  no  property.
In  this  respect  she  is  placed  on  one  footing  with  a  son  and  a
slave.8  The  wife  could  not  leave  her  husband  under  any  circum
stances,  but  he  might  take  other  wives  and  might  "supersede"
rather  than  divorce  her  if  she  "  drink  spirituous  liquor,  is  of  bad
conduct,  rebellious,  diseased,  mischievous  or  wasteful."  Further  :
"  A  barren  wife  may  be  superseded  in  the  eighth  year,  she  whose

1  Manu,  iii.  55.  2  Mann,  ii.  145. 3  Vasishtha,  xiii.  47,  48.

4  Manu,  viii.  299,  300. 5  Manu,  ix.  2.  6  Manu.  ix.  12.

7  When  creating  them,  Manu  allotted  to  women  (a  love  of  their)  bed,
(of  their)  seat  and  (of)  ornament,  impure  desires,  wrath,  dishonesty,  malice,
and  bad  conduct. (Manu,  ix.  17,  and  see  the  whole  passage,  13-18.)

8  This,  however,  is  not  carried  out  consistently. (Manu,  ix.  194.)

VOL.  I.  O


194  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

children  all  die  in  the  tenth,  she  who  bears  only  daughters  in
the  eleventh,  but  she  who  is  quarrelsome  without  delay."
"  But  a  sick  wife  who  is  kind  to  her  husband  and  virtuous  in
her  conduct,  may  be  superseded  only  with  her  own  consent  and
must  never  be  disgraced." l  There  are  indeed  traces  in  the  text
of  Manu,  on  the  one  hand,  of  a  custom  allowing  deserted  wives
as  well  as  widows  to  marry  again,  and,  on  the  other,  of  an
idealistic  attempt  to  establish  indissoluble  monogamous  marriage.
But  these  remain  as  traces  only.  What  the  Brahmans  actually
succeeded  in  doing  was  to  prevent  the  re-marriage  of  women
even  after  the  death  of  their  husbands,  while  men  obtained  the
right  to  take  as  many  wives  as  they  pleased,  though  they  might
not  dismiss  any  existing  wives  save  for  one  of  the  faults
enumerated.2  Such  having  been  the  position  of  the  wife  during
the  husband's  lifetime,  after  his  death  she  must  remain  faithful
to  him,  "  she  must  not  even  mention  the  name  of  another  man
after  her  husband  has  died."  3  She  is  now  under  the  tutelage  of

1  Manu,  ix.  80-82.

2  Manu,  always  liberal  in  inconsistencies,  is  more  than  usually  so  on  this
point. The  cause,  as  shown  by  J.  D.  Mayne,  is  clearly  mutilation  of  the
text  in  the  interest  of  conflicting  views. Thus  in  ix.  46,  47,  we  read :
"  Neither  by  sale  nor  by  repudiation  is  a  wife  released  from  her  husband.
.  .  .  Once  is  the  partition  (of  the  inheritance)  made,  (once  is)  a  maiden
given  in  marriage,  etc." From  this  it  is  clear  that  the  repudiated  wife
could  not  re-marry. Further  it  seems  that  the  attempt  was  being  made  to
impose  monogamy  and  conjugal  fidelity  on  the  husband  as  well. "Let
mutual  fidelity  continue  unito  death,  this  may  be  considered  as  the  summary
of  the  highest  law  for  husband  and  wife." (ix.  101.) Connect  this  with  v.
168. "  Having  thus,  at  the  funeral,  given  the  sacred  fires  to  his  wife  who
dies  before  him,  he  may  marry  again,  and  again  kindle  the  (fires)." This
seems  to  imply  monogamy  with  mutual  fidelity  as  the  ideal,  but  in  other
parts  a  plurality  of  wives  is  freely  contemplated,  and  in  ix.  77-82,  the  dis
missal  of  a  wife  is  permitted  on  several  conditions  as  shown  in  the  text.
Further  Mayne,  Hindu  Latv  and  Usaye,  p.  93,  shows  conclusively  that  a
passage  has  been  omitted  before  ix.  76,  justifying  a  wife  in  marrying  again
after  desertion  for  a  period  of  years. Thus  we  trace  (1)  a  period  when
widows  and  deserted  wives  may  marry  again,  (2)  an  attempt  to  establish
monogamy. But  the  net  result  of  this  sacramental  conception  of  marriage,
impinging  on  actual  law  and  usage,  was,  in  the  Brahmanic  codes,  the
greatest  liberty  for  the  man,  and  the  most  complete  bondage  for  the  wife.

3  Manu,  v.  157. On  the  other  hand,  not  only  is  suttee  not  mentioned
by  Manu,  but  the  original  text  appears,  as  we  have  seen,  to  contemplate
re-marriage. (See  especially  ix.  175,  176.) Among  the  Jats  of  the  Punjab,
re-marriage  is  allowed  to  the  deserted  wife  and  to  the  widow  ;  in  "Western
India,  it  is  allowed  to  the  lower  castes  if  the  husband  is  impotent,  if  the
parties  are  continually  quarrelling,  or  if,  by  mutual  consent,  the  husband
breaks  the  wife's  neck  ornament,  or  if  he  deserts  her  for  twelve  years. ( J.  D.


WOMAN  AND MARRIAGE  195

her  son,  for  a  woman  is  never  a  free  agent.  "  By  a  girl,  by  a
young  woman,  or  even  by  an  aged  one,  nothing  must  be  done
independently,  even  in  her  own  house.  In  childhood  a  female
must  be  subject  to  her  father,  in  youth  to  her  husband,  when
her  lord  is  dead  to  her  sons ;  a  woman  must  never  be  in
dependent."  l

The  chastity  of  women  was  to  be  preserved  by  their  seclusion,
and  their  unfaithfulness  punished  by  their  husbands.  We  have
seen  that  in  the  barbaric  world  the  infringement  of  chastity  is
regarded  mainly  as  an  offence  against  the  woman's  owner.  The
influence  of  this  conception  is  still  apparent  in  the  Brahmanical
codes,  which,  in  assigning  punishments  for  seduction  and  adultery,
observe  a  marked  distinction  between  the  cases  where  the
woman  is  properly  guarded  and  those  in  which  she  is  free
from  proper  surveillance.2  The  same  conception  had  another

Mayne,  op.  cit.,  94,  95.)  Polygamy,  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  which  the
earlier  text  of  Manu  seems  to  have  wavered,  remains  to  this  day  an  undoubted
right.  On  the  whole,  we  may  say  that  nowhere  has  the  subjection  of  women
been  more  complete  than  in  India,  and  Mohammedan  influence,  far  from
improving  matters,  has  only  furthered  the  practice  of  seclusion.

1  Manu,  v.  147,  148.

2  For  a  scale  of  penalties  modifiable  according  as  the  woman  is  guarded
or  not,  see  Manu,  viii.  374  if.

On  the  subject  of  legal  punishments  and  religious  penances  for  different
forms  of  immorality,  Manu  is  quite  bewildering  in  his  divergencies  of
statement,  and  the  case  is  made  worse  if  the  other  Brahmanist  law  books
are  consulted.  Two  instances  may  suffice  to  illustrate  the  difficulty  of  ex
tracting  a  consistent  view.  In  viii.  371,  the  king  is  to  cause  the  adulteress
to  be  devoured  by  dogs.  But  in  xi.  177,  "an  exceedingly  corrupt  wife"
is  merely  to  be  confined  to  one  apartment  and  to  perform  the  penance  pre
scribed  for  males  in  the  case  of  adultery.  Probably  the  explanation  is  that
the  first  passage  which  speaks  of  a  wife  "proud  of  the  greatness  of  her
relatives"  lays  down  the  penalty  for  high  caste  women  who  love  men  of
lower  caste.  This  is  explicitly  stated  in  the  corresponding  passage  of
Gautama's  code  (xxiii.  14,  15).  But  there  is  nothing  in  Manu  himself  to
clear  up  the  point.  Again,  in  xi.  59,  intercourse  with  unmarried  maidens
is  somewhat  strangely  classed  with  the  deadliest  of  all  sins — violation  of
the  Guru's  (teacher's)  bed — but  in  §  62  it  is  classed  among  minor  offences
causing  loss  of  caste.

I  shall  not  attempt  to  thread  my  way  through  the  maze,  but  will  note  a
few  salient  points  :

(1)  Considering  the  low  position  of  women,  the  punishments  of  immoral
ity,  where  no  caste  complication  is  involved,  seem  moderate. It  would
seem  as  though  but  little  responsibility  were  attached  to  the  woman. Thus
the  maiden  who  makes  advances  to  a  man  of  high  caste  is  not  to  be  fined,
only  if  he  is  of  lower  caste  is  she  to  be  confined  to  her  house  (viii.  365).

(2)  A  low  caste  seducer  suffered  corporal  punishment. One  of  equal
caste  had  to  pay  the  nuptial  fee  if  demanded  by  the  woman's  father.


196  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

consequence,  paradoxical  enough  in  our  eyes.  As  the  husband
was  the  proprietor  of  the  wife,  he  was  also  the  owner  of  her
children,  whether  they  were  his  children  after  the  flesh  or  not.
And  as  children  were  a  desirable  acquisition  for  the  purposes
both  of  this  world  and  the  next,  it  was  not  unusual  for  a  child
less  husband  to  compel  his  wife  to  bear  him  a  child  by  another
man.  In  the  Mahabharata  we  read  that  wives  who  refuse  such
a  duty  are  guilty  of  sin.  It  was  through  a  similar  order  of  ideas
that  if  the  husband  died  childless  his  brother1  was  appointed
to  raise  up  seed  to  him.  This,  of  course,  was  for  religious
purposes  only.  The  son  of  the  appointed  lover,  on  the  other
hand,  was  the  son  for  this  world  as  well  as  the  next.  But  with
the  progress  of  civilization  the  Niyoga,  as  this  custom  was
called,  gradually  fell  into  discredit  and  made  way  for  a  purer
conception  of  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife.  It  deserves
mentioning  here  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable  paradoxes  in  the
field  of  Comparative  Ethics  that  the  same  teaching  which  insists
so  strongly  on  the  guarding  of  women  as  though  the  preservation
of  their  persons  for  the  benefit  of  their  owners  were  the  sole
object  of  their  existence,  should  also  say  of  adultery  that  "  men
who  have  no  marital  property  in  women,  but  sow  their  seed  in
the  soil  of  others,  benefit  the  owner  of  the  woman."  2  But  the
paradox  resolves  itself  into  this,  that  proprietary  right  rather
than  personal  self-respect  and  love  is  deemed  the  basis  of
conjugal  obligation.  Property  is  more  than  personality,  and  it
is  precisely  this  that  is  characteristic  of  Oriental  as  on  the  whole
of  primitive  marriage.

4.  Turning  from  India  to  China,  we  do  not  find  much  change
in  the  position  of  the  woman. The  arrangement  of  marriage

(3)  Adultery  and  fornication  appear  as  religious  offences  (xi.  59  seq.).
_  (4)  The  husband's  right  to  kill  an  unfaithful  wife  is  substantially  recog
nized — the  penance  required  being  only  to  give  a  leathern  bag,  a  bow,  a
goat,  or  a  sheep,  according  to  her  caste. (Manu,  xi.  139.)

1  The  Levirate  is  usually  connected  with  the  principle  that  the  widow
belongs  to  her  husband's  family,  and  probably  this  was  its  historical  origin
in  India. But  in  Manu  it  rests  on  religious  considerations  and  is  reduced
to  the  dimensions  necessary  for  religious  purposes. The  brother  must  only
cohabit  with  the  widow  so  far  as  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  raising  up
seed  to  his  brother  (Manu,  ix.  60),  and  the  whole  practice  is  forbidden  in
the  passage  64-68,  which  contradicts  the  clauses  permitting  the  Niyoga.

2  Manu,  ix,  51.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  197

is  in  the  hands  of  the  parents,  and  the  son  is  as  much  at  their
disposal  as  the  daughter.1

"Young  people,"  says  the  Editor  of  the  Shc-Kiny?  "and
especially  young  ladies,  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  business  of
getting  married.  Their  parents  will  see  to  it.  They  have  to
merely  wait  for  their  orders.  If  they  do  not  do  so,  but  rush  to
marriage  on  the  impulse  of  their  own  desires  and  preferences,
they  transgress  the  rules  of  heaven  and  violate  the  law  of  their
lot."  The  marriage  is,  in  fact,  arranged  by  go-betweens  who
form  a  kind  of  profession,  and  as  it  is  now,  so  was  it  perhaps
three  thousand  years  ago  in  the  days  of  the  She-King?

The  full  ceremony  of  marriage  is,  as  a  rule,  gone  through  with
only  one  woman ;  bigamy  or  the  raising  of  a  concubine  to  the
rank  of  wife  is  punished  by  ninety  blows4  (unless  in  certain
exceptional  cases),  but  there  are  secondary  wives  or  concubines
who  o\ve  obedience  to  the  first  wife,  and  it  is  a  point  much
insisted  on  in  the  classical  books  that  the  head  wife  should
show  no  jealousy  of  her  inferiors.5

1  Chinese  travellers  note  relics  of  marriage  by  capture  in  the  ceremonial
and  point  out  that  the  ideograph  for  slave  is  compounded  of  "  woman  "  and
"hand,"  implying  that  the  woman  is  the  type  of  that  which,  in  the  phrase
of  the  Koran,  "your  right  hand  possesses. '' Further,  to  marry  a  wife  is
written  "to  take  a  woman,"  while  to  marry  a  man  has  a  different  ^symbol.
(Douglas,  Society  in  China,  202.) In  this  connection  note  that  the  imperial
editors,  writing  on  the  She-Kiny,  Part  I.,  Bk.  i. Ode  2,  speak  of  a  strict
taboo  on  the  relation of  husband and wife  in  antiquity. "Anciently
the  rules  to  be  observed  between  husband  and  wife  required  the  greatest
circumspection. They  did  not  speak  directly  to  each  other,  but  employed
internuncios,  thus  showing  how  strictly  reserved should be intercourse
between  men  and  women,  and  preventing all disrespectful  familiarity."
(Legge,  The  She-Kiny,  Part  L,  Bk.  i.  Ode  2,  p.  7,  note.)

2  Bk.  iv.  Ode  7,  Stanza  3,  note.

3  "  How  do  we  proceed  in  taking  a  wife  ?

Announcement  must  first  be  made  to  our  parents.
Since  such  announcement  was  made,
Why  do  you  still  indulge  her  desires  ?  .  .  .
How  do  we  proceed  in  taking  a  wife  1
Without  a  go-between  it  cannot  be  done.

She-Kiny,  Bk.  viii.  Ode  6,  Sts.  3,  4.

4  Fornication  is  punished  with  eighty  blows,  and  the  pander  is  liable
to  seventy.  (Alabaster,  Notes  and  Commentaries  on  Chines  Criminal  Law,
p.  367.)

6  Writing  of  the  She-Kiny,  Dr.  Legge  says:  "The  institution  of  the
harem  is  very  prominent,  and  there  the  wife  appears  lovely  on  her  entering
into  it,  reigning  in  it  with  entire  devotion  to  her  husband's  happiness,  free


198  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

The  Chinese  husband  is  master  in  his  own  household,  the
patriot,  potestas  is  strongly  developed,  and  the  State  interferes
inside  the  family  only  in  extreme  cases.1  The  husband  may
kill  his  wife  if  taken  in  adultery ; 2  he  may  strike  her  without
wounding  her,3  whereas  she  receives  a  hundred  blows  for
striking  him ; 4  while  if,  for  abuse  of  his  parents,  he  so  punishes
her  as  to  cause  her  death,  he  receives  a  hundred  blows.  He
may  sell  his  wife,5  and  sometimes  does  so  in  times  of  famine,
he  may  divorce  her  for  barrenness,  lasciviousness,  disregard
of  his  parents,  talkativeness,  thievish  propensities,  envious  and
suspicious  temper,  and  inveterate  infirmity.  She,  on  the  other
hand,  has  no  power  of  divorcing  him,6  but  at  best  may  arrange
to  part  by  mutual  consent.7

The  power  of  the  husband  does  not  end  with  the  dissolution
of  marriage ;  if  he  makes  formal  complaint  of  the  commission

from  all  jealousy  of  the  inferior  inmates,  in  the  most  friendly  spirit
promoting  their  comfort  and  setting  them  an  example  of  frugality  and
industry.  It  is  apparently  to  these  inferior  inmates  that  the  concluding
verse  of  an  Ode  expressing  the  affectionate  devotion  of  a  wife,  alludes  :

c<  When  your  arrows  and  line  have  found  them,
I  will  dress  them  fitly  for  you  .  .  .
When  I  know  those  whose  acquaintance  you  wish,
I  will  give  them  of  the  ornaments  of  my  girdle.
When  I  know  those  with  whom  you  are  cordial,
I  will  send  to  them  of  the  ornaments  of  my  girdle.
When  I  know  those  whom  you  love,
I  will  repay  their  friendship  from  the  ornaments  of  my  girdle.'

She-Kitig,  Part  I.,  Bk.  vii.  Ode  8.

1  Douglas,  78. A  father  who  kills  his  son  without  cause  is  subject  to  a
light  penalty. If  he  kills  him  for  striking  or  abusing  his  parents,  he  goes
free. (Alabaster,  156.) The  father  may  require  the  courts  to  order  the
transportation  of  an  unruly  son  (ib.,  154),  and  a  child  may  be  sold  for  good
cause. (76.,  157.)

2  But  it  must  be  done  on  the  spot. Otherwise  he  is  liable  to  a  mitigated
penalty. (Alabaster,  187,  188.)

3  But  he  must  exercise  judgment  in  correcting  her. "  If  he  knocks  her
brains  out  when  told  by  his  mother-in-law  to  give  her  a  whipping,  he  will
be  responsible  for  the  murder." (J6.,  189.)

4  Douglas,  81. If  the  husband  kills  her  for  striking  him  or  his  parents,
extenuating circumstances  are  allowed. For  killing  the  wife  without
cause,  the  penalty  is  strangulation  subject  to  revision. (Alabaster,  186.)
For  killing  the  husband  it  is  decapitation,  a  severer  punishment  because
it  affects  the  after-life. (lb.,  192.)

6  By  practice,  not,  unless  in  exceptional  circumstances,  by  strict  law.
If  she  commits  suicide  in  consequence,  he  is  liable  to  three  years'
transportation.  (Alabaster,  189.)

6  Unless  it  is  for  impotence. (Ib-,  182.)  7  Douglas,  71.


WOMAN AND  MARRIAGE  199

of  bigamy  by  his  wife,  she  is  strangled.  After  the  husband's
death  the  widow  still  owes  him  a  duty.  There  is  no  definite
institution  of  suttee,  but  contemporary  authorities  tell  us  that
the  suicide  of  widows  is  frequent,  and  in  the  south  often  public,
and  turning  back  to  the  classical  books,  we  find  the  widow
profess^  life-long  chastity  and  devotion  to  the  memory  of  the
departed.1  Hence  it  is  intelligible  that  women  frequently
prefer  a  nunnery  or  suicide  to  marriage.  And  yet  the  love  of
home  and  yearning  for  absent  wife  and  child  is,  we  are  told,
no  infrequent  theme  of  Chinese  poetry.  Such  is  the  power  of
human  feeling  to  survive  all  laws  and  institutions.

The  position  of  Chinese  women  has  not  undergone  any
fundamental  change  within  the  historical  period.  Perhaps  in
some  respects  it  has  deteriorated.2  In  particular  the  binding

1  "  It  floats  about,  that  boat  of  cypress  wood,
There  in  the  middle  of  the  Ho,
With  his  two  tufts  of  hair  falling  over  his  forehead,
He  was  my  mate,

And  I  swear  that  till  death  I  will  have  no  other.
O  mother,  O  Heaven,
Why  will  you  not  understand  me  1
It  floats  about,  that  boat  of  cypress  wood,
There  by  the  side  of  the  Ho,

With  his  two  tufts  of  hair  falling  over  his  forehead,
He  was  my  only  one,

And  I  swear  that  till  death  I  will  not  do  the  evil  thing.
0  mother,  0  Heaven,
Why  will  you  not  understand  me?"

She-King,  Part  I.,  Bk.  iv.  Ode  1.

Cf  Douglas,  216,  etc.  The  sacrifice  of  wives  at  the  death  of  the
emperor  was  abolished  by  Kanghksi  1661-1721.  (Douglas,  227.)  Human
sacrifice  at  funerals  (chiefly  of  women)  appears  intermittently  irom  the
first  recorded  case  (that  of  Wu,  ruler  of  Tsin,  B.C.  677,  when  sixty-six
people  were  sacrificed)  to  the  present  time.  It  was  opposed  by  the  Con
fucians.  In  the  eighteenth  century  suttee  was  on  the  increase,  and  to
check  it  the  honours  conferred  on  the  suttee  women  revoked,  A.D  1729
(De  Groot,  Religious  Systems  of  China,  ii.  721-807.)  De  Groot  considers  it
incredible  that  the  case  of  Wu  should  really  have  been  the  first.  Possibly
he  was  the  first  of  his  house  to  be  so  "  honoured."

2  The  She-King  describes  the  difference  of  attitude  to  the  infant  son  and
daughter  in  terms  which  are  exactly  reproduced  to-day  :
"Sons  shall  be  born  to  him  ;

They  will  be  put  to  sleep  on  couches  ;

They  will  be  clothed  in  robes  ;

They  will  have  sceptres  to  play  with  ;

Their  cry  will  be  loud.

They  will  be  (hereafter)  resplendent  with  red  knee-covers,

The  (future)  king,  the  princes  of  the  land.


200  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

of  feet  has  grown  up  within  the  last  thousand  years,  a  mush
room  growth  in  the  antiquity  of  China.1  The  great  teachers,
though  personally  married  to  one  wife,  and  having  no  concu
bines,  did  nothing  for  the  amelioration  of  the  position  of  women.
Mencius,  indeed,  proposed  to  divorce  his  wife  because  he  found
her  in  a  squatting  position  on  the  floor  of  her  room,  and  was
only  restrained  by  his  mother's  advice  from  doing  so.  This
same  mother  expressed  the  whole  duty  of  Chinese  women  when
she  refused  to  be  consulted  as  to  where  they  should  live.  She
said,  "  It  does  not  belong  to  a  woman  to  determine  anything  of
herself,  but  she  is  subject  to  the  rule  of  the  three  obediences ;
when  young  she  has  to  obey  her  parents,  when  married  her
husband,  and  when  a  widow  her  son."

It  only  remains  to  add  that  where  men  keep  women  in  so
much  subjection  they  generally  impute  to  them  a  double  dose
of  original  sin,  and  the  She- King,  chiming  in  with  the  literature
of  the  Hebrews  and  Hindoos,  says,  "  Disorder  does  not  come
down  from  heaven,  it  is  produced  by  the  woman.  Those  from
whom  come  no  lessons,  no  instruction,  are  women  and  eunuchs."  2

5.  The  Hebrew  marriage  law  begins  when  we  first  come  across  it
in  the  fully-developed  patriarchal  stage.  The  analogy  of  primitive
Arabian  tribes  suggests  an  earlier  state  of  mother-right,  but  of
this  there  are  in  the  Old  Testament  only  the  merest  traces.3

Daughters  shall  be  born  to  him  ;

They  will  be  put  to  sleep  on  the  ground  ;

They  will  be  clothed  with  wrappers  ;

They  will  have  tiles  to  play  with.

It  will  be  theirs  neither  to  do  wrong  nor  to  do  good.

Only  about  the  spirits  and  the  food  will  they  have  to  think,

And  to  cause  no  sorrow  to  their  parents."

She-King,  Part  II.,  Bk.  iv.  Ode  5,  Sts.  8,  9.

In  point  of  fact  the  lot  of  the  infant  daughter  was  often  much  worse.
The  extent  of  infanticide  in  China  has  undoubtedly  been  exaggerated.
The  killing  even  of  illegitimate  children  after,  though  not  at  birth,  is  an
offence,  though  but  lightly  punished.  (Alabaster,  170.)  The  practice,
however,  is  frequent  in  many  districts,  and  it  is  the  daughter  who  is
ordinarily  the  sufferer.

1  Yet  there  is  an  objection  to  the  bamboo  as  a  penalty  for  women,  and  if
subjected  to  it,  they  are  not  stripped  as they  were  in  England to  the
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century. (Alabaster,  op.  cit.,  107.)

2  She-King,  Part  III.,  Bk.  iii.  Ode  10,  St.  3.

3  It  is  clear  that  Sara  was  really  Abraham's  half-sister,  and  his  marriage
to  his  father's  daughter  would  be  in  accordance  with  primitive  custom
under  mother-right.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  201

A  man  acquires  a  wife  by  purchase  or  by  service,  from  her
father  or  her  nearest  male  relative.1  In  either  case  she  passes
completely  out  of  her  father's  family,  and  belongs  to  him  who
has  paid  for  her.  "Is  there  yet  any  portion  or  inheritance
for  us  in  our  father's  house  ?  "  say  Leah  and  Rachel.  "  Are  we
not  counted  of  him  strangers  ?  for  he  hath  sold  us  and  hath  also
quite  devoured  the  price  paid  for  us."  2

This  very  neat  summary  of  the  theory  of  marriage  by  service
has  already  been  referred  to.  But  the  marriage  affairs  of  Jacob
illustrate  some  further  points  which  we  can  understand  well
from  the  Babylonian  code.  Part  of  the  agreement  between  him
and  Laban  is  that  he  shall  not  "  afflict  "  Laban's  daughters,  and
that  he  shall  riot  "take  wives  beside  my  daughters."3  This
is  quite  in  the  spirit  of  a  Babylonish  marriage  contract.  But
there  is  a  further  point  of  similarity.  Though  Jacob  took  no
more  wives,  each  of  his  two  wives  gave  him  a  handmaid  precisely
as  is  contemplated  in  the  Code  of  Hammurabi,  and  the  hand
maid's  children  were  in  each  case  reckoned  to  the  wife.  In
Hammurabi's  language,  "  the  wife  had  granted  him  the  children."

Polygamy  is  contemplated  in  the  Law,  the  only  limitation
being  that  in  the  Priestly  Code  two  sisters  are  not  to  be  married
at  the  same  time.  Concubinage  is  also  contemplated,  and  so
is  the  sale  of  a  daughter  for  that  purpose.  The  daughter  that
is  sold  is  especially  protected  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant.  She
is  not  to  be  set  free  in  the  Sabbatical  year,  but  if  she  "please
not  her  master  who  hath  espoused  her  to  himself,  then  shall  lie
let  her  be  redeemed ;  to  sell  her  unto  a  strange  people  he  shall
have  no  power."  If  a  girl  were  espoused  to  his  son  she  should
be  dealt  with  "  after  the  manner  of  daughters,"  or  if  married  to
her  master  she  was  protected  in  case  he  took  another  wife.
"  Her  food,  her  raiment  and  her  duty  in  marriage  shall  he  not
diminish."  In  the  humane  code  of  Deuteronomy  protection
is  even  extended  to  the  captive  bondwoman.  She  is  to  be
allowed  a  full  month  for  mourning  before  being  married,  and
once  married,  "  if  thou  have  no  delight  in  her  then  thou  shalt
let  her  go  whither  she  will,  but  thou  shalt  not  sell  her  at  all  for

1  Laban  apparently  gives  away  Rebecca,  his  sister,  and  both  he  and  her
mother  receive  precious  things  for  her.  At  the  same  time  Rebecca's  own
wishes  clearly  are  considered.

a  Gen.  xxxi.  14.  *  Gen.  xxxi.  50.


202  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

money,  thou  shalt  not  deal  with  her  as  a  chattel  because  thou
hast  humbled  her."

While  there  is  no  prohibition  of  polygamy  in  the  Law —
Deuteronomy  merely  states  that  the  children  of  the  better-loved
wife  are  not  to  be  preferred  to  the  first-born — in  practice,
as  among  the  Egyptians,  the  custom  seems  to  have  died  out
little  by  little,1  and  in  the  Proverbs  monogamy  seems  to  be
assumed  throughout.  The  right  of  divorce  rested  entirely  with
the  man,  and  the  grounds  of  it  in  Deuteronomy  are  very  vaguely
expressed.  "  If  she  find  no  favour  in  his  eyes  because  he  hath
found  some  unseemly  thing  in  her,  he  shall  write  her  a  bill  of
divorcement."  But  none  of  the  codes  are  at  pains  to  define  the
grounds  of  divorce  clearly.  They  assume  it  as  a  right  of  the
husband,  and  their  careless  expressions  have  given  grounds  for
much  difference  of  interpretation  which  has  affected  Christian
as  well  as  Jewish  Law.2

There  is  no  mention  in  the  Law  of  divorce  by  the  wife,  but
among  the  later  Jews  she  could  claim  a  divorce  if  her  husband

1  Apparently  it  was  not  formally  forbidden  till  the  tenth  century,  A.D.
(Bryce,  Studies,  ii.  p.  384.)

2  Of  the  Jewish  Legalists  the  school  of  Shammai  (first  century,  B.C.)
pressing  the  word  "  nakedness,"  which  is  the  most  literal  rendering  of  the
term  translated  "unseemly,"  understood  it  of  unchastity ;  the  school  of
Hillel,  pressing  (in  Rabbinical  fashion)  the  word  "  thing,"  and  the  clause,
"if  she  find  no  favour  in  his  eyes"  (though  this,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is
qualified  by  the  following  words,  "  because  he  hath  found  some  unseemly
thing  in  her"),  supposed  the  most  trivial  causes  to  be  included,  declaring,
for  instance,  that  a  wife  might  be  divorced,  even  if  she  burnt  her  husband's
food,  or  if  he  saw  a  woman  who  pleased  him  better. It  may  be  doubted,
however,  how  far  the  latter  opinion  was  literally  acted  upon. The  grounds
mentioned  in  the  Mishnah  as  justifying  divorce  are,  violation  of  the  law  of
Moses,  or  of  the  Jewish  customs,  the  former  being  said  to  consist  in  a
woman's  causing  her  husband  to  eat  food  on  which  tithe  has  not  been  paid  ;
in  causing  him  to  offend  against  the  law  of  Lev.  xviii.  19 ;  in  not  setting
apart  the  first  of  the  dough,  Num.  xv.  20  ff .,  and  in  failing  to  perform  any
vow  which  she  has  made  ;  and  the  latter  in  appearing  in  public  with
dishevelled  hair,  spinning  (and  exposing  her  arms)  in  the  streets,  and  con
versing  indiscriminately with men,  to  which others added, speaking
disrespectfully  of  her  husband's  parents  in  his  presence,  or  brawling  in  his
house. The  Karaite  Jews  limited  the  grounds  of  divorce  more  exclusively
to  offences  against  modesty  or  good  taste,  a  change of  religion,  serious
bodily  defects,  and  repulsive  complaints. That  the  Hebrew  word  denotes
something  short  of  actual  unchastity,  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that
for  this  a  different  penalty  is  enacted,  viz.  death,  also  the  same  expression
is  used,  not  of  what  is  immoral,  but  only  of  what  is  unbecoming. It  is
most natural to understand it of immodest or  indecent behaviour.
(Summarized  from  Driver,  Deuteronomy,  p.  270,  note.)


WOMAN  AND MARRIAGE  203

were  a  leper  or  afflicted  by  a  polypus  or  engaged  iu  a  repulsive
trade.1

The  position  of  the  woman  in  the  family  gives  her  guardian
certain  definite  rights  and  duties  as  to  the  disposal  of  her  person.
Thus  Judah,  as  the  head  of  the  family,  proposes  to  burn  Tamar,
his  daughter-in-law,  for  unchastity,  but  acknowledges  in  time  that
he  was  bound  to  give  her  as  a  widow  of  his  son  Onan  to  his
other  sou  Shelah.  The  husband's  brother,  in  fact,  had  the  duty
of  marrying  the  widow,  and,  failing  the  brother,  the  obligation
fell  on  the  kindred.  Boaz,  as  Ruth's  kinsman,  first  offers  her
to  a  nearer  relative,  and  on  his  refusal  weds  her  himself.  The
daughter  does  not  inherit  lauded  property  if  there  are  sons,
but  failing  sons,  she  becomes  the  heir,  and  in  that  case  she
must  marry  within  the  tribe,  a  recognition  of  the  eminent
ownership  of  the  tribe  over  the  whole  land.

Such  being  the  position  of  women,  it  is  not  to  be  expected
that  the  attitude  expressed  to  them  in  literature  should  be  one
of  great  respect  or  admiration.  At  best  their  virtues  as  house
wives  were  admitted,  but  in  the  famous  description  of  the
virtuous  housewife  in  the  Proverbs  there  is  not  a  word  of  a
union  of  mind  or  soul,  and  there  is  little  indeed  to  differentiate
the  wife  from  the  cheerful,  active,  intelligent,  and  let  us  add,
charitable  housekeeper.  We  read  that  "  she  spreadeth  out  her
hands  to  the  poor,1'  and  again,  "  she  openeth  her  mouth  with
wisdom  and  the  law  of  kindness  is  on  her  tongue,"  but  there  is
no  word  of  the  romance  of  love  or  of  the  higher  side  of  the
conjugal  relation.2

On  the  other  side  of  the  account  woman  is  regarded  as  the
source  of  evil.  "  Give  me  any  wickedness  save  the  wickedness  of
a  woman  "  is  the  burden  of  Ecclesiasticus.  A  bad  woman  is  the
temptress  and  the  destroyer  throughout  the  Wisdom  literature,
and  it  was  through  woman  that  sin  came  into  the  world,  and  for
this  reason,  that  she  was  to  be  subject  to  her  husband.3

1  Driver,  p.  271.

2  It  is  probably  another  writer  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  who  says  that
"  a  virtuous  woman  is  a  crown  to  her  husband." (Prov.  xii.  4.)

3  Mr.  Montefiore  points  out  that  the  appreciation  of  a  good  woman  is
higher  in  the  "  Wisdom  of  the  Son  of  Sirach  "  than  in  the  Proverbs,  in
correspondence  with  the  general  advance  in  her  position. (Hibbert  Lectures.
1892,  p.  491.)


204  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

6.  We  have  seen  that  among  the  primitive  Arabs  mother-right
and  polyandrous  unions  prevailed,  but  in  Mohammed's  time  the
women  were  mere  chattels,  forming  a  part  of  the  estate  of  their
husband  or  father  and  descending  to  the  son.  They  were  held
in  low  account,  and  female  infants  were  frequently  put  to  death.
"  Women  are  the  whips  of  Satan  "  is  an  amiable  saying  of  the
masculine  Arab  of  this  period,  having  said  which  it  is  not
surprising  that  he  should  add  :  "  A  man  can  bear  anything  but
the  mention  of  his  wives."  Mohammed  set  himself  to  ameliorate
the  position  of  women.  "Ye  men,"  he  said,  "ye  have  rights
over  your  wives,  and  your  wives  have  rights  over  you."  But  he
was  not  able  to  carry  his  reforms  very  far  according  to  our  ideas.
He  limited  the  number  of  legitimate  wives  to  four,  but  allowed
an  unlimited  number  of  slave  concubines;  he  insisted  that
the  woman's  consent  to  her  marriage  should  be  obtained,  but
the  consent  of  her  guardian  also  remained  essential.  Whether
the  temporary  marriage  in  practice  in  Mohammed's  time  is  still
allowed  is  debated  between  the  sects.1

But  free  divorce  Mohammed  was  compelled  to  tolerate  :  "  The
thing  which  is  lawful  but  is  disliked  by  God  is  divorce."  There
are,  indeed,  certain  cases  in  which  divorce  is  compulsory,2  but
even  apart  from  them  the  husband  may  divorce  his  wife  without
assigning  any  cause.  The  wife,  however,  is  protected  by  the
dower,  ^or  more  strictly,  the  bride  price,  of  which  a  portion  is
deferred,  and  which  may  be  claimed  by  the  wife  if  she  is  divorced
without  cause.3  Her  position  is  therefore  somewhat  similar
to  that  which  the  provident  Babylonian  or  Egyptian  woman
secured  for  herself  by  the  marriage  contract.  On  her  side,  the
wife  is  bound  to  live  with  her  husband,  but  if  she  can  prove  ill-
treatment,  can  obtain  a  separation  from  the  Kadi.  Bad  conduct
or  gross  neglect  is  a  good  defence  to  a  suit  brought  by  the
husband  for  the  restitution  of  conjugal  rights.4  The  husband
has,  however,  the  right  of  chastisement,  and  the  admonition  of
the  prophet,  "Not  one  of  you  must  whip  his  wife  like  whip
ping  a  slave,"  does  not,  to  European  ears,  appear  to  err  on  the
side  of  chivalry.5

1  Hughes,  Dictionary  of  Islam,  p.  314.  2  Hughes,  pp.  87,  88.

3  Ib.,  91.  4  j^  673-

5  The  traditions  record  that  the  prophet  forbade  the  Moslems  to  beat
their  wives. Brute  force  being  thus  ruled  out,  natural  superiority  asserts


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  205

Yet  Mohammed  made  the  kind  and  equitable  treatment  of
wives  a  moral  if  not  a  legal  duty  :  "  The  best  of  you  is  he  who
behaves  best  to  his  wives."  The  lord  of  many  women  must  bo
impartial.  "  When  a  man  has  two  wives  and  docs  not  treat
them  equally  ho  will  come  on  the  day  of  resurrection  with  half
of  his  body  fallen  off."  But  if  there  is  to  be  kindness,  it  is  to  be
such  as  is  due  to  the  weaker  vessel:  "Admonish  your  wives  with
kindness,  because  women  were  created  from  the  crooked  bone  of
the  side."  l

Thc  position  of  the  wife  under  the  Sunni  law  is  thus  summed
up  by  Mr.  Hughes  : —

"  Her  consent  to  marriage  is  necessary.  She  cannot  legally  object
to  he  one  of  four  wives.  Nor  can  she  object  to  an  unlimited
number  of  handmaids.  She  is  entitled  to  a  marriage  settlement  or
dower,  which  must  bo  paid  to  her  in  case  of  divorce  or  separation.
She  may,  however,  remit  either  whole  or  part  of  the  dower.  She
may  refuse  to  join  her  husband  until  the  dower  is  paid.  She
may  be  at  any  time,  Avith  or  without  cause,  divorced  by  her
husband.  She  may  seek  or  claim  divorce  (khuP)  from  her  husband
with  her  husband's  consent.  She  may  be  chastised  by  her  husband.
She  cannot  give  evidence  in  a  court  of  law  against  her  husband.
According  to  the  Sunnis,  her  evidence  in  favour  of  her  husband  is
not  admissible,  but  the  Shi'ahs  maintain  the  opposite  view.  Her
husband  can  demand  her  seclusion  from  public.  If  she  becomes
a  widoAv  she  must  observe  hidad  or  mourning  for  the  space  of  four
months  and  ten  days.  In  the  event  of  her  husband's  death  she  is
entitled  to  a  portion  of  her  husband's  estate  in  addition  to  her  claim
of  dower,  the  claim  of  dower  taking  precedence  of  all  other  claims
on  the  estate."2

Nor  has  a  woman  full  legal  privileges  outside  marriage. Her


itself,  and  the  faithful  come  to  complain  tliat  the  women  have  got  the
upper  hand.  The  prophet  consequently  revokes  the  order,  and  then  the
women  complain  in  their  turn.  Mohammed  is  then  reduced  to  moral
suasion  :  '•  Those  men  who  beat  their  wives  do  not  behave  well.  He  is  not  of
my  way,  who  teaches  a  woman  to  go  astray  and  entices  a  slave  from  his
master."  (Hughes,  671.)

1  A  wife  taken  in  adultery  might  be  stoned,  but  four  witnesses  with  a
fivefold  repetition  of  the  oath  were  required  to  prove  the  offence. (Koran,
Part I.,  Chap.  iv. 15.) Nor is the death-penalty  recommended, but
rather  seclusion  in  the  house. (Loc.  cit.  and  Hughes,  p.  11.) Fornication  is
strictly  forbidden  to  men.

2  Hughes,  p.  671.


206  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

evidence  is  not  accepted  in  cases  involving  retaliation.  Her
fine  is  one-half  that  of  a  man,  and  the  value  of  her  testimony
one-half  that  of  a  male  witness.  Yet  she  may  hold  public
positions,  she  may  act  as  a  judge  except  where  retaliation  is
involved,  and  in  some  Mohammedan  states  princesses  have  ruled.
She  can  hold  property,  retains  the  usufruct  of  her  property
during  marriage,  and  takes  the  property  with  her  in  case  of
divorce.  She  has  also  a  claim  to  inherit  along  with  her  male
relations,  confirmed  by  the  express  words  of  the  prophet.1  She
is  not  to  be  slain  in  war,  and  for  apostasy  she  is  not  put  to
death,  but  imprisoned  until  she  recants.  The  general  attitude
of  the  Mohammedan  world  towards  her  is  too  well  known  to  need
illustration,  but  two  traditional  sayings  of  Mohammed  may  be
quoted  as  illuminating  the  intellectual  chaos  to  which  a  well-
meaning  man  is  reduced  when  he  contemplates  that  helpmate
over  whom  he  so  complacently  assumes  superiority  and  dominion.
The  first  is  this,  "  I  have  not  left  any  calamity  more  detrimental
to  mankind  than  women,"  and  the  second  is  the  complementary
expression  of  the  master  in  his  other  mood,  "  The  world  and  all
things  in  it  are  valuable,  but  more  valuable  than  all  is  a  virtuous
woman."

With  this  final  contradiction  mirrored  in  the  double  motive
for  secluding  women,  (a)  as  a  compliment,  implying  that  they
are  elevated  above  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life ;  (&)  as  a  pre
caution,  implying  that  they  are  not  to  be  trusted  with  liberty —
with  this  contradiction  in  theory  and  in  practice,  rooted  as  it  is
in  a  radically  false  view  of  womanhood,  we  may  leave  the
Oriental  world  and  its  efforts  to  deal  with  the  relations  of  the
sexes.

7.  But  the  first  nation  of  the  West  to  which  we  turn  was  in  this
respect  largely  orientalized.  The  Greeks  founded  Western
civilization,  but  their  rapid  advance  in  general  culture  was  by
no  means  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  improvement  in  the
position  of  women.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  in  the  earliest  period
and  among  some  of  the  most  backward  states  that  the  woman
has  most  freedom.

The  Homeric  woman  moves  freely  among  men.  Nausicaa
1  Koran,  i.  p.  72  ;  cf.  Dareste,  pp.  61-63.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  207

welcomes  Odysseus  and  brings  him  to  her  father's  house.  She
bids  him  kneel  to  her  mother  if  he  would  gain  a  welcome  and
succour  from  her  father.1  The  relation  of  husband  and  wife  is
close  and  tender ;  Andromache  relates  how  her  father's  house
has  been  destroyed  with  all  that  were  in  it,  "  but  now,  Hector,
thou  art  my  father  and  gracious  mother,  thou  art  my  brother,
nay,  thou  art  my  valiant  husband."  2

We  never  hear  of  more  than  one  legitimate  wife.  On  the
other  hand,  the  carrying  off  of  women  as  bond-slaves  was
habitual.  Briseis  was  a  recognized  portion  of  the  spoil,  and  such
capture  implies  concubinage  along  with  legitimate  marriage.3
If  the  bridegroom  could  not  take  the  bride  in  a  raid,  he  bought
her  for  a  goodly  number  of  cattle,  arid  over  his  concubines* at
any  rate,  he  exercised  powers  of  life  and  death.  Odysseus
compels  the  faithless  handmaidens  to  carry  forth  the  bodies  of
the  suitors  and  bids  Telemaclms  put  them  to  the  sword ;  but
Telemachus  thinks  this  too  good  a  death,  and  strings  them  up
to  a  ship's  cable  in  the  hall,  where  they  hang  struggling  like
thrushes  in  a  net.4

The  patria  potestas  persisted  in  a  mild  form  in  the  historical
period.5  The  father  was  the  religious  and  legal  head  of  the
family  ;  he  performed  the  family  sacra,  and  represented  wife,
children  and  slaves  in  the  courts.0  Nor  were  limitations  on
personal  liberty  and  responsibility  peculiar  to  the  wife,  for  here
again  woman  was  subject  to  the  three  obediences  to  father,
husband  or  son,  and  failing  them,  to  her  nearest  blood  relation.  '
At  the  same  time  Arcte's  position  seems  to  have  been  somewhat
exceptional,  for  Alcinous  honoured  her  as  no  other  woman  in  the  world
is  honoured  of  all  that  now-a-days  keep  house  under  the  hand  of  their
lords.  (Od.,  vii.,  Butcher  and  Lang  Tr.,  p.  105.)

f  Iliad,  vi.  429,  430.

3  Yet  the  wife  might  resent  this. Laertes  bought  Eurycleia  in  her
youth  lor  twenty  oxen  and  honoured  her  equally  with  his  wife,  "but  he
never  lay  with  her,  for  he  shunned  the  wrath  of  his  lady." (Od i Tr
Butcher  and  Lang,  p.  15.)

4  Od.,  xxii.  468.

5  The  right  of  exposing  a  child  was  limited  in  Sparta  by  the  meeting  of
the  tribesmen. (Plutarch,  Lycurgus,  16,  cited  by  Leist.) Leist,  p.  59,  thinks
the  a7x"TT6rs  must  be  meant. At  Athens  the  right  disappeared  at  an  early
date,  and  the  recognition  of  the  child  could  be  compelled  by  le^al  process
(Leist,  ib.) The  adult  son  was  emancipated.

6  The  Athenian  woman  could  follow  no  suit  of  a  value  exceeding  a
medimnos,  except  through  a  guardian. The  wife  had  very  limited  powers
of  alienation  without  the  husband's  consent.


208  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

The  sons  in  most  cases  divided  the  inheritance,  the  daughters
having  only  a  right  to  maintenance  and  dowry.  But  what
property  women  had  remained  theirs  during  marriage,  and  in
some  states  they  even  had  the  right  of  management.1  In  early
times  the  father  might  sell  his  daughters,  or  brothers  their
sisters,  when  under  their  guardianship.  This  right  was  abolished
by  Solon  except  in  the  case  of  unchastity,2  but  a  father  retained
the  right  of  controlling  his  daughter  and  even  of  disposing  of
her  by  will,3  or  of  giving  his  son,  while  a  minor,  in  adoption  to
another  family.4  There  could  be  no  legitimate  marriage  without
an  assignment  of  the  bride  by  her  guardian.5  The  wife  passed
into  the  husband's  family,  and  was  separated  from  her  own  kin
and  their  sacra.  At  Athens  she  might  be  divorced  on  payment
of  the  bride  price,  while  on  her  side  she  could  only  obtain  a
divorce  'by  the  sanction  of  the  archon.6  At  Sparta,  where,  in
some  respects,  e.g.  in  regard  to  property,  she  had  a  hijglier
position,7  it  seems  that  looser  relations  prevailed.  Brothers
might  share  a  wife  in  common,  and  wife-lending  was  recognized,
whereas  at  Athens  the  punishment  of  adultery  was  enforced.8

1  Busolt,  Handbnch  der  Klassischen  Alkertumswissenschaft,  19,  20.

2  fri  8"  o#5e  Qvyarfpas  iru>\e1v  ovr'  adeXtyds  SiStaffi  ir\}]v  a.v  /J.rj  A.a/3j?  irapOevov  avSpl
ffvyyeyevrjfj.fvnv. (Pint.  Solon,  13,  23,  cited  by  Busolt,  I.  c.)

3  Letourneau,  La  Femme,  416.

4  Busolt,  p.  19. According  to  Leist,  p.  62,  he  had  practical,  but  not
legal  control  over  the  son's  marriage.

6  At  any  rate  at  Athens.  (Busolt,  201.)  The  a7X'0"reIs  (relations  to  the
fourth  degree  on  both  sides)  had  to  see  that  the  orphan  heiress  was  married,
and  her  nearest  male  relation  (after  her  brothers)  had  the  right  of  marry
ing  her,  and  correspondingly  the  duty  of  so  doing  or  of  finding  a  husband
for  her.  (Busolt,  20  ;  Leist,  40,  47.)

6  Letourneau,  La  Femme,  423. At  Sparta  divorce  for  sterility  seems  to
have  been  expected  at  any  rate  of  a  king. (Herodt.,  v.  40.)

7  According  to  Aristotle  two-fifths  of  the land  of  Sparta  had  come  into
the  hands  of  women  by  inheritance  and  bequest  in  his  time,  and  the
Spartiate  women,  having  successfully  resisted  the  attempt  of  Lycurgus  to
impose  on  them  the  same  discipline  as  the  men  accepted,  enjoyed  a  state  of
liberty  which  in  Aristotle's  view  amounted  to  licence,  and  was  disastrous
to  Sparta. (Politics,  ii.  1269  B,  1270  A.)

8  By  the  Solonian  legislation the  husband who concealed  his wife's
adultery  was  punished  with  an/xia. Yet  the  punishment  of  the  adulterer
was  left  in  the  husband's  hands. If  caught  flagrante  ddicto  he  was  abso
lutely  at  the  husband's  mercy. In  any  case  he  could  be  imprisoned  at  the
husband's  pleasure,  and  was  released  on  payment  of  a  fine. (Letourneau,  p.
422.) The  wife  was  not  killed,  but  divorced. (Leist,  p.  300.) For  an
instance  of  wife-lending  at  Athens,  Letourneau  cites  the  case  of  Kimon.
(Letourneau,  p.  415.)


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  209

Monogamy  prevailed  in  the  main,1  but  concubinage  was  legally
recognized,  provided  that  the  handmaiden  did  not  reside  in  the
same  house  with  the  legal  wife.  The  concubine's  children  might
be  legitimated  by  adoption,  and  might  then  enter  the  phratry,
whereby  they  acquired  all  the  privileges  of  citizenship.2

But  the  woman,  though  under  ward,  was  certainly  not  regarded
as  a  chattel.  Probably  Aristotle  expressed  the  ordinary  Greek
view  accurately  enough  when  he  said  that  a  man  should  rule  his
slaves  as  a  despot,  his  children  as  a  king,  and  his  wife  as  a
magistrate  in  a  free  state.  Yet  it  was  a  Greek  thinker  who
first  frankly  argued  the  case  for  the  free  admission  of  women  to
all  the  duties  and  rights  of  man.  Plato's  position  differs  from
that  of  his  modern  successors  in  that  he  insists  rather  on  women's
duties  than  on  their  rights,  more  on  what  the  state  loses  by
their  restriction  to  the  family  circle  than  on  the  loss  to  their
own  personality.  Further,  though  he  had  the  experience  of
Sparta  to  go  upon,  his  own  teaching  was  too  much  associated
with  polemics  against  the  family  and  with  a  fanciful  ideal  of
communism  to  be  taken  quite  seriously.  On  the  other  hand,
Aristotle  summed  up  the  whole  philosophy  of  the  ancient  world,
of  the  East,  and  perhaps  the  prevailing  sentiment  in  modern
Europe,  when,  discussing  those  who  are  fit  to  bear  rule  and  order
the  affairs  of  men,  he  says  that  a  slave  does  not  possess  that
power  of  deliberation  (TO  /SovAeuTiKoV)  which  is  the  basis  alike  of
self-government  and  of  the  government  of  others.  A  child
possesses  it  but  imperfectly.  A  woman  possesses  it,  but  in  her
it  is  without  authority  (favpov).  After  all,  the  Greeks  did  little
to  develop  it.  There  appear  to  have  been  no  regular  schools
for  girls  at  Athens,3  and  it  was  only  the  courtesan  of  the  higher
class  who  was  a  fit  helpmeet  mentally  for  Pericles  or  capable  of
sustaining  a  conversation  with  Socrates.  Xenophon's  ideal  wife
is  a  good  housekeeper,  like  her  of  the  Proverbs.

8.  The  modern  European  marriage  law  has  three  roots — Roman
Law,  Primitive  Teutonic  custom,  and  the  Christian  doctrine  of

1  Anaxandrides,  king  of  Sparta,  declined  to  divorce  his  barren  wife,  but
consented  to  take  a  second.  This  was  regarded  as  quite  un-Spartau.
(Herodt.,  v.  40.)

•  Busolt,  op.  cit.,  p.  201.

3  Here  the  Spartans  were  more  liberal,  as  they  admitted  women  to  the
gymnasia.  (Busolt,  ii.  158.)

VOL. I.  p


210  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

marriage;  but  it  has  been  largely  re-modelled  in  the  modern
period  under  rationalizing  influences.  It  cannot  be  studied
statically,  but  has  a  long,  varied  and  interesting  history,  of
which  an  attempt  will  be  made  here  to  give  the  briefest  possible
outline.  This  history  starts  with  the  early  Roman  family,
organized  as  it  was  under  the  highly-developed  potcstas  of  the
father.  All  the  children  are  the  father's,  and  in  law  he  can
dispose  of  them  at  pleasure.1  He  can  chastise  them,  sell  them
into  slavery,  and  even  put  them  to  death  (Jus  vitcc  necisque).2
Before  exercising  this  supreme  power  he  has,  it  is  true,  to
consult  the  council  of  relations,  but  he  is  not  bound  by  their
judgment.  In  short,  the  paternal  power  is  nowhere  more
strongly  developed,  nor  does  the  position  of  wife  and  children
anywhere  approach  in  law  more  nearly  to  that  of  slaves,  owned
by  the  paterfamilias,  and  except  as  a  matter  of  grace,  incapable
of  owning  anything  themselves.

Into  the  family  thus  constituted  a  wife  passed  on  her  marriage.
The  marriage  might  be  accomplished  by  either  of  two  forms,  and
it  might  also  be  made  valid  apparently  without  any  form  at  all.
The  first  form  was  confarreatio,  in  which  the  essential  feature
was  the  eating  by  both  bride  and  bridegroom  of  a  cake — an  act
of  the  kind  which  we  call  symbolic,  but  which  to  primitive  man
is  rather  magical,  actually  efficacious  in  establishing  a  unity  of
the  man  and  woman.  The  second  form  was  called  coemptio,
and  was  of  the  nature  of  a  formal  sale,  almost  certainly,  in  the
light  of  what  we  know  of  other  peoples,  preserving  the  memory
of  a  real  purchase  of  the  wife  by  the  husband,  which  as  anything
but  a  form  had  already  fallen  into  disuse  when  history  begins.
Both  these  forms  transferred  the  wife  from  the  power  (potestas)
or  hand  (manus)  of  her  father  into  that  of  her  husband,  to  whom

1  Exposure,  however,  if  the  law  attributed  by  Dionysius  (ii.  15,  Bruns,
p.  7)  to  Romulus  is  correct,  was  limited  to  female  infants  and  required  the
consent  of  the  neighbours — atraaav  appeva  yeveav  fKrpt<f>eiv,  Kal  6vya.Tepooi>  ras
•n-puToytvovs. No  child  was  to  be  killed  under  three  years — n-AV  el  -rt  yevoiro
TraiSiov  avdirripov  $  repas  ev6vs  atrb  yovr^s.  ravra §'  ovtc  eKw\vffev  ('O 'P(i>/*v\os)
fKTiOevai  TOVS  yeivafj.evovs,  firi5ei£avTas  irpOTepov  irevre  avSpdffi  TO?S  tyyurra  oiKovffiv,

etc.

2  Bruns  (p.  7),  quoting  Dion.  ii.  26. ('O  'Pw/j.v\os)  'diraffav  tdwKev  i^ovfflaf
Trarpl  KaO'  vlov, /cat  irapa  Trdvra  rl>v  rov  filov  J(f6vov  edv  re  elpyew  edv  re  paffTi-
yovv, edv  re Seff/juov tin TO>V  KOT' aypbv tpyoiv Karexetl>} *dv  re  aitoKTivvvvai
Trpoatpr)rai, — d\Aa  Kal  TraiAeiV  ecprjtce r'bv  vH>v  r$  irarpi, — Kal  TOVTO  avvex<!>pr)ffe  ry
•jraTpi,  pexpi  rplrris  irpdffeus  a.tj>'  vlov  xpwcn-f(ra(r0at. — yuero  Se  rfyv  rpirrjv  irpafftv

TOV  Ttarp6s.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  211

she  became  as  a  daughter.  For  all  purposes,  sacred  and  profane,
she  passed  from  the  one  family  to  the  other.1  But  just  as
inanimate  property,  which  normally  passed  from  hand  to  hand
by  a  special  ceremony  of  transfer,  might  also  acquire  a  new  owner
by  long  unchallenged  possession  and  use,  so  was  it  also  with
human  property.  The  woman  who  without  either  of  the  two
ceremonies  mentioned  was  given  by  her  father  to  a  man  and
lived  with  him  as  his  wife  for  a  whole  year  without  interruption
became  in  law  his  wife  by  use  (usus)  and  passed  as  completely
in  manum  mariti  as  if  she  had  eaten  with  him  the  sacred  cake.

All  these  three  modes  of  marriage  were  in  existence  at  the
time  of  the  drawing  up  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  whichever  of
them  she  chose,  the  woman  passed  into  the  family  and  into  the
power  of  her  husband.  Yet  her  position  differed  in  two  essential
respects  from  that  of  the  Oriental  wife.  She  was  her  husband's
only  wife.  At  no  period  of  Roman  history  are  there  any  traces
of  polygamy  or  concubinage.2  And  not  only  was  she  the  sole
wife,  but  the  tie  which  bound  her  to  her  husband  was  difficult
to  break  arid  rarely  broken.  It  is  true  that  each  form  of
union  could  be  undone  by  a  certain  prescribed  ceremony  _
confarreatio  by  di/arreatio,  cocmptio  by  remancipatio.  But
these  were  resorted  to  rarely,  and  it  would  appear  only  fur
grave  offences,  the  council  of  relations  being  first  called  in  to
give  judgment.3  It  does  not  appear  that  the  wife  had  any
on  the  religious  marriage  Dion,  ywcuica


Kar<.


,  ar<.  y^ov,

ttpovs  ffvve\6ovffav  avSpl  Koivwvbv  airdvruv  dvai  XP^a-ruv  re  Kal  lepuv  (Bruns, p.

2  The  concubinale  of  which  we  hear  in  Roman  law  is  a  form  of  union
bereft  of  some  of  the  civil  rights  of  marriage,  not  the  relation  of  a  married
man  to  a  secondary  wile  or  slave-girl.

3  Bryce,  Studies  in  Jurisprudence,  vol.  ii.  p.  403. The offences for
which,  according  to  Dionysius,  ii.  25  (Bruns,  p.  7),  she  was  brought  to  trial
belore  a  council  ol  relatives  were,  however,  punishable  with  death. They
were adultery and wine-drinking, (ravra—ol avyyevets  ^^  rov avSpbs
eoiVaCo^.) The  grounds  for  divorce  stated  by  Plutarch  are  poisoning  the
children,  the  use  of  false  keys,  and  adultery. Divorce  for  any  other  reason
was  punished  with  confiscation  of  property. The  wife  could  not  leave  her

husband  in  any  case,  (ywaud  /J.TJ  SiSovs  &iro\e'nretv  frvSpa,  yvvcuKO.  8e  5i5oCy
tic&d\\ftv  fjrt  (papnaKelq  TCKVWV  ?)  K\eiotii>  viro/3o\fj  Kal  pLoix^vQelffav  el  5'  &\\oos
risavoveni^airo,  rfc  ofoias  avrov:rb  ^v  -Hjs  ywantbs  e'ivai,  rb  Se  -rijs  Aryi^Tpos
upbv  KeAevo^.  Bruns,  p.  (5.  Of.  Girard,  p.  154.)  Divorce  by  the  husband
was  recognized  in  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  husband  takes  the  wife's  keys
away  and  turns  her  out  of  the  house.  "  Illam  suam  suas  res  sibi  habere
jussit,  ex  XII  tabulis,  claves  ademit,  excyit."  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  28.  Bruns,


212  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

means  of  repudiating  the  husband,  or  of  emancipating  herself
from  his  mdnus.  In  practice  marriage  was  so  nearly  indissoluble
that  the  divorce  of  his  wife  by  Spurius  Carvilius  Ruga  in  B.C.
231  was  declared  to  be  the  first  instance  l  known  since  the
foundation  of  the  city.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  remem
bered  that  the  unfaithful  wife  might  be  put  to  death  without
trial,  and  that  the  husband  who  had  other  good  causes  of
complaint  would  be  supported  by  the  family  council  in
executing  or  in  repudiating  her.2

9.  Such  was  the  primitive  Roman  marriage  with  the  manus.
But  even  in  the  days  of  the  Twelve  Tables  a  wholly  different
union  had  made  its  appearance.  If  the  enjoyment  of  property
was  broken  for  awhile  before  the  year  was  out,  no  title  to  it
arose  out  of  the  usufruct.  This  idea  was  applied  to  marriage
by  usus,  and  already  in  the  time  of  the  Twelve  Tables  we  find
that  if  the  cohabitation  was  broken  for  three  nights  in  every
year,  the  wife  did  not  become  the  property  of  the  husband.
When  or  how  it  became  a  custom  to  convert  this  breach  of
cohabitation  into  a  system,  and  so  establish  a  form  of  marriage
in  which  the  wife  did  not  pass  into  the  manus  of  the  husband,
we  do  not  know.  What  is  certain  is  that  this  new  form  of  free
marriage  rapidly  ousted  its  older  rivals.  The  bride  now  remained
in  her  father's  power,  she  was  still  a  member  of  her  own  family,
and  by  consequence  had  no  position  in  that  of  her  husband.
Subject  to  the  nominal  control  of  her  father  or  her  guardian,
she  thus  acquired  complete  control  of  her  own  property,  and
became,  in  fact,  her  own  mistress.  She  was  not  in  theory  a
free  woman  unless  emancipated.  She  was  only  free  from  her
husband.  But  it  need  hardly  be  pointed  out  that  the  practical
control  of  relations  with  whom  as  a  married  woman  she  no
longer  lived  was  not  likely  to  be  a  very  serious  matter,  and  in
point  of  fact,  where  it  was  felt  to  be  irksome,  it  was  from  time

1  Euga's  wife  was  divorced  for  sterility,  and  Mr.  Bryce  takes  the  sweep
ing  statement  of  the  authorities  to  mean  that  it  was  the  first  instance  of  a
divorce  in  which  no  crime  was  alleged  (ii.  403).

2  At  the  same  time,  if  Plutarch  (Kom.  22)  is  to  be trusted,  it  was  a
religious  offence  to  sell  her  as  a slave (rbv  5'  diroS^/xeroi'  ywaiica. Bvea-dai
xQoviois  6fo7s  (Bruns,  7). In  this  point  she  enjoyed  a  material  advantage
over  the  children.


WOMAN  AND MARRIAGE  213

to  time  limited  by  law.  Thus  the  father  had  naturally  as  a
part  of  his  potestds  the  right  to  break  the  marriage  at  will.
But  this  logical  application  of  the  paternal  power  was  abolished
under  the  Antonines,  or  restricted  to  cases  where  there  was
grave  cause  for  its  exercise.1

On  the  other  hand,  the  tutela  was  a  reality  for  unmarried
women,  and  the  Roman  law  never  seems  to  have  fully  acknow
ledged  that  the  consent  of  the  adult  woman,  and  her  consent
alone,  was  the  one  necessary  condition  to  her  marriage.  Origin
ally,  indeed,  the  consent  of  the  parties  does  not  seem  to  have
been  required  at  all.  This  would  be  all  in  accordance  with
primitive  ideas.  But  here  again  the  law  was  modified  as  time
went  on,  and  the  consent  of  the  woman,  as  well  as  the  man,
became  a  normal,  and,  in  some  cases,  a  legally  necessary
condition.2  Further,  with  the  general  emancipation  of  women
the  necessity  for  a  guardian  appears  to  have  gradually  died
away.3  Hence  the  Roman  matron  of  the  Empire  was  more
fully  her  own  mistress  than  the  married  woman  of  any  earlier
civilization,  with  the  possible  exception  of  a  certain  period  of
Egyptian  history,  and  it  must  be  added,  than  the  wife  of  any  later

1  The  separation  of  a  wife  from  Ler  husband  by  her  father  was  forbidden
by  Antoninus  Pius,  but  was  permitted  "  niagna  et  justa  causa  interveni-
ente"  by  his  successor. (Sir  F.  Jeune,  End.  Brit.,  art. "Divorce," p.
471  ;  Girard,  p.  155.) The  son  also  acquired  the  right  to  emancipation
in  case  of  ill-treatment. (Girard,  183.)

2  The  consent  of  the  parties  was  of  course  required  if  they  were  sui
juris. On  the  other  hand,  by  the  strict  logic  of  the  law,  if  either  was  in
tutela,  and  this  would  be  the  normal  case  with  a  girl  (and  even  with  a
grown-up  woman),  the  affair  would  have  been  one  for  the  guardians  alone.
Thus Ulpian, v. 2, says, "  Consentiant si sui juris  sunt, aut etiam
parentes  eorum  si  in  potestate  sunt." (Cited  by  Girard, p.  147,  note.)
The  Lex  Julia,  A.U.C.  736,  gave  an  appeal  from  the  guardians,  if  they
refused  consent,  to  a  court. Further,  the  best  jurists,  including  Ulpian
himself,  held  the  consent  of  the  parties  to  be  necessary  as  well  as  that  of
their  guardians. "Nnptiae  consistere  non  possunt  nisi  consent iantomnes  ;
id  est  qui  coeunt,  quorumque  in  potestate  sunt." (Digest,  XXIII.,  ii.  2.)
With  this,  however,  we  must  read — "  Sed  quae  patris  voluntati  non  repug-
nat consentire intelligitur. Tune autem solum dissentiendi a_  patre
licentia  filiae  conceditur  si  indignum  moribus  vel  turpem  sponsum  ei  pater
eligat." (Just.  Digest,  xxiii.  i.  12. Cited  in  Viollet,  Droit  Civil  Fran?ais,
p.  404.)

3  Originally  all  women  were  in  tutelage. "  Veteres  voluerunt  feminas,
etiamsi  perfectae  aetatis  sint — in  tutela  esse— exoeptis  virginibus  yestalibus,
quas  ....  liberas  esse  voluerunt  ; itaque  etiam  lege  XII  Tabularum
cautum  est." (Gains,  i.  144,  145,  in  Brims,  21.) On  the  extinction  of  the
tulela-,  see  Girard,  pp.  196  and  213.


214.  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

civilization  down  to  our  own  generation.  Practically  independent
of  her  father,  she  was  legally'  independent  of  her  husband.  She
could  bring  an  action  against  others  and  with  some  limitations
against  him.1  She  could  hold  property  and  dispose  of  it  freely.2
On  the  other  hand,  being  separated  from  his  family,  she  does
not  succeed  to  his  property  if  he  dies  intestate,  nor  do  her
children  succeed  to  her,  nor  she  to  them.  So  much  followed
from  the  strict  theory  of  marriage  without  the  manus,  though
here,  as  elsewhere,  natural  feeling  had  its  way,  and  practical
rules  were  introduced  by  the  Praetorian  legislation  to  prevent
consequences  which  would  seem  harsh  to  the  temper  of  the
time.

These  changes  naturally  affected  the  stability  of  marriage.
We  have  seen  that  under  the  old  law  divorce  was  rare  and
difficult,  but  the  revolution  effected  in  marriage  by  the  dis
appearance  of  the  manus  was  nowhere  more  conspicuous  than
in  its  effect  upon  the  permanence  of  the  marriage  tie.  By  the
newer  form  of  marriage  neither  did  the  wife  pass  into  the
husband's  family  nor  the  husband  into  the  wife's  family.  They
remained  distinct  persons,  distinct  individualities,  and  as  they
freely  entered  into  the  marriage  relation,  so  could  they  freely
leave  it.  Divorce,  in  short,  as  in  so  many  primitive  tribes,
stood  freely  at  the  choice  of  either  party.  In  the  best  time  of
the  Republic  divorce  without  adequate  cause  incurred  penalties,
a  pecuniary  fine,  or,  still  more  serious,  the  nota  censoria.  But
with  the  growth  of  the  new  form  of  marriage  opinion  rapidly
changed,  and,  as  Mr.  Bryce  points  out,  we  find  at  the  close  of
the  Republic  not  only  Pompey,  but  "  such  austere  moralists  as
Cato  the  Younger  and  the  philosophic  Cicero"  putting  away
their  wives.  The  reader  of  Cicero's  letters  who  is  unacquainted
with  the  Roman  law  of  divorce  will  perhaps  remember  the

1  In  case  of  adultery  the  husband  could  originally  kill  the  wife. The
Lex  Julia  compelled  him  to  prosecute,  the  punishment  being  relegatio.  The
same  law  punished  fornication  with  women  of  rank. (Girard,  Manuel
elementaire  du  Droit  Romain,  160,  176.)

2  Girard,  p.  159. The  dos  or  dowry  brought  by  the  wife  from  her  own
family's  resources  to  the  maintenance  of  the  joint  life  passed  originally  to
the  husband ;  but  while  he  continued  to  administer  it,  his  right  over  it  became
more  and  more  restricted  in  favour  of  the  wife,  so  that  the  jurists  (e.  g.
Ulpian)  speak  of  it  as  being  her  property,  and  this  is  recognized  by  Justinian,
who  gives  her  a  right  to  reclaim  it  on  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage  from
whatever  cause. (Girard,  pp.  922-926.)


215


shock  of  surprise  with  which,  after  becoming  well  acquainted
with Terentia  from  many  allusions  he  suddenly  finds  Cicero
calmly  referring  to  his  divorce  and  re-marriage. At  this  pen.
divorce  had,  in  fact,  become  as  commonplace  an  incident  of

as  marriage  itself.

How  far  the  freedom  of  women  had  the  demoralizing  result!
which have been  generally  attributed to  it by  those whose
business  it  has  been  to  paint  the  Roman  Empire  in  the  darkest
colours  is  a  matter  on  which  the  best  authorities  do  not  speak
with  confidence, It  must  be  remembered  that  our  accounts  o
Roman  social  life  are  drawn  in  part  from  satirists  like  Juvenal,
or  satirical  historians  like  Tacitus,  and  that  we  should  be  as  far
astray  in  taking  their  description  as  an  impartial  account  of  the
society  in  which  they  lived  as  we  should  be  if  we  accepted  the
picture  of  our  own  social  life  as  it  could  be  painted  for  us  by
some  preacher  of  reform,  or  some  contemporary  censor  of  morals.
The  satirist  has  a  great  function  in  the  world,  but  it  is  not  that
of  supplying  the  historian  of  manners  with  material  ready  for  use
without  analysis. Other  sources  are  the  writings  of  Christian
fathers,  who 'from  a  different point  of view  were  even more
prone  to  denounce  the  wickedness  of  the  world  as  they  found  it
L The  very  fact  that  the Romans  took  so  serious  a  view  of
feminine  profligacy  militates  against the  belief  that  the  cor
ruption  had  gone  quite  so  deep  as  is  generally  supposed. Lucius
Piso  declared  that  modesty  had  vanished  since  the  censorship  of
Messalla  and  Cassius  in  B.C.  154.1 Yet  we  have  the  testimony
of  Velleius  that  in  the  proscriptions  of  the  Second  Triumvirate,
while  the  sons  were  never  faithful  and  freed-men  only  sometimes
so  the  wives  could  be  trusted  always. The  freedom  of  divorce
was  abused,  as  it  is  in  the  present  day  in  America, According
to  Seneca  there  were  women  who  reckoned  the  years  not  by  the
consuls,  but  by  their husbands,  but this again  is  obviously
satire. On  the  other  hand,  there  are  instances  of  three,  four,  or
five  wives,  and,  again,  of  three  to  five  husbands. A  marriage  of
forty-one  years  is  recorded  as  unusually  long,  and  in  this  case
the  wife  had  urged  divorce  and  re-marriage  upon  her  husband
i  Friedlander,  SittengexhicUe  Eoms.,  i.  475 _  Friedlandrfs  whole Dis
cussion,  pp.  475-507,  is  instructive,  it  somewhat  indecisive.  Jhe  judg
of  Professor  Dill,  whose  work  has  appeared  since  the  above  was  written,  is
more  clearly  favourable, (fioman  Society,  pp.  77,  <9,  145,  etc.)


216  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

after  the  death  of  their  daughter,  for  the  sake  of  getting  children.
This,  however,  is  remote  in  sentiment  from  anything  like  pro
fligacy,  and  connects  itself  rather  with  the  primitive  idea  of  the
necessity  of  children.  The  literature  of  the  time  has  stories  of
faithful  wives  as  well  as  of  profligate  women  to  record — stories  of
wives  accompanying  their  husbands  in  suicide,  dying  with  them
in  proscriptions,  or  going  with  them  into  exile.  Every  one  knows
of  Arria,  who  thrust  the  dagger  first  into  her  own  bosom,  and
then  offered  it  to  her  husband,  with  the  words,  "  Paete,  non
dolet."  But  we  do  not  all  know  that  she  became  a  kind  of
heroine  of  the  time,  and  upon  a  gravestone  in  Anagnia  is
addressed  along  with  Laodamia  by  a  woman  who  asks  her  to
receive  her  soul.1

The  evidence  of  the  tombstones,  which  in  all  ages  bear
a  singular  family  resemblance,  shows  that  the  domestic  ideal
held  sway  under  the  free  manners  of  imperial  Rome,  as  under
the  masculine  despotism  of  the  East  or  the  sentimentality  of  the
West.  A  panegyric  on  Murdia  in  the  second  half  of  the  first  cen
tury  says  all  gravestones  of  women  must  be  alike,  "  because  their
virtues  admit  of  no  heterogeneity,  and  it  is  enough  that  all  have
shown  themselves  worthy  of  the  same  good  report."  "  All  the
greater  renown  has  my  dearest  mother  won,  who  has  equalled
and  in  no  way  fallen  behind  other  women  in  modesty,  rectitude,
chastity,  obedience,  household  work,  carefulness  and  loyalty."
Another  inscription  says,  "  She  was  of  pleasant  address  and  noble
gait,  took  care  of  her  house  and  span."  In  another,  the  husband
has  sworn  not  to  take  another  wife.  Another,  "  I  await  my
husband " ;  another,  "  Never  have  I  experienced  a  pain  from
thee,  except  through  thy  death."

Upon  the  whole  the  Roman  Matron  would  have  seemed  to
have  retained  the  position  of  her  husband's  companion,  counsellor
and  friend,  which  she  had  held  in  those  more  austere  times
when  marriage  brought  her  legally  under  his  dominion.

10.  To  understand  how  Roman  marriage  became  modified  in
the  Middle  Ages  we  must  retrace  our  steps  and  hark  back  to  the
two  other  influences  mentioned  at  the  outset.  The  first  of  these
need  not  detain  us  long,  for  the  primitive  law  of  the  Germanic

1  Friedlander,  i.  514.


WOMAN  AND  MARRIAGE  217

tribes  which  overran  the  Roman  Empire  closely  resembled
the  early  law  of  the  Romans  themselves.  The  power  of  the
husband  was  strongly  developed  ;  he  might  expose  the  infant
children,  chastise  his  wife,  dispose  of  her  person.  He  could
not  put  her  to  death,  but  if  she  was  unfaithful,  he  was,  with
the  consent  of  the  relations,  judge  and  executioner.1  The
wife  was  acquired  by  purchase  from  her  own  relatives  without
reference  to  her  own  desires,2  and  by  purchase  passed  out  of
her  family.  She  did  not  inherit  in  early  times  at  all,  though
at  a  later  period  she  acquired  that  right  in  the  absence
of  male  heirs.  She  was  in  perpetual  ward,  subject,  in  short,
to  the  Chinese  rule  of  the  three  obediences,  to  which  must
be  added,  as  feudal  powers  developed,  the  rule  of  the  king
or  other  feudal  superior.3  And  the  guardianship  or  mundium
was  frankly  regarded  in  early  law  rather  as  a  source  of  profit  to
the  guardian  than  as  a  means  of  defence  to  the  ward,  and  for  this
reason  it  fetched  a  price  in  the  market,  and  was,  in  fact,  saleable
far  down  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Lastly,  the  German  wife,  though
respected,  had  not  the  certainty  enjoyed  by  the  early  Roman
Matron  of  reigning  alone  in  the  household.  It  is  true  that
polygamy  was  rare  in  the  early  German  tribes,  but  this,  as  we
have  seen,  is  universally  the  case  where  the  numbers  of  the
sexes  are  equal.  Polygamy  was  allowed,  and  was  practised  by
the  chiefs.

This  primitive  marriage  system  came  into  contact  not  only
with  the  Roman  Law,  but  with  the  still  more  powerful  influence
of  the  Church.  The  Church  regarded  marriage  as  a  concession
to  the  weakness  of  the  flesh.  It  is  not  a  sin,  and  those  who
denounce  it  as  such  are  severely  reprobated.  Nevertheless  it  is
of  the  nature  of  a  hindrance  in  spiritual  duties.  It  is  incom-

1  Conversely  the  adultery  of  a  man  is  no  offence  against  Iris  own  wife,  but
only  against  another  husband. The  proprietary  view  appears  strongly  in
the  old  English  law. "  If  a  freeman  lie  with  a  freeman's  wife  let  him  pay
for  it  with  his  wergild,  and  provide  another  wife  with  his  own  money  "
i.e.  to  replace  his  mistress  who  has  been  slain  by  her  husband. (Howard,
Matrimonial  Institutions,  ii.  35.)

2  Whether  it  was  the  woman  or  the  guardianship  over  her  which  was
technically  sold  is  a  fine  legal  point,  on  which  a  host  of  authorities  may  be
seen  arrayed  on  both  sides  in  Howard,  i.  260,  261. The  only  ethical  points
in  question  are  (1)  whether  her  consent  was  necessary  ;  (2)  what  rights  she
enjoyed  when  sold.

3  Waitz,  VerfassunysijeschicJde,  i.  57-60.


218  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

patible  with  the  performance  of  the  Sacraments,  and  thus
continence  is  enjoined  on  priests.  It  was  indeed  only  after
a  long  struggle  that  the  celibacy  of  the  priesthood  was  established
as  a  law  of  the  Roman  Church.  Such  a  prohibition  was  mooted
at  the  Council  of  Nice,  but  not  carried,  while  by  the  rejection  of
the  proposal  at  the  Sixth  Council  the  Eastern  Church  escaped
from  this  burden  altogether.  Nor  was  it  till  the  time  of
Hildebrand  that  it  became  the  definitive  rule  in  the  West.
With  regard  to  the  laity,  the  chief  concern  of  the  Church  was
to  save  souls  by  preventing  the  deadly  sin  of  fornication.  Hence
came  several  results ;  on  the  one  hand,  the  form  of  marriage
was  reduced  to  its  simplest  possible  terms.  The  mere  statement
of  each  party  that  they  took  one  another  as  spouses  was  deemed
sufficient,  providing  that  the  mutual  pledge  referred  to  the  present
(per  verba  de  prtesenti).1  Even  witnesses  were  not  necessary,
though,  of  course,  they  were  in  practice  required  in  order  to  prove
that  the  pledge  had  been  made.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  parties
to  have  a  wedding  ceremony  in  church,  in  fact,  it  became  a  breach
of  law  and  morals  to  marry  by  any  other  form,  but  the  omission
of  such  a  ceremony  did  not  affect  the  validity  of  the  marriage.2
In  close  connection  with  this  law  as  to  the  form  of  marriage  is
the  position  to  which  the  Church  was  gradually  led,  and  which
it  finally  maintained  with  great  firmness,  that  the  consent
of  the  parties  alone  is  the  only  thing  necessary  to  constitute
a  valid  marriage.  Here  the  Church  had  not  only  to  combat
old  tradition  and  the  authority  of  the  parents,  but  also  the
seignorial  power  of  the  feudal  lord,  and  it  must  be  accounted  to
it  for  righteousness  that  it  emancipated  the  woman  of  the
servile  as  well  as  of  the  free  classes  in  relation  to  the  most
important  event  of  her  life.3

1  At  least  from  the  time  of  Alexander  III. The  controversies  as  to  the
exact  conditions  of  a  valid  marriage  (e.  g.  as  to  whether  consummation  was
required,  as  Gratian  maintains,  to  complete  the  marriage)  need  not  trouble
us  here. (Howard,  op.  cit.,  i.  336,  337. Decret.  Grat.,  1062,  seq.)

2  For  the  stages  by  which  the  ecclesiastical  ceremony  grew  up,  and
was  made  legally  obligatory,  see  Howard,  i.  chap.  7. Lay  marriage  and
clandestine  marriage,  though  illegal,  remained  valid  down  to  the  Council
of  Trent  in  Catholic  countries. In  England,  except  for  the  period  of  the
Commonwealth,  they  were  valid  down  to  the  passing  of  Lord  Hardwicke's
Act  in  1753. (Howard,  i. 351  and  446,  etc.) For  the  scandalous  Fleet
marriages  which  made  the  Act  necessary,  see  ib.,  437,  seq.

3  The  early  fathers  held  by  the  consent  of  the  parents,  and  Ambrose


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  219

A  third  consequence  was  that  the  marriage,  once  concluded,
was  indissoluble  ;  it  was  deadly  sin  for  one  man  to  have  to  do
with  more  than  one  woman,  or  for  one  woman  with  more  than
one  man.  That  being  so,  divorce  in  the  full  sense  became
at  once  an  immorality ;  there  might  be  separation  for  grave
cause,  but  even  that  is  jealously  restricted  as  giving  occasion  for
sin.  There  might  also  be  annulment  of  marriage,  which  is  simply
a  recognition  that  what  purported  and  was  supposed  to  be  a
marriage,  never  was  a  lawful  union  at  all,  but  there  could  be  no
putting  asunder  of  those  whom  God  had  once  joined  together.1


apparently  thinks  that  the  whole  matter  should  be  left  to  them.  He  quotes
with  approval  Euripides  :

l'V/X</>eV/J.aTGJl' fJ.^V TMV €fJ.OJV TTCtTTJp C/jLO?

lj.tpi.fj.vav  C£EI,  K'OVK  e/j.ov  Kpiveiv  raSe

and  says,  "ergo  quod  et  ipsi  philosophi  mirati  sunt  servate  virgines.''
(Decretum  Cfratiani,  Corpus  Juris  Canunici,  1124.)

In  Gratian  it  is  admitted  that  the  "  paternus  consensus  desideratur  in
nuptiis,  nee  sine  eo  legitimae  nuptiae  habeantur,''  and  he  quotes  "  illud
Evaristi  Papae  :  Aliter  non  fit  legitimum  conjugium,  nisi  a  parentibus
traditur  "  (p.  1123.)  But  the  consent  of  the  parents  was  incompatible  with
the  self-marriage  of  the  parties,  which  the  Church  held  necessary  for  the
avoidance  of  fornication.  Accordingly  Gratian's  own  view  is  that  consent
makes  marriage  (pp.  1002,  etc.),  though  he  has  difficulty  in  reconciling
this  with  the  further  condition  that  consummation  should  have  taken  place.
With  these  difficulties  we  are  not  concerned  here.  The  question  of  parental
assent  was  decided  by  Innocent  III.,  who  declared  it  unnecessary.
(Viollet,  ]>.  406.  See  Howard,  vol.  i.  p.  336,  etc.)  The  Decretals  of
Gregory  IX.  are  perfectly  clear,  "  Matrimoniuin  solo  consensu  contrahitur."
(Corpus  Juris,  p.  660.)

The  Council  of  Trent,  while  compelled  by  the  abuses  of  private
marriages  to  declare  marriage  void  if  not  performed  by  a  priest,  anathema
tizes  those  who  maintain  that  marriage  without  the  consent  of  the  parents
is  invalid.  (Acts  of  Council  of  Trent  in  Corpus  Juris,  p.  71.)  It  is,  of
course,  not  implied  that  the  father  lias  no  right  of  veto,  but  only  that  the
marriage  once  consummated  is  indissoluble.  But^further,  the  daughter  who
disobeyed  her  father's  order  to  marry  was  protected  by  the  Church.  She
was  declared  free  of  the  sin  of  ingratitude,  and  is  therefore  not  to  be
disinherited.  (Owen,  Institutes  of  Canon  Law,  p.  133.)

1  This  was  the  final  view  of  the  Church,  reached  by  slow  degrees.  The
deliverances  of  the  New  Testament  being  uncertain,  the  views  of  the  early
fathers  waver,  but  nearly  all  agree  that  divorce  is  forbidden  except  for
''  fornication."  This  term  is,  however,  sometimes  given  a  wider  spiritual
sense  so  as  to  include  idolatry  and  even  covetousness.  But  Augustine
(who  had  at  first  admitted  the  wider  view)  came  to  regard  adultery  as  the
only  cause  of  separation,  refused  to  allow  any  difference  between  man  and
woman,  and  allowed  no  dissolution  of  the  nuptial  bond  even  for  adultery.
This  view  was  accepted  by  the  Council  of  Carthage  in  407.  In  its  final
form  the  canon  law  allowed  separation  for  (1)  adultery,  the  wife  having  an
equal  right  of  action  with  the  husband;  (2)  "  spiritual "  adultery,  which


220

Lastly,  the  moral  consequences  of  any  violation  of  the  marriage
law  were  held  by  the  Church  to  affect  the  man  no  less  than  the
woman.  And  though  the  Church  never  succeeded  in  converting
the  world  to  this  view,  it  must  be  noted  here  as  a  departure
hardly,  if  ever,  paralleled  in  the  history  of  ethical  thought  before
the  rise  of  the  spiritual  religions.1

The  whole  domain  of  marriage  was  in  the  end  conquered
by  the  Church,  but  the  victory  was  only  gradual.  Polygamy
remained  among  the  Franks  in  the  days  of  Chilperic  and  Dago-
bert,  the  latter  of  whom  had  three  queens,  and  in  some  districts
of  France,  such  as  Bigorre,  concubinage  lasted  up  to  the  fifteenth
century.  But  monogamy  speedily  became  the  rule  everywhere.2
In  the  matter  of  the  bride's  freedom  the  struggle  was  more  pro
longed,  and  two  voices  were  sometimes  heard  within  the  Churcli
itself,  but  from  the  ninth  century  onwards  the  consent  of  both
parties  was  at  least  supposed,  and  by  the  decision  of  Innocent  III.
the  consent  of  the  father  ceased  to  be  even  a  necessary  condition.
The  feudal  power  of  disposing  of  widows  and  orphans  was  also
slowly  worn  away.  In  614  we  find  it  repudiated  by  Clothaire  II.,
yet  it  survived,  and  in  1232  we  find  the  Emperor  resigning  his  right
in  this  direction  at  Frankfort.3  Generally  speaking,  the  families
of  serfs  required  authorization  to  marry,  and  in  England  no
mark  of  servile  tenure  was  more  resented  than  the  payment
of  the  merchet,  or  fine  on  marriage,  which  implied  that  the
right  of  marrying  was  at  the  lord's  discretion.4  In  1408

came  to  mean  apostacy,  and  perhaps  compulsion  of  one  party  by  the  other
to  commit  crime  ;  (3)  cruelty. (Howard,  ii.  p.  53.)

1  Gratian  quotes  Ambrose,  who  is very  precise  : "  Omne stuprum
adulterium  est,  nee  viro  licet  quod  mulieri  non  licet. Eadem  a  viro  quae
ab  uxore  debetur  castimonia." (Corpus  Juris,  1128.)

2  Viollet,  p.  388.

3  Viollet,  p.  410. As  to  the  authority  of  feudal  superiors,  the  Council  of
Trent  finds  that  in  the  sixteenth  century  it  is  still  common  for  secular  lords
to  compel  men  and  women  in  their  jurisdiction  to  marry  against  their  will,
and  denounces  the  practice  sub  anathematis  poena  "  quum  maxime  nefarium
sit  matrimonii  libertatem  violare." (Council  of  Trent,  p.  74.)  From  an  early
period  the  Church  had  given  sacramental  sanction  to  the  concubinate,  i.  e.
marriages  of  the  unfree,  or  between  unfree  and  free. (Howard,  i.  p.  276.)
On  the  other  hand,  the  sacramental  view  enables  the  Church  to  justify  the
dismissal  of  a  mistress  for  a  wife  of  free  status,  "  Ancillam  a  toro  abjicere  et
uxorem  certae  ingenuitatis  accipere  non  duplicatio  conjugii  sed  profectus
est  honestatis." (Pope  Leo  in  Deer.  Grat.,  p.  1123.) This  was  to  invest
the  most  callous  and  heartless  form  of  wickedness  with  an  air  of  piety.

4  Connected  with  the  merchet  was  the  fine  for  incontinence  payable  to


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  221

we  find  the  Parlement  of  Paris  contesting  the  right  of  the
Due  de  Berry  to  force  a  girl  of  eight  into  marriage.  The
king's  right  was  exercised  frequently  by  Louis  XL,  and  Louis
XII.  forced  Alain  d'Albret  to  consent  to  the  marriage  of
his  daughter  to  Caesar  Borgia.  The  Council  of  Trent  wholly
forbade  seignorial  interference,  yet  complaints  are  heard  of
it  as  late  as  1576  and  1614,  and  in  1623  it  was  necessary  for
Philip  IV.  of  Spain  to  forbid  it  in  Franche  Comte.  The  royal
right  was  still  exercised  in  France  in  the  seventeenth  century.
In  the  eighteenth  it  died  away,  save  that  the  king's  consent
was  still  required  in  the  case  of  princes  of  the  blood  and
grandees.  Napoleon  made  a  last  effort  to  revive  it.1

Nor  did  the  Church  get  its  own  way  with  regard  to  divorce  at
one  blow.  Constantino  did  not  attempt  to  prohibit  divorce,  but
confined  himself  to  the  imposition  of  pecuniary  penalties  accord
ing  to  the  cause.  But  Theodosius  and  Honorius  in  421  carried
the  matter  a  step  further,  prohibiting  re-marriage  in  case  either
husband  or  wife  divorced  the  other  party  without  sufficient
reason.  The  next  step  was  the  abolition  of  divorce  by  mutual
consent  by  Justinian ;  but  this  step  proved  unpopular,  and  the
law  was  repealed  by  Justin,  who  substantially  re-enacted  the
Theodosian  code;  and  the  Church  did  not  get  its  way  in  the
Byzantine  Empire  until  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Leo.2

the  lord,  since  in  the  loss  of  virginity  there  was  a  risk  that  the  chance  of
marriage  might  be  lost  and  therewith  the  lord's  merchet  might  never


Revolutionist,  vol.  i.  p.  61.

1  Viollet,  p.  410-414.

2  By  the  law  of  Constantino,  the  wife  could  divorce  her  husband  for
murder,  the  preparation  of  poisons,  or  the  violation  of  a  tomb. If  she
divorced  him  for  any  other  cause,  she  forfeited  her  dowry  and  was  liable  to
deportation. The  husband  could  divorce  the  wife  for  adultery,  the  pre
paration  of  poisons,  and  for  acting  as  a  procuress. If  he  divorced  her  for
any  other  cause  he  forfeited  the  dowry,  and  if  he  married  again,  the  first
wife  could  take  the  dowry  of  the  second. The  legislation  of  Theodosius
and  Honorius  in  421  allowed  the  wife  to  divorce  for  grave  reasons,  including
crime, but  if  she  divorced  her  husband  for  moderate  faults,  including
"criminal conduct," she forfeited her dowry,  became incapable of  re
marriage  and  liable  to  deportation. The  husband,  if  divorcing  for  serious
crime,  retained  the  dowry  ;  if  for  "criminal  conduct,"  he  did  not  retain  it
but  could  marry  again  ;  if  for  mere  dislike,  he  forfeited  the  common  pro-


222  MORALS  IN^EVOLUTION

In  Western  Europe  the  conquest  of  the  barbarians  was
gradual.  In  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries  the  capitularies
absolutely  prohibited  divorce,  yet  exceptions  were  admitted
subsequently  here  and  there.  In  the  Canon  Law  itself  traces
of  a  more  lenient  view  appear.1  Dissolution  of  marriage  for
impotence  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  Roman  custom,  but,
says  a  rescript  of  Alexander  III.,  "  if  the  custom  of  the  Gallic
Church  so  had  it,  we  will  patiently  endure  it."2  Moreover,  a
case  is  recorded  in  which  a  husband,  having  been  absent  for
more  than  ten  years  and  refusing  to  return,  a  bishop  had
pronounced  him  divorced,  and  declared  the  wife  free  to  marry.
Though  this  decision  is  not  confirmed,  and  nothing  apparently
came  of  it,  yet  it  is  held,  in  view  of  the  bishop's  sentence,  that
the  children  of  the  wife  in  this  case  are  to  be  deemed  legitimate.3
All  these  doubts  and  exceptions  were  swept  away  by  the  Council
of  Trent,  and  to  the  present  day  in  countries  dominated  by  the
Canon  Law  there  exists  no  divorce  dissolving  the  vinculum
matrimonii  by  the  ordinary  law.4  The  Pope,  of  course,  havino-
the  power  of  the  Keys,  can  override  all  laws,  but  this  does  not

perty  and  could  not  marry  again.  In  449,  after  an  experimental  restoration
of  the  law  of  the  early  empire,  Theodosius  specified  twelve  offences  (including
cruelty  and  adultery)  for  whicli  a  wife  could  divorce  her  husband.  The
same  mutatis  mutandis  applied  to  the  husband,  but  he  could  further  go  upon
the  ground  that  his  wife  dined  with  men  without  his  knowledge,  left  home
at  night  without  adequate  cause,  or  frequented  the  circus,  etc.,  after  being
forbidden  to  do  so.  If  he  divorced  her  for  any  other  reason,  he  forfeited
the  dowry  and  property  brought  into  the  marriage.  If  she  did  so  she
suffered  the  same  penalty,  and  could  not  marry  again  for  three  years.

Justinian  took  the  further  step  of  abolishing  divorce  by  mutual  consent
under  penalty  of  being  immured  in  a  monastery,  and  he  re-enacted  the
Theodosian  law  of  divorce  by  one  party  with  some  modifications  of  detail.
Divorce  by  mutual  consent  was  re-introduced  by  Justin  and  finally
abolished  by  Leo.  (Bryce,  ii.  p.  408,  and  Howard,  ii.  pp.  28-33.)

1  Still  more  clearly  do  the  Penitentials  of  this  period  show  the  com
promise  necessary  to  adjust  the  Canon  Law  to  Germanic  custom. (Howard
ii.  45.)

2  Decret.  Greg.,  705. In  other  chapters  divorce  for  impotence  is  recog
nized  under  conditions. In  Gratian's  view  it  would  prevent  the  completion
of  marriage  (for  conjugium  confirmatur  officio),  but  if  occurring  after  con
summation,  would  not  be  a  ground  of  dissolution. (1149.)

3  Decret.  Greg.  IX.,  Corpus  Juris,  p.  713.

4  On  the  other  hand,  down  to  the  Council  of  Trent,  the  recognition  of
clandestine  marriages  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  complicated  system  of  re
strictions  on  the  other,  made  the  annulment  of  marriage  only  too  easy. On
the  whole  the  marriage  tie  during  the  Middle  Ages  seems  to  have  been
almost  as  loose  in  practice  as  it  was  rigid  in  theory.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  223

affect  the  general  principle,  nor  does  it  bring  relief  to  those  who
are  without  the  means  of  setting  the  spiritual  machinery  in
motion.

11.  Both  as  to  the  tutelage  of  women  and  as  to  the  general
power  of  the  father  the  early  Germanic  law  in  large  measure
reproduced  the  features  of  early  Rome.  Both  were  modified
by  the  impact  of  civilization,  of  the  civil  law  and  of  Christian
influences.  But  they  were  modified  in  different  ways.  The
father's  power  decayed  more  rapidly  and  more  completely  than
the  husband's,  and  while  the  unmarried  woman  became
personally  free,  the  wife  remained  sub  virga  mariti.

The  primitive  German  father  had  the  power  of  life  and
death  over  his  children.1  At  any  rate  he  could  expose  them
before  they  had  taken  food,2  and  he  could  sell  his  children
certainly,  and  in  most  tribes  probably  his  wife  also,  into
slavery.  Even  in  the  seventh  century  the  Church  has  to  admit
the  right  of  a  father  to  sell  a  son  under  seven  into  slavery.3
Down  to  the  ninth  century  the  husband  was  possibly  within
his  rights  in  killing  his  wife  for  a  "good"  reason.4  The
Lombard  law  ran,  "  Non  licet  earn  interficere  ad  suum  libitum
sed.  rationabiliter,"  and  at  Worms  in  the  eleventh  century
witnesses  were  asked,  "  Est  aliquis  qui  uxorem  suam  absque
lego  aut  probatione  interfecerit  ?  " 5  The  sale  of  children  had
been  prohibited  in  the  Empire  by  Diocletian,  but  the  law  was
found  to  lead  to  infanticide,  and  it  was  again  allowed  by
Constantino,  though  at  birth  only,  and  that  with  an  option
of  redemption.  It  was  prohibited  by  the  laws  of  the  Visigoths
and  by  the  Carlovingians,  but  instances  in  which  it  occurred  are
quoted  from  French  law-books  as  late  as  the  fifteenth  century.

1  Waitz,  VKt-fnamngsfjeschiclite,  49.  2  Viollet,  497,  499.

3  Pollock  and  Maitland,  History  of  English  Law,  ii.  436.

4  Viollet,  p.  500.

5  Viollet,  Loc.  cit. Even  in  the  Canon  Law  the  murder  of  a  faithless  wife
is somewhat  faintly  deprecated. Gratian  is  at  pains  to show  that the
apparent  countenance  given  by  Pope  Nicholas  refers  to  the  practice  of
civil  law  alone,  but  Pope  Pius,  whom  he  also  quotes,  merely  says,  "  Qui-
cunque  propriam  uxorem  absque  lege  vel  sine  causa  et  certa  probatione
interfecerit aliamque duxerit uxorem, annis depositis publicam agat
poenitentiam." (1152.) Gratian  himself  is  clear  that  the  murder  of  an
adulteress  is  unlawful. (1154.)


224  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

The  sale  of  a  wife  appears  in  the  eleventh  century  at  Cologne,1
and  in  the  same  century  Cnut  had  to  forbid  the  sale  of  a  woman
to  a  man  whom  she  disliked.2

While  these  grosser  excesses  of  marital  and  paternal  power
died  away  during  the  earlier  Middle  Ages,  the  subjection  of
the  wife  remained.  But  of  the  wife  only.3  From  the  Conquest
onwards  the  unmarried  English  woman  on  attaining  her
majority  became  fully  equipped  4  with  all  legal  and  civil  rights,
as  much  a  legal  personality  as  the  Babylonian  woman  had  been
three  thousand  years  before.  But  the  wife  was  still,  if  not  the
husband's  slave,  at  any  rate  his  liege  subject.  Her  personality
is  merged  in  his.  The  law  does  not  hold  her  responsible  even
for  crimes  committed  in  his  presence,  and  therefore  it  is  pre
sumed  under  his  influence  and  authority.  If  she  kills  him  it
is  petty  treason — the  revolt  of  a  subject  against  a  sovereign  in
a  miniature  kingdom.  She  could  not  bring  an  action  against
him  nor  he  against  her.  But  of  course  the  theory  could  not
be  pushed  to  its  full  length.  The  wife  was  human,  and  so,
after  all,  were  the  legists,  and  if  ill-treated  she  could  go  to
the  ecclesiastical  courts  for  protection,  and  if  the  husband  was
obstinate  they  could  call  in  the  power  of  the  secular  arm.5  The
King's  Court  would  punish  him  for  maltreating  her,6  but  the
right  of  chastisement  remained,  and  the  history  thereof,  together

1  Viollet,  p.  502.  2  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  364.

3  While  unmarried  women  become  emancipated,  the  wife  remains  subject
to  her  husband's  correction. In  Normandy,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  it  is
held  that  a  man  could  not  be  prosecuted  for  beating  his  wife,  slave,  son,  or
daughter,  or  any  one,  "  en  sa  mesgnie." And  it  is  the  same  in  other  parts  of
France, though  in  Flanders  the  magistrates  condemned  a  husband  for
beating  his  wife  till  the  blood  flowed. The  subservience  of  the  wife  was
expressed  by  her  waiting  at  table,  kissing  the  husband's  knees  and  calling
him  her  lord. (Viollet,  pp.  503-4.) As  to  property,  however,  in  France  and
some  parts  of  Germany  a  doctrine  of  community  of  goods  grew  up  in  which
the  husband  had  the  right  of  management,  but  the  rights  of  the  wife  were
considerable. And  owing  to  the  law  of  dower,  the  French  wife  in  the
thirteenth  century  could  institute  an  action  without  her  husband's  consent,
which  at  present  she  cannot  do. (Viollet,  p.  293.) Here,  however,  we  touch
on  the  indirect  consequences  of  laws  of  property,  rather  than  on  customs
flowing  from  the  central  conception  of  the  position  of  women.

4  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  437. The  writers  do  not  consider  it  clearly
established  that  a  life-long  tutela  of  women  ever  existed  in  England,  as
among  the  other  Germanic  peoples.

6  In  1224  a  wife  obtained  a  writ  directing  a  sheriff  to  provide  her  with
maintenance  out  of  the  husband's  lands. (Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  435.)
6  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  436.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  225

with  the  whole  theory  of  marriage  thereunto  appertaining,  is
explained  with  much  unconscious  humour  by  Blackstone.

"  The  very  being  or  legal  existence  of  the  woman  is  suspended
during  the  marriage,  or  at  least  is  incorporated  and  consolidated
into  that  of  the  husband,  under  whose  wing,  protection  and
cover,  she  performs  everything."  Hence  a  man  cannot  grant
anything  directly  to  his  wife,  or  contract  with  her,  "  for  the
grant  would  be  to  suppose  her  separate  existence,  and  to
covenant  with  her  would  be  only  to  covenant  with  himself."
He  is  bound  to  provide  her  with  necessaries,  but  for  anything
besides  necessaries  he  is  not  chargeable.  She  can  bring  no
action  without  his  concurrence,  nor  be  sued  without  making
him  a  defendant.  In  criminal  cases  she  may  be  convicted  and
punished  separately,  but  she  is  considered  as  acting  under  his
orders,  and  in  some  felonies  (though  not  murder)  she  is  excused,
if  acting  under  his  constraint.

"  The  husband  also  (by  the  old  law)  might  give  his  wife  moderate
correction.  For,  as  he  is  to  answer  for  her  misbehaviour,  the  law
thought  it  reasonable  to  entrust  him  with  the  power  of  restraining
her,  by  domestic  chastisement,  in  the  same  moderation  that  a  man
is  allowed  to  correct  his  apprentices  or  children."  .  .  .  "But  this
power  of  correction  was  confined  within  reasonable  bounds,  and  the
husband  was  prohibited  from  using  any  violence  to  his  wife,  '  aliter
quam  ad  virum,  ex  causa  regiminis  et  castigationis  uxoris  suae,  licitc
et  rationabiliter  pertinet.'  The  civil  law  gave  the  husband  the
same,  or  a  larger  authority  over  his  wife,  allowing  him  for  some
misdemeanours,  '  flagellis  et  fustibus  acriter  verberare  uxorem ' ;
for  others,  only  'modicam  castigationem  adhibere.'  (Nov.  117,  c.
If.)  But,  with  us,  iu  the  politer  reign  of  Charles  II.,  this  power  of
correction  began  to  be  doubted,  and  a  wife  may  now  have  security
of  the  peace  against  her  husband ;  or,  in  return,  a  husband  against
his  wife.  Yet  the  lower  rank  of  people,  who  were  always  fond  of
the  old  common  law,  still  claim  and  exert  their  antient  privilege,
and  the  courts  of  law  will  still  permit  a  husband  to  restrain  a  wife
of  her  liberty  in  case  of  any  gross  misbehaviour.  These  are  the
chief  legal  effects  of  marriage  during  the  coverture,  upon  which  we
may  observe,  that  even  the  disabilities  which  the  wife  lies  under  are
for  the  most  part  intended  for  her  protection  and  benefit.  So  great
a  favourite  is  the  female  sex  of  the  laws  of  England."  l
1  Blackstone,  vol.  i.  pp.  430-433  (edition  17651

VOL. I.


226  MOKALS IN  EVOLUTION

12.  With  Blackstone  we  arrive  at  the  middle  of  the  modern
period,  and  we  find  the  position  of  woman  somewhat  anomalous.
In  particular,  the  legal  status  of  the  married  and  unmarried
woman  stood  in  strong  contrast.  The  gradually  deepening
sense  of  personal  rights  extended  itself  to  women  as  well  as  to
men,  and  we  have  seen  that  the  Church  worked  along  with
the  growing  sentiment  of  social  justice  to  emancipate  the  un
married  woman  from  bondage,  and  make  her  her  own  mistress
in  the  most  important  matter  of  her  own  marriage.  Women
as  such,  had  few,  if  any,  disqualifications  as  to  the  tenure  of
property,  as  to  inheritance,  and  as  to  the  full  exercise  of  legal
and  civil  rights.1  Though  still  debarred  from  the  professions,
they  were,  generally  speaking,  competent  as  witnesses,  could
sue  and  be  sued  like  a  man,  could  inherit  and  bequeath  freely  ;
few,  if  any,  relics  of  the  tutela  remain  beyond  the  years  of
minority.2  Further,  the  sentiment  that  first  becomes  marked
in  mediaeval  literature  had  given  them  a  position  in  the  esteem
of  man  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  parallel  in  earlier  thought.3
Yet  in  law  the  whole  personality  of  the  married  woman  was
as  much  as  ever  absorbed  in  that  of  her  husband.  In  this
direction  the  old  conception  of  the  right  of  the  husband  was
modified  rather  than  combated  by  the  influences  of  religion
and  the  romantic  attitude  to  women  and  marriage.  For  if
these  influences  emphasized  the  beauty  of  womanliness,  it  was
a  beauty  which  depended  on  meekness  and  self-denial.  The

1  Except  in  relation  to  property  the  history of  the  position  of  women
was  broadly  alike  on  the  Continent  and  in  England.

2  I  need  not  here  deal  with  exceptions  which  are  interesting  enough  as
survivals. For  certain  disabilities  in  modern  French  law,  see  Viollet,  p.  291.

3  Two  opposed  streams  of  thought  are  discerned  in  the  Christian  teaching
as  to  woman. On  the  one  hand,  Christianity,  and  particularly  Catholicism,
was  essentially  a  feminine  religion. Its  appeal  was  to  the  womanly  type,
and among women  at  all  periods  it  has  found  its  heartiest  response.
Though  debarred  from the  priesthood, as  saints,  martyrs,  and  virgins,
women  occupied  a  high  place  in  the  hagiology,  and  a  woman  was  the  mother
of  God. On  the  other  hand,  woman  was  no  less  certainly  the  door  of  hell,
the  source  of  temptations,  the  corrupter  even  of  the  saints. The  filthiest
view  of  love  and  marriage  was  taken  by  the  ascetics  and  is  embodied  in  the
Penitentials. The  horrible  saints  of  the  desert  could  scarcely  bear  to  see  a
sister  or  a  mother. (Lecky,  ii.  127.) A  fair  estimate  of  the  influence  of
Christianity  as  a  whole,  for  which  perhaps  sufficient  material  has  not  yet
been  accumulated,  must  at  least  give  full  weight  to  both  these  tendencies.
On  the  whole  subject,  see  Lecky,  especially  vol.  ii.  p.  316,  seq.


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  227

strength  of  woman  was  in  her  weakness.  She  conquered  by
yielding.  Her  gentleness  had  to  be  guarded  from  the  turmoil
of  the  world,  her  fragrance  to  be  kept  sweet  and  fresh,  away
from  its  dust  and  the  smoke  of  battles.  Hence  her  need  of
a  champion  and  guardian.  Again,  in  the  romantic  view  of
marriage  the  two  beings  were  united  iu  one,  and  this  was
easily  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  woman  was  merged  in  the
man  and  against  him  was  rightless,  or  had  a  claim  to  protection
only  in  the  most  extreme  cases.  Thus  the  law,  as  Blackstone
with  his  sleek  satisfaction  expounds  it,  was  not  far  removed
from  prevailing  sentiment  either  in  what  it  gave  to  women  or
in  what  it  withheld.  Yet  Blackstone  wrote  two  centuries
after  the  Reformation,  and  the  Reformation  had  already  begun
to  break  up  the  canonical  view  of  marriage.  The  Reformers
differed  from  the  Romish  Church  in  two  points  of  capital
importance.  They  declined  to  regard  marriage  either  as  a
Sacrament1  or  as  a  concession  to  the  weakness  of  the  flesh.
On  the  contrary,  they  considered  it  the  most  desirable  state
for  man.  Hence,  on  the  one  hand  the  abolition  of  celibacy
amongst  the  clergy,  and  on  the  other  the  tendency  to  treat
marriage  as  a  civil  contract  and  the  revival  of  divorce,  freedom
in  which  latter  respect  was  advocated  by  many  great  Protestant
writers,  and  notably  by  Milton.2  But  in  cutting  itself  free  from
the  legal  and  moral  structure  built  up  by  the  mediaeval  Church,
Protestantism  failed  to  provide  a  clear  and  consistent  standard
ot  its  own.  The  conception  of  the  marriage  relation  as  a  civil
contract  was  not  at  bottom  compatible  with  the  rigorous  treat
ment  of  the  most  venial  sexual  irregularity  as  a  religious
offence  of  the  deepest  dye,  and  the  Old  Testament  influences
which  made  the  husband  absolute  head  of  the  family  suited
ill  with  the  measure  of  equality  already  conceded  to  the  wife.3

1  I.  e.  not  in  the  magical  sense. In  the  spiritual  sense,  Luther  regarded
the  word  "  sacrament,"  as  necessary  to  express  the  holiness  of  the  marriage
state. (Howard,  i.  387.)

2  Adultery  and  malicious  desertion,  widened  so  as  to  include  cruelty,
were  reckoned  by  the  continental  reformers  generally  as  good  causes  of
divorce,  and  it  was  agreed  that  re-marriage  was  allowable  to  the  innocent
party. (Howard, ii. pp.  62,  65,  etc.) The  English  reformers  followed
somewhat  more  cautiously  in  the  same  line. (Ib.,  p.  73.)

3  The  influence  of  the  Old  Testament  told  both  ways  on  the  reformers.
On  the  one  hand,  it  aided  them  in  cutting  down  on  the  whole  to  reasonable
limits  the  absurd  mass  of  restrictions  on  marriage  which  the  mediaeval


228  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

Hence,  even  in  Protestant  countries  legislation  moved  but
slowly,  and  on  the  whole  it  was  only  during  the  nineteenth
century  and  under  new  influences  that  the  law  of  marriage
and  the  position  of  women  underwent  a  fundamental  change.
The  modern  conception  of  personal  rights  proved  to  be  incom
patible  with  the  old  marriage  law,  and  indeed  with  the  mediaeval
sentiment  in  regard  to  women.  Applying  the  doctrine  that
moral  worth  and  the  adequate  realization  of  character  imply
full  responsibility,  it  has  dismissed  as  a  piece  of  false  sentiment
the  ideal  of  feminine  innocence  shrouded  from  the  world,  has
bade  women  take  their  own  lives  in  hand,  and  in  considerable
measure  broken  down  the  barriers  which  debarred  them  from
other  occupations  than  that  of  marriage.1  Within  marriage
it  has  revolutionized  the  position  of  the  wife,  giving  back  to
her  the  personal  independence  which  she  enjoyed  under  the
later  Roman  law.  This  change  was  not  consummated  in
England  until  the  Married  Women's  Property  Acts  of  1870  and
1882.  As  we  have  seen  from  Blackstone,  women  had  acquired
personal  protection  from  the  wife-beating  husband  during  "  the

Church  had  accumulated.  On  the  other,  it  tended  to  justify  a  barbaric
view  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  husband,  and  led  Luther  and  other  early
reformers  to  admit  polygamy  and  concubinage.

The  fierceness  of  Puritan  sentiment  in  regard  to  the  sins  of  the  flesh
appears  to  combine  Old  Testament  barbarism  with  early  Christian  con
demnation  of  unchastity.  The  early  reformers  considered  death  the
appropriate  penalty  for  adultery,  and  in  the  American  colonies,  where  Pro
testantism  most  influenced  legislation,  savage  penalties  were  imposed,  not
only  for  adultery,  but  even  for  the  pre-nuptial  incontinence  of  betrothed
persons,  e.  g.  couples  who  had  children  born  within  seven  months  of  mar
riage  were  publicly  flogged.  See  the  extraordinary  collection  of  sentences
in  Howard,  vol.  ii.  p.  169,  seq.  Here  are  records  of  sentences  :  "A.  F.,  for
having  a  child  born  six  weeks  before  the  ordinary  time  of  women  after
marriage,  fined  for  uncleanness  and  whipt,  and  his  wife  set  in  the  stocks."
"C.  E.,  for  abusing  himself  with  his  wife  before  marriage,  sentenced  to  be
whipt  publicly  at  the  post,  she  to  stand  by  while  the  execution  is  performed.
Done,  and  he  fined  five  pounds  for  the  trouble."  (p.  186.)

1  Though  there  have  been  times  in  earlier  history  when  women  have,  in
fact,  taken  a  prominent  part  in  intellectual  or  public  life  (witness,  e.g.
India  in  Buddha's  time),  the  systematic  and  reasoned  insistence  on  the
claims  of  women  to  free  admission  to  any  occupation  for  which  they  can  fit
themselves,  seem — apart  from  the  case  of  Plato — to  be  almost  confined  to
the  latter  half  of  the  modern  period.  Works  in  defence  of  women's  rights
appear  sporadically  in  England,  France,  and  Germany,  from  the  end  of  the
seventeenth  century  onwards.  The  first  which  is  now  at  all  remembered,
however,  is  probably  Mary  Wollstonecraft's  Vindication,  published  in
1792.  (Howard,  op.  cit.,  iii.  238,  239.)


WOMAN  AND  MARRIAGE  229

politer  reign  of  Charles  II.,"  but  their  property,  except  where
protected  by  settlement,  remained  at  the  absolute  disposal  of
their  lord  and  master.  This  protection  was  a  privilege  of  the
daughters  of  the  propertied  classes.  There  was  literally  no
protection  for  the  wife  of  a  drunkard  struggling  to  support  her
children  by  the  labour  of  her  hands  from  the  husband  who
should  choose  to  sponge  upon  what  she  earned.  Such  earnings
were  emancipated  from  the  husband's  control  by  the  Act  of
1.870.  In  1882  the  same  principles  were  applied  to  all
property ;  and  the  English  law,  which  was  the  most  backward
in  Europe,  became  in  twelve  years  the  most  forward,  Russia
and  Italy,  strange  combination,  being  the  only  other  countries
which  fully  recognized  the  independence  of  the  wife's  property
in  the  absence  of  a  settlement.1

1  The  movement  of  other  countries  is,  however,  in  the  same  direction.
Sweden  emancipated  the  wife's  earnings  in  1874,  Denmark  in  1880,
Norway  in  1888  ;  the  German  Civil  Code  places  the  wife's  earnings
amongst  her  separate  property  which  is  beyond  the  husband's  control.
Property  bequeathed  to  the  wife  is  separate  only  when  so  stipulated  by  the
donor.

Our  Married  Women's  Property  Act  applies  to  England  and  Ireland  only.
In  Scotland,  by  the  Acts  of  1877  and  1881,  the  wife  acquired  complete
control  of  her  earnings  and  income  from  personality.  But  she  may  not
dispose  of  the  principal  sum  without  her  husband's  consent.

The  French  Jaw  rests  on  a  wholly  different  basis  to  ours,  and  is  not
easily  to  be  compared.  Here  and  in  other  countries  such  as  Belgium,
where  the  law  is  based  on  the  Code  Civile,  there  is  a  community  of  goods
between  husband  and  wife,  which,  in  a  measure,  compensates  the  wife  for  a
certain  loss  of  liberty.  The  code  states  that  the  husband  owes  her  pro
tection  and  the  wife  owes  him  obedience.  She  is  under  an  obligation  to
live  with  him,  and  he  to  receive  her  and  furnish  her  with  everything
necessary  for  the  wants  of  life  according  to  his  means  and  station.  She  has
the  absolute  right  to  the  one-half  of  everything  he  earns,  but  on  the  other
hand  she  may  not,  without  authority,  alienate  property  even  if  it  be  her
own,  nor  can  she  sue  even  if  she  be  carrying  on  a  trade,  nor  make  a
contract,  without  his  authorization.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  authorization
is  unreasonably  refused,  she  may  apply  for  it  to  a  court.

In  one  direction  the  primitive  marital  power  is  maintained  in  a  modified
form  in  some  continental,  particularly  in  Latin,  countries.  In  France  the
husband  still  has  the  right  to  kill  the  paramour  of  his  wife  taken  in  the  act.
This  is  perhaps  of  the  nature  of  a  concession  to  the  strength  of  passion.
But  further,  the  husband,  and  he  alone,  can  denounce  his  wife  to  the
tribunals  for  adultery,  and  cause  her  to  be  imprisoned  for  not  less  than
three  months  or  more  than  two  years  at  his  pleasure.  "  Le  mari  restera  le
maitre  d'arreter  Pellet  de  cette  condainiiation  en  consentant  a  reprendre  sa
femnie."  (Penal  Code,  330,  337  ;  Viollet,  p.  505.)  This  is  a  survival  of
the  law  of  the  Ancien  Regime,  by  which  the  husband  might  immure  the
adulteress  in  a  monastery,  or  even  in  a  house  of  correction,  by  an  authority
obtained  from  the  king.  The  imprisonment  might  be  for  lite.


230  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

13.  Thus  the  tendency  of  the  modern  marriage  law  is  to
guarantee  to  the  wife  equality  of  civil  status,  with  full  legal  pro
tection  for  her  person  and  free  disposal  of  her  property.  We  are
next  to  consider  its  effect  upon  the  permanence  of  the  marriage
tie.  In  the  previous  stages  of  the  development  of  marriage
which  have  been  traced  we  have  seen  it  treated —

1st.  As  an  imperfectly- organized  relation  which  does  not
identify  husband  and  wife  as  members  of  one  family.

2nd.  As  an  act  of  appropriation  by  capture,  purchase  or
service,  whereby  the  wife  has  passed  into  a  semi-servile
relation.

3rd.  As  a  Sacrament,  whereby  an  indissoluble  union  was
created  which  man  could  not  undo.1

4th.  In  the  Roman  Law,  and  perhaps  in  that  of  Egypt,  as
a  contract  on  specified  terms,  revocable  at  the  will  of  one
party  or  of  both,  or  finally  voidable  under  certain  specified
conditions.

The  law  of  modern  countries  since  the  Reformation  appears  to
have  fluctuated  between  the  two  latter  conceptions  of  marriage.
Countries  which  have  maintained  the  rule  of  the  Roman  Church,
of  course,  do  not  allow  divorce  under  any  circumstances  what
ever.  This  is  the  case  with  Italy,  Spain  and  Portugal  in  Europe;
and  with  Mexico,  Brazil,  Chili,  the  Argentine  Republic,  and  most
of  the  South  American  States.  In  some  states  of  mixed  religions
the  Canon  Law  is  applied  to  Catholics :  thus  in  Austria  there
is  no  divorce  even  if  one  party  to  the  marriage  should  not  be  a
Catholic.2  The  same  rule  applies  in  Hungary.

The  German  Civil  Code  breaks  wholly  with  the  marital  power,  by
equalizing  the  crime  of  husband  and  wife.  Yet  it  preserves  the  private
character  of  the  offence  by  making  adultery  punishable  with  imprisonment
on  the  application  of  the  injured  party.

The  Portuguese  have  erected  a  monument  more  durable  than  brass  to  the
Catholic  interpretation  of  equal  moral  responsibility  by  a  law  which
punishes  the  adultery  of  the  wife  with  from  two  to  three  years'  hard
labour,  and  of  the  husband,  if  committed  under  the  conjugal  roof,  with  a
fine  of  not  less  than  £2,  nor  more  than  £480.

1  In  this  relation,  the  religious  marriage  may  fittingly  be  enumerated  as
a  distinct  type.

2  In  Bavaria  and  in  Wurtemberg,  before  the  consolidation  of  the  German
law  under  the  new  Imperial code,  there  was  no  absolute  divorce  for
Catholics, but the restriction did not apply to mixed marriages.
(Parliamentary  Papers,  1894;  Miscellaneous,  No.  2,  p.  24.)


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  231

The  Greek  Church,  adhering  in  the  main  to  the  traditions  of
the  Roman  Law  as  re-modelled  by  Justinian,  allows  divorce,  and
it  is  an  interesting  point  of  historical  continuity  that  the  law
of  divorce  in  Greece  at  the  present  day  is,  with  unimportant
amendments,1  that  established  by  Justinian.2

In  France  divorce  was  unknown  until  1792,  and  a  wife
could  not  even  obtain  a  separation  from  an  unfaithful  husband.
In  that  year  the  Convention  went  to  the  other  extreme,
admitting  divorce,  not  only  by  mutual  consent,  but  even  for
incompatibility  of  temper  alleged  by  one  party.  There  was  a
re-action  under  the  Directory  in  1795,  and  in  1797  the  Church
re-affirmed  the  indissolubility  of  marriage.  Napoleon,  however,
allowed  divorce  by  mutual  consent  under  some  restrictions.3

1  Parliamentary  Papers,  1894  ;  Misc.,  No.  2,  p.  81.

a  The  law  of  the  Greek  Church  is  followed  pretty  closely  in  Servia.
Divorce  cases  are  tried  by  the  Spiritual  Courts,  and  the  grounds  are  :
Adultery,  an  attempt  on  the  life  of  either  consort,  treason,  leaving  the
Church,  "if  the  wife  without  the  husband  visits  the  baths,  beer  gardens,  or
other  suspicious  places  with  men,  or  if  the  husband  brings  strange  women
into  his  house,  or  keeps  them  elsewhere,"  an  accusation  of  adultery
against  an  innocent  wife,  or  urging  her  to  unchastity,  condemnation  to
seven  years'  imprisonment,  desertion  for  seven  years  or  for  three  years,  if
the  husband  has  left  the  country  and  cannot  be  traced,  or  for  four  years  if
it  is  proved  to  be  wilful.

In  Russia  the  rules  of  divorce  vary  according  to  the  religion  of  the  parties,
but  it  is  admitted  both  for  the  Russo-Greek  and  the  Lutheran  in  cases
where  the  fault  of  one  party  has  violated  or  practically  nullified  the
marriage  contract.  (Parly.  Papers,  ib.,  128.)

In  the  case  of  members  of  the  Russo-Greek  Church,  the  grounds  of
divorce  are  :  Adultery  (though  only  when  provable  by  an  eye-witness),
impotence,  a  sentence  involving  a  loss  of  civil  rights,  five  years'  desertion.
It  should  be  noted  that  the  guilty  party  may  be  condemned  to  celibacy  for
adultery.  Among  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church  the  grounds  are  :
Adultery,  pre-nuptial  unchastity  of  the  wife,  attempt  to  poison,  five  years'
desertion,  repugnance  to  marital  intercourse,  refusal  to  fulfil  conjugal
duties,  incurable  infectious  disease,  madness,  depravity  of  life,  cruelty^and
offensive  treatment,  attempted  dishonour,  unnatural  propensities,  crimes
involving  capital  punishment  or  penal  exile.

In  Roumania  divorce  is  allowed  by  mutual  consent  of  the  parties,
provided  that  the  court  is  satisfied  that  the  maintenance  of  a  common  life
is  impossible,  that  the  separation  is  sanctioned  by  the  parents,  and  provision
is  made  for  the  maintenance  of  the  wife  and  children.  (Parly.  Papers,  ib.,
pp.  126,  127.)

3  The  husband  had  to  be  over-25,  and  the  wife  over  21  ;  they  must  have
been  married  more  than  two  and  less  than  twenty  years.  The  approval  of
the  parents  was  required,  and  a  proper  agreement  had  to  be  made  for  the
maintenance  of  wife  and  children.  In  other  respects,  however,  the  law
was  not  equal  between  husband  and  wife,  as  she  could  not  claim  for  divorce


232  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

On  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  divorce  was  entirely
suppressed  (1816),  and  though  its  re-introduction  was  voted  by
the  Chamber  in  1831,  it  was  thrown  out  by  the  Peers,  and
there  was  no  divorce  in  France  until  1884.  Under  the  law
of  that  year  and  of  1886  the  grounds  of  divorce  are  equal
for  either  party,  and  are —

(1) Adultery.
fExces.

(2)jSevices.

llnjures  graves.

(3)  Conviction  for  crimes  involving  certain  aggravated
punishments.

"  Exces  "  is  interpreted  to  mean  acts  of  violence  endangering
life;  "  sevices,"  other  acts  of  violence;  while  as  to  "injures"
involving  lesser  misconduct,  the  Courts  have  a  wide  discre
tion.  They  take  it  generally  to  cover  calumnious  imputations,
desertion,  refusal  of  cohabitation,  and  habitual  drunkenness.1

In  Germany  the  revolutionary  epoch  left  its  mark,  and  by
the  Prussian  Code  of  1794  divorce  was  allowed  for  any  of
ten  causes,  including  mutual  consent  in  case  of  insuperable
aversion  where  the  marriage  was  childless,  and  even  if  there
were  children  where  the  cause  was  held  good  by  the  judge.
But  under  the  new  civil  code,  which  came  into  force  on
January  1,  1900,  the  conditions  are  more  stringent,  the
grounds  recognized  being —

for  adultery  unless  with  certain  aggravations.  (Jeune,  art.  "  Divorce  "  in
Encydop.  Brit.)

1  Belgium  preserves  the  Imperial  Code  of  1803,  but  Holland,  though  the
law  of  marriage  is,  in  general,  based  on  that  code,  restricts  the  grounds  of
divorce  to  adultery,  malicious  desertion,  imprisonment  for  over  four  years,
and  ill-treatment  endangering  life.  (Parly.  Papers,  ib.,  pp.  33  and  100.)  The
Grand  Duchy  of  Luxembourg,  keeping  closer  to  its  original,  "allows  the
mutual  and  continued  consent  of  both  parties"  under  legal  conditions  and
tests  to  be  "  a  sufficient  proof  that  life  in  common  is  insupportable  to  them."
(Parly.  Papers,  ib.,  p.  90.)

In  Switzerland  the  causes  recognized  are  :  Adultery,  attempt  on  the  life
of  either  party,  great  ill-usage,  serious  injury,  sentence  to  a  degrading
punishment,  desertion  for  two  years  after  a  judicial  order  to  return,  mental
derangement  ;  and  finally  a  divorce  or  separation  for  a  period  of  two  years
may  be  granted,  for  other  "  circumstances  seriously  affecting  the  mainten
ance  of  the  conjugal  tie,"  and  at  the  expiration  of  the  two  year  period  the
grant  is  renewable.  The  Swiss  law  has  in  consequence  come  in  for  some
criticism  as  facilitating  the  dissolution  of  marriage  for  trivial  causes.
(Parly.  Papers,  Misc.,  No.  2  of  1894,  p.  150.)


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  233

(1)  Adultery ;  which,  it  is  to  be  observed,  is  further  punish
able by imprisonment on the application of the innocent
party.

(2)  Endangering  of  life.

(3)  Desertion.1

(4)  Insanity.

(5)  Gross  neglect  of  duties  by  one  of  the  parties  or  the
leading  of  such  an  immoral or  dishonourable  life  as  entirely
destroys  the  conjugal  relations.

Denmark,2  Sweden3  and  Norway4  recognize  adultery,  desertion,
and  conviction  of  serious  crime,  as  causes  of  divorce.

Thus  the  divorce  laws  of  Europe  present  an  almost  bewilder
ing  variety.  To  find  some  order  and  method  in  them  we  may
group  them  under  four  heads.

There  are  (1)  the  countries  which  remain  under  the  Canon
Law  and  admit  no  divorce.

There  arc  (2)  countries  or  populations  governed  or  influenced
by  the  law  of  the  Greek  Church,  running  back  to  Justinian.

There  arc  (3)  the  countries  governed  or  influenced  by  the
Code  Napoleon.

And  (4)  there  is  the  group  of  Protestant  countries.

The  common  tendency  in  the  last  three  cases  is  to  place
divorce  upon  an  equal  footing  for  both  parties,  and  to  permit
it  in  all  cases  where  the  act  of  one  party  without  the  collusion
of  the  other  has  practically  nullified  the  marriage  contract.
Thus  desertion  and  conviction  of  serious  crimes  are  generally
recognized  causes ;  but  in  countries  influenced  by  the  Code
Civile  the  element  of  personal  injury  is  especially  pressed,  and
where  this  is  loosely  interpreted  divorce  becomes  easy.  In  the
Protestant  countries  conviction  of  crime  and  the  distinct  refusal
of  one  party  to  perform  his  or  her  duty  is  more  prominent.

1  Provided  that  the  guilty  party  has  for  one  year  refused  to  obey  an
order  for  restitution  of  the  conjugal  life,  or  has  refused  to  cohabit  for  one
year,  having  gone  abroad  or  to  such 'place  as  makes  communication  difficult.
(Parly.  Papers,  Misc.,  No.  2,  1903.)

-  Parly.  Papers, No.  2,  1804,  p.  53.  3  16.,  p.  146.

4  Ib.,  ]>.  147.  The  term  of  imprisonment  supplying  adequate  ground  for
divorce  has  been  reduced  by  the  law  of  1902  to  a  period  of  six  years,_or  to
imprisonment  exceeding  three  months  for  any  crime  against  the  petitioner,
or  finally  to  imprisonment  irrespective  of  duration  for  specified  crimes  of
an  outrageous  character.  A  sentence  for  vagrancy,  intemperance,  and  other
ill-conduct,  may  also  be  a  ground  of  divorce.


234  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

14.  In  the  United  Kingdom  the  history  of  the  Divorce  Law  is
altogether  peculiar.  The  Scottish  Courts  began  to  grant  divorces
soon  after  the  Reformation,  and  in  1573  recognized  desertion,  as
well  as  adultery,  as  a  cause ;  this  remains  the  Scottish  law  to
the  present  day.  But  in  England  the  course  of  events  was
different.  The  Commission  appointed  by  Henry  VIII.  and
Edward  VI.  recommended  divorce  for  adultery,  desertion  and
cruelty,  and  Lord  Northampton  (temp.  Edward  VI.),  who  married
again  after  a  separation  a  mensa  et  thoro  was  held  justified,  but
the  recommendations  of  the  Commission  never  became  law,  and
in  Foljambe's  case  at  the  end  of  Elizabeth's  reign  marriage  was
held  indissoluble.  In  1669  the  first  divorce  was  granted  by
private  Act  of  Parliament,  but  there  were  only  five  such  Acts
before  George  I.'s  time,  and  it  was  not  till  1857  that  divorce
was  allowed  by  English  law,  and  this  law  differs  from  that
of  the  majority  of  continental  countries  in  not  recognizing  the
practical  destruction  of  the  marriage  life  through  desertion,
crime  or  drunkenness  as  a  ground  for  anything  more  than
separation.  Neither  does  it  place  husband  and  wife  on  an
equal  footing.  Down  to  1884  the  Courts  could  enforce  an
order  for  the  restitution  of  conjugal  rights  by  imprisonment,
but  in  1884  this  power  was  withdrawn,  and  in  the  Jackson  case,
a  few  years  later,  it  was  apparently  held  that  though  such  an
order  could  be  obtained  by  a  husband  or  wife,  it  could  neither
be  enforced  by  the  Courts  nor  could  the  injured  party  be  allowed
to  enforce  it  for  himself.  Thus  the  tendency  of  recent  English
legislation  has  been  to  facilitate  separation,  but  not  to  enable
him  or  her  who  has  made  the  mistake  of  marrying  a  confirmed
criminal,  a  lunatic  or  an  habitual  drunkard  to  marry  again.

The  British  Colonies,  and  with  them,  of  course,  the  United
States,  started  with  the  English  law,  but  have  for  the  most  part
modified  it  in  the  direction  of  greater  liberty.  Canada  forms
the  exception.  In  the  Dominion,  under  the  influence  of  the
Roman  religion,  no  divorce  courts  have  been  instituted,  and
none  exist  except  in  Nova  Scotia,  New  Brunswick,  Prince
Edward's  Island  and  British  Columbia,  where  they  had  been
instituted  before  the  Union,  and  where  the  conditions  of  divorce
are  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  as  under  English  law.1
1  Parly.  Papers,  1894,  vol.  70,  part  iii.  p.  54  ff.


WOMAN AND  MARRIAGE  233

In  South  Africa  the  Roman  Dutch  Law  in  Capo  Colony
recognizes  adultery  and  graver  sexual  offences,  malicious  deser
tion,  perpetual  imprisonment,  long  absences  and  refusal  of
marital  privileges  as  grounds  of  divorce,  but  in  practice  it
appears  that  only  the  first  two  causes  are  brought  forward.
Natal  also  recognizes  desertion  in  addition  to  adultery.1  In
the  Australasian  group  divorce  is  either  on  the  English  lines
or  modified  so  as  to  admit  desertion,  drunkenness  and  crime
as  grounds.2

15.  The  divorce  laws  of  the  United  States  form  a  study  by
themselves,  and  the  utmost  that  I  can  attempt  is  a  summary
of  the  principal  features.  In  one  State  or  another  twelve
different  causes  of  divorce  are  recognized  ;  they  are—

(1)  Adultery. This  is  recognized  generally  as  a  ground  of
divorce.

(2)  Bigamy. General.

(3)  Impotence. General,  but  as  a rule with the require
ment  that  the  plaintiff  must  be  ignorant  of  the  fact  at  the  time
of  marriage.

(•i)  Idiocy. Most  States.

(5)  Wilful  desertion.  The  term  varying  from  six  months
to  five  years.  This  is  usually  a  ground  of  absolute  divorce,  but

1  Parly.  Papers,  cd.  1785  (1903),  p.  21.

2  Southern  and  Western  Australia,  Queensland  and Tasmania  adhere
to  English  law. (Parly.  Papers,  1894,  vol.  70,  pp.  15,  16,  33,  95.) New
South  Wales  places  husband  and  wife  on  an  equal  footing  in  the  matter  ot
adultery  provided  the  husband  is  domiciled  in  the  colony. (Parly.  Papers,
1903,  cd. 1785,  p. 13.) It  also  recognizes  desertion,  cruelty,  conviction
for  crime,  and  habitual  drunkenness ; while,  further, it  is  a  ground  of
divorce  if  the  wife  has  "  habitually  neglected  or  rendered  herself  unfit  to
discharge  her  domestic  duties  ;  or  if  the  husband  has  habitually  left  the  wife
without  the  means  of  support." (!&.,  p.  14.) Victoria  recognizes  desertion,
imprisonment and  habitual drunkenness. This must be coupled in
the  case  of  the  husband  either  with  cruelty  or  with  the  charge  that  he
has "  habitually  left  his  wife  without means  of  support  ; "  on  the  part
of  the  wife,  "with  neglect of  her domestic  duties." Adultery  _  by the
husband  in  the  law  of  this  colony  is  only  a  sufficient  ground  of  divorce  if
committed  in  the  conjugal  residence,  or  coupled  with  circumstances  or
conduct  of  aggravation. (Parly.  Papers, 1894,  vol. 70,  part  i.  p. 19.)
New  Zealand,  which,  till  1898,  adhered  closely  to  the  English  law, now
recognizes  imprisonment  for  serious  crime,  desertion  and  habitual  drunken
ness,  coupled  with  cruelty  on  the  part  of  the  husband,  or  habitual  neglec
of  domestic  duties  on  the  part  of  the  wife. (Parly. Papers, 1903, cd.
1785,  p.  16.)


236  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

sometimes  of  separation  only,  and  as  a  rule  the  deserted  party
must  not  have  consented  to  it  or  have  rejected  reconciliation.

(6)  Absence. New  Hampshire  and  Connecticut.

(7)  Neglect of  husband to support wife. Twenty  States,
but  in  some  of  these  it  is  a  ground  of  separation  only.

(8)  Habitual  drunkenness  for  a  term of  years. Almost all
States.

(9)  Use  of  opium. Two  States.

(10)  Conviction  of  felony. The  greater  part  of  the  country.

(11)  Extreme  cruelty. Almost  all  States,  but  in  some  only
as  a  ground  of  separation.

(12)  Indignities  to  the  person. Eight  States.

To  these  may  be  added  a  variety  of  causes,  recognized^  in  one
State  or  more.  In  Illinois  divorce  may  be  given  at  the  general
discretion  of  the  Court.1  In  Washington  2  divorce  may  be  given
for  any  cause  deemed  by  the  Court  sufficient,  and  when  it  shall
be  satisfied  that  the  parties  can  no  longer  live  together.  In
South  Carolina  there  is  no  divorce  at  all.3

1  The  summary  given  in  the  text  is  derived  from  Parly.  Papers,  1894,
Misc.,  No.  2. The  statements  given  by  Mr.  W.  F.  Wilcox  (Encydop.  Brit.,
Ed.  X.  article  "Divorce  ")  may  be  summarized  as  follows  : — In  six  out  of
seven  States  divorce  is  allowed  for  adultery, desertion, and  cruelty ;  in
thirty-nine  States  for  imprisonment,  in  thirty-eight  for  habitual  drunken
ness,  in  twenty-two  for  neglect  to  provide. In  all  States  but  two,  complete
separation  lasting  from  one  to  five  years  is  a  ground  of  divorce. (16.  art
"  Marriage,"  p.  549.)

2  Bryce,  Studies  in  Jurisprudence,  ii.  p.  440.

3  The  charge  brought  by  critics  of  the  United  States  marriage  laws,
however,  is  not  so  much  directed  against  loose  rules  of  law,  as  against  lax
interpretation  by  courts. This  is  carried  so  far  in  some  States,  that  it
would  seem  as  though  divorce  were  placed  at  the  free  disposal  of  either
party. One  wife  alleges  that  her  husband  "  has  never  offered  to  take  her
out  riding " ; another,  that  he  quoted  verses  from  the  New  Testament
about wives obeying their husbands  ; a third,  "  that he does  not
come home till ten o'clock at night, and when he does come
home he keeps plaintiff awake  talking." These  cases,  with  further
details which have their ludicrous side,  are quoted  by Mr. Bryce
op.  cit.,  vol. ii. p. 445,  from a report  of  the United States Labour
Bureau  of  1880. The  number  of  divorces  granted  in  the  Union  increased
from  9,937  in  1867,  to  25,535  in  1886,  a  proportion  of  250  to 100,000
married  couples. In  some  of  the  laxer  States,  however,  the  proportion  is
much higher, there being  in Ohio,  for  instance,  some 3,000 divorces
annually  to  from  33,000  to  44,000  marriages. In  two-thirds  of  the  suits
the  wife  is  the  plaintiff,  but  statistics  combat  the  siiggestion  that  desire  for
another  marriage  is  the  common  cause  of  divorce. Thus  in  Connecticut,
where  the  figures  are  best  available,  only  one-third  of  those  divorced  re
marry  in  each  year. A  further  point of  high  importance  is  that  the


WOMAN  AND  MARRIAGE  237

1C.  Comparing  the  divorce  laws  of  modern  states  as  a  whole,
the  general  tendency,  notwithstanding  the  bewildering  differences
in  detail,  is  tolerably  clear.  Legislation  moves  in  the  direction
of  allowing  divorce  for  adultery,  cruelty,  persistent  desertion,
habitual  drunkenness,  serious  crime— in  short,  for  such  be
haviour  of  one  party  as  makes  the  married  life  impossible  or
unbearable  to  the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  no  marked
tendency  to  the  Roman  system  of  divorce  by  mutual  consent.
On  the  contrary,  anything  of  the  nature  of  collusion  between  the
parties  is  frequently  a  bar  to  proceedings.  Marriage  is  on  the
whole  regarded  as  a  contract,  but  not  like  other  contracts,  void
able  by  the  agreement  of  the  parties  to  it.  Its  dissolution  is
regarded  as  a  relief  which  one  party  may  claim  on  the  ground  of
the  other  party's  delinquency,  and  in  a  measure  as  the  punish
ment  of  that  delinquency,  rather  than  as  the  voluntary  annul
ment  of  a  bond,  in  which  the  function  of  the  State  is  to  see  that
no  fraud  is  committed,  and  that  the  involuntary  parties  to  the
original  contract,  the  children,  do  not  suffer.

But  though  a  contract  of  a  peculiar  kind,  marriage  in  modern
legislation  is  distinctly  a  contract  rather  than  a  sacrament— a
relation  which  binds  two  parties  together  without  annulling  the
legal  personality  of  cither,  and  terminable  by  the  fault  of
cither.  In  ethics  the  change  that  it  has  undergone  may
be  expressed  by  saying  that  from  being  a  sacrament  in  the
magical,  it  has  become  one  in  the  ethical,  sense.  Regarded  as  a
magical  sacrament,  marriage  is  a  rite  which  removes  the  taboo
on  sexual  intercourse  between  a  man  and  a  woman,  while  at  the
same  time  imposing  a  lifelong  taboo  on  the  intercourse  of  either
of  them  with  a  third  person.  As  an  ethical  sacrament,  marriage
is  the  fruition  of  perfect  love,  in  which  at  its  best  men  and
women  pass  beyond  themselves  and  become  aware  through  feel
ing  and  direct  intuition  of  a  higher  order  of  reality  in  which  self
and  sense  disappear.  If  it  is  not  given  to  all  to  obtain  this  best,
yet  the  humbler  lessons  of  unselfishness  and  mutual  aid  are

number  of  divorces  in  proportion  to  the  population  does  not  vary  with  the
number  of  causes  for  which  divorce  can  be  obtained.  £.  g.  in  1<  bO,  JNew
York  admitted  adultery  only  as  a  cause  ;  New  Jersey  added  desertion,  and
Pennsylvania  further  added  cruelty  and  imprisonment.  Yet  ^ew  York
had  78  divorces  per  100,000  couples  ;  New  Jersey  26,  and  Pennsylvania
(Howard,  iii.  217.)


238  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

learnt  by  ordinary  men  and  women  in  greater  or  less  degree
from  marriage,  and  seldom  effectually  learnt  from  other  sources.
But  this  ethical  conception  implies  the  retention  of  full  personal
rights  by  the  wife,  and  though  doubtless  realized  often  enough
under  the  older  quasi-servile  marriage,  this  is  because  the  facts
of  human  nature  and  the  relations  based  upon  them  cut  deeper
than  all  law,  and  wives  have  been  men's  helpmates  and  some
times  their  tyrants  even  when  law  made  them  most  abjectly
their  slaves.  The  modern  view  of  marriage  recognizes  a  relation
that  love  has  known  from  the  outset.  But  this  is  a  relation
only  possible  between  free  self-governing  persons.  If  it  be  true
that  "  woman  is  not  undeveloped  man,  but  diverse,"  that  diversity
will  best  express  itself  through  her  freedom  to  act  as  a  responsi
ble  agent,  and  only  when  so  expressed  can  we  justly  measure  its
character  and  amount.  Such  freedom  is  the  basis  of  marriage
as  an  ethical  sacrament,  and  that  conception  of  marriage  is
accordingly  bound  up  with  the  general  liberation  of  women.

In  the  lowest  stages  of  society  the  life  of  women  is  less  differ
entiated  from  that  of  men  than  it  afterwards  becomes,  but  there
is  a  tendency  for  the  heavier  drudgery  to  fall  on  them,  while  the
men  do  the  hunting  or  fighting.  At  a  higher  stage  the  sphere
of  woman  becomes  more  clearly  restricted  to  the  house.  She
does  hard  outside  work  only  when  compelled  thereto  by  poverty,
and  the  idea  grows  that  she  should  be  protected  by  her  men-folk
and  as  far  as  possible  sheltered  from  the  world.  She  becomes  a
different  being,  romantically  conceived  as  of  finer,  more  ethereal,
texture  than  the  male,  but  is  practically  allowed  no  will  or
character  of  her  own.  At  a  still  further  stage  the  ethical  con
ception  of  personality  comes  into  play.  To  be  the  ideal  being
that  man  would  have  her  it  is  recognized  that  woman  must  be  a
responsible  agent,  and  it  is  seen  that  her  special  talents  and
qualities  must  have  all  the  scope  which  freedom  gives  to  come
to  the  fulness  of  their  development,  while  it  is  only  through  free
development  that  the  extent  of  her  differentiation  can  be  deter
mined.  Roughly  parallel  to  this  movement  of  thought  is  the
evolution  of  the  marriage  tie  as  we  have  traced  it — the  natural
family  at  first  incomplete  and  the  marital  relation  loose  and  un
certain  ;  next,  a  close  union  under  the  lordship  of  the  husband,
based  in  its  lower  forms  on  proprietary  right,  and  at  a  higher


WOMAN AND MARRIAGE  239

stage  on  religious  sanctions  ;  and  finally,  a  union,  not  less  inti
mate  because  less  mechanical,  between  two  free  and  responsible
persons,  in  which  the  equal  rights  of  both  are  maintained,  based
not  on  a  magical  sacrament,  but  on  the  most  sacred  human
relation.


CHAPTER  VI

EELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES

1.  IN  the  early  stages  of  ethics,  rights  and  duties  do  not  attach
to  a  human  being  as  such.  They  attach  to  him  as  a  member  of  a
group.  A  stranger  may  enter  a  community  with  a  safe  conduct,
or  under  the  protection  of  some  god  or  some  taboo.  He  may
come  as  a  guest  under  the  aegis  of  his  host.  But  except  under
such  special  conditions  he  is  destitute  of  rights.  The  members
of  the  community  will  give  him  no  protection  because  he  is  not
one  of  themselves.  They  stand  by  one  another,  but  except  for
such  special  reasons  as  have  been  mentioned  have  no  concern
with  outsiders.  Morality  is  in  its  origin  group-morality.  This
division  between  the  community  and  the  stranger  cuts  deep  into
the  ethical  consciousness.  In  primitive  society  it  implies  a
very  narrow  circumscription  of  the  ethical  area,  since  primitive
societies,  besides  being  exclusive,  are  generally  small.  But  far
from  being  confined  to  primitive  society,  the  essential  features  of
group-morality  are  maintained  with  great  persistence,  though  in
very  varying  shapes,  into  the  higher  civilizations.  Civilized
humanity  is  still  organized  in  groups,  and  there  is  still  a  deep
distinction  between  the  obligations  binding  members  of  the  same
group  to  one  another  and  those  which  are  recognized  as  holding
as  between  members  of  different  groups.  Every  independent
nation  is  such  a  group.  In  greater  or  less  degree  every  distinct
class  within  a  nation  is  such  a  group.  Religious  bodies,  political
parties,  all  sorts  of  voluntary  associations,  and  finally  the  family
itself,  are  other  instances.

But  here  one  distinction  is  to  be  noted. All  these  groupings

may  be  the  basis  of  special  obligations,  but  it  does  not  follow

240


that  they  all  alike  maintain  group-morality  in  its  distinctive
features.  For  these  distinctive  features  consist  not  so  much  in
the  recognition  of  special  obligations  as  in  the  denial  of  more
general  rights  and  duties  arising  out  of  more  general  relations.
The  special  and  the  general  need  not  necessarily  conflict.  The
one  may  supplement  the  other.  It  is  where  a  wider  obligation
is  ignored  or  overridden  in  favour  of  the  narrower  that  we  speak
of  group-morality.1  A  great  part  of  the  comparative  study  of
ethics  consists  in  tracing  the  forms  assumed  by  group-morality
and  its  modification  by  wider  ideas  of  obligation,  and  much  of
ethical  evolution  is  constituted  by  the  interaction  of  the  two
principles.  In  the  present  chapter  and  the  next  we  shall  con
sider  the  two  departments  in  which  this  evolution  appears  to
be  of  the  greatest  importance.  We  shall  begin  with  the  mutual
relations  of  independently-governed  communities  and  their
respective  members.

2.  Early  society  is,  as  has  been  said,  organized  generally  in  small
groups,  and  between  these  groups  and  their  respective  members
there  is  not,  except  under  special  conditions,  any  bond  of  mutual
regard.  Hence,  man  being  a  pugnacious  creature,  it  is  natural
that  they  should,  in  the  absence  of  any  external  influence,  be
frequently  in  a  condition  of  strife.  There  are,  indeed,  a  few  tribes
to  which  war  is  unknown.  Such  were  some  of  the  Esquimaux.2
Such  are  one  or  two  small,  favoured  and  isolated  South  Sea
Island  peoples  ;3  but  these  cases  are  almost  always  those  of  small
populations,  separated  by  physical  obstacles  from  the  wider
Avorld.1  Keeping  to  our  method  of  characterizing  the  savage
state  by  the  features  which,  without  being  universal,  are  never-

1  The  term  is  of  course  one  of  disparagement,  so  far  as  we  assume  the
correctness  of  the  modern  point  of  view.  It  may,  however,  be,  and  at
times  has  been,  that  the  more  humanitarian  view  is  too  crudely  expressed,
and  the  group-morality  which  protests  against  it  may  then  prove  to  be
relatively  right.

a  For  example,  the  people  of  Bailin's  Land  had  no  warfare,  and  Ross  could
not  make  them  understand  the  meaning  of  battles.  (Reclus,  108.)

:;  The  Lower  Carolinas  are  said  by  Waitz  to  live  at  peace,  while  furnish
ing  the  upper  islands  with  arms.  In  the  small  islands  of  the  Tokilan  and
Eliiee  group  no  weapons  are  known  except  those  washed  ashore,  which  are
stored  in  the  temples.  (Wait/,  v.  ii.  1!)0.)

1  The  Todas,  a  small  tribe  of  Indian  aborigines,  have  also  the  character
of  being  most  pacific,  and  are  said  to  use  no  weapons.  (Reclus,  pp.  182-3.)

VOL.  I.  K


242  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

theless  predominant,  we  may  on  the  whole  accept  the  general
view  that  in  the  savage  and  barbarous  state  each  tribe,  except
in  so  far  as  bound  by  special  agreements,  is  in  a  condition  of
moral  isolation  from  its  neighbours.  Their  members  have  no
assured  rights  within  its  bounds,  and  the  tribes  themselves  are
potential  enemies  rather  than  natural  friends.  The  actual
frequency  and  seriousness  of  warfare,  of  course,  vary  very  greatly,
according  to  the  more  or  less  martial  character  of  the  people,
their  geographical  conditions  and  economic  circumstances.

i  Regular  organized  war  implies  a  certain  social  development,  and
is  hardly  to  be  found  at  the  lowest  grades,  but  we  find  "  a  sort  of"
warfare  in  the  form,  perhaps,  of  perpetual  predatory  raids,  as
where  an  outcast  tribe  like  the  Bushmen  live  largely  by  pillaging
its  more  settled  neighbours,  who  reply  whenever  they  can  with
pitiless  massacres.1  We  find  fighting  arising  from  disputes
about  the  infringement  of  the  tribal  border — the  "  frontier
incidents "  of  savagery — as  often  among  the  Australian  clans.2
It  may  arise  out  of  personal  injuries,  the  capture  of  a  woman  or
the  slaying  of  a  man,  which  the  injured  tribe  is  determined  to

>l  resent.  In  this  latter  case  there  is  no  very  deep  distinction
between  a  war  of  distinct  tribes  and  the  blood  feud  of  two  clans
within  a  tribe.  In  both  cases  the  fighting  may  be  of  the  nature
of  a  trial  by  combat,  and  so  it  is  perhaps  that  we  find  here  and
there  a  regular  arrangement  of  the  campaign  in  which  time,
place,  and  even  the  number  of  the  combatants  and  their  weapons
are  predetermined.  Thus  in  the  Malay  region  clan  disputes  are
sometimes  settled  by  duels,  or  by  battles  arranged  at  fixed  times
and  places.  Among  the  Battas  of  Sumatra  the  relatives  of  the
combatants  mingle  freely  while  the  war  is  in  progress.  Yet  the
actual  fighting  is  waged  to  the  extermination  of  the  beaten  party,
saving  always  its  chief.3  The  tale  of  the  Horatii  and  Curiatii

1  Letourneau,  La  GWre/pp.  56,  57,  quoting  Moffat,  Twenty-three  Years
in  Central  Africa.

2  Letourneau,  #>., p. 29. Border relations, however, according to
Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  (Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  p.  32),  are
generally  amicable,  and  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  constant  state  of
enmity.

3  Waitz,  v.  i.  pp.  161,  162. In some  peoples,  though  there  may  be
no  precise  arrangements  as  for  a  judicial  combat,  a  very  little  bloodshed
seems  to  appease  the  martial  ardour  of  the  combatants. Thus  among  the
Micronesians,  it  is  said,  wars  break  out  on  small  pretexts,  but  on  the  death


RELATIONS  BETWEEN  COMMUNITIES 243

preserves  the  memory  of  a  custom  of  "  representative  fighting  "
among  the  early  Latin  tribes,  and  instances  occur  in  Greek
history  down  to  the  sixth  century.1  We  may  perhaps  connect
with  this  range  of  ideas  certain  indications  of  what  we  might
call  a  sportsmanlike  view  of  war.  Instances  might  be  found
among  the  North  American  Indians — for  example,  in  the  story  of
the  Arkansas  giving  a  share  of  their  powder  to  the  Chickasaw  to
fight  them  with,  or  of  the  Algonquin  refraining  from  pressing
an  attack  on  the  Iroquois  on  its  being  pointed  out  that  night
had  fallen.2

Apart  from  this  half-judicial,  half-chivalrous  view,  the  warfare
of  savage  and  primitive  societies  is  not  always  without  its  rules
and  limitations.  Often  an  open  and  honourable  declaration  of
war  is  insisted  on,  as  among  the  Kaffirs,3  and  in  early  Rome.4
The  persons  of  envoys  are  as  a  rule  respected,  and  often  women
are  employed  for  this  purpose.  Agreements  are  understood  and
bad  faith  is  condemned.5  We  even  hear  of  instances  in  which
the  use  of  poisoned  weapons  is  avoided,6  and  in  which  permanent
injury  to  property  is  forbidden.7

of  two  or  three  warriors  the  rest  run  away,  and  offer  gifts  which  terminate
the  war.  Yet  prisoners  are  often  tortured  and  the  land  hud  waste.  Waitz,
v.  ii.  p.  132.

1  Herodotus,  Bk.  i.  chap.  82.

2  Waitz,  hi.  p. 154. For  a similar case  among  the  Australians,  see
Letourneau,  op.  tit.,  p.  33.

3  Waitz,  ii.  p.  398.

\  Cicero,  De  Bepublica,  ii.  17,  quoted  in  Brims,  p.  11.

u  E.  rj.  the  N.  A.  Indians  had  their  regular  flags  of  truce,  peace  councils,
and  pipes  of  peace.  (Catlin,  N.  A.  Indians,  ii.  p.  242.)  In  early  Koine
those  who  offended  against  a  foreign  nation  by  an  attack  on  envoys,  were
made  over  to  them  (deditio)  to  deal  with  as  they  pleased.  By  an  intricate
perversion  of  moral  sentiment,  the  people  might  refuse  to  ratify  a  truce
made  by  a  general  in  the  field  on  its  behalf,  but  in  that  case  surrendered
the  general,  as  though  it  were  he  who  had  broken  his  word  to  the  injured
enemy.  By  this  vicarious  sacrifice  the  commonwealth  was  to  be  relieved
from  all  guilt  (ut  populus  religione  solvatur),  the  injury  being  put  on  to
the  head  of  the  general  who  had  done  his  best  for  it  (quandoque  noxam
nocuerunt  .  .  .  ob  earn  rem  hosce  homines  vobis  dedo.)  (Livy,  ix.  10.
Ihering,  Geist  des  Romischen  Bechts,  i.  131.)  In  all  this,  however  distorted,  a
feeling  of  the  obligation  of  good  faith  between  nations  is  indubitably  present.

6  E.g.  among  the Kaffirs. Waitz, ii. 398,  399. According  to this
authority,  the  Kaffirs  also  avoided  the  starving  out  of  an  enemy,  and,
generally speaking,  showed a  certain  chivalry  in  war  which  they  have
unlearnt  in  contact  with  the  whites.

7  Among  the  Eastern Carolinas,  the  victor  carries  off  the  movables,  but
does  not  take  the  land  of  the  vanquished,  and  avoids  cutting  down  their


244  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

3.  But  while  war,  like  other  departments  of  savage  life,  has  its
customs  and  obligations,  and  while  in  some  of  them  we  can  trace
germs  of  moral  feeling,  of  honour  and  fair  play,  we  must  not
blind  ourselves  to  the  broad  fact  that  this  same  rule  of  custom
generally  lends  to  savage  warfare  something  of  the  character
of  a  personal  feud.  We  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  saying  of
uncivilized  warfare  in  general  terms  that  it  is  in  its  essence  as
much  a  struggle  between  individuals  as  between  communities,
that  the  conquered  enemy  has  no  recognized  rights  of  immunity
to  protect  him,  but  that  his  person  and  property,  his  wives  and
children,  stand  at  the  mercy  of  the  conqueror.  As  in  other
departments  of  ethics,  so  here  we  find  that  this  principle  is  not
always  pushed  to  an  extreme.  There  are  all  manner  of  variations
in  the  rigour  with  which  it  is  applied,  and  still  more  in  the
practical  consequences  drawn  from  it.  Here  and  there  we  find
touches  of  humaner  feeling  investing  themselves  with  a  religious
sanction.  In  other  cases  social  circumstances  mitigate  the  lot
of  captives.  But  in  the  main  the  defeated  enemy  is  rightless,
and  is  treated  as  best  suits  the  victor's  convenience.

This  will  readily  appear  from  a  brief  survey  of  the  possible
alternatives  in  the  treatment  of  prisoners.  Quarter  may  be
refused  altogether,  or  if  the  prisoner  is  taken  he  may  be  enslaved,
tortured,  eaten,  adopted,  ransomed,  exchanged,  or  liberated.

fruit-trees.  (Waitz,  v.  ii.  pp.  118, 119.)  Even  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,
which  lays  down  a  kind  of  ideal  code  of  extermination,  based  on  religious
principles,  deprecates  the  cutting  down  of  fruit-trees,  but  rather  for  the
advantage  of  the  invader  than  for  any  more  magnanimous  motive  :  "  For
thou  mayest  eat  of  them,  and  thou  shalt  not  cut  them  down  :  for  is  the
tree  of  the  field  man,  that  it  should  be  besieged  of  thee  ? "  (Deut.  xx.  19.)
Quaint  illustrations  of  savage  chivalry  occur  where  some  primitive  con
ception,  colliding  with  the  ordinary  instincts  of  warfare,  places  enemies
under  a  sacred  obligation  to  each  other.  Instances  may  be  found  among
some  of  the  Indian  hill  tribes,  for  whom  hospitality  is  so  sacred  a  duty
that  a  defeated  enemy  can  avail  himself  of  it  against  his  conqueror.  M.
Reclus,  p.  261,  mentions  the  case  of  a  Bengalese  clan  being  driven  out  of
their  homes  by  an  enemy,  and  coming  to  claim  asylum  as  guests  with  their
conquerors,  to  whom  they  proved  so  expensive  as  lodgers,  that  it  became
more  profitable  to  restore  the  lands  and  goods  taken  from  them.  The
same  author  mentions  the  case  of  a  murderer  playing  the  same  trick  upon
the  father  of  the  murdered  man,  who  not  only  could  not  touch  him  as  long
as  he  was  his  guest,  but  was  compelled  to  support  him — a  situation  which
could  only  be'paralleled  by  that  of  the  N.  A.  Indian  widow,  who  might  be
appeased  for  the  murder  of  her  husband  by  the  adoption  of  the  murderer
in  his  place.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 245

Further,  a  distinction  may  bo  and  in  practice  often  is  drawn
between  the  adult  males  among  the  enemy  on  the  one  hand  and
the  women  and  children  on  the  other,  c.rj.  the  males  maybe  put
to  the  sword,  while  the  women  and  children  are  enslaved  or
perhaps  adopted. Coming  now  to  the  actual  practice  of  savage
and  barbarous  races,  we  find  that,  at  least  so  far  as  regards  males,
the  milder  alternatives  are  by  far  the  rarer. Of  exchange  there
are  one  or  two  instances  among  the  North  American  Indians,
for  example,  in the tribes  of  New  California,  where,  though
enemies are killed in battle, they are not scalped, and
prisoners  are  not  enslaved,  but  exchanged.1 Ransom  is  also  very
seldom  understood  by  savages,  but  the  Creek  Indians  were  said
to  adopt  boy  and  girl  prisoners  and  to  hold grown  men  and
women  for  ransom,  though  apparently  they  were  also  subject  to
an  ordeal,  as  it  is  stated  by  the  same  authority  (an  eighteenth-
century  writer  who  lived  among  them)  that  the  women  of  the  tribe
•were  wont  to  make  payment  in  tobacco  for  the  privilege  of  whip
ping  prisoners  as  they  passed.2 The  third  alternative  was  that
of  adoption,  which,  especially  among  the  North  American  Indians,
forms  the  main  exception  to  the  rule  that  the  prisoner  is  onlv
saved  in  order  to  become  a  slave. For  several  tribes  saw  another
use,  based upon another  phase  of  savage  ideas,  to  which  he
could  be  put. They  might  impersonate  the  deceased  warriors
of  the  tribe. It  is  a  part  of  savage  make-believe  that  one  man
can  stand  for  another,  that  a  man's  personality  can  be  transferred,
possibly  by  the  supposed  tranfusion  of  the  soul,  possibly  by  a
ceremonial  investiture  with  the  names,  rights  and  possessions  of
the  deceased. It  was  a  fairly  common  practice  among  the  Red
Indians  to  spare  prisoners  for  this  purpose. They  had,  in  the
first  instance,  to  undergo  an  ordeal,  a  severe  whipping  or  other
torture,  and  then,  if  a  widowed  woman  of  the  tribe  chose  to
adopt  one  as  her  husband,  he  might  live  and  become  a  member
of  the  tribe,  replacing  the  dead  man  in  every  respect,  as  husband
to  his  widow,  as  father  to  his  children,  as  bearer  of  his  totem,  as

1  Waitz,  iv.  241. But  they  would  seem  to  take  women  captives,  as  one
of  their  war-songs  begins  :  "  Let  us  go,  leader,  to  the  war,  let  us  go  and
make  booty  of  a  fine  maiden." Catlin,  ii.  71,  relates  that  the  Comanches
kept  a  little  white  boy  as  a  prisoner,  and  finally  exchanged  him  for  three
members  of  their  own  tribes  bought  by  the  whites  from  the  Osages.

2  Caleb  Swan  in  Schoolerat't,  v.  280.


246  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

successor  to  all  his  rights  and  duties — in  short,  as  perpetuating
his  personality.1

To  pass  to  the  more  severe  alternatives  the  refusal  of  quarter
in  battle  is  widespread.  In  North  America  we  find  it  in  place
of  either  torture  or  adoption  among  the  Apaches,2  the  Chippe-
wyans,3  and  generally  among  the  California!!  tribes.4  In  negro
warfare  the  defeated  are  often  annihilated.  The  men  are  killed,
sometimes  for  eating,  sometimes  merely  for  the  killing ;  the
women  and  children  are  sometimes  killed,  sometimes  enslaved.
The  Waganda  and  the  Masai  killed  all  the  adult  males,  the
Bechuana  took  no  prisoners.  The  Fans  took  them,  but  ate  them.
The  Gallas  first  massacred  indiscriminately  in  Abyssinia ;  they

1  Catlin  gives  it  as  the  general  practice  of  the  Indians  known  to  him
that  they  inflict  appalling  tortures  on  their  prisoners,  in  sufficient  numbers
to  atone  for  those  similarly  dealt  with  by  their  enemies,  while  the
remainder  were  adopted  as  husbands  by  widows  in  the  tribe.  (Op.  cit.,  ii.
240.)  The  element  of  fiction  comes  out  strongly  when  we  learn  that  a  boy
may  be  adopted  in  place  of  a  deceased  husband,  and  is  then  called  father
by  the  children  of  the  deceased.  (Schoolcraft — Drake,  i.  218-220.)  Among
the  Dakotas  male  prisoners  were  seldom  taken,  except  by  previous  arrange
ment,  which  would  be  made  when  the  warriors  of  the  tribe  wished  to  take
one  or  more  for  adoption  to  recruit  their  number.  The  fate  of  the  warrior
would  in  this  case  depend  upon  the  decision  of  the  war-chief.  (School-
craft — Drake,  i.  188.)  Among  the  Iroquois,  prisoners  had  to  run  the
gauntlet  all  through  the  villages  lying  near  the  line  of  march.  At  the
journey's  end  they  might  be  adopted  by  those  who  had  lost  relations,  and
when  bereaved  families  were  satisfied,  if  the  remaining  prisoners  seemed
desirable  acquisitions  to  any  family  the  gauntlet  test  would  be  applied  to
them.  They  would  be  lashed  by  the  women  and  children,  and  those  who
fell  from  exhaustion  under  the  ordeal  would  be  dispatched,  the  survivors
being  adopted.  It  should  be  added  that  when  adopted  captives  became
discontented  with  their  new  life,  they  were  in  some  cases  set  at  liberty.
Adoption,  as  already  mentioned,  was  in  this  tribe  the  rule  for  the  treatment
of  women  and  children  captives.  (Schoolcraft — Drake,  i.  218, 247.  Morgan,
League  of  the  Iroquois,  341-4.)  Morgan  adds  that  a  distinguished  chief
was  sometimes  restored  to  his  own  people  as  a  mark  of  admiration.  He
was  then  bound  in  honour  not  to  fight  against  his  conquerors  in  future.

Outside  the  North  American  Indians  we  do  not  hear  much  of  adoption,
but  according  to  De  Eochas,  quoted  by  Letourneau,  op.  cit.,  p.  49,  it  occurs
in  New  Caledonia,  presumably  when  the  victor's  larder  does  not  need  re
plenishing,  or  when  the  need  of  making  good  the  losses  of  the  village  is
more  pressing.  Similarly  among  the  Andamanese,  Man,  J.  A.  J.,  xii.  p.  356,
states  that  though  women  and  children  may  be  killed  in  a  night  attack  on
a  village,  the  child,  if  taken  alive,  would  be  treated  kindly,  in  the  hope  of
inducing  it  to  join  the  captor's  tribe.

2  Eeclus,  p.  128,  but  Waitz,  iii.  157,  says  that  the  Apaches  sometimes
tormented  their  prisoners,  sometimes  sold  them.

3  Waitz,  loc.  cit.

4  Powers,  Tribes  of  Calif  ornia,  405.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES

now  castrate  their  male  prisoners.1  But  mere  killing  did  not
always  suffice ;  an  easy  death  might  be  too  good  a  fate  for  an
execrated  foe.  Torture,  which,  as  is  well  known,  reaches  its
most  extreme  development  among  the  North  American  Indians,
seems  to  be  due  to  no  more  recondite  motive  than  that  of
revenge.  Thus,  according  to  Catlin,2  prisoners  are  tortured  in
sufficient  numbers  to  atone  for  those  similarly  dealt  with  by
their  enemies  ;  and  it  is  stated  that  children  are  encouraged  ^  to
take  part  in  the  process  in  order  to  instil  hardness  and  vindictive
feelings  into  their  minds.  The  rude  Takhali,  according  to
Waitz"3  give  their  children  a  regular  training  in  cruelty,  especially
to  animals— as  though  this  were  necessary.  Torture  is  commonest
among  the  Eastern  and  Southern  tribes  of  North  America,  and
did  not  occur  among  all  the  tribes  of  the  West.4  ^  The  horrible
history  is  only  lightened  by  the  extraordinary  stories  of  fortitude
with  which  it  was  borne  and  by  occasional  instances  of  self-
sacrifice,  such  as  that  of  a  certain  Chippewa  chief,  Bi-am-wah
who,  having  been  taken  captive,  was  saved  by  his  father,  a  noted
warrior,  who  voluntarily  surrendered  himself  to  the  conquering
tribe  and  offered  himself  for  torture  in  his  son's  place.  It  is  one
of  the  few  gleams  of  light  which  break  the  darkness  of  savage
history  to  read  that  later  in  life  the  rescued  Bi-am-wah  made
an  agreement  with  the  Sioux  by  which  the  burning  of  prisoners
was  stopped  on  both  sides.

The  next  alternative  to  torture  is  that  of  cannibalism.
Cannibalism  may  have  either  a  magical,  or  a  religious,  or  a
purely  materialistic  value;  and,  as  warfare  develops  and  be
comes  systematic,  and  especially  as  some  barbarous  tribe  con
solidates  itself  and  grows  stronger  than  its  neighbours,  the
practice  assumes  gigantic  proportions.  Prisoners  are  not  merely
killed  and  eaten  on  the  spot,5  but  are  taken  home,  well  treated
and  fattened  for  the  slaughter,  possibly  provided  with  a  wife  and

1  Post,  Afrik.  Jurisprudent,  i.  84,  85.  "  Catlin,  ii.  240.

3  Waitz,  iii.  117.

4  Waitz,  iii.  157. Except  among  the  North  American  Indians,  1  rmd  tho
torture  of  prisoners  but  rarely  referred  to  by  ethnologists,  unless  as  an
incident  of  cannibalism,  human  sacrifice,  or  the  slave  trade. But  Waitz,
v.  ii.  p.  134,  attributes  the  practice  to  some  Micronesians. It  was  not  un
common  in  mediaeval  Europe.

•'  The  suggestively  named  "  Niam-niam "  are  said  to  advance  to  buttle
with  the  cry,  "  Meat,  meat  !  To  the  oven,  to  the  oven  !  "  (Letourneau,  p.  86.)


248  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

encouraged  to  breed  a  family  for  the  same  purpose.  There  comes,
indeed,  a  stage,  perhaps  the  most  revolting  in  the  history  of  human
development,  at  which  the  weaker  tribes  are  made  almost  to
perform  the  functions  of  cattle  in  the  economy  of  life  for  the
stronger.  This  tendency  is  accentuated  by  the  parallel  develop
ment  of  human  sacrifice,  whether  for  religious  or  magical
reasons.  The  human  victim  may  be  a  feast  for  the  gods.  Or  it
may  be  that  by  eating  the  dead  man,  and  particularly  by  eating
certain  parts  of  him,  such  as  his  heart,1  the  conqueror  is  held  to
acquire  his  virtues,  or  some  occult  influence  is  supposed  to
be  exercised  upon  the  crops,  the  weather,  the  stability  of  a
bridge,  or  the  fortunes  of  war.

Cannibalism  is  or  has  been  widely  spread2  throughout  Africa,
Oceania,  South  America  and  the  Malay  region  (though  it  would
be  too  much  to  say  that  it  was  general  anywhere),  and  often
where  it  is  not  now  a  flourishing  institution  there  are  distinct
traces  of  it  in  legend3  or,  as  among  the  Micronesians  and  the
Anclamanese,  in  the  belief  that  strangers  or  neighbouring  tribes4
are  cannibalistic,  or  again  in  certain  magical  rights  and  customs
having  a  cannibalistic  significance.  The  Melanesians  are  not
cannibals,  yet  they  will  eat  a  piece  of  a  dead  man's  flesh  to  estab
lish  communion  with  his  ghost.5  Among  the  North  American
Indians,  where  it  is  rare  within  the  times  of  which  we  have  a
record,  we  have  phrases  like  "  eating  the  heart  of  an  enemy  and
drinking  his  blood,"  which  probably  are  not  mere  metaphors.

1  For  example,  among  the  Yoruba  hearts  are  regularly  sold  to  give
courage. (Ellis,  Yorula-speaking  Peoples,  p.  69.)

2  It  is  not,  of  course,  confined  to  captives,  though  they  are  the  handiest
material  if  available. Sometimes  the  aged  are  eaten,  as  among  the  Battas
of  Sumatra. (Waitz,  v.  i.  p.  189.) Sometimes  the  young. For  example,
among  the  Central  Australians,  a  younger  child  is  eaten  in  order  to  give
strength to  an  elder. (Spencer  and Gillen,  i.  p.  475.) Sometimes  a
slave. Sometimes  it  is  a  gruesome  punishment,  e.  g.  for  adultery,  treason,
espionage,  and robbery  by  night  among the  Battas,  who  also  eat  their
prisoners. (Waitz,  loc.  cit.,  188.)

3  Enemies  are  still  eaten  in  the  Luritcha  tribe  of  the  Central  Australians.
Among  the  Arunta,  cannibalism,  if  not  wholly  discarded,  is  very  slightly
practised,  but  its  memory  lives  in  many  traditions  of  the  "  Alcheringa  " —
the  Australians'  "  great  long  ago  " — and  some  of  the  Engwura  ceremonies  are
thought  to  represent  its  suppression. (Spencer  and  Gillen,  I.  324,  473-5.)

4  The  Aiiius  of  the  Tokapchi  district  are  particularly  addicted  to  night
attacks,  and  are  alleged  to  have  been  cannibals,  and  are  even  now  abhorred
by  their  neighbours. (Batchelor,  Ainu  of  Japan,  288.)

6  Codrington,  J.  A.  I.,  x.  285.


RELATIONS BETWEEN  COMMUNITIES 249

The  Sioux,  who  in  later  times  abhorred  cannibalism,  used  at
one  time  to  cat  the  heart  of  an  enemy.  The  Chippewas  are
said  to  have  practised  cannibalism.  The  name  "  mohawk "
means  "  man-eater,"  and  in  certain  tribes  there  were  special
societies  of  cannibals  who  were  deemed  to  possess  magical
powers.1  Passing  to  tropical  America,  the  Caribs,  who  lived  a
blameless  and  well-ordered  life  among  themselves,  made  such
frequent  cannibal  raids  that  the  very  name  of  "  cannibal  "  is
supposed  to  be  a  corruption  of  their  tribal  name.  In  Guatemala
and  Nicaragua,  prisoners  were  generally2  sacrificed  and  eaten,
while  it  was  in  ancient  Mexico  that  cannibalism  and  human
sacrifice  reached  probably  their  greatest  development  in  history.
The  Mexicans  maintained  an  eternal  warfare  with  the  Tlaxcala
in  order  that  the  supply  of  captives  for  sacrifice  might  be  kept
up.  The  victim  was  identified  with  the  god,  and  his  killing  and
eating  meant  a  resurrection  of  the  god  and  a  renewal  of  his
strength.3  According  to  the  Mexican  legend  the  gods  them
selves  sacrificed  themselves  to  the  sun  to  endue  him  with
strength  to  do  his  work,  and  they  handed  on  the  duty  to  their
human  representatives,  directing  men  to  fight  and  kill  each
other  to  provide  the  sun  with  food.4  Among  the  Guaranis  of
South  America  a  sixteenth-century  account  describes  the
cannibal  sacrifice  of  prisoners,  who,  with  an  exaggeration  of
cruelty,  were  given  a  wife  previously,  and  if  there  was  a  child  it
was  fattened  and  eaten.5

Finally,  with  the  category  of  ideas  to  which  cannibalism  and
human  sacrifice  belong  we  should  connect  the  head-hunting
raids  especially  common  in  the  Malayo-Polynesian  region.  The
carefully-preserved  skull  is  at  once  a  trophy  and  proof  of  valour,
a  memorial  of  vengeance,  and  a  property  of  magic  powers.
Different  aspects  are  specially  prominent  among  different
peoples.  The  Nagas  of  the  Indian  Hills,  all  of  whom  are  head-
hunters,  are  said  to  keep  the  skull  to  glut  their  vengeance.6

1  Waitz,  iii.  159.

2  According  to  Torquemada. According  to  some  other  authorities,  the
practice  was  confined  to  certain  tribes. (Waitz,  iv.  264.)

:)  Payne,  Histun/  of  the  New  World  called  America,  i.  470.  Fra/ev,  iii
1 34  A'.

4  Payne,  i.  r>04.  •'  Letourncau,  La  Fenime,  1GO,  1(31,  1G3.

0  Godden,  J.  A.  I.,  xxvii.  p.  15.


250  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

In  Melanesia  the  idea  of  human  sacrifice  is  prominent  and  we
are  closer  to  cannibalism.  For  at  the  funeral  of  a  chief  an  ex
pedition  starts  off  to  take  heads  in  his  honour,  and  any  one  with
whom  it  falls  in,  not  being  of  the  chief's  own  people,  serves  the
purpose.  The  object  alleged,  in  one  of  the  islands — Florida — for
human  sacrifice  to  the  dead,  is  that  "mana"  is  obtained — the
mysterious  power  with  which  chiefs  are  endowed  in  life  as  well
as  after  death,  which  they  can  transmit  from  the  grave  to  those
who  then  put  themselves  into  communion  with  them.  Further,
in  another  Melanesian  island — Ysabel — the  human  victim  is
eaten,  and  we  have  full-blown  magical  cannibalism  ;  and  to  illus
trate  the  affinity  of  ideas,  we  find  that  in  Florida,  where  the
victim  is  supposed  only  to  be  sacrificed,  it  is  admitted  that  a
little  flesh  is  eaten.1  But  with  these  customs  we  are  passing
away  from  the  special  ethics  of  war  into  those  of  primitive
religion  generally.  Head-hunting  may  be  a  purely  private
matter.  It  may  be  an  incident  in  the  making  up  of  a  blood
feud,  as  among  the  Lampongs  of  Sumatra,  where  the  murderer
must  appease  his  victim's  family  with  two  skulls  and  a  victim
to  be  buried  at  the  grave.2  It  may  be  a  matter  of  private  ven
geance  or  gain  or  glory,  as  among  the  Nagas,  where  men  lurk
about  the  water-ghat  of  a  hostile  village  for  the  first  woman  or
child  that  comes  to  draw  water.  Or  it  may  be,  as  sometimes
among  the  same  people,  the  express  object  of  an  organized
expedition.3  In  the  former  case  it  is  at  most  an  incident  in  the
life  of  neighbouring  hostile  villages.  Only  in  the  latter  is  it  the
object  of  regular  warfare.

A  horrible  feature  of  Naga  head-hunting  is  that  the  skull  of  a
woman  or  child,  even  a  baby  in  arms,  is  prized  as  much  as  a
man's.  It  is  even  thought  a  greater  feat  to  obtain  one,  since
it  implies  the  boldness  of  penetrating  into  the  heart  of  the
enemy's  country.  This  indiscriminate  slaughter  of  women  and
children  is  frequent,  but  not  universal,  in  savage  and  barbaric
warfare.4  Among  these  same  Nagas  in  the  feuds  of  clans  as
distinguished  from  the  wars  between  tribes  the  women  are
sometimes  spared.  In  the  quarrels  of  the  Luhuga  killing  is
limited  by  agreement,  and  the  women  are  not  injured.  It  is  a

1  Codrington,  J.  A.  I.,  x.  308,  309.  2  Waitz,  v.  149.

3  Godden,  1.  c. 4  Godden,  op.  cit.,  p.  13,  quoting  Sir  J.  Johnstone.


RELATIONS  BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 251

bright  spot  in  the  sombre  picture  of  North  American  Indian
warfare  that  women  were  respected. The  reason  was  a  magico-
religious  belief,  in  which  it  is  open  to  us  to  find  an  ethical
element,  that  unchastity  would  bring  misfortune. The  Dakotas,
we  are  told,  "generally  treat  female  captives  with  respect. We
hear  of  no  violation  of  chastity  on  their  war  parties. During
their  absence  the  cause  of  their  being  chaste  on  their  excursions,
they  say,  is  that  they  may  not  bring  vengeance  down  upon  their
own  heads,  that  is,  displease  the  spirits  of  the  deceased  and  the
war  medicine,  as  they  would  be  made  to  suffer  for  their  incon-
tinency. They  must  keep  themselves  from  women  all  the  time
they  are  out  at  war. Superstition  has  a  controlling  influence
over  them  in  this  as  in  other  respects."1 Among  the  Hurons
and  in  Virginia,  though  no  quarter  was  given  as  a  rule  in  the
fight,  women  and  children  were  generally  made  prisoners. The
Winnebagos 2  say  that  they  respect  chastity  in  war  at  the  bidding
of  the  Great  Spirit. The  Iroquois  did  no  violence  to  women
captives, and  Catlin  states  this as the general rule of  the
Indians  that  he  knew. An  exception  are  the  Indians  of  Texas,
who  treated  female  captives  with  cruelty. But  the  general  rule
for  women  captives  was  adoption  in  a  servile  condition. Simi
larly  in  Oceania,  it  is  stated  that  in  the  feuds  of  the  little  island
of  Rotuma  women  are  respected,  and  that  in  the  Carolinas  and
the  Marshall  and  Gilbert  Islands  women  prisoners  are  generally
spared. At  a  higher  level,  among  the  Kabyles  of  North  Africa
we  are  told  that  women  are  respected  in  war,  and  even  in  an
assault  upon  a  village  are  not  molested. Sometimes  the  women
are  so  completely  free  from  danger  that  they  come  and  go  with
out  hindrance  in  the  hostile  territory,  or  look  on  calmly  at^the
battle  and  perhaps  in  the  end  effect  a  reconciliation. This  is
the  more  intelligible  when  the  fighting  tribes  are  exogamous,  so
that  the  wife  of  a  warrior  on  one  side  is  sister  or  daughter  of  a
champion  on  the  other. In  this  capacity  they  act  as  reconcilers
among the  Kolarian  tribes  of  Bengal.3 Often,  as  among the
Australians  and  the  Papuans,  they  are  employed  as  envoys  and

1  Prescott  in  Schoolcraft,  iv.  p.  63. The  magical  element  in  this  con
ception  comes  out  well  in  the  point  that  among  the  Iroquois  the  war-clnel
was  generally  unmarried. (Waitz,  iii.  158.) The  general  idea  is  clearly
that  women  are  taboo  to  fighting  men  as  injuring  their  powers.

2  See  Schoolcraft— Drake,  i.  188.  3  Beclus,  29o.


(  I  )


252  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

are  inviolable.1  But  more  often,  though  unmolested  in  the
actual  warfare,  the  fate  which  awaits  them  as  prisoners  is  no
enviable  one.  While  the  men  are  tortured,  eaten,  sacrificed  or
simply  killed,  the  women  and  children  are  carried  off  as  slaves.2
This  is  one  of  the  commonest  methods  of  dealing  with  prisoners
in  the  uncivilized  world.  A  slightly  higher  level  is  reached
when  the  male  captives  are  allowed  to  share  the  fate  of  their
wives  and  children.

For  there  comes  a  time  in  social  development  when  the  victor
sees  that  a  live  prisoner  is  after  all  better  than  a  dead  one.
Speaking  generally,  the  custom  of  enslaving  male  prisoners  does
not  arise  until  two  conditions  have  been  satisfied.  On  the  one
hand,  a  certain  level  of  industrial  organization  must  have  been
reached,  making  slave  labour  desirable  ;  on  the  other,  a  certain
warlike  supremacy  must  have  been  attained  by  the  slave-hold
ing  tribe  which  has  familiarized  it  with  the  possession  of
captives,  and  so  given  scope  for  the  habit  of  utilizing  them  to
grow  up.  Perhaps  a  third  negative  condition  may  be  added,
that  the  vindictive  passions  must  be  sufficiently  held  in  check
to  prevent  their  gratification  in  the  moment  of  victory.  It  is
thus  not  until  the  higher  savagery,  or  perhaps  the  lower  levels
of  barbarism,  that  we  find  slavery  beginning  to  develop  in  any
marked  degree,  and  universally  it  has  flourished  more  in  races
capable  of  permanent  and  steady  labour  than  with  those  which
are  either  hunters  or  fighters  or  nothing.  It  was  impossible  to
create  a  large  slave  population  among  the  North  American
Indians  east  of  the  Rockies,  and  we  only  find  the  practice  of
slave-holding  among  them  in  scattered  instances.  West  of  the
Rockies,  on  the  other  hand,  slavery  is  general.3  In  other  parts

1  Letourneau,  La  Gmrre,  p.  36.

2  Among  the  North.  American  Indians,  while  the  males  (unless  adopted)
were  generally  tortured  and  killed,  women  and  children  were  more  often
taken  captives,  and  adopted  in  a  servile  position. (Waitz,  iii.  154,  156.)
The  enslavement  of  women  in  Black  Africa  is  referred  to  below.  Similarly
at  the  other  end  of  the  old  world,  among  the  Ainus,  the  result  of  the
frequent  night-raids,  whereby  a  quarrel  between  villages  is  avenged,  is  that
nearly  all  the  males  are  killed  while  the  women  and  children  are  enslaved,
the  women  often  as  concubines. (Batchelor,  288.) In  this  connection  it
must  be  remembered  that  in  forty  or  more  peoples  practising  marriage  by
capture  as  a  full  reality,  the  possession  of  a  woman  is  the  direct  object  of  the
war  or  raid.

3  E.  </.  it  is  universal  in  Oregon. (Waitz,  iii.  345.) Cf.  Major  Alvord  in


RELATIONS  BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 253

of  the  savage  world  it  is  the  ordinary  alternative  to  the  exter
mination  of  the  vanquished.  In  Oceania  the  one  method  of
treatment  sometimes  replaces  the  other.  Thus  among  the
Papuans  war  is  the  more  savage  and  cannibalistic,  where  slavery
is  little  practised.1  Or  the  two  methods  may  be  combined,  as  in
the  Solomon  Islands,  where,  in  addition  to  war,  a  regular  trade
recruits  the  slave  market,  not  only,  however,  for  purposes  of
labour,  but  also  for  purposes  of  cannibalism  and  human  sacrifice.
Again,  in  Fiji  the  slaves  are  not  worked  hard,  but  are  fattened
for  eating;  and  throughout  Melanesia  on  the  whole  slavery
rather  subserves  cannibalism  than  opposes  it.  In  Polynesia
human  victims  were  generally  chosen  from  prisoners  of  war  and
from  slaves.  In  tropical  South  America  prisoners  may  be  put  to
death  (and  perhaps  eaten),  enslaved  or  adopted.2  Throughout
Black  Africa  the  two  institutions  also  coexist,  the  general  rule
being  that  where  the  men  are  killed  and  perhaps  eaten,  the
women  and  children  may  be  enslaved.  Thus  the  Waganda  slay
all  the  men  and  enslave  the  women  and  children ;  the  Masai
kill  all  the  men;  the  Wakuafi  enslave  them;  the  Bechuana
take  no  prisoners.3  On  the  whole,  however,  through  savage  and
barbarian  Africa,  with  the  exception  of  the  Kaffir  tribes,4  slavery
is  universal  and  strongly  developed,  and  its  principal  source  of
recruitment  is  war.  Throughout  the  Malay  world  the  enslave
ment  of  captives  is  found  as  an  alternative  to  cannibalism  and
head-hunting,  while,  again,  in  the  tribes  of  the  Asiatic  Steppes
the  captives  are  often  put  to  death,  but  slaves  or  serfs  are  numer
ous  in  proportion  to  the  wealth  and  fighting  power  of  the  people
who  hold  them.

Schoolcraft,  v.  654,  where  an  instance  is  given  of  a  slave  being  sacrificed  on
his  master's  death.

1  Letourneau,  L'Esdavaye,  p.  35.  According  to  the  same  authority
(La,  Guerre,  pp.  38,  39)  head-hunting  is  common,  and  a  woman's  skull  is  as
valuable  as  a  man's.  But  women  and  girls  are  often  spared  in  raids  and
taken  for  concubines.  According  to  Kohler,  Z.  f.  v<jl.  Eechtsvnssenschaft,
1900,  p.  364,  slavery  and  a  slave-trade  occur  in  certain  parts,  and  slaves
are  sometimes  eaten.  Adoption,  however,  is  another  possible  alter
native  to  cannibalism  in  some  parts  of  Oceania,  e.  <j.  in  New  Caledonia,
where  slavery  is  unknown.  (Letourneau,  La  Guerre,  p.  49.)

*  Schmidt,;?./.  V.  JR.,  1898,  p.  294.

•0<  Post,  Afrik.  Jurisprudent  i.  85.

4  For  very  divergent  accounts  of  the  Kaffirs  both  as  to  treatment  of
prisoners  and  as  to  the  extent  to  which  they  recognized  slavery,  see
Waitz,  ii.  398  ;  Letourneau,  La,  Guerre,  96,  97  ;  ib.,  L'Esclavnr/e,  p.  53.


245  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

We  may  briefly  summarize  these  characteristics  of  savage  and
barbaric  war  by  saying  that  it  is  waged,  not  merely  by  tribe
against  tribe,  but  by  individuals  against  individuals.  Its  motive
is  often  vengeance,  the  slaying  of  a  man  or  the  kidnapping  of
a  woman,  and  whether  it  ends  in  the  extermination  or  the  en
slavement  of  the  beaten  party,  or  even  in  the  milder  alternative
of  their  adoption,  it  is  equally  directed  against  the  individual
persons  who  constitute  the  hostile  community.  The  conquered
in  war  stand  with  their  persons  and  property  wholly  at  the
disposal  of  the  victors.  Their  fate  may  be  harsher  or  milder.
They  may  be  eaten,  or  sacrificed,  or  tortured,  or  simply  slain
where  they  stand  ;  their  lives  may  be  spared,  and  they  may  be
led  into  slavery.  But  in  all  these  cases — and  they  form  the
overwhelming  majority — they  are  treated  as  rightless  and
defenceless  against  those  who  conquer  them.  Even  in  the  case
where  they  are  adopted  as  members  of  the  conquering  tribe,  it
can  scarcely  be  said  that  their  personal  rights  are  taken  into
consideration.

4.  In  early  civilization  the  character  of  war  is  not  fundamentally
changed  in  this  respect.  Only  the  growth  of  industry  and  of
a  settled  order  is  a  stimulus  to  the  general  enslavement  of
prisoners  in  preference  to  their  destruction,  while  the  develop
ment  of  military  power  increases  the  means  of  capture.  Canni
balism  generally  dies  out — the  case  of  Mexico  is  an  exception.
Human  sacrifice  also  occurs,  but  in  the  majority  of  instances,  if
the  prisoners  are  not  slain  in  pure  vengeance,  they  are  either
carried  off  as  slaves  to  the  conqueror  (and  many  of  the  great
works  of  early  civilization  were  built  by  slave  labour  of  this  kind)
or  a  tribute  is  laid  upon  them,  and  they  become  a  semi-servile
population.

In  ancient  Egypt  we  find  traces  of  cannibalism  in  the
pyramidal  inscriptions,  but  they  are  not  specially  connected
with  warfare.  Something  of  the  nature  of  human  sacrifice,
however,  appears  to  have  persisted  to  a  late  epoch.  No  bas
relief  is  more  familiar  to  the  traveller  in  Egypt  than  that
representing  the  king  as  a  gigantic  figure  holding  up  a  mace
to  smite  the  heads  of  a  bunch  of  little  captives,  whom  he  holds
with  one  hand,  in  the  presence  of  a  triad  of  gods.  This  scene,


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 255

found  among  some  of  the  very  earliest  of  Egyptian  monuments,
recurs  in  the  Middle  and  New  Kingdoms.1  In  some  cases  the
bulk  of  the  males  were  simply  exterminated,  but  chiefs  were
selected,  either  for  sacrifice  or  for  special  vengeance.  Thothmes

II.  (18th  Dynasty)  records:  "This  army  of  his  Majesty  over
threw these foreigners. They  took the life of  every male
according  to  all  that  his  Majesty  commanded,  except  that  one
of  those  children  of  the  Prince  of  Kush  was  brought  alive  as  a
live  prisoner  with  his  household  to  his  Majesty  and  placed  under
the  foot  of  the  good  god." 2 Again,  Amenhotep  II.  (18th  Dynasty)
narrates  how  "  His  Majesty  returned  in  joy  of  heart  to  his  father
Amen. His  hand  had  struck  down  the  seven  chiefs  with  his
mace himself.  .  .  . They  were  hung  up by  the  feet  on  the
front  of  the  bark  of  his  Majesty.  .  .  . The  six  of  these  enemies
were  huno-  in  front  of  the  walls  of  Thebes,  and  the  hands  in  the

O

same  manner."  3  The  hands  in  this  passage  refer  to  the  method
of  enumerating  the  slain.  Of  those  who  were  killed  the  hands
were  cut  off  and  sent  to  the  king  as  a  voucher  for  the  number
destroyed,  and  so  the  number  of  hands  is  a  recognized  expression
for  the  number  of  slain  warriors,  and  we  have  representations
upon  the  monuments  of  heaps  of  hands  of  dead  captives  being
brought  in  and  piled  before  the  triumphant  king.

On  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  Egyptian  warlike  expeditions
were  apparently  mere  slave  razzias.  Thus  the  officer  Se'anch,  who
opened  up  Hammamat  under  the  llth  Dynasty,  records  how  he
"  repaired  to  the  sea  and  hunted  people  and  hunted  cattle,  and
I  came  to  this  region  with  sixty  full-grown  people  and  seventy
of  their  young  children  at  a  single  time."  Similarly,  Usurtesen

III.  (12th  Dynasty)  commemorates  his  victory  over  the  Nubians :

1  Usurtesen  (12th  Dynasty)  set  up  a  stele  commemorating  his  victories
over  the  peoples  beyond  the  Cataract. Ten  of  their  principal  chiefs  had
passed  before  Amon  as  prisoners,  their  arms  tied  behind  their  backs,  and
had  been  sacrificed  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  by  the  sovereign  himself. There
are instances of human sacrifice as late as the Christian epoch.
(Amelineau, La Morale  Eyyptienne. Introduction,  p.  76.) Amru,  the
Mohammedan conqueror  of  Egypt, forbade  a  young  girl  being  thrown
into  the  river  to  get  a  good  inundation. This,  of  course,  is  not  connected
directly  with  warfare,  but  as  prisoners  had  been  the  principal  source  of
sacrifice  to  the  gods  in  earlier  times,  the  persistence  of  the  idea  of  human
sacrifice  throws  an  ill-omened  light  upon  their  lot,  even  in  later  days.

2  Flinders  Petr-ie,  History  of  Egypt,  17£Aand  ISth  Dynasties,  p.  73.

3  16.,  156.


256  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

"  I  have  carried  off  their  women  and  captured  their  men,  for  I
marched  to  their  well.  I  slew  their  oxen,  cut  down  their  com
and  set  fire  to  it."1

The  appropriate  god,  of  course,  took  a  part  with  zest  in  these
proceedings.  "  The  good  god  exults  when  he  begins  to  fight ;
he  is  joyful  when  he  is  to  cross  the  frontier,  and  is  content  when
he  sees  blood  ;  he  cuts  off  the  heads  of  his  enemies,  and  an  hour
of  fighting  gives  him  more  delight  than  a  day  of  pleasure."  So
say  the  inscriptions  of  the  19th  Dynasty.  Mercilessness  is
idealized.  Eulogizing  the  king,  Sinuhit  says :  "  He  is  a  lion
who  strikes  with  the  claw  ...  he  has  a  heart  closed  to  pity ;
when  he  sees  the  multitudes  he  lets  nothing  remain  behind
him."  And  Sinuhit  himself,  in  narrating  a  single  combat  with
his  foe,  expresses  with  admirable  terseness  the  primitive  theory
of  retaliation :  "  I  shot  at  him,  and  my  arrow  stuck  in  his  neck.
He  cried  out  and  fell  upon  his  nose.  I  brought  down  upon  him
his  own  battle-axe.  .  .  .  Then  I  took  his  goods,  I  seized  his
cattle.  What  he  had  thought  to  do  to  me  I  did  it  unto  him.  I
seized  that  which  was  in  his  tent;  I  spoiled  his  dwelling;  I
grew  great  thereby."  2

Thus  the  rightlessness  of  the  captured  enemy  was  complete.
The  ideas  of  vengeance  and  retaliation  were  practically  unmiti
gated,  and  no  softening  influence  was  exerted  by  religion.  Upon
the  other  hand,  the  idea  of  a  regular  treaty  with  a  foreign
nation  was  distinctly  understood.  Thus  we  have,  in  the  reign
of  Rameses  II.,  a  treaty  with  the  Cheta,  providing  for  the  return
of  deserters  from  either  country  to  their  original  home,  and
promising  that  neither  the  deserter  himself  nor  his  wives  or
children  shall  be  destroyed,  nor  his  mother  be  slain.

In  the  sister  civilization  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  Valleys
more  is  known  of  the  warlike  methods  of  the  relatively  barbar
ous  Assyrians  than  of  the  relatively  civilized  Babylonians.  Of
the  Babylonians  our  principal  information  comes  from  their
treatment  of  the  Jews,  which  included  their  arbitrary  removal

1  Of. the complacent account in  the inscription of Uni. (Sayce,
Records  of  the  Past  (new  series),  vol.  ii.  p.  7.) Sometimes  the  captives
became  the  spoil  of  the  general  himself. Aahmes,  in  the  beginning  of  the
18th  Dynasty,  gratefully  acknowledges  his  Majesty's  goodness  to  him  in  this
respect. Flinders  Petrie,  op.  cit.,  p.  22. Cf.  Erman,  506.

2  Sayce,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  22.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 257

from  their  own  land  into  a  species  of  captivity,  of  the  conditions
of  which  we  know  little,  but,  with  the  exception  of  the  putting
out  of  Zedekiah's  eyes,  we  hardly  hear  of  the  personal  tortures
so  savagely  boasted  of  by  one  after  another  of  the  Assyrian
kings.  Towards  the  Babylonians  the  Assyrians  themselves
were  mild  in  comparison  with  their  treatment  of  other
people  ;  but  the  boasting  of  the  Assyrian  conquerors  over  the
horrors  perpetrated  under  their  orders,  though  it  appears  in
certain  details  to  have  been  exaggerated  by  mistranslation,  will
probably  always  remain  the  classical  exposition  of  naked  and
boastful  ferocity  in  warfare.  "To  the  city  of  Kinabu,"  says
Assur-natsir-pal  (B.C.  883-858),"!  approached.  .  .  .  I  captured
it.  Six  hundred  of  their  fighting  men  I  slew  with  the  sword,
3,000  of  their  captives  I  burned  with  fire.  .  .  .  The  people  of
the  country  of  Nirbu  encouraged  one  another  .  .  .  the  city  of
Tela  was  very  strong  .  .  .  3,000  of  their  fighting  men  I  slew
with  the  sword  ;  their  spoil,  their  goods,  their  oxen  and  their
sheep  I  carried  away  ;  their  numerous  captives  I  burned  with  fire.
I  captured  many  of  the  soldiers  alive  with  the  hand.  I  cut  off
the  hands  and  feet  of  some  ;  I  cut  off  the  noses,  the  ears  and  the
fingers  of  others  ;  the  eyes  of  the  numerous  soldiers  I  put  out."
Again,  in  another  city,  "  I  impaled  700  men  upon  stakes  at  the
approach  to  their  great  gate.  The  city  I  overthrew,  dug  up  and
reduced  to  a  mound  and  ruin.  Their  young  men  and  their
maidens  I  burned  as  a  holocaust."  1  And  so  on  through  a  list  of
mutilations,  burnings  and  impalements.

Quarter,  of  course,  was  not  always  refused.  Often  the  king
narrates  that  the  captives  "  took  my  feet.  I  laid  hold  upon  them
and  counted  them  among  the  men  of  my  own  country."  And
it  should  be  noted  that,  in  the  Assyrian  Pantheon,  there  was  at
least  one  god  who  apparently  made  for  righteousness  and  mercy.
Asshur  is  always  identified  with  the  conquering  king.  He  fights
with  Asshur,  and  wins  victories  for  Asshur,  but  Shamash  bestows
his  favours  on  the  kings  for  righteousness,  and  it  is  at  least
worth  noting  that  we  find  Tiglath  Pileser  setting  captives  free
in  Shamash's  presence.  The  conquered  might  be  carried  off  as
slaves,  or  they  might  remain  as  tributaries,  and  the  unwieldy
and  short-lived  empires  of  the  Near  East  consisted  of  such
1  Sayce,  Records  of  the  Past,  ii.  145,  159,  etc.


VOL.  I.


258  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

tributary  states,  frequently  rebelling,  and  reduced  by  great
barbarity  to  submission  and  the  payment  of  further  tribute.
Probably  the  increased  number  of  slaves  in  later,  as  compared
with  earlier  Babylonian  times,  may  be  ascribed  to  a  long  course
of  successful  warfare.

5.  The  religious  motive  which,  among  the  Assyrians  and
Egyptians,  merely  adds  emphasis  and  a  certain  exaltation  to
warlike  ferocity,  became  among  the  Hebrews  a  reason  for
carrying  the  savage  practices  of  extermination  to  the  extreme.
We  are  perhaps  hardly  to  assume  that  the  primitive  tribes  who
conquered  Canaan  were  in  reality  so  bloodthirsty  as  their
historians  represent  them.  The  destruction,  as  commentators
say,  takes  place  on  paper,  but  it  is  none  the  less  ethically
significant.  The  rules  of  war,  as  held  by  a  strict  Jahvist  in  the
sixth  century,  are  laid  down  in  the  twentieth  chapter  of
Deuteronomy.  A  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  cities  which
are  far  off  and  those  of  the  Canaanites.  In  the  former  case  the
Hebrews  were  first  to  proclaim  peace  to  the  city  to  which  they
drew  nigh,  and  "  if  it  make  thee  answer  of  peace,  and  open  unto
thee,  then  it  shall  be  that  all  the  people  that  is  found  therein
shall  become  tributary  unto  thee  and  shall  serve  thee."  This
is  the  milder  fate.  But  if  it  makes  Avar  and  the  Lord  deliver  it
"  into  thine  hand,  thou  shalt  smite  every  male  thereof  with  the
edge  of  the  sword ;  but  the  women  and  the  little  ones,  and  the
cattle,  and  all  that  is  in  the  city,  even  all  the  spoil  thereof,  shalt
thou  take  for  a  prey  unto  thyself."  This  corresponds  closely
enough  to  what  we  have  found  to  be  the  most  common  practice
of  barbarian  warfare — tribute  or  forced  labour  from  those  who
submit  voluntarily,  the  massacre  of  the  males  and  enslavement
of  women  and  children  in  other  cases.  A  typical  case  is
narrated,  presumably  as  an  example,1  in  Numbers,  where  all  the
male  Midianites  are  slain,  but  the  women  and  children  are
taken  ;  but  Moses  is  wroth  with  the  host  for  saving  all  the
women  alive,  on  the  ground  that  they  cause  Israel  to  trespass,
and  he  bids  them  kill  every  male  among  the  little  ones  and
every  woman,  except  the  virgins,  whom  they  may  keep  for  them
selves.  Here  the  fear  of  religious  contamination  comes  in,  and
1  Num.  xxxi.  8,  9.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 259

this  is  carried  to  an  extreme  in  the  case  of  the  Canaanite  cities
with  which  we  have  now  to  deal.  They  were  to  be  utterly
destroyed.  "  Of  the  cities  of  these  peoples  which  the  Lord  thy
God  giveth  thee  for  an  inheritance,  thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing
that  breatheth."  And  so,  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  Jericho
is  "  devoted,"  that  is  to  say,  it  is  made  over  absolutely  to
Jahveh  ;  the  city  with  everything  belonging  to  it  is  sacred,  and
so  taboo  to  man,  and  a  curse  is  laid  upon  the  site,  so  that  it  can
never  be  built  up  again.  When  Achan  secretes  a  wedge  of  gold
taken  from  the  spoil,  he  communicates  the  curse  to  the  whole
host,  and  the  people  suffer  defeat  until  they  remove  from  them
the  accursed  thing.  In  point  of  fact  this  religious  extermination
was  of  course  very  incomplete,  for  the  Canaanites  remained,  and
we  find  Solomon  l  levying  a  tribute  of  bond  service  upon  them.
But  there  was  much  savage  barbarity,  whether  from  religious
motives  or  merely  from  revenge.  Joab  smote  every  male  in
Edom,2  and  when  he  took  Kabbah,  "  he  brought  forth  the
people  that  were  therein,  and  put  them  under  saws,  and  under
harrows  of  iron,  and  under  axes  of  iron,  and  made  them  pass
through  the  brick-kiln,3  and  thus  did  he  unto  all  the  cities  of
the  children  of  Ammon."  J

Indiscriminate  massacres  were  sometimes  practised  in  the
civil  wars  of  the  people,  as  in  the  case  of  the  male  Ephraimites
who  could  not  pronounce  the  famous  shibboleth,5  and  of  the
Benjamites,6  and  the  people  of  Jabesh-gilead  who  were  destroyed,
men,  women  and  children,  for  not  joining  in  the  destruction  of
the  Benjamites.7  Only  in  two  points  does  a  higher  ethical

1  1  Kings  ix.  20,  21.  2  1  Kings  xi.  15.

3  The  Revised  Version  mercifully  suggests  a  slight  change  in  the  text,
which  would  run — "  Made  them  labour  at  the  brick  mould." (2  Sam.  xii.
31.)

4  1  Chronicles  xx.  3.  5  Judges  xii.  6.  ()  Judges  xx.  and  xxi.

7  The  whole  story  of  Judges  xx.  and  xxi.  is  complex  and  probably  de
rived  by  putting  different  and  incompatible  versions  together.  It  is
intended  to  represent  an  execution  of  justice  for  a  wicked  act  upon  a  tribe,
but  it  incidentally  reveals  the  barbarities  mentioned  in  the  text.  It  is  to
be  observed,  however,  that  the  Israelites  shrink  from  the  utter  destruction
of  a  tribe,  and  so  they  preserve  four  hundred  virgins  from  the  people
of  Jabesh-gilead  as  wives  for  the  surviving  Benjamites,  whose  women  had
been  destroyed,  while  they  further  encourage  the  Benjamites  to  carry  off
maidens  from  the  feast  at  Shiloh  to  make  up  for  deficiencies,  an  inter
mingling  of  crude  barbarisms  with  an  attempt  at  a  moral  which  could
hardly  be  surpassed  for  confusion.


260  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

conception  emerge.  First,  there  is  the  provision  for  a  female
captive  in  Deuteronomy,  referred  to  in  a  previous  chapter.
She  was  to  have  her  time  for  mourning,  and,  if  married  by  her
captor,  was  not  to  be  sold  nor  dealt  with  as  a  slave,  "  because
thou  hast  humbled  her."  Here  there  is  a  touch  of  humanity
leavening  general  barbarism.  Another  point  is  the  observance
of  the  oath  made  to  the  children  of  Gibeon.  They  deceived
Joshua  into  thinking  they  were  strangers,  but  the  covenant
with  them  was  to  be  observed  to  the  letter,  and  so  they  became
hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  unto  all  the  congregation.
The  oath,  that  is  to  say,  was  inviolable  though  taken  in  covenant
with  a  foreigner  and  a  heathen.

The  spirit  of  retaliation  and  the  taking  of  captives  persists
even  in  the  exilic  writer  of  Isaiah  xiii.  and  xiv. :  "  They  shall
take  them  captive  whose  captives  they  were,  and  they  shall
rule  over  their  oppressors."  x  Yet  Micah  is  one  of  the  first  to
dream  of  a  universal  peace.  God  "  shall  judge  between  many
peoples,  and  shall  reprove  strong  nations  afar  off,  and  they  shall
beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares  and  their  spears  into  pruning-
hooks;  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither
shall  they  learn  war  any  more."  With  this  passage,  which  is
repeated  in  almost  the  same  terms  in  the  exilic  "  Isaiah,"  we
find  the  religion  of  the  Jews  turning  its  face  away  from  the
fierce  exclusiveness  which  led  merely  to  an  idealization  of  the
most  savage  elements  of  warfare  towards  those  hopes  of  a  world-
embracing  religion,  which  was  destined  to  so  mighty  a  growth,
though  the  fruits  of  universal  peace  have  not  yet  been  borne.

6.  So  far  we  have  dealt  with  the  essentially  warlike  peoples.
As  we  go  further  east  we  come  to  that  part  of  the  human  race
in  which  the  inherent  preference  of  peace  to  war,  professed  by
other  peoples,  appears  to  be  more  of  a  reality.  Both  in  Hindu
and  in  Chinese  ethics,  widely  different  as  they  are  in  other
respects,  war  takes  a  lower  place  than  in  Western  civilization.
India,  of  course,  had  its  heroic  age.  War  is  frequently  mentioned
in  the  Vedas.  War  chariots  were  used,  and  spears,  swords,
knives  and  defensive  armour.  Probably  the  Aryan  invaders  of
India  did  not  differ  much  in  the  rules  of  warfare  from  their

1  Isaiah  xiv.  2.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 261

kindred  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  the  Mahabharata
we  find  the  fighting  spirit  idealized.  Chivalry  is  recognized,
and  honourable  and  dishonourable  methods  of  warfare  are
distinguished.

"Red  with  rage,  Bhima  stepped  up  to  the  king-lion,  who  lay
outstretched,  with  his  club  beside  him,  beat  in  his  skull  with  his
foot,  and  said  :  '  We  have  not  laid  fire  to  burn  our  enemies,  nor
cheated  them  in  the  game,  nor  outraged  their  wives  ;  by  the  strength
of  our  arms  alone  we  destroy  our  enemies.' '

The  victors,  however,  carry  off  slave-women  along  with  the
booty ;  so  that,  though  there  might  be  rules  of  chivalry  in  the
fight,  the  prisoners,  as  in  barbaric  warfare,  were  at  the  disposal  of
the  conqueror.  But  not  at  his  absolute  disposal ;  quarter  for  the
vanquished  and  general  respect  for  women,  though  they  appear
to  have  been  lawfully  part  of  the  spoil,  are  strongly  insisted
upon.  Manu  has,  in  fact,  a  complete,  though  brief,  legal  code  of
warfare.

When  he  fights  with  his  foes  in  buttle,  let  him  not  strike  with
weapons  concealed  (in  wood),  nor  with  (such  as  are)  barbed,  poisoned,
or  the  points  of  which  arc  blazing  with  fire.  Let  him  not  strike  one
who  (in  flight)  has  climbed  on  an  eminence,  nor  a  eunuch,  nor  one
who  joins  the  palms  of  his  hands  (in  supplication),  nor  one  who
(flees)  with  flying  hair,  nor  one  who  sits  down,  nor  one  who  says,
"  I  am  thine."  Nor  one  who  sleeps,  nor  one  who  has  lost  his  coat
of  mail,  nor  one  who  is  naked,  nor  one  who  is  disarmed,  nor  one  who
looks  on  without  taking  part  in  the  fight,  nor  one  who  is  fighting
with  another  (foe).  Nor  one  whose  weapons  are  broken,  nor  one
afflicted  (with  sorrow),  nor  one  who  has  been  grievously  wounded,
nor  one  who  is  in  fear,  nor  one  who  has  turned  to  flight ;  (but  in  all
these  cases  let  him)  remember  the  duty  (of  honourable  warriors).2

This  recognition  of  chivalrous  usage  and  limitation  of  the
use  of  barbarous  methods  may  be  associated  with  that  general
tendency  of  Indian  thought  which  put  the  priestly  caste  above
the  warrior.  Purity  of  life  is  the  first  object,  and  the  spiritual
law  involving  as  it  does  at  its  best  careful  abstinence  from
injury  to  every  living  creature,  man  or  beast,  becomes  an  ideal
of  life  which,  in  the  Brahmanic  teaching,  ranks  above  the  old

1  Duncker,  History  of  Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  p.  93.

2  Manu,  vii.  wee.  90-93.


262  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

knightly  ideal.1  This  ideal  of  peace  and  universal  beneficence
was  further  emphasized  by  Buddhism,  to  which  the  taking  of
human  life  under  any  conditions  is  a  crime.

Passing  still  further  east,  we  find  that  Chinese  thinkers,  so
different  from  Indian  in  other  respects,  agree  with  them  in  their
attitude  to  warfare.  Yet  Chinese  warfare  itself  was,  at  any  rate
in  early  times,  thoroughly  barbaric.  Few  prisoners  were  made  ;
the  vanquished  chiefs  were  put  to  death,  while  the  common
soldiers  were  released  after  an  ear  had  been  cut  off.  The  left
ears  of  the  slain  were  also  cut  off,  no  doubt  for  purposes  of
reckoning.2  Captives,  however,  were  at  times  made  slaves  and
were  also  tortured.  We  find  allusions  to  both  these  practices  in
the  classical  books,  e.g.  in  the  She-King —

"With  our  prisoners  for  the  question  and  our  captive  crowd  we  return."3
Again —

"My  sorrowing  heart  is  very  sad,
I  think  of  my  unfortunate  position.
The  innocent  people  will  all  be  reduced  to  servitude  with  me."4

And  again —

"  The  engines  of  onfall  and  assault  were  gently  applied
Against  the  walls  of  Ts'ung,  high  and  great.
Captives  for  the  question  were  brought  in  one  after  another.
The  left  ears  (of  the  slain)  were  taken  leisurely."5

The  classical  books,  however,  more  than  once  represent  the
superiority  of  peaceful  to  warlike  methods.  The  emperor  or
prince  who  gives  an  example  of  justice  and  graciousness  is  re
presented  as  attracting  the  people  to  him,  and  warlike  chiefs  are
depicted  as  being  influenced  by  an  example  of  goodwill  and
readiness  to  give  up  a  point.  This  is  brought  out  very  quaintly
in  such  stories  as  those  of  the  chiefs  of  Joo  and  Juy,  who  had  a
quarrel  about  a  strip  of  territory,  which  they  went  to  lay  before

1  Duncker,  op.  cit.  107.

2  Biot,  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  translated  in  Legge's  Prolegomena  to
the  She-King,  chap.  4,  p.  158.

a  She-King,  Part  II.,  Booki.  Ode  8,  Stanza  6.  On  this  Dr.  Legge  notes  :
"  Those  who  would  be  questioned  "  (put  to  the  torture)  "  indicate,  we  may
suppose,  chiefs  of  the  Heen-yun  ;  the  '  crowd  of  captives,'  the  multitude  of
their  followers."

4  Part  II.,  Book  iv.  Ode  8,  Stanza  3.

5  Part  III.,  Book  i.  Ode  7,  Stanza  8. On  this  Dr.  Legge  notes :  "  When
prisoners  refused  to  submit,  they  were  put  to  death  and  their  left  ears
taken  off."


RELATIONS  BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 263

the  lord  of  Chow.  But  "  as  soon  as  they  entered  his  territory,
they  saw  the  ploughers  readily  yielding  the  furrow,  and  travellers
yieldino-thepath,toone  another;"  and  in  fact  every  one  giving
way  to°every  one  else.  All  this  made  them  ashamed  of  their
own  quarrel.  They  became  reunited,  and  the  affair  being  noised
abroad,  more  than  forty  states  tendered  their  submission  to
Chow.1  But  in  this  glorification  of  the  virtues  of  an  excellent
passivity  and  of  conquering  by  the  meek  surrender  of  claims,  we
come  perilously  near  to  a  thin  excuse  for  mere  cowardice  or
failure.  The  reader  must  judge  in  which  way  the  following
story  may  be  interpreted.  When  the  Emperor  Yu  could  not
conquer  the  rebels  of  Meaou,  he  was  admonished  by  Yih  that
"  pride  brings  loss,  and  humility  receives  increase."  Moved  by
the  "excellent  words,"  he  drew  off  his  army  and  "set  about
diffusing  his  accomplishments  and  virtue  more  widely."
better  part  of  valour  had  its  reward.  "  In  seventy  days  the
Prince  of  Meaou  came  to  make  his  submission."  ^  One  would
like  to  know  the  precise  nature  of  the  "  submission."

In  the  teaching  of  Mencius,  however,  there  is  no  doubt  at  all
about  the  strenuous  opposition  to  war  and  militarism,
protests  of  this  great  teacher  against  the  use  of  force  were
repeated  and  strenuous.  They  were  based  upon  the  purest  of
humanitarian  principles  and  applied  with  great  psychological
insio-ht.  When  Mencius  saw  King  Seuen  much  touched  by  the
frightened  appearance  of  an  ox  being  led  to  the  sacrifice  and
ordering  that  a  sheep  should  be  substituted  for  it,  he  told  him
very  justly  that  it  was  because  "you  saw  the  oxen  and  had  not
seen  the  sheep."  A  superior  man,  he  went  on,  cannot  eat  the
animals  whose  dying  cries  he  has  heard,  and  so  he  keeps  away
from  his  cook-room.  Mencius  had  thus  grasped  the  fundamental
fact  of  the  part  played  by  want  of  imagination  in  maintaining
warfare.  He  proceeds  to  point  out  that  here  "  is  kindness
sufficient  to  reach  to  animals,  and  no  benefits  are  extended
from  it  to  the  people."3  The  king  should  begin,  he  says,  with
reverence  to  age  and  kindness  to  youth  in  his  own  family,  and
the  example  would  spread  and  tend  to  humanize  the  people.

1  She-King,  Vol.  II.,  p.  441,  note.

2  Shoo-King,  Part  II.,  Book  ii.,  iii.,  21.

3  Mencius,  Book  I.,  Part  i.  ch.  7,  par.  8-10.


264  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Instead  of  doing  this  the  king  prepares  for  war.  Does  this  give
him  pleasure  ?  The  king  admits  that  it  does  not,  but  says  he
does  it  to  "  seek  for  what  I  greatly  desire."  Mencius  asks  for
what  reason  he  desires  it — for  lack  of  food,  clothing  or  sounds  ?
No ;  it  is  for  none  of  these.  "  You  wish  to  enlarge  your
territories  ...  to  rule  the  middle  kingdom  and  to  attract  to
you  the  barbarous  tribes  that  surround  it,  but  to  do  what  you  do
to  seek  for  what  you  desire  is  like  climbing  a  tree  to  seek  for
fish."  In  fact,  it  is  worse,  for  it  is  calamitous.  "  Now,  if  your
Majesty  will  institute  a  government  whose  action  should  all
be  benevolent,  this  would  cause  all  the  officers  in  the  Empire  to
wish  to  stand  in  your  Majesty's  court,  and  the  farmers  all  to
wish  to  plough  in  your  Majesty's  fields,  and  the  merchants  both
travelling  and  stationary,  all  to  wish  to  store  their  goods  in  your
Majesty's  market-places  .  .  .  and  all  throughout  the  Empire
who  feel  aggrieved  by  their  rulers  to  wish  to  come  and  complain
to  your  Majesty."  In  short,  Mencius'  prescription  for  making
one's  self  a  universal  monarch  was  to  prove  one's  self  the  best
and  most  just  monarch.1  He  would  disallow  the  annexation  of.
conquered  territory  except  by  the  will  of  the  conquered  people.
When  King  Seuen  had  conquered  Yen,  he  asked  Mencius  if  he
should  take  possession  of  it.  Mencius  replied  that,  if  the  people
of  Yen  would  be  pleased  with  his  doing  so,  let  him  do  it ;  other
wise  not.2  War  itself  Mencius  denounces  as  a  crime,  and  those
who  make  war  as  worthy  of  death  and  worse.  Confucius,  he  said,
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  ministers  of  oppressive
princes;  "how  much  more  would  he  have  rejected  those  who
are  vehement  to  fight  for  their  prince.  When  contentions  about
territory  are  the  ground  on  which  they  fight,  they  slaughter
men  until  the  fields  are  filled  with  them  .  .  .  this  is  what  is
called  leading  on  the  land  to  devour  human  flesh."  Death,  he
says,  is  not  enough  for  such  a  crime,  and  those  who  are  skilful  to
fight  should  suffer  the  highest  punishment.  Again,  "  to  employ
an  uninstructed  people  in  war  may  be  said  to  be  destroying  the
people.  .  .  .  Though  by  a  single  battle  you  should  subdue  Tse  and
get  possession  of  Nan-yan,  the  thing  ought  not  to  be  done."  3  The
mere  transfer  of  territory  is  wrong,  but  the  bloodshed  by  which

1  Book  I.,  Part  i.  cli.  7.  2  Book  I.,  Part  ii.  ch.  10.

3  Book  IV.,  Part  i.  ch.  14  ;  Book  VI.,  Part  ii.  ch.  8.


RELATIONS  BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 265

it  is  achieved  is  worse.  "  If  it  were  merely  taking  the  place
from  the  one  state  to  give  it  to  the  other,  a  benevolent  man
would  not  do  it ;  how  much  less  will  he  do  so  when  the  end
is  to  be  sought  by  the  slaughter  of  men." 1  As  to  ministers  who
advise  a  warlike  policy  with  a  view  to  conquest,  they  might  be
tolerated  in  these  degenerate  days,  but  in  the  good  old  times
they  would  have  been  called  robbers  of  the  people.  Mencius
said :  "  Those  who  now-a-days  serve  their  sovereigns,  say,
'  We  can  for  our  sovereign  enlarge  the  limits  of  the  cultivated
ground  and  fill  his  treasuries  and  arsenals.'  Such  persons  are
now-a-days  called  'Good  Ministers,'  but  anciently  they  were
called  'Robbers  of  the  People."  The  generals  Mencius
involved  in  one  condemnation  with  the  warlike  ministers.
"  There  are  men  who  say,  '  I  am  skilful  at  marshalling  troops ;
I  am  skilful  at  conducting  a  battle.'  They  are  great  criminals."
The  warlike  Western  world  has  scarcely  known  a  more  vigorous
and  sweeping  protest  against  warfare  and  everything  connected
with  it  and  every  principle  upon  which  it  is  based.  And  if  it  is
said  that  the  Chinese  Empire,  under  the  inspiration  of  such
teaching,  has  ceased  to  be  able  adequately  to  defend  itself
against  barbarians,  it  should  also  be  remembered  that,  under  the

o

Chinese  system,  a  population  larger  than  that  of  Europe  live  in
permanent  peace  with  one  another,  and  that  they  have,  in  a
sense,  as  their  own  religious  books  recommend,  absorbed  those
who  have  conquered  them  by  peaceful  arts.

7.  From  these  ideals  of  peace  we  return  to  the  fighting  nations
of  the  Western  world.  In  Homeric  Greece  wars  were  often
little  more  than  raids  for  women  and  cattle  lifting,  or  they  were
reprisals  for  similar  raids  by  a  hostile  clan.  Piracy  was  held  to
be  improper  and  displeasing  to  the  gods,  but  not  shameful,  and
Thucydides  remarks  that  to  ask  a  stranger  whether  he  was  a
pirate  was  apparently  not  considered  an  act  of  discourtesy.4  In
a  captured  town  the  normal  fate  of  the  men  was  to  be  slain,  and
of  the  women  to  be  carried  off  as  bond  slaves.  Achilles  boasts
of  the  pillage  of  which  he  has  been  guilty.5  Quarter
may  be  refused  at  will.  Before  the  death  of  Patroclus  Achilles

1  lb.,  sec.  8.  2  Book  VI.,  Part  ii.  ch.  9.

3  Book  VII.,  Part  ii.  ch.  4. 4  Thucyd.,  i.  5. •>  Iliad,  ix.  325,  etc.


266  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

often  accepted  ransom,  but  after  it  he  declares  his  intention  of
refusing  all  quarter  and  rejects  Lycaon's  prayers  for  his  life.
The  corpse  of  the  dead  is  insulted ;  Hector  is  dragged  at  the
chariot  wheels,  and  twelve  youths  are  sacrificed  to  the  spirit  of
Patroclus.  Even  in  the  historical  period  prisoners  of  war  were
unconditionally  the  property  of  the  conqueror.1  Custom  enjoined
quarter,2  but  prisoners  were  often  killed.3  Generally  prisoners
were  held  for  exchange  or  ransom,4  or  sold  as  slaves.  The  booty
was  divided,  and  a  tithe  was  given  to  the  gods.  In  the  case  of
the  Medising  cities  the  patriot  Greeks  took  oath  to  devote  a
tithe  of  their  goods  to  Delphi.  But  generally  the  terms
obtained  by  a  surrendered  city  depended  upon  the  Homologia.5
When  a  town  was  stormed  all  the  males  were  often  put  to  the
sword  and  the  women  and  children  enslaved.6  At  the  capture
of  Plataea  the  Spartans  put  all  the  prisoners  to  death  after  a
judicial  trial,  and  the  Athenians  were  no  better.  On  the  sup
pression  of  the  revolt  of  Chios  all  the  men  were  slain  and  the
women  and  children  enslaved.  The  same  fate  befell  Melos,7
while  at  Mende  the  generals  intervened  to  prevent  the  massacre.8
At  times  the  dead  were  mutilated,9  and  the  same  fate  might
even  befall  the  living.10  The  massacres  did  not  always  go  without
a  protest.  In  the  famous  case  of  Mitylene,  the  destruction  of
the  entire  city,  after  having  been  voted  by  the  assembly,  was
rescinded  by  the  redoubled  efforts  of  the  friends  of  the
Mityleneans,  who,  by  the  aid  of  a  specially  swift  trireme,  over
took  the  first  order  in  time  to  prevent  its  execution,  so  that
only  1,000  Mityleneans  were  put  to  death.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Greeks  were  perhaps  the  first  people

1  Busolt,  Handbuch der  klassischen  Altertumswissenschaft,  Bd.  iv.  p.
59. Aristotle,  Politics,  i.  2-6,  1255a.

2  Thucyd.,  iii.  58,  66,  67. The  surrendered  Platceans  plead  that  "  the
custom  of  Hellas  does  not  allow  the  suppliant  to  be  put  to  death." The
plea,  however,  was  not  allowed.

3  Thucyd.,  i. 30 ; ii. 67  ; iii. 32. Xenophon,  Hellenics,  II.,  i. 32.
Plutarch,  Lysander  (tr.  Langhorne),  p.  311.

4  Thucyd.,  ii.  103  ;  iv.  69  ;  v.  3. Herodt.,  i.  89.

5  In  the  case  of  Potidiea,  the  men  were  allowed  to  leave  the  city  with
one  garment,  the  women  with  two. The  Athenians  blamed  the  general
for  concluding  the  agreement  instead  of  forcing  a  surrender  at  discretion.
(Thucyd.,  ii.  70.)

6  Iliad,  ix.  590. Thucyd.,  iii.  28 ;  v.  3,  32,  116.

7  Thucyd.,  v.  116.  »  Thucyd.  iv.  130.

9  Xenophon,  Atmbasis,  iii.  4.  10  Xenophon,  Hellenics,  ii.  1.


RELATIONS  BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 267

to  develop  something  like  a  regular  international  law.  Feuds
between  neighbours  were  replaced  by  spondae,  which  passed
ultimately  into  alliances,  generally  of  a  defensive  character,  and
for  a  specified  number  of  years.1  But  further  than  this,  they
developed  a  regular  system  of  arbitration.  Periander  of  Corinth
arbitrated  between  Athens  and  Mitylene  as  to  the  possession  of
Sigeum.  In  the  sixth  century  Sparta  arbitrated  between  Athens
and  Megara,  and  appeals  to  Delphi  were  not  uncommon.2  Some
times  states  were  pledged  by  oath  or  by  the  deposit  of  a  sum
of  money  to  abide  by  arbitration,  but  in  other  cases  the  loyal
acceptance  of  the  decision  was  a  matter  of  goodwill,  and  was
sometimes  refused,  as  in  the  case  of  Thebes  3  and  of  Elis.4

Furthermore,  the  instances  of  severity  quoted  above  represent
the  darkest  side  of  Greek  warfare.  There  was  a  better  spirit
at  work  which  recognized  certain  common  laws  of  the  Hellenes,
"unwritten  laws  "  prescribing  a  measure  of  justice  in  inter-state
dealings,  and  of  moderation  and  humanity  to  the  vanquished.
The  conquered  Platceans  appeal,  though  they  appeal  in  vain,
to  the  custom  of  Hellas,  which  does  not  allow  suppliants  to  be
put  to  death.5  The  dealings  of  the  Athenians  with  Melos  are
scathingly  exposed  by  Thucydides  by  the  absolute  contempt  of
right  which  he  puts  into  the  mouths  of  the  apologists  for
Athens,  and  the  incident  is  dramatically  set  immediately  before
the  narrative  of  the  Syracusan  expedition,  in  which  the
impieties  of  Athenian  aggression  were  heavily  punished.  Mr.
Murray  considers  that  the  same  incident  was  the  immediate
occasion  of  Euripides'  moving  representation  of  the  sufferings  of
the  "  Trojan  Women  "  played  in  the  following  year.  Further,
the  whole  principle  of  Greek  warfare  was  challenged  by  the
philosophers.  The  enslavement  of  Greek  prisoners,  the  stripping
of  the  slain,  the  erection  of  trophies  in  temples,  the  ravaging  of
the  land  (apart  from  carrying  off  the  crop  of  the  season)  and
the  burning  of  houses  are  all  condemned  by  Plato.  The
refusal  of  quarter  is  not  explicitly  mentioned,  from  which  we
may  infer  that  at  least  as  a  matter  of  principle  this  was
sufficiently  recognized  as  a  wrong  in  the  fourth  century.  On  the
other  hand,  this  milder  practice  is  only  insisted  on  in  wars

1  Busolt,  op.  cit.,  p.  54.  -  Thucyd.  i.  28.  3  Herodt.,  vi.  108.

*  Thucyd.,  v.  31.  5  Thucyd.,  iii.  58.


268  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

between  Greek  and  Greek.  These  should  be  conducted  as  civil
strife  is  at  present,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  mitigations  specified,
while  in  future,  Greeks  should  behave  to  barbarians  as  they
now  do  to  one  another.1  Nor  was  Plato  alone  in  his  attitude.
Aristotle,  while  recording  that  the  law  "  is  an  agreement  Avherein
they  say  that  what  is  conquered  in  war  is  the  property  of  the
conqueror,"  records  that  many  jurists  bring  a  charge  as  it  were
of  illegality  against  this  law,  and  both  jurists  and  philosophers
are  divided  on  the  point.2  Aristotle  himself  points  out  that  the
origin  of  a  war  may  not  be  just,  and  "  no  one  would  say  that  he  is
a  slave  who  does  not  deserve  to  be  a  slave,  for  if  so  those  who  are
held  noblest  might  be  slaves  and  sons  of  slaves  if  they  happened
to  be  captured  and  sold."  The  truth  is  that  the  Greeks  "  do
not  mean  to  call  themselves  slaves,  but  the  barbarians."  The
solution  is  that  there  are  natural  slaves,  who  are  slaves  every
where.  In  other  words,  the  barbarian  is  ordained  by  nature  as
slave  to  the  Hellene,  but  the  Hellenes  should  be  free.3  In  this
argument  Aristotle  clearly  conceives  himself  to  be  merely
stating  explicitly  and  consistently  the  principle  which  is  con
fusedly  held  in  the  uninstructed  thought  of  the  period.  He  thus
represents  the  stage  which  the  best  Greek  ethics  really  attained
in  this  direction — an  acceptance  of  a  higher  rule  of  warfare
enjoining  respect  for  the  persons  of  the  conquered  (Plato's
argument  would  add  for  their  property  as  well)  within  the  limits
of  Hellas.4  Outside  these  limits  the  old  rules  of  barbaric
warfare  persist  unaltered.

At  Rome  a  defeated  enemy  was  in  principle  rightless.  The
very  type  and  exemplar  of  property  is  that  which  is  captured
from  an  enemy.  Stranger  and  enemy  are  identical  terms.  The
stranger  can  have  no  rights  except  through  the  protection  of  a
citizen,  and  even  apart  from  war  and  hostility  it  is  a  juristic

1  Observe,  however,  that  tin's  summary  of  the  argument  is  put  into  the
mouth  of  Glaucon,  not  of  Socrates.  Possibly  Plato  would  have  been
willing  to  preacli  a  more  comprehensive  humanity,  but  feared  to  push  the
argument  too  far.  (Republic,  v.  469-471.)

2  TOVTO  S?J  T£I  SiKaiov  TroAAoi  T<av  ei'  -rcis  v6jj.ois  wtnrep  firjropa  ypatyot'TCU  irapavofj.d)!'
.....  Kal  TOIS  /J.fV  ovTca  So/ce?  Tols  8'  SKfivias,  Kal  Twi'  ffofyiav. Aristotle,  Politics,

i.,  vi.  2.

3  76.,  pars.  4-6.

4  The  principle  found  practical  expression  in  the  oath  of  the  Delphian
Amphictyony  not  to  destroy  any  allied  state,  nor  to  cut  off  its  water  in  war
or  peace. (Busolt,  p.  65.)


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 269

maxim  that  a  member  of  a  foreign  community  not  bound  to
Rome  by  any  treaty  might  be  lawfully  enslaved  ;  in  other  words,
all  leoal  rights  are  confined  to  citizens  and  those  to  whom  their

o  r>

protection  is  extended,  and  the  alien,  and  therefore  .still  more  the
captured  foemau,  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  conqueror.  In  point  of
fact  the  conquered  were  often  put  to  death  in  great  numbers,  for
example,  the  population  of  Vacca  by  Metellus  in  the  Jugurthine
war.1  The  same  fate  befell  many  towns  of  Gaul  under  the  com
paratively  clement  Julius  Ceesar.  The  taking  of  Ilurgis  in
Spain  was  succeeded  by  a  general  massacre  in  which  neither
women  nor  children  were  spared.-  Tacitus,  describing  the
ravaging  of  the  Marsi  by  Germanicus,  says  that  neither  sex  nor
age  were  grounds  of  mercy.3  The  good  Emperor  Titus  massacred
or  sold  as  slaves  all  the  captives  at  the  taking  of  Jerusalem.4

But  these  are  extreme  cases.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt
that  the  general  feeling  of  the  Roman  world  condemned  excesses

o  o

of  barbarity.  Livy  makes  Camillus  say  that  his  soldiers  direct
their  arms  not  against  that  age  which  is  spared  even  in  the
capture  of  a  town,  but  against  armed  men.5  The  slaughter  of
non-combatants,  old  men,  women  and  children,  is  frequently
spoken  of  in  terms  of  condemnation,  even  of  horror,0  and  Livy's
words,  "jure  belli  in  armatos  repugnantesque  caedes,"  7  imply
the  full  limitation  of  the  right  of  killing  to  active  combatants
as  understood  in  modern  warfare.  The  violation  of  women,  if
frequently  allowed,  was  as  frequently  condemned,  and  measures
were  by  some  generals  taken  to  prevent  it.8  Upon  the  whole,
personal  barbarity,  indiscriminate  massacre,  the  refusal  of

1  Letourneau,  L<i  Guerre,  p.  40(5.

2  Grotius,  iii.,  4,  9,  quoting  Appian.

:!  Grotius,  iii.,  ch.  iv.  section  9,  and  authorities  there  cited,  especially
the  cynical  remark  of  Horace  which  sums  up  the  whole  matter,  "  Vendere
cum  possis  captivum  occidere  noli."  (Ep.  xvi.  09.)

4  Letourneau,  La  Guerre,  p.  407,  quoting  Joseph  us,  Bell.  Jud.,  Book  vi.
ch.  xlv.

6  Livy,  v.  27,  and  other  passages  quoted  in  Grotius,  iii.  11.

(i  Instances,  Greek  and  Latin,  in  Grotius,  I.  c.

1  Livy,  xxviii.  23.  Grotius,  ib.  Grotius  further  cites  Sallust,  Jits/-ur-
thine  War,  ch.  90,  for  a  condemnation  of  the  slaughter  of  men  after
surrender  as  contra  jits  belli.  Elsewhere,  par.  0,  he  quotes  Cicero  as  saying
that  captives  who  have  not  shown  cruelty  should  be  spared,  and  Seneca  as
insisting  that  an  enemy  should  be  set  free,  and  even  held  in  honour,  if  he
has  fought  for  honourable  reasons.

8  E.  g.  Marcellus  and  Scipio. Grotius,  Book  iii.,  ch.  iv.  par.  19.


270  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

quarter,  the  violation  of  women,  and  the  slaying  of  captives,
though  practised  in  times  of  excitement  or  loose  discipline,  are
condemned  by  the  better  minds  as  contrary  to  the  jus  belli.1
On  the  other  hand,  the  enslavement  of  prisoners,  if  desired,
and  the  confiscation  of  property  were  admitted  to  be
regular.2

The  importation  of  slaves  into  Italy  on  a  large  scale,  owing  to
war  and  the  slave  trade,  revolutionized  the  Roman  economic
system,  and  led  thereby  to  the  fall  of  the  Republic.  But,
instead  of  being  enslaved,  the  conquered  people  might  become
tributary — dediticii.  The  formula  in  this  case  expresses  the
absoluteness  of  surrender  exacted  by  an  ancient  conqueror  :  "  I
give  my  person,  my  town,  my  land,  the  water  which  runs  there,
my  boundary  gods,  my  temples,  my  movables,  all  the  things
which  belong  to  the  gods,  to  the  Roman  people."  3  The  people
who  surrendered  on  these  terms  retained  their  lands  on  payment
of  tribute  and  accepted  a  Roman  governor.  They  had  in
strictness  no  rights  as  against  the  Roman  Government,  and
whatever  liberties  were  accorded  to  them  were  reversible  at  will.4
But  a  more  liberal  system  grew  up  as  the  Roman  conquests  were
extended.  In  some  cases  a  community  was  allowed  to  retain
its  own  government  while  brought  under  the  political  hegemony
of  Rome  as  an  ally,  with  rights  secured  by  foedus.  A
considerable  measure  of  local  self-government  was  left  to  the
civilized  communities  fully  incorporated  in  the  Empire,  and
the  spread  of  Roman  civilization  was  regularly  marked  by
the  extension  of  municipal  privileges.  Further,  civic  rights
were  extended  to  the  subjects  of  Rome,  first  in  the  form  of  the
jus  Latinum,  which  from  early  days  had  conferred  the  principal
civil  rights  on  inhabitants  of  the  cities  of  Latium,  and  finally,
as  civilized  order  advanced,  of  the  full  Roman  franchise,  which,
though  its  political  value  disappeared  with  the  fall  of  the  Republic,

1  An  exception  must  be  admitted  in  the  case  of  the  vanquished  king  or
general,  who  might  be,  and  not  infrequently  was,  put  to  death  in  the
Mamertine  prison  before  the  sacrifice  to  Capitoline  Jupiter  was  proceeded
with. (Grotius,  iii.,  11,  1.)

2  See Livy, cited in Grotius,  iii., 5, 1  : "Esse quaedam  belli  jura
quae  ut  facere  ita  pati  sit  fas  :  sata  exuri,  dirui  tecta  :  praedas  hominum
pecorumque  agi."

3  Letourneau,  p.  468.

4  Mommsen,  Hist,  of  Rome,  Book  iv.  ch.  7.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 271

placed  subjects  and  masters  on  equal  terms  before  the  law.
The  boast  of  Virgil  that  Rome  spared  the  submissive  and  warred
down  the  proud  was  not  wholly  without  justification,  and  the
Roman  Empire  gradually  approached  the  ideal  of  a  world  state,
in  which  distinctions  of  nationality  carried  no  difference  of
privilege,  but  citizenship  was  extended  to  all  free  men.  There
was  in  this  a  certain  approach  to  universalism  which  might  hold
within  it  some  promise,  if  not  of  an  abolition  of  war,  at  any  rate
of  a  reconstitution  of  its  character.

8.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  bearing  of  universalism,  as  I;
represented  by  the  world  religions,  upon  the  moralities  of  war.  |l
In  the  teaching  of  the  Koran  it  appears  to  be  assumed  that
true  believers  will  live  at  peace,  while  they  will  conquer  and
subdue  the  unbeliever.  "  If  the  two  parties  of  believers  quarrel,
then  make  peace  between  them ;  and  if  one  of  the  twain
outrages  the  other,  then  fight  the  party  that  has  committed  the
outrage  until  it  return  to  God's  bidding  ;  and  if  it  do  return,
then  make  peace  between  them  with  equity  and  be  just.
Verily  God  loves  the  just.  The  believers  are  but  brothers,  so
make  peace  between  your  two  brethren  and  fear  God,  haply  ye
may  obtain  mercy."  l  No  Moslem  captive  might  be  enslaved.2
Very  different  was  the  attitude  to  unbelievers.  "  And  when  ye
meet  those  who  misbelieve,  then  striking  off  heads  until  ye  have
massacred  them,  arid  bind  fast  the  bonds."  Theoretically,  in
fact,  there  is  perpetual  war  with  all  countries  which  have  not
embraced  Islam.  But  there  are  degrees.  No  compromise  was
possible  with  Arabian  idolaters  or  with  apostates.  Non- Arabian
idolaters  might  be  reduced  to  slavery,  and,  generally  speaking,
captives  might  be  slain,  since  the  Prophet  did  so,  and  slaying
them  terminates  wickedness,  but  if  a  captive  became  a  Moslem
on  the  battlefield,  he  might  not  be  put  to  death,  but  in  this
case  he  might  still  be  enslaved,  as  the  reason  for  enslaving  him,
that  is  to  say,  securing  his  person,  came  into  operation  before
the  change  of  faith.  Slavery,  then,  was  the  second  alternative,
and  beyond  this  there  was  the  milder  possibility  that  the  captive
might  be  released  as  a  Zimmi,  that  is  to  say,  as  a  non-Moslem

1  Koran,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ix.,  chap.  49.

2  Grotius,  iii.,  7,  ix.,  2.


272  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

subject,  liable  to  tribute.  In  any  case  a  woman  was  not  to  be
slain  in  war.  Mohammedan  teaching,  then,  rests  on  the  distinction
between  Moslem  and  non-Moslem.  Within  the  Moslem  world  it
looks  forward  to  universal  peace  and  forbids  the  enslavement  of
the  captive.  Outside  that  world  it  allows  not  only  enslavement,
but  the  refusal  of  quarter.

The  character  and  effects  of  Christian  teaching  are  somewhat
complex.  While  the  Gospels  pronounced  definitely  against
violence  in  any  shape  or  form,  the  Church  accommodated  her
teaching  to  the  practice  of  a  warlike  age,  and  Augustine
upholds  the  soldier's  profession,  and  endeavours  to  lay  down  the
conditions  upon  which  war  is  justified.  "  To  wage  war  is  not  a
crime,  but  to  wage  war  for  the  sake  of  booty."  1  There  is  no
moral  distinction  between  open  fighting  and  ambuscade  in  a
just  war,  "  but  just  wars  are  commonly  defined  as  those  which
avenge  injuries,  if  any  race  or  state  which  is  to  be  attacked  in
war  has  either  neglected  to  punish  wrongs  done  by  its  own
citizens  or  to  retrieve  what  has  been  wrongfully  carried  off."'
Again,  the  kind  of  war  ordained  by  God  is  just.  Ambrose,
strongly  denouncing  the  principle  of  non-resistance,  declares
that  he  who  does  not  defend  a  friend  is  as  bad  as  the  aggressor.3
On  the  other  hand,  malice,  cruelty  and  vengeance,  the  implac
able  spirit,  savagery  in  insurrection  (feritas  rebellandi)  and  the
lust  of  dominion  are  condemned  by  Augustine.4  The  purport
of  these  distinctions,  for  what  they  are  worth,  is  to  condemn
aggression  and  restrict  warfare  to  the  defensive.  Private  war
fare,  moreover,  was  persistently  combated  by  the  Church,5  and
with  regard  to  the  rules  of  warfare  generally,  the  canons  dealing
with  the  treatment  of  the  enemy  in  person  or  property  mark  a
distinct  advance  in  European  custom.  To  enslave  a  fellow-
Christian  or  to  put  him  to  death,  except  in  the  actual  fighting,
was  forbidden  from  an  early  date,6  and  Augustine  lays  down,

1  Serm.  xix. Quoted  by  Gratian,  Corpus  Juris,  893,  but  apparently  of
doubtful  authenticity.

2  Corpus  Juris,  894. Reading  "  si  qua  gens  vel  civitas  quae  bello  petenda

est."

3'  Ib. 898.  4  Contra  Manichaeos,  Corpus  Juris,  892.

5  According  to  Westermarck,  however,  with  comparatively  little  success.
(Moral  Ideas,  p.  356,  seq.).

6  Grotius,  loc.  cit.,  quoting  Gregoras,  who  lays  it  down  as  a  rule  holding
among  Christians,  Sm  rV  TTJS  nia-reus  TaiiTOT-fira,  recognized  not  only  among


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 273

though  not  in  very  forcible  language,  the  broad  principle  of  later
warfare,  that  the  slaughter  of  the  enemy  is  to  be  limited  by
necessity  (hostem  pugnantcm  necessitas  deprimat  non  voluntas).1
From  this  it  follows  that  the  lives  of  non-combatants,  as  well  as
captives,  should  be  spared.  Women  and  children  are  therefore
secured  from  violence.  Priests  naturally  enjoyed  the  same
privilege,  and  it  was  extended  by  the  Canon  Law  to  husband
men  and  tradesmen.2  Even  as  to  the  practice  of  ransom,  which
grew  up  when  quarter  came  to  be  allowed,  the  Canon  Law  had
its  doubts,  to  be  overcome  by  a  lawyer's  quibble.  "  A  captive's
goods  are  unjustly  extorted  from  him,  but  arc  justly  proffered
to  redeem  his  life,"  is  the  solution  proposed  by  Gratian  ;3  a
solution  which  in  practice  justifies  ransom,  and  in  theory  must
be  taken  to  admit  that  the  captive's  life  is  forfeit.

How  far  these  relatively  enlightened  principles  were  from
restraining  the  barbarity  of  the  Middle  Ages  every  one  knows.
From  the  decline  of  the  Western  Empire  to  the  Peace  of  West
phalia  the  internal  wars  of  Western  Europe  present  a  series  of
barbarities  and  horrors  which  fully  equal  those  of  the  Greek  or
the  Italian  peoples,  and  Grotius  in  his  search  for  instances  of
magnanimity,  generosity  and  the  reprobation  of  methods  of
savagery  more  often  quotes  Greek  or  Roman  generals  than
those  of  the  Middle  Ages  or  of  his  own  time.  Yet  the  idea  of
chivalry — the  cult  of  the  very  parfait  gcntil  knight,  sworn  to
succour  the  oppressed,  to  defend  women  and  children,  and  to
avoid  all  unknightly  deeds— is  a  true  product  of  the  Middle
Ages,  and  its  appearance  side  by  side  with  the  barbarities  of
actual  warfare  is  characteristic  of  the  period.  In  the  genera
tions  before  Grotius'  own  time  and  during  his  life  the  savagery

Romans  and  Thessalonians,  but  among  Illyrians,  Tribal li,  and  Bulgarians,
TO.  /xey  -Kpay/jLara  p.6va  ffKv\fvttv  ra  tie  fftiip.ara.  /J.T)  av5pa,Tro8t£ea6ai,  fM-rjSe  rpovfveii>  f|o>
Trj.T  iro\efj.iKT'is  Trapard^ews  /j.ySfva.

1  Augustine,  Ep.  207. C.  J.,  892.

2  Grotius,  iii.,  11,  12. Hall  (A Treatise  on  International  Law,  p.  397)
refers  to  the  Canon  deTreuga  (Decret.  Greg.,  p.  203,  lib.  i.,  Tit.  xxxiv.  cap.
2),  which  laid  down  that  monks,  merchants,  husbandmen  and  their  animals,
travellers,  etc.,  are  not  to  be  killed. Hall  also  cites  Franciscus  a  Victoria
as  maintaining  "  quod  etiam  in  bello  contra  Turcos  non  licet  interficere
infantes. Imo  nee  feminas  inter  infideles." The  tradition  lingered  long
that  a  garrison  which  held  out  a  I'outrance  might  lawfully  be  massacred.
This  is  discussed  by  Grotius  iii.,  11,  1C,  etc. See  Hall,  400.

'•'  Grat.,  Corpus  Juris,  896.

VOL.  i.  x


274  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

of  warfare  had  gathered  itself  for  a  supreme  effort,  and  under
the  guiding  genius  of  an  Alva  and  a  Tilly  had  shown  what  men
could  do  to  one  another.  But  with  the  Peace  of  Westphalia
the  period  of  the  religious  wars  came  to  an  end.  Men  were
sickened  with  horrors,  and  were  the  more  ready  to  listen  to
those  who,  like  Grotius,  had  a  rule  to  propound  whereby  even
in  war  men  might  be  saved  from  becoming  fiends.  The  devas
tation  of  the  Palatinate,  which  half-a-century  earlier  would
have  passed  unnoticed  as  an  ordinary  incident  of  war,  coming
in  1689,  caused  a  thrill  of  horror  in  Europe,  and  from  that  time
onwards  the  practice  of  war  underwent  a  slow  and  insufficient,
but  still  a  real  amendment.

9.  The  principle  to  which  Grotius  appealed  was  the  Law  of
Nature,  which,  however  fictitious  in  the  form  in  which  it  was
conceived  by  him  and  his  contemporaries,  expressed  the  pro
found  ethical  truth  that  the  rights  and  duties  of  men  are  not
circumscribed  by  the  limitations  of  positive  law  or  of  revelation,
but  rest  upon  certain  universal  attributes  of  humanity.  But
this  principle  was  pregnant  with  great  consequences.  By  rest
ing  rights  and  duties  on  human  nature  as  such,  it  gets  below
the  distinction  of  compatriot  and  foreigner  and  destroys  the
basis  of  group-morality.  Once  grant  that  an  enemy  does  not
cease  to  be  a  man,  to  whom  as  a  man  certain  primary  duties
are  owing,  and  we  have  a  principle  which  undermines  the  whole
structure  of  the  earlier  ethics  of  warfare.  As  a  human  being
possessed  of  human  rights,  the  enemy  comes  under  the  ordinary
civilized  conceptions  of  justice.  He  cannot  fairly  be  punished
for  the  delinquencies  of  his  nation.  Grant,  what  every
belligerent  assumes,  that  his  own  cause  is  just  and  that  of  the
opponent  indefensible,  grant  that  this  is  proved  to  the  full
satisfaction  of  the  military  conscience  by  the  verdict  of  the  god
of  battles,  still  it  is  only  the  hostile  government  that  is  in  fault.
The  citizen  of  the  conquered  country,  even  the  soldier  of  the
beaten  army,  is  not  in  fault.  He  has  merely  done  his  duty  as  a
patriot,  and  to  make  him  suffer  either  in  person  or  property  for
the  delinquencies  of  his  government  would  be  to  apply  the  bar
baric  principle  of  collective  responsibility.  That  suffering  will
fall  on  individuals  is  certain.  Modern  ethics  have  done  little


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 275

to  mitigate  the  methods  allowable  in  the  pursuit  of  victory.
Soldiers  may  be  slain  in  any  number  and  by  all  methods  except
the  few  barred  by  the  Geneva  Convention  and  the  Hague  Con
ference.  Civilians,  men,  women  and  children  may  be  shut  up
in  fortified  towns  and  starved  into  surrender  at  whatever  cost  of
suffering  and  of  life.  Property  may  be  requisitioned  at  the
discretion  of  the  invader.  But  all  these  things  are  done  to
increase  the  chances  of  victory,  and  except  with  this  object  no
infliction  of  death  or  suffering,  no  pillage  or  destruction  of
property  is  lawful.  On  the  contrary,  the  victor  owes  as  much
consideration  to  the  vanquished  as  to  his  own  side.  The
captive  wounded  must  be  cared  for,  prisoners  must  be  suitably
maintained.  At  the  close  of  a  war,  even  if  territory  is  annexed,
there  should  be  no  confiscation  of  property  or  loss  of  personal
rights.  Some  thinkers  sum  the  matter  up  in  the  formula  that
civilized  war  is  "a  relation  of  a  state  to  a  state,  not  of  an
individual  to  an  individual,"  and  if  this  is  rejected  by  good
authorities1  as  carrying  legal  consequences,  which  they  are
unwilling  to  admit,  it  may  be  accepted  in  ethics  as  practically
denning  the  modern  attitude.  War  must  be  undertaken  and
carried  on  by  an  organized  government.  It  must  be  waged,  if
not  by  regular  troops,  at  least  by  combatants  authorized  in  a
regular  manner.  Non-combatants  must  be  respected  in  person
arid,  so  far  as  military  exigencies  permit,  in  property.  On  their
side,  they  must  abstain  from  warlike  acts,  arid  failing  to  do  so
render  themselves  liable  to  military  execution.  The  killing  of
an  enemy  except  in  the  course  of  a  regular  military  operation
is  murder.  A  sharp  line  is  drawn  between  hostile  acts  done  in
accordance  with  law  and  under  orders  and  those  done  irregu
larly.  The  latter  are  subject  to  punishment  if  the  offender  is
caught.  Thus,  if  not  technically  accurate,  the  view  that  war
is  a  state  of  hostility  between  organized  governments  rather
than  between  individuals  expresses  an  important  measure  of
truth.2

1  Hall,  ]..  64.

2  I  speak  in  the  text  of  civilized  war. In  fighting  savages,  the  white
man deliberately  lowers himself  to the savage level. The  burning  of
kraals,  for  example,  has  been  distinctly  justified  on  the  ground  of  reciprocal
usage,  and the refusal of  quarter  almost  as  openly. Further,  when a
savage  enemy  is  overthrown,  the  white  man  not  seldom  enters  upon  his


276  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

10.  In  emancipating  individual  rights  from  the  violence  of  war,
the  international  lawyers  were  merely  applying  the  conception
of  the  rights  of  the  individual  personality  on  which  modern
ethics rest. The further question remained, whether the
various  groups  of  mankind have  as  groups  assignable  rights.
Has  a  state  rights  as  against  other  states  ? Has  a  nationality
which  has  no  independent  government  a  right  as  against  the
state  or  empire  of  which  it  forms  a  part  ? Has  a  locality  rights
as  against  the  country  within  which  it  lies  ? Confining  ourselves
for  the  present  to  the  first  question,  we  may  point  out  that  the
utter  denial  of  all  obligations  as  between  communities  under
separate governments has seldom if  ever been consistently
carried out. Even savages  recognize  the  obligations  of  good
faith,  and  the  wickedness  of  breaking  a  covenant  when  once
made. On  the  other  hand,  the  right  of  the  stronger  to  impose
what  terms  he  pleases,  and  if  necessary  to  push  his  demands  to
the  point  of  the  utter  annihilation  of  his  enemy  as  an  inde
pendent  power,  has  been  almost  as  generally  admitted. Yet  in
its  denial  of  international  justice  the  world  has  always  been  singu
larly  halting. The  fable  of  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  has  always
applied  to  the  dealings  of  strong  and  weak  peoples,  and  men  are
never  content  to  destroy  their  enemies  without  first  proving  them
to  be  wholly  in  the  wrong  and  utterly  unworthy  to  live. In
our  own  day  the  confusion  of  ideas  has  reached  its  height,  and
results  in  changes  of  attitude  which  succeed  one  another  with
bewildering  rapidity,  men  who  at  one  moment  deny  all  pleas
for  international  justice  as  silly  sentimentality  firing  up  immedi
ately  afterwards  when  they  are  accused  of  applying  their  own
principles  with  perfect  consistency,  and  denying  as  a  disgraceful
slander the charge  that they  have  followed practices  which
they have always declared to be  justifiable. From these
symptoms we may conclude that the human conscience is
uneasy  when  it  is finding formulas to  sanction wrong-doing

territory  and  cattle,  sometimes  also  reducing  liim  to  partial  slavery.
Further,  even  as  between  whites,  the  rules  of  warfare  are  too  frequently
honoured  in  the  breach.  They  are  kept  at  the  outset,  and  as  long  as  both
armies  are  well  in  hand,  but  in  the  absence  of  an  impartial  tribunal  to
enforce  them,  they  become  relaxed,  and  each  side  charges  the  other  with
breaches  of  them,  and  considers  the  charge  a  sufficient  excuse  for  a  further
breach  on  its  own  part.  The  text  describes  civilized  war  at  its  best.


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 277

in  international  affairs,  and  that  in  the  back  of  their  minds
people  recognize  that  justice  is  justice  even  though  there  be
no  power  to  enforce  it.

In  the  medieval  world  such  a  power  was  in  fact  found  in
the  spiritual  supremacy  of  the  Pope,  which  accustomed  men
to  the  reconciliation  of  national  independence  with  a  spiritual
authority  to  whom  all  alike  could  appeal.  When  the  Reforma
tion  broke  up  this  unity  and  the  discovery  of  America  raised
new  problems  of  international  right  and  wrong,  the  modem
idea  of  an  international  code  soon  emerges.  The  early  writers,
like  Franciscus  a  Victoria,  who  boldly  challenged  the  whole
position  of  the  Spanish  in  the  Indies,  were  too  far  ahead  of
their  generation,  and  passed  away  without  sensibly  influencing
it.  The  work  of  Grotius,  as  we  have  seen,  had  a  more  enduring
influence,  and  that  not  only  on  the  usages  of  war,  but  on  the
whole  conception  of  nations  as  being  at  once  politically  inde
pendent  and  yet  morally  subject  to  the  Law  of  Nature.  A  more
revolutionary  principle  was  introduced,  or  rather  was  brought
into  prominence,  by  the  Society  of  Friends,  who  denounced  all
warfare  as  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  Christ,  and  sought  to
recall  men  to  the  principle  of  non-resistance.  The  influence
of  the  Society  on  the  modern  world  is  not  to  be  measured  by
the  number  of  converts  to  its  principles.  It  is  a  protest  which  \
has  set  the  military  spirit  the  task  of  justifying  itself.  Such  1
justification  may  be  founded  in  theory  on  the  necessities  of
self-defence.  But  if  self-defence  is  a  fully  sufficient  justifica
tion  when  the  genuine  motive  of  resistance,  the  study  of
history  compels  us  to  recognize  that  it  is  too  often  a  mere
cloak  for  aggression.  Nor  if  people  are  in  earnest  in  the  desire
to  restrict  war  to  the  occasions  on  which  a  nation  can  main
tain  its  plain  rights  by  no  other  means,  will  they  question  that
war  is  a  radically  rude  and  barbarous  method  of  attaining
that  end,  justifiable  at  best  only  until  means  of  obtaining
justice  in  international  affairs  are  devised  by  the  common-sense
of  civilized  humanity.  The  repeated  settlement  of  difficulties
— sometimes  of  a  most  anxious  and  irritating  nature — by
arbitration  in  recent  years,  the  instances  of  general  agreements
settling  outstanding  controversies  and  providing  for  arbitration
on  future  matters  of  disagreement,  and  finally  the  provision  of


278  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

a  standing  machinery  for  such  occasions,  all  point  to  a  partial
replacement  of  war  by  arbitration,  and  there  seems  every  reason
to  hope  that  within  a  generation  the  employment  of  judicial
arbitrament  will  be  as  common  among  the  European  states
as  it  was  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  between  the  states  of
Greece.

The  doctrine  of  natural  liberty,  particularly  as  preached  by
Cobden  and  the  Free  Traders,  also  told  heavily  on  the  side  of
peace,  just  as  the  recrudescence  of  militarism  in  our  own  day
has  been  associated,  not  in  this  country  alone,  with  economic
Protection.  But  the  Cobdenite  doctrine  was  negative,  and
might  even,  if  rigidly  applied  in  cases  like  that  of  the  Armenians,
be  made  a  justification  for  a  cynical  policy  of  national  isolation.
More  elastic  and  more  human  was  the  Gladstonian  creed,  which,
following  in  the  tradition  of  Fox,  and  equally  of  Canning,
utterly  broke  with  the  doctrine  of  state  morality  and  rested
international  dealings  on  the  simple  ground  of  right  and  wrong
as  applicable  to  all  other  human  relations.  This  is  the  Grotian
principle,  but  more  thoroughly  carried  out.  For  Grotius,  holding
that  states  were  bound  by  the  Law  of  Nature,  conceived  their
conduct  as  restricted  only  in  those  directions — and  they  were
not  so  many — with  which  the  Law  of  Nature  dealt.  The  fuller
view  allows  of  no  fundamental  difference  between  one  branch  of
morality  and  another.  One  is  as  "  natural "  as  the  other,  and
so  the  conception  that  we  form  of  the  honour,  the  true  interest,
the  advancement  of  our  country  is  to  be  measured  by  the  same
standards  as  we  apply  in  judging  of  what  redounds  to  the
honour,  the  true  interest,  the  advancement  of  our  dearest  friends.
At  this  point  we  reach  the  result  to  which  Mazzini  was  led  by
one  road  and  Comte  by  another,  of  each  nation  as  a  member
of  the  family  of  nations  which  constitute  humanity,  as  possess
ing  duties  as  well  as  rights  in  virtue  of  its  position,  and  as
deriving  a  higher  honour  and  more  lasting  glory  from  its
services  to  the  greater  whole  of  which  it  is  a  part  than  from  any
exhibition  of  superior  strength  shown  in  rivalry  with  its  fellow-
members.  Just  as  international  law  rests  in  its  beginnings  on
the  conception  of  humanity  as  incarnate  in  the  person  of  every
human  being,  so  in  the  consummated  conception  of  right  and
brotherhood  between  nations,  it  touches  the  other  pole  of


RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNITIES 279

modern  ethics— the  conception  of  humanity  as  a  whole,  the  sum
of  all  human  beings  and  their  collective  history.  In  this  con
ception  the  old  group-morality  disappears.  The  special  relations
of  citizenship  impose  special  obligations,  but  they  are  no  longer
incompatible  with  the  wider  obligations  to  humanity  at  large,
but  supplement  them.  The  Englishman  owes  a  duty  to
England— the  mother  of  freedom,  the  land  of  his  fathers,  the
state  which  protects  him,  the  nation  which  stimulates  and  guides
him  with  a  glorious  tradition,  which  it  is  his  most  splendid
ambition  to  carry  further  on  its  true  line  of  growth.  He  does
not  owe  the  same  duties  to  France  or  Germany,  but  he  owes
them  recognition  as  members  of  the  family  of  nations,  and  there
are  times  when  he  can  best  serve  England  by  reminding  her  of
what  is  due  to  them.  The  true  patriotism  is  the  corner-stone
of  true  internationalism.

In  all  this  it  is  true  that  we  are  describing  the  ideals  of
thinkers  and  statesmen  rather  than  the  practice  of  nations.
Still,  that  such  ideals  should  have  come  into  touch  with  prac
tical  statesmanship,  as  in  the  course  of  the  nineteenth  century
they  undoubtedly  did,  is  itself  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance
for  ethical  history.  And  notwithstanding  a  certain  counter
movement  in  more  recent  thought  the  actual  realization  of
internationalism  contrives  on  the  whole  to  move  forward.  The
development  may  be  compared  to  the  rise  of  justice  within
society.  The  civilized  world  has  passed  through  the  age  of  the
blood  feud  in  which  any  quarrel  gave  rise  to  a  war  of  extermina
tion.  Custom  has  long  since  restricted  the  quarrel,  excluded
non-combatants  from  the  ring,  and  prohibited  the  general
massacre  or  enslavement  of  the  kinsfolk.  But,  as  in  many
primitive  societies,  there  is  no  physical  force  behind  these
customs,  there  is  nothing  but  the  pressure  of  opinion  and  the
ethical  and  religious  ideas  shared  by  the  nations  concerned  in
common  with  its  neighbours.  The  next  stage  is  to  institute  a
court  for  the  settlement  of  disputes.  Such  a  court  generally
has  no  powers  in  early  society  except  the  moral  power  of  an
appeal  to  opinion,  and  precisely  this  is  the  position  of  the  Hague
tribunal.  It  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  a  time  when  the  decisions
of  that  tribunal  shall  have  gained  such  authority  that  to  dispute
them  will  be  held  at  once  an  outrage  on  justice  and  a  menace


280  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

to  the  world's  peace — such  a  menace  as  would  provoke  a  com
bination  of  powers  to  coerce  the  recalcitrant  party.  At  that
point  the  world's  tribunal  will  have  gained  the  executive
authority  needed  to  transform  it  into  a  fully-developed  court  of
justice.


CHAPTER VII

CLASS RELATIONS

1.  WE  have  seen  that  morality  at  its  outset  is  bound  up  with
the  structure  of  the  social  group.  Between  members  of  any
one  community  the  obligations  recognized  may  be  many  and
stringent,  while  in  relation  to  outsiders  no  obligations  are
recognized  at  all.  The  typical  primitive  community  is,  as  it
were,  a  little  island  of  friends  amid  a  sea  of  strangers  and
enemies.  The  consequences  of  the  group  principle  we  have
traced  in  the  history  of  warfare.  We  have  seen  it  applied  in
its  extreme  form  in  the  treatment  of  conquered  enemies  as  men
destitute  of  any  title  to  consideration  ;  we  have  seen  that  as
moral  development  proceeds,  it  is  moderated  and  softened,  but
that,  except  in  the  highest  ethical  thought,  it  does  not  wholly
disappear.  Throughout  history  we  have  the  standing  contrast
of  the  comparative  peace,  order  and  co-operation  within  each
organized  society,  and  the  disunion  constantly  tending  to  hos
tility  found  in  the  relations  of  different  societies  to  one  another.
We  have  now  to  trace  the  operation  of  the  same  principle  upon
the  structure  of  society  itself.

The  primitive  community  is,  as  a  rule,  small,  but  compact  and
homogeneous.  There  is  always  the  distinction  between  its
own  members  and  outsiders ;  there  is  also  a  greater  or  less  dis
tinction  in  the  rights  enjoyed  by  the  two  sexes.  In  other  respects
the  obligations  constituting  its  ethical  life  are  fairly  uniform.
But  as  society  grows  and  its  industrial  life  develops,  as  primitive
barbarism  gives  way  to  some  degree  of  culture,  this  simplicity  of
the  early  social  organization  breaks  up,  and  now  the  group
principle  obtains  a  fresh  development.  Distinct  groups  arise

281


282  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

within  each  society,  within  the  limits  of  a  single  community,
under  one  king  or  one  governing  body. Besides  the  group  of
free  men — to  use  that  term  provisionally — who  constitute  the
members  of  the  community  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word,
there  arise  inferior  classes,  slaves  or  serfs  or  low-caste  men  who
are  in  the  community  and  yet  not  of  it,  who  are  subject  to  its
laws  and  customs,  but  not  possessed  of  all  the  civil  rights  which
membership  confers. These inferior  groups  within  the  com
munity  occupy  a  position  which  is  morally  and  legally  analogous
to  that  of  strangers  and  enemies. In  extreme  cases  they  are
wholly  devoid  of  rights,  in  other  cases  their  inferiority  is  marked
by  a  more  or  less  serious  lack  of  the  civil  rights  enjoyed  by  their
superiors. Historically,  in  the  case  of  slaves,  their  position  is,
•  in  point  of  fact,  very  largely  that  of  incorporated  enemies,  and
whether  this  corresponds  to  the  historical  fact  or  not,  ethically
speaking,  the  denial  of  personal  rights  from  which  they  suffer  is
a  consequence  of  that  same  group-morality  which  from  the  first
contrasts  friend  and  neighbour  with  stranger  and  enemy,  and
denies  to  the  one  the  elementary  rights  of  a  human  being,  which
are  readily  accorded  to  the  other.

Not  merely  political  privileges,  but  civil  rights,  the  right  of
holding  property,  the  right  of  personal  freedom,  the right  of
marriage,  even  the  right  of  protection  of  life  or  limb,  are  wholly
or  in  part  denied  to  classes  excluded  from  full  membership  of
the  community. Such  distinctions  of  personal  status  are  found
in  one  form  or  another  in  the  great  mass  of  societies,  civilized  or
uncivilized, which  stand  above  the lowest stages  of  culture.
They  persist  well  into  the  modern  period,  and  are  but  slowly
modified,  and  partially  abrogated  in  proportion  as  the  whole
principle  of  group-morality  yields  to  ethical  criticism. Of  these
distinctions  the  commonest  is,  of  course,  the  distinction  between
slave and free, but slavery is in many cases replaced by
serfdom  and  in  others  by  caste. What  is  common  to  all  three
institutions  is  the  derogation  from  full  rights  which  they  imply.
In  detail  they  are  distinct,  though  the  line  of  demarcation  is
not  always  easy  to  draw. We  may  say  that  the  slave,  properly
regarded,  is  a  man  whom  law  and  custom  regard  as  the  property
of  another. In  extreme  cases  he  is  wholly  without  rights,  a
pure  chattel;  in  other  cases  he  may  be  protected  in  certain


CLASS RELATIONS  283

respects,  but  so  may  an  ox  or  an  ass.  As  long  as  he  is  for  all
ordinary  purposes  completely  at  his  master's  disposal,  rendering
to  his  master  the  fruits  of  his  work,  performing  his  work  under
orders,  rewarded  at  his  master's  discretion,  and  liable  to  punish
ment  on  his  master's  judgment,  he  may,  though  protected  in
other  relations,  fairly  be  called  a  slave.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
he  acquires  a  certain  position  of  his  own,  obtains  property  from
which  he  cannot  be  dislodged  except  for  some  default,  enjoys  the
right  of  marriage  and  protection  for  life  and  limb,  he  becomes,
though  still  liable  to  labour  under  his  master's  direction,  still

o

subject,  perhaps,  to  punishment  and  still  in  an  inferior  legal
position,  no  longer  a  slave,  strictly  so  called,  but  a  serf.  Serf  and
slave  alike  belong  as  a  rule  to  private  masters.  A  servile  caste,
on  the  other  hand,  is  not  necessarily  in  the  ownership  of  any
man  or  body  of  men.  It  is  distinguished  by  a  greater  or  less
lack  of  personal  rights,  by  social  inferiority,  and  probably  by  a
taboo  cutting  it  off  from  intercourse  with  others.  Arid  as  there
may  be  servile  castes  falling  below  the  normal  level  of  free  men,
so  there  may  be  privileged  castes  of  nobles  possessing,  as  it  were,
an  excess  of  rights,  and  these  privileges  may  indirectly  depress
the  position  of  the  ordinary  member  of  society  and  impair  his
freedom  by  withholding  protection  from  him  in  relation  to  one
of  the  nobility.  Finally,  the  whole  community  may  suffer  a
similar  depression  in  relation  to  the  king,  who,  in  the  extreme
development  of  the  despotic  principle,  becomes,  as  we  have  seen,
eminent  owner  of  all  property  and  lord  of  the  persons  of  his
subjects.  In  such  cases,  though  there  may  still  be  distinct
grades  in  society,  yet  all  subjects  alike  are  in  principle  destitute
of  rights.

Now  all  these  methods  of  the  gradation  of  rights,  if  the  phrase
be  allowed,  rest  ultimately  on  the  principle  of  group-morality—
the  principle  that  rights  and  duties  do  not  attach  to  the  human
being  as  such,  but  arc  determined  by  extraneous  considerations,
social,  political,  or  religious.  The  development  which  this  prin
ciple  attains  varies  very  greatly  in  different  societies,  and  depends
upon  economic  and  social,  as  well  as  on  ethical  and  religious
conditions  ;  but  its  operation  in  one  form  or  another  persists
throughout  history,  and  is  one  of  the  dominant  facts,  if  not  the
dominant  fact,  ethically  considered,  in  the  evolution  of  human


284  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

society.  In  tracing  its  varied  development,  we  shall  for  the
most  part  follow  the  history  of  slavery  and  serfdom  as  the
main  line  along  which  it  runs.  We  shall,  however,  deal
with  other  forms  which  the  principle  assumes,  as  occasion
requires.

2.  In  the  primitive  group,  as  has  been  said,  we  find,  as  a  rule,
no  distinction  of  slave  and  free,  no  serfdom,  no  caste,  and  little,  if
any,  distinction  between  chief  and  follower.  Taking  this  state
ment  alone,  one  might  infer  that  the  primitive  savage  realizes
the  ideal  of  the  philosopher  of  a  community  of  free  men  and
equals;  but  the  savage  enjoys  freedom  and  equality,  not  because
he  has  realized  the  value  of  those  conceptions,  but  because
neither  he  nor  his  fellow  is  strong  enough  to  put  himself  above
his  neighbour.  Two  conditions  suffice  to  ensure  the  growth  of
slavery  or  of  a  servile  caste  in  the  savage  world.  The  first
condition  is  a  certain  development  of  industrialism.  In  a  hunter
tribe,  which  lives  from  hand  to  mouth,  there  is  little  occasion  for
the  services  of  a  slave.  The  harder  and  less  interesting  work
can  be  put  upon  the  women,  and  the  chief  occupation  of  the  men
is  to  fight.  This  brings  us  at  once  to  the  second  condition,
which  is  a  measure  of  warlike  prowess,  giving  to  a  tribe  the
means  of  supplying  slaves  from  its  captives.  But  not  only  must
a  tribe  that  is  to  obtain  captive  slaves,  conquer;  it  must  also
refrain  from  putting  its  captives  to  death,  and  we  have  already
seen  how  the  difficulty  of  exercising  such  restraint  militates
against  the  rise  of  slavery  in  savage  society,  and  how,  in  con
sequence,  though  the  idea  of  slavery  is  widely  diffused  in  the
uncivilized  world,  the  institution  grows  more  important  step
by  step  with  the  development  of  civilization.  We  find  many
civilized  people,  where  slavery  has  attained  a  luxuriant  growth,
retaining  a  tradition  of  a  time  at  which  there  were  no  slaves,
and  these  traditions  may  well  preserve  an  historical  truth.  But
the  enslavement  of  the  vanquished  is  not  the  only  alternative
open  to  a  conquering  people.  Instead  of  apportioning  the
captives  to  individuals  as  their  booty,  they  may  reduce  the
conquered  tribe  collectively  to  a  servile  position.  In  that  case
we  get  from  the  first  a  system  of  puHic  serfdom.  In  other  cases,
again,  possibly  as  a  development  of  this  practice,  the  distinction


CLASS RELATIONS  285

of  conqueror  and  conquered  hardens  into  a  distinction  of  caste
sanctioned  by  religion.  Finally,  the  development  of  military
organization,  and  the  consequent  rise  of  the  power  of  the  chief,
are  responsible  for  that  form  of  "  rightlessness  "  in  which  all
members  of  the  tribe  become  slaves  of  the  king.1

In  one  or  other  of  these  different  forms  we  find  the  conception
of  a  class  of  men,  wholly  or  partly  destitute  of  rights,  widely
diffused  throughout  the  uncivilized  world.  The  special  home  of
slavery  is,  of  course,  Negro  Africa,  where  the  exceptions  in  which
the  institution  is  not  found  are  quite  inconsiderable.2  In
Oceania  there  is  more  variety.  In  some  of  the  islands,  as  has
been  seen,  war  is  but  little  known,  and  in  these  cases  slavery  is
also  absent ; :!  but  there  are  other  causes  militating  against  its
development.  In  Melanesia  cannibalism  is  frequent,  and,  in.
some  cases,  for  example  in  Fiji,  slaves  are  kept  for  cannibal
purposes.4  In  Micronesia,  again,  a  strongly-marked  caste  divi
sion  partially  replaces  slavery,  though  there  may  be  slaves  in
the  proper  sense  in  addition  to  the  servile  caste.  Throughout

1  Post,  Afrik.  Jiu-isp.,  vol.  i.  p.  115,  seq.,  gives  a  number  of  African
peoples  in  which  the  king  has  absolute  powers  of  life  and  death  over
his  people,  and  a  number  in  which  all  subjects  are  regarded  as  his  slaves.
Among  the  Kaffirs  the  king  could  take  any  man's  cattle  to  replace  his
own.

-  According  to  Waitz,  vol.  ii.  p.  398,  slavery  was  for  the  most  part
unknown  among  Kaffirs,  and  the  case  of  a  sale  of  children  recorded  by
Moffat  is  regarded  as  exceptional.  A  less  favourable  view  of  Kaffir  warfare
is  taken  by  Letourneau  (Esclavage,  p.  53),  who  says  that  they  took  girl
prisoners  as  concubines  and  youths  as  slaves,  though  their  manners  were
too  savage  for  regular  slavery.  Letourneau  also  draws  attention  (pp.  54,  55)
to  a  servile  class,  called  balala,  among  the  Bechuanas,  who  had  no  possessions,
had  to  perform  manual  labour  in  return  for  food,  might  be  slain  for  dis
obedience,  and  supplied  victims  for  human  sacrifice  upon  occasion.  We
have  here  something  more  nearly  approaching  a  caste  distinction  than
ordinary  slavery.

The  Hottentots,  according  to  Letourneau  (/6.,  pp.  49-51),  gave  no
quarter  and  held  no  slaves,  but,  according  to  authorities  cited  by  Kohler
(Z.f.  V.  R.,  190-2,  p.  340),  slavery,  though  it  has  now  disappeared,  existed
formerly,  and  the  slaves  were  at  the  masters'  mercy  and  often  ill-treated.

3  For  example,  in  the  little  island  of  llotuma  slavery  proper  did  not  exist
and  casual  strangers  were  usually  married  and  adopted  into  a  clan. Some
Fijians  and  Melanesians,  however,  have  been  treated  as  inferiors,  not  being
adopted. (J.  S.  Gardiner  in  ,7".  A.  I.,  xxvii.  p.  486.) In  parts  of  New
Guinea  there  is  no  slavery  (Letourneau,  p.  39)  ;  it  is  the  exception  among
the  Papuas. (16.,  p.  35,  and  Kohler,  Z.  f.  V.  K,  1900,  p.  364.)

4  Letourneau,  op.  cit.,  p.  41. Broadly,  Letourneau  concludes  Melanesian
slavery  originated  lor  the  sake  of  cannibalism.


286  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

Polynesia  caste  is  more  prominent  than  slavery.1  It  is  a
Polynesian  saying,  that  "  a  chief  cannot  steal,"  and  in  Tahiti,  if
a  chief  asks,  "  Whose  is  that  tree,  etc.,"  the  owner  answers,
"  Yours  and  mine."  The  killing  of  one  of  the  lower  by  a
member  of  the  higher  class  is  regarded  as  merely  a  peccadillo.2
In  Micronesia  the  original  principle  of  the  constitution  seems
to  have  been  a  division  into  two  castes,  the  one  god-like,
immortal,  and  possessing  all  the  power ;  the  other  having
no  souls,  no  property,  no  wives,  and  doing  all  the  hard
labour ;  but  below  these  again  were  the  enslaved  prisoners.3  In
the  Malay  region  slavery  is  widely  diffused ,  especially  in  the
towns,4  though,  as  we  shall  see  later,  its  forms  differ,  and  in
some  cases, particularly  under  Mohammedan  influence,  the  slave  is
by  no  means  rightless.  Among  the  rude  Indian  hill  tribes  the
institution  is  naturally  less  developed.  In  some  cases,  as  among
the  Bodos  and  Dhimals,  there  are  apparently  no  slaves,  and  the
same  is  said  to  be  true  of  some  of  the  Naga  tribes.  Other
Nagas,  however,  make  slaves  of  captives,5  and  among  many
other  hill  tribes  slaves  are  held.6  The  nomad  tribes  of  Central
Asia  do  not  generally  spare  their  captives,  and  still  practise
human  sacrifice,  but  the  richer  tribes  are  slave-holders.7  Among
the  North  American  Indiana  slavery  is  but  little  developed  east
of  the  Rockies,  though  there  were  a  few  tribes  which  occasionally
practised8  it  as  an  alternative  to  the  torture  or  adoption  of

1  Thus  in  the  Marquesas  Islands  there  were  no  slaves,  but  a  despised
lower class who furnished victims for human sacrifice. (Letourneau,
p.  183.)

2  16.,  188.

3  Waitz,  v.  ii.  p.  125. In  the  Carolinas  not  only  was  intermarriage
forbidden,  but  the  lower  caste  had  to  avoid  contact  with  the  higher  on
pain  of  death. Fishery  and  sea-faring  were  forbidden  occupations  to  the
lower  caste.

4  See  Waitz,  Anthropologie,  v.  i.  154,  seq.  ;  Ratzel,  History  of  Mankind,
i.  446.

6  Slavery  is  said  to  be  universal  among  the  Aos  (Godden,  J.  A.  /.,
xxvi.  p.  184),  but  the  Luhupas  and  one  or  two  other  tribes  are  said  to
have  no  slaves  and  to  be  opposed  to  the  institution. All  the  Nagas  are
head-hunters. (Godden,  J.  A.  J.,  xxvii.  p.  12.)

0  E.  g.  Kukis,  Garos,  Gonds  and  Khouds,  who  use  slaves  for  sacrifices.
The  Lakka  Kols  have  serfs  instead  of  slaves. (Letourneau,  pp.  305,  306.)

7  Ratzel,  vol.  iii.  p.  346. According  to  Letourneau  (p.  223),  a  form
of  serf  cultivation  is  more  strongly  developed  than  personal  slavery.

8  E.g.  according  to  Waitz,  vol.  iii.  p.  158,  the  tribes  of  North  Carolina,
the  Navajos,  Iroquois  and  Hurons.


CLASS RELATIONS  287

prisoners.  In  the  west  and  north,  however,  it  was  widely
diffused,1  though  here  also,  in  some  cases,  the  indiscriminate
massacre  of  prisoners  was  the  common  alternative.  In  the
tribes  of  tropical  South  America  slavery  appears  to  be  confined  to
war  captives,  but  prisoners  may  also  be  put  to  death  or  adopted
as  members  of  the  tribe.2

Thus  while  avoiding  undue  generalization  we  may  fairly  say
(1)  that  in  the  rudest  tribes  there  are  no  class  distinctions,  the
harder  and  more  menial  work  falling  often  (though  not  always)
upon  the  women ;  (2)  as  a  tribe  grows  in  culture,  and  especially
in  military  strength,  the  first  result  is,  as  a  rule,  that  the
conquered  enemies  are  sacrificed,  eaten,  tortured,  or  in  any  case
put  to  death.  But  (3)  with  a  certain  softening  of  manners,  or  at
any  rate  with  a  cooler  perception  of  permanent  advantage,
prisoners  are  spared  and  enslaved.  This  grace  is  first  reserved
for  women  and  children,  but  is  afterwards  extended  to  male
captives.  A  class  is  thus  formed  who  are  within  the  jurisdiction
of  the  conquering  tribe,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  law  and
morals  remain  outside  it.  Either  in  the  form  of  a  class  of  slaves
or  of  a  degraded  quasi-servile  lower  caste,  the  presence  of  such
an  element  in  the  population  is  a  general  feature  in  societies
which  have  emerged  from  the  lower  savagery  and  the  rawest
militarism.  On  the  strict  principle  of  group-morality  this  class
is  destitute  of  rights,  and  only  too  often  the  principle  is  con
sistently  carried  out.  The  typical  slave  can  neither  marry  nor
hold  property  except  on  sufferance.  His  very  life  is  in  his
master's  hands.  He  may  be  flogged,  maimed,  sold,  pawned,
given  away,  exchanged,  or  put  to  death.

3.  In  many  slave  systems,  however,  this  "  rightlessness "  is

1  Thus among the Oregons prisoners were enslaved "  from time
immemorial "  and  sometimes  sacrificed  at  the  death  of  a  master. (Alvord
in  Schoolcraf't,  v.  p.  654.) Slavery  is said  to  have  extended  over  the
whole north-west coast. (Waitz,  vol. iii. p.  329.) At Nootka  Sound
prisoners  when  spared  were  enslaved. The  Chinooks  made  slave  razzias
and  held  the  slave  as  a  chattel  and  object  of  trade. (lb.,  pp.  334,  338.)
The  Apaches  killed  the  male  captives,  but  sometimes  held  the  women  as
slaves. (Reclus,  p.  128.)

2  Schmidt,  Z.  f.  V.  K,  1898,  p.  294. According  to  Letourneau  (p.  123),
the  Nomads  of  the  Pampas  rarely  give  quarter  to  males,  but  sometimes
take  women  as  slave  concubines  and  bring  up  children  to  be  adopted  into
the  conquering  tribe.


288  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

qualified  in  various  ways.  How  this  qualification  arises  we
shall  best  understand  if  we  take  a  more  complete  view  of  the
actual  sources  from  which  slaves  are  recruited.  Hitherto  we
have  spoken  only  of  captives  in  war.  But  this,  though  probably
the  original  method  by  which  a  servile  class  is  formed,  is  not  the
only  method  by  which  it  is  recruited.  Of  other  methods  the
first  and  greatest  is  inheritance — for  normally  a  slave's  child  is
also  a  slave.  Secondly,  in  most  barbaric  and  semi-civilized
societies  the  numbers  of  the  slave  class  are  swollen  by  other
causes,  principally  by  debt,  crime,  and  the  slave  trade.  In  some
cases  slavery  is  the  prescribed  penalty  for  crime.  More  often
the  man  who  cannot  pay  the  prescribed  composition  either  falls
into  slavery  himself  as  a  debt-slave  in  order,  as  it  were,  to  work
out  his  debt,  or  sells,  particularly  under  the  sway  of  the  fully
developed  patria  potestas,  his  wife  or  child  for  that  purpose.
"  What !  shall  I  starve  as  long  as  my  sister  has  children  whom
she  can  sell  ?  "  was  the  remark  of  an  African  negro  to  Burton —
a  remark  which  comprises  a  whole  chapter  upon  primitive  ethics
in  a  few  words.

The  formation  of  debtor-slaves,  and  even  the  increase  of  here
ditary  slaves,  has,  however,  a  certain  softening  influence  upon
the  institution  of  slavery  itself,  for  while  the  captive  slave
remains  an  enemy  in  the  sight  of  law  and  morals  and  is  there
fore  rightless,  the  debtor  or  the  criminal  was  originally  a  member
of  the  community,  and  in  relation  to  him  there  is  apt  to  arise
some  limitation  of  the  power  of  the  master.  The  family  of  the
debtor-slave  will  not  see  him  treated  with  unlimited  cruelty ;
they  retain  some  right  of  protection,  however  illogically,  just
as  they  retain  protection  over  the  purchased  wife,  however
illogically.  In  fact  the  slave  is  no  longer  a  mere  stranger  or
enemy.  He  is  partially  incorporated  in  the  community  and  has
some  recognized  rights,  though  by  no  means  those  of  a  free  man.
The  improvement  tends  to  extend  itself  to  the  hereditary  slave
who  also  was  born  in  the  community,  though  within  the  slave
class.  Thus  there  comes  to  be  a  distinction  between  the
domestic  slave  and  the  slave  who  is  captured  or  bought  from
abroad.  The  one  remains  a  chattel-slave,  the  other  is  becoming  a
serf.  There  are  thus  many  gradations  of  "  rightlessness  "  in  the
servile  status,  and  these  must  very  briefly  be  passed  in  review.


CLASS RELATIONS  289

Customs  protecting  the  slave  from  undue  tyranny  are  found
in  the  barbaric  and  semi-civilized  world,  though  in  many  cases
they  are  not  derived  from  barbaric  ideas,  but  are  traceable  to  the
influence  of  Mohammedanism. In  these  customs  the  distinction
between  the  domestic  and  the  foreign  slave  is  generally  well  ]
marked. Illustrations  of  almost  every  degree  in  "rightlessness"
may  be  drawn  from  African  slavery. Thus,  among  the  Foulah,
house  slaves  are  treated  as  members  of  the  family,  and  are  sold
only  in  necessity  or  for  a  punishment,  while  war  captives  and
purchased  foreign  slaves  are  wholly  without  rights. In  Bambara
captives  are  pure  chattels,  but  house  slaves  have  a  good  position
and  in  some  cases  are  treated  as  members  of  the  family. Among
the  Timmanees,  the  Bulloms,  and  the  Beni-amer,  no  one  is  sold
as  a  slave  who  was  not  bought  as  such. Among  the  Mandin-
goes  native  slaves  arc  protected,  while  others  are  at  the  mercy  of
the  master  to  sell  or  kill. On  the  Congo  the  captive  slave  may
be  sold,  but  house  slaves  only  after  a  palaver,  that  is,  with  the
consent  of  the  community. Among  the  Barea  and  Kunama  the
master  has  no  right  of  life  and  death  over  native  slaves. At
Timbuctoo  no  native  can  be  enslaved  at  all. Among  the  West
Equatorial  tribes  the  slave  may  be  killed  by  his  master,  but  not
sold  abroad  except  for  some  transgression. At  Nuffi  a  master
may  strike,  but  not  mutilate  or  kill  his  slave. In  Sokoto  and
among  the  Yolofs  the  captive  slave  may  be  sold  at  will,  the  born
slave  only  after  repeated  chastisement. In  Bihe  pawn-slaves
are  protected,  while  bought  ones  can  be  arbitrarily punished,
and  only  in  the  case  of  their  death  is  a  small  fine  due  from  the
owner  to  the  king. Among  the  Mpongwe  the  house  slave  can
only  be  sold  for  some  offence,  and  here  slaves  call  their  master
"  father "  and  are  well  treated. The  Fantis  recognize  the  dis
tinction  between  the  slaves  of  their  own  tribe  and  those  of  other
tribes,  and  among  the  Ibu,  on  the  Niger,  slaves  can  hold  property,
build  houses  and  marry.1 They  then  rank  as  free,  owing  only  a
yearly  tax,  and  the  relation,  in  fact,  passes  into  a  kind  of  light
serfdom. Similarly  at  Sokoto  the  slave  is  at  about  the  age  of
twenty  given  a  wife  and  set  up  in  a  hut  in  the  country. At
Boussa  they  farm  the  land  on  the  metayer  principle,  and  though
in  law  the  masters  could  sell  them  and  take  their  wives,  children

1  See  Post,  Afrik.  Jurisprudent,  i.  pp.  88,  92,  96  ;  Waitz,  ii.  213-214.
VOL.  I.  u


290  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

and  goods,  in  practice  they  enjoy  much  liberty  and  property.1
Various  forms  of  serfdom,  existing  often  side  by  side  with
slavery,  are  common  in  Africa,  the  serf  cultivating  the  land  and
owing  labour  service  or  payment  in  kind,  and  sometimes  holding
property  of  his  own.2

A  right  frequent  in  Mohammedan  countries,  found  also  in  one
or  two  instances  of  non-Mohammedan  tribes,  is  that  of  changing
the  master.  This  a  slave  can  effect  by  the  legal  process  of  noxae
datio,  by  which,  on  inflicting  some  injury  on  some  man  other
than  his  own  master,  he,  ipso  facto,  becomes  that  man's  slave.
Among  the  Barea  and  Kunama  a  native  slave  can  simply  leave
for  another  village  and  so  become  free.  In  Zanzibar  slaves
obtain  this  right  as  the  result  of  deliberate  ill-treatment,  and  the
same  custom  is  found  on  the  Congo,  among  the  Apingi,  and
other  West  Equatorial  tribes.  In  Ashanti  slaves  can  commend
themselves  to  a  new  master  by  giving  him  the  right  of  life  and
death  over  them,  and  in  Timbuctoo,  if  ill-treated,  a  slave  may
appeal  to  the  court  in  order  to  be  sold.  Among  the  Beni-amer
the  distinction  between  the  born  slave  and  the  foreign  slave  is
well  marked  in  the  case  of  homicide.  For  the  bought  slave  only
the  "  wer  "  can  be  demanded,  but  the  born  slave  can  be  avenged
by  blood.  The  marriage  of  slaves  depends  generally  upon  the
will  of  the  master.  In  relation  to  property  their  rights  vary
greatly,  and  here  again  the  distinction  of  origin  of  slaves  makes
itself  felt,  e.  g.  among  the  Bogos  and  Marea  a  slave  who  is  the
son  of  a  free-born  man  has  the  right  to  buy  his  freedom,  a  right
which  is  denied  to  the  slave  by  birth.3

Of  the  various  tribes  mentioned,  those  in  which  protection  is
carried  furthest  are  for  the  most  part  either  partially  Mohammed-
anized  or  partially  „  Christianized,4  and  while  some  distinction
between  domestic  and  foreign  slaves  may  be  attributed  to

1  Letourneau, p. 103. Yet  at  Sokoto  captive slaves, besides  being
frequently  sold,  are  treated  as  beasts  of  burden  and  chained  for  trivial
offences. (Post,  A.  J.,  i.  p.  96  ;  Letourneau,  L'Esclavage,  p.  102.)

2  For  instances  see  Post,  Afrik.  Jurisp.,  pp.  98,  101,  106. In  case  of
failure  to  make  due  payments  the  serf  is  often  reduced  to  the  position
of  a  slave,  e.  g.  among  the  Takue,  Marea,  and  Bogos. Among  the  Beni-
amer  the  penalty  of  failure  is  death. (Post,  A.  J.,  i.  p.  101.)

3  Instances  are  found  at  Khartoum,  among  the  Usagara,  the  Futatoro,
and  among  the  Kimbunda. (Post,  A.  J.,  103,  105,  112.)

4  Letourneau,  88.


CLASS RELATIONS  291

Negroland  generally,  such  further  amelioration  of  the  slave's
position  as  is  to  be  found  in  barbarous  or  semi-civilized  Africa  is
probably  to  be  attributed  to  the  higher  ethics  of  a  civilized
religion.1  The  same  influence  is  found  at  work  among  the
Malays,  where  the  distinction  of  native  and  foreign  slaves  also
re-appears.  Speaking  generally,  the  captive  slaves  are  destitute
of  rights,  and  the  capture  and  sale  of  slaves  is  a  chief  line  of
business  among  all  Malays  who  trade  in  ships  of  their  own.
But  crime  and  debt  are  also  rich  sources  of  slavery,2  and  in  some
parts  at  least  the  slave  has  a  measure  of  protection.  In  the
Malacca  Peninsula,  where  the  influence  of  Islam  is  strong,  the
slave  if  struck  may  bring  his  master  into  court,  and  the  slave
woman  who  bears  a  child  to  her  master  goes  free.3  The  Battaks
also,  head-hunters  though  they  are,  put  a  limit  on  the  master's
right  of  punishment.4

Thus  in  the  barbaric  world  we  already  find  degrees  of  right-
lessness,  and  a  measure  of  legal  or  customary  protection,  at  least
for  certain  classes  of  slaves.  This  alleviation  is  often  but  not
always  5  traceable  to  the  influence  of  one  of  the  higher  religions.
The  free  man  who  has  become  a  slave  is  not  wholly  cut  off  from
membership  of  the  community,  but  retains  certain  recognized
rights,  though  by  no  means  those  which  full  membership
confers.  We  have  now  to  see  how  the  idea  of  slavery,  and  of
rightlessness  generally,  fare  in  the  main  forms  of  civilization.

4.  In  the  early  Babylonian  Empire  slavery  was  fully  developed
as  an  institution,  though  slaves  were  not  so  numerous  as  they

1  Letourneau,  p.  72,  seq.  2  Waltz,  v.,  i.  143,  153.

3  16.,  153-5.

4  According  to  Letourneau  (p.  200),  the  master  may  punish,  but  not  put
the  slaves  to death. According  to  Waitz,  op.  cit.,  p.  188,  punishment
must  be  inflicted  by  a  magistrate. The  slave  becomes  a  concubine  by
prolonged cohabitation,  and sometimes  a  legitimate wife. (Letourneau,
1.  c.) Among  the  more  savage  Battaks  slaves  are  used  for  human  sacrifices.
(Letourneau,  p.  203.)

6  Apart  from  some  of  the  instances  already  given,  in  ancient  Mexico,
where  captive  slaves  were  taken  principally  for  food,  domestic  slaves
were  protected.  They  might  not  be  sold  without  their  consent,  nor
chastised  without  previous  warning.  If  ill-treated  they  might  take  refuge
with  the  king,  and  to  kill  them  was  a  capital  offence.  They  could  hold
property  and  marry,  and  their  children  were  free.  (Letourneau,  pp.  157,  158 ;
cf.  also  Payne,  vol.  ii.  p.  485,  note  3.)


292  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

afterwards  became.  The  slave  is  spoken  of  in  the  contracts1
not  as  a  man,  but  as  a  chattel.  Slaves  are  reckoned  in  a  transfer
as  so  many  pieces  of  goods.  They  were  distinguished  by  a
brand,  and,  if  they  were  runaways,  often  wore  fetters.2  They
are  recruited  by  capture,  by  debt,  and  by  the  sale  of  wives  or
children  by  husbands  or  fathers.  They  pass  on  a  man's  death
to  his  heirs,  and  can  be  pawned,  given  away  or  sold.  With
the  exception  of  debt -slaves,  the  Code  of  Hammurabi  makes  no
provision  for  their  protection  against  their  masters.  The  only
case  in  which  it  prescribes  any  treatment  is  that  of  the  repudia
tion  of  their  master,  in  which  the  penalty  assigned  is  the
comparatively  light  one  of  losing  an  ear.  In  practice,  however,
it  would  seem  that  the  punishments  for  running  away  were
severe.3  The  provisions  in  the  Code  for  cases  of  injury  to  a
slave  by  some  one  other  than  his  master  are  fall  of  significance.
The  slave's  life  has  its  price,  but  clearly  the  price  goes  to  the
master,  for  in  the  passages  which  refer  to  the  killing  of  a  slave
the  law  is  that  the  offender  shall  render  slave  for  slave.  For
example —

"  If  a  doctor  has  treated  the  severe  wound  of  a  slave  of  a  poor
man  with  a  bronze  lancet  and  has  caused  his  death,  he  shall  render
slave  for  slave.

"  If  he  has  opened  his  abscess  with  a  bronze  lancet  and  has  made
him  lose  his  eye,  he  shall  pay  money,  half  his  price." 4

Similarly,  the  defaulting  builder  who  causes  a  free  man's  death
is  punished  by  the  law  of  retaliation,  but  if  it  is  a  slave  who
dies  "  he  shall  give  slave  for  slave."  5  This  is  pleasant  for  the
master,  but  of  no  particular  value  to  the  slave,  and  so  when
sect.  199  says  that  if  a  man  "  has  caused  the  loss  of  the  eye  of
a  gentleman's  servant,  or  has  shattered  the  limb  of  a  gentleman's
servant,  he  shall  pay  half  his  price,"  we  may  assume  that  it  is
the  owner  who  benefits.6  The  loss  of  life  or  limb  by  a  slave  is

1  The  contracts  yield  no  instance  of  more  than  four  in  a  family,  and
great  houses often have  only  one. (Meissner,  Altbabylon. Privatrecht,
pp.  6,  7.)

2  Meissner,  loc.  cit.  3  Meissner, loc  cit.,  and  De  Servitute,  p.  2.
4  Hammurabi,  sees.  219,  220.  6  Op.  cit.,  sec.  231.
6  Compare  the  clauses  dealing  with  miscarriage,  213,  214  : "  If  he  has

struck  a  gentleman's  maidservant,  and  caused  her  to  drop  that  which  is  in
her  womb,  he  shall  pay  two  shekels  of  silver.  If  that  maidservant  has
died,  he  shall  pay  one-third  of  a  mina  of  silver."


CLASS  RELATIONS  293

loss  to  the  master,  and  is  made  good  by  compensating  him — so
completely  is  the  slave  his  chattel.1  Debt-slaves,  however,  were,
as  has  been  noticed,  in  a  more  favourable  position.  Their
bondage  is  limited  to  three  years.  If  a  man  has  a  debt,  says
clause  117,  "and  he  has  given  his  wife,  his  son,  his  daughter,
for  the  money,  or  has  handed  over  to  work  off  the  debt,  for
three  years  they  shall  work  in  the  house  of  their  buyer  or
exploiter,  in  the  fourth  year  he  shall  fix  their  liberty."  Further,
the  person  seized  by  a  creditor  in  distraint  is  protected  by
retaliation  or  price,  according  as  he  is  a  free  man  or  slave.2

In  practice  the  position  of  the  Babylonian  slave  was  probably
much  more  favourable  than  it  appears  in  legal  theory.  In  the
records  of  the  New  Kingdom,  slaves  often  appear  as  principals
in  business  transactions.  They  carry  on  trades  or  businesses,
such  as  banking,  and  have  a  peculium  which  is  virtually  assured
to  them,  though  in  law  it  may  be  their  master's,  and  for  which
they  pay  a  yearly  tribute  to  the  owner.  Out  of  this  peculium
some  slaves,  if  not  all,  might  buy  back  their  liberty.3  We  find
them  entering  into  contracts  with  other  slaves  and  even  with
free  men,  suing  and  sued  at  law,  and  in  many  ways  acting  as
though  free.4  On  the  other  hand,  they  might  be  branded.  The
rich  Itti-Marduk-Balatu  buys  two  slaves,  one  marked  on  the
ears  and  the  eyes  and  one  who  is  simply  described  as  branded,
for  three  minae?  This  same  great  banker  disposes  of  a  slave
girl  to  one  purchaser  after  another  for  immoral  purposes,  and  a
contract  selling  a  woman  to  a  brothel-keeper  is  preserved.6
The  slave  girl  was  entirely  at  the  disposal  of  her  master,  and
indeed,  if  he  totally  neglected  her,  it  was  held  that  she  would
in  time  become  a  malevolent  being  with  demoniac  powers,
against  whom  magical  conjurations  were  pronounced.7  Slaves
were  freely  pawned,  given  away  and  sold.  Putting  all  the  facts

1  Notwithstanding  the  bad  legal  position  of  slaves,  the  code  contemplates
the  marriage  of  slaves  with  free  women,  sec.  175.

2  Sec.  116. The  clause  contemplates  distraint  upon  the  person only
(Dareste,  Journal  dcK  Savants,  Oct.  1002,  p.  526),  and  apparently  the  seizure
of  the  son  or  slave  of  the  actual  debtor.

3  Oppert,  Condition  des  Esdavcs  a  Babylone,  p.  4.

4  Kohler  and  Peiser,  Aus  dem  babylonischen  Bechtslehen,  lift.  i.  1  ;  ii.  6.

5  Meissner,  De  Servit-ute,  p.  20.

0  Kohler  and  Peiser,  op.  cit.,  iv.  28,  29.
7  Maspero,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.  735.


294  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

together,  it  would  seem  that  there  were  different  classes  of
slaves,  distinguished  in  practice  and  by  custom  if  not  in  law,
and  that,  while  some  of  them  had  practical  enjoyment  of  various
important  rights,  the  conception  of  chattel  slavery  had  by  no
means  disappeared.

Our  information  as  to  ancient  Egyptian  slavery  is  not  so
precise  as  it  is  for  Babylon,  and  when  dealing  with  a  history
extending  over,  perhaps,  four  or  five  thousand  years,  it  is  easy  to
make  statements  which  would  be  true  of  one  period,  but  would
not  hold  of  others.  Some  broad  features,  however,  appear
tolerably  constant.  The  main  sources  of  recruitment  of  slaves
in  the  full  sense  of  the  term  were  capture  and  the  slave  trade.
The  conquering  Egyptians  did  not  always  kill  all  their  male
captives,  but  frequently  took  them  alive,  and  throughout  their
history  down  to  the  New  Kingdom,  frequently  organized  warlike
expeditions  or  razzias  for  the  purpose  of  slave-hunting.1  Prisoners
were  taken  for  service  on  the  public  works,2  or  to  the  harems,
and  it  appears  from  the  Tell-el-Amarna  letters,  that,  in  addition
to  thousands  of  female  slave  captives,  there  was  a  regular
tribute  of  girls  from  various  places.3  On  the  public  works,  the
pyramids,  the  great  temples  and  palaces,  the  labour  and  lives  of
the  captives  were  prodigally  spent.  Ramcses  IV.,  in  one  expedi
tion  for  transporting  great  blocks  of  granite,  employed  5000
common  soldiers,  800  barbarian  mercenaries,  2000  bond-servants
of  the  temples  and  200  officers.  When  foreign  captives  were  not
available  the  Pharaohs  employed  their  subjects.4

An  idea  of  the  number  of  slaves  in  Egypt  may  be  formed
from  the  fact  that  in  the  course  of  thirty  years  Rameses  III.
presented  113,433  to  the  temples  alone.5  These  slaves  were
apparently  entirely  at  the  disposal  of  their  master,  who  removed
them  from  place  to  place,  sold  them,  used  them  as  he  pleased,
pursued  them  if  they  succeeded  in  escaping,  and  had  the  right
of  re-capturing  them  as  soon  as  he  received  information  of  their

1  See  above,  Chap.  VI.  pp.  255,  256.

2  Diodorus  describes  the  suffering  of  captive  slaves,  including  women
and  old  men,  in  the  Nubian  gold  mines. His  description  refers  to  the
times of  the Ptolemies, but  there  is  no  reason  to suppose  that  things
had  got  any  worse  under  the  rule  of  the  Greeks.  (Erman,  Life  in  Ancient
Egypt,  463  ;  Diodorus,  iii.  11.)

3  Flinders  Petrie,  History  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.  p.  274.

4  Erman,  p.  476.  '°  Maspero,  p.  326.


CLASS RELATIONS  295

whereabouts.  They  worked  for  him  under  their  overseers'  orders,
receiving  no  regular  wages,  and  with  no  hope  of  recovering
their  liberty.1  The  captives,  however,  apparently  intermarried
frequently  with  natives,  and  had  families  and  descendants  who,
at  the  end  of  two  or  three  generations,  became  assimilated  with
the  indio-enous  races,  and  passed  into  the  condition  of  serfdom,
in  which  the  mass  of  the  native  Egyptian  population  appears
to  have  lived.  How  far  this  serfdom  extended,  and  what  classes
were  free,  it  is  difficult  to  say  with  precision.  Erman  points
out  that  in  the  early  Empire,  if  we  went  only  by  the  monuments
and  representations  in  the  tombs,  we  might  conclude  that  there
was  no  intermediate  class  between  the  great  men  in  the  kingdom,
the  priests  and  officers,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  crowd  of
labourers  and  serfs  on  the  other ;  but  probably  there  must  have
been  some  middle  class  which  helped  to  bring  Egyptian  art
and  handicraft  to  their  pitch  of  perfection.2  In  the  New  Kingdom
the  peasant  serfs  were  strictly  part  of  the  property  of  the  crown,
or  the  temple  to  which  the  land  belonged.  They  were  despised
by  the  scribes,  and  their  condition  is  the  subject  of  many
contemporary  descriptions  implying  abject  servility.
The  following  verses  refer  to  the  slaves—

"The  poor  child  is  only  brought  up,
That  he  may  be  torn  from  his  mother's  arms  ;
As  soon  as  he  comes  to  man's  estate,
His  bones  are  beaten  like  those  of  a  donkey  ;
He  is  driven,  he  has  indeed  no  heart  in  his  body."3

Even  more  graphic  are  the  descriptions  in  the  Sallier
papyrus —

"  The  stone-cutter,  who  seeks  his  living  by  Avorking  in  all  kinds
of  durable  stone,  when  at  last  he  has  earned  something,  and  his
two  arms  are  worn  out,  he  stops;  but  if  at  sunrise  he  remain  sitting,
his  legs  are  tied  to  his  back.  .  .  .  When  the  (mason's)  work  is
quite  finished,  if  he  has  bread,  he  returns  home,  and  his  children
have  been  beaten  unmercifully  (during  his  absence).  The  weaver
within  doors  is  worse  off  there  than  a  woman ;  squatting,  his
knees  against  his  chest,  he  does  not  breathe.  If  during  the  day
he  slackens  weaving,  he  is  bound  fast  as  the  lotuses  of  the  lake ;

1  Maspero,  loc.  cit. In  a  large  measure  the  slave  work  was  done  in  the
regular  workhouses,  or  er(/astula. For  the  employment  of  bondwomen  in
these  places  sec  W.  Max  Muller,  Liebespoesie,  p.  6.

2  Erman,  pp.  100,  101.  3  Erman,  p.  128


296  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION


and  it  is  by  giving  bread  to  the  doorkeeper  that  the  latter  permits
him  to  see  the  light."  l

More  than  this,  it  would  seem  that  even  the  free  man,  who
was  unrestricted  in  his  power  to  move  about  and  dispose  of
himself  and  his  labour,  was  insecure  unless  he  had  his  master,
who  would  afford  to  him  protection.  Egyptian  society,  in  fact,
was  organized  upon  a  feudal  basis.

"From  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  social  scale  every  free  man
acknowledged  a  master,  who  secured  to  him  justice  and  protection
in  exchange  for  his  obedience  and  fealty.  The  moment  an  Egyptian
tried  to  withdraw  himself  from  this  subjection,  the  peace  of  his  life
was  at  an  end;  he  became  a  man  without  a  master,  and  .  .  .
without  a  recognized  protector.  .  .  .  Any  one  might  stop  him  on
the  way,  steal  his  cattle,  merchandise  and  property  on  the  most
trivial  pretext,  and  if  he  attempted  to  protest,  might  beat  him  with
almost  certain  impunity."  2

Further,  it  is  only  in  a  qualified  sense  that  freedom  can  be
spoken  of  at  all  in  relation  to  a  country  governed  as  Egypt  was.
As  against  the  king  or  a  great  feudal  lord,  the  Egyptian  peasant
often,  if  nominally  free  and  possessed  of  his  own  plot  of  land,
was  without  defence  and  without  recognized  rights.  The  tax-
gatherer  was  in  ancient  Egypt  what  he  remained  to  the  Modern
Period.  Here  is  the  description  of  him  true  to  the  life  in  the
Sallier  papyrus3 —

"  The  scribe  steps  out  of  the  boat  at  the  landing-place  to  levy  the
tithe,  and  there  come  the  keepers  of  the  doors  of  the  granary  with
cudgels  and  the  negroes  with  ribs  of  palm-leaves,  who  come  crying :
'  Come  now,  corn  ! '  There  is  none,  and  they  throw  the  cultivator
full  length  upon  the  ground;  bound,  dragged  to  the  canal,  they
fling  him  in  head  first ;  his  wife  is  bound  with  him,  his  children
are  put  in  chains ;  the  neighbours,  in  the  meantime,  leave  him,  and
fly  to  save  their  grain."

The  system  of  forced  labour  was  no  less  oppressive  to  the
peasantry  than  that  of  the  collection  of  taxes.  The  slaves  were
insufficient  to  cultivate  the  royal  and  seignorial  lands,  and  the
balance  of  the  work  fell  upon  the  neighbouring  peasantry,  none
being  exempt  except  the  destitute,  soldiers  on  service,  with  their
families,  certain  public  employes  and  servitors  of  the  temple.

1  Maspero,  p.  312.  2  j& }  309  3  jj ^  331


CLASS  RELATIONS  297

The  work  was  hard,  and  enforced  by  the  stick,  and  not  only  did
it  recur  at  regular  periods,  but  in  addition  there  were  irregular
corvees  whenever  it  suited  the  king  or  lord  to  demand  them.1
The  slave,  properly  so  called,  was  not  indeed  wholly,  or  at
any  rate  not  at  all  times,  destitute  of  rights. According to
Diodorus  his  murder  was  punished  with  death,  the  object  of  the
law  being,  in  the  view  of  the  Greek  historian,  to  keep  people
from  bad*  actions  not  through  differences  of  fortune,  but  rather
from  the  nature  of  the  actions  themselves,  and  at  the  same  time
to  accustom  a  man  by  care  for  slaves  to  avoid  far  more  all
offences  against  free  men.2 This  is  a  thoroughly  Greek  inter
pretation  of  the  facts. If  Diodorus  is  correct,  the  explanation  is
rather  that  before  the  overwhelming  might  of  the  king  and  his
officers,  the  distinction  of  bond  and  free  became  of  very  secondary
account. The  free  man  was  himself  rightless  in  the  Egyptian
constitution,  for  the  king  was  by  Egyptian  principle  master  of  the
whole  land  of  Egypt,  owner  of  all  property  and  lord  of  all  men
who  dwelt  therein. The  position,  as  in  other  Oriental  countries
where  despotic  authority  has  gone  to  its  full  length,  recalls  rather
the  despotism  of  the  African  potentate  than  any  Greek  maxims
of  the  value  of  free  men. The  Egyptian  recognized  duties  to
dependants,  as  appears  from  pleadings  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,
in  which  the  deceased  denies  that  he  has  oppressed  those  under
him.3 But  these  are  rather  the  duties  of  benevolent  consideration
than  of  legal  right. Egypt  is  a  typical  Oriental  monarchy,  a
country  in  which  it  may be  rather  said  that  all  classes  were
rightless  than  that  slaves  were  distinguished  from  free  men  by
the  lack  of  rights.

5.  The  history  of  slavery  among  the  Hebrews  is  interesting,  both
for  the  strong  distinction  made  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  and

1  Ib 333 etc Most  of  our  information  refers  to  the  Ptolemaic  period,
but  the  practice  was  undoubtedly  more  ancient,  being  referred  to  in  inscrip
tions  of  the  Middle  Empire.

2  Diodorus,  i.  7G-7.

3  In  another  well-known  pleading,  the  soul  protests  according  to  some
translators  that  he  has  not  caused  harm  to  be  done  to  the  servant  by  his


p.  5321.)


298  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

still  more  for  the  progress  which  we  can  trace  in  law  and  custom
affecting  the  position  of  the  slave.  According  to  the  later  law
all  the  Canaanites  ought  to  have  been  utterly  destroyed  upon
the  conquest,  but  this  represents  an  ideal  of  barbarity  which
there  is  no  reason  to  think  was  ever  realized,  and  the  narrative
itself  admits  as  much,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  Gibeonites,
who  became  "  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water." l  Whether
by  capture  or  by  purchase  Gentiles  clearly  became  slaves,  and
the  law  ended  by  regarding  the  Gentile  as  the  only  slave  whom
a  Hebrew  ought  in  strict  propriety  to  hold.  Further,  though
the  stranger  is  constantly  recommended  to  consideration  and
just  treatment,  laws  for  the  protection  of  the  slave  apparently
apply  in  the  main  to  the  Hebrew  only.  We  pass  now  to  the
consideration  of  these  laws.

In  the  earliest  code  2  the  period  of  service  for  a  male  Hebrew
is  limited  to  six  years.  "  In  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  free  for
nothing."  But  the  case  is  contemplated  that  his  master  has
given  him  a  wife,  and  in  that  case  she,  with  her  children,  would
remain  with  her  master,  and  he  might  therefore  choose  to  abide
also.  If  so,  "  then  his  master  shall  bring  him  unto  God  (that  is,
to  the  temple)  and  shall  bring  him  to  the  door  or  unto  the  door
post,  and  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear  through  with  an  awl ;  and
he  shall  serve  him  for  ever."3  The  Hebrew  father  might  sell  his
children  into  slavery,  and  the  daughter  who  had  thus  been  sold
was  not  released  in  the  seventh  year,  as  were  the  men-servants ;
but  she  might  be  redeemed,  and  if  not  suitably  married  to  the
son  of  her  master,  regain  her  freedom.  As  to  general  protection,
"  If  a  man  smite  his  servant  or  his  maid  with  a  rod  and  he  die
under  his  hand,  he  shall  surely  be  punished  " — in  what  way  is
not  stated.  The  protection  given  to  the  slave  would  be  more
valuable  if  it  were  not  for  the  qualifying  clauses  which  follow.
"  Notwithstanding,  if  he  continue  a  day  or  two  he  shall  not  be
punished ;  for  he  is  his  money."  4  This  is  chattel  slavery  partially
ashamed  of  itself.  The  code  further  provides  that  either  a  male
or  female  slave  should  obtain  freedom  for  the  loss  of  an  eye  or  a

1  Further,  Solomon  levied  tribute  of  bond  service  upon  all  the  Canaanites
left,  but  not  upon  the  Israelites. (1  Kings  ix.  21.)

2  Exodus  xx.-xxiii.  3  ]jx>  xxj  2-6.

4  Ex.  xxi.  20. Here  the  qualification  "  Hebrew  "  does  not  appear,  but  it
is  perhaps  to  be  understood  from  its  use  earlier  in  the  chapter.


CLASS  RELATIONS  299

tooth.  As  in  the  Code  of  Hammurabi,1  the  master  takes  the
value  of  the  servant  when  he  is  killed  by  another  man's  ox,  the
price  being  fixed  at  thirty  shekels  of  silver.  It  is  a  noteworthy
inconsistency  that  retaliation  is  to  be  exercised  upon  the  ox  in
this  instance— that  is  to  say,  it  is  to  be  stoned  to  death.  But
where  the  ox  gores  a  free  man  or  woman,  retaliation  can  also  be
exercised  upon  the  master  (supposing  he  has  been  guilty  of  neg
ligence)  unless  he  can  buy  himself  off.  The  distinction  is  signi
ficant  of  the  true  position  of  the  slave  as  a  chattel  whose  price
must  be  made  good,  rather  than  as  a  human  being  for  whom
retaliation  can  be  demanded.

The  code  of  Deuteronomy  does  not  make  any  fundamental
change  in  the  position  of  the  slave,  though  here,  as  in  other
respects,  it  breathes  [a  more  humane  spirit.  In  this  code  the
Fourth  Commandment  reads  differently,  the  remark  being  in
serted,  "  that  thy  man-servant  and  thy  maid-servant  may  rest  as
well  as  thou."  The  insertion  of  this  considerate  reason  is
thoroughly  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  prophetic  code.
The  Hebrew  slave  is  still  to  be  released  in  the  seventh  year,  and
released  with  gifts.  "When  thou  sendest  him  out  free  from
theo  thou  shalt  not  let  him  go  away  empty.  Thou  shalt  furnish
him  liberally  out  of  thy  flock,"  and  so  forth.  "  Thou  shalt  re
member  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  the  laud  of  Egypt  and  the
Lord  thy  God  redeemed  thee."

The  provisions  as  to  the  marriage  01  the  slave  to  a  wife  pro
vided  by  his  master  disappear,  and  the  Hebrew  woman  is  to  be
free  as  well  as  the  man.  Nor  is  there  here  any  reference  to  the
sale  of  daughters.  The  man-stealer  is  (as  in  the  earlier  code)
to  be  put  to  death,  but  apparently  only  when  offending  against
an  Israelite ; 2  and  by  a  not  infrequent  inconsistency  the  fugi
tive  slave  is  not  to  be  given  up,  but  "  shall  dwell  with  thee,  in
the  midst  of  thee,  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose  within  one
of  thy  gates  where  it  liketh  him  best.  Thou  shalt  not  oppress

him."3

In  the  priestly  code  the  most  definite  change  is  one  which
appears  at  first  sight  reactionary.  The  slave  is  now  to  be  re
leased,  not  in  the  seventh  year,  but  in  the  year  of  Jubilee ;  yet,
in  other  respects,  the  code  is  considerate  to  the  Hebrew  slave,

i  Hammurabi,  sec.  252.  2  Deut.  xxiv.  7.  3  Dent,  xxiii.  15.


300  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

arid  indeed  denies  that  he  ought  to  be  a  bondman  at  all.  "  If
thy  brother  be  waxen  poor  "  the  true  duty  of  the  more  fortunate
Hebrew  is  to  uphold  him.  "As  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner
shall  he  live  with  thee,"  but  if  he  "  sell  himself  unto  thee,  thou
shalt  not  take  him  to  serve  as  a  bond-servant.  As  a  hired
servant  and  as  a  sojourner  he  shall  be  with  thee;  he  shall
sojourn  with  thee  until  the  year  of  jubile." l

It  is  the  Gentile — and  here  is  the  true  spirit  of  ancient
slavery — it  is  the  Gentile  who  is  the  appropriate  bondman.
"  As  for  thy  bondmen  and  bondmaids  ...  of  the  nations  that  are
round  about  you,  of  them  shall  ye  buy  bondmen  and  bondmaids.
Moreover,  of  the  children  of  the  strangers  that  do  sojourn  among
you,  of  them  shall  ye  buy."  "  Over  your  brethren  ye  shall  not
rule  with  rigour."

Thus  the  Levitican  code  comes  as  near  as  possible  to  the
abolition  of  Hebrew  slavery.  Nevertheless,  it  lengthens  the
term  from  seven  years  to  fifty.  The  explanation  of  this  change
is  probably  to  be  found  in  a  passage  in  Jeremiah,2  from  which  it
appears  that  the  provision  for  releasing  the  slaves  in  the  seventh
year  was  practically,  if  not  avowedly,  a  novelty  in  Josiah's  time.
It  is  of  course  treated  by  Jeremiah  as  having  belonged  to  the
original  Covenant ;  but  nevertheless  it  appears  from  his  account
that  King  Zedekiah  proclaimed  this  liberty  as  a  new  thing,
doubtless  in  accordance  with  the  recently-promulgated  code  of
Deuteronomy;  and  that,  while  it  was  temporarily  obeyed,  a
relapse  very  speedily  followed  for  which  punishment  by  pesti
lence  and  famine  is  proclaimed.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that
the  law  of  Jubilee,  while  probably  of  ancient  date  and  a  survival
of  communal  tenure  so  far  as  regards  land,  is  applied  to  slaves  in
the  hope  of  rendering  the  benevolent  intentions  of  Deuteronomy
a  practical  reality.3

1  Leviticus  xxv.  35,  39,  40.  2  Jeremiah,  chap,  xxxiv.

3  The  picture  of  Hebrew  slavery  would  not  be  complete  without  a
reference  to  the  attitude  of  the  wise  man  in  Ecclesiasticus.  He  bids  his
reader  treat  a  good  servant  well,  and  not  defraud  him  of  release.  This,  of
course,  with  an  eye  on  the  year  of  Jubilee.  (Chap.  vii.  21.)  Indeed,  lie
would  have  him  treated  as  a  brother  :  "  For  thou  hast  need  of  him  as  of
thine  own  soul."  And  a  more  practical  reminder  follows,  which  may  serve
to  help  us,  too,  to  understand  a  factor  which  must  always  have  tended  to
mitigate  the  slave's  lot :  "  If  thou  treat  him  evil  and  he  run  away  from
thee,  which  way  wilt  thou  go  to  seek  him."  On  the  other  hand,  you  should


CLASS  RELATIONS  301

In  any  case,  regarded  as  a  whole,  the  development  of
Hebrew  law  and  custom  in  relation  to  slavery  is  an  interesting
example,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  amelioration  of  the  slave's
position  by  a  distinct  touch  of  humanitarian  sentiment;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  of  the  persistence,  owing  to  the  dominance
of  an  exclusive  national  religion,  of  the  deep  distinction  between
the  domestic  slave  and  the  foreign.

Qm  India.— In  India  slavery  was  already  known  in  the  Vedic
age.  The  institution  persisted  in  the  Brahmanic  period,  although
its  existence  was  denied  by  the  Greek  travellers  of  Alexander's
time.  Whether  the  Greeks  only  saw  certain  districts  in  which
slaves  were  few  or  were  misled  by  the  absence  of  rural  slavery
is  not  certain,  but  the  recognition  of  slavery  as  an  institution  in
the  Brahmanic  law-books  is  perfectly  clear.  Manu  distinguishes
slaves  of  seven  kinds —

"There  arc  slaves  of  seven  kinds,  (viz.)  he  who  is  made  a  captive
under  a  standard,  he  who  serves  for  his  daily  food,  he  who  is  horn  in
the  house,  he  who  is  bought  and  he  who  is  given,  ho  who  is  inherited
from  ancestors,  and  he  who  is  enslaved  by  way  of  punishment."

He  proceeds  to  declare  that,  like  the  wife  and  the  son,  the
slave  has  no  property.  The  wealth  which  lie  earns  is  acquired
for  him  to  whom  he  belongs.

"A  Brahmana  may  confidently  seize  the  good  of  (his)  Sudra
(slave) ;  for,  as  that  (slave)  can  have  no  property,  his  master  may
take  his  possessions."

Quarrels  with  slaves  arc  to  bo  avoided.  They  should  be
treated,  Manu  says,  "  as  one's  shadow."  If  offended  by  them  one
should  "bear  it  without  resentment,"  l  Much  more  moderate
rules  for  their  punishment  are  laid  down  than  by  the  Hebrew
lawgiver.2

But  slavery  is  of  very  secondary  importance  in  Hindu  society
as  compared  with  caste.  It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to
attempt  a  full  discussion  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  caste  in

be  severe  with  a  bad  servant,  and  if  lie  be  not  obedient,  put  on  him  heavy
fetters.  Making  a  bad  servant's  side  bleed  is  one  of  the  list  of  tluntjs  of
which  a  man  ought  not  to  be  ashamed.  (Chap.  xlii.  5.)

1  Manu,  viii.  415,  416,  417  ;  iv.  185.

2  See  above,  Chap.  V.  p.  193  ;  Manu,  viii.  299-300.


302  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

India.  We  have  seen  the  more  elementary  forms  of  the  institu
tion  in  other  races.  In  India  it  reached  an  altogether  abnormal
development,  which  is  of  more  interest  for  the  student  of  Hindu
society  than  for  the  general  history  of  ethics.  Caste  did  not
exist  in  the  primitive  society  of  Vedic  times,  though  conditions
out  of  which  it  in  all  probability  arose  were  already  present.
The  Aryans  found  themselves  a  conquering  white  minority
among  the  subject,  dark-skinned  population,  and  the  contrast
between  the  Aryan  and  the  Dasyu  is  already  deeply  marked.
"Varna,"  the  Sanskrit  word  for  caste,  means  originally  colour,  and
some  at  least  of  the  Sanskrit  authorities  adopted  the  distinction
of  colour  as  their  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  institution.1
In  fact,  towards  the  close  of  the  Vedic  age  it  would  seem  that
the  institution  has  taken  shape.  Four  castes  are  mentioned  in
the  Purusha-Sukta,  one  of  the  latest  hymns  found  in  the  Vedic
collection  : 2  "  When  they  formed  Purusha,  into  how  many  parts
did  they  divide  him  ?  What  was  his  mouth  ?  What  were  his
arms  ?  What  were  called  his  thighs  and  his  feet  ? "  The
answer  is  that  the  Brahman  issued  from  his  mouth,  the  Ksha-
triya  from  his  arms,  the  Vaisya  from  his  thighs,  and  the  Sudra
from  his  feet.  The  first  three,  the  priests,  the  warriors,  and
the  farmers,  were  all  Aryans  and  twice-born  men.  The  Sudras
alone  were  the  once-born  and  the  slaves  of  all  the  rest.  These
were  the  four  original  and  legitimate  castes.  The  mass  of  lower-
caste  men  were  held  to  have  issued  from  various  mixtures  be
tween  the  four  original  orders.  Without  attempting  here  to  go
into  the  Brahmanic  theories  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  caste  in
general,  or  dwelling  on  this  occasion  upon  the  position  of  the
Brahman,  it  may  suffice  to  quote  a  few  laws  from  Manu  illus
trating  the  position  of  the  Sudra,  which  tend  to  show  the  ethical
analogy  between  a  caste  system  and  a  slave  system.
The  Sudra  in  Manu  is  as  such  a  born  slave.

"  A  Sudra,  though  emancipated  by  his  master,  is  not  released  from
servitude ;  since  that  is  innate  in  him,  who  can  set  him  free  from
it  ? "  3

If  a  Brahman  requires  any  article  for  a  sacrifice  which
he  cannot  find  handy,  "he  may  take  at  his  pleasure,  two  or

1  Muir,  Sanscrit  Texts,  vol.  i.  p.  140.  2  Muir,  i.  156,  157.

a  Manu,  viii.  414.


CLASS  RELATIONS  303

three  articles  from  the  house  of  a  Sudra,  for  a  Sudra  has
no  business  with  sacrifices." l  To  kill  a  Sudra  is  a  minor
offence,  placed  in  the  same  list  with  the  cutting  down  of  green
trees  for  firewood,  neglecting  to  kindle  the  sacred  fires,  super
intending  mines,  stealing  grain,  etc.,  and  the  penance  for
killing  a  Sudra  is  to  give  ten  white  cows  and  a  bull  to  a
Brahman. 2  On  the  other  hand,  an  assault  by  a  Sudra  upon
any  twice-born  man  is  punished  by  mutilation  of  the  offending
limb.3  The  defamation  of  a  Brahman  or  an  insult  to  a  twice-
born  man  by  a  Sudra  is  punished  with  equal  severity :  "  He
shall  have  his  tongue  cut  out,  for  he  is  of  low  origin  " ;  while,
"  if  he  arrogantly  teaches  Brahmanas  their  duty,  the  king  shall
cause  hot  oil  to  be  poured  into  his  mouth  and  into  his  ears."  4

For  a  Sudra  to  have  anything  to  do  with  a  woman  of  the
twice-born  caste  was  a  serious  offence,  but  as  to  marriage  with
a  Sudra  woman,  Manu's  opinion  fluctuates.5  Lastly,  the  Sudras
serve  as  scapegoats.  "  O  Takman,"  says  the  Atharva  Veda,
addressing  the  demon  who  brings  fever,  "go  to  the  Mujavant
or  further.  Attack  the  Sudra  woman,  the  teeming  one,  shake
her,  O  Takman."  G  The  relative  values  of  the  lives  of  men  of
the  four  castes  are  summed  up.  "  One-fourth  (of  the  penance)
for  the  murder  of  a  Brahmana  is  prescribed  (as  expiation)  for
(intentionally)  killing  a  Kshatriya,  one-eighth  for  killing  a
Vaisya ;  know  that  it  is  one-sixteenth  for  killing  a  virtuous
Sudra."  7

It  ought  only  to  be  subjoined  that  the  distinction  of  caste
was  a  matter  of  some  perplexity  to  moralists,  even  in  the
Brahmanic  age.  Among  the  different  accounts  of  castes  given  in
the  Mahabharata  some  roundly  assert  that  character  makes  caste.

Nahusha,  who  had  been  condemned  to  take  the  form  of  a
serpent,  asks  Yudhishthira  the  question  :  "  Who  is  a  Brahman,  and

1  Manu,  xi.  13.  2  Ib.,  xi.  64,  G5,  66,  67, 131.

3  16.,  viii.  279,  280.  4  Ib.,  viii.  270,  272.

6  In  one  place,  iii.  17,  the  Brahman  who  takes  a  Sudra  to  wife
will,  after  death,  sink  into  Hell ;  and  other  passages  equally  condemn
any  relations  with  Sudra  women.  (E.  y.  iii.  191,  250.)  But  in  other  places
marriage  with  a  Sudra  is  contemplated,  and  merely  aifects  inheritance.  In
ix.  151,  the  son  of  the  Sudra  wife  is  to  take  one  share  of  the  estate  as
against  three  shares  of  the  son  of  the  Brahman  ;  but  in  sec.  160,  the  son  of
a  Sudra  is  not  an  heir  at  all.  Commentators  explain  that  this  is  the  case
in  which  the  Sudra  wife  is  not  legally  married.

6  Duncker,  Hist,  of  Antiquity,  vol.  iv.  281.  7  Manu,  xi.  127.


304  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

what  is  the  object  of  knowledge?"  Yudhishthira  replies:  "The
man  in  whom  are  seen  truth,  liberality,  patience,  virtue,  innocence,
devotion  and  compassion" — he  is  a  Brahman  according  to  the
religious  tradition.  The  serpent  answers,  "  But  in  Sudras  also  we
meet  with  truth,  liberality,  calmness,  innocence,  harmlessness  and
compassion,  0  Yudhishthira."  Yudhishthira  replies  :  "Whenever  a
Sudra  has  any  virtuous  characteristics,  and  a  Brahman  lacks  it,
that  Sudra  will  not  be  really  a  Sudra,  nor  that  Brahman  a  Brahman.
The  man  in  whom  this  virtuous  character  is  seen  is  a  Brahman,
and  the  man  in  whom  it  is  not  seen  is  a  Sudra."  The  serpent
proceeds  :  "If  you  regard  him  only  as  a  Brahman  whom  his  conduct
makes  such,  then  caste  is  of  no  avail  until  deeds  are  superadded
to  it."  Thus  pressed,  Yudhishthira  admits  the  confusion  of  castes
in  the  actual  Avorld,  and  concludes  that  good  conduct  and  the
fulfilment  of  the  prescribed  ceremonies  are  alike  necessary.1

Other  passages  declared  that  fundamentally  "  there  is  no
difference  of  castes.  This  world,  having  been  at  first  created
by  Brahma,  entirely  Brahmanic,  became  separated  into  castes
in  consequence  of  works  " ; 2  and  the  speaker,  Bhrigu,  being  now
asked  what  constitutes  membership  of  a  caste,  replies  that —

He  who  is  pure,  consecrated  by  the  natal  and  other  initiatory
ceremonies,  who  duly  studies  the  Veda,  practises  the  six  kinds  of
works,  and  the  rites  of  purification,  who  eats  of  offerings,  is
attached  to  his  religious  teacher,  is  constant  in  austerities,  and  is
devoted  to  truth,  is  called  a  Brahman.  He  in  whom  are  seen
truth,  liberality,  inoffensiveness,  innocence,  modesty,  compassion
and  devotion,  is  declared  to  be  a  Brahman.  He  who  is  unclean,  is
addicted  constantly  to  all  kinds  of  food,  performs  all  kinds  of  work,
has  abandoned  the  Veda,  and  is  destitute  of  pure  observances,  is
called  a  Sudra.3

Here  we  have  an  ethical  doctrine  of  equality,  or — which  is
the  same  thing — of  distinction  by  merit  alone,  strictly  in  line
with  the  teachings  of  Buddha,  in  whose  Order  there  was  no
thought  of  caste,  and  for  whom  the  true  Brahman  was  he  who
lived  the  perfectly  pure  and  holy  life.

7.  China. — In  China  a  tradition  is  preserved  of  an  epoch  at
which  there  was  no  slavery,  and  in  the  classical  book  of  poems,

1  Summarized  from  Muir,  Sanscrit  Texts,  vol.  i.  133-138.
2  Muir,  i.  140.  3  Summarized  from  Muir,  i.  142.


CLASS RELATIONS  305

the  She-King,  there  is  little  that  points  definitely  to  the
existence  of  the  institution  in  its  strict  sense.  Few  prisoners
were  taken  at  that  time,  and  therefore  it  was  very  possible
that  slaves  also  were  few,  but  the  evidence  appears  clear  that
slavery  did  exist  in  the  Chow  Dynasty.1  The  institution  is
certainly  ancient,  and  even  at  the  present  day  general,  although
no  doubt  far  less  important  than  in  some  other  countries.  Debt
slavery  no  longer  exists,  and  in  the  pacific  land  of  China  war  has
ceased  to  be  a  source  of  supply  ;  but  the  slave-trade  is  general,2
and  the  sale  of  daughters  by  their  parents,  and  of  wives  by  their
husbands,  particularly  in  times  of  famine,  is  a  rich  source  of
recruitment  of  the  slave  class.  Kidnapping  is  also  frequent.
The  slaves,  we  are  told,  are  generally  treated  well,  and  there  is
that  social  equality  between  mistress  and  slave-girls  which  we
so  commonly  find  in  the  East,  mitigating  the  harshness  of  legal
institutions.  But  the  protection  of  the  slave  is  very  inadequate.
It  is  true  that  the  master  has  not  the  power  of  life  and  death,
but  the  punishment  for  killing  a  slave  is  only  the  bamboo.3
Further,  if  death  is  caused  by  a  canonical  or  legitimate
punishment  the  man  is  held  guiltless ; 4  branding,  we  are  told,
is  but  a  small  part  of  the  punishment  of  a  slave  for  running
away,5  while  the  slave  who  strikes  his  master  is  liable  to  death
by  beheading.

8.  Slavery,  like  polygamy  and  divorce,  was  an  institution  which
Mohammed  found  fully  established  among  his  fellow-countrymen,
which  he  disliked  and  set  himself  to  mitigate,  but  could  not
attempt  to  abolish.  A  difference,  however,  is  made  between
Moslem  and  non-Moslem  captives.  In  a  war  with  Moslems
prisoners  were  not  enslaved.  If  the  prisoner  on  the  battlefield
became  a  Moslem  ho  might  not  be  killed,  but  according  to  the

1  Legge,  Prolegomena  to  the  She-King,  p.  166,  and  footnote. In  point  of
fact  there  are  passages  in  the  She-King  itself  which  can  hardly  admit  of
two  interpretations. (Vol.  2,  Part  ii.,  Bk.  4,  Ode  viii.  Stanza  3.)

2  Douglas,  Society  in  China,  p.  346.

3  The  punishment  applies  to  deliberate  murder  or  mutilation,  with  death
as  the  result,  and  if  the  slave  is  innocent,  banishment  is  added. (Kohler,
cited  by  Post,  Grundriss,  i.  p.  373.)

4  If  an  innocent  slave  is  put  to  death,  his  wife  and  children  become  free.
(Kohler,  cited  by  Post,  Grundriss,  i.  372.)

5  Douglas,  op.  cit.,  p.  350.

VOL.  I.  3;


306  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

traditions  lie  ought  even  to  be  set  free,  though  if  he  became
a  Moslem  subsequently  he  remained  a  slave.1  The  holding  of
Moslem  slaves  was  not,  as  such,  prohibited,  but  their  emancipa
tion  was  regarded  as  an  act  of  special  merit.  According  to  the
tradition :  "  Whosoever  frees  a  slave  who  is  a  Moslem,  God  will
redeem  every  member  of  his  body  limb  for  limb  from  hell  fire."  2
Mohammed  sought  mitigation  of  the  slave's  lot  by  ethical  rather
than  legal  means.  The  slave  has  no  civil  liberty,  and  can
only  possess  property  by  the  owner's  permission.  The  master's
power  is  unlimited,  and  he  is  not  slain  for  the  murder  of  his
slave.  He  has  unlimited  power  over  his  female  slaves;  as  a
matter  of  law  he  may  prostitute  them ;  he  may  give  a  slave  in
marriage  to  whom  he  will,  though  he  may  not  annul  the
marriage  when  once  completed.3  On  the  other  hand,  the
Prophet  enjoins  upon  Moslems  to  exercise  kindness  to  slaves,
forbids  the  prostitution  of  slave-girls  as  a  religious  offence,  and
enjoins  emancipation  whenever  a  slave  is  able  to  redeem  him
self.  "  When  a  slave  of  yours  has  money  to  redeem  his  bond,
then  you  must  not  allow  him  to  come  into  your  presence  after
wards."  "  Behaving  well  to  slaves  is  a  means  of  prosperity,  and
behaving  ill  to  them  is  a  cause  of  loss."  "  Whenever  any  one
of  you  is  about  to  beat  a  slave  and  the  slave  asks  pardon  in
the  name  of  God,  then  withhold  yourself  from  beating  him.
Feed  your  slaves  with  food  of  that  which  you  eat  and  clothe
them  with  such  clothing  as  you  wear,  and  command  them  not
to  do  that  which  they  are  unable."  Wrongful  punishment,
which,  in  some  institutions,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  legal  ground
of  manumission,  was  held  by  Mohammed  to  be  a  moral  ground.
"He  who  beats  his  slave  without  fault  or  slaps  him  on  the
face,  his  atonement  for  this  is  freeing  him."  As  an  illustration
of  the  spirit  in  which  this  behest  was  conceived,  we  may  quote
the  story  of  the  Caliph  Othman,  who,  having  twisted  his
memlook's  ear,  bade  the  slave  twist  his  own.4  A  further

1  But  according  to  Hidayali,  the  conversion  to  Islam  on  the  battlefield
did  not  necessarily  save  a  man  from  slavery. (Hughes,  Dictionary  of  Islam,
597.)

2  Ib.,  p.  597.

3  If  a  slave-girl  has  a  child  by  her  master  she  becomes  free  at  hia  death,
while  if  the  child  be  acknowledged  by  the  master, she becomes free
thereupon. (16.,  597,  598.)

*  Ib.,  599.


CLASS RELATIONS  307

humane  provision  forbade  the  separation  of  mother  and  child :
"  Whoever  is  the  cause  of  separation  between  mother  and  child
by  selling  and  giving,  God  will  separate  him  from  his  friends
on  the  day  of  resurrection."  J

Conversely,  the  Prophet  had  certain  promises  for  the  dutiful
slave :  "  It  is  well  for  a  slave  who  regularly  worships  God  and
discharges  his  master's  work  properly  " ;  and  again :  "  When  a
slave  wishes  well  to  his  master  and  worships  God  well,  for  him
are  double  rewards."  On  the  whole,  the  authorities  tell  us  that
the  Prophet's  rules  of  good  treatment  are  observed.  Masters
are  bound  to  maintain  their  slaves  or  emancipate  them.  To
sell  a  slave  of  long  standing  is  considered  disgraceful,  and
female  slaves  are  seldom  emancipated  without  being  provided
for.  The  Egyptian  slaves  in  Lane's  time  were  numerous,  but
well  cared  for,  and  ranked  socially  above  free  servants.  With
all  these  mitigations  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  recognition  of
the  slave  traffic  by  Mohammedanism  has  been,  and  is  to  this  day,
a  curse  to  Africa  and  a  source  of  disturbance  to  the  world's  politics.

9.  Greece. — Like  the  Chinese,  the  Greeks  had  a  tradition  of  a
pro-historic  epoch  in  which  there  were  110  slaves."  But  in  the
Homeric  epoch  we  find  slavery  in  full  swing,  and  the  regular
issue  of  the  capture  of  a  town  is  that  the  men  should  be  slain
and  the  women  enslaved.  Hector  knows — and  no  thought  is
so  bitter  to  him — that  when  Troy  is  taken  and  he  himself  is
slain,  it  will  be  Andromache's  fate  to  be  a  bondwoman  to  one
of  her  conquerors.  Her  family  had  already  suffered  the  same
fate.  The  swift-footed,  godlike  Achilles  had  destroyed  her
father  and  her  seven  brothers,  and  had  carried  off  her  mother
"  with  the  rest  of  the  spoil,"  though  he  afterwards  set  her  free
for  an  immense  ransom.  Now,  Hector  was  all  these  to  her,  but
the  day  would  come  when  the  Argives  would  sack  the  sacred
town  of  Ilium  and  Hector  in  his  turn  be  taken  from  her,  and  it
would  be  her  lot  to  fall  into  slavery.3  Apart  from  legitimate
warfare,  piracy — which  for  that  matter  was  in  the  Homeric
view  hardly  less  legitimate — was  a  frequent  source  of  slavery.

1  Though  this  saying  is  attributed  to  Mohammed,  it  is  said  by  Tabir  that
"  we  used  to  sell  the  mothers  of  children  in  the  time  of  the  Prophet  and
of  Abu  I5ekr,  but  Umar  forbade  it  in  his  time." (Hughes,  599.)

2  Herodt.,  vi.  137  ;  Busolt,  Handbuch,  p.  11. 3  Iliad,  vi.  414-495.


308  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

Many  children  suffered  the  fate  of  Eumaeus  the  swineherd,
and  were  carried  off  by  the  pirate  and  sold  across  the  wine-dark
sea.  Slavery  was  hereditary,  and  the  slave  might  be  sold  or
put  to  death,  as  the  faithless  female  slaves  were  hanged  by
Telemachus.1  On  the  other  hand,  slaves  might  own  houses  and
property  of  their  own  and  live  in  the  practical  freedom  in
which  we  find  the  goodly  Eumaeus.  Lastly,  it  should  be  noted
that  the  slaves  were  not  the  only  rightless  class,  for  the  stranger
is  also  outside  the  protection  of  the  law,  though,  even  if  a  beggar
and  a  fugitive,  he  is  under  the  shelter  of  Zeus  so  long  as  he  is  a
guest  and  claims  the  right  of  hospitality.

In  the  rural  districts  of  Greece  slavery  remained  rare.
Pericles  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  Peloponnesians  are
autourgoi — cultivators  of  their  own  lands.2  It  is  even  said
that  slave-holding  was  forbidden  in  Phocis  and  Lokris  down
to  the  fourth  century.3  But  in  the  more  developed  states  the
growth  of  wealth  meant,  as  always  in  the  ancient  world,  increase
in  the  number  of  slaves  and — what  was  most  fatal — the  belief
that  work  was  not  compatible  with  the  dignity  of  a  free  man.
Slavery  remained  a  recognized  fate  for  prisoners  of  war  as  an
alternative  to  massacre,  and  even  Plato  could  only  hope  that
Greeks  would  abandon  the  practice  of  enslaving  fellow-Greeks,
restricting  themselves  to  the  barbarian,  who,  as  Aristotle  held,
was  the  only  natural  slave.  But  through  the  institution  of  debt
slavery  the  poorer  classes  in  each  state  were  frequently  menaced
with  falling  into  enslavement.  Before  Solon's  time  the  land
was  tilled  by  poor  cultivators  for  the  rich,  and  on  their  failure
to  pay  five-sixths  of  their  produce  to  the  landlord,  they  fell
into  the  position  of  serfs  along  with  their  wives  and  children.
The  prohibition  of  debt  slavery  and  the  pledging  of  the  person
by  Solon  was  thus  the  salvation  of  civil  freedom  for  Athens ;  and
with  the  progress  of  Athenian  democracy,  although  it  was  a
democracy  of  free  men  only,  the  position  of  the  slaves  was
indirectly  improved.  The  master  had  the  right  of  corporal
punishment  and  of  branding,  but  could  not  put  a  slave  to  death
without  a  judicial  decision.4  A  right  of  action  for  vfipis  protected

1  Odyssey,  xxii.,  Trsl.  Butcher  and  Lang,  p.  374.

2  Thucyd.  i.  141.  3  Busolt,  p.  12.

4  This  held  in  other  states  as  well. See  Isocrates,  Panath.  181,  in


CLASS RELATIONS  309

the  slave  from  ill-treatment  by  strangers,  and  if  maltreated  by  his
master  he  could  take  refuge  in  the  Theseum  or  some  other  asylum
and  demand  to  be  sold — a  demand  which  was  investigated  either
by  the  priests  or  by  a  judicial  process.  On  the  other  hand,  the
slave  was  not  directly  recognized  as  a  personality  by  the  law ;  he
could  only  be  represented  by  his  master,  who  could  sue  for
damages  on  his  account.  Except  in  murder  cases  he  could  only
give  evidence  under  torture,  to  which  he  might  be  given  up  at
the  will  of  his  master,  the  belief  being  that  this  was  the  only
way  to  get  truth  from  him.  He  could  only  give  evidence
against  his  master  upon  a  charge  of  treason.  At  the  same  time,
he  was  often  allowed  to  hold  property  and  found  a  family,  while
he  might  buy  his  freedom  by  entrusting  his  earnings  to  a  priest.
The  development  in  the  Dorian  states  was  somewhat  different.
Here  serfdom  was  more  prominent  than  slavery,  though  the  two
institutions  existed  sometimes  side  by  side.  The  Dorian
conquerors  divided  part  of  the  land  among  themselves,  leaving
it  to  be  tilled  by  the  conquered  people  as  public  serfs,  while
part  was  left  to  its  original  possessors,  who  were  personally  free
but  had  no  political  rights.  Hence  the  two  classes  of  Helots
and  Perioeci.  The  conquered  population  were  bound  to  the  soil,
but  could  not  be  sold  or  set  free  except  by  the  State,  though
the  landlord,  for  whom  they  cultivated  the  land  at  a  fixed  rate,
was  their  immediate  master.  The  Helots  of  Sparta,  as  is  well
known,  were  seditious,  and  Avere  ill-treated  and  frequently  put
to  death  in  fear,  or  at  least  in  anticipation,  of  some  rising.  The
Penestae  of  Thessaly,  who  were  otherwise  in  a  closely  analogous
position  to  the  Helots,  were  better  off  in  this  respect,  as  they
could  only  be  put  to  death  by  judicial  process.  In  Crete  there
were  two  classes  of  serfs,  those  on  the  public  land  and  those
belonging  to  private  owners,  who  might  contract  a  legal
marriage  and  hold  and  inherit  property,  and,  according  to
Aristotle,  were  treated  by  masters  on  terms  of  social  equality.
Besides  these  two  classes  of  serfs  there  were  slaves  who  might
be  bought  and  sold.

Busolt,  p.  12.  In  the  Laws,  ix.  865,  the  slayer  of  his  own  slave  is  to
undergo  a  legal  purification  corresponding  to  that  imposed  on  the  uninten
tional  homicide  of  a  free  man,  and  incur  no  further  penalty.  For  a  case
in  which  the  killing  of  a  slave  might  be  treated  as  murder,  cf.  ib.,  872.


310  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

It  should  be  added  that  the  distinction  between  the  citizen
and  the  non-citizen  is  strongly  marked  throughout  Greek
history.  Aliens  were  forbidden  at  Sparta  altogether,  and  at
Athens,  where  their  numbers  became  great,  they  were  as  such
destitute  of  rights,  but  in  practice  they  were  required  to  inscribe
themselves  on  the  list  of  resident  aliens.  They  then  came
under  special  State  protection,  for  which,  and  for  the  right  to
exercise  a  trade,  they  paid  a  certain  tribute.  They  still  required
a  representative  in  a  law  court,  and  had  neither  the  right  of
marriage  with  citizens,  unless  by  treaty  with  their  own  State,
nor  the  right  of  holding  land.1

The  organization  of  the  City  State,  in  fact,  led  naturally
to  a  deeply-marked  distinction  between  the  full  citizen  and  all
others,  whether  Greek  or  Barbarian,  whether  free  or  unfree.
And  we  may  take  it  as  a  mark  of  the  ethical  superiority  of  the
Greeks  that  the  logical  consequences  were  so  far  mitigated,  as
we  have  seen  them  to  have  been  in  the  legislation  for  the  pro
tection  of  slaves.

10.  Rome. — At  Rome  the  strict  limitation  of  civil  rights  to  full
citizens,  combined  with  the  peculiar  development  of  the  powers
of  the  paterfamilias,  had  a  depressing  effect  upon  the  position
of  slaves.  Not  only  captured  enemies,  but,  even  down  to  the
time  of  Justinian,  any  unprotected  foreigner  was  liable  to  en
slavement.  A  free  Roman  could  not  become  a  slave  within
Rome  itself,  but  deserters,  and  all  those  who  were  omitted
from  the  census,  could  be  sold  abroad  by  the  magistrate,  children
by  their  parents,  debtors  by  their  creditors,  the  thief  by  the
injured  party.

In  practice  the  slave  of  the  earlier  period  was,  as  a  rule,  fairly
well  treated,  and  there  was  probably  no  great  social  distinction
between  him  and  his  master ;  but  he  was  in  law  a  chattel.  He
had  no  family  of  his  own ;  his  union  (contubernium)  was  no
legal  marriage.  He  had  no  status  in  a  court  of  justice,  but  if
he  wished  to  sue  for  an  injury,  could  only  do  so  through  his
master.  Even  if  abandoned  by  his  master  he  did  not  become
free,  but  was  the  lawful  property  of  the  first  comer.  Not  that
cruel  treatment  passed  without  condemnation.  Cruelty,  even
1  Busolt,  pp.  12-14,  15,  68,  119.


CLASS RELATIONS  311

to  animals,  was  subject  to  religious  and  even  legal  penalties.1
Gross  cases  might  involve  the  intervention  of  the  censor.
Though  the  slave  could  legally  hold  no  property,  custom  secured
him  his  own  peculium,  and  he  might  even  come  to  purchase  his
freedom.

Such  was  the  position  of  the  slave  in  early  Rome.  The
growth  of  the  Roman  dominion,  the  rise  of  the  great  estates,
submerging  the  old  freeholder  with  his  small  plot  of  ground,
and  the  facility  of  obtaining  slaves  from  the  numbers  thrown
into  the  market  by  capture  in  war  and  by  traffic  with  pirates,
combined  to  give  Roman  slavery  towards  the  close  of  the
Republic  a  new  and  dark  character.  The  land  was  cultivated
in  many  districts  by  slave-gangs,  working  in  chains  and  confined
by  night  in  prison  workhouses  under  conditions  described  by
Mommsen  as  such  that  by  comparison  with  their  sufferings  it
is  probable  that  all  that  was  endured  by  negro  slaves  was  but
a  drop.  But  some  relief  came  from  the  humaner  ideas  of
advancing  civilization,  fostered  by  contact  with  Greek  culture.
In  particular,  the  Stoic  philosophy  was  the  champion  of  the
slaves.  Seneca  vigorously  pleads  their  cause,  and  in  particular
reprobates  the  cruelty  of  the  gladiatorial  games.  The  jurists
of  the  next  century  went  further,  and  distinctly  laid  down  that
by  natural  law  all  men  are  equal  and  that  slavery  is  a  human
institution  contrary  to  nature.  "  Quod  ad  jus  naturale  attinet,
omnes  homines  aequales  sunt,"  writes  Ulpian ; 2  and  more
distinctly  Florentinus  :  "  Servitus  est  constitutio  juris  gentium,
qua  quis  dominio  alieno  contra  naturam  subjicitur." J  The
Stoical  teaching  had  its  effect  on  legislation.  The  practice  of
the  exposure  and  sale  of  children  and  of  pledging  them  for
debt  was  forbidden,  while  an  edict  of  Diocletian  forbade  a
free  man  to  sell  himself.  Man-stealers  were  punished  with
death.  The  insolvent  debtor  was  no  longer  made  a  slave.  The
right  of  bequest  was  granted  to  slaves.  Some  approach  was
made  to  a  recognition  of  their  marriage,  not  only  after  emanci
pation,  but  even  4  while  in  slavery,  with  a  view  to  hindering  the
separation  of  families.  Some  legal  security  had  already  been
given  to  their  personal  property,  the  peculium,  by  the  praetorian

1  Girard,  Many  el,  89,  91.  -  See  Girard,  p.  92.

3  See  Girard,  p.  88,  note  1.  4  Assuz  timidcment,  Girard,  p.  94.


312  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

edicts.  The  Lex  Pdronia  (perhaps  of  A.D.  19)  forbade  throwing
a  slave  to  the  wild  beasts  without  a  judicial  decision.1  Under
Hadrian  the  power  of  life  and  death  was  taken  from  the  master,
and  under  Antoninus  Pius  the  master  who  killed  his  own  slave
sine  causa  was  punished  as  a  homicide.  An  edict  of  Claudius
had  meanwhile  enfranchised  the  old  or  sick  slave  who  was
abandoned  by  his  master.2  Under  Nero  the  slave  had  been
given  the  right  to  complain  of  ill-treatment  to  the  magistrate.
Under  Pius  the  slave  who  was  cruelly  treated  could  claim  to  be
sold,  and  by  a  special  refinement  it  was  held  cruelty  to  employ
an  educated  slave  on  degrading  or  manual  work.  Constantine
deprived  masters  who  abandoned  new-born  slaves,  of  their  rights
over  them.3  Emancipation,  though  restricted  by  Augustus,
was  again  made  easier,  and  though  the  use  of  torture  at  judicial
investigation  remained,  it  was  in  some  respects  limited.4

While  the  legal  position  of  the  slave  was  being  thus  improved
by  the  imperial  legislation,  a  new  form  of  serfdom  was  growing
up  under  the  name  of  the  Colonate.  Some  of  the  Coloni  were
probably  foreign  captives  and  immigrants  settled  upon  the  soil,
while  others  were  originally  free  tenants,  who  lapsed  into  a
semi-servile  condition  through  the  insecurity  of  the  times  and
largely  through  self-commendation.  The  status  of  the  Coloni
was  regulated  in  the  fourth  century  for  fiscal  purposes.  Under
Constantine,  in  332,  the  Colonus  could  not  quit  his  holding  nor
could  he  marry  off  the  property  of  his  lord.  On  the  other
hand,  he  could  not  be  disturbed  or  be  subjected  arbitrarily  to
increased  charges,  and  as  the  status  was  hereditary,  we  have
here  a  fully-developed  predial  serfdom  with  fixed  but  limited
rights  for  the  serf.5  The  master  might  inflict  moderate  chas
tisement,  but  the  Colonus  had  a  legal  remedy  for  injury  or
excessive  demands.6  While  the  Colonate  was  partly  recruited
from  the  previously  free  peasantry,  a  compensating  process  was
going  on  whereby  rural  slaves  obtained  a  settlement  upon
the  land  as  quasi-Coloni  or  Casati.  They  were  assimilated  to

1  Girard,  p.  94.  2  L.  c.  3  Ib.,  p.  95.

4  Ingram,  History  of  Slavery,  60-64,  etc.  6  Ib.,  pp.  78,  79,  etc.

6  The  Colonus  could  also  contract  a  valid  marriage,  but  he  had  to  marry
within  the  domain  unless  he  purchased  a  dispensation.  The  right  of
punishment  was  conceded  to  the  master  for  certain  specified  faults.
(Letourneau,  L'Esdavaye,  pp.  422,  423.)


CLASS RELATIONS  313

the  Colon!  by  tlie  law  of  Valentinian  I.  in  377,  could  not  be  sold
apart  from  the  land,  and  by  the  end  of  the  seventh  century  were
merged  in  the  Colonate.1

We  have  now  reached  a  point  in  the  history  of  slavery  at
which  two  fresh  influences  have  to  be  considered.  The  first  of
these  is  the  barbarian  conquests  ;  the  second  that  of  the  medieval
Church.  The  German  tribes,  generally  speaking,  recognized
chattel  slavery,  and  slaves  were  recruited  from  the  sources
ordinarily  recognized  among  barbarians  —  war,  unprotected
strangers,  voluntary  commendation,  and  in  certain  cases  debt
(i.e.  in  cases  of  incapacity  to  pay  the  wergild.  This  was  the
only  form  of  debt  slavery  known.) 2  Even  in  Merovingian  times
the  slave  was  a  true  chattel,  whose  life  had  indeed  a  price,  but
a  price  payable,  like  that  of  the  Babylonian  slave,  to  his  lord,
and  not  a  fixed  wer  like  a  free  man,  but  a  sum  proportionate  to
his  value.3  But  besides  the  slaves,  who  were  not  numerous,
the  Germans  recognized  a  class  of  imperfectly  free  men,  the
Liti,  who  had  land  of  their  own,  without  which  a  German  could
not  be  a  citizen,  but  were  in  a  dependent  position.  Their
status  varied  very  much  from  tribe  to  tribe,  and  from  one
period  to  another.  At  first  tributary  to  the  people,  we  find
them  at  a  later  stage  in  subjection  to  an  individual  master.
They  took  no  part  in  the  meetings  of  the  people,  and  while
originally  they  could  plead  before  a  court,  their  wergild  was
ordinarily  half  that  of  a  free  man.  Their  marriage  with  free
people  was  a  mesalliance,  wherein  the  children  followed  the
rank  of  the  mother.  As  we  approach  the  "  Frankish "  period
we  find  their  position  more  distinctly  assimilated  to  that  of
serfs.4

11.  Thus  the  Middle  Ages  begin  with  two  fairly  distinct  classes
of  the  unfree  ;  on  the  one  hand,  the  slaves  proper,  whose
position  has  been  ameliorated  in  Roman  law,  but  remains  that

1  Ingram,  History  of  Slavery,  p.  80  ;  cf.  Viollet,  Histoirc  du  Droit  Civil
Frangais,  p.  312. Valentinian  prohibited  their  sale  apart  from  the  land.

2  Schroder,  Lehrbuch,  p.  46.

3  Schroder,  p.  346. The  price  was,  however,  becoming  a  fixed  tariff,
and  so  gradually  approximating  to  a  true  wergild. (Ib.,  218.)

4  Schroder,  pp.  50,  51,  221-223. In  the  latter  period  their  position
still  varied  very  greatly  as  between  different  peoples.


314  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

of  pure  chattels  by  the  law  of  the  conquerors ;  on  the  other
hand,  a  class  of  serfs  in  various  degrees  of  unfreedom,  which
had  already  grown  up  in  the  later  ages  of  the  Empire  and
was  reinforced  by  the  corresponding  class  of  Liti  among  the
conquerors.

The  moral  influence  of  the  Stoic  philosophy  which  had  in
spired  the  imperial  legislation  for  the  benefit  of  slaves  was  now
replaced  by  that  of  the  Church.  Like  the  Stoics,  the  Church
accepted  slavery  as  an  institution  which  it  did  not  seek"  to
abolish,  but  it  was  so  far  influenced  by  the  philosophic  idea  of
natural  equality  that  it  set  itself  to  minimize  an  evil  which  it
could  not  cure.  There  was  indeed  one  distinction  which  in  the
event  became  a  distinction  of  importance.  The  Stoic  philo
sophy  was  strictly  universalist  in  character.  For  the  Stoic
all  men  were  brothers  and  there  was  no  distinction  of  nation
ality,  class,  or  creed.  For  the  Church  all  men  ought  to  be
brothers,  but  many  men  were,  unfortunately,  unbelievers,  and
the  brotherhood  of  men  was  for  many  purposes  limited  to
members  of  the  Church.  Thus  it  followed  naturally  from
Christian  principle  that  the  holding  of  Christians  in  slavery,
and  still  more  the  reducing  of  Christians  to  slavery  by  capture
or  by  purchase,  were  actions  which,  if  not  wholly  illegal,  were
contrary  to  the  best  religious  teaching.  Accordingly  from  an
early  period  the  custom  of  enslaving  prisoners  of  war  began  to
be  abandoned,  at  any  rate  in  war  between  Christians,  while  the
Church  further  set  itself  energetically  to  combat  the  traffic  in
slaves.1  The  custom  of  treating  the  slave  as  a  fixture  on  the
estate,  which  in  the  Empire  had  been  made  matter  of  legal
enactment,  was  first  adopted  by  the  West  Franks  among  the
barbarians,  and  spread  from  them  to  other  peoples  by  degrees.2
The  prohibition  to  enslave  captives  is  treated  by  Gregoras  as
the  traditional  law  "  not  only  of  the  Romans  and  Thessalians,
but  of  the  Illyrians,  Triballi  and  Bulgarians  on  account  of  the

1  For  example,  the  Bristol  slave  trade  was  suppressed  by  Wulfstan,
Bishop  of  Worcester,  towards  the  close  of  the  eleventh  century. It  had
been  prohibited  previously  by  Ethelbert  and  Canute,  and  again  by  William
the  Conqueror. The  selling  of  a  countryman  beyond  the seas  was  for
bidden  in  the "  Dooms "  of Ina, and  the same  prohibition,  so far as
Christians  were  concerned,  in  the  "Dooms"  of  Ethelred. (Pollock  and
Maitland,  i.  p.  35.)

2  Schroder,  p.  219.


CLASS RELATIONS  315

unity  of  faith."1 But  as this prohibition did not  apply to
pagans,  until  the conversion  of  the  Slavs  it  left  them  as  the
one  source open  to  the Western  European  countries for  the
acquisition  of  fresh slaves  whether  by  capture  or by  traffic.
The interval before their conversion lasted long enough,
and this source of  slaves  was during that time  sufficiently
important to  alter the European name for the institution.
The former "  servus " was now accurately represented in
mediaeval  and  modern  language  by  the  "serf";  a"S;av"was,
with slight modification, in German,  French and English,  a
"slave."2 As  the  Slavs  became  converted  to  Christi-inity  this
source  of  recruitment  for  the  slave  class  was  cut  otF. There
remained  debt  slavery,  the  sale  of  wife  and  children  by  husband
and  father,  and  the  sale  of  a  man  by  himself  in  time  of  need.
All these  sources  of  slavery  remained  in  the earlier  Middle
Ages,3 but they were already in process of decay. Self-
enslavement  was  a  desperate  resource  to  which  men  were  only
driven  in  times  of  great  need,  and  probably  became  infrequent
in  proportion  as  a  more  settled  order  made  years  of  famine
rarer  ;  and  the  downfall  of  free  men  tended  rather  to  swell  the
class  of  serfs  than of  slaves. The  sale  of  men  was  on the
whole opposed by the Church;1 and debt slavery was also
limited  under  religious  influences. From  the  Carolingian  age
onward  it  became  limited  to  a  period  necessary  for  the  paying
off  of  the  debt,5  and  thus  ceased  to  be  a  source  of  hereditary
slavery properly  so-called. Meanwhile the Church was also
urgent  in  pressing  the  claims  of  manumission. The  grounds
for  this  are  based  on  the  broadest  Stoical  principle  by  Gregory
the  Great,  who  urges  that  "  it  is  a  good  deed  if  men,  whom
nature  created  and  brought  forth  free  from  the  beginning  and
the  law  of  nations  has  put  under  the  yoke  of  slavery,  are  by

1  See  Grotius,  book  iii.  chap.  ix.

2  In  addition  to  possible  sources  of  capture  by  war  there  was  the  slave
trade  iu  the  hands  of  the  Jews. (Schroder,  p.  459,  quoting  T.  Waitz,  5,  ii.
207.)

:!  Schroder,  p.  220.

*  For  example,  at  the  Council  of  Coblenz,  in  922  (Viollet,  311);  and
Wulfstan  again  is  prominent  with  protestations  against  the  enslavement
of  "  cradle  children."  Nevertheless,  the  Church  allowed  a  man  to  give
himself  up  along  with  his  wife  and  children  as  slave  to  an  abbey,  at  any
rate  until  he  could  redeem  himself.  (Schroder,  p.  220,  note  26.)

5  See  Schroder,  220,  compared  with  459.


316  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

the  benevolence  of  a  liberator  restored  to  their  liberty  in  that
natural  condition  in  which  they  were  born." This  is  the  full
doctrine  of  human  rights  applied  in  somewhat  halting  fashion
by  way  of  recommending  a  beneficent  practice. But  however
haltingly  applied,  the  moral  conception  of  universalism,  intro
duced  by  the  Stoic  philosophy  and  favoured  with  limitations  by
the  Church,  was  in  principle  fatal  to  slavery. That  institution
depends,  as  we  have  argued  throughout,  upon  group-morality
and  the  distinction  between  man  and  man. It  is  suited  to  the
genius  of  primitive  religions,  whether  in  the  form  of  separate
family  cults  or  of  national  creeds,  but  it  is  opposed  in  spirit  to
any  doctrine  which teaches that  the  same  moral  obligations
must  apply  to  all  humanity  alike. The  Stoics  first  preached
this  doctrine  with  effect  in  Western  Europe,  but  unfortunately,
in  applying  it  to  the  case  of  the  slave,  they  were  hampered  by
their  view  of  the  indifference  of  all  outward  circumstances,  and
preached  that  the  slave  in  his  slavery  could  be  and  should  be
as  truly  king  and  lord  of  himself  as  the  Emperor  on  his  throne.
The slave Epictetus was no  less his  own  master than the
Emperor  Marcus  Aurelius. The  leaders  of  the  Church  accepted
the  principle  of  human  brotherhood,  but  to  them  also  worldly
institutions were  secondary,  because  salvation,  if  obtained  in
this  world,  was  not  obtained  for  this  life,  but  for  the  life  to
come. They  dealt with  slavery,  therefore,  not  so  much  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  rights  of  the  slave  as  from  that  of  the
duties  of  the  master,  and  limiting  their conception  of  equal
rights  by  the  principle  of  brotherhood  in  Christ  alone,  they
took  less  account  of  the  fate  of  those  outside the Christian
community. The results are written deep  in  history. The
question  is  always  asked  how  far  the  abolition  of  slavery  in
Europe  was  due  to  moral,  how  far  to  economic,  causes. The
answer  appears  to  be  that,  so  far  as  regards  slavery  proper,  the
two  factors  worked  in  harmony. The  transition  to  serfdom  was
favoured  by the  economic  situation.1 But  the disappearance

1  See  Vinogradoff,  Growth  of  the  Manor,  pp.  202-204.  A  great  social
reform  like  the  abolition  of  slavery  is  seldom  brought  about  by  moral
agencies  alone.  It  is  only  when  these  can  take  advantage  of  a  favourable
political  or  economic  situation  that  they  get  their  way.  Hence  there  is
always  on  the  surface  of  things  colour  for  the  cynical  view  that  what  appear
to  be  moral  improvements  are  really  due  to  non-moral  causes.  But  this


CLASS RELATIONS  317

of  slavery  is  no  less  distinctly  connected  with  the  rise  of
universalism  in  ethics,  first  in  philosophy  and  afterwards  in
religion.  In  neither  form  was  the  institution  of  slavery  directly
combated,  but  the  indirect  effect,  first  by  ameliorating  the
position  of  the  slave  and  thereby  curtailing  the  rights  of  the
master,  secondly  by  encouraging  manumission,  and  thirdly  and
most  important  of  all  by  cutting  off  the  sources  of  supply,  was
that  slavery  died  of  inanition,  and  by  the  end  of  the  twelfth
century  was  almost  unknown  in  Europe.  On  the  other  hand,
when  the  Christian  world  came  into  contact  a  century  or  two
later  as  a  conquering  power  with  non-Christian  races,  there  was
no  moral  force  at  hand  to  resist  the  natural  result  and  new
forms  of  slavery  grew  up.

12.  The  history  of  serfdom  in  the  Middle  Ages  is  more  compli
cated  and  obscure,  especially  as  to  the  causes  and  progress  of  its
disappearance.  We  have  seen  a  form  of  predial  serfdom  already
growing  up  within  the  Roman  Empire.  We  have  seen  also  that,
in  addition  to  the  slave  class,  the  barbarian  conquerors  introduced
into  the  constitutions  of  Western  Europe  imperfectly  distinguished
classes  of  semi-free  citizens.  All  these  elements  contributed  to
form  that  great  mass  of  the  population  which  throughout  the
Middle  Ages  stood  between  the  free  man  and  the  slave,  and
whilst  slavery,  as  we  have  seen,  was  slowly  dying  out,  serfdom
for  a  long  time  continued  to  flourish  and  increase,  recruited  in
part  from  the  ranks  of  the  slaves  and  in  part  from  free  men  who,
either  by  conquest  or  through  economic  causes,  sometimes  even
by  voluntary  surrender  of  their  freedom  with  a  view  to  gaining
the  protection  of  a  lord,  swelled  the  number  of  the  semi-free.
Thus  mediasval  serfdom  represents,  on  the  one  hand,  a  progress
from  slavery,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  degradation  of  free  men
which  is  a  not  uncommon  incident  of  epochs  of  unrest  and  of
military  conquest.  It  is  not  within  our  limits  to  characterize

view  ignores  the  cases  in  which  the  political  and  economic  forces  tend  in
the  opposite  direction.  In  modern  industry,  for  example,  the  circum
stances,  if  we  eliminate  the  moral  factor,  are  eminently  favourable  to  the
development  of  a  servile  system,  but  every  move  in  this  direction  has  con
stantly  been  combated,  on  the  whole  with  conspicuous  success,  by  the
deliberate  efforts  of  men  and  women  animated  by  a  sense  of  justice  and
humanity.


318  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

all  the  different  grades  of  unfreedom  which  resulted.  At  most
a  general  idea  may  be  given.  Serfdom,  though  not  essentially
and  universally  confined  to  peasants  settled  upon  the  land,
tended  in  point  of  fact  through  the  Middle  Ages  to  lose  its
domestic  and  assume  a  territorial  character.  In  the  Frankish
Empire  the  serf  was,  generally  speaking,  glebaz  adscriptus.  He
might  not  leave  his  land,  while  on  the  other  side  he  could  not
be  sold  apart  from  the  land.  He  could  acquire  property,  but
had  not  complete  control  of  it.  He  had  to  perform  certain
definite  services  to  his  master,  which  could  not  be  altered
arbitrarily,  and  in  the  earlier  period  he  required  the  lord's
consent  to  marriage,  at  any  rate  outside  the  domain,  while  he
had  also  to  pay  for  securing  the  lord's  consent.  He  came  under
the  protection  of  the  law,  having  as  a  rule  half  the  wergild  and
half  the  fines  of  a  free  man.  In  other  respects,  the  position  of
the  serf  was  extremely  different  among  different  peoples.
Among  the  Saxons  the  Liti  were  a  part  of  the  people.  Among
the  Frisians,  and  probably  among  the  Saxons  also,  they  could
plead  in  court,  and  in  cases  of  injury  received  a  part  of  the  wer
themselves,  only  one  portion  going  to  their  lord.  Among  the
Lombards,  on  the  other  hand,  the  corresponding  class  could  not
appear  in  the  courts,  and  the  lord  received  their  wer  as  though
they  were  slaves.  Between  these  extremes  there  were  numerous
intermediate  grades.1  As  the  Middle  Ages  advanced  the
heaviest  burdens  of  serfdom  tended  to  disappear  in  the  Empire.
In  particular  the  right  to  marry  was  acquired  by  the  serf,  and
here,  as  has  been  mentioned  in  Chapter  V.,  the  influence  of  the
•  Church  was  probably  decisive.  The  payment  upon  marriage,
however,  was  continued,  at  any  rate  in  cases  where  it  took  the
bride  off  the  estate,  and  in  this  case  it  still  required  the  approval
of  the  lord — not  that  the  withholding  of  such  approval  would
invalidate  the  marriage,  but  that  it  would  render  the  parties
liable  to  punishment.2  The  old  right  of  the  lord  to  inherit  from
the  serf  had  been  reduced  3  to  the  right  to  a  duty  on  the  inherit
ance  ;  and  the  other  restrictions  on  the  serf's  right  to  property
were  in  process  of  disappearance.  His  personal  tribute  was
converted  into  a  rent  upon  his  holding  and  his  stock,  and  the

1  Schroder,  222,  223.  2  j&.}  p.  455.

3  "  Schon  in  der  voriyen  Periods  "  ; Schroder,  ib.


CLASS RELATIONS  319

limitation  upon  his  power  to  alienate  his  land  into  a  right  of
pre-emption  on  the  part  of  the  lord.1  Finally,  the  growth  of
free  cities  favoured  freedom.  The  serf,  escaping  to  them,  could
be  reclaimed  by  his  master  within  a  year  and  a  day,  but  from
that  time  onwards  was  free.  The  principle  "  Air  makes  free,"
that  is  to  say,  that  the  position  of  a  person  follows  the  general
law  of  the  land  on  which  he  is  settled  and  does  not  depend
upon  his  birth,  became  adopted  in  the  later  Middle  Ages  and
naturally  tended  to  emancipation.2

In  France  the  conditions  of  serfdom  varied  from  province  to
province  and  from  period  to  period.0  A  conception  of  the
different  grades  of  unfreedom  covered  by  the  term  may  be
derived  from  the  description  given  at  the  close  of  the  thirteenth
century  by  Beaumanoir.  In  one  grade  the  whole  property  of
the  serf  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  lord,  who  might  also  imprison
him  at  pleasure ;  in  the  other  grade,  the  lord  could  command
nothing  from  the  serf  except  a  fixed  customary  sum,  though  he
was  still  the  serf's  heir  unless  the  children  redeemed  the
succession.1  Serfdom  had  already  become  rare  and  had  in  some
provinces  disappeared.  Some  serfs  gained  the  right  of  paying  a
fixed  "  taille,"  and  the  right  of  holding  and  transmitting  property
were,  generally  speaking,  acquired  early.  In  a  medieval
decision  given  at  Paris  the  characteristics  laid  down  as  dis
tinguishing  a  serf  are  (1)  he  cannot  marry  without  the  permis
sion  of  the  lord,  and  (2)  he  cannot  give  or  bequeath  goods.  The
second  condition  was  the  more  general,  and  the  milder  form  of
serfdom  persisted  to  the  eighteenth  century.5

In  England,  as  elsewhere,  serfdom  was  increasing  just  at  the
period  when  slavery  was  disappearing,  and  the  number  of  serfs
was  swelled  by  the  merging  of  different  classes,  slaves,  villeins,
and  even  free  men,  under  a  single  denomination.  The  serf
was  not  properly  speaking  adscriptus  glebte,  although  he  passed
with  the  manor  when  it  was  sold  or  inherited ;  but  he  could  be
moved  from  place  to  place  and  from  one  service  to  another  at

1  Schroder,  p.  456.

2  Ib.,  p.  460. On  the  re-action  which  began  in  the  fifteenth  century,
and  which  was  due  largely  to  the  unfavourable  economic  position  of  the
landless  free  labourers,  see  Schroder,  pp.  460,  461.

3  Viollet,  pp.  307,  313,  ff.  4  16.,  p.  314.
5  Ib.,  p.  315.


320  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

the  lord's  will,1  and  by  strict  right  could  be  sold,  though  the
right  was  rarely  exercised.2  The  general  characteristics  of  the
villeinage  were  that  the  villein  by  birth  could  not  marry  his
daughter  without  paying  a  fine,  nor  permit  his  son  to  take  holy
orders,  nor  sell  his  calf  or  horse ;  that  he  is  bound  to  serve  as  a
reeve  in  the  manor,  and  that  his  youngest  son  succeeds  to  his
holding  on  his  death.3  To  this  it  must  be  added  that  while  the
serf  has  full  legal  rights  in  relation  to  third  parties,  the  criminal
law  makes  a  great  distinction  between  his  lord  and  him.  Thus
in  the  Leges  Henrici  if  the  lord  takes  away  the  man's  land  or
deserts  him  in  mortal  peril  he  forfeits  his  lordship,  but  the  man
must  bear  with  the  lord's  ill-treatment  of  him  for  thirty  days  in
war  and  a  year  and  a  day  in  peace.  To  kill  one's  lord  is  like
blasphemy  and  is  punishable  with  death  by  torture,  whereas  if
a  lord  kills  his  man  without  cause  a  fine  will  suffice.  This
is  the  "high-water  mark  of  English  vassalism."4  The  Norman
law  is  more  liberal,  but  still  draws  a  distinction.  "  If  a  lord
kills  his  man  he  shall  be  punishable  with  death,  if  the  man  his
lord  he  shall  be  drawn  and  hanged,  and  even  if  it  be  by  mis
adventure  he  shall  be  punishable  with  death."  The  lord
would  be  punished  for  killing  or  maiming  the  villein,  but  might
beat  or  imprison  his  serf.5

The  history  of  the  decline  of  serfdom  in  the  later  Middle
Ages,  both  in  France  and  England,  is  no!;  very  clear.  The  lawyers
who  had  been  unfavourable  to  freedom  down  to  the  thirteenth
century  changed  their  attitude  during  that  period  under  the
influence  of  the  new  ideas  of  the  State  as  a  whole,  no  longer  broken
up  into  half-independent  feudal  territories,  but,  as  a  single
authority,  having  equal  claim  upon  all  its  subjects  alike.6  That
these  more  enlightened  ideas  accompanied  the  improvement  of
social  organization  was  an  extremely  fortunate  circumstance  for
the  English  serf.  In  England,  as  on  the  Continent,  freedom  might
be  acquired  by  escaping  from  the  lord's  jurisdiction,  and  the  courts
now  favoured  liberty.  Feudal  barbarism  admitted  this  rough  and
ready  method  of  emancipation  largely  because  it  lacked  the  means
of  securing  the  person  of  the  runaway.  With  the  growth  of  the

1  Vinogradoff,  Villeinage  in  England,  p.  57.  2  16.,  p.  151.

3  Ib,,  p.  156.  4  Pollock  and  Maitland,  i.  p.  300.

6  16.,  i.  p.  416.  6  Vinogradoff,  p.  131.


CLASS RELATIONS  321

kingly  power  and  the  better  settlement  of  society,  this  primitive
check  upon  oppression  would  naturally  disappear,  and  thus  where
the  ethical  conception  of  freedom  was  wanting,  the  growth  of
civilization  meant  the  prolongation  of  the  old  bondage  and  even,  as
in  Russia  and  Germany,  deterioration  in  its  character.  In  England
and  France,  upon  the  other  hand,  there  was  something  of  the
nature  of  an  ethical  resistance  to  any  tightening  of  the  bonds,  and
thus  the  development  of  order  had  a  beneficial  effect  on  the  slave
rather  than  the  reverse,  for  it  tended  to  encourage  the  system  of
money  payments  as  a  substitute  for  labour  service,  and  though
in  theory  the  serf  remained  the  lord's  man,  yet  in  practice,  in
proportion  as  labour  services  were  commuted  for  a  money  rent
his  position  became  scarcely  distinguishable  from  that  of  a
tenant  farmer.  From  whatever  causes,  servile  tenure  was  in  fact
rapidly  becoming  obsolete  during  the  fourteenth  century.  One
of  the  latest  records  we  have  of  the  existence  of  bondmen  in
England  is  in  a  document  in  which  Elizabeth  enfranchises  some
remaining  serfs  of  the  Crown  in  1574,  *  but  there  were  Scottish
miners  who  remained  serfs  down  to  1799  and  were  not  particu
larly  desirous  of  having  their  condition  changed.

Yet  elements  of  servility  remain  in  the  position  of  the  labourer.
The  Statute  of  Labourers  in  1348  was  passed  in  the  intention  of
preventing  workmen  from  taking  advantage  of  the  rise  in  wages
due  to  the  depopulation  of  the  country  by  the  Black  Death,  and
was  the  beginning  of  a  series  of  labour  laws  which  brought  the
labourer  into  a  position  which  as  described  in  Blackstone  stood
as  follows : — (1)  The  law  first  of  all  compels  all  persons  with
no  visible  effects  to  work ;  (2)  defines  their  hours  in  summer  and
winter ;  (3)  punishes  those  who  desert  their  work  ;  (4)  empowers
justices  to  fix  the  rate  of  wage  for  agricultural  labour  and
punishes  those  who  give  or  exact  more  than  the  wages  so  settled.2
We  know  that  these  laws  were  largely  a  dead  letter.  Never
theless  they  illustrate  the  attitude  of  the  governing  classes.
What  was  in  practice  more  important  was  the  Statute  of
Apprentices  (Fifth  of  Elizabeth),  which  restricted  the  right  to
carry  on  a  trade  to  those  who  had  served  an  apprenticeship,  while

1  This  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  latest  record,  but  Prof.  Vinogra-
doff  informs  me  that  this  is  not  absolutely  correct.
-  I.,  p.  414.

VOL.  i.  y


322  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

the  operation  of  the  Poor  Law,  especially  of  the  Act  of  Settle
ment,  tended  in  practice  to  restrict  the  motions  of  the  English
labourer  almost  as  much  as  regular  serfdom  would  do.1  Indeed
had  this  statute  been  rigidly  and  universally  carried  out,  it  would
have  had  the  effect  of  fixing  the  labourer  in  his  parish  like  a
predial  serf  without  the  right  upon  the  land  which  redeems  the
serfs  position.  To  describe  its  practical  operation  in  these  terms
might  savour  of  exaggeration,  yet  the  historian  of  the  Poor  Law
declares  that  with  this  Act  the  "iron  of  slavery  entered  into  the
soul  of  the  English  labourer,"  and  those  who  know  the  midland
or  south  country  labourer  of  the  present  day  can  see  the  scar
still  there.  Again,  Blackstone  writes  : —

"  A  master  may  by  law  correct  his  apprentice  or  servant  for
negligence  or  other  misbehaviour,  so  it  be  done  with  moderation;
though  if  the  master's  wife  beats  him,  it  is  good  cause  of  departure.
But  if  any  servant,  workman  or  labourer  assaults  his  master  or  dame
he  shall  suffer  one  year's  imprisonment  and  other  open  corporal
punishment  not  extending  to  life  or  limb."

Further,  in  Blackstone's  time  a  servant  through  whose  negli
gence  a  fire  happens  forfeits  £100,  and  in  default  of  payment
might  be  committed  to  a  workhouse  with  hard  labour  for  eighteen
months.  It  is  not  difficult  to  recognize  in  these  distinctions
between  the  rights  of  master  and  servant  an  echo  of  the  law  as
to  lord  and  serf.

Nor  was  the  English  law  altogether  free  from  caste  distinctions
in  the  earlier  part  of  the  modern  period.  The  benefit  of  clergy,
which  had  originally  been  an  immunity  claimed  by  ecclesiastics

1  In  the  effort  to  deal  with  vagabondage  the  law  has  at  different  times
come  perilously  near  to  re-introducing  slavery.  A  statute  of  Edward
VI.  ordained  that  all  idle  vagabonds  should  be  made  slaves,  fed  on
bread  and  water  and  refuse  meat,  wear  iron  rings,  and  be  compelled  by
beating,  chains,  etc.,  to  do  the  work  assigned  to  them.  This  was  repealed
in  two  years.  It  is  now  laid  down  that  slaves  acquire  freedom  by  landing
in  England,  but  this  does  not  affect  the  right  a  master  may  have  acquired
to  a  man's  perpetual  service,  and  "  the  infamous  and  unchristian  practice  of
withholding  baptism  from  negro  servants,  lest  they  should  thereby  gain
their  liberty,  was  totally  without  foundation."  The  Law  of  England  will  not
dissolve  a  civil  obligation  between  master  and  servant  on  account  of  the
alteration  of  faith  in  either  of  the  parties,  "  but  the  slave  is  entitled  to  the
same  liberty  in  England  before  as  after  baptism ;  and,  whatever  service
the  heathen  negro  owed  to  his  English  master,  the  same  is  he  bound  to
render  when  a  Christian."  (Blackstone,  i.,  412,  413.)


CLASS RELATIONS  323

from  the  secular  courts,  had  been  gradually  transformed  into  a
mere  class  privilege,  whereby  educated  persons  could  escape
punishment  for  secondary  offences.  Thus  in  the  seventeenth
century  the  question  whether  a  man  would  be  hanged  for
larceny  or  not  depended  on  whether  he  could  read,  unless  in
deed  he  had  forfeited  the  benefit  of  clergy  by  contracting  a
second  marriage  or  by  marrying  a  widow.  In  1705  the  neces
sity  for  reading  was  abolished,  and  benefit  of  clergy  could  there
after  be  claimed  by  all  persons  alike  for  a  first  offence  in  the
case  of  secondary  crimes.  But  important  distinctions  were  still
made.  The  offender,  unless  he  was  a  peer  or  a  clerk  in  orders,
was,  until  1779,  branded  in  the  hand  and  liable  to  seven  years'
transportation.  Clerks  in  orders,  on  the  other  hand,  might
plead  their  clergy  for  any  number  of  offences,  and  peers  had
received  the  same  privileges  as  clerks  by  the  statute  of  1547.
On  the  other  hand,  during  the  eighteenth  century  benefit  of
clergy  was  gradually  withdrawn  from  an  increasing  number  of
offences,  but  it  was  not  until  1827  that  it  was  finally  abolished,
and  even  then  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  privilege  of  peers
fell  with  it.  This  question  was  not  settled  until  1841,  when  the
statute  of  Edward  VI.  was  repealed,  and  peers  accused  of  felony
became  liable  to  the  same  punishments  as  other  persons.

When  it  is  remembered,  further,  that  the  whole  administration
of  petty  justice  and  of  the  preliminary  process  in  graver  crimes  was
in  the  hands  of  the  landed  gentry,  upon  whose  estates  the  labour
ing  classes,  rendered  landless  by  economic  changes,  were  fixed,
as  has  been  shown,  by  the  Act  of  Settlement,  when  it  is  further
borne  in  mind  that  the  same  justices  had  the  power  of  fixing
wages,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  working  classes  in  the  country
were  always  upon  or  over  the  verge  of  pauperism  and  dependent
upon  the  support  of  the  poor  law,  the  control  of  which  was  sub
stantially  in  the  same  hands,  it  will  be  recognized  that  the
nominal  freedom  of  the  English  labourer  down  to  the  beginning
of  the  reform  period  was  a  blessing  very  much  disguised,  and
that  the  reality  compared  unfavourably  with  the  lighter  forms
of  serfdom.  The  first  stages  in  the  progress  of  the  factory
system  made  matters  even  worse.  The  new  demand  for  child
labour  introduced  for  a  period  what  was  in  essence  if  not  in
name  a  form  of  child  slavery,  pauper  children  being  regularly


324  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

imported  in  the  manufacturing  districts  as  apprentices  and  set
to  work  under  conditions  as  to  hours  and  also  as  to  housing
which  would  have  been  onerous  even  at  less  tender  years.  But
these  abuses,  when  fully  realized  by  the  public,  were  met  within
a  period  of  time  which,  in  comparison  with  the  normal  slow
ness  of  reform,  may  almost  be  called  brief,  by  a  series  of  legis
lative  measures,  overriding  the  so-called  freedom  of  contract,
and  protecting  the  children  from  their  legal  guardians.  The
factory  system,  in  short,  reproduced  the  economic  conditions
under  which,  in  other  circumstances,  a  form  of  slavery  would
have  arisen.  And  from  this  result  England  and  the  other
industrial  nations  with  it  have  been  saved  by  a  distinctively
ethical  movement.

Upon  the  Continent  the  direct  manumission  of  serfs  was
perhaps  more  frequent  than  in  England.  Enfranchisements  en
bloc  were  common.  We  even  hear  of  such  things  being  done  by
abbeys.  St.  Benedict  of  Aniane  in  the  ninth  century  emanci
pates  serfs  on  the  land  which  he  receives.1  Charters  were
sometimes  given  upon  payment  to  whole  villages  and  by  kings
to  whole  counties.  In  1315  Louis  X.  invited  all  the  serfs
on  the  Crown  lands  to  purchase  their  liberty,  but  the  price
asked  was  too  high.  A  general  abolition  of  personal  serfdom  was
demanded  by  the  Third  Estate  at  Blois  in  1576,  and  again  at
Paris  in  1614.  This  was  not  granted,  but  the  institution  was
quite  unknown  in  many  provinces  in  the  seventeenth  century.
It  remained  in  Franche-Comte',  Bourgogne,  Alsace-Lorraine,
Trois  Evech6s,  Champagne,  Bourbonnais,  La  Marche,  Nivernois,
Berry ;  but  the  burden  was  relatively  light,  and  when  the  Duke
of  Lorraine  proposed  a  money  commutation  for  their  services  in
1711,  the  serfs  who  were  to  benefit  by  it  themselves  raised
objections.  The  question  was  raised  by  Voltaire,  and  by  an
edict  of  1779  Louis  XVI.  enfranchised  the  serfs  of  the  royal
domain  and  encouraged  general  abolition.  Serfdom  was  finally
abolished  in  France  without  compensation  on  the  night  of
August  4,  1789,  along  with  the  other  incidents  of  feudal
tenure.  At  the  same  time  fell  the  whole  system  of  privileges
which  had  made  the  nobles  and  the  clergy  castes  set  apart  from
the  mass  of  the  people.

1  Ingrain,  op.  ci't.,  p.  93.


CLASS RELATIONS  325

In  the  German  Empire  the  progress,  which  we  have  seen
going  forward  until  the  thirteenth  century,  was  arrested  in  the
fifteenth,  and  a  re-action  took  place,  leading  to  the  peasant  war
at  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  Serfdom  lingered  on,  but  in
1719-20  it  was  abolished  on  the  Crown  lands  of  East  Prussia  by
Frederick  William  I.  Frederick  the  Great  attempted  to  forbid
corporal  punishment  and  aimed  at  a  general  emancipation,  but
achieved  little  except  in  Prussian  Poland.  The  liberation  of
the  German  serf  was  to  come  indirectly  from  the  French  Revo
lution.  Napoleon  carried  out  emancipation  in  the  conquered
territory,  and  as  part  of  the  general  preparation  for  resistance  to
France,  the  Prussian  statesmen  issued  an  edict  in  1807  by
which  the  whole  population  of  Prussia  was  made  free  by  a
stroke  of  the  pen.1  Serfdom  admitting  arbitrary  exactions  and
corporal  punishment  remained,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  of
Maria  Theresa  and  her  successors,  in  a  great  part  of  the
Austrian  Empire  down  to  1848.  It  was  abolished  in  Russia  in
1861.  The  emancipation  of  the  Russian  serf  may  be  taken  as
the  final  termination  of  the  enslavement  by  law,  whether  com
plete  or  partial,  of  white  men.  The  later  stages  of  the  process
in  the  more  backward  countries  were  thus  clearly  deliberate
acts  of  government,  based  upon  general  conceptions  either  of
human  rights  or  of  the  conditions  of  social  well-being.  And  on
the  whole  the  continental  serf  gained  something  through  the
delay.  Emancipated  in  England  more  by  economic  causes  than
on  ethical  principles,  he  tended  to  become  a  landless  labourer,
more  abject  in  some  relations  than  a  serf  with  defined  rights.
On  the  Continent  in  most  countries  he  retained  his  land,  subject
to  servile  restrictions,  and  when  the  ethical  movement  struck
off  his  chains,  it  left  him  a  free  peasant  cultivator.  In  England
his  practical  freedom  was  to  be  won  at  a  later  date  and  at  the
cost  of  a  depletion  of  the  rural  districts,  which  is  raising  the
agrarian  problem  in  a  form  elsewhere  unknown.  So  much
depends  on  the  nature  of  the  causes  determining  a  change  like
that  from  servitude  to  freedom,  however  great  the  inherent
importance  of  the  change  itself.

13.  The  abolition  of  slavery  and  serfdom  in  the  modern  world
1  Ingram,  op.  cit,  pp.  119-129.


326

may,  from  one  point  of  view,  be  described  as  a  process  whereby
the  obligations  of  group-morality  were  extended  so  as  to  cover
all  Christians,  or  at  any  rate  all  white  Christians.  Unfortun
ately,  this  result  is  not  the  same  thing  as  a  strictly  universalistic
morality.  As  long  as  the  Christian  communities  lived  in  isola
tion  and  did  not  come  into  touch  with  weaker  races  as  their
conquerors,  the  matter  was  not  one  of  any  very  practical  moment,
but  when,  with  the  discovery  of  a  new  world  and  the  circum
navigation  of  Africa,  a  fresh  economic  position  arose,  making
slave  labour  industrially  advantageous,  while  at  the  same  time
a  vast  black  population  was  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  far
stronger  white  man,  slavery  grew  up  again  in  a  new  and,  in
some  respects,  a  more  debased  form.  It  is  worth  noting,  as
illustrating  the  ethical  principle  involved,  that  the  old  Roman
slavery  had  never  entirely  disappeared.  In  the  eleventh  cen
tury  we  find  Gregory  VII.  exacting  from  Demetrius  of  Dalmatia
a  promise  not  to  sell  men.  There  was  a  slave  trade  with
Mussulmans  in  Venice  and  in  Sicily  right  through  the  medieval
period.  In  the  twelfth  century  slaves  were  sold  at  fairs  in
Champagne,  and  Saracen  slaves  were  found  in  the  south  of
France  in  possession  of  a  bishop  at  that  period.1  Though  the
French  law  in  the  sixteenth  century  recognized  that  no  slave
could  exist  on  French  soil,  the  maxim,  as  formulated  by  Loisel,
is  applied  to  those  who  enter  France  only  upon  their  being
baptized.  But  these  smouldering  embers  of  slavery  were  now
destined  to  burst  out  into  flame.  The  Portuguese  began  im
porting  negro  slaves  in  1442;  and  obtained  a  bull  sanctioning
the  practice  from  Pope  Nicholas  V.  in  1454.  The  reason  was
characteristic.  A  great  number  of  the  captives  had  been  con
verted  to  the  Catholic  faith,  "and  it  is  hoped  that  by  the
favour  of  the  divine  clemency,  if  this  process  is  continued,  the
nations  themselves  may  be  converted  to  the  faith,  or  at  any  rate
the  souls  of  many  from  among  them  may  be  made  of  profit  to
Christ."  2  In  fact,  the  hope — probably  the  quite  sincere  hope—
of  saving  souls  paralyzed,  to  say  the  least,  the  protest  which

1  So  at  Narbonne  and  in  Provence  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  in
Roussillon  down  to  its  annexation  by  France. A  Saracen  was  publicly
sold  in  1296. (Viollet,  pp.  329,  330.)

2  Viollet,  p.  330.


CLASS RELATIONS  327

would  otherwise  have  been  made  against  what  was  in  essence  a
revival  of  one  of  the  worst  features  of  barbarism. It  was  quite
a  logical  exception  made  by  Pope  Calixtus  III.  in  1456,  when
he  prohibited  the  enslavement  of  Christians  in  the  East,  and  by
Pius II.  in  1462, when  he  severely  blamed Christians  who
enslaved negro neophytes. When Columbus shipped 500
Indian  prisoners  to  Spain  to  sell  as  slaves,  the  law  of  the  case
was  investigated  by  Isabella,  and,  theologians  differing  in  their
view,  she  finally  ordered  the  Indians  to  be  sent  back  to  their
homes.1 Meanwhile,  in  the  New  World  the Spaniards were
making  slaves  freely  of  Indians  and  treating  them  with  great
cruelty. Las  Casas,  impressed  with  the  honors  which  he  saw,
was  struck  with  the  idea  that  negroes  would  endure  that  bond
age  without  sinking  under  it,  and  with  the  most  benevolent
intentions  gave  the  most  unfortunate  advice  that  residents  in
Hispaniola  sliould  be  allowed  to  import  negro  slaves.2 Regular
black traffic accordingly began, notwithstanding successive
efforts  made  by  the  Popes,  when  they  grasped  the  situation,  to
suppress  it.3 All  the  great  trade  nations  of  Western  Europe
joined  in  the  traffic,  and  must  share  the  blame  alike. Europe
itself  was  not  preserved  whole  from  this  scourge. In  England,
indeed, it was held in the case of the negro Somerset
(1772)  that  English  soil  emancipated,  but  this  doctrine,  which
had  been  good  law  in  France  in  1571,  was  suspended  in  1716
and  again  in  1738. Slaves  became  common,  and  were  even  sold
at  Paris  down  to  1762. From  the  sixteenth  to  the  eighteenth
century  the  Popes  themselves  had  Turkish  galley-slaves,  and
Louis XIV., besides these, had Jewish slaves and Russian
captives.4

This  second  slavery  was  put  down  by  a  distinctly  ethical  move
ment.  It  began  with  the  Quakers  in  the  seventeenth  century.
George  Fox  had  already  desired  the  Friends  in  America  to
treat  their  negroes  well,  arid  "  that  after  certain  years  of  servi-

1  Ingram,  142,  143.

a  "Which  ad  vice,"  says  Las  Casas  himself,  "after  lie  had  apprehended
the  nature  of  the  thing,  he  would  not  have  given  for  all  he  had  in  the  world.

3§S,!'  The  Bull  of  Urban  VIII.,  1537,  and  of  Benedict  XIV.,  1741
(Viol  let,  p.  331.)

4  Viollet,  p.  332.  The  position  of  slaves  in  France  and  her  colonies  was
minutely  regulated  by  the  Code  Noir  of  Louis  XIV.,  1685.


328  MOKALS  IN  EVOLUTION

tude  they  should  set  them  free."  In  1727  the  Society  declared
that  slavery  was  not  an  allowed  practice.  In  1761  they  excluded
from  membership  all  concerned  in  it,  and  in  1783  formed  an
association  for  liberating  negroes  and  discouraging  the  traffic.
The  Pennsylvanian  Quakers  had  condemned  it  from  1696
onwards.  Many  leading  names  in  English  thought  are  quoted
in  Dr.  Ingram's  History  as  opponents  of  the  slave  trade  from
the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  to  that  of  the  eighteenth.
Among  them  are  Baxter,  Steele,  Pope,  Cowper,  Day,  Hutcheson,
Wesley,  Whitefield,  Adam  Smith,  Johnson  and  Paley.  An
English  Committee  for  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade  was
formed  in  1787,  and  the  motion  for  abolition,  which  was
defeated  in  the  House  of  Lords  in  1794,  was  carried  under
Fox's  premiership  in  1807.1  The  French  Revolution  had  gone
further.  In  1791  the  old  principle  that  the  French  soil  emanci
pates  was  re-asserted  by  the  Convention,  and  in  1794  slavery
in  the  French  colonies  was  abolished  by  decree.  But  the
moment  was  ill  chosen,  as  Hayti  was  in  revolt,  and  Napoleon
restored  slavery  in  1802.  At  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  British
influence  was  active  in  obtaining  the  consent  of  other  nations
for  the  suppression  of  the  slave  trade,  and  France  acquiesced,  in
the  treaties  of  1814  and  1815.  The  British  and  Foreign  Anti-
Slavery  Society  was  founded  in  1823,  and  secured  Abolition  ten
years  later.  Slavery  was  abolished  by  France  in  1848,  by
Portugal  in  1858,  by  the  Dutch  in  1863,  and  by  Brazil  in  1888.
The  founders  of  the  United  States  had  been  opposed  to  slavery
and  attempted  to  exclude  it  by  the  Constitution,  but  were
defeated  by  the  opposition  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  An
Abolition  Society  was  formed  in  1774  and  re-constructed  by
Franklin  in  1787.  The  Northern  States  adopted  measures  for
abolition  between  1777  and  1804,  and  importation  was  pro
hibited  by  the  United  States  in  1807.  An  Anti-Slavery  Society
was  founded  in  1833,  and  at  the  cost  of  civil  war  emancipation
was  proclaimed  in  1863.2  Unfortunately,  the  legacy  of  slavery
remains  in  the  Southern  States,  taking,  on  the  one  hand,  the
form  of  the  most  horrible  personal  cruelties  which  disgrace  any
nation  claiming  to  be  civilized,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the

1  The  trade  had  been  abolished  by  Denmark  in  1792.

2  Ingram,  154-182.


CLASS RELATIONS  329

efforts  to  re-introduce slavery by a side wind through the
corrupt  use  of  the  criminal  law.

14.  Slavery  is  no  longer  admittedly  l  practised  by  any  white
nation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  problem  of  dealing  with  coloured
labour  has  not  been  yet  satisfactorily  solved.  Here  and  there
"forced  labour  "  has  been  allowed,  and  forms  of  contract  labour  are
common,  which,  to  say  the  least,  are  difficult  to  keep  free  from
every  servile  taint.  The  questions  raised  by  the  various  forms  of
contract  allowed  by  the  British  and  other  civilized  governments
since  the  abolition  of  slavery  belong,  however,  rather  to  the  con
troversies  of  the  moment  than  to  the  historical  study  which  is  the
object  of  the  present  work,  and  I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  them
here.  It  may,  however,  be  allowable  to  say  that  the  modern
tendency  to  the  concentration  of  wealth,  or  at  least  of  the  forces
directing  labour  in  a  few  hands,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
vast  reserves  of  cheap  labour  to  which  access  has  been  given  by
the  opening  up  of  China  and  the  African  continent  reproduce  in
very  essential  features  the  conditions  out  of  which  great  slave
systems  have  arisen  in  the  past,  and  the  temptation  to  utilize
the  cheap  and  relatively  docile  labour  of  a  weaker  and  perhaps  a
subjugated  race  against  the  well-organized  battalions  of  the
white  artisans,  is  one  by  which  leaders  of  industry,  being  human,
cannot  fail  to  be  attracted,  and  therefore  raises  possibilities
which  no  statesman  can  ignore.

The  result  of  this  brief  review  is  to  show  that  the  principle  of
the  equality  of  all  classes  before  the  law  can  hardly  be  said  to  have
been  accepted  by  the  Western  world  as  a  whole  before  the  revo
lutionary  period.  The  whole  structure  of  mediasval  society  had
been  based  upon  the  principle  of  subordination  and.was  moulded
in  the  spirit  of  caste.  Confronted  at  all  times  with  the  doctrine
of  Christian  Brotherhood,  and,  later  on,  with  the  principle  of
natural  equality,  this  structure  was  also  undermined  by  the
growth  of  industry  and  the  complex  forces,  ethical,  political,
and  economic,  which  transformed  the  feudal  kingdom  into  the
organized  state.  Under  these  influences  slavery  proper  disap
peared  as  we  have  seen  in  the  course  of  the  twelfth  century;
and  in  the  most  advanced  nations  serfdom  followed  it  in  the
1  Not  even  by  the  Congo  State.


330  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

period  between  the  thirteenth  century  and  the  sixteenth.  But  for
the  completion  of  the  work  fully  two  more  centuries  were  required.
In  the  less  advanced  countries  serfdom  itself  lingered  on  into  the
nineteenth  century.  In  France,  though  caste  privileges  grew  more
and  more  out  of  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  time,  they  could
only  be  destroyed  by  a  revolution.  In  England,  where  they  were
rather  a  practical  consequence  of  political  superiority  than  the
express  subject  of  legal  enactment,  they  yielded  later  but  more
peacefully  to  the  influences  of  the  Reform  period.  So  modern  is
the  change  whereby  law  and  public  institutions  have  turned
towards  equality  rather  than  subordination  as  their  ideal.  An
ideal  such  equality  must  perhaps  always  be.  Wealth  and  influ
ence  will  always  have  their  weight,  not  only  in  social  life,  but
in  the  business  of  government  and  even  in  the  administration  of
justice.  Yet  the  true  spirit  of  caste  is  gradually  being  reduced  to
a  shadow  of  its  former  self.  Expelled  by  slow  degrees  from  the
sphere  of  law  and  government,  it  has  been  left  to  amuse  itself
with  a  mock  kingdom  in  the  region  of  ceremonial  and  social
intercourse,  in  which  the  ghosts  of  by-gone  realities  keep  up
a  mock  state  for  the  amusement  of  the  philosopher.

As  long  as  class,  racial,  and  national  antagonisms  play  a  part
in  life  we  cannot  say  that  group-morality  has  been  altogether
overcome.  Nevertheless,  the  evolution  sketched  in  the  present
and  precediDg  chapter  is  of  no  small  significance  for  ethics.  At
the  outset  men  are  organized  in  small  groups  bound  to  mutual
aid  and  forbearance,  while  they  are  indifferent  or  hostile  to  out
siders.  There  is  no  organic  bond  uniting  humanity  as  a  whole.
Hence  the  captive  enemy  and,  in  principle,  unless  there  are
special  reasons  to  the  contrary,  the  peaceful  stranger  are
"  rightless."  But  by  degrees  a  wider  conception  of  obligation
arises.  Fellow-Greeks,  co-religionists,  fellow-white  men,  ulti
mately  fellow-men,  enter  the  circle  to  which  obligations  apply,
and  even  the  violence  of  conquest  is  limited  by  the  rights
attaching  to  the  conquered  as  human  beings.  The  "  group  "  is
thus  widened  till  it  includes  all  humanity,  at  which  point  group-
morality  disappears,  merged  in  universalism.  But  the  rights
first  recognized  are  those  of  the  person.  To  take  into  account
the  rights  of  the  organized  community  is  a  further  step,  following
logically  from  the  first,  no  doubt,  but  following  slowly.  Here  too


CLASS RELATIONS  331

we  recognize  a  slow  advance  in  the  civilized  world,  an  advance
which,  if  unimpeded,  would  finally  overcome  the  "group-
morality  "  of  nations  in  favour  of  a  true  internationalism  of
morals  and  law.

Turning  next  to  the  internal  composition  of  the  community,
we  saw  that  the  primitive  group  was  relatively  small  and  homo
geneous.  But  as  society  grows  divisions  come,  and  a  new  form
of  group-morality  arises — distinctions  of  high  caste  and  low  caste,
bond  and  free,  and  the  like.  In  engendering,  accentuating  and
maintaining  these  distinctions,  military  conquest,  economic  in
equalities,  religious  differences,  race  and  colour  antipathies,  have
all  played  their  part,  and  up  to  the  middle  civilization  social  divi
sions  probably  tend  to  increase  rather  than  diminish.  Combated
by  the  teaching  of  the  higher  ethical  and  religious  systems,  they
have  been  mitigated  and  in  large  measure  overcome  in  the
modern  world.  Most  tenaciously  maintained  where  the  "  colour
line "  is  the  outward  and  too  visible  symbol  of  deep-seated
differences  of  race,  culture,  character,  and  traditions,  they  are
countered  even  here  by  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  modern
state  that  equal  protection  and  equal  opportunity  are  the  birth
right  of  all  its  subjects.  Thus  though  the  colour  line  is  the  last
ditch  of  group-morality,  here  too  in  the  modern  period,  taken  as  a
whole,  Universalism  has  made  great  inroads.  With  the  improve
ment  of  communication  and  the  growth  of  commerce,  Humanity
is  rapidly  becoming,  physically  speaking,  a  single  society —
single  in  the  sense  that  what  affects  one  part  tends  to  affect
the  whole.  This  unification  intensifies  the  difficulties  of  ethics
because  it  brings  into  closer  juxtaposition  races  and  classes  who
are  not  prepared  by  their  previous  history  to  live  harmoniously
together.  Hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  law  and  morals  do  not
show  a  regular,  parallel  advance.  Nevertheless  the  upshot  of
the  evidence  here  reviewed  is  that,  ethically  as  well  as  physically,
humanity  is  becoming  one — one,  not  by  the  suppression  of  differ
ences  or  the  mechanical  arrangement  of  lifeless  parts,  but  by  a
widened  consciousness  of  obligation,  a  more  sensitive  response  to
the  claims  of  justice,  a  greater  forbearance  towards  differences
of  type,  a  more  enlightened  conception  of  human  purposes.


PROPERTY AND POVERTY

1.  AMONG  primitive  peoples  there  is  little  scope  for  the  institu
tion  of  private  property. Land,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  later
on,  is  held  in  common,  and  apart  from  land  and  its  produce,
such  peoples  possess  little  which  can  be  appropriated,  except  their
small  personal  belongings. These,  it  would  seem,  belong  to  the
individual  from the  first. Indeed,  tools  and  weapons  are  so
completely identified with their owner, that they  are  very
frequently  buried  with  him,  and  that  on  one  of  two  grounds —
either  that  he  may  use  them  in  his  future  life,  or  because  as
belonging  to  a  dead  man  they  are  regarded  as  dangerous  and  are
therefore  best  done  away  with.  Now  the  recognition  of  individual
property  in  personal  belongings  and  of  communal  property  in
land  and  its  produce  may  both  be  explained  as  resting  on  one
and  the  same  principle — the  principle  of  occupation  and  use.
It  is  the  individual  who  actually  carries  and  handles  the  spear
or  fishing-net,  the  family  or  the  tribe  which  actually  occupies
and hunts  over  the  land. Thus  we  may  provisionally  accept
the  view  that  property  in  its  early  stages  is  based  on  occupation
and  use,  and  cannot  be  dissevered  from  them. But  with  the
destruction  of  the  dead  man's  belongings  we  touch  on  another
conception,  which  we  must  allow  for  at  very  low,  perhaps  at  the
lowest,  stages. Among  many  rude  peoples  the  statement  that
property  depends  upon  user  must  be  qualified  by  the  exception
that  it  may  also  be  secured  by  taboo. This  is  probably  the
explanation  of  the  extreme  scrupulousness  shown  by  some  savages
in  regard  to  the  belongings  of  others.  Thus,  among  the  Kunama,
Dr.  Tylor  remarks  that  a  hedge  may  be  mended  by  a  cotton

332


PROPERTY AND POVERTY

thread.1  That  would  certainly  not  do  in  the  civilized  world.
But  then  the  civilized  man  does  not  fear  that  death  will  follow
from  a  breach  of  the  fence  as  a  magic  result.  In  Oceania,2  where
taboo  reaches  its  extreme  development,  it  is  freely  used  for
protection  of  property,  real  and  personal.  In  ancient  Babylon
boundary  stones  were  secured  by  an  imprecation,3  that  is  to  say,
a  curse  was  laid  upon  them  which  would  fall  on  those  who  should
remove  them.  The  heap  of  stones  which  Jacob  and  Laban  set
up  were  to  be  witnesses  between  them,  and  it  is  possible  that
here  too  the  power  to  punish  the  transgressor  was  conceived  as
lying  within  the  stone  itself;  while  at  a  later  stage,  in  accord-
ance°  with  the  regular  development  of  religion,  the  curse  was
laid  upon  him  who  moves  the  stone  by  Jehovah.  When^  we
read  of  the  Western  Esquimaux,  whose  honesty  is  highly  praised
by  travellers,  that  other  people's  goods  left  about  with  a  stone
placed  over  them  are  quite  secure,  we  can  hardly  avoid  wonder
ing  whether  this  is  due  to  simple  honesty  of  character  or  to  the
magic  qualities  of  the  stone.

Thus  the  legal  conception  of  user  may  be  reinforced  by  the
magical  idea  of  taboo  as  a  basis  of  property.  But— whether
owing  to  the  irregular  development  of  the  latter  conception  or
not_We  have  next  to  observe  that  the  regard  actually  paid  to
rio-hts  of  property  is  a  very  fluctuating  quantity  in  the  less
civilized  world,  and  the  moral  attitude  to  the  whole  matter
differs  seriously  from  that  of  more  developed  races.  We  cannot,
indeed,  speak  in  general  terms.  Some  savage  peoples  get  a  very
good  character  from  travellers  for  honesty,  while  others  are
severely  condemned.  This  condemnation,  again,  sometimes
refers  merely  to  their  habit  of  stealing  from  other  tribes  or  from
strangers,  and  this,  as  we  have  seen,  hardly  counts.  Strangers
have  no  rights,  whether  of  life  or  property,  except  in  so  far  as
protected  by  the  law  of  hospitality.  Thus  among  the  Red
Indians  the  guest  was  safe  while  under  the  roof  of  his  host,  but
might  be  freely  robbed  in  the  prairie.4  The  real  question,
therefore,  is  how  far  the  rights  of  property  are  recognized  within
the  tribe.  As  to  this  we  find  very  divergent  statements,  and

1  Tylor,  Contemp.  Eeview,  April  1873,  p.  704.

2  Eatzel,  History  of  Mankind,  vol.  i.  p.  285.

3  Maspero,  p.  762.  4  Waitz,  vol.  in.  pp.  129,  130.


334  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

sometimes  much  difference  between  nearly  allied  peoples
Thus  among  the  Nagas,1  in  some  tribes  theft  is  punishable  by
fines,  beating,  and  even  death,  but  in  two  of  the  tribes  it  is  not
considered  disgraceful  at  all.  In  some  peoples  successful  theft
is  held  as  by  no  means  dishonourable.  The  case  of  Autolycus
has  been  referred  to  in  Chapter  I.  Among  some  of  the  Esqui
maux  theft  when  discovered  is  merely  held  a  clever  trick;2
among  the  Balantes  in  Africa  it  is  held  honourable,  while
among  the  Kaffirs  the  children  of  chiefs  may  steal  within  their
own  tribe.3  Even  in  some  civilized  or  semi-civilized  com
munities,  as  at  one  time  in  ancient  Egypt,  we  find  a
recognized  organization  of  theft  under  constituted  authorities,
who  duly  restore  the  property  to  the  owner  on  payment  of  a
portion  of  its  value.4  Further,  the  distinction  so  frequent  in
early  law  between  the  manifest  and  the  non-manifest  thief—
that  is  to  say,  between  the  thief  taken  in  the  act  and  the  thief
who  has  got  clear  away — probably  points  to  a  time  when  the
successful  thief  was  rather  admired  for  his  skill  than  condemned
for  dishonesty,  and  possibly  acquired,  or  might  at  any  rate
confer,  a  title  to  the  goods.6  This  same  distinction  illustrates
a  further  point.  The  tendency  of  early  law  is,  as  will  be  under
stood  from  the  discussion  in  Chapter  III,  to  treat  theft  like
other  delinquencies,  from  the  point  of  view  of  vengeance  rather
than  of  justice.  The  owner,  surprising  the  thieTm~the  act  of
carrying  off  his  goods,  will  naturally  attack,  and  will  very  likely
kill  him.  If  so,  who,  on  primitive  principles,  can  blame  him  ?
But  if  he  does  not  come  up  with  the  thief,  but  finds  out  the
robbery  in  cold  blood,  then  he  ought  to  control  his  vindictive
feelings,  and  be  thankful  if  custom  allows  him  to  get  restitution,

1  Godden,  J.  A.  I.,  26,  op.  cit.,  p.  174.  2  Waitz?  vol  m 309

Post,  Afrik.  Juris.,  vol. ii. p. 83. Similarly there  was  a  class  of
privileged  thieves  in  Ashanti.

4  In  Abyssinia  thieves  are  organized  under  a  chief  who  pays  tribute.
(Post,  loc.  cit.}  Waitz  (vol.  ii.  p.  218)  mentions  that  in  some  parts  of
Africa  the  thief  keeps  half  of  what  he  steals.  For  the  organization  of
thieves  in  Egypt,  see  Diodorus,  i.  80,  1.

6  See  Pollock  and  Maitland,  vol.  ii.  p.  497.  Instances  of  the  "receiver"
being  vested  with  ownership  of  movables  occur  in  contemporary  Africa.
(Post,  Afrik.  Juris.,  vol.  ii.  p.  162.)  On  the  Congo,  according  to  Waitz  (loc.
Wk.),  secret  theft  is  held  slavish,  but  open  robbery  lordly,  and  he  states  that
the  Kaffirs  generally  condemn  theft,  but  admire  it  when  cleverly  executed.
(Op.  cit.,  401.)


PROPERTY AND  POVERTY  835

with  perhaps  something  more,  for  his  pains.  In  early  English
law,  the  thief  caught  red-handed  could  be  hanged  without
opportunity  of  self-defence  before  an  impromptu  court.  But
an  action  for  ^robbery,  even  in  the  twelfth  century,  involved
only  a  double  restitution.1  In  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  "  if
the  thief  be  found  breaking  in  and  be  smitten  that  he  die,  there
shall  be  no  blood-guiltiness  for  him.  If  the  sun  be  risen  upon
him,  there  shall  be  blood-guiltiness  for  him."  The  owner
should  not  let  the  sun  rise  upon  his  wrath.  The  thief  must
merely  make  restitution.  If  the  stolen  animal  is  alive  he  shall
pay  double,  if  he  has  killed  or  sold  it  "  he  shall  pay  five  oxen
for  an  ox,  and  four  sheep  for  a  sheep."2  The  Moors,  on  the
other  hand,  at  the  present  day  do  not  punish  theft  by  night,  but
only  by  day,  and  then  only  when  the  thief  is  caught  in  the  act.3
It  is  clear  that  in  such  distinctions  as  these  the  law  takes
account,  not  of  the  right  and  the  wrong  of  the  case,  as  we
should  conceive  it,  but  merely  of  the  degree  of  resentment
natural  to  the  man  who  is  wronged  and  of  the  manner  in  which
he  may  be  expected  to  appease  it.  Clearly,  wherever  the  thief
is  allowed  to  keep  a  part  of  the  stolen  property,  or  has  simply
to  make  restitution,  stealing  can  hardly  be  considered  a  wicked
act  in  our  sense  of  the  term,  and  even  where  restitution  is
double  or  manifold,  we  must  regard  it  as  rather  intended  to
satisfy  the  injured  party  than  as  a  punishment  of  the  wrong
doer.4

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  also  many  cases,  even  in  the
uncivilized  world,  where  theft  is  severely  punished,  not  only  by
fines,  which  are  a  form  of  manifold  restitution,  but  also  by  beating,
enslavement,  mutilation,  humiliating  exposure,  and  even  death.5
Indeed,  as  soon  as  public  punishments  arise,  it  is  generally
punished  with  great  severity.  Thus  in  England  an  action  for
robbery,  which  only  involved  double  restitution  in  the  time  of
Glanvil,  who  died  in  1190,  was  punished  by  death  and  mutila
tion  in  the  time  of  Bracton,  who  died  in  1268,°  and  a  little

1  Pollock  and  Maitland,  vol.  ii.  pp.  494  and  579.

2  Exodus  xxii.  1-4.  3  Post,  Afrik.  Juris.,  vol.  ii.  p.  85.

4  Restitution  is  a  very  common  penalty  in  Africa.  (Post,  Afrik.  Juris.,  vol
ii.  p.  83.)

5  Instances  of  all  these  in  Africa  (Post,  I.  c.)
8  Pollock  and  Maitland,  ii.  p.  494.


33G  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

while  later  death  was  the  invariable  penalty,  even  in  the  end
for  the  theft  of  a  shilling ;  while  smaller  thefts — petty  larceny
— were  punished  by  whipping,  pillory,  or  by  the  loss  of  an  ear,
and  on  repetition  by  death.

The  conclusion  to  which  facts  such  as  these  point,  and
which,  remembering  how  scanty  the  evidence  is,  we  may
tentatively  adopt,  is  that  the  conception  of  property,  even  in
relation  to  personal  belongings,  is  somewhat  irregularly  de
veloped  in  the  uncivilized  world.  Where  the  rights  of  owners
are  very  strictly  regarded  the  cause  is  in  many  instances  the
fear  of  magic,  though  in  some  cases  (as  among  the  Iroquois  and
the  Dakotas)1  it  may  have  a  more  decisively  moral  character.
But  in  a  very  large  number  of  cases,  if  not  in  the  majority,  we
have  reason  for  supposing  that  the  right  of  property  is  not  held
morally  sacred  as  with  us,  theft  not  being  punished  as  theft,
while  in  some  cases  stolen  goods  are  not  even  recoverable.  On
the  other  hand,  with  the  rise  of  a  settled  society,  while  private
property  in  land  is  developing,  and  property  in  movables  is
increasing  through  the  growth  of  the  arts,  the  punishment  of
the  thief  is  taken  out  of  the  category  of  vengeance  ;  he  is  dealt
with  as  a  moral  offender,  and  that  with  the  extreme  of  severity.2
This  is  after  all  only  to  state  in  special  relation  to  property
the  conclusions  which  we  reached  in  Chapter  III.  with  regard
to  rights  in  general.  My  right  to  my  property,  like  my  other
rights,  is  in  the  earlier  stages  only  mine  in  the  sense  that
I  shall  be  expected  to  avenge  its  infringement  by  certain

1  Cf.  Schoolcraft — Drake,  vol.  i.  p.  222. "Theft  is  very  scandalous
among  them  since  they  have  no  locks  but  those  of  their  minds  to  preserve
their  goods." (From  Coldan's  account.) Among  the  Dakotas  pilfering  by
women  and  children  was  common,  but  the  men  despised  it  as  too  low  a
practice  for  them. (Ib.,  vol.  i.  p.  206.)

2  In  Rome  the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables — like  most  laws  of  that  stage —
distinguished  the  thief  caught  in  the  act — the  fur  manifestus — from  the
thief  not  caught  in  the  act — the/itr  nee  manifestus. The  latter  must  make
double restitution, the  former  is  punished  corporally — in  the case of
robbery  by  night  or  with  the  strong  hand,  by  death ;  in  other  cases  by
beating  and  slavery. In  the  later  legislation  the  injured  party  had  choice
of  a  new  form  of  criminal  action  whereby  corporal  punishment  might  be
inflicted, or  of  the  actio  furii  which carried  infamia  and  double  or
quadruple  restitution.  (Girard,  pp.  392-394.) In  the  Code  of  Hammurabi,
both  death  and  restitution  are  recognized. (Sections  6 and  following.)
Manu  prescribes  fines,  corporal  punishment  and  mutilations  for  thefts  of
various  kinds  (viii.  319  ff.).


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  337

recognized  methods.  That  I  have  a  moral  claim  to  it,  which
it  is  wicked  to  infringe,  and  not  only  wicked  but  an  offence
punishable  by  society,  is  a  higher  conception  which  is  only
perfected  by  degrees.

2.  So  far  we  have  followed  the  development  of  the  conception v
of  property  as  an  ethical  right. The  evolution  in  the  actual \
conditions  of  ownership  belongs  rather  to  the  province  of  the
economist or the  jurist. But  certain  points  must  be  noted.
In  primitive  society,  as  has  been  mentioned,  private  property  is !
limited  to  the  insignificant  personal  possessions,  the  arms  and S
tools,  etc.,  of  the  savage — while  the  land,  the  great  and  per
manent  source  of  sustenance,  is  generally  common  to  the  family
or  to  the  clan,  and  in  the  rudest  forms  there  is  not  only  common j
ownership,  but — so  far  as  the  land  can  be  said  to  be  occupied —
common  occupation. A  group  of  Australians  wander  over  a
certain  area  with  assignable  boundaries,  which  of  course  they
maintain against others.1 The  Red Indians  hunt  a  certain
district,  which  is  special  to  each  tribe,  but  common  to  all  within
it.2 Even  the  produce  of  the  hunting  is  often  common,  or  is
distributed  by  fixed  customary  rules. All  the  tribes  who  hunt
in the  plains, except  the  half-bred  Crees,  are  said to make
common stork  of  the booty.3 When  agriculture  begins  the
land  is  generally  portioned  out,  at  least temporarily,  to the
totems  or  the  family  groups  within  the  tribe. But  within  the
family  group  the  produce  is  still  common,  and  the  land  itself  is
still  the  common  property  of  the  tribe  as  a  whole.4

1  Spencer  and  Gillen,  i.  p.  8.

2  Kohler,  Zeitschrift  fur  vgl.  Rwst.,  1897,  p.  402.

3  Morgan, House and Houselife  of  the American  Aborigines,  p.  (59.
He  adds  that  the  tribes  of  the  Columbia  Eiver  make  common  stock  of  the
fishing. Among  the  Western  Esquimaux  any  one  may  take  the  game  from
the  snares,  while  all  large  game  is  common.  (Reclus,  p.  111.) Among  the
South  American  Indians  the common hunt  yields common  booty,  but
there  may  also  be  private  hunting. The  captor  has  the  right  to  a  prisoner's
head,  while  the;  neighbours  have  the  rest  of  him,  but  if  the  captive  is
enslaved  he  belongs  to  the  community.  (Schmidt,  Z.f.  F.  R.,  1898,  p.  311.)
The  non-agricultural  tribes  of  Africa  know  no  division  of  land. (Post,  Afrik.
Jim's.,  vol.  ii.  p.  167.)

1  Among  the  Creeks  each  village  had  a  common  field  divided  into
patches  for  each  family,  the  harvest  was  conducted  in  common,  and  a
certain  portion  was  set  aside  for  the  common  store  out  of  which  the  needy
were  supported .  Among  the  Iroquois,  the  land  was  the  property  of  the
tribe.  The  harvest  was  carried  out  by  the  joint  family  in  common,  and  the
VOL.  i.  z


338  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

We  have  here  two  kinds  of  communism,  a  wider  and  a
narrower,  and  these  persist  with  various  modifications  through
much  higher  grades  of  culture.  We  see  the  transition  to  the
division  of  the  tribal  property  among  the  households  in  such
an  instance  as  that  of  the  Iroquois,  where  families  may  possess
and  retain  common  lands  by  occupying  them,  though  the  land
remains  strictly  the  property  of  the  tribe.1  When  a  division  is
made,  the  allotments  may  only  last  for  a  short  period — perhaps  a
year  or  two ; 2  often,  again,  they  depend  on  cultivation,3  and  if
deserted  the  land  reverts  to  the  community.  But  such  divisions
may  also  become  customary  and  periodical,  so  that  there  is  a
redistribution  at  the  end  of  a  fixed  period.  Or,  lastly,  the
redistribution  may  be  given  up,4  and  the  lots  become  family
property,  but  the  eminent  rights  of  the  community  are  still
recognized — for  instance,  in  customs  regulating  the  methods  of
cultivation  or  forbidding  alienation  without  its  consent.  These
rights  will  also  be  found  surviving  in  the  common  pasture,  and
with  still  greater  persistence  in  the  common  woodland.

products  distributed  by  the  women  among  the  different  departments ;
though  the  village  did  not  make  a  common  stock,  the  obligations  of
hospitality  would  prevent  anybody  from  going  short.  (Morgan,  Hoitselife,
pp.  61-66.)  Common  cultivation  and  division  of  the  harvest  is  also  found
on  the  Sierra  Leone  Coast.  (Post,  Afrik.  Juris,  ii.  p.  172.)  Sometimes  the
communism  is  of  a  rough  and  general  character  rather  than  a  matter  of
distinct  right.  Among  some  of  the  Papuans,  for  instance,  every  one  is
expected  to  give  when  asked.  "  The  people  is  God,"  it  is  irreligious  to
refuse  anything.  We  see  here  the  borderland  between  regular  communism
and  the  indiscriminate  profusion  and  liberality  which  are  such  common
characteristics  of  primitive  life.  (Kohler,  Z.f.  V.  1L,  1900,  p.  368.)

1  Morgan,  League  of  the  Iroquois,  p.  326. Similarly  among  the  Yoruba,
the  land  belongs  to  the  tribe,  but  it  is  vested  in  the  chief,  who  allots  it  to  the
householders  according  to  their  requirements,  and  it  becomes  hereditary
and  inalienable. (Ellis,  Yoruba,  p.  188.)

2  This is common among the North American Indians. (Kohler,
Z.f.  V.  R,  1897,  p.  402.)

3  E.  g. in  many  African  tribes  land  is  only  appropriated  while  in  use.
On  the  other  hand,  land  often  becomes  hereditary  among  the  Foulah  of
Futajallon,  among  the  Mandingos  and  the  Somali,  but  uncultivated  land
falls  back  to  the  community. (Post,  A.  J.,  ii.  169,  170.)

In  the  Code  of  Hammurabi,  it  would  seem  that  leaving  the  land  unoccu
pied  for  three  years  destroys  the  title  to  it  as  against  another  person  who  has
occupied  and  cultivated  it.  (Clause  30.)

4  Thus  in  India,  though  the  lots  have  become  inalienable,  the  tradition
of  redistribution  remains. (Mayne,  p.  112.) On  the  other  hand,  in  the
Russian Mir, the  system of periodical redistribution  is, according  to
Kovalevsky,  an  innovation.  (Modern  Customs  and  Ancient  Laivs  of  Russia,
p.  93,  etc.)


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  339

But  while  the  communism  of  the  village  gradually  wastes  away,
there  is  also  a  communism  on  a  smaller  scale  which  forms  the
economic  basis  of  the  "joint  family »  The  joint  family  consists  of
a  whole  group  of  relations  connected  by  father-right  or  mother-
right,  as  the  case  may  be  ;  the  property  of  this  group  is  generally
administered  by  the  head,  but  is  owned  and  its  produce  shared
by  all  in  common.  ;^  It  is  in  strictness  indivisible  and  inalienable.
It  can  neither  be  sold,  given  away  nor  bequeathed.  But
within  this  communistic  scheme  we  find  private  property
arising  in  a  variety  of  forms  in  very  different  degrees.  Thus,
individual  members  may  acquire  a  pcculium  on  certain  con
ditions.  For  example,  the  daughter,  who  is  allowed  to  retain
the  savings  of  her  industry  and  take  them  away  with  her  on
marriage  as  her  dowry.1  Again,  the  joint  family  may  break  up
into  separate  families ;  alienation  may  be  allowed  under  varying
restrictions ; 2  or,  finally,  the  house-father  may  acquire  so  much
predominance  3  that  the  common  rights  are  merged  in  him.

Without  attempting  to  generalize  as  to  the  processes  by
which  the  village  or  family  communism  breaks  up,  we  may  leave
the  few  points  thus  noted  to  suggest  the  various  methods  of
transition  that  are  possible,  and  the  number  of  gradations
whereby  the  system  of  private  ownership  may  be  approached.
But  we  must  note,  further,  that  with  the  rise  of  the  monarchical

1  This  appears  to  be  the  only  form  of  private  property  in  the  Eussian
joint  family  down  to  the  present  day.  (Kovalevsky,  Modern  Customs,  p.  59.)

a_  A  strong  case  is  the  Hebrew  Law  of  Jubilee  by  which  all  land  reverted
to  its  original  owners  at  the  end  of  fifty  years  ;  this  in  effect  provided  that
family  property  should  not  be  permanently  alienable.  The  proprietary
rights  of  the  tribe  are  also  maintained  in  the  priestly  code  by  the  rule  pro
hibiting  daughters  who,  failing  sons,  have  inherited  property,  to  marry  out
of  the  tribe.  (Numbers  xxxvi.)  More  commonly  a  right  of  repurchase
remains  where  alienation  has  been  allowed.  The  French  right  of  retrait
ligni'gcr  was  not  finally  abolished  till  1790.  (Viollet,  p.  563.)

3  In  early  Home  the  family  property  was  conjoint,  but  the  system  was
much  modified  by  the  power  of  the  Koman  paterfamilias  and  also  by  the
right  of  the  heirs  to  demand  partition  at  the  death  of  the  father.  There  was
also  probably  a  wider  primitive  community  of  land  as  between  possibly  the
whole  people  or  more  probably  the  gens.  (Girard,  p.  249.)

For  the  varying  positions  of  the  father  in  the  Indian  household,  see  J.  D.
Mayue,  Hindu  Law  and  Usage,  p.  222  arid  following.  Mayne  makes  the
distinction  between  the  patriarchal  and  the  joint  family  turn  on  the  question
whether  on  the  death  of  the  eldest  ascendant  the  family  do  or  do  not
remain  together  (p.  223).  He  points  out  that  under  the  patriarchate  all
acquired  property  fell  to  the  father.  In  this  stage  the  head  of  the  house
hold  acquires  private  property  indeed,  but  at  the  expense  of  all  the  rest.


310  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

or  aristocratic kingdom the communal  system is apt to be

'  qualified  or  superseded  by  some  form  of  feudal  tenure. Vassalage

„  and  overlordship  replace  the  patriarchate  or  the  joint  family.

,f  Again,  the  break  up  of  the  feudal  organization  in  the  more  advanced

(  societies  makes  room  for  private  ownership. But  even  here  in

relation  to  land  there  are  limitations. Law  or  custom  limits  the

freedom  of  bequest  and  determines  the  rules  of  inheritance,  so

that  the  apparent  owner  is  more  often  than  not  a  life  tenant  only.

With these qualifications,  however,  we  may  consider  private

property in land as the  general rule  in  the  more  advanced

civilizations. In relation to other forms of property the

emancipation  of the individual is probably  more  rapid and

certainly more complete. The importance of "  stock " or

"  capital "  becomes  greater  as  the  arts  of  life  improve,  and  here,

as  the  joint  family  breaks  up,  the  individual  becomes  absolute

owner. The evolving  conception of  property  as  an  absolute

personal  right  has  full  swing,  and  in  proportion  as  industry  and

commerce  advance  becomes  more  and  more  a  cardinal  point  in

the  common  life  of  society.

It  would  appear,  then,  that  a  double  process  of  development
lies  behind  the  modern  institution  of  private  property.  On  the
one  hand,  there  is  the  gradual  emergence  of  the  right  of  ownership
as  a  right.  On  the  other,  there  is  the  gradual  extension  of  owner
ship  by  individuals  as  against  ownership  by  families,  clans,
villages  or  tribes — an  extension  standing  in  close  relation  to  the
!;  general  break  up  of  the  primitive  group  and  the  emergence  of
the  free  responsible  individual  as  an  ethical  and  legal  personality.
It  appears  to  be  only  in  relatively  high  civilizations  that  private
property,  getting  within  its  scope  the  land  and — with  still  more
completeness — the  other  leading  means  of  production,  becomes
the  dominant  factor  in  the  economic  organization  of  society.

3.  Private  property, held  in  absolute  ownership,  produces  a  basis
for  the  free  exchange  of  goods,  and  from  the  exchange  of  goods
arise  commerce,  the  division  of  labour  and  free  industrial
enterprise.  In  its  early  stages  society  seems  to  know  exchange
only  in  the  very  rudimentary  form  of  direct  barter.  A  may
give  his  cattle  for  B's  sheep,  or  his  sword  for  B's  spear.  Each
object  is  handed  over  then  and  there,  and  the  transaction  is,  so


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  341

to  say,  instantaneous.  But  if  a  regular  trade  is  to  develop,  this
immediate  and  simultaneous  completion  of  the  exchange
becomes  impossible.  It  becomes  necessary  to  rely  on  the
promises  for  the  future  of  either  one  party  or  both,  and  thus
exchange  generates  contract.  But  the  conception  of  a  binding
contract  is  not  reached  at  one  stroke.  To  us  the  moral  duty  of
keeping  faith  may  appear  axiomatic,  and  may  seem  to  provide
a  very  simple  and  obvious  ethical  basis  for  a  legal  obligation.
But  early  law  does  not  dig  down  to  ethical  foundations.  In  its
primitive  form  it  is  wont  to  recognize  no  contractual  undertaking
at  all  as  binding  for  the  future.1  It  knows  only  those  which  are
completed  immediately  on  both  sides,  like  a  sale  or  an  exchange
of  goods.  It  is  a  step  onwards  when  a  form  is  prescribed,  the
fulfilment  of  which  makes  the  contract  binding.2  But  still  it  is
the  legal  form  rather  than  the  ethical  element,  the  promise,
which  has  force.

"  That  which  the  law  arms  with  its  sanctions  is  not  a  promise,  but
a  promise  accompanied  with  solemn  ceremonial.  Not  only  are  the
formalities  of  equal  importance  with  the  promise  itself,  but  they  are,
if  anything,  of  greater  importance.  .  .  .  No  pledge  is  enforced  if  a
single  form  be  omitted  or  misplaced,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the
forms  can  be  shown  to  have  been  accurately  proceeded  with,  it  is
of  no  avail  to  plead  that  the  promise  was  made  under  duress  or
deception.  The  transmutation  of  this  ancient  view  into  the  familiar
notion  of  a  Contract  is  plainly  seen  in  the  history  of  jurisprudence.
First,  one  or  two  steps  in  the  ceremonial  are  dispensed  with  ;  then
the  others  are  simplified  or  permitted  to  be  neglected  on  certain
conditions  ;  lastly,  a  few  specific  contracts  are  separated  from  the  rest
and  allowed  to  be  entered  into  without  form,  the  selected  contracts
being  those  on  which  the  activity  and  energy  of  social  intercourse
depend.  Slowly,  but  most  distinctly,  the  mental  engagement
isolates  itself  amid  the  technicalities,  and  gradually  becomes  the  sole
ingredient  on  which  the  interest  of  the  jurisconsult  is  concen
trated.  .  .  .  Forms  are  thenceforward  only  retained  so  far  as  they

1  See  Schroder,  p.  63,  for  the  Primitive  Germans  "  wie  alle  Naturvolker."
Post,  Grundnsa,  vol.  ii.  p.  617  seq.  Girard,  Manuel,  p.  417,  on  early
Roman  Law  :  "  Nuda  pactio  obligationem  non  parit."

a  For  the  form  of  the  Roman  Nexum,  see  Maine,  Ancient  Law,  p.  320.
The  oath  or  the  ordeal  are  common  forms  •  for  instances,  see  Post,  I.  c.  A
more  substantial  guarantee  is  the  requirement  of  a  deposit  as  among  the
Chinese.  (16.,  p.  619.)


342  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

are guarantees of  authenticity and securities for caution  and
deliberation."1

Once  recognized  as  fully  binding  in  morals  and  law,  the
importance  of  con  tract  /as  an  element  in  social  life  increases  with
i  every  step  forward  in  civilization.  At  the  outset  its  scope  is
narrowly  limited  by  the  social  structure.  As  long  as  the  old
grouping  remains  by  which  a  man  has  a  fixed  place  as  member
of  a  clan,  a  joint  family,  a  village  community,  he  is  scarcely  free
to  enter  into  obligations  upon  his  own  account.  He  cannot
bind  himself  without  binding  others,  and  so  obligations  must  be
entered  into,  if  at  all,  between  communities  rather  than  indi
viduals.  Hence  the  part  played  by  voluntary  contract  in  life  is
insignificant.  Again,  in  the  earlier  civilizations,  rules  of  caste,
or  the  inherited  obligations  of  feudal  tenure,  fix  each  man's
place  and  function,  and  greatly  curtail  his  opportunities  for
Centering  into  voluntary  relations  with  other  men.  As  these
barriers,  one  after  another,  break  down,  there  arises  a  new
mobility  in  the  social  world.  Instead  of  fellow-clansmen,  or  lord
and  vassal,  bound  to  each  other  by  hereditary  and  unalterable
ties,  we  have  merely  fellow-citizens,  who  have  no  special  ties  but
those  which  they  form  for  themselves,  who  come  together  for
mutual  aid  and,  if  not  pleased  with  each  other,  can  separate
again.  The  old  solid  structure  of  society,  in  which  each  atom
was  definitely  bound  to  its  neighbours,  has  deliquesced  into  a  mass
of  freely-moving  molecules.  The  process  is  completed  in  the
modern  world  by  the  comparative  ease  with  which  the  last
barrier — that  of  the  state  frontier — is  overleapt.  Capital
migrates  with  perfect  freedom,  human  beings  almost  as  easily  in
proportion  as  alien  laws  have  ceased  to  be  oppressive,  and  the
same  broad  civic  rights  are  recognized  in  all  the  advanced
nations.  In  the  new  structure  of  society  it  is  more  and  more

1  Maine,  Ancient  Law,  p.  313.

For  stages  in  the  development  from  the  nexum  to  the  consensual  contract,
see  Maine,  op.  cit.,  p.  338.  Maine  points  out  that  the  moral  element  first
enters  decisively  into  the  Real  Contract  where  part  performance  or  one-sided
performance  imposes  the  duty  of  fulfilment.  Several  civilized  peoples
recognize  a  right  of  one-sided  retractation,  at  any  rate  within  a  certain
limit  of  time.  Thus  Maim,  viii.  sections  222,  223.  According  to  Post
(I.  c.)  the  law  of  Islam  originally  gave  a  right  of  retractation  holding  until
the  parties  had  separated.  The  ancient  Babylonian  seller  could  re-purchase
by  repayment  with  interest,  and  his  family  had  a  similar  right.  (16.)


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  343

true  that  the  whole  world  is  open  to  the  individual,  though  it  is
also  true  that  he  is  in  a  sense  alone  in  its  vastness.

4.  Free  contract  and  private  property  are  the  foundations  of
civilized  economics,  but  they  bring  their  own  problems  in  their
train. At  once  the  cause  and  effect  of  the  breakdown  of  the
old  social  groupings,  the  accumulations  of  wealth  which  they
render  possible  bring  about  new  divisions,  new  contrasts,  new
antagonisms. On  this  side  in  all  the  more  virile  races their
work  has  been  combated  stoutly,  if  not  always  wisely,  by  the  best
citizens  and  often  by  the  religious  leaders. The  old  communal
rights  are  furbished  up  anew  as  in  the  Sabbatical  year  and  the
later  year  of  Jubilee. The  prophets  thunder  against  those  who
grind the face of  the poor. Exactions threatening serious
diminution  of  the  roll  of  citizens  are  met  by  the  abolition  of
debt slavery,  by  a  general  cancelling  of  debts,  perhaps  by  a
division  of  lands. In  particular,  usury  is  denounced  as  unnatural
by  the  philosopher  or  as  wicked  by  the  prophet. Religion  con
secrates  poverty,  or  inspires  attempts  at  a  deliberate  communism.
Yet,  after  all,  antiquity  has  handed  on  the  problem  unsolved  to
the modern world,  and riot only unsolved but  replete  with
difficulties  more  formidable  in  proportion  as  the  emancipation  of
the  individual  is  more  complete  and  the  forces  at  the  command
of  industrial, commercial or financial genius immeasurably
greater than at any previous epoch. The sense of these
difficulties  has  deeply  affected  modern  legislation. There  are
few  countries  in  which  contracts  in  industrial  matters  are  left
wholly  unregulated. In  England  in  particular  we  have  a  vast
mass  of  industrial  legislation,  dating  back  at  least  to  the  Factory
Act  of  1802,  restricting  in  numerous  directions  the  agreements
which  may  be  made  between  employer  and  employed. In  quite
a  similar  spirit  agrarian  legislation  has  often  restricted  freedom
of  bargaining as between landlord and tenant. Yet the
defenders of  such legislation  are  by  no  means  compelled to
disparage  freedom  of  contract. They  may  perfectly  recognize
that  for  individuals  to  have  the  power  of  entering  into  obligations
without  restraint  arising  from  their  birth  or  status  is  one  of  the
leading  differentiae  of  the  higher  civilization. But  they can
point  out  that  in  this  relation  freedom  has  a  somewhat  ambiguous


344  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

meaning.  The  starving  man  may  be  free  by  the  law  of  the  land,
but  is  not  free  by  the  law  of  the  facts  to  reject  the  only  bargain
which  enables  him  to  obtain  food.  A  contract  is,  in  fact,  never
altogether  free  unless  the  parties  to  it  are  fairly  on  terms  of
equality,  and  they  are  not  on  terms  of  equality  if  the  con
sequences  of  rejecting  the  bargain  will' be  vastly  more  serious  to
the  one  than  to  the  other.  When  economic  conditions  destroy
this  balance  of  equality  it  is  held  that  the  principle  underlying
free  contract  is  rather  maintained  than  disturbed  by  state
regulations  prohibiting  contracts  that  are  proved  to  be  injurious
to  one  of  the  parties.  Thus,  though — or  let  us  rather  say  precisely
because — "  contract "  is  the  basis  of  the  modern  social  order,  the
character  of  contracts  is  a  matter  to  which  the  State  cannot  and
does  not  remain  indifferent.  If  this  analysis  is  correct,  modern
industrial  legislation  does  not  reject  free  contract  as  an  exploded
principle,  but  is  rather  seeking  to  get  beneath  the  surface  of  the
terms  to  the  point  where  freedom  is  really  to  be  found  :  and  in
this  effort,  the  conception  of  free  contract,  it  would  appear,  must
undergo  a  certain  reconstruction.

Something  similar  seems  to  have  occurred  in  the  attitude  of
legislation  to  the  idea  of  private  property.  It  is  difficult  to  speak
with  certainty  on  a  question  where  all  the  principles  involved
are  matters  of  contention  between  rival  parties,  but,  judging  as
far  as  possible  from  the  trend  of  actual  legislation  alone,  certain
results  emerge.  In  the  first  place,  the  modern  state  is  committed
to  a  wider  conception  of  its  functions  than  that  of  maintaining
order  or  defending  itself  against  aggression.  In  various  direc
tions  it  takes  active  measures  for  the  promotion  of  common
objects  which  experience  has  shown  to  be  unattainable  by
individual  effort.  Of  these  objects  some,  like  State  education,
touch  the  interests  of  the  poor  more  directly  than  those  of  the
rich,  while  others,  like  the  provision  for  the  maintenance  of  the
indigent,  avowedly  benefit  the  poor  alone.  Yet  it  has  to  be
recognized  that  if  the  cost  of  these  objects  were  thrown  by  taxa
tion  on  the  poorer  classes  they  would  largely  defeat  their  own
purpose,  by  intensifying  the  poverty  which  they  are  intended  to
relieve.  Modern  legislation,  therefore,  cannot  wholly  escape  the
criticism  that  it  tends  to  throw  upon  the  wealthy  the  cost  of
measures  which  primarily  benefit  the  poor.  Now,  to  the  strict


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  345

upholder  of  the  absolute  right  of  private  property  all  such
legislation  must  appear  iniquitous.  To  him  the  right  of  the
individual  against  the  State  stands  on  just  the  same  footing  as
his  right  against  any  other  individual.  The  right  of  the  State
to  levy  taxes  for  its  own  needs  is  indeed  necessarily  admitted,
but  this  taxation  is  regarded  as  a  kind  of  exaction,  imposed
by  the  established  authority  and  justified  only  by  the  needs
of  social  order  and  national  defence.  Any  tampering  with
the  possessions  of  one  class  for  the  benefit  principally  of
another  is  mere  spoliation.  The  defenders  of  the  present  trend
of  economic  legislation,  if  they  take  any  higher  ground  than  that
of  temporary  expediency,  are  forced  in  effect  to  question  this
absoluteness  of  private  rights.  Without  necessarily  being  com
mitted  to  any  socialistic  scheme  of  economic  organization,  they
maintain  that  the  rights  of  property  rest  upon  the  goodwill  of
society,  which  provides  and  pays  for  the  forces  necessary  to  main
tain  them  and  which  may  modify  and  at  times  has  modified
them  in  important  particulars  (e.  <j.  in  relation  to  inheritance  and
bequest).  They  urge,  further,  on  economic  grounds  that  there
is  a  social  element  in  value— the  growth  of  society,  its  good
order,  the  industries  and  exchanges  which  it  facilitates,  actually
creating  some  kinds  of  wealth  (e.g.  much  of  the  value  of  urban
sites  and  of  municipal  monopolies),  and  entering  as  a  factor  into
others.  Even  such  a  factor  in  production  as  good  workmanship
is  in  part  attributable  to  the  social  order.  The  numerous
intelligent,  highly-skilled  and  steady  workmen  whom  a  modern
engineer  can  count  upon  finding  ready  to  his  hand  put  him  into
a  very  different  position  to  that  of  Watt  or  even  Stevenson.
The  existence  of  such  a  class  is  due  to  complex  causes,  but  in
large  measure  it  is  attributable  to  the  great  social  reforms  of  the
intervening  period,  and  the  wealth  that  the  class  of  skilled
artisans  create,  whether  it  takes  the  form  of  profits  to  the
employer  or  wages  for  themselves,  has  its  root  in  social  conditions
which  created  them  arid  were  not  created  by  them.  To  put  it
more  generally,  the  maintenance  of  good  social  order  is  the  con
dition  of  developed  industry,  and  therefore  of  the  wealth  arising
from  it.

Now  those  who  emphasize  these  social  factors  in  value  are  led
to  question  the  absoluteness  of  the  rights  of  private  property


346  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

when  urged  against  the  State,  and  to  contend  that  they  should
be  viewed  rather  in  relation  to  the  social  organization  as  a  whole
and  defined  in  accordance  with  its  needs.  In  this  organization
the  individual  has  his  place  as  a  responsible  agent,  whose  duty  it
is  to  do  useful  work  and  whose  right  it  is  to  receive  such  reward
as  will  call  forth  and  serve  to  maintain  his  energies  at  their  best.
Society  on  its  side  has  the  duty  of  maintaining  and  improving
the  social  order,  and  assuring  to  all  its  members  the  opportunity
of  finding  their  places  within  that  order.  That  it  may  perform
this  duty,  it  has  the  corresponding  right  to  a  share  in  the  wealth
which  it  helps  to  create,  and  it  does  not  go  beyond  its  share  as
long  as  it  leaves  to  energy,  talent  and  initiative,  devoted  to  useful
ends,  full  scope  for  occupation  and  the  stimulus  of  adequate
reward.  Such,  in  briefest  outline,  seems  to  be  the  principle
underlying  much  of  modern  legislation — a  principle  which,  it
will  be  seen,  implies  a  certain  reconstruction  of  the  conception  of
property,  just  as  we  saw  above  that  other  legislative  tendencies
compelled  a  reconstruction  in  the  conception  of  contract.

5.  With  the  growth  of  property  and  the  development  of  trade  is
closely  bound  up  the  question  of  the  treatment  of  those  who  are
submerged  in  the  process.  But  this  opens  the  wider  ethical
question  of  the  whole  attitude  of  society  to  the  helpless,  the
suffering  and  the  dependent.  In  this  relation  we  shall  have  to
admit  that  the  development  of  personal  responsibility  as  shown
in  the  growth  of  private  property  and  of  contract  has  its  hardening
side.  The  brightest  aspect  of  primitive  life  is  seen  in  its  freedom
of  giving,  its  expansive  and  often  chivalrous  hospitality,  induced
partly  by  the  sense  of  a  common  necessity,  but  certainly
facilitated  by  communal  living.  In  the  whole  department  of
conduct  which  concerns  the  treatment  of  the  helpless,  whether
it  be  the  aged  or  the  infirm,  the  child  or  the  stranger,  the
divergence  of  the  primitive  from  the  civilized  point  of  view
both  for  good  and  for  evil  is  strongly  marked.  We  have  the
key  to  the  difference  if  we  keep  always  in  mind,  on  the  one  hand,
that  primitive  ethics  knows  nothing  of  those  rights  inherent
in  personality  upon  which  the  civilized  order  is  founded,  but  that,
on  the  other  hand,  through  the  very  absence  of  individual  re
sponsibility  the  movements  of  pity  have  free  play,  while,  through


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  347

the  prevalence  of  family  and  village  communism,  they  have  a
simple  and  natural  means  ready  to  hand  for  the  relief  of  indigence.
Both  points  appear  in  the  treatment  of  the  stranger.  As
such  he  is  rightless.  He  belongs  to  no  clan,  and  it  is  therefore
nobody's  business  to  avenge  him  if  robbed  or  slain.  He  must
find  a  protector  if  he  would  be  safe.  Yet  if  he  once  enters
into  the  bonds  of  hospitality  he  is  sacred.1  Tims  the  stranger
found  outside  a  Red  Indian  camp  might  be  treated  as  an
enemy,2  but  once  admitted  as  a  guest  he  is  sure  of  a  hos
pitable  reception.  The  communal  living  in  the  joint  house
hold  accustomed  the  Indian  to  the  habit  of  readily  sharing
what  he  had  with  those  who  needed  it.3  The  Indian,  says
Morgan,  "would  surrender  his  dinner  to  feed  the  hungry,
vacate  his  bed  to  refresh  the  weary,  and  give  up  his  apparel  to
clothe  the  naked."4  To  such  men  the  cold  exclusiveness  of  the
civilized  man's  house  is  equally  astonishing  and  repulsive.
"  You  know  our  practice,"  said  Canassatego,  an  eighteenth-
century  Ononadaga  chief,  to  a  white  man,  in  a  striking  allocu
tion  which  Morgan  quotes.  "  If  a  white  man  .  .  .  enters  one  of
our  cabins  we  all  treat  him  as  I  do  you.  We  dry  him  if  he  is
wet,  we  warm  him  if  he  is  cold,  and  give  him  meat  and  drink
that  he  may  allay  his -hunger  and  thirst;  and  we  spread  soft
furs  for  him  to  rest  and  sleep  on.  We  demand  nothing  in

1  In  a  paper  read  before  the  Sociological  Society,  Dr.  Westermarck  has
advanced  strong  reasons  for  the  suggestion  that  magical  conceptions  have
much  to  do  with  primitive  hospitality. The  guest  is  in  a  measure  feared  as
a  mysterious  stranger. Outside  the  house  he  can  do  no  harm,  but  once  in
contact  with  the  property  or  the  person  of  his  host  he  may  on  magical  prin
ciples  be  most  dangerous. Hence  at  once  a  reason  for  the  distinction  made
between  his  treatment  inside  and  outside  the  dwelling-place,  and  for  the
importance  of  the  ceremonial  of  contact  whereby  he  acquires  the  right  to
hospitable  entertainment. In  the  same  way  Dr.  Westermarck  refers  the
divine  protection  of  the  beggar  to  a  humble  origin  in  the  fear  of  the  beggar's
malediction. At  the  same  time  such  explanations,  however  true  in  them
selves,  do  not  settle  the  question  how  far  such  fears  are  the  expression  in  a
form  congruous  to  primitive  thought  of  an  ethical  feeling  that  something  is
due  to  the  suffering  and  the  helpless.

2  See  Waitz,  iii.  166.  3  Morgan,  Houselife,  p.  61.

4  Morgan,  League  of  the  Iroquois,  p.  328.  Similarly,  Catlin  (vol.  i.  p.  230)
points  out  that  the  dog,  though  immensely  valued,  is  sacrificed  for  a
guest,  if  there  is  no  other  way  of  providing  for  him.  Coldan  (in  School-
craft— Drake,  vol.  i.  p.  221)  remarks  that  the  Iroquois  carried  hospitality
beyond  the  bounds  of  "  Christian  civility  "—a  delicate  way  of  referring
to  wife-lending.


348

return.  But  if  I  go  into  a  white  man's  house  at  Albany  and
ask  for  victuals  and  drink,  they  say,  '  Where  is  your  money  ? '
And  if  I  have  none,  they  say,  '  Get  out,  you  Indian  dog  I'"1
Every  one  knows  of  the  hospitality  of  the  primitive  Arab,  and
how  a  sheikh  would  give  away  his  last  camel,  or  slay  his
favourite  horse,  for  a  guest's  benefit.2  Often  the  stranger  has  a
mysterious  sanctity.  The  hospitable  host,  like  Abraham,  may
.7  find  himself  entertaining  angels  unawares.  The  wanderer
comes,  as  in  early  Greece,  from  Zeus.  "  Do  not  treat  strangers
slightingly  "  is  an  Ainu  saying,  "  for  you  never  know  whom  you
are  entertaining."  3  A  custom  which  alone  makes  possible  any
movement  outside  the  boundaries  of  the  tribe  in  the  primitive
world  may  well  acquire  a  religious  sanction.4

Mother's  love  is  the  foundation  of  human  social  life,  and  we
are  therefore  prepared  to  find  that  affection  and  care  for  chil
dren  by  one  parent  if  not  by  both  is  traceable  to  the  lowest
levels  of  humanity.  But  the  legal  position  of  the  child  is  not
the  same  in  primitive  society  as  with  us.  The  "right  to  live  "
is  a  consequence  of  the  ethics  of  personality  and  is  not  recog
nized  by  the  savage,  nor,  if  it  were  recognized,  would  infanticide,
being  an  action  committed  within  the  family  circle,  necessarily
attract  the  attention  of  any  authority  outside  the  family
group.  To  primitive  man  having  a  severe  struggle  for  exist
ence  the  advent  of  a  new  mouth  to  feed  is  often  a  serious
matter.  Hence  infanticide  is  a  widely-diffused,  though  by  no
means  universal,  practice  in  the  uncivilized  world,  and  coin
cides  with  genuine  and  even  devoted  attachment  to  the
child  if  once  allowed  to  live.5  If  the  father  takes  up  the

1  Morgan,  The  Iroquois,  p.  329.

2  See  Palmer,  Koran,  Introduction,  p.  x.  3  Batchelor,  p.  114.

4  I  have  referred  above  (chap.  vi.  p.  244)  to  the  extreme  case  of
hospitality  to  enemies  among  the  Bengalese  hill  men.

6  A  number  of  savage  and  barbarous  peoples  not  practising  infanticide —
with  special  reference  to  female  infanticide — are  mentioned  in  Wester-
marck's  Human  Marriage,  p.  311.  Outside  Africa  the  list  is  decidedly
exiguous,  and  some  of  the  instances  are  admittedly  doubtful,  e.g.  the
Fuegians,  among  whom  it  is  only  a  question  of  the  frequency  of  the
practice  (compare  the  statements  of  Mr.  Bridges  quoted  by  Wester-
inarck,  p.  313,  and  Hyades,  p.  376),  and  the  Dakotas,  for  whom  see
Schoolcraft,  vol.  iii.  p.  243.  Westermarck  states  that  there  is  not  a
single  known  instance  in  Africa,  but  according  to  Waitz  (vol.  ii.  p.  391)
it  is  not  uncommon  among  the  Bechuana  and  the  Zulus.  Sutherland


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  349

child,1  if  the  clan  deckles  that  it  is  to  be  preserved,  even,2  it
may  be,  if  it  has  once  taken  food,  its  life  is  secure.  It  will  be
carefully  tended,  and  often  savage,  like  civilized,  parents  will  go
without  food  rather  than  let  the  child  go  hungry.  Even  orphans
are  among  many  people  looked  after.3  The  restriction  of  infanti
cide  to  the  weak  and  ill-formed  marks  the  decay  of  the  practice.4
Lastly,  in  their  treatment  of  the  sick  and  aged,  uncivilized
peoples  differ  greatly.  Many  are  said  to  take  great  care  of
them.  Others  get  a  bad  character  from  travellers.  In  many
instances  the  helpless  are  abandoned,  and  in  some  they  are,
perhaps  at  their  own  request,  put  to  a  more  merciful  death.5


(vol.  i.  p.  116)  quotes  Kolben  (p.  80)  and  Span-man  (vol.  i.  p.  258)  as
alleging  occasional  infanticide  among  the  Hottentots.

1  Thus  the  Roman  father  was  said  tollere  or  suscipere  liberos.  So  too  the
German  father,  but  here  the  right  of  putting  the  new-born  child  to  death
belonged  to  other  persons  as  well,  especially  the  mother  and  grandmother.
In  the  Frisian  laws  it  is  allowed  to  the  mother  only.  (Schroder,  p.  67.)

'^  Among  the  Creeks  infanticide  required  the  consent  of  both  the  clan
and  the  parents.  (Schoolcrat't,  vol.  v.  p.  272.)  At  Sparta  it  was  a  tribal
matter.  The  elders  of  the  phylum  examined  the  child  to  decide  if  it  were
well  formed,  and  if  not  it  was  exposed  on  Mount  Taygetus.  (Busolt,
p.  109.)

:!  Among  some  South  American  Indians  the  chief  is  the  guardian  of
bastards  and  orphans.  (Schmidt,  Z.  f.  V.  IL,  1898,  p.  289.)  Occasional
notices  of  orphans  suggest  that  the  care  which  they  receive  is  inadequate.
(Of.  Schoolcraft,  vol.  ii.  p.  194,  The  Dakotas  ;  Waitz,  vol.  iii.  p.  342,
Indians  of  Oregon.)

4  The  opposite  sentiment is  expressed  in  a  remarkable  manner  by  a
Toda  woman. "  We  never  kill boys. As  for  girls,  it  is  different ; but
still  we  only  kill  the  sturdy  and  strong  ;  it  would  be  a  sin  to  lay  hands
on  the  weakly  and  deformed." (Reclus,  p.  198.)

5  The  Andamans  are  said  to take  the  greatest  care  of  the  sick  and
helpless  (Man,  J.  A.  I.,  12,  p.  82),  and  so  are  the Central  Australians.
Among  the  North  American  Indians  the  aged  are  said to  be generally
respected,  yet  are  often  left  behind  in  necessity  or  put  to  death. (Waitz,
vol.  iii.  p.  115.) That  this  is  not  quite  so  inhuman  as  appears  to  us  is
made  clear  by  the  narrative  of  Catlin  in  the  text. The  Oregon  Indians
are  said  to  take  good  cure  of  the  aged,  but  the  sick  are  often  neglected
(Waitz,  vol.  iii. pp.  342-340,  and  Schoolcraft,  vol.  v. p.  654.) Among
the  Winnebagoes  the  aged  and  infirm  sometimes sutfered  in  seasons  of
scarcity,  but  they  were  helped  by  friends  and  relations,  and  the  chief
sometimes  requested  the  U.S.  Government  to  give  such  persons  an  extra
share  of  the  tribal  annuity. (Schoolcraft,  vol.  iv.  p.  56.) The  Win  tuns  of
California  are  said  to  be  rather  neglectful  than  otherwise  of  the  sick  and
aged,  and  the  mild  statement  is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  infirm  people
crawling  to  the  river-side  and  being  allowed  to  fall  in  and  drown. (Powers,
p.  231.) Among  the  Iroquois  a  reform  is  recorded  by  Morgan. The  aged
were  formerly  exposed, but  after  the  formation  of  the League  and of
permanent  villages  were  well  cared  for. (League  of  the  Iroquois,  p.  171.)


350  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

This  is  not  altogether  due  to  inhumanity.  The  savage,
especially  the  nomad,  cannot  with  the  best  will  in  the  world
provide  for  the  aged  as  we  could  if  we  desired  to  do  so.  Catlin
saw  an  old  man  left  behind  with  tent  and  fire,  but  no  weapon,
while  the  tribe  marched  off.  The  old  man  himself  bade  them
leave  him.  "  You  should  all  go,  where  you  can  get  meat.  My
days  are  nearly  all  numbered,  and  I  am  a  burden  to  my  children.
I  cannot  go,  and  I  wish  to  die.  Keep  your  heart  stout  and
think  not  of  me.  I  am  no  longer  good  for  anything."  With
these  words  the  ceremony  of  abandonment  was  completed,  and
it  was  certainly  not  wanting  in  dignity  or  pathos.1

6.  In  the  earlier  civilizations  the  solidarity  of  the  family,
cemented  and  extended  as  it  often  was  by  the  development  of
ancestor  worship,  secured  good  treatment  of  the  infirm  and  aged
parent  within  the  kindred.  Towards  the  poor  and  helpless
generally  the  Oriental  civilizations  teach  the  beauty  and  virtue
of  beneficence  and  consideration.  This  is  strongly  marked  in
ancient  Egypt.  The  soul  before  the  Judgment  Seat  winds  up
its  repudiation  of  sins  by  claiming  positive  merit.  "  I  have
given  bread  to  the  hungry  man,  and  water  to  the  thirsty  man,
and  apparel  to  the  naked  man,  and  a  boat  to  the  shipwrecked
mariner."  2  The  inscriptions  on  the  tombs  of  kings  and  nobles
lay  stress  on  their  goodness  to  the  poor.  They  claim  to  be
"  the  staff  of  support  to  the  aged,  the  foster-father  of  the  chil
dren,  the  counsellor  of  the  unfortunate,  the  refuge  in  which
those  who  suffer  from  the  cold  in  Thebes  may  warm  themselves,

Among  the  Apaches  and  the  Western  Esquimaux  death  is  felt  to  be  the
best  lot  for  the  aged.  The  Esquimaux  believes  he  will  be  born  again
young  and  vigorous.  (Reclus,  pp.  103  and  132.)  The  practice  of  leaving
the  sick  and  aged  to  their  fate  or  even  putting  them  to  death  is  widely
diffused  in  Africa,  but  there  are  exceptions,  e.  g.  the  Mandingoes,  and
possibly  the  Kaffirs  (though  this  is  denied  by  Waitz,  vol.  ii.  p.  340).  The
custom  is  said  to  be  recently  extinct  in  Southern  Nubia.  (Post,  Afrik.
Juris.,  vol.  i.  p.  298.)

1  Catlin,  vol.  i.  p. 216. Whatever  provision  there  may be for  the
aged  and  infirm  it  is,  as  we  might  suppose,  mainly  a  matter  of  the  goodwill
of  the  family  or  clan. It  is  seldom  in  the  savage  world  that  we  read  of
any  regular  public  provision. The Creeks  are  an  exception,  who  are
described  as  having  public  "  hot  houses  "  provided  in  which  poor  old  men
and  women  suffering  from  want  of  clothes  may  sleep. (Caleb  Swan  in
Schoolcraft,  vol.  v.  p.  265.)

2  Book  of  the  Dead,  chap,  cxxv.,  Budge's  Trans.,  vol.  ii.  p.  372.


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  351

the  bread  of  the  afflicted  which  never  failed  in  the  city  of  the
South."  Ameny,  a  ruler  of  the  nome  of  the  Gazelle  in  the
days  of  the  12th  Dynasty,  gives  himself  the  best  of  characters
as  a  good  master  and  lord —

"  I  have  caused  no  child  of  tender  age  to  mourn  ;  I  have  despoiled
no  widow ;  I  have  driven  away  no  tiller  of  the  soil ;  I  have  taken
no  workmen  away  from  their  foreman  for  the  public  works ;  none
have  been  unfortunate  about  me,  nor  starving  in  my  time.  When
years  of  scarcity  arose,  as  I  had  cultivated  all  the  lands  of  the  nome
of  the  Gazelle  to  its  northern  and  southern  boundaries,  causing  its
inhabitants  to  live,  and  creating  provisions,  none  who  were  hungry
were  found  there,  for  I  gave  to  the  widow  as  well  as  to  the  woman
who  had  a  husband,  and  I  made  no  distinction  between  high  and
low  in  all  that  I  gave.  If,  on  the  contrary,  there  were  high  Niles,
the  possessors  of  the  land  became  rich  in  all  things,  for  I  did  not
raise  the  rate  of  the  tax  upon  the  fields." 1

To  our  ears  it  may  seem  that  the  gentleman  protests  too
much,  and  possibly  lie  succeeds  in  giving  us  a  more  vivid
picture  of  what  the  feudal  lords  of  Egypt  did  than  of  what  they
refrained  from  doing,  but  at  least  he  makes  the  ideal  standard
of  conduct  for  the  Egyptian  ruler  clear  enough.

Hospitality  is  still  recognized  as  a  virtue.  Sinuit,  who  fled
to  the  Edomite  desert,  describes  his  life  there —

"  When  a  traveller  went  and  returned  from  the  interior,  lie
turned  aside  from  his  road  to  visit  me,  for  I  rendered  services  to  all
the  world.  I  gave  water  to  the  thirsty,  I  set  on  his  journey  the
traveller  who  had  been  hindered  from  passing  by,  I  chastised  the
brigand."  -

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Maxims  of  Ani  of  the  New
Kingdom  we  sec  the  civilized  man's  fear  of  the  beggar  growing
up.  "Let  not  your  hand  be  despoiled  for  the  man  whom  you
do  not  know.  He  came  to  you  for  your  ruin."  And  again,
"  Let  your  eye  be  open  in  fear  lest  you  become  a  beggar." 3
Yet  the  Maxims  preach  hospitality  with  a  touch  of  the  later
familiar  gnomic  sentiment — the  suggestion  that  moderation  in
prosperity  is  a  kind  of  surety  against  the  changes  of  fortune —

1  Maspero,  p.  338. Erman,  pp.  93,  94. The  translation  varies  slightly

2  Sayce,  Records  of  the  Past,  vol.  ii.  p.  23.

3  Anielineau,  trans.  S8  xviii.  and  xxi.

7  O  O


352  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

"  Eat  not  bread  while  another  standeth  by,  and  thou  placest  not
thy  hand  on  the  bread  for  him.  The  one  is  rich,  and  the  other  is
poor,  and  bread  remaineth  with  him  who  is  open-handed.  He  who
was  prosperous  last  year,  even  in  this  may  be  a  vagrant."  l

We  meet  with  fewer  passages  of  this  tendency  in  Babylonish
literature.  But  it  appears  from  the  Incantation  Tables  that
failure  in  duty  to  the  helpless,  and  especially  the  dependant,
and  churlishness  in  refusing  a  request,  might  bring  a  curse
upon  a  man.2

Respect  for  the  aged  is  a  part  of  the  corner-stone  of  Chinese
ethics,  the  duty  of  filial  obedience.  But  further,  benevolence
generally,  and  the  duty  of  the  governor  to  the  governed,  are
important  parts  of  the  ethical  teaching.  "  Benevolence,"  says
Mencius,  "is  the  most  honourable  dignity  conferred  by  Heaven,"
and  the  classical  writings  are  full  of  our  duties  to  our  neigh
bours,  and  of  the  rulers  to  the  mass  of  the  people.  "  When
sovereigns  appointed  inspectors,"  says  a  passage  in  the  Shoo-
King,  "  they  .  .  .  said  to  them,  '  Do  not  give  way  to  violence
or  oppression ;  and  go  on  to  show  reverence  for  the  weak  and
find  connections  for  destitute  women.' " 3  Corn  was  left,  as
among  the  Hebrews,  for  the  widows  who  came  to  glean.

"  There  shall  be  young  grain  unreaped

And  here  some  sheaves  ungathered,
There  shall  be  handfuls  left  on  the  ground,

And  here  ears  untouched
For  the  benefit  of  the  widow."  4

Public  assistance  for  the  aged  and  infirm  was  organized  by
the  Emperor  Tai  Tsung  (A.D.  627-649).  Foundling  hospitals
were  also  established,  and  under  the  Ming  Dynasty,  Hung  Wu
again  took  up  the  question  of  the  aged  and  infirm.  Alrnshouses
and  granaries  for  the  relief  of  famine  are  also  maintained.5  The
slow  disintegration  of  the  communal  life  has  gradually  forced
the  higher  authorities  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  the  indigent.

1  Griffith,  World's  Literature,  5341. To  somewhat  similar  effect,  though
in  obscure  language,  Amelineau,  §  xxvi.  :  "  It  is  God  who  is  the  giver—
therefore  have  pity  and  feed  the  hungry."

2  For  the  text,  see  below,  Part  II.,  chap.  ii.

3  Shoo-King  (Tr.  Legge,  Part  V.,  xi.  3.)

4  She-King,  vol.  2,  Part  II.,  Book  vi.  Ode  8. Legge's  Prolegomena,  p.
150.

5  Laffitte,  Chinese  Civilization,  pp.  53,  58.


PROPERTY  AND  POVERTY  353

In  India  almsgiving  was  recognized  as  an  act  of  merit  from
the  Vedic  period  onwards.

"The  prosperity  of  the  liberal  man  never  decays;  while  the
illiberal  finds  no  comforter.  He  is  the  bountiful  man  who  gives  to
the  lean  beggar  who  comes  to  him  craving  for  food.  Success  attends
that  man  in  the  sacrifice,  and  he  secures  for  himself  a  friend  in  the
future.  He  who  keeps  his  food  to  himself  has  his  sin  to  himself." J

Similarly,  the  Upanishads  teach  that "  there  are  three  branches
of  law.  Sacrifice,  study  and  charity  are  the  first." 2  And  again  :
"The  divine  voice  of  thunder  repeats  the  same,  Da,  Da,  Da,
that  is,  Be  subdued,  Give,  Be  merciful.  Therefore  let  that  triad
be  taught,  Subduing,  Giving  and  Mercy."  3

In  Manu  the  obligation  of  hospitality  is  peremptory.

"  A  guest  who  is  sent  by  the  (setting)  sun  in  the  evening,  must  not
be  driven  away  by  a  householder ;  whether  he  have  come  at  (supper-
time)  or  at  an  inopportune  moment,  he  must  not  stay  in  the  house
without  entertainment.

"Let  him  not  eat  any  (dainty)  food  which  he  does  not  offer  to  his
guest."  -1

But  it  is  due  in  its  fulness  to  caste-fellows  alone.  Towards
members  of  a  lower  caste  it  is  optional.5  To  share  one's  good
things  is  a  matter  of  positive  duty.  To  eat  first  without  feeding
infants, the  sick  and  others,  will  cause  a  man  to  be  devoured  by  dogs
and  vultures  after  death.0  But  no  great  self-sacrifice  is  expected.

"  A  householder  must  give  (as  much  food)  as  he  is  able  (to  spare)
to  those  who  do  not  cook  for  themselves,  and  to  all  beings  one  must
distribute  (food)  without  detriment  (to  one's  own  interest)." 7

The  plucking  of  food  by  the  wayside  is  allowed  to  the  higher
castes.8  Finally,  in  one  passage  we  trace  a  higher  social  con
ception.  The  Sudra  is  naturally  a  slave,  but  even  as  a  slave  he
ought  to  have  his  due  maintenance.9

1  Muir,  Sanscrit  Texts,  vol.  v.  p.  431.

2  The  Upanishads,  Tr.  M.  Miiller,  vol.  i.  p.  35.

3  Miiller—  Upanishads,  Part  II.,  p.  190.  4  Manu,  iii.  105,  106.

5  Apastamba  is  more  modern.  "  If  a  Sudra  comes  as  a  guest  (to  a
Brahmana),  he  shall  give  him  some  work  to  do.  He  may  feed  him  after."
(Sacred  Books,  vol.  ii.  p.  110.)

u  Cf.  Baudh.,  ii.  3,  5,  17.  "He  shall  never  eat  without  having  given
away  (some  small  portion  of  the  food)."

7  Manu,  iv.  32.  *  Ib.,  viii.  341.  9  Ib.,  x.  124,  125.

VOL.  I.  A  A


354  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

Hebrew  legislation  dealt  with  the  problem  of  poverty  both
with  a  view  to  prevention  and  to  cure.  We  know  with  what
wonderful  power  the  prophets  denounced  the  oppressors  of
the  poor  and  declaimed  woe  upon  those  who  joined  house  to
house  and  field  to  field.  The  resistance  to  that  tendency  to
the  depression  of  the  poorer  citizens,  which  accompanies
economic  progress,  was  the  main  burden  of  social  morality
as  preached  by  the  prophets,  and  took  practical  shape  in  legis
lation  in  the  form  of  the  limitation  of  debt  slavery;  release
of  debts,  according  to  Deuteronomy  in  the  seventh  year,1  and
according  to  the  later  code  in  the  fiftieth ;  the  prohibition
of  usury ;  2  and  the  insistence  on  equal  justice  between  the
stranger  and  the  fatherless.  Deuteronomy  adds  that  the  debtor
is  to  fetch  his  own  pledge  from  his  house,  to  have  his  pledged
garment  restored  to  him  at  nightfall,  and  that  neither  a  mill
stone  nor  a  widow's  raiment  is  to  be  taken.  These  were
measures  designed  to  prevent  Israelites  from  falling  out  of  the
class  of  free  men.  There  were  besides  the  practical  provisions
for  the  relief  of  the  poor.  These  were  probably  developed  from
common  festivals  of  the  clan,  where  every  one  had  a  right  to
claim  a  portion.3  For  this  purpose  the  Book  of  the  Covenant
makes  use  of  the  Sabbatical  year,  in  which  the  land  was  to  rest
that  the  poor  might  eat.  But  they  would  not  eat  very  much
from  the  fruits  of  fallow  land,  and  so  Deuteronomy  prescribes
that  a  tithe  of  every  third  year's  produce  shall  be  shared  with
the  stranger,  the  fatherless  and  the  widow.  It  also  insists  that
the  gleanings  of  the  field  and  the  vineyards  be  left  to  them.4
The  duty  of  almsgiving  was  rigidly  enforced.  "  He  who  gave
less  than  a  tenth  of  his  means  was  a  man  of  evil  eye."  5  There

1  Deuteronomy  xv.  1. Verse  8  says  in  rather  futile  fashion  that  this  is
not  to  deter  the  Hebrew  from  lending  to  his  brother,  but  it  does  not  say
what  is  to  compel  him. Note  that  by  verse  3  the  law  does  not  apply  to
foreigners.

2  This  appears  already  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  Exodus  xxii.  25,
and  the  next  verse  insists  that  the  neighbour's  raiment  when  taken  as  a
pledge  is  to  be  restored  at  sundown. Usury  is  uniformly  allowed  against
the  foreigner. (Deut.  xxiii.  20.)

3  Robertson  Smith,  Religion  of  the  Semites,  p.  250.

4  Deuteronomy  xiv.  28,  andxxiv.  19-21. In  the  priestly  code  it  would
seem,  however,  that  the  tithe  goes  to  the  Levites,  and  it  is  re-enacted  that
the  "  Sabbath  of  the  land  .  .  .  shall  be  food  for  thee  .  .  .  thy  servant .  .  .
and  thy  stranger." (Lev.  xxv.  6.)

5  Maimonides,  quoted  by  Loch,  Art.  "Charity  and  Charities,"  Bncycl.


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  355

were  collections  in  the  synagogues  for  the  poor  and  the  strangers,
and  there  were  elected  almoners.  Lastly,  honour  for  the  ao-ed
and  regard  for  the  afflicted  are  insisted  upon  as  moral  and
religious  duties.

In  the  law  of  Islam  also  almsgiving  is  insisted  upon  as  one  of
the  five  practical  duties  of  the  creed.  Usury  is  forbidden,  and
pronounced  by  the  Prophet  as  being  as  cursed  as  almsgiving  is
blest.

"  Those  who  devour  usury  shall  not  rise  again,  save  as  he  riscth
whom  Satan  hath  paralyzed  with  a  touch ;  and  that  is  because  they
say  'selling  is  only  like  usury,'  but  God  has  made  selling  lawful  and
usury  unlawful.  God  shall  blot  out  usury,  but  shall  make  alms
giving  profitable,  for  God  loves  not  any  sinful  misbeliever."  l

The  spoils  of  the  enemy  were  to  be  for  the  poor.

"  What  God  gave  as  spoils  to  His  Apostle  of  the  people  of  the
cities  is  God's  and  the  Apostle's,  and  for  kinsfolk,  orphans,  and  the
poor  and  the  wayfarer,  so  that  it  should  not  bo  circulated  among
the  rich  men  of  you."  -

But  after  Mohammed's  time  a  rate  on  property  of  about
one-fortieth  of  all  that  had  been  in  the  believer's  possession
for  a  year,  which  had  originally  been  a  contribution  to  the
expenses  of  war  against  infidels,  became  converted  into  a  kind
of  poor  rate.3  A  plan  of  pensions  for  all  Moslems  was  set  on
foot  by  Caliph  Omar.

7.  I  have  referred  briefly  to  the  position  of  the  beggar  and
the  suppliant  in  Homeric  Greece.  In  Hesiod's  time  we  find  the
duty  of  liberality  still  insisted  upon,  but  the  attitude  to  the
beggar  is  already  changing.  Hesiod  reprehends  begging  as  a
disgrace,  and  says  that  once  beggars  may  be  helped,  or  twice,
and  then  they  will  be  refused.  He  makes  almsgiving  a  matter
of  reciprocity.  "  Love  him  who  loves  thee,  and  cleave  to  him
who  cleaveth  to  thee.  To  him  who  would  have  given  give  ;
to  him  who  would  not  have  given  give  not."  4  During  the
classical  period  some  measure  of  the  primitive  communal

Brit.,  ed.  x.,  p.  CG7. Lofh  adds  that  even  the  poor  had  to  give  alms,  and
a  refusal  was  punished  with  stripes  by  the  Sanhedrim.

1  Koran,  i.  (Sacred  Books,  vi.),  p.  4-1.

-  Koran,  chap.  lix.  3  Palmer,  Introduction  to  the  Koran,  p.  73.

4  Loch,  EncycL  Brit.,  p.  660.


356  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

system  still  lingered.  In  Crete  and  in  Sparta  there  was  direct
maintenance  for  all  citizens  at  the  public  tables.  At  Athens
the  Phratry  retained  much  of  its  old  vitality.  Down  to  Solon's
time  the  property  of  the  childless  reverted  to  the  clan,  and  even
after  him  the  same  thing  happened  to  that  of  intestates.  Out
of  this  stock  the  clan  provided  for  orphans,  and  the  nearest
agnatic  relation  had  either  to  marry  or  dower  the  orphan  girl.
But  the  new  State  organization  also  assumed  the  duties  of
maintaining  needy  citizens,  in  the  first  place,  by  public  granaries
and  the  frequent  distribution  of  food  to  adult  citizens  on  the
register;  secondly,  by  public  relief  to  the  infirm  with  property
of  not  more  than  three  minae;  and  lastly,  by  payment  for  public
services,  which  became  more  and  more  important  as  the
institutions  of  the  country  passed  into  the  hands  of  large
popular  bodies.1  Moreover,  an  indirect  method  of  maintaining
the  roll  of  citizens  and  preventing  them  from  sinking  into
slavery  and  being  lost  to  the  State  was  found  in  colonization,
bands  of  Athenian  citizens  being  led  out  to  a  newly-conquered
territory  and  settled  in  lots  on  the  land.  Solon's  legislation
against  debt  slavery  had  already  effectually  blocked  that  broad
path  of  degradation  in  the  ancient  world.  Apart  from  State
aid  there  was  much  private  charity,  and  mutual  help  societies
were  frequent.  Hospitality  still  ranked  as  an  important  virtue.
In  some  places  there  were  brotherhoods  of  public  charity  with
a  common  chest,  and  there  were  resting-places  and  probably
hospital  provision  for  travellers  at  the  temples.2  The  temples
also  were  the  centres  of  medical  relief.  The  sons  of  Asklepios
dwelt  in  their  neighbourhood,  and  probably  attended  the  poor
gratuitously,  at  least  at  Athens.  Hippocrates  lays  down  that
it  should  be  a  doctor's  first  duty  on  entering  a  town  to  attend
to  the  poor  who  are  sick.3

In  Rome the  economic tendency  to the centralization of
capital  and  the  consequent  reduction  of  the  poorer  citizens  to

1  Distribution  of  public  money  was  opposed  by  Aristotle,  who  urged  that
the  object  of  statesmen  should  be  to  make  the  mass  of  citizens  independent,
and  advised  that  public  relief  should  take  the  form  of  starting  them  in
farms  or  in  business. (Aristotle,  Politics,  1320  A.)

2  At  Megara  there  were  houses  in  the  town  for  strangers,  maintained  at
the  public  cost,  and  in  Crete  strangers  had  a  place  at  the  public  meals.
(Loch,  6C2.)

3  Loch,  662,  663.


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  357

destitution  and  dependence  took  a  very  aggravated  form,  owing
in  part  to  the  facilities  offered  by  conquest  and  in  part  to  the
cheapness  and  the  abject  position  of  the  slave.  The  legislation
of  the  Gracchi,  intended  to  counteract  this  evil,  was  probably
valuable  so  far  as  the  division  of  the  public  lands  was  concerned,
but  injurious  in  that  it  started  the  system  of  distributing
corn  to  Roman  citizens  at  about  half  the  cost  price,  a  system
which  had  an  immense  and  unhealthy  development.  The  Lex
Octavia  restricted  the  right  to  citizens  settled  at  Rome,  and
probably  later  legislation  introduced  a  property  test,  but  the
Lex  Clodia  made  the  distribution  gratuitous,  and  in  the
time  of  Aurelian  there  were  important  additions,  consisting
probably  of  oil,  and  perhaps  of  wine  and  clothes.  The  system
spread  to  Constantinople,  Alexandria  and  Antioch,  and  with  the
extending  of  civic  rights  to  the  whole  of  the  Empire,  must  have
tended  to  foster  a  vast  anil  idle  city  proletariat.1

In  other  directions  Roman  charity  had  a  more  beneficent
turn.  Hospitals  with  infirmaries  for  sick  slaves  attached  are
mentioned  in  the  first  century  A.D.,  while  there  was  a  chief
physician  in  each  rcgio  for  the  poor."  Voluntary  associations
for  common  purposes  had  a  vigorous  vitality.  There  were
trade  guilds  with  a  strongly-developed  social  life,3  with  their

1  Loch,  664,  665.

2  During  the  first  century  after  Christ  there  were  charitable  organiza
tions  of  many  kinds  in  the  Romanjworld. Money  was  given  or  bequeathed
to  buy  oil  and  meal,  which  was  either  given  away  or  sold  at  moderate  prices.

Poor  parents  received  help  in  the  bringing  up  of  their  children,  until
the  latter  could  reasonably  fend  for  themselves.  There  were  foundations
for  the  helpless  aged,  and  the  sick  were  cared  for,  not  only  by  their  own
community,  but' through  private  agencies.  Medicines  were  distributed
free.  Free  burial  places  were  provided  by  the  community,  or  again  from
private  sources.

Rich  burghers  supported  education,  and  in  100  A.D.  the  younger  1  liny
gave  a  library  and  means  to  support  it  to  Como,  and  provided  a  teacher
for  the  higher  branches  of  education,  so  that  would-be  students  there  were
no  longer  forced  to  go  to  Milan.  (Plin.,  Epp.  iv.  13.)  On  great  occasions
it  was  customary  to  make  some  public  gift— buildings,  foundations,  gladia
torial  games,  etc.  (Friedlander,  Darstdlunyen  aus  der  Sittengeschichte
Hums.,  iii.  p.  151.)

3  Social  intercourse  appears  the  most  prominent  side  of  the  hie  of  the
guilds. How  far  they  were  "friendly  societies  "  in  our  sense  is  not  quite
so  clear,  but  the  provision  for  burial  was  usual,  and  at  least  in  one  case
other  benefits were assured. On these points, and on the immense
development  of the  "Colleges,"  see  Dill,  Roman  Society  from Nero  to
Marcus  Aureliim,  Bk.  ii.,  ch.  3.


358  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

special  rites  and  their  own  god.  They  held  holidays  in  common
in  which  men  and  women  both  took  part,  and  provided  for  the
burial  of  their  members.  In  fact,  most  of  the  poor  belonged  to
funeral  benefit  societies.1  The  care  of  destitute  children  was
undertaken  by  the  Emperors  Nerva  and  Trajan,  who  lent  money
at  low  interest  to  municipalities  for  their  upbringing.  At
Veleia  three  hundred  children  were  thus  assisted.  But  the
system,  though  much  extended  by  the  Antonines,  fell  into
disuse  in  the  troubles  of  the  third  century.

8.  The  problem  of  poor  relief  was  now  taken  up  by  the
Church.  This  was  in  its  primitive  form  a  congregation  in  which
the  poorer  members  were  relieved  out  of  the  offerings  given  at
the  altar.  As  the  Church  became  divided  into  parishes,  the
parish  became  the  area  for  relief,  and  in  Rome,  under  Gregory,
the  deacons  had  the  care  of  the  poor,  the  widows  and  the  orphans
in  their  districts,  in  each  of  which  there  was  a  hospital.  Besides
this  regular  relief,  on  the  first  of  every  month  Gregory  made  a
distribution  in  kind  to  the  poor.  This  was  the  model  of  mediaeval
distribution,  the  parishes  maintaining  their  poor,  while  the
bishops  and  abbots  set  aside  in  addition  a  definite  sum  for  their
relief.  Endowed  charities  were,  in  fact,  springing  up  rapidly  in
the  fourth  century,  and  the  Theodosian  code  mentions  institutions
for  the  receipt  of  strangers,  for  the  poor  and  sick,  as  well  as
orphanages  and  houses  for  children.  The  tithe  became  a  legal
obligation  under  Charlemagne,  and  out  of  it  the  priests  had  the
definite  duty  of  supporting  the  poor.  Almsgiving  was  a  work
of  merit  from  the  first.  "  If  there  were  no  poor  the  greater
part  of  your  sins  would  not  be  removed ;  they  are  the  healers
of  your  wounds,"  says  St.  Chrysostom.  And  not  only  was
almsgiving  virtuous,  but  voluntary  poverty  was  an  ideal.  It
did  not  escape  the  leaders  of  the  Church  that  abuses  were
incidental  to  such  a  principle,  and  St.  Ambrose  recognizes  the
evils' of  pauperism  and  urges  method  in  giving,  though  his  rule
is  little  more  than  a  recommendation  of  impartiality.  On  the

1  Friedliinder,  i.  pp.  146-152.  The  collegia  passed  under  State  super
vision  and  gradually  developed  into  something  of  the  nature  of  castes  ;
members  who  fled  were  brought  back  and  children  were  compelled  to
succeed  their  parents  in  their  turn.


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  359

other  hand,  the  dangers  inherent  in  the  conception  were  much
aggravated  by  its  being  linked  with  the  system  of  indulgences.1
The  whole  conception,  however,  was  swept  away  by  Protestantism,
which  accordingly  gave  an  impulse  to  the  movement  for  sub
stituting  public  for  the  ecclesiastical  relief  of  the  poor. Already
from  the growth  of  the towns  new  charitable  agencies had
arisen. The  guilds  undertook  to  collect  for  the  support  of  their
members,  Boroughs  established  hospitals  and  almshoiises,  gave
out-relief  to  the  registered  poor  and  supported  orphans.2 In
England  the  disappearance  of  serfdom  and  the  new  independence
of  the  working  classes  began  to  exercise  the  minds  of  the  rulers
of  the  country  from  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century. The
confusion  between  the  vagrant  and  the  independent  workman
seeking  the  best  market  for  his  labour  dates  back  to  that  time,
and  inspires  much  of  the  severity  with  which  the  sturdy  and
valiant  beggar  is  treated  in  the  series  of  laws  from  the  Edwards
to  Elizabeth. For,  blended  with  just  indignation  at  the  idler
and impostor  was the  intelligible but sinister desire  of  the
o-overning  classes  to keep  the  newly-enfranchised  labourer  in
a  state  of  economic  subjection. For  this  purpose  it  was  not
merely  necessary  to  fix  wages,  but  also  as  far  as  possible  to
prevent  the  workman  from  moving  freely  in  search  of  a  better
market.3 Hence the repressive side of the later mediaeval
legislation. On  the  other  hand,  as  long  as  medieval  charity
lasted  much  relief  was  given,  though  with  little  system,  by  the
monasteries,  and  from  1287  onwards  the  parish  became  the  area
for  a  more  or  less  compulsory  rate.4 The  religious  and  economic
changes  of  the  sixteenth century  produced  a  new  situation.
The  suppression  of  the  monasteries  closed  one  source  of  poor
relief,  while  the  conversion  of  arable  land  to  pasture  restricted
the  labour  market. Mendicants— sturdy  and  valiant  beggars—
1  According  to  Thomas  Aquinas  lie  who  does  an  act  of  charity  ^merits
spiritual  good  through  being  in  a  state  of  charity,  and  its  effect  in  this
respect  is  tested  by  the  recipient  being  moved  to  pray  for  the  benefactor.
St Thomas recognizes that  the  claims  on  our  beneficence  are  relative,
depending  on  such  considerations  as  relationship,  but  alms  should  consist
of  all  that  is  superfluous,  the  donor  retaining  what  is  necessary  to  him
in  view  of  his  needs,  his  family  and  his  diynitas ;  but  his  gift  should  only
meet  the  actual  necessities  of  the  recipient,  and  not  be  such  as  should  lead
to  excess  or  apathy. (Loch,  675.)

^  We  find  this  system  as  early  as  the  ninth  century. (Loch,  p.  0/7.)
3  See  Eowle,  Poor  .Law,  p.  55.  4  Loch,  p.  676.


360  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

were  treated  with  a  severity  which  culminated  in  the  statute  of
Edward  VI.  offering  them  as  temporary  slaves  to  the  first  comer.
But  meanwhile  a  more  humane  conception  was  making  way.
Attempts  were  made  to  classify  the  poor  and  provide  mainten
ance  for  the  "  impotent,  feeble  and  lame  who  are  poor  in  very
deed," 1  while  the  able-bodied  were  to  be  sent  to  Bridewell  for
correction.  The  movement  culminated  in  the  Act  of  1601,
which  definitely  acknowledged  the  duty  of  society  as  an  organ
ized  body  to  save  its  poorer  members  from  actual  destitution,
by  appointing  overseers  in  each  parish  with  power  to  levy
rates  for  the  support  of  the  indigent.  But  in  the  actual  working
of  this  just  and  beneficent  principle  great  dangers  were  disclosed.
The  standing  difficulty  of  discriminating  between  those  who
would  and  those  who  would  not  work,  and  the  conflicts  between
humane  sentiment  and  desire  for  economy,  led  by  different
roads  to  the  degradation  of  large  sections  of  the  working  class.
The  economical  motive  stimulated  each  locality  to  reduce  the
number  of  mouths  that  it  might  have  to  feed,  and  so  led
speedily  to  the  Act  of  Settlement  (1662),  which  enabled  the
overseers  to  compel  arjy  immigrant  into  their  parish  to  return
to  his  original  abode,  unless  he  could  give  security  to  the  new
parish  that  he  would  not  become  chargeable  to  it.  Thus,  on  the
one  side,2  the  Poor  Law  threatened  the  working  classes  with  a
new  serfdom.  On  the  other,  it  tended  when  laxly  administered
to  general  pauperization,  and  issued  towards  the  close  of  the
eighteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  in  a
system  whereby  regularly  insufficient  wages  were  regularly  made
good  at  the  expense  of  the  ratepayers.3

The  worst  features  of  the  Act  of  Settlement  were  repealed  in
1795,  and  the  whole  system  of  the  Poor  Law  revolutionized  in
1834.  With  the  workings  of  the  new  system  thus  constituted
and  the  problems  to  which  it  has  given  rise  I  must  not  here
attempt  to  deal.  But  the  broad  principles  underlying  the  atti
tude  of  the  modern  State  towards  the  poor  must  be  summarily
indicated.  The  fundamental  principle  of  1601 — that  it  is  the
duty  of  the  public  authority  to  see  that  no  one  actually  perishes
for  want  of  necessaries — seems  to  be  accepted — if  sometimes  in

1  From  the  Statute  of  1551. Fowle,  p.  57. "  See  Chap.  vii.  p.  322.
3  On  the  growth  of  the  English  Poor  Law,  see  Loch,  676-680.


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  361

grudging  terms — by  modern  civilized  governments  in  general.1
But  starting  from  this  point  a  considerable  onward  movement
can  be  traced.  First  poverty  and  pauperism,  though  connected,
are  distinct,  and  this  vital  distinction  is  recognized  in  practice.
In  very  varying  forms,  much  of  modern  legislation  has  been
aimed  at  the  alleviation  of  poverty  and  the  raising  of  the  mass
of  the  industrial  classes  into  an  economic  position  in  which  they
could  fairly  hope  to  provide  the  means  of  a  civilized  existence
for  themselves,  their  families,  and  even  the  helpless  ones  who
belong  to  them.  The  methods  used  vary  according  to  the  spirit
of  the  age  or  the  economic  circumstances  of  each  people.  In
some  countries  great  measures  of  agrarian  reform  accompanying
the  emancipation  of  serfs  have  established  a  free  peasantry  upon
the  soil.  In  our  country,  where  the  divorce  of  the  labourer  from
the  land  remains,  much  has  been  done  by  reducing  or  abolishing
the  taxes  on  the  necessaries  of  life,  by  sanitary  legislation,  by
Factory  Acts,  and  by  the  recognition  of  the  right  of  combination.
Such  legislation  as  this  belongs  to  the  organic  life  of  the  modern
State — it  is  among  the  processes  of  its  healthy  growth  towards
a  fuller,  completer  existence.  To  such  growth  diseases  are  inci
dent,  and  among  them  pauperism  is  one  of  the  chief.  In  dealing
with  this  disease  the  effort  of  state-controlled  and  voluntary
agencies  alike  is  more  and  more  directed  to  disentangling  causes
—to  discovering  what  is  due  to  lack  of  employment,  what  to
physical  incapacity,  what  to  faults  of  character.  It  may  frankly
be  admitted  that  we  as  yet  have  not  much  to  boast  of  either  in
our  diagnosis  of  causes  or  in  our  capacity  to  find  remedies  for
each  specific  form  of  the  disease.  But  it  is  something  to  have
recognized  that  to  have  the  poor  always  with  us  is  not  a  blessing,
and  that  the  duty  of  the  rich  is  not  exhausted  by  the  most
liberal  giving  of  alms.  Public  and  private  charity  have  in  fact
undergone  a  transmutation  which  reflects  the  general  change
from  the  mediaeval  to  the  modern  order.  Free  bounty  in  alms
is  the  virtue  appropriate  to  the  lord  dealing  with  humble  de
pendants,  just  as  easy-going  communism  was  natural  to  the

1  See  for  France,  Sweden,  Denmark,  Prussia,  Holland,  Austria,  and  the
United  States — Fowle,  op.  cit.,  pp.  6,  7.  There  is  sometimes  an  attempt  to
distinguish  between  the  duty  of  the  State  and  the  rights  of  the  recipient,
which  ethically  amounts  to  very  little,  though  it  might  have  legal
importance.


362  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

primitive  clan.  A  reciprocal  obligation  binding  the  individual
to  work  for  his  living  and  the  State  to  see  that  no  one  of  its
members  fails  to  obtain  the  bare  essentials  of  a  civilized  exist
ence  is  appropriate  to  a  society  resting  on  the  recognition  of
personal  rights.  To  develop  these  two  principles  in  their  full
meaning,  so  to  apply  them  in  practice  as  to  avoid  any  form  of
compulsion  which  would  interfere  with  the  equally  stringent
principle  of  personal  freedom,  to  adapt  them  to  varying  circum
stances  in  such  wise  as  best  to  help  him  who  is  impoverished
through  no  fault  of  his  own  to  regain  his  place  in  the  ranks  of
independent  labour,  while  yet  taking  suitable  care  of  those  who
are  mentally  or  morally  incompetent  to  manage  their  own  lives
— these  are  problems  which  the  future  may  solve.  The  most
that  we  can  claim  for  ourselves  is  that  we  are  beginning  to  state
them  with  precision.

The  poet  tells  us  that  with  the  advance  of  civilization  the  in
dividual  withers,  but  the  truer  romance  of  historical  prose  tells
a  different  story.  In  early  society  the  individual  is  nothing
apart  from  his  community.  The  sphere  of  private  property  is
very  small  and  the  power  of  the  individual  to  enter  into  new
relations  by  contract  and  so  carve  out  a  career  is  even  less.
Land,  the  principal  source  of  wealth,  is  communally  owned  and
there  is  little  incentive  to  individual  industry.  On  the  other
hand,  if  there  is  no  wealth,  there  is  also  no  pauperism.  In
equality  grows  as  society  advances,  and  in  this  advance,  on  its
economic  side,  private  ownership  and  free  contract  play  the
principal  part.  Yet  both  these  factors  are  still  greatly  hampered
in  the  early  and  middle  civilizations  by  feudal  tenures  and  caste
restrictions.  So  far  as  these  remain, the  structure  of  society  is
still  comparatively  immobile.  The  position  of  the  individual  is
still  determined  more  by  inherited  status  than  by  his  own
deserts.

At  a  still  higher  stage  these  restrictions  fall  away.  Men  stand
fully  free  to  enter  into  occupations  of  all  kinds,  to  acquire  wealth
in  all  forms,  and  to  dispose  of  and  (in  many  cases)  bequeath  it
at  their  will.  No  divisions  of  class  or  even  of  nationality  inter
fere  with  their  movements  or  prevent  them  from  entering  into
relations  with  other  men  in  which  they  may  find  advantage.
But  these  general  statements  have  to  be  taken  with  one  limiting


PROPERTY AND POVERTY  363

condition.  The  liberties  that  men  enjoy  are  secured  only  by  the
social  order  maintained  by  the  State,  and  the  State  in  its  turn  has
to  demand  that  every  right  must  be  defined  in  terms  of  the  common
good,  and  neither  private  property  nor  free  contract  can  escape
this  general  law.  Thus  the  modern  world  rests  in  a  fuller  sense
than  previous  civilizations  on  the  free  individual,  but  the  indivi
dual  owes  his  freedom  to  state  law,  and  the  obverse  side  of  the
rights  which  he  enjoys  is  the  social  duty  which  he  owes.  Society
has  freed  him  from  other  ties,  but  not  from  the  tie  which  binds
him  to  the  social  life.  If  the  individual  is  one  pole,  society  as
a  whole  is  the  opposite  pole  of  the  modern  ethical  system.

Finally,  customs  admitting  the  acquisition  and  holding  of
property  have  as  their  reverse  side  the  necessity  for  dealing  with
those  who  have  and  can  acquire  none.  Here  we  have  a  quite
parallel  evolution.  In  primitive  society  there  is  an  easy  com
munism  among  the  kinsfolk,  often — but  by  no  means  always —
much  consideration  for  children,  the  aged  and  the  helpless,  and
lavish  hospitality  for  the  stranger  if  the  host  chooses  to  receive
him.  In  the  more  advanced  societies  the  duties  of  the  govern
ing  classes  are  strongly  insisted  on  by  religion  and  social  ethics.
Those  whom  the  decay  of  primitive  communal  institutions  has
left  helpless  and  who  have  fallen  outside  the  regular  lines  of
the  social  structure  are  recommended  to  the  charity  of  their
superiors.  The  lords  of  the  land  must  be  merciful  and  forbearing
to  their  dependants.  The  rich  are  taught  to  give  freely  out  of
their  abundance  to  the  poor.  At  a  higher  stage,  again,  the
method  of  arbitrary  doles  to  a  dependent  class  gives  way  to  the
conception  of  a  reciprocal  obligation  between  the  State  and  its
citizens,  and  contented  acquiescence  in  perpetual  poor  relief  to
the  systematic  attempt  to  get  at  the  roots  at  once  of  poverty
and  pauperism  by  organic  reform  in  the  economic  structure  of
society.


SUMMARY

WE  have  now  considered  in  outline  first  ihe  main  principles
underlying  different  forms  of  social  organization  ;  secondly,  the
manner  in  which  the  behaviour  of  individuals  is  regulated,
their  duties  enforced  and  their  rights  maintained ;  and  thirdly,
a  number  of  the  rules  determining  in  the  main  relations  of  life
what  those  rights  and  duties  are.  \  We  saw  that  primitive  society
rested  on  ties  spontaneously  formed  by  blood-kinship,  by  inter
marriage  and  perhaps  by  mere  neighbourhood ;  that  the  social
structure  is  extended  and  in  some  respects  also  consolidated  by
the  rise  of  military  power  and  the  separation  of  rulers  and  ruled  ;
we  saw  that  the  principle  of  force,  underlying  government  at
this  stage,  is  transmuted  and  partially  moralized  by  ethical  and
religious  influence  into  a  principle  of  authority,  exacting  obedi
ence  of  its  subjects  as  a  right,  but  owing  them  consideration  and
paternal  government  as  a  duty.  We  saw  finally  that  in  the  higher
civilizations  a  new  principle  makes  headway,  whereby  the  fabric
of  society  comes  to  rest  rather  upon  the  goodwill  of  the  citizens
and  the  social  nature  of  man,  while  the  claims  of  government
are  based  not  on  self-constituted  authority  backed  ultimately
by  the  sword  but  on  the  necessity  of  an  ordered  rule  in  the
interests  not  only  of  social  co-operation,  but  of  individual
freedom.

In  the  maintenance  of  rights  and  redress  of  wrongs,  the  move
ment,  broadly  viewed,  is  parallel.  Starting  from  the  entire  lack
of  regular  methods  for  enforcing  justice  which  appears  here  and
there  in  the  lowest  peoples,  we  soon  pass  into  the  stage  of  the
blood  feud  in  which  rights  are  maintained  and  wrongs  punished
by  the  parties  interested  or  their  kinsfolk.  From  this  we  ascend
by  many  gradations  to  the  impartial  justice  of  a  public  tribunal,

364


SUMMARY  3G5

investigating  each  case  by  rational  process,  distinguishing  crimes
from  civil  wrongs  and  limiting  the  responsibility  for  a  wrong  to
the  individual  perpetrator.  Growing  up,  as  a  rule,  under  the
shadow  of  the  principle  of  authority  and  acting  in  the  interests
of  external  order  rather  than  of  personal  rights,  the  law  is
administered  often  with  insufficient  safeguards  for  the  innocent
and  with  cruel  severity  to  the  criminal,  and  the  next  step  is  to
remedy  these  defects  by  changes  aimed  at  reforming  the  criminal
and  cutting  off  the  sources  of  crime.  At  each  step  there  is  an
advance  in  the  maintenance  of  order,  and  on  reflection  we
recognize  that  the  better  maintenance  of  order  means  greater
security  for  individuals  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  rights.  Again,
the  elaboration  of  the  legal  view  of  responsibility  isolates  the
individual  from  the  groups  which  in  primitive  society  stand  and
fall  together.  But  it  isolates  him  from  these  only  to  bring  him
into  close  dependence  on  a  wider  society — the  state  as  a  whole,
to  which  he  finds  himself  bound  by  mutual  obligations  of  duties
and  rights.

In  the  position  of  women  and  the  structure  of  the  family  we
find  a  development  which,  if  not  parallel,  is  yet  analogous.  We
have  seen  the  natural  family  beginning  with  a  relatively  loose
organization,  and  passing  into  a  state  in  which  close-knit
relations  were  obtained  at  the  expense  of  the  subjection  of  the
wife,  while  the  aim  of  the  higher  civilizations  appears  to  be  to
reconcile  the  intimacy  of  the  union  with  equal  freedom  for
both  parties.  The  movement  is  on  the  one  hand  towards  closer
structure,  on  the  other  to  personal  freedom,  and  the  problem  is
again  to  reconcile  the  claims  of  personality  and  the  duties  of
a  common  life,  though  this  common  life  is  here  that  of  two
individuals  rather  than  that  of  all  society.  On  the  other  hand,
in  the  position  of  women,  economically  and  socially,  apart  from
the  question  of  marriage,  it  is  the  idea  of  personality  that  is
mainly  prominent.  For  in  the  early  stages  there  is  little  respect
for  women,  and,  so  far  as  labour  is  divided,  it  is  more  often  than
not  to  their  disadvantage.  Then  with  the  growing  dependence
of  the  wife  arises  as  a  partial  compensation  the  view  that
woman  has  a  sphere  of  her  own,  in  some  ways  higher  than  that
of  her  lord.  But  when  this  view,  which  carries  in  it  the  seeds
of  a  deeper  respect  for  women  than  the  older  world  conceived,  is


366  MORALS  IN EVOLUTION

pushed  to  its  conclusion,  it  is  seen  that  to  realize  what  is  in
them,  women  too  must  have  the  open  field  which  men  demand,
and  be  free,  if  it  be  only  to  work  out  and  establish  their
diversity.

From  sex  we  passed  to  other  divisions  of  human  beings
which  affect  the  conception  of  moral  obligation.  In  the  primi
tive  world  every  man  is  a  member  of  a  group  to  which  his
obligations  strictly  so-called  are  limited,  members  of  other
groups  being  indifferent  or  hostile.  From  this  "  group-morality  "
arises  first  the  problem  of  intertribal,  or,  as  they  afterwards
become,  international  relations.  In  the  early  stages  these
relations  are  frequently  hostile,  and  hostility  is  directed  towards
the  individuals  of  the  opposing  community,  and  not  merely
against  the  community  as  a  corporate  whole.  A  step  onward  is
taken  when  the  personal  character  disappears  from  warfare  and
the  result  of  victory,  even  if  pushed  to  the  point  of  annexation,
is  not  to  cancel  the  rights  of  the  conquered  or  to  punish  them
for  attachment  to  their  own  side.  Lastly,  in  this  fuller  recog
nition  of  a  common  humanity — for  that  is  what  it  amounts  to —
we  find  the  beginning  of  a  more  far-reaching  conception  of  a
law,  and  therefore  ultimate  of  a  society  of  nations  to  which  each
independent  state  owes  allegiance.

Considered  internally,  the  small  primitive  group  was  found
to  be — apart  from  the  distinction  of  sex — generally  speaking,  a
society  of  equals.  Differences  of  class,  or  caste,  and  the  distinc
tion  of  free  man  and  serf  or  slave,  arose  in  the  earlier  phases  of
social  growth.  On  this  side  personal  rights  are  apt  to  suffer
deterioration  in  the  earlier  phases  of  social  advance.  The
growth  of  a  large  order  and  a  firm  authority  is  hostile  at  the
outset  to  the  maintenance  of  individual  freedom  and  social
equality.  Ethical  and  religious  progress  tends  to  redress  the
balance,  and  the  claims  of  personality  reassert  themselves
piecemeal  in  the  higher  civilizations.  But  this  wider  recogni
tion  of  personal  rights  implies  that  the  barriers  which  divide
classes  and  sections  of  the  community  are  overcome,  and  a  true
social  unity  achieved.

Turning  from  the  rights  of  person  to  those  of  property  and
contract,  we  have  seen  the  simple  communism  of  primitive
peoples  give  way  to  a  system  of  free  contract  and  individual


SUMMARY  3G7

ownership,  from  which  the  hampering  restrictions  of  caste  and
feudal  status  gradually  fall  away.  Once  again  individual  energy
and  initiative  are  set  free  from  all  restrictions,  but  once  a<Tain
individual  freedom  was  seen  to  raise  questions  of  social  control.
Finally,  in  the  treatment  of  the  poor  we  have  traced  an  analogous
movement  from  simple  communism  through  the  paternal
benevolence  of  a  superior  caste  to  the  recognition  of  a  mutual
obligation  as  between  the  individual  and  the  state.

Thus  amid  all  the  variety  of  social  institutions  and  the  ebb
and  flow  of  historical  change,  it  is  possible  in  the  end  to  detect
a  double  movement  marking  the  transition  from  the  lower  to
the  higher  levels  of  civilized  law  and  custom.  On  the  one  hand
the  social  order  is  strengthened  and  extended.  The  blood  feud
yields  to  the  reign  of  law,  personal  chieftainship  to  a  regular
government  and  an  organized  police.  At  the  same  time  the
social  organization  grows  in  extent.  Instead  of  small  primitive
groups  we  have  nation-states  or  continental  empires,  great  areas
enjoying  internal  peace  and  owning  a  common  law.  On  this
side  the  individual  human  being  becomes  more  and  more
subject  to  social  constraint,  and,  as  we  have  frequently  seen,  the
changes  making  for  the  tightening  of  the  social  fabric  may
diminish  the  rights  which  the  individual  or  large  classes  of
individuals  can  claim,  so  that  fewer  rights  may  be  enjoyed,
though,  with  the  improvement  of  public  order,  those  which
remain  are  more  secure.  In  this  relation  liberty  and  order )
become  opposed.  But  the  opposition  is  not  essential.  From
the  first  the  individual  relies  on  social  forces  to  maintain  him  in
his  rights,  and  in  the  higher  form  of  social  organization  we  have
seen  order  and  liberty  drawing  together  again,  the  underlying
truth  that  unites  them  being  simply  that  the  best  ordered
community  is  that  which  gives  most  scope  to  its  component
members  to  make  the  best  of  themselves,  while  the  "  best "  in
human  nature  is  that  which  contributes  to  the  harmony  and,
onward  movement  of  society.  Thus  the  modern  state  comes  to
rest  more  and  more  on  the  rights  and  duties,  the  obligations
and  responsibilities  that  we  include  under  the  ethical  and  legal
conception  of  personality.  The  responsible  human  being,  man
or  woman,  is  the  centre  of  modern  ethics  as  of  modern  law,  free
so  far  as  law  and  custom  are  concerned  to  make  his  own  life,


368  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

bound  by  no  restrictions  of  status  nor  even  of  nationality  or
race,  answerable  for  his  acts  and  for  those  of  no  other,  at  liberty
to  make  the  best  or  the  worst  of  himself,  to  accept  or  decline
relations  with  others.  On  the  other  hand,  as  this  free  individual
breaks  the  shell  of  the  older  groupings,  he  comes  into  direct
relations  with  the  state  as  a  whole  which  succeeds  to  many  of
the  rights  and  duties  of  the  older  groups.  The  social  nature  of
man  is  not  diminished  either  on  the  side  of  its  needs  or  its  duties
by  the  fuller  recognition  of  personal  rights.  The  difference  is
that  so  far  as  rights  and  duties  are  conceived  as  attaching  to
human  beings  as  such,  they  become  universalized,  and  are  there
fore  the  care  of  society  as  a  whole  rather  of  any  partial  group
organization.  The  typical  instance  of  this  change  is  the  rise  of
public  courts  enforcing  a  law  which  is  equally  binding  on  all
members  of  society.  But  lastly,  the  universalism  which  the
idea  of  personality  holds  within  it  cannot  be  satisfied  with  the
limits  of  the  nation-state.  In  proportion  as  obligations  are
determined  by  human  nature  as  such  they  overstep  national
and  racial  as  well  as  family  and  class  limitations,  and  apply  to
humanity  as  a  whole.  Hence,  as  has  been  seen  in  analyzing
the  idea  of  internationalism,  the  double  meaning  of  "  humanity  "
as  an  expression  for  a  certain  quality  that  is  in  each  man,  and
•as  an  expression  for  the  whole  race  of  men,  is  not  a  mere
ambiguity.  The  two  meanings  are  intimately  related,  for
"  humanity  "  as  a  whole  is  the  society  to  which,  by  virtue  of  the
"  humanity "  within  each  of  us,  we  really  belong,  and  these
two  meanings  are  the  poles  between  which  modern  ethical
conceptions  move.  Thus  if  we  are  to  sum  up  the  whole  process
sketched  in  this  volume  in  a  phrase,  we  may  say  that  it  is  in
this  double  sense  to  realize  humanity.

The  controversies  which  have  filled  modern  history  attach
themselves  in  their  ethical  aspect  sometimes  to  one  side,  some
times  to  the  other  of  this  principle.  Of  many  of  these  little
has  been  said  in  this  volume,  because  in  outline  the  facts  are
well  known  and  a  detailed  discussion  would  be  impossible  within
the  limits  of  a  general  sketch.  It  may,  however,  be  pointed  out
that  the  ethical  questions  which  have  agitated  the  modern  world
from,  say,  the  period  of  the  Reformation  to  our  own  day  have
turned  either  on  the  vindication  of  personal  right,  or  on  the


SUMMARY  369

extended  conception  of  human  brotherhood.  On  the  one  hand,
ethical  progress  has  taken  the  form  of  a  protest  against  the
principle  of  authority  which  at  the  outset  of  the  period  every
where  dominated  the  world,  and,  so  far,  has  tended  to  curtail  the
sphere  of  government  in  favour  of  individual  liberty.  This  is
the  history,  for  example,  of  the  very  gradual  process  whereby  first
liberty  of  conscience  and  finally  religious  equality  has  been
established  as  a  corner-stone  of  the  modern  state.  This  change
is  sometimes  represented  as  merely  a  consequence  of  religious
scepticism,  the  implication  being  that  if  the  world  held  itself  as
certain  of  fundamental  truths  as  it  did  in  the  twelfth  century  it
would  not  hesitate  to  impose  them  on  all  its  members  by  force
as  it  did  then  on  the  rare  occasions  which  arose.  But  there  is
a  deeper  principle  involved,  illustrating  the  many-sided  meaning
of  the  idea  of  Personality.  Far  from  implying  an  indifference
to  religion,  the  principle  of  religious  equality  is  a  recognition  of
the  profound  importance  of  intellectual  sincerity,  particularly  in
relation  to  the  deepest  problems  of  life.  From  the  moment  that
honesty  is  recognized  as  a  duty  it  becomes  increasingly  repugnant
to  penalize  the  beliefs  to  which  it- may  lead.  The  heavier  the
penalties  the  more  exclusively  they  fall  on  the  stoutest  and  best
natures,  that  is  precisely  on  those  best  qualified  under  happier
circumstances  to  serve  society ;  and  the  only  logical  alternative
is  to  admit  the  necessity  for  divergencies  in  an  imperfect  world.
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  principle  is  free  from  logical
defects  or  practical  difficulties.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  there  are
or  may  be  opinions  which  in  some  relations  must  disqualify  the
holder.  For  example,  a  sincere  conviction  which  would  prevent
a  man  from  conscientiously  discharging  the  duties  of  a  particular
office  must  disqualify  him  from  holding  the  office.  But  the
principle  of  freedom  in  opinion  would  merely  require  that  his
unorthodox  or  unpopular  views  should  not  disqualify  him  for
other  offices  with  which  they  are  not  concerned.  In  other  words,
freedom  is  limited  by  responsibility.  A  man  undertakes  to  fulfil
a  certain  social  function,  to  administer,  to  teach,  or  to  preach,
and  it  is  expected  that  he  will  fulfil  and  not  exceed  that  function,
and  as  long  as  he  does  so  his  thoughts  are  his  own.  There  is
thus  a  certain  logic  below  the  apparent  compromises  of  public

lite,  which,  by  enabling  men  of  most  diverse  views  to  co-operate
VOL.  i.  B  B


370  MORALS IN  EVOLUTION

without  injury  to  their  own  self-respect,  secures  the  best  brains
and  the  highest  characters  for  the  public  service.

The modern state undoubtedly uses constraint, as every
organized  society  must  do,  but  the  grounds  on  which  constraint
is  justified  in  the  modern  world  are  distinctive  and  significant.
For  constraint  may  be  justified,  and  in  the  older  conception  was
justified,  on  the  ground  that  if  a  man  will  not  do  what  he  ought
he  must  be  made  to  do  it,  and  it  may  be  applied  to  speech  and
writing  on  the  ground  that  if  it  is  wrong  to  do  a  thing  it  is
equally  wrong  to  recommend  it. But  it  is  precisely  in  these
two  relations  that  compulsion  most  offends  the  modern  idea  of
liberty. To  force a person to  act rightly  for  his  own  sake
implies  an  ethical  confusion,  for  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  he  acts
freely  that  his  actions  have  ethical  value. Conversely  to  suppress
free  speech  is  to  bring  force  into  the  true  spiritual  world — the
world  of  ideas,  where  it  is  most  urgent  both  from  the  personal
and  ultimately  from  the  public  point  of  view  that  there  should
be  freedom. On  the  other  hand,  when  the  freedom  of  one  man
is  used  to  the  molestation  of  another  or  the  hindrance  of  what
are  deemed  his  legitimate  activities,  constraint  is  required. And
if  individual freedom may not be used  to  the  prejudice  of
another  individual,  neither  can  it  claim  the  right  to  thwart  the
will of  society  as  a  whole. Hence  an  important  distinction
which  will  be  found  to  underlie  much  of  modern  legislation. As
long  as  the  general  will  can  be  carried  out  effectively  without
compelling  the  reluctant  minority  to  follow  suit,  the  tendency  is
to  avoid  compulsion. On  the  other  hand,  where  certain  con
ditions  are  believed  to  be  essential  to  the  common  good,  and  the
recusance  of  a  minority,  perhaps  of  a  few  individuals,  would
render  them unattainable, compulsion is deemed legitimate.
In  such  cases  it  is  felt  that  the  general  will,  dealing  with  general
interests,  has  rights  quite  comparable  in  kind  to  those  of  the
individual  will  in  relation  to  its  individual  interests,  while  to
enforce  compulsion  is  after  all  only  in  accord  with  the  universally
admitted  limit  to  liberty  that  it  does not convey  the right
to injure others. Further, compulsion is  limited to  actions,
since words alone cannot impede a resolute majority  from
doing  what  they  wish  to  do, unless indeed  their  convictions
are a little shaky, and in that case  it may perhaps be


SUMMARY  371

all  the  better  for  them  to  hear  the  other  side.  Again,  in
leaving  expression  free  the  law  leaves  to  each  man  what  is
peculiarly  his,  the  right  to  think  for  himself  and  honestly  express
his  convictions  whether  he  is  allowed  to  act  by  them  or  not.  In
all  these  ways  the  idea  of  personality  seems  to  have  profoundly
influenced  the  theory  and  practice  of  legislation,  tending  not
always  to  the  curtailment  of  social  activity — for,  as  we  shall  see
later,  it  has  a  counter  tendency  in  the  enlargement  which  it
gives  to  the  conception  of  the  common  good — but  certainly  to
the  material  modification  of  the  character  and  aims  of  law.

Freedom  of  discussion  practically  implies  the influence of
discussion upon government, and the doctrine of popular
sovereignty  with  universal  suffrage  drew  its strength  first  in
the  modern  world  from  the  conception  of  the  right  of  each
individual  to  have  a  voice  in  determining  the  laws  under  which
he  has  to  live. The  democratic  movement  was  directed  at  the
outset  against  arbitrary  power. Its  first  demand  was  for  personal
freedom,  i.  e.  immunity  from  arbitrary  treatment  and  security  in
the  possession  of  legal  rights. The  political  rights  which  came
next  appeared  naturally  as  an  extension  of  this  freedom  and  as
another  check  on  governmental  authority. But  as  soon  as  they
were  adequately  secured  and  the  ultimate  sovereignty  of  the
people  was  realized,  the  notion  of  a  check  on  government  became
inadequate. The  people  as  a  whole  could  not  be  engaged  merely
in  checking  itself. In  point  of  fact  whenever  it  was  a  question
of  extending  the  franchise  it  was  another  side  of  the  principle  of
personality,  the  idea  of  equal  rights,  that  came  forward. But
this  idea,  while  founded  on  personality,  is  meaningless  apart  from
the  conception  of  something  which  all  share  alike,  and  equality
in political rights therefore  implies a community in which
members  have  an  equal  right  to  take  part  in  the  functions  of
government — that  is to  say,  merely  a  more  perfect  or more
complete  community  than  one  in  which  certain  members  are
wholly  or  in  part  excluded from  the  common life. Political
democracy  therefore  seems  to  range  the  whole  distance  between
the  two  poles  of  the  humanitarian  idea,  resting  on  the  principle
of  personality on the one hand and of the all-embracing
community  on  the  other.

The  family  and  the  state  are  not  the  only  communities  which


372  MORALS IN EVOLUTION

men  form.  On  the  contrary,  a  leading  characteristic  of  the
modern  world  is  the  ease  with  which  people  combine  for  pur
poses  of  all  kinds,  from  that  of  hearing  each  other's  views  on
Browning  to  that  of  regulating  wages  or  promoting  the  passage
of  a  Bill  in  Parliament.  The  right  of  association  is  one  which
often  raises  grave  political  and  social  problems,  and,  strangely
enough,  it  can  be  brought  into  contact  with  both  poles  of  our
"  underlying  principle,"  and  in  either  case  it  may  receive  support
or  opposition  according  to  the  reading  of  the  facts.  Take  the
case  of  Trade  Unions.  These  were  as  a  matter  of  history  legal
ized  in  England  under  the  influence  of  individualistic  ideas,  the
ground  taken  being  the  right  inherent  in  individuals  to  associate
together  freely  for  the  promoting  of  their  several  interests.  Yet
the  strength  of  a  Trade  Union  lies  entirely  in  the  Collective
Bargain,  and  its  moral  force  is  derived  wholly  from  the  concep
tion  of  the  workers  in  a  given  trade — ultimately,  perhaps,  all  the
manual  workers  of  the  country — as  forming  a  community  with
certain  objects  in  common.  So  far  the  Trade  Union  finds  sup
port  both  in  individualism  and  collectivism.  Yet  from  both
ideas  it  is  possible  to  derive  arguments  against  the  right  of  com
bination.  On  individualist  grounds  it  may  be  condemned  as
impairing  the  rights  of  the  non-Unionist,  on  collectivist  grounds
as  forming  a  state  within  a  state,  and  assuming  functions  which
only  the  government  representing  employers  as  well  as  em
ployed,  brain  workers  as  well  as  manual  workers,  can  fairly  carry
out.  Hence  in  point  of  fact  Trade  Unionism  has  always  been
opposed  by  the  more  extreme  among  Individualists  and  Socialists,
and  has  found  support  among  the  more  moderate  of  each  party.
The  movements  of  opinion  and  of  English  legislation  on  the
subject  from  1800  to  the  present  day  reflect  with  tolerable
accuracy  the  fluctuation  of  thought  between  these  poles,  accord
ing  as  now  one,  now  another,  aspect  of  the  problem  took  the
leading  place  in  the  public  mind,  the  tendency  being  upon  the
whole  to  recognize  the  necessity  of  voluntary  combination  as  a
remedy  for  the  economic  weakness  of  the  mass  of  manual
workers  and  to  bring  it  by  the  definition  of  its  rights  and
responsibilities  more  closely  into  connection  with  the  State
system.

What  has  been  said  of  Trade  Unions  applies  mutatis  mutandis


SUMMARY  373

to  voluntary  association  in  general.  The  State  organization  is
far  from  exhausting  the  necessities  of  common  action.  It  can
use  its  power  of  compulsory  taxation  to  carry  out  certain  objects
of  common  interest.  But  precisely  because  it  uses  compulsion,
it  has  to  give  fair  consideration  to  all  classes  and  all  sections  and
cannot  wisely  proceed  further  than  the  general  opinion  of  the
community  warrants.  Voluntary  associations,  on  the  other  hand,
which  exercise  no  compulsion  on  any  one  except  on  their  own
members,  who  freely  join  and  are  free  to  leave  them,  may  rightly
pursue  a  thousand  and  one  laudable  objects  for  which  a  com
bined  effort  is  necessary,  but  which  perhaps  appeal  only  to  a  few.
Thus  the  fuller  development  of  the  principle  of  community  or
association  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  continual  expansion
in  the  sphere  of  State  activity.  On  the  contrary,  the  activity  of
voluntary  combination  has  developed  and  is  developing  with  at
least  equal  rapidity.

Under  the  name  of  voluntary  association  we  think  naturally
of  combinations  deliberately  formed  for  some  definite  purpose.
But  there  is  also  a  form  of  common  life  into  which  men  fall,  if
not  hindered,  by  a  kind  of  instinct,  a  life  based  on  old  traditions,
and  a  certain  community  of  character,  language,  custom,  and
generally  religion,  all  that  goes  to  make  up  the  impalpable  but
very  real  bonds  of  nationality.  Struggles  for  national  freedom
have  made  a  large  part  of  the  modern  movement,  and  have
generally  been  associated  with  ideas  of  personal  liberty  and  of
popular  sovereignty.  Yet  the  connection  of  thought  is  not
always  easy  to  make  out.  Where  a  race  is  definitely  held  in
subjection  by  an  autocratic  government  which  concedes  to  it
neither  political  nor  equal  civil  rights,  the  case  is  indeed  clear
enough.  So  far  it  does  not  differ  from  that  of  any  disfran
chised  class.  But  further,  though  fully  enfranchised,  a  nation
ality  may  be  incorporated  against  its  will  with  a  larger  nation
in  one  political  community,  and  its  separatist  aspirations  may
then  be  regarded  as  having  no  special  sanction  in  the  principle
of  Liberty  and  as  being  opposed  to  the  widening  of  human
brotherhood  in  that  they  tend  to  split  up  society  and  perpetuate
divisions.  As  to  the  first  point,  the  proof  of  the  argument  is  in
practical  experience.  If  it  turns  out  possible  to  maintain  the
undesired  union  without  special  restrictions  on  the  political  and


374  MORALS  IN  EVOLUTION

personal  rights  of  the  recalcitrant  people,  well  and  good.  But
the  stronger  the  national  feeling,  the  less  likely  is  this  to  be  the
case  and  the  further  are  governments  driven  along  the  road  of
coercion  and  into  the  forbidden  ground  of  the  modern  spirit,
where  men  are  made  to  suffer  most  in  proportion  to  their
nobility  and  steadfastness  of  character.  The  heroes  of  national
ism  have,  wherever  their  cause  has  flourished,  connected  it  with
that  of  personal  right,  and  put  their  opponents  into  the  odious
position  of  punishing  men  for  qualities  which  in  a  cool  hour  they
must  themselves  admire.  From  the  social  point  of  view,  again,
if  fewer  differences  existed  the  problems  of  social  organization
would  be  much  simpler,  but  the  social  life  would  also  be  poorer.
At  this  point  divergences  in  the  conception  of  a  community
come  to  a  head.  If  the  best  community  is  that  in  which  the
order  deemed 'most  suitable  by  the  wisest  heads  is  imposed  on  all
members  without  regard  to  their  wishes,  then  differences  of
nationality  can  expect  little  consideration.  But  if  the  best-
ordered  society  is  that  which  makes  most  room  for  the  self-
development  of  many  different  types,  the  case  is  altered,  and  just
as  there  is  free  play  for  the  individual  so  also  is  there  room —
though  to  make  it  may  involve  great  changes  in  the  governmental
machinery — for  those  groupings  of  individuals  which  spontane
ously  form  and  stubbornly  maintain  themselves  against  legal  pres
sure.  Thus  from  several  points  of  view  the  re-grouping  of  peoples
according  to  national  divisions,  which  has  made  up  so  much  of
modern  history,  falls  into  its  place  as  part  of  the  wider  move
ment  which  has  replaced  the  arbitrary  government  of  authority
by  the  political  state  resting  on  the  common  good  and  general
assent  of  the  great  bulk  of  its  citizens.

Probably  in  all  the  movements  here  mentioned  the  side  which
has  been  most  prominent  in  history  has  been  the  vindication  of
individual  or  group  rights  as  against  governmental  authority.
But  it  would  be  a  mistake  on  that  account  to  identify  them  with
any  general  tendency  towards  individualism  as  against  the  claims
of  the  common  life.  On  the  contrary,  at  every  step  the  fuller
recognition  of  rights  implies  a  deepening  sense  of  common  re
sponsibility,  since,  as  has  been  repeatedly  asserted,  the  recogni
tion  of  a  right  implies  its  maintenance  by  society.  From  the
assumption  of  the  duty  of  protecting  life  and  limb  onwards  the


SUMMARY  375

development  of  the  modern  state  has  witnessed  an  extension  of
the  sense  of  collective  responsibility — a  responsibility  which  may
almost  indifferently  be  stated  in  terms  of  the  rights  of  individuals
or  the  duties  of  society.  On  whichever  of  the  two  principles,  in
practice  the  modern  state  guarantees  the  bare  necessaries  of  life
to  all  its  members,  and  adds  thereto  in  varying  degree  the  con
ditions  of  something  more  than  a  bare  life.  In  a  long  series  of
industrial  statutes  it  has  sought  to  ensure  the  safety  and  health
of  the  working  class,  and  to  protect  its  members  from  fraud  and
oppression.  It  maintains  a  certain  standard  of  sanitation  in
buildings,  provides  or  encourages  facilities  for  transport,  and
gives  the  rudiments  of  education  without  charge.  How  much
further  the  State  machinery  can  be  profitably  used  in  this  con
nection  is  matter  of  controversy  into  which  I  do  not  inquire
here.  But  whether  trust  be  put  in  the  machinery  of  law  or  the
efforts  of  voluntary  agency,  the  sphere  of  combined  action  grows
in  proportion  as  the  respect  for  human  personality  deepens.
The  obligation  to  do  what  is  in  them  to  make  life  more  human
will  be  felt  by  some  as  a  debt  which  they  owe  to  suffering  human

beings,  by  others  as  something  due  to  society. But  in  this  re-

i  •

lation  at  least  it  is  easy  to  recognize  that  it  is  the  same  principle

which  is  seen  from  two  different  sides,  and  that  the  conscious
efforts  to  better  the  life  of  humanity  in  which  the  whole  tend
ency  of  modern  thought  is  summed  up  can  work  through  no  other
channel  than  the  humanity  which  is  alive  in  every  man  and
woman.


