Mind in Evolution (L. T. Hobhouse, 1901)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/mindinevolution01hobhgoog). Hobhouse's evolutionary study of mind from animal instinct to human reason.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


at |http : //books . google . com/


^\oA


/


^


MIND IN EVOLUTION


BY THE SAME AUTHOR
THE

THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE

A contribution to some problems of Logic and
Metaphysics

Price 21 1-
METHUEN & CO.


MIND

IN EVOLUTION


BY

L. T. HOBHOUSE

LATS nCLLOW AND ASSISTANT-TUTOR OF C.C.C, OXFORD
FORMERLY FBLLOW OF MRRTON COLLEGB


MACMILLAIjft «i(B( jCO^'^iMiTED

MEW YORK:^THK HAClOiaXK COMPANY


RicHAW) Clav and Sons, UumD,

LONDON AND BONGAT


I0tilb3o


*-


PREFACE

The form of the present work needs a preliminary
word of explanation. Its subject is " Mind in Evolution,"
but no one will expect that such a subject should be
treated with any pretence of adequacy within a single
volume or by a single writer. The contribution offered
in the following pages is of a double character. There
is, first, an attempt to sketch in outline what seem to the
writer to be the main phases' of )nent^l development.
There is, secondly, an attempt to fill in this outline so
far as the lower phases are concerned. To put the same
distinction in different words, a hypothesis is propounded
as to the general trend of mental evolution, and an attempt
is made to test this hypothesis so far as animal intelli-
gence and the generic distinction between animal and
human intelligence are concerned. For the rest, that is
to say in all that relates to the higher development of the
human mind in society, the outline is left to be filled in
upon a future occasion. The whole subject naturally falls
into the two main divisions of animal and human evolu-
tion, and the mass of matter to be dealt with is so great
that it is convenient to keep the two parts separate. At
the same time evolution is a single continuous process the
different phases of which are only seen in their true


VI


PREFACE


significance when treated as parts of the whole to which
they belong. This is my excuse for combining a general
design with a partial execution.

Even as to that portion of the hypothesis which I have
described as being tested in the present work I cannot
pretend that the test is in any sense final. The hypothesis,
though it appears to me to stand the test thus far, remains
a hypothesis. The nature and limits of animal intelli-
gence in its higher forms are matters of keen controversy,
and will long remain so. In a science so little advanced
as G)mparative Psychology the justification for publishing
any opinions or arguments must lie not in any pretence
to finality, but in the hope of suggesting further
investigation.

The general conception of mental evolution presented
in this volume was formed some fourteen or fifteen years
ago when I had come into close contact with the criticisms
then current on Comte, Mill, and Spencer. The con-
ception has been in my mind ever since, subject to
constant modification as it was confronted with fresh
facts or the better psychological analysis of other thinkers.
The general view of evolution which most closely cor-
responds to it, is to be found, I think, in Dr. Lester
Ward's Outlines of Sociology ^ published in 1898. I
mention these points as indicating the general character
of my obligations to other writers.

My more special obligations in the present work are,
first, to Principal Lloyd Morgan and Professor Alexander,
who have read the manuscript, and made numerous valu-
able suggestions. I hasten to add that they must not be
held responsible for anything that appears in the text.
In the preparation of my material I was helped by
Mr. A. E. Taylor, some of whose work done originally
in this connection will, I hope, see the light in another


PREFACE vii

form. Many references to be found scattered through the
volume are due to his suggestion, and for some he is
wholly responsible. I have to thank Mr. W. E. Hoyle,
of The Owens College, for help in a number of technical
points. Miss M. V. Vernon for help in the preparation
of the MS., and several friends for ^d in experiments.
Last, but not least, I am under a special obligation to
Messrs. Jennison, proprietors of the Belle Vue Gardens,
Manchester, for their courtesy in placing their great
collection of animals at my (tisposal for the purpose of
my investigations.


^ ANALYSIS

/"^ -^ CHAPTER I


MIND AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION

The nonnal tendency of evolution is not towards a higher, but (2) a.
divergent type. 3. In the resulting diversity old types survive, and
there is deterioration as well as improvement. 4. Within these
divergencies there is one line of true development. This is the
evolution of Mind. 5. The generic function of Mind is to organise
Life by correlating its parts. 6. Its gro¥rth consists in the widening
scope and increasing articulateness of correlation, (7) with which
it replaces that organisation of life which rests on heredity. 8. To
trace this growth m outline is the object of this work.»

Pages I— 10

CHAPTER II

ORGANIC ADAPTABILITY

Without raising the Question whether organic processes are to
be explained by mecnanical laws we may characterise organic
activity in general terms, (2) as that which tends to keep the
character of the organism constant at an equilibrium point through
unceasing change, a tendency illustrated by the rhythmical processes
of health, and (3) by repair, regeneration, and development. 4. In
this self • maintenance through change and by adaptability the
organism differs from the machine. 5. The same principle appears
in the expenditure of energy by an organism. 6. Resulting concep-
tion of organic adaptability and its limitations . . . /Pages II — 24

CHAPTER III

REFLEX ACTION

Action generally is one method of adaptation. If due to internal
changes it is Impulsive or Automatic 2. If a uniform response to
sensory stimulus, it is a reflex. 3. Is reflex action mechanical ? It
is independent of intelligence. 4. False arguments (against the


ANALYSIS

mechanical theory. 5. As contrasted with purposive action, reflexes
are mechanical 6. But they show organic adaptability in varying
degrees, (7) which perhaps explains the appearance of purposive
ratification in abnormal cases. 8. Resultmg view of reflexes as
passing from the bare mechanical to the adaptive type. 9. The
development of reflexes in the individual and the race (10) out of
random actions Pages 25 — 45


CHAPTER IV
INSTINCT


^


J. Instinct is a product of Evolution. 2. It cannot be resolved into a
form of intelligence. 3. Its evolution is merely one aspect of the
evolution of structure. 4. Instinct is closely related to reflex action,
(5) but differs from a compound reflex in that its successive actions
are dominated by a persistent internal state, (6) the influence of
which is shown in adaptive modifications and variations of method.
7. In '*pure instinct" modifications issue from the interaction of
heredita^ methods of response with the general organic condition ;
(8) but intelligence arises within instinct to develop the necessary
modifications, (9} hence arise strange contrasts of sagacity and
stupidity in the same animal, to be ascribed to the limited scope of
intelligence. (10). As its scope widens, intelligence gradually replaces
instinct. 11. Is instinctive action accompanied by consciousness?

Pages 46—80

CHAPTER V

ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT

f . Generically, Intelligence is distinguished from Instinct as a correlation
of exi)en%nces and actions effected by the individual within his own
life history. 2. The experience on which intelligence rests is
generically an experience of relations, (3) its simplest form being
the confirmation or inhibition of a response according to the resultant
feeling, (4) depending on a modified revival of the original
experience. The process may be called Assimilation. 5. The main
function of experience at this stage is to define general instinctive
tendencies. 6. Cases in which a response is not modified, but
created, by close association with a feeling may also be referred to
assimilation. 7. For such operations of experience ideas are not
necessary. 8. Their results in human consciousness are acquired
perceptions and perceptual impulses. 9. Intelligence at this level
effects '* a correlation between a mass of experiences and subsequent
reactions to stimulus." 10. Evidence for tne diffusion of this form
of intelligence in the animal kingdom Pages Z\ — iii

CHAPTER VI
CONCRETE EXPERIENCE AND THE PRACTICAL JUDGMENT

I. Judgment as a synthesis of distinct elements is to be distinguished
from Assimilation and from the Association of Ideas. As a
synthesis of perceptual elements, it may be called the Practical
Judgment. 2. The Practical Judgment rests on the revival of
Concrete Experience. 3. The conditions of this revival differ from


ANALYSIS xi

those of Association. 4. Such a synthesis is the condition of the
knowledge of individual objects, of memory and anticipation, of
purpose and desire. 5. The knowledge of objects also makes
possible (a) a rudimentary analogical inference, and (d) the selective
application of the (^ta of experience. 6. The effect of the Practical
Judgment as seen in behaviour is that instead of a mere modification
of response the results of experience are applied to the guidance of
action. 7. There is thus in this stage of inteUigence a correlation of
perceptual and practical relations, which may be compared to the
logical inference from minor premiss to conclusion on the basis of a
perceived parallel Pages 112 — 139

CHAPTER VII

UEARNING AMONG THE HIGHER ANIMALS. THE METHOD OF TRIAL

AND ERROR

f . Acts of apparent purpose can hardly be explained by Association of
Ideas, but may grow uo through Trial and Error. 2. Mr. Thorn-
dike's experiments shoy that many novel acts can be learnt in this
way. 3. But his results do not prove that all cats and dogs learn by
habituation. 4. Nor is it universally true that animals learn nothing
by being put through an action. 5. Experimental results are in the
main unfavourable to reflective imitation, but the preliminary ques-
tion should be settled whether an animal can learn by perception of
results affecting itself. Pi^es 140 — 151

CHAPTER VIII

SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

f . Starting with the purpose of testing the power of perceptual learning,
the experiments dealt widi the power of learning as a whole. 2. The
factor of attention. 3. Inducement, suggestion, and encouragement
as methods of teaching. 4. Description of experiments on method
of learning. 5. Further experiments show that though in learning a
trick there is a tendency to form habits, this is controlled by percep-
tion of results. 6. Probable reasons for imputing perceptual learning,
(7) and direction of effort towards the production of physical
dianges iniplying what may be called practical ideas in a very crude
form. 8. Further evidence in favour of perceptual learning. Sheer
accident does not seem to count for much unless attended to.
9. The normal process of learning shows that more importance
attaches to attention than to repetition of instances. 10. Summary
of probable deductions Pages 1^2 — 218

CHAPTER IX

THE KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS

I. Animals appear to draw inferences from one object to another similar
only in the relation of its parts. Thus they know an object as a concrete
whole, 2, and as a centre of many relations. 3. They display the
emotional states which go naturally with knowledge of individuals,
(4) and there is some evidence that they apply laiowledge of how


xii ANALYSIS

persons or other animals will act so as to devise somewhat origina
plans of action. 5. Summary. There is in animal behaviour some
mdependent evidence for each of the functions mentioned as
characteristic of the Practical Judgment Pages 219 — 233

CHAPTER X

ARTICULATE IDEAS

I. Both for practical ideas in a less crude form and for a certain
originality of application there is experimental evidence in the
behaviour of apes. 2. Use of stick, &c., to reach food. 3. Dealing
with tied rope. 4. With bolt and hook. 5. Case of failure in coip-
paring one situation with another. 6. Inserting stick in a tube.
7. Use of stool. 8. Removing obstacle from chain. 9. Unwinding
chain. 10. Attemi)ted theft. 11. Evidence for similar articulation
or original application of experience among other mammals is of the
"anecdotal" kind. It cannot be wholly rejected. 12. Practical
judgment may be attributed to apes with high probability, and with
some probability to other of the more intelligent mammals.

Pages 234—269

CHAPTER XI

INTELLIGENCE AND THE SOCIAL INSTINCTS

I. There is evidence of an element of intelligence in the more complex,
especially the social instincts, (2) while conversely, the social
instincts apparently implying recognition of individuals are especially
characteristic of the most intelligent animals. 3. It is thus probable
that the social act is in the concrete sense purposive, and if so, the
rudiment of morality cannot be denied to animals. . Pages 270—280

CHAPTER XII

THE CONCEPT

I. Concrete experience will explain the highest developments of animal
experience (2) but not the power of communication by language,-
(3) which rests on the power of detaching ideas from perception and
recombining them, (4) which is precisely the point in which animal
language and baby talk in its first stage fail. 5. From this stage
language advances in the human being to the formation of general
conceptions, (6) which rest on a cross correlation of the perceptual
order, (7) and are the fotmdation of Universal Judgments in which
(8) thought explicitly recognises the necessary connection which is
the real basis of all inference, (9) and thereby deals with experience
past and future in masses, (10} thus building up the world of Ideas.

Pages 281 — 300

CHAPTER XIII
THE PRODUCTS OF CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT

I. Akin to the Universal in genesis and function is the conception of
Personality, with its* abiding interests in Self (2) and others (3) and of
organised society. 4. On the basis of conceptions universal and


ANALYSIS xiii

individual are built the distinctively human thought-products of
creative imagination, morals, religion, and science. 5. Psychologic-
ally the real difference between this and lower stages is in degree of
scope and clearness, but it may be regarded as specially distinguished
by the appearance of Conceptual Thinking, Self-consciousness, and
WilL 6. Morally the difference is that conduct is (a) directed to
comprehensive ends, (7) and {&) standardised and made subject to
general rules. 8. Through this medium, tradition becomes fused
with instinct as the basis of conduct. 9. In sum, by an advance in
scope and articulation, we arrived at a higher level of thought, in
which the affinities underlying lower inferences are analysed out^ and
through them great masses of experience past and future, individual
and racial, are brought into correlation Pitg€s 501 — 326


CHAPTER XIV
SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT

In the three stages examined, the organisation of life becomes
constantly more comprehensive, but in the highest remains very
fragmentary. 2. Completeness of system is first made a direct
object by science. 3. But the study of principles and methods leads
back to philosophy, which by evaluating the work of the mind (4)
makes possible a true systematisation of the sciences. Thus syste-
matic Uiought deals with the conditions on which less developed
thought rests. 5. The goal of the whole development being the
appreciation by the Mind of the conditions and possibilities of its
own ^^wth, f>., the completed '^ organisation " of life. 6. This
organisation implies an ethical development in which the principle of
the unity of tne species has overcome that of individual self-
assertion. Both principles are at work in the animal world (7) and
their interaction explains the inconsistencies of ordinary morals,
(8) which is fostered by the organisation of the race into a vast num-
ber of groups competing in a vanety of ways. 9. As against this
organisation^ humanitarianism, imperfectly incorporated in the
higher religions, stands for the. unity of the race (10) and for its
development, which it makes the supreme object of human effort,
and the touchstone of recognised institutions and codes. 11. Thus
the ethical and intellectual development converge on the same point
— ^the organisation of the life of tne race through knowledge of its
conditions. 12. From this point the development of mind becomes
intelligent and self-determined Pag^es 327—357


CHAPTER XV /y^

SUMMARY OF THE STAGES OF CORRELATION

I. Orthogenic evolution consists in a development of organisation cul-
minating in the determination of its own development by the race
2. Summary of the stages by which out of the struggle for existence
this organisation is step by step elaborated .... Fogies 358—373


xiv ANALYSIS

CHAPTER XVI
ORGANISATION, CONFLICT, AND EVOLUTION


^


Orthogenic evolution consists in the rise of higher organisation — ^the
higher organisation being that in which unity is more complete and
scope greater. 2. The basis of the process is an improved physical
organisation on which the higher, intelligent organisation rests
3. Organisation is the most efficient means of maintaining life, (4)
and this is true of the special forms of organisation by Intelligence
and social co-operation. 5. Fundamental antithesis between the
organisation of life and the struggle for existence. 6. With the
growth of organisation comes a modification of plan, substituting
pleasure, (7) and later happiness for bare existence as the end cf
action. 8. Effort towards a higher development is made possible by
a mitigation of the struggle for existence, (9} and finally becomes the
explicit end upon which the whole plan of organisation is seen to
rest Pages n\'-y^


CHAPTER XVII

SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT

In the absence of mind, life is relatively anarchic, and evolution plan-
less. The evolution of mind consists in the introduction of order
and purpose. 2. It is an organic growth, and yet, at least in its
higher stages, the working out of a purpose. 3. As the purpose
becomes realised, the movement itself becomes^ more sure and swift.

4. Can orthogenic evolution as a whole be regarded as purposive ?

5. Reality as a whole is a single system which cannot be brought
under the category of teleology or mechanism. 6. But the ideal of
thought points to an organic self development, at once mechanically
conditioned, and purposive, which closely corresponds to the facts
of Orthogenic Evolution Pages 395 — 406


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS


Abhrtviation, Full Title of Work,

Bethe Ameisen .... Diirfen wir den Ameisen und Bienen psychische
Qualitaten zuschreiben ? von Albrecht Bethe,
1898.

DahL Versuch einer Darstellung der psychischen

Voigan^e in den Spinnen — F. Dahl, Viertel-
jahnchrift fiir wissenschafUiche Philosophie,
VoLIX.

Muller and Schumann . Experimentelle Beitrage zur Untersuchung des
Gedachtnisses. — Zeitschrift fiir Pyschologie
und Physiologie der Sinnes Organe, 1894.

Prcyer I The Senses and the Will, by W. Preyer (Eng.

trans, by H. W. Brown, iSgiS)

Preyer 1 1 The Development ^ the Intellect, hyVf.Vve^x

(Eng. trans, by H. W. Brown, i89i5).

M. E. A. Mental Evolution in Animals, by G. J.

Romanes, 1885.

Romanes Animcd Intelligence, by G. J. Romanes, sixth

edition, 1895.

Wasmann, S. d. A. . . Vergleichende Studien iiber das Seelenleben
der Ameisen und der hdhem Thiere, von Erich
Wasmann, S. J., second edition.

Wesley Mills The Nature and Development of Animal InUl-

ligence, by Professor Wesley Mills, 1898.


MIND IN EVOLUTION

CHAPTER I

MIND AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION

I. Evolution is a natural process, moving without
regard to human judgments of what is good or bad, right
or wrong. So its exponents, who are often also its apostles,
assure us. None the less, it is held up to our admiration
as a process which makes for good. The term itself, in-
deed, suggests a growing fullness of existence, the unrolling
of latent powers, a tendency towards perfection, the process
by which a thing comes to be that for which it was destined^
Evolution is used as synonymous with progress, and pro-
gress, at least before its association with commercial sta-
tistics, meant a movement towards better things. The
doctrine that whatever is is right reappears in the modern-
ised form that whatever comes to be is justified. Nature
thus conceived is not perfect, but is always on the way to
become perfect. If only the fittest survive, each generation
since the world began must be able to boast with Diomed
that its members are much better than their fathers.

Unfortunately for the biolc^ical enthusiast, the perfection
which Nature seeks is not always a perfection which man
as a rational being can welcome or love. If the struggle
for existence has produced the wisdom of man, it has also
sharpened the tiger's claw and poisoned the cobra's fang.
Nothing lives ** unless helped by another's death," and the


2 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

progress of each species includes advance in the means of
destroying others as well as preserving itself Nor can it
readily be conceded that the various species which thus
learn to destroy each other more efficiently are necessarily
higher or nobler in type than the ancestral forms from
which they are derived. If, indeed, the "higher" type-
simply means that which is best capable of dealing with the
circumstances in which it is placed, then it is undeniably
true that the highest survive in the struggle for existence.
But the truth is at this point a truism, not worth mention-
ing but for the mischief which it has wrought. In the
nature of organic evolution, in the factors known to be at
work therein, in Natural Selection as such, there is nothing -
whatever to prove that the individuals who prevail over
others in the struggle for existence must necessarily be in
any way " higher *' in the sense which we human beings
attach to that word. There is nothing in the nature of
the struggle itself to show that the type which prevails
must always be one which we should recognise as morally
better, intellectually more developed, physically more
beautiful, or in any way more desirable. It all depends
on circumstances. In some parts of Africa the horse is
driven out by the Tsetse fly ; in others the white man
succumbs before the malaria germ, just as in this country
the honest investor goes down before the swindling com-
pany promoter. If it be sjud that in the end the better
type will prevail, that man is upon the whole dominant
among animals, and honesty upon the whole among men,
I do not wish to deny, nor yet at this stage to afllirm it. I
am only concerned to protest against its being affirmed
upon a thoroughly false ground, and in a thoroughly false
form. The worst type very often survives, and evolution
is not always upwards.

2. It is not even normally upwards. If we take man as
the highest type of animal, and regard the line of evolution
which ends in man as the upward line, then, as we know,
at every point from the lowest upwards there are countless
diverging lines. Evolution is not serial. Its plan is not^
that of a straight line or even a spiral, but rather that of a
tree. For the species that has moved some distance along


I MIND AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION 3

a branch there is little or no chance of returning to the
main stem, and for such a species further development
means movement further away from the line of ascent.
Look at any general scheme of organic evolution (Haeckel's,
for example), and consider the lines of divergence.^ We
find, for example, Echinodermata, Arthropods, or MoUusca,
ranked as co-ordinate with the Tunicata from which Verte-
brates are derived. They are not stages in the evolution
of Vertebrates, nor can their further evolution bring them
nearer to the Vertebrate type. The crab does not become
more perfect by approximating insensibly to the Verte-
brates, but rather, if the expression be allowed, by becoming
more decisively and perfectly a crab — ^that is, by develop-
ing those features, strength of grip, hardness of outer shell,
or whatever they may be, which distinguish it from other
Crustacea. The evolution of the dog, under the guidance
of man, has not made him more human, but has brought
out all sorts of canine qualities — scent, strength, swiftness,
and the rest — and carried each to perfection after its own
kind. Normally, evolution accentuates the existing ten-
dency, whatever it be. By whatever organ or faculty a
species is struggling to maintain itself, that organ or
faculty will be brought by the survival of the fittest tq
the finest point of perfection. ^

3. This perfection may, from any point of view but
that of success in the struggle for existence, be nothing
but d^radationi Eyes become atrophied as a useless en-
cumbrance to animals that dwell in caves. A general
d^radation of type is suitable to the parasite, and the
thick-skinned man gets on best in the World. There are
many instances of sheer deterioration in organic as in social
evolution, and in each case the lower type is that which
most successfully adapts itself to circumstances and manages
to survive. Nor, though the higher type may become
in some d^ee dominant, is the lower eliminated. The
primitive organic forms appear to have subsisted with
comparatively little alteration to the present day. At any
rate, no organism could be very much simpler than the

^ Some good diagrams illustrating this point are given by Mr. Herbert
Spencer, Principles of Biology^ Vol. I. Ch. XL p. 388.

B 2


4 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

lowest Rhizopods, which must either have remaned nearly
unchanged through many gtological periods, or represent
a process of degradation equal in extent and scope to that
of their previous evolution. But indeed there is nothing
in the general principles of Evolution to imply the necessity
of perpetual change. The fundamental fact of Evolution
is that through differentiation multiplication becomes easy.
Ten beings requiring precisely the same food would have
much less chance of supporting themselves in a given space
than the same number feeding on different things. Thus,
if one of the ten develops a liking for food of a different

, kind, the pressure on the others is lightened, and their-
chance improved. If we apply this to variation in a
species, we see that, while its first effect will be very
adverse to the old stock, the future consequences may be
quite different. It may be that by striking out a fresh
line the variation relieves the old type from the pressure of
competition. Its reduced numbers find means of subsist-
ence again, and increase finally to their old point. Espe-<
cially in social evolution, however rapid the rate of change,
we constantly find, if we look for them, survivals of the
primitive type. The small general shop is not utterly ex-
tinguished by the mammoth store. The village cobbler
remains, even if it be only to botch the boots that are
made at a Leicester factory. So also do the Protista sur-
vive, and there is not the slightest reason to suppose that
they are passing away. Many of them indeed in the
form of disease germs wage an equal struggle with the
lords of creation. The tendency of^ evolution as a whole
is not to produce the highest type, but rather to produce
as many types as possible, filling in all the lacunae of/
organic possibility, not necessarily destroying any but
those which have not the character of their own kind in
sufficient strength. Ev^olutjonjtends to space out the types
that it suffers, to cut fliem deep and'fttie.- ^ It multiplies

1 and it defines, but it does not necessarily elevate."""

4. We have spoken already of at least one upward line
in the evolutionary tree. Can we trace this line ? Is there a
development in the true sense ? Is there progress, or the evo-
lution of a higher type ? To answer these questions, we must


I MIND AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION 5

first know what is higher and what lower. To say that the
highest thing that man knows is Mind, or Soul, or Spirit,
may be to state an axiom, or to make an assumption. If
the latter, I must, a£ any rate, for the sake of clearness
make the assumption here. Evolution "upwards *' — Ortho-
genic or, as it has been called, Aristogenic Evolution ^ — is
the growth of Mind, or of the conditions which make
Mind possible.^ Evolution in any other direction — which
we may call Doliogenic — is the growth of any other quali-
ties whatever that assist survival. The main purpose of
this work is to inquire into the character, tendency, and
scope of Orthogenic Evolution : in other words, into the
growth of mind. It will be best to say at once that we
shall not be concerned with what is called (as I think,
confusedly and inappropriately called) the ultimate nature
of Mind We shall not endeavour to trace the origin of
Mind out of something else that is not mind. So far as
its origin is concerned, we shall take it as a factor in
organic evolution, and shall content ourselves with point-
ing out certain more primitive factors of which it is the
natural development. In regard to its nature, we shall be
principally occupied, not with what Mind is felt to be by
its possessor, but rather with its operations as apparent to
an onlooker. What bearing these investigations may have
on the nature of Mind, its origin in the organic world,
or its function in the whole of things, are questions upon
which our results must speak for themselves. The origin
of Mind, in the modest sense explained, is a comparatively
small portion of our subject. We shall be more occupied
with its evolution, not in the sense of its origin, but in the
sense of that unrolling of its full nature which is what evo-
lution most strictly means. If Mind is the highest thing,*
Orthogenic Evolution must consist in the unfolding of all
that there is of latent possibility in Mind, the awakening
of its powers, the development of its scope. It will be
well to take a preliminary view of this development.

* By Mr. Sutherland, Origin and Growth of the Moral Instinct^ Vol. I.
p. 29. The antithetic word used by him is Dologenic, which suggested
to me by assonance the ^uite different Doliogenic.

' Taking these conditions into account we shall be able to substitute
a more comprehensive definition at a later stage.


6 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

5. Mind, as we are to deal with it, is known by its
functions. The function which modern philosophy seized
upon as expressing the vital essence of Mind was that of
bringing things together so that they have a bearing upon
one another. Where there is mind there is order and
system, correlation and proportion^ a harmonising of forces,
and an interconnection of parts. The organism which is
gifted with intelligence shows it by arranging its actions
on a certain plan. It adapts means to ends, which is one
sort of correlation, and in so doing it perhaps brings a
past experience to bear, interpreting a perception, for
example, by memory ; and this is another sort of corre-
lation. Its scheme of action may include the good of its
young, or its mate, or its friends, along with its own, and
this is again another sort of correlation. In proportion as
its acts tend to promote the same end, its conduct may be,
termed organised, and its several actions correlated. And
the organisation, as we have just seen, may include several
individuals, a pair of mates, a community, or conceivably
a whole species.

Of "organised" action it may be said — with certdn
reservations to be explained lower down — ^that it is in-
telligent. Unorganised action is unintelligent. Where
there is no mind at work — again with the same reserva-
tions — ^action is random, blind, isolated, conflicting. What
is done is done on the impulse of the moment, and not as
a means to an end. Past experience, however much in
point, is not used in interpreting perception ; while, as
between different people, if they are not of one mind,
their purposes, however well planned for the good of each,
tend to thwart one another. In the latter case, which is
important for our purposes, there is mind — a mind in each
individual — but there is no mind which comprehends the
ends of all in a single plan, and makes of that plan its
purpose.

J 6. Where minds differ is in organising power — that is, in
comprehensiveness or in scope. The dog who begs for
his dinner acts, to all appearance, intelligently. He adjusts
means to ends, and correlates a simple action with its
immediate result. So also does a statesman who drafts a


I MIND AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION 7

clause in a Bill, or an engineer who decides on strengthen-
ing a girder. In each case there is a certain correlation. ^
Actions are fitted together so that they form a connected
whole, or an intelligible plan. The difference is partly in
the scope of the plan, partly in the method of its con-
struction. The dog performs a single action with a view
to an immediate gratification. The man, whether states-
man or engineer, has to deal with a problem which it
would perhaps fill many pages even to formulate ; and, in
adjusting each detail, has to think out a series of compli-
cated interactions, lest in filling a void at one place he may
disturb equilibrium somewhere else. If we turn to the
data by which dog and man are guided, we find a similar
result, of analogy and of contrast. The dog was tndned
to b^ ; that is, he learnt that by begging he obtained
food. When he applies the lesson, and b^s of his own
accord, he connects this experience with his present
needs, brings it to bear on his present action. The
man also correlates experiences, but he has a thousand
and one data to take into account. A great propor-
tion of them may rest, not on his -own observation,
bat on the testimony of others, and he has to work
them up in all manner of ways, to reconstruct and
to calculate, before they can serve his purpose. There
is the same process of interconnecting distinct facts at
work, but as the interconnection is immeasurably broader
in its scope, so it is infinitely more subtle and intricate
in its methods.

The growth of mind in life is, then, manifested in the
wider and more subtle interconnection of what is otherwise
separate and even inconsistent. The rise of reason is a
swelling harmony which gradually subdues discord, and
uses it to its own ends. To the true rationalism the
supreme reason is no dry pedant living apart and blighting
the free spontaneous life of impulse, but the animating
spirit that interpenetrates experience and gives to its other-
wise scattered fragments new and harmonious meaning.
Aristotle,^ with much quaint nobility of phrase, has de-
scribed the inner harmony of the man in whom the real
» E/A. Nic, IX. 4.


8 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

or thinking self^ is supreme, how he "agrees with him-
self,** and " feels with his own joys and sorrows, because
the same thing is at all times pleasant or painful to him,
and not one thing at one time and another at another,**
since with him is no variableness neither shadow of turn-
ing. Modern thinkers ^ have worked out in some detail
this correspondence between the " inner harmony " of the
moral or practical reason, and the "outer harmony'* of
man's relations in society. Both within the soul and in
the relations between men, reason, as her sway extends,
harmonises, correlates, and connects. The clash of wills
is subdued, without loss of vigour or of personality, in
a common will. The experience, not merely of the in-
dividual but of the race, is brought to bear on the
problems which the race must solve.

7. At this point it will naturally be urged that, after
all, things are not, in the absence of reason, as anarchic as
might appear from our argument. If the lower animals
do not act from purpose, they still behave in a perfectly
determinate manner, and in the way best suited to their
needs. The singing of the birds or the play of the butter-
fly is no mere frivolity, but is serious courtship. Even '
the kitten that seems to be amusing itself with a ball of
string is really preparing, after the fashion that Nature has
provided, for the serious business of hunting mice. In
short in the brute creation Instinct replaces intelligence
as the correlating or unifying principle in life. On the
basis of instinct, means are adapted to ends, food is ob-
tained, danger avoided, the young cared for, and long con-
nected trains of action, like the nest-building of birds or in-
sects, carried out with undeviating persistence. And not only
does instinct adapt means to ends, but, it may be further
urged, in so doing it uses the very same means which we
have dwelt upon as the peculiar property of intelligence.
For on any theory of Evolution it is the past experience
of the species which determines the instinctive reactions of
the individual. Just as in human life the arts develop

* TA btaPOTiriK69^—en€p iKoaroi €lvai doictt.

* See particularly Prof. Alexander, Moral Order and Progress^
p. 117, &c.


1 MIND AS A FACTOR IN EVOLUTION 9

from stage to stage as new experiments are made and
found successful, so in the animal world slight variations
which turn out well are preserved. The physical structure
which made them possible is handed on, and becomes the
basis from which a fresh start can be made. The struc-
ture of eye, wing, beak, and claw that make perfect the
swoop and pounce of the falcon are the result of countless
ancestral experiences in the course of which the structure
which made some slight approach to this point of per-
fection prevailed over others, and prevailed more surely
the more nearly it reached its goal.

Thus, it may be said, in instinct as determined by natural \
selection we have a correlating principle that governs all
life, and what more could intelligence do ? It draws on
all the past experience of the species, and beyond this
whither can intelligence go for its data? In one sense.
Intelligence, even in the highest form in which we know
it, certainly does much less. Its scope is not yet so wide
nor its hold so firm. But the whole process of Orthogenic
Evolution consists in the gradual replacement of instinct by
reason, and it is the final goal of reason to do precisely
what is ascribed to Instinct above — ^to bring all the ex-
perience of the race to bear in organising the whole life of
the race.

That instinct is a basis for the adjustment and coordi-
nation of action unsurpassed in its own way we cannot
deny. And along with instinct we must here class all that
belongs to the hereditary structure of the organism — a
wider conception than that of instinct in the strict sense.
That reason is something higher than instinct, that intelli-
gent correlation stands above adjustment issuing directly
from inherited physical structure, we must continue for
the present to assume. The sequel will have much to do
with these two methods of adaptation, with their contrast
in idea, and their subtle interweaving in reality. I hope
that it may also in some degree justify the assumption
here made.

8. Our object then will be to trace the main stages of
orthogenic evolution, which we have provisionally identified'
with the evolution of Mind. Not that we seek to unfold


lo MIND IN EVOLUTION ch. i

the character of Mind as it develops in its entirety. Our
task is the less impracticable one of seeking to indicate the
main line of its development. This we shall attempt to
do by considering its generic function in organic life and
evolution, and distinguishing certain principal stages into
which the development of that function falls. The generic
function we have already seen to be the adjustment of
action to the ends of the individual or of the spedes, based
upon a correlation of past experience, present circumstances,
and future possibilities. To see how this correlation
develops in method, in scope, in power, and in promise,
will be our principal object. How far we are justified in
making it the measure of mental development, the result
must show.

Meanwhile we have seen that there are other methods
of correlation and adjustment than those of intelligence —
methods contrasted in their character, but closely inter-
woven in their working. To get a just conception of the
distinctive nature of intelligence, these methods must be
examined as a preliminary.


CHAPTER II

ORGANIC ADAPTABILITY

I. The adaptation of behaviour to the requirements of
an organism may be intelligent or instinctive, but neither
intelligence nor instinct, in the ordinary use of the terms,
explsdn all cases of adaptation. A measure of adaptability
is the common character of all living organic matter. We
find it in plants no less than in animals, in Protozoa no
less than m Mammals. This adaptability gives to the
re-actions of organisms an appearance of purpose which, it
should be noted at the outset, is commonly explained by
physiologists as appearance only. The prevailing view is
that the white blood-corpuscle which makes its way through
the blood to the bacteria which it is about to devour is as
certainly moved by mechanical forces, if we could only
detect them, as the red corpuscle which is carried along
passively in the blood-stream. The waving of the cilia,
or delicate threads which proceed from the lining of the
windpipe, and by a constant upward swish sweep away any
chance foreign body from the approaches to the lungs, is
held no more spontaneous than the alternate bending and
recovery of the long grass in the wind. We can tell what
it is that bends the grass. We do not at present know
what moves the cilia. It is no massive outer force ; it is
a series of molecular, presumably chemical, changes. But
physiolc^ists for the most part agree in the hypothesis —
which it is well to remember is no more than a hypothesis
— ^that if we knew all about these changes, we should find
them to be only very complicated results of the same set


12 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

of physical laws in accordance ip^th which the grass bows
before the wind.

It is not necessary for our purposes to investigate this
question. We may be content to take the facts of organic
adaptability as we find them, and form from them a concep-
tion of what the organism can do. If we assume that the
prevailing physiological conception is correct, and that the
organism is in fact a cunningly contrived machine, we
may remember that every machine has a function and
character of its own. It is composed of parts which,
taken by themselves, are common to many machines, and
work in accordance with highly general laws, yet in their
combination make up a machine which may be quite in-
dividual, and work in a way peculiar to itself. The
machine as a whole may draw a train, or spin cotton, and
any one, an onlooker or a purchaser, may be allowed to ask
what it does without asking how it is built. Precisely this
is our business with the organism. If the organism is a
machine, if it is made up of parts each of which can be
found also in the inorganic world, and acts in accordance
with the very same laws which prevail in that sphere, still
the combination of these parts may be distinctive, and the
work it does may be peculiar. It may be to evolve car-
bonic acid, or it may be to produce poetry. We may be
allowed to inquire into the character of its work, and even
into the way in which it does it, without forming a theory
as to the structure of the machine.

2. The normal life of any organism from highest to
lowest is a process of unceasing change. It involves a con-
stant interchange of substance with the outer world, an
equally constant metabolism or transformation within itself
of the substances which it takes up from without, and a
no less constant transformation of energy. Such processes
are common to all organisms. If we spoke only of the
higher forms, many other activities could of course be
added. Throughout this unceasing process of change,
which differentiates it from inanimate matter, the organism
preserves its own identity as clearly as the unchanging rock.
This feat of preserving itself in the midst of change could
not be accomplished as it is in the midst of ever varying


II ORGANIC ADAPTABIUTY 13

drcumstances, unless there were a certsun equilibrium point,
as we may call it, which the organism is always striving to
m^ntain. It is true that the equilibrium is a moving
equilibrium. The process of rapid growth in youth, of
slow change during maturity, and of gradual decay ending
in death (or internal transformation ending in fission), is
of course the normal orbit of every organism. The equili-
brium point moves along this orbit, and the momentary
changes of which we speak are so many oscillations about
the equilibrium point as it moves. What immediately
concerns us is that every organism is so built, whether on
mechanical principles or not, that every deviation from the
equilibrium point sets up a tendency to return to it. This
is true both of the nornud and of the abnormal circum-
stances that aflFect the organism. A few illustrations may
make this general statement a little clearer.

The normal breathing of the healthy man serves among
other things to maintain a certain balance between the
demand and supply of oxygen within the body. In
the alternate expansion and contraction of the lungs we
have a simple instance of osdilation about a mean point,
in which by whatever mechanism the deviation in one
direction itself tends to bring about tne contrary motion.
Under certain circumstances, normal breathing does not
supply oxygen in sufficient quantities. If the atmosphere is
d^cient in oxygen, or if by violent exercise the muscles
consume more than their due share, we begin to pant, to
take deeper breaths, and take them more quickly. The
same action has the effect of eliminating the extra quantity
of carbonic acid^ evolved by the muscles during violent
exercise. The organism makes an effort to maint^n as
nearly as possible its normal state.

Still more instructive for our purposes is the mainten-
ance of an almost even temperature by all warm-blooded
animals. In man, the temperature of the blood is main-
tained, no matter what the temperature of the surrounding
air, at 98V !**• I'he fluctuations around this point

' It seems doubtful, however, whether the carbonic acid has a direct
cflfect. See Foster, Text Book of Physiology^ II. pp. 632 and 634, sixth
edition, 1895.


14 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

during health are so narrow that any marked deviation is
at once taken as a symptom of illness. Without going
into detail, it is sufficient to say that this balance is msdn-
tained principally by two mechanisms, the vasomotor
system, and the perspiration. The vasomotor nerves
govern the calibre of the small arteries which supply the
surface of the body with blood, dilating or constricting
them as the case may be. The application of something
cold to the skin acting through these nerves causes con-
striction of the blood-vessels. The result is that less
blood comes to the surface, and as it is the blood that
brings the heat the skin is cooled, but the body as a
whole gives off less heat than usual. Exactly the opposite
result follows from the application of heat. Now the
small arteries are dilated, the surface is flushed with
blood, and heat is rapidly lost. Similarly, the increase
of heat again acting through a nervous mechanism throws
the sweat glands into activity, and the consequent
evaporation keeps the body cool.

" The working of this heat-regulating mechanism is well seen
in the case of exercise. Since every muscular contraction gives
rise to heat, exercise must increase for the time being the pro-
duction of heat ; yet the bodily temperature rarely rises so much
as a degree centigrade, if at all. By exercise the respiration is
quickened, and the loss of heat by the lungs increased. The
circulation of blood is also quickened, and the cutaneous vascular
areas becoming dilated, a larger amount of blood passes through
the skin. Added to this, the skin perspires freely. Thus a large
amount of heat is lost to the body, sufficient to neutralise the
addition caused by the muscular contraction, the increase which
the more rapid flow of blood through the abdominal organs might
tend to bring about being more than sufficiently counteracted by
their smaller supply for the time. The sense of warmth, which
is felt during exercise in consequence of the flushing of the skin,
is in itself a token that a regulative cooling is being carried on.
In a similar way the application of external cold or heat defeats its
own ends, either partially or completely.** ^

It is merely a familiar instance of the same well adapted

rhythm, that work makes us hungry, that being hungry

we find something to eat, that eating it makes us able to

work again, and thereby earn our next meal. It is a more

* Foster, op. cit. Part II. p. 849.


II ORGANIC ADAPTABILITY 15

spedal application of the same fact that the muscle which
we especially exercise gets an extra supply of blood and
grows in proportion.

3. Thus both in general and in special ways, the normal
healthy life is a process of unceasing oscillation about an
imaginary equilibrium point, departure from which tends
of itself to set up processes which take the organism back
again. The same feature of organic action appears in a
more curious shape in more or less abnormal life. A
machine can be made to regulate its own action within
certain limits. Thus, in the steam engine, the forward
thrust of the jnston opens and shuts vsilves by which the
backward thrust is at once brought about. Here there is
perhaps a parallel to the automatic rhythm of breathing, or
of the heart's beat. More than that, by the device of the
^* governor " a steam engine can regulate its own available
energy in accordance with the work required of it. There
is a close analogy here to the laboured breathing of hard
exercise where more oxygen is required. But I do not
think that any machine can repair itself when its own
structure is in some way injured. This, within limits,
every organism can do. Even the human body can repair
its skin and its broken bones. This repairing means that
in the healthy organism a lesion sets up processes which
tend to restore the normal condition. Let us first observe
the d^ree and kind of adaptation involved in the healing
of a broken bone. The spongy substance of the long
bones in the higher vertebrates is —

^ . . . . arranged on a similar mechanical principle to that ot
arched structures in general ; it is composed of numerous fine bony
plates, so arranged as to withstand the greatest amount of tension
and pressure, and to igive the utmost firmness with a minimum
expenditure of material. But the direction, position, and strength
of these bony plates are by no means congenital or determined in
advance : they depend on circumstances. If the bone is broken
and heals out of the straight, the plates of the spongy tissue be-
come rearranged, so as to lie in the new direction of greatest
tension and pressure ; thus they can adapt themselves to changed


circumstances.


wi


1 Prof. Weismann, Romanes' Lecture^ p. 15, quoted by Mr. Lloyd
Morgan ; HMi and Instinct^ p. 313.


i6 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

But it is among the lowest organisms that ** Regeneration'*
performs the most remarkable feats. As long as one
condition is maintained, a Protozoon may be not merely
injured, but divided into several pieces, and yet each piece
will, in a few hours, grow into the entire animal again,
dwarfed perhaps, but otherwise, to all appearance, healthy
and content. The condition is that each fragment should
contain a portion of the " nucleus " of the cell in addition
to some of the surrounding protoplasm. If this condition
is not observed ; if, for example, a portion of the proto-
plasm is cut off by itself, it retains for some while activities
as similar as may be to those of the entire animal, but it
shows no power of reconstruction or recuperation, and in
the end it perishes. But a StentOTj for example, may be
divided into twenty-seven parts, and the twenty-seventh
fraction may, if containing a fragment of nucleus in its
protoplasm, live to become a complete Stentor agdn.^ The
remarkable nature of this process is best illustrated by the
diagram on the opposite page, which I take from Prof.
E. B. Wilson's work, l!he Cell in Development and
Inheritance^ p. 250.

It will be seen that, however much the fragments differ,
they end by reproducing the entire organism, the repro-
ductive process having in each case the same equilibrium
point at which waste and repair balance one another and
growth ceases.

Equally remarkable is the tendency of a mutilated
embryo to develop into a perfect animal. When the
fertilised ovum divides into two distinct cells, it would be
natural to suppose that each one of these was destined to
develop into one half of the body, and it might be inferred
that if one were destroyed, the other must either perish or
develop into one half of the embryo only. But it is found,
in point of fact, that there are further possibilities. In
some cases the half embryo is formed first, and the missing
half is regenerated from it later on. In other cases the
half-embryo formation is found only in the earliest stages,
while in others again it is entirely suppressed. Thus, to
illustrate the first case, Roux destroyed one of the two
* V^ilson, The Cell in Development and Inheritance^ p. 249.


II


ORGANIC ADAPTABILITY


17


" cleavage cells " into which the ovum of a frog divides,
and found that the other grew into an embryo which
wholly lacked one half of the body. The missing half
could, however, grow out of the existing half at a later
stage.^ For the second case we may quote experiments on


Regeneration in the Unicellular Animal Stentor [Gruber].
A, Animal divided into three pieces, each containing a fragment of the nucleus.
B. The three fragments«Jshortly afterwards. C, The three fragments after
twenty-four hours, each regenerated to a perfect animal.


the ova of sea-urchins, which divide first into two and
then into four cells. If at either stage these cells are
isolated, they continue to segment

"as if still forming part of an entire larva, and give rise to a
half (or quarter) blastula. The opening soon closes, however, to
form a small complete blastula, and the resulting gastrula and
Pluteus larva is a perfectly formed dwarf of only hdf (or quarter)
the normal size," *

1 Verwom, General Physiology^ trans. F. S. Lee, 1899, P« 534-
« Wilson, op, cit, p. 308.

C


i8 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Lastly, in Amphioxus the isolated blastomere cells pro-
duced by division of the ovum segment from the beginning
like a smaller ovum.^

One might say, looking at these cases alone, that the
embryo was determined to do its duty, and grow up true
to type, whatever happened. Or, dropping metaphor, one
might infer the existence of internal forces in the germ
cells absolutely determining the lines of growth, irre-
spectively of the material supplied to them. This infer-
ence, however, would not be altogether sound. Both re-
generation and development are largely conditioned by
external circumstances. Thus a Tuiularia has the very
useful faculty of growing a new head, in case it should
have the misfortune to be decapitated. But this regenera-
tion can only go forward in water, and if the decapitated
end is buried in the sand, it is the other end which
develops the head.^ Either end of the worm is able to
grow a head with the help of water, neither end without
it. So again, if growth were fixed by internal causes
alone, a tadpole must necessarily develop into a frog when
the time comes. But if at that point in its career a tad-
pole is prevented from leaving the water, it retains its tail
and gills while increasing in size." Similarly the crus-
tacean Artemia salina assumes two specifically difiFerent
forms, according as it is brought up in sea water or in
fresh water.* Thus while on the one side we find the
organism clinging, as it were, to its type, in spite of
adverse circumstances, we find it, on the other, departing
from its type to suit special circumstances. The growth
and maintenance of the organism are due, not merely to a
complex balance of internal forces, but also to compli-
cated reactions between these forces in their successive
phases and the forces of the environment.

4. What appears to be the distinguishing mark of an
organism is that, through all these complications, it main-
tains its hold on the balance of forces necessary to its
existence. It is not merely that its functions run smoothly
in the particular groove marked out for them by its struc-

» Wilson, op. cit. p. 309. ' lb, p. 325.

' Vcrwom, p. 182. * lb, p. 183.


II ORGANIC ADAPTABILITY 19

ture, but that, within tolerably wide limits, it can survive
accidents, which cause a considerable departure from its
normal course, and either struggle back to the typical life
of the species again, or effect some compromise with cir-
cumstances by which life is maintained in some more or
less modified form. Adaptability of this kind does not
seem to be found in the inorganic world. A stone m^n-
tains its existence for centuries, it may be, but maintains it
unchanged. If the stone could be said to have a life, it
would be one of dull mechanical persistence in the estab-
lished fact. If it is scratched, dinted, or broken, it remains
scratched, dinted, or broken, and there is no more to be
said. There is nothing comparable to the recuperation of
the living being.

k may very well be true that, if we take the common
characteristics of organised beings one by one, and look about
us for comparisons, we can find something to match each
one severally in the inanimate world. Thus the tendency
to regain the equilibrium point is common to mechanical
arrangements, like the pendulum, and to all bodies so far
as they are elastic. The analogy is real so far as it goes.
In one particular way, the elastic body can be made to
deviate from, and then will tend to return to, an equilibrium
point. But the tendency is limited to a single kind of
reaction ; it is called into being only by the application of
an external force, to which the reaction is strictly pro-
portioned, and the existence of the object as an elastic
body does not consist in, nor depend upon, a state of con-
stant activity in oscillating about the point of equilibrium.
It is possible, again, to taJce up those points of difference,
and urge that each can be matched in the inorganic world.
The pendulum, for example, is in fact constantly oscil-
lating about the equilibrium point, and its existence as a
pendulum may not unfairly be said to depend upon its so
doing. But the continued motion of the pendulum de-
pends upon an outside force. It has no power of accumu-
lating afresh the energy which it loses at each swing. It
is not like the organism, self-maintaining. That is to
say, it does not of itself find the means of maintaining the
process which constitutes its existence.

c 2


20 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

This last point of contrast is, indeed, challenged by
Dr. Verworn,^ who compares an organism with a steam
engine in its need for being supplied with energy from
without. The steam engine is supplied with fuel, and
this, he urges, is analogous to the supply of energy to the
organism, through its food. But here, again, the analogy
seems only to carry us a part of the way. The steam
engine does not go to look for coal when it runs short, nor
would it dream, as the engineer has dreamt, of substituting
oil in case coal were not available.^ The case of machinery
is, indeed, not a little instructive. Human ingenuity has
succeeded in mimicking one form of organic activity after
another. Up to a certain point, the steam engine can be
made self-acting. We have already drawn attention to the
opening and closing of the valves by the piston as com-
parable to the rhythm of respiration. In speaking of the
pendulum, we might have referred to the " compensating "

» Op. ciU p. 123.'

^ A similar criticism applies to an ingenious example adduced by Dr.
Verwom to show that continuous metabolism, by which a body is con-
tinually being built up from certain materials which are as constantly
broken down and excreted, is not peculiar to living organisms.

" A simple example of this is found in the behaviour of nitric acid in
the production of concentrated sulphuric acid. If nitric acid be mixed
with sulphurous anhydride, which is obtained in the manufacture of
sulphuric acid by roasting sulphur ore, the sulphurous acid withdraws
oxyp^en from the nitric acid and passes over into sulphuric acid, while the
nitric acid becomes nitrous acia. If the constant entrance of fresh air
and water be provided, the nitric acid is constantly reformed from the
nitrous acid and gives a part of its oxygen again to new quantities of
sulphurous acid, so that the molecule of nitric acid is continually being
alternately broken down with loss of oxygen and built up with absorption
of oxygen. In this manner, with the same quantity of nitric acia, an
unlimited quantity of sulphurous acid can be changed into sulphuric
acid." Op. cit p. 125.

This continuous process can be maintained under certain uniform con-
ditions. An organism will maintain a number of such processes at once,
digesting, respiring, secreting, and at the same time adapting its actions
to the acquisition of new material, and all under more or less varying
conditions of the outer world. Could the nitric acid adapt itself to a
change of diet? Of course, the adaptability of the organism is also
limited. But the point seems to be this : — If we change the conditions
which affect the nitric acid, we shall inevitably increase or decrease its
bulk and the rapidity of its formation, and this in direct proportion to the
change in the conditions. If we change the conditions affecting an
organism, it will, up to a certain limit, adapt itself to the change, and
after, perhaps, an interval of disturbance, appear very much as it was
before. Its bulk, for example, .will not uniformly increase or decrease in
direct proportion to its food supply.


II ORGANIC ADAPTABILITY 21

arrangement whereby it is made to adjust itse[f so nicely
to differences of temperature that its length remains
approximately constant, though every portion of it ex-
pands. Here is an adaptation as remarkable in its way as
the vasomotor adjustments which maintain the even tem-
perature of the warm-blooded animal. If finally we were
to take refuge in the uniformity of machinery, and con-
trast it with the infinite capacity of the organism for ad-
justing itself to the changing details of its surroundings,
which are never twice the same, if we urged that machinery
must always turn out the same pattern, and cannot
achieve individuality, our last card of this suit is trumped
by the linotype. No two consecutive lines of a book or a
newspaper contain the same number of words of the same
size. Hence the " spaces " required to bring the line to
the right length differ from line to line in a manner which
it is absolutely impossible to predict. There is no rule
and no uniformity in the matter. The human compositor
puts in the spaces as he sees that they are needed, and one
would say that this was a point at which the service of the
human eye could not be dispensed with. But, by a very
simple arrangement, the same end is achieved by the lino
type, and with equal accuracy.

In these and no doubt in many other ways that might
be specified the machine is made to perform functions
which in this or that feature recall the behaviour of a living
organism. Such examples are instructive both in their
success and in their failure. For the condition of success
is a combination of mechanical forces expressly designed
to meet the end in view, and this suggests that whatever
the creative force that brings the organism into being, the
organic structure is a combination of parts determined in a
general way by the functions which they will have to per-
form in the structure as a whole. They are so arranged
as to maintain a certain balance, to regain it from within
tolerably wide limits of variation, and even to re-adjust
the prindple of the balance itself (i.e., to modify the
organic structure), if this is demanded by the environment.
Any single characteristic in this self-maintaining process
can probably be paralleled from the organic world ; but


22 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

whether the process as a whole can be paralleled is quite
another question. It seems rather from the illustra-
tions I have given that the thing that resembles an organ-
ism in one respect differs in another, and that where this
difference is overcome a new one breaks out.

5. In the most fundamental feature of self-mdnten-
ance, it may be doubted whether any inanimate substance
can be fairly matched against the living organism. It is by
suitable response to stimulus in the main that organisms
preserve themselves. Now the excitability of living tissue
differs from the response of an elastic spring to pressure
in that the energy evolved in the response bears no definite
relation to the energy of the stimulus. It is interesting to
see how Dr. Verworn deals with this point.

** It can be said in general that irritability is the capacity of a
body to react to an external influence by some kind of change in
its condition, in which the extent of the reaction stands in no
definite proportion to the extent of the influence. As a matter
of fact, irritability, or excitability, is a property of all living sub-
stance, whether the organism responds to the external influence
by the production of definite substances, as with secreting gland-
cells, or definite forms of energy, as with muscle-cells, phosphor-
escent cells, and electric cells, or whether it responds by depression
or even standstill of its vital activities. But irritability is not the
exclusive property of organisms, for lifeless substances are likewise
irritable and respond to external influences by definite changes,
e,g.j by the production of definite substances or of energy, in
which process the extent of the production by no means corre-
sponds always to the extent of the external impulse. The clearest
examples of such cases are afforded by explosive substances. By
a slight shock nitro-glycerine is decomposed into water, carbonic
acid, oxygen and nitrogen, the process being accompanied by a
powerful evolution of energy ; in other words, nitro-glycerine,
responds to an external influence by an enormous production of
energy and a change of material. Hence irritability is not an
absolute sign of difference between or^nisms and inorganic
bodies, and it is seen that a fundamental contrast between the
two is afforded no more by their dynamical than by their structural
and genetic relations." ^

Here again then an analogy can be found, but here again
the analogy does not carry us the whole way. After the
1 Op. cit p. 124,


II ORGANIC ADAPTABIUTY 23

exploaon the nitro-glycerine is gone once for all. Its
identity is lost. It is dissipated into component parts.
But the muscle which has violently contracted in response
to a slight tickling of the skin remains as good a muscle as
before. Doubtless it has lost a certain amount of potential
energy, and its cells have undergone a chemical change
parallel to that experienced by the nitro-glycerine. But
there is the muscle sound as ever, and already actively
engaged in assimilating new substances from the blood
which will restore the proteids oxidised in the contraction. - j^ i^
The organism in short in letting energy loose still main- ^ ^^^^
tains itself, and the letting loose of the energy is ordinarily \,J^
a means of maintaining it. The oi]?anism is apparently
the only thing that maintsdns itself by the liberation in
response to a stimulus of its own energy.* In other words,
the liberation of energy is controlled by a principle of
organisation or correlation of changes whereby fresh sub-
stance or fresh energy is stored up which will bring the
organism back to the very same condition in which it was
found before the liberation of energy took place. The
example of the muscle will recur to the reader as illustrat-
ing what I mean.

6. An organism then, as we are led to concdve it, may
be roughly described as a whole consisting of parts each of
which is conditioned in its behaviour, and even often in its
existence, by its relation to the remainder. These relations
are such that as the parts interact with one another and
with the outside world they tend to undergo a regular
series of changes which constitute the development of the
oi^anism from birth to death. The general course of the
development is to this extent fixed by the original consti-
tution of the organism. But as the surroundings with
which it is brought into contact are infinitely various, what
may be called the typical course of development is a purely
imaginary line from which the life history of any organism
diverges at every moment in greater or less degree. But
the forces that keep its various parts together are such
that within tolerably wide limits it can accommodate itself

' I owe this point to some remarks made to me some years ago by Sir
J. Burdon Sanderson.


24 MIND IN EVOLUTION ch. ii

to changes in the forces acting on it, msdntaining its
existence, and even its general character, unchanged in their
despite. This is achieved by an appropriate modification
of its action, a change at one point for example compen-
sating a change at another, whereby under novel circum-
stances, or perhaps with grave modification of some^art of
the organism itself, the plan of the whole is as nearly
constant as may be. If we sum all this up by saying that
the living organism is distinguished by its tendency to
maintain itself through process and against change we do not
mean to ascribe purpose to the physiological organism as
such, but merely to express the relation between the action
of the organism and its consequences. Were we deter-
mined to ascribe the facts of organic adaptability to a
mind, it would have to be a mind possessed exclusively
with the effort to maintain the organic equilibrium from
moment to moment, a mind immersed in the physical
processes constituting the life of the organism, and limited
in its scope to the adjustment of each successive vital
change.


CHAPTER III

REFLEX ACTION

I. The organism msdntains itself by continual adapta-
tions. There is adaptation in every process of life, inward
as well as outward, in absorption, secretion, respiration, no
less than in those movements of the limbs which for the
observer constitute pre-eminently the actions of an organism.
These actions, however, whereby it modifies its relations to
other organisms and the outer world generally, form one
case, and for us the most important case, of the exercise of
its powers of adaptation.

There are indeed actions which do not show any sign
of being adapted to the drcumstances in which the
organism is placed. That is to say, they apparently
serve no useful end. At any rate they do not make any
beneficial change in the relation of the organism to its
surroundings. Among these are probably to be ranked
all impulsive actions — actions, that is, which " are caused
without previous peripheral excitement exclusively by
the nutritive and other organic processes that go on in
the motor centres of the lowest rank." ^ More briefly,
an impulsive movement is due to purely internal
changes. Just as the kettle goes on quietly simmering
till presently the lid lifts and the. water boils over, so in a
nerve centre, or for that matter in any mass of protoplasm,
internal changes may go on, while for the outward

* Preyer, I. p. 196. The term is so used by Preyer and Verwom. It is
not quite satis&ctory, as it has another use. Perhaps " sporadic" would
be better, but it might be taken to include indeterminate reflexes.


26 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

observer all is peace, till suddenly a culminating point is
reached, and a limb or the whole body is thrown into
decided, perhaps sudden and violent, movement. Im-
pulsive movements are found in the foetal life of the
higher animals. Movements of the chick in the egg from
the fifth day are reported by Preyer,* and according to the
same observer the ** outstretching and bending of the arms
and legs " of new-born children is " nothing else than a
continuation of the intra-uterine movements.* The aim-
less waving about of arms and legs noticeable up to the
third quarter of the first year are referred by him to the
same class.' Actions of this class, according to Dr. Ver-
worn, make up a considerable part of the life of Protista.

" A Stentor draws itself suddenly together, stretches itself out,
draws in again after a short time, may remain stretched out a
long time without the slightest contraction, till presently it gives
vent to a whole series of contractions at irregular intervals.**

There is no appearance of purpose in these irregular
movements, and Dr. Verworn* points out that by im-
perceptible degrees they pass over into periodical, that is to
say, automatic movements. Automatic movement indeed,
as we see it in the pulsating vacuole among Protista, and
among higher animals in the beating of the heart, or the
action of the respiratory centre, is a development and
adaptation of impulsive action to special requirements of
the organism. It is due to the interaction of internal
forces (though it may be modified by outer influences)
but it is repeated at regular intervals, or rather, like the
beating of the heart, it forms a connected cycle of events
each of which introduces the next, till at length the cycle
is completed and starts afresh.

To understand both impulsive and automatic move*
ments, we must bear in mind that in any living cell
chemical changes are constantly going on. The proto-
plasm of the cell is building itself up out of materials

* Preyer, I. p. 201. * Ih, p. 205.

' /^* p- 207. It may be, of course, that these motions have a casual
good effect as exercise, but this would not exclude them from the scope
of our definition.

^ ProHsten Siudien^ p. 142.


Ill REFLEX ACTION 27

supplied by the surrounding medium. This is the
assimilative process. At the same time an opposite
process of dissimilation is going on, in which the con-
stituents of the protoplasm form new combinations, and
ultimately become waste products of which the cell gets
rid. These changes involv^R^ a constant molecular
movement?^ the cell is never in a condition of stable
equilibrium. But the outer results may be very different,
according as the internal changes do or do not tend to
balance one another. If they merely oscillate slightly
about the point of equilibrium, there will be no outward
sign of change. If there is a slow but decided gain of one
set of forces in one part of the cell, an amoeboid move-
ment will result. The cell will slowly put out a pro-
jection or " pseudopodium " in one direction, or draw in
another from an opposite quarter. If the nature of the
molecular change is to produce a large mass of unstable
chemical compounds in a certain part, then the effect of
the final touch will be to " explode " this mass, and a
sudden and violent contraction follows. In the higher
organisms, besides the interaction of molecules in each
cell, there is the interaction of many distinct cells, and
indeed distinct organs, to be taken into account. The
restless movements of the infant may be due to changes
in the nerve centres, but they may also arise from a
thousand and one different stimuli from the muscles,
joints, digestive organs or any part of the body, and
mdeed of other things with which the body comes into
contact. It thus becomes impossible to draw a clear
and certain line between impulsive actions of this class
and the lowest kind of reflexes, with which we shall
have presently to deal. It remains only to add that
in the case of automatic actions the internal changes of
which we speak appear to have become regulated, pre-
sumably under the influence of natural selection, so as to
follow one another in a fixed order and at a determinate
speed. There are the same processes of building up and
breaking down, and they give rise in the same way to con-
traction and expansion, but they have become more
accurately adjusted to one another in their proportions, so


28 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

that each contraction is of measured length, force, and
speed, and is succeeded at a fixed interval by an equally
determinate movement of expansion.

2. Reflex Action.

Hitherto we have dealt with actions resulting from
inward changes. We have now to consider actions
brought about by the influences of the environment.
All organisms may be aflFected by the direct contact of
outer things with their surface, and most organisms, except
the lowest, can be affected in other ways as well as
through their organs of sense. Such an affection is called
a stimulus, and the resulting change in the organism a
response. It is of course principally by its responses to
stimuli that the organism succeeds in adjusting its
behaviour towards changes in the outer world in a way
favourable to its own existence. If the mouse were not
stimulated to run away by the sight of the cat, it would
not be long for this world, and if the cat were not so
excited by the sight of the mouse and of other food as to
make the movements necessary for catching, seizing, and
eating, she in her turn would starve. The most primitive
form in which response is adapted to requirements is that
in which a simple sensory stimulus calls forth a uniform
reaction on the part of the organism. Such a response is
known as a Reflex action. This is an extended usage, and
etymologically is, it must be admitted, not altogether
appropriate. The term applies strictly to animals with a
developed nervous system. In such animals the reflex act
consists of two distinct movements or processes, a sensory
or afferent process, and a motor or eflfcrent process. Thus
if one inadvertently touches a hot iron the burning of the
hand sends a wave of excitement along the sensory nerves
to some part of the central nervous system. This is the
sensory or aflferent process. From the brain descends a
back wave of excitement causing the contraction of several
muscles whereby the hand is withdrawn. This is the
efferent or motor process. The two together make up a
reflex action.

But the above definition, which corresponds to the
extended usage of the term now common, applies very


Ill REFLEX ACTION 29

clearly to the responses of many animals which have no
nervous system at all. If the long hair-like " flagellum "
of a Poteriodendron be lightly touched as it waves about
in the water, the effect is instantaneous. The waving
thread suddenly rolls itself up in a coil, while the body,
which consists of a mass of protoplasm standing on a sort
of stalk, fixed to the bottom of a miniature cup, is with-
drawn hastily to the bottom of the cup, where it lies for a
few seconds, after which it begins to rise again.^ If the
pseudopodium^-or temporary arm of protoplasm stretching
out from the cell body — of a Rhizopod, like DifHugia
urceolata, be touched with a needle it becomes wrinkled,
and if touched somewhat harder withdraws into the cell
mass.^ It is needless to multiply instances. Reflex action
in the sense of uniform response to simple stimulus is the
normal if not the only type of reaction known among the
lowest organisms.

3. If we regard only the function that it subserves in
the life of the organism, reflex action impresses us as
purposive. If we look only at the method by which it is
carried out, it impresses us as mechanical.' If something
comes straight at my face, I blink. The action is well
adapted to the purpose of protecting my eyes from the

» Vcrworn, Prot St p. 86. * lb, p. 83.

* The broad difference between the mechanical and purposive may
be expressed by saying that in a mechanical structure part acts on part
and change produces change by laws which, given the parts and the
antecedent change, cannot be modified whatever their effect. In an
intelligent plan, on the contrary, each constituent process is determined
by its relation to the End in view, and is modifiable accordingly. It
should be noted further that a machine may be constructed by an intelli-
gent mind so that the interaction of its parts is normally fitted to produce
a certain end Taking the creative mind into account, the parts and their
interaction and the resulting processes then belong to a purposive system.
There is thus an indirect correlation between the constituent process and
the end subserved, but this falls short of a direct purposive correlation,
where its contribution to the end is as such the ground on which the
process rests. The difference comes to the suiface in cases where through
some accident the machine is no longer subserving its due purpose, and
yet its parts continue to act. The part played by the human mind is taken
in the organic world, according to biological theory, by certain laws of
heredity and survival whereby the organism becomes a system of inter-
acting parts so adjusted as under normal conditions to preserve its own
life. Here again there is ultimately a certain correlation of process and
end, but even more indirect than before. See below (Ch. III. p. 42 ;
Ch. VI. p. 126).


30 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

blow. But it is unintelligent. I may know perfectly well
that the object is not going to hit me, but notwithstanding
every effort I blink. Whether itself to be regarded as
intelligent or not, reflex action proceeds independently of
the conscious intelligence of human beings. It is in many
cases both among men and animals independent of the
higher cerebral centres which are essential to intelligent
action in the ordinary sense. There are some reflexes of
which we are not conscious at all ; for example, the con-
traction of the iris under the influence of light. There are
others of which we may or may not be consdous, but
which we cannot hinder. Such are, for many people,
blinking, and probably for all people vasomotor reflexes
like blushing and growing pale. There are others which
we can interfere with in some slight degree, like breathing,
coughing, sneezing, and laughing. Others again can be
inhibited by a strong effort of will, such as weeping,
screaming, and groaning. But in all alike the conscious
intelligence seems to have nothing to do with initiating or
directing the action. The action proceeds of itself It
does not need consciousness nor the other activities of the
organism. I remember being thrown by a sudden accident
over the handles of an old-fashioned high bicycle. The
thing happened so quickly that I realised nothing about
it till I found myself on the ground. Yet I fell on my
hands, and my face and head were not touched. And the
throwing out of the hands is a complex action involving
the well adapted duly proportioned contraction of quite a
number of muscles.

4. There are certain fallacious arguments against the
mechanical conception of reflex action which it will be well
to consider. Take first the fact of adaptation. Many
reflexes among the higher animals involve very complex
co-ordination of muscular movements, a definite order and
simultaneity of contractions, a careful adjustment of the
length and vigour of each contraction, and so forth. In
this respect the higher reflexes contrast very markedly
with the simple contractions of, for example, a muscle-
nerve preparation, or the slow withdrawal of a pseudopodium
by a Rhizopod.


Ill REFLEX ACTION 31

"When the peripheral stump of a divided sciatic nerve is
stimulated with the interrupted current, the muscles of the lee
are at once thrown into tetanus, continue in the same rigid
condition during the passage of the current, and relax immediately
on the current being shut ofF. When the same current is applied
for a second only, to the skin of the flank of a brainless firog, the
leg is drawn up and the foot rapidly swept over the spot irritated,
as if to wipe away the irritation ; but this movement is a complex
one, requiring the contraction of particular muscles in a definite
sequence, with a carefully adjusted proportion between the
amounts of contraction of the individual muscles. And this com-
plex movement, this balanced and arranged series of contractions,
may be repeated more than once as the result of a single stimula-
tion of the skin. When a deep breath is caused by a dash of
cold water, the same co-ordinated and carefully arranged series of
contractions is also seen to result, as part of a reflex action, from a
simple stimulus." ^

All this, of course, only proves that the machinery, if it
is machinery, is complex, and well adjusted to its end.
Put a penny on a balance, and it weighs down the scale
by the simple action of the lever. Put it into the slot of
an automatic machine, and it produces a stick of chocolate
by I know not what complication of levers and cogs.
Complexity of adjustment does not take us out of the
region of machinery.

A second fallacious argument may be founded on the
disproportion in a reflex action between stimulus and
result.

** When we stimulate the nerve of a muscle-nerve preparation
the result, though modified in part by the condition of the muscle
and nerve, whether fresh and irritable or exhausted, for instance,
is directly dependent on the nature and strength of the stimulus."
... ^' In a reflex action, on the other hand, the movements
called forth by the same stimulus maybe in one case insignificant,
and in another violent and excessive, the result depending on the
arrangements and condition of the central portion of the reflex
mechanism. Thus the mere contact of a hair with the mucous
membrane lining the larynx, a contact which can originate only
the very slightest afferent impulses, may call forth a convulsive
fit of coughing, in which a very large number of muscles are
thrown into violent contractions; whereas the same contact of
the hair with other surfaces of the body may produce no obvious

^ Foster, I. p. 184.


32 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

effect at all. Similarly, while in the brainless but otherwise
normal frog, a slight touch on the skin of the flank will produce
nothing but a faint flicker of the underlying muscles, the same
touch on the same part of a frog poisoned with strychnia will
produce violent lasting tetanic contractions of nearly all the
muscles of the body." ^

It might be inferred from this that the reflex is, in a
sense, originated by the organism, instead of being, as in
a machine, a transformation of energy from one shape to
another. But the truth is that the stimulus is not to
be compared to the fuel which supplies the engine with its
energy, but to the touch which turns the handle and sets
accumulated enei^ free to work.

" The nerve centre may be regarded as a collection of explosive
charges ready to be discharged, and so to start eflperent impulses
along certain eflerent nerves, and these charges are so arran8;ed
and so related to certain aflperent nerves, that aflPerent impulses
reaching the centre along those nerves may in one case discharge
a few only of the charges and so give rise to feeble movements,
and in another case discharge a very large number and so give rise
to large and violent movements." *

This fundamental feature of the reflex mechanism must,
however, be kept carefully in mind in judging the true
character of certain modifications of the reflex act to which
we shall shortly come.

5. So far we have found nothing to differentiate the
reflex mechanism from any other piece of machinery.
There is a cert^n arrangement — a sense-organ, an afferent
nerve, a nerve centre consisting essentially of a more or less
complicated ramification of nerve fibres, one or more
efferent or motor nerves, and one or more muscles. Apply
a stimulus, and the machinery works. Nerves, nerve
centres and muscles are thrown into activity. As in a
machine the parts not merely act, but act together in a
prearranged harmony, the general tendency of which is to
deal with the stimulus in the way best suited to the needs
of the organism.

These last words recall us once more to the conception of
purpose, and we may now put the question thus. Is it
» Foster, I. pp. 182, 183. » Ib,^ I. p. 183.


Ill REFLEX ACTION 33

the needs of the organism that determine the action, or is
it the preformed structure ? Is the act the result of a struc-
ture that is already there, or is it adopted as a means to an
end, which is still to be realised ? Broadly speaking the
hcts leave us in no doubt as to the answer. In the typical
reflex the structure is " already there." The organism or
part of it is attuned to a cert^n kind of stimulus so as to
react to it in a special manner. It is so attuned that the
manner of reaction adopted for each stimulus is under
ordinary circumstances beneficial to the organism. Of the
structure we may perhaps say with certain reservations
that it has grown up because it is useful to the organism.
But of the particular act we must say that it is performed
not because it is useful at the present moment, but because
it is the necessary result of the action of a given stimulus
upon a given structure. Circumstances may be such that
this response does not serve the normal " purpose," but
unless these ** drcumstances " are counter stimuli acting on
the nerve centres, they have no effect. Taking this last
qualification into account, we may say that a reflex action
is a response to the present operative stimuli as such.
This differentiates it from an act of purpose. Purposive
action may also from one point of view be regarded as the
response of a structure to its surroimdings in accordance
with laws which are uniform after their kind. But here
the fundamental law is precisely that action is deto-mined
not by the immediate, perceptible surroimdings as such,
but by whatever consideration affects the attainment of the
end. Hence, far from being tied to a uniform response to
a given stimulus, purposive action deals with the whole
present situation at any moment by correlating it with any
relevant facts, however remote, finally shaping its action in
the way which, all things taken into account, will be most
likely to lead to its desired end. Hence the purposive
act is determined by its end, and it is thus to be contrasted
generically with the predetermined response of structure to
stimulus, the adjective ** predetermined " meaning that the
structure must respond to the stimuli acting upon it as
such, and cannot bring them into relation with remote but
relevant facts so as to modify its behaviour appropriately.

D


34 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

To illustrate. The blinking reflex is carried out by the
muscles of the eyelids quite independently of real danger
to the eye, and most people are unable to hinder it even if
they try. Darwin* has told us how he tried to prevent
himself from starting back when a snake struck at the
plate glass which was a perfectly safe screen. Darwin*s
intelligence grasped the truth of the situation, but his
lower motor-centres were rigidly bound to act in accord-
ance with ancestral custom. In a mammal the whole
machinery of breathing may be destroyed, but the suitable
movements of the nostrils and glottis still continue if their
connection with the medulla remans intact.^ The nostrils
dilate and contract not to let in air, but because their
muscles are governed by a rhythmic alternation of stimuli
emanating from the respiratory centre in the medulla. As
long as the centre and the connections remain intact, they
go on with their work whether it assists in breathing or
not.' In the same way might the screw of a sinking steamer
rotate wildly in the iur as the bows plunge down. The
screw rotates not to propel the ship, but because its motion
is governed by connections with the engine, and as long as
these remain uninterrupted, rotate it will. Similarly the
sucking reflex is well adapted to the needs of babies and
other young animals for food, but it is a response not to
the nipple nor to the food, but to anything that comes into
the lips.^ Hence the infant in its leisure moments sucks
its thumb or anything else that comes handy.

* Exfression of the EmotionSy p. 40 (2nd ed.).

* Foster, II. p. 616.

' A friendly critic points out that respiratory movements are automatic
rather than reflex (though constantly subject to reflex influences), but I
let the illustration stand as exemplifying a highly mechanical process in
the life of the organism.

* Preyer, I. p. 127. *' Experiments on little guinea-pigs, only eight to
sixteen hours old, and separated from the mother after two hours, proved
to me absolutely that concentrated water-solutions of tartaric acid, soda,
glycerine, introduced into the mouth through glass tubes, are swallowed
just as greedily or eagerly as cow*s milk and water, with vigorous
sucking. But then the empty tube, placed with the end upon the tongue,
occasioned just such sucking. The experiments conducted in this
manner cannot, therefore, yield much that can be depended upon.
Touch, as a reflex stimulus to sucking in hungry new-bom creatures,
overpowers any taste-stimuli acting at the same time. Newly-born
animals that have eaten enough do not, however, suck regularly in
general." For human infimts, see p. x xo.


in REFLEX ACTION 35

What has been said is perhaps sufficient to show that,
speaking generally, the reflex is determined by the struc-
ture, or a portion of the structure, of the organism which
is specially arranged to meet a specific sensory stimulus
with a specific reaction. It is easy to see, first, that such
a type of action can readily be conceived of as arising
under the influence of natural selection, where, under
ordinary drcumstances, one sort of reaction, a, to a
stimulus a, is decidedly more often beneficial than any
other. It will also be seen that a mode of action so
ari^ng will, in a preponderant number of cases, but not
necessarily in all, be suited to the actual needs of the
individual in a given case. While, lastly, such an action
would not imply on the part of the individual any sort
of intelligent purpose in the sense of a power to remodel
its behaviour at need in such a way as to bring about a
result to which it looks forward.'

6. Uniform reaction to present stimulus is the charac-
teristic of unintelligent response in general. But given
such response, there are still two possibilities. It may de-
pend on the condition of the organism as a whole, and if
so, the normal reaction to one stimulus may be modified
by the effect of other simultaneous stimuli, internal and
external. Or it may be a response of a definite part of
the bodily structure assigned to one particular element in
the sensory surroundings. The latter kind is the typical
reflex, and is illustrated in the examples drawn above from
the respiratory mechanism. It is in such cases that the
reflex act especially impresses us as mechanical. But we are
not to r^anl all reflex actions as of this type. In all higher
organisms the reflex is the act of a part rather than the
whole of the bodily structure, but it is an act dependent in
very varying degrees upon the condition of the whole. If
there are some reflexes that proceed with the fixity and
sureness of fate, there are others that may be inhibited by
a counter stimulus or by a reaction of the whole organism,
wluch we call an eflFort of will. Such an interaction clearly
brings the reflex into closer relation with the condition of
the oi^anism as a whole. And this process is carried a
step farther where we find reflexes that are not set in motion

D 2


36 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

at all unless the general bodily condition is suitable. Thus
** the babe that has had enough does not suck." ^ To put
it generally, in addition to the stimulus and the permanent
structure there must be a general condition of exdtability,
or susceptibility to the specific excitement, and this con-
dition will depend very much on the requirements of the
organism. We here get adjustment to needs agdn at a
higher remove. If the condition of the oi^anism is such
that a reaction would be beneficial then normally the state
of excitability is present, and the animal is ready to react
as soon as the stimulus appears. The dog's stomach being
empty it is good for him to eat, and he is accordingly
hungry (ready to be excited by food), and therefore pounces
on the bone when he sees it. Conversely the sated dog
either buries the bone or neglects it. All this goes to show
that the reflex machinery is a part of the whole organism,
and may be very dependent for its worldng on the condi-
tion of the remainder. Reflexes vary from the extreme
of independence to a comparatively close connection with
the general state of the organism. All alike are mechanical
in the sense in which mechanism is opposed to purpose.
Only the former are mechanical in the sense in which the
rigidity of a machine is contrasted with the adaptability of
an organism.

7. Apart from these cases of dependence on the general
state of^ the oi^anism, there are certain ambiguous and
puzzling instances in which a reflex does appear to be
modified to suit the spedal conditions under which its
work has to be done. In these cases, if we are still to
treat the response as a reflex, we have to think of the
stimulus as not merely setting the machinery in motion,
but as guiding it throughout ; and of the machinery as,
after all, composed of living tissue, and therefore tending
to find its way to the equilibrium point. When a brain-
less frog rdses its foot to wipe off a drop of acid from the
thigh,* the excitement generated by the acid not merely
sets the movement going, but directs the co-ordination of
movements by which it is in the end allayed. If the
irritant is not removed from the windpipe by a cough, one
* Preyer. I. p. 152. " Foster, I. p. 183.


Ill REFLEX ACTION 37

goes on coughing. The action is continued till equili-
brium is regained. What is most remarkable is that in
certain cases the reflex action may be materially modified
by the necessities of the position. In Pfluger*s experi-
ment the brainless frog is prevented from removing the
add with the foot which it normally uses, and it ac-
cordingly uses the other foot. The same observer
obtained similar results with a sleeping child.^ It is of
course possible to treat the frog's action as intelligent and
not reflex. But a comparison with various other actions
seems to place it in a truer perspective. Crossed reflexes
{i.e. reflexes of the opposite side of the body to the part
stimulated) are not uncommon, but they are not always
well adapted. Preyer (loc. cit.) notes the irregularity of
the path taken by nervous impulses in young children.
In the dog, if the brain has been injured, stimulation of
a particular spot will, if the leg of the side stimulated be
gently held, call forth scratching movements of the
opposite 1^. These are ineflTectual because the leg is not
crossed over.* These and many other facts indicate that
the nerve centres governing the corresponding limbs and
reactions of the two sides are in intimate connection. If
the stimulus is strong, and is not speedily relieved, the
excitement generated in the first centre overflows into the
centre most closely connected with it. This is no more
than what happens in the case of any strong and persistent
stimulus. If the ** pseudopodium " of a Rhizopod is
moderately stimulated, it is withdrawn. But if it is cut
offy not only is the stump withdrawn, but the movement
of withdrawal spreads to the other pseudopodia. Similarly

... " if a flank of a brainless frog be very lightly touched,
the only reflex movement which is visible is a slight twitching of
the muscles lying immediately underneath the spot of skin
stimulated. If the stimulus be increased, the movements will
spread to the hind-leg of the same side, which frequently will
execute a movement calculated to push or wipe away the
stimulus. By forcibly pinching the same spot of skin, or other-

* Preyer^ I. p. 221. Preyer's own observations, however, go to show
that there is not so much uniformity in the preference for the unilateral
reflex as is suggested by Pflixger.

* Jostcr, III. p. 981.


38 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

wise increasing the stimulus, the resulting movements nuy be led
to embrace the fere-leg of the same side, then the opposite side,
and finally, almost all the muscles of the body.** ^

The peculiarity in Pfluger*s e3q)eriment is the appropriate-
ness of the course taken by the overflow. This is partly
explained by the close similarity of the motions, the only
real modification being the crossing of the legs. In this
we seem to find, if we put the matter in its simplest form,
a special case of the power of an excitement to determine
the direction of an action in relation to its own position
on the periphery. The stimulus not merely sets the
machinery in motion, but guides it.*

If we press the purposive character of spedal adaptation
too hard, we shall end by attributing intelligence to an
excised muscle. If a muscle under a certain stimulus lifts
a given load a certain height, it would be natural to
suppose that imder the same stimulus it would only lift
double the weight half the height. But this is not
necessarily true.

. . . ** The height to which the weight is raised may be in
the second instance as great, or even greater, than in the first.
That is to say, the resistance offered to the contraction actually
augments the contraction, the tension of the muscular fibre in-
creases the facility with which the explosive changes resulting in
a contraction take place. And we have other evidence that any-
thing which tends to stretch the muscular fibres, whether during
rest or during contraction, increases the metabolism of the
muscle." *

Yet we do not impute to the muscle a conscientious
determination to do its duty at all costs. Rather, we find
in this observation a fresh case of the organic adaptability

* Foster, I. p. 183.

* The " directive " action of a stimulus is a point too easily overlooked.
We forget that any irritation — say of the skin — ^not merely sets the
muscles of hand or paw in motion, but ^ides them so accurately that the
limb is moved precisely to the spot irritated. The distinctness, as well
as the iniportance of this directive function, is shown in the case of a dog
with an injured hemisphere, which responds to every sort of irritation in
any part of the body by the same scratching movement applied to the
same spot. (Goltz, Utber die Verrichtungtn des GrosshimSy p. 60, cf.
pp. 65, 98, &c.)

' Foster, I. p. 143.


Ill REFLEX ACTION 39

by which everything tends within cert^n limits to find its
way to its equilibrium point by beaten paths if possible, if
not, by beating out new paths. The organism does not
rest in unstable equilibrium, but seeks this way and that
means of restoring the balance. And this power of
adaptability we must grant to reflex actions which are
themselves merely well developed methods by which the
organism makes and long has made its necessary responses
to the changes of the outer world. These responses are,
as contrasted with true purposive action, mechanical, but
they have not the wholly unvarying fixity of the dead
machine. Adaptations tnemselves, they are also within
limits adaptable, so as to realise better the equilibrium
which it is their function to restore.

8. To put together our results up to this point.
Reflex action is the response to stimulus of a structure
which is especially framed so as to respond to a stimulus
of such a kind in such a way. Such structures may be
formed under the influence of natural selection,^ where it
is in general beneficial to the organism to respond in one
way rather than another to stimuli of any given kind.
The reflex action is not called forth or detenmned by the
purpose that it serves in the economy of the oi^anism, for
it persists even where useless or injurious. It is however
subject in varying degrees to the condition of the organism
as a whole, and thereby arises a further adaptation of its
action to what is required. In the typicd reflex this
subjection is at a minimum, and there is imiform response
of a special structure to appropriate stimulus. The more
absolute this uniformity, the more close does the reflex
approach the dead-medunical type. But the response of
the special structure may, in higher cases, depend in some
measure on the state of the organism as a whole, and this
not merely in the negative sense that it is liable to
inhibition, but in the sense that a certain state of the
organism is a positive condition of its exercise. Such an
adaptation though more complex is still a response of
pre-formed structure to present stimuli, and is as such

^ They may also be fonned at least in higher organisms by habit, and
when so fonned have the same general character.


40 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

unintelligent. But in proportion as it thus becomes adapt-
able to the whole state of the organism, the reflex has in
reality become a constituent element in action of a higher
type. In this capacity we shall meet it again in the next
chapter in discussing Instinct. Finally, how far adaptation
of this kind covers the somewhat ambiguous cases in which
under abnormal circumstances an action is varied, and
varied " suitably," remains uncertain. We may continue
to class such actions as reflexes of a developed type as long
as they can be explained by conceiving a directive action
of the stimulus added to the initiatory impulse. The
reflex action is a bit of mechanism, but it is organic
mechanism.

9. Reflex action in development.

Reflex actions are not always perfect from birth. There
is in this respect a remarkable diflFerence between one action
and another, and also between one animal and another.
From the very first, the yoimg chick can peck with an ac-
curacy which is not indeed perfect, but is remarkable for
being so near perfection. The human infant, on the other
hand, has but few such established reflexes in the first week
of its existence. Darwin^ found sneezing, hiccoughing,
yawning, stretching, sucking and screaming to be " well
performed " during the first seven days. On the other
hand, the blinking reflex, which is so markedly mechanical
later on, does not appear on the first day, and the ability
to direct the eyes to an object — to " fixate " — is utterly
lacking.^ Even breathing — in which reflex as well as
automatic movements are concerned — is less regular with
babies than in later life, and of the more complicated re-
flexes involved in walking and grasping, it is needless to
speak.^ The rapidity and uniformity with which many
reflexes are learnt suggests that the mechanism is almost
but not quite perfected by heredity. At the best it is
probably at birth like a new machine which needs to be
worked two or three times before it is thoroughly in order.

* Mind^ Vol. II. p. 285. » Preyer, op, cit pp. 25 and 41.

s The grasping of an object placed within the fingers appears from the
first ; but grasping at a thing, or even looking at it m the hand, is
delayed for some weeks. Sec Parwin, op, [cit, p. 286, and Preyer, I.
p. 47, &C


Ill REFLEX ACTION 41

In the machine the thousand stnuns and stresses upon
diiFerent parts have to adjust themselves to one another
in actual working before the running is really smooth
and easy. We may readily suppose an even greater
degree of self-adjustment in the living organism, the
result of which is merely to smooth and facilitate the
working of a structure which is already there in all its
essential parts.

Such a structure, we have seen, may readily be conceived
as growing up under the influence of natural selection.
Among the higher animals, or at any rate, in man, it also
grows more rapidly under another influence. We have all
experienced the growth through practice of true reflexes.
If we have forgotten our experience in learning to walk,
we remember learning to shave, skate, swim, or ride a
bicycle. We remember learning, though we might have a
good deal of difliculty in explaining how we learnt. In
general what we know is that we attempt to follow certain
instructions, and in so doing flounder about, making random
shots which go on all sides of the mark, and every now and
then hit it. The cyclist as he learns is always falling, and
his attempt to save himself from a tumble on one side
merely lands him in danger of a fall on the other. As our
training advances, there are some things which we are
definitely conscious of finding out. We see how the thing
is done by doing it, though the most careful explanation
on the part of our teacher could not show us the way.
But having done it once, we know how to do it again.
There are other things, and perhaps they are more numer-
ous, in which consciousness does not seem to play by any
means so important a part. We learn to do them uncon-
sciously. Each time that we succeed we find it becomes
easier to repeat them. Success in these cases plays the part
which conscious intelligence plays in the former class.
Each action that achieves its end leaves behind it a tend-
ency to repeat that action, while the unsuccessful actions
are inhibited. Thus in the individual life, below the level
of intelligence, success — the attainment of the equilibrium
to which the organism is tending — plays the part which in
the life of the species falls to Natural Selection. It con^


42 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

firms the tendency which makes for organic equilibrium,
and checks the opposing tendencies.

This selective force acts equally upon reflexes with a
hereditary basis. In the co-ordinating movements of the
eyes or the 1^ many irregular and unsuitable movements
occur at first, but are gradually discarded in favour of the
movements required by the organic equilibrium.^ Children
make random movements about the breast and often suck
at the wrong place.* Even the localisation of a part of
the body by the hand is arrived at after this ^shion, as is
shown by the following very instructive instance given
by Prof. Preyer."

• • . ^^ In the case of two children, who in the first half-year
suiFered from local itching eruptions of the skin (milk-crust), the
reflexive movements of the limbs were quite irregular, and at the
beginning absolutely unsuited, afterwards not in all cases suited,
to relieve the pain or the feeling of tickling ; at all events, apart
from the turnings of the head, which was the most tormented,
and which was moved hither and thither like a pendulum when
the arms were confined (fourth month). Many times when the
arms had escaped from the tethers in the night, the fiice was
scratched to bleeding in several places that were evidently not
troublesome (fourth to sixth month^. At every unguarded
moment the hands went to the head, and the skin, even the
sound part of it, was rubbed and scratched. These scratching
movements cannot be inborn, they must be acquired. The
result of an accidental contact of the head and hand appearing in
the diminution of the tickling sensation must have induced a
preference of the movement of the hand to the head among all
sorts of movements." . . .

Understanding that this comparatively rapid process of
acquisition in individual experience, which we find in the
higher and more adaptable animals, is replaced in the lower
orders by natural selection acting in the course of genera-
tions upon the race, we have in this instance the whole
scheme of the development of the reflex in a concrete

* Preyer, I. p. 39.

' lb, p. 134. Puppies also miss the teat, and will try moreover to suck
one another or the master's finger. (Wesley Mills, pp. 118, 119.)

* lb, p. 223. Mr. Lloyd Morgan suggests, by way of contrast, the
apparent accuracy with which young birds, only a day or so old, scratch a
spot artificially irritated


Ill REFLEX ACTION 43

illustration. There is a stimulus which disturbs the
equilibrium of the organism. A certsun reaction would [
restore that equilibrium. The first result of the distiirb-
ance is a series of random actions. These fail to remove
the source of disturbance. At length one succeeds. This
one has an advant^ subsequently over others if the 1
individual is capable of training, and in course of time the
tendencies to perform this act preponderate over all others.
If the individuals of the species are not capable of training,
those which in their random movements come nearest to
the one required will have a cert^n advantage in the
struggle for existence, and thus in a more roundabout way
the reflex mechanism is built up by inheritance.

10. The random, undifferentiated actions out of which
we suppose the reflex to be hewn are no mere fiction of the
scientific imagination. The random movements of impulse
are matched by numerous instances of quite random
reflexes. The latter occur in all conditions of over excita-
bility. Great joy and pain throw the whole body into
motions not adapted to serve it in any way unless the
droning oflFof the excitement be itself regarded as a service.
If any stimulus be greatly increased in intensity, it not
merely calls forth the movements suited to dealing with it,
but brings more and more muscles into action till the
whole body may be convulsed.^ There is a tendency,
well seen in the naked protoplasm of many unicellular

> Instances of undifferentiated or purposeless nervous discharge are
¥rell seen in pathological states. In cases of injury to one hemisphere,
Gdltz speaks of a regular " Entfesselung der reflektorischen vorgange"
{pp. ciL p. $9). In another dog a curious special reflex — putting out the
tongue and licking the nose — ^appeared regularly in response to tickling
of the back. Evidently the response has nothing to do with the stimulus,
and we can only suppose that the excitation oli that particular part
happened for some reason to find the line of least resistance in discharging
along the nerve paths, ending finaUy in the muscles of the tongue. On
the permanent inhibitory function of that part of the cerebrum which he
calls the association centres, see Flechsig, Gehim und Seele^ p. 32. The
reflexes, if not held in constant quiet restraint, would run riot. The due
response of a lower centre is an application in an appropriate manner of
aportion only of the nervous disctiarge which the stimulus sets going.
This general discharge may be regarded as the matrix out of which
suitable or adaptive action is hewn. Or, to vary the metaphor, it is the
flow of water tor which experience and natural selection finds a usejful
channel, while they also devise means of absorbing or damming up the
overflow. The primitive thing is the flow. The clumnel is formed utter.


44 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

organisms, for an excitement to spread like a wave in
proportion to its initial strength. A slight shake will
make Amoeba princeps hesitate in putting forth its *^legs."
A prolonged concussion will gradually affect the entire
organism and make it roll up almost into a ball. In
strychnine poisoning, where the excitability of the nerves
is abnormally hdghtened, a slight touch produces general
convulsions.

The primitive fact to which these considerations bring
us back is the excitability of protoplasm. Protoplasm, in
whatever form, is a substance in very unstable chemical
equilibrium. Since it is never at rest internally, the
equilibrium is often upset by changes within the mass of
the protoplasm itself, and we then have impulsive move-
ments. But various external events — ^the impingement of
a ray of light or heat, a chemical afEnity, or a purely
mechanical contact — may also, in ways which at present
can only be surmised, gravely disturb the equilibrium of
the substance at every point. The disturbance has a
tendency to propagate itself, a tendency which goes on
until its energy is dissipated, or until a countervailing
force of some kind restores the balance. The result of
such a disturbance is or may be a movement of the mass,
or an alteration of its form. Unless there is something in
the previous history of the individual organism or its
species to direct the movement, there is no reason why it
should be in any way suited to the needs of the organism
in relation to that stimulus. It will be a random move-
ment which may be useful, harmful or neutral to the
organism. It is clear that variations in the direction of
useful action will be helpful to a race in the struggle for
existence, and that a race in which they occur would be
likely to survive. But action at this stage depends on the
molecular relations of protoplasm whether in its undifferen-
tiated form or as later in the highly conductile form of
nerve fibres. The preponderance of a certain type of
action therefore means the prevalence of a certain structure.
In this way structures are built up under the influence of
natural selection so planned that a stimulus of a given kind
inevitably produces a certain reaction. Such a reaction is a


Ill REFLEX ACTION 45

reflex. It is mechanical in so far that it is the result of a
pre-existing structure which acts uniformly in response to
stimuli of a particular kind. Though it produces a certain
result, it is not the fact that it will produce the particular
result which brings it into being, but the fact that similar
actions have in the past produced similar results. It is
thus a consequence, not a means. It is also in some degree
mechanical in another sense, viz., that it is in part
independent of the rest of the organism and its condition.
But that is a matter of degree, and we get many variations
from the extreme type in which a reflex appears to go on
quite independently of the organic life, up to cases in which
it is not only dependent on the general state of the
oi^anism, but may even in some slight degree depart from
its true type under the influence of the straining of the
organism to r^ain its equilibrium and abolish a disturbance.
At what precise point along this particular line we must
regard the action as passing out of the domain of the reflex
into something higher, is a question to be settled in each
particular case according to its merits.


CHAPTER IV

INSTINCT ^

I . We were taught in our childhood that man had reason,
while animals had instinct. What instinct precisely was,
was not, so far as my own memory goes, made particularly
clear. But it was generally understood to be a somewhat
mysterious power, the limits of wluch were exceecUngly
ill-defined, while its workings were undoubtedly a con-
spicuous instance of that Providential ordering of things
whereby the fly is endowed with wings to escape the spider,
and the spider with jaws to devour the fly. I cannot find
a better statement of the traditional, popular, and, one
may say, pious conception of instinct than that given by
Captain Marryat's Mastemum Ready — a work written
for edification.

** * Instinct in animals, William,* continued Mr. Seagrave, * is
a feeling which compels them to perform certain acts without
previous thought or reflection ; this instinct is in full force at the
moment of their birth ; it is the guidance of the Almighty's hand
unseen ; it was therefore perfect in the beginning, and has never
varied. The swallow built her nest, the spider its web, the bee
formed its comb, precisely in the same way four thousand years
ago as they do now.' "

It may be s^d to be the breakdown of this conception
which made animal psychology possible as a science. As

> The following chapter was written before seeing Mr. Lloyd Morgan's
final expression of his views in Animal Behaviour^ with which I am glad
to find myself in close agreement. My debt to him, however, is none the
less, since the chapter is largely based upon his earlier work.


CHAP. IV INSTINCT 47

soon as it was seen that instinct^ like other animal functions,
rested upon conditions many of which can be assigned, that
it does not spring into existence all at once in full per-
fection, but is subject, like other features of organic life,
to growth and change and possibly to decay, that it is not
always perfect or unerring, that no impassable gulf severs
it from intelligence, but rather that intelligence first arises
within the sphere of instinct — ^when instinct was thus
brought into relation with more commonplace facts, the
awe and mystery surrounding it were dissolved, and the
central feature of animal psychology became susceptible of
scientific treatment. No one supposes that all instincts
are explained, or are easy to understand in the present
state of our knowledge. The central conception of mstinct
itself is not as clearly defined as might be desired. But
instinct is no longer a mysterious faculty which may at
once be set down as a sufficient explanation of anything in
the behaviour of animals that we do not understand.
Instinct cannot do anything and everything. It has limits
even if we have difficulties in drawing them with precision.
And secondly, its territory is not apart, but strictly con-
tinuous with other powers of organised beings. Instinct
in short is a product of evolution. It presides at a certain
phase, and has, all in due order, its beginning, its rise, its
culmination, and its decline.

To give the full proof of what I have ssdd would be
merely to repeat or summarise the works of authors far
more competent to deal with the matter than myself. I
may merely advert briefly to the abundant evidence showing
that instinct is not always perfect in its working ; that it
does not proceed on an undiangeable model ; that it is on
occasion applied mistakenly, uselessly and injuriously ; that
it is often incomplete at birth, and requires development ;
and that at any rate, among the higher animals, it is so
interwoven with intelligence that the two factors become
exceectingly difficult to disentangle.

Nothing seems more instinctive than the impulse of the
young mammal to suck its mother's breast. Undoubtedly
there is an innate tendency to suck, and an impulse to suck
the breast. But there is no unerring inward guide leading


1kowfoik»


48 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

it to obtain its needed nourishment. On the contrary, good
observers state that many young pigs, puppies and kittens
would fail to find the teat altogether unless helped by
the mother, wlule of the lamb Mr. Hudson says : —

^^ It does not know what to suck. It will take into its mouth
whatever comes near, in most cases a tuft of wool on its dam's
neck, and at this it will continue sucking for an indefinite time."

It is, he thinks, the strong smelling secretion of the udder
that at length attracts the lamb.^

There is no more wonderful operation of " instinct "
than the nest of the bird, or the web of the spider. But
neither of these are in all cases immutable in type nor perfect
from birth. Dahl* found with one species of spider, which
makes a web with one section omitted and the space
occupied by a single thread, that the first web spun is of a
more primitive type. It is made complete, like an ordinary
web. The more developed form is found sometimes in
the second web, sometimes after several repetitions. One
individual combined the signal thread with the perfect web.
The nest-builcUng of birds is unquestionably instinctive, but
as unquestionably it is an art which difiFerent individuals
of the same spedes possess in difiierent degrees of perfec-
tion,' and which is modifiable in many difiFerent ways, as
circumstances suggest or require.^

Few instincts seem more mysterious than those which
lead insects to choose for depositing their eggs precisely in
those places which are best adapted for hatching out the
larva. Yet the flesh fly has been known to deposit its
eggs in the flowers of the carrion plant, the smell of which
resembles that of putrid meat.* No case of this kind is
more wonderful than that of the Sitaris beetle,* the larva
of which begins life by attaching itself to a bee which has

^ Lloyd Morgan, Habit and Instinct^ pp. 114-116. C£ Preyer, I.
pp. I3S>I40, and Wesley Mills, pp. 118, 119.

> Dahl., p. 168.

' See LJoyd Morgan, Habit and Instinct^ p. 234 et seq.

^ For abundant evidence, see Romanes, MM,A. p. 209 ff. and Wallace,
Natural SeUctioHy p. 1 10 et seq,

^ Romanes, M,E,A. p. 167. C£ Schneider, Der thieriscke Wille^
p. 268.

> Uoyd Morgan, Habit and Instinct^ pp. 15, 304.


IV INSTINCT 49

afterwards to provide for it. Does one ask how the larva
knows the bee ? The reply is, it does not.

'* Although they are close to the abodes of the bees they do
not enter them, but seek to attach themselves to any hairy object
that may come near them, and thus a certain number of them
get on to the bodies of the Anthophora and are carried to its nest.
They attach themselves with equal readiness to any other hairy
insect, and it is probable that very large numbers perish in con-
sequence of attaching themselves to the wrong insects." ^

These and similar instances go to show that what guides
the larva or the fly is no unerring internal or external
guide, but the contact of the hairs, the smell of the meat.
The mechanism of the instinct consists in this : that at the
time when the fly is ready to lay the ^gs, the smell (or
the diflfused chemical stimulus which, for us, is a smell)
attracts the fly, and contact with the smelling substance
gives the final touch which sets the process of laying to
work. Similarly the cuttlefish at the due season has the
impulse to embrace its mate. Here the stimulus appears
to be the shape of the mate, for a piece of wood appro-
priately shaped will be so violently and persistently em-
braced that it can be used as a bait with success.'

These few instances will serve to show that instinct is
not the mysteriously unerring guide that tradition has
made of it. It is not invariably perfect from birth ; it
often needs and undergoes development in the lifetime of
the individual ; it often misleads its possessor, and, as we
shall show later, it is, at any rate in its higher forms,
capable of well-directed modifications.

2. Indeed, instinctive action of the more plastic kind
bears at first sight all the signs and tokens of deliberate
purpose — and deliberate purpose implies intelligence. Can
we then regard instinct as a form of intelligence ? The
question would hardly be entertained by any pychologist,
but it may be well to assign briefly some or the reasons
for dismissing it. If we impute intelligence to an anj^nal,
we do so on the same ground ultimately as that which
justifies us in imputing intelligence to another man. We

* The Cambridge Natural History^ VI. p. 272.
' Schneider, Z>^ MiVmrA^ Wille^ p. 173.

£


50 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

reason outwards to other men from ourselves, and similarly
we reason outwards to animals from men. And the test
of our reasonings is in the end the same— corroboration of
our results by inferences proceeding from difierent data
and along difierent lines. Bearing these prindples in
mind, we observe : —

a. Instinctive and intelligent actions are opposed in their
genesis.

To grasp fully the nature of what he is doing, a man
must have some experience of it. Instinct, on the other
hand, is often almost perfect, and sometimes quite perfect,
without any experience at all. At that stage its action is,
even in an otherwise intelligent being, carried on without
consciousness of its end or its nature. Thus when an
otherwise intelligent youth falls in love for the first time,
he has little or no conception of what has befallen him,
until little by little he b^ns to compare his experiences
with what he has seen and heard and read. Then he
knows. To assume that a canary bred in captivity has a
conception of the nest which she builds is to suppose
something utterly opposed to that human experience which
is the real ba^s of the original assumption. Men do not
evolve conceptions out of nothing, in the way which the
canary would, accorcUng to the assumption, have to do.
On the other hand, men do perform actions without know-
ing the reason why, and come at the reason afterwards by
reflection. In short, instinct is a " vera causa." We know
it among ourselves. Innate conception is not a ** vera
causa." To impute it to an animal is to infer, on the
ground of actions similar to those of man, an intellectual
method opposed to those of man.

fi. Instinct and Intelligence are opposed in the nature
of their contents.

If we were to r^ard as the work of thought actions
which we usually attribute to instinct, we should have to
impute to the animals which perform them a marvellous
capacity for intricate scheming and planning. A single
instance will be a suffident illustration.

^The caterpillar of the emperor moth spins at the upper
extremity of its cocoon a double arch of stiff bristles, held together


IV INSTINCT 51

above only by a few fine threads. The cocoon, i.e.j opens at the
very least pressure from within, but is able to resist quite strong
pressure from without. Autenrieth writes of this in his Ansichten
iiher Natur- und Salenleben : ^ If the caterpillar acted from reflec-
tion and with understanding, it must, on human analogy, have
pursued the following train of thought : that it had reached its
chrysalis stage, and would therefore be at the mercy of any un-
lucky accident, without possibility of escape, unless it took certain
precautionary measures in advance ; that it would have to issue
from its cocoon as imago without having organs or strength for
breaking through the cover it had spun as caterpillar, and without
possessing any secretion, like other insects, which would, if
emitted, eat through the threads of silk ; and that consequently,
unless it took care to provide as caterpillar a convenient exit from
its cocoon, it must certainly come to a premature end in im-
prisonment. On the other hand, it must have clearly recognised
during its work upon the cocoon that, in order to have free egress
as imago, it would onlv be necessary to construct an arch which
could resist attacks from without while opening easily from
within J and that these conditions would be frilfiUed if the arch
were made of stiflF threads, inclined together in the median line,
and with their ends left free. At the same time it must have
realised that the plan could be carried out if the silk employed for
the construction of the other parts of the cocoon were employed
with special care and skill at the upper end. Yet it could have
learnt nothing of all this from its parents.' " ^ . . .

It is out of keeping with anything that wc know of
Thought to suppose that it could reach such a pitch of
perfection in relation to a singl£ series of acts, and not
show itself in any other way. But it is quite in keeping
with the nature of heredity to suppose that in a spedes to
which a certain method of protection has become important, (^
that method should go on under the influence of natural
selection, becoming more and more perfect in its mechanical
precision. And that instincts no less complex are of this
mechanical character is proved by instances which we have
already quoted, and to wluch we might add indefinitely.
The truth is, that it is precisely the highly complex
development of apparent purpose in certain relations,
combined with entire absence of any corresponding mani- 1
festation of intelligence in other respects, that forces us to
recognise the piuposiveness as only apparent. One has seen
* Wundt, Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology^ pp. 391-392.

S 2


52 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

incautious writers attributing high unselfishness to an in-
sect because it sacrifices itself for young whom it will never
see. It is precisely this apparent refinement which removes
the action out of the mond category altogether, by making
it impossible for the insect to know what it is about.
3. Instinct and heredity.

The explanation of instinct by intelligence does not
accord with the facts. If the intelligence is regarded as a
sort of providential guidance of the animal, the explana-
tion founders on the mistakes of instinct and its varia-
bility. If it is the animal's own intelligence that is called
in, we have seen that it must be an intelligence opposed in
the method of its growth and its structure when grown to
any sort of intelligence of which we have clear knowledge.
These explanations have accordingly given way to the
biological theory which explains Instinct by heredity. If
a structure can arise through heredity under the influence
I of natural selection, so also can the function which such a
structure performs, and instinct, upon this view, is nothing
but the specific function of a definite inherited structure.
The evolution of wings is not a separate process from the
evolution of flying. The growth of claws and teeth
implies the development of a particular habit of fighting
and obtaining food. These broad correlations of structure
and functions are everyc^y matters too familiar to strike
us. The observant naturalist can carry this correspondence
further into detail, as when Dr. A. R. Wallace shows that
the absence of nests among the Megapodidae is correlated
with the large size of their ^gs. This involves an
interval of ten or twelve days between the maturation of
each egg, and makes it impossible that all should be
hatched together.^ But to complete the account of the
relation between structure and function, we should require
a knowledge of the molecular structure of the nervous
system of which we are as yet only at the b^inning.
The reason why the bird uses its wings, or the tiger its
claws, is not merely that they possess wings and claws, but
that the muscles of wings and claws are connected through
a ramification of nerve fibres with their sense organs. If
> Malay Archipelago^ Vol. I. p. 418,


IV INSTINCT 53

we could trace out these ramifications in detail, we should
be able to specify the actual hereditary structures on
which the flying of the bird or the crouch and spring of
the tiger depend. We are only on the threshold of the
investigations necessary for such a purpose. But we have
no reason to doubt that as in general so in detail we should
find a close correspondence between inherited structure and
inherited mode of action, which would justify us in
r^arding the latter as the response made by the former to
accustomed stimulus.

^ 4. Treating instinct, then, as the response of inherited,
structure to stimulus, comparative psychology has inclined
to regard it as closely related to reflex action. The smell
of putrid meat attracts the gravid carrion fly. That is, it
sets up motions of the wings which bring the fly to it, and
the fly having arrived, the smell and the contact combined
stimulate the functions of oviposition. \ The sight of
appropriate food stimulates the chick to peck, just as the
contact of the food with the interior of the bill stimulates
the swallowing reflexes. And just as the sight of food
stimulates the chick to peck, so the sight of the chick
stimulates the hen to duck, or to scratch for food, or to
protect it against danger, and so forth.

But the last instance shows us that if we actually
identify instinctive with reflex action, we shall be running
into psu-adox. In the maternal care exercised by the hen
many reflexes are involved as constituent elements. No
doubt a certain optical stimulus may by a purely reflex
process make the hen utter the " danger cluck ; " the
sound of which in the same way induces the chicks to
hide. As they run to her she spreads out her wings to
receive them, and so forth. Each particular act may be
described without obvious violence as reflex, but the/
whole is an adaptive combination of reflexes in which the
combination is as important as each separate act. There
seems to be at least some permanent state corresponding
to what we call maternal feeling, or the parental instinct
which donunates the hen*s actions throughout, and with-
out which the various reflexes would not be discharged
by their appropriate stimuli. If she had no chickens to


54 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

think of, the hen would pick up the food which she finds,
and would seek her own safety when frightened.

To this it may be replied that the adaptive combination

^ of the reflexes is itself a part of the mechanism provided
by heredity for the m^ntenance of the species. Those
who hold with Mr. Herbert Spencer that instinct is merely
compound reflex action, will point out that each action
that we have mentioned naturally calls for the next until
the chain is complete. ' This concatenation is no doubt
adaptive, but it is also mechanical, and to impute to the
hen maternal feeling unless we can show that this feeling
has some outward eflfect in modifying her actions, is a
piece of pure anthropomorphic imagery, s Upon its own
conditions, this argument is sound. In comparative
psychology the legal maxim must hold, that the thing
which does not at some point or other appear in action
must be treated as non-existent. And it may freely be
admitted that in many actions wluch we ordinarily class as
instincts, there is little to show that the reflexes are
controlled by any persistent inward condition of the
orgamsm. So far as this is so, the *^ instinct " approaches
the compound-reflex type. There are, however, other
cases in which the ** instinct " exhibits a more special
adaptation of reflexes, which postulates a certsun general
control of action by the persistent requirements of the
organism.

The true compound reflex is of two kinds. In the first,
a single stimulus sets in motion a co-ordinated series of
muscular contractions. Thus the contact of a foreign
substance with the interior of the windpipe produces the
series of contractions which we call a fit of coughing.
Here the whole machinery must be prearranged. There
are in the arrangements of muscles, nerves, and nerve
centres certain lines of communication as complex but also
as definitely and rigidly fixed as those of a telephone when
the connection is made. The impulse having once set the
wave of excitement in motion, the wave travels along the
ordained channel till the end is reached, and organic
equilibrium is again restored. In the second and more

, complex case, there is a series of stimuli as well as a series


IV INSTINCT 55

of actions, the actions being so adjusted as to bring the new
stimuli into play. This arrangement may be very perfect
where the stimuli are themselves changes within the
organism, as in the case of respiration. But this is not
essential. Under ordinary circumstances walking — the
act of walking as distinct from the purpose with which we
set out — is for every one but an infant a true compound
reflex. The contact of the foot ynth the ground sets in
motion a number of waves of excitement directed in part
to msdnt^ning the balance in part to the onward movement.
The resulting contractions bring the other foot forward,
and the result is a fresh contact, setting similar contrac-
tions to work, and so forth.

This familiar instance may serve to illustrate the general
plan of a compound reflex, and to show that there is
nothing to prevent a train of action of considerable com-
plexity being carried on through a succession of responses
each following with rigid and predetermined uniformity
upon its proper stimulus. Where an " instinct " is of this
character, it may often be made to betray itself by some
slight variation in the circumstances which render the
action useless or injurious. Judged by this test, some of the
most complicated instincts of insects appear to be of the
reflex type. A well-known observation by M. Fabre will
illustrate my point.^

..." A solitary wasp, Sphex flavipennisy which provisions its
nest with small grsisshoppers, when it returns to the cell, leaves
the victim outside, and goes down for a moment to see that all is
right. During her absence M. Fabre moved the grasshopper a
litde. Out came the Sphex, soon found her victim, dragged it to
the mouth of the cell, and left it as before. Again and again N

M. Fabre moved the grasshopper, but every time the Sphex did ^^^
exactly the same thing, imtil M. Fabre was tired out." * ^ V <\0^^

Equally well known is the same observer's experiment
on the larva of Chalicodoma.

^ Lubbock, Senses of Animals^ p. 245.

^ It does not follow that the wasp was destitute of intelligence, or that
it is not under any circumstances su^le to bring intelligence to bear on the
action. Indeed, a subsequent experiment of Fabre's on another individual
proves the contrary. See also Peckham, Solitary Wasps^ p. 39. Many
human actions are performed mechanically day by day, but a sufficiently
strong stimulus directs attention to them, and brings intelligence to bear.


56 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

^^ This genus is enclosed in an earthen cell, through which at
maturity the young insect eats its way. M. Fabre found that
if he pasted a piece of paper round the cell the insect had no
difficulty in eating through it, but if he enclosed the cell in a
paper case, so that there was a space even of only a few lines
between the cell and the paper, in that case the paper formed an
effectual prison. The instinct of the insect taught it to bite
through one enclosure, but it had not wit enough to do so a
second time.'* ^

What seems like unremitting maternal love is suddenly
shown in quite a different light by a slight alteration of
the conditions. The Bembex carefully feeds her grub, and
never makes a mistake in finding her way to her cell,
although it is covered with sand and is then undistinguish-
able to us from the surroundings, but when M. Fabre
removed the earth and exposed the cell, the Bembex did
not appear to recognise the young that she had so carefully
tended.^ One is driven to infer a very different mental
process from that of the bird, which will follow her young
if taken from her, or even from that of the perch, that will
remove a nest that has once been disturbed.*

Traces of this mechanical method of response are found
side by side or blended with intelligence in the higher
animals. Mr. Lloyd Morgan quotes an amusing story of
a tame squirrel which would ** bury " a nut in the floor of
a room.

" He would press the nut down on the carpet, and then go
through all the motions of patting the earth over it, after which
he went about his business as if that nut were safely buried." ^

The dog's habit of turning round before going to sleep
is of a similar character, and so are numberless little
irrational habits of which we are aware in our friends.^ A
man likes to adhere to his particular way of doing a thing,
even though a better way be shown him. In proportion
. as they exhibit this fixed and unadaptable uniformity of

1 M.E.A. p. i66.

' Lubbock, loc, cit p. 254. ' Romanes, p. 251. Cf. Schneider.

* Habit and Instinct^^. 123.

^ Habit and Instinct, though of different origin, have so many points of
resemblance that we may be allowed sometimes to illustrate the one by an
example from the other.


IV INSTINCT 57

response, instincts approach the compound reflex limit and
deserve to be called mechanical.

5. Instincts recede from this type in proportion as the
persistent internal disposition^ influences the response. We
may illustrate the influence of such a condition from human
actions, where not herecUty but an acquired habit is the
baas of co-ordination. As I walk down the street, I avoid
obstacles without thinking about them. The sight of each
passer by, of the lamp post or an approaching cab dis-
charges suitable movements of my legs without — unless the
danger is sudden or unusual — distracting my thoughts from
the conversation which I am carrying on. The process is
reflex. If, instead of walking, I am bicycling, I avoid the
perils of 'bus or cab no less " instinctively," that is, auto-
matically. But here quite a different set of muscles are
called into play. I steer not by my feet but by my hands
and the swinging of my body. If a cart suddenly stops in
front of me, I throw my weight on to the rising pedal.
If I were briskly walking, I should pull up quite diflTerently,
with one foot out, and knee bent but tense. In a word,
the reflexes excited by the same objects or circumstances
difller according to the pursuit in which I am for the time
engaged. While that pursuit continues the reflexes are
set to play a particular tune as each is touched. In this
instance, the setting is fixed by habit, but the effect is the
same where it is inherited. Where there is by heredity a
certain setting determining reflexes in a special way, there
is an instinct which is distinguishable from a compound
reflex. The instinctive act is no longer one which follows
with perfect uniformity from a certain stimulus. It follows
from that stimulus only if it is appropriate to the setting
of the organism at the time. We have indeed already
noted that reflexes may be adaptable to organic conditions.
It is on such adaptable reflexes that instinct rests, and its
business is precisely to shape them aright. To the "setting"
it is due that the sated animal rejects food that the hungry
animal would devour. It is for the same reason that the

* The Gennan Siimmung^ used by Preyer (I. p. 197) in this connection
expresses my meaning better. Mr. Lloyd Morgan calls the internal factor
a craving (Animal Bakaviour, p. 102}.


58 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

" broody " hen is attracted to the nest by eggs, and that
the male is excited by the female at the appropriate
season.

The setting itself may be called forth by external
stimuli, as when sexual passion is aroused by the presence
of a particular female. But it also develops normally in
the life of the organism according to the stage of its
growth, or it may be according to such general outward
changes as are involved in the coming round of the season.
Thus, like impulsive action, the ** setting " of the instinctive
act arises from internal causes, for which reason the true
instinct may be regarded as a kind of synthesis of the im-
pulsive and the reflex type of acdon — the internally
initiated and the externally regulated. In the case of the
Chalicodoma grub, indeed, and others that might be men-
tioned,^ the mechanical sequence on which we have laid
stress may as fairly be called the working out of an im-
pulsive series as the discharging of a row of reflexes. In
many complex cases of parasitism, the success of the
arrangement depends on the action of the young being
performed automatically at a certsun stBgt of its develop-
ment. It forms a lodgment upon its host, or begins to
devour it, with the same precision and regularity with
which it undei^oes its various structural metamorphoses.

6. Owing to the influence of the setting there is, in the
higher instincts, a certain plasticity of adjustment to the
needs of each case. Alternative methods of action are
used, and used appropriately. DiflFerent kinds of reaction
are combined in ways that must vary, more or less, from
case to case. Lastly within certain limits special ob-
stacles or deviations from the normal course of events
seem to call up special reactions fitted to deal with them.

How far this plasticity goes is a matter of degree. At
the one end of the scale we have a ** mechanical " sequence
of reflexes. Starting from this we have adaptations, at
first slight and afterwards important. As their importance
increases, we reach a point where, as we shall see, we must
begin to regard instinct as suflFused by intelligence. The

I Huberts caterpillar (Darwin, Origin of SpedeSj p. 208} is a con-
spicuous and well-known instance.


IV INSTINCT 59

combination of actions in one of the higher instincts, which
may perhaps be helped out by a modicum of intelligence,
may be illustrated by Dr. Oscar Schmidt's account of the
stalking of a sandhopper by a crab.^ While the sandhopper
is feeding among seaweed, the crab approaches behind a
clump ot weed, which he uses as ^* cover." There was a
distance of about eight inches between the two animals,
which the crab had to cross without alarming his vicdm.
Presently he left his cover, and, crouching down, crept
towards the sandhopper. When he had got about half
way, the sandhopper stopped eating, and turned towards
the crab, which immediately disapp^ured in the sand. Pre-
sently the sand rose nearer the sandhopper, the crab re-
appeared, took a stealthy step or two towards the victim,
and then sprang upon him.

There are here a succession of acts of diverse character
— ^watching, stealthy creeping, hiding, and pouncing, all
brought into operation as the case requires. The whole
series turns upon a fixed point — ^the seizure of the prey ;
and each of the varied set of acts is adopted in accordance
with the varying actions of the prey, or the varying re-
lations between it and the hunter. If we regard each
several movement as a reflex, we must admit that it is at
least a response to a stimulus of a complicated kind. The
aght of the prey at a certain distance, and with its back
turned, induces stealthy approach. At close quarters it
induces a sudden leap. The turning of the sandhopper*s
head sets in motion the reflexes — ^themselves a complex
series — ^involved in burrowing under the sand. In short,
the crab reacts ftom moment to moment, not to a series of
simple sense stimuli, but to the changing phases of a com- .
plex ^tuation.

By the "situation" here is meant those objects and
changes in the immediate surroimdings that have a bearing
on the attainment of a particular end, and operate on the
sense organs of an animal. The influence which we have
to ascribe to the situation implies the existence of an
abiding internal state of the organism which deals with it,
adjusting action to its changing phases in the way
^ Quoted from Brehm's TkUrUben by Schneider, p. 324.


6o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

described. Just as the reflex excitability is the correlative of
the sense-stimulus, so this relatively permanent state, which
dominates many reflexes, is the correlative of a combination
of circumstances, or a " situation." It is this relatively
permanent state, directing a series of actions towards a
definite result, that we call Instinct. The construction of
a cocoon by a caterpillar, or a tube by a worm, may be
quite mechanical, but there is evidence of something not
quite mechanical in the power of repairing the things con-
structed, or of dealing with any special obstacle to con-
struction in a suitable way. The Ant Lion, according to
writers quoted by Romanes,^ has some capacity of this kind,
and even among worms we find traces of adaptation. Thus,
the Terebella builds its tube by selecting grains of sand —
in captivity it is less ddnty, but generally rejects glass —
seizing them with its feelers, drawing them m, and, after
secreting a certain cement upon them, protruding its head
and deporting them where required. It not only repairs
holes, but if a piece does not stick at first, it repeats the
process of cementing, while, if the object is too big to be
drawn in, it protrudes its forepart to the entrance of the
tube, and cements it on the spot.^ Caterpillars show a
cert^n power of adaptation in repairing injuries to their
cocoons, and the methods used by difiTerent individuals are
not necessarily the same. Thus, according to Kirby and
Spence, Bonnet

.... "having opened several cocoons of a moth {Noctua
verba5ci\ which are composed of a mixture of grains of earth and
silk, just after being finished, the larvae did not repair the injury
in the same manner. Some employed both earth and silk \ others
contented themselves with spinning a silken veil before the
opening.** '

Mr. Romanes also quotes an instructive observation of
Reaumur on the larva of the Tinea moth, which eats out
the parenchyma of the elm leaf, preserving the outer mem-
brane as a coat, and being careful not to separate them at
the outer edge where they unite. This edge becomes one

* Romanes, p. 235.

« Brehm, Thierleben^ Vol. X. pp. 127, 128.

^ Quoted by Romanes, p. 236.


IV INSTINCT 6 1

of the seams of its coat. The other seam the larva makes
for itself. " Reaumur cut off the edge of a newly-finished
coat, so as to expose the body of the larva at that point.'*^
It thereupon

^ sewed up the rent ; and not only so, but ^ the scissors having
cut off one of the projections intended to enter into the con-
struction of the triangular end of the case, it entirely changed the
original plan, and made that end the head which had been first
designed for the tail.*"*

Lastly, according to Dahl," a spider will not only repair
an injury to its web if sufficiently serious, but if it finds
that a thread which it has spun does not fit the rest of
the network, it will reject that thread and substitute
another.

The converse case to the repair of damage is the
utilisation of a special opportunity so as to dispense with
unnecessary labour. Thus we find, ag^n, according to
Kirby and Spence, that the

"common cabbage caterpillar, which, when building web
under stone or wooden surfaces, previously covers a space with a
web to form a base for supporting its dependent pupa ; when
building a web beneath a muslin surface dispenses with this
base altogether. It perceives that the woven texture of the
muslin forms facilities for attaching the threads of the cocoon
securely enough to support the weight of the cocoon without
the necessity of making the usual square inch or so of basal
support." *

This instance * is thrown into relief by the conduct of
Ruber's caterpillar, which has been already referred to.

* Quoted by Romanes, p. 237.

^ An entomological friend remarks on this story that the caterpillar
would probably (as in the previous example) merely set about to spin a
piece of web where it was exposed, and this would have the effect, not
planned by the insect, of " sewing " the edges together. If so, both this
and the previous example show how an adaptive modification would
result from the persistence with which the instinct operates until it is
satisfied.

' Dahl, Vol. IX. p. 166 ff. * Romanes, p. 237.

^ A parallel is the action of the dung beetle, which normally makes
pellets for its eggs, but utilises any that it finds ready made. (Quoted
from Kirby and Spence by Romanes, M,E,A, p. 244.) Mr. Romanes
goes much too far m calling this an " intelligent adaptation." On the face
of it, it is merely an instance where an appropriate object calls out the
instinctive reactions, that part of the normal instinctive operation which is
rendered unnecessary remaining suppressed.


62 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

. . . *^ P. Huber has described a caterpillar which makes, by
a succession of processes, a very complicated hammock for its
metamorphosis ; and he found that if he took a caterpillar which
had completed its hammock up to, say, the sixth stage of con-
struction, and put it into a hammock completed up only to the
third stafi;e, the caterpillar did not seem puzzled, but repeated the
fourth, hfth, and sixth stages of construction. If, however, a
caterpillar was taken out of a hammock made up, for instance, to
the third stage^ and put into one finished to the ninth stage, so
that much of its work was done for it, far from feeling the benefit
of this, it was much embarrassed, and even forced to go over the
ab-eady finished work, starting from the third stage which it had
left off before it could complete its hammock. Scl again, the hive-
bee in the construction of its comb seems compelled to follow an
invariable order of work." *

We have here the extreme mechanical or compound reflex
type of instinct, just as in the other illustrations from
caterpillar life we had instances of the adaptive, plastic
type.

The power of overcoming obstacles, and also the
limitation of that power as long as we move in the region
of pure instinct, is well illustrated by another ** caterpillar
story" communicated to Mr. Romanes by Mr. G. B.
Budcton :

** Many caterpillars of Pieris rapa have, during this autumn,
fed below my windows. On searching for suitable positions for
passing into chrysalides, some eight or ten individuals, in their
direct march upwards, encountered the plate-glass panes of my
windows ; on these they appeared to be unable to stand. Accord-
ingly in every case thev made silken ladders, some of them five
feet long, each ladder being formed of a single continuous thread
woven in elegant loops from side to side. • • . The reasoning,
however, seems to be but narrow, for one ladder was constructed
parallel to the window-frame for nearly three feet, on which
secure footing could be had by simply diverting the track two
inches.** «

The larva has, it would seem, a definite method of deal-
ing with the particular difiiculty of a smooth surface. It
does not matter that a much simpler method is at hand.
The caterpillar acts more majorum^ and would doubtless be

* AfM^. p. 179. * Romanes, p4[2^6.


IV INSTINCT 63

shocked at the suggtstion that it should depart from
tradition. This suggestion, however, its perceptions are
incapable of making to it. Lastly, we may take a case
where simple patience is the method prescribed for over-
coming an obstacle :

"Very young hermit-crabs, not long after leaving the egg,
rush with extraordinary animation for suitable sheik that are
given to them in the water. They examine the opening at the
mouth, and take up their quarters inside with remarkable alacrity.
But, if it chances that the shells are still occupied by molluscs,
then they stay close by the opening, and wait till the snail
dies, which generally occiu^ soon after the beginning of the
imprisonment and the strict watch. Upon this the small crab
pulls out the carcass, devours it, and moves into the lodging
himself.- 1

On this Preyer remarks : —

'* What foresight ! On account of the preference of the empty
shells, the whole proceeding can not be hereditary. But the
young animals are not instructed. They were ftom the begin-
ning separated ftom their parents, and had no time or opportunity
for experiences of their own. They must, therefore, have in-
herited their practice of waiting ftom their ancestors, as a rule of
conduct for the case where the shell is occupied, and they can at
once distinguish such a one ftom an empty one.** *

The element that is not hereditary seems to be supplied
by perception. The empty shell invites immediate entry.
The full one sets in motion a different train of actions,
equally hereditary, and also adapted in the end to give
possession of the shell. ^

In the last illustration given, and in some of the others,
it will be seen that instinct overcomes its obstacle by
bringing up as it were a reserve method not ordinarily
employed. It has alternative methods. We may say if
we please that the reserve method is merely a response to
a spedal stimulus, but we must keep in mind that the
spedality of the stimulus lies precisely in this, that the
success of the instinct cannot be compassed by ordinary
means. The cat-like patience of the hermit-crab is only

* Prcycr, p. 240^ • Jd. p. 241,


64 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

called forth by the necessity of getting into a shell, and by
its finding the shell occupied. The same general explanation
would apply to the action of the vine weevil, which makes
a nest for its eggs by rolling up a young vine leaf. If
the tender young leaf fails it, it shaves off one membrane
of an old leaf, and uses that.^ More remarkable, if
correctly reported, is the account given by Romanes of a
spider which, being so injured that it could not spin
effectually, took to stalking its prey.^ Not only will a
hungry wolf attack a man from whom he would otherwise
fly, but according to Dahl,^ a fasting spider, which was
normally shy of dangerous insects, fought fiercely with a
wasp. The contrast between the ordinary gentleness of
the female of many mammalia and her fierceness and
bravery in defence of her young is in reality another case
in point. An example both of persistence in overcoming
obstacles and of variation in method is supplied by the
larva of Cecidipta excoecaria.

^ The female moth lavs an egg on a gall, and the resulting
larva bores into the gall and nourishes itself on the interior till
all is eaten except a thin external coat ; the caterpillar then
pupates in this chamber. The galls vary in size and shape, and
the larva displays much constructive ability in adapting its home
to its needs by the addition of tubes of silk or by other modes.
Sometimes the amount of food furnished by the interior of the
gall is not sufficient ; the larva, in such cases, resorts to the leaves
of the plant for a supplement, but does not eat them in the usual
manner of a caterpillar ; it cuts off and carries a leaf to the en-
trance of its abode, fastens the leaf there with silk, and then itself
entering, feeds, from the interior, on the food it has thus
acquired." *

Lastly, the behaviour of crabs in finding means of
concealment gives examples both of the " mechanical "
and of the more adaptive type. Many crabs have the
habit of covering themselves with seaweed or other readily
adherent objects, the utility of the action lying in the

* Schneider, p. 271. He notes it as a rare instance of an insect
altering a custom on encountering an obstacle, and thinks it implies a
certain degree of reflection.

» M.E^.p, 209. « op. ciL p. 178.

♦ Cambridge Natural History^ VI. p. 424.


IV INSTINCT 65

di^uise. In one case, that of Dorippe, the habit appears
to have degenerated into a merely mechanical reflex, the
crab, as described by Schneider, constantly taking up bits
of stone, sponge, or anything else of suitable size and
shape, and fixing them on to itself. ' As it tears away one
bit to make room for another, it will often use the same
object a second or third time over, while it will throw
away objects much better suited for its " purpose," in
favour of bits of glass which do not conceal it at all.^
On the other hand, a crab described by Mr. Bateson ^
shows more capacity for adjustment. It takes the weed
in its chelae, tears it across, puts one end in its mouth and
chews it, and finally rubs it on its head and legs until it
is caught by the hairs. If however the hairs do not catch
the piece, the crab puts it back into its mouth and chews
it up again. Here the non-fulfilment of the function has
a (Urect influence. The crab persists or repeats the
necessary steps. Whether this implies intelligence or not
is a question which we will not raise at present. We may
content ourselves with noting the fact that by whatever
means special actions are brought to bear by which the
ends of the instinct are achieveid. Still more instructive
is Schneider's' experiment on some "sea-spiders" to
which he gave pieces of paper and linen as well as bits of
algae, which they generally use. The paper and linen
were at first utterly neglected, but when Schneider removed
the algae, a divergence appeared. Of the five crabs, three
grubbed in the sand, and so covered their backs with bits
of shell and pebble, while the other two betook them-
selves to the paper and the linen. In the former case, a
second kind of habitual reaction is evoked. In the latter,
one object is substituted for another. The paper does not,
as long as algae are present, excite the crab to seize it ;
but the algae being gone, the paper steps into their place
so that the instinct may still be fulfilled. The instinct is
thus in part independent of stimulus. It needs objects in
order to work itself out, but it is not entirely set in
motion by the influence of those objects.

* Op, cit, p. 210, * Journal of Marine Biology ^ 1889-90, p. 213.

» Op, ciL p. 318.

F


66 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

7. At this point it may be asked how far we are justified
in referring well-devised adaptations of hereditary methods
to mere instinct. An alternative explanation suggests
itself. It is possible that within the sphere of instinct,
intelligence plays a certain subordinate part. Though the
impulse to a particular course of action is hereditary, there
may be sufficient intelligence not indeed to devise the whole
plan upon which the animal proceeds, but to carry out
those minor modifications which peculiar circumstances
demand. This would be an intelligence operating within
the sphere of instinct. But there are many modifications
which do not seem to require this explanation, and may be
ascribed to what we will call pure instinct ; /.^., instinct
operating without intelligence. Thus, to begin with, some
of the examples of variation adduced above are, as has been
already suggested, to be put down to the existence of more
than one hereditary reflex mechanism subserving the same
end. A normal stimulus a excites the reflex a ; a less
frequent stimulus b excites 8 ; the reaction of a to a and
/8 to B giving essentially the same result. Thus one sort
of danger may cause a creature to run away ; another may
prompt it to hide, or perhaps to stay quite still (to " sham
dead"). Here we clearly have to deal with hereditary
methods of reaction, though they are different methods.
But there is a more complex case. Though the whole
mechanism employed may be hereditary, and so in a sense
reflex, each reflex element may be suitably modified and
adjusted by the pressure of the totality of conditions. We
have seen already that in some degree this applies to
reflexes from an early stage. The replete child does not
suck. That is, the reflex excitability depends on certain
relevant organic conditions.^ In a more general way we
can now understand how an adjustment, and seemingly a

^ Another excellent illustration of the variation of response according
to the general state and requirements of the organism is seen in Prof
Whitman's observations on the leech Clepsine, quoted in Mr. Lloyd
Morgan's Animal Behaviour^ pp. 159, 160. This leech has two distinct
methods of behaviour in danger. One is to hug the surface on which it
is resting, flattening the body and stiffening the fiesh. The other is to
roll itself up into a ball, free to roll away in any direction. " If by chance
the animal has eggs, it will not desert them to escape in this way " —
otherwise it may adopt either mode of defence.


IV INSTINCT 67

very intelligent adjustment, may be efFected to difficult
circumstances through the influence that different stimuli
have in counterworking one another. ^Ir. Romanes tells
on the authority of Mr. E. L. Layanl a " snake story "
which may perhaps be explained in tms fashion.

" I once watched one (/.^., a cobra) wnich had thrust its head
through a narrow aperture and swallowed one (/.^., a toad).
With this encumbrance he could not withdraw himself. Finding
this, he reluctantly disgorged the precious morsel, which began to
move off. This was too much for snake philosophy to bear, and
the toad was again seized ; and again, after violent efforts to
escape, was the snake compelled to part with it. This time,
however, a lesson had been learnt, and the toad was seized by one
leg, withdrawn, and then swallowed in triumph." ^

Here there appears a sort of conflict between the impulse
to seize, and the necessity of withdrawing the head. The
result is a kind of compromise which happens to suit the
case well. The toad is seized, but the swallowing reflex
is kept in abeyance till the withdrawal is performed.
Without dogmatising about this particular instance, one
sees how the conflict of impulses may work out to a
harmony : how different stimuli, each severally exciting an
unsuitable reflex, may act upon and so modify one another
as to produce the required adjustment. Where each
stimulus acts alone, we get the pure reflex. Where they
act together, and in relation to a persistent internal
condition, we get instinct. Where finally we have methods
used that are neither reflex nor to be explained by this
composition of reflexes (so to call it), we must impute
intelligence. The basis of instinct is heredity, and we can
impute an action to pure instinct only if it is hereditary,
or explicable in the ways suggested by the interaction of
hereditary tendencies. The other great class of actions
are those devised by the individual animal for himself on
the basis of his own experience, and these are called gen-
erically Intelligent. Of Intelligence operating within
the sphere of Instinct there is ample evidence. There
are modifications of instinctive action directly traceable
to experience. There are adaptations which cannot be
^ Romanes, p. 262.

F 2


68 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

expluned by any interaction of purely hereditary tendencies,
and there are cases in which the whole structure of the
instinct is profoundly modified by the experience of the
individual.

The habits of solitary wasps have lately been the sub-
ject of a charming monograph by two very careful observers,
who have corrected the somewhat startling conclusions of
earlier naturalists, and have made a notable contribution
to the whole question of Instinct.^ I may quote some of
their observations :

** When the provisioning is completed the time arrives for the
final closing of the nest, and in this, as in all the processes of
Ammophilay the character of the work differs with the individual.
For example, of two wasps that we saw close their nests on the
same day, one wedged two or three pellets into the top of the
hole, kicked in a little dust and then smoothed the surface over,
finishing it all within five minutes. This one seemed possessed
by a spirit of hurry and bustle, and did not believe in spending
time on non-essentials. The other, on the contrary, was an
artist, an idealist. She worked for an hour, first filling the neck
of the burrow with fine earth which was jammed down with
much energy, this part of the work being accompanied by a loud
and cheerful humming, and next arranging the surface of the
ground with scrupulous care, and sweeping every particle of dust
to a distance. Even then she was not satisfied, but went
scampering around hunting for some fitting object to crown the
whole. First she tried to drag a withered leaf to the spot, but
the long stem stuck in the ground and embarrassed her. Relin-
quishing this, she ran along a branch of the plant under which
she was working, and, leaning over, picked up fi'om the ground
below a good sized stone, but the effort was too much for her,
and she turned a somersault on to the ground. She then started
to bring a large lump of earth, but this evidently did not come up
to her ideal, for she dropped it after a moment, and seizing an-
other dry leaf carried it successfully to the spot and placed it
directly over the nest.'* *

We find here, first, variation as between individuals, so
marked that we can hardly suppose heredity alone to
account for the details of each method. Secondly, what

* Instincts and Habits of Solitary Wasps^ by Mr. and Mrs. Peckham ;
Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey^ BuUetin No. 2,
« R 21.


IV INSTINCT 69

is more important, we find in the later case a series of
trials by which, after one or two failures, a satisfactory
result is obtained. We cannot describe this second wasp
as responding in a reflex manner to a particular kind of
object. We can only say of her that she has an impulse to
bring something suitable to cover her hole. A leaf, a stone, a
lump of earth, and again a leaf, are tried in succession until
one suits. The objects used differ greatly, the muscular re-
actions differ materially. What is constant is merely the
end to be achieved, and in some sense or other we must
regard the wasp as determined by this end, that is to say,
as acting with purpose.

The writers give several instances of the dexterity with
which wasps get spiders into their holes. In one case the wasp

"was holding it by the under side of the body, the venter
being toward the hole, and the legs spread out and stopped its
entrance. A moment's tugging convinced her that this would
not do, and she then turned the spider over, holding it by the
back, whereupon the legs at once folded themselves across the
underside of the thorax and the spider was drawn out of
sight."!

Writing of the same species {Pompilus fuscipennis )^ they
say : —

'^The spider never went in easily, always requiring to be
shifted and turned and tugged at. There was an especial tend-
ency to bite at the legs at this point of time, when the wasp,
standing within the tunnel, was trying to drag the spider down.
In one instance she managed to get it past the entrance, but it
stuck in the gallery, and after working at it in that position for a
time she brought it out, subjected the legs to a severe squeezing,
and tried again. It was still a very bad fit, but by turning it
about and pulling at it she succeeded in getting it in." ^

Another individual, of P. marginatusj stored her prey in
a hole from which she had to remove it.

" The task, however, was not an easy one. She exerted all
her strength, so that we expected to see the poor victim dis-
membered before our eyes, and still it did not come. At last
she seemed to realise that there was more than one way to accom-
plish her end, and turned her attention to cutting away the earth
to make the opening larger. After a few moments' work she

* P. 141. * P. 143-


70 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

tried again, and although the passage was still much too small for
convenience, the spider was at length dragged forth, looking
much the worse for wear." ^

Lastly, they think that a P. scekstus actually compared
spider and hole before attempting to get the prey in.

'* Presently she went to look at her nest and seemed to be
struck with a thought that had already occurred to us — that it
was decidedly too small to hold the spider. Back she went for
another survey of her bulky victim, measured it with her eye,
without touching it, drew her conclusions, and at once retiu-ned
to the nest and began to make it larger. We have several times
seen wasps enlarge their holes when a trial had demonstrated
that the spider would not go in, but this seemed a remarkably
intelligent use of the comparative faculty." *

Whatever the correct interpretation of this last obser-
vation, enough has been said to show that these wasps
adapt means to ends in a way suited to the individual
occasion. They are by no means confined to a series of
reactions evoked with mechanical uniformity by a uniform
stimulus. On the contrary, they are able to deal within
limits with each emergency presented by the individual
differences of the prey they have captured. Once again,
we cannot say that, given a spider and their hole, the
" dragging reflex ** is excited. What is excited is the
impulse to get it in^ and this is accomplished by dragging,
biting, turning over, or enlarging the hole, as the case may
be. We are dealing not with reflex action but with the
impulse to achieve a particular object to which many
muscular actions are subordinated in ways that vary
according to the needs of each case.

Without multiplying instances unnecessarily, we may
quote one further statement showing that like birds and
ants, wasps and bees are capable of modifying their whole
method of nest-building in well directed adjustment to
novel circumstances.

" Pelopceus^ instead of building in hollow trees or under shelv-
ing rocks, as was the ancient custom of the race, now nests in
chimneys, or under the eaves of buildings. We have found
T, rubrocinctum taking advantage of the face of a straw stack that

1 P. 150. « P. 158.


IV INSTINCT 71

had been cut off smoothly as the cattle were fed through the
winter. The same power of adaptation is shown by Fabre*s
experiment with Osmia^ in which he took two dozen nests in
shells from a quarry, where the bees had been nesting for
centuries, and placed them in his study along with some empty
shells and some hollow stems. When the bees came out, in the
spring, nearly all of them selected the stalks to build in as being
litter suited to their use than the shells." ^

8. By extending the field it would be easy to multiply
indefinitely instances of what we may call provisionally the
play of intelligence within instinct. I have taken the
solitary wasps because their case is typical. There is no
doubt of the instinctive character of their plan of action.
They can have no ** education " from parents, and prac-
tically none from one another. Moreover, in many
instances their action, otherwise so intelligent, becomes
strangely blind. Indeed, some of the strongest instances
of " mechanical " instinct may be drawn from this very
field. It is among the Hymenoptera, and especially among
bees and wasps, that we find instincts most wonderfully
plastic in their adaptability on one side, and most strangely
stupid in mechanical persistence on another. Some such
examples have already been quoted.* Many may be added
from Mr. and Mrs. Peckham*s work. Both among the wood-
boxing and mud-dauber wasps they find frequent cases of
the nest being carefully made and sealed up— empty !' A
single fact of this kind is enough to wreck the suggestion
that the nest-building of the wasp is a fully intelligent
process as we understand intelligence. If, again, a wasp
understood that her business was to store a nest with food,
she would hardly reject a suitable insect when she finds one
ready to hand. But there are many such instances. Having,
for example, dropped a beetle in her disturbance at being
watched, a wasp let it lie for three days close by her web
without picking it up again.* The behaviour of others
was still more irrational.

" While Cerceris was away hunting, some dry sand was thrown
into the nest and the entrance was then stopped with damp sand.

> P. 235.

2 Those of Chalicodoma grub, p. 55, 56, and the Bembex, p. 56.

' P. 84. * /^. p. 114.


72 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

She returned laden with prey, and seeing herself forced to resume
the profession of a miner, abandoned her victim, cleared the en-
trance, penetrated within, came out again, and flew off in search
of new prey. After two successive trips she penetrated a third
time into her dwelling and began to reject the dry sand which
had been thrown in. In the midst of this sand was a bee. It
was evident that in one of the trips that we had seen her make
she could not reach directly to the cell which she was provision-
ing and dropped the victim at the place where she had to stop.
Presently the wasp flew away. The hours passed on, and she
returned without a bee, entered, and threw out the other one
which she now considered an encumbering object. Thus of two
victims which were procured with great trouble, one was aband-
oned on the threshold, and the other was dropped half way in —
neither served as food for larvs. What of that ? Cerceris had
given the sting — that was enough.

^^ At another time a nest, one of the cells of which was not
entirely provisioned, was destroyed at evening. On the next
morning Cerceris brought a newly stung bee and placed it in the
hole. On the following day she came again, charged with prey,
and dropped her bee, which rolled to the bottom of the excava-
tion. She had not brought the full number for provisioning the
nest. Instinct commanded her to bring them, and she obeyed,
but not knowing where to put them, let them fall." ^

Such cases bring us back by a sharp turn to the con-
ception of instinct as a mechanism that must run down in
its own way. So does the following. A specimen of
P. tnarginatus is seen dragging a small spider along.

^^ The spider was so small that she held it in her mandibles
well above the ground, and we only speak of her as dragging it
because she walked backward and acted as though she were
obliged to exert herself. Quite often the spiders taken by this
species are too large to be carried, and then it is necessary to drag
them, and this habit is so ingrained that, when it would be much
more convenient to go straight ahead, they stick to the ancient
custom, and seem unable to move in any other way." *

We may perhaps best understand this behaviour if we
compare it with our own little foibles. We all have our
own way of doing things, and though our reason may tell
us that somebody else's way is better, still we like our own.
The basis of this liking is a kind of structure — ^which we
^ P. 209. « p. 146.


IV INSTINCT 73

may indifFerently call mental or cerebral — built up by past
actions. The structure once formed, we find satisfaction
in its exercise, and a certain dissatisfaction in anything
which excites the structure without bringing .it into full
exercise, e.g.y when we do the same thing, but are made to
do it in a different way. So it is with the wasp. It wants
to act in its own way, but we cannot infer that it is wholly
unaware of what it is doing, or in all respects incapable of
guiding its actions.

9. Still, this contrast of dull and often wholly irrational
uniformity with highly adaptive contrivances remains the
most remarkable feature of insect psychology. Is the dung-
beetle wonderfully intelligent, or crassly mechanical?
Reading of its powers of co-operation — ^how^one beetle will
push another's ball for him and so on — one is ready to
exclaim in wonder at this high development alike of
intelligence and social feeling. Reading again of their
habit at breeding time of rolling any small balls, even if
made of wood or stone,^ one is ready to swing to the
opposite extreme, and to explain what before appeared as
co-operation as due to the lack of discrimination enough to
distinguish between one pellet and another. But then,
again, what is one to think when a good observer describes
such a beetle getting out of a difficulty in a manner one
can hardly conceive of as provided for by heredity ? Mr.
Lloyd Morgan tells us of a beetle getting his ball into a hol-
low, and finding the sides too steep to roll it up, whereupon

^ leaving the ball he butted down the sand at one side of the
hollow so as to produce an inclined plane of much less angle." *

Once again, the beetle's nervous system seems to be
lifted out of the class of hereditary mechanisms.

Of the many contrasts that might be quoted from the
bee world I will give only one, where the power of adapta-
tion and the tendency to mechanical ^persistence are illus-
trated in a single case.

" Fritz Miiller has recorded a singular case bearing on the
instinct of these social Insects. He says that a nest of a small

^ Schneider, p. 187.

^ Animal Ltfle and Intelligence^ p. 368.


74 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Trigona was built in a hollow tree, and that as a consequence of
the irregularity of the hole the bees were obliged to give a very
irregular shape to their combs of honey. These bees were cap-
tured and put in a spacious box (presumably together with the
irregular comb, but this he im fortunately does not mention) :
after a year, ^ when perhaps not a single bee survived of those
which had come from the canella tree,' they still continued to
build irregular combs, though quite regular combs were built by
several communities of the same species that he had kept.'' ^

Though the bees are not so dominated by mechanism
but that they can, at need, adapt their building to the re-
quired space, the strength of inertia is still such that the
very modification once acquired tends to go on of itself.

Had we been concerned to disprove that wasps have an
intelligent conception of their whole plan of operations for
feeding their young, we might have quoted the numerous
cases in which they tolerate, or even feed, parasites, which
live upon the food which they store up for their own
grubs. But we may quote one even stronger case from
among ants, whose power of adaptive modification far ex-
ceeds that of any other insect. Every one knows the tender
care which ants bestow upon their larvae. Yet they freely
tolerate in their nest the Lomechusa beetle, the larva of
which eats their cherished young. It is as though we bred
and tended cattle which habitually devoured our children.
Does any one say that this proves the nursing of larvae to
be wholly blind i If so, let him mark what follows. The
ants not merely tolerate the Lomechusa, but actively tend
its larvae, on the same methods by which they nurse their
own. Now, it happens the nursing suited to an ant larva
is fatal to a Lomechusa larva, and in course of time the
ants appear to find this out, and modify their whole system
of nursing.^

* Cambridge Natural History^ VI. p. 64.

* Wasmann, S, d. ^.,.pp. 125-8. He says that the modified system is
applied to the ant larvae as well, produciug as a result many pseudo-
females instead of mere neuters.

Wasmann thinks the whole proceeding an insoluble problem for the
theory of animal intelligence and morality, and sees in it an illustration
of the Divine wisdom that maintains the equilibrium in nature. Whether
it is a conceivable attribute of a Divine wisdom so to make its creatures
that they can only be preserved by destroying each other, is a problem
which Dr. Wasmann does not raise. One may ask whether such a


IV INSTINCT 75

Difficult as it is to conceive the psycholc^ical conditions
under which such contrasts are possible, we may still get
some help from the analc^y of human action. When
comparative psychologists take occasional inconsistency as
proving the utter absence of intelligence, they are using
an argument which would equally disprove the existence of
intelligence in man. After all, is an ant nourishing para-
sites that destroy its young guilty of a greater absurdity
than, say, a mother promoting her daughter's happiness by
selling her to a rich husband, or an inquisitor burning a
heretic in the name of Christian charity, or an Emperor
forbidding his troops to give quarter in the name of civili-
sation ? The mother really desires her daughter's happi-
ness, but her conception of the means thereto is confused,
and rendered self-contradictory by worldly ambitions. The
inquisitor's conception of Christian charity is similarly cor-
rupted by the subtle corporate egoism of a Church and the
cruel pedantry of bad theolc^y. Even the Emperor has
some conception of civilisation, but it is the civilisation of
militarism. In all cases there impinge on the avowed plan
of action conflicting impulses of a kind not to stop the
course of action, but to merge in it and distort it. Speak-
ing generally, man is only in part conscious of his own
purposes in their real meaning and value. It is his own
nature — of which, after all, he only knows the surface —
which sets him his purpose, and impels him to carry it out.
Hence, between the course in which his own character is
driving him and the end which he recognises and formu-

wisdom, though supposed to be infinite, is not more self-contradictory than
the limited intelligence that may be attributed to ants. That a limited
intelligence should exhibit contradictions in its different processes is not
surprising, and it is the chief defect of Dr. Wasmann's book that he over-
looks this point. In the present case, for example, he attributes the
modification of nursing methods by the ants to " sense knowledge," but
refuses the name of intelligence, because Intelligence, he says, would
teach the ants that the better they nurse the Lomechusse, the more
certainly their nest will perish. That depends on the degree of intelli-
gence. There may be intelligence enough to grasp simple and immediate
results that does not extend to wider or more remote results. Be that as
it may, the intelligence of the ants appears equal^ on Wasmann's own
showing, to defeating the manoeuvres of the "Divine wisdom." The
truth is that the whole proceeding illustrates, not merely limitation of
intelligence, but, still more, perversion of instinct, disregard for the
young, otherwise so carefully tended.


76 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

lates to himself, there is room for wide discrepancy. Now,
if we imagine this original structure more elaborately
worked out in its details, so as to dominate action more
completely, and the sphere of intelligence reduced, so as to
grasp ends less adequately, we seem to approach a condition
realised in those instincts which admit some play of in-
telligence unthin their sphere. To reach ** pure instinct "
we have only to conceive the sphere of intelligence gradu-
ally reduced to zero, while the original mechanism is further
elaborated so as to provide for each separate response to
each new phase of a normal situation.

There is a further point. The psycholc^ist is apt to
characterise an instinct by what he knows of its function
in the life of the species, and either to attribute to the
animal the purpose of fulfilling that function, or to deny
it all intelligent purpose whatever. Thus, at first blush,
the neglect of parasites by the wasp, or the sealing of an
empty nest, seems to reduce all the other care and trouble
which the insect shows to a piece of meaningless stupidity,
which we can only expljun by referring it to an elaborate
but blindly working mechanism. But here, again, the
human parallel should help us. To the evolutionist, the
youth courting the maid is merely obeying an impulse
cunningly contrived by Nature for the preservation of the
species. But suppose the courting fails, and in the end the
youth dies an old bachelor for the sake of his only love,
what becomes of Nature's cunning contrivance ? The
70uth, so far as his conscious interests go, has nothing to
do with Nature's purposes. Her plans are not his. Yet
he has plans and purposes of his own, none the less intelli-
gent because they do not wholly fit in with what Nature,
with the approval of the evolutionist, has planned for him.
The relation is rather that our personified Nature has a
plan into which she inveigles the youth. He never sees
more than the next step, but the plan is so cunningly con-
trived that, as he takes that step, the next ag^n comes
into view, and he feels himself attracted or, it may be,
driven towards it. So is it also with the solitary wasp.
We cannot, for reasons given, attribute to her true under-
standing of her performances as the evolutionist understands


IV INSTINCT 77

them, but we must think of her as led on by her impulses
and the stimulus of outer things, to dig a hole, to catch and
sting caterpillars and spiders, to drag them to her hole, to
store it, lay her egg, seal it up, depart and begin anew.
Each stage, we may think, is to her as attractive or inevit-
able as the course of courtship and marriage to the youth.

lo. The difference would seem to be this. A well
developed instinct determines a long course of action.
The more it becomes suffused with intelligence, the
greater the proportion of the whole course which may be
grasped as a conscious purpose. In " pure " instinct, each
stage by passing brings on the next, and the instinct must
run through its course by a prescribed series of stages or
not at aU.i It cannot, outside narrow limits, adopt
alternatives. Intelligence, on the other hand, grasping the
ultimate sum, is indifferent as to the method by which it is
reached. Thus as intelligence rises, the fixed processes of
instinct dissolve. But intelligence does not spring into
being fully armed from the head of Zeus. It is bom
within the sphere of instinct, and at first grasps only a
little bit of what instinct prompts. It apprehends, say,
the next stage, and, ordinary means fsuling, guides some
special effort to reach that stage, the next stage, not the
ultimate end, being the purpose understood and realised by
the animal. It is easy to see how from this point it may
develop, taking remoter stages or ends into account, until
it grasps the final purpose and meaning of conduct.
Clearly also, as this development proceeds, the need for
detailed determination of response by heredity disappears.

We may perhaps make the matter clearer by symbolis-
ing the whole process somewhat in this fashion. Let a
be the beginning and z the final purpose of a life process.
Pure instinct proceeds from a to z through a uniform
series of stages b, c, d, &c. If the conditions for any
one of these fail, the instinct is wrecked. Fully adequate
intelligence makes z its goal from the beginning, and is
indifferent whether it reaches it through b, c, d, or
through any other intermediaries, b, c, d, fij 7, & Nascent

1 This is to be read with the qualifications given above as distinguishing
pure instinct from the compound reflex.


\


78 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

intelligence acting ** within the instinct ** grasps a proximate
end — e.g.y at the stage a it dims at c, and if the conditions
leading to b are not present, may substitute fi ; or, it may
be, the stage b, except as a means to c, drops out
altogether. As intelligence develops, remoter stages
become direct objects of action, the means cease to be
prescribed by hereditary tendency, and instead are chosen
with increasing freedom from the possibilities present.^

At this stage the impulse to do a certain thing is fixed
by heredity, but the means of doing it are not so fixed,
but are in part or altogether left to the individual to find
out for himself. On this basis it appears at once that the
conception of instinct becomes very elastic. The thing
to be done may be something which only requires one
step to effect it. If so, it is but one degree removed from
the reflex response. Or it may be very remote, and a
number of steps must be devised to work it out. Or,
lastly, it may be of a general character, and then the
circumstances of the individual may not only determine
the means, but may give its whole concrete filling to the
end itself. Thus in man the desire to marry is based on
an instinct, but the love of one woman is based on
circumstances peculiar to the individual. Broadly speak-
ing, it is in the last two forms that instinct remdns
important in the life of man, as laying down a scheme of
life to which experience supplies the concrete filling, and
as positing ends to which intelligence supplies the series of
intermediate steps.

To sum up. There may be much plasticity of instinct
without intelligence, but the fact that instinct is an
abiding state of the organism related to an end that may
be remote, and that the behaviour which it dictates is
from the first determined by complex conditions, and not
by a single stimulus, makes possible those more individual

^ To put the same idea in more popular fashion, we may say that the
youth's consciousness, when he first ^oes courting, is to be expressed, not
in the form, " I want a wife and family," but in the words, " I must just
see her to-day.'' Similarly, attributing language to the wasp struggling
with the spider, we must suppose her to say to herself, not "If I don't
give it this spider, my grub when it hatches will starve," but " I must get
this spider into this hole ;" and if you asked her why, the mere gift of
language alone would not enable her to tell you.


IV INSTINCT 79

and original adjustments of means to ends which we call
Intelligent. Intelligence, if this view is correct, arises
within the sphere of instinct ; indeed, we can draw no
sharp and certain line between them in nature. Yet in
idea they are quite distinct. \In so far as an act is
instinctive, it is not intelligent, and conversely. We will
not here try to determine the point at which intelligence
first arises in the animal world, but we may say that so far
as action is based upon hereditary modes of response, or
the composition of such responses, it remains pure instinct.
When, on the other hand, means are devised by the
individual on the basis of its own experience for com-
passing the ultimate and proximate ends to which it is
impelled, a new principle appears which we identify pro-
visionally with intelligence. At first narrowly limited in
scope, intelligence deals with proximate ends. As it
expands, it comes to embrace the remoter and at length
the ultimate end to which action is directed. Along with
this advance, the power of choosing the means best suited
to the purpose expands, and the determination of successive
stages of action by hereditary structure simultaneously
disappears. Thus, whether involving intelligence or not,
instinct is the abiding state directing action to the attain-
ment of certain results, but if it is pure instinct, the
actions are all of a type fixed by heredity ; they are
modifiable only by interaction with other reflexes or by the
condition of excitability which forms the " abiding state."
Modification of hereditary action not thus explicable must
be referred to the assistance given to instinct by a nascent
intelligence.

We have not raised the question whether consciousness
of any kind must be held to accompany reflex actions, or
those of "pure instinct." We shall not raise that question
now so far as animals are concerned, because there seems
to be no means of answering it. But it will be well to
consider what elements in human consciousness may be
referred to the response of hereditary structure to stimulus.
Reflex actions, so far as they are truly reflex, seem to have
no necessary connexion with consciousness. One is but
seldom aware of breathing, and one may cough in one's


8o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap, iv

sleep. The reflex may indeed in many cases supply a
sensation to consciousness, but the sensation is in no way
essential to its performance. If consciousness acts at all,
it is more likely to be for the inhibition of the reflex than
anything else. We may fdrly say, then, that the reflex as
such is not attended by or represented in consciousness.

On the other hand, all sensation is the conscious accom-
paniment of a response to stimulus by the nerve structure.
I see, not merely because the image of an object is cast
upon my retina, but because optic nerve and brain react to
that stimulus in a particular way. Experience of course
rapidly acquires a share in modelling sensation, but there
seems no reason to deny that " crude sensations," repre-
senting the reaction of the inherited structure as such to
the appropriate excitement, contribute at least one element
to our complex consciousness. In the human being, then,
sensation is the element in consciousness which we may
refer, at least in its crudest form, to inherited methods of
response. And with sensation we must class feeling.
Feeling, indeed, is more conspicuously connected with
response, since it is generally if not necessarily and essen-
tially associated with important muscular reactions afl^ecting
not only the ** voluntary" muscles but those of the viscera.
Whether these contractions are to be regarded as cause or
eflFect of the feeling is a question somewhat fruitlessly
raised by contemporary psychology, into which we shall
not enter. We merely note that feeling is the conscious
state associated with certain responses of the physical
structure determined in the first instance by heredity.
Whether hereditary responses do or do not yield sensation
and feeling to animals, there seems no reason to doubt that
they yield them to man.^

^ It may be objected that, as we have no direct means of examining an
infant's consciousness, we cannot prove that any feeling arises until the
brain structure has been modified in experience. But the question thus
raised is not very material. The point is that sensation and feeUng arise
in the reaction of a preformed structure to stimulus. Whether the pre-
formation is, in the case of man, effected entirely by heredity or in part
by experience is not very important in view of the very different degrees
of perfection with which heredity does its work in different species. A
reflex perfect on the second day is little less hereditary than one that is
strictly congenital.


CHAPTER V.

ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT^

I. Under the names of reflex action and instinct, we
have dealt with one method by which animal organisms
adjust their actions to suit their needs. This adjustment,
as we have seen, rests in a sense upon a correlation of the
experiences of the race. For if instinct is based upon
heredity, and heredity conditioned by natural selection,
the growth of an instinctive tendency is determined by the
aid which it gives in preserving the race. From the germ
of an instinct onward, those individuals in which it is more
vigorous or more advanced have an advantage in the
struggle for existence over others, and thus in accordance
with the current theories of the origin of species, an
instinct attains its perfect development. The same thing
may be said of reflex action, and of all that part of animal
behaviour which depends directly upon the response of
hereditary structure to stimulus. Thus by the action of
purely biological causes a correlation is effected between
the past experiences and the subsequent behaviour of a
spedes, whereby action is adapted to circumstances, as the
conditions of race-maintenance require.

But, as we saw in Chapter I., this is not the only nor
the most efficient form of correlation between experience
and action. Throughout the greater part if not the whole

' In this chapter I am largely indebted to Dr. Ward's articles on
Assiniilation and Association m Mind {N.S,, Vols. II. and III.). The
corresponding portions of Mr. Stout's ManucU of Psychology^ which
unfortunately I had not seen when the chapter was written, contains a
dear and cogent statement of views which are, in the main, the same
as those expressed below.

G


82 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

of the animal kingdom, the individual organism has a
certain power, greater or less as the case may be, of
effecting a similar correlation within its own lifetime. It
does not come into existence with all its actions prede-
termined in every detail by inherited structure, for we find
its behaviour modified as its life advances. We have seen
that a measure of such modification arises within the
sphere of " pure instinct.*' But to complete our accoimt
of instinct, we were forced to take notice of cert^n more
thorough-going modifications which could not be explained
in the same way. Such modifications we referred pro-
visionally to intelligence, meaning by intelligence the
bower of an organism to adapt action to re quireme nt
Iwithout the guidance of a hereditary method of adjustment.
We have now to ask what proof there is that any given
adjustment is thus discovered, so to say, by the individual,
and is not merely some subtler or less usual device of
heredity. The broad answer to this question is that
modification in accordance with the results of experience
must be our main criterion. When we find an animal,
for example, first acting in one way, and then, after
experience of results, acting in another, we must ascribe
the change to the eflFect of its experience, a. The modified
action is not hereditary ; it arises in and out of the
/experience of the animal, and indicates that in some degree
j the animal can correlate its own past experiences with its
(subsequent action. In this correlation we have already
found the generic essence of intelligence, and our task will
now be to describe the form in which it first appears, and
then to trace its further evolution. In the growth of this
power of correlation lies the evolution of Mind.
2. Experience and inference.

Physiologically considered, the effects of experience
upon behaviour form a special case of organic adaptability.
But it may be remarked here once for all that when we
speak of experience, we shall mean a special kind of
experience and a special case of organic adaptability.
Wherever after a cert^n experience the organism adapts
itself better to a certain sort of stimulus, it has un-
doubtedly been modified by its experience, but it has not


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 83

necessarily learnt anything by experience of results. Thus
any oi^anism, from Protozoa to man, is likely to tolerate
unusual heat or cold better after a certain amount of
exposure to it than at first.* But we do not tolerate
extreme heat better because we have found its effects to be
beneficial. The exposure puts a certain strain on the
organism. If the organism responds to the strain, and
does not sink under it, it is able to bear a similar strsun
better a second time. We are not, without further
evidence, warranted in attributing such a change to
experience of the results of such a response. For it is
part of the general law of organic adaptability that a thing
done once is more easily done a second time, and a thing
suflFered once is, if recovery is complete, more easily
suffered a second time. So far as this law applies, the'
organism is modified not by experience of the consequences
of what it does, but by the doin^Jtself. Many of the
effects of practice and exercise s^m tcTbe referable to the
direct influence, as we may call it, of experience. Thus,
as we have seen, many reflexes are more or less imperfect
at birth, and are improved by practice. But it does not
follow that the improvement is due to experience of the
results of the reflex. In any exercise involving strength
in a particular muscle, we improve with practice because
the muscle itself grows stronger, and it grows stronger,
not because we find that it is better so, but through a
reflex arrangement by which exercise increases its blqod
supply, that is to say, secures it more nourishment.^ In
the same way, there is every probability that a reflex
mechanism improves not only through the confirmation of
well adapted actions and the inhibition of others, but also
because usage makes the different parts work better
together. In learning to ride a bicycle, we are told to
turn to the side towards which we are beginning to fall.
We do this at first consciously and awkwardly. By
degrees we respond at once more rapidly and more gently

* For adaptation of this sort among Protozoa sec Verwom, Prot. SL ;
for Fla^ellata, p. 42 ; Stentor, p. 72, &c.

* This is, of course, a result of the exercise, but it is not through
learning that this result follows that we modify our use of the limb, but
the result itself is such as to give us an improved limb.

G 2


84 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

to the stimulus, and in this way we soon, or late, learn
to balance without perceptible oscillation or conscious
effort. The improvement is, doubtless, largely due to the
confirmation of more and inhibition of less successful
responses. But it would seem that something must also
be set down to the readier appreciation and more perfect
conduction of the excitement by the nerves — their more
perfect control of the muscles. At any rate, this explana-
tion has to be taken into account wherever we have to deal
with an action which is the same in general character and
apparent purpose from the beginning, and merely improves
with practice in its execution. It probably explains the
slowly acquired mastery of its reflexes by a young child,
and the rapidly growing perfection of pecking by a newly
hatched chick.^ And I should be inclined to apply it to
most of the many human accomplishments in which what
one is definitely taught bears but a small proportion to
what muscles, nerves, and nerve centres have to learn in
the way of execution.

But there are other cases in which action is not merely
improved in execution, but profoundly modified in
character by experience. We may say that it is re-
directed. And in these cases we can point to the results
of the act as the operative cause. The burnt child that
dreads the fire does not grasp at the flame more efficiently,
but refrains from grasping at all. The direction or aim of
the action is reversed, and reversed, as we know, in con-
sequence of its result when tried. It is because the child
has modified its behaviour in consequence of a relation
experienced between act and consequent, that its conduct
has been taken as the type of experience acting as the
basis of rational conduct. The unit of reasoning is a
relation of datum and consequence, whether the act of
reasoning be merely to apply the knowledge of the relation
in a fresh case, or to use it as a brick in building up some
more complex mental structure. There are vast differ-
ences between the ways in which this relation is grasped
and used by minds of different orders, but the relation

1 See Lloyd Morgan, Habit and Instinct^ p. 36. See also Preyer, I.
p. 236, and Thomdike, Psych. Review^ Vol. VI. pp. 284 et seq.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 85

itself seems to be the pivot of all inference. It is through
this relation that an object of experience points the mind
to something beyond itself. Hence any action resting
implicitly or explicitly on an experienced relation between
datum and consequence may be said to be of the inferential
type. Such a " relation " may be " experienced " as we
shall see in very different forms, and in very different degrees
of explicitness, but we ought not, as I think, to exclude
from the type any action based on an experience into
which, however inarticulately, such a relation enters as an
essential element. I should say, then, that when we
experience a certain result as flowing from a certain line of
conduct, and modify our behaviour accordingly, we are
drawing a simple inference. Action of this kind is of the
inferential type, and is in line urith the general development
of intelligence. When, on the other hand, we bear heat
or pain better merely because we have borne a good deal
already, it is not our conscious intelligence that is directing
our conduct in accordance with experienced results, but the
heat or pain which have had a physical effect on us that
has left a permanent trace. When I speak of experience, \
then, I mean experience of thQ kind on which inference is \
founded, and that is, to speak generally, experience of]
relations.

3. Confirmation and Inhibition.

In human beings, the operation of experience in its
simplest form is seen when impulsive, reflex or random
actions are modified by the pleasure or pain immediately
resulting. But this operation of experience is, to all out-
ward appearance, as familiar among animals as among men.
The burnt puppy, as some one has said, dreads the fire as
much as the burnt child. Is it making an assumption to
say that both dread it for the same reason — namely, that
both feel ? If it is an assumption, we must make it pro-
visionally, for the sake of compendiously describing the
simplest cases of the action of experience. After a pre
liminary description, we may refer to our assvunption
agsdn.

Experience does not, it must be remembered, arise in a
vacuum. The senses do not furnish a dark room. On the


86 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

contrary, experience begins to operate on organisms that
have already certain tendencies to act, and its first effect is
to modify those tendencies. This operation, in its simplest
and also its completest form, is beautifully illustrated by
Mr. Lloyd Morgan*s observations on young chickens.

'* With regard to the objects at which domestic chicks peck, in
the absence of any parental guidance, one may say that they
strike at first with perfect impartiality at anything of suitable
size : grain, small stones, bread-crumbs, chopped-up wax matches,
currants, bits of paper, buttons, beads, cigarette-ash and ends,
their own toes and those of their companions, maggots, bits of
thread, specks on the floor, their neighbours' eyes — anything and
everything, not too large, that can or cannot be seized is pecked
at, and, if possible, tested in the bill. . . . There does not seem
to be any congenital discrimination between nutritious and in-
nutritious objects, or between those which are nice and those
which are nasty. This is a matter of individual acquisition.
They soon learn, however, what is good for eating, and what is
unpleasant, and rapidly associate the appearance with the taste.
A young chick two days old, for example, had learnt to pick out
pieces of yolk from others of white of egg. I cut little bits of
orange-peel of about the same size as the pieces of yolk, and one
of these was soon seized, but at once relinquished, the chick
shaking his head. Seizing another, he held it for a moment in
the bili^ but then dropped it and scratched at the base of his beak.
That was enough ; he could not again be induced to seize a piece
of orange-peel. The obnoxious material was now removed, and
pieces of yolk of egg substituted, but they were left untouched,
being probably taken for orange-peel. Subsequently, he looked
at the yolk with hesitation, but presently pecked doubtfully, not
seizing, but merely touching. Then he pecked again, seized,
and swallowed.

"To some other chicks I threw cinnabar larvz, distasteful
caterpillars, conspicuous by alternate rings of black and golden-
yellow. They were seized at once, but dropped uninjured ; the
chicks wiped their bills — a sign of distaste — and seldom touched
the caterpillars a second time. The cinnabar larvae were then
removed, and thrown in again towards the close of the day.
Some of the chicks tried them once, but they were soon left.
The next day the young birds were given brown loopers and
green cabbage-moth caterpillars. These were approached with
some suspicion, but presently one chick ran oflF with a looper,
and wa3 followed by others, one of which stole and ate it. In a
few minutes all the caterpillars were cleared off. Later in the
day they were given some more of these edible caterpillars, which


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 87

were eaten freely ; and then some cinnabar larvae. One chick
ran, but check^ himself, and, without touching the caterpillar,
wiped his bill — a memory of the nasty taste being apparently
suggested by association at sight of the yellow-and-black cater-
pillar. Another seized one, and dropped it at once. A third
subsequently approached a cinnabar as it crawled along, gave the
danger note, and ran off. Then I threw in more edible cater-
pillars, which again were eaten freely. The chicks had thus
learnt to discriminate by sight between the nice and the nasty
caterpillars." *

The inference from these observations seems clear enough.
The inherited tendency of the chicks is to peck — ^to peck
at "anything and everything, not too large." But ex-
perience very rapidly teaches that it is pleasant to peck at
some things — such as yolk of egg, or cabbage-moth cater-
pillars — and very unpleasant to peck at others, such as
cinnabar caterpillars or bits of orange-peel. The tendency
to peck at the one sort of object is accordingly confirmed.
The tendency to peck at others is inhibited. And the
result is that pecking, from being an indiscriminate ten-
dency, becomes a definite mode of response to certain
objects. The instinctive tendency is regulated, narrowed,
and defined, as it becomes a habit in which experience has
played its part.

This form of the action of experience is very widely dif-
fused in the animal kingdom, and is too simple to need
much further illustration. But I may note one or two cases
illustrating an important difference in one point. One in-
stance was sometimes enough to teach Mr. Lloyd Morgan*s
sharp little chicks. But the effect of the experience tends
to wear off with time. The chick that had learnt to re-
ject the cinnabar larva at one hour would perhaps try it
ag^n later in the day, or perhaps he would make a move-
ment to try it, and then, as we should say of a human
being, recollect himself. More marked cases of this gradual
growth and equally gradual obliteration of the effects of
experience may be seen in other animals. Thus DahP
gave a spider a fly dipped in turpentine. The spider
sprang upon it three times, and, disliking the turpentine,

^ Lloyd Morgan, Hadit and Instinct^ pp. 40-42.
« Op. at. p 173.


88 MIND IN EVOLUTION - chap.

withdrew on each occasion. After the third attempt, it
turned aside when the fly came in sight. Three instances
sufficed to inhibit the impulse to spring. Nor would the
spider for some hours attack a fly of the same species that
was innocent of turpentine. The next day the spider
attacked the fly in turpentine again, but once only.

Here three experiences were necessary to establish the
result in the first instance, and on the following day the
eflFect was partially obliterated, so that one instance was
needed to renew it. Every one is familiar with similar
points in the working of human memory — ^the ** fixing " of
a verse by repetition, its fading with time, and its revival
by perhaps a single reading.

It may be worth while to place in contrast with the in-
stances given above a case of extreme stupidity in this
respect. Speaking of a number of fish in an aquarium,
Mr. Bateson says : —

^ None of the fish seem to get any lasting appreciation of the
nature of the plate glass wall of the tank. The same fish will
again and again knock its head against the glass in trying to
seize objects moving on the other side."

A dangling button, or even a curl of smoke, may attract
them. After repeated attempts, they will desist, but some
of the oldest inhabitants, which have been living in the
aquarium about a year, will try again next time. This
failure is no doubt partly due to dulness of sense per-
ception, but, considering the length of time allowed for
learning, it implies a surprising incapacity for turning ex-
periences to account — a stupidity surpassing even that of
Mobius's pike, which, after dashing itself for three months
against a glass partition in the attempt to Rtt at some
minnows, became at last so firmly persuaded of the danger
of attacking them that, when the partition was removed,
it left them quite unmolested.

The cases which have been quoted, and which might be
indefinitely multiplied, admit of a simple general descrip-
tion. A certain stimulus, in the case of the chick some
small object within striking distance, evokes a reaction — in
this case pecking. This reaction has a certain result, con-


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 89

nected in this case with the swallowing or tasting of the
object, and in future the same stimulus evokes a modified
reaction. The modification may be in either of two direc-
tions. The " result " — the tasting or swallowing — may be
to confirm the original mode of reaction, so that in one
instance that sort of object is in future preferred for peck-
ing at and swallowing to others. This was the case with
the yolk of egg and the green caterpillars. Or it may be
to prevent or inhibit the reaction, as in the case of the
orange-peel or the cinnabar larvs. In either case, we have
a sequence of facts which we may symbolise thus : —

Stimulus Reaction Consequence
s r p

followed by

s p w

In this sequence, all the links mentioned but one are
matters of direct observation. That one is the consequence
which I have called p. Now, in our human experience, we
have also direct knowledge of p. It is in such simple
cases as those described a feeling, and if its action is con-
firnuitory of the reaction which caused it, it is a pleasant
feeling ; if inhibitory ^ a painful feeling. We need not
labour this point. The burnt child dreads the fire because
it hurts, and continues to steal the sugar with increasing*
avidity because it is sweet. In the case of the chick, we
cannot directly observe the feeling. We can, however,
be sure that something happens in the place where we
have put p^ otherwise there would be no cause to account
for the subsequent change — and the action of this some-
thing is precisely analogous to the action of pleasure and
pain in human experience.*

1 We feel sure about the child, first, because we know our own feelings,
and it is so like ourselves ; and secondlyr, because it expresses itself in
ways which we understand. The chick is not quite so like ourselves,
and we do not understand all its expressions so readily. Still, the
inference is at bottom the same. If we extend our reasonings from our
fellow men to our fellow creatures with due attention to the points of
identity and difference, we shall find them corroborating, not conflicting
with one another. And this, in the end, is the test of all reasoning.
Moreover, whether a feeling or not, something happens to the burnt
kitten precisely comparable m cause and effect to that which be&lls the
burnt child. Whenever this occurs — whenever the behaviour of an
animal forces us to infer a change essentially similar in its causes and its


90 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

The analogy may be carried a little further. G>nfining
ourselves for the moment to the action of pain and the
case in which a mode of reaction is inhibited, we have to
remark that the act of inhibition is of a twofold character.
We have spoken already of the subsequent and more or
less permanent effect of the painful experience, but this is
only a sort of repetition of its immediate effect. If there
is time, pain inhibits or arrests the particular action that
is causing it. A nasty morsel is spat out from the mouth ;
the hot potato is dropped before it is well seized. It is the
same with the chicks. The orange-peel, the very first
time it is seized, is ^* at once relinquished, the chick shaking
his head." Another is held for a moment, and then
dropped, the chick scratching " at the base of his beak " —
to rub away the taste, as a child would explain. Significant
in this relation is the behaviour of another chick, who had
already had experience of cinnabar larvae. When, later in
the day, more were given him, he " ran but checked him-
self, and without touching the caterpillar, wiped his bill."
Mr. Lloyd Morgan explains this as due to " a memory of
the nasty taste " being " suggested by association at sight
of the yellow and black caterpillar." We may be content
to point out that a movement of rejection, a movement
•adapted to getting rid of a nasty taste, is evoked by the
sight of the caterpillar just as it was in the original ex-
perience by its presence in the chick's mouth. In the same
way, to swallow very disagreeable food may produce in us
retching or actual sickness, and if the impression is very

effects to one which, as we know it among ourselves, is accompanied by a
certain state of consciousness — I shall speak of the two changes by the
same name. By using such language, I do not wish to prejudge the
question whether they are identical in diaracter. Indeed, I am not here
concerned so much with the kind of consciousness that animals may
enjoy, as with the bearings of their experiences on their actions and
achievements. In describmg the behaviour of an animal, to use terms
derived from the human consciousness is often the only way of avoiding
intolerable prolixity. Properly guarded and corrected by attention to
points of difference as well as resemblance, such usage can lead to so
little error that, even if we were ultimately to decide that all animals were
automata, no change but that of names would be needed in our account.
By "feeling" in an animal, then, we shall mean a state essentially similar
in causation and function to that which we know as feeling in ourselves.
Whether it is similar in other respects, is a question which we do not
decide by merely using the term. And so with similar terms.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 91

strong, the mere sight or even the bare idea of such food
may subsequently produce a certain feeling of nausea, or
perhaps evoke gestures expressing violent rejection.

The upshot of these considerations is that the pain felt
in such cases,* is the expression in consciousness^ of inhibitory
movement — withdrawal, shrinking, flight, rejection, what-
ever it may be that is best adapted to cutting short the
effect of some stimulus, or some reaction which one has
incautiously made. Conversely, pleasure is the expresaon
of confirmatory movement tending to prolong the reaction,
or carry it out strenuously to its final development — to
swallow with gusto, or to expose more and more of the
surface to the pleasing contact.

4. From this slight account, we can gather a certain
conception, however inadequate, of the nature of the change
whereby experience modifies a reaction. The first point
which emerges clearly is that the inhibitory movement,
which on a superficial view may seem to appear for the
first time after the organism has once had a " painful **
experience really first appears in the first experience itself,
and is merely repeated under somewhat modified conditions,
and accordingly with different results, in the later ex-
periences. Let us analyse this modified repetition. The
sight of the cinnabar caterpillar was at first a stimulus to
pecking. The result of the peck was the taste^^ and the
taste involved the movement of rejection. But the taste also
of course involved contact of the food with the tongue or
palate, and if we divide these two stages of the consequence
p of the reaction, we get altogether not three stages, but
four.


5 — r — c —


P


(the sight) (pecking) (*< unpleasant "


(movement of


taste)


rejection).


afterwards we have s followed at once by p


(the sight) (rejection)


1 I am &r from saying that there is no other source of feeling than the
motor reaction to sense stimulus.

* The term " expression " is meant to convey a concomitance of the
intimate nature of which we are ignorant, though we know it must be
something other than bare concomitance.

' The word is used, of course, with the provisions and on the grounds
explained above (p. 89, note).


92 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Strictly, what is altered is not p, which came into exist-
ence, at any rate in tendency and effect, in the first
experience, but the effect of s. j, which before called
forth r, now excites p, and the intervening stage c seems
to have nothing to do with the matter. How then is the
action of s modified ?

We can partly answer this by understanding accurately
how far it has been modified. In this way : that instead
of evoking as before a pecking movement, it either has no
outward result at all, or it evokes a contrary movement of
rejection or aversion, which movement is of the same
character as one that it previously excited through an
intermediary. This gives us the broad character of the
whole proceeding. The excitement aroused by a certdn
stimulus has taken to itself, or assimilated the character of
another excitement which it has previously brought about.
The excitement originally produced by the sight of the
orange-peel prompted pecking. Pecking produced a con-
tact with the inside of the bill, which in its turn produced
a violent movement of rejection. Now the first excitement
becomes clothed with the character of the second in greater
or less degree, so that either the two motor excitements
— ^the original and the acquired— cancel each other and
produce absolute indifference, or the acquired effect pre-
dominates, and there is a movement of disgust.^

There is a further point. In the instances taken, the
inhibitory movement in the first trial follows close upon

* Mr. Stout, with whose very clear account of this process the above is,
generally speaking, in close agreement, passes one criticism on the alter-
nation theory which seems to po too far. This theory attributes to the
chick a "faintly revived sensation of disgust" accompanying the sight of
the caterpillar. Mr. Stout objects {^Manual of Psychology^ p. 88) that this
would lead to two movements which would interfere with one another
only so far as they are " mechanically incompatible." " One would expect
a nondescript blend of the two movements, or an alternation between
them.** Mr. Stout seems to overlook the point that it would be two
divergent cerebral processes that would be set up, and that these might
fight it out within the brain and without appearing in outward action.
But, in point of fact, the two processes do at times (as some of the above
instances show) give evidence of themselves in action. We really get
occasionally something like a blend or an alternation. I think, therefore,
that we should admit a double excitement, and distinguish the growth of
positive movements, or expressions of aversion, from that of the direct
extinction of the original movement towards acceptance.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 93

the heels of the instinctive response. Now we know that
a wave of excitement once started in the nervous system
persists for a certain short time. Hence the inhibitory wave
arises before the original excitement has subsided, and as
we have seen, impinges on and perhaps modifies or half
cancels it in the very first instance. And this modification
tends to persist, or at least leave a trace. For we find that
as painful experiences are repeated, the original impulse is
not merely checked, but sooner or later dies away. This
part of the process of learning is therefore suggestive of the
fusion of two immediately consecutive waves of excitement.
If this is what actually occurs in the lowest forms of learn-
ing, the element of time would in such cases become an
essential condition of success. Whatever the theory of the
matter, in the instances taken the results which go to
modify the eflfects of an excitement are in point of fact as
nearly as possible immediate results, and are in fact based
on a second quality of the same object which by its first
perceived quality excites the reaction. There is then some
ground for classing these cases together, and holding that
the primitive form of modification by experienced results
is that in which the result which operates is immediately
due to the reaction upon the original stimulus, being in
very many if not in all cases brought about by a second
stimulus which the reaction itself brings to bear upon the
oi^anism. The instances of tasting, burning, bruising, &c.,
which we have used, are all obviously of this class. We
may then define the first type of the quasi-inferential modi-
fication of behaviour which we have come across as the
modification of the reaction to a certain stimulus due to
the immediate eflFects of the reaction,^

* The above description of the elementary workings of experience must
not be taken for an attempt at explanation. How a fleeting experience
can have a permanent effect is strictly a metaphysical rather than a
psychological question, and beyond saying that there must be something
permanent, whether we call it mind or brain, on which successive experi-
ences act, metaphysics can I fear do little to answer it. It may be well
however in view of certain misunderstandings which have arisen, to
remind the reader that the " excitements," " feelings," &c., of which I
speak have no substantial existence, but are states of the permanent
subject, and that when we speak of their '' interactions," the " effect of
one excitement on another," and so forth, we are merely using a familiar
form of speech to describe relations between different states, or the eflfects
of an experience on the permanent susceptibilities of its subject.


94 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

5. The effect of this kind of modifiability is best seen
by considering its bearing upon instinct. It acts upon a
certain sort of instinctive reaction, and tends, as Mr. Lloyd
Morgan has well said, to "define" the instinct. We have
seen that an instinct may be congenitally more or less
perfect, more or less definite, as the case may be. There
is nothing in the general nature of instinct to make it
inconceivable that a chick should be bom with an inherited
tendency, working with certainty and precision from birth,
to peck at one sort of caterpillar and avoid another, just as
a certain fly passes over other places, and lays its eggs
where a horse will lick them, and so get them into its
alimentary canal where they are destined to be hatched.
But chicks are not born so. They peck at small things
indiscriminately at first, and experience cuts them off
certain things and concentrates them on others. Just as
the fly reacts to one particular very definite object, so the
chick reacts to the very indefinite object "small thing
within reach.' ^ Experience circumscribes this object. It
excludes from it yellow and black striped caterpillars, bits
of orange-peel and so on, while it promotes green cater-
pillars or bits of egg to prominence within the class of
objects that remain. What is true of the chick is true in
varying degree of numberless other birds and mammals in
instincts of various kinds. It is natural to look on the
aversion and terror manifested by a kitten when it first
sees a dog as based on an instinctive dread and horror of
dogs as dogs. But in fact, what is congenital appears to
be a reaction to the dog's smell,^ which can be inhibited,
moreover, by familiarity with friendly dogs. It is natural
to speak of a chick as instinctively dreading the cry of a
hawk, or as " knowing " its mother's warning cry or her
inviting cluck by instinct. But it appears truer to fact to
say that sounds of that quality aflfect the young bird, and
that the particular note to which it will respond by cower-
ing or coming forward will depend largely on the way in
which its hereditary tendencies have been modified by
experience. Similarly, one would say that a lamb instinct-
ively follows its mother. But it is truer to say that by

* Wesley Mills, pp. 176 and 177.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 95

nature it has an inclination to follow any large animal,
and that experience teaches it to single out its mother as
the best animal to follow. Similarly, the young orang-
outang clings to its mother, but not because it is the
mother, but because it has a tendency to hang on by its
claws to something hairy — a tendency of which Dn Wallace
availed himself to make a dimimy mother for an orphan of
that species.

Summing up a mass of evidence upon this point, Mr.
Lloyd Morgan says, instincts

. . . "are evoked by stimuli, the general type of which is
Burly definite, and may, in some cases, be in response to particular
objects. Of the latter possibility we have, however, but little
satisfactory evidence.'* *

And again,

"acquired definiteness is built, through association, on the
foundation of congenital responses, which are modified, under
experience, to meet new circumstances." *

Thus the general function of experience, so far, is greatly
to increase the plasticity whereby the instinctive reactions
of an individual can be adjusted to his circumstances. It
may be said to make possible the rise of instincts adjusted
at birth to stimuli of a highly general, instead of a defi-
nitely particularised character, and this is the first step in
the conversion of an instinct into a general tendency
capable of being directed by experience. The instinctive
tendency as such becomes more general, and experience
makes it definite.^

' Habit and Instinct^ P- 99* * P. loa

' There is, indeed, a still more elementary form in which experience
may be said to define or particularise an instinct. In the description of
the stalking of a sandhopper by a crab, we noted how actions were
adapted to the particular circumstances of the case, and this notwith-
standing that each action was of an instinctive origin, and would be
repeated without change under similar circumstances. The perception of
the sandhopper and its actions, however, brought these different acts to
bear in a way which might never be repeated m precisely^ the same way
in any second case. Thus there was an element of individuality as well
as an element of generality about the instinctive act. The instinct of the
crab is to hunt sandhoppers. Its perception brings the instinct to bear
upon the individual sandhopper, and the instinct works itself out according
to the behaviour of the sandhopper and its relations to the crab. We
are carried a step further when a hunt is continued after the prey is out


96 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

6. Retrogressive AssimilaHon.

In the cases hitherto discussed, there was to begin with
a reaction, random or instinctive, to a certain stimulus, and
the effect of experience was to modify this reaction. We
pass now to cases in which a reaction is acquired to which
there is no initial tendency. In the former cases, the
reaction had to be modified ; in these it has to be as it
were created.

The sight of a man or the sound of a human voice
cannot under ordinary circumstances stimulate a wild
animal that does not prey upon man to expect food or
prepare to receive it. But if the same animal is caught
and kept in captivity, it will soon "get to know" its
keeper and perhaps its feeding time. If it is an intelligent
animal it may itself be readily tr^ned to make conventional
signs of itsdeare for food, as I have seen an elephant ring-
ing a bell and turning a rattle, while a smaller elephant in
the next stall would knock with its trunk against the sides
of its cage to win back to itself the attention and the buns
which were being unfairly attracted by its neighbour. But
in its simpler form, this operation of experience is seen
very much lower down in the intellectual scale. Fish, for
example, who are accustomed to be fed, will come to the
surface and be ready to snap as soon as any one approaches
their tank. Mr. Bateson^ describes a roclding which
under these circumstances would lift its head above water

of the range of perception. Thus Schneider {of, cit p. 312) describes
how a turtle hunted tor a hermit crab that had taken refuge between
some big stones — ^an action which he regards as proving the existence of
an idea of the crab in the mind of the turtle. Without going so far as
this, we may, at any rate, say that the perception of the prey here
maintains its influence after it is past. It causes the same sort of efforts
to get at the victim as would be put forward were the victim still in sight.
Much the same may be said of the " homing " which is common i^x down
in the animal scale. The snail, after it has eaten and is well filled, returns
alone its trail to rest in the comer that it has already found secure and
comfortable. The instinct to return is, of course, directed by the par-
ticular place which serves as home for the time being. Such seem to be
the most elementary cases in which an experience has a certain after
effect — modifying, directing, or defining impulse. It is by no means easy
to decide in such cases whether we have to do with experience of results
(experience of the inferential type), or not. Many of them seem rather to
be covered by what Mr. Stout calls Primary Retentiveness. {MamuU^
p. 81.)
* Journal of Marine Biology^ p. 238.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 97

and snap at the fingers. According to Brehm^ tortoises
and turtles in general become accustomed to men who
treat them well — though it is probably the human form or
voice to which they react, as it is elsewhere said that the
most easily tameable of Chelonia do not distinguish indi-
viduals.* Watersnakes, we learn on the same authority,'
get excited when the keeper bringing food opens the door
(though they are often stupid enough to bite the tongs),
and similar facts are recorded of frogs and toads.^ In fact,
this grade of intelligence is fairly well marked among
Fish, Reptiles, and Amphibia. Similar instances among
Birds are given by Mr. Lloyd Morgan. **

" A moorhen chick, for whose benefit we had dug up worms
with a spade, and which, standing by, jumped on the first-turned
sod and seized every wriggling speck which caught his keen eye,
would soon run from some distance to me as soon as I took hold
of the spade."

How are we to understand these cases ?
There are three possible explanations.

a. It may be that the animal is aware of the con-
nection between the object to which it is at first indifferent,
and the feeding or other experience, whatever it be, in
which it is interested — /.^., it observes and remembers that
the one leads to the other.

Without at all denying that this may be the true
account of the process in certain cases, we must notice that
there are two other possible explanations which do not
imply so much intelligence.

b. The originally " indifferent " object may be directly
associated with the object of interest.

The keeper brings the food, and the sight and smell
thereof, which stimulate the animal to come forward
eagerly and seize it, are intertwined in its perception with
the sight of the keeper. The spade turns up the worms,
and the moorhen picks them. The excitement of picking
is thus fused with the sight of spade and digging, and this

* Thierlebeny VII. p. 547.

* lb, p. 562. ^ lb. p. 471.

* lb. pp. 667 and 700. Cf. Weir, Dcnun of Reason^ p. 72.
^ HMi and Instinct^ p. 148.

H


98 . MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

spectacle takes on permanently the character which belongs
to it in certain experiences. In other words, we have a
slightly modified case of assimilation. As before the sight
of the black and yellow striped grub took upon itself the
character of an object of aversion, so the spade or the
keeper becomes an object of attraction. This explanation
is at least possible wherever the perception of the object
which thus acquires a power of exciting the organism can
be reasonably supposed to have been, in an earlier ex-
perience, an element in a state of excitement similar in its
tendency and character.

c. But it is also possible, and in some cases probable,
that more or less random movements of the animal itself
play a part. The fish that first happens to come near the
surface will get the pick of the crumbs, and this fact will
tend to confirm or " stamp in " the random mode of re-
action. In the instance quoted above from Preyer,^ irrita-
tion of the skin set up random reflexes, of which some
gave relief, and were accordingly preferred. Apart, how-
ever, from the simplest cases, in which the originally
random movement meets immediate " confirmation,'* there
remans for this explanation a cert^n difficulty which has
been very clearly pointed out by Mr. Thorndike,* who has
made much more liberal use of the explanation than any other
writer. Except in these cases, the " confirmatory " wave
must come after the initial movements of the action leading
up to it are well over. How than can it help to establish
them ? To this the first reply is, Can it do so } That is
to say, apart from intelligence, is any complicated or
lengthy series of actions learnt in this way } It so — ^which
remains to be proved — I imagine that the " confirmatory
wave " must be conceived * as gradually spreading, as it
were, backward. We can imagine the delight of feeding
and the impulse to come to the best place for it attached,
first to the sight of the food itself, then to the keeper who
brings it, then to the sound of his approaching footsteps,
and finally, perhaps, to the click of a gate which he opens

' P. 42. ' Animal Intelligence^ pp. 103, 104.

' That is to say, if (i) we assume (as above, p. 93) that the primitive
form of assimilation rests on fusion of excitements, and (2) we treat these
cases as mere extensions of the primitive form.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 99

on his way. Remoter associations of this kind are un-
doubtedly formed, and it would be interesting to get some
det^led account of the way in which they are formed,
particularly among animals of no very great intelligence.
I do not know of any decisive evidence on this point, and
I must, therefore, let this third explanation stand as a
possibility, even in the case of somewhat lengthy trains of
association.^

7. Of the three explanations offered, the second and
third, though different in detail, are alike in principle. Both
dispense with any intelligent apprehension of the relation
between act and consequence, and trace the genesis of a
response to the power of an excitation to absorb into itself
or assinulate the motor tendencies or feelings with which
it is intimately associated. Since this simpler explanation
covers the facts, we have no right, on the strength of mere
modification of response to stimulus alone, to impute the
higher degree of intelligence suggested by the first expla-
nation. It is no doubt natural to explain an alteration of
behaviour towards an object by saying that the animal re-
members the results of previous action, and infers that
similar results will follow in a fresh case. It may seem a
still more modest assimiption if we explain that the ideas of
two objects or two qualities— of keeper and food, or black
and yellow stripes and nasty taste — have become associated
in the animal's mind. But a little consideration of our
own human experience will show that even this explanation
goes further than is warranted by the facts. In ordinary
perception we are, as a rule, in direct contact through our
sense organs with only one or two qualities of the objects
about us. Experience has taught us their other qualities,
and we have always at hand, ready for immediate use, the
knowledge that we have gained. But in dealing with
familiar objects in practice, we seldom, imless the occasion
calls for reflection, stay to form any definite idea of the
unperceived qualities. We act first as we should act if we
reasoned from our idea of them, but without forming that

^ It is an obvious corollary from the third explanation that the remoter
association can only be formed by slow degrees. This accords well with
the facts in the lower grades of intelligence.

H 2


loo MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

idea. The educated perception itself discharges the appro-
priate reaction. Thus, the sight of a cab coming towards
me, as I cross the street, causes me to hurry out of its way.
The reason for hurrying may be formulated in the judg-
ment, ^^ at the speed at which that cab is coming, it will
overtake me ; " but if I stayed to form the judgment
before beginning to quicken my pace, I should probably be
run over. What really happens is that the sight of the
cab discharges the motion without the aid of any reflection.
And this is due to the action of previous experiences of
cabs and other moving bodies which have incorporated
themselves in the perception. The perception has assimi-
lated them. The experiences have endowed it with a
power of awaking reactions which they have shown to be
appropriate.

If it be replied that nevertheless ideas played their part
in this training of the perceptions, the rejoinder is that
the part played by ideas is seldom if ever exhaustive.
Mill's case of the dyer who could not communicate his art
is but one instance out of many. I remember an excellent
but uneducated Cornish cook who, if asked how much of
a given ingredient she had put into a successful dish,
would reply, " Well, as much as I thought." Her per-
ceptions had become insensibly adjusted to her require-
ments, her ideas lagged far behind. Indeed, relatively to
perceptions, ideas are of a more reflective character, and
like all that is reflective, they follow and but imperfectly
interpret their material.

8. We have seen that in human psychology " crude "
sensation and feeling belong to the sphere of instinct.
That is, they may appear as the psychical side of responses
made by preformed structure to stimulus. The account
now given of the earliest operations of experience seems to
corroborate this view, inasmuch as it postulates sensation
and feeling as the data on which it works. Its product in
the human mind is the state often familiarly described as
an act of Recognition, though we are aware that it does not
involve the presence of ideas. Now what is the character
of an act of "Recognition" not involving ideas.? The
object *' recognised " is something more for the mind than


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT loi

that one of its qualities which happens to be present to
sense. The orange is for the child more than the colour
or the smell. In what way is it more ? If we attribute
to the child definitely formed ideas (as of " acid," "juicy/'
&c.) then the orange is a possible subject for any of these
ideal qualities as predicates. But these are ideas, and lie
outside sense-perception. What is there then in " Recog-
nition " of this kind more than the sense-qualities and yet
less than these ideal qualities ? The answer seems to be,
a character which association with the ideal qualities has
lent to the presented quality. In some cases this character
can be pointed out in the sense-content itself. Thus, we
"see" a thing at a distance at which without previous
experience we should not know it to be. The rumble that
comes in at the open window " sounds " far off. If I had
no experience of the effect of distance on sound, it would
presumably be indistinguishable from a low rumble near
by. In each instance the stimulus has " assimilated " a
character, such characters having been associated with
similar stimuli in past experience. In other cases we may
say that the character assimilated shows itself in action.
That the orange is more than a yellow ball to the child
appears in the fact that the child tries to suck it. The
coming tennis ball follows a path of which I have not time
to form an idea, but which guides me as I spring and
strike none the less. In short, in these cases of assimila-
tive recc^ition, the " crude *' sensation has assimilated
certain characters which, if disentangled, form the contents
of ideas, but which are not disentangled as long as they are
assimilated. Prominent among these are motor impulses.
These differ from reflex or instinctive impulses in being
guided by present stimulus in accordance with the results
of previous experience. We may call them acquired
sense-impulses, and say that the present stage of assimila-
tive experience postulates sensations and feelings as its
data, and produces acquired sense-impulse passing into
habit as its result.*

* Except in the use of certain terms, the above is in close accord with
Mr. Stout's lucid and forcible account of Acquirement of Meaning
(Manual, pp. 84-93).


I02 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

9. The correlation of Experiences and Actions thus
efFected is found, as we have seen, among animals as well
as in man. A mass of grouped experiences — sensations,
motor reactions, and feelings, have an effect on the
organisation of such a kind that the response is sub-
sequently modified according to the nature of the feeling.
There is a correlation between a mass of related ex-
periences and subsequent reactions. The general character
of the correlation consists in this — ^that the results of
reaction to a certain stimulus temporarily or permanently
modify the motor excitement produced by similar stimuli.
To put it shortly, experienced feelings are correlated with
a subsequent response to stimulus. To the observer it is
clear that the basis of this correlation is the relation of
stimulus, reaction, and feeling in the primary experiences.
But it docs not follow that the animal aflFected grasps this
relation as it is grasped by the observer. Should any
animal do so, it must be credited with a more complex
and articulate correlation of its experiences than that
which we have described. To explain the nature of such
more advanced correlation, and to discuss whether there
are any species of animals to which it may be attributed,
will be the work of Chapters VI-X.

For the present, we are content to note that there is
abundant evidence for the existence of the elementary kind
of correlation, on which human perceptions and perceptual
impulses are based, far down in the animal scale. Whether
we are to attribute sensation, feeling and perception to
animals as to man, may always be made a question, seeing
that the consciousness of another can never be a matter of
direct observation. But that animals do succeed in
correlating their experiences in the sense explained is not
a hypothesis, but a matter of observed fact. We regard
correlation as the precise work of intelligence, and we
therefore set down this elementary correlation as the first
stage beyond Instinct in the Evolution of Mind, whether
among animals or Man. Its operation is probably con-
fined principally to adjusting reactions suitably to their
immediate results. If more remote correlations are
efFected, it must be by a very slow and gradual process.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 103

The reactions effected are either those resulting from
instincts of a more or less indefinite character, or are such
as lead to the immediate gratification of instinctive needs.
In the first case, experience tends to define, limit, and
direct a more or less general instinct. In the second, it
assists in the satisfaction of instinct. In either case it
helps to increase the plasticity of instinct and the adapta-
bility of the organism. While in rendering it possible
for animals to thrive without highly definite instincts, it
helps to bring about the substitution of more or less
general tendencies and impulses for narrowly defined
methods of reaction. And this, to conclude, means the
rise of a fuller and more varied type, ready to respond to
its surroundings in more diverse ways. Specialisation in
nerve structure begins to give way to the general power of
adaptation and acquisition whereby in the course of a life-
time many diverse actions may become as perfect as the
two or three highly elaborated adjustments of the more
mechanical type.

10. The diffusion of the lower form of Intelligence in
the animal world.

He would be a bold man who should undertake to say
where the capacity for learning by experience first appears
in the animal world, or where it first begins to develop
into a higher form than that described. There is however
some reason to think that this grade of intelligence is
typical of certain species, orders, or even classes of the
animal kingdom. In other divisions, perhaps because they
are less understood, perhaps because they really stand lower,
ascertained instances of modification by experience are less
abundant. In some of the lowest divisions they seem to
fail altogether. To summarise the evidence, however im-
perfectly, will perhaps help us a little further towards
understanding the general course of Mental Evolution,^

^ It must be remembered that in the matter of intelligence there is
perhaps even more difference between the individuals of a species,
the species of a genus, and even between the Orders of a Class, than
in the matter of physical structure. A classification of the animal
kingdom based on intelligence would probably cut right across the
classifications based on structure. It would probably associate the nest-
building stickleback with the lower birds ; it would class the Cephalopoda
with Fish and Reptiles ratbex: than among the Molluscs ; apdi whateyej:


I04 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

We have already quoted instances showing that among
cert^n fish, at any rate in some individuals, the modifying
influence of experience is at a minimum. Even the
simplest sort of modification, the inhibition of an impulse,
fails in certain cases, as in those quoted by Mr. Bateson,
where after twelve months* constant experience, fish per-
sisted in knocking their heads against the glass wall of their
tank. On the other hand, there is no doubt that certdn
fish learn to come to the surface for food on the approach
of human beings, and perhaps at the sound of a voice, or of
a bell. This is a simple case of an acquired reaction of
the sort described in this chapter. Somewhat more difficult
is the avoidance of baits. Romanes states generally that there
is a marked increase of wariness in waters which are much
fished, and attributes the change to ** observation," on the
ground that " young trout under such circumstances are less
wary than old ones." If the trout really draw an inference
from their observation of others being caught and dragged
to the surface, they are capable of a much more complex
mental operation than those hitherto described. But in the
absence of details, one would be inclined to think that in
such cases the older fish are of the more wary type which
under the circumstances has survived. Of each new gener-
ation, at least for a long period, a great number would
always be of the less wary type, and these would be caught.
The more waters are fished, the more the young are likely
to preponderate among those caught. For, taking any
single generation, the least wary will be most caught at
each fishing, so that the more wary will preponderate more
and more, whence, in subsequent fishings, that generation

it did with ants and bees, it would draw a well-marked line between them
and most of the insects. Intelligent acts are, above all others, " adaptive "
characters — characters taken up by the organism in immediate response
to its surroundings, and such characters as Darwin showed are the least
to be depended on as tests of genealogical affinity. Hence any general
statement as to the intelligence of, say, Fish or Birds, can only mean at
the utmost that the kind of intelligence in question is very widely diffused
among Fish or Birds — so widely, perhaps, that it may be regarded as
representing the mean level in the Class. Some species, and perhaps
whole Orders, may rise above or fall below it, while within each species
the individual differences will often be much greater than they are in
matters of visible structure. This qualification must be understood as
applying to any general statement in the text.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 105

will have an advantage over the younger ones. At the
same time fish show a good deal of " caution," i.e.j they
examine strange objects and approach them tentatively.
Schneider notes this of the mullet and parrot fish precisely
in relation to baits. There is therefore a certain basis for
experience to work upon. If, in the course of such inves-
tigation, a fish is frightened, say by the shadow of the
fisherman, it will be still more cautious next time. Thus
the increase of wariness may be due purely to the elimina-
tion of the unwary, or it may be assisted by frightening
experiences. But there seems no reason to attribute it to
an articulate, analogical inference.

Many fish are however capable of being guided by
experience in the elementary form described above (p.
95, note). They have the sort of instincts that must be
concentrated on particular objects, and this implies that
their experience in relation to those objects has some niore
or less persistent eflFect upon them. For examj^fe, they
have haunts, and in some cases homes. The shark haunts
places that it has found to be good hunting grounds.^
The stickleback " knows the way " back to his nest, even
if he has been absent for some hours." Evidently we have
here the operation of experience in some form. What sort
of experience is it ? Is it accurate to attribute to the fish
definite memory of the place and knowledge of its relations
in space ? Or shall we be right in explaining its return to
its haunts as due to those workings of experience on per-
ception, and through perception on motor impulse, which
have been described in this chapter ? The same question
may be asked about other members of the animal kingdom,
of the same or perhaps of lower grade. Thus, many
Crustacea — prawns, for example* — have regular " homes "
or lurking places. Even limpets* have been proved to have
fixed resting places to which they return, and the same is
true of snails.*^ A little reflection will show that the power
of " homing " does not amount to that general knowledge
of locality, involving many complex relations, which we shall

> Brehm, VIII. p. 440. Cf. Schneider, p. 312. * 3. p. 171.

' Bateson, ofi. cit, p. 211. ^ Romanes, pp. 28, 29.

* Cambridge Natural History^ VoL III. p. 35.


io6 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

see reason to ascribe to some at least among the higher
vertebrates. It does not necessarily imply anything beyond
a tendency to go back along the trail, which may well be
hereditary. If this is so, the fixing of a home or a haunt
is in such cases an instance of the defining of an instinct by
experience. The homing tendency is fixed on a particular
spot. In some instances there is direct confirmatory
evidence that this is the true explanation. Snails leave a
tndl visible to our eyes, and are known to follow it even
when it is irregular.^ Even if there is no trail, if a fish, for
example, is guided by the objects near its haunt, we could
not safely assume a higher process than that of association
between perception and impulse. When the shark is
hungry, the sight of the objects in the neighbourhood of
which it obtained prey attract it, and this influence might
spread to other objects on the way. There is nothing in a
monotonous out going or home coming that might not be
built up by habituation.

Just as in " homing " or in lurking experience affixes an
instinctive tendency to one object rather than another, so
in chasing prey, fighting a rival, defending eggs, it makes
a given object a permanent source of excitability. At this
stage of intelligence, a quarrel, for example, does not cease
when the enemy is out of sight. In Brehm's Thierleben ^
there is a terrible account showing ^^furens quid femina
possu'^ even among fish. Rival female Paradise-fishes
had to be separated by a glass partition. This would not
prevent them from futile attempts to injure each other,
and when a curtain was hung over the glass to hide the
hated rival charms from the sight of each, they glutted
their morbid feelings by getting round it so as to stare at
each other. Finally, one jumped clear over the partition
to resume the attack. Out of sight, it will be seen, is not
altogether out of mind among fish. The hereditary

* Cambridge Natural History^ o\. III. p. 35. According to Bethe {Amei-
sen, p. 9), limpets, if moved a little from their path, are unable to find their
way. This observation, however, is difficult to reconcile with the results
obtained by Mr. Lloyd Morgan, who shows {Animal Behaviour, p. 1 56)
that from short distances (up to six inches) the majority of limpets find
their way back. The successes rapidly diminish as the distance is
increased to two feet. *- VIII.pp. 187, 188.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 107

tendencies to envy, hatred, malice and all uncharitableness
are definitely concentrated upon a certain object. It is
not merely the sight of that object that will arouse the
instinct. There is a state of permanent excitation or
excitability of which the object is the centre, and under
stress of which the hostile action may be continued or
renewed just as though the enemy were still in sight. Of
the difference between this permanence of excitability,
with its renewed discharges of nervous energy and true
recognition, a beautiful example is drawn from the obser-
vations of sticklebacks by Evers.* Sticklebacks found
with their nests and transported into a tank neglected
them — the moving disturbed the habitual course of action.
But sticklebacks that had built in a tank would take care
of eggs collected in the open like their own. The sight of
the egg in the nest is enough to excite the parental
tendency. But what is most significant for our purpose
is the case of one stickleback in particular, which was
taken from his nest to another tank. The nest was put in
after him, and both he and his nest were attacked by
several females, so that it became necessary to cover the
nest with sand. After swimming about wildly for a time
he b^an to recover, and appeared to be searching, and
Evers, by way of helping him, brought some of the eggs
to the surface as he approached. Some of the females
pounced on the eggs. The result was at once to reawaken
the father stickleback's protective instincts. He attacked
the females, and then undertook the defence of the nest as
before. The evidence when put together suggests that the
stickleback does not in our sense of the term recognise the
eggs as his own. The truer view is that at breeding time
his parental instincts are awakened by the perception of his
eggs. If the action of the instinct is broken off, the sight
of his own eggs may fail to renew it, while a chance
excitement may set the whole machinery in motion again.
The attachment of hereditary modes of action to certain
objects or individuals is certainly an effect of experience.

* Brehm, VIII. pp. 171, 172. Evers justly remarks that it is impossi-
ble to decide whether he recognised the nest as his own or not. Com-
parison with the other cases mentioned suggests the explanation offered
m the text


io8 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

But we cannot infer from it knowledge of those objects or
individuals as objects or individuals. It is rather a form
of the defining or particularising of instinct in which we
found the most elementary operations of experience.

According to the general account of the mental qualities
of Fish given in Brehm's Thierleben^ Fish have a certain
"understanding/' but very little. They can distinguish
enemies from those who are not hostile. They become
wary of traps (Nachstellungen) and note places of safety.
They accustom themselves to a keeper, to feeding time,
and a signal like the sound of a bell that food is coming.
They choose suitable places for hunting, where they lie in
wait for their prey, learn to overcome obstacles, and with-
draw themselves from danger, form a more or less intimate
connection with their fellows, and hunt in co-operation.
In some cases they show a measure of care for their young.
Broadly speaking, this account seems to tally well with the
elementary form of intelligence which we have described.
Both among Reptiles and Amphibia, a certain capacity for
training is verified by many examples. They " come to
know ** their keepers, for example, in the sense of coming
at call or at sight of them,* but in this case the knowledge
often has very marked limitations. It would seem, for
example, that they have, for the most part, little capacity
for distinguishing individuals.' Very similar facts are
established with regard to frogs and toads. Reptiles, like
fish, haunt definite places. Crocodiles, for instance, haunt
watering places* where they pick up cattle or human beings,
and a tame yellow adder has been known, when let loose,
to return to his cage.*^ After what has been said above,
Schneider's description of a turtle persistently chasing a
hermit crab will be readily understood as a cc^nate example
of intelligence. Of direct modification by experience,
the case of a Texan Snapping Turtle will serve as an

* Brehm, VIII. p. 12. The account of reptile intelligence in the same
work (VII. pp. 24, 25) points to a similar type.

^ Brehm, VII. p. 547, for tortoises. The most intelligent and most
tameable kind, the fresh- water tortoises, however, do not distinguish
individuals (pp. 562, 563). For snakes, ib, p. 220 ; for lizards, pp. 34, 35 ;
crocodiles, p, 525 ; toads, p. 700.

^ lb, p. 25. On the limits to the taming of snakes, see p. 220.

* lb, p. 508. * lb, p. 297.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT 109

example.^ Having been caught with a bait, and having
successfully resisted being dragged ashore, it afterwards
avoided both the bait and the place where it was
caught.

To pass to Invertebrates ; there is no doubt that in
some form or other the power of learning by experience
is to be found among many Insects, Spiders, and, I should
say, Crustacea. Of the Hymenoptera it is needless to
speak. Among insects other than the Hymenoptera,
which may be classed tc^ether for our purposes as the
Lower Insects, the evidence that I have seen for the power
of learning by experience is remarkably scanty. Romanes ^
quotes a story of a fly that became tame enough to
perch on its friend*s thumb and eat sugar, but it is signi-
ficant that it finally met with its death by mistaking the
thumb. The same author tells a story of an earwig that
came regularly for its breakfast.

Among Cephalopoda there is good evidence of the eflFects
of experience in the form which we are examining. The
well-known story of the vengeance of an octopus on a
lobster is parallel with the rivalry of the female Paradise
fish, showing a similar persistence of excitement.® It
agrees with this that cephalopods should, like fish and
reptiles, " know " their keepers,* and that they should learn
to avoid the stinging sea anemones on the shell of hermit-
crabs, and adopt a safer method of procuring them.
When we descend from Cephalopods to other molluscs,
the evidence for any degree of learning from experience
becomes much more scanty. We have seen that snails
and limpets have the power of " homing ; " the former,
at least, are apparently guided by a trail. It is possible
under the circumstances that the whole process may be
instinctive. When sated with food, for example, the

* 1 Brehm, VII. pp. 555, 556.

' Pp. 231 and 229. The story of a beetle that fetched a companion to
move a cockchafer is beyond me. The apparent co-operation of dung
beetles in rolling their balls (id, pp. 236-238} is probably to be explained
by the fact that to the beetle one ball is as good as another. Balls, as
such, provoke the beetle to roll — even if they are quite of the wrong kind.
(Schneider, p. 187.)

^ Romanes, p. 30 ; Schneider, p. 78. * Schneider, /oc. ciL


no MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

mollusc may feel a blind impulse to retrace its steps along
its trail. Of definite readjustment by experience evidence
is too scanty to rely on.^ Among still lower organisms,
evidence of the working of experience in the form under
consideration becomes more and more scanty. Among
Protozoa there is one recorded instance of modification by
experience, and, so far as I Icnow, one only. In the course
of some experiments Messrs. Hodge and Acking gave
some Vorticellae a " pure culture of yeast plants " in place
of their normal food. " This attempt," they say, " re-
sulted in an interesting demonstration of the educability
of vorticellae." They took greedily to the food at first,
then ejected it "with volcanic energy," and afterwards
" for several hours at least — how long the memory lasted
was not determined — ^the individual could not be induced
to repeat the experiment." * One would be glad to know
whether during the same time they took any other food.
It would seem possible that they were left in a state of
collapse. In any case, in a temporary inhibition of this
kind, we have the operation of experience in its most
rudimentary form.

Neither does there seem to be much evidence for the

' According to Bingley (Animai Biography^ Vol. III. p. 454, quoted
by Romanes, p. 26) the razor fish, which can be induced to come to the
surface of the sand by sprinkling salt, will, if once seized and let go,
prefer the salt to the dangers of exposure. There is a story (which has
crossed the Atlantic) of a snail which would come at the call of a girl
who had trained it to do so, while it shrank from other voices. {CatnMdge
Natural History^ Vol. III. p. 35.) That oysters learn to keep their shells
shut out of water for a longer and longer time is well known, but it is not
clear to me whether this is due to simple practice — each time the thing is
done making the next easier— or to experience of disagreeable results from
opening (see Cambridge Natural History ^ Vol. III. p. 1 10). Mr. Lonsdale's
story of the pair of snails made famous by Darwin is, at least in the
interpretation given it, quite isolated. If the observation is correct, I should
suppose that the first snail, after feeding, had an impulse to return on
its trail to its mate, and that when they started again, the weaker mate
being rested, and being also hungrier, was impellea to follow. Of failure
to learn on the part of the snail, a good instance is recorded by Mobius.
A snail attempted to take a piece of meat from a polyp {Actinia nusem-
bryantkemum\ and coming into contact with the polyp's tentacles, shrank
together, and turned away. It returned to the chax^ge, with the same
result. This was repeated several times over, till Mobius charitably gave
the snail another piece of meat. (Brehm, 2nd edition, X. p. 479. The
second half of the story is not ^iven in Brehm's 3rd edition.)

* Quoted by Mr. G. P. Watkms, " Psychical Life in Protozoa," American
Journal of Psychology J Jan. 1900, pp. 179, 180.


V ASSIMILATION AND READJUSTMENT iii

capacity to learn from experience among Coelenterata,
Echincldermata, or Worms.* It would seem a plausible
suggestion that if the capacity does not altogether dis-
appear in the lowest divisions of the animal kingdom, it
becomes rarer in its occurrence, and less conspicuous in its
effects. I must leave it to more competent authorities to
decide whether any animal organism can be regarded as
wholly destitute of this means of self-adjustment, but the
evidence that I have referred to suggests that the action of
experience is at something like a zero point among
Protozoa, that faint traces of it are shown among the
Lower Molluscs, and that as readjusting and particular-
ising instinctive action it becomes a prominent feature of
the life of Cephalopods, of very many Articulata, and of
the Lower Vertebrates.

^ Mr. Lloyd Morgan, however, seems to think that the method of
drawing down leaves by the apex into their holes by earthworms may be
in part attributable to some form of individual experience. (Animal
Behaviour^ p. 159.)


:f


CHAPTER VI

CONCRETE EXPERIENCE AND THE PRACTICAL JUDGMENT

I. In the lowest grade of intelligence, an animal learns
by experience, and the experience is in a sense experience of
a relation. There is a stimulus, a reaction, and a feeling,
and this sequence, repeated many times over, modifies the
reaction. For the observer it is clear that it is the relation
between stimulus and feeling which operates, but we saw
no reason to assume that the relation is grasped in the same
way by the organism on which it operates. The fish or
reptile may be excited by the approach of the keeper, and
stimulated to come forward for their food. But we can-
not infer that they correlate the perception of the keeper
with an idea of food, and choose to come forward as a
means towards securing that desirable end, the first and
best morsel. In the present chapter we deal with the stage
in which correlations of this sort are effected. We must
inquire, first, what precisely the nature of such correlation
is as compared with lower forms of mental adjustment ;
next, what kind of experience it implies, and what behaviour
can be built up by its means ; and lastly, whether there is
any evidence that this stage is reached below the level of
humanity.

I. General character of the Practical Judgment.

a. Judgment and Assimilation.

When we find that the burnt child dreads the fire, we
may explain the fact in either of two ways. It may be
that the child grasps and retains the relation between the
flame as a bright, shining lambent, object attractive to its


CH. VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 113

eyes, and the flame as a cruel burning heat, scorching its
little hand. If so, it has formed a judgment, which, when
it can speak, it will express in the proposition — " fire
bums," and an idea of fire as one thing with diflFerent
attributes. Its experience is a whole containing elements
which remain distinct. Both as such a whole, and as being
concerned with a particular object, we may call it a concrete
experience. Equally concrete is the idea or judgment
founded thereon. But if the child is incapable of so much
thought, it may still reach the same practical result by a
more direct method. It may be that the bright lambent
appearance which first stimulated its grasping reflex takes
to itself as the result of the grasping a new character. It
thus acquires the deterrent repulsive force of the burning .
which it brought about, and for the future, when the child
looks at the fire, it has, without thinking of the burning,
a perception which prompts avoidance instead of nearer
approach. In the one case, two terms are grasped in their
relation. In the other, one term only is present, but it
has for practical purposes borrowed the character of the
other to which it stood related in past experience.^ In the
first case, there is judgment : in the second, assimilation.

b. The Association of Ideas.

Assimilation, we have seen, does not necessarily involve

^ In ordinary phraseology the relation A — B, explicit in the one case,
acts implicitly in the other. It may be asked how we can distinguish
the two, when we are judging, not hy our own consciousness, but by
inference from behaviour. A relation is explicit in consciousness if its
terms are united and yet distinct. It is implicit if it merely influences
consciousness, so as, for example, to affect the way in which one of its
terms is apprehended. Generalising this we may say that in conscious-
ness the explicit is the same as the distinct, while the implicit is that
which is present merely as qualifying or influencing something else.
Extending the distinction to cases where we can jud^e only by behaviour,
we may say that an element of experience is explicitly grasped by the
mind if a distinct function in the guidance of behaviour can be assigned
to it. It acts implicitly if, without having any distinctive effect of its own,
it is yet a necessary part of some expenence which has a function as a
whole. Thus, in the case of assimilation, the experience A — B operates
as a whole, and its elements have an effect only as contributing to this
operation. In concrete experience, on the other hand, the relation A — B
has, for example, a distinct function from that of the term A, for the
reaction to A will differ according as B is or is not expected to follow. In
conceptual thought, again, the relation uniting A and B acquires a
function distinct from that of A and B themselves, since it may go to
build up concepts with which A and B have nothing to do.

I


114 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

ideas at all. A perception which has " assimilated " the
motor character of some experience to which it is related,
has the power of shaping behaviour as though with a view
to the repetition of that experience, yet no idea of the pur-
pose of the adaptation comes before consciousness. In a
Judgment, on the other hand, both of the related terms in
their relation are presented or represented. The case of the
Association of Ideas is intermediate. Here the perception
does call up an idea, or one idea calls up another, but, as
the associative process is generally conceived, the ideas
merely succeed one another. They are not held together
and formed into new judgments. It was the fundamental
error of Hume's psychology — an error which also vitiated
much of his logic and metaphysics — ^to treat associated ideas,
so conceived, as equivalent to a belief in the connection of
their contents. To believe that b is the effect of a is not
at all the same thing as to have a lively idea of b following
upon an idea of a. On the contrary, it consists in grasp-
ing the terms a and b together in a determinate relation,
and asserting that relation of reality.

It may be asked whether Association as distinguished
from Assimilation on the one hand and Judgment on the
other is a real process at all. Is there a stage or a state in
which ideas follow one another without being brought into
relation? Thought is continuous — not, as the early
Associationists seemed to regard it, discrete. Perception
passes into idea, and for a space they dwell together.
Even in the most dreamy reverie, it may be sdd, continuity
and connection have more to do with the line of thought
than " contiguity." But this objection must not be pushed
too far. It is harder to keep in mind a jangle of nonsense
than a sentence with meaning in it, but it is by no means
impossible.* The former presence of two elements in one
and the same whole of consciousness is often quite sufficient
to revive them in grotesque juxtaposition in a train of
thought. It is to this that we owe the Miss Bateses and
Mrs. Nicklebys of literature and of real life.

Ideas, then, may be associated without being logically
connected. Moreover, even if they were associated so that
^ For some measure of the difference in labour, see below, p. 122.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 115

a logician reflecting upon them could detect and expose the
relation, it does not follow that that relation is itself present
to the mind as the ideas float past. In a not uncommon
experience, the act of " putting two and two together "
follows quite clearly and distinctly as a separate act upon
the passage of the two ideas so united before conscious-
ness. If it is argued, for contentious purposes, that mere
sequence of ideas in a continuous consciousness involves a
kind of relation, it must be replied that even so, this rela-
tion is not necessarily grasped by that consciousness. It
would be truer to the facts to urge that the relation between
juxtaposed elements of consciousness is apprehended with
varying degrees of distinctness, and if this view be adopted,
we may apply the term Associated ideas to the limiting
case in which this apprehension disappears, and the term
Judgment to the case where two or more elements are
definitely held together in some distinctive relation, making
of them a whole with a character of its own.

c. The Practical Judgment,

Except in one point, the Judgment as thus defined is
identical with the Judgment of Lc^ic. In Logic, the term
is best reserved for such assertions as may be expressed
without modification in a proposition, that is, in words.*
But, as we shall see more fully later, the rendering
of a synthesis in words is a distinct and separate
act from that of forming the synthesis itself. A child
may be aware that fire is a bright object that
burns, without being able to form or even to under-
stand the words. Just as I may feel or see without
naming, perhaps without being able to name what I was
feeling or seeing, so I may retain the memory of what I
have felt or seen without the aid of language, and the same
thing applies to the relation, say, of co-existence or sequence
between what I felt and saw. This relation is one thing,
its verbal expression another, involving, as we shall see
later, a distinct act of correlation. Concrete experience and
the practical thinking in which it is reproduced are so far

^ This, at least, seems to correspond best to general usage. See the
writer's Theory of Knowledge^ p. 122. I need not here enter into the
question whedier there is synthesis in every logical judgment — ^a point
which I have discussed in the same work, pp. 149-153.

I 2


ii6 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap

from being dependent on language that to the end they
cannot in all their individuality and detail be adequately
expressed in language. The proofs of this will, I hope,
accumulate as we go on. Meanwhile^ we need a term to
distinguish a synthesis of experiences in which language is
not used from the logical judgment. Such a synthesis will
deal with the particular objects and events of experience,^
and its purpose will be to guide action in relation thereto.
We may therefore call it Practical Judgment.*

II. The Condiiions of the Practical Judgment in Experience.

2. a. Concrete experience.

The character of the Practical Judgment depends in the
last resort upon the experience on which it rests. In the
lower stage of Intelligence the experience throughout was
of a sensori-motor character. There was a sense-excitement
giving rise to a reaction, followed by a feeling, and the
feeling in turn had a motor effect. What followed was a
modified reaction, explained in popular language as due to
a ** revival '* of the feeling, or, at least, of the motor
impulse belonging to it. Postponing for a moment further
analysis of this explanation, let us first observe that the
formation of judgments rests on a more concrete or articu-
late form of experience. Suppose that we have an appre-
hension of concrete objects with their parts and qualities,
their actions and changes, and suppose this apprehension to
be " revived " (as the feeling impulse was revived), then
we have in our revived experiences wholes consisting of
distinguishable parts — that is, a synthesis of elements that
remain distinct — that is the content we require for our
** practical judgment." Perception as we know it in our-
selves is complex and continuous. As we look at a house,
walls, windows, and chimneys appear, forming distinct
elements which are yet united in one whole. As we attend
to a series of events, listen to a speech, or watch a cricket

^ For if the elements of the synthesis, are recognised as general, the
conditions of language are at once present See below, Chap. XII., p. 284.

'It should be noted that the limiting adjective, " practical," has been
applied to animal intelligence in a somewhat different sense by other
wnters. Thus, the late Dr. Mivart (On Truths p. 345) speaks of animals
as drawing " practical inferences," and these appear to be identical with
his " sensuous inferences " (p. 14?) which correspond rather with the
Association of Ideas than with the " Practical Judgment " of the text


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 117

match, a continuous stream of perceptions, distinct and yet
connected, passes through our consciousness. When we
bring analysis to bear on the total impression made in
cither case, it reveals an order in the experience, a relation
between part and part, which contributes as much to the
total impression as the parts themselves. This relation
analysis can dissect out and in a sense treat as independent
of the terms which enter into it. But just because this is
the work of analysis, it leads to conception, not merely
to perception. What analysis reveals, however, is that,
without being dissected out, the relations go to qualify
or lend their character to perception, and are thus as
truly parts of what is perceived as the terms that they
unite. Hence we may speak of them when thus ap-
prehended as perceptual relations, and use this term
to express contents of perception in which elements
that remain distinct are united in a determinate order
to form a whole.

Let us now suppose a mind endowed with perceptions
of this concrete kind, and with the power of reproducing
them ideally in relation to a present perception. Thus,
seeing one side of the house, I can mentally affix the
unseen sides to that which I see, and recollecting, for
example, on which side the door is, can direct my steps
accordingly. Here the relations of unseen parts to one
another and to what is seen are grasped as before in
perception, so now in idea, and this is what I mean by the
Practical Judgment. It is more than Assimilation, because
what is revived is an idea, a definite reference to something
unperceived. It is more than Association, because the
relation between the "revived" idea and the given per-
ception is an essential part of it, and it is less than analytic
thought, because the relations involved are not dissected
out as distinct elements in consciousness.

b. Revival.

But we cannot pass on without dwelling on the Law of
Revival (or Association, or Redintegration, as it is variously
called). The broad facts, whether in this or the lower
stage, are the same. There are certain experiences, a, b, c,
contemporaneous or following in continuity one upon the


ii8 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap

other. Let a arise again, from whatever cause, and we
say that it tends to " revive " b and c. What is the
character of this revival ? Let us first remove a mis-
understanding so gross that it should never have arisen.
Neither the a nor the b nor the c of the new case are
identical with the original a, b, and c. A state of
consciousness, having once been, is gone. It has no sub-
stantial existence, as it were, underground, from which it
may be brought up again. When we speak of reviving b,
we mean at most a state Bj, similar to the original Bj. An
ordinary understanding of the English language ought to
prevent any mistake on this head.

But now comes the real difficulty. What is revived is,
after all, not bb^ — ^something exactly like b — but, say, ^,
something partially like b, but modified in some respects.
What is the nature or the condition of this modification ?
In the lower stage, taking the simplest case where an
inhibitory movement p is revived, there is this important
difference from the original. In the first experience we
have s — r — p — p — sensation, reaction, p^n, recoil. The
recoil or inhibitory movement is separated by two links
from the original stimulus. If when " revived " it remained
so separated, it would be too late to effect anything. In
being revived, it is also brought forward in time. At the
the same time, the original tendency r begins to drop out.
Hence, if we say here that the partial experience revives
the whole, it is a modified whole. The modification seems
to consist in this, that whereas the original whole was
extended in time, what is revived consists of elements
which are nearly, if not quite, contemporaneous. The
last stage of the original sequence now follows immediately
on the first. Indeed, as we know the phenomena in human
consciousness, it does not really follow as a distinct step,
but qualifies the sensation. The sight which has disgusting
associations becomes itself disgusting.

Now, if we turn to the revival of concrete experiences,
we shall find an analogous result. After the experience of
A — B — c, we say that a revives b and c, but we at once
explain that we do not mean that the perception of a
revives the perception of b and c, but the ideas of them.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 119

In many cases — and there is reason for thinking that these
cases are of the original type — a excites an anticipation
(or memory) of b and c. To understand this, let us
first remember that things and events are not isolated, but
connected, so that we should symbolise the original ex-
perience not as A, B, c, but as a — b — c. Let this
whole be ** revived " by a. Then, on the face of it, what
a revives is not b and c each separately, but b following
on A, and c on b. Certain elements in relation to a are
therefore excited. Now let it be as before a condition
that these elements should be excited along with a — as
parts of the same state of consciousness. If they are
brought before consciousness as co-present with a, the
revived state will conflict with the original in which
they were not co-present. If this conflict is to be avoided,
they must, as excited, be elements belonging to a and yet,
as " revived " from the original, they are events following
on A in a definite relation. That is to say, they are
elements by f, of a judgment of anticipation, a does not
really revive a c, but it excites a judgment anticipating
the sequence a — b — c. The content of this judgment
consists of the elements given in experience in their
relation to a. Its character as a judgment depends on its
power of reviving distinct experiences in a single state of
consciousness without prejudice to their distinctness.

Experience then operates, whether in Assimilation or
Judgment, by the law, as we may call it, of modified
revival. The condition of revival in these cases appears
to be that the revived element must enter into the same
state of consciousness with that which revives it.^ And
this condition determines its change of character. The
Practical Judgment " revives '* experience only in the same
loose sense in which it is revived in Assimilation. The
judgment which we refer to a past perception as its cause

* A state of consciousness has duration, so that though revival takes
time, A persists while it is bringing b into consciousness, and so with b and
f, but A may be gone before c has come. This, of course, occurs in any
long train of thought. Further, as experience grows more complex, and
its results frequently conflict, beliefs are often depressed into mere sug-
gestions or thoughts of reality. We then have *' association of ideas " as
ordinarily conceived.


I20 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

is not itself a perception, but is an assertion about things
that are not perceived. In the case of the Practical
Judgment, it is an assertion of things that have been or
will be, an assertion bringing them into relation with what
is perceived. The experience on which this judgment is
founded differs from the experience of the lower stage.
For in the lower stage. Sensations (i) have no apparent
function unless they excite a motor reaction, and (2)
coalesce in subsequent experience with the feelings which
modify them. In the experiences imderlying the practical

{'udgment, a sensation not itself moving a reaction may
Lave a function as initiating ideas, which perhaps at several
removes determine conduct. While secondly, it is the
main point on which we have insisted that each element is
kept distinct from the others that it calls up. In the
lower stage it is merely necessary that there should be
sense-experiences affecting the mind so as to dispose it to
action. In the higher stage, there is perception of the
surrounding world of objects in their manifold relations,
changes, &c. Lastly, it will readily appear that in this
concrete experience, any one element is a centre of many
relations. A perceived object is associated not merely
with some feeling, but with many other objects perceived
at the same time. Any one of these it may suggest,
according as a subsequent purpose marks out the lines of
interest, and hence, as we shall find, ** revival" in this
stage is no longer necessarily dominated by association,
but is free to supply means to ends as circumstances
require.

3. c. Concrete Experience and Memory.

The way in which a relation is originally experienced
appears to have an important influence on its chances of
revival. We all know that we can remember with more
or less of accuracy, and for a greater or less period, persons
or places seen only once. Similarly we remember events
as having happened once. In all these cases a single
experience is enough to form a basis for subsequent
revival. On the other hand, if we want to learn some-
thing by rote, we repeat it over and over again, and get it
perfect by degrees. In the first case the power of revival


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 121

appears to be perfected by a single experience. In the
second, it grows very gradually by frequent repetitions.
What is the explanation of this contrast ?

In the first place, we must beware of exaggerating it.
Our memory of a person or place seen once is seldom
perfect. It fades with time, and is strengthened by renewal.
In these respects it clearly follows the same law as memory
due to repetition, and we may infer that there is no
fundamental difference. The real distinction lies in con-
nectedness of elements. If a — b — c form a rigidly and
necessarily connected whole for thought, clearly, to
remember a would be to remember b and c as well. If
they are utterly disconnected, it requires three distinct
efforts to recall them. There is an intermediate case in
which they are apprehended in relation, though not in
necessary relation, so that the remembrance of one
naturally, though not inevitably, leads on to another.
Thus I may r^ily remember a connected conversation
or a well put argument, as each point leads naturally to
the next. So ag^n the metre as well as the thought
help in the memory of verse. While in matters of simple
perception, to reodl one part, for example, of a once
visited place is to have a beginning from which the space
relations themselves help one in reconstructing the rest.
In short, if instead of a, b, c, three quite separate data, we
have a — b — c so related that one passes into the other
or is continuous with it in perception, or leads up to it in
meaning, we have quite a different groundwork to go
upon. Our memory rests partly on the connection. In
the alternative case it rests on association, the bringing of
two things together in consciousness without any recognised
connection. The difference which is made by connected-
ness may be estimated by comparing the number of re-
petitions necessary for learning (i) a series of isolated
words or meaningless syllables, and (2) a connected piece
of writing. Comparing words and phrases, MM. Binet
and Henri estimate the advantage of phrases in one case as
25 to i.^ Comparing a series of meaningless syllables
with a stanza of Don Juarty Ebbinghaus^ found that
^ Ann/e Psychologiquey 1894, p. 31. ' GeddchttUsSy p. 69.


122 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

ten times as many repetitions were necessary in the former
case.

If we could say that association only acts by more or
less frequent repetition, the problem of determining what
is due to connected experience, and what is not, would be
immensely simplified. But we cannot deny that a single
experience without any insight into relation may in some
cases form a basis for memory. Thus even a series of
meaningless syllables, if not too long, may be retained
perfectly for a few moments, after a single hearing.^ But
the effect very speedily lapses. After twenty-four hours,
the only result of a number of readings sufficient to get
the syllables by heart for the moment is a certain
diminution in the number required to get them perfect
again* To illustrate the point, it will be enough to give one
series of Ebbinghaus's experiments with twelve syllables,
comparing it with his results for a stanza. The Roman
numerals indicate the successive days ; the Arabic figures,
the number of times necessary to get the repetition
perfect.

Days I. II. III. IV. ' V. VI.

12 syllables 16.5 11 7.5 5 3 2.5

Stanza of Don Juan 7.75 3.75 1.75 .5 00*

I may subjoin a further table given by Mr. G. W.
Smith,' showing the very slow improvement from repeti-
tion up to twelve times. Ten syllables were read and
repeated. The table shows the number correctly given,
and the number of mistakes after a given number of
readings.

Number of Number cor- t^^^\ v^^^

Readings. rectly given. ^^'^^^ ^™'^-

I 2.2 22.2

3 2.5 21.4

6 2.8 20.5

9 34 '8.9

12 3.9 17.3

We may conclude that as we approximate to irrational
association in human experience, the number of repetitions

* Binet and Henri, loc, cit p. 7. * Op. cit. p. 112.

' Psychological Review^ 1896, "The Place of Repetition in Memory."


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 123

required to fix a sequence in memory for any length of
time becomes very large. Forty repetitions did not suffice
to fix twelve syllables in Ebbinghaus*s memory perfectly
for twenty-four hours, while as many as twelve readings
fixed less than four syllables out of ten in Mr. G. W.
Smith's experiments.

There is, however, another cause of retention to be con-
sidered besides frequency, namely, the vividness of an
experience or the emotional interest attending it. In our
own experience, we know that strong emotion lends a
peculiar vividness to surrounding detdls so that very often
trivial things that happened in a moment of great stress
remain stamped in the memory for life. This vividness of
irrelevant detail may be used to express a feeling which
otherwise could not find utterance.

** All's over, then — docs truth sound bitter
As one at first believes ?
Hark, 'tis the sparrows' goodnight twitter
About your cottage eaves !

And the leafbuds on the vine are woolly,

I noticed that, to-dav ;
One day more bursts them open fully :

You know the red turns grey."

But cases of deep emotion stand by themselves. In a
general way, it appears from a series of experiments con-
ducted by Miss M. W. Calkins, that frequency is more
powerful than vividness as a cause of association.^ It is
further clear that the influence of feeling, or other intense
experience, would only extend to experiences close to it in
time.*

* "Association" {Psych, Rev. Monograph Supplement), pp. 55, 56.
Miss Calkins points out correctly that the vividness procurable m an
experiment is not comparable to that of " richly emotional expjeriences."

' Two subordinate points of importance remain to be noticed. In a
series of associations, A, B, c, D, E, the natural tendency is for A to
excite B, B to excite c, and so forth. But a also acquires a certain
power of exciting C, or even D or E, without the intermediates. This
power is, however, materially lower than that of normal association,
and it diminishes rapidly as the links omitted are increased. (For
the evidence, see Ebbinghaus, op. cit. pp. 130, ff., and Miiller and
Schtunann, p. 307.) It results that between experiences separated by an


124 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

To sum up. In the sphere of articulate experience, a
very few impressions, often a single impression, will suffice
to form a permanent basis for memory. Where the con-
nection of elements is not apprehended, memory rests
either (i) on frequent repetition, or (2) on the excitement
of strong feeling. This second influence can only extend
to experiences bordering closely in time upon the moment
of feeling. In association each link normally recalls that
which immediately follows, but it also has a weak tendency
to recall remoter experiences. To bear these points in
mind will give us some help in deciding how to class some
of the examples of the use of experience which we shall
meet.

III. The products and application of the Practical Judg-
ment.

4. a. Knowledge of objects.^

From what has been said of concrete experience and its
revival, it follows that in this stage the mind may without
impropriety be said not merely to react appropriately to
objects, but to have a certain knowledge of them. This
knowledge must indeed fall short of the conceptual under-
standing whereby the characters of perceived objects fall
into their place in a system of thought. But still it may
be called knowledge of an object as a whole consisting of
distinct parts. Such knowledge is not yielded by Assimi-
lation alone, for here, beyond the quality perceived by the
sense organ, we have no definite reference to other
characters of the object. It is not yielded by the Asso-
ciation of ideas. To know an orange is not merely to

interval of time the associational tie, if there is any, must be relatively
weak.

Lastly, reversed associations are not impossible. If a series of names
is learnt, we all know that we can with difficulty repeat them in reverse
order. The observations of Miiller and Schumann, however, suggest that
this can only happen where the pi:evious name or syllable forms one
complex state of consciousness with tlie later one which "revives" it. If
two syllables were grouped, they formed a well-marked backward associa-
tion, but as between separate impressions they failed to establish the
process with certainty (^. cit, p. 308). It is safe to say that if association
m this form is possible without the aid of articulate recollection — f>.,
remembrance of relations between elements — its effect is relatively feeble.

* The term is here used not in the general sense of " object of thought
or of consciousness," but rather in the popular sense of a material thmg
with a certain individuality. An animal would be an object in this sense.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 125

associate a cert^n colour with a certain shape, smell,
weight, softness, taste and so forth. If we use the word
associate at all, we must qualify it by adding ^* in certain
defined relations to one another.*' To know that this is
an orange is to know that what I see before me will,
if I put it to my nose, emit a certdn scent, if I
put my teeth into it as it is, will be unpleasantly bitter,
but if I first peel it, will reveal a pleasing juicy pulp, and
so forth. In other words, the common object, to become
known as an object, must be understood as a kind of
structure involving related elements. In the same way,
my knowledge of a house is not a mere association of one
room with another, but a knowledge of the relations of the
rooms, etc., in space. While even with regard to a series
of events, though association mthout synthesis^ might
reproduce the ideas in an order corresponding to that in
which the events occurred, my knowledge of the events as
a series must imply that two or more of them are held
together in their relations.

b. Memory and Anticipation.

It thus appears that knowledge of objects, and other
persons or animals, knowledge of localities, and knowledge
of occurrences depend on a more or less developed power
of grasping the elements of experience in their mutual
relations. From this again it will be seen that both
Expectation and Memory, in the stricter sense of those
terms, rest upon the same basis. Memory, indeed, as a
general name for the permanent influence of experience, is
present in the lowest stages of Assimilation. Something
is, even in that stage, retained and revived in relation to
the present. But suppose that what is "retained" is a
series of events grasped as a series, and that this series is
revived in relation to present perception as its first step.
We then have anticipation or expectation of the coming
events. If agsun any connected series is grasped as a whole,

^ Such a synthesis, as I have argued elsewhere, may be given in appre-
hension in the simpler cases where it unites two immediately sensible
qualities through their coexistence in one point of space at one moment.
Beyond this, and thus in every case where the behaviour of an object at
different times enters into one conception of it, the synthesis acts by
bringing into relation contents of distinct perceptions.


126 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

there may at the end be retention in idea of the earlier
stages. Such a mental reference to an experience that is
past constitutes the memory-judgment in its primitive
form. What is remembered or expected must be placed
in some more or less defined relation to ourselves at the
present moment, and conversely, where such an act of
mental reference to past or future is possible, there are the
conditions for the judgments of memory or expectation.

c. Purpose.

With the power of anticipation arises for the first time
the possibility of purposive^ action in the strict sense. The
paradox of organic action is that it carries out apparent
purposes without purposing to do so. That is to say, it is
adapted to the securing of results which we as spectators
recognise as valuable to the organism, and yet we do not
imagine it to be determined by any conception of those
results. Just as the general bodily structure of a plant or
an animal is adapted to meet the broad requirements of its
mode of life, so its hereditary modes of reaction are so
directed that while each is called up from hour to hour by
its appropriate stimulus, and only by that stimulus, the
result is to serve and to maintain the type of life peculiar
to the species. The ordinary healthy animal does not eat
in order to support life, but because it is hungry. It does
not seek its mate in order to propagate the species, but in
obedience to the sexual impulse. If we speak of those
impulses as purposive, that is as determined by the
" purposes " they fulfil, we must bear in mind that the
determination is of a very indirect and circuitous kind.
In the individual animal, under the sway of instinct, the
purposive impulse — say, the impulse to seize and devour
its prey — is determined not by prevision of the beneficial
effects of eating, but immediately by its inherited structure,
awakened as it is to activity by the presence of the prey.
This structure however has grown up in the main because
it did answer the requirements of the animal's ancestors.
Structures which answered those needs less adequately have

* The term is, indeed, frequently applied to adaptations not supposed
to be the result of design. It seems far less confusing to use the epithet
" adaptive " in such cases, and keep the term purposive for that which is
genuinely purposed.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 127

been eliminated, and through the laws of inheritance the
surviving structure has been perfected. Thus, in an in-
direct and circuitous fashion, the results of an action do go
to determine what the action shall be before the level of
intelligent purpose is reached. But this is true only in the
sense that the generic results of that sort of action have
operated on the individual to make him what he is. The
particular results of this particular action are not operative.
The act is really the result of a permanent structure acted
upon by a stimulus. It is adaptive, not purposive, and
its consequence in the particular case is a result, not an
end.

Since intelligence is above all things purposive in
character, the appearance of actions definitely directed to
and determined by the ends which they serve is perhaps
the most critical moment in the evolution of Mind. How
are we to understand this determination ? Let us first be
clear that where there is purpose, there we can say that
this particular action is determined by this particular end.
Where there is adaptation without purpose, any given
action is not determined by its own end, but by a structure
which has grown up by subserving results which were
" ends " only to the onlooker. But how is determination
by an end to be understood ? The end is something not
yet real at the moment of action. What is real, however,
is the organism and the circumstances in which it is placed,
and the distinction may now be re-stated in the form in
which it appears in actual behaviour. In adaptive action,
there is something in the circumstances to which the
organism responds in a manner fixed by heredity or habit.
In purposive action there is no fixed response to perception,
but behaviour is determined by the relation between itself
and the end to be gained. The " mechanical " reflex is a
fixed type of reaction to a stimulus of a certain kind.
Given stimulus and organism, the reaction is always the
same. With qualifications expldned above (Chap. IV.) the
same thing holds even of the less mechanical instincts.
Adjustment follows requirement more closely, but it is
still an adjustment of types or modes of reaction. We
move, so to say, in a region of universals, and action


128 MIND IN EVOLUTION ch /

apparently purposive is in reality blind. A fish will dart
at a wriggling worm. This satisfies a need. Is it done in
order to satisfy the need ? It seems rather that the sight
of the wriggling object causes the dart,since wriggling things
that are not edible — a thread to which a button is hang-
ing, or a curl of cigarette smoke,^ will have the same eflTect.
A male frog at mating time is provided with a machinery
for grasping the female, but he will as readily grasp other
objects of appropriate size. In the readjustments discussed
in the last chapter, we find these types of reaction changed
by experience of results, but they are changed for fresh
types, fresh methods of reaction. The mind in that stage
acquires new habits, but habits they are still. Thus a
child is accustomed to drink from its special mug.
Another mug would do quite as well, but there is a
domestic storm because the proper mug cannot be found.
As long as habit is dominant, we cannot speak of purposive
action, action determined by an end, but must still call it
adaptive action, action issuing from a structure inherited or
acquired in response to a stimulus which calls it forth in
all circumstances until the structure is further modified,
Where, on the other hand, we have action not based on
habit, but on the relation between the thing done and the
result of doing it, there we have purpose. In acquired
adaptation, though the response produces a result suited to
the organism, it is performed, not because the result will
follow in this particular case, but, in the last analysis,
because similar results have followed in previous cases, and
they have fixed the habit. In purposive action, so far as
it is purposive, there is no habit fixed, but the response to
the surroundings is determined by the eflTect which it will
have in the particular case ; that is to say, by the relation
between act and consequence. Hence we do not respond
uniformly to similar surroundings, but take into account
anything that, though outside the range of perception, is
relevant to our object. Thus, I get up and leave the room
to fetch a book which I left upstairs, not because anything
which I see or feel moves me to rise and walk, but because
I wish to get the book ; and I direct my steps to the room
^ Bateson, loc, cit.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 129

where I left it just now, and not to the bookshelf from
which I have fetched it a hundred times before.^ It is
clear that purposive action as thus defined will have a
much wider range and be capable of much more complex
and subtle application to varying circumstances than
adaptive action at its best.

d. Purpose and knowledge of relation.

But in human experience action can be purposively
directed to an end, only if there is an idea of the end. It
can be based on a relation of end to means only if there is
knowledge of that relation. Such knowledge, however,
is in itself quite distinct from a habit of action, and is
attained in a different way. It may, for example, be
derived directly or indirectly from passive observation.
Hence a second characteristic of purposive action. It is
based on knowledge, not on habit, and conversely, if we
have evidence that an act is based on knowledge, we have
evidence that it is purposive. Such evidence, as has been
hinted, may be derived from the nature of the experience
antecedent to an action. Thus, in the example of the
book, my movements are based on the knowledge of various
relations derived from experience (of the house and its
parts, memory of where I left the book, and so on), and
in its determining factors there is nothing either instinctive
or habitual.* The action may be so far novel that I may
never have left a book in this particular room before.
Experience gives knowledge of certain relations which are
utilised in action when they can be so applied to present
circumstances as to lead up to a desired end. The relations
may be first perceived in circumstances in which they are
indifferent, and give rise to no reaction. They are after-
wards applied in fresh circumstances, and so become a
guide to action. Clearly, in such instances, there is no
preformed habit.

^ Unless, indeed, in a fit of absence, I relapse into a mechanical mode
of action, and then very probably my feet will carry me on the more
accustomed path.

' This statement applies only to the determining factors of the act, for,
just as the waUcing is a reflex, so my turning one way or another may be,
when once the general direction is fixed, carried out more or less
mechanically. Conscious adjustments constantly make use of subordinate
mechanical factors.


130 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

As judged from outward action, then, the certain
signs of purposive action appear so far to be these two :
The relation upon which it is based may be experi-
enced without leading to the formation of a habit ; ^
and again, may be applied in circumstances difli:ring
from those in which it was originally perceived. Action
may often be purposive without possessing these marks,
but where we find these marks we may be sure that it
is purposive.

e. Idea and Desire.

The purposive act, not being guided by response to per-
ception, is determined by reference to an end. This act of
reference we know in the human consciousness as an idea.^
We are thus brought to the primitive function that ideas
fulfil in conduct. As long as impulses are fixed in rela-
tion to stimulus, whether by heredity or habit, action
neither requires nor tolerates any further guide. But if
the ends of an impulse are to be served by actions varying
from case to case, a uniform reaction to uniform stimulus
will no longer do, and the case is met in the human world
by a formulation of the end to which one is impelled,
along with its relation to the surrounding circumstances.
The formulation of the end constitutes an Idea, and the

* The clearest case of this is, of course, where the relation experienced
is not between the action of an orjg^anism and its effects, but between two
or more events or objects which it perceives.

' Generically an idea is a mode of consciousness which in the scope of
its reference goes beyond what is directly present to our senses. To put
the matter in its most general way, the mind, so far as it is active, is
either concerned with what is immediately present to it, or is asserting,
suggesting, wishing, commanding, &c., something not present In all
these cases we may distinguish the content of the act from the way in
which the content is entertained (i.^., by way of assertion, command, &c.).
The content has always a reference beyond the present, and this is what
we call an idea. [Even where an idea is applied to a present object, as
when we name what we see before us, the use of the idea is either to
determine the unperceived qualities of the object, or to class it, i>., bring
it into relation with some general characteristic of reality.] Psychologi-
cally an idea ma)r take the form of an image, i>., something actually like
a percept, but with less sensational vividness and detail (on this, see
Stout, ^. cit, pp. 396-413). But we must carefully distinguish in thought
between the image as something present to the mind — an object of
internal consciousness — and the idea as containing a reference beyond
itself. It is on this reference that the logical or practical function of the
idea depends. The image is, at most, the form taken by the mental act
in which that function is carried out.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 131

impulse so qualified becomes a Desire. In other words,
so long as stimulus guides action in a uniform manner, no
idea of the end is required. Where the point to which
action is directed must be defined specially for each action,
there an idea is, in human conduct, necessary. In the
animal world, though we know nothing of what passes in
an animal's consciousness, we must yet, if we find action
similarly defined, impute to the animal something which,
if not an idea, is capable of performing an identical
function. If ideas arise in this way as a definition of
impulse, it is easy to understand that they carry a motor
excitement with them. Action would seem to be the
primitive and natural accompaniment of an idea, and it is
only in the course of further evolution that ideas arise
which do not prompt to action.

5. / Knowledge of Objects and Analogy.

Two further points remain in which the application of
concrete experience is contrasted with habituation. First,
since perception yields knowledge of objects as wholes
containing related elements, it makes possible inferences
concerning objects which are similar as wholes, that is in
the arrangement of their parts rather than in any special
sense quality. Inferences of this character seem to underlie
much of our practical thinking about the common objects
of life. We may be at a loss to name any single important
sense-quality in which, say, two animals resemble each
other ; and yet we are sure that there is a real identity of
character which will make them for many purposes act
alike. Such an inference, drawn, as it continually is, with-
out any analytical reflection, is the rudest form of analogy,
being based on what are really similarities of relation.
Such similarities may appear as an influence in practical
inference as soon as wholes of related elements are dis-
tinctly experienced — that is to say, as soon as we attain to
knowledge of concrete objects ; and unless there is such
knowledge, it is hard to see on what such an inference
could rest. Hence, conversely, inference based on such a
similarity as distinguished from identity of sense-quality
may be taken as evidence that experience is of the concrete
type.

K 2


132 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

g. Objects as centres of relations.

Secondly, since the relations in which objects stand are
manifold, concrete experience supplies the possibility of
reacting to an object in very different ways, according to
the purpose in hand. Hence the comparative elasticity of
the Practical Judgment in the choice of means, which we
have contrasted with the rigidity of habit.

Now Association is mental habit. If one learns a string
of words without meaning, like the Enay mena^ mona^ mite
of childhood, each word odls up the other, not through
any appropriateness of relation, but through the influence
of past sequences. In consequence association, like all other
generic bases of reaction, will often act inappropriately. If
a man has got into the habit of winding up his watch
mechanically when he takes oflF his waistcoat, he will occa-
sionally find himself doing it if he happens to change his
clothes at any unusual time in the day. Similarly, if a
verse is being repeated by rote, a casual association may
lead to the substitution of a word or line belonging to
another verse, and making nonsense. These aberrations
are, of course, checked in human experience by the fact
that nonsense or abnormality at once arrests attention, and
brings in higher processes than those of association.

Association, then, tends to form a series in which a calls
up by b calls up r, and so forth.^ The idea which will
follow on a or b is determinate, and the more so, the
stronger the association. If there is a well-rooted associa-
tion between a and by b is the only possible follower of a.
The term a may stand in relation to very many other
terms, but by association it will preferably excite the idea
of one of them — that one with which it is most intimately
associated. If more than one association has been formed,
the weaker must either give way, or serve merely to
distract and weaken attention unless consciousness is com-
prehensive enough to hold both ideas before it in their
distinctness. Here, then, association is at a disadvantage

> It is true that earlier antecedents have their effect. In rei>eating a
verse by rote, it would hardly be accurate to think, for example, of each
word as the sole cause determining the reproduction of the word following
it. The general remembrance of Uie verse produces a mental atmosphere
which is, no doubt, an underlying condition of correct reproduction.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 133

as compared with the judgment. Concrete experience
yields us knowledge of objects which are the meeting
points of many relations. An object in space, for instance,
is related to an indefinite number of surrounding objects.
One of these related objects, and perhaps one only, is
relevant to the purpose of the moment. To this object,
whether it is that suggested by the dominant Association
or not, our purpose will direct our thoughts. On another
occasion, a quite different object may be the one relevant
to our purpose, and the direction of our thought is altered
accordingly. Thus, while association brings up the same
ideas with dull uniformity, the purposive judgment selects
from the material presented by experience the relation
which it requires.^

To sum up this part of the discussion in a few words —
we have found that capacity to hold distinct elements in
relation which we have called the Practical Judgment to
be distinct from Assimilation and from the Association of
Ideas. We have found it to be the unit process by which
the knowledge of objects or individuals is built up, and
to be the condition of rudimentary Memory and Anticipa-
tion. In this capacity, it makes possible purposive action
in the strict sense, that is to say, action in which an
impulse, which, having a defined end, may here be called
Desire, deals with the complex and varying circumstances
of individual cases in the manner best suited to give it
satisfaction. In so doing it reveals its distinction from
association in that it is not dominated by mental habit,
but out of the many relations to a given term which
experience may have suggested, selects for the guidance of
its operations that term which is most appropriate for its
purposes. In this stage, therefore, we have behaviour
which does not merely consist of general modes of reaction
— whether hereditary, or modified by experienced results
into more suitable habits — adapted in a general way so as
to be under normal circumstances beneficial. We have
behaviour guided by knowledge of objects in manifold

* /^., so far as the purpose is dominant. In the concrete the stronger
association tends to conflict with the purpose, and may overwhelm it. I
am again contrasting limiting cases.


134 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

relations, by particular memories or anticipations, capable
of adjusting itself to the varying details of circumstance
and having the data of experience freely at its disposal for
the attainment of its desires.

IV. General Character of Concrete Experience and the
Practical Judgment.

6. Concrete Experience consists in the perception of
surrounding objects in their changes and relations. The
elements of a percept being connected, a single experience
may have a permanent effect, shown in its capacity for
being revived. Such revival in relation to a present per-
ception constitutes the Practical Judgment of which the
unperceived elements are concrete ideas. An impulse
directed by such an idea is purposive, and constitutes a
Desire. Such is broadly the group of related psychological
elements which characterise the stage of Concrete Experi-
ence and the Practical Judgment.

The use of experience in action has at this stage certain
distinctive features, through which it presents a well-
marked contrast with the work of Assimilation.

The basis of action consists of data of experience in
their relations. Of these data, we observe that :

(i) Only one experience is required as a basis of
future action. For assimilation, on the other hand, many
repetitions are necessary, except perhaps in some of the
cases in which feeling follows immediately upon sensation,
and modifies its motor effect.

(2) The relations given in experience, and guiding
subsequent action, may be relations between any objects
of perception, and are not (as in the case of Assimilation)
confined to those between sensations and the motor
excitements immediately attendant on them. Hence,
further

a. Inferences may be based on a general similarity

(a similar relation of parts), and not merely on
similarity in a distinct sense quality.

b. The same content may stand in several distinct

relations without confusion. In the case of
Assimilation (and Association) one content leads
uniformly to one other.


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 135

(3) The results of experience are applied to action in
a manner not determined by the experience itself. In the
case of Assimilation, the application of experience is not
distinct from its acquisition, the formation of a habit
being the formation of a tendency to act.

Thus, what is effected in this stage is a correlation
between experienced perceptual relations on the one h^nd,
and the adoption of means to a practical end on the other.
Action is not merely modified by, but based on applied
experience.

It will be seen that the unit of this process from first to
last is the perceptual relation.^ By this I do not mean a
relation apprehended in abstraction from the related terms,
but a whole consisting of terms in their relation. There
are three stages in the experience of relations which
should be distinguished. In the first, a relation between
A and B affects the mind though a and b are never
apprehended as related. This is the case of assimilation
where e.g.^ 2l feeling modifies the effect of a sensation,
though the sequence sensation-feeling is never grasped.
In the third and highest, the relation a between the two
terms a — b is distinguished, named, and compared with
others. Thus in the same instance the relation is known
as one of sequence, perhaps as one of causation. Here
there is knowledge of the relation as such, and we are in
the world of " universals " or general conceptions. In the
second and intermediate stage the relation is not appre-

^ It may be as well to repeat that by the term perceptual relation, I
intend a perceptual content m which distinct but related elements are
included. In such a perception, the relations contained contribute to the
character of the whole as much as the elements that are related, and in
that sense the relations must be said to be perceived. It does not follow
that the character of any of the relations concerned is analysed out and
distinguished from the terms which compose it. When I look at any
complex object, as, e.g., the front of a house, I am aware of a whole with
many distinct parts. These parts are in definite relations to one another.
I may concentrate attention on any pair ; e.g., a window to the right of the
door. I then not merely see the door and window, but see them in their
relation to one another. By an act of analysis I can go further, and
make of the relation a distinct object of thought, independent of the
terms which it connects in this particular case. But in so doing I pass
from perception to conception. When I speak of a relation as perceptual,
or even as " perceived," I mean that it is not thus distinguished, but is
an element in a perceived whole.


136 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

hended as such, but the terms in their relation are grasped
together. The datum of experience is here the content
A — B. In our instance the whole proceeding, feeling-
foUowing-on-sensation, is apprehended, though the relation
of sequence is not dissected out and so prepared for
naming and comparison with others. This I call the
stage of Concrete Experience and the Practical Judgment,
and its unit is the perceptual relation.

Apart from introspection, we may justly impute this
knowledge of objects in relation when we find action
based on the relation a — b as distinct from the contents
A, or B, alone. The marks distinguishing action of such
a character have been enumerated above.

V. T^he Practical Judgment as a stage in the Correlation
of Experiences.

7. It remains to characterise in general terms the
Method and Scope of the correlation effected in this stage,
and to contrast it with the work of the lower stage of
Assimilation.

As to scope, the first or lower stage is concerned with
the correlation of sense stimuli and resulting feelings, and
its function is to define and regulate instinctive and
random action. The second or higher stage deals with
concrete objects, and the adjustment of action to make or
meet changes in the physical surroundings. Its relation
to instinct will be discussed later.

As to method, we have found that the basis of the
whole process is a perceived relation — in itself a corre-
lation of distinct experiences. The terminus of the pro-
cess is again what we have called a practical relation : an
adjustment of means to ends ; once more an act ot
correlation. Further, the second act of correlation is, as
we have seen, based upon the first ; and there is thus a
wider kind of correlation, including the two constituent
relations which form the starting point and the conclusion.
We may express this by describing this stage as a corre-
lation of relations.

If for the word correlation we substitute inference, the
process described shows a clear analogy to one familiar to
logicians. It resembles\ in short, the inference from


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 137

particulars to particulars in which the implied universal is
not made explicit. That is to say, a particular relation
Ai — Bi is perceived ; and where in a second case Aj is given,
the correlate b, is inferred.

This inference is equivalent to the passage in the
syllogism from the minor premiss (this is a^) to the con-
clusion (it will be B,). What is called the inference from
particulars to particulars then may also be described as an
argument from minor to conclusion, founded on observed
parallels.

We must try to understand clearly how far inference at
this stage differs from the corresponding process in the
lower stage.

Consider the case of the chick which learns to peck at
yolk of egg. We may explain this as acquired habit
or as acquired knowledge. In the former case, a series of
experiences gradually remodel action. In the latter, an ex-
perienced relation is grasped and applied. If the latter
explanation is adopted, we naturally express it by saying
that the chick has learnt that yolk of egg is good, but it
is essential to note that to express the result in general
terms is precisely what the chick cannot do. The chick,
we are assuming, perceives the relation in each instance in
which it is given, and later on expects the coming result
before it is given. The man, observing the chick's action,
sees that it is working upon a principle that might be
stated in general terms ; but it is the man that states the
principle, not the chick.

If, to carry the matter a stage further, the man were
addicted to formal logic, he would express the whole
process, as it goes on in his own mind, in the well-known
scheme of induction and syllogism. Thus :

1. This, that, and the other yolk of egg is good.

2. Yolk of egg is good.

3. This is a piece of yolk.

4. This is good.

Now, if the chick's intelligence reaches the second stage,
but no higher, it grasps the relation expressed in (i), (3),
and (4) of these stages, but not that expressed in (2). At
each trial it has recognised the fact that " this piece of yolk


138 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

is good/' and having grasped this it is at a later stage
capable of forming the judgment which combines (3) and
(4). That is to say, we may represent it as saying to
itself : " This is a piece of yolk : it will be good/' In
other words, it has previously grasped the particular re-
lations upon which its subsequent inference rests, and the
inference itself consists in the grasping of a relation of
which only one term is perceived. This stage is then a
correlation of relations, and if we compare it to explicit
inference as analysed in syllogism, we may say that the
concrete relations upon which the major premiss is based
are perceived, and the relation which leads from minor to
conclusion is judged, while the major premiss is represented
by the psychological result of the repeated perceptions ;
a result shown in the power of judging the relation in a
fresh case when only one term is perceived.

If now again we reverse our supposition, and reduce the
intelligence of the chick to the lower stage, we shall find
that much less is explicit, and much more psychological
process that we can only know by its results. We shall
now have to say that the relations known to the onlooker
are never perceived as such by the chick, but that each
trial of the yolk goes to build up a habit (which takes the
place of the major premiss), which on the perception of the
yolk, issues at once in pecking. The perception of the
yolk corresponds to the minor premiss, and the pecking
to the conclusion of this practical syllogism ; but the
chick does not, according to our analysis of this stage,
grasp the relation which unites them ; he merely passes
from the one to the others. In short, the minor premiss
is here replaced by a perception acting upon a preformed
disposition. We may express the contrast by saying that
in the lower stage, at the moment of action, the conclusion
alone is the explicit object of consciousness. " This is to
be pecked at " expresses the chick's consciousness ; that,
and no more. In the second and higher stage, the relation
of minor and conclusion is explicit, " This, being yolk of
cggi 5s to be pecked at.*' Thus in the lower stage, the
conclusion appears as an impulse, issuing from all that has
gone before as its psychological basis. There is correlation


VI PRACTICAL JUDGMENT 139

between a set of experiences on the one side, and a mode
of reaction to stimulus on the other. The higher stage is
essentially a process of perception and judgment — a cor-
relation, as we have called it, of relations.

Finally, the transition from the lower to the higher stage
rests on the growth of experience in clearness and compre-
hensiveness. In the primitive experience, the feeling
modifies the sensation which it follows. Let the scope of
consciousness be extended so that sensation and feeling may
be apprehended together while yet remaining distinct, and
the content sensation-giving-place-to-feeling comes into
being. This is the germ of the higher stage.


CHAPTER VII

LEARNING AMONG THE HIGHER ANIMALS. THE METHOD
OF TRIAL AND ERROR

We have now to ask whether there is any evidence that
this stage of intelligence is attained by any animals other
than man.

I. Let us begin by considering a very simple instance of
the apparently purposive choice of means to an end. I
once had a cat which learnt to " knock at the door " by
lifting the mat outside and letting it fall.^ The common
account of this proceeding would be that the cat did it in
order to get in. It assumes the cat's action to be
determined by its end. Is the common account wrong.?
Let us test it by trying explanations founded on the more
primitive operations of experience. First, then, can we
explain the cat's action by the assodation of ideas .? The
obvious difficulty here is to find the idea or perception
which sets the process going. The sight of a door or a
mat was not, so far as I am aware, associated in the cat's
experience with the action which it performed until it had
performed it. If there were association, it must be said to
work retrogressively. The cat associates the idea of getting
in with that of some one coming to the door, and this again
with the making of a sound to attract attention, and so
forth. Those who hold language of this kind are really
describing what I have called the Practical Judgment in
different terms. Such a series of associations so well
adjusted means in reality a set of related elements grasped
^ The habit is, I believe, not uncommon among cats.


vn LEARNING AMONG HIGHER ANIMALS 141

by the animal and used to determine its action. Ideas of
" persons/* " opening doors/' " attracting attention " and so
forth would have no effect unless attached to the existing
circumstances. If the cat has such abstract ideas at all,
she must have something more — ^namely the power of
applying them to present perception. The "ideas" of
calling attention and of dropping the mat must somehow
be brought together. Further, if the process is one of
association, it is a strange coincidence that the right asso-
ciates are chosen. If the cat began on a string of associations
starting from the people in the room, she might as easily
go on to dwell on the pleasures of getting in, of how she
would coax a morsel of fish from one, or a saucerful of
cream from another, and so spend her time in idle reverie.
But she avoids these associations, and selects those suited
to her purpose. In short, we find signs on the one hand
of the application of ideas, on the other of selection. Both
of these features indicate a higher stage than that of sheer
association. This we shall always find, if we endeavour to
apply the association of ideas regressively as explaining
the apparent choice of means to a desired end.

But there is another possible line of explanation. Mr.
Lloyd Morgan's dog Tony learned to open a gate by lifting
the latch with his head. I do not know how my cat learnt
to knock, but Mr. Lloyd Morgan tells us that Tony

^ after looking out between the bars in a number of places in
the railings, at length chanced to gaze out under, and at the
same time inadvertently lift, the latch.*' [The dog then] " after
a while profited by the fortunate results of an originally fortuitous
experience, and now opens the gate whenever he wants to
do so."i

Here then is a way back to association. It is of course
still possible on the facts before us that Tony grasped the
relation which he had once experienced — ^saw, however
vaguely, that pushing in his head at a particular point and
then lifting it would get the gate open, and that he after-
wards applied this knowledge. But it is also possible that
the pleasure of getting through became associated with

^ //Mi and /nstincty p. 154.


142 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

that method of action and "stamped it in" — ^in other
words, that the action assimilated the character of its result
and became in itself attractive to the dog.

2. Mr. Thorndike^s Experiments.

This method of explanation, which, it will been seen,
virtually dispenses not only with a knowledge of relations,
but with association of ideas, and carries us back to the
stage of assimilation,^ has been applied as a sort of universal
solvent by Mr. Thorndike.* Mr. Thorndike's view, based
upon a number of ingenious experiments with cats, dogs,
and chicken, is, roughly, that the acquired actions of all
animals below the primates are to be explained upon that
principle of the selection of the successful act and elimina-
tion of failures which we applied in Chapter V. to explain
retrogressive associations. Mr. Thorndike does not go
quite as far as to deny animals all images or ideas whatever,
but his general position and tendency is not unfairly
represented by the following passage.

" The possibility is that animals may have no images or memories
at all^ no ideas to associate. Perhaps the entire &ct of association
in animals is the presence of sense-impressions with which are
associated, by resultant pleasure, certain impulses, and that there-
fore, and therefore only, a certain situation brings forth a certain
act."»

In any case, he seems pretty clear that the association of
ideas is not the important point, but rather the impulse-
feeling association.

" The groundwork of animal associations is not the association
of ideas^ but the association of idea or sense-impression with
impulsed *

The general conception of the life of the higher animals
that results is so interesting as to deserve quotation in full.

" One who had seen the phenomena so far described, who has
watched the life of a cat or dog for a month or more under test
conditions, gets, or fancies he gets, a fairly definite idea of what

1 This method of learning, depending on repeated blundering efiforts
with fortuitous successes that are gradually selected, has been called by
Mr. Lloyd Morgan the Method of Trial and Error.

* "Animal Intelligence," Psych, Rev. Mon. Supp. Vol. II. No. 4.

' P. 73- * P. 71.


i;


VII LEARNING AMONG HIGHER ANIMALS 143

the intellectual life of a cat or dog feels like. It is most like
what we feel when consciousness contains little thought about
anything, when we feel the sense-impressions in their first in-
tention, so to speak, when we feel our own body, and the im-
pulses we give to it. Sometimes one gets this animal consciousness
while in swimming, for example. One feels the water, the sky,
the birds above, but with no thoughts about them or memories
of how they looked at other times, or aesthetic judgments about
their beauty ; one feels no ideas about what movements he will
make, but feels himself make them, feels his body throughout.
Self-consciousness dies away. Social consciousness dies away.
The meanings, and values, and connections of things die away.
One feels sense-impressions, has impulses, feels the movements he
makes ; that is all.

This pictorial description may be supplemented by an account
of some associations in human life which are learneci in the same
way as are animal associations ; associations, therefore, where the
process of formation is possibly homologous with that in animals.
When a man learns to swim, to play tennis or billiards, or to
juggle, the process is something like what happens when the cat
learns to pull the string to get out of the box, provided, of course,
we remove, in the man's case, all the accompanying mentality
which is not directly concerned in learning the feat. Like the
latter, the former contains desire, sense-impression, impulse, act
and possible representations. Like it, the former is learned
gradually. Moreover, the associations concerned cannot be
formed by imitation. One does not know how to dive just by
seeing another man dive. You cannot form them from being
put through them, though, of course, this helps indirectly, in a
way that it does not with animals. One makes use of no feelings
of a common element, no perceptions of similarity. The tennis
player does not feel, ^^ This ball coming at this angle and with
this speed is similar in angle, though not in speed, to that other
ball of an hour ago, therefore I will hit it in a similar way." He
simply feels an impulse from the sense-impression. Finally, the
elements of the associations are not isolated. No tennis-player's
stream of thought is filled with free-floating representations of any
of the tens of thousands of sense-impressions of movements he has
seen and made on the tennis-court. Yet there is consciousness
enough at the time, keen consciousness of the sense-impressions,
impulses, feelings of one's bodily acts. So with the animals.
There is consciousness enough, but of this kind." ^

It would be out of place to examine Mr. Thorndike's
interesting paper in full detail, but we may consider

1 Pp. 83, 84.


144 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the main reasons which lead him to this remarkable
conclusion.

Mr. Thorndike's principal experiments consisted in
placing cats, dogs, and chickens in a variety of cages so
contrived that they could be opened by means well within
the animal's physical powers, yet quite outside the range
of its ordinary experience. Thus clawing at a string, de-
pressing a lever, pushing aside a swing door and so forth en-
abled the prisoner to escape. It was found that the cat or
dog — we may confine our attention to them — ^at first clawed
and scratched more or less indiscriminately; in so doing
it would in course of time give, by accident, the required
push or pull, and so obtain its freedom. After a certain
number of repetitions, the animal would acquire the power
of doing what was needed more and more quickly, until
at last the trick was properly learnt. The right action was
^^ stamped in " by success, while the indiscriminate pawing
was stamped out. As a measure of the perfection of the
habit, the fime required to achieve freedom is taken
practically as the sole test. The results are exhibited
graphically in "time curves," falling with more or less
marked fluctuations from the maximum point of several
minutes, to the minimum of a few seconds. Some of the
tricks, it may be mentioned, were decidedly complex. One
was a " thumb latch " complicated by the fact that after
the latch was lifted the door still required a force of 400
grammes to open it, and still more by the fact that the
latch would " fall back into place again unless the door
were pushed out at least a little.'* Another, called Box J,
required two separate movements to open it ; others call^
K and L required three such movements. Bearing in mind
that the result of these movements would be something
utterly foreign to the initial experiences of the cats, and
would to the end remain connected only by the observed
fact of sequence and not by any perceived continuity, one
is somewhat surprised at the measure of success which the
animals achieved. All the cats learned some of the tricks,
and all the tricks appear to have been learnt by some.
The dogs were not so uniformly successful. Let us
then examine the grounds on which Mr. Thorndike uses


VII LEARNING AMONG HIGHER ANIMALS 145

observations which some writers might have taken as a
proof of high intelligence, as proving precisely the
contrary.

3. a. Habituation and number of instances.

Explicit memory, as we have seen, serves as a basis for
inference from a single experience. If we could convert
the proposition and be assured that inferences from a
single experience imply explicit memory, then we could
without further difficulty assign memory and the type of
inference based on it to many animals. The elephant or
the dog that long cherish vindictiveness for a single
injury, the horse which knows better than its rider the road
they have once traversed, and that perhaps in a contrary
direction, could be said without more ado to draw inferences
of this type. We must return to this point later. It
is enough for the present to remark that while habits are,
as every one knows, generally formed gradually by many
repetitions, explicit memory is due to a single experience.

Mr. Thomdike's first argimient is based upon this
contrast.

"The gradual slope of the time-curve, then, shows the absence
of reasoning. They represent the wearing smooth of a path in
the brain, not the decisions of a rational consciousness.*' ^

But is the slope gradual ^ Turning to the actual curves
(p. 18, fF) there seem to be many cases in which it is not
so by any means. Thus in Box D, which was opened by
pulling a string at the top of the box, one cat appears to
have learnt the way of escape after four successful trials
(the failures clearly would have no direct influence),
another after two trials, another after one only. That is
to say, after the trials mentioned, the time taken, though
slightly fluctuating, did not exceed half a minute. Another
cat appears to have learnt the trick in one trial — though
its time afterwards rose in two cases to about a minute,
and after many experiments it became so well versed in
the matter that a lapse of seventy-two days only raised its
time to a little over a minute again.^

' P. 45.

' I speak with some diffidence as to the exact numbers, as the curves
are not so drawn as to be particularly easy to measure. On this point,


146 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Take Box E again, where the cats had to put out a paw
and claw a string outside the box — a thing that would hardly
be done accidentally in many minutes of random clawir^,
and would, one would say, not be done twice over in
such a manner within twenty experiments. One cat
(No. 6) after one success reduced its time to about ninety
seconds, and after the third trial to fifty seconds. It had a
few more trials, and after fourteen days its first experiment
took about one minute. These figures surely si^gest
partial recollection rapidly becomir^ perfect, rather than a
slowly ingrained habit. Box I, which was opened by a
lever, appears to have been mastered by cat No. 3 in one
instance, while Nos. 4 and 5 seem to have had no difficulty
with it from the beginning — ^their time never rising much
beyond half a minute, and remaining at a minimum after
the lapse of many days.

In many cases no doubt the fluctuations persist longer
and the instances approximate more closely to the type
required by Mr. Thomdike's argument. But a few
instances to the contrary are sufficient to disprove his
sweeping general statement. It is quite possible that some
of the cats learnt the tricks more intelligently than others,
just as some failed to learn many tricks altogether. These
differences are still more marked in the case of the few
dogs experimented on. Hardly any of their time curves
can be called gradual — unless the slope of a church steeple
is gradual. In the lever box, one dog's time curve came
down from several minutes to fifty seconds after a single
success. Another began with a time of some forty seconds
only, which he reduced in three experiments to eight or
ten. A third seems to have got the trick nearly perfect
after one success, and quite so after two. It seems

and in the whole examination of Mr. Thorndike's important monograph,
I have been specially helped by Mr. A. £. Taylor.

As to the fluctuations, it must be observed that the time taken can only
be a very rough and imperfect measure of the perfection of the cat's habit
or understanding as the case may be. Alterations in degree of liveliness,
accidental failures to clutch properly, and a dozen other causes, would
produce delays, and various fluctuations occurring in cases where habits
were well established seem to indicate that this occurred. Mr. Thorn-
dike does not seem to realise at all adequately the very rough and ready
character of his statistical methods.


VII LEARNING AMONG HIGHER ANIMALS 147

superfluous to quote further examples. Mr. Thorndike
himself would probably have been impressed by those
referred to if he had not entertained an exaggerated
conception of the " perfection " of what we have called
explicit memory, or memory in its stricter sense.

. . . ^^Real memory is an absolute thing, including every-
thing but forgetfulness. If the cat had real memory it would,
when after an interval dropped into a box, remember that from
this box it escaped by doing this or that and consequently, either
immediately or after a time of recollection, go do it, or else it
would not remember and would fail utterly to do it." ^

The statement is so astonishing that one would take it for
a mere slip, but that much of Mr. Thorndike*s argument
is founded upon it. A moment's self-recollection is enough
to show that memories of past events or of things learnt
are of all degrees of completeness. That it should take
four or five trials to teach a cat a novel sort of trick is
certainly no more than one would expect on the hypothesis
that a clear grasp of the relations involved was being
gradually formed and fixed in memory. What Mr.
Thorndike's experiments prove, so far, is not that cats
and dogs are invariably educated by the association process,
i.e. by habituation alone, but, on the contrary, that at least
some cats and dogs conform in at least one point to the
methods of acquisition by concrete experience — ^they learn
in a very few instance^.

4. Failure to learn by being put through an action.

What we may call the sense-impulse theory of associa-
tion implies that an animal can only learn to do a thing by
doing it, and so getting the pleasure of success associated
with the doing. Now, if one puts an animal through an
act to show him how it is done, and if he can learn in this
way, the theory breaks down. For to have his limbs
mechanically moved by the hand is quite a different thing
from moving them himself. The set of sensations involv^
would be, apart from the "perception of the movement^ in the
main different. In particular, the impulse to move would
be absent. This case therefore is critical for the sense-

1 P. 98*

I. %


148 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

impulse theory. Mr. Thomdike himself obtained n^a*
tive results from his experiments, which he generalises.
But here again his experience is surely at variance with
common knowledge. I have seen dogs in process of learn-
ing tricks by being held in position. Wundt^ explains
that he taught his poodle to shut the door in that fashion
— in four or five lessons moreover ; and my wife, who had
a pug which shut the door to admiration, tells me that she
taught it in the same way. The regular method of teach-
ing elephants is, as I am informed by the experienced
elephant trainer at the Belle Vue Gardens, Manchester, for
the keeper to guide the trunk from point to point.* To
test Mr. Thorndike's assertion, I myself made a little ex-
periment with a kitten, which seems clear enough. I
showed the kitten some food, fish or milk, and then, setting
the dish for a moment on another table near, I lifted the
kitten on to a desk, and handed it the food. I did this
six times without result, the kitten merely mewing and
begging in its own fashion. The seventh time the kitten
jumped on to the desk of itself.' After this I left home,
and it had no more lessons for a fortnight. On my return
I found that it jumped on to the desk at the first trial, and
after that the act became habitual. In this case the kitten
did the thing regularly after doing it once ; and it never
had any inducement to get on to the table, such as might
produce a nascent impulse, in seeing the food there while
it was below. It saw the food in my hand, near but not
on the desk, or else, as I bent to pick it up, on the table
near.

No doubt cats and dogs differ, and so do their trainers,
but even a few positive instances are sufficient to destroy
Mr. Thomdike's generalisation.*

* Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology^ p. 360.
■ See below, p. 164 and 260.

' On the sixth triail, the kitten got on to a chair as if to get up, but
went down again. Except on one day, when I gave it two lessons, the
experiments were, roughly, at intervals of twenty-four hours.

* Mr. Small, whose remarks (American Journal of Psychology^ Jan.
1900) go to the root of the matter, points out that any '* Attempt ... to
restrain or constrain the animal would defeat the desired end — attention
would assuredly be diverted from the objective point to the restraining
conditions — would be lost in the affective absorption induced by them^
(p. 163). And commenting on Mr. Thomdike's experiments, he says :


VII LEARNING AMONG HIGHER ANIMALS 149

5. Failure to imitate.

A more serious negative result was reached by Mr.
Thomdike on another point. He found reason to think
that imitation in the sense of *^ transferred association " does
not exist among mammals below the primates. That is to
say, that animals never will do a thing because they see
others obtain their ends by so doing. Cats and dogs were
shut up in boxes, and allowed to watch the method by
which another cat or d(^ escaped from another compart-
ment of the box. To this compartment they were
afterwards admitted, and it was found that they had learnt
nothing. These experiments are of somewhat doubtful
value.^ So far as they go, they fall in with the view to
which I have been led independently, that an animal
makes no intellectual provision for the future. If the
cat could say to itself, "There is my friend Tom in the
outer compartment. I shall be let in there in a minute,
so I will watch, and see how Tom gets out ; " it would
doubtless watch Tom's proceedings with care, but it would
also be a much more reflective animal than it is. The
probability is rather that its attention is aroused only as a
rule by the act or object that leads up to or is connected
with the end to which it is itself striving. Other things
may strike it by chance, but its interest is not directed to
them. Thus it would be more likely that one animal
would imitate another if both were trying to escape or to
get fed at the same time.* Whether under these conditions

'* This method manifestly disregards the factor of attention above adverted
to, and consequently fails to demonstrate the absence in animals of those
higher associative processes involved in inferential imitation " (p. 164}.
It follows that the method would be much less likely to succeed with a
cat, which resents being held, than with the obedient elephant or the
trustful dog. I failed in my attempt to use it with a Rhesus monkey
(see below, p. 248).

1 Mr. Thomdike says that the cats watched their instructors " more or
less," and afterwards reckons up the number of times which a cat
" probably saw " or " certainly saw." My own experience in experiment-
ing convinces me so strongly of the difficulty of judging what a cat or
dog really sees — even when I am making a direct effort to get its atten-
tion — that I am surprised that so experienced an investigator should
speak of certainty in connection with the question whether one cat saw
another perform a seemingly trivial operation on the other side of a
grating.

• Mr. Thomdike tried this experiment with two cats, of which one, in
fact, succeeded. Mr. Thomdike, however, states that it acted just like


150 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

there might be reflective imitation — ^imitation based on
the perception of another's act and its result to that
other — remains uncertain.

What has first to be settled is the possibility of a still
simpler mental act — learning by the perception of an event
and its consequence — when that consequence directly affects
the learner. If an animal sees something done which has
the immediate eflfect of giving it what it wants, then the
something done falls within the sphere of interest as above

the others who formed the association by accident. But I notice in
Mr. Thomdike's table that this particular cat only succeeded in one other
box ; we are not told in how many it failed. In any case, Mr. Thomdike
seems to be in error in arguing that there was no imitation because the
one cat used its teeth to pull the string, and the other its claw. In my
experiments I found that animals frequently varied their own method in
this fashion. Mr. Thomdike's argument would only hold against a purely
mechanical and unintelligent theory of imitation.

Another cat failed to climb up netting, though eighty times it saw other
cats climb up and get fed ; but as Mr. Thomdike tells us that even when
a piece of fisn was held out through the netting he would not climb after
it, this result is not very surprising. If the cat would not climb to get
fish which he saw before him, it is not likely that he would climb because
he saw others do so.

In the remaining experiment mentioned by Mr. Thomdike, two cats
leamed to do as a third, but they did not " form the association more
quickly than they would have done alone.'' But how quickly would they
have formed it alone ? One could only judge from the speed of other
cats, and nothing is more unsafe than to infer from the performance of
one animal to that of another.

Mr. W. S. Small's experiments with rats {American Journal oj
Psychology Jan. 1900) are more satisfactory on this point. They go to
show — {a) that when two or more rats are confronted with a difficulty
{e.g.y to find their way into a box to get food) one will overcome it first,
and there will be no tendency on the part of the others to leam from him
as long as he is there. They will follow him, and very likely rob hini,
but they will leave him to do the work. But {b) if the pioneer rat is
removed, the effect is not uniform. In several instances the remaining
rats seemed to have leamed nothing ; but in the case of four young rats,
called A, B, C, and D^ the results seemed to favour imitation. Here rat a
leamt the trick first m an hour and a quarter. As long as he remained
in the box, no other rat seems to have made any attempt to help or leam
from him, but on his removal, rat B made the attempt, and succeeded in
two and a half minutes. Again, when B was removed, C succeeded in
the same time. D was not tried alone. This does, I think, suggest that
both B and C had leamt something from A, but Mr. Small seems to
think that what they learnt was merely to attack the door and not waste
time on the rest of the box. What is most instructive in aiding us to
judge the value of negative results is the total change in the behav-
iour of these rats as soon as the pioneer is removed. If a rat finds
that stealing is easier than work, he will leave his friend to work, and for
his own part will adhere to his stealing. There is evidently a good deal
of human nature in rats.


vir LEARNING AMONG HIGHER ANIMALS 151

defined. Do animals profit by experience of this kind ?
If so, their action falls outside the category of habituation.
If an animal pulls a string because having done so before it
has given him pleasure, it is possible to regard his educa-
tion as the gradual growth of a random way of acting into
a habit. But if he pulls it because he has seen it pulled,
and then got the pleasant result, his act appears rather as a
practical application of what he has seen — a perceptual
relation converted into a practical adjustment. It is quite
possible that an animal should get to this point without
being capable of the slightly more complex act of applying
to himself what another does on his own account.


CHAPTER VIII

SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

I. In the hope of deciding whether animals can learn
by perception of results (as distinct from ** imitation " in
the usual sense), I made a number of experiments on a
variety of animals. I have not been able to carry the
experiments as far as I could wish, but they seem to me to
be suggestive of certain results both in regard to the special
point which I had in view, and in relation to the broader
question of the part played by accident and habituation on
the one hand, and by the " intelligent " apprehension of
means and ends on the other. My experiments were begun
with my own dog and cat. They were afterwards, by the
courtesy of Messrs. Jennison,^ extended to several animals in
their great collection at the Belle Vue Gardens, Manchester,
including monkeys of several species, a young female
elephant, and an otter. It seemed to me that interesting
analogies and contrasts might be drawn by confronting
different animals with the same or similar problems, and
so, I think, it turned out.

I must say a word about the methods used. Of the
character of the individual animals, a most important
point, I will speak as I come to each. Essentially, each
experiment consisted in setting the animal the task of
obtaining food by some method presumably strange to it.
For example, food was put into a box, which was
then shut, and left for the animal to open, or it was

^ I must particularly thank Mr. George Jennison for many hours of
helpful collab


CH. VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 153

placed out of reach, yet so that it could be obtained by
pulling a string, or pushing a door. The animal was
first allowed time to discover the method of obtaining it
for itself. If after a little while it showed no sign of
hitting on the right method, it was shown, and allowed to
get the food.^ Fresh food was then placed as before, and a
new trial began. It was of course necessary that the
experiments should be tried before the animal's ordinary
meal, but there seems to be an immense difference in the
effort which different animals will make to satisfy their
hunger, and this difference has to be kept carefully in
mind in weighing results.

2. The original object being to discover whether
what an animal sees done will have any effect, the first
thing was to secure that it should see. This can only be
done by gaining its attention, and I do not think that
any one who has experienced the difficulty of getting an
animal to attend to what is going on before his nose, will
be surprised at any number of failures to learn by
perception of results. In every case the animal is taken up,
on the one hand with its desire for the food, on the
other, with its own instinctive or habitual method of
dealing with the obstacle before it. One's dog will
momentarily attend out of politeness to his master, but a
cat is moved by no such considerations, nor is an elephant,
nor a monkey. A mere mechanical performance of the
act before the animal, which it may or may not see,
has no effect whatever. I therefore always endeavoured
to call attention to what I was doing.

It must be added here that as with a human being, so
with an animal attentive perception is something different
from mere perception. I will not attempt to determine in
what psychologically the difference consists, but there is in
some animals a certain obvious difference of expression
which strikes the observer. The pricked ears, fixed gaze,
and strained, tense, alert attitude of the attentive dog are

^ It might be thought that to withhold the food is the better plan.
Sometimes I did this, but never for many trials together. It discourages
the animal, and makes him think (I speak popularly) that he is bemg
fooled. The opposite danger — very marked with some dogs — is that he
may simply wait, or beg his master to do the thing for him again.


154 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

unmistakable. When one says that the dog attends, one
means that he assumes an attitude of this kind, and where
there is attention, there seems to be a mental digestion of
the fact attended to, a working of it into the mass of
experience so that it becomes available as a guide to action.
Whatever else may be said of human attention, this will,
I imagine, be allowed to be its normal effect, and this is,
I think, also its normal effect in the animal world.

3. Besides showing the thing to be done, then, I also tried
to attract attention. Further, after the trick was shown,
in case of failure on the part of the animal, I used two
supplementary methods. The first, which I call Sugges-
tion, consisted in pointing to the object to be attacked by
way of reminder. It was used rarely.^ The second,
which I call Encouragement, was used habitually, and
consists in stimulating the animal to persevere by a *^ good
dog " or a " get it, pussy," or by pointing, not to the
object to be seized, but to the place where the food is.
Encouragement is distinct from Suggestion as merely
stimulating the animal to effort, and not helping in any way
to direct its efforts. I also used Discouragement when an
animal became rough in his excitement.

The time of each trial was not regularly taken. Times
are apt to be quite as misleading as instructive. Suppose,
for example, that a cat begins without any delay to pull out a
bolt which sticks a little. It is an open question whether
she will persist or not. If not, she will probably take to
her ablutions, and after washing her face with great
elaboration while the experimenter waits with what
patience he can command, will deign to return to the

^ Suggestion is to be distinguished from inducement. I might teach
my dog to bite at a string by waving my hand with a piece of meat
towards it so that he would jump after my hand and accidentally catch
the string. I might get him to raise a catch by smearing the box below
and at the side of it with meat, so that in smelling at it he would knock
the catch up. Then, if he discovered that to bite the string or raise
the catch gained him meat, he would, of course, repeat the act. This
would be a simple case of learning the thing by domg it, and bears no
relation to learning by seeing. Mere pointing could only be an induce-
ment if there were a previous association through which an animal had
learnt to interpret the sign. Apart from such association its function is
to direct attention to the proper object, and so revive the "ideas"
associated therewith.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 155

business in hand, and perhaps with one strong pull get the
bolt out. In this way the time may suddenly rise
from twenty seconds to five or six minutes, and the rise
really signifies nothing but a slight failure in persistence.
Nevertheless, I generally took the time when I could get
a time keeper, as there are cases, particularly where " trial
and error " play a large part, in which it can be made
instructive. In the main, I relied on taking notes of
everything that seemed essential at the moment. What
an animal does is far more important for our purposes
than the time which it takes to do it.

My original aim being to measure the influence of
perceptual acquisition (learning by perception of results)
as distinct from motor acquisition (learning an act by
doing it) I tried to find thmgs for the animals to do in
which accidental success was improbable. It is no easy
matter to devise problems which combine this feature with
that of being clearly within the competence of the animal
physically and mentally. Some experiments I discarded
when I found them opening a door to accidental success.
Others I went on with for the sake of collateral problems,
without regarding them as instances of learning by
perception. Those which do seem to indicate perceptual
acquisition are of unequal value, some being more and
others less open to the suggestion that the success may
have been accidental.^

4. Description of experiments.

(i). Pulling string.

My first experiment was with my cat Tim, a small black
tom, rather more than a year old. It was repeated with
my dog. Jack.

Tim is a sociable creature, who follows his friends about in the
half dog-like way that some cats have, but as a psychologist he
has two great defects. His attention is of the most fickle order,
and what is even worse, he gets his meals at the most irregular
times, and by methods known only to himself. It is therefore
impossible to say beforehand whether he will take any sustained
interest in the proceedings at all. He will not put himself out

^ I was throughout trying to find methods quite as much as results, and
I have given a somewhat full account, even of experiments which prove
little, in the hope that the methods used may be suggestive to others.


156 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

much even for fish, and five or six mouthfuls seem alwajrs to
take the edge ofF his appetite. Jack, on the other hand — ^my
dog, who may be introduced at the same time — has two great
merits. He is always anxious to oblige, and he is quite im&il-
ingly ready to eat. In other respects, 1 sliould not have regarded
Jack as a favourable subject for experiments designed to test the
higher limits of animal intelligence. His moral qualities — if
psychologists will allow me to speak of such a thing in connection
with a dog — have endeared him to a large circle of friends, but
his stoutest champions have admitted that his virtues were of the
heart rather than the head. At the same time, after comparing
his performances with those of other dogs, I think we underrated
Jack. It remains, however, that his manners are rough and
boisterous. He is very strong, and claws things to pieces if he
does not get what he wants.^ But, as I soon found out, the
essential difference between Jack and the cat is that Jack's atten-
tion is concentrated, and Tim's dissipated. The cat is the finer
workman, doing things scientifically if he does them at all, but
he seldom makes a real effort to overcome a difficulty. Jack
bounces and blunders into everything, is apt, if the right method
fails, to get excited and try his strength, yet by continuity of
effort learns more rapidly and learns more.

In this particular experiment, Jack showed to great
advantage as compared with Tim, and indeed, with all
other animals on whom I have tried it, except the elephant
and the monkeys. A piece of meat was placed on a card
to which a string was tied, and then placed on a shelf
beyond reach of the animal with the string dangling
down. After long delay the trick seemed to " come ' to
the cat almost on a sudden.

I first tried this with Tim, thinking that a young cat would
very likely pull the string in play. I was surprised to find that
he took no notice of it. I showed him seven times, pulling the
string down before his eyes, and letting him get the meat.
Neither this, nor a series of trials in which the card was placed
on the table barely out of the cat's reach, had the slightest effect.
The kitten once grabbed at the* string as I was arranging the
card, probably in play, and brought the card down without
the meat. For the rest, he either made nStb^no attempt at all.


^ In this connection it would be natural to mention Jack's breed, but
this is a point on which I hope nobody will inquire. I could not bring
myself to call Jack a mongrel. I may say that some have thought him
more of a fox-terrier than anything else. If so, he is on an unusually
large scale, with broad, brawny chest, and mighty claws.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 157

or tried to claw at the meat directly. About a fortnight after-
wards I began a long series of trials in which the string was tied
to a chair leg to make it more conspicuous. Sometimes I let
Jack pull the food down — when the kitten frequently stole it —
sometimes I pulled it myself. Fourteen trials gave no result.
Next day, eight trials passed without result, but at the ninth, the
cat bit slightly at the string close by my fingers as I adjusted it,
and as soon as I had got it right, pawed the string down. The
biting was doubtless due to the string being slightly smeared with
fish, but the effect was apparently to call the cat's attention to
the string for the first time in all this long series. It is clear
that in pawing it his aim was to get the fish on the table. If he
had merely been attracted by the smear on the string, he would
have used his mouth. At the next trial, he sat still for a while,
and then pawed the string again. At the next, he took to wash-
ing himself, and I gave up for a time ; but on replacing the string
I saw him watching me, and he pulled it down at once. In the
next trial he did the same. Next day he appeared to have for-
gotten, but walked under the string and knocked it down with
his tail. At the second trial, he slightly brushed against the
string, but walked away. I had to rearrange it. He watched
me doing so, and pawed it down at once. He then pulled it five
times running without hesitation.

I have described this experiment at length because,
putting all the facts together, they seem to show the
effect of attention in a very remarkable way. It really
seemed that though the string was constantly before its
eyes, the cat never took notice of it till the incident of
the biting,^ and from its single success on this occa-
sion the trick — in spite of one lapse later in the series,
and temporary forgetfulness on the following day — was
substantially learnt.

The experiment was tried with two other cats. Teufel,
a four year-old half-Persian, belonging to Miss G. Thring,
who kindly made several experiments for me, only suc-
ceeded after his attention was called to the string by its

^ It is possible that in the case mentioned in the earlier series the cat
did turn its attention once to the string, but as it acted prematurely, and
failed to get the food, this would disappoint it, and account for its not
attempting the same method again. That the cat should fail to take any
note of a string just before its eyes will surprise no one who has watched
cats attentively. I have known this same cat seize my fingers instead of
a piece of fish which I held out. Cats frequently have great difficulty in
finding food that lies just before them on the ground.


158 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

being moved about. On the other hand, Miss M. V.
Vernon, who also kindly made some observations for me,
found that her cat Balbus pulled the string without being
shown at all.* The individual differences among dogs in
this experiment are not less striking. Two collies and a
fox-terrier which I tried failed to learn it in several trials.
One collie brushed the string down four times in roamit^
about, and still showed no sign of learning the trick. Jack,
on the other hand, was present while I was teaching the
kitten one day. He saw me pull it down once, and the
next time took the string neatly in his teeth and pulled it
down. Oddly enough, he did not repeat this success at
once, but for several trials would stand and bark stupidly
for two or three minutes until I pointed towards the
string, or lightly touched it.

Sometimes I had to point two or three times. He began in the
same way next day, so at the second trial I changed my tactics,
pointing to the card. Jack then jumped up towards it and
scrabbled it down. At his next trial — the eighth all told from
the beginning — he pulled the string without being shown, and
never foiled again. As soon as he was perfect in it, I stretched
the string across from the chimney-piece to a chair-back, and
found that Jack jumped at it at once. He began by aiming too
high, and while still on his hind legs, edged away sidewap till he
came to a point which he could reach.

In this experiment, anything like accident seems ruled
out. The very first success was a quite definite act, with
every appearance of deliberateness, and opposed in character
to the jumping up and " scrabbling " which occurred at
his first trial. Jack saw the thir^ done, and then did it.
He was not, however, established in the trick by the suc-
cess, but needed ** suggestion." Now, it is possible that
the mere pointing to the string might induce a dog to
seize and pull it independently of any special association,

* The card was placed on a table, and the string tied to a chair. The
experimenter prevented the cat from jumping at the table, and pointed
to the string, which he then pawed. The card was then moved to a
(higher) sideboard, and the string left to dangle. After a long delay,
Balbus's attention was attracted to the string, and he pawed it. Next
day he failed in this once, and was shown. He also failed several
times when the food was placed still higher, and this notwithstanding
two successes.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 159

but I cannot think of anything in Jack's previous behaviour
which would siiggest that it would have had this effect on
him. My lightly touching the string might, I think, have
led him to smell at it, and possibly to paw at it. I know
nothing to suggest that it would have led him to bite it,
and it therefore seems to me to have acted as a suggestion
or reminder of what he had just done. On the whole, the
impression left: on me is that Jack learnt this trick by
perception of result plus suggestion.

(2). String on banisters.

After teaching Jack the previous experiment, I tied a
string to the banisters of the landing, and hung to it a
little tin toy bucket containing meat. I passed the string
round the next banister to the one to which it was tied, so
that by pulling the string between the two, he could get
the bucket up. I will give Jack's full record for this
experiment, as it is a little interesting.

1. In showing Jack the arrangement his paw got twisted in
the string. I notice this point as possibly helping to suggest
pulling to him. As soon as I put meat in, and dropped bucket,
Jack ran downstairs to see if he could get it from there. He
then came back and tugged at string, but, taking it near the
place where it is tied, he only pulls at the post, so to say, and
there is no tendency to pull bucket up. I encourage him a little,
but without result. I then alter string by passing it over three
or four posts, so that if he seizes it at the further end horn place
where it is tied, and then backs away from banisters, he can get
it. Having altered it, I partly pull it up from right place, where-
upon Jack seizes string and gets food.

2. He pulled at once, but string slipped, and he failed. I then
pointed to right place, whereupon he pulled again. Bucket stuck
just at top ; I pulled it in, and meat had tumbled out, so I gave
him a piece. (The bucket was very apt to catch in ledge made
by floor ; it was not very easy to get meat out).

3. Jack again pulls, without waiting for a sign, but fails to
back far enough, and bucket slips down. He tries again and
fails. I pull it up for him.

4. After some delay Jack succeeds, backing better this time.

5. Slight delay ; then success.

6. First trial — pulls it nearly up, and then misses. After some
encouragement, tries again, and succeeds.

Next day.

J. Jack makes two or three attempts ; is uncertain as to right


i6o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

place, fmOj gets bucket up to top, but knocks it bock in trying
to seize ic I then show him.

2. Does not get string well at right place, but backs well, and
so manages to pull bucket up.

3* Took right place, helped self with paw, and got it.

4. Does not go at right point first, but gets towards it, and
rapidly gets meat.

Two days interval

I. Jack gets it without difficulty.

It will be seen that Jack did not require to be taught to
pull at the string. This might be expl^ned by saying
that Jack had come by this time to pull at strings as such.
This, however, would be to pass over the fact that he first
ran downstairs, trying to get the meat there. I think,
therefore, we ought to call it an adaptive use of the expe-
rience previously gained with the string. Next, Jack had
to learn the right place to pull at. Pointing did not teach
him this, as the record shows. He learnt it apparently
from seeing how the meat was pulled up ; and by the
same method, also no doubt aided by his own failures and
successes, he learnt to back properly, at the same time
letting the string run through his teeth. On the whole,
the experiment is rather a complicated one. It does not
succeed unless the animal takes the string, backs away
from the banisters, and lets the string run through his
teeth as he does so without letting go. Yet Jack prac-
tically learnt it at the fourth trial, and only wanted to be
shown once on the following day. I should ascribe this
success to a fusion of the method of perception of results
with that of experience of success and failure.^

(3). Lever.

I took an old bird-cage, and passed the pole laterally
through the wires of the door, weaving them in and out.

^ Since writing the above, I have been shown an interesting account of
a similar perfotmance by a bird, in Our Bird Friends, by R. Kearton.
For the benefit of some blue tits, Mr. Kearton hung the kernel of a
Barcelona nut from a stump. The little birds could hang on to it with
their feet, and peck at it. " Great Tits tried time ailer time to imitate
their lighter brethren, but never once succeeded in maintaining their hold
upon the kernel. But one, wiser than the rest, did a much cleverer thing
one day. He stood on the stump, and, seizing the thread, hauled it in
reef by reef with his bill and feet until he got the kernel to the top, when
he held it down and chipped his well-deserved reward off it" (p. 11).


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS i6i

The pole ran out along and beyond the side of the cage,
so that by pressing it, the door, which otherwise shut with
a spring, could be opened. I held the cage above Jack's
head, in such a position that the door would open down-
wards, and a piece of meat placed inside would then fall
out. For six trials (after each of which he was shown)
Jack merely jumped up and ^' scrabbled " at the cage. He
then pulled the lever but did not get ** fixed " in the habit
immediately.

There were three or four more failures out of eleven trials in
this series, and he had to be shown three times the next day.
He then became perfect in it, and when for the cage I substituted
a box which could only be opened by a projecting lever, he soon
went at the lever after a little preliminary scratching at the box,
and without being shown.

It is clear that accident might easily enter into this experiment,
especially in the case of the box. Jack, however, did not seem
to learn it by any accidental clawing. He naturally aimed
straight at the food, and he had to learn to claw or bite (he used
both methods) at a bar some inches away. He seemed to do
this' quite definitely all of a sudden,^ though he sometimes forgot
it afterwards.

Tim failed to learn this trick in three trials with the
bird-c^e, but acquired it at the third trial with the box,
and did not afterwards fail.^

Of other animals, the otter learnt to use the lever by being
first accustomed to open the door, which for his benefit was left
with a crevice afterwards filled up. The elephant had no diffi-
culty with it. One collie. Rose, absolutely feiled, or perhaps
refused ' to open a box thus by lifting the lid. Her son opened
it after being shown three times.^

^ The notes show that he once before nearly pawed the lever — ^in his
first triaL

* When a general statement of this kind is made it refers only to the
same experiment under the same conditions. Sometimes an acquired
trick enters as an element into a more complicated experiment, and then
failure in that experiment would put the animal off its simpler performance.
This occurred in the present case.

' After showing her several times, her master arranged so that she
began pushing her nose in as he lifted. Even this had no effect

* He failed several times the same night, but I found afterwards that
the lever would rub uncomfortably against his nose. I altered this, and
next night he succeeded.

M


1 62 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap,

(4). Pull-bolt

The same and similar boxes were fastened by a loose
bolt which could be drawn right out. I call this the
pull-bolt.

I first showed this box to Jack placed on a chair in such a
way that the bolt being drawn the lid would fall. He pulled
the bolt out at once with his teeth. This was not extraordinary
cleverness, but rather a ** false analogy " from the lever experi-
ment. He had been accustomed to seize the lever in his mouth
and pull, and he now treated the bolt in the same way. To
determine how far he could discriminate the two things, I gave
him the two boxes alternately, and found that he got on very
well as long as one box was on the floor and the other on the
chair so arranged that the bolt was end on to him as he approached
it. But next day I placed both boxes on the floor, and much
confusion resulted. Four times Jack pulled the bolt as though it
were the lever, at right angles, and had to be shown. The fifth
time he got it roughly out, helping himself at the end with his
paw.

I subjoin the rest of his " record " under this head

Same afternoon (this from imperfect notes jotted after series
was over) he had to be shown the lever oncfy and was then suc-
cessful. (His experience with the bolt would of course put him
off the lever.) Then was thrice shown bolt. Then succeeded
twice.

Next day the bolt and bar are put on the same box, which
is now slightly tilted so that it is necessary to paw bar (after
the bolt is drawn out) to open it.

1. Pulls out bolt, but puzzled because door does not open.
Shown.

2. Scrabbles and pulls more or less in right direction, but has
to be shown — and also have door opened for him.

3. Gets bolt out, and opens door half by accident.

4. Pulls out bolt very awkwardly, and after delay, opens door.

1 now give him the bar alone.

I. He takes it in his teeth, but has his paw against the door,
and gets violent. I have to set the box to rights and give it him
again, when he opens it.

2 and 3. Opens bar upwards.

We return again to bolt, which he pulls out better, but he
scrabbles so hard at door that it breaks.

Two or three days after, pulls out bolt and opens box three
times, though coming up from off side and from behind. Also
twice pulls out bolt by string attached to it.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 163

Many days later I gave him thirteen trials with the bolt
again, in all of which he succeeded in both movements (bolt and
lever). The average time of the second to the seventh trials
being roughly, 29% of the last six, 23".

This success was a case of acquired discrimination.
Jack had to learn that one sort of projection had to be
pulled out, while another had to be pulled at right angles.
This was perhaps rendered more rather than less difficult
by his spurious success at first. There was the further
difficulty, that, by using his strength. Jack could get out the
bolt, or possibly break it when pulling at a considerable
angle. This was much against rapidity and neatness of
learning.

This was the first experiment in which a double action
was made necessary. The bolt and lever being learnt
separately, the box was so arranged as to combine them.
Jack was baffled by this until twice shown.

The cat learnt the bolt rapidly, and soon came to pull
it out scientifically, curling his claw round, and working
by a series of pulls.

His record is as follows : —

I and 2. Shown.

3. I now place box on floor. He claws bolt out. I put it
bade, holding door firm, thinking he has done it accidentally. He
does it again, and gets meat.

4 to 9. Pulls bolt out. N.B. Once in 5 after bolt is out,
does not see door is open, until I swing it for him. Afterwards
opens door himself. In 8, tries to open the door before bolt
is properly out.

Next day. (Box tilted, so that door must definitely be opened
by cat after bolt is drawn).

1. Claws about, has to be shown.

2. After hesitation, pulls out awkwardly. Door not opening,
cat is puzzled, and I have to do it.

3. Pulls out better, and opens.

4. Same.

After two days — new smooth bolt.

1. Several times tries bolt, but it is too slippery. I put in a
rough one. He reftises to try. I pull it out, and he opens door
by the bolt-catch.

2. Pulls it out after two or three efforts. Opens.

3. Same.

M 2


1 64 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Box turned with lid up.

After some exploring of side, kitten pushes lid up.
It will be seen that the cat also acquired the double movement
(clawing door open after pulling out bolt) after two trials.

The bolt trick seems important. In Jack's case it
could be done by blundering strength, but it would seem
that the cat had to know pretty clearly what to do, and
how to do it, before he could succeed.

The bolt trick was also taught to two elephants. The
box used was broadly similar, except that the bolt was
made of iron and the lid of the box was opened with a
knob. The first elephant, an old female named Sally, was
taught in my presence by the keeper. As the box was
placed for the lid to open upwards, three movements were
necessary — (i) to pull out the bolt ; (2) to pull up the
lid by the knob ; (3) to get the trunk under the lid to
prevent it falling again. This last was physically no easy
matter. The method used by the very experienced keeper,
Mr. Lawrence, was that of taking the trunk in his hand
and guiding it, teaching his elephant the whole trick stage
by stage.

The bolt was virtually learnt at the seventh trial, but the com-
bined movement was not perfect till after the fortieth trial on the
third day. Sally showed some intelligence in trying to meet the
difficulty of the falling lid — trying, for example, to throw it right
back, but I doubt if £e would luive had the patience to get it
perfect without guidance.

I now began to teach a young elephant inappropriately
called Lily.

Lily is ten years old, and not much taller than I am. In
teachmg her, two or three points have to be kept in mind. Her
trimk is ceaselessly in motion, groping about everything outside
her cage, frequently about the pockets of her teacher. There is
therefore a large proportion of random movement which some-
times contributed to success, and sometimes to £ulure, and in any
case leaves a large field open for accident. A«iin, her eyes are a
long way off, and one cannot tell what she is looking at. She is,
I regret to say, a very impatient pupil, and apt to get excessively
annoyed when she fails in an experiment. On these occasions,
like a monkey, but unlike other animals that I have taught, she


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 165

seems to get angry with her tools, and, if she can, gets hold of
them and smashes them.

I first showed Lily the box unbolted, and she quickly learnt to
open it by the knob.^ I then put in the bolt, and she pushed it
out by a random movement. That it was random was proved
by the two following trials in which she feiled and was shown.
At the fourth trial she succeeded, and here she seems to have
learnt the trick, for three more successes followed, and no fail-
ure.* The next day, however, she was awkward about it, and I
showed her twice.' Some days later she pulled out the bolt at
the first trial, though she £uled to get the lid open until I turned
it conveniently for her.

I do not think there is any doubt that the elephant
learnt the trick substantially at tne fourth trial. How
she learnt it is another question which I cannot decide.
The first — purely random — success apparently gave her
no help ; and, indeed, my observations suggest that, as a
general rule, the more a success appears to be purely
accidental, the less it is likely to be repeated. The same
tendency to random movement caused her partial failures
(trying the knob first, and pulling the bolt the wrong
way) later on. It is to be observed that this was a double
movement learnt regressively — /.^., the act to be done last
was learnt first. Having learnt to open the door by the
knob, she had then to learn that it was useless to pull the
knob till the bolt was out. To learn this without getting
disgusted implies a certain measure of articulateness in
experience. Two things must be, in some sense, known,
and their order kept in mind.

Billy, the otter, a most mercurial little animal, was now
taught the bolt.

^ I kept the box sideways to avoid the complication of raising the lid.
Even so, the opening was not easy, as the bars of the cage would get in
the way.

* After the seventh trial I turned the box up. This baffled her at first,
and she kept fumbling about the side where the bolt had been. (This
suggests that she goes more by feeling than by sight.) However, she
succeeded in the end.

^ In her first trial she tried the handle before the bolt, and also tried
to pull the bolt the wrong way. She then took to knocking the bolt out.
I replaced it, and showed her. After this she got vexec^ and tried to
confiscate the box. I rescued it, and showed her. Two or three times
this day she was awkward and uncertain in her actions.


1 66 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap,

Billy's method of solving a problem is quite distinctive. His
principle is never to stay still. He slips all over and round the
box like a drop of quicksilver, sniffing and paviring and gnawing
with a vast amount of superfluous energy, and greatly delaying
himself thereby.^ He was but a young thing, however, and
rather like a kitten in his ways, mewing with excitement while
the box was being adjusted. He learnt the bolt after seeing it
done twelve times, but how far by seeing it done, I am unable to
judge. Billy was taught by his keeper. When I visited him
he showed a distinct inclination to increase his meal at the ex-
pense of my legs. At the same time, by an odd coincidence, I
found that a better view of the proceedings could be obtained
from outside the bars. So Billy's education was left to Mr. Cray-
thorn, who has taken great interest in his development, and has
frequently assisted me by taking notes in my absence.

The bolt was pulled out twelve times, the otter being left each
time to open the box by the lever. The otter then pulled out
the bolt three times running, with some delay. The next day
he had to be shown the first time, but after that he always suc-
ceeded, though by no means always with equal neatness. He would
often bite at the bolt a good deal, and sometimes on the wrong side
of the staple, but he would soon correct himself. Sometimes,
too, he would pull the bolt half out, leave it hanging, and then
try the lever. After a struggle with it, he would go back, and
finish with the bolt.* At times he would take a run round after
pulling out the bolt, or gnaw irrelevantly at the lever oi the
extracted bolt itself. At other times, when the door was swollen
with damp, and would not open easily, his persistence in pushing
at the lever was really remarkable. On the whole Billy's
behaviour may be understood best by regarding the proper plan of
action as a kind of centre from which he kept deviating alwajrs
to return again.

(5). Push-back bolt.

A similar box was fastened by a bolt furnished with a
knob. It could not be pulled out, but had to be pushed
back. This turned out to be much harder for the

* Mr. Smairs description of his rats (" An Experimental Study of the
Mental Processes of the Rat," W. S. Small, American Journal of
Psychology^ Jan. 1900) often reminds me of Billy. Superfluous movements
of the kind make it difficult to measure intelligence, especially when they
intervene between two actions. Mr. Small rightly remarks (p. 142) that
extra hunger sometimes increases rather than diminishes the useless
movements, which, of course, come nearer to the normal methods by
which hunger is satisfied.

• He is now, I am told, very perfect with the bolt, but he has been used
to it for between two and three months.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 167

animals, principally, I think, because they got no definite
impression of the thing to be done. The other bolt was
pulled out. There was a definite change, which the
animal soon learnt was a necessary preliminary to the
opening of the box. The cat altogether failed with this
trick, trying to draw the bolt out like the other one.
Even the chimpanzee failed, though repeatedly shown.
The little Rhesus monkey, Jimmy, of whom I shall have
to say more, dealt with the difficulty by turning the box
over and over, till presently the bolt fell.^ Afterwards I
kept my foot on the box, and he gradually learnt how to
deal with the bolt by constantly experimenting with it.
A similar box with an ordinary iron bolt fitted vnth a
catch was placed in a cage with three large Drills. The
bolt was drawn several times in their presence, but they
were far too wild to be systematically shown. They made
no attempt at it, and it was not till two days after that
the box was first found open.

That day, it was opened twice. Three days later it was again
found open, and the next day it was opened half a dozen times.
The next day I saw it done for the first time. At the first trial
two of the three still bit at the box, but the third pulled the bolt.
At the second trial a second ' monkey attacked the bolt, which
was now placed with the catch down. He took the handle,
raised it out of the catch by an up and down movement, and con-
tinuing the same movement, gradually worked it back. Evidently
he had learnt to free the bolt from the catch by repeatedly work-
ing the handle up and down, and he kept up this movement when
there was no need for it.

The monkeys, when they did learn this trick, learnt it
properly. The case was difiFerent with Jack and the
elephant. In all, I gave Jack about ninety lessons, and at
the end I do not think he clearly appreciated what he had
to do. The reason probably is that the staples hid the

^ On the other hand, a little female monkey did it at sight. She had
lived in a house before, and must, I think, have had experience with
bolts.

' I wish I could be quite sure that it was not the same monkey, as it
would throw light on the question of imitation ; but the truth is that the
three were so much alike and so wild in their movements that it was
difficult to tell. Both Mr. Craythorn and I were under the impression
that it was not the same monkey.


1 68 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

bolt, and the dog never clearly saw the dlfierence between
pushing it back all the way and part of the way.

A special source of confusion on this head would be that if the
bolt were nearly but not quite back, an extra strong pull and a
vigorous shake of the box would shake it back and open the box.
Hence Jack was tempted to trust to strength rather than art.
Hence, also, he never quite perfectly learnt that the bolt must be
pushed before the lever was pulled,^ though he seemed to get
nearly right on this point in the first ten trials.

Upon the whole, whether by his own attempts or by
watching me, or by both methods combined. Jack learnt
that he had to push the bolt and then paw the lever, but
exactly how, or how far the bolt was to be pushed, he did
not understand. His perceptions, as indicated by his
method of dealing with the bolt were, to use Mr Small*s
expression, ** crass.** He knew that a lot of pulling with
the teeth or pushing with the paw at the bolt was the
thing wanted, but he had no *^ idea ** of the object of the
pushing and pulling — Le.j he did not seem to direct it
definitely to the effecting of a particular physical change as a
step towards his desire. In this respect his action con-
trasted with, for example, the behaviour of the cat in
pulling out the other bolt, and with his own behaviour in
pulling up the string, and in other experiments to be
mentioned later.

A further point of interest in this experiment was the
impotence of a casual success.

Jack actually succeeded at the third trial, but clearly without
understanding how, for at the next attempt he tried to pull the
bolt the wrong way. A second sporadic success occurred much
later, and at the forty-fourth trial' came a third success, after
which there were few complete feilures,' but the work remained

^ In the last fifty-eight trials he tried the lever first seven times,4hree at
he beginning of one day's series, two at the beginning of ano^er, and
the remaining two quite sporadically. '

' There was a gap of two or three days after the first fourteen trials, as
Jack in his efforts with the lever broke it.

* Three or four times I showed him without waiting to see if be would
manage it himself— the main interest being to see whether he would get
really perfect His average time during the last three days was, roughly,
37", 29", and 32". The time frequently fell to 5', and sometimes rose
to 70 or So".


viii SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 169

very rough, and the average time nearly constant from day to
day. Such seems the typical character of a trick in which the
point is not clearly apprehended, and all the animal knows is,
roughly, that a certain sort of action is* required.

The elephant learnt this trick better than Jack, but, on
the whole, in the same way.

After leaving her to fumble with the bolt and bar for a long
time, I showed her both movements. After this, she twice suc-
ceeded in a fumbling way. She seemed to learn from this that
both bolt and lever had to be used, and that the bolt came first.
(She only three times afterwards made a mistake on this point,
and only once seriously). At the eighth and ninth trials she
succeeded again,^ and the next day was successful, though in a
fumbling way, throughout. I only once noticed her definitely
trying to push the bolt the wrong way, and when once I turned
the box round (so that to pull in the same direction as before
would be wrong), she tried to push instead of pull, and then,
after a little fumbling in the wrong direction, moved round in
her stall so as to get in the right position for pulling.'

On the whole, we may say that the elephant learnt that
the bolt must be pushed inwards, and the lever then
pulled. She nearly learnt this from seeing it done two or
three times, and had it practically perfect after eight trials,
in which she had herself done it three times. She failed to
learn that the bolt must be pushed quite back.

(6). Catch.

I had a box made for Jack, closed with an ordinary
window-catch. He could lift it with his nose, and then
open the box by pulling at the catch with his paw. This
second movement, unless skilfully applied, was apt to
close the catch again ; and this difEculty entirely bafHed
the cat, who never tried to lift the catch, but failed in
this preliminary. Tim, I must say, showed great stupidity
in this experiment. He never grasped that by merely
changing his position he would avoid the hitch, but would

* The experiment ended for the day at this point, because Lily
succeeded in getting hold of the box, with which she was obviously
annoyed, and leant her chin on it. It was a very strong box, but an
adjournment for repairs was at once necessary.

' When I reversed the box again, she was not so successful, fumbling a
bit, but presently she seemed to get accidentally into a better position,
and then opened the box easily.


I70 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

sit in the same place, pawing the catch down two or three
times running. At the same time he generally modified
the act in some slight way so as to get it open in the end.
Jack, on the other hand, found out the whole process
for himself in one trial. He had by this time had a con-
siderable experience of boxes, and he went straight for the
latch. His record is as follows : —

1. Not shown. After little scrabbling, raises latch with nose,
scrabbles at it, and knocks it down two or three times. Tries to
pull it with mouth. At length opens. N.B. He attacked
&stening immediately.

2. Begins scrabbling. Soon lifts with nose, and after an un-
successftil attempt, opens with paw. I5^

3. Lifts latch at once, and scrabbles at it with paw, but
knocks it down again. Then takes it in mouth, lifts, and
opens. 24'.

4. Lifts at once ; scratches open. 9^

5- 5"-

6. 4\

Next evening — runs at box arranged for cat, lifts twice with
nose, each time knocking down again with paw ; lifts again, and
opens with paw.

I cannot regard any part of Jack's behaviour on this
occasion as a wholly random act. He selected the catch

for attack, soon found that some-
thing was movable, and moved
it. He would then feel that the
door was free, and would try to
scratch it open. That, not^th-
standing initial failures in the
, ^ , , , . . scratching — suitably varied once

^y bolt, drawn ; f, catch, raised ; , ,,.° .^1 \ ^ -.u u

/, lever. by puUing With the teeth — he

should have virtually learnt the
whole business in one trial, indicates something more like
appreciation of the actual thing that needed doing, and
the dependence of one point on another, than anything
else that I have seen in Jack's behaviour.

For the otter I had a different kind of catch. The
projecting wooden lever of the lid had a notch cut in it,
into which another wooden lever, pivoted on the side,
descended. Once raised, the catch did not fall again, as


viif SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 171

it worked stiffly, and the box was opened by the lever.
This is his record : —

December 6th. — i. First tried lever itself, next lifted catch by
pushing nose under, but did not understand it. Seized catch by
teeth, pushing it down again. Pushed head under catch, raising
it, pulled lever, and opened. Time about 50^

December 7th. Morning.

Did it immediately (keeper's statement).

Afternoon (own observation).

1. Raised catch quickly -, did not pull lever at once ; bit at
catch ; then pulled.

2. In interval he has done a " string '* trick.^ In doing that,
he tried unsuccessftilly putting head under lever. This now puts
him off. He gnaws and pulls at both lever and catch for some
time, but presendy lifts with head and opens.

December 8th. Morning. Pull bolt added.
(Keeper reports) raised catch and pulled bolt together three
times rapidly.

Afternoon (own observation).

1. Bolt and catch. Knocks up catch, but gets excited, and bites
and pulls at right angles at bolt instead of pulling it out. Then
bites and struggles all about.

Catch taken off. Half pulls out bolt, but leaves it hanging,
and rampages again. Bolt replaced. Pulls it out up to outer staple
and opens.

2. Does both actions pretty rapidly, lifting catch, then drawing
bolt and again lifting catch, which has fallen, and opens.

3. Keeps on at lever and catch. Pulls bolt half out. Gnaws
again. At last opens. Time about 2' 35".

Subsequent experiments showed that the trick was
learnt.

There was much more of accident in this than in Jack's
success, as the detsul of the first trial shows. Nevertheless,
the otter showed great alertness in taking advantage of an
accidental success.

A second box was then given him, similar to the first,
except that the catch had to be depressed instead of raised.
Result : —

I. Otter quite baffled — ^all over place 5 presently gets chin over
catch ; depresses it ; at once puts head under and raises it again.

^ In this the lever was tied by a string. The experiment £Etiled through
difficulties of arrangement.


172 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

This done twice. At length depresses further by double move-
ment, and, after a little scrabbling, opens. Time over i!.

2. Similar. Thrice pulls down lever and raises again, once
without raising again. After some minutes, shown two or three
times. But does not try. Gives up.

Next day —

1. Pushes down catch twice and raises again. At length pulls
it down and opens door by lever. Time 30" to 40*".

2. lo'". Tries at once this time, pushing at lever as soon as
catch is depressed.

3. iff. Pushes down and does not raise again, but quits for
a while and smells round. Comes back and at lever.

4. lo'^. Would be immediate, but did not clear catch of lever
at first.

5. 12^ Snifis about a bit. Then both movements at once.

Next day, the two boxes were alternated, and he did
both without difficulty and no sign of confusion.

With this second box it is clear that the first trial of the
second day was the critical success. The showing had
apparently no eflFect. It was a random success properly
utilised.

I gave the same box to the elephant.

After accustoming her to the lever, I put on the catch. She
pulled violently at the catch and lever, nearly thrusting the catch
down. I haa to take the box away in fear of consequences.
When I gave it back, she showed no improvement. I then
showed her twice, once opening the box, but not letting her get
the bread. Again she got violent, and I had to rescue the box.
After this, however, she began fumbling at the catch, pulling it
down and up again, and then pulling at the lever. She was
beginning to learn. I now showed her the whole process twice,
and thereafter she managed to do it, though she had a way of
catching the tip of the trunk in the end of the catch after she
had depressed it, whereby she kept raising it again. At the twelfth
trial she was perfect, her times for this and the four remaining
trials of the day being roughly 3", 2% ^^ 6", 3^

Next day her times were about 12", 30", and 5 to f. There
was some tumbling in the first two, but the clear downward
thrust was unmistakable.

This experiment is perhaps more distinctly suggestive
of learning by perception than any other of Lily*s
performances. At any rate, it was a rapid piece of


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 173

learning. There was only one occasion after her first
success in which she so far forgot herself as to try the
lever first.

(7). (Loop).

As already mentioned. Jack's box had an iron lever
projecting from the lid by which it was opened. I drove
a gimlet into the side of the box parallel with the lever,
and placed a brass loop over it and the lever. As I
placed the box for Jack, the loop had to be pushed up in
order to open the box. Jack learnt this after being shown
twice.

During the first two trials Jack *' scrabbled " a good deal, once
or twice nearly knocking the loop up with his nose in the course
of his random movements. The loop was twice pulled off, and
he was left to open the box. The third time he knocked up the
loop with his nose, and with some difficulty opened the box. He
did not hil again, though for three or four trials there was some
useless preliminary scrabbling.^ Sometimes the loop stuck a little,
and he would then push hard and repeatedly. Next day, there
was a litde scrabbling at the first trial, but no &ilure.

There may have been an element of accident in the
first success. It was within the scope of a random move-
ment. The dog seemed quite clear in this instance as to
what had to be done. The persistence and gradual dying
away of useless scrabbling is noteworthy.

The cat did this trick at sight.

No doubt attracted by the novelty of the loop (which for his
benefit was put sideways), he began clawing at it at once, and in
about 90 seconds got it off and opened the box. He repeated
this eight times, but showed a tendency to claw at the gimlet
(also a novelty) before the lever. The total times varied from
60^^ to 15". The next night he refiised to try, but the next he
succeeded, awkwardly, three times.

This was a clear case of a single random success having
a permanent effect.

(8). Spike.

Taking out the gimlet I put a small chdn over the
lever, and, stretching it tight, stuck a skewer through a

* From the seventh to eleventh trials inclusive, his average time for the
whole process was under 14'.


174


MIND IN EVOLUTION


CHAP.


link and into the hole. The chain was too tight for
Jack to get at it with his teeth, and the only resource was
to pull out the skewer.

During five trials Jack ^ bit and pulled indiscriminately at
lever, chain, and skewer. At the sixth trial he pulled skewer out
awkwardly.*

At the seventh he pulled it half out with an effort, and then
gave up, returning after an interval, and pulling it out. There
was then an interval, after which his record is as follows : —

8. Scratches long time at chain ; does not try to pull skewer out
with teeth.

9. Half pulls out with teeth ; tries to scratch out rest of the


Box ARRANGED WITH LoOP.

/, lever ; A, loop ; g, gimlet.


Box ARRANGED WITH SpIKB.

/, lever ; c, chain ; j, spike.


way and to push his nose through the door. Shown. Time
3 minutes.

10. Half pulls skewer, gets it out at last ; declines to open for
some time, at last opens.

11. Knocked skewer ftirther in with nose, scrabbled, barked,
gave up. I put skewer so as to project beyond bar ; he opened.
Time, little over i minute.

12. Pulls it out and opens with v&ry little scrabbling.

13. Reluctant, little scrabbling, opens. Time, 30*.

14. Pulling at skewer nearly all time ; skewer-head in beyond
bolt. 35^ ^

15. Does not try to bite skewer for long time, but pushes at
lever and chain. I pull skewer out beyond bolt, thinking he

1 In the first trial I had used a strinfir, which he managed to get off (he
had had a previous experiment of this kind which failed owing to defective
mechanism). I then substituted the chain. At the fourth trial he took
the skewer in his teeth as I was pulling it out.

* I left it projecting further, so that it was more easily grasped.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 175

could not get at it, but he accidentally knocks it in ; then deliber-
ately pulls skewer out and opens. Time i', 20^^.

16. Barks, slowly pulls out, skewer sticks a good deal, opens.
Time, i' 5^

Next day, I alternated the loop and spike experiments.
Result :

Loop.

1. 12^ Pushes from beginning with nose.

2. 7^ Does it at once.

Skewer immediately afterwards substituted.

1. i' ii\ Gets it out gradually, pulling at it practically
whole of time ; some difficulty in grasping, as skewer pushed in
up to head. Began at skewer at once.

2. iff. Skewer a little further out, more easily grasped.

The cat, oddly enough, pulled out the skewer at sight
as he had done with the loop, but in a casual fashion. In
this case the random success left no impression. The cat
had three more trials, in which he utterly failed, never
even trying the skewer again, though I showed him each
time, and finally used suggestion, pulling the skewer
half out.

A comparison of the two experiments of the loop and
skewer is instructive. They show, first, how much a young
cat may do as the result of random exploration. In this
respect the elephant, monkey, and cat resemble each other
for experimental purposes. All fiddle with things, espe-
cially new things, examine them and pull them about. In
this, they differ, if not from puppies, at any rate from
older dogs, who investigate things, not by picking them
to pieces, but by smelling at them. To avoid accidental
success with a dog, he must be given something that he
will not eflFect either by smelling about in the neighbour-
hood or by random scratching. For this reason, notwith-
standing the case of the cat, I cannot think Jack's success
with the skewer was in any way accidental. The act was
for him a very awkward one, and at best he had a great
struggle with it.^ In some cases he had to make more

^ I believe that I spoke encouragingly once or twice during these
struggles. The adjustment of the skewer might also have been sugges-
tive as a reminder m some of the later trials. I mention these as the only
possible aids^to him, other than perception and his own efforts.


176 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

than one distinct efFort. Altogether it seemed very clear
to me in this case that he saw what had to be done, and
did it. The cat's two performances, on the other hand,
are instructive as a contrast. In both cases it led ofF with
a random success. In the one case this success was imme-
diately utilised ; in the other it had no effect at all.

(9). Upsetting jug or tumbler.

One knows how a cat will get milk out of a jug, wluch
it cannot reach with its tongue, by dipping in the paw, and
licking it. Would a cat learn to turn a jug over and
pour the milk out, a thing which a monkey does as a
matter of course ? Or, conversely, if a tumbler or vase
were inverted over a piece of food, would it turn it over
to get the food .? With the jug. Miss G. Thring made a
series of experiments with her cat Teufel, the result of
which was somewhat anomalous.

After experiments on five successive evenings, which had
resulted in complete fiiilure, some scraps of meat were put into
the jug instead of milk. The cat turned the jug over accident-
ally with his hind leg, but was not allowed to pick up the meat
He then put his paw in, and turned the jug over four times in
ten minutes. On the third occasion, the jug being more full, he
fished out the meat with his paw twice, but then, not getting
anv more, turned it over. He still refused to turn it over when
filled with milk instead of meat, until the ninth night, when it
happened that the jug was placed on a newspaper instead of a
plate. The cat, for some reason best known to himself, seemed
to think that this made an essential difference, overturned the
jug at once, and lapped up the milk. This was done several
times. After a week's interval the cat was given the jug on a
plate as at first, but overturned it without any hesitation.

The interpretation of this very interesting experiment is not
easy. The nrst success with the meat may have been due to
the accidental overturning. If so, it was a singularly intelligent
application of an accident, since the cat was not allowed to get
the meat. From what I saw of the cat, I am more inclined to
think that there was not much discrimination between clawing at
the meat, and clawing the jug over. The other question sug-
gested is why the substitution of the newspaper shoiild make any
difference. I cannot pretend to answer this question ; but it
seems clear, for whatever reason, that the cat had originally some
reluctance to upsetting the milk, which was overcome when he
once accomplished it without untoward results.


viii SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 177

I tried my cat with the milk jug once or twice only, but
without effect. I then gave him several lessons with a
tumbler, inverted over meat, also without effect. He per-
sistently tried to claw at the carpet, or to smell at the
bottom of the tumbler. Miss Vernon's cat Balbus be-
haved in the same way.

I now substituted for the tumbler a little bronze tripod,
which was more easily upset because it stuck in the carpet.
The cat soon learned to upset this, apparently by seeing it
done, and afterwards extended the act to other objects.

I upset it, by pushing at the top, six times. The seventh time ^
the cat turned it over deliberately with its paw at the top, and
repeated this six times.

The next day, the cat still failed with the glass, but repeated
its success with the tripod.^ A tall vase was then substituted.
The cat put its paw round, and moved the vase, finally managing
to push it away from the meat. A short silver candlestick was
then substituted, being inverted over the meat. This the cat
pushed with paw or nose, either pulling it away or knocking it
over, seven times in succession. But when the candlestick was
set upright, and the meat put under its broad, flat bottom, the cat
failed to turn it over. Next day, he turned the candlestick over
twice, and when set upright managed to move it away. I now
took a china vase again, and first gave it him upright ; he put his
paw right down, and managed to reach the fish, at the same time
upsetting the vase. I then reversed the vase. He tried to get
the fish by moving it along, so I lightly held the vase over it,
whereupon he put his paw round it higher up, and turned it over.
At the next trial, he repeated this at once.

This success seemed to be originally due to perception
of results. There was no movement in the original efforts
of the cat at all resembling those which I showed him.
There was the tentative pawii^ of the fifth trial, which
suggested that the " idea " was half formed. Then came
the definite success of the seventh trial, followed by an
unbroken series of successes.

In strong contrast with the performance of Tim was

^ At the fifth trial, the cat put its paw gently to the top and side of the
tripod, as though half making up its mind to give a push. Otherwise it
merely smelt about, and made no effort.

' It knocked it down first with its head, but the tripod being replaced,
knocked it down again with paw.

N


178 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the success of two older cats, Teufcl and a Persian living
in the same house, who turned tumblers over without
being shown.

I tried Jack with this experiment, but it was of no avsdl,
for he applied his nose so vigorously to the bottom of the
tumbler, that he knocked it over or pushed it away without
the slightest difficulty. On the other hand, a little fox-
terrier who visited me one evening behaved in a manner
strikingly recalling Tim*s performance.

During three trials, he merely smelt about, or stared in a sur-
prised fiishion at the vase. At the fourth, he knocked it over.
At the fifth, after staring and smelling, he very hesitatingly
pawed the top and sides. He then seemed to abandon the enter-
prise as too bold, but presently plucked up heart, put his paw out
again, and knocked it over. The sixth time, after pawing in-
effectually at the side, he knocked it over with a push of his nose
near the bottom. The seventh and eighth times he knocked it
clean over with his paw, each time after a short pause. The
dog's behaviour suggested that he had seen something very sur-

? rising ; and though he had seen it, did not quite believe in it.
t was not the hesitation of an imperfectly formed habit, but — at
least in appearance — rather that of an imperfectly grasped idea.

(lo). Cover.

A very simple experiment was to see whether a cat
would lift a lid to get at food beneath it. Tim learnt this
on being shown five times.

I took a little china tea-pot, and dropped some fish inside before
Tim's eyes. At first he pawed hard at it, chiefly at the spout.
I lifted the lid, and he clawed out the fish. At the next trial, he
pawed at the cover, and pushed with his nose, but had to be
shown again. At the next, he made a dash at it as I put the
meat in, and helped by this, pawed the cover off. However, at
the fourth and fifth trials he failed. At the sixth, I took the
cover off two or three times, replacing it. He then pushed it
off, and repeated this three times without failure. The next
day he seemed at first to have forgotten, but presently succeeded
without being shown. When I substituted a larger tea-pot of
wholly different appesA^nce, he got off the top at once, and got
the meat out without turning it over.

Jack did this trick without being shown.

He was in the room while I was teaching the kitten. Whether
he was watching, or merely used his common sense, I do not


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 179

know ; but he lifted the cover with his nose at once. He could
not, however, get the fish out, and I upset the tea-pot for him.
Next time he pulled off the lid and upset the pot at once. The
food unfortunately stuck in it, and I pulled it out. The third
time he turned it completely upside down ; and when, after an
interval, I gave him the large tea-pot, he first, after removing the
cover, turned it on its side ; then, as the fi«h was still unattain-
able, turned it completely over, and pulled it away from the
food.

After being once shown Jack learnt to pull a stopper
out of a jar with his teeth.

The stopper fitted into a large round glass jar, and could be
lifted with the teeth by a projecting peg. I lifted it out for him
once, and left him to deal with the jar, which he did by knock-
ing it over, and rolling it all about the room until the meat was
jerked out. At the second trial he pulled at the stopper himself
with his teeth ; and he repeated this many times. As to the
other part of the experiment : if I left the bottle to Jack, he
found no better method than that of rolling it about Another
way was for me to hold the bottle, when he could get his paw in.
I took his paw, and pulled the biscuit out with it twice j and
after this he used the paw himself when I held the bottle. The
first time that he did so, however, seemed to be in the course of
general scrabbling^ so that an accidental success may have com-
bined with the effect of my teaching to influence him.

The first part of this experiment seemed to me strongly
suggestive of perceptual learning.

(11). Drawers.

I used a small cabinet of four drawers for the instruction
of Jack and three cats. The cats could open the drawers
easily by clawing the loops. Jack could not get hold of
the loops well, and had to do it by hard scratching. In
this way, whether by watching me, or by random efforts,
he learned the trick substantially in seven trials.

During four trials, there was no result beyond smelline about,
and once a litde.scratchmg near the handle. At the fifth and
sixth trials, he scrabbled wildly at the handle (and the one right
handle out of four). The seventh time he scrabbled hard at the
top of the drawer, and apparently in the crevice between the
drawer and the chest. In this way he somehow got the drawer
open. There was then an interval, after which he failed once,
and then succeeded five times. I afterwards tried his power of

N 2


i8o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

discriminating the drawers, in which he failed signally ; and
owing to his disappointments, he twice failed or refused to open
at all. Nevertheless, I think it may fairly be said that the trick
of opening, as distinct from discriminating, was definitely ac-
quired. It is hard in this case to say how much was accident, and
how much perception of results.

Some time later, I tried Jack with a drawer more suited
to his capacities. It was a drawer in the sideboard, a little
above his head, with a brass handle which I stuck out for
him to take in the teeth. If he pawed at it the handle
fell, and he frustrated himself, so he could only pull quite
deliberately with his teeth. From the result it appeared
that he rapidly learnt what he ought to do, but for a long
time failed, owing to a curious reluctance to pull the metal
handle.

For five trials Jack clawed indiscriminately ; for three more
he clawed at or about the handle j at the ninth and tenth he took
the handle gendy in his teeth, but did not pull, and refused any
further attempt. The next day, after twice refusing any attempt,
he again took the handle gently in his teeth without pulling, and
again refused further attempt. After two days persistently
showing him, I tried holding him up to it, and pointing, without
result. I then took his head in my hands, and tried to put the
handle in his teeth, but he merely resisted. By this time I was
convinced that it was not stupidity, but reluctance to pull the handle,
which he probably felt hard to his gums. I therefore lashed a short
stick (previously used in the bolt and lever experiments) to the
handle. He at once, without any showine or pointing, took the
stick in his mouth near the end, and pulled. The pull being a
little sidewavs, the drawer jammed, and I helped him. The rest
of his recora (from the 4th trial of that day) is as follows : —

4. Same — again drawer jams, and I have to help.

5. He manages it alone.

6. I now take stick off handle. He again barks as before, and
refuses for some time, but finally, being encouraged, takes handle
in teeth, and after hesitation, pulls.

7. Pulls it out, but not far enough, and in scrabbling to get
his nose in, shuts it again. Then baffled. Knocks handle up
with his nose. I put it out for him, and he pulls drawer out
again, further this time.

8. Same thing happens.

9. This time he pulls it &rther out. Nevertheless, as he rises
to take food, his weight somehow shoves drawer back, and it


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS i8i

catches his paw. He naturally refuses to try again for some
time, but I encourage him a good deal, and at length he opens.

ID. Opens more carefully, using nose instead of claw, when
drawer is opened a little way. Then uses paw.

I can hardly doubt that Jack really understood this trick
from an early stage, but was afraid of it. When he found
that the drawer opened so easily, he got over his objection
to the handle. The minor adjustments, in particular the
avoidance of shutting the drawer upon his paw a second
time, are interesting, and show a very clear appreciation
of what had to be done.

About three weeks later I gave Jack another little
cabinet of drawers, hanging a button-hook on to the
handle so that he could get hold of it. This he very
rapidly dealt with. As he was smelling about, the drawer
shook a little bit open, and I shut it again. This seemed
to stimulate his attention, and he at once opened it, re-
peating his success three or four times.

The cats dealt with the cabinet of drawers in a much
more scientific fashion than Jack.

My cat was encouraged by the drawer being left slightly open
at first, but two other cats, Teufel and his companion, a two
year old Persian, learnt it without any such adventitious aids.
Teufel was shown it three times, and then opened with the
handle. At the next attempt he failed at first, tried again, and
succeeded. After this he did not fail again. The Persian was
shown twice only, and then opened without fiiil.^

The discrimination of the drawers was quite another
matter. Jack fuled in this hopelessly ; so, at first, did
Tim. I have seen the cat open the bottom drawer when
the food was placed in the top. The failure seems due
entirely to inattention.

In a long series of experiments, the cat was right three tirHts
out of six — ^and in the remaining trials, hesitated twice at the
right drawer — when allowed to stand just in front of the drawers.
When held further away while the meat was put in, he became
confused, and in the next six trials was only right twice. In
the next six he was right three times ; in the next, twice i but

* The experiment was repeated with Teufel the next evening without
failure, but apparently not with the other cat


1 82 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

counting from the last trial of that six, he was right four times
running, which suggests that, if I had continued the experiment,
there would have been an improvement.

The older cats did better. Teufel, in the first series,
was right four times out of six ; in the second series was
wrong once only, and right three or four times nmning.^
The two year old Persian was right three times out of five.

The little Rhesus monkey, Jimmy, who was Idndly lent
to me by Messrs. Jennison for some days, also failed
signally in this experiment.

He was generally right if I let him sit in front of the drawers
while I put the food in ; but if I banished him to a chair, he got
quite wrong, and by degrees I noticed that he was elaborating a
method of his own to save him the trouble of attention. To
make quite sure, he would open the drawers sjrstematically, from
the bottom upwards.'

Success or failure, in an experiment of this kind, seems
to be a matter principally of attention, partly of reten-
tiveness.'

(12). Sliding lid.

I taught Jack to open a child's toy box, the lid of which
slid out in one direction only.

During three trials he clawed promiscuously. At the fourth
he pawed the top half open, but not seeing that he had succeeded
lay down dejectedly. I pointed at the top, and he jumped up
and finished his work. He repeated this four times, the last

^ In this series bread and butter were used instead of meat, to avoid
guidance by smell, if possible. This, however, is hardier a danger in this
experiment as the cat opens with its daw, and at that distance the smell
could hardly guide it as between one drawer and another.

* He did not, indeed, get this system perfect, as he often forgot the
bottom drawer ; but it seemed to be growmg as he went on. The point
of it was that when an upper drawer was pulled out, the one below was
difficult to reach, so Jimmy made sure of avoiding this difficulty. In
quite a similar way the chimpanzee, who had to identify two boxes out of
seven (marked B and containing banana), frankly gave up the attempt,
and took them quite systematically in order, sometimes finishing the row
after he had secured the two pieces of banana, and sometimes leaving it.
In discrimination experiments of this kind the penalty of failive is not
sufficient to stir the animal's attention. Somebody unkindly suggested
that, if we put a live wasp in each of the blank boxes, we should soon
teach the chimpanzee his alphabet.

* Some further experiments confirming this view will be mentioned
lower down.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 183

three without any delay. The next day he had to be shown
twice, and after this he sometimes clawed from the side or at
random at first ; but he always got it right in the end. In the
fourth trial, for example, he came round, and clawed from the
end. In one case he tried to finish the work with his teeth.

Clearly it would be possible to learn this by random
clawing, and I will not undertake to discriminate the
factors in Jack's success. Some of the details that I have
mentioned, however, show that, by whatever means, he had
acquired a pretty clear appreciation of what was to be
done ; that is to say, that the lid had to be pulled, and
pulled in a particular direction. My cat wholly failed in
this trick because he sat at the end where the meat was
put in, i.e.j the blind end of the box ; and persistently
scratched in that direction. Teufel, on the other hand,
learnt the trick in almost the same way as Jack. He is
described as watching anxiously during four trials. At
the fifth he scraped the lid, slightly opened it, and then
was helped. He did not fail again that night or the next,
but required a hint once on the third night.

(13). Pushing of door.

After Jack had learnt to pull the string, I put the card
with the meat on a high shelf, and tied the string to a
tack stuck into the top of a cupboard door, near by. The
door swung open so as to bring the tack near to the shelf.
When pushed away from that position, it would pull the
string, and with it the card and food, down to the floor.
Jack never showed any appreciation of the mechanism of
this arrangement, for after he had learnt to push at the
door, he frequently came to the wrong side. I must
admit, however, that by pushing hard enough on the
wrong side, he caused the door to rebound, and so several
times obtained his desire.

I did not begin by showing him how to do this, as I wanted
to see whether he could puzzle it out for himself. At the first
trial the door was pushed accidentally, but it is not likely that
Jack saw how it happened. At the second. Jack managed by an
extra high jump to catch the string. At .the third, I called
attention to the door, and he pushed it. At the fourth, he
pushed the door on the wrong side, without result. I pointed to


1 84 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the door again, and he stood up to it, so moving it ; whether
intentionally or not was not clear. He then twice got the meat
by knocking the door with his back as he jumped up towards the
string ; but at the seventh time he failed altogether, and I showed
him the whole process. After this, he never failed to respond to
the pointing,^ which I made slighter and slighter till, on the
third day, and twenty-third trial in all, I dispensed with it.

This series was abnormal in the number of trials re-
quiring suggestion after the first success. It may be noted,
however, that while there was one complete fidlure after
the first success, there was no such failure after he had
once been shown. This experiment is mainly interesting
as illustrating what Mr. Small calls crassness. The dog
learns quickly that he is to push a door ; but which way
he is to push it is a point which he treats as more or less
immaterial.

(14). Weight.

I arranged the box already described on a table, with
the projecting bar pointing upwards. In this position, if
the lid were not held, the door would fall open of its own
weight, and a biscuit would fall out. I then tied a string
to the lever, and passed it over the back of the box nearly
to the floor. A flat iron placed on a hook at the end of
the string held the lid closed. If the flat iron was knocked
off the lid fell.

Jack pretty quickly learned to knock it off. I showed him
four times without success, the mechanism being defective.*
After the mechanism was put right, I showed him three times.
The third time he tugged hard at the string. The fourth time
he stared hard at the iron, and then retired. I said to him, ^^ Get
it." He whined, and went towards the box. I said to him,
"No.** He then came to me, knocked the iron oflF with his
paw, and got the biscuit. Next time he did this almost at once.
Next time he began bv biting at the string. The iron fell off,
but I prevented the lid from falling, and replaced the weight.
He then began jumping on the box, but, being restrained, looked
carefully at the iron and pawed it off. Next time I had to
restrain him from pulling the table cloth, and he then pawed off

^ At the first trial next day he showed no remembrance when I touched
the door. He then put his paws up, but it was not quite clear that he
pushed with intention.

' For the same reason two previous trials had been without result.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 185

the iron. Next time he knocked it off without hesitation. The
next day he first bit at the string, and the iron tumbled off, and
he got the biscuit. In the next trial he repeated this, but I
cheated him by keeping my fingers on the lid, and replaced the
iron. He then pawed it off the hook, and repeated this four times
in succession.

This experiment seemed to me strongly suggestive of
learning by perception of results. I cannot think that any
accident would have led Jack to pay the slightest attention
to the weight.

Failures of Jack.

{a) I tried without success to arrange a converse experi-
ment to that of the weight.

A basket was hung by a string from the door of the box, and
the plan was to balance it so that when a weight was put into
the basket, it would weigh the lid down. Unfortunately my
arrangement was very defective \ and furthermore, Jack soon
found out that to put his own paw in the basket was quite as
efifective as putting the weight in it. I tried to defeat him by
frankly holding the lid in place when he used his foot, and I
gradually got him to the point of knocking down and pawing the
piece of wood which I used as a weight, and which was placed
near the basket. At other times he would take the wood in his
teeth, and three or four times he knocked the wood on to the
basket. The failure may be ascribed partly to the complexity of
the task ; but equally, I think, to the knowledge of another and
simpler method.

{b) Hook.

The same explanation applies to an experiment in which I tied
the latch of a box by a string to a hook, which was then fastened
to a nail, first, on tne box itself; later, at a distance of about a
yard from the box.^ The string held the latch in place, and to
free it, it was necessary either to break the string or remove the
hook. I began by testing whether Jack would learn this without
seeing it done. I kept putting the hook on, and removing it
while his attention was distracted by something else. This had
no efifect ; he merely bit and clawed at the string, and at times
succeeded in bitmg it through. When I substituted wire, he
would still pull so hard that the wire sometimes broke. After an
interval of some days, I tried the same trick, only showing him.
Unfortunately, the hook several times gave, which encouraged

^ See diagram, p. 244.


1 86 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

him in pulling hard at the wire. It was not until the twentieth
trial that he made any attempt at the hook, though he had twice
before come to look at it, probably because I called his attention
to what I was doing. He then pawed at it a little, but failed to
get it off. This seemed to discourage him. He tried at the
hook vaguely two or three times afterwards, but never succeeded.

It seemed indeed that an accidental failure, when the
trick was attempted in the way shown, was abnormally dis-
couraging. Thus, I tried Jack with the simple trick of
opening a cupboard door by pulling a key arranged so that
he could easily get hold of it. He was so quick about
this that at the first trial he jumped up to help me to pull,
and at the second he began to pull at once. Unfortu-
nately, to reach the key he had to put his forepaws on the
ledge below the door, and they rested ag^nst the door
itself, neutralising his efforts to open it.^ After this
failure, though several times shown, he refused to make
the slightest effort — surely a suggestive result."

5. Habit and Discrimination.

To these experiments, in so far as they may be
offered in proof of learning by perception of results, two
objections may be raised. The first is that, after all,
each trick might have been performed in the first instance
in a more or less random way, and that such an accidental
success, not the sight of what the teacher did, would
be really responsible for the establishment of the trick.
This objection I will deal with later. It will be most
convenient to consider, first, another line of criticism
which allows " imitation," but holds that, at least below
the apes, it is of the sensori-motor kind. This kind
of imitation, Mr. Small found well-marked among his
rats,' leading one to dig or scratch where another was

^ Instances of animals thus hindering their own actions are fairly
common, but both Jack and the elephant frequently showed some adroit-
ness in overcoming that kind of hindrance. I thought my Rhesus,
Jimmy, very stupid for trying to open his box upward while he sat on the
lid, but my respect for him increased when, after many trials, he managed
it — by sidling to the edge of the hinges.

' I mean that the effect was more marked than that of an ordinary
failure, and points to more subtle psychological forces than that of bare
perception and its application — namely, to the dog's confidence in his
master and what he points out to him.

' Op. cit, p. 102.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 187

digging or scratching, and indeed, it is matter of common
observation. The question, then, is this : does my dog
pull a string or a lever merely because he sees me doing so,
or because he has just seen the results which followed
when I did so ? In the first alternative, the imitation is
sensori-motor — that is, the perception of what is done
discharges a motor impulse to do the same thing, quite
apart from any purpose to be served by doing it. Of such
a character, to quote Mr. Small again, is the frown of the
baby which answers the frown of the nurse.

In an extreme form, this interpretation would be quite
inapplicable to the animals observed by me. The inter-
pretation would require that the animal should be influenced
by the perception at the time when it perceives it. Thus
the rat, I suppose, runs to dig or gnaw where and while
the other is digging or gnawing. My animals, on the
other hand, normally repeated my performance only after
it was all over and the result had accrued. Jack did not, for
example, rush forward to help me to drag down the string,
but watched me as I dragged it down, searched for the
meat, ate it up, waited while I replaced meat and card, and
then dragged it down again. The opposite cases ^ were
quite exceptional, and I think confined to Jack, who was
aJways the most eager of my pupils.*

^ Such were his actions in one trial of the spike experiment, and in the
cupboard-door experiment.

^ By way of testing this irrational suggestibility, I did one or two
** control " experiments. I took a little ivory box, and solemnly opened it
before Jack. There was nothing inside. I then gave it him to play with,
and he pawed it about and chewed it. This was repeated four or five
times, after which Jack would not touch it unless bidden. He never tried
to lift the lid off, though it came off several times as he played with the
box. A day or two afterwards I put an empty paper-rack before the cat,
who was at once very much interested. The rack consisted of three or
four brass leaves or sides. One of these was loose, and I pulled it out.
The cat began at once to claw the rack, and presently pulled the loose
piece out, but sideways, not lengthwise as I had done. Nothing hap-
pened. I showed him again several times, and as nothing happened, his
mterest speedily drooped, and he departed, probably in some dudgeon.

Meanwhile, Jack was watching the proceedings. He now came up,
and pawed all about, getting out the loose piece first sideways, and after
a time, during which he was not shown aeam, lengthwise. I then showed
him once or twice, and at length he pullea it out more or less deliberately.
When he found that nothing happened, and I replaced the piece, he took
no notice of it at alL I showed him again, and he knocked the piece out
sideways, and bit it After this he rdus^ to take any notice till I had


1 88 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

The theory may, however, be reconstructed in a more
plausible form. It may be s^d that the animal never
perceived the relation between one act and another, but
that when his attention was called to the act, he acquired
a slight impulse to do it, which was speedily confirmed by
the satisfactory results. There are not wanting facts in
favour of this theory. Jack, for example, undoubtedly
acquired a taste for hanging strings, and would pull at
them frequently with no result. Similarly, the elephant,
who would pull in a basket containing bread by means of
a cord, would also pull dummy cords arranged for the
purpose. I have seen the cat sitting up before the cabinet
of drawers systematically pulling out one after another
when there was nothing in them at all, and what is more,
I have seen him pull out the same drawer three or four
times in succession. Such cases suggest at least that the
action tends to become habitual or sensori-motor. That is
to say, it tends to become attached to the perception itself.
And so far as it is attached to the perception, the rela-
tion between the act and its apparent end ceases to be
operative.

How far, then, does this tendency go, and how far can
we still trace the direct influence of the end upon the act ?
The simplest method of determining this question is by a
discrimination test. An animal is accustomed to react to
a particular object, and by so doing gets food. We wish
to decide whether the reaction is determined by the sight
of the object, or the desire for the food. Let us then
multiply the object by two or three, and arrange so that
the food is connected with one only. If the animal has
means of knowing this, and — the food of course being out

shown him three times, when he pawed at the side, and knocked the
whole thing over. After this he absolutely refused to take any notice until
he was ordered to pull it out, when he again got up and knocked the
whole rack over.

Both animals began with every appearance of expectation that
this was to be another of the now familiar tricks, which, according to
experience, resulted in a tit-bit for them. Both showed interest in the
proceedings, and an attempt to follow what I was doing at first ; and
Doth, when they found there was no result, abandoned their efforts. It
would, of course, be possible to get the do^ to persist through the motive
of obedience, but this would be quite a different thing from mechanical
imitation. Of this there seemed to be no trace.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 189

of sight at the time of action — prefers the appropriate
object, the motive seems sufficiently clear. I have already
mentioned some of the experiments which I made in this
connection. The behaviour of the cats to the drawers
showed in two cases a decided, in the third case a slighter,
preference for the right one. The otter showed no hesi-
tation or confusion at all between the two similar boxes, in
one of which the catch had to be lifted, and in the other,
depressed. But as a special test of this question, I made
some experiments with Jack and his strings.

In the first series,^ I put a paper on the projection over a door,
carried the string over a neighbouring picture, and dangled a
dummy string down from the upper hinge of the door, so that the
two strings hung at an interval of about a yard. The dummy was
the nearest to Jack. As I was arranging this, Jack tugged at the
wrong string, and I drove him away. When 1 put the biscuit
up, and called him, he ran up, and pulled the right string. Next
time he pulled the wrong string.

His whole series is as follows.

1. Right string first.

2. Wrong first.

3. Right first (seeing me put it up).

4. Right first (seeing put up).

5. Wrong first ; not seeing put up.

6. Right first ; ditto.

7. Right approached, not pulled ; pulled wrong, then right
(ditto).

8. Right first.

9. Right first.

10. String shortened (to obviate difficulty of his seizing it too
low to pull efficiendy). Fails to find right string ; pulls wrong
one i back, and looks for right, but does not see it till I point
repeatedly.

11. Right first.

12. Right attempted -, misses seizing it. Pulls wrong, chews
it, and goes back to right.

Next day.

Right five times running. He only pulled at wrong string at

^ I had previously made an experiment with four strings attached to
his box. Three were dummies, and one pulled the lever which opened
the box. Jack virtually failed in this. I kept turning the box about, and
his tendency was to take the string nearest him. He was right first
seven times out of twenty. The strings swung about near together, and
this and the movement of the box made matters too puzzling for him.


190 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

beginning, while I was arranging experiment, and before I put
right string up. (N.B. wrong string once pulled down after
biscuit eaten.)

In this series :

{a) He was right from the first when he saw process of
arrangement.

{b) When not seeing it, his first record was wrong, right,
wrong, right, right.

{c) Then came shortening of string, and he fiuled to see it.
That twice put him wrong. But that he had really learnt the
right string is shown by his behaviour next day, when the string
was made more easy to see, and he made no mistake. He there-
fore certainly learnt to discriminate strings in eight experiments
without seeing the biscuit put up ; and probably three trials
would have been enough, but for the difficulty of sight.

I now reversed the strings, making the arrangement before his
eyes. We will call the string which was formed right and now
wrong, the old stringy and the other the new string,

1. Pulls old string first, then new.

2. New.

3. New.

He is now taken away, so that he cannot see biscuit put up.
Result :

I I times pulls old string first, each time passing the new string
to get to it.

12. Stops at right, with claw on it ; hesitates, looking towards
old ; biscuit falls down.

13. Old again. After three-quarters of an hour :— -

14. Old. 24. Old ; hesitation.

15. New. 25. Old.
16 Old. 26. New.

Old. 27. New.

New. 28. New.

19. Old. 29. New.

20. New. 30. New.

21. Old. 71. New.

22. Old. Next day.

23. New. New, five times running.

This was a case of sheer mechanical habit, gradually overcome.
The seizing of the wrong string became more and more mechanical,
so that after pulling it, the dog would not wait to see whether
the biscuit had fallen down, but would go to the new string at
once, even with the old string still in his mouth.

It must be remembered, however, that the penalty of mistake
was a very slight one ; he always pulled the rieht string immedi-
ately after the wrong one — therefore virtually Tost nothing by it


M.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 191

So far the experiments were not decisive. The first
series showed that Jack could discriminate the strings,
and preferred that which he learnt to be connected with
the food. The second series, on the other hand, testifies
forcibly to the strength of habit Later on therefore I
made a second series of experiments in which he saw the
biscuit put up, but could not see it after it was put up.
Three strings hung down side by side, at intervals of
about a foot ; and I put the food first on one card, and
then on another, varying them quite irregularly. The
result showed a rapid growth of discrimination, which
soon became nearly perfect.

Jack, who had not had the string experiment for some time,
was very much excited, and at first kept pulling down the strings
before I had time to put the meat up. He then began pulling m
very random fashion, and only chose the right one nrst three
times in the first fifteen trials. Soon, however, he became more
attentive. In the next fifteen trials he was right seven times, and
seven times also in the next ten. The experiment was resumed
in the afternoon under stricter conditions. He was held back a
yard or two, and I counted three after the biscuit was placed, and
before he was let go. In the first four experiments he was right
twice, but had some difficulty at the beginning in seeing the
strings. In the next ten, he was right seven times, and one trial
was doubtful.^ During the course of these trials he gave up
pulling down the remaining strings after getting the biscuit.

I now made a further experiment to test the effect of
irrational imitation. Putting the biscuit on one of the
cards, I pulled it down, and let him take it. I then placed
a biscuit on another card, to see whether he would be
guided by what he now saw, or by what I had just done.
The case was closely analogous to the ordinary experi-
ments, in which he had learnt to get food by the method
by which I had previously got it for him ; and the ques-
tion therefore seemed here to come to a head. If he was
influenced by what he saw me do, there would be some
tendency to pull the string which I had pulled. But if
this influence was subordinate to the desire of getting the
biscuit, he would soon learn that for once he was wrong in
following me; and he would as before take to watching

^ He jumped between two strings, but caught the right one.


192 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

where the biscuit was put, and pulling the string that led
to that place. This is in fact what fell out. In the first
four trials, he three times pulled the string which I had
pulled previously.^ After this, he six times in succession
pulled the right one, to the neglect of that which I had
pulled before.

This experiment seemed to me to show at once the
influence of previous perception, and its subordination to
the results connected with it. The experiment also illus-
trated once more the function of attention. Comparing
its earlier and later stages, it would seem that Jack's
attention was rapidly cultivated. He b^an with great
carelessness; and his successes were actually below the
average of pure chance. By the end of the day, he had
improved so much as to be nearly always right.

Tied cord.

I was struck by a performance of the chimpanzee with a
cord which I had knotted round a bar outside his cage.
He was accustomed to pulling in food by means of this
cord, and I wished to see how he would act if I tied the
cord round a staple, so that the end in his possession
became inoperative. I found that without any hesitation,
he ^^made a long arm,*' and reached beyond the knot ; arid
I thought it would be interesting to compare the action of
other animals on this point. I therefore arranged a cord
for Jack's benefit, which passed from the leg of a table
diagonally upwards, round a support of the sideboard at
about three feet from the ground, and from there up to a
high shelf where a little basket was placed. The result
showed that Jack had no appreciation of the knot, and did
not find the right place for himself, but learnt it rapidly
from my suggestion.

The string was first made loose, and Jack got the basket by
pulling the lower portion. I then knotted it round the support,
but, as it happened, I did not make the knot tight enough ; and
by biting persistently at the lower string Jack got the biscuit again.

^ At the first trial he nearly pulled the right one, but passed to mine.
Both strings fell. In the third trial, he pulled neither the right string nor
mine. It must be added that each time, after having pulled down the
card, I replaced it immediately before placing the biscuit on another card,
so that his attention to the wrong card was maintained.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 193

At the third trial, Jack pulled the lower string till it broke, when he
got some satisfaction in chewing it. He then pulled slightly at
the short hanging end of it, and theh pulled above the knot. I
now substituted a stout cord, and first made it loose. Jack pulled
from below as before. I then tied it again, and the rest of his
record is as follows.

5. He pulls hard at wrong place. Then higher up, close
to the knot but not above, which involves his coming round leg
of sideboard. Sits watching. Goes away. Comes hick. Just
nips at cord in wrong place, but gives no real pull, and sits still
again.

I say, ^^ Good dog ; ** he pulls at wrong part again. I point to
basket. Again at wrong ; now Jumps up and at knot. I point
to basket again — similar result. I point to string — similar result.
I point to right spot 0/ string. Same, only tries to get paw up on
to sideboard.

I point again. He comes round under string and to right place,
and pulk successfully.

6. Wrong again. Then waits. I say, " Good dog j " no result.
Then he comes round, bites just by knot, but gets right side, and
so succeeds.

7. Right at once (both these times he started from same comer
where he had sat at first, and had to come round corner of side-
board).

8. Comes round at once, but at first takes string just below
knot. Quickly drops it, and pulls right.

9. Pulls wrong hard. Then jumps at sideboard. Pulls, not
seriously, at wrong again. Pause. At last comes round as before
from corner, and yet pulls wrongs near knot. He lies still a long
time. At last I say, *'Go on, Jack.*' He goes to right place,
pulls wrong slightlv, then right.

10. To right place at once (from old corner). Pulls wrong
slightly. Then right.

11. Wrong slightly, but quickly to right.

12. Barely mouths wrong. Then right.

13. Right at once.

14. Same (makes a sort of feint at wrong).
Next day.

1. Wrong first. Then quickly round, and pulls right

2. Right at once.

3. Same.

4. Same.

This really resolved itself into a discrimination
experiment, in which Jack learnt the right part of the

o


194 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

string by my pointing to it twice in one trial,^ after
which he never altogether failed, though he once tem-
porarily forgot.2

Teufel also did an experiment of this kind, in which
the rightpart of the string was at first distinguished by some
wool. The right string was pointed at the first time, and
once later. The whole record is as follows.

RECORD IN BRIEF.

(Right or wrong 2t first trial.)

Third night
Wrong.
Right.
Right
Right
Right
Right.


First night.


Second night.


I. Right (pointed to).


Right


2. Wrong.


Right


3. Wrong.


Right.


4. Right.


Right.


5. Wrong.


Wrong.


6. Right


7. Wrong.


8. Right (pointed).


9. Right


10. Right


II. Right.


12. Right.


Finally, I arranged a similar experiment for the elephant,
with similar results.

A cord started from the bottom of her stall, and was passed
over the railing above her head. From there it descended
diagonally, and was tied to a basket placed out of sight, two or
three yards away. She pulled it in six times by means of the
near portion of the cord, showing by the way some ingenuity in
so doing, either helping herself with her foot, or turning her head
right away. The cord was now tied round the railing, and the
elephant was at first baffled. In despair she opened her mouth
wide for the food to be thrown in, and having raised her trunk

^ His success in No 3 may have helped him, but it would probably be
neutralised by my leaving the string slack again in No. 4.

* This was a particularly instructive case of temporary failure. I did
not give him the slightest hint or reminder, but after he had waited
stupidly for a long time, I told him to go on, in the reproachful tone
which one might use to a person who really knows a thing, but is
suffering from some inhibition which prevents his using it. In Jack's
case my remark seemed precisely to have this effect of removing the
inhibition, or perhaps of supplying the needed stimulus to set the
marhinery to work.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 195

for the purpose, brought it down with a swish over the outer
portion of the cord, and secured the basket. This was clearly an
accident, and at the second trial, she was quite baffled again. At
length the keeper, who was present, pointed to the right cord,
and she pulled it. At the third trial, however, she again pulled
the wrong part hard at first, but at length, in again putting her
trunk up to open her mouth, she put it round the outer cord, and
pulled. This time it did not seem to be altogether an accident,
for she curled the trunk about the cord ; and in fact, in the next
trial, she pulled the right almost at once. In the next
trial again, after slightly trying the wrong part, she pulled right.
She was then three times right in succession. Two days later
she began by pulling at the right cord, but the basket caught in
some raik over which she had to pull it This led her to try the
wrong part for a while, but she reverted to the right portion, and
got the bread. At the next trial she tried the wrong part for a
moment, and then was right ; after this she was right four times
in succession. Six days later she always pulled the right cord,
though generally with a slight preliminary pull at the wrong one.
On the knot being loosened, however, she pulled the downward
string.

Result of the Discrimination experiments — Instinct^ Habit^
and Intelligence.

Taken together, the discrimination experiments go to
show that whatever the force of habit, and whatever the
feebleness and uncertainty of attention, the animals are on
the whole aware of what they are about, and able at need
to correct their errors by results. Their behaviour is
most easily understood if we conceive the more intelligent
act as overlaying habitual action, which in its turn over-
lays the actions of instinct and impulse. Mr. Small notes
the inveterate tendency of his rats to " fool." They run
about, smell, dig, or gnaw, without real reference to the
business in hand. In the same way Jack scrabbles and
jumps, the kitten wanders and picks, the otter slips about
everywhere like ground lightning, the elephant fumbles
ceaselessly, the monkey pulls things about. This is, as
it were, the basal behaviour : the matrix out of which
more adaptive action is hewn. But it tends to persist, even
when the intelligent mode of conduct is fully formed.
Still more does the animal tend to relapse into it when his
intelligence fails. Under the pressure of desire he must

o 2


196 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

do something ; and he falls back on the action that is
native to him. Upon this tendency are superimposed the
results of experience. Experience selects some of these
actions, and applies them to this or that object. So
selected or applied, the acts tend to become habitual, and
are performed apart from those results which brought
them into being. They become in this way incorporated,
though less intimately, in the life of the animal, and
serve him as a form of play or recreation. But once
more, they give place on occasion to the actual desires or
the animal, and the thing necessary for their attainment.
We must take habit into account as a disturbing influence
in the work of intelligence, but we must not attribute to it
all that intelligence does.

6. Probable reasons for imputing perceptual Learning.

The question remains, whether, after all, any of the
tricks were learnt by perception. I have admitted, as the
detailed account shows, that other elements may in some
cases have entered in, and may not this be true even when
appearances suggested the contrary ^ Is it not possible
that in each case, after a certain amount of random
endeavour, the animal hit by chance upon the appro-
priate movement, and finding that successful, repeated
it? If this were so, to show the method would be
superfluous, and an animal should learn on the average
as quickly if left to itself as upon the method adopted by
me. I may say at once that the influence of imitation
cannot be finally established until comparative experiments
on a large scale have been conducted upon this point.^

^ As a beginning I myself borrowed fwo collies, mother and son, for
the purpose. My intention was to proceed as follows : — Taking experi-
ment a, to show the method to the mother, and leave the son to discover
it. Then, taking ^, to reverse the process, showing it to the son, and
leaving the mother to find it out. For both do^s, each trial was to be
limited to 30 seconds, and, upon a series of experiments, it would appear
whether the tricks shown were upon the average learnt in fewer trials
than the tricks not shown. By this method of alternation I hoped to
eliminate the differences of quality between the two animals. My experi-
ment failed, because neither animal was sufficiently successful to give
tangible results. The older collie would pay no attention at all to what
she was shown, but merely looked to her master, and begged him to do
the thing for her. I only succeeded in teaching her (by showing) to
scratch open a lid ; and I am bound to say that, having once got the
method, she applied it to a quite different box intelligently enough, always


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 197

My experiments gave the affirmative instance, and the
negative is required. But the reasons for holding as a
probable inference that my animals were guided by what
they saw, are briefly these. There was in nearly all the
experiments which succeeded (and most did succeed)
a certsun point at which a well-marked change of attitude
took place. This point varied, from the second trial to
the seventh or eighth, and once or twice it was still longer
delayed. Before this point, the efforts were of a random
character ; not purposeless, indeed, but directed towards
getting the food by the methods natural or habitual to the
animal. At a certain point it became clear that the
animal was abandoning these methods, and adopting mine.
The transition was more or less clearly marked, in accord-
ance with the nature of the thing to be done. Where
that was something very definite, the transition was
striking and conspicuous. Such, for example, was Jack's
first experiment with the string, where he bqgan by leaping
up and pawing wildly, and after once seeing the card
pulled, took the string neatly in his teeth, and pulled it
down. Other conspicuous instances with Jack were the
spike experiment, in which, from general biting at spike,
chain, or lever, he passed in one triaP to the deliberate
attempt to pull out a skewer somewhat tightly rammed in,
and four or five inches long — an action which required
definite and sustained effort. Another case was that of
the weight, where, from biting at a string and jumping up
at the box. Jack, after having steadily looked at the
weight, came up and knocked it off. Equally definite was

turning the box rapidly round till she found her scratching succeeding.
In fact, she was not wanting in intelligence, but in initiative. So marked
was this that when, in despair, I gave her a tin, which, as I held it, could
not fail to open if once scratched at, and which the young dog accordingly
scratched open at once, she made no effort till shown it several times. It
was after learning this that she was taught to scratch open the lid of the
other two boxes. The young dog was much more lively, and inclined to
attempt things. He learnt rapidly (by showing) to open a box by the
lever, throwing it upwards with his nose ; and also more slowly (when
shown) to push back a lid with his nose. But the matter could not finally
be decided without employing at least a dozen dogs or cats. At best, I
do not think that perception of results would, except in difficult tricks,
counterbalance any marked difference in intelligence or initiative.
^ After one preliminary eiSbrt, in which he joined me in pulling.


198 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

tne removal of the stopper, done neatly with the teeth
after the operation had once been seen. No less definite
was the pulling out of the sideboard drawer by the handle,
though this experiment was marred by the reluctance
described above. There is no sort of gradual transition
from a general scrabble of the paws about a drawer, to the
act of quietly seizing the handle with the teeth. Similarly,
the opening of the drawer by Teufel and the Persian ; the
drawing of a bolt by my cat ; the upsetting of the tripod
and the pulling down of the string by the same animal,
were very definite actions, not emerging from a general
scratch, but, from the first, to all appearance definite in
their aim. The little fox-terrier's action with the tripod,
like the cat's, seemed to be a quite definite act, emerging
as it were out of pure nothingness, i.e.j out of mere absence
of effort. It must be added that as the table (p. 210)
shows, both in these instances and in others, what was
once acquired was very rarely lost. In many cases
there was no complete failure after the first success.
In others, there was none in the same series. Where
there were failures, they were generally few, suggesting
a momentary forgetfulness rather than an imperfectly
formed habit.

7. Evidence of guidance by ** Ideas^

Nor is this ail. In some cases there were indications
that the animal was learning not merely to execute a
certain movement, but to do a certain thing : to move a
certain object in the way in which it had been shown.
Such, at least, was the impression left on my mind. When
the cat, for example, learnt to pull out a bolt, it learnt
not merely to paw, nor to paw at a particular thing, but
to pull that bolt right out, a thing requiring a certain
combination or repetition of minor movements.^ I have
already referred once or twice to Jack's eflFbrts with the
skewer. Even more remarkable was the combination of
efforts by which he pulled the string up through the
banisters. We cannot in such a case apply the conception

^ This at least is true of his action at its best It was not always
equally decisive, and once at least the cat pulled at the door before the
bolt was properly out


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 199

of a perceived object discharging a uniform motor reaction.
There is rather a combination of movements which are
not always the same except in this, that they are so
adjusted as to produce a certain perceptible change in the
external world. The string is seized in the place learnt
through two or three experiences to be best ; the dog
backs, and lets the string run through his teeth without
letting go, or perhaps helps himself with his paw ; and
finally darts forward for the bucket, all as the needs of
the moment dictate.^ So again in opening the sideboard
drawer : Jack not merely pulls, but learns for himself how
to get his head into the drawer without shutting it again,
altering the method when he once hurts himself, and
finding another. So again I have seen him, when standing
up to pull open the door of his box by means of a wire,
accidentally pushing it with his paws again as he let go.
At a second trial he was careful to avoid this, dropping
the wire, and pushing his nose in as soon as there was
room. Similarly, I have seen the elephant shift the box
that she was opening when she had found that in a certain
position the door would slam to again before she could
get her trunk in. I have mentioned how well she would
pull in the rope by successive stages, and in the same way,
in an experiment in pulling a stick, which will be referred
to lower down, I noticed her " shortening," slipping her
trunk along the stick as she got the end nearer towards
her. These minor adjustments suggest the dominance
of an effort to effect a certsun external change : to pull in
a stick, pull out a bolt, open a door. They thus
correspond to what in human experience we know as
ideomotor action — action in which we deal with the
objects of perception not in accordance with a fixed

^ Thinking memory might have exaggerated Jack's performance in
this trick, I tried it again after writing the above. In the first trial he
succeeded with some difficulty by backing, and letting the string run
through his teeth as he pulled. At the second he tried another method.
Having pulled the string in a little way, he dropped it, and tried by
darting[ forward to catch it further on. In this he was defeated, because
the string slipped away more quickly than he could get forward. He
then put his paw on the string, holdmg it while he darted his mouth
forward. Repeating this once or twice, he succeeded in getting the
bucket up--on the whole perhaps his most intelligent performance, and
in detail quite novel


200 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

habitual response, but in such a manner as to produce in
them a certain change which we desire.

These indications, slight as they may be,^ suggest — and
the result would hold, apart from the question of imitation
— ^that what the animals learnt was not merely to respond
in a particular way to a particular object, but to produce a
certain change in that object as a means to securing their
food. If this view is correct we have here in an
elementary form the equivalent in action of the practical
judgment — or idea. That is to say, we have a series of
muscular movements directed towards a certain proximate
end, which end is supported and made valuable by the fact
that it is a means to something further. Action is directed
towards the end a. a is in itself indifferent, but is valuable
to the animal as a means to b. This relation, a — b, the
animal has had opportunities of perceiving. We have,
therefore, if the observations are correctly analysed, the
clearest evidence that it is the knowledge of this sequence
applied by the animal which determines its behaviour. In
human experience the means and the end in such a case
form the content of ideas, and their combination would be
called a judgment. The above observations suggest that,
if animals have not such ideas, they have something which
can perform an equivalent function. To put it differently,
I would define a practical idea as the function which directs
action, not necessarily in accordance with habit or instinct,
to the production of a certain perceptible result. It is,
further, a necessary part of such an idea that it rests on a
perceptual basis, and is capable of being brought into
relation with another such idea, for example, as means
to end.*.

Absence of analysis.

At the same time it must be understood that, if we
attribute ideas to an animal, they are not ideas arrived at

^ I much regret that I did not make more frequent notes on points of
this kind, the significance of which did not occur to me at first I have
tried in the text to render fairly the impression left on my memory by
many of the experiments, in the hope that in future experiments special
attention may be given to this point.

* It is in these points that the function of an idea differs from that of
instinct, which also dominates and guides minor (reflex) adjustments so
as to produce a certain result


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 201

by any breaking-up, analysis, or other elaboration of what
is given in perception. None of my animals (with the
possible exception now and again of the monkeys) showed
the least understanding of the how or why of their
actions, as distinct from the crude fact that to do such
and such a thing produced the result they required. It is
this want of what one may call analysis that made, for
example, the push-back bolt such a difficulty. What
Jack or the elephant knew was, crudely, that they had to
push this bolt. That the reason why they had to push it
was to get it clear of the staple they obviously never
grasped.^

Similarly, Jack learnt to push a door, but which side he
was to push it he did not know. Clearly he did not
realise that to push the door would pull the string, and so
drag down the card. All he knew was that a push on
either side might get him the meat.' If, then, positively,
the experiments suggest " practical ideas " negatively,
they strongly suggest absence of any sort of analysis in
the genesis of those ideas. An animal can shift its
attention to this or that object, or change within the
sphere of perception ; but it cannot apparently follow out
the structure of any complex object with any minuteness
and accuracy.

8. Further evidence as to perceptual learning.

To return to perceptual learning. If we allow ourselves
to go outside the region of experiment we find plenty of
instances of it in the observations of psychologists and
others. Of these the ordinary case of the cat and the
thumb-latch will serve, as an example, as well as another.

^ It may have been mere chance, but I did observe the monkey Jimmy
at times fingering the space between the two staples. Here at least was
a datum out of which understanding of the bolt might come.

' I therefore fully agree with Mr. Small's meaning, though I should
employ a slightly different terminology, when he says : — " It is also clear,
I think, that, what properly may be called ideas, find slight place in the
associative process. Crass images — visual, olfactory, motor — organic
conditions, and instinctive activities are assuredly the main elements.
That these elements may bleach out and attenuate into ideas is not
impossible " {op. cit.^ p. 1 55.)

As I use it, the term idea means any mental state, however little
aaalysed^ the function of which is to refer to something not actually
perceived (see above, Ch. VI.. p. 130^ note 2}.


202 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Writers like Mr. Thomdike, who deny imitation, have to
fall back on the theory that the cat learns this, in the first
instance, by some lucky combination of random jumpings
and clutchings and scratchings and pushings. This would
only be possible, to begin with, if cats habitually jumped
about and clutched and scratched in such a manner when
they wanted to leave a room. Mr. Thorndike has experi-
mented so much with cats shut up in cages that he seems
to think this a possible explanation. If three cats out of
eight learnt, by scrabbling all round their pens, to open
their latches, why, he asks,^ should not three cats in a
thousand learn to open a thumb-latch " in the same way ? "
— i.e.y I suppose, by jumping and scratching all round the
room. But the reply is that a thousand cats do not
spend their time jumping and scratching round rooms.
Such behaviour is, no doubt, natural to cats confined in a
cage, but ordinary observation of cats under normal
conditions is enough to show that this explanation is
purely imaginary.

Comparative unimportance of accident.

I must add here that, so far as I could judge, the more
a success was accidental the less likely were the animals
to take advantage of ft. The elephant, for example, who
succeeded by a random pull in getting out the bolt at the
first trial, failed immediately afterwards. But when, after
being twice shown, it succeeded again, the trick was
established. Jack seldom failed more than once or twice
after learning apparently by perception. But consider the
case of the push-back bolt, which Jack learnt principally
by trial and error. Here there was a random success at
the third trial, followed by no less than twenty-nine
failures. A second success later on was also isolated, and
it was not till the forty-fourth trial that a third success
practically established the trick. I have referred above to
the collie, which no less than four times knocked the
string down by roaming about, but showed no inclination
whatever to pull it down by a deliberate act. In short,
these experiments seem to suggest that recent writers have
over-estimated the effect of pure accident. In any case

» op. ciL, p. 44.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 203

it would seem that, whether accidental or not, the success
is only effective if attended to. When due to some chance
movement disconnected with the efforts of the animal,^
it seemed, as a rule, to leave no impression."

* As, e.g,y the knocking down of the string by the cat with his tail.

■ So far as they go the "double movement " tricks, if property arranged,
tell in fevour of learning by attention to the changes rather than by
association of movements. The most instructive of these experiments
are those in which an animal first learns an act A, and then learns that B
must be done to make A possible. Thus, the otter first learns to pull a
lever, then to draw a bolt or raise a catch in order that the pulling of the
lever may be effective. If this be explained as regressive association it
must be borne in mind that first the association of success with the act A
has to be dissolved — the animal pulls at the lever and finds it of no use.
Then the association has to be reconstituted for A-in-the-circumstances-
created-by-the-performance-of-B, and then B has to be learnt. Now, all
this is accomplished by the animals in some cases in a very few trials.

Instances of double movements learnt by Jack were the 'Moop" and
"skewer" and "pull-out bolt" It is noteworthy that where, as in the
"push-back bolt," he had great difficulty in learning the preliminary
movement, he would every now and then try the other out of its place.

The cat got the order right in the " loop " experiment, but wrong in the
" skewer." He also got disheartened with the lever in the " push-back
bolt " experiment, and refused to try it.

The elephant learnt bolt and knob, and gradually got perfect about
the order (see table). After learning the catch she was only once
wrong as to the order, but in the " push-back bolt " did not properly
acquire it.

The otter learnt some highly complex movements rapidly, but was
never " safe " as to the order. Subject to that limitation it may be said
to have learnt the bolt and lever in thirteen trials, catch and lever in one.
It did the catch and bolt together, with only one failure, though with
much delay. Later it was given a box with two levers to be raised
running at right angles with each other. It took five minutes over this
at the first trial, and two minutes at the second. When I saw it a fort-
night later it bungled the first trial rather, but did the second in thirty-five
seconds. It then tried a box with one catch to raise, another at ri^ht
angles to depress, and a bolt to draw. It failed in the first two tnals
because it knocked one catch up so as to interfere with the other. This
being prevented with a nail it succeeded, though with a good deal of
bungling, but in the second trial it seemed clear about the two catches.
The Rhesus monkey, Jimmy, learnt several double movements. Thus, I
taught him first to push back one bolt, then to pull at a wedge which
prevented the bolt from going back, then to remove a spike which pre-
vented him from pulling at the wedge, and, in addition, to pull out a
loose bolt by which the box was also guarded. Jimmy, when interested,
would go through the whole performance, every part of which, except the
pushing of the bolt, he learnt for himself, with great rapidity. But I am
bound to add that he would also pull at the spike when I so arranged it
as to have no function. Playful pulling at things is the basis of Jimmy's
learning.

Further experiments are wanted on this head, particularly with regard
to the rapidity with which the order is learnt before any safe inference
can be drawn from them.


204 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Attention not natural but acquired.

Nor had the animals — and this is a further native
result of some importance — any natural impulse to attend
to what they were shown. There is no instinct to learn
by perception. So far as my own experience goes, indeed,
the absence of this instinct is as strongly marked among
apes as among lower mammals. I found the Rhesus
monkey less attentive than my dog, and certainly not more
attentive than the cat.^ To learn new methods of action
by watching an external process is certainly not a part of
an average animal's normal life. On the other hand,
attention can be cultivated. Jack showed a very marked
improvement in this respect, so that I was able to lead him
on step by step to more difficult things ; and both he and
my cat showed what may be called a general appreciation
of what was to be done. They became excited when I
made preparations for an experiment, even though it was
of a new kind. This was very plainly marked in their
disappointment with the " control " experiment which I
tried without food.

9. The normal process of learning.

Whatever the basis of learning, whether accident,
imitation, or other, the normal process was clear enough.
In each case the central point was what I have called the
critical success. In nearly all cases this was also the first
success. Sometimes, indeed, success was arrived at in stages.
The animal would fairly attempt the right method without
succeeding ; or perhaps, though having once succeeded, it
would require a reminder before succeeding again. But
seldom would it fall back from partial success to complete
failure. In other cases success was heralded by a kind of
tentative action, as when the fox-terrier or the cat slightly

^ Hence he utterly failed, though repeatedly shown, to learn to op)en a
cupboard door by turning a button. For another conspicuous failure see
p. 248. I also tried in vain to teach him to use a hammer to break
walnuts. Miss Romanes succeeded in this with her Cebus, but it was
already accustomed to use a metal plate for this purpose, and merely
learnt to substitute the hammer. I do not wish to generalise from a
slender experience, but I am bound to say that the monkeys I observed
scarcely snowed a trace of " mechanical " imitation in their behaviour,
and generally learnt much less by being shown than from their own
experimentation.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 205

pawed the vase without seriously trying to overturn
it. Finally, after success, it was not uncommon to have
a break-down in one, and, more rarely, two trials of the
same series. Generally this happened when the series
had been prolonged, and it gave the impression that the
animal's powers of concentration had been exhausted by its
successful effort. There is no doubt that the process of
learning what to us appears so simple is to them attended
with great effort. It was seldom of any use to prolong a
lesson beyond a dozen, or, at most, twenty trials ; and the
dog and cat in particular would seem, at the end of such a
series, quite exhausted, and would stretch themselves out
for a good sleep, after half-an-hour of which they would
wake up, and do very much better.

Many observers credit animals with apparent " memory "
of particular events, and, rightly understood, this view
coincides with the conception to which we have been led
of the learning process. We cannot, indeed, from any
external action infer that an animal makes a memory-
judgment in the strict sense, /.^., is aware of an event as
having taken place at a certain time in the past. In this
sense the possession of memory by animals is at least
unprovable. What we can say is that a single occurrence
often has a permanent effect upon the animal, as shown by
its actions after perhaps considerable lapse of time. With
the higher animals this effect in not confined to cases in
which a simple reaction is encouraged or inhibited by the
immediately attendant pleasure or psun.^ It is seen equally
in the speedy and long-retained recognition of places and
persons. The power of cats and dogs to find their way

^ Inhibition is, of course, the least definite, and in that way the easiest
lesson that experience can teach. A case of inhibition by one experience
is alleged by Bingley (quoted by Romanes, p. 25) from the MoUusca. I
should like to see it tested. It is also possible that in the matter of the
signs of approaching prey or danger, heredity prepares a machinery with
which the appropriate sound or sight fits not congenitally, but softer a
minimum of practice. In these cases there may be rapid learning, and
yet the operation of experience may be only of the mechanical, inarticulate
kind. But where a poodle remembers his way to any house where he has
once been, we have to do with an appreciation of space relations probably
very complex, which, one would say, must either be retained in an
articulate form, or not at all (see Brehm's Tkierleben^ 3rd ed., Vol. II.,
p. 157).


2o6 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

home over a route once traversed, even among all the
turnings of a big town, is too familiar to need remark.
Similarly, Romanes correctly writes :—

^^ The memory of the horse is remarkably good, as almost every
one must have had occasion to observe who has driven one over
roads which the animal may have only once traversed a long time
before." 1

A comparatively trivial event may also be ** fixed " by
a single occurrence.

** When I was at the Cape I used to take my two dogs up the
Devil's Peak, an outlying point of Table Moimtain. There were
several places at which it was necessary that I should lift them
from ledge to ledge since they could not scramble up by them-
selves. After the first ascent they always remembered these
places and waited patiently to be lifted up.** ^

It would be useless to multiply instances. The question
is, how to interpret a familiar observation. In that inter-
pretation we cannot, if we go solely by the actions of the
animal, attribute to it a memory-judgment in the sense of
an act of thought about the past. But we can fairly say that
one condition of the memory-judgment is present, i,e.j the
animal takes note of a single occurrence, and guides his
conduct thereby on subsequent occasions.

Summary.

To put these points briefly together, the experiments
suggest:—

I . That animals learn by attention to a simple sequence
of events. It is easiest for them to learn, if the first event
is an act of their own, and the second a result of that act,
which gratifies or hurts them. But even in those cases,
their method of learning does not ordinarily, in the
instances which I have observed, conform to the notion of
the gradual growth or inhibition of a habit. It conforms
rather to the rise of an idea, at first perhaps dimly grasped ;
then clearly seen ; for a while waveringly held, Jbut soon
definitely established.

* Animal Intelligence^ p. 330.

■ Lloyd Morgan, Comparative Psychology y p. 1 18.


VIII SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 207

2. For reasons that have been given, the basis of what
was learnt was, in several cases, most probably the per-
ception of what was done by the experimenter, and its
result. This, however, requires further proof.

3. Whether by perception of what was done by another,
or by noting the results of their own actions, it seems fair
to say — ^though on this point, also, further evidence is
required — ^that what the animals learnt to do was, in some
instances, though not in all, to effect a certain perceptual
change as a step to securing food. Their behaviour can-
not be described in all cases as a uniform motor reaction to
a perception, but rather suggested a combination of efforts
to effect a definite change in the perceived object. Such a
direction of action to an external change, I call a practical
idea. And the correlation of such an idea with a remoter
end, I call a practical judgment.

4. This ** idea," however, does not represent any analysis
of what is perceived. Animal perception as compared with
human perception would seem, by the use of it, to be crude ;
and the ideas derived from it are no less crude.

5. There is no natural tendency to learn by perception ;
still less to "reflective" as distinct from "simple"
imitation.^

It may be added that in spite of much difference in the
way of going about a thing, there appeared to be no
essential difference in capacity to learn between the dogs,
elephants, cats, and otter. The difference between in-
dividual dogs, for example, appeared much more marked
than those between the dog Jack and the elephant Lily.

^ Mr. Small says, 'Mt is not impossible that a form of imitation,
involving the higher associative processes, might be demonstrated if it
were possible to direct the attention of the rat to the actions of the other
rat, while retaining undiminished the affective basis for action" (p. 163,
op, cit.). Except that the animals used to watch, not the actions of
another, but my motions, this sentence expresses in a few words the
point on which success or failure in the above experiments appeared
to turn.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII

The object of the subjoined tables is to exhibit some of the
main results of the above experiments in summary form. They must
be taken rather as a rough aid to the formation of a judgment than
as an exact statement of results possessing equal numerical value.
Different experiments were directed towards different objects, and
none were performed with a view to tabulation. Hence, for
example, the number of fiulures after first success depends largely
on the interest which the experimenter had in getting his animal
perfect by showing it repeatedly. There was no time-limit for
successes. These defects are, it is hoped, partly remedied by the
appended notes and partly by the full preceding description. In
the first tables, only experiments in which success was established
are reckoned — the test of success being, unless otherwise stated,
at least four successes — ^whether on the same or different days —
after the last failure. In Table IV. is given a list of definite
failures. Table I. illustrates the process of acquisition — especially
the effect of the first success. Before the first complete success
there was often an act which might on various grounds be termed
a partial success. There must be something arbitrary in the
nature of such successes, but it would be more misleading to
ignore them, and, when necessary, their character is briefly ex-
plained in the ^' Remarks.'* Only complete feilures are reckoned
under the heading so named, mere mistakes or blimdering being
passed over.

Table II. arranges the experiments with the elephant somewhat
differently, distinguishing the apparently random successes before
the trick had been shown from those achieved afterwards. The
result is to suggest that the showing had a material eflFect. As
the elephant was a great fumbler, columns are added for her
partial failures — in which are reckoned not mere mistakes of
execution, but failures indicating misapprehension or forgetfulness
of the right method.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII 209

Table III. deals with the Method of Acquisition. It is con-
fined to the cats and dogs, and to those experiments in which
there was some suggestion of perceptual learning. It states the
method used by the experimenter (in which connection see the
general accoimt, pp. 151 to 155), and compares the behaviour of
the animal at the first trial with the behaviour necessary for
success. When there was a distinct suggestion of some other
influence guiding the animal, that is noted.

Table IV. notes the definite cases of failure where the experi-
ment was fairly tried. Twelve trials distributed over more than
one day are taJcen as establishing a fair trial. In some cases I
have entered failures of special interest not fulfilling this condition.
Only animals appearing in the other tables are entered.


2IO


MIND IN EVOLUTION


C/3
CO

D


o


o

h

HH

O?
O

<

fa

o

CO
(A

w
o
o
Pi

w
•J

<


1


.5'


II


Oh e «


5 S

M CO


1


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII


211


-g


•I


I


.it

Is-


(2JS


^


hen
try.
sue-


»2*


11^


bar.
t out,
ed, refu
er this.


1


y at the

get bol

substitut

trials aft


1


feebl
not
one

two


1


Claws
Could
easier
Only
cessfu]


«


« «


o S O tnO N


M O O O M


w o o «


o n o <^o o


o o o o o o


t tow J^fOvO


NO ^C0>0 CO


§


•?

H


f


B


P 2


212


MIND IN EVOLUTION


I


a
s


1


s
1.


I'


11


v^ 21 M OJ


. a § 3 * -^


2


H^ «


1 1'

It

II «* II


I


11

Hi

II £ ^


I"


CO


3


I


_2_


2


3


I


s


I


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII 213


M


e*>


^


e


-


«


«


w


M


CO


K M


«
^


«


w


«


e*>


>B


^


^


I-;


^


o «


•2 -g-s


•s


I


i

I


"ill


3


214


MIND IN EVOLUTION


o

h

Oh

o


Cu.
•J


<


II


Ti .- ^ * 3

?-\ I?


1^1


2


lip I


^if


i


&


I


a


^


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII


215


55
O

h

o

•<

o

Q
O

h

IS


<


** ^ o

pi


s^l


If -

.,?a i-^* °3 i g>

V a s o a .S


CO


la B?!
stalls


§
1


O


I

I
1


•5


I

•J


2 8 \^
S5 O CO


18


I


I


S S: »S bAl:!


i*|-


I


I 1 ■

i H

CU CO M


|i.


i

CO


f


p


2l6


MIND IN EVOLUTION


3


1 11' I


1


ill'


.lllillfclll


111
III

Oh


II


V


1^


III


•s
•5


•f-s


^1


o.tS


.s

r

1"^


I

O CO
CO


SM u) o
CO "*


CO

■n

CO


O
CO


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII


217


3

n


§3t


I mm

rS;&» jf« s a 3
«<g-lt|8:l58i


,.i ^-s


•31


■2311

Q "


Ml


■3

i


:3


I


2

CO


9*^


1


>1 1 :

1^ ^! III

lillf 111

is 11 1. 5il


1 I


a^


Hi
1^1


I

11


:§


I


i

2


I I


I I


•I


a


I


•a

i


<s


1^


ri


I


CO


in

o o.^


f

CO


2l8


MIND IN EVOLUTION


M
O

O

<

as
h

>
•J

•<
w
•J

h
<


<

Q

o


£5

<

h


(X4

Q


<


Hr


II


■5 =


^1 3


:;!


...4


CHAPTER IX

THE KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS

I. So far, the results of experiment indicate that the
higher animals can learn, not merely by the mechanical
repetition of experiences, but by careful attention to one
or mor^ instances, the number being really irrelevant,
provided that attention is once seized. Further, they
appear to learn by the perception of concrete facts in their
relations, i.e., in their order as experienced. This order
they are capable of " reproducing," in the sense that they
can apply the results of perception to guide their future
action. This does not mean that they are aware of
relations as such, or order as such, or qualities as such,
but that they are aware of the concrete whole, which the
qualities in their relations build up ; and that when the
whole is familiar to them, they can proceed inferentially,
from the part or state which they see, to the part or state
which they do not see. This view is corroborated by
certain general considerations and by evidence outside the
region of experiment.

a. Class Inferences.

The more intelligent animals not merely learn to react
appropriately to a certain kind of sense stimulus, but from
knowledge of one concrete and perhaps highly complex
object, they learn to deal suitably with another object of
the same class. Thus, a dog that is accustomed to one
house readily familiarises himself with another. In the
course of some observations which I made on the power


220 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

of dogs to find their way about a new place, I carried a
fox-terrier in a box into a room on the first floor of my
house, and asked her master to call her from outside.
After being let out from the box, and going to the
window, she appeared for a short time to be puzzled, but
soon started off, and went steadily out of the door, down-
stairs, out at the house door, and round the comer to her
master. Her total time was 27 seconds. This dog was
not in the least infallible, for in the very next experiment
she missed her way to begin with. But apparently she was
guided by what in a human being we should call common-
sense. Familiar with houses, staircases, rooms, and doors,
she would understand that to reach her master, she must
get out of the room and out of the house. She would be
familiar with stairs as leading her to the ground floor.
She would judge that, though leaving the house in the
opposite direction, she would be able to get round to
where her master stood.^ None of the d<^ which I
observed in this connection, with the exception of one
puppy,' showed any hesitation in endeavouring to get out
of the house, by however roundabout a way, if their
master was outside, or to run round to some door which
they had before passed through, if he was inside.* That
is to say, the full-grown dogs, though in different degrees,
could use their experience of houses as structures that
have passages and doors and staircases by means of which
you can reach your object through roundabout paths, as a
guide in my house, which was strange to them. In the
same way, an animal's attitude to strange men is deter-
mined by his dealings with the men he knows ; if he is
guided by resemblance, it is certainly not because he fails
in discriminating one individual from another. The little
monkey Jimmy was respectful and even friendly to all
men, and flew quite systematically at all women and

* From the front door onwards, she may very possibly have been in-
fluenced by previous experience, as she had come m that direction from
her home. In fact, she took the same turning wrongly in the next experi-
ment. She had not, however, been brought in through the front door, but
by another way ; nor had her master been in the house at all.

* Another young dog failed at first to go down the stairs.

' On the other hand, they had considerable difficuhy in locating a room
from outside, particularly if it was upstairs.


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 221

children. Whether this was due to a generalisation from
teasing boys, and the nurses who accompany them, I do
not know. The point remains, that Jimmy was guided
by a general, or, as it might be called, a class resemblance,
and this again not to the detriment of his knowledge of
individuals,^ for I have seen him get into a state of wild
excitement on merely hearing the footsteps of his former
keeper.

Little facts of this kind suggest that the assemblage ot
qualities which constitute an individual make a certain
impression upon the animal mind,* and prepare it to deal
with objects presenting a general similarity to those with
which it is familiar. In short, an animal reacts, not only
to resemblances of simple sense quality, but to the more
general similarities which unite the individuals of a class.
Such similarity is notoriously difficult to analyse ; but it
seems to be a similarity in which many elements are con-
cerned, and in which the relation between the elements is
perhaps the determining feature. I one day gave Jack his
box with a footstool in front, which prevented the door
from opening. After very little hesitation, Jack scratched
away the stool and got at the door ; and he repeated this
action when for the wooden footstool I substituted a large
hassock. Now, Jack would be of course accustomed to
scratch at things, and in particular to scratch away earth
to find a buried bone. It is extremely unlikely that he
ever before had to scratch away a similar object under
similar circumstances. It was s^ain an act of common
sense, the application by a kind of analogy to a new object
of an action familiar under other circumstances. The
similarity connecting this action with Jack's ordinary ex-
perience would be a similarity in the relation between the
thing desired and the obstacle hindering access to it.
Similarly, when I gave Jack a box with a new sort of
fastening (the catch), he attacked it at once and per-
sistently. Though he did not know what was to be

^ At the same time his memory is very short. He clearly did not
recognise me at first after a few days' absence.

* On this point see some good remarks in Mr. Shaler's Domesticated
AnimalSy p. 39, on a dog's knowledge of the boundaries of his master's
property:


222 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

done to it, he saw that this was the thing to attack and
explore.

On the whole, then, it would seem that animals are
influenced by similarity of relations. Not that they
dissect out the common element which constitutes a class
identity ; they have not solved the problem which has
baffled logicians. It is rather that they have a concrete
perception of the man or animal, house or locality with
which they are familiar ; that such an object contains
many elements in various relations ; and that when they
meet another object similar in general character, i.e. really
in its constitutive relations, to the first, they know how to
deal with it. This implies that they have the power of
grasping an object as a whole including distinct elements
which I have called Concrete Experience, and the power of
applying this experience which I have called Practical
Judgment.

2. b. The object as centre of relations.

A further point distinguishing the knowledge of objects
lies in the use made of it. To perception, as already
pointed out, any object is a centre of many relations.
And if there is knowledge of objects, any one of these
relations should be available to serve whatever happens to
be the purpose of the moment. Here again is a marked
difference from the habituation in accordance with which an
animal learns to react in a uniform manner to a given
stimulus. Thus one can understand that by habit or
association, an animal should always resort to a particular
spot as his home or his feeding place, or that he should
follow — as our own feet often mechanically follow — ^ well-
known path. But if applied to expl^n a dog or cat's
acquaintance with locality, the habituation theory seems to
break down. Thus, on this theory, when a dog, hearing
the dinner-bell, rushes down to the dining-room from a
distant part of the house, we should have to explain its
action somewhat after this fashion. The sound of the bell
impels it to rise : the sight of the door, to open it and
pass through ; the sight of the passage, to turn to the
right, go downstairs, turn to the left, and so forth. Each
new motion must on this theory be due to an impulse


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 223

arising out of a similar reaction in the past, with which a
satisfactory result is associated. It is, on the surface, an
argument against this theory, that if the direct or custom-
ary way into a room is barred, a dog or cat will at once^
betake itself to any other route that there may be. This
adoption of alternatives suggests that their action is to be
referred, not to an impulse urging them to move in a
particular direction, but rather to a desire to be in a par-
ticular place, the road to which is indifferent, so long as it
is passable.

By way of testing the point, I made a number of experiments
with dogs about the house in which I live, to which all of them
were strange. Like most houses that go hack for four centuries,
this house is full of turnings and windings, and afforded oppor-
tunities for devising on a small scale intricate and alternative
routes. My method was to get the dog's master to stay outside
the house, while I took the dog in, and brought it to the window,
whence it could see its master, who would then call it. After-
wards I would reverse the process, the master going inside, while
the dog remained outside. In all cases, the use of scent was pre-
vented, by taking care that the master did not go over the track
which the dog would have to follow. The dog, it will be
observed, had to respond to its master's call in quite unfamiliar
circumstances. It had no association between taking this turn or
that turn, and the satisfaction of rejoining its master.

In these as in other experiments the dogs showed a great
variation in intelligence, initiative, and persistence.' The most
noticeable defect was a failure in ^' orientation," the result ot
which was that on getting out of the house, for example, the
dog would turn towards the spot where his master had last been
found instead of towards that in which he had last been seen.'
In such cases, the dog would as a rule rapidly return, and either
go back into the house, and perhaps to the window again, or (as

^ As a rule. I confess I have seen dogs fail in this respect
' Putting aside the case of the puppy mentioned above, there were
comparatively few complete failures (though there were often initial
mistakes) when the master was outside. The dogs were also very feirly
successful in finding their master in a ground floor room, but uniformly
failed when he called to them from upstairs. This may be attributed
partly to greater complexity, but mainly to the impossibility for a dog of
identifying an upstair room by its window. The ground floor room the
dog could look into and recognise.

' I only noted one clear case in which the more familiar route was at
once rejected for the right one, against many in whidi a mistake was
made at this point


224 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

in at least one case) at once try the other direction.^ In these
cases, no doubt, previous experience has an undue influence, i^^
we get incipient habit, but the habit explains only the wrong port
of the act, not the eflFort to correct it.

Neither impulse guided by habit nor random searching seem
adequately to explain the way in which a dog looks for his master.
Thus, in one of my experiments, a dog is held at the back of the
house, and sees his master go in through the back door and re-
appear at the dining-room window, which looks in that direction.
After trying to follow his master through the back — unsuccess-
fully, because the door is shut — ^he makes oflF round two comers
to the front door, and so into the dining-room. He had never
been in this room before, but has once been from the back into
the house by the front door.' The experiment is once repeated^
and the dog remembers this route five days later. On arriving at
the house on this occasion, he is taken through a side door into
the dining-room, and then out at the back. He first finds his
way in through the front as mentioned, and then for a further
trial both fi-ont and back door are shut. The dog goes to and
firo from one to the other,' and then suddenly goes right off round
the house and in by the side door — z route which he had never
taken before. There mav have been an element of chance in this
success,^ but, on the wnole, we seem to have a series of acts
dictated by the desire to find the master operating on the remem-
brance of the modes of entrance. The same interpretation seems
to apply to one more instance which may be given.

A little fox-terrier had once found her way from the back of
the house through the fi-ont door into the dining-room to her
master. I then took her out aeain, the master remaining where
he was, to the same place ouside, closing the fi-ont door behind
me. After trying the front door several times, she at last set off
round a further corner of the house, and found the side door,
through which she got into the house, and found her master. The
total time was 2 minutes 20 seconds. She had indeed traversed
the whole of this route before, but under quite different circum-
stances, for she had come round from the back to find her master
in the garden outside the side door, and fi-om thence I had taken
her away from him through the side door to show her the
dining-room, upon which followed the two experiments that I
have mentioned.

1 This part of the experiment was unfortunately spoilt in several
instances by masters calling their dofifs prematurely.

> The room itself he may have found by scent, chance, or possibly
'* direction sense."

* For some reason he did not go the whole way to the back door.

* But it was repeated immediately afterwaids without any hesita-r
tion.


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 225

In this matter of searching for a lost object, the contrast
between desire and impulse seems to be presented in a very
simple form. By impulse, I imderstand response to sense
stimulus, response determined by the stimulus as such.
Such a response would explain a dog's running straight to
his master on heaf ing his voice. A series of such responses
might explain its following a route of which every portion
was familiar, and each turn associated with the satisfaction
of the impulse. But I do not see how it can be made to
explain the traversing of a route not associated with such
satisfaction,^ nor the rapid choice of an alternative route,
nor the return, which I have seen in the case of a puzzled
dog, to the point of departure to seek further assurance.
These appear rather as a series of actions dictated not
merely by the perception of each object on the dog's path,
but by the constant pressure of a desire, the determining
factor in which is the remembrance of the master as seen
at a certain spot, the relations of wjiich to the place in
which the animal finds itself determine its motions from
moment to moment.

3. c. Knowledge of individuals.

It will now be understood that what has been called
above ' the knowledge of localities, objects, or individuals,
makes its appearance in this stage of intelligence. That
is to say, there is something more than acquired appro-
priate reaction to a perceived quality. There is an
appreciation of an object, as a whole, to which many parts
and many qualities belong ; and there is a capacity for
definite reference to those of the parts or qualities which
are not perceived. A toad, a snake, or even a fish, is said
to know its keeper. What this usually means is, in fact,
that the animal comes at the sound of his voice, or
perhaps at the sight of him. There are two or three
kinds of reaction which the presence of the keeper excites.
This is no more knowing a person than to put down so
many shillings on demand is to know the clerk at a
booking office. It is merely appropriate reaction to certain

^ Except, perhaps, where an animal has only to retrace a path just
traversed.
» P. 124.

Q


226 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

qualities of a person. We human beings know our friends
in a very different way. A man is many-sided, and to
know him is to respond to him with a many-sided imder-
standing. in their degree the higher animals have this
knowl^ge of their masters. The ape, the dog, and the
elephant — in a lesser degree the horse, and even the cat —
notoriously "understand one.*' The dog follows with
anxious sympathy the subtlest variations of mood.
"Knowledige * of this kind makes attachment possible
as an emotion. It may be said that in attributing emotions
of this kind to the higher animals, we base ourselves, after
all, on certain modes of reaction. But, if we do, our
interpretation is borne out by agreement with the facts.
The cat that looks angry also acts like an angry being,
and scepticism on this point may prove practically
dangerous. On the whole, we may say that knowledge
of individuals becomes possible at the level of intelligence
which we are discussing, and that the appropriate emotions
of attachment, dislike, jealousy, and so forth, are to all
appearance expressed at this stage.

A certain mutual understanding seems also to be implied
in many features of animal play. No doubt play is
instinctive, and the activities of play are often called
forth by a stimulus acting upon hereditary structure ; but
observers tell us of many instances in which animals of
different species, even where one might naturally be the
prey of the other, learn to play fearlessly together.^ It
is difficult to think that a game could arise under these
circumstances, or be maintained without degenerating into
a serious fight or hunt, unless each animal takes what the
other does as meant in play, and not as meant in earnest.
It must know, that is to say, that the threat to bite is not
going to be followed by a real bite. In a word, each
animal must judge of what the other is going to do.*

The view that an animal not merely reacts to objects,
but knows them, is thus confirmed by evidence from more
than one source. We have seen some ground for thinking

> See Groos, p. 128, 143.

' For the degree of mutual understanding in courtship, see Groos,
p. 253.


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 227

that it perceives changes in outer objects, and bases its
action thereupon, or adapts it to the production of such
changes as it desires. It appears to be guided not only by
the simple resemblances of sense-qualities, but by the
similarities of relation which constitute the bond of
identity between complex objects. And now, lastly, we
have seen that it is not tied to one uniform type of
reaction in response to a perceived object, but forms its
behaviour in accordance with the relation in which the
object stands to the goal of its desire for the moment.

4. d. The application of experience.

These results are corroborated by observers who report
cases in which the behaviour of an animal is devised to
meet the behaviour which he has learnt to expect from
other animals, or from men.

In these cases, the experience may be said to be applied
with a certain amount of originality, which puts the
behaviour observed out of the category of habituation.
A certain event is anticipated, and, without instruction or
suggestion, preparation is made to meet it. Or, perhaps,
a situation has been found advantageous, and a spontaneous
effort is made to bring such a situation into being again.
Or, lastly, unique circumstances occur, in which knowledge
is applied in a manner appropriate to those circumstances
alone. In all of these cases, we have behaviour indicating
not merely knowledge of objects, but also power of
applying that knowledge with a certain spontaneity.
Now, are these cases authentic? Does such behaviour
exist ^ I know of no experimental evidence of it below
the level of the apes.* There is, however, a considerable
body of casual observation,* tending to show that be-
haviour of this kind is not uncommon, at least among
the more intelligent mammals. It will be worth our while
to analyse a few instances.

If it is true that a pointer will sometimes adopt,
untaught, the plan of running round cover so that he

* The evidence with regard to the apes will be referred to in the next
chapter. By experimental evidence I mean cases in which the circum-
stances and antecedents of the act have been systematically traced.

* The value of evidence of this kind is briefly considered in Chapter
X., p. 260 et seq»

Q 2


2l8


MIND IN EVOLUTION


o
o

<

h
>

h

C4


<
Q

o


P

l-H

h


(I4

Q


51^1


1^


I


o
c


^2


■5 =


I


t 5


J


w


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 229

is explained in rational terms, and the dog is supposed to think the
therefore. But on similar principlts every case of association may
be thus interpreted." ^

He proceeds to show how the refusal of a cinnabar
caterpillar by a chick may be interpreted as a rational act,
and thrown into syllogistic form.

" Nothing is easier than to interpret this intelligent course of
action in rational and logical terms : — Black and gold caterpillars
are nasty ; that is a black and gold caterpillar ; therefore it is nasty.
This does not seem to me to be at all more far-fetched than the
suggestion of Mr. Stone's that his dog reasoned : — ^That dog is
barking out of doors, therefore he is not in this room." ^

I quite agree with Mr. Lloyd Morgan that there is no
evidence that a dog can ** think the therefore." That is
to say, it has no explicit consciousness of the thought-
connection uniting one stage of the inference to the next.
I see nothing whatever to suggest that an animal can
analyse out this element in its own mental processes as a
man does when he uses an illative particle. But this does
not seem a sufficient ground for denying to the operation
the title of inference.' To the animal much less is explicit
than to the man, but to the man much less is explicit than
to the philosopher, and to the philosopher much less is
explicit than he could wish. Inference is essentially one
function, from the simplest case quoted by Mr. Morgan
of the chick, up to the highest elaboration of experience
by the human intellect. The differences are differences in
articulateness on the one side, and comprehensiveness on
the other; and the question is, precisely what point in the
scale of ascending clearness is occupied by such an inference
as that attributed in this story to the dog. Admitting
that it falls below the stage in which inference is expressible

* Comparative Psychology, p. 300. * VJ. p. 301 .

* It is no doubt in part a question of terms. I have used the term
inference in a very wide sense to express a certain generic unity of
function exercised with very different degrees of articulateness. It is, of
course, possible for any writer, while recognising this generic unity, to
prefer to keep the term mference for the higher grades. This difference
of usage is, as I gather, responsible for making the divergence between
Mr. Lloyd Morgan's views and mine appear much greater than it
really is.


230 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

in general terms, and the connection of one proposition
with another by an appropriate particle, must we say that
it falls to the stage represented by association ? If we
contrast the use made of experience by the dog and the
chick respectively, we shall see that there is a very material
difference. The chick's response to a certain stimulus is
guided by the feeling experienced in immediate relation to
a precisely similar stimulus. We may, therefore, fairly
speak of an association between the stimulus and that
feeling. The dog, on the other hand, in this story, has to
make a sort of construction of several different elements of
experience. Mr. Lloyd Morgan would not suggest that
the sound of a bark outside would naturally impel the
little dog in the room to jump up and seize a bone. It
has this effect only as applied to the particular circum-
stances ; and one does not see how the little dog could
apply it except by going through a process corresponding
to that attributed to him by Mr. Stone. The bark
operates on him only as suggesting that the big dog is
out of the room ; and being out of the room, cannot
prevent him from taking the bone. Past experience sug-
gests each stage in this argument, but the dog has to put
them together for himself. His action, taken as a whole,
is not based on the association of a feeling with a stimulus,
but on a judgment resting on experience as to where
another dog is, and what it can or cannot do.

Under the same head fall cases in which a cat or dog
gets a man to do for him what he cannot do himself. A
good instance is narrated by Perez,^ whose dog, a puppy
of six months, having been punished for not going out of
doors when it was desirable that he should have done so,
wakened M. Perez at nights by scratching at his door, or
howling. The same writer a little lower down* describes
how M. Marion's cat, as soon as dinner was served, would
go to and fro between the table and his master, inviting
him by mines persuasives to come to the joint feast.
Every one knows, or ought to know, that cat.

Closely connected with these are the many instances of
apparent deceit which give animal psychologists some

* Lts Trois Pretnikres Annies de VEnfant^ p. 263. * P. 272.


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 231

trouble to explain.^ It is not necessary to suppose that an
animal thinl^ out a lie, as a deliberately treacherous
human being would do ; but an animal does know what it
is told to do and what it is forbidden to do. It knows
. what the consequences of disobedience will be ; and it
knows when its master's eye is on it, and when it is not.
If it is very acute, it may further recognise some of the
signs by which its master will gather what it has done in
his absence ; and it may seek to remove them. All this
follows very simply from the attribution to an animal of a
judgment based on experience as to the way in which its
master will behave. No higher faculty is required, but
we cannot, unless we wholly reject or painfully distort
evidence of the kind under consideration, do with any-
thing lower.

The distinctive feature of the cases dealt with in this
section is that if they are correctly reported and inter-
preted, they are cases of the application of experience with
a certain originality or spontaneity. In its lowest form,
the application of experience is not distinguishable from
its acquisition. Habit is built up out of action, or the
refraining from action ; and it issues in similar actions or
similar refnunings. The formation of the habit is the
tendency to act (or refrain). Nothing need be added to
the habit in order to produce the action. In the higher
forms of experience, there is a change in this point. Ex-
perience is acquired in order that it may be used in practice,
but its acquisition and its application fall apart into two
clearly distinguishable acts. In its most elementary form,
this distinction appears even in cases of learning by direct
perception of results. An animal desiring b, observes
the sequence ab. It applies this by setting to work to
produce a. It sees food placed in a box, it sees the door
shut and bolted ; then again it sees the bolt withdrawn,
and finds that it can open the door and get the food. Its
attention once clearly awakened to this sequence, it draws

^ For instances, see Schneider, p. 355 ; K. and O. Miiller, p. 13,
and Lloyd Morgan, Comparative Psychology^ p. 371. (The story of
the Maltese terrier which was supposed to dance round the table on
two legs ; but dropped on to four at the end where it could not bet
seen.)


232 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the bolt for itself, opens the door, and gets fed. There is
here, first, the perception of a sequence of events ; and
then, a second stage, in which the perception has to be
worked into the effort of desire, and the motor impulses
necessary to the act. This second stage sometimes fuls,
as when my dog refused to pull the drawer, the working
of which, as his actions seemed to show, he had perfectly
learnt. When it succeeds, it is a Idnd of synthesis of the
result of perception with the motor impulse effected by the
organism itself. This, then, is the simplest case of the
application of experience. Much more distinctive and
dedsive are the cases referred to immediately above, in
which, on the strength of past experience, a certain event
is anticipated, and without any instruction or suggestion,
preparations are made to meet it. A few demonstrated
cases of this, which we may distinguish as spontaneous
application, would be sufficient to decide the whole
question before us ; but for animals below the apes,
evidence on the point is, as we have hinted, not wholly
satisfactory.

5. However this may be, we have seen some ground for
thinking that the more intelligent animals have knowledge
of surrounding objects which they apply in action ; that 1
they are capable of learning to act in accordance with physi-
cal changes which they witness ; that they can be influenced ^
by the general similarities which unite individuals of the
same class, and can guide their action in dealing with any *
object by the relation in which it stands to that which they
desire. Further, evidence has been brought that in the
process by which they learn, not repetition of instances, but
concentration of attention is the important point. Lastly,
it is suggested that in some cases, they not merely learn to
meet a given perception with a certain motor reaction, but
also to combine and adapt their actions so as to effect
physical changes which, as they have learnt, aid them in
gaining their ends. We have thus gone through all the
points enumerated on p. 134 as distinctive of Concrete
Experience and the Practice Judgment, and have seen
some ground for imputing each and all to the higher
animals. At no one point, perhaps, is the evidence con-


IX KNOWLEDGE OF CONCRETE OBJECTS 233

elusive ; but it is to be rememWed that these functions
are interconnected, so that evidence of capacity for one is
indirect evidence of capacity for another. We have, there-
fore, a set of independent arguments all pointing in the
same direction, and it is on this convergence of evidence,
rather than on decisive proof at any one point, that our
hypothesis must rest.


CHAPTER X

ARTICULATE IDEAS

I. We have seen evidence in animal behaviour for the
operation of what we called practical ideas, but they were
ideas of a very crude ^nd unanalysed character. Evidence
of more articulate ideas is much more restricted, and so
far as decisive experimental tests are concerned, confined,
I believe, to apes. By a more articulate idea, is meant
one in which comparatively distinct elements are held
in a comparatively distinct relation. Thus, that a bolt
must be pushed back is a crude idea ; that it must be
pushed back so as to clear a staple, a relatively articulate
one, implying a distinction between the parts of the object
perceived (the bolt and its staples), and an appreciation of
the relation between them. As ideas become more articu-
late, the results of experience are more freely combined or
modified to suit practical needs. Something like originality
begins to show itself, and we have instances of what we
have called " spontaneous application." Of this also, it is
difiSicult to find experimental evidence for animals lower
than the apes. Whether this is because the intelligence
of all other mammals is lower, or because ape intelligence
lends itself more readily to the kind of experiment which
human intelligence most readily devises, is not so clear.
There is, in fact, a good deal of evidence of the anecdotal
kind suggesting the existence of intelligence of this grade
below the Primates. Before considering the value of such
evidence, I may illustrate the kind of articulateness and


cHAP.x ARTICULATE IDEAS 235

originality of which I speak from some experiments which
I made with the monkeys at Belle Vue.

My principal dealings were with two monkeys. One was the
little Rhesus Jimmy, who has already been mentioned more than
once, and who came to stay with me for several days. Jimmy
was not altogether a hopeful subject for experiments. His
attention was terribly dissipated. In the monkey house, every
noise distracted him, and he would break off in the middle of a
most promising experiment to run backwards and forwards in his
cage, in sympathy with the monkeys in the large cage opposite. He
seldom appeared to be hungry ; but I found at last that he would
do almost anything for a baked potato. After that discovery, we
got on better.^ Nor can I praise Jimmy's temper. I have
already mentioned that he flew at all women and children ; and
though he tolerated me, and would climb about me as if I were a
piece of furniture, he never showed a trace of affection. In my
house, I found that his chief passion was for the fire. He would
sit on the edge of the fender, or stand on his hind legs, close to the
high, old-fashioned grate, with scarcely two inches between his
chest and the flames. But though I once noticed him touch a
bar, and draw his hand quickly away, he never burnt himself with
the hot cinders. The black cinders he ate freely, and packed his
cheek pouches with them.

The other monkey of which I saw most was the chimpanzee,
whom for reasons of my own I called the Professor. The diffi-
culty with the Professor is his extremely retiring and unsociable
disposition. No one can approach him with whom he is not quite
familiar ; and after an acquaintance of two months, he will only
take a banana from my hand at arm's length, amid great trepi-
dation. It is therefore very difficult to show the Professor any-
thing. When, for instance, I tried to instruct him in the push
bolt, I had always to leave the box in the cage, and retire myself,
before he would come near it.

2. When I first saw the Professor, he had already elab-
orated a somewhat remarkable performance. He lives
for warmth in a cage enclosed within a larger cage or
house. Passers by threw nuts and other gratifying objects

^ In this want of persistence, Jimmy contrasts strongly with the Cebus
described by Miss Romanes. Nor did Jimmy show any of that " tireless
spirit of investigation" which Dr. Romanes found in the same animal.
The only thing Jimmy investigated was his own person, and in this he
certainly did seem absolutely tireless. But he snowed extremely little
curiosity, and no persistence m working at anything, except for the sake
of food.


236 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

into the house, which would often fall too far from
his cage to be within reach of his arm. To deal with this
difficulty, he would retire to his bed, pull from it his rug,
stuff the rug with considerable effort, bit by bit, through
the narrow rails, and proceed to throw it like a net over
the desired object, which he would thus work towards
him. It was noticeable that he was always careful to pull
the rug in agsun. The first thing I taught the Professor
was to substitute a stick for the cumbrous rug.

I cut a small stick from a tree, pulled a bit of banana about
with it, and gave it to him. He tried to use it, though inefFectually.
The next day, I brought him up a stout walking-stick with a
crook, which he used awkwardly, and nearly succeeded in his
object He then used his rue instead, with success. I then put
a piece of banana in a box. He tried ineffectually to reach it with
his rug, and failed, but did not use the stick. I pulled the box a
little about with the stick, and left it with him. When I came
back, he had got the box, and opened it. Next day, he used the
stick at once to get a lump of sugar. At first, he knocked it away,
but soon got the stick round, used the crook, and pulled it in. I
found, however, that he never really learned the use of the crook.
He would use either end indiscriminately. This, I think, was not
altogether due to stupidity. It must be remembered that he had
to work the stick with his hands through narrow bars. He was
awkward with it at the best of times, and when the heavy crook
was at the remote end, he could not place it accurately enough to
be of real use to him.

Next day, the chimpanzee learnt to use a short stick in
order to reach a larger one, with which in turn he could
reach the banana.

I put my stick out of his reach, and a piece of banana beyond
it again, while I gave him a short stick. He did not, however,
use it until I first pushed the big stick about with it. He then
made an attempt to reach my stick with the short one, but with-
out success. I gave him rather a larger stick, with which he at
once tried to reach mine ; but instead of getting hold of it, he
knocked it slantwise, so that one end was further off from him
than before, and one end nearer. He now directed his stick to
the nearer end, pulled mine in, and with its aid reached the
banana. Another day, he was given a big broom handle to use.
As he drew the banana in, the end of the handle knocked against
the partition door of his cage, which was behind him. He at
once shifted it so as to clear the door.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 237

In general, he had two chief movements with his stick.
The banana was generally given him inside a cigar box.
He would reach out with his stick at the box, and sweep
it round by a radial motion, so that it came up to the
side of his cage. It will be observed that in so doing
he was not obeying the natural impulse to draw it strsdght
towards him, but merely was bringing it to a point to
which he could afterwards go and get it. One half of
his cage, however, was covered with plate glass, so that
if in describing a quarter circle he swept the box up
against the glass, he could not reach it at once with
his arm. He would then alter the motion, and rake
with the point of the stick, drawing the box in in a
straight line. When he had to fish for a box close by
the wall, he would take trouble to get his stick in between
the wall and the box, showing that he was quite aware of
the way in which he had to push it. On the other hand,
he not only, as I have mentioned, failed to learn the use of
the crook ; but I have seen him sweep at the box with
the crook downwards, so that the stick passed over the top.

On one occasion, when I borrowed a child's hoop, and gave it
him in place of a stick, he used it very uninteUigently. Instead of
getting the hoop round the banana, he made sweeps with it, so
that the curvature kept driving the fruit away. I should like to
have made further experiments to see how he would have learnt
the proper use of the hoop, but its small owner became alarmed
for its safety. The Professor sometimes tried to find remarkable
substitutes for a stick. On one occasion, when he was trying an
experiment with a rope, which he could not understand, he spied
a long, heavy iron bar lying by his cage. He dragged this up, and
it came over the rope, of which he had one end in his cage, while
the other end was festened to the box outside. He tried to push
the bar out towards the box, and foiling, tugged at the rope, lift-
ing it up, and the bar with it. The bar of course ran down the
rope, and nearly reached the box. How much of this was
intentional, the reader may determine for himself. In any case,
I am not going to infer that the chimpanzee understood the
principle of the inclined plane.

One day I gave him a rope with a noose to throw over
the box in place of his stick. I did not give him any hint,
but he soon tried it in a vague way. He did not, how-


238 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

ever, understand the matter very well, for when he suc-
ceeded in getting the rope round the box, he did not seem
aware of his advantage, flung it away, went off for his
shawl, and used it very successfully. I then tied a block
of wood to the rope to assist in throwing it. He attempted
this spontaneously, at first without success. Presently,
however, he happened to pitch the block right into the
box, which to-day was open, pulled it in, and got the
banana. Notwithstanding this signal success, he never
took to this trick.

At the next trial, he tried to use his rug, until I confiscated it ;
but after one or two unsuccessful trials, he succeeded in throwing
the block beyond the box, and roping it in. At the next trial he
failed again, and tried a smaller shawl, which I was also compelled
to confiscate. Bereft of all other means, he threw the block once
more, but hit the wrong side. One more failure stirred mv com-
punction, and I gave him the banana, and restored his connscated
property. The next day he would not throw the block, but used
the rope with success. At length, however, he refused to go on
with this method. Evidently he had considerable physical diffi-
culty in throwing at all well.^

In another connection, however, he would also use the
rope with some ingenuity. In the experiment to which I
have already referred, when the box was tied to a rope,
the further end of which was passed over a stanchion
several feet from the cage, he failed, as I shall mention
later, to find the right method, but was fertile in devising
wrong ones. He would shake the rope violently, so that
the banana would fall out of the box. He would then
swing the rope to and fro, swishing the banana about from
side to side, until by degrees it would come within his
reach, in a way which I should have thought beforehand
to be quite impossible.

Jimmy was much slower in learning the use of the stick,
but he had probably had no previous experience like that
with the rug. I b^an by placing a nut in the crook of a

' Pechuel-Losche (Brehm's Tkierleben^ I., p. 50) has given reasons
for repudiating the common view that many monkeys in the natural state
use stones, nuts, &c., as missiles. Miss Romanes' observations, however,
show beyond doubt that her Cebus threw things at people deliberately.
{Animal Intelligence^ p. 485, &c.)


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 239

little stick, the whole resting on a board which I arranged
outside Jimmy's cage at Belle Vue. He at once pulled
the nut in, but made no attempt that day to get the stick
into position for himself. The next day I arranged it
again, and also dragged the nut about outside. At the
fourth trial on that day, he waved the stick about as
if vaguely trying to hit the nut. I append the remsunder
of the notes taken on that day, and the next.

4. Stick being placed near nut, he swishes it sidewa)rs, and gets
nut.

5. Swishes about persistently with stick. Knocks nut away
once, and we replace. Then by deliberate casts gets it.

6. Pushes stick out from cage. Hits nut away. Sulks.

7. Great struggle to get it. Throws stick and picks it up again.
At last gets nut.

8. No effort, till we go away. Then at once tries, but knocks
nut away.

Next day.

1. Swishes stick about vaguely. Swipes at nut. Vexed, and
throws stick away. Gets stick over nut, and pulls a little. Gives
up again. Throws stick over it, and pulls by crook. At last
gets it.

2. Swipes about, knocks nut further away. New stick sub-
stituted — ^T shape. Examines and bites at it. Gets it into cage.
Apple substituted for nut. Stick lies near. He gets apple at once.

3. After long time with no effort, makes awkward casts at apple,
handle of stick getting mixed up with netting. Throws stick
away again in vexation. Does not understand drawing it in like
Professor. I give it back, putting it under bar. Tries to throw
it over apple sideways ; fails.

4. After an interval, I shorten stick. He fishes about for small
pieces, and gets them.

5. Gets a big bit better.

As long as he was in his cage, Jimmy showed himself much less
handy with the stick than the Professor. He had to operate
through a wire netting, which however did not reach to the floor
by an interval of more than an inch. He seldom made use of this
interval for getting the stick in and out, though it was much
handier than working through the railing. If the stick was put
inside the netting, he had great difficulty in getting it out. The
crosspiece with which the stick was fitted was too long to go
through the mesh of the net without a little manceuvring ; and in
this, he very often &iled. He would push it so violently that the
stick would get through and fall out of his reach ; and once he bit


240 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the cro6S offj probably out of annoyance. Nor did he manage the
pulling in as well as the chimpanzee, frequently getting the end of
the stick involved with the meshes of the net. In fact, in the
whole matter of manipulation, the chimpanzee is the more
dexterous of the two. In handling the boxes, for example, in
which his fruit was placed, he always turned them edgewise if he
wanted to get them through the bars. Similarly, the child's hoop
mentioned above was passed by him in and out of the bars edgewise
without difficulty. Jimmy's comparative &ilure in this respect
must be ascribed largely to impatience. To say the truth, if he
did not succeed at once, he lost his temper.

Jimmy pretty soon leamt to use a short stick in order
to reach the longer one. If stick and fruit were both too
far from him, he would try to help himself by pulling the
whole board on which they lay towards him ; and he
seemed quite clear as to the necessity of getting the stick
beyond the thing that he was pulling. If it lay just on his
side of the apple or nut, he would be carefiil not to knock
the apple away, but to get the stick well beyond it. When
Jimmy was staying in my house, he was kept on the cord ;
and, being unembarrassed with netting, would use a stick
very freely. It is also interesting that without any in-
struction he rapidly learnt to use substitutes.

I first gave him a child's skipping-rope. He took no notice to
begin with, but when I placed the rope suggestively near the
bread, which was out of his reach, he made a cast at it with
the wooden handle. At first he lost the rope. I returned it to
him, when he threw it again, and worked the bread within his
reach. After this, he would use a cord ; and, after some hesi-
tation, a wire. If other things failed, he would pull off the large
dust sheet which covered his chair, and use that, as the Professor
did his rug. Here is one note which shows his resourcefulness in
trying one thing after another. I put a piece of onion in a basket
within reach of his stick. After first revising any effort, he tried
to reach it with the stick, and &iled. In reaching towards it, he
found the big box (one of Jack's boxes, which he also used) l3ring
across his chain, and preventing his reaching forward. He threw
the box off. Having feiiled with the stick, he will not try it
again, but makes wild efforts to throw the rope. Then he actually
rolls his box at the food ; then goes off and gets down the dust
sheet from the chair, and tries unskilfully to sweep at it ; finally,
makes a longer stretch, and just reaches it with his own claw (his
elasticity was really remarkable).


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 241

Both these monkeys, then, clearly learnt to use sticks,
ropes, or anything else that came handy, to reach at things
outside the range of their claws.^ It is instructive to com-
pare their behaviour with that of the dog and the elephant.
I chained Jack up, put a biscuit out of his reach in the
crook of a stick, and he rapidly learnt to pull it in. But
of any attempt to get the stick into the position in which
he could use it, I never saw a sign.' It was the same with
the elephant, who time after time would pull the stick in to
her, getting the bun if it happened to be placed exactly
right, and missing it if it was possible to do so.' Thus, the
elephant and the dog remained in the first stage of the
trick. It would of course have been far less easy for them
to have got the stick into the right position, but for the
elephant, at least, it would not have been impossible. She
confined herself, however, to repeating what she had done
herself with success, or seen done for her. But to get the
stick into position, and use it with effect, involved rather
more than this. It is true that the monkeys had seen me use
it, and that Jimmy had also seen me place it in the right
position for him to use ; but it was no mechanical imitation
by which they learnt to use the stick for themselves. It
was necessary that they should grasp how the stick
and the food stood in relation to them ; that they should
get the stick at the food and beyond it. If we regard
imitation as the basis of this performance, it is imitation
of the higher order, that we have called Reflective or
Analogical. A form of ^^ analogical extension*' is also
strongly marked in the use of substitutes differing very
widely in appearance and the manner of use from the

^ Mr. Bates's Cebus also used a stick for similar purposes, and on one
occasion is recorded to have flung a swing at some skins which he wanted
so as to get them on the return of the swing (Romanes, p. 480). Miss
Romanes records similar facts. Two other monkeys at Belle Vue failed
to learn the use of the stick in the few lessons which I gave them. It
would seem to be a feat which must be learnt by the animals.

' I did not, I must admit, repeat the experiment many times, because

Jack strained at the chain so much in his excitement, that I was afraid of
is hurting himself.

' When she missed it, she got excessively annoyed with the stick, and
would try to break it by stamping on it, or would throw it away into her
cage, if I did not intercept her. On such an occasion she returned it to me
on being ordered, with a very bad grace.

R


242 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

object first employed. Another point illustrated besides
the " articulateness " dwelt on above, is the combination
of movements frequently observed, — z good case of the
sort of adaptation of one act to another in a series which
we have taken as differentiating Desire from Impulse.
There was indeed in their whole proceeding a d^;ree of
articulateness which I have not seen in experiments with any
other animals. Mr. Small's epithet "crass" would have
to be modified before it was applied to the perceptions or
ideas of monkeys. Their handling is ind^ much less
dexterous, and — if I may use the expression — refined, than
one would suppose an untaught man's to be, but far more
discriminating than that of any other animal that I have seen.
Perpetually exploring objects, pulling them to pieces, and
pushing them about, they get to understand better than
any other animal how things will act, and what they can
do to things. Their hands are far finer organs of tactual
discrimination than anything which lower animals possess;
but equally, they seem inferior in this point to the hirnian
finger ; and with this tactual discrimination, the degree of
their appreciation of objects, their behaviour and relations,
seems to be closely correlated.

3. Tied rope. (See above p. 192.)

The elephant, dog and and cat were easily taught to
pull beyond the knot of a tied rope. The monkeys
may be said rather to have shown an appreciation of
the knot.

The Professor was enclosed in his inner cage, as shown in the
diagram. I tied a box to a rope, passing one end straight through
both bars to him, while the other was passed round beyond the
bars, and also given to him. It was natural that he should pull
the straight rope, and this he did, reaching through both bars to
get at the box. I then twisted the straight rope round one of
the bars. He at once put his hand beyond the bar, and pulled
the rope in.^ I then moved the knot to a remoter bar. After
once pulling on his side of the knot, he again reached beyond,
and I found the next day that he would either claw beyond the

^ Mr. George Jennison, an experienced and very judicious observer,
who was with me, thought this attributable merely to the effort to reach
as far as possible. The subsequent trials, however, suggest that the
chimpanzee recognised the knot as the critical point.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 243

knot at first, or after one trial at his end of the rope. He would
also sometimes claw slightly at the knot itself. When, finally,
I moved the knot to a l»r beyond his reach, after a slight trial at
the straight cord, he would pull the other.^ For Jimmy, I ar-
ranged a cord knotted to the handle of a writing-desk. He was
tied to a heavy chair, by moving which I could let him reach
beyond the knot, or prevent him, at pleasure. When I let him
do so, he at once reached beyond the knot, even if he had to
make a great stretch for it. When I put the chair back, he did
not try to use a stick to rake in the free cord, but at first pulled
the tied part fruitlessly, and then taking it in both hands, pulled
so hard as to drag his chair forward, whereupon he immediately


Inner Cage •


Onter Cage


Plate -glass b


House


d^, inner railed door ; J^, outer door ; k\ i^, X*, knot in different positions.


reached out, and caught the cord beyond the knot. This was
repeated, and if at first accidental, certainly became deliberate.
On the other hand, if the chair was held fast, he would not at
first try to use the stick to fish for the string, but would pull
irrationally at the tied string.* The next day, however, he took
to the stick, and thereafter used it freely. He would now wholly
disregard the tied string, unless he wished to pull himself forward
by means of it.

* There followed two trials in which he attempted the wrong rope first
and then pulled the right. He then pulled the right five times running.
The ends of the rope lay close together, and were indistinguishable in
appearance.

* The stick was placed in position for him several times, and then he
used it, but he only once that day made an effort to get it into position
himself.

R 2


244


MIND IN EVOLUTION


CHAP.


4. Bolt fastened by hook.

I took the box with the push-back bolt, tied a string to
the knob, and, passing it round the box, fastened it by a hook
to a ndl at the back. The string now held the bolt
forward in the staple, so that unless the hook was removed,
the bolt could not be pushed back. Jimmy at first failed
to find out how to open this box, but one day appeared to
learn it, as it were, in a flash.


A. Diagram showing box with hook fastened to wire netting.

B. Diagram showing hook fastened to nail at back of box.

At the first trial, he worked a good deal at the bolt, bit the
string a little, and after a time, took the hook off. He then
began to work at the bolt, and might have found it all out, but
that his attention was suddenly distracted. After this, though he
two or three times took the hook off, the action was purposeless,
as he would go away again, and perhaps not try the bolt until a
minute had passed, or perhaps not at all. Two or three days
afterwards, however, I was putting my hand to the hook, mean-
ing to take it ofF without letting him see. Apparently this called
his attention to the hook. He at once took it ofF, and almost
immediately, came round the box, pushed back the bolt, and
opened it. He repeated this five times, and when the hook was
too tight to come ofF, he would pull the string till it slackened.
To baffle him, I now turned the box up so that the hook was
underneath. At first, not finding the hook, he pulled at the string
and worked at the bolt ; but at length he turned the box over,
the hook fell ofF, and he opened.

I then ftirther varied the experiment by fastening the hook to
the netting of his cage, pulling the box away from it so that the
string was taut. After trying the bolt a little, he attacked the
hook ; but it was too tight to come ofF He then threw the box
about, until he turned it into a position in which the bolt fell.^
After another trial, in which he fiuled to remove the hook, I

^ He had an amusing struggle to keep the lid up while he got under-
neath it Finally he threw the lid right back.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 245

fastened it again so that the string was slack. He then quickly
pulled the hook ofF. His record for the rest of the day is as
follows : —

12. I re-fasten tight. He tries bolt, works to and fro, and
leaves it more forward, so that string is slacker. Then at hook.
Gets it ofF and opens.

13. Slightly at bolt; then at hook. String works slack, and
he opens.

14. String too tight for movement of bolt to let it slacken.
He tries hook hard, finally gets bodily on to string, so as to pull
box in towards festening and make string slack. Then gets
hook ofF, and opens.

15. After trying hook, pulls string down hard at once. Tries
bolt slightly, which nearly goes back. Then takes ofF hook.
Then opens.

16. Same. Tries hook well. Then bodily on to string.
Pulls in. Then gets hook ofF, and opens.

The next day he was indlfFerent, and I did not try him again
till ten days after, when I tied back the catch of the other box
in a similar manner, fastening the hook first to a chain. He ap-
peared at first to have forgotten this experiment, and began by
biting through the string ; and when I replaced the string by
wire, he pushed the box about until he got it into a position
where it could be opened. I then fastened the hook on to the
box itself again. He watched me doing this, and attacked the
hook at once, but it was too tight for him. I then gave him six
more trials with the hook on the chain, each time taking it ofF as far
as possible without letting him see me do so.^ It was not, however,
till the sixth trial that he made any attempt at the hook.^ So I
took the hook ofF, and put it on to the fender. After this, he
succeeded at once, and repeated his old performance of jumping
on the string, or giving it a vigorous pull if it was too tight for
the hook to come ofF.

Taking this experiment as a whole, three things are
noteworthy.

(i) First, the monkey showed no systematic endeavour
to trace out the nature of the obstacle to his
pulling the bolt. He did not follow the string round, and
get the hook ofF, but

(2) He did recognise obstacles when, so to say, they

* He may have seen me at the third trial.

* Instead of trying the hook, he bit the string through once, and another
time broke it in jumping on the box, the cord by which he was held
catching in the string and pulling it violently. It was noteworthy that he
repeated this jump, which he had found successful.


246 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

stared him in the face ; and then devised means of his own
for dealing with them. This was particularly noticeable
in the slackening of the string. He must in some obscure
fashion have felt that the string was pulling against him
when he tried to unfasten the hook ; and for this he found
the appropriate remedy. This was therefore a good case of
" original application."

(3) His first success was one of the most striking
examples that I have seen of the efFect of a sudden turn of
attention. Though he had pulled off the hook before, and
also pushed back the bolt, he had clearly never put two
and two together. For some inscrutable reason, the move-
ment of my hand suddenly seemed to bring the whole thing

into his mind. He at
once took off the hook,
pulled back the bolt,
opened the box, and did
not fail again.

5. On the other hand,
both monkeys failed in
another experiment with
a hooked rope. I passed
a rope round a stanchion
outside the chimpanzee's
cage, tied a box to one
part of it, and gave the free end to the chimpanzee. The
other end I hooked to a bar of his cage. The result was
that he could pull the free end as hard as he pleased, but it
would have no efFect unless he took the hook off. In this
he fai^Ied, though I repeatedly took the hook off myself,
thinking that he might learn to see the difference which it
made. Jimmy failed equally in a similar experiment which
I arranged for him. Both monkeys, after trying one rope,
would try the other ; and it was interesting to note how,
on at least one occasion, the chimpanzee, after having lost
the free end of the rope by pulling hard at the other, kept
both ropes in his hands while he pulled. The same monkey
showed considerable, but from the experimenter's point of
view perverted, ingenuity in getting the box within his
reach by swishing the rope about from side to side. Why


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 247

did neither of them learn to take ofFthe hook ? Imitation
was excluded, because I concealed the operation as much as
possible, and it would seem that they failed to compare the
two situations (hook off and hook on) so as to draw an
inference. This failure is to be connected with the very
short-sighted want of attention to my operations while ad-
justing the experiment. Such attention was rare. Had
the monkeys any degree of forethought going beyond the
satisfaction of their felt desire, one would suppose that they
would take note of what passed in one experiment with a
view to success in the next. They would therefore fix
their minds on the nature of that change in the situation
which enabled them to get the coveted prize. I never
saw in a monkey any trace of a prevision of this kind.

6. Working stick within tube.

I noticed the Professor one day trying very inefFectually
to use a small stick as a lever to open a box. I did not
further test his powers in this direction, but thought of a
slightly diflFerent experiment. There was a large iron
pipe lying in the cage, into which I stuflFed a piece of
banana, and gave the monkey his little stick with a tin
tack at the end, by which I thought he might fish it out.
I did not show him this at all ; but he at once used the
stick, working it in with ease, and though he failed to get
the banana out bodily, he seemed to derive satisfaction
from sucking the end of the stick each time he drew it
out. As I thought this was meagre sustenance for him,
and a poor reward for so much merit, I secured a shorter
piece of piping, and a long iron rod, one end of which
would pass easily into the pipe, while it was long enough
to go right through. The Professor meant to use this in
the same way as the stick, but he very soon found that he
pushed the banana right out at the other end. He then
always looked for it at that end, and moreover, finding
that it was apt to get lost in his hay, he transferred his
operations to the part of his floor which was covered with
sawdust. Moreover, one trial was enough to show him
that only one end of the rod could be used.^ I wondered

1 If he made a mistake on the point on subsequent days, he speedily
corrected himself.


248 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

whether anything could have suggested this operation to
the chimpanzee, and I found afterwards that when drink-
ing his water at lunch, he had a way of dipping straws in,
and then sucking them. This, or the use of his finger in
searching, would perhaps be the point of departure for
this burrowing in a hole with a stick. But the analc^
seems somewhat remote. For the rest, the decree of
exactitude required in the execution was the most inter-
esting feature of this performance.

Jimmy, on the other hand, absolutely failed to learn
this trick. Though repeatedly shown it with a hollow
bamboo, and either a stick to push the food out, or a
wire to fish it up with, he never made the slightest effort
to push the food out for himself. If I gave him the tube
with the stick inside it, he would pull it back instead of
pushing, though if the next moment I took it in my own
hands, he would look anxiously at the opposite end to see
the potato come out. It was a remarkable and by no means
isolated case of failure in imitation.

7. Use of stool.

The first evening that Jimmy was with me, I observed
him pull a box towards him, climb on the top of it, and
thence jump to the top of the table. This can hardly
have been by design, as he could climb the table without
such aid with the greatest ease. But the next day I
made a series of experiments to see whether he would
learn to place a box or chair for himself, with a view to
standing on it.

The experiment was not very easy to arrange for so
agile a climber, but I managed it by putting a piece of
potato on a table at such a distance from the point to
which his cord was fastened that he could just reach it if
his body and the cord ^ made as nearly as possible a straight
line. Thus he had not ^la\i^i enough to climb the table,
nor to reach to the top as he stood on the ground ; but
if he stood on the stool and stretched forward, he could
just reach it. I did not, to the best of my remembrance,
let him see me bring the box to the table for him,

^ The cord was tied to a belt of sacking, which went round the nar-
rowest part of his body above the thighs.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 249

but rather brought the table and adjusted it to the
box. After he had got it in this fashion, I moved
the box away. He did not try to move it back, but
began exploring the box, and threw it open. The lid,
being thrown back, came near to the table, and after a
little time spent in investigating the box and himself, he
jumped on to the lid and got the food. When I put
another piece of bread on the table, he did not try to
repeat this performance, but tried to pull the table towards
him. He then jumped on to the box, and tried to open
it in a futile way while sitting on the lid. After a long
interval, I attracted his attention to the bread again, and


he once more opened the door of the box ; but this time
it opened at right angles to the direction required, and so
did not help him. He pushed the box a little towards
the table, but did not persist. After another trial, in
which he circumvented me by extraordinary litheness of
body, he began pulling a chair towards the table, but
found it too hard work, and gave up. I then noted as
follows : —

Pulls at box. Takes up brush and makes a vague lunge with
it, then takes rope, and similarly half tries to throw it.

I put a lighter chair within his reach. He tumbles it over
box, and finally down by table — it lies lengthwise. He then
climbs on it and tries to reach biscuit, but his rope has got
twisted, and is too short. I lei^then it, and push table nearer.
He gets biscuit.

I now put chair in another place, upright again. He climbs
about it, but instead of using it, pulls table near him. Ultimately
gets food by reaching from chair.


250 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Food replaced. Fairlv pulls box to within reach of table — gets
on to it and reaches food. Replaced. Tries to reach from chair
as it stands, and to pull table. Gets on to chair through back, so
that rope is passed through, and will get twisted unless he goes
back. I show him a bigger piece. He jumps down through
back of chair y goes to box, opens it, and pulls it a little way to-
wards table, then jumps on top and gives up again. Finally,
through my moving biscuit a little nearer to encourage him he
gets it. I now place it on top of high chair. He tries to climb
chair, but fails. He catches curtain, and swings by it to chair,
and gets biscuit.

After lunch, I place potato in basket hung from ceiling. He
gets it by jumping, and reaching from screen which he climbs up
and along. At length, other things being made impossible, I put
chair near. He pulls at this, and finally turns it over so that it
falls underneath. He then climbs on it and gets potato.

Replaced. He does not try to use chair, but after some efforts
by other means, drags box underneath, jumps on it, and gets
part. As I write above, he tried to draw box towards table
where bulk of potato is lef^. It is too far. He also tries to throw
rope. Finally I move table a little nearer, and he gets potato,
standing on box. Replaced, and box put out of way. He lugs
it up. rushes it too far. Then brings it back, opens lid. Stands
on it, and tries to reach. I push table nearer him, and he gets
potato.

I now put box so that by opening lid and throwing it back he
can reach. He gets on top, and so prevents himself from opening
until he gets near hinge. He then opens, tumbling right over.
He climbs on lid to reach, but the whole thing overbalances.
The same evening he pushed the box towards the table, but
rolled it over too far. Tries to reach and fails. Sits on box and
opens lid (at side) quite uselessly. Apparently tries to get it to
stand out at right angles.^ No further effort though I draw table
a little nearer. On my going out of door, reaches food from
corner of box.

The next day, he fidled to use the box as a stool. The
day after, I placed the box in its old position while his
back was turned. The result was as follows : —

No notice till I go out of room. He struggles as I watch
behind door. Chain is too short, and box is only in his way.

1 I mention this as suggesting that he had a confused remembrance of
getting the food before by opening the lid, which he now applies quite
absurdly. He seemed to try to make the lid stick out at right angles, as
it does when thrown back from the top.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 251

He removes it. I lengthen chain, and move table slightly and
raise onion, placing it on a piece of bamboo rested on some
object on the table. He goes at it, fails to reach, pulls oak chair
towards him, gets on it, reaches out, drags at corner of oak table
so that onion, which is on bamboo, swings round over chair ;
then just manages to knock it over on to floor, jumps down
and gets it. After two miscalculations of mine, in which he
gets it without chair, he again pulls chair into line, and
gets food, reaching over it with great stretch, and knocking
onion down.

His success in this experiment indicates a power of
fairly precise adjustment of one thing to another ; and it
is one in which neither accident nor imitation can be sup-
posed to have played much part. I do not think that he
ever saw me adjust the stool to the table,^ nor could chance
play much part in aiding him to place a thing which, if to
be used at sdl, had to be brought into one particular posi-
tion and no other. I only once saw him make a complete
mistake upon this point ; * when he dragged a large basket
into the line between his fastening and the food, but much
too near to the fastening. One must admit that in this
case the animal judged, from memory or otherwise, that a
certain arrangement would help him, and set about to
make that arrangement. What is principally remarkable
is that the arrangement involved a certain adjustment
of one thing in relation to another. If we expl^n
it by reference to an idea, we must conceive the idea
as having much less of that " crassness," of which we
have spoken.*

8. Removing obstacle from chain.

I arranged matters so that the monkey's chain was
shortened for effective purposes by passing round a corner
of his box.

I then put a piece of potato on the floor, just beyond

* Nor, if he did, did he begin by a similar movement, but by throwing
open the lid.

^ I.e.y as to the direction in which the stool had to be moved. It
sometimes happened that the heavy box would roll too far or not far
enough.

3 Cuvier's Orang would place a chair for himself to stand on, according
to Romanes. {Animal Intelligence^ p. 481.)


252 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

his reach. After a little hesitation, he came back, moved
the box out of the way, and after a little fiddling with it,
went back and got the potato. This was repeated a
second and third time without hesitation.* The next day,
he pushed the box, and later, the fender, out of the way of
his chain ; and when, later, I put the fender right over
his chain so as to shorten it to two or three inches, he
pushed it back, gaining a foot, and then turned it com-
pletely over, thereby freeing himself. I do not infer
that Jimmy knows that the diagonal is
shorter than two sides of an oblong, but I
think he did clearly appreciate that the box
prevented his chain from running out, and
this is what I mean by an articulate idea
of concrete objects in their relaions. The
same may be said of Miss Romanes' Cebus,
who would take great pains to push the
marble slab to which his ch^n was fastened
nearer to the object desired.

^^ It is too heavy for him to pull along by his
chain without hurting himself, so when he desires
to do any mischief which is beyond the reach of his chain, he
deliberately goes to the marble and pushes an arm down between
an upright part of it and the wall, until he has moved the whole
slab sufficiently far from the wall to admit of his slipping
down behind the upright part himself. He then places his
back against the wall and his four hands against the upright
part of the marble, and pushes the slab as far as he can stretch
his long legs."*

A still higher perception of ** concrete relations " is
implied in the account of a Barbary ape in Brehm's Thiers
leben^ which found a niche into which it could squeeze its
rope and so fasten it. The rope thus became a 'Swing,
and if it was either too short or too long, the monkey is
said to have climbed up and altered the fastening.

^ Each time he acted furtively, apparently fearing that I should prevent
him. This, I think, accounts for the fiddling with the box in the first
trial — ^a characteristic performance when he meant to do something which
he thought forbidden. * Romanes, p. 487. ^ I. p. 147.


ARTICULATE IDEAS


253


9. Unwinding chain.

In dealing with his chain generally, Jimmy was far less
clever than Miss Romanes' Cebus. He could never be
relied on to undo any serious tangle ; ^ and he con-
stantly got himself twisted by wandering to and fro.
He would, however, as a rule, undo a single twist by
retracing his steps ; and sometimes would undo a more
complicated one by a developed form of the method of
trial and error, which consisted in this : that each time

he felt the cord shortening
on him, he would go back the
way he had come. In this way,
by successive trials, he was likely
to get free. He did not, how-
ever, improve in this respect in
the course of a considerable
number of experiments.

It would take up too much
space to relate the whole of
this series. I will mention one
or two points that seem signi-
ficant. After the knotted string
experiment, when I had the
potato in a basket attached by
a cord to a handle of the bureau,
which he could reach by a stick if he had the full
length of his chain, I passed the chain round an oak
table,^ thereby shortening it for practical purposes.
(Fig. I.) The first result was as follows : —

He darts at tied end, and tries to pull himself up by it ; does

* Contrast Miss Romanes : " When his chain becomes twisted round
the bars of a ' clothes-horse ' (which is given him to run about upon),
and thus too short for his comfort, he looks at it intently and pulls it with
his finders this way and that, and when he sees how the turns are taken,
he deliberately goes round and round the bars, first this way, then that,
until the chain is quite disentanp^led " (p. 486). From what Jimmy did, I
think he could have learnt this if he were a little more persistent and
attentive, but after seeing his failures, I can realise better the high degree
of '* articulateness," both of perception and purpose, implied in the
description given by Miss Romanes.

* There luid previously been two or three untwisting experiments.


IP
Fig. I.
[A, knot ; /, basket with potato.


254 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

move table in this way and gets nearer. Tries to grab at string
beyond knot. Tries wildly. Tries to catch it by throwing other
string over it, and nearly succeeds. Never attempts to come back
and walk round table, nor to move table out of way, nor to
use stick. Finally, being encouraged by extra hard pull at tied
string, manages to shift table and so reach. No mistake about
his going for string beyond knot.

In the second trial, he used the stick ; in the third, he
gave up. I then picked him up, and took him round the
table to untwist him, but he was much frightened, and
presently got twisted again. I soon found that he was
really after the reminder of the potato, which had
been left carelessly in another part of the room. At
length, in the course of his wanderings, he got free
from the legs of the table. I quote the following from
my notes : —

He still does not think of going round table, but makes another
fainthearted attempt to reach the food directly. Presently wanders
round to fire, and then sees strings ^ goes at string beyond knot,
and gets.

I again put cord round table. He tries to reach ; then comes
slowly but steadily round table, and back to fire. Then goes and
gets.

Food, &c., replaced. After once straining towards string, goes
round table, straight to string, and gets food.

Replaced. Same ; but cord has got twisted round foot of table,
so he pulls at tied string, pulls table nearer, and gets food by
pulling string beyond knot.

After lunch, replaced. After short pull, /.^., straining at his
cord, goes round at once.

I now pass chain through legs of table. He goes back through
and round at once.


It will be seen (i) that it did not occur to him to go
round the table at the first trial,. but (2) that having once
done so in casual fashion with satisfactory results he
repeated the process.

After this, I tried the more complicated untwisting
experiments to which I have referred. The next day, I


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 255

varied the experiment by passing the chain round a
high "grandfather's chair," standing in the corner of
the room. (Fig. i.) The way round would be quite
dark and unobvious, but I wished to see whether he
would draw the analogy from the table. The result was
as follows : —

He makes great effort to reach potato, tries to use hammer as
stick to reach it, tries to move chair, turns and pulls with hands
at rope, makes (for first time that I have seen him do it) a sort of
dash at point where his chain is fastened, but does not think of
going round chair.

I take chain from chair and put it round table. As I arrange,
he is excited, wanders, and gets entangled. Cannot disentangle
himself. I do so, and let him have some potato. Then I replace
round table. After trying straight at potato, he at once darts
back, but instead of going outside, leaves one leg to the right,
table standing thus :


^aiteniaff


Fig. 2.
r, route ; r, chain ; /, l^s.

He then gets entangled, but disentangles himself by stages, and,
getting free, goes somewhat hesitatingly round table and gets
potato.

Replaced. He makes exactly same mistake, but rapidly
disentangles himself through three or four turnings, runs round
table and gets.

Total time can only have been a few seconds.


256 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Replaced. He rushes round right way before I have time to
put potato down. I give him some bread.
Replaced. No hesitation.
I now placed chain thus :


• Pdfdb

Fig. 3.

He starts wrong, but rapidly gets out between legs^ perhaps by
chance, then goes round table and gets.

Replaced. He untwists himself (though starting wrong) while
I am placing bread. Then comes round table and gets food.

These experiments give a fair measure of his accuracy
in disentangling himself.

Some more untwisting experiments followed, and then I placed
the chain round the high chair again.

He tries a little at potato (/.^., to reach it directly), but does not
attempt to go round chair. Jumps on it once. Very little
effort. After interval, tries again, wanders a little. The clank
of his chain seems to strike him, and he starts off, goes round
chair deliberately, and gets potato.

Replaced. Tries (direct method), then back, and after one
feilse start, goes round at once.

Replaced. Does not even try to go straight, but goes round
at once.

In this experiment agdn, the thing seemed to strike
him all of a sudden. Just as in the hook experiment, the


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 257

movement of my hand, so, in this, the clank of the chain
seemed suddenly to set the whole thing before him. For
the rest, one may regard his getting round the chair as a
kind of analogy from his experience with the table, and
one not so easy to draw in fact as it may seem from its
description upon paper. For round the table the lie of
the ch^n when once attended to was obvious ; round the
chair it was hidden in the darkness of the corner.

10. Attempted theft.

My reasons for suspecting Jimmy of trying to deceive
me are not only a certain furtiveness of manner that came
over him at times ; but the use of methods the object of
which was unmistakable. It often happened that when
I was giving him bits of potato, I would leave the bulk
of the potato carelessly somewhere within his reach. On
such an occasion the first symptom I noticed of anything
wrong was a loss of interest in the experiment. I would
then see him wandering off to perch on some table or
chair, or investigate some harmless object. Looking for
a reason, I would see that he was almost within striking
distance of my potato, and then, a stern " No, Jimmy,
no ! " would send him scuttling back to the fire, and to
the investigation of his person. On one occasion in par-
ticular, as I was going out of the room, having left the
potato on a table, as I thought, out of his reach, I saw
him walking quietly, not to the table, but towards a box
near by. As I looked back, I saw him sidling from the
box to the table, and I stopped him just on the spring.^

People ask whether animals use deception. I do not
for a moment suppose that Jimmy has any clear con-
ception of a lie. I do not suppose that he troubles
himself about my mental state. But I do think that he
could form a pretty shrewd estimate of the way in which
I was likely to act under given circumstances. He was
perfectly certain that if I saw him making a dive for the
whole potato, I should stop him ; and I do attribute to
him further, the idea — I do not know how else to express
it — ^that if he avoided going straight at the prize, he

* Of a baboon described in Brehm's Thierlebm (I. p. 177) it is said
that she ''stahl meisterhaft."


258 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

might get near enough to it for a spring. I doubt
whether Jimmy's state of mind can, with due allowance
for the facts, be reasonably analysed into simpler terms
than these ; and the use of these terms clearly implies
both an " original " application of experience, and a fairly
complex adjustment of one consideration to another.

II. I have imputed " practical ideas " to animals lower
than the monkeys, to express the fact that they not merely
respond in a uniform manner to a certain physical situation,
but appear to direct their actions to the production of a
certain physical change. Keeping to the same terminology,
I should say that what distinguishes the ideas of monkeys
from those of other animals in so far as experiments like
mine can measure them, is an increase in elaboration and
articulateness. By increased elaboration, I mean that in
experiments of this kind, the monkey is less the slave of
the perceptual order. There is more work of the mind in
the plans which he lays on the basis of his experience.
And this is principally shown in the increased articulateness
of the plan itself. The monkey can apply one object to
another ; that is why he can use a stick, a stool, a poker.^
It may be said, so could the dog, if he had a hand. I am
not prepared to deny this hypothetical statement ; but I
would rejoin that if the dog had a hand, his intelligence
would be developed in a different way. He has not the
empirical data at the disposal of the monkey ; and there-
fore, in experiments of the kind which one can institute in
a house or a laboratory, experiments depending principally
upon the manipulation of objects, the ape appears head
and shoulders above other animals. Whether we speak of
ideas or not, we cannot refuse to allow to the ape actions

* The reasons why animals do not use tools are partly physical, partly
mental, and the two reasons are correlated. The use of tools implies a
certain articulateness of ideas — the grasping of different objects in rela-
tions not given by perception. This articulateness again implies a power
of tactual discrimination only to be gained by the use of the hand. Hence
the employment of tools is almost unknown below the apes, and rare
among them. Of the nuUnng of a tool, I only know one authentic
instance. A chimpanzee formerly at Belle Vue would not only pick the
key of its cage out of a bunch, but could make itself a key out of a piece
of wood. This is less marvellous than it sounds. The key was a simple
square (like a railway key), and the monkey had only to bite the wood
till it would fit into the square hole.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 259

in which one point is correlated with another, and this
perhaps with a third or fourth, on the basis of past
experience and present perception, yet without being
dominated by either, with a certain degree of precision, in
such a way as to bring about the gratification of an
impulse. The empirical basis of such a plan is often more
or less indirect. In the use of the stick as a rake, there
was for the chimpanzee his own experience with the rug,
and the hint which I gave him by using the stick myself.
To transfer the act, and apply it to himself and his own
needs, was, at lowest, a strong case of "reflective
imitation." But the use of the term imitation in this
connection is really misleading. At most, my act served
as a hint. It would be impossible to use a stick under
such circumstances with success merely from seeing another
do it, and without grasping for one's self the way in which
it is to be done. And all the detailed adjustments by which
the use of the stick was perfected, were worked out by the
monkey for himself. The same animal's use of the stick,
and afterwards the iron rod, in the pipe, is another example
of a very accurate adjustment of means to ends, to the
latter of which it is difficult to think that there could have
been any close parallel in his previous experience. One
must rather imagine his general knowledge of objects
reacting on his immediate perception and desire, and
together engendering an essentially novel kind of act.

In the case of the little monkey, the adjustment of the
footstool, and the removal of obstacles from his chain,
seem again to rest rather on a kind of common sense than
on any specific experience, and to imply a tolerably
accurate judgment of the spatial relations of the objects
concerned. The furtiveness which I have dicussed above
suggests similarly a certain power of combining inferences
as to how I should act, and how he could act, and how the
potato might be the result.

Does a similar power of selecting and combining
results of experience under the stimulus of desire exist
among other mammals, or is it confined to monkeys?
Systematic observation and experiment, of which in com-
parative psychology there is a plentiful lack, does not

s 2


26o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

enable us to answer this question decisively. In my own
experiments, the difFerence between monkeys and other
animals appeared strongly marked. But I was experiment-
ing in a field much more suited to the ways of a monkey
than to those of other animals. Suppose one were to take
a dog, for example, on his own ground ; in a hunting
problem, for instance. Is it not possible that he would
show an equal power of applying the results of experience
in a novel manner ? If we are to trust to ordinary
observation, and "anecdotal evidence," the answer is
undoubtedly in the affirmative. The question for
psychology is as to the value of such evidence. Much
of it, everybody knows, is consciously or unconsciously
invented or exaggerated. And even where the facts are
faithfully report^, we can never be sure that we know all
the circumstances. What appears when complete to be an
act of great sagacity, may, when its genesis is carefully
traced, reveal itself as the outcome of accident, or perhaps
of training.^

On the other hand, comparative psychology cannot
afford altogether to neglect the casual observation. It
must be borne in mind that the little combinations of
experience which are in question, are, to the animal, if
they exist at all, what a new invention is to the human
being. When sufficiently clear and pronounced to strike
the observer, they would naturally be rarities, occurring
only now and then under favourable conditions, internal

* See, for example, the delightful and instructive story of Mr. Lloyd
Morgan's fox temer Tony, and the crooked stick, with the passing
remarks thereon of the countryman who had watched the proceedmgs for
two minutes. It is superfluous to add that a trained animal may exhibit
apparently marvellous intelligence, with a very moderate amount of the
real article. There was formerly an elephant at Belle Vue which would
take a penny from a bystander, put it into the slot of an automatic
machine, and get a biscuit from the other end of the machine. If a
halfpenny were offered instead of a penny, the elephant would fling it
back angpily. " Marvellous intelligence I " is the enthusiast's comment.
" Rather too tall a story," is the sceptic's. The simple truth is, that every
stage in the performance was a matter of careful traming. The elephant,
as the keeper explained to me, was taught the use of the machine by
having its trunk guided ; and, having learnt this, was taught, by between
two and three months' labour, to distinguish between the penny which
would and the halfpenny which would not set it working. A modicum of
intelligence remains when the explanation is given in full, but nothing
beyond the ordinary performance of an elephant.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 261

and external. Such conditions are likely to .occur only
when the animal is at work on its own ground. They
arc less probable when we set the animal to work at a task
of our choosing. Lastly, it must be added that the body
of evidence of this kind is too considerable to be
altogether ignored. There appear to be in the ordinary
works on natural history and animal psychology, a great
number of instances of " animal sagacity " which are
impossible if we suppose the learning of animals limited
to the formation of habits or associations, but are readily
intelligible if we grant them the power of forming
practical ideas on the basis of experience, and of appro-
priately selecting and combining such ideas to meet the
pressure of practical needs in the circumstances of the
moment.

I will not go through the mass of this evidence, but
may take one or two cases as typical. I have referred
above to stories such as those given in General Hutchin-
son's book Dog Breaking^ of dogs running round
game when they found that the game, instead of rising,
ran before them. Clearly, this is a violation of habit, and
is unintelligible if we suppose the dog to act without the
purpose of making the birds rise. On the other hand, no
abstract idea : no general plan : no universal conception
is required. Grant that the dog wants to get these birds
up, and that past experience will enable him to form a
concrete judgment as to how they will act, and we have
all the conditions that we need. What is postulated is,
concrete experience, present purpose, and the interaction
of the results of experience with present perception to
form a combination or adaptation of actions suitable to
the needs of the moment.

To recognise what I have called the practical judgment
as something not identical with the association of ideas,
but as intermediate between habituation on the one side,
and general reasoning on the other, is, as it seems to me,
to find the key not only to the ordinary behaviour of the
higher animals, which we witness from day to day, but
also to these little acts of invention and ingenuity which
^ See pp. 289 and 210.


262 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

occasional observers recount. The observer who is not a
psychologist is apt to translate the animal's action into
abstract terms, as if it were the animal who made the
abstraction, and not the observer. The psychologist,
whose duty it is to prune the exuberance of imagination,
resolves the proceeding into an instance of association,
where it may be that association, if the term is to remain
distinct from what I have called the Practical Judgment,
cannot be made to cover all the facts. Thus Mr. Lloyd
Morgan writes as follows : —

"A well-known writer. Dr. Andrew Wilson, describes the case
of a dog which used to hunt a rabbit nearlv every morning down
a curved shrubbery, and each time ran it into a drain at the end.
* The dog then appears to have come to the conclusion * — I quote
Dr. Wilson*s words — * that the chord of a circle is shorter than
its arc, for he raised the rabbit again, and, instead of following him
through the shrubbery as usual, he took the short cut to the drain,
and was ready and in waiting on the rabbit when he arrived, and
caught him. It is here assumed that the dog perceived the
relation between a chord and its arc. I do not myself believe
that he did ; — but that is not the question ; it is merely an ex-
pression of individual opinion. The question is : — Can we or can
we not explain the dog's action as the outcome of sense-experience,
as indicative of intelligence profiting by association ? I do not see
how this can be denied. The terrier used to start the rabbit
nearly every morning, and each time saw it escape into the old
drain. There were thus ample opportunities for establishing an
association between rabbit and drain. That the sight of the
rabbit should suggest the drain into which it daily escaped, and
that when the idea was suggested, the dog should run there
directly, is a sequence not impossible, one would think, to sense-
experience." ^

I do not, any more than Mr. Lloyd Morgan, suppose a
dog to know that a chord is shorter than its arc, but
neither do I think an association of the idea of the drain
with that of the rabbit adequate or even relevant to the
case. Why should an " idea of the drain " cause the dog
to run to it ? The dog does not want to catch a drain,

^ Comparative Psychology^ pp. 301, 302. It should be said that Mr.
Lloyd Morgan has in his latest work, Animal Behaviour^ practically
given up the use of the term Association from a sense, as I gather, of its
ambigmty.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 263

but a rabbit. What is needed is the idea of the " rabbit at
the drain," and that, moreover, as an event that will shortly
take place. In fact, as we analyse the idea, it turns into
the judgment, " The rabbit will run to the drain " as it
did yesterday, and then it becomes an intelligible basis for
the dog's action in taking the nearest course. In any case,
whether we call it association or judgment, we have to
admit that the dog acted, not as he acted before, but with
a difference, and this difference is explained if we conceive
him as applying the results won from previous experience
to present circumstances in subservience to his desire. I
do not suppose that the little monkey Jimmy is aware that
a straight line is the shortest between any two points.
What I imagine is, that he found that if he had something
to stand on at a particular point, he could reach the
potato ; and he therefore brought things to stand on at
that point.^

I will add one more dog story, which seems to me to
indicate the intelligent use of experience as distinguished
from mere association, on the authority of Mr. Lloyd
Morgan himself.

"When I was at the Diocesan College near Capetown, a
retriever, Scamp, used to come and sit with the lecturers at
supper. He despised bread, but used to get an occasional bone,
which he was not, however, allowed to eat in the hall. He took
it to the door and stood there till it was opened for him. On
one occasion he heard outside the excited barking of the other

^ Many stories are told by animal psychologists, and referred to
association, when the whole point of the story is that the ordinary
associations of the act are not present, that is to say, the act is performed
under new circumstances, or in a new form, where everything but that
which is essential to the purpose is aJtered. Thus Wundt, who refers
everything to association, tells a story of his poodle, who frequently
crossed a river with his master, and if left behind, was compelled to swim.
The poodle much preferred going dryshod, and on one occasion, after
runnmg up and down the bank " whining dismally," he suddenly saw a
strange boat pushing off to cross, jumped in, and crossed without wetting
himself. In joining the strangers, the dog was of course violating his
habits, and if we say that he had an association between boats putting off,
and crossing the river, we tend to overlook the central fact, that it is not
the idea of crossing the river that he needs, but the idea of getting into
the boat This idea is associated with the presence of his master or his
friends, and the event shows that instead of being at the mercy of his
associations, he picks out what is essentisd, and drops the rest


264 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

dogs. He ran round the hall, picked up a piece of bread which
one of the bovs had dropped, and stood with it in his mouth at
the door. When it was opened, he dropped the bread and raced
off into the darkness to join the other dogs." ^

The associationist's explanation of this piece of craft
must evidently be cumbrous. He must plead that the dog
had got accustomed to connect being let out with having
something in his mouth, and that now, wanting to be let
out, the familiar associate turned up. But in ordinary
circumstances, the dog had a bone, and not bread ; he
wanted to eat, and not to get out ; he did not drop his
food ; and so forth. In short, the circiunstances are as
different as possible, except in regard to the particular
relation between taking food in his mouth and getting out,
which happens to serve the dog's purpose. The ordinary
associations were not present. But out of past experience,
the animal picks a way of satisfying its desires. The
practical judgment is not independent of associations, for
association supplies the whole of its material. But out of
that material, it selects what it wants, and shapes it as
required.

As more observers and experimentalists enter the field,
it should be possible to cover the ground now left to
casual observation in a more systematic manner. In the
meantime, if by a self-denying ordinance we restrict our-
selves entirely to the comparatively few observations which
have been made consecutively, like those of Dr. Wesley
Mills ; or under very precise conditions, like those of Mr.
Small and Mr. Thorndike, we shall have to draw a marked
line between the apes and the lower mammals, allowing
to the former a power of combining the results of experi-
ence which is not provable for the latter. If however,
taking the whole evidence now available, we ask what is
the conclusion pointed to with the greatest probability, it is,
that on their own lines, and in their own way, some at least
of the more intelligent mammals have powers equivalent
to those of the ape.

Intelligence, we shall recognise, develops in different
forms, and in divers directions. It originates within the
* Lloyd Morgan, Comparative Psychology^ p. 95.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 265

sphere of instinct, and in its earlier stages is shaped by the
instinct which it subserves and expands. We must not
expect to find dog intelligence to be quite the same thing
as cat intelligence or ape intelligence. It is not only a
question of difference in degree, but also, in a sense, of
difference in quality, arising from difference in origin.
Among men, we know that a, who is clever at languages,
is incredibly stupid at mathematics, while with b, it is just
the opposite. So, a dog may show not merely a highly
developed hunting instinct, but real cleverness in the adap-
tation of past experiences, when it is a question of catching
a hare, but he may be also an intolerable dullard about
opening a box.*

* It maybe well here to observe that there are forms of novel adapta-
tion to special circumstances which do not imply a knowledge of means
and ends. Many cases of organic adaptation must be referred to physio-
logical rather than mental causes. The simpler instinctive adjustments
hold an intermediate position. Above them, but below the class which
we have been discussing, appear to fall certain actions which may
be called Impulsive adjustments. This term may be applied

(a) Where an instinctive mode of response is newly applied. Thus
Dahl observed a spider, which habitually cut the thread holding its fly
when carrying the fiy off to the hole, fighting witli another spider over a
prey which was claimed by both. Both spiders were fastened by threads
to their own point of support, and the first spider won the victory by
severing the thread of the other. If this was not merely a happy blunder,
we may regard it as a modified application of a habitual impulse. The
rival spider's thread occupied the place ordinarily taken by the meshes
entangling the fiy, and bemg so far similar, awakes the cutting impulse.

Perhaps a similar explanation may be applied to the action of a
caterpillar which tried to mount three difierent sides of a pit in succes-
sion (Weir, Dawn of Retuan^ p. 206). Here, and in a somewhat similar
application of the method of exhaustions by a snail (Romanes, p. 26), we
shall probably find the key in the habitual moving of the head for pur-
poses of exploration. The animal is accustomed to try different directions
m succession, and adapts the habit very neatly to its specisd difficulty.

{b) A commoner and clearer case is that in which one method of
achieving an end being fruitless or painful, another equally in accord with
the structure and instincts of the animal is adopted. Thus an octopus,
having being stung by the anemones with which hermit-crabs arm
their shells (with an eye to this very result) will cease to seize the shells,
but will, feel inside them instead, and draw the victim out with its
tentacles.* The same impulse is at work, and its first line of discharge
being blocked, it finds another.

One imagines a similar process in the case of the beetle seen by Mr.
Lloyd Morgan {Animal Life and Inielligence, p. 368), which could not
lift Its ball out of a hole, and butted down the side so that it could roll it
up. We need not assume that the beetle supposed itself to be converting
a perpendicular wall into an inclined plane. Probably it was merely
butting away an obstacle.

{c) One imptdse impinging on another may result in a happy'compro-


266 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.


Summary and Conclusion

1 2. The question with which we set out at Chapter VII.
was, whether the second grade of intelligence was
realised in the animal world. That grade of intelligence we
called the grade of Concrete Experience and the Practical
Judgment. It was marked by the appearance of several
functions in dose interconnection. The primary function
is that of concrete experience itself; i.e.j the power of per-
ceiving surrounding objects or passing events as wholes ot
distinguishable parts. Where such an experience exists,
and is ** reproducible " in the form of ideas guiding action,
we have all the characteristics of the second stage. We
have memory, in the form of the idea of a past event ;
anticipation, in the form of an idea of something about
to come attached to present circumstances through the
relation suggested from the past. Anticipation, with the
impulse to avoid or attain, is again Desire. Where there
is desire, i.e., the idea of the end, there may also be an
idea of the means, and choice of means with a view to the
end. Such a choice from the material presented by re-
produced experience, is the Practical Judgment. Lastly,
out of the combined results of perceptions and the concrete
ideas reproduced in connection with them, is built up the
knowledge of individuals, localities, and the whole concrete
surroundings of the organism : surroundings including a
multitude of related facts, any one of which relations is at
the disposal of the practical judgment to serve its ends.
In a word, concrete objects are known in their relations,
and the knowledge is applied in action

These functions being thus closely interconnected, the

mise by which both are satisfied — in the manner discussed in relation to
instinctive adjustments (above, Ch. IV. p. 66).

It remains that in many of these cases, we must end for the present
with a confession of ignorance. We cannot understand them until more
is known of the whole life and character of the animals concerned. What
is important for the present is that we should not impute a knowledge of
the relation of means and ends unless we see action resulting from an
experience of that relation, and then only under the conditions and with
the limitations that have been discussed in the last two chapters.


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 267

possession of any one makes the possession of others a
matter of some probability. And if there is independent
evidence, of some probability, for the possession of each
function by the higher mammals, the probabilities stand to
strengthen one another. Now, the only evidence to be
found for the performance of these or any other functions
by animal intelligence, is evidence derived from animal
behaviour. Having this in view, we laid down certain points
of behaviour by which the practical judgment might be dis-
tinguished from the lower stage of intelligence in which
action passes out of the control of instinct to come imder
that of habit. These points were as follows : —

ii). The single Instance.
labit is built up by a large number of repetitions. One
clear perception of a relation should have a permanent
effect.

On this head, we found abundant evidence that the
higher animals frequently learn by a single instance, and
normally by what I have called a critical instance, in which
their attention seems to be for the first time definitely
directed to the facts.

(2). The Perception of objects in their relations.

The relations given in concrete experience and guiding
subsequent actions may be relations between any objects of
perception — and are not (as in the case of Assimilation)
confined to those between sensation and the motor excite-
ments immediately attendant upon them.

The simplest evidence of the appreciation of such
relations is Learning by Perception of Results. A habit
can only be acquired by previous action. The practical
judgment can be formed on the basis of a perception that
the change a leads to the desired result b.

Of the power of animals to learn in this way, probable
though not conclusive evidence has been given. In many
cases in which accidental success seems improbable, animals
repeated what they had seen done, and in some instances,
actions were so co-ordinated as to bring about the physical
or external change a, which the animal had observed to
lead to the end b. In this way they coincided with the
fimction of a practical idea a, the essential features of


268 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

which would be, on the one hand, its power to direct the
minor adjustments of action towards the production of a
physical event, and on the other, of being correlated with
and subordinate to another idea.

Further evidence tending in the same direction is to be
found :

a. In the appreciation of that general similarity of rela-
tions in which objects of a class resemble one another. We
saw reason to think that in inferring from one person,
animal, or complex inanimate object to another of the same
class, an animal shows itself to be guided by similarity of
this kind.

^. In the absence of a uniform reaction to a known
object, and the choice on the contrary of a reaction deter-
mined by the relation in which the object may stand to the
thing desired. On this head, we brought evidence to show
that an animal's knowledge of locality could not be resolved
into a series of motor reactions to the things which sur-
round it, but that its movements may be guided by Desire
to find what is out of the range of perception.

(3). Application of Experience.

The results of experience are applied in action in a
manner not predetermined by the experience itself.

Such application appears in an elementary form even in
" perceptual learning," where what is first a passive obser-
vation is utilised as a guide to action. A much higher
case, in which the contrast with habit and association is
decisive, is that of " spontaneous application," in which an
inference is drawn from experience, and an act not done or
seen before is performed to meet the case.

Of such use of experience there seems to be sufficient
evidence in the behaviour of apes.^ Among lower animals,
the evidence at present is sporadic and " anecdotal."

With the higher forms of application, we must class
" reflective imitation," in which the act of another, which
produced no direct result to the observing animal, is by it

^ I would refer to the action of the Rhesus in loosening the string
which held the hook, in its attempts at "theft," and as a probable case,
in the use of the footstool. The use by both chimpanzee and Rhesus
of one stick to reach another seems a slightly more complex case of
"application.**


X ARTICULATE IDEAS 269

copied and applied to its own ends. Of this there is also
evidence among apes, as in the use of the stick, but again,
below that level the evidence is uncertain.

Lastly, greater freedom in the application of the results
of experience to one another^ combined with more nicety
of perception and clearness of reproduction, yield results of
which we have found experimental evidence in the be-
haviour of apes. Such are the relatively articulate Ideas,
involving a relatively accurate and detailed appreciation of
the relations of objects (as in the use of the stick, the stool,
the removal of obstacles from the chain, the insertion of a
stick into a tube). Such are again the intelligent combin-
ation of distinct methods of effecting a purpose, seen, for
example, in the efforts of the chimpanzee to swing a banana
out of its box, and then swish it in by lateral movements
of the rope. The same thing appears in many details of its
use of the stick. To the same mental factors we may
refer such analogical extension of experience as the use by
the Rhesus of a rope or a sheet instead of the stick which
it had learnt to handle.

It thus appears that so far as experimental evidence is
concerned, both the Application of experience in its higher
forms, and the power of forming and combining ideas of a
fairly articulate type appear in the behaviour of apes, but
not of lower animals ; but the tendency of a mass of anec-
dotal evidence would suggest that in a different sphere
corresponding powers might be found among the more
intelligent mammals below the primates.

Putting all the evidence under these heads together, I
think it may be held that the cluster of functions here
grouped together under the head of the Practical Judg-
ment, are to be found in the animal world below man.
That is to say, that animal intelligence at its highest point
of development effects a correlation between perceptual
and practical relations. As applied to the apes, this con-
clusion appears very probable indeed ; and as applied to
some other mammals, it is, I think, a better provisional
hypothesis than any other that I know. As a provisional
hypothesis, its truth will be assumed in the rest of this
work.


CHAPTER XI

INTELLIGENCE AND THE SOCIAL INSTINCTS

I. We have already seen that instinct and intelligence,
though opposed in idea, are so far from being incompatible
in fact, that it is within the sphere of instinct that intelli-
gence first arises. The first function 'of intelligence is to
define the proximate ends of instinct, and thereby to render
experience available in the choice or revision of means.
Hence, the higher the intelligence, the greater the
complexrty of which instincts are capable, and the more
readily are they adaptable to meet a novel situation, and
the individuality of changing circumstances. We have,
unfortunately, no means of precisely measuring the com-
plexity of which pure instinct is capable. But about the
higher instincts, two things are noteworthy.

(i) It is in those Orders or Classes where we find most
evidence of intelligence, that instincts chiefly arise which
are adaptable to very complex conditions. It is here, for
example, that we find attention to the young, the rudiments
of social life, and of mutual help ; the provision of a
temporary or permanent home.

(2) We have direct evidence that operations of which
the basis is instinctive are modified in detail according to
experience of results. It is to be inferred that instinct, at
least among the higher animals, is not wholly blind.
There must be some consciousness of the purpose, where,
as the result of experience, means are taken to avoid its
frustration. Thus the foundation of mutual help is no
doubt instinctive. The cry of the yovmg excites the


CH. XI SOCIAL INSTINCTS 271

mother to come to it, or to hunt for food for it, as the
case may be. The mother cat is moved to lick and clean
her kittens as unthinkingly as they are moved to suck her.
When they pair, birds doubtless feel an impulse to build,
which the sudden gift of language would no more enable
them to explain than it would help to teach them the art
of nest-building. Nest-making, complex as it is, is mainly
the result of instinct.^ Yet in these matters experience
also plays a part. Whether it is experience of the higher
or lower grade is difficult to determine. But when we find
that birds which have built their nests on the ground learn
on the introduction of cats into their island to move house
to the more salubrious quarters of the tree tops, we must
recognise that in animal behaviour there are well-developed
schemes of action in which intelligence has its share.
They are frequently modified by experience, and suitably
adapted to peculiar or to changed circumstances. They
are not instincts of the complex-mechanical type. Though
certainly not due to intelligence alone, they are not executed
altogether without intelligence. The adaptability of be-
haviour in the main based on heredity is well illustrated in
the case of nest-building. The oriole, according to Dr.
A. R. Wallace,* endeavours ordinarily to conceal its nest
from snakes and hawks, but in villages where it does not
fear these enemies, it builds openly. The orchard oriole
builds a shallow nest upon the stifFer branches, but upon
the slender twigs of the weeping willow builds deep, so
that the young may not be thrown out by the swaying of
the nest. The house sparrow, which makes a domed nest
in a tree, is content with loose building in a hole in thatch.
Schneider^ states on the authority of Brehm that a tame
Cardinal finch which was bringing up a Cowbird, brought
it a cricket to eat. The nestling finding the insect too big,
the nurse tore and chewed the prey, and gave the softened
pieces to its charge. Many habits, which seem too complex
to be wholly due to intelligence, are nevertheless gradually

* Dr. A. R. Wallace maintained the contrary view {Natural Selection^
p. 10 et 5eq\ but the evidence given by Mr. Lloyd Morgan {Habit and
Instinct^ p. 232 et seq,) appears conclusive.

* Natural SelectioHy pp. 114, 115. Cf. Romanes, M.E,A.^ p. 210.
» P. 374 ; Brehm, IV. p. 373.


272 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

learnt. Thus, though the basis of nest-building is indubit-
ably hereditary, perfection in the art is acquired by practice.^
One might, as Schneider says,* attribute the opening of fir
cones by the woodpecker to get at the seeds inside, to an
inherited method of reaction to a certain perception ; but,
in point of fact, it appears that the old birds bring the
young, first the seed itself, then partly opened cones, and
then the complete cones. Thus the method of preparing
the family dinner is at least as much a tradition as an
instinct.

Such instances suggest that in the higher instincts, while
the ground plan is no doubt determined by heredity, many
of its points are grasped by intelligence. Instinct prompts
the building of the nest, but intelligence notices a casual
defect, and makes it good. There is hereditary impulse to
feed, clean, and protect the young, but there is a sufficiently
clear understanding of what the young wants at any given
moment — sufficiently clear to enable a special need to be
met by methods not provided for by heredity. Thus, at
this stage, pure instinct tends to disappear, or, more strictly,
to become suffused with intelligence. Intelligence grows
in power of grasping the purposes which instinct sets before
the individual, and in carrying them into effect by means
suggested by experience or the perception of special
circumstances.

The use of " sentinels," which is widely diffused among
birds and mammals, is another practice which, though
perhaps more uniform in its working, is very difficult to
understand, without allowing a measure of intelligence
to eke out habit and instinct. Mr. G)rnish (pp. 48, 49)
quotes from Mr. St. John a vivid description of the manner
in which a flock of wild geese coming to a field of newly
sown grain " make numerous circling flights " before
alighting, " and the least suspicious object prevents them
from pitching." If they do alight they remain motion-
less a minute or two with head erect reconnoitring.
They then leave a sentry who " either stands on some
elevated part of the field, or walks slowly with the

* Wallace, loc. cit. ; Lloyd Morgan, IfaMt and Instinct^ pp. 234 fF ;
Romanes, M.E,A, pp. 209-212, * P. 298,


XI SOCIAL INSTINCTS 273

rest — never, however, venturing to pick up a single grain
of corn, his whole energies being employed in watching."
Mr. St. John says : "When the sentry thinks that he has
performed a fair share of duty, he gives the nearest
bird to him a sharp peck. I have seen him some-
times pull out a bunch of feathers if the first hint is not
immediately attended to, and at the same time uttering
a querulous kind of cry." Mr. St. John was constantly
baulked by sentinel geese, and found whole flocks of swans
would have their heads in the water except one — " who was
relieved from time to time." Sentinels have an alarm
note. " Ibex, marmots, and mountain-sheep whistle, prairie
dogs bark, elephants trumpet, wild geese and swans have a
kind of bugle call, rabbits stamp on the ground, sheep do
the same, and wild ducks, as the writer has noticed, utter
a very low caution quack to signal * The enemy in sight.' "

The response to the alarm cry is no doubt an ordinary
case of an instinctive method of reaction perfected by ex-
perience, but the position and behaviour of the sentinel,
and in particular, the change of sentinels, are diflficult to
explain without crediting the birds or beasts concerned with
some power of understanding one another and the purpose
they are fulfilling. Moreover, according to Brehm,^ at
least one case has been observed in which the sentinels were
set as the direct result of experience. A marabout having
been shot in visiting a slaughter house, the survivors there-
after instituted a guard. There is surely a marked contrast
between such a use of experience, and the mere pruning of
impulsive tendencies by pleasure and pain. In the latter
case a reaction is checked or encouraged by what an animal
has itself felt. In the former, a special contrivance is
adopted to avoid a fate which it has witnessed in the case
of another.

2. The appearance of sympathy and attachment between
the higher animals may doubtless, in many cases, be ex-
plicable as the eflFect of hereditary methods of response to
stimulus as perfected by experience. Just as the smell may
direct the young to the udder, so the sight of the calf may
stimulate the cow to go towards it, or run after the cart
^ Quoted by Schneider, p. 352 ; Brehm, VI. p. 522.


274 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

which is carrying it away, and the cry of the young bird
may stimulate the parent to go worm-hunting. But here
again we find a " particularity " in the behaviour of animals
which could not be provided for beforehand by a class-
response. When a monkey — and a male, moreover —
comes back from a general flight to rescue a young one
which has been cut off by dogs,^ the notion of an instinctive
adjustment, or an action acquired gradually by practice, is
ludicrously out of place. We are forced to speak of the
ape as acting with a purpose, and if we allow it purpose
in this case, we must grant it sympathy or fellow feel-
ing of some kind. It is not merely mothers that feed
their young, but companions or " friends " that upon
occasion feed others in distress.* A cat no doubt suckles
its young by instinct, but it is not by instinct that when
her milk has run dry, she will coax her mistress to the hay-
loft where the kittens are, and bring them to her.® A
young mammal will doubtless follow an older one more or
less blindly and uniformly, but what can we say of the fol-
lowing incident described by Mr. Cornish* on the authority
of Lord Lovat ?

** Three stags had been moved in a young plantation. The
two best jumped the three ft. wire fence, but a third, a two year
old stag, got frightened, and refused. The two waited for him
for some time, while he walked and ran up and down ; at last
the larger of the two — a good royal — came back to the fence.
The little one ran towards him and the royal trotted away ;
but no, the little one could not make up his mind to jump.
Back came the royal over the fence, went close up to the little
fellow, and actually Jtissed him several times. With the glass not
500 yards away, we could see them rub their noses together.
Then the royal led down to the fence, but still the little stag
would not have it. At last the royal tossed his head in the air,
and seeming to say " Well, you are a fool," went off up the hill
to join his companion. When out of sight the little one took
courage, got over the fence in a scramble, and followed."

The ordinary reader would infer from this that the

» See Brehm's Thierleben^ I. p. 186.

* See Darwin, Descent of Man^ I. p. ^^ \ and Lloyd Morgan, Amtfutl
Life and Intelligence, pp. 397, 398. Cf. Romanes, p. 473.

» Brehm, Thierleben, I. p. 438.

* Animals at Work and at Play^ p. 26.


XI SOCIAL INSTINCTS 275

older stag wanted to encourage the young one and get him
across the fence, and substantially, the ordinary reader is
right. The stag cannot analyse or describe his own
actions, and it would be a fallacy to impute the descrip-
tion to him. Nevertheless, it may be, and I think is as
nearly as possible the right description as given by a
looker on. It is of some interest in this connection to
contrast the abundant prima facie evidence of attachment
and affection among Birds and Mammals with the com-
paratively rare cases among the Lower Vertebrates. Apart
from one or two isolated stories of snakes, the evidence
for attachment to individuals among these classes is in
fact somewhat dim. Many that can be tamed — tortoises,
for example — do not appear to distinguish individuals, and
according to the statement already quoted from Brehm's
Thierkben^ the crocodile does not distinguish between the
white man who shoots him and the black man who does
not.^ Yet the distinction, if difficult, is material. In care
for the young, reptiles and amphibia appear for the most
part to be on a level with the higher Fish. The majority
of fish pay no attention to their very immature ova, and
accordingly enormous numbers are spawned to main-
tain the equilibrium of the species.* The most rudi-
mentary form of attention is shown, for example, by the
female Aspredo, which sticks the eggs to her, and so
carries them about. She hatches two thousand annually,
as against sixty thousand in the nearest species."
Similarly the females of Solenostomata and Doryrhamphus
carry their eggs in pouches. In other cases the male
carries the fertilised eggs in his mouth or in a pouch.
Among fish, the dump-fish (Cyclopterus Lumpus) carries
its young, which adhere to it, into places of safety, and
the Angel-fish (Squatina) takes them if threatened into
its mouth.* Without fuller information than I have
found, it is very difficult to judge whether there is any-

* Brehm, VII. p. 24.

* According to Mr. Sutherland (Vol. I. p. 27), in 75 species represent-
ing 8 out of the 10 orders, the yearly average is 646,000 per female. It must
be remembered, however, that these are unfertilised ova, and are scarcely
comparable to the fertilised and well-protected ^%^ of higher vertebrates.

* Loc, ciL p. 31. * Schneider, p. 379.

T 2


276 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

thing more than instinct in these actions, which, if
effective, must at any rate be fairly well adjusted to
the presence of real danger. The semi-intelligent Para-
dise-fish makes a rude nest of bubbles, and is said to make
a special provision for the weakly, yet when its young are
old enough to fend for themselves it frequently eats
them.^ The highest development of nest-building is
found among sticklebacks, to which we have already
referred,* and we must not forget the conscientious care
shown by some species of sharks in fixing their eggs in a
safe position. Careful choice of place for oviposition is
indeed characteristic of this grade, and some rough
preparation may go along with it. Among reptiles,
tortoises scrape holes for their eggs, and some measure
of care for them is shown by crocodiles, lizards and
snakes. All these actions, however, along with the nicely
adapted oviposition of many insects, and the choice of
suitable spots by cephalopods, we must set down to
instinct. More interesting are cases of protection attri-
buted to parents in this grade. Thus the cayman is said
to defend its young,* and the guana to defend its
mate.* Upon the whole, the parental behaviour in
these classes is no higher than we should expect from
the general level of their intelligence. The gregarious-
ness of fish and other animals in this stage would seem
to be purely instinctive, and the alleged instances of
attachment too few to lay stress upon. There is little
if anything of that close attachment to individuals and
many-sided attention to their needs that we find so
conspicuously among birds and mammals.^

A broad comparison of the diflFerent forms of parental
care, from its germ to its highest development in the
animal world, is given by Schneider.* From this it

1 Brehm, VIII. pp. 187, 188.

^ See Sutherland, I. p. 36, and a good description in Romanes, p. 243
et seq.

' Brehm, II. p. 536. ♦ Romanes, p. 255.

* The summary account of reptile intelligence in Brehm's Thierleben
.VII. pp. 24, 25) states explicitly that their care for the young is not
to be compared with that displayed by birds and mammals. It is " meist
wohl nur Fol^e eines mit der Geschlechtsthatigkeit zusammenhangendes
Reizes" — a significant description. ^ Op, cit p. 372 et seq.


XI SOCIAL INSTINCTS 277

would appear that the operations implying attachment
to the young as an individual are peculiar to classes
of animals in which there is independent evidence of the
higher grade of intelligence, i.e., the higher insects, birds,
and mammals. In the lower grades, as among some
molluscs, the eggs are so far attended to as to be
fastened to an appropriate spot.^ And among some
fish, there are cases in which this is done with a
certain adaptive skill and care.* But the feeding of the
living young is confined to the higher classes mentioned ;
and in these classes, and in these exclusively, are found
instances of the more complicated parental care implied
in the training of the young, and their protection at
the risk of the parent.

These facts when put together appear significant. It
is in the classes which appear most intelligent, and there-
fore most capable of recognising the young, and of
understanding their needs, that we find the rudiments
of an individual attention first appearing ; and we know
that this individual attention, though instinctive in its
basis, is not wholly blind in its operation. Is it too
much to infer that the working of the parental instinct
implies a recognition of the young whidi is something
more than an automatic reaction, and a desire to satisfy
them which is not wholly blind ?

3. Anifnal Morality.

The higher animals lead a social life, not only in the
sense that they congregate together like swarms of
gnats or shoals of fish, but in the sense that they have
social or family relations with one another. In these
relations, acts of mutual help or forbearance are involved,
and it is out of acts of mutual help and forbearance
that morality as we know it among men is built up.
Are we then to attribute morality to animals? Have
we a right to praise or blame them, to apply to them
epithets carrying a moral significance .? This question, so
far as it is not a question of words, will be found to
resolve itself into the question of the degree of intelli-
gence which we impute to animals. Their behaviour
* op. ciU p. 267. * E.g. sharks ; op. ciL p. 273.


S


278 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

has frequently the external character of an act of
sympathy, forbearance, courage, self-restraint. The

auestion whether these terms are rightly applicable
epends on the question, how much the animals know
of what they are about. If we decide to apply them, we
do not mean that animals act in obedience to any
conception of right or any principle of duty. We mean
in final analysis this — that the apparent end of the
" social " action for the sake of which we human beings
give it its name and assign its character is also its real
end. This end of course is concrete and particular, not
abstract and universal. The animal shows sympathy not
because sympathy is a virtue, but because it sympathises.
On the other hand, the show of sympathy is not merely
an inherited or habitual method of reaction to a certain
kind of stimulus. It is not merely an unthinking
response to the cry of a hungry animal or the sight of
one that is in distress. It is directed to the relief of the
distress, and guided accordingly by what is required
therefor. The little monkey, famous through Darwin's
description, that rescued its keeper, is justly called brave,
for it knew the danger, and overcame its fear. Such
bravery requires no knowledge of general principles to
make it admirable.

We move in this matter between two sources of fallacy.
If we say that consciousness of its purpose is not necessary
to make an act praiseworthy, we end by making praise
and blame meaningless. If we praise a fly for the
unselfishness which it shows in providing for young which
it will never see, and of which it cannot be supposed to
have the most rudimentary idea ^ we must end by
lauding the self-sacrifice of the microbe which ends its
own existence by splitting into two or four young
microbes. What an excess of parental devotion ! May
we not even, while we are about it, call it rather devotion
to the welfare of the species and the interests of posterity ?
Clearly the purpose must govern praise and blame, or the
attribution of any of those qualities which carry a note
of praise or blame. We must not go by the result which
* See Weir, The Dawn of Reason^ p. 104.


XI SOCIAL INSTINCTS 279

the action is adapted to produce, but by the psychological
nature of the adaptation.

But here an opposite fallacy aw^ts us. If there is to
be consciousness of purpose, can moral purpose be some-
thing attributed to any animal ? Does an animal do a
brave or kindly act because it is brave or kindly ? The
difficulty in this form arises from a misconception of the
purpose of an act. A kind act is one that is done for
the sake, say, of relieving suffering. It is not one done
for the sake of being kindly. That would be a quite
different purpose, implying a general principle of action,
and the act which it dictates would rather be an act of
duty than of kindness. A kindly act in the strictest and
most direct sense is one which purposes the help that it
gives. It may well be that even of this end the animal
has a much less clear conception than the man. He
probably cannot realise the feeling of the sufferer, but he
sees him in want or danger, and purposes to see him safe
or satisfied. There is a distinction of degree here, not of
kind. The distinction of kind arises, as we shall see, when
in the human world emotions and impulses are named, and
their actions and objects generalised into rules, while the
rules in turn are subordinated to principles. The man
may then act by rule or on principle, and if this is essential
to morality, then morality is rightly confined to man.
But the rules of human conduct are in turn based on
purposes which they do not create, but rather systematise,
and thus in a measure remodel. The moral judgment is a
reflection on the purpose, and the higher animal, if the
view of the preceding chapters is correct, has the purpose,
though it has not the judgment upon it. The lower
animal, on the contrary, has neither the judgment nor the
purpose, but merely the impulse to react which heredity
or experience has shaped in a fashion which simulates
purpose. If this is granted, it becomes a matter of words
where we shall draw the line of " morality."

Perhaps the strongest reason for so drawing it as to
include the higher animals is to be derived from the facts
of self-control. In lower stages, one instinctive impulse
may inhibit another, — fear, for example, may overcome


28o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap, xi

hunger, or, as in the case of Mr. Lloyd Morgan's chicks,
the experience of a repulsive taste may operate so as to
overcome subsequently the general tendency to peck. In
the higher stage we find action dictated by purposes. We
also find the natural reaction to a sensory stimulus subor-
dinated to some remoter end in which the animal's general
habits of life are concerned. That is to say, we have ,
purpose controlling impulse, and such a form of control is
the germ which, as purposes are widened and systematised,
develops into the rational self control of human morality.
Pathetic stories are well known of dogs impelled to bite
under the extreme pain of the dressing of a wound, and
checking the impulse, or converting it into a caress. The
self-restraint of a pointer is the result of severe training,
but we must not regard it as the work of mere blind habit
superseding blind impulse, for, as Diezel remarks,^ the
same dog who will refrain from following a hare in his
master's presence, will eagerly chase it if unobserved. The
impulse is not extinct, but is controlled by knowledge of
results. There is no need to multiply instances, as the
broad fact is generally admitted, and the only question is
as to its proper analysis. I will not here discuss whether
the appearance of self-control in the observed instances is
itself enough to prove the higher degree of intelligence of
which we have been speaking. It is at least something
of a corroboration.

^ In Brehm's Thierleben^ II. pp. 144, 145.


CHAPTER XII

THE CONCEPT

I. If the conclusions reached in the preceding chapters
are sound, the highest animals have as much capacity for
dealing with the practical exigencies of their surroundings
as can be attained by an intelligence limited in its scope to
the concrete and the practical. Intelligence as we conceive
it in this stage is capable of forming what we have called
Practical Judgments. Its Impulses are transformed into
Desires by consciousness of their Purpose, and are regu-
lated in action by the perceived relation o£^ means to end.
Its experience is no longer of the dim, semi-conscious kind
which slowly remodels impulse by inhibiting one tendency
and augmenting another. It is an explicit experience of
concrete objects with their attributes, and of events in
their relations. There is no reason for denying it a certain
memory of the past, and there is strong ground for grant-
ing it anticipation of the future. In short, at this stage
intelligence grasps events in concrete series so far as they
are relevant to immediate practical interests.

To understand the next stage of mental evolution, we
must inquire in what ascertainable way such an intelligence
falls short of ordinary human achievement. We may
suitably attack this problem by inquiring first, what pre-
cisely the use of language adds to the practical intelligence
which we have described. An intelligent dog or ape can,
if the evidence which we have quoted is sound, use ex-
perience intelligently, and even plan an adjustment of
means to ends with a certain measure of inventiveness.


282 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

But it cannot describe what it does to us, nor, so far
as we know, to another individual of its own species. In
many respects, a child of three shows less practical
capacity and intelligence than a dog, but it has one great
advantage : that it can describe what it is doing, o;* what
it wants, and can learn to do fresh things, not only by
imitation, but by having them explained to it. Now, the
description of a concrete fact or action proceeds, as we all
know, by combinations of simple words each expressing a
general idea. The free use of language supposes a stock
of general ideas, and description of particular facts is a
means whereby those facts are brought into relation with
the store of ideas. It is in the existence of such a store
at its disposal for use in practice that human intelligence
is broadly distinguished from that of the highest animals.

If we grant the highest animals concrete experience, the
power of grasping perceived relations and applying them
afresh to new and different circumstances, we grant, I
believe, enough to explain the most intelligent action
which can be attributed to them on any substantial
authority. Caution, cunning, and sagacity of the kind of
which " animal stories " are so full do not as a rule imply
anything more or less than thp " concrete experience *'
that we have described. How much readiness may be
shown in the use of past experience, how much cleverness
and originality in the adaptation of means to ends, is a
question purely of degree. How much of these qualities
we are to grant to animals is a question of fact. The
evidence by which it is to be decided is at present in a
very unsatisfactory condition. But the same general
powers with which we have credited the higher animals
would explain alleged instances of sagacity and cunning
which one would certainly not rely upon to prove the
possession of such powers. Nor by going further in this
direction, and attributing to animals more of the kind of
intelligence in question, do we bring them sensibly nearer
to the distinctively human intelligence the specific character
of which consists, as we have hinted, in a distinct method
of oi^anising or correlating its experiences.

To take an illustration. I have referred to the chim-


XII THE CONCEPT 283

panzee Consul, at Belle Vue, which made a key for itself
by biting a piece of wood till it would fit into the square
keyhole. The animal had been taught to use the key. It
found that some pieces of wood would act instead, and
then, when a piece was of the wrong shape, it bit off the
excrescence which hindered it. There is here a clear
appreciation based on experience of the relations of one
object to another, and what we have called a "spon-
taneous application " of this experience prompting an act
which is in no way imitation, but is cleverly adjusted to
overcoming a practical difficulty. All this falls readily
within the lines already laid down. But supposing that we
could find a monkey that had never seen a key used, and
supposing that the circumstances forced us to infer that he
had been told all about keys, and how to use them, by a com-
panion ; then we should have to revise our view altogether,
and admit that monkeys, like men , can form ideas which
are communicable in the absence of the sense impressions
to which they relate.

2. If we consider how such communication is effected
by human language, we shall be able to measure the
difference. If the key were used, not by a man to confine
an ape, but by a white man to confine a savage, any
savage who had seen it work would be able to make the
matter sufficiently clear to his friends by the use of words
drawn from the common objects of their experience. If
keys were unknown in the tribe, the narrator would fall
back on simpler and more general ideas, which he would
combine so as to convey a description accurate enough for
the purpose, and the white man would soon have to fall
back on some more recondite device for the " benevolent "
control of his " contract labour."

Now much controversy may be raised on the question
whether animals can have " ideas." The point is perhaps
not capable of strict proof. We have attributed to the
higher animals " practical ideas " in the sense of a function
which does for them that which practical ideas do for
human behaviour. The nature of the inner consciousness
that we impute to them cannot of course be matter of
direct observation, and our conception of it rests on an


284 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

analogy which is admittedly not perfect in all respects.
Our present point, however, is that whatever ideas we
attribute to an animal, they are ideas of the concrete, the
particular object of desire, the relation impressed by past
experience. Thus, the chimpanzee may have an idea of
the key and the door, and the fruit that he will steal, if he
can escape. Our difficulty in representing, or at any rate
in trying to set forth his presumed state of mind in words,
is precisely that in clothing it in words, we do what he
cannot do. We put it into general terms — ^rendering the
content of a consciousness which is concrete and particular
in terms of its elements, which are general and common
to many experiences. If the chimpanzee could so break
up his perception, analysing it into elements common to
the experience of other monkeys which knew nothing of
keys, if he could re-combine the severed elements as we
put general terms together to form the unique meaning of
a sentence, and if his companions could follow such a com-
bination — ^then he would be able to communicate to them
the precise nature of an operation which they had never
witnessed. He would be able to speak.

3. Language rests on the combination of general terms,^
and its use therefore implies at least two things. First,
the general content, idea, meaning, or whatever we may
call it, which the term expresses, must be analysed out of
the perceptions of experience ; and secondly, it must be
capable of combination, performed apart from the compul-
sion of perception, with other and similar ideas. In his
dealings with the key we have attributed to the monkey
a clear consciousness of distinct elements — the key, the hole,
the opening of the door, and so forth. These elements and
their relations he recognises clearly in the particular case.
He has seen them, and in some form he retains the im-
pression. But to be able to communicate the impression,
he would have to do something more first. He would

^ I do not raise for the moment the question whether all terms are
general. It is enough that they are common to a wider experience than
that of the individual— an experience common at least to speaker and
hearer. If " John " means anything to me when you use the name, John
must have entered directly or indirectly into my experience as well as
yours.


/am


XII THE CONCEPT 285

have to be able to single out the elements and identify
each of them with its class. This could only be done if
some conception of the class, a conception operating
independently of present perception, were already formed,
and expressed by a class name. This brings us to the first
stage in the formation of language. The process of
naming implies, first, that the common elements in
different experiences are attended to. There is not very
much in this as it stands, because in the lowest types of
inference, the common element in different cases is what
is operative. If a child calls out " Mam-mie " at sight
of its mother, this is a simple reaction to a familiar
percept not differing in principle from other reactions,
such as that of running towards the mother, or smiling in
response to her. The action of the common character or
the ** universal " is no peculiarity of human intelligence.
It begins with intelligence itself.

What is new is perhaps better seen when we turn to
the second element in the use of language. If language
consisted of baby talk — of exclamations Dad-da ! Gee-gee !
PufF-pufF ! at the sight of the appropriate objects — it would
not serve as a basis of communication. Baby talk in its
first stage has only an element of language, viz., the word.
It is a second stage, and in the case of infantile de-
velopment distinctly later and more difficult to com-
pass, when distinct words are put tc^ether, especially
when they are put together to express something which
is not present to perception. When this can be done,
even in the simplest way, it shows that ideas can be
detached from their context, and pieced together newly.
Even in the narration of an event, this is true of the
hearer, though not perhaps necessarily of the narrator.
When a child of two comes in and relates some little
event of its walk, it may be regarded as merely reviving
the impression. But when the child itself understands a
story, the higher stage is clearly reached. The different
words must each carry a meaning. It is the word which
gives rise to the idea, which must therefore be independent
of perception. If the monkey could communicate the
secret of the key, not only would it have to possess a set


286 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

of terms to express each point in the description, but the
other monkeys would have to be endowed with an intel-
ligence in which each of these words would give rise to a
definite idea which they could combine as they followed
the story into an intelligible whole. It seems to be this use
of the elements of experiences as ideas that can be detached
from the perceptions in which they are first given, and in
their detached state brought at will into any sort of com-
bination which is the psychological basis of language.

4. It may serve to make some of these points clearer if
we examine the analogies or approaches to language that
we find in the animal world. First of all, then, the cries
and other sounds made by animals under the influence of
various feelings and emotions, are significant in two ways.
They express the feelings of the animal in the sense of being
physiological results, reflexes produced by or attendant on
those feelings. In this sense they are no more and no less
expressive than tears or laughter, or the arching of a cat's
back, or the stifi^ening of her hdr. ' But they are also expres-
sive in a sense which brings them much closer to language.
They are "understood" by other members of the same or it
may be of other species, in the sense that they act upon other
individuals in a determinate manner, which we may presume
moreover to be the manner desired by the animal who
utters the sounds. Thus the love call of bird or mam-
mal acts as invitation to the opposite sex, the " danger-
cluck " of a hen calls the chicks under her wings, and the
angry barking of a dog frightens away an intruder. There
seems no reason to deny that sounds of this kind are
uttered not merely as the reflex eflFect of the emotional
situation, but with intention, as they certainly are uttered
with efi^ect. The cries of animals form a true rudimentary
language, in so far that they are sounds uttered in order
to aflFect the behaviour of others, and successful in their
object. The limitation of this sort of language is that it
is concerned with immediate feeling and the appropriate
action, expressing the one, and inciting to the other. It
is in no way disengaged from the concrete experience of
which we have spoken. Its utterances are indeed in a
sense " universals." The ** danger-cluck," for instance, is


XII THE CONCEPT 287

a sound uniformly evoked by circumstances differing in-
definitely in detail, but agreeing in that they are terrifying.
But they are utterances which only concern the present,
the objects or circumstances immediately perceived or
desired.

The function of the instinctive cry may be performed
among domestic animals by the spoken word. The dog's
name called out in a tone of reproof, approval, or
exhortation, as the case may be, excites him to appropriate
actions. The parrot goes a step further, and undoubtedly
uses words with intention. Of a learned grey parrot, it
is said : —

** As soon as the dinner bell rang he called the waitress louder
and louder until she appeared. If a knock came at the door, he
said, * Come in,' but was never deceived by any one in the room.
If he saw preparation made for uncorking a bottle, he made the
noise long before the cork was out. . . . When the green parrot
standing near him screamed, he first tried to quiet her with a
reproving ' Pst ! ' but if that did not avail he called out in a loud
voice, ^ Hush, hush, you ! ' He loved to talk to himself late in
the evening, and regularly closed his monologue with the words,
* Good night, good night, Jacky.* " ^

In one sense, probably the parrot does not understand
the meaning of what he says. He knows " good night "
or " come in " as sounds appropriate to certain occasions,
and, it may be, as producing certain eflFects on others.
But there is, I imagine, no reason to suppose that he can
analyse, that he knows the meanings of good and of night
taken severally, so that he might at need construct such a
phrase for himself. Without such knowledge, it seems
clear that the words are only a more refined and subtle
development due to education of the cry or scream, which
also is a definite sound used appropriately and with
effect.

Closely analogous to parrot talk is the speech of a child
about, and for some time after, the close of the first year.
Before that time, syllables really meaningless are uttered
often with many vain repetitions. This babblement
seems to represent the really instinctive element in language.

* Groos, Play of AninuUs^ p. 204.


288 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Darwin noted the syllable " Da " pronounced clearly but
without meaning by his child at five months.^ The same
child, like other children at a later date, invented
words to express his wants.* Indeed, Darwin places the
invention of words before the imitation of words spoken
by others in the development of speech. I have noticed
that the sounds " Dad, dad, dad," " Mam, mam, mam,"
are often repeated long before they are used with any
meaning, but how far this is due to the child's hearing the
sounds, it is impossible to say.* Preyer * gives a very clear
account of the linguistic powers of his child at this age.

^^Of these syllables [a number of meaningless sounds already
used by the child], na-na regularly denotes a desire, and the arms
are stretched out in connection with it ; mama is referred to the
mother perhaps in the fifty-fourth week, on account of the
pleasure she shows at the utterance of these syllables, but they
are also repeated mechanically without any reference to her;
atta is uttered now and then at going away, but at other times
also. His joy — e,g.y at recognising his mother at a distance — ^the
child expresses by crowing sounds, which have become stronger
and higher than they were, but which cannot be clearly desig-
nated ; the nearest approach to representation of them is dhijd.
Affirmation and negation may already be recognised by the tone
of voice alone. The signification of the cooing and the grunt-
ing sounds remains the same. The former indicates desire of
food ; the latter the need of relieving the bowels. As if to
exercise the vocal cords, extraordinarily high tones are now pro-
duced, which may be regarded as signs of pleasure in his own
power. An imperfect language has thus already been formed im-
perceptibly, although no single object is as yet designated by a
sound assigned to it alone ^

The Understanding of words was somewhat more
advanced, but Preyer notes that the word ** give," for
example, "operates almost like a reflex stimulus,
•mechanically.'"* He taught his child some little tricks
in response to certain questions, &c., and just like a dog,

» jl/iW,Vol.ll. p. 292.

* lb, p. 293. Tame (J/irW, Vol. I. P. 253) also suggests that the effect
of example and education is to call a child's attention to the sounds it has
alread)^ made, 1.^., so that it selects sounds appropriately.

* Taine (loc, ciL p. 254) notices that " papa " is used without meaning
at first, and is associated with the father later.

* Preyer, II. p. 114. ' P. 12a


XII THE CONCEPT 289

whose education is imperfect, the little fellow would
occasionally get confused, and substitute one response for
another. On the whole, we may say that there is a well-
marked stage in a child's development, falling roughly
between the twelfth and eighteenth months, in which
it responds to certain perceptions with a word, and to
certain words with an act. At this stage it cannot be
placed above the parrot, nor on the side of understanding
above the dog. It is well to mark out this stage in which
isolated words are clearly developed from the later stage
in which words are put together to form language proper.
The use of language at the level which we have been
considering does not rise above the sensori-motor type —
in which, whether by inheritance, or as the result of
experience, a sound or a sign produces a certain reaction.
The only difference from an ordinary sensori-motor
action is in the intention of the individual who makes
use of the sound or sign. It may be strongly questioned
whether there is any evidence of the communication of
complex facts among animals. Thus, there is a well-
known class of dog-stories in which, for example, a little
dog is mauled by an enemy, and gets his big friend to
come and avenge him. Mr. Lloyd Morgan ^ relates such
a story of a little dog and his big friend Boxer. As the
story is told, it gives the impression that the little dog
must have given a dramatic recital of his wrongs, but Mr.
Lloyd Morgan thinks, I have no doubt rightly, that all
the little d(^ said was " Come ! " In other words,
the little dog was able to incite Boxer to follow him, and
then to attack the enemy. Mr. Romanes* directly
observed a similar communication between two Skye
terriers, and interprets it in the same way. Similarly, in
the numerous games of animals in which somewhat subtle
and complex mutual understanding is involved,* we need
not postulate any explicit interchange of ideas. One dog
will entice another to play by taking up the appropriate

* Animal Life and Intelligence^ p. 344.

* Animal Intelligence^ p. 445.

3 See Groos, op. cit.^ pp. 124 etseqj also 225, 245, 253, for numerous
instances among birds and mammals.

U


290 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

attitude ; ^ one action leads to another ; the playful mood
is readily aroused by the appropriate stimulus, and partly
by instinct, partly by training, the young animals scuffle
and race and make pretended bites, according to the
rules of the game. Finally, a cat or a dog can make us
understand well enough within certain limits what it wants.
Without saying, " I want to go out," a cat will make it
quite clear by stages. She will attract attention by
mewing and rubbing agdnst one's legs. Then, looking
up, one sees from her face that she wants something. As
soon as she sees that her master is attentive, she will stroll
in a delicately insinuating manner towards the door,
looking round to see if she is followed, and, if not, coming
back agsun, and going to and fro from the door to her
master. Finally, if she does not get her way at once, she
will sit before the door with a gaze half reproachful and
half resigned, but wholly suggestive, towards the handle.
And as soon as she gets the door opened, she darts out
without the ** thank you " which a good-natured dog would
be sure to express.

We shall probably not be far wrong if we take this
proceeding as typical of animal language. The cat knows
in the concrete what she wants, but she has no terms
common to her and her master into which she can reduce
it, and so make it clear in its completeness at once. What
she can do is to impel her master to take the successive
steps required, one by one. Her " language " is thus an
adaptation or employment of concrete experience and the
practical judgment. It is not an analysis of the concrete
into its elements whereby it is brought into connection
with a world of ideas common to two interlocutors.*

^ See, for instance, a good description in Groos, p. 124.

' It is possible that by a combination of senson-motor suggestions a
specially intelligent animal might be made virtually to understand a com-
plex situation. Such, for example, would be the case with the dog which,
according to Dr. Wesley Mills {op, cit, p. 33} would fetch at command
any one of six different articles. A still stronger case is that of the dog
which, on the authority of Mr. Bastian {The Brain as an Organ of Mind^
p. 315), would fetch home the particular cow named to it, or keep cattle in
an assigned part of a field. These cases seem to illustrate the beginnings
of a transition to a higher stage, but they are clearly developments of the
process already descnbed. The order to fetch, e.g.^ excites a set of motor


xii THE CONCEPT 291

5. The same results may be put in a slightly difFerent
way by saying that language among animals, so far as is
known, and among children at the word-reflex stage, does
not assert facts, but is either exclamatory or hortatory.
With children, the word which is at first an exclamation
or a call becomes converted into a word-sentence during,
we may perhaps say, the latter half of the second year.
Preyer recognised the first spoken judgment in the case of
his child in the twenty-third month. The judgment
referred to the milk which the child was drinking, and
consisted of the word Heiss / That this was a judgment
meaning "The milk is too hot," rather than an excla-
mation, could of course only be determined by the
circumstances and manner of the child. But the circum-
stances are often such as to leave no doubt upon the
matter. Thus, I have seen a little girl come down stairs,
display a new dress, and say, " Nannie," by way of con-
veying that Nannie (nurse) had put it on. But a decided
advance in articulation, mental as well as verbal, is shown
when two or more words are for the first time put together.^
Preyer* found the first significant combination during the
twenty-fourth month, in the command or wish, ** Haim,

impulses which the name "hat" or "stick" defines by attaching it to a
familiar object.

If higher developments of communication are to be found in the animal
world, it will probably be among apes. Their chatter is said to contain
more distinct sounds than that of any other animals, if we except the
artificial case of birds trained to talk ; but, apart from the question of in-
telligence, it may be doubted if they have sufficient nicety of perception
to found a language. Indeed, Mr. George Jennison writes me : " In
four gears' work with chimpanzees we could never notice any sounds not
marking distinct emotions, — pleasure, pain, anger. Almost any chim-
panzee will resp>ond to the * pleasure ' cry."

As to the social Hymenoptera, Lubbock's experiments {AntSy Bees and
WaspSy pp. 275-8, and 311, 312) are unfavourable to communication
among Bees and Wasps, while with regard to Ants, they appear to in-
dicate the kind of communication we have described as sensori-motor
(see p. 164). The further experiments described (pp. 172-177) do not
really seem to modify this result. Bethe {Ameisen, pp. 51-54) throws
doubt even on Lubbock's somewhat modest inferences, and attributes
all the apparent communication of ants to a marvellous co-ordination of
smells with motor impulses. But Bethe is defending a thesis.

^ I mean, of course, words that already have a separate use. An
independent-minded little girl of my acquamtance used the phrase Pitda
(put me down) almost before any other, but this was of course a mere
imitation of the total sound, not a combination made by the child
herself. * Op, at. p. 151.

U 2


292 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

mimi," which is nursery-German for " I would like to go
home and drink milk." A month later, the same child
attained the dignity of a five- word sentence, exhibiting its
"first attempt to relate a personal experience — " mimi
atta teppa, papa di (Milk gone [on] carpet. Papa [said]
Fie).^ It was in the eleventh month that this child first
clearly used a word {aUay which appears to be the German
equivalent of the English nursery ta-fa) with significance.
It is in the twenty-fifth that it first puts as many as five
words together to describe a past event. The length of
the interval, during which the child is rapidly developing
in every way, may serve to indicate the difficulty and im-
portance of the transition from appropriate exclamation to
articulate assertion of fact.

Listening to a little boy in the stage to which we have
now traced Preyer's child, chattering happily to himself as
he played, I have often noticed how his talk consisted of a
running commentary on what he was doing. For example,
if he was building a station, he would be saying, " Now
put dat dar, man go dar, puflF puflF come in dar," and so
on, suiting in each case the word to the act, as though he
were practising the art of simple description, which indeed,
in an unconscious way no doubt, he was doing. As this
process advances, the child gradually builds up a true
world of ** detachable " ideas, detachable because they are
applied in all manner of combinations, and serve as a link
between one percept and another, and between himself and
his hearer.

6. When an element common to many experiences is
not merely recognised when it appears, but (i) is thought
of without being perceived, and (2) is capable of being
combined in thought with other elements, it becomes a
concept of general meaning and application. To be a
general concept, the element must be something for con-
sciousness apart from its perceptual setting, and it must be
applicable to a diflFerent setting. The concept grows up
by a movement in which synthesis and analysis interact.
The most important form of synthesis concerned is
comparison by which analysis is guided. Now, analysis

* Op. cit p. 155.


XII THE CONCEPT 293

of a kind may be imputed to the practical judgment, in
which there is undoubtedly a certain selection of the
related elements within the complex situation of an
experience. If a cat, for example, sees that the lifting of
a latch has to do with the opening of a door, it is clear
that it has singled out certain elements in the perception,
it has distinguished the latch from the rest of the door.
There is, however, no reason to think that analysis in this
stage goes beyond the point of distinguishing one concrete
object or actual event from other objects or events. The
handle is still an object of perception : it might theoretic-
ally occupy the whole of a perception. Its movement is
an event seen, and seen to be followed by another event,
the opening of the door. So far as it singles out objects
or events in this way, analysis seems to consist in a move-
ment of attention towards one percept rather than others
that are within the range of the organs of sense at a
certain time.

^ In the formation of general conceptions, on the other
hand, analysis breaks up perception in a different manner.
It not merely isolates one object or one series of events
from others, but dissects an object or event into com-
ponent elements. The child, for example, as it examines
the latch, might measure its length and breadth, or learn
that it was a lever moving on a fulcrum in accordance with
certain mechanical laws. These properties of the latch are
no longer concrete percepts. They are certainly elements
in a perception, but unlike the latch, which conceivably
might fill perceptual consciousness to the exclusion of
anything else, they cannot any one of them be given in
perception except as elements in or attributes of the whole
which they characterise. When analysis breaks up a
percep t in this manner, it follows a new line of cleavage.
In the previous case it merely divided a complex set of
percepts into components, each of which was as good a
percept as the whole. Now it breaks up the percept into
elements which in perception are mere attributes of the
whole, and dependent thereon. The object is always
concrete. It is the attribute of the object or a relation in
which it stands that is general. To distinguish such an


294 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

aspect or relation as a quality of the concrete whole is to
form a concept applicable equally to other concrete
objects. In other words, generality rests on the attributive
relation, the fact that concrete wholes are qualified by
attributes. •The concept is the thought-function which
has mastered this attributive relation, and therefore can
construct what is not perceived, nor ever has been
perceived, as a whole. The analytic movement which we
have thus traced is under another aspect also a movement
of synthesis. - Analysis rests on comparison, which is an
act of synthesis, since it brings different experiences into
relation ; and gains in explicitness, pari passu with the
common character on which the comparison turns. And
not only does the concept rest on a synthesis, but its
essential function is to make a further synthesis possible.-
It must not be r^arded as a kind of mechanical abstraction
which takes an attribute out of its surroundings and hangs
it up alone in mid air. The general attribute is nothing
if it is not understood as qualifying objects, and in its use
in thought — and explicitly so in the universal judgment —
it must be recombined with other elements of reality. It
is the power of entering into diverse combinations while
still recognised as the same content that constitutes
generality. And recombination does not mean that the
two elements are placed side by side, but that they are
fused or applied to one another in a certain definite
manner. The new combination, in short, is in a general
way parallel to that from which the elements were
originally taken by analysis.^ There is thus in the free
usage of detached concepts a synthetic process always at
work articulating what has been disarticulated by analysis.-
To make the general concept a reality, the mind must be
able not merely to detail fragments of its experience, but
to follow that articulation of reality whereby attributes
qualify substances, enter into relations, are resolvable in
turn into more elementary attributes, and are united by
manifold and interwoven affinities. This articulation
is the broad basis of the conception and the judgment,
and analysis and synthesis are the processes by which the
mind comes to understand and track it out.


XII THE CONCEPT 295

When we say that analysis is guided by comparison, we
do not mean that there is always an explicit mental syn-
thesis of two distinct cases before the common element can
be selected and named. Such synthesis certainly exists,
and is expressed in the Comparative Judgment (Jem is as
tall as Jack. These two ribbons do not match). But
explicit comparison is not essential in the lowest stages of
the evolution of the concept. It is enough that similarity
is operative. Now similarity, the presence of a common
element in several experiences, is also operative in the
stage of concrete experience. The difference is that, not
necessarily the similarity relation, but the common element
which is the basis of the similarity is in this higher stage
made explicit. Here, as throughout mental evolution, what
is before operative without being recognised is now recog-
nised, and is more effectively operative than before. The
practical experience of the lower stage is really a form of
argument from particulars to particulars. Based on a re-
semblance, the foundation of which is not clearly brought
before consciousness, it is loosely and unsystematicaJly
applied according as the resemblance happens or does not
happen to strike the mind. When the point of resem-
blance is analysed out, and a general proposition is founded
thereon, we get, in substitution for this loose and hap-
hazard procedure, a fixed rule, stating what we can and
what we cannot infer from our data. As the "major
premiss " becomes explicit, inference becomes exact.
r It will be seen that the formation of the general concept
implies no new "faculty." It merely brings into clear
consciousness the common element in diverse experiences
which was already at work in guiding practical inference.
And in so doing it relies on the analytic movements of
attention which were equally necessary at the earlier stage.
But it does imply that analysis has taken a new turn, that
it is applied to distinguishing the qualities or attributes of
things, and it does bring into consciousness a new kind
of relation. The characteristic affinities of things form
the basis of the whole world of ideas, with its generalisa-
tions, qualifications, definitions, and classifications. These
affinities in a humble sphere are operative in guiding prac-


296 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

tical inference. But that stage is most easily understood
if we conceive the mind as actively occupied with the
concrete circumstances in which it is placed, and the series
of events with which it has to deal. Affinities between
this series and others influence the mind in its choice of
means to the practical end, but the affinities are operative
without being brought before consciousness. It is this
cross-relation between the different series of events, the
affinities and differences which unite and separate them,
that the general conception and the universal judgment
bring out. In other words, we have reached a higher
stage of correlation, in which a new relation is brought
into consciousness, and one more of the operative factors
no longer merely influences the mind, but is recognised
as an influence. We are a step further on in bringing the
factors of knowledge into an articulate system.
^7. The general meaning — the reference to a class or to
Reality at large — is potential rather than explicit in the
Concept. It is made explicit in the Universal Judgment.
The function of this judgment is to bring the contents
of two general conceptions into relation with each other,
whether as substance and attribute, cause and effect, or
in any other way. ** Animal '* is a general conception.
" All animals possess consciousness," a Universal Judg-
ment, true or false. The universal relation is asserted as
holding good apart from any special circumstances or any
particular perception. Its reference is to Reality at large,
and it asserts that wherever we find the one term
there we shall find the other which is predicated of it.
This is often expressed by saying that it attributes one
thing to another "as such.'' In our example, the fact
that an organism is an animal is taken to be of itself, or
" as such,** a sufficient ground for crediting it with con-
sciousness. The universal deals with general terms, and
attributes one to the other without taking anything else
into account. It thus enables us to go beyond our own
experience, and build up a "world of ideas."*

* We are not of course to suppose the rigidly defined universal of
science common to all human thought. The universal begins in the form
of the rough and ready ntle of common sense, to which common .sen^e


XII THE CONCEPT 297

8. It follows that the true universal is a relation which
is not merely actual, but necessary. At least, it is grounded
on necessity. We may say that a thing is so because we see
it, or because it must be so. In the first case our judgment
is based on perception, and ought not to go beyond per-
ception. If we go beyond perception legitimately, it is
because of some connection that we have reason to suppose
between the terms of our judgment, some necessity which
brings them into relation. Hence we can always convert
the universal into a hypothetical judgment, and instead
of All A is B, All murderers are hanged, say, If a thing
is A, then it is b — if a man commits a murder, he is
hanged.

This necessity is clearly recognised in human thought
where two or more propositions are connected by means of
a " then," " therefore," " because," or whatever it may
be. The ordinary combination of a single premiss (the
minor premiss of formal logic) and a conclusion is, in fact,
a sort of translation of the universal into the particular case.
The universal All sugar is sweet, is, so to say, incarnate
in the inference " I have put plenty of sugar into this, so
you will find it sweet." The Syllogism of formal logic
writes down the universal in its abstract dress as its " major
premiss," and follows it up with a minor and conclusion
which merely repeat it in its concrete form. It thus
achieves a wholly unreal form of thought, a form corre-
sponding to no actual process. None the less, it sets out
what is implied in the actual process in which conscious-
ness advances from a single premiss to the conclusion.

This advance, which we now see to be the application
of the necessity contained in the universal judgment, has
its verbal expression in a connecting particle. Here again

itself tacitly allows many exceptions and limiting conditions. But from
the first rough rule onwards, the assumption is the same, that one general
term may be used as a basis for inferring another. The conditions
limiting a universal truth are themselves universals. The ideal universal
takes all these conditions into its scope, thereby evolving from a single
judgment into what is really a system of judgments. Common sense is
apt to leave the conditions unexpressed, and scarcely distinguishes the
strict from the Approximate Universal — the judgment of general validity.
Its "General truths" rest on the same principle ^ the scientific Uni-
versal, but carry out its conditions less fully.


298 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

we find a process operative at an earlier stage becoming
recognised in consciousness. From the first germ of
intelligence onwards, the mind is of course influenced
by the connection between one experience and another.
The necessity whereby a follows upon b leads it when
it perceives b to prepare for a. But in the stage of con-
crete experience, this, we may believe, is an influence which
operates without being formed into an object of conscious-
ness. In the stage now under consideration, this influence,
always operative, becomes a sufficiently clear content of
consciousness to be expressed by a word. Thus in the
recognition of necessary connexion by the Universal Judg-
ment, we have once more a mental achievement which
consists in forming into a distinct content of conscious-
ness an element which at an earlier stage is operative
without apparently being understood by the mind on
which it operates.

9. A no less important aspect of the Universal Judg-
ment is its reference to an indefinite number of cases, or,
if we prefer so to put it, to reality and experience as a
whole. This aspect of the universal has indeed been
something of a stumbling block to logicians from Aristotle
downwards. There is something of a paradox in a form
of thought taken to refer to a number of cases of which
no one is specified, and the vast majority may be utterly
unknown.^ A sense of the paradox has led many writers
to refuse any meaning to the universal as " taken in exten-
sion." They have failed to allow for a certain unavoidable
artificiality in the distinction of Lc^c which seeks to
appraise functions of thought that cannot wholly be
understood in isolation from other functions to which
they are related. The universal judgment is not so much
a reference to an indefinite number of particulars as a rule
of reference. As a thought-function, it needs, in this re-
spect, completion by the "minor premiss," or again, it
forms the keystone of the arch in Judgments of Com-
parison and Classification. But however incomplete in

* This is the point common to Aristotle, Post AnaL^ I. i, and Mill,
Logic^ II. ch. 3. It led Mr. Bradley (.Logic^ p. 228) and Hegel {Wiss,
der Lo^. Part II. Werke, Bd. V. p. 146) to find a contradiction in the
Syllogism " taken in extension."


XII THE CONCEPT 299

isolation, its function in thought is (a) to sum up the
result of a mass of experience, and {i) thereby to form a
guide in dealing with a further mass of experience to
come. Under both aspects it brings the action of the
moment into explicit relation not merely with the imme-
diate circumstances or the particular end, but with masses
of experience past and future.

Under this aspect, once again, we find the universal
rendering explicit influences which have already been
operative without being expressly formulated. In both
the lower stages of intelligence, the influence of often
repeated experience appears in ways too manifold and too
obvious to need mentioning in detail. Indirectly the
same influence may be traced even in pre-intelligent
organic reaction — since even if we exclude any direct
transmission of " acquired qualities," it is the broad
average result of ancestral experience that goes to deter-
mine the constitution of the individual, and his reflexes
and instincts thereby. Thus, in an indirect, cumbersome,
and imperfect manner, with much loss of life and
efficiency, the actions of animals in the lower stages
become shaped by the preponderant results of great
masses of experience, and fitted to conform roughly not
merely to momentary ends, but to the general plan of
their lives. When the results of experience can be
rapidly summed up and communicated, it would seem that
this process should become far more speedy and eflTective.
There is evidently more scope for tradition and training ;
less necessity for perfection of instinct ; less elimination ;
less waste of life ; less time and energy lost in learning.
One sees how it is that with the growth of intelligence in
human life, the ready-made perfect instinct tends to
disappear, while yet the power of maintaining life
increases.

10. Thus the " world of ideas " or of universals, which
is generally, and I believe rightly, taken as the distinctive
property of humanity, is built up by a special application
of that power of correlating its experiences which is the
universal property of mind. But the correlation follows
a different line and rests on a more articulate form of


300 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap, xii

experience. Experiences are now correlated not merely in
their order of time or space, and in subservience to
immediate practical interests, but upon the basis of their
affinities, and the more remote connexions that follow
therefrom. To arrive at these affinities involves a
measure of analysis and comparison whereby the character
of an experience, or any portion of its character, is
detached from its setting or surroundings, and becomes
free to enter into new combinations, or conceptions.
The combinations so formed may be taken as mere
products of the imagination, or they may be held to
express general truths, or they may form rules of conduct.
In any case, they go to make up the world of ideas. In the
second case — we need not here discuss the difficult logical
implications of the third — they form judgments held to
be possibly, probably, or certainly true, and affirming
relations as actual, contingent, or intrinsically necessary.
Such judgments sum up in general terms the results of
experience, and apply to the future with a reference that
is no less general. By tracing back experiences to their
underlying affinities, human thought is also made capable
of grasping experience in masses, and ordering action
towards comprehensive ends. It is set free from the
limitation of immediate surroundings and the pressure
of felt wants, and there is no longer any permanent limit
to the scope of its reference, or to the field within which
it is able to bring chaos of experience into harmony and
co-ordination.


CHAPTER XIII

THE PRODUCTS OF CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT

I. "The Self.

The universal is not the only form in which experiences
can be massed. Its function in this respect is fulfilled,
and fulfilled more definitely, by the Collective Concept —
which unites many individuals into a whole, and less
obviously, but no less certainly, by the Individual concept,
as distinguished from the Particular. The Individual
person and even the Individual thing is an object not
confined to a single experience, but comrjion to many, and
probably not even exhibiting its whole character until a
long series of experiences is accomplished. To have a
conception of one's own Self, one must be aware of a
certain identity running through the^ mass 'of past
experiences, and inferentially prolonged into the future.
The genesis of such a conception seems therefore to
depend on the capacity for organising experiences in the
mass on the basis of their relations and afilinities, the
particular relation which is the basis of this conception
being that of permanence or persistent identity. And the
case of the Self is typical. Generally the Individual and
the Collective Concept resemble the true Universal in
detachment from any single sense experience, and in that
they group together a mass of experiences on the basis of
a common element pervading them all. This element,
which in the true universal is a common quality or
character, is in the individual or collective concept rather
some kind of persistent identity, or causal interconnection.


302 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Concepts of all these kinds, therefore, are formed by the
same methods of correlation applied to different material,
and are thus to be referred to one and the same stage
in the growth of mind. Viewed as a correlation of life's
experiences, it will appear that the conception of self
must always be in varying degrees incomplete. " Know
thyself" was a precept of the gods, a precept therefore
which man cannot adequately fulfil. It might be regarded
as fulfilled sufficiently for human purposes if we had a
clear grasp of the essential structure of that being that
unrolls itself in the personal actions and experiences, and
true self-interest would be to act conformably to the
permanent requirements, of that structure.^ In actual
life this is not realised. Indeed, at first sight, the actual
man is so inconsistent in his different capacities that we
often speak of him as having two or more personalities —
and psychology gives to popular language a certain
sanction. In a sense, it is scientifically true that the
business man, who has spent the day in besting a rival, is
not the same person as the father who comes home to
romp with his children. The outward and visible sem-
blance is the same, but within it there are two quite
diflFerent masses of thought, emotion, and will, each
forming an interconnected system by itself, yet standing
in no logical or moral relation with the other. When
the cleavage becomes extreme, we speak of "double
personality," of alienation or insanity. But the germ
of this sort of madness is in all of us.

If we could carry psycho-physical research far enough,
we should presumably find an ultimate unity in which even
these extreme differences come together. Meanwhile it
remains true for practical purposes, that is to say, for the
scientific evaluation of self-knowledge, that the practical self,
the self which a man considers when he is thinking about his
" interest," is rather a great fragment of his being than his
being's whole. A business man in his office has nothing
to do with " sentiment," but looks at things ** as a business
man." At home he may be entirely swayed by the

^ Cf. the famous description of true and false self love in Aristotle,
Ethics IX. ch. 8.


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 303

" sentiment " that elsewhere he disparages. Between his
home and his business there is probably the ultimate bond
of connection that the one is maintained by the other, but
this does not mean that the principles or ideas of the one
in any great degree dominate the details of the other.
Practically a man's action in any capacity is guided mainly
not by what he is in other respects, but by what he is in
that capacity.

What is true of self-knowledge applies of course equally
to self-interest. The self-interest which guides a man's
action can only be the interest of the self as the man con-
ceives it at the time. A man might act in the interest of
his true self, if he knew his true self. But for practical
purposes " enlightened self-interest " ordinarily means the
subordination of momentary considerations to the broad
ends or the general plan by which a man is dominated in
one or other of his different capacities. It seems necessary
to say this much in order to avoid exaggerating the co-
ordination of conduct which the conception of the self may
be held to introduce into life. In its theoretical complete-
ness, enlightened self interest would mean the subordination
of each action to the whole system of purposes that make
up the self. This would also of course involve that the
experiences and the impulses of the personality were brought
into a system. To understand how far self-knowledge
would take us in the intelligent co-ordination of action, we
may usefully throw this ideal or ** limiting conception "
into contrast with the fragmentary co-ordinations of the
"practical judgment." Here there is combination of
means to an immediate end. There may even be the
preference of one " end " over another, as when a dog,
after wavering between the principles of obedience and the
impulse to hunt, comes at last reluctantly to his master's
call. In this case of " self-control " we see the dog's per-
manent habits overcoming a momentary impulse based on
a deep-seated instinct, and we might say without much
straining that the dog's " truer nature," founded on his
fidelity, conquers the mutinous impulse which threatens its
harmony. But it would be a long step from this admission
to the suggestion that the dog on his part has any concept


304 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

of the self, any broad principles or any conception of his
own permanent welfare to the test of which he brings his
action. No doubt the broad tendencies of his nature
operate unconsciously within the dog as they operate for
the most part unconsciously within us. But we can also,
with varying degrees of accuracy, understand and formulate
them, and this there is no evidence that the dog can do.
Thus, so far as the conscious co-ordination of action is con-
cerned, the Practical Judgment, resting on concrete ex-
perience alone without the power of summing up masses
of experience into general conceptions, is limited to the
adjustment of means to a desired end, or the preference of
one end over another. The judgment of Enlightened Self-
Interest in its theoretical perfection would subordinate all
immediate and even remoter ends to the requirements of
the self as a whole. In actual life, it guides its action
rather by certain broad purposes, each of which fills a great
part of life, but which are not brought into such system-
atic harmony with one another that we can speak of the
whole life as forming a rational unity. ^ Just as masses of
past experience are summed up in the form of universal
judgments, so the broad purposes of life, masses as we may
say of future experiences, are summed up in the conception
of the self and of the various broad ends of life that fall
within it ; and actual conduct is correlated with both.

2. With the conception of Self comes the conception of
other Selves. Indeed, as many thinkers have been fond of
insisting, the two conceptions are in constant interaction.
We form our conceptions of others from ourselves, and of
ourselves from others. It follows that the conception of
Personality in another will tend to be of the same broken
and partial character as the conception of Self. We know
one person merely as a " good fellow " at the club, another
purely as a professional colleague. Even our nearest and
dearest, whom we think we know through and through,
we find, tragically, to be "strangers yet." As are the

* It is perhaps superfluous to point out the obverse truth, that the
cheapest way of approaching unity is to starve the self by suppressing all
sides of it save one, as, e,g.^ by consistent asceticism, or sensualism, or
even professionalism.


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 305

limitations of self-interest as a practical guide, so are the
limitations of interest in others. The unity of the species,
of society within the species, and of many closer organ-
isations, of which the family is the chief, within society
imply a varying measure of interest benevolent or
malevolent in others. Confining ourselves to benevolence
— a serious restriction in the world as we know it — we
might repeat all that we have said of the direction of con-
duct by and towards the interest of Self, substituting for
self another or others. Action may be guided by the re-
quirements of another personality as well as our own, and
is so in the case of all actions of affection, benevolence, and
social duty other than those which spring from the impulse
of the moment. The relatively permanent happiness as
distinguished from the temporary needs or pleasure of
another is the end of sympathetic or social action at this
stage of intelligence.

This development of " altruism " is an elaboration of
impulses which are already well developed among the
higher animals. In one sense indeed many birds and mam-
mals recognise the personality of others in a very thorough-
going manner, since they give undoubted signs of permanent
and deep-seated attachment to individuals. « This does not
necessarily imply, however, that they conceive the in-
dividual as a personality in the sense explained above in
dealing with the self. It means that the sight of the
beloved mate or child or master rejoices them, that absence
of the loved one depresses them, and stimulates them to
find him. If we were to look for a conception of person-
ality as something that persists and develops, we should
look for it first, perhaps, in the training of the young.
Such training undoubtedly appears among the more intel-
ligent birds and mammals, but it would seem to be limited
to three methods. There is first, punishment, the slap
which a mother ape or even a cat gives to the young one
which transgresses. This, if not merely impulsive, is
sufficiently explained by the desire of the mother to check
the young one in doing something immediately harmful.
There is secondly the method of stimulating the young to
exercise its faculties, as by bringing it its natural prey to

X


i


MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

play with, and there is, thirdly, the method of example
which the young is encouraged to imitate, as seen in the
practice of those Divers which hold a fish before their young
and then dive with it.^ These methods seem to follow
very naturally from the parental instincts as developed by
concrete experience. The direct delight* in seeing the
young ones do things may as readily be conceived to be
a part of the parental instinct among animals as it certainly
is among men. The means used are simple adaptation to
immediate practical ends all working on an instinctive basis.
We can hardly credit the mother-cat with a conception of
the future career of her kitten as a famous mouser or as a
household pet. Nor can we legitimately impute to her
that vicarious self-control which would subordinate the
immediate gratification of the kitten to the training of its
character. It is to be feared that whenever the mother-
cat's action has the appearance of such a refinement, it is
rather to her own comfort than to her ideas of moral
trwning that we must look for explanation. But these
conceptions of permanent welfare and character are the root
ideas of human education, and follow naturally from the
conception of personality.^

3. If the conception of personality in Self and others
is dependent on the power of grasping masses of ex-
perience in comprehensive and inter-related conceptions, it
seems hardly necessary to argue that the same thing is true
of organised political society. Human society probably
in all forms, and certainly in all but the most primitive,
rests on a mass of observances based on tradition, and
providing rules of conduct that continually thwart heredi-
tary impulse or instinct. Rights and duties in relation to
property, to sex, to a parent, to a chief, form a system,
and, as social life develops, a system so complex as to be
difficult even for the trained reasoner to apply consistently.
The finer diflferentiation of duty in the several relations of

* See Schneider, p. 375. * /<^., p. 376.

' Whether such a conception and the type of education founded on it is
universal among mankind, we do not here inquire. The foundation is
laid in the power of forming conceptions. What is built on it may vary
indefinitely, and extreme cases may vary down to zero. The savage con-
ception of personality is no doubt extremely rude and confused.


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 307

life, though inherited tendency is its foundation through-
out, far outruns in subtle complexity any possible achieve-
ment of instinct.

One hesitates to dogmatise about animal societies until
they have been more thoroughly studied, but what we know
of them goes to show that the division of labour — the
most notable form of social differentiation in the animal
world — is based, in the cases where it is most elaborate,
on differences of structure. This is conspicuously the
case with the Social Hymenoptera, where the distribution
of functions between fertile females, infertile females, and
males, is the basis of the whole order. The further
differentiations which appear among ants as between
" workers " and " warriors," " mistresses " and " slaves,"
are also directly correlated with differences of physical
structure. The division of labour in these cases would
thus seem in its main lines to follow rather than to over-
ride the inherited tendencies to which physical structures
give rise. On the other hand, the rudimentary division
that we find among the higher vertebrates is not sufficient
to justify us in speaking of a social ^^ system " at all.
The habit of fixing sentinels is the typical case. Probably
we must ascribe this to a kind of tradition as much as to
heredity^ the habit once formed being kept up in each
flock or herd from generation to generation, by the simple
practice of forcing the younger members as they grow up
to take their turn at watching while the others reed. It
is a special adjustment to the needs of a gregarious life,
part instinctive, part traditional, part, very likely, intel-
ligent. One such adjustment, however, does not make a
system with a complex ramification of duties. Lastly, the
submission to a chief, which we find conspicuous among
apes, seems to be of the same habitual character. The
most active and capable member of a troop tends to
acquire a certain primacy. Here agsun there seems to be
something of habit, and perhaps something of intelligence,
operating on the hereditary tendency to follow and imi-
tate. If there were evidence that the chieftainship
became hereditary, and that apes would tolerate and
grovel before a rot faineant^ we should have to consider


3o8 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

anew whether the ape should not be put on a level with
Homo sapiens.

Whether an organised social life distinguishable on the
principles suggested from that of the social animals can
be attributed to all races of men without exception, is a
question which will be better left to a future occasion to
examine. It is enough for our present purposes that
organised social life as we know it in the human race from
a low if not the lowest level upwards, rests on a comple»ty
of relations maintained from generation to generation by
oral or written tradition. It is this complexity of
organisation in which many distinct and on the surface
conflicting obligations can be held together, which appears
to distinguish human society and human morality from the
social life and morality of animals. It would be super-
fluous to dwell on the way in which this complexity
increases in civilised and particularly in modern civilised
life. The relations of a man to his family, his neighbours,
his town, his profession, class, country, church, his own
moral consciousness, and his duty to humanity, involve
him in a network of obligations about which the surprising
thing is that the cases of conflicting duty are so few.
Among the higher animals we seem to find traces of the
personal, family, and social impulses which form the basis
of human life and society. But to work these out into an
elaborate system in which every instinct is pruned and
reshaped by a mass of social observances, customs or laws,
would seem impossible without the machinery of general
rules, definitions, and exceptions provided by conceptual
thought. If moral impulse exists among the higher
animals, morality as a rule of life comes into being only
with the conceptual order of thought, and hand in hand
with a regular political society.

4. It should be added that with the power of working
with detached ideas the whole world of imagination may
be said to come into being. There is, if not art, at least
the potentiality of art as soon as there is free play of ideas
in detachment from practical interests. So certain does
this seem to be, that the existence of anything resembling
Art among any species of animals might of itself be taken


xiii CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 309

as sufficient evidence of the capacity of that species for
conceptual thinking.^ Science and the technical arts rest
on the same basis. Though science arises out of and
remains indirectly connected with practical interests, these
are of course not the interests of immediate action to
which the "practical judgment" is limited. It is only
when men get interested in needs that go beyond the
particular purpose in hand, and begin to generalise and
reflect upon them, that they evolve out of their
practical skill a body of technical rules that can be handed
on and developed. Finally, like art and science, religion
is a system of conceptions built up by the aid of imagina-
tion out of inward and outward experiences. We do not
here inquire into the historical origin of religion. It is
sufficient to note that in all its forms its practical efficacy
and real meaning in the life of a people rests on the
adequacy and faithfulness with which it clothes, in a form
which appeals to the feelings, the experience, particularly
the moral experience, of the people who profess it.
Religion is one form in which experience, taking the word
in its most comprehensive sense, is organised. All true
revelation is from within. The only Sinai is a fresh .
height of man's spiritual nature, and the missionary irA»-^
attempts to preach religion can only succeed in so far as
an equation, so to say, establishes itself between the
doctrine taught and the minds of those who learn. Thus
it is the perpetual tragedy of the higher religions to be
vulgarised as they become popular, and to be ruined by
success. When the apostle has converted the crowd, he
becomes a bishop.

In the diflFerent forms thus cursorily enumerated, — in
traditional morality, custom, and law, in social organisation,
in the technical arts, in science, in religion, and even
indirectly in imaginative art — human experience organises
itself into systems governing human conduct. Past
experience, including now the accumulated tradition of
the race, is used in an organised form in guiding conduct.

* The analogue of Art amonjg; the lower animals is play in which ima-
gination, if it can be said to exist, takes the concrete form of immediate *
frolicsome action.


3IO MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Action is shaped and determined by some conception of
the permanent good of self, the family, society, and
possibly the species. The same factors have been present
all along, even before the germ of intelligence appears.
For instinct is shaped under the laws of heredity by the
past experience of the species, and it is so shaped as to
contribute indirectly to the permanent maintenance of the
species. But in this early stage the process of shaping is
extremely slow, cumbersome, and wasteful, and it is only
in the course of a geological period that it can bring forth
a more many-sided, fuller life, that is, a higher organisation.
For the combination of many higher qualities in one
individual can only be a comparatively rare occurrence, and
even then, the survival of that individual, and the
preponderance of his descendants, is exposed to all the
accidents of untoward outward circumstances. Hence it is
that orthogenic evolution — the development of higher
types — is of geological slowness, and is only one course out
of many that evolution must take. At its best, biolc^cal
evolution finds the right path only by being constantly
turned back from the wrong one. Only when experience
is so far systematised that the future is read in the light of
the past, does a race begin to move towards the fulfilment
of its powers with the certainty of a man who knows
where he wishes to arrive, and how to find his way thither.

5. Psychological Aspects of the T'hird Stage.

Psychologically, the diflTerence between this stage and
the preceding is entirely a matter of improved articulation
and wider comprehension. It is not that new faculties
are introduced, but that old faculties receive a fresh de-
velopment. The old question, whether animals reason, is
a question which people will go on putting for ever until
they arrive at a definition of reason which will satisfy
everybody. How far an animal or a man must be held
to understand the grounds of his action before we can say
that he acts rationally, is in one sense a question of terms ;
in another, a question of degree. We might parry the
question whether animals reason by asking whether man
reasons, and there would not be wanting plausible grounds
for answering the latter question with a negative. What


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 311

man has ever fully taken into account all the premises of
any practical or theoretical conclusion to which he commits
himself? Philosophy is aware that common action rests
upon assumptions of which it is wholly unconscious, and
she is also aware that she herself can only analyse out and
justify those assumptions in an incomplete manner. A
chicken avoids a caterpillar because he dislikes the taste.
We perhaps refuse to allow that the chicken reasons be-
cause he does not know what it is that makes the cater-
pillar taste bad. After the chicken follows the chemist,
who finds that the caterpillar secretes a certain acid. We
clap our hands and applaud him as a reasoner who has ex-
plained everything. But will the chemist explain why a
given acid should have an acrid taste, or show how the
experience of unpleasantness should modify subsequent
action ? A horse learns to lift a latch. We do not think
he reasons. He merely has found out how it is done, and
does it. A man explains to a child the action of the latch,
and shows how by pressing it at one point you lift it out
of a catch at another. He, we say, reasons because he
analyses the process and how it is done. But a physicist
might point out that the man knows nothing whatever
about it unless he sees that the principle of the lever is
involved in a simple form, and a metaphysician might add
that the physicist cannot be said to understand the prin-
ciple of the lever unless he is prepared to decide whether
it is a principle which holds true of reality, and if so, on
what epistemological grounds.

If we allow reason to the human species in general, and
yet restrict it to that species, it must be by identifying the
term reason arbitrarily with a certain grade in the develop-
ment of analysis. It would be true to say that abstract or
explicitly general reasoning emerges in the level of intelli-
gence under consideration, but we have seen that abstractness
is only one side of generality, and that the generality
of human as opposed to animal reasoning is once more
primarily a matter of explicitness. At bottom the function
of mind in this as in the lower stages is to organise life by
the correlation of experiences. As in every stage of mental
growth what is new is that the work of the mind becomes


312 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

on the one hand more explicit or articulate, on the other,
more comprehensive in scope. That these two move-
ments, if not at bottom identical, are closely interwoven,
is seen in the relations of analysis to comparison. We
clear up our experiences by bringing them into relation,
and being so cleared up, the thought that emerges is the
more truly universal in its application. It is this double
movement, then, which forms the world of ideas by trac-
ing experience to the underlying affinities on which both
universal and individual conceptions rest. In these affini-
ties we arrive at the basis of the more primitive inferences
of the practical intelligence, and in this sense we might be
tempted to say that human Reason gets at the ground
upon which animal intelligence works without knowing it.
But it will be better to avoid using the term Reason to
characterise any one stage in distinction from others. The
particular organisation of experience which we are now
describing rests on the detached idea or the concept as
its unit, and, if it is to have a name, may be best qualified
as the stage of Conception, the Conceptual Judgment and
Conceptual Reasoning.

What is true of the Reason is true also of Self conscious-
ness. A dog or ape looks after " itself." It has a self,
i.e.y a pervading identity and permanent character, is aware
at least of its present needs and seeks to satisfy them.
What we miss is evidence that the self is present to it as
a persistent identity in such a way, for example, as to shape
the choice of immediate ends by considerations of lifelong
welfare. The self of which the animal is conscious is a
very small fragment as compared with the self of which
the man is aware. The light of consciousness reaches but
a short way before and after in the animal, and since there
is nothing to show that his conception of himself acts other-
wise than his conception of his present end, there is no
point in attributing to him knowledge of self. A man,
on the other hand, who, for example, rejects a desired end
on the ground that it is unworthy of him, shows that his
consciousness of self is a permanent regulative force distinct
from the desires or plans of action which he forms from
day to day.


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 313

On the same ground, Will in a special sense may be
said to emerge along with Conceptual Reasoning. We
have wedded Desire to Concrete Experience and the Prac-
tical Judgment on the ground that the Practical Judgment
knows its concrete end, and that where the end is known,
the impulse towards it is rightly characterised as Desire.
Facts also compel us to admit a conflict of desires in that
stage. What then is there in Will beyond the victory of
one desire over another ? The true answer to this ques-
tion, which is of considerable interest in view of the
above discussions, seems to be given by those thinkers
who identify the will with the total or resultant
influence of character as a whole, while desire rests upon
some single and separate impulse. The will is not to be
regarded as an additional impulse, or as a force existing
outside impulses and operating upon them. It is rather
the system or synthesis of impulses, the broad practical
bent and tendency of one's nature. Now here as else-
where the development as we pass from a lower to a
higher stage consists primarily in a growing explicitness.
It is quite possible that even in animal life, when there is
a conflict of desires, that one tends to prevail which is
most intimately bound up with the animal's whole mode
of life. And at least among the domestic animals, we see
symptoms of shame and remorse when under the stress of
momentary excitement such an impulse is violated — and
remorse is precisely the tingling with which the permanent
character, the real self, comes to life again. The new
development is merely that those broad tendencies of the
character which before operated, if at all, obscurely and
unconsciously, havfe now a definite conception to guide
them. The nature of the self, its character, its duties, the
wider life of which it is a part, now become conceptions,
ideals, or principles which appeal to the personality as
a whole, just as particular satisfactions appeal to special
impulses. Just as the special impulse when it formulates
its end into an idea becomes Desire, so what we have called
the broad impulses of the personality when their end is
defined by conception constitute Will. The will, with
its broad, permanent ends, presents itself as overriding and


314 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

independent of impulse, and out of this appearance the
fiction of the motiveless Will has very naturally grown
up. We are aware of the Will often not as desire, but
as constraint overcoming Desire, and when Will and
Desire coalesce there is still something added to desire
which we express as Resolve or Determination. The
reason is that even in human experience, the basis of the
Will is too wide and too deep to be brought within the
scope and limits of a single act of consciousness. The
Will is more than we can feel at any one moment, for it is
the whole self, or ourself acting as a whole. This action
of the self as a whole is called out and directed by
the broad ends of life, and things seen to be bound up
therewith. It therefore belongs to the grade of mental
development under discussion.

6. The development of moral impulses into the moral
will determines in principle the advance m the content of
morality — the objects on which the moral will insists —
in the human as compared with the animal world. One
side of this advance we have already found to be implied in
the growth of the conception of Personality (pp. 304-306).
On this side the change is a development rather than a
revolution. Most of the higher animals have a well-
developed family life for which they constantly labour
and not infrequently sacrifice themselves. Many of them
are also capable of a wider social life based on mutual help
and friendliness. More than this can hardly be said uni-
versally of all races of men, and within all races numerous
individual exceptions would have to be made of those who
are far from being capable of as much. Yet the moral
change is no less profound than the intellectual, of which
it is indeed one expression. We attribute sympathy and
attachment to the higher animals. That is to say, we
credit them with desire to relieve the distress or satisfy the
wants of another, to feed the young, to defend a com-
panion, to gratify a master. Take them at their highest,
and these are still desires addressed to immediate ends. It
is true that in many, probably in most cases, they actually
serve the permanent good of the object of affection. But
if the feeding, warming, and protection of the nestling all


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 315

actually subserve its permanent health and growth, this is
merely a very familiar illustration of those co-ordinations of
instinct by which desires are brought into general harmony
with needs. We have no more right to credit the mother
bird with a conception of the future career of her nestling,
than to suppose that she originally accepted the attentions
of her mate with a view to maintaining the numbers of
the species. In this grade, it is only so far as action is
instinctive that its ends are broad and permanent. So far
as it is intelligent and based on experience, its aims are
near and concrete. Obviously, this limitation of view
must apply to social action in this grade.

Now the characteristic of human intelligence as we have
defined it is that it widens out so as to grasp experience in
masses, and comprehend life in some sort as a whole.
Thus widened, the same impulses that we saw before in
the narrow concrete sphere develop into the manifold rela-
tions of personality. Sympathy, for example, becomes a
regard not merely for the immediate needs, but for the
career, the character, the mental development of another.
The hen that clucks to her chick, and the mother that
plans out a child's education with a view to physical
health, growth of character, and the profession that must
be taken up twenty years hence, are both moved by the
parental impulse, but there is a difference in comprehen-
siveness of aim. Conversely, in the same way, we can
conceive an animal — a sentinel deer, for example — per-
forming the service immediately necessary for its herd.
We can hardly conceive it as having the good of the herd
as a permanent object of action. Animals may have selfish
impulses, that is, desires for their own gratification as
opposed to that of another. Man alone is swayed by self-
interest ; that is, an intelligent subordination of desire to
his permanent welfare as he conceives it. And just as his
own permanent welfare becomes an end to him, so in pro-
portion to his moral qualities does the permanent welfare
of other people. It is in this way that the social qualities
of animals are transformed in becoming human.

7. Morality is not ordinarily conceived as consisting in
the devotion to certain broad and comprehensive purposes


3i6 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

so much as in conforming to certain rules. Without in-
quiring here how far this conception is adequate, we may
point out that the mass of rules, traditions, customs, laws,
moral judgments, religious conceptions, which make up the
accepted code of conduct in any society, naturally subserve
the broad end of the maintenance of that social system on
which they are dependent. They are the media axiomata
by which conduct is brought into relation to the broad
requirements of the welfare, or, at lowest, the maintenance
of society. Ordinary unreflecting morality is therefore
conduct adjusted to the maintenance of the existing social
type. It stands at a lower grade than the conduct delib-
erately regulated by some general principle, but in several
respects at a higher grade than the highest development of
the " Practical Judgment.'* For to begin with, though a
rule may not be referred back to the principle which under-
lies and justifies it, it is still a rule, still general ; that is to
say, it is as such independent of impulse, and dependent on
a general conception recognised not only by the agent, but
by onlookers. In other words, it is a standard of conduct.
Thus it becomes relatively independent of the caprice of
the individual and the whim of the moment. The social
sanction is there to guide the errant individual, and the
moral sanction — the man's permanent conception of himself
— to check the errant whim. To illustrate by a single
point : the diflFerence is that between an act of kindness
based on an impulse of sympathy or afl^ection, and an act
of justice, based on an acknowledged duty or right. It is
proverbially easier to be generous or kind than to be just ;
and the reason is, that while kindness springs from an
impulse which its object, from whatever cause, happens to
have excited, justice is required, whether the impulse is
there or not. Such a requirement can only be fulfilled
where there is the recognition of a universal law applying
under specified conditions to all individuals, and under all
circumstances, without reference to the feelings or desires
of the agent. Thus with the apprehension of general
rules, social relations cease to rest merely upon instinct
and impulse, and pass instead into a system of acknow-
ledged rights and duties.


xiit CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 317

Two corollaries follow from the standardising of conduct.
One is the possibility of adapting conduct to a highly
complex social structure. Of this something has already
been said. The other is, that while social behaviour be-
comes more stable, it is also more capable of development.
Social changes are on the average far more rapid than those
changes in the physical constitution of a species upon which
instinct ultimately rests. Change of behaviour through
modification of instinct must proceed with the same geo-
logical slowness which marks all the stages of physical
evolution. Through submission to the social standard,
conduct may be made to accommodate itself to the chang-
ing requirements of social life, without lagging more than
two or three generations behind the requirements them-
selves.

Thus by the standardising of morality a force grows up
outside of instinct to regulate conduct. In the end, this
force no doubt owes its origin to instinct, but it is instinct
modified, on the one hand, by tradition : on the other, by
the rational apprehension of what is required. What is
recognised as right in accordance with this standard may
in many cases be very far removed from the inborn im-
pulses of the individual. Under its guidance, the social
impulses develop into a recognition of what is due to
others, placed above momentary caprice or personal desire.
Such a standard admits of development into a code,
adaptable to the thousand details of a complex social
structure ; while finally, as the needs of social life change,
the standard is capable of organic modification along
with them, in accordance with the reasoned appreciation
of necessity.

In this place, I am only concerned to contrast animal
behaviour with human morality taken in the rough and as
a whole. How morality as a contribution to the organi-
sation of life develops within the human race to the stage
thus roughly indicated, would have to be the subject of a
separate inquiry. To the same inquiry would belong the
consideration of the steps by which it further advances
to something higher. What the nature of this higher
stage is, will be briefly indicated in a later chapter.


3i8 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

8. The position of instinct.

It needs no argument to show that intelligence, when
developed to the point now reached, must very largely
replace instinct as the guide of conduct. Indeed, the
tendency of ordinary thought is to exaggerate this eiFect,
and to contrast the reason which governs man with the
instinct that rules animals. But man is no more regulated
by pure reason than animals by pure instinct. As has
been indicated above in Chapter IV., the basis of human
conduct is hereditary character : the hereditary tendency
to feel, to think, to act in a determinate manner.
Properly considered, the impulse to reason is itself an
instinct ; and the methods by which we reason, the " laws
of thought," are, in the first place, inherited methods of
reaction to the appropriate object. They are indeed
improved and refined under the guidance of experience
and reflection, but in this respect their history is quite
parallel to that of the humbler instincts of animal
life.

But now if instinct, i.^., hereditary character, mental
and moral, be the ultimate basis of human conduct, can
we say in general terms how far it is remodelled by
the rational use of experience } What is principally
important for our purpose is to compare the remodelling
as eflFected in this stage with the corresponding process in
the next lower grade of intelligence. In that grade, we
found, first of all, that the instinctive use of means to an
end might be remodelled, as when in the course of
training a dog works out a way of meeting the special
tricks of diflFerent kinds of game. We found, secondly,
that out of random actions, or out of mere observation,
methods could be built up which have no specific basis in
instinct at all. We found, thirdly, that even the ends of
action might be in some respects modified by the nature
of the individual objects to which by instinct an animal's
interests are attached, as when the dog is said to take his
character from his master. In all these three cases,
instinct on the one hand, and the direct experience of the
individual on the other, come into immediate contact ;
and a certain modification, whether in the choice of ends


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 319

or of means, results. What is peculiar to human intelli-
gence, is the rise of tradition as a third force impinging
upon the other two. The instinct of each individual
human being is in contact throughout his life with the
body of beliefs, moral judgments, social institutions, rules
of art or craft that make up the tradition of the society
into which he is born. These enter into his character,
interpenetrate his hereditary impulses, not only encourag-
ing and restraining, but with more subtle power, pre-
scribing to each impulse the sphere within which it is to
move, and the object on which it may exercise itself.
And the character so formed is all the while in interaction
with the results of experience in the narrower sense of
that which the individual finds out for himself, as opposed
to that of which he is told. Tradition, in the broad
sense in which it is here taken, rests of course principally
on language, and language, as we have seen, is both the
parent and the child of the Universal. Hence it is that
though there is a rudimentary form of tradition among
the higher orders of animals, it cannot there fill the place
which we here attribute to it. The rudiments of instruc-
tion which an ape, a cat, or a bird can furnish to its
young, are limited to a few acts of restraint and encour-
agement, supplementing, or, rather, anticipating the
lessons which individual experience would teach. In
human society, on the other hand, tradition goes to the
root-principles of action, both as shaping the ends
recognised as desirable, and as furnishing rules of method
of which but few could be found out in the course of
individual experience, and those only by exceptionally
gifted or exceptionally fortunate persons. In a word,
tradition as based on the Universal brings the experience
of the race to bear on individual conduct in a new
sense. If we are right in holding that instinct is due to
heredity, while heredity works through natural selection,
then, as we have already seen, there is a sense in which
instinct itself utilises the experience of the race to guide
the individual. What is performed at that stage by the
constant elimination of the majority of individuals born,
and by the stereotyping of the structure of those which


320 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

survive, is executed at this higher stage by the oi^anisa-
tion of the experience of those who have lived, and rests
upon the plasticity of those who learn by it. In short, at
this stage, we have organised racial experience largely
taking the place of that hereditary structure which
represents the result of an infinity of conflicting and
chaotic experiences in past generations. In fine, in the
highest animal species, instinct lays the ground plan of
conduct, within which details may be remodelled by
individual experience. In the human species, the ground
plan is itself reconstituted by the organised experience
of the race.

9. To bring together the main heads of our account,
we have suggested that human intelligence develops out of
a lower form by growth in those features of Comprehen-
sion on the one hand, and Articulateness on the other, by
which the higher stage of animal intelligence was marked
out from the lower, (a) Mind, it is suggested, differs
from mind in the degree in which these powers are
developed, in the area of experience which it can com-
prehend, and in the articulateness with which it can
comprehend it. But here, as elsewhere, there come points
in growth where change of degree becomes change of
kind. The constitution of a physical body is understood
to be determined by the energy of movement on the part
of its constituent molecules. Increase the vibration of the
constituent molecules, and a solid body gets warmer to the
touch, and expands in volume. Increase it still further,
and other physical characteristics are changed. The body
perhaps becomes soft and pliable. Presently there comes
a point at which the solid body becomes liquid, the energy
of movement having overcome the forces which cause
each swinging molecule to return constantly to the same
point. Increase it yet again, and the liquid becomes a
vapour, the energy of movement having altogether over-
come that of cohesion. Thus do successive increments of
quantity produce as they pass certain critical phases
changes of quality. In the instance just taken, the
change of quality is, as I understand, due to the disturb-
ance of the relation between the force that is increasing


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 321

and the force that remans constant. In the mental
world, the change may be expldned in this way : that
as the scope and clearness of mind increase, certain points
are successively reached at which quite new achievements
become possible. Those achievements, once possible, carry
with them a whole train of consequences. And thus the
species that has just succeeded in turning the corner finds
itself in a different world from that which has just failed.

To understand then the rise of the specifically human
intelligence, we have to suppose a mind capable of holding
together more elements of experience than the highest
animal can cope with, and of noting each several element
more clearly. Where separate experiences are thus held
together, they have an effect which we have already noted
in the animal world upon the movements of attention.
Common qualities and differences rise into notice. In
proportion as the elements of each experience become
conspicuous, they react upon association, bringing to mind
other experiences, partially but not wholly identical.
Through their influence in turn the points of identity and
of difference are thrown into relief. In other words, acts
of comparison and analysis dd one another, extending the
scope of judgment, and adding to its precision.

The first critical phase in this development, marking
the transition to human intelligence, is that in which the
common element obtains a firm enough hold over attention
to be responded to with a name of its own. How this
stage arose in the race we cannot tell, but it arises in the
individual as a rule between the tenth and fourteenth
month, by a process which seems to be at least in part
instinctive. At any rate, the instruction given by mother
or nurse has the instinctive babblement ofthe baby to work
upon, and as soon as a word is acquired, the child seems to
feel an instinctive satisfaction in its use. But this stage,
as we have seen, is only the rudiment of the Univer^,
and the mere fact that a word is used after this fashion no
more proves intelligence than any other other simple and
uniform reaction to stimulus. The importance ofthe word
lies in the part which it plays as mechanism in the further
stages. For just as the content first suggests the word, so

y


322 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the word being learnt suggests the content ; and therefore
the combination of words the combinaticm of contents.
Now, it is not the mere disentangling of common characters
that is essential to the higher stage, but, as we have seen,
the power of recombining. We are at the edge of the
plane of general reasoning as soon as the mind can make
for itself, without the aid of perception, an intelligible
synthe^s of common qualities. It may then be ssud to have
a practical command of that attributive relation upon which
the general concept is based. This synthesis the child no
doubt learns to make largely from others. If, as is here
assumed, the evolution hypothesis is correct, the human
race must have learnt it step by step alongside with the
development of language.

(^) Given the power of operating with common qualities
as units, all that we have called the world of ideas becomes
possible. Henceforward the experience of each individual
dwells alongside with a body of thought distinct from but
related to it. For this body of thought is in large part a
heritage from others, and in turn helps to r^ulate the
direct experience of the individual. This perpetual cross
reference between acquired ideas and (Urect experience is
the fundamental feature of human thought, of the existence
of which in the animal world there is not the slightest
trace.

(r) The contrast in explicitness and comprehen^on be-
tween this stage and the preceding sufficiently appears from
the nature of the Univerwd itself. We saw that logically the
procedure of the lower stage was an aigimient from particu-
lars to particulars. Such an argument implies the imiversal
truth ; Le.j it is the common character of the two cases
that operates within the mind to produce the inference,
while if the mind reflects upon its own process, it is com-
pelled to recognise that the process is only valid if the
universal truth holds. In the present stage the Universal,
we have seen, is recc^ised ; i.e.y the implication of the
lower form of inference is now made explicit. And what
is true imiversaily, is rec(^nised as being true necessarily.
Logical sequence not merely directs the operations of nund,
but is recognised by the mind, and not merely by the


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 323

reflecting mind of the logician, but by every one who has
learnt the use of " therefore " and " because." We have
already compared the two lower stages of intelligence to a
syllogistic process in varying degree of explicitness. In the
first stage we saw that what corresponds to the major premiss
is a certain formed disposition, what corresponds to the
minor a stimulus, what corresponds to the conclusion, a
response. The premisses in this case are antecedent con-
ditions from which the response follows, but there is no
evidence that either of them is grasped in relation to the
response or its results. In the second stage we held that
the starting point is a perceived relation — as of action and
consequence — an " observed particular," and the result a
judgment equivalent to the combination of minor premiss
and conclusion, the major being still represented only by
the mental habit which predisposes towards the combination.
In the third stage the major premiss itself becomes explicit
and the syllogism complete. We have the universal judg-
ment, the particular, and their combination in the conclusion.
I do not mean that ordinary reasonings are cast in syllogistic
form, but that each of the three (or including antecedent
experience four) phases which are formulated in syllogism is
now a distinct mental content, a distinct judgment. All
along there were general qualities and universal relations
contained in the world of experience. All along these
guided the mind whether in action or in the formation of
judgments. Now they not merely guide the mind, but are
apprehended by the mind, and they become in their turn
units or terms which can enter into higher combinations as
the order of experience and the laws of thought may
determine. So far, then, the apprehension of the Universal
appears as a turning round of the mind upon its previous
operations ; a bringing into clear consciousness of what it
was doing before.

{d) But the Universal has another aspect. It sums up
in itself the results of a set of experiences when compared
and analysed ; and it refers to a whole class of facts, of
experiences actual or potential. Thus to reason in
Universals is to bring classes of facts into relation with one
another. Experiences already correlated by the affinities

y 2


324 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

which have lead us to class them together become for us
now a unit which may be correlated with any other units
similarly constituted ; and this correlation may reach any
degree of complexity. The characteristic of this stage, in
short, is the correlation of experiences in groups or masses.
The Universal is not the only form in which experiences
are grouped. The great Collective and Individual con-
cepts on which much of human thought is based are
arrived at on similar principles, and in great measure have
similar functions. They rest on pervading identities traced
by the comparison and analysis of diverse experiences, and
their reference covers indefinitely great masses of experience,
future and potential, as well as past or present. Of such a
kind are the substances of ordinary thought, the personality
of self and of others, the sodety to which the individual
belongs, to say nothing of the wider and deeper concepts
belonging to the higher stages of human intelligence. A
very little reflection shows that conceptions of this kind are
no less important than true universals in the correlation of
experience by human thought.

(e) It is in particular in virtue of the co-ordination of a
certain set of experiences under the conception of self,
that man is credited with self consciousness. In the deter-
mination of conduct by comprehensive ends or broad
principles answering to the permanent character of the self
as against the cravings of the moment he manifests Will
as opposed to Desire.

(/) But with the conception of Will we pass at once
into the ethical side of the development. The same co-
ordination which builds up the conception of self, builds
up the conception of other personalities, and the sym-
pathetic impulse of the animal world develops into a
rational regard for the worth and welfare of others. A
similar development builds up the human society, with its
system of rights and duties in which each individual finds
his place. In such a system, again by a parallel develop-
ment, the social and selfish impulses of the animal are
elaborated into rules of conduct resting on the relatively
permanent character of human beings and their societies,
and recognised as superior to momentary impulse and


XIII CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT 325

even to the individual will. In other words, conduct is
standardised.

(g) It is an essential feature of the change described
that the part formerly played by instinct, as the basis
upon which individual experience has to work, is now
largely taken over by traidition. Instinct does not dis-
appear, but on the one hand, the individual becomes
capable of grasping and even criticising the ends to which
it urges him, and on the other, he is born into a society
with rules and principles of art and of life which in part
combat, in part fuse with and modify, the hereditary
impulses of common human nature. In the highest plane
of animal intelligence we found that the scheme of life
was still determined by instinct, though it might be modi-
fied by individual experience. In the present stage, the
outlines of the scheme itself are as much determined
by the organised experience of the race represented in
" tradition," as by its unorganised experience, represented
by the forces of heredity. In short, the organised ex-
perience of the race now enters into the principles and
bases of conduct, fusing with instinct or displacing it.

To conclude. In the present stage the general con-
cept — the relation of affinity underlying and connecting
diverse experiences — ^is analysed out and made the baas of
higher synthesis. Thus we have a correlation of those
relations of affinity which underlie and determine the
correlation of the preceding stages. The distinctive
psychological act on which the correlation depends is the
Universal Judgment, i.e.y which in combining general
concepts —

(a) makes explicit the connectedness of experience,
and

(/8) makes a comprehensive reference through the
medium of common character to masses of related experi-
ence. Thought in this stage may therefore be typified in
the completed syllogism with explicit major premiss as
contrasted with the truncated syllogisms of the previous
stages.

In scope, it effects a correlation of grouped experiences,
racial and individual, organised under conceptions {a) of


326 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap, xiii

connections of fact, {i) or standards of action, the
results of the first group being subordinated to those of
the second partly as contributing to thdr fcxmation,
partly as guiding the choice of means to the ends which
they prescribe.

Under its ethical aspect, this correlation appears as a
direction of conduct by Will guided by general con-
ceptions of the welfare of self, others, or the community,
as well as by the code of rules in accordance with which
the life of any given sodety is organised.

As a result, not only does individual experience (as in
the previous stage) modify the general plan of behaviour
resting on instinct, but the recoiled experience of the race
is brought to bear on its hereditary tendencies, engender-
ing an explicit conception of the main ends desirable in
the life to be lived by man.


CHAPTER XIV

SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT

I. The central feature of the stage of intelligence de-
scribed in the two preceding chapters is that comprehen-
sive reference to an indefinitely great mass of experiences
which we know as the concept. We might regard the ideal
action of this stage as directed by generalisations which
embody vast masses of previous experience towards an end
which will comprehend vast masses of future experience.
And it is not merely the individual but the race whose
experience is thus organised. Through this organisation,
not merely the particular actions but the general setting or
framework of life comes to rest quite as much upon
tradition as upon instinct. A mass of social customs,
political obligations, religious beliefs, environ a child from
the first, and are often in marked conflict with his inherited
impulses. Instinct as modified by social tradition is now
the ground-work of life, while apart from simple reflexes,
there is very little in the detailed adjustment of means to
ends in daily life in which acquired knowledge does not
take the principal part.

But no words are needed to show how incomplete even
at this stage is the organisation of life. Man is man, but
not yet master of his fate. All that he has done by
centuries of progress is to reclaim a little garden plot out
of the vast wilderness of unknown and unmanageable
forces of nature, among which the forces of his own
nature are not the least terrible and by far the most
incalculable. Nor if he could bend all nature to his


328 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

bidding would he yet understand fully to what end to use
his power. The world of human ends is not yet an ordered
community owning the sway of a single comprehensive
principle. It is a scene of bitter and perpetual strife,
where rival philosophies and fratricidal religions contend,
the crowd of ignobler passions often joining in the fight.
The reason that is within us forces us to hold that what*
ever is right and good cannot be destructive of other
things right and good, but rather must co-operate with
them to the same ultimate end. But human ethics as we
know them provide no such harmony. Half the energies
of the best men are taken up in combating others no less
well intentioned than themselves.' It is no doubt right
provisionally that both should ^ht for their principles,
just as in war men on both sidbs, fighting for their own
country, are as individuals justified. So far the compre-
hensiveness of the modem spirit can bring in a certain
ethical harmony. But it is a harmony which deepens the
tragedy that it ennobles, and ennobles it only by pointing
to a still loftier harmony resting on the common nature
that underlies all differences and the greater far oiF end of
human kind which all actual effort but dimly apprehends.

Reason, as the impulse to harmonise and unify, keeps
constantly before us the ideal of a principle which should
explain the world, and a purpose which should rationalise
human effort. Man has not reached his goal, but he has
made some progress since the days when he chipped the
flint spear heads of the river-drifts. This progress is
most apparent on the side of knowledge, and we will
consider that first.

2. In what has been said hitherto of the organisation of
human experience, we have had in view thought as it
exists among men in general, not thought as specially
developed in art, religion, science, or philosophy. We
have in short been dealing with ** common-sense " know-
ledge and common-sense ways of thinking. We may
now briefly contrast the characteristics of common sense
with those of that higher organisation of experience which
constitutes science.

We have seen that in the third stage generalisations


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 329

are made explicit, and becoming explicit, they may be
further correlated with one another as well as with fresh
perceptions. As this correlation proceeds, loosely or-
ganised masses of thought arise. We know that common
sense abhors trains of reasoning and abjures close analysis.
Nevertheless in our common knowledge ideas already
exist in combinations. Tacit combinations they may
be, but they are real, as we find from the numbers that
rush to the defence when any cherished thought is assdled.
The ideas connected with our daily life, our homes,
belongings, occupations, politics, form combinations of
this kind. We do not reduce them to system, but we
might do so if there were an adequate motive to set
us to work. But though there are combinations at this
stage, they are loose and ill organised, as is sufficiently
shown by the contradictions which arise when the
generalities of common sense are taken literally as
universal truths. Common sense, indeed, tolerates a good
deal of contradiction. It does not distinguish very
carefully between " never " and ** hardly ever," and tacit
saving clauses are part of its stock in trade. For the rest,
common sense admits that it does not know everything,
and is always ready to live and learn.

Suppose however that instead of tolerating contradic-
tions we seek to resolve or explain them. The explanation
will have to be found in the drawing of fresh distinctions
based upon a more thorough analysis. With this analysis,
we are already on the way towards turning our rough
generalisations into relatively exact universals. With
exact universals to work with, our loose inferences turn
into rigid proofs, and we find that we have passed from
common sense to science.

Character of Science.

The best single term for describing the general
character of Science as opposed to common sense is System.
Science works the data of experience into a whole of
interconnected facts. It may be objected that there is
interconnection of facts in all reasoning, and that the
distinction is therefore a mere matter of degree. But
even in the Third Stage systematisation is an underlying


330 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

principle, not the explidt object of mental efFort. Com-
mon sense carries interconnection as far as is necessary for
the purpose in hand But a new step is taken when the
purpose in hand is that of making interconnection com-
plete, and this is the step taken when we b^n to inves-
tigate a subject for the sake of understanding it through
and through. In science system becomes the explicit
purpose.

Science is systematic in the first place because it seeks
to be complete. It takes a certun subject-matter and
examines it not from the point of view of some practical
or imaginative interest, but for the sake of understanding
its essential nature as exhibited in all its developments.
Thus the beginning of science is the marking off, often by
a crude distinction which is afterwards revised, of a
department of experience for its field of operations. Next,
since the business of science is thorough understanding, it
must discover as well as it can the real connections of
things. This involves going beneath the generalities of
common sense, with their " practical certainty," to the
most definite and precise conceptions attainable. For
this purpose both terms and their relationships must be
accurately defined, and hence the saying — a one-sided
saying — that science is measurement. Hence also the part
played by definition, the true place of which is neither at
the beginning nor at the end of science, but all along its
march — ^the definitions being modified as knowledge of
the subject advances. To form some idea of the relation
between accuracy and systematic interconnection, we might
compare common sense to the implements of a handicraft,
and science to a modern machine. The parts of the loco-
motive or the printing machine must be adjusted with
the minutest accuracy to fit into a scheme of rigid wheels
and levers. The craftsman's tool may deviate from the
normal, and the craftsman himself will correct the
deviations. He gets to know his implement and accommo-
date himself to its individuality. The slightest deviation
stops the perfect but rigid system of the machine. In the
same way, common sense makes use of its rough generalities
without disaster, but for elaboration and system there


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 331

must be accuracy in each part, to the last millionth of an
inch.

It must be added that science goes more deeply than
common sense into the fact of connection itself. It does
not merely go beneath the practical efficiency of good
working rules to the strictly defined and conditioned
universal on which the rules rest. It goes beyond the
universal itself, seeking its why and wherefore by breaking
it up into elements and discovering further affinities. In
so doing, it tries to trace its way up to the central
point, what Aristotle called the essence of the subject, and
works from the centre outwards, drawing the radial lines so
as to preserve affinities and follow the lines of vital
distinction. The preparatory work of such a system is
that of classification, the final work, that of Explanation.
As the highest of the "systematic forms,** Explanation
exhibits the fact explained not merely as dependent on
another fact, but as necessarily occupying its assigned place
in a system of connected facts. Whether it resolves
compound laws into their elements, traces derivative truths
to their origin, exhibits the character of a part as
dependent on its place in a structure, or deals with an
event or process as some spedal phase in the genesis of an
oi^anic growth, the tendency of sdence seems always to
be to a systematisation of thought which shall not be
merely a connection of some one element with some other,
but rather the reference of all elements to a whole into the
plan of which they fit.

3. The beginner in science has been sometimes re-
presented ^ as turning to a new method because of his
disgust with the contradictions to which he was brought
by following the unreflective, unanalysed workings of
common sense. However this may be, there must speedily
arise in sdence a tadt recognition of the divergence
between thought and truth, or between ** truth " as it
appears to man, and Reality. At a certain stage of
reflection, the mind begins to recognise that its opinions
are in a sense of its own making. The natural man does
not question that he is in duly and hourly contact with
1 E,g. by Plato, Rep. VII.


332 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

reality ; he makes no question about the validity of the
conclusions which he draws from this seeming reality by
steps which appear no less self evident. Common sense
may be convinced of error as of illuacm, but while it
revises its results, it neither calls its own methods into
questions nor doubts its senses. It is satisfied to be right
in its own world. It does not ask about the limits of that
world, nor inquire whether its experience is the same thing
as reality. Yet the human mind, like the human body, is
the outcome of a long and highly specialised evolution.
It is a very elaborate structure, with determinate functions
of its own, and its every act and thought, every inference,
perception, and feeling depends as much upon this structure
as upon the outer world which acts upon it, and stimulates
it to reaction. We thus contribute to the making of our
own experience — ^that experience which at first we all take
as though it had a sort of absolute value wholly in-
dependent of ourselves. The full realisation and dis^
cussion of this difficulty is the central problem of
philosophy, but it is important to recc^ise that it makes
itself felt in one way and another even in the special sdences.
The world of science is not the same as the world of
common sense. The material universe as conceived by
molecular physics is not the universe as known to sight
and touch, only rather more completely known. The
conceptions of Life, of Personality, of Society are not
merely deepened and widened in scientific treatment, but in
great measure they have to be taken to pieces and thought
out anew. In many sciences, we get, by the use of
instruments, into a new world of perceptions, and are thus
forced to realise incidentally the relativity of our own
sense-experience. In all science we constantly find that
the conceptions which have grown up uncritically, and
which we began by using confidently as moulds into which
reality must fit, are spontaneous products of our limited
experience, which a wider experience would transform out
of all recc^nition.

But with this scepticism about fundamental conceptions,
we are thrown back on first principles. We shall need a
criterion of certainty, that is to say, a Logic. We shall


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 333

need an examination into the relation between the world
of our thought, and the world of ultimate reality, Le.^ a
Metaphysic. And in these inquiries there is wrapped up
another which is, strictly speaking, a special science, but
yet is concerned with those mental processes which are at
work in building up science itself, i.e. Psychology. Clearly,
if we want to evaluate the human factor in human
thought, we must understand the laws of growth by which
our ways of thinking have adssp. Historically, therefore.
Psychology has arisen in close connection with Logic and
Metaphysics. This is not the place to argue the predse
delimitation of the spheres of Logic, Metaphysics, and
Psychol(^. What I have to do is to call attention to
the work which these three branches of investigation have
shared between themselves. This work has a double
aspect. On the one hand, it is essentially an analysis of
the work of mind, and to many people this would seem to
be the differentiating mark between philosophy and
science. Thus, if we wish to contrast the highest stage of
mental development with all those that have gone before,
we might say that while in all the other stages the mind is
at work correlating its experiences, in this stage for the
first time it turns to analysing the principle and method
of correlation itself, the laws that govern it in its system-
making. On the other hand it is only by evaluating this
unknown quantity that we get a determinate relation
between thought in any sphere, and reality. That is to
say, this analysis is the primary condition of a completed
synthesis. If the partial systems of science can be con-
ceivably built up into a unified science revealing the true
nature of things, this analysis must be the keystone of the
arch.

4. This unification of experience is the ideal to which
philosophy points. For in the search for first principles,
philosophy finds itself brought up against something that
looks very like an insoluble contradiction. We cannot go
outside experience in order to judge experience. We may
push a science back to its first principles, but may still
ask on what those first principles rest. We may cUstin-
guish true ways of thinking from false, and yet be


334 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

reminded that the true ways are only ways of thinking.
Are we then landed ultimately in pure assumption as our
starting point ? Or may we recognise that the search for
a peg outside the world of thought to which thought
may be hung, is the result of an illusion, by which we
transfer to thought as a whole methods justly applicable
only to a part ? If this is so, the ultimate justification of
thought and experience is to be found within the world of
thought and experience itself. As I have argued at length
elsewhere, it is to be found in point of fact in its character
as a coherent system, a whole in which the diverse parts
support and necessitate one another. The goal of philo-
sophy is therefore a system which should embrace all
experience.

There have been two views of the function of philosophy
which at first sight are difficult to reconcile. One is, that
philosophy is the unification of the sciences ; the other,
stated broadly, is that it is the analysis of the presupposi-
tions of thought. In the view here taken, these two
conceptions coincide, for it is in the possibility of harmonis-
ing the results of thought that the test of thought is ulti-
mately to be found, and such a unification is not possible
without taking exact account of the way in which thought
goes to work in building up its conceptions. The correla-
tion of the sdences on the basis of an analysis of experience
seems then to be the fuller statement of the work of philo-
sophy. It is by such a correlation, if at all, that we get back
from the world of thought which has arisen uncritically out
of human experience and human evolution to the Reality
which we still hope to be attainable. We find the need
of such a correlation obscurely felt in the special sciences
when in trouble about their elementary conceptions, ex-
plicitly recognised in modern metaphysics, but not yet
satisfied by any philosophic system. The ideal unity of
the philosopher, however far beyond the reach of human
attainment, may serve as a ^* regulative concept,'* indicating
the direction in which the advance of thought moves and
the principles by which it is guided. The prime feature
whidi distinguishes this movement from the work of
common sense is the emergence of the idea of systematic


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 335

interconnection from its position as an underlying prindple
into the forefront of the struggle as the avowed object of
effort The exactness of science and its disengagement from
practical interests are corollaries of this principle. But
secondly, the idea of system necessitates in the way
described a criticism of method, and thirdly, the result
of this criticism is a remodelling of the whole conception
of experience and the truth that can be built upon experi-
ence, in such a way as to evaluate the work of mind, and
determine the relation of thought to reality. Explicit
systematisation, criticism of thought processes, and the
consequent " return to reality," are thus the three factors
determining the philosophic movement of thought. In
other words, here, and in the other advances of thought
that we have traced, the methods of lower phases are
made explicit, and as a consequence the character of the
systematisation is remodelled. Ordinary human thought
makes explicit the universal that underlies animal ex-
perience. Philosophy makes explicit the principles of
correlation that underlie the use of the universal. And
thus, while the bodies of common-sense knowledge are
fragmentary and rough-hewn, the ideal philosophic system
is an accurate piecing together of experience into a single
coherent whole. Thus philosophy grows out of common
sense, and completes its work. But it completes it only
by taking it to pieces and putting it together again. It
is ordinary thought not merely extended, but in a measure
transformed.

Philosophy then, in its narrower sense as the analysis of
mind, may be s^d to deal with the conditions under which
the general truths and inferences of common sense arose.
Meanwhile the sciences deal with what is in a sense the
same problem in a different form. For, as we have seen,
they trace the rough rules of common sense to the true
universals that underlie them, and out of these universals
they make their system. Finally, philosophy in the wider
sense is the effort towards the ideal unification of these
processes, the system of adequately defined truths in which
contradictions are resolved, and errors and half truths alike
explained. Putting these points together, we may formulate


336 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the work of systematic thought in general as the effort to ^

discover the conditions under which the general truths of
common sense arise, and by the correlation of these deeper
truths to complete the systematisation of experience.

5. Self^onscious developnent.

The ideal unity of thought is, as has been indicated,
rather a ^^r^ulative concept** than an attainable goal.
But there is a point in the movement which it guides
which may also be very remote, but whether remote or
near, seems to indicate the natural terminus of the whole
development which we have been following. We can
conceive as not indefinitely remote a stage of knowl^e in
which the human species should come to understand its
own development, its history, conditions, and possibilities,
and on the basis of such an understanding should direct
its own future, just as an individual who thoroughly
understands himself and the conditions of his life may
mark out his career for himself. Such a development
must be intellectual on the one ^de and ethical on the ;

other. Intellectually, the whole progress of the sciences
and philosophy may be regarded as so many steps towards
it, the lower sciences as giving man control of nature, the
higher as yielding the requisite knowledge of human life,
physical, mental, and social. Moreover, as G>mte and
others have shown, the lower or more abstract sciences lead
up to the higher or more concrete, — Mathematics to physics,
physics and chemistry to biology, biology to the mental
and social sciences. If we imagine the higher sciences as
complete as they are at present rudimentary, we should have
in them a general theoretical account of the conctitions of
human development, physical and moral. Thus prolonging
in imagination the line of mental development traced in the
foregoing pages, we are led to the conception of a scheme
embracing the whole problem of human life and destiny
on earth. We start with a consciousness limited to
the reaction of the moment, and knowing nothing of the
past which determines its action, nor of the future which
its action will affect. Step by step, as we advance, more
of the past and the future come within the scope of
intelligence, and we end at a point where all that has


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 337

made the race what it is is brought into the account and
made to prove what it has in it to be. At this stage^ the
mind of man is first fully self-conscious in the strict
sense — conscious of its own nature, of the conditions
under which it lives and works, of the future to
which it may aspire.

6. But *^ self-consciousness " of this kind is not attained
by scientific theory alone. It rests on a spiritual truth,
and must be applied by a moral force. Now moral force
is not a method of intellectual development, and spiritual
truth cannot be grasped by the intellect unaided. A race
devoid of moral feeling could not appreciate its own unity,
which is essentially a moral truth. Along with the intel-
lectual development of which we have spoken must there-
fore go a certain evolution of ethical conceptions which
we must attempt briefly to characterise.

The moral conceptions of men rest in the end on the
moral impulses of human nature. This does not always
hold of the individual, for the conceptions which a man
accepts intellectually and follows more or less involuntarily
are in great part worked out for him by society, and im-
posed upon him first by his spiritual pastors and masters,
and then by the requirements of social life. Thus in
ordinary life we are painfully conscious at times of the
divorce between moral theory and practice. Nevertheless,
if we take human society as a whole, the Aristotelian posi-
tion holds true, that the conception of virtue rests on the
practice thereof.^ X^^^^ is to say, the whole system of
moral tradition governing the life of a society is evolved
from the practical impulses and feelings at work in the
past and in the present. It is from these as they operate
on each other, and are reacted upon in turn by the physical
conditions of life, that the social system with its complex
rights and duties and the moral traditions in which these
are formulated evolve. There is indeed one other regulative
condition, namely, the stage of intellectual development
reached. This has an important influence in more than

^ Nic, EtA. VII. 8, 4. n^t hfi «Kti (cV rois fiaOrffiaruunf) 6 \^g
didao'xaXuc&r rtfv dpx&v, oUrt iuravBa' aXX* dptrrj ij <f}vaiKrj fj iBtarij rov
6p6odo(ti¥ irtpl TTfy apxjiv.

Z


338 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

one shape, as we shall presently see, but it is not the ba^s
of the matter.

From a very early if not the earliest stages of develop-
ment onwards, the maintenance of the species rests on two
conditions, conditions often so closely related as to be
almost identical, but at times thrown into sharp contrast
and antagonism. The first of these is what we may call
the principle of self-m«ntenance, " the will to live." We
have observed this principle at work in the processes to
which we do not attribute consciousness at all, in the form
of that tendency to self-m^ntenance which we attribute to
organisms as such. It persists in the various impulses
tending not merely to the maintenance of life, but to the
msuntenance of the individual in his own character, the
fulfilment of his impulses or desires, the realisation of his
individuality. But this principle is from an early stage
limited and controlled or modified in its action by another.
In all but the lowest stages, the life of a species depends
not only on the efforts of each incUvidual to moun-
tain himself, but on a certain unique relation between
different individuals composing the species. At least as
soon as distinction of sex appears, the incHviduals of a
species begin to have need of one another. They are not
complete each in himself, but need a complement, which
they find in another individual possessing the same funda-
mental specific character developed with certain differences.
The most obvious and most permanent need of this kind
is that of sex, but in the highest orders this relationship
takes a thousand different shapes. The young needs the
parent, and so also does the parental instinct cry out for
young ones to satisfy it. The gregarious instinct runs far
down into the lower animal world, and in human life every
man must needs have some other human being by him, if
only to annoy him. Even rivalry and hatred rest on some
sort of consciousness of a common nature subjected to
difference, and of mutual help and love we need not
speak.

One need not waste words in showing that this relation
to other individuals must profoundly modify the workings
of " self-assertion," either by directly thwarting it, as when


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 339

love enjoins self-sacrifice, or perhaps by entering into and
modifying it, as when a man makes the pursuit of revenge
the object of a lifetime. The genesis of morality may be
said to consist in the development and interaction of these
two principles.

In the stage of pure instinct, the influence of the ele-
mentary relationships appears chiefly in the sexual and
parental impulse. We cannot regard these as imselfish,
any more th^n we can regard the impulse to eat and drink
as selfish. Both terms imply a conception of ends, which
is alien to pure instinct. The conception of a primitive
egoism on which sociability is somehow overlaid is without
foundation either in biology or in psychology. Indeed, it
has been said with more truth of Nature —

** So careful of the type she seems,
So careless of the single life."

For the impulses of sex and provision for young, if not
unselfish, at least do not tend to self-maintenance. In
some instances, as the act of procreation in the fly, and
courtship in the case of the male spider, they are danger-
ous, and even fatal, while if we allowed the solitary wasps
any sort of understanding of the purpose of their actions,
we should have to admire the self-devotion of their unre-
mitting toil to build and provision an abiding place for
the grub which they n^er see. We do not impute such
reflection, and we therefore reckon the actions mentioned
as neither selfish nor unselfish. What is clear is that in
following out these instincts the animal is acting as a part
of a whole, as a member of a species. He is stimulated by
his aflinity to another individual, and. his actions are of
service to individuals that come after him. It does not
seem that the ^* social principle,** so to call it, makes any
marked advance in the first stage of intelligence. We have
seen that the attention shown to the young is of a rudi-
mentary character, and that social life is little more than a
manifestation of the gregarious instinct. It is indeed '(Hfli-
cult to see how the experiences operating within the
limitations of this first stage could teach anything with
regard to the eflFect of conduct on others. So far, it is

z 2


340 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

only when the consequences of action make themselves
apparent in the feelings of the agent that they influence
subsequent conduct, and under that limitation it is hard to
think that the effect of action upon others can be in any
way apprehended. It is in the stage of concrete experi-
ence, where we get on the one hand purposive action, and
on the other recognition of and definite feelings towards
individuals, that action first becomes interesting from the
point of view of the ethical inquirer. In this stage life is
still dominated by the struggle for existence, but the animal
builds up for himself a little ring fence within which the
impulses making for co-operation are allowed full play.
Family life is conspicuous for its development in this stage.
Mating is often relatively permanent— conspicuously
among many species of birds^ — and the care for the young
is carried to a high pitch. In many.cases herds and flocks
are found which live in the m^n in a state of internal
peace, and in which mutual helpfulness and sometimes a
simple division of labour are found. In these little com-
munities we have already seen that many of the fundamental
sodal and self-regarding impulses appear. There is every
sign of sympathy and attachment, and equally of pride,
jealousy, anger, and hatred — qualities also implying a
relation to others as individuals, though a relation of
antagonism. Upon the whole, the higher animals appear
to act on the Mosaic precept, " Thou Shalt love thy friend
and hate thine enemy." The greater part of the world is
either an enemy or a prey, and accordingly the animal
must live principally by taking care of himself and being
ready to fight. Hence self assertion is the dominant note
of his character if he is strong, self protection if he is weak,
and he must have the qualities known as ^^self-r^arding,*'
which belong thereto. But there is a little bit of the
world which is a friend, and in relation to this little bit he
develops a cUfFerent side of his character, and becomes a
social animal. Thus in this stage the ^^ social principle,"
that is, the fundamental identity of the species appearing
in difl^erent forms according to age, sex, and individuality,
becomes the foimdation, first, of certain distinctive relations
which we might almost call " personal," with the appro-


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 341

priate emotions of love, hate, sympathy, attachment,
jealousy. Secondly, it is the foundation of little social
structures, families, flocks, herds, resting on a cert^n com-
munity of interest, admitting of a simple division of labour,
and possessing some permanence. To maintain these little
societies there must be a considerable measure of mutual
understanding and assistance. That is to say, among the
concrete or practical ends which we recognise at this level
of development, the satisfaction of mate or young or even
comrade may figure along with the satisfaction of self. We
may say broadly that in this stage, on the basis of Sym-
pathy, actions are adapted to concrete social ends. It must
further be recollected that such action rests neither on blind
impulse, nor on any general conception, but is directed to
the particular practical end preferred at the moment — ^that
is, it is based upon desire. Human morality rests on the
same fundamental conditions at a higher stage of develop-
ment. Our common human nature is the ultimate basis
of moral conceptions. Upon the emotional need we have
of each other rest the affections, and with them the rela-
tions of family and friends. On the same creed extended
and reinforced by common understandings and common
interests which enjoin mutual help and mutual self-restraint
rests society. In short, upon the basis of a common nature
is reared a common interest and understanding. But this
common interest is not at first explicitly recc^nised. It is
rather a principle embedded in the structure of society,
and fostering its life and growth. What comes before con-
sciousness in the earlier stages is rather the mass of rules and
customs prescribing those dealings of individuals with one
another on which the existing social structure rests. These
rules and customs evolve later into written laws on the one
hand, and moral judgments supplementing and correcting
established laws on the other. Human society is from the
first differentiated from any animal society that we know
of by the fact that the individual actions on which it rests
are not left either to fixed instincts and habits on the one
hand, or to the desires of the moment on the other, but
are embodied in general rulesforming a permanent standard
which society itself will enforce. In this formulation of


342 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the general rules of action prescribed by the conditions of
life, and particularly of social life, we find the foundation
of human moral systems.

It follows that effective mcH^l theory is broadly relative
to the practical exigencies of the existing sodal structure.
Now the existing social structure rests on a very partial
application of that principle of a common human nature to
which it owes its existence. In primitive life, sodeties are
small, and mutually hostile. The common interest which
unites the men of group a makes them collectively hostile
to group B. Nor is this all. The relations within any angle
group are by no means dominated by the social principle
to the exclu^on of any other. The actual structure of
any society is a kind of compromise between the claims of
self assertion and the recognition of what is due from man
to man. The pure social principle would demand the
suppression of every instinct of antagonism and personal
aggrandisement. Effectively recc^nised morality has
never demanded anything of the land. It recognises
self-assertion, rivalry, competition, and antagonism, within
their limits, and seeks so to adjust them that they shall
not be destructive of the social order. The social princi-
ple is, as it were, Society's collective instinct of self-pre-
servation, and it reduces the other instincts to order as
best it may, but its original aim is not to conquer but
to compromise with them. It is at a later stage, when
the social principle has become more explicitly realised,
that there arises a moral theory going beyond actual
morality. Hence also comes about a divorce between the
moral ideal, or religion and philosophy on the one hand,
and the effective morality which is the generalised
expression of customary conduct and the recc^nised
requirements of social life, on the other. We are told,
for example, to love our enemies, but the primitive man,
and we are all primitive men when it comes to the point,
loves his friends and hates his enemies, and his conceptions
of right and wrong rest on the hate as much as on the
love. The average man learns in church to love his
neighbour as himself, but he keeps the lesson for Sundays
and holy-days, Le.j days on which he has nothing to do.


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 343

It does not enter into his practical consciousness of right
and wrong. When he sets about to best his neighbour,
he has no sense of wrongdoing as he has when he steals or
lies. We are not to think of the conception of doing to
others as we would be done by as a principle which appeals
to the average man in the light of a duty against which
he habitually transgresses with a certain sense of remorse.
On the contrary, it does not for the most part appeal to
him as standing in any relation to practice at all. It is
just a pretty formula which he likes to hear repeated, as
long as the preacher does not use it to draw uncomfortable
conclusions bearing on practical life. Under the veneer
of Christian ethics, the average man has a code of his
own. It is a mistake in the opposite direction to suppose
with the cynic that the natural man recognises no purely
moral obligation. On the contrary, he is constantly
surprising the attentive observer by showing a regard for
some kind of code in quite unexpected ways. But it is
a code of his own — a code one may conjecture, differing
more or less from class to class and from nation to nation,
and based in each case on the realised relations of a man's
life, on the nature and exigencies of the particular part
which it falls to him to play, the special form which the
struggle for existence takes for him. Life remains for
the average man a game which he plays ag^nst others,
and he has the character and the sentiments appropriate
to a player. His morality consists essentially in recog*
nising the rules of the game. If you condemn the game
altogether, in the name of something higher than war and
competition, he simply does not understand you, or he
classes you with those ministers of religion who preach
upon the blessings of peace one day, and the next lead
with voices raised to highest sanctimonious pitch the
popular howl for war. The average man not only plays
his game against others, but in his heart approves of and
respects them when they play it well against him. Still,
he expects them to keep to certain rules. If they hit, it
must be above the belt, and if they cheat, it must be
all in accordance with the regular tricks of the trade.
The average man has, as we say, his code.


344 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

. . . ^^ What passes as the moral consciousness of mankind is
no more purely and unreservedly moral than manb'nd itself. It
is a highly complex product of very various sentiments, many of
them beautiful, most of them respectable, but some of them
irrational and ugly. To make sure of this, it is only necessary
to take the average moral sentiment of workaday life, consider not
the phrases which it employs, but the application which it makes
of them, and compare it with any well-known example of the
genuine ethical spirit, say the Sermon on the Mount, which
comes almost as near as is humanly possible to unalloyed ethical
truth. The difference resolves itself into this, that whereas the
Sermon on the Mount is an expression of pure love, the average
moral sentiment is an expression of regard for others tempered by
rivalry and fear. It is a compromise between the primitive
struggle for existence and the sense of an identical nature and
purpose. Hence, to illustrate by a single point, its regard for
success as such, and its contempt and dislike of failure ; its feeble
criticism of successful violence and its self-righteous zeal in
devising fresh degradation for those who are already disgraced.
There can be little doubt that the average moral man thoroughly
enjoys the punishment of an offender and feels his own righteous-
ness enhanced thereby. Objection to cruelty seems to be a
comparatively modern feeling, still in its infancy and limited to
a snudl percentage of people. An unauthorised shot at a rabbit
is still a far more serious offence than beating a child with a
poker, and pecca fortiter remains a tolerably safe motto. In the
same spirit, when the average man talks of honour he is not really
thinking of a moral quality, but of something which makes a man
respected and feared by others, which puts him beyond the reach
of insult or injury. It is only in this sense that a duel can be
called an affair of honour, ana it is in just the same sense that a
nation's honour is thought to be more 'seriously menaced by a
frank admission that it has done a wrong, than by the most un-
scrupulous use of force against the people that it has injured. In
short, force, self-assertion, and all that contributes to the market
value of man or woman, are natural objects of admiration for the
consciousness which is immersed in the struggle for existence,
and they remain constantly at strife with the ideas of love, self-
surrender, and mutual service which arise with the dawning
consciousness of a common human nature." ^

7. Ordinary unreflecting morality is in line both with
lower and higher developments in its ultimate basis. The

* From the writer's "Ethical Basis of Collectivism," IntemoHomU
Journal of EthicSy Jan. 1898, pp. 151, 152


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 345

common character and interests of the species, its unity
for certain purposes, go to determine the instincts, and later,
the sympathies and antipathies of animals ; in human
thought they become, within certain limits to be insisted
on presently, explicitly realised. Our social morality rests
on our knowledge that others are made of like clay to
ourselves. But what the average man knows of others is
that while for some purposes or in some relations he may
rely on their help, for other purposes he must also be pre-
pared to maintain himself against them. Now within a
society, as order develops, the average man comes to
conform himself well enough to the customs, laws, and
understandings which establish a cert^n compromise
between his self-assertion and his regard for his neighbour.
He recognises, to use our former expression, the rules of
the game. But outside the organised sodety, all men are
primitively enemies, and here, at least, it is astonishing
how primitive we still are. The result of social morality
in its lower stages is to organise men into competing
groups. Nowhere, as we all know, is the paradox of the
moral consciousness more conspicuous than in the contrast
between the relations upon which it insists within a well
ordered society, and those which it tolerates or encourages
towards the foreigner. Dr. Wallace gives an idyllic
account of the Dyaks of Borneo, who appear to be the most
charming and orderly of people— only they have an
unfortunate habit of head-hunting. The heads, of course,
are only taken from the inhabitants of other villages.
Here, surely, is the human moral consciousness in a nut
shell. Popular prints of Boers skewered like hogs by
a British lance seem to indicate that the humane and
kindly British public is, apart from the colour of the skin,
remarkably like the Dyak.

For the natural man, rights and obligations efFectively
extend only to the Group to which he belongs. In any
society but the most primitive tribe, which is too small and
too feebly organised to admit of much differentiation, the
differences and antagonisms that keep different tribes
apart are reproduced, if somewhat more faintly, in the re-
lations of groups, classes, or castes within the tribe. All


346 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

the world over, a man has one morality which he keeps for
his peers, and another for those ** beneath " him. It is
instructive to note how the moral distinction survives the
disappearance of the political forms or legal barriers in
which it is originally expressed. It is in the most
democratic communities that we are apt to find the shades
of social inequality most nicely marked off. The average
man cannot genuinely feel that an inferior class deserves or
even really desires the kind of treatment which he expects
for himself, and recognises as due from him to others of
his own order. *^ Libbaty*s a kinder thing that don't agree
with niggers " is a maxim which, mutatis mutandis^ governs
social morality all the world over.

If we trace the moral paradox to its root, we shall find that
it grows out of an inadequate conception of that common
human nature upon which morality rests. The duties that
we recc^nise towards others, the rights of our own to which
we expect them to pay regard, are founded on the common
human nature which makes possible the broad reciprocity,
the give and take of social life. To this principle civilised
morality invariably does lip-service, but it is so imperfectly
realised, and its obligations so funtly felt, that it is only
applied where other motives come to its support. These
motives fall roughly into two main classes. There are,
first, those of affection and sympathy on which rest family
life, and, in a less d^ree, the intercourse of friends, and
the relations of a man to those whom he recc^nises heartily
as his " neighbours." There is, secondly, the community
of interests, not necessarily mere self-interest, but the sense
of an end common to a certain group, be it a class, an
organisation, a party, or a nation. We have already seen
how this community of interest underlies the formation of
social groups, and develops along with them, being at once
the cause and effect of their life and growth.

8. The social structure at any given place and time, and
the moral system appertaining to it, is a partial organisa-
tion of many conflicting forces. The self-assertion of
individuals, the collective selfishness of families and other
minor groups are not subdued, but come to a kind of com-
promise with the necessities of social union, and the fighting


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 347

spirit is permanently mdntained by the hostile or at best
unsocial and unorganised relations of society as a whole to
other societies. But from an early period the sense of a
common human nature makes itself felt above the limita-
tions of the ordinary workaday morality. There is, for
example, a certain chivalrousness towards enemies apparent
even at the level of barbarism, and the impulses of sympathy
and tenderness occasionally well up over all barriers of
class or race or creed.* A moral revolution is introduced
as soon as the conception of common humanity becomes
recc^nised as the fundamental moral truth which is to be
thanked for such advances in social organisation as have
been already made. With the explicit recognition of this
principle begins the organisation of life on quite a different
scale and with altogether higher ends.

The first and most striking effect of the humanitarian
principle is its levelling tendency. In the ancient world,
the Stoic doctrine of the fatherhood of God, and the con-
sequent brotherhood of man, was instrumental in breaking
down the barriers raised by differences of race, nationality,
and even caste against the universal application of moral
truth. The older morality of Greece and Rome was civic.
It was concerned with the reciprocal obligations and rights
of free men in a city state, and but faintly concerned itself
with duties to slaves or foreigners.^ The Stoic doctrine was
better suited to be the ethical creed of the great denation-
alised Roman Empire. In proclaiming the moral equality
of the slave with his master. Stoicism overleapt class boun-
daries as well as race boundaries, and made quite clear for
the first time in Western Civilisation that a man is to be
judged, not by his birth or fortune, but by what he is worth
as a man.' The absorption of humanitarianism in super-

^ Nevertheless the utter cynicism of Athens in the fifth century B.c.
shocked the Greek world, just as France at the beginning of the nine-
teenth century, and England at the end of it, have shock^ the modem
world. The Melian dialogue followed by the dramatic retribution of the
Sicilian catastrophe is Thucydides' testimony to this feeling of his con-
temporaries. But Plato's conclusions (Rep. 469-471) show how narrow
was the conception of humanitaiian duties m the fourth century.

* A single passage in Aristotle {Eih. Nic, VIII. 11, 7) may bf^ said
to admit this truth by implication, but rather by way of exception to a
rule than as a fundamental axiom of life.


V


348 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

natural religion has at once popularised and corrupted it.
Between the great world-religions of Buddha, Christ, or
Mohammed, and the more ancient tribal or national religions,
there is a broad difference, roughly parallel to the difference
between humanitarian and nationalist ethics. The world-
religion at least seeks to include all men in its scope. If
all men could be persuaded to believe the same thing, this
would be well enough, but as in matters of theolc^y this
ideal is never realised, the effect of religious teaching is
ordinarily to draw a very vital distinction between those
who are of the household of faith and those who dwell
without. Hence the revived humanitarianism of modem
times has often had to protest against the ethics of religion,
and for a time found itself allied with science in combating
the Church. There were however sufficiently strong
humanitarian elements in the Christian creed to assert
themselves against the degradation of religion, and the
modem humanitarian movement from the Evangelical
revival of the Eighteenth century down to the Christain
Socialism of our own day, has been as much furthered by
the established religion on certain sides as it has been
hampered and obstructed by it on others. It is but just to
add that in the modern world the humanitarian spirit has
also had to fight the crudities of an incomplete and over con-
fident science. The humanitarianism which, whether as a
force interpenetrating older creeds or as itself a religion, is
familiar to the modern world, is principally associate with
the series of political and social changes to which it gives
unity of meaning and purpose. Many of these changes
have a negative or destructive aspect. Such, for instance, are
the abolition of slavery, the destruction of class privilege,
the establishment of equality of opportunity. But the
humanitarian principle is not negative but inclusive, and
aims at destruction only so far as is necessary to the removal
of barriers by which its operation is limited. It is as much
concerned for the extension of corporate responsibility as
for the free self-development of the individual ; but the
social order which it seeks is that of a higher organisation
in which differences are not obliterated, but preserved.
Similarly it holds the unity of the human race for a


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 349

principle which transcends all differences and rivalries of
nations, whence its persistent opposition to warfare ; but it
has no less often been the champion of nationality because
it recc^nises that the problem is to make divergent types
contribute to a vast harmony, not to reduce them to the
dead uniformity of a bureaucratic machine-world. Hence
politically its problem is on the one hand to create a state
which, without derogation to present freedom, shall he a
true community with no outcast or disinherited class ; on
the other, to make each state part of one greater com-
munity in which without loss of national vitality there
would be an overruling sense of the common human
heritage. I speak only of its efforts, and do not here
attempt to measure its success.

9. But there is another aspect of the humanitarian spirit
of which it will be well for our purposes to form some
conception, however imperfect. Its doctrine, as we have
put it, is that a man is to be judged by his worth as a man.
Properly speaking, it would carry this conception a step
further, and insist that moral and social values themselves
are to be measured and estimated in accordance with the
requirements and possibilities of human nature. The im-
portance of this position is that current doctrines of right
and wrong and the current estimate of comparative values
may diverge very greatly from what is best suited to the
normal development of the human species. For this diverg-
ence there are several reasons. In the first place, we have
seen that the moral standards of a people are evolved in
correspondence with the practical needs of that people.
They must accord with the social structure assumed under
pressure of that necessity. Clearly such necessities may
be of a temporary character, and they may be such as to
stunt or distort the social growth. Now the influence of
tradition tends to maintain moral rules after the need for
them has passed away. Morality is like a plant growing
in a confined space, which cannot at once resume its natural
form as soon as the confining barriers are removed. This
obstacle to free development is much aggravated by the
tendency of moral conceptions to crystallise into precepts
arrogating to themselves a supernatural sanction, and


3SO MIND IN EVOLUTION chap

accordingly an absolute fixity. This assumption, which
doubtless strengthens moral authority as long as the
supernatural basis is firmly believed in, and the ideal

E reached is thoroughly in harmony with the desires and
etter tendencies or the time, tends to undermine the hold
of morality altc^ether as soon as the possibility of a wider
and completer life is opened out. Religion is a progressive
force when it seizes on a new moral truth and presents
it convincingly to the popular imagination. It becomes
retrc^ressive when in presence of a still higher truth it
obstinately maintsuns the absolute validity and fixity of
the old.

Agdnst the tendency to bring conceptions of right and
wrong to the bar of tradition or of supernatural truth, it has
to be ssud that both tradition and religion have rather to
be brought before the bar of human nature. It is out of
the needs of common human nature that morality is ori-
ginally built up. Could we arrive at a complete conception
of human nature and its possibilities, we should possess
final moral truth. The humanitarian spirit has at least
reached the point of conceiving human nature as an
organism with a natural growth of its own. The growth
of the individual is limited in morality as in actual fact
by the corresponding growth of others. There is as it
were a moral struggle tor existence, no less than a physical,
and the character arrives at maturity at the expense of
some loss. Like the individual, the species has also a
possible and natural growth, made up necessarily of the
growth of its members, but difiFering in this, that it can
go on from generation to generation. The full meaning
of the humanitarian principle is to conceive of this growth
as a whole as the end and sum of all human efiFort, and to
judge existing conceptions of right and wrong thereby.

Human development may be instructively compared and
contrasted with simple organic growth. If we consider a
seed, we know that it contains within it certain possibilities
of development. In the proper soil and under assignable
conditions its growth will follow a normal course, and it
will come to the perfect flower. What is true of the seed
is true of the human being at birth. For each there is


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 351

normal development, a possibility of full and perfect
realisation, resting on certain conditions and laws of
growth. There is however this difference, that the
flower may become perfect at the expense of its neigh-
bours, while for the man, this method of attaining perfec-
tion destroys it. The perfection of the human soul is a
function of the perfection of others. Thus from indivi-
dual development we are driven on to social development,
and from that, to the development of the whole race. For
the race to be perfect, the individuals must be perfect, and
an essential part of their perfection must lie in their mutual
relations. This again is a peculiarity of the human world.
The general idea of a racial development is of course appli-
cable to the plant as well as to the man. Just as the
botanist studies the growth of the individual rose, its
normal course, its perfection, the conditions of health and
disease, so he investigates the evolution of the species or
the variety, shows how a generic type exhibits the promise
and potency of a specific form, and discovers the condi-
tions under which that form evolves. So does the sociolo-
gist with the human species : he treats it as something
that has evolved, and is evolving, and he seeks to discover
what further developments it holds in germ. In this way
the study of growth, human evolution, is to the humani-
tarian spirit what botany is to the gardener, who would
not only bring the flowers that he has to the summit
of their perfection, but would seek to derive from them
new and more beautiful varieties.

This scanty sketch will serve its purpose if it suggests
that the ethics of the civilised world is a field of thought
in which two principles, or more strictly, two phases of
development, are confusedly intermingled. On the one
hand is the morality of the natural man, a morality that
has grown up in correlation with the facts of individual
and social life, and this morality tends to be the effective
rule of conduct. On the other hand is a Wgher morality,
based on a conception, more or less perfect, of what life
means. This morality appeals too strongly to the con-
science or reason of mankind to be overtly rejected when
fairly presented, but it is not as yet strong enough to over-


352 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

come established practice when the two conflict. Hence
those " conventional lies," by which a faulty civilisation
seeks to make the best of both worlds. Hence also the
pitiable state of the recc^ised religious bodies, most of
which admit large fragments, more or less distorted, of
true ethical teaching which as parts of the established
order they dare not apply.

It will readily be seen that " natural morality " corre-
sponds to the Third Stage of intellectual development.
It has already been characterised in describing that stage.
At that level experience is organised into conceptions, and
similarly conduct is formulated in general rules, but as
there is no penetrating analysis of the conceptions, so there
is no striving after the underlying purpose that might
justify but might also remodel the rules. This analysis,
which involves moral as well as intellectual insight, is the
foundation of a higher moral teaching, which has historic-
ally become current in a fragmentary manner and in very
diverse forms. The central idea which gives unity to
these differences is that humanity is the object of man,
i.e.j that the business of the human race is to work out
all that it has in it to be. In this conception the social
structure and even the current morality are treated as
servants rather than masters of human life. And if we
follow out this doctrine into all that it implies, we are led
to think of an ethical system which will be guided by the
conception of the human race as a whole, bound together by
the ties of a common nature, and capable under ascertun-
able conditions of a future for which all earlier evolution
is preparatory.

lo. Such a principle might serve as a basis for that
comprehensive harmony of conduct which we should
expect to find at the highest stage of development. In
this respect again it contrasts with the fragmentary and
more or less inconsistent rules which satisfy unscientific
thought. But it is worth adding that a transition from
the lower or fragmentary to the higher or systematic
ethics may be seen at the point at which without any
scientific analysis, some general conception arises, compre-
hending and subordinating to itself all minor rules of


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 353

conduct. Such a conception may be social or religious ;
the end that it proposes may be the welfare of society, or
it may be obedience to the will of God. In either case,
though with very different results, such a conception
endows life for the first time with real unity of purpose,
and under its guidance a man's every action comes to be
devoted to a single end. Such an end, however, rarely
includes within it the whole of human nature. Those
who consecrate their lives to a single cause tend, as we are
often tragically made aware, to limit themselves in pro-
portion to their success in concentration. There are very
few men who can be as ardent in their patriotism as
Mazzini, and yet at the same time conceive of their
country as the servant rather than the mistress of
humanity. The ordinary patriotism is, if made the
highest end of life, a narrow, exclusive, and in the long
run a self-destructive idea. Conversely the greatest
modern statesmen in our own country have been noted
for qualifying the insular by the " European " view.
Nor need we waste words in describing how religion often
tends to narrow as well as to elevate. A man's God is
a crystallisation of certain elements of his own nature. It
is therefore a limited being, narrower than the man him-
self. To find the true God is to understand the Spirit
which moves and works in all things and strives towards
realisation, and it is only this God whose service is the
perfect freedom which consists in following the plan which
is at once natural and divine.

The ideal of moral philosophy is also to bring the con-
duct of life under the unity of a single comprehensive
purpose. But this unity, it is suggest^, is formed by a
deliberate synthesis of the divergent but not necessarily
conflicting possibilities of human development. Nothing,
if the method is true to itself, can be left out that is per-
manently necessary or desirable in the formation of human
character. Hence the ethical religion claims the privilege
of concentrating, like other religions, all life and all its
powers on a single aim, but it concentrates without narrow-
ing. Its ideal is to bring to their highest pitch all the
faculties of man so far as they are capable of harmonious

A A


354 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

development. Its enemy is everything that conflicts with
such harmony, and of this it finds much in the established
order, and even in the recc^nised moral and religious
teaching of the best ordered societies. It has therefore
constantly to go back from the recc^nised ideal to its own
deeper ideal. Its work is constantly to revise social rela-
tions and moral values in accordance with the realities of
human nature and social life. In this formula we arrive
by another road at the point reached when discussing the
goal of scientific thought. We saw then that the develop-
ment of science and philosophy pointed to the ideal of a
completed system in which the results of race experience
should be so far co-ordinated as to make possible a just
understanding of the true lines of race-<ievelopment. We
saw that this ideal postulated a certain development of
the ethical consciousness, since it is for this consciousness
that the race becomes a unity, while even to apprehend,
and, much more, to translate it into a practical correlation
of conduct and ideal, an ethical principle was needed as the
underlying motive. We have now sketched the course of
ethical development so far as to show that it leads us to
the same result, that the highest ethical consciousness
postulates an understanding of the possibilities of race
development, and consists in the efiFort to remodel sodal,
moral, and religious life in accordance therewith. As in
theoretical, so in practical science, the higher development
consists in a double process. Like philosophy, it is a com-
pletion of the co-ordination of conduct which we find in all
moral ideals by the formation of a single comprehensive
system. Like philosophy, it proceeds by tracing existing
conceptions back to underlying principles, finding in such
principles a keystone of the arch.

The parallel between ethical development and the general
growth of system and co-ordination of which it is a part,
may indeed be carried through all the four intellectual
stages which we have distinguished. In the first stage we
have impulse not explicitly related to its end. Accordingly
we have no evidence of purposive action for the good of
another. In the second stage we have concrete, practical
ends. Corresponding with this, we have sympathy and


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 355

attachment binding one individual to others, and corre-
lating his actions with their immediate needs. In the third
stage, action rests on general conceptions, and is adapted to
comprehensive ends. Ethically it is guided by moral
rules, and may be subordinated to an end as comprehensive
as the permanent welfare of a great community. In the
fourth stage general conceptions being traced back to their
principles are formed into a comprehensive system in which
any particular thought or action must find its definite
place in relation to all the rest. Ethically this general
conception is the realisation of the full promise of human
nature in the effort towards which it is conceived that
human effort might find a unity which should not be a
limitation.

Summary.

The last stage of development that we have traced
consists, like the earlier ones, in a double advance in ex-
plicitness and comprehension. Once again, there is no
breach of continuity, but a series of changes amounting as
they are summed up to a difference of quality. Going below
the reasoning of the previous stage and its conditions in
reality, thought now interconnects the universal Truths
which constitute these conditions and forms of them a
system, the aim of which is to render experience intelligible
as a whole. From first to last, the mind works by corre-
lating experiences. In the highest development of the
present stage, the principles and methods of correlation
themselves become objects of consciousness, and form a
distinguishable element in the system which they build up.
We have compared the earlier stages to distinct phases in
the apprehension of a lexical syllogism. The lowest stage
we compared to a syllogism in which the conclusion alone
was explicit, the premisses being represented by psychological
forces which, without being grasped as such, produced
their result. The second stage we took as equivalent to
the inference from minor to conclusion, where a major
premiss was still unrecognised. In the third stage, the
major was brought into the conscious process, and we had

A A 2


356 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

major, minor, and conclusion explicitly recognised as a
coherent whole. It remains that in this last stage the
theory of syllogism, the character of the Universal and the
Particular, the assumptions involved in reasoning, in a
word, the whole thought-process operating as a psycho-
logical force in the lower stages, should be analysed out,
and become, like its data and its products, an object of
examination and criticism. The highest operation of
thought, as we know it, is to be conscious of its own prin-
ciples. And this applies, of course, to the moral and
practical as well as to the theoretical functions of thought.
We demand at this stage a similar analysis of the ba^s of
the moral judgment : of religious conceptions : of the
social structure. In the lower stages of human develop-
ment these conceptions grow like natural products.
Though their life is in the thought and action of intelli-
gent individuals, yet the action of man on man, of thought
on thought, of the social structure on the individual, of
the individual on his environment, is so subtle and so
complex that though each step in the progress of any
great change may be the conscious act of a rational agent,
the change as a whole proceeds unconsdously and without
plan. Gradually to weld the vast mass of interrelated
cause and effect that constitutes history into an intelligible
whole, will be the latest result — for it is a result not yet
achieved — of the highest science. In point of explidtness,
then, the work of the highest human philosophy is to
analyse and bring into its system the principles upon which
that system rests.

These principles form the keystone of the arch, which
for the first time embraces the whole of human purpose
within its span. In the previous stages, we have seen how
the organisation of experience b^an modestly, with the
readjustment of instinctive processes, and developed to the
point where in human life it uses the recorded experience
of the past to form a basis of conduct, and a setting for
the life and purposes of the individual. But up to this
point, though experiences are grouped together, the results
are not systematically co-ordinated inter se^ nor has life one
purpose, plan, or rule, but rather many that contend with


XIV SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT 357

one another. It remains for the highest stage to reduce
the whole of human experience to a single system, and to
make the future of humanity the all-embracing purpose of
action. Remote as this ideal organisation of life may be,
it is suggested that the trend of theoretical science is
towards the discovery of the conditions of human de-
velopnient, ^hile.the trend of the ethicail . spirit is- towards
maKng that development the supreme object of action.
In the union of these movements, human thought would
seem to come as near as possible to the limiting conception
of the correlation of all experience with all action. At
any rate, knowledge of the underlying conditions of
development would become the basis of a system of
conduct designed to promote development. The life
of the species would become self-conscious, and its growth
self-determined. It remains only to note that the force of
instinct or heredity would not disappear, but it would no
longer be a force operating outside the system of know-
ledge. On the contrary, it would enter into the system
and be duly allowed for among the fundamental conditions
affecting the possibilities of growth.


CHAPTER XV

SUMMARY OF THE STAGES OF CORRELATIOK

I. The broad fact dealt with in the preceding chapters
is the adaptation of human and animal action to the
requirements of life and growth. Such adaptation we have
found to involve a certsdn correlation, to put it in the
most general terms possible, between the experiences and
actions of the individual and of the race. In the character
of the correlation found at different stages there is an^
immense difference, and as is the nature of the correlatibn,
such is the adequacy, subtleness, and comprehensiveness of
the adaptation, and such also the *^ requirements ot
existence" which the organism seeks to meet. At one
end of the scale we have a method of correlation based on
the principle of heredity, and working out in the course ot
many generations and through the extinction of a majority
of incfividuals, a structure fitted to respond with some-
thing approaching the regularity of a machine, to those
promptings of the environment or of the inward mechanism
which concern the safety of the individual and the per-
petuation of the species. Adaptation at this stage, though
often a model of precision in its working, is seen never-
theless in its narrowest and most primitive shape. For
each act is merely a response to a stimulus or set of stimuli
which under normal circumstances gives the required result,
but where the environment deviates from the normal,
there is little or no power of making the necessary
readjustments. Lastly, the requirements of existence
which action is adapted to secure are the requirements of a


CH. XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 359

bare existence, or, to put it more fully, of the maintenance
of the specific type. Action is not adapted to the im-
provement of the type, nor even to making the life of the
individual or of other individuals better or fuller or more
comfortable.

From this stage of correlation we passed to those in
which the behaviour of the organism is less and less rigidly
defined by heredity, while the part played by experience
becomes greater. Adaptation becomes at the same time
more many-sided and directed to remoter and more
comprehensive aims, including conceptions of welfare
which involve something more than the bare existence of
the species. As the development proceeds, the experience
of the race is once more brought into play in a new form,
as acting not merely through inheritance, but through
tradition and history, and finally as the basis of scientific
inductions. In a parallel fashion, the conception of the
ends of conduct widens until it grasps the welfare of the
race as a whole as its object. At this point Develop
ment, at first blind and mechanical, advancing through
stress of conflict and competition, becomes directed and
purposeful — an organic growth, and yet the growth of
an organism that knows its own destiny, and by knowing
achieves it.

This process is, as we conceive, the fundamental fact of
Orthogenic Evolution. We have now to summarise the
main features of the successive stages as they have appeared
in the preceding chapters.

I. The Pre-intelligent Stage.

There is, as we have seen, an indirect correlation of
experience, reaction, and welfare, before intelligence, that
is, the capacity of the individual to learn from experience,
comes into play. Response to stimulus is in this stage the
outcome of an inherited structure, and if a certain variation
of structure gives a more suitable response, that is, one
better adapted to preserve the organism or its oflFspring,
such a structure would tend to be " selected/* That is to
say, individual? possessing it would have an advantage in
the struggle for existence. In this way inborn tendencies
to a given method of response may be correlated with the


36o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

past experiences of the race. The points to be summarily
noted here as to this method of adaptation are : —

1. Such correlation is not achieved within the experience

of any individual, but only through a succession
of individuals, resting upon the destruction of most
of them.

2. The ** welfare " subserved by the adaptation is simply

the survival of the race under the existing conditions
of its environment.

3. Adaptation is limited by stimulus ; that is to say, if

the normal stimulus fails or is greatly modified, the
power of carrying out the ** ends " which the
adaptation subserves is small, and often altogether
absent.
. 4. The growth of adaptation (i.^., the evolution of an
instinct) is limited by the condition that each stage
of change must be directly more beneficial than
that which it supersedes (/.^., without regard to
the question whether a further development on
similar lines would be still more beneficial or
not).

It follows that (as compared with correlation effected
within the experience of the individual) the rate of change
is indefinitely slow, and there is no necessary tendency to
a higher type, but merely to one which will under existing
circumstances maintain itself more efficiently.

11. Correlation based on Individual Experience.

Of this process we have distinguished four great
stages.

Stage L Unconscious Readjustment.

While inherited behaviour, whether instinctive or reflex,
consists of the response to stimulus of a preformed
structure, we find in this stage a modification of such
response by experience of its eflFects. This process may
be regarded as the germ of all subsequent correlation. In
this first stage, the correlation is to be understood as
follows :

The feeling consequent upon instinctive or random
reaction to a stimulus modifies the reaction to similar


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 361

stimuli in a manner determined by the nature of the
feeling. Simple instances are those of the spider refusing
after a few trials a fly which had been dipped in turpentine,
or of the fish which learns to come for food on the
approach of human beings.

To the observer it is clear that the basis of the"*^
modification is a certsdn relation of stimulus, reaction, and
feeling. But for the intelligence at this stage, these
elements and their relations are not explicit. They have
no distinct function each for itself, but act as a whole so as
to efiFect the particular modification described. Classing
feelings among motor-stimuli, we may describe the whole
process as a direct correlation of a set of motor experi-
ences with subsequent reactions to stimulus, the term
direct being used to imply that no subsidiary correlation
is involved in the process. As a thought process we
have compared it to a syllogism in which the mind is
explicitly aware of the practical conclusion alone, the
premisses being represented by a certain combination of
psychological forces from which the conclusion follows.
The sphere of this kind of correlation is that of instinctive
and random action. Its function is to adapt such action
to its immediate consequences in feeling, and its efiFect on
the species is to render instinct more plastic and general
where otherwise it would have to be particular and
defined. Of its ethical aspect, ail that can be said is that
as it is the feeling of the individual alone that operates in
modifying action, it is difficult to suppose that either the
instincts tending to self msuntenance or those tending to
race maintenance can be essentially modified. Summarily
the work of intelligence in this stage may be described as

The direct correlation^ of a set of motor experiences with
subsequent reactions to stimulus.

Its distinctive psychological unit ^ is an excitation which
has acquired a certain motor character from previous ex-
periences of feeling. This is the explicit basis of action,

^ By a psychological unit I mean a product of experience manifesting
itself as such either b^ entering into relation with other experiences or by
becoming itself the direct basis of action. By distinctive, I mean mark-
ing off the present from the immediately preceding stage.


362 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap

and into it the result — ^the feeling which the action will
produce or avoid — does not enter. The experiences which
go to modify the excitation form part of a psychological
process, not of a content for consciousness, and the whole
process of correlation is comparable to a syllogism in
which the conclusion only should be an explicit content
for consciousness.

The scope of the experience co-ordinated is the relation
between reaction upon stimulus and the immediately attend-
ant feeling. The scope of the adjustment effected is pre-
cisely the same — ^that is, adaptation of reaction so as to
produce the most suitable feeling.

The sphere of this adjustment is that of instinctive or
random action, and its general biological effect is to render
instinct more plastic.

Ethically considered, action in this stage is Impulsive^
and so far as determined by experience, must be regarded
as limited to adjustments based on and relative to the
feeling of the individual alone.

Stage IL Concrete Experience and the Practical Judgment.

It is clear that in the first stage the scope of intelligence
is at a minimum, being confined to the felt character of
the excitement of the moment. This character must
contain a motor impulse more or less definite, but it need
not be in any way differentiated into distinct elements.
Hence discrimination is also at its lowest point. The first
advance in both these respects brings us to the second stage.
Psychologically, the new departure which has taken place
in this stage is that the related term which in the previous
stage merely influences action, is now brought explicitly
into consciousness. In other words, the perceptual
relation, the concrete whole in which distinct terms are
united, now appears to be the basis of action, or even
to enter, along with other experiences, into higher com-
binations. Thus in the previous stage, where an excita-
tion A led to a consequence b, it acquired thereby a
motor character fi. But in proportion as p becomes
accurately defined and individualised in each new case,
it comes to be equivalent to what is in human conscious-
ness a motor idea of b in a definite relation to a. The


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 363

content thus arrived at is a whole constituted by related
elements.

The judgment in which distinct elements are held in
relation must rest upon a perception, and thus the founda-
tion of the change we are describing must lie in the growing
distinctness and comprehensiveness of perception whereby
related objects can be apprehended distinctly and yet
tc^ther. Such apprehension again becomes possible as*
the perception proper becomes disengaged from the motor
impulse (otherwise the different elements in a complex
content would lead to confused reactions). Such a per- *
ceptual content, when freely reproducible, becomes the
basis of the recognition of individual objects, persons, and
places, and of the succession of events. Action is now
no longer tied to a specific motor stimulus, but is based
on a relation whereby means and end are connected.

We have called this the stage of Concrete Experience
and of the Practical Judgment. The correlation which it
effects is a degree more complex than that of the preceding
stage. Its terms are themselves relations. In the per-
ceptual relation which forms the starting point, experiences
which are distinct are already combined to form a whole.
The adjustment of means to ends is again, as we have
understood it, a distinct act of correlation, and the one
relation is based on the other. We may express this
increased complexity by describing this stage as the corre-
lation of relations, the one set being perceptual, the other
practical. Both are essentially concrete, that is to say, we
deal in this stage not with the relation as such, but with
two or more related objects of experience. From this
it follows that while the "particular" relations are
** conscious " or ** explicit," the ** universal " that connects
them operates unconsciously. In a given case a conse-
quence is anticipated on the basis of a parallel experience,
but there is no consciousness of the implied generalisation,
nor even an analysis revealing the point of identity as
against the individual differences between the two cases.
The inferential process involved is thus parallel to the
argument from particulars to particulars, or, if we regard
the application of experience alone, to an argument from


364 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

minor premiss to conclusion. In this argument the major
premiss is not an explidt object of consciousness, but is
represented by the psychologic effect of past experience,
which makes the mind draw its inference.

The increased scope of correlation in this stage is most
clearly seen in the fact that in reaching it we pass from
the sphere of motor reaction and attendant feelings to
that of perception and the anticipation of events. The
organism can now be said to *^ know " outer objects (as
having distinct qualities, for example) to recognise persons
and other animals and to anticipate their behaviour. Its
instincts as bearing relation to other individuals &c, are
thus subject to modification in accordance with experience,
while it is also possible for it to learn modes of action to
which there is no instinctive tendency at all. On the
other hand, the animal's action appears to be limited to
what may be called its concrete environment and immediate
practical ends.

On the ethical aspect, the important points to note are,
first, that action being prompted by an idea of its end, we
may say that in this stage Impulse is replaced by Desire,
and since desires may conflict, the germs of deliberation
and even of self-control appear. Secondly, with the
knowledge of individuals and their behaviour comes the
possibility of emotional states in relation to them. For
our purposes the most significant of these states are
Sympathy and Affection, whereby the experiences of
another become an object of desire along mth one*s own.
The sympathetic desires and feelings are in the first place
the conscious rendering of the instincts tending to the
maintenance of the species, but observation shows that
they may be transferred under the workings of experience
to other beings {e.g.y men) to whom they do not attach
instinctively.

To sum up.

The work of intelligence in this stage may be described
as a Correlation of perceptual and practical relations.

Its cUstinctive psychological unit is the concrete whole
consisting of related elements which forms the content of
perception on the one hand and the basis of action on the


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 365

other. In the correlation of these wholes the universal
relation is the implicitly operative force. Comparing it in
this respect with the previous stage, we see that the con-
crete relation which was there merely an element in the
" process " has here passed over with the content. The
underlying identity remains outside. The process of
correlation is thus comparable to a Syllogism in which
minor premiss and conclusion are avowed, while the major
premiss is suppressed.

In scope, the experiences co-ordinated are those of the
concrete objects and events in their relation^ with which the
mind comes in contact through perception. The scope of
purpose is the adoption 0/ means to practical ends.

In sphere this co-ordination is limited to ends determined
in general character by instinct. In general biological
effect, its tendency is to throw instinct back to the outlines
or plan of action, and to replace it in detail by individual
experience and mutual help and even tradition.

Under its Ethical Aspect its distinguishing feature is the
determination of behaviour by Desire having for its object
the experience of others as well as of the Agent.

Stage III. Conceptual Thinking and fVill.

In the last stage, the connection between the perceived
relation and the action based on it remained unanalysed.
It rests on an element of identical quality and implies a
generalisation which are not in that stage made explicit.
The steps by which this bond of connection is analysed
out as a distinct content of thought lead us to the third
stage.

The starting point, logically, of this process is the act
of analysis which renders distinct the common element in
different instances. This analysis, which represents a
higher development of articulateness in perception, is
conditioned by comparisons which throw the common
point into relief by exhibiting it in varying contexts. Such
comparisons are rendered possible by the increased scope
of experience, and are in turn facilitated by the analytical
tendency which they cultivate. Thus through increase
in the scope and clearness of intelligence a new kind of
correlation grows up, resting on the common characters


366 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

which run through experience, and their specific difFerences.
We have called such correlation cross-relation, because it
runs across the order of direct perceptual or practical
activity in which the relations of the previous stages have
been found. Of the working out of this correlation,
language, both as cause and effect, is the central feature.

This cross connection then appears as the backbone of
the third stage. The terms which it connects are not
merely perceptual relations. They are analysed elements
of perception — qualities as such, or relations as such.
Out of such elements generalisations are formed in which
the connection between experience and subsequent action is
definitely formulated, and moreover felt as connection, as
inference. In short, the relations of affinity which form
the basis of the previous correlations in the concrete
sphere, are now explicitly recognised for what they are.
This recognition again means that they are fitted in their
turn to become terms in a higher and more comprehensive .
correlation. On the other hand, the methods by which
they themselves are drawn from and applied to experience
still remain uncritidsed. The work of correlation becomes
at length comparable to a complete syllogism in which
both premisses are made explicit. Yet there is at work a
thought-process which, with all the assumptions involved
in reasonmg on the ba^s of experience, is not yet taken
into account.

In scope, the correlation that is now made possible is
inmieasurably widened. In the conceptions of this stage,
thought first finds itself possessed of contents set free
from the line of practical interests, and also — ^through the
possibility of freely breaking up and inter-connecting
detached concepts — from the perceptual order. In this
way a ** world of ideas " is formed, going beyond as well
as behind experience, and the conceptions which form this
world — whether logically universal, or like the Self and
the State, Individual — are equally schemes of reference to
great masses of experience, past or future. Thus the
results of great groups of experience are massed together,
and in experience we must now once more include the
experience of the race as handed on by tradition. Similarly,


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 367

the purposes of action are grouped Into schemes, or
subordinated to general rules. Conduct is adjusted to
meet jhe requirements of self or others as Persons, of
Society as an abiding structure, or Morality as a system
of universal rules. In fine, the correlation is now between ^
the focussed results of connected bodies of experience and
broad purposes of life or general standards of conduct.

Though the part played by experience and thought
operating on experience is so greatly increased, it must
not be supposed that the instinctive basis of action has
disappeared. On the contrary, experience and the use
made of it are determined in the first place by the
inherited structure. The same fundamental conditions
are at the root of the ideals of life, and largely even of
the theories of reality which emerge in this stage. Yet
at all points, in a manner which we do not in this work
seek to determine in detail, instinct is now infused with
experience, if in experience we include tradition. The
nature of man's ends can now no more be called purely
instinctive than the means whereby he learns to achieve
them.

From the ethical point of view, we note, first, the
emergence of Will as something more than a balancing of
Desires — more, because it expresses the personality as a
whole which now for the first time has a comprehensive
end or scheme of life to guide it. As desire is transformed
into will, so sympathy is transformed into regard for the
personality of others, and the social impulses of the
previous stage pass into an ordered conception of social
life and its duties, with a felt obligation of its own that
is independent of passing impulse. Conduct is standardised,
and becomes explicit morality.

To sum up : the work of intelligence in this stage is
the correlation of the affinities which underlie and connect
the elements of concrete experience.

Its distinctive psychological feature is the apprehension
of universalsy i.e,j of connectedness in experience whereby
comprehensive reference to masses of related experience is
rendered possible.

It is thus comparable with the completed syll(^ism with


368 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

explicit Major Premiss, and comparing it with the pre-
ceding stage, we see that the pervading identity which was
there the central feature of the inexplicit " process," has
now passed over into the recognised ** content," leaving
outside those general methods and assumptions of thought
by which the universal and all other products of intelli-
gence are built up.

The scope of intelligence in this stage is the correlation
of the results of groups of eKperience^ racial as well as
individual, organised under conceptions, {a) of connections
of fact, {b) of standards of action, the results of the first
group being subordinated to those of the second, partly as
contributing to their formation, partly as guiding the
choice of means to the ends which they prescribe.

Intelligence thus brings within its sphere many of the
permanent conditions under which life is maintained^ and
of the great ends that make it desirable. In this it partly
replaces and partly remodels hereditary tendencies. Yet
by these tendencies it is itself unconsciously guided.

Under its Ethical Aspect, this is the stage of Will
guided by general conceptions of the permanent welfare of
self, others, or the community, as well as by the code ot
rules in accordance with which the life of any given society
is organised.

Stage IV. Rational System.

The interconnection of experience with experience, which
is the essence of what we mean by system, has been seen
at work in all the preceding stages, and in the third stage
the work of systematisation has gone so far as to group
experiences and purposes into more or less organised
bodies. Nevertheless it is a familiar characteristic of
** common sense*' knowledge that it is unsystematic.
This is as much as to say that its systematisation is inex-
plicit and incomplete. We may consider that the fourth
stage begins when system, /.^., the formation of a coherent,
self supporting, exact and exhaustive body of knowledge
upon a subject — begins to be made an explicit object of
mental effort. The stage would be complete when such
a system should embrace the conditions and possibilities
of human evolution.


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 369

From an early stage of its development, the effort
to systematise induces two consequences. The first is a
criticism of the principles upon which thought has hitherto
dealt with experience, the seconds criticism of experience
itself, or perhaps rather of the result constructed by
thought operating in and upon experience. In this move-
ment, the work of analysis, of rendering thought articulate,
reaches its final stage, at which it attacks the principles,
methods, and processes of thought itself. We compared
the inferences of the last stage to a syllogism in which
both premisses and conclusion were completely explicit ;
but in this stage there is yet another point that is explicit,
i.e,y the assumptions involved in syllogising, in building
up and applying universal conceptions.

Ideally, intelligence at this stage also reaches its highest
development in point of scope, for its ultimate goal is
nothing less than the complete synthesis of reality as a
whole. This goal we have treated as merely a *• regulative
concept.'* Reality is infinite, but the conditions afiPect-
ing human life and its development are finite, and there
is no reason why they should not come within the scope
of science. The knowledge of the conditions of human
life and of the possibilities of the human race would there-
fore constitute the scope of intelligence, if we conceive the
scientific stage to have arrived at maturity. The result
would be a system including not all reality, but all that
afiTects practical life.

The application of such a system would be a deliberate
organisation of life, in which the development of the race
is itself the supreme object. And of such an organisation
the highest ethical consciousness supplies the necessary
basis. If we imagine the tendencies which we see in germ
to have reached maturity, we should have brought the deve-
lopment of mind to a point at which the slow and uncer-
tain growth emerging through conflict and competition with
forms that are often stronger though less worthy, would
be replaced by an orderly development moving steadily
towards an ascertained goal, and master of the conditions,
internal and external, of its advance. Thus the scope of
correlation at this stage is inclusive of all matters afiPecting

B B


370 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

action. The whole experience of the race is used to guide
the whole future of the race. From race-experience — in
that widest sense in which moral, spiritual, and imagi-
native experience are comprehended — is derived that
understanding of man's own nature, the meaning of his
life on earth, by which action is so shaped as to bring
about the consummation in which the human spirit
** comes to itself," and in so doing enters on its kingdom.
We express this by saying that the conditions and character
of human development are made the basis of conduct
directed to the perfection of that development.

At this point the hereditary factor undergoes its final
transformation. For under one aspect the special work
of this stage consists not in eliminating but in evaluating
that factor. The methods upon which correlation rests
remained unconscious and implicit in the third stage.
They are of course methods resting on a hereditary
structure modified by such gradual and unnoticed opera-
tions of experience as are no more conscious or deliberate
b their workings than the growth of physical structure
itself. While science and philosophy have to criticise
methods of inference, they have also to take account
of the limitations of sense-experience — ^limitations of
course depending on the inherited structure of the sense
organs. But perhaps most important of all is the
evaluation of the hereditary factor in the moral, con-
sciousness. We have seen that in the previous stage the
moral impulses gave rise to definitely formulated rules
and standards of action. They also fuse with the concep-
tions coming from other sources to make the religions of
the world. But though they give rise to explicit con-
ceptions, they themselves are far from being clearly
analysed. Nowhere is the contrast between clearness of
result and obscurity of process more marked or of more
serious importance than in the sphere of practical conduct
What is contributed by instinct, what by tradition, how
much rests on conscious or unconscious adaptation to
economic or political circumstances, how far theories of
the supernatural have elevated, debased, or in any way
modified ethical conceptions, are questions of which ethical


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 371

theory has hardly yet touched the fringe. The problem
on solving which the possibility of "self-conscious de-
velopment" depends is to find the value of all these unknown
quantities, and by evaluating them, to determine how
much of moral truth is contained in recognised morality.
This is, in other words, to determine what is meant by
the best and highest development of the human soul, and
what conduct is essential thereto.

Summing up : The work of intelligence in this stage
may be described as the Correlation of the conditions under-
lying the formation of the general concepts of the preceding
stage.

Its distinctive psychological unit is the apprehension of
the principles and processes underlying thought — the pro-
cess of thinking made conscious. This is the process
implicit in all the preceding stages, and in bringing it into
consciousness so that the whole of the ** thought process ''
now passes into the content, the reasoning of this stage is
as a syllogism in which the assumptions involved in
syllogising should be taken into account.

In scope, the work of Intelligence is to correlate the
permanent underlying conditions of racial development with
its ideal goal.

Its sphere is thus coextensive with lifCy and includes
the due appreciation of the conditions imposed on develop-
ment by heredity.

Under its Ethical Aspect, we may call this the stage of
the rational Will in which social standards are subordinated
to and unified in the real conditions of human welfare and
development.

At this fourth stage of development, the wheel has come \
full circle. We start from a condition in which ancestral j
" experience " acting indirectly through heredity and the \ \

elimination of the less adapted fits responses to stimuli into |
an order suited to maintain the racial type in the environ- j
ment in which it finds itself. Passing out of this condition, ;
we enter on a process in which life is more and more
dominated by intelligence.

In the lowest stage of this process, a dimly felt mass of
experience gradually remodels reaction to stimulus. In the .

B B 2


1


372 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

second stage, the perceptual world becomes clear and con-
crete, and its relations are used intelligently in the service
of desire. In the thud^^age the mind dissects out the
threads of common quality that bind the moving show of
perception, and by their aid grasps experience in masses,
and subordinates action to large and general purposes.
Finally, in the fourth stage, it works down to the principle
whereby these great fragments of knowledge and of purpose
are pieced tc^ether into a rational system, comprehending
in a synthesis of thought and action the summed experi-
ence and purpose of the race. In each stage, as the sphere
of experience grows, that of heredity is transformed. In
the first stage it is rendered plastic and general instead
of being relatively particular and rigid. In the second,
it begins to fuse with experience as the basis of action. In
the third, it tends to disappear as a separate force, being
partly formulated into niles of life, partly fused with
tradition, and partly overlaid thereby. Meanwhile,
Experience in the form of recorded history is extending
over the ancestral line through which heredity acts, and
thus in the fourth stage we come to the point in which the
whole field at first covered by unconsdous physical forces
is now overrun by experience and thought. Race experience,
race mdntenance, and race-future are still the determining
factors, but all now fall within the scope of the Reason, and
purposes equally with methods are transformed' accordingly.
It is not the maintenance of the type, but its perfection,
which is sought : not mere adaptation to circumstances,
but the domination of the rational spirit in the world.

Note. — It should be superfluous to say that the above division of in-
tellectual growth into stages is of a hypothetical character, and is not
regarded by the writer as, at best, anything more than a first approxima-
tion to the truth. Such as it is, the scheme has a twofold ori^n ; (i) in
an analysis of developed experience ; (2} in the observation of less
developed experience. The fourfold method of correlation differing stage
by stage (a) in respect of the factors explicitly taken into account, and
(S) therewith in extent of the sphere comprehended, appears to the writer
to be realised in human consciousness as we run the gamut from philo-
sophical reflection down to the quasi-mechimical response of habit
Wiiether these stages into which developed human reason can be analysed
correspond to stages by which it grew is of course another question — a
question only to be answered by a much wider knowledge of animal
psychology and of the distinct processes of human development than we


XV STAGES OF CORRELATION 373

at present possess. If we accept evolution, analogy suggests that human
intelligence is a specific and higher development of a more general form
of intelligence. Hence, if we cut away the higher development, we
should come to something roughly common to man and the higher
animals. If we cut further, we should come to something common to
man and a wider class of animals, and so forth. But there is a caution
to be borne in mind. No two species will come to a quite identical de-
velopment No part of the physical structure of man, I suppose, is
precisely equivalent to the homologous part in another mammal, still less
in another vertebrate of a different class. It is the same with the mental
structure. We must not expect to find any animals whose intelligence
falls readily into any classification based on the analysis of human ex-
perience. We can only expect to find hoipologous developments. That
being understood, it may be said that the method of the preceding
chapters, so far as they relate to animals, has been to analyse out the
phases of intellectual development as distinguishable in human experience,
and to discover what homologous structures are to be found in the animal
world In accordance with these homologies animals are ranked in the
classification.


CHAPTER XVI

ORGANISATION, CONFLICT, AND EVOLUTION

I. We assumed in Chapter I. that Orthogenic Evolution
must be identical with the evolution of Mind. This
evolution we have now traced, and found to consist in a
gradually developing organisation of life. This intelligent
organisation, however, is but the natural development and
expansion of a process which in its lower stages is purely
biological. The growth of intelligence and of social life
rests on a high development of physical organisation. To
grasp the process of Orthogenic Evolution as a whole, we
must therefore extend our view. Speaking generally, it is
an advance towards a higher organisation, a development
of the organic principle in life. But what is a " higher "
organisation ? Can any definition be found which mil not
bring us back to the conception of Mind or to some human
judgment of value ?

Some light on this question may be gained by considering
what we mean by organic unity. By an organic whole, is
understood one which (a) has a certain general character or
individuality, while (i) it consists of distinguishable parts
each with a certain character of its own, but (r) such that
they cannot exist unmodified apart from the whole, while
the character of the whole is similarly dependent upon them.
By a mechanical whole, the negation of this interdepend-
ence is intended. It may indeed be doubted whether a
purely mechanical whole exists as a reality in rerum natura.
Thus, a heap of cannon balls, which has sometimes served


CH, XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 375

as an instance, may be said to have a certain character of
its own which in some degree affects the individual balls
— by pressure, for example, which imperceptibly alters
their figure, and presumably their molecular structure.
The definitions then must be taken as laying down two
limiting conceptions to which actual things approximate more
or less closely, and which are used in ordinary thought.
Thus, e.g.j by the mechanical view of society is meant the
theory which treats human beings as being constant
quantities, whether in or out of their social relations. The
organic view of society recognises an interdependence
whereby the individual is modified by the very social
relations which he himself helps to build up. Without
going deeper into the nature of the organic principle, these
simple considerations may lead us to cUstinguish two main
lines of organic development. There is, first, degree of
organic unity., A whole is more organic in proportion as
the interdependence of parts is more complete, and one line
of advancing organisation will consist in perfecting this
unity. Then there is, secondly, scope of organisation.
Very simple elements may be very completely organised.
Much more numerous, diverse, or complex elements may
be less completely organised. In the first case, there is a
perfect organism of low or narrow scope. In the second,
an imperfect organism of a higher or wider scope. Scope
of organisation is proportioned to the diversity of elements
which go to build up its unity. A Rhizopod is not so
completely a unity as man is, but even if it were, it would
be a lower organism. It is a unity including much less
of diflTerentiation. From this distinction, it will readily
appear that there are two methods by which organic unity
may develop. One is by the gradual obliteration of the
distinctive characters of the parts, wherein all that is opposed
to imity and organisation is worn away. The other is by
the working out of a higher type of organisation in which
there is room for more of difference and of what is at a
lower stage contradiction. It is dear that it is only the
latter form of development by which organisation can grow
in perfection and in scope simultaneously. Taking the
two tests of Unity and Scope together, we may regard


376 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

orthogenic evolution as consisting essentially in the rise of
a higher organisation.

2. Now the organisation of the life of a spedes as a
whole depends on three more elementary forms of cor-
relation. These are : —

(i). The correlation of the constituent parts of the
individual — perfection of structure and function.

(2). The correlation of the several acts and experiences
of the individual.

(3). The correlation of the acts and lives of different
individuals.

With the two latter we have dealt. It remains to show
in a summary way how their development is associated
with an advance in physical organisation from the lowest
organisms to man. The Protista are classed as the lowest
organisms on account of their " simplicity," i.e.^ the narrow
scope of their organisation, confined as it is to a single
cell. Among the lowest Metazoa, the unity of the distinct
cells that constitute the living being is so loose that it is
often difficult to say whether a certsun aggregation of cells
should be regarded as one individual or many.

**When, from sundry points on the body of a common
polype, there bud out young polypes which, after acquiring
mouths and tentacles and closing up the communications between
their stomachs and the stomach of the parent, finally separate
fi-om the parent ; we may with propriety regard them as distinct
individuals. But when in the allied compound Hydrozoa^ we
find that these young polypes continue permanently connected with
the parent \ and when by this continuous budding-out there is
presently produced a tree-like aggregation, having a common
alimentary canal into which the digestive cavity of each polype
opens ; it is no longer so clear that these little sacs, fiimished with
mouths and tentacles, are severally to be regarded as distinct
individuals. We cannot deny a certain individuality to the
polypedom." ^

Long after organisation is sufficiently developed to leave
no doubt as to the unity of the organism, the separate
parts still retain powers which show that their mutual de-

* Herbert Spencer, Principles of Biology^ Vol. I. p. 246. Cf. Verwom,
pp. 63, 64.


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 377

pendence is still far from complete. The most remarkable
of these powers is that of Regeneration, which, as is well-
known, diminishes roughly in proportion as organisation
advances. For example, among Worms, it is common to
find Regeneration not only of the tail, but even of the
head.^ No Vertebrate could imitate this feat of growing
its head anew, but the lower Vertebrates ret^n a con-
siderable though diminished power of regenerating lost
limbs and other organs. Thus, the larval Salamander
regenerates the lens of the eye from the posterior layer of
the iris.' The Salamander can also regenerate an am-
putated limb, if the bone is cut across, but not if it is
exarticulated. These powers however are by no means
common to all the lower Vertebrates — the fret's limb, for
example, would merely heal without growing again — and
are, I imagine, wholly lost in the higher classes of birds
and mammals, where the power of regeneration is confined
to that fresh growth of the adjacent tissues which we are
familiar with in the healing over of a wound, or in the
mending of a bone.

As the loss of regenerative power points to a growing
centralisation of the vital functions, so also does the
gradual loss of independence on the part of the lower
nerve-centres point to the growing centralisation of the
nervous system. In passing from the higher to the lower
vertebrates, the relative independence of the spinal re-
flexes is well marked ; but it is as nothing to the powers of
separate nerve centres among the higher Invertebrates.
Thus, the loss of the hind quarters does not prevent a
bumble bee from continuing its meal, nor an ant from
persisting in a battle.* Wasmann mentions cases of an ant
or wasp fighting with its own severed limbs.* On the
other hand, according to Forel,* the severed head of an ant
still distinguishes a friend from an enemy. On the same
authority we learn that crickets deprived^^^e cerebral
ganglia can be stimulated by touch to c^^Ktion. At
this stage it is clear that the unity ^^B nervous


' Sec e.g, Wilson, op. «/., p. 325, • Wilson^. 329.

* Wasmann, Instinct und IntelUgenz^ p, 93. * Ibid,

^ Aperqu de Psychologie cofnparJey Annie psychologiqiu^ 1895, p. 25.


378 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

system is not the unity with which we arc familiar
in man, or in animals which approach man in the general
plan of their structure. In truth, unity of nervous
organisation is less necessary and perhaps less possible
where behaviour consists mainly of a scries of instinctive
reactions. Reflexes and instincts may be eflidently carried
out, each by its own appropriate mechanism, and their
mutual dependence may be slight. But in proportion as
the organism comes to rely upon its own experience for
guidance, it becomes more and more necessary that
diflFerent actions and different experiences should be
brought to bear upon one another ; and for this purpose
different parts of the nervous system must be more
intimately correlated. Thus completeness of physical
unification serves as a condition of that still higher
organisation of life which is the work of intelligence.

In the same way, social life has its ultimate basis in a
refinement of physical organisation whereby the play of
separate individual lives becomes interwoven. This is first
seen at a low stage of the animal world in the distincticm
of sex whereby each individual becomes an incomplete
organism, needing union with another to fulfil its vital
functions, and endowed accordingly with means of finding
and uniting with the other. It is seen, secondly, in the
physical relation of mother and young both before and
after birth — a relation which, as has been shown, steadily
grows in importance as we ascend the orthc^enic scale.
In both cases physical bonds unite otherwise distinct
individuals ^ to form temporarily or permanently a higher
organisation. As intelligence in general starts from the
organised unity of the individual, so the social intelligence
— the organising principle which makes a unity of separate
individual lives — starts with a physical organisation which
does the same work in little.

Thus from first to last the essence of orthogenic
evolution is a progress in Organisation. Such a progress
takes two forms. There is a development in organic

^ In the case of the embryo indeed we get a doubt as to the dis-
tinctness of individuality quite parallel to that which we have noted in
regard to the component parts of the lowest Metazoa.


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 379

unity or " organicity," as parts and wholes come to be
more and more completely interdependent. And there is
increase of scope, as the life or purpose of the organisation
becomes more and more comprehensive. The lower
phases of this movement are worked out by biological
forces. The higher are the work of Mind.

3. We saw in Chapter II. that all organic life rests on
adaptation. The means of maintaining life differ from
species to species, and improvement of organisation — ^the
method of Orthogenic Evolution, is one means among the
rest. It may be shown that this method is not only (as
we have assumed) a higher, but also a more efficient
method than any other. If we look on the life of a
species, its structure and normal functions, as something
adapted, I will not say to perfecting, but merely to
maintaining itself, it is clear that the efficiency of the
adaptation may be measured broadly by the proportion
of individuals that it is able to preserve through their
normal life span. If the normal life span is difficult to
measure, we may take instead the less severe test of
maturity, and measure the efficiency of organisation by the
number of individuals which it is capable of maturing to the
point at which they in turn can propagate the species com-
pared with the number of those that perish by the way.

Of this proportion we can judge in a rough and ready
way by the birth-rate of any given species. For unless
the numbers of the species are to increase or decrease in
geometrical proportion, the adults must year by year be
replaced by, on the average, an equal number of the new
generation, neither more nor less. For this purpose, the
less efficient the species, the greater the number of young
that will be required. Accordingly, imless in any species
we have evidence for a steady growth or diminution of
numbers, we may fidrly take the birth-rate as a rough test
of efficiency of organisation. The better the species
is adapted to maintain itself, the lower will be the birth-
rate, and conversely.^

^ The birth rate for this purpose means the average number of young
per adult, not per annum. A comparatively slow breeding animal may in
this sense have a high birth rate if it is long lived. (See Weismann,
Essays in Heredity^ " On the Duration of Life.")


38o MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Bearing this in mind, we find much significance in the
enormous diflTerences in fertility that are to be found in
diflTerent divisions of the organic world. This fertility
seems to be at its highest where individual organisation is
lowest, that is to say, among Protozoa. It is at its lowest
in the human race.^ It is calculated that a single Para-
moecium would, if unchecked, produce two hundred and
sixty-eight billions of descendants in one month, while
another Infusorian is credited with a possible progeny of
a hundred and seventy billions in four days.* The birth
and death roll of many parasites is small in comparison
with these figures, but it has been computed that
60,000,000 eggs arc contained in the body of a single
Nematode,* while, to pass to Insects, Huxley calculated
that the helpless Aphis, the prey of countless insects, is so
prolific that in ten generations the produce of one indivi-
dual would contain more substance than 500,000,000 men.*
Speaking generally, it appears that Invertebrates are more
prolific than Vertebrates, excepting Fish,* while among
Vertebrates we find on the whole a regular descent from
Fish, through Amphibia and Reptiles to Birds and
Mammals. This is brought out in the following figures
which I take from Mr. Sutherland's valuable work.*

Number of young produced per annum by each female.

r- — -

Fish . / 646,000

Amphibia (average of 20 species) ' 441

Reptiles (average of 39 species) 17

Birds (average of 2000 species) 5

Mammals (average of 82 species) 3*2

Higher orders of Mammals ....... 1*3

Ape and Man ^

In interpreting these figures, we must bear in mind that
we are not always comparing like with like. In the case
of fish, we are for the most part reckoning unfertilised
ova, vast quantities of which in fact miss fertilisation.

^ The Elephant is perhaps less fertile than man, but the Elephant is
dying out, wnile the human race is increasing in numbers.

* Ray Lankester, Comparative Longevity^ p. 74.
■ Cambridffe Natural History^ VoL II. p. 162.

* Op cit. Vol. VI. p. 589. * Ray Lankester, lee. cit.

* Op. cit, p. 41.


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 381

In the higher classes we are reckoning either fertilised eggs
or living young. But when all deductions are made,
enough seems to remain to justify the general truth of
Mr. Herbert Spencer's view that fertility and high%
individual development in the main tend to vary/
inversely.

. . . ^^Individuation and Genesis are necessarily antagonistic
Grouping under the word Individuation all processes by which
individud life is completed and maintained ; and enlarging the
meaning of the word Genesis so as to include all processes aiding
the formation and perfecting of new individuals ; we see that the
two are fundamentally opposed. Assuming other things to
remain the same — assuming that environing conditions as to
climate, food, enemies, &c, continue constant ; then, inevitably,
every higher degree of individual evolution is followed by a
lower degree of race-multiplication, and vice versa. Pro- \
gress in bulk, complexity, or activity, involves retrogress in |
fertility ; and progress in fertility involves retrogress in bulk, '
complexity, or activity.

This statement needs a slight qualification. For reasons to be
hereafter assigned, the relation described is never completely main-
tained ; and in the small departure from it, we shall find a
remarkable self-acting tendency to further the supremacy of
the most-developed types. Here, however, this hint must
suffice."^ . . .

There are doubtless many great deviations from the
general tendency. One species may be more preyed upon
than another of no higher organisation. If so it must
either be more fertile in order to maintsdn its numbers, or
its nimibers must fall till they reach a point compatible
with greater security. Again, there are countless " dolio-
genic" devices for protection which do not imply an
advance, and may even involve retrogression in general
development. Such, I imagine, are the hard outer shell
of the tortoise, the disagreeable taste of certain insects,
and the " protective mimicry *' of others. The point is
that with ail the fluctuations due to these causes we find
upon the whole a gradual diminution in fertility as we
pass from the lowest organisation to the highest.

» Op. dt VoL II. p. 429.


382 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

4. So far of organisation generally. There is further
evidence, general and special, for the efficiency of the two
higher developments ot organisation — Intelligence and the
Social Life. The efficiency of Intelligence is best measured
by contrasting it with that of Instinct — the next highest
stage of organisation reached in the organic world. After
what has been said, a single reflection will make clear the
superiority of Intelligence. Under natural selection In-
stinct is made and kept perfect only by the ruthless
elimination of the majority of individuals. Any diminu-
tion in the severity of the struggle will tend to diminish
the perfection of the instruments by which it is waged.
The species under such circumstances, far from dominating
nature, is still struggling for existence, and only its most
capable members survive. The condition of their survival
is not organised co-operation, but internecine struggle with
one another and with the rest of the world. If from the
maintenance of Instinct we go back to its growth, we find
its inefficiency as compared with that of intelligence in the
extreme slowness of adaptation to novel circumstances.
On any theory of evolution, a modification of instinct to
suit a change in the environment must be the tardy result
of the accumulated effects of inheritance through many
generations. Whatever advance there is proceeds at a
rate which we may call geological. It requires great
periods of time to work itself out. Compared with such
sluggishness, the sodal changes which appear to us slow
enough are as the express train to the stage waggon.
Between the England of Alfred's time and the England
of to-day how many changes of specific value would an
accurate sodological classification have to admit ? The
reason of the difference is very simple. Whatever its
end, intelligence sees it in advance, and goes towards it as
straight as circumstances permit. Natural selection, or
whatever other biological force is responsible for instinct,
does not see its goal at all, but merely favours the breed
which most nearly approaches it, and by the preponderance
of success in that direction, the species is at length trans-
formed as a whole into a new type. Thus the replacement


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 383

of instinct by intelligence as the guide of life means a
complete revolution in the rate of change. There may
be progress — Orthogenic Evolution — under natural selec-
tion, but if so, it must be fortuitous, indirect, and incom-
parably slow. It is only under the guidance of intelligence (
that progress can become the normal condition.

Unfortunately it is only in its most developed form that
intelligence takes rank as a serious factor in the evolution
of higher species. In its beginnings, indeed throughout
the animal world, intelligence is but one among many
qualities through which a species mountains itself, adiieving
the ends prescribed by its structure. At this stage, in-
telligence develops under the influence of natural selection,
and therefore at " geological *' speed. Probably the same
thing holds of primitive man. It is only as the mind, in v
the course of this advance, widens its scope and begins to \
form general conceptions of social welfare, of religion, of
the principles of a science or a handicraft, that the move-
ment begins to come with a rush. We do not indeed
find a steady general advance of civilisation, for the human
mind has not yet grasped the conditions of civilisation as
a whole, but here and there, as some new conception
arises, we find results worked out with unexampled
rapidity, and out of many such movements arises a social
evolution. If in the animal world we find intelligence
active mainly in adapting means to ends from day to day,
in the himian world we find in it also the underlying
cause of great changes of type. Here again it replaces
the purely biological forces.

One aspect of organisation remains to be considered —
the correlation of the lives and actions of difiTerent in-
dividuals. Here agsun there is evidence that wastage
diminishes as correlation improves. In the animal world
this correlation depends mainly on two factors. One is
an organic change whereby the young remains till a later
and later stage within the body of the mother. The
other is a psychical change whereby the parent comes to
maintain and care for the young with more and more
persistence and efliciency. The first change brings about


384


MIND IN EVOLUTION


CHAP.


an enormous decrease in the number of young requisite
for the msuntenance of the species. Indeed, the viva-
parous fish is a far more economical breeder than the
nest-builders.^ Summing up on the fertility of fish, Mr.
Sutherland says : —

^ OF species that exhibit no sort of parental care, the average
of forty-nine give 1,040,000 eggs to a female each year ; while
among those which msike nests or any apology for nests the
number is only about 10,000. Among those which have any
protective tricks, such as carrying the eggs in pouches or attached
to the body, or in the mouth, the average number is under 1,000 ;
while among those whose care takes the form of a uterine or
quasi-uterine gestation which brings the young into the world
sdive, an average of fifty-six eggs is quite sufficient/' *

Now, the mere postponement of birth is of course a
purely physical development. Still, it is an important
step in the organisation of life and in curtailment of the
struggle for existence. The higher development of corre-
lation between separate lives begins with parental care in
the ordinary sense. Its efficacy is best seen in the higher
Classes. For example, Mr. Sutherland * divides Birds into
three grades, his account of which ^ may be summed up
in tabular form : —


Lowest grade.
The young are

capable.
There is no nest.


Average number
of eggs 12*5 per
annum.


Middle grade.
Young dependent but

can run at birth.
Loose nest.


Average 7*66.


Highest grade.
Young callow.

High skill in nest
building or in find-
ing substitutes.

Average 4*5.


Here it will be seen that with the development of
intelligence and of parental care, though the young are

^ We must except the most efficient nest-builders, such as the stickle-
back, who hatches from 20 to 90 eggs only at a time {op. cit p. 36}.
^ Op, cit Vol. I. p. 40. ' Op. cit. p. 58.

\ * Op. cit. pp. 54-71.


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 385

more callow, fewer of them are needed to maintain the
numbers of the species.

With more complication of detail, Mr. Sutherland
shows that the same law holds among Mammals. Thus
from the lowest organisms up to the highest, culminating
in Man, we find, with many fluctuations due to other
causes, a steady tendency to decrease of fertility, im-
plying a diminution of waste, and a better organisation
of life.^

^ How &r does this process continue in human species ? Is it the case
that as civilisation advances, the waste of life is less ? The question is of
the greatest interest, but cannot be answered by considering fertility
alone.

If we compare one nation or one g^de of civilisation with another, the
birth-rates alone will not be sufficient, since in many cases population is
notoriously increasing, while in others, and particularly m the lower
races, it is diminishing, and even dying out. Moreover, as to the birth-
rate itself, no trustworthy figures exist for non-European peoples.
Another method of investigation would be to find in any given nation the

Proportion of children which actually survive to a marriageable age. But
ere again, anything like accurate information would be limited to
civilised nations.

Looking, however, to the actual facts, scanty as they are, we observe,
first, that among European countries, the most backward are those in
which infantile mortality is highest. According to Mulhall {Dictionary
0/ StaiisticSy p. 178) the number of children out of 1,000 who complete
the fifth year of life is : —

In Russia 425

II Spain 571

„ Austria 614

as against : —

In France 751

„ Denmark 755

„ Belgium 756

„ England 762

„ Scotland 780

„ Sweden 783

„ Ireland 837

„ Norway 838

It agrees with this that the birth-rate per marriage is also highest in
Russia, where it is 57 as against 4'2 in England and 3*0 in France.

In France, with the birth-rate per family mentioned, population is
practically stationary, the increase having been '08 per 1,000 in the five
years 1891-5. (Newsholme's Vital Statistics^ p. 15.)

This affords us a rough measure of the wastage of life in a modem
civilised country, which corresponds fairly well with the figures for be-
tween four and five thousand Danish families given in Professor Karl
Pearson's Chances of Death, (Essay on R^roductive Selection^ p. 98.)
In these figures, the average gross fertility of families in the pro-
fessional, commercial, and artisan class is given, compared with the net

C C


386


MIND IN EVOLUTION


CHAP.


5. Now, the further the birth-rate falls, the smaller is the
field in which natural selection can be exerdsed. And yet
the higher types are well maintained, and within the
highest type the forward movement is most rapid of all.

fertility arrived at by takine the number of survivors, first after 15, then
after 25 years of married life.

Gross and Net Fertility (Danish Figures).


Professional class
Commercial . . .


Artisan


No. of


Gross

Net


944


Gross i 2,009

Net —

Gross 2,934

Net —


Dtumtionof
I (t5-a4


4-24
3-25 (77)

432

2-91 (-67)

479

yi2 (-65)


No. of


898
1,622

1,457


DoTAtion

(s5 yean and

owerX


4-80
3*38 (70)

4*91

3'i3 (-64)

5'26
3-17 (-60)


The broad result for our purposes is to show that the proportion of
children surviving to the age at which they might in turn marry and have
children varies from 60 per cent, upwards. We shall therefore not be
far wrong if we take three children, or a fraction over, to a marriage, as
the number required to maintain the level of population in a modem
civilised country of the first rank. We seem, further, to be pretty safe in
assuming that a higher rate is rec^uired in a country of distinctly lower
civilisation, such as Russia. Passmg to non-European countries, we find
a wild confiision of assertions as to the birth-rate. It has been suggested
on the basis of such statements as are to be found collected in Floss's
Das IVM^thsi the non-European birth-rate tends to be rather lower than
the European, averaging perhaps four to the family, or a fraction below.
But here three remarks suggest themselves. The first is, that the ten-
dency of casual observations of this kind is almost undoubtedly to under-
estimate. A missionary in a savage tribe finds three children with the
father and mother, and takes that as the number of the family, ignoring
the grown-up, the dead, and the unborn. Mr. Sutherland indeed says
roundly that " wherever travellers have taken pains to discover, not the
number of children actually alive, but the number that had been bom
to a savage woman^ the result comes out about seven to ten for each."
The second point is, that even if we took the low figures given as £aiir
samples, and assumed the birth-rate of non-European nations to be
below that of Europeans, it still does not follow that the wastage of
life is so low. To settle this point, we should have to know funher,
whether in less civilised countries increase of population is found to
go along with the lower birth-rate. And that brings us to the third
point, <>., the well-known fact that many savage tribes, where the birth
rate is known to be low, are actually becoming extinct

So far then, the slender and unsatisfactory evidence available would
seem to show that the diminution of wastage, which is one of the most^


XIV ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 387

The truth is that organisation as a method of maintdning I
the species is set from the first in antithesis to Natural 1
Selection. Natural Selection rests on destruction. It J
maintains the type only by sacrificing the majority of
individuals. Organisation, especially in the form of
Intelligence, sets itself rather to maintain the individuals,
and in so doing improves the type. The rational organisa-
tion of life, from the dawn of parental care upwards, tends
to suspend the struggle upon which natural selection rests,
and there is here, for the believer in progress through

prominent facts of biological evolution, from the lowest organisms to man,
has been continued, though at a slower rate, within the limits of human
evolution.

An indirect confirmation of this view is the greater variety of civilised
as compared with uncivilised man. The many-sidedness of civilisation as
compared with barbarism, and of higher civilisation as compared with
lower, is one of the central features of historical development. Accord-
ing to Professor Karl Pearson, this increased variability extends even to
physical structure {Mathematical Contributions to the Theory of Evolu-
tion^ Proc. Royal Society, Vol. LXI. No. 375), and he rightly points out
that this increase of variability implies a diminished pressiire on the part
of Natural Selection. But there is a further point to be considered. We
are comparing the capacity of different societies to maintain their mem-
bers. But the difficulty of so doing increases, within limits and under
conditions that need not be specified here, in proportion to the density of
population. It is here that we find the greatest differences between
civilised and lower races. The greater part of the savage and barbarian
world is thinly peopled, and no great aggregations of population are to
be found below the level of the great European and Asiatic civilisations.
Elsewhere it appears that density of population is confined to small
specially favoured areas, such as the Gilbert Islands and certain s(>ots in
the Black Belt of Africa. For great masses of population we must go to
the civilised lands of China, Japan, India, or Western Europe. In the
case of the first three the growth of population is dependent as much on
natural advantages as on the social order, though in the third case the
maintenance of the Pax Britannica has been responsible for an enormous
growth during the past century. There remains the case of Western
Europe, which we assume to be the home of the highest civilisation of
all. Here the average density is indeed below that of China, but it
implies a still higher grade m the mastery of the conditions of life.
Density and increase of p)opulation become at this stage independent of
natural advantages, or more accurately, men adapt to their use and profit
conditions which at a lower stage they would find unfavourable or im-
possible to cope with. Hence of course the far spreading range of the
white man and his dominance in climates not his own. Thus in uncivilised
countries population is generally sparse, in civilised countries of the
second rank it becomes dense under favourable conditions, while in the
higher civilisation it becomes relatively independent of the bounties ot
nature. There can then be little doubt that the power to maintain the
life of its members by which we have measured the ** efficiency" of
a species increases in a very marked degree as we pass from the lowest
to the highest phases of human development.

C C 2


388 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

natural selection, an insoluble contradiction. The solution
is to find progress not in the laws of inheritance— except
in so far as these may be used by intelligence for
its own purpose — but rather in the organisation of life
culminating in the deliberate self-^levelopment of a race
under the guidance of reason. Organised life rests not on
internecine rivalry, but on mutual interdependence.

This organisation is at first physical or biological. It is
extended by intelligence, the essential function of which
is to correlate experience and action. The development
of intelligence consists in mdemiig the scope of this
function, as well as in perfecting its execution. There is
an organisation of individual experience, an organisation of
social life. Of this organisation in both these forms we
have roughly sketched the growth. Life is indeed in a
sense organised without intelligence, but only in a
rudimentary way. Without intelligence, the race is not
master of its fate. ^ It is so built as to behave itself
appropriately within a certain groove. Outside of that
groove it is lost. Its instincts may prompt a measure of
co-operation, but this, agdn, will be within limits
mechanically defined. It is never at this stage master of
its surroundings, for the very perfection of its hereditary
adjustments rests on a constant elimination of the great
majority of its component members. Its rate of progress
at the best is such as can be attained by a gradual
elimination of the less efficient individuals. In all these /
respects the growth of mind works a gradual revolution,/
reorganising life on the basis of knowledge, realising the!
unity of the race, and deliberately working out its\
capacities for development. \

6. But not only is the organisation of life made more
efficient by intelligence, but its very purpose is gradually
revolutionised. To complete our account, we must trace
the steps of this revolution. The first change introduced
by the intelligent use of experience lies in the substitution
of pleasures and pains for life and death as the *^ sanctions "
of conduct. It is a necessary consequence of this truth
that we should hold with Mr. Herbert Spencer that the
pleasurable and the life-giving, the painful and the death-


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 389

dealing tend to coincide. So much would be determined
by natural selection. We must only bear in mind, first,
that it is the life of the race which natural selection has
metaphorically in view. There is to the biologist no
paradox in the pleasurableness of self-sacrificing eflFort on
behalf of children, descendants, or even the species as a
whole. Secondly, as life becomes more complex, we
must remember that what is pleasurable from one point
of view may be overwhelmingly painful from another.
This understood, we may say that in the first stage of
intelligence pleasure and pain are substituted as " masters "
of conduct for life and death. The first result is that
readjustments which natural selection might take an epoch
to effect, are carried through by the direct method within a
single lifetime, and perhaps ultimately through a single
experience. The readjustment, besides being swifter, is
obviously less wasteful of life ; and lastly, it favours an
improvement of type. This it does in two ways. From
the first, it makes possible a pliability of nerve-structure
which, while incompatible with detailed instinct, forms a
basis for more various and therefore broader development.
If width of scope is one test of development, we see here
the beginnings of an upward movement. Secondly, since
pleasure and pain instead of life and death are now the
determining factors, we see a possibility that modes of
action may be built up not concerned with the mere
maintenance of the species, but with anything that may
yield pleasure to its members. The primitive pleasures
and pains will doubtless be connected with race maintenance
(as the pleasures of eating, drinking, and sex), and as we
have seen both feelings must throughout development be
limited in the main by natural selection. This however
is a limiting condition only. Pleasures must not be
preponderantly unhealthy. It does not follow that
pleasures may not arise that have no bearing one way or
other on the life of the species. And if experience lights
on unexpected sources of pleasure, it will certainly attend
to them, and work them for what they are worth.
Further, since we find pleasure in the full development of
faculty, it is a possible and indeed a probable case that


390 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

among the pleasures on which experience lights should be
some connected not with the maintenance of the race at its
then level, but with the further expansion of its powers.
Such an expansion may be of little use to it as a means of
survival for the present, but it means progress hereafter.
Something like this would seem to be the history of those
mathematical and aesthetic *^ faculties " which have been a
stumbling block to Natural Selection.

7. Even among the higher animals the exercise of
faculty seems to be intrinsically pleasant, to be desired
upon its own account and independently of its value in
maintsdning life. When we pass to the human level of
development, it is not merely pleasure, but a deeper
and more comprehensive end which plays a similar part.
As is Pleasure to Desire, so is Happiness to Will. Will
is not Desire, nor merely a resultant of desires, but an
expression of the whole personality. Desire is the impulse
towards a particular end in which a partial and temporary
satisfaction is found ; Will, the impulse to a broader end,
in which the whole being of the agent is concerned. Plea-
sure is the satisfaction of Desire : Happiness the satisfac-
tion of Will, the attainment by a man of what he feels to
be his true being's end and aim. Now, the conception of
Happiness will vary, not only according to individual
temperament and circumstances, but also according to the
current ideas of life and society. For in all but the most
degraded, and perhaps even in them, the conception of per-
sonal worth and of the part that a man is expected to play
in life enters as an ingredient, perhaps as the determining
ingrectient, into the conception of his own happiness. And
besides his function in this life, there is the conception of
another life, or of his duty to God, which profoundly
influences the notion of happiness formed by great num-
bers of men. Finally, the happiness of others, which in
a greater or less degree a man identifies with his own,
is determined in the concrete form which it takes by a
similar multiplicity of influences. I am not here con-
cerned to go into these influences in det^l, or to analyse
the actual conception of Happiness that prevails at diflTerent
times or under diflTerent conditions. I call attention to


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 391

two points only. One is, that as it actually develops.
Happiness as an end is something very difFerent from life
as an end. There have been important sects which have
even held the suppression of life, or of important elements
in life, essential to man's temporal or eternal happiness.
And apart from abnormalities of this kind, one may say
generally that to live well is not the same thing as to live.
Happiness does not mean necessarily increased quantity of
life, but a special quality.

The second point is what we may call the relativity of
Happiness. The conceptions of value are, as we have
hinted, largely a matter of social tradition ; largely, again,
dependent on religious belief. Thus, apart from philoso-
phic analysis and reflection, they are to be numbered among
those determining conceptions of life which grow up in
a spontaneous semi-unconscious way with the life of
society. And taking the world over from China to Peru,
they may diflTer within very wide limits. No doubt here
as lower in the scale, natural selection operating in the
background keeps a certain check on the growth of ideas.
If the conception of well-being comes to conflict too vio-
lently \ndth the real conditions of life, the society which it
dominates will obviously tend to succumb. The ideal of
celibacy, for example, can only weed out the community
or the class which faithfully puts it in practice. But gene-
rally speaking natural selection drives humanity with a
suflficiently loose rein. Man is by so much the most
dominant of animals, that he can aflFord himself a good
deal of latitude, and yet preserve himself from- destruction.

8. This latitude is indeed a necessary condition of the
highest development. Natural selection can preserve and
augment nothing that is not immediately useful. If the
pigment-fleck which is the first rudimentary germ of the
eye is preserved and developed, it must be because it is
useful as a pigment-fleck. The plea that it will later
develop into a magnificent sense-organ of the highest
possible utility could not av^l it in the court of natural
selection unless it could prove services actually rendered
by itself. So is it with all the faculties ; and most of
all with the higher faculties of man. The philosopher.


39^ MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

as Plato's contemporaries complained, occupies lumself
with things superfluous. He is wont to walk into the
well while gazing at the stars ; and he may be thankful
with Plato himself if he is able to get under the shelter
of a wall, and philosophise there unmolested by the storms
that beat outside. Originality is the greatest disadvantage
to its possessor in the intellectual market. The same
point is more obviously true on the moral side. Every
one of the Christian virtues is obviously a disadvantage
to its possessor in the struggle for existence, more par-
ticularly in a Christian community. The greatest offence
a man can commit against society is to be in any respect
better than society. For such the criminal law has always
reserved its worst tortures. But these germs of higher
qualities, so dangerous to their possessors, are destined in
their fuller development to carry human life to a higher
level. What was a short time ago a struggling ideal, is
now placidly accepted as normal. The world wonders
how it could ever have got on without it. The martyr
of the past generation is duly canonised, while the gridiron
is being cheerfully heated for the prophet of a still higher
creed.

Natural Selection no doubt plays a beneficent part in
human life in curing the worst aberrations of the moral
or social standard. And this is not all. The higher
principle, if it is given time to develop far enough and
deepen its hold, is also stronger than any lower principle,
and fairly beats it in the struggle for existence. Mr.
Sutherland has shown at great length how first the parental
and then the social principle are positively fortified and
confirmed by the struggle for existence. The most carefiit
parents will bring the largest proportion of their family to
maturity, while the children of the careless and the callous
are allowed to die. Similarly at a higher remove the best
ordered State is at an advantage over its competitors.
But here at once we trench upon the limits of this method
of progress. The good order necessary to a successful war
may, as we well know, be secured at the cost of individual
liberty, and of much besides. Hence an iron despotism
may overthrow a state containing within it the elements


A


XVI ORGANISATION AND EVOLUTION 393

of a higher order, which, if it came to maturity, would be
not only better but also stronger than its conqueror. And
this is but one instance of a rule pervading all relations of
life. If the man of genius is endowed with unusually
strong will, or is placid in exceptionally favourable dr-
cumstances, he not merely escapes disaster, but imposes
his genius on the world, and is recognised as one of its
great men. The inventor is not always ruined, and if
not ruined, he makes a fortune. The loving tempera-
ment is not always crushed, and if not crushed, it is the
foundation of the most enduring happiness. But it re-

/ mains that in the ordinary course of the world, the virtues
and excellences belonging to the highest type are a disad-
vantage to the individual in the naked struggle for exist-
ence. They need the shelter of a social order in which
the reign of force is suspended or mitigated, and in that
shelter they reach a maturity in which they are found to
be after all the strongest as well as the most beautiful
growth.

9. The suspension of the struggle for existence makes
possible a many-sided development. In some directions
this development is all good, in others it is a mixed good,
in yet others it may lead to evils which the unmitigated
struggle would never allow to come into existence. But
upon the whole, this many-sidedness means that human
life becomes fuller, and that the infinitely varied capacities
of human beings find more and more room for satisfaction.

\ And this again is as much as to say that life reaches a higher
\ \ stage of organisation. For the highest organism is that
which, while maintaining its unity, allows the fullest de-
velopment of individuality in its parts. The controlling
factor needed to replace the rude efficacy of the struggle,
is the intelligent apprehension of the organisation possible
for human life, and the subjection of current standards of
value to that principle. At this point the conditions of
existence cease to act as a check on intelligence from out-
side. They are absorbed into its system as part of the
knowledge which it uses for its own ends. The philo-
sophic science of the highest stage brings us back to the
conditions of existence as the source of laws for conduct


'1


\


394 MIND IN EVOLUTION ch. xvi

from which we started in the sphere of instinct, but the
conditions and the existence are transformecL The
conditions are used by the mind as its instruments,
and the existence which it contemplates is not that
which it knows, but the lugher life which it sees to
be possible. In a certain sort we have treated mental
development throughout as a process in which an implicit
purpose gradually comes into view. But we must beu* in
mind that in proportion as it comes into view, it is changed
in character. The implicit purpose of the lower type is
to m^ntain itself, to satisfy the wants and impulses be-
longing to that type. But the very fict that impulse
comes to understand itself as desire implies that the type
is changed to something better, and the same holds at eaxh
higher stage. If a man understood the real mental and
moral forces that underlie his cherished ambitions, his
ambitions would thereby be changed. We must therefore
understand the organisation of life as changing not only
in method but in plan, as it passes from the control of
heredity and the struggle for existence to that of Reason
and purpose. At its lowest it is an organisation of be-
haviour directed to the maintenance of the type. It passes
to organisation directed to the attainment of purposes
varying in scope and character, and ultimately becomes
an organisation for the comprehensive purpose of bringing
life itself to the perfection of its development.


CHAPTER XVII

SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT

Our object in the present work has been to ascertain
the character and function of Mind as the organising
principle in Evolution. In the absence of intelligence
and in its lowest stages, Life is, as we expressed it, " un-
organised." The successive actions of an individual are
not properly correlated. As between different individuals
there is conflict rather than co-operation. In the process
by which species are formecl there is an even more com-
plete lack of plan. The fact that biological evolution
rests on a struggle for existence is itself enough to show
a want of that organic unity in which the good of one
part is necessarily the good of the rest. Were a species
to become a unity, and its development organic, the
fundamental condition would be that each individual should
find the furthering, the development, of his own nature
in that which furthers and develops others. Evolution
by natural selection is thus the direct negation of an
organic growth. It is in no way parallel to the regular
unfolding of a germ. It is an irregular backwards and
forwards movement in which now an individual of one
type prevails, now an example of another, and little by
little, the battle swings over to the one side. This is not
development. It is more like a slow process of sifting, in
which, by a long series of stages, and with many pauses,
grains of one kind tend to come together in one heap. In
such a process, clearly the accidental as well as the more


396 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

permanent character of the environment must play a
a notable part.

Accordingly evolution biolc^cally considered exhibits
no comprehensive plan or pervacUng. tendency. It pro-
duces, not necessarily a lugher type, but one that deals
more efFectually with its particular environment. It may
be said perhaps to tend towards variation, but the variation
is not necessarily towards anything higher or better.

I. The development of Mind in animals and Man
means in our view the gradual introduction of a higher
principle of organisation into this relatively chaotic state.
The first function of mind is to organise individual ex-
perience, and this it begins in its first stage by correlating
masses of past experience with subsequent reactions. The
next stage brings us to a more detailed, complex, and far-
reaching correlation. Elements of experience are combined
so as to give knowledge of concrete objects and indivi-
duals, and on the basis of this concrete experience, means
are adapted to practical ends. This concrete knowledge
makes possible a mutual understanding of individuals,
and the impulses of aid to mate or young are
thereby transformed into sympathetic actions. Here the
second function of the mind — the transmutation of
rivalry into co-operation — is seen to b^in. In the next
stage experience is formed into organised bodies, the
essence of which is expressed in some general conception,
and on this basis action is adapted to broad views of the
purpose of life. With these broader views, the sympa-
thetic impulses of the lower stages become elaborated into
systems of morality which serve to support organised
societies. In such a conception as patriotic devotion to
the permanent welfare of one's country, we have, in com-
parison with all previous stages, a vast field within which
co-operation and organic harmony may prevail. But we
have not yet eliminated the inorganic element. Rivalry
remains, both in the strife of nations, and in those internal
relations of society which mirror its external life. The
next step in organisation accordingly is a fourth stage in
which the conception of social welfare is subordinated to
a scientific determination of the pos^bilities of human


XVII SELF^ONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT 397

evolution. The presuppositions of this stage are that the
conceptions of the previous stage are referred back to
the principles which underlie them, whereby common
sense knowledge is at length organised into philosophic
science. Secondly, the same essential process is applied to
the moral or social purposes which must be recognised as
secondary and relative to the underlying principles of
human evolution. These conditions being satisfied, a
co-ordination of thought and conduct becomes possible,
in which the whole experience of the species would be
used in furtherance of the one end that can embrace all
human action, the development of the human species
towards whatever perfection it may be within its power to
attain.

We saw above that the inorganic character of biological
evolution appeared principally in two points. Its basis
being a struggle for existence, there could be nothing of
that organic relation of parts which makes the good of
each the good of all. This organic relation we have now
come upon in the ethical conception of a common human
nature as supreme over all differences. It is true that
this principle recognises a unity that was there before, but
in recognising it transforms it. The fundamental kinship
of men is a fact before it is admitted, but it is only
when it is admitted that it becomes a bond of union.
Thus it is only at the summit of ethical develop-
ment that this organic relationship comes into existence.
The second point on which we laid stress was the absence
of any pervading principles or plan in biological
evolution. This reproach is also removed at the stage
of self-conscious development. As soon as the past
and present evolution of man are understood as the
opening stages of a much nobler growth, as soon as that
further growth becomes sufficiently understood to operate
upon standards of morality and conceptions of social effort,
evolution becomes conscious and full of purpose. Now, if
not before, it has a goal, or, if we prefer it, a standard of
perfect development to which it moves forward with
that orderly unrolling of powers which we find in
organic growth. When, further, the previous course of


398 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.


\


mental evolution is conceived as a process by which the
intellectual and moral unity necessary for this growth
were prepared, we carve out of the whole of evolution one
great process of "orthogenic evolution" of which the
tendency and direction are one from first to last — the
evolution of Mind as the dominating principle in this
world. If still further extending our view we take into
account on the one hand the biological conditions on which
intelligence rests, on the other hand the generic function of
Mind in the world, we may describe the whole process as
the development of organisation and trace its beginning
to the first germ of life. Whether this unity of tendency
can be properly regarded as the expression of a purpose is
not so clear. What is clear is that in the earlier stages no
such purpose is realised by any of the individuals con-
cerned in the evolutionary process. There arc elements,
fragments of the purpose, realised in the lower stages, and
these gradually come together into that wider purpose ^
which makes of subsequent evolution an organic de-
velopment.

2. But are we right in calling it an organic develop-
ment ? Should we not rather, if we wish to understand
what human progress as designed by man would be,
compare it to a purpose executed by human fore-thought ?
There is certainly one point which should be noticed. An
organic growth in the ordinary sense follows a strictly
determinate course. Not only its beginning and end, but
each intervening stage follows in rigid sequence, each
depending on and arising out of that which went before.
Certainly there may be deviations of a kind, but these
proceed by equally uniform laws from abnormalities of the
environment. Now, if the development of humanity
were fixed in this way, there would be no need of in-
telligence. The function of intelligence is to adjust
variable relations, but if the development of the human
species were, like the physical development of each in-
dividual, based on a determinate interaction of structure
and environment, it may be questioned whether human
intelligence could do anything to aflfect it. But human
development is not fixed in this sense. Its proper aim.


XVII SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT 399

and, we may say, its general course, are fixed by the
germinal possibilities of human nature, but wherever
intelligence can act, the limitations of ordinary organic
growth may be overstepped. An organic growth must, as
we have tried to show, always hold on its course, an
unfolding now of this structure, next of that, being the due
order never departed from. Intelligence, on the other hand,
may execute any sort of curve to get to its ultimate end.
It cannot, indeed, break any law of nature, but within the
limits of the laws of nature, it can alter the course by
which it reaches its goal at its pleasure. Since in the
intelligence which we presuppose in our "self-conscious
evolution,** we have all the mastery of the forces of
nature, oi^anic and inorganic, that the sciences give, with
the knowledge of man and his social life added thereto,
we should surely have not less but more of this intelligent
disposition of events than in the contrivance of any
ordinary human scheme.

But if we conceive future evolution as essentially a
human purpose, we must be on our guard against an
opposite fallacy. From such a conception we should be
apt to infer in it something mechanical and also something
arbitrary. Man imposes his purposes as it were on things
without regard to their wants and requirements. Bars and
rivets and wheels of steel or brass do not spontaneously
come together to make a steam-engine, nor in a steam-
engine have they ever that organic relation which subsists
between cells of the animal body. They are simply
brought into shape by an agent acting upon them, an
agent which they do not set in motion. Human evolution,
on the contrary, is the work of man — the product of the
being who evolves. Man does not stand outside his own
growth and plan it. He becomes aware of its possibilities
as he grows, and, if we are right, there comes a stage when
conception of the perfected growth seizes upon him, and
makes him intelligently work towards it. There is here
on the one hand no distinction between the worker and his
material. It is the material which does the work. On
the other hand, the " material " is not ** indifferent ** to its
destiny. It is out of human nature as it is that the


4CX> MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

conception of the ultimate pwpose and destinies of man is
evolved, and human nature being what it is, this purpose
must appeal to it in the end with compelling force.

If then self-conscious evolution is like the working out
of a human purpose in allowing unlimited license of
method, it resembles an organic growth in that its moving
principle is within. It resembles an organic growth in
that the broad possibilities of development are already
determined in the germ, but differs from it in that the
actual growth is determined by the conception of the end
itself and may be modified as that conception requires.
It is therefore an organic growth and something more ; it
is a purpose and something more. This we have tried to
express by calling it a self-conscious evolution. It should
be added that there is one point in which both human
purposes and organic growths agree. Both are definitely
making by diflFerent methods for an ascertsuned goal. In
this they differ from the process of biological evolution,
which arrives at a goal without maldng for it. One may
perhaps convey some conception of the difference by an
image. Three persons start for a certain place. One
does not know the way, but is directed to follow a certjdn
road. Keeping to this road, he arrives safely and speedily
unless there should be any unforeseen obstacle, such as a
broken bridge, in which case, as he knows no other paths,
he is blocked. This is the case of "organic growth.'*
Another, Intelligence, knows where the point is, and finds
his way there, going by a detour if the direct road is
impassable. The third wanders at random, but as every-
where there are hedges and walls preventing him from
getting far out of the way, and as hedges grow up behind
him to prevent his return, he gradually arrives by
eliminating all possibilities of going anywhere else. This
is the evolutionary process. We might vary the image by
substituting three companies for three individuals. Of the
first company, three or four out of ten would arrive, and
that speedily, but the remainder would be unable to swim
the stream where the bridge was broken. Of the second
class, all would arrive, and, on the average, still more
speedily, since, taking obstacles into account, they know the


XVII SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT 401

best way. Of the third, the different members would start
together and gradually disperse, and, having a tendency to
keep apart, one out of the number would in time happen on
one of the paths leading to the right spot.

3. Self-conscious evolution, then, differs from previous
evolution in having a purpose towards which it steadily
makes its way. This difference not only affects the
method by which it advances, but also the rate at which
it moves. I referred at the outset to the growing rapidity
of social changes as orthogenic evolution advances. The
whole life span of the human species, even if we take the
highest estimates of its antiquity, is a very small fraction
of the millions of years occupied by organic evolution.
But it is not too much to say that the extension during
that time in the scope of Mind and its power to control
natural forces and direct its own life is as great, and in
some respects greater than all that was was effected in the
vastly longer period preceding the appearance ot man.
But this is not all. If we accept a high antiquity — of
anything over 100,000 years — for the human race, the
result follows, that the greater part, eight or nine tenths
at least of that period belongs to the lowest stage of
culture — the stage in which men had not learnt to grind
and polish their stone tools and weapons. The first
rudiments of civilisation in the great river valleys arose
from 6,000 to 8,000 years ago, but this again was a
civilisation judged by modern standards of an extremely
stationary type. It is only with the rise of Greek civilisa-
tion that anything like a forward movement began, and
civilisation since that day has had not only to maintain
and improve itself, but to absorb and control the vast
masses of barbarism which have constantly threatened to
submerge it. To this day the outlying mass of savagery
and semi-civilisation still threatens us, not with the open
conquest which has haunted perverted imaginations, but
with the far subtler danger of internal corruption. Civilised
man as we have seen too often in recent years, has a painful
tendency to adapt his manners and his standard to those
of the lower races whom he conquers. The master takes
his character from the slave.

D D


402 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

Nevertheless, the facts briefly adverted to, which might
be drawn out effectively in great detail, illustrate
sufficiently the self-accelerating tendency of mental
growth. Of the total growth of mind in scope and power
during the existence of the human race, at least one half
must be assigned to the comparatively short period from
the beginnings of Greek history to the present day. But
it must be remembered that the mater part of this period
still lies outside the scope of " sel^-ccm8dous evolution." It
is only in modem times, as I hope to show in detail on
another occasion, that the threads begin to be drawn
together to weave the lai^er purpose. Up to this point
civilisation still moves in large measure through conflict,
though the social systems, the principles, the purposes that
conflict are wider, and give more scope for internal
development. As civilised societies become more highly
organised and their ideas more comprehensive, the onward
movement in each becomes more sure and its orbit more
vast. And yet, to this day, how great a proportion of
the enei^es of the best and ablest men is spent in
combating one another. If we can imagine all this
energy harmonised by the conception of a great pervading
purpose, we can form some conception of the increased
efficiency with which "self-conscious evolution" would
bring its forces to bear.

4. The conclusion to which we have been led is that
among the manifold conflicting movements of evolution,
there is one tendency of which the significance is not
obscure. In orthogenic evolution we find a constant
development of Mind in scope, and accordingly in power.
Slow at first, the development gathers speed with growth,
and finally settles in to the steady movement of a germ
unfolding under the direction of an intelligent knowledge
of its powers and of its life-conditions. The goal of the
movement, as far as we can foresee at present, is the mastery
by the human mind of the conditions, internal as well as
external, of its life and growth. The primitive intelligence is
useful to the organism as a more elastic method of adjusting
itself to its environment. As the mental powers develop,
the tables are turned, and the mind adjusts its environment


XVII SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT 403

to its own needs. " Mihi res non me rebus subjungere
Conor " is the motto that its takes for its own. With the
mastery of external nature, applied science has made us all
familiar. But the last enemy that man shall overcome is
himself. The internal conditions of life, the physiological
basis of mental activity, the sociological laws that operate
for the most part unconsciously, are parts of the " environ-
ment " which the self-conscious intelligence has to master,
and it is on this mastery that the regnum hominis will
rest.

The development in its highest stage is beyond doubt
purposive. The purpose is conceived in the human mind
itself. Are we now to throw the purpose back, and to
conceive the whole course of orthogenic evolution as
determined thereby ? We can conceive such a purpose in
one of two forms. We may place it within the evolu-
tionary process, attributing it to the beings taking part
therein, or we may place it outside the process in a
hypothetical Being who contrives the whole movement, and
shapes it towards the end defined. In the former alternative,
we are forced to characterise the purpose as an unconscious
purpose, and this threatens to be a contradiction in terms.
At most, we can say that there are in the earlier stages
elements of purpose and understanding which are
gradually blended and fused into coherence. The latter
alternative would bring us to the conception of an
unconditioned creation of the world-order, which can
never be accepted by the intelligence without stifling the
moral sense. Is there any third possibility ?

5. I have argued elsewhere that a close examination
of the postulates of knowledge leads us to conceive
Reality as a single comprehensive system in which all
things and all processes have their place in accordance
with a single pervading scheme. This scheme cannot be
something foreign to the elements which compose it, for
there is nothing outside it to impose it upon them. It is
the expression of their nature as a whole, and upon it they
in turn depend for their existence. If we would
figure such a relationship in terms of a familiar experience,
we may think of a living organism in which the life

D D 2


404 MIND IN EVOLUTION chap.

process rests on the working of every part, and in turn
makes that working possible. The life cannot be more
than the parts make possible, yet the parts are not
conditions that limit it as from without, but are its con-
stituent elements, and apart from the whole have no
existence.

So, far, however, there is nothing to show that either
development or purpose are necessary parts of such a
scheme. We might still say that what the whole order and
framework of the universe is now, is determined by what
it was yesterday, and so on to infinity. But over and
above the postulate of thought, there is an ideal of thought
which we cannot regard as valueless for truth, though it
may be both unrealised and unprovable. The methods of
thought are valid, and give us reality. If, tradng them
onwards in their natural direction, we find them pointing
to a certain end as the goal of completed thought, we
cannot easily avoid the belief that such a goal is in fact
attainable. Now the goal of thought is a system
intelligible in itself and without passing outside it.
Whether such a system must be finite or not is a
different question. If we could attsun to it, the concep-
tions of finite and infinite would probably be changed from
what they are for us now. But whether the system were
to shed light on a finite or infinite reality, the principle
which is to make all things intelligible must lie wholly
within it if it is to be complete.

Now, it is easy to show that in such a system the
ultimate grounds of interconnection can neither be purely
mechanical nor purely teleological. Reality is or includes
a time process. Now, if we take any time process, and
consider its beginning, we are dealing with a partial fact,
and for every partial fact, thought demands an explanation
which will connect it with Reality as a whole. For the
cause of the origin of a process, then, we may look in two
directions, to its results or to its antecedents. If we look
to the latter, we are clearly going outside the process.
But if the process is one in which the whole nature of our
ultimate system is to be expressed, we cannot go out^de
it without denying the claim of our system to be complete.


XVII SELF-CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT 405

We are therefore thrown forward towards the results of
this system. But neither can the purpose achieved by the
process stand alone, for the necessity of the process must
also be made plain. If an unconditional purpose were the
secret of the universe, there could be no explanation of
the means, the process, and the effort through which the
purpose is realised.

6. From the conception of purpose, then, we are again
thrown back on origins, just as these throw us forward to
their purpose. We have, in short, to conceive a single
principle not realised in full at any one phase, but pervad-
ing the whole world-process. In this principle, the possible
and the actual in a sense come together, for what it is to
be is an integral condition that goes to make the world
what it is. We cannot take any phase of Reality as an
absolute starting-point and regard it as determining every-
thing that follows upon it mechanically, or everything that
precedes it teleologically. If we conceive any process as
making up the life of an intelligible world-whole, we must
conceive its origin and issue as dependent on and implying
one another. That is, we must conceive it as determined
organically. And the word is the more appropriate
because, just as we saw at first that the relations of a
comprehensive plan to its elements could be figured in the
penetration of all the organic elements by the life of the
whole, so now when we treat the plan as the plan of a
process, we find its nearest analogy in the struggle of life
within its physical conditions to realise its ^11 nature.
The life that, determined on one side by its constituent
elements, is equally determined from the first by its own
possibility and promise, displays a history in which end
and origin, broad principles and detailed conditions, form
a systematic whole.

If this ideal of thought may be taken as adumbrating
the ultimate nature of Reality, nature is neither wholly
blind, nor wholly the creature of intelligent purpose.
Origin and purpose are mutually dependent parts of one
scheme. What was in the beginning was in order that
what shall be might be realised. But what shall be, and
the way in which it shall come about, are equally the


4o6 MIND IN EVOLUTION ch. xvii

creations of that which was at first. If we seek to realise
in some concrete fashion what this means, we shall think
once more of the germ of a soul in a living organism.
The soul would not exist in germ, but that there is laid
up in store for it a futurity which repays the travsul of
development. Neither could it exist but for the physical
conditions in which it is immersed. Its development is a
war with these conditions which msuntain and yet limit it,
and its triumph is the submission of the conditions to its
perfected nature. In this image we have a brief account
of the whole process of the evolution of Mind as traced
in these chapters, and therewith the process of evolution
upon this earth appears as the worldng out in concrete
shape and on this relatively narrow stage of the vaster
process which we dimly conceive as constitutii^ the
essential life of the world.


INDEX


INDEX


Accident, comparative nnimportance

of, in experiments, 202
Acquirement of meaning, loi
Acquisition, perceptual and motor, 155
Affection, development of, 364
Alexander^ Professor^ 8
Altruism, 305
Amphibia, 97, 108
Analysis, absence of, in animals, 200
Animal societies and division of labour,

307
Animal behaviour and human morality,

314, 31S
Ants {see Hymencptera)
Application of experience, 227
Application, spontaneous, 227
AHitotU, 7, 8, 298, 302, 331, 337, 347
Art, evolution of, 308
Articulata, in

Articulateness in experience, 165
Assimilation and Readjustment, Ch. V
„ retrogressive, 96

,, work of, 136

Association of Ideas, 113, 117, 132
Association, sense impulse theory of,

147
Attention not natural but acquired, 204
AutenrUth^ 51
Automatic movements, 26


B


BastiaHy Dr, H, C, 290
Batesy H. W., 241

Bateson, fV. 65, 88, 96, 104, 105, 128
Bees {see Hymenoptera'S
BetlUy Albreckty 106, 291
Binet and Henriy 121, 122
Bingleyy Rev, W,^ no, 205
Birds, reflex action among, 40
„ operation of experience among,
86, 87. 97


Birds, modification of instinct among,
271

„ sentinels used by, 272, 307

„ grades of, 384
Birth-rate, 379-387
Bonnet y C, 60
Bradley, /*. H,, 298
BreknCs ThurUben, 59, 60, 97, loj,

106, 107, 108, 109, no, 205, 238,

2|2, 257, 271, 273, 274, 275, 276,

BuckioHy G, B„ 62

Burden Sanderson^ Sir J.y 23


Calkins, Miss M, IV,, 123
Cambridge Natural History, 49, 64,

74, 105, 106, no, 380
Cats, Mr. Thomdike's, 142-150

„ character of, 155

„ pulling string, 156, 157, 158

„ using lever, 161

„ using pull-bolt, 163, 164

,, using push-back bolt, 167

„ lifting catch, 169

„ „ loop, 173

„ pulling spike, 175

,, lifting cover, 178

„ upsettii^ jug, &c, 176, 177, 178

,, opening drawers, 181, 182

,, sliding lid, 183

,, "control" experiments with,
187, 188

,, using tied cord, 194
Cells, 16, 26, 27
Cephalopods, faint traces of action of

experience among, 109, 1 1 1
Children, reflex action in development
in, 42
,, early speech in, 285-292,
321, 322

{su Infants)
Christian Socialism, 348


4IO


INDEX


C]asgificfttk»» pieptrmtoiy work of

Scienoe, 331
CoelentenU, little evidence as to

learning by experience among, 11
Common lensc^ 328, 329
ComprehensiTenest as test of mental

development, 6
Comtif Angustit 336
Concept, the, Ch. XII

„ the Collective, 301
„ the Individnal, 301
Concepts, general, 292 «/ seq.
ConoeptaaT thought, products of^ Ch.

Conceptual thinking and Will, 365
Conduct, standardising of, 325
Confirmation and Inhibition, 85
Conventional Lies, 352
Co-ordination of Action, 9
ComisM, C. /., 272, 273, 274
Correlation of intelligent organisms, 6
, , of Experiences and Actions,

102, 136
„ as essential work of Intelli-
gence, 102
„ of sense stimuli, 136
„ of relations, 136, 3i53
„ of sciences is work of
phUosophv, 334
Correlation, summary of stages of, Ch.

XV
Crickets, powers of separate nerve-
centres among, 376
Cross-relation, 366
Crustacea 59, 63, 109
Cuvier^ Baron George, 251


Dahl, K, 48, 61, 64, 87, 265
Darwin, Charies, 34, 40, 58, 1 10, 274,

278,288
Definition, part played by in science,

330
Desire, development of, 313

„ nature of, 324, 390
Development, general character of,
Ch. I
,, human, 350

„ self-conscious, Ch. XVII

Dieul, 280

Direction experiments, 219 et sef.

Discouragement, use of, in experiments,

154
Discrimination experiments, 179^/ seg..

Dogs : Mr. Lloyd Morgan's Tony, 141,
142
„ Mr. Thomdike's, 142
M using lever, 160, 161.


Dogs : imitation experiments with, 196,

■97
„ yacJk, character of, 156
„ „ pnlhng string, 155
„ „ pulling string on banisters,

159
„ „ using lever, 160
„ „ „ pull-bolt, 162-164
„ „ „ push-back bolt, 167-

169
„ „ lifting catch, 169, 170

M .> loop, 173
„ „ pulling spike, 173-175
„ „ upsetung jug, &c, ifi
„ „ lifting cover, 178, 179
, , , , opening drawers, 1 79-1 8 1
„ „ sliding lid, 182, 183
,, „ pushi]^ door, 183, 184
„ „ knocking off weight, 184,

185
„ „ failing with basket, 185,

186
„ „ failing with hook, 185, 186
„ „ *' control" with experi-
ments, 187
„ „ pulling strings, 189-192
„ „ „ Ued cord, 192-194

Doliogenic evolution, 381
Dologenic evolution, 5
" Double movement " tricks, 203
Dyaks, head-huntiog among, 345


EbHnghaus, Herr, 121, 122, 123

Echinodermata, 3, 1 1

Elephants, retrogressive assimilatioo
among, 96
„ using pull-bolt, 164, 165
„ ,, push-back bolt, 169

„ lifting catch, 172, 173
„ pulling tied cord, 194,

195
,, reaching with stick, 241
„ using automatic machine,

260
„ low fertility of, 380
Encouragement, use of in experiments,

154

European countries and inlant mor-
tality, 385
Evangelical Revival, the, 348
Evers, Herr, 107

Evolution, general character of, 1-5
, , Haeckel's scheme of organic,

3

„ anstogenic, 5
„ doliogenic, 5, 381
„ dologenic, 5
„ orthogenic, 5-10, 310, 379^
398, 401, 402


INDEX


411


Evolntion, biological, inorganic duurac-
ter of, 397
,f self-consdotts, Ch. XVII

Experience and Inference, 74, 82
„ as relating Instinct, 79
„ modifying a reaction, 80,

91

„ concrete, and the Practical

Judgment, Ch. VI., 222
„ concrete, 116

„ ,, revival of, 117

„ „ and Memory, 120

„ „ among higher ani-

mals, 282
„ articulate, 124

„ application of, 227 it seq.,

268,283
„ hnman, and systems of con-

duct, 309
Experimental results, Ch. VIII

„ „ Ublesof, 208-218

Explanation, final work of science, 331


PabrttJuUsy 5$

Fertility, tables of human, 385, 386

Fish, instinct amon^, 49

, , lower form oftntelligence among,
104-109

„ treatment of young by, 275, 276
Flechsigt Htrvy 43
Forel, H., yn
Foster, Sir Michael^ 13,14, 32, 34, 36,

37,38


GoU%, Prof, Friidrkhy 38, 43
Groos, Karl, 226, 287, 289, 290
Guinea-pigs, infant, reaction to touch-
stimulus in, 34


H

Habit and Discrimination, 186
Habituation, 145
Haeckel^ Ernst, 3
Happiness, nature of, 390

„ development of, 391

„ relativity of, 391

ffiigg/, G. W, F, 298
Hodge and Ackif^y no
Hitber, Pierre, j8, 61
Hudson, Mr, 48

Human development and organic
growth, 350
„ evolution, 351
„ race, low fertility of, 385


Human fertility decreases with higher

development, 385, et sea.
Humanitarian principle, tne, 347, 351
Hume, Daaid, 114
Hutchinson, General, 228, 261
Hjrmenoptm, learning l^ experience
amon^, 109
„ conunumcation among,

291
„ powersofseparatenerve-

centres among, 377


I


Idea and Desire, 130
Ideas, Association of, 113, 114
„ evidence of guidance by, 198
„ articulate, Cn. X
„ practical, of animals, 258
„ can animals have ? 283
Imitation, failure in, 149

„ influence of, in experiments,

191 et seq,
„ reflective or analogical,
241
Impulsive movements, 25
Impulsive adjustments, 2i55
Inmnts and reaction to touch-stimulus.


InSre


lerence, nature of, 229
Inferences, based on general similarity,

134
Inferential t^ of action, 85
Insects, instmct among, 48-56

„ lower, learning by experience

amon^, 109
„ " protective mimicry " of, 381
Instinct as unifying principle, 8, 9
„ and Intdligence, 8, 9, 10,

49-S2, 71. 19s
„ not always complete at birth,

49
„ and Heredity, 52
„ '< mechanical," 71
^ „ shaped by Experience, 270,
318
„ position of, 318
,, slow advance of, 382, 383
Intelligence, working within sphere of
Instinct, 66, 67
difiiision of lower form,

103
human, development of,

320
and the Social Instincts,

Ch. XI
stages of, 103-111, 136-
139. 264-269, Ch. XV,
320 et seq,, jjSj et seq,
work of, 367
efficiency of, 38Z


412


INDEX


Intelligence, affecting organisation of

life, 383
Invertebrata, power of learning by
experience among, 109
„ more prolific than Verte-

brata, 380


fennison^ Mr, GeorM^ 152, 242, 291
Journal of Marine Biology ^ 65, 96
Judgment and Assimilation, 112

„ the Practical, general char-
acter of, 112
„ ,, „ and Concrete Ex-

perience, Ch.
VI, 134, 362
f> M ., as a stage in

the correla-
tion of ex-
periences, 136
„ „ Comparative, 295

„ Universal, 296 €t seq,^
32s. 326


/Cearton, R,y 160
ICirby and Spentt^ 60, 61
Knowledge of Individuals, 225

„ „ Concrete Objects, Ch. IX


Language, elements implied in its use,
284, 285
„ analogies to, in the animal

world, 286
„ animal, 287
„ of young children, 285-292
Layard, E, Z., 67
Leeches, variation of response in, 66
Lloyd Morgan, Principal, 15, 42, 46,
48. 56, 57. 66, 73, 84, 87, 90, 94.
95, 97, 106, III, 141, 142, 206, 228,
229, 230, 231, 260, 262. 263, 264,
265, 271, 272, 274, 280, 289
Logic, the Judgment of, 115

„ and criterion of certainty, 332
LonsdaJi, Mr,, no
Lcvat, Lord, 274
Lubbock, Sir/,, 55, 56, 291


M

Mammals, adaptation in, 1 1

„ instinct sometimes incom-
plete at birth, 48


Mammals, fertility decreases with

higher development, 385
Marion, H,, %yi
Marryai, Captain, 46
Mechanism in organic processes, 19-22
Memory, Concrete Expnience and, lao
„ and Anticipation, 125
„ in animals, 205

Metaphysics in connection with Logic

and Psychology, 333
Milt,/, S„ 298

Mimicry, protective, in insects, 381
'*Mind'* (periodical), 40, 81, 288
Mind, function of in Evolution, 5, 395

„ highest known reality, 5
Mivart, Dr,, 116
Mobhu, K,, 88, no
MoUusca, effects of experience on, 109,

111,205

Monkeys : —
Chimpanzee {Consul) and key, 258,
283,284
„ Professor, character of,

235
using push-
back bolt,
167
using boxes,

182
using tied
cord, 192,
242,243
reaching
with stick,
236
using

237. 23
working
stick with-
in tube,
247, 248
Drills, using push-back bolt, 167
Monkey rescuing keeper, 278
Orang, Cuvier's, 251
Rhesus, ytmfffjf, character of, 235
„ „ opening drawers,

182
M „ double movements,

203
), „ reaching with stick,

239,240
„ „ using rope, 240

>f M 11 tied rope, 243

»> i» ,, bolt fastened

by hook,
244-247
1 1 „ working stick within

tu))e, 248
»» ,, using stool, 248-251

«t ») removing obstacle

from chain, 251-
252


INDEX


413


Monkeys (con/.)—
Rhesus, Jimmy^ unwinding chain,
253-257 ^ ^
M 19 attempting theft,

257
Morality, animal, 277

,, standardising of, 317
„ average, 342 tt seq,

,• of Greece and Rome, 347
„ higher, 351
„ " natural," 352

Moral Impulses, development of, into

moral will, 314
Moral Standards and practical needs,

349
Mailer^ Friiz^ 73
MUlUr and Schumann^ 123, 124
MUller, K, and a. 231
Mulhall, M. a, 385

N

Natural Selection as factor in Evolu-
tion, 2
„ ,, influence on reflex

action, 35, 39, 41
,, „ and birth rate, 387

„ „ in human life, 390,

392
Nest -building among birds, 48, 271,

272. 384
„ „ fish and reptiles,

48,275-277,384
„ „ hymenoptera, 70

Niwsholmet A,^ 385
Normal process of learning in animals,
204

O

Objects, knowledge of, 124, 131

„ as centres of relations, 132, 222
,, concrete, knowledge of, Ch. IX
Organic development, lines of, 376
Organised and unorganised behaviour.

Organised life, resting on mutual inter-
dependence, 388
Organism, the, adaptability of, Ch. Ill
„ „ equilibrium of, 14, 15,

19, 21
)f M regeneration in, 15-18

„ „ identity of, 18, 22-24

„ „ highest, nature of, 386

et seq.
Otter, character of, 165, 166
,, using pull-bolt, 166
„ catch, 170-172


P

Parental care among animals, 276, 277
Parrot, using words with intention, 287


Pearson, Prof. Karl, 385, 386, 387
Peckham, Mr, and Mrs,, 55, 68-72
Perception of objects in their relation,
267
„ „ Results, learning by, 267

Perceptual learning, 196-198, 201-204

„ relation, 135
P&H, B,, 230

Personality, conception of, 304, 332
Pechuei'Loseke, £,, 238
jyiHger, E„ 37, 38

Philosophic movement of thought, fac-
tors of, 335
Philosophy and Science, 333
ideal of. 333-335
„ views of function of, 334

Plato, 331, 347
Ploss, Dr. H,, 386
Polyp and snail, no
Polypes, individuality of, 376
Preyer, W„ 2K, 26, 34, 36, 37, 40, 42,

4«, 57, 63, 84, 98, 288, 291, 292
Primary retenliveness, 96
Protista, survival of, 4

„ reflex action among, 26
„ lowest organisms, 376
Protoplasm, excitability of, 44
Protozoa, adaptability among, ii, 83
„ regeneration among, 16, 17,

18
,, reflex action among, 26
„ modification by experience,

no, III
», high fertility of, 380
Psychology, connection with Logic and

Metaphysics, 333
Purpose, 126

, , and knowledge of relation, 1 29
Purposive action, 128


RaU, Mr. Small's, 148-150, 166, 186,

X87, 195, 201, 207
Pay, Lankester, Prof. £,, 380
Reality, nature of, 404, 405
Reason, its function in life, 7, 8

,, do animals ? 310

„ does man? 310

„ as a harmonising impulse, 328
Reasoning, emergence of conceptual,

313
Riaumur, P. A. F, de, 60, 61
Recognition, loi
Redintegration, Law of, 117
Reflex Action, as mechanical, 29

„ „ modification of, 32

„ If ss determined by struc-

ture, 33

„ „ as distinct from purpos-

ive action, 33


\1


414


INDEX


Reflex Action, in defelopmcst, 40

,, „ " mechanical " sequence

of,?8
„ „ imperfect at birth, im-

proved by practice, 84
Regeneration among worms, 377

377


Religion, evolution of, 309

„ of Buddha, Christ, and Ma-
homet, 348
Reptiles, retrogressive assimilation
among, 97
„ capacity for training, 108
„ treatment of yonng by, 275
Resolve, development o( 314
Revival, Law of, 117
Rhizopods, simple ovj^anisms, 4
„ reflex action among, ag
„ modification of reflexes in,

„ organisation of, 375

Ramanet, Dr, C7./> 48, S^* te> 6l> ^»

64, 67, I04, 105. 109. "O, acH>

aos, ao6, 235, 238, 241, 251, 252,

253, 265, 271, 272, 274, 276, 289

Roux^ W., 16


Social life, effidency of, 382

„ principle, the, 339 ti siq.
Society, mechanical and organic view

of. 375

Spemctr, Herbert, 3, 54, 376, 381, 388

Spiders, web-making among, 48
„ adaptation among, 64
„ effects of experience as, 87, 88

Squirrel, borying nnt, 56

St. John, C, 272,273

Stags and fence, 274

Stimulus and response, 28, 29, 33, 88,

Stoic doctrine, 347
Statu, Mr., 228, 229, 230
Stemi, Dr. G, F., 81, 92, 96, loi
Suggestion, use of in experiments, 154
SiSktrkmd, Alex,, 5, 275, 276, 380,

384. 38s, 392
Sympathy among higher animals, 273
„ development of, 341, 367
Synthesis of reali^ as a whole, 369
System, as general character ot

Science, 329
System, rational, 368


Salamanders, r ege n eration among, 377

Schmidt, Dr. Oscar, 59

ScAneider, G. H., 48, 49> 56, 59i 64,

65, 105, 108, 109, 231, 271, 273,

275. 276, 277, 306
Science, evolution of, J09

„ contrasted with common sense,

„ character of, 329
Scope of inquiry, 6-8
Self, conception of the, 301
Self-assertion, 338
Self-consdons development, Ch. XVII,

Selhconsdousness, 312, 337

Self-interest, 303

Self-knowledge, 302

Self-maintenance, 338

Selves, conception of other, 304

** Sentinels" used by birds and mam-
mals, 272, 307, 315 ^

Shaler, N. S., 221, 228

Sma/l, IV. S,, 14S-150, 166, 186, 187,
195, 201, 207, 242, 264

Smith, G. W,, 122, 123

Snail, failing to learn, no

Snakes: —
Cobra and toad» 67
Watersnakes and retrogressive assim-
ilation, 97


Taine, Henri, 288

Taylor, A. £,, 146

Teleology, 404, 405

ThomcRke, £.L.,S^^, 142-150, 202,

264
Thought, systematic, Ch. XIV

„ „ work of, 334 et

seq.
Thucydides, 347

Tradition restii^ on language, 319
„ taking place 01 Instinct, 325,

3«7
Trial and Error, method of, Ch. VTI
Tunicata, vertebrates derived from, 3
Turtles and retrogressive assimilation,

97
Turtle, Texan, learning by experience,
108


U

Unity, organic, 375

Universal, aspects of the, 319 et seq.


Vertebrates, higher, less prolific than

Invertebrates, 380
Vertebrates, lower, action of experience

among, in


Y


INDEX


415


Vertebrates, lower, cases of affection

rare, 275
Verwom, Dr. Max^ 17, 18, 20, 22, 25,

26, 29, 83, 377
Vorticellae, effecl of expenence among,

no

W

Wallace^ Dr. A. R,^ 48, 52, 95, 271,

272, 345
Ward, Dr. James, 8x
Wasmann Erich, 74, 377
Wasps (see Hymetu^era)
IVaikins, G. P., iio
Weir, Dr. fames, jun., 97, 265, 278


Weismann, Prof. A., 15, 379

Wesley Mills, Prof., 42, 48, 94, 264,

290
Whitman, Prof., 66
^ill, emergence ot 313, 367

„ conception of, 324

„ expression of whole personality,

390
Wilson, Dr. Andrew, 262
Wilson, Prof. E. B., 16, 17, 377
World-religions,. 348
Worms, regeneration among, 377
„ little evidence as to learning
from experience, in
Wundt, Wilhelm^ 51, 148, 263


THE END


MICHARD CLAY AND SONS LIMITBD LONDON AND BUNCAV.


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARY


To avoid fine, this book should be returned on returned

or before the date last stamped below '^*


^3 "31


:iei


1934


a bios oil 730 tiia


H- fc


.1 S'


1

1


tSfp


«^


Stanford Uniyenitj Libraiy
Stanford, California


In order tluit otlien
retnm it m MHm m
Ike date due.


VMddabook,
IratBot later
