THE

PHYSIOLOGY OF INDUSTRY:

BEING AN EXPOSURE OP

CERTAIN FALLACIES IN EXISTING THEORIES

OF ECONOMICS.


By a. F. mummery

AND

J, A. HOBSON.


V

\


LONDON :
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1889.


#^s


LONDON :
Printed by Henry Hansard and Son, 41, Parker Street, Dmry Lane, W.C.


—- T TTY^'SBaii


PREFACE.


The theory of Political Economy, as it left the

hands of Mill some forty years ago, has received many

vigorous assaults, and few economists can now be

found who would consent to accept it as their creed ;

but, strangely enough, while essential links in the

argument have been destroyed, the main practical

conclusion to which it leads is still regarded as a truth

which no one must question. This conclusion is

stated by Mill in these words^' saving enriches and /

spending impoverishes the community along with'

the individual,' and it may be generally defined as

an assertion that the effective love of money is the

root of all economic good. Not merely does it

enrich the thrifty individual himself, but it raises

wages, gives work to the unemployed, and scatters

blessings on every side. From the daily papers to

a 2


'\


ff^


PREFACE.


\

\


the latest economic treatise, frotti^he pulpit to the
House of Commons, this conclusion is reiterated and
re-stated till it appears positively impious to question
it. Yet the educated world, supported by the ma-
jority of economic thinkers, up to the publication of
Ricardo's work strenuously denied this doctrine, and
its ultimate acceptance was exclusively due to their
inability to meet the now exploded wages-fund
doctrine. That the conclusion should have sur-
vived the argument on which it logically stood, can
be explained on no other hypothesis than the com-
manding authority of the great men who asserted it.
Economic critics have ventured to attack the theory
in detail, but they have shrunk appalled from touch-
ing its main conclusions. Our purpose is to show
that these conclusions are not tenable, that an undue
exercise of the habit of saving is possible, and that
such undue exercise impoverishes the Community,
throws labourers out of work, drives down wages,
and spreads that gloom and prostration through the
commercial world which is known as Depression in
Trade ; that, in short, the effective love of money is
the root of all economic evil. Having thus stated the
conclusions to which our argument leads, it appears


PREFACE.


desirable to give a brief outline of its course, and to
note the more important points at which it conflicts
with currently accepted dogmas;
/The object of production is to provide ' utilities and
conveniences' for consumers, and the process is a
continuous one from the first handling of the raw
material to the moment when it is finally consumed
as a utility or a convenience. The only use of
Capital being to aid the production of these utilities
and conveniences, the total used will necessarily vary
with the total of utilities and conveniences daily or-
weekly consumed. / Now saving, while it increase^
the existing aggregate of Capital, simultaneously
reduces the quantity of utilities and conveniences:
consumed; any undue exercise of this habit must,^


therefore, cause an accumulation of Capital in excess- .
of that which is required for use, and this^xcess will/ /
exist in the form of general over-production..

Examining the terms Demand and Supply, and
extending Professor Cairnes' argument pn this subject,
we reach a law of price which enables us to relate our
theory to existing commercial phenomena, and to
identify Depression in Trade with a general fall in the^'^f
rate of incomes ; this latter with a decrease in the.


Ti PREFACE.


\


quantity of the use of the Requisites of Production
demanded relatively to the quantity available for use ;
and this, again, with insufficiency in the quantity of
utilities and conveniences demanded, an insufficiency
which we show can only arise from the imduly saving
habits of the Community, f We are thus brought to
the conclusion that the basis on which all economic
teaching since Adam Smith has stood, viz., that the
quantity annually produced is determined by the
aggregates of Natural Agents, Capital, and Labour
available, is erroneous, and that, on the contrarj^, the
quantity produced, while it can never exceed the
, limits imposed by these aggregates, may be, and
\ actually is, reduced far below this maximum by the
check that undue saving and the consequent accumu-
lation of over-supply exerts on production ; ue., that in
the normal state of modem industrial Communities,
consumption limits production and not production
- consumption/) We illustrate the effect of this check,
step by step, by the commercial phenomena of the
years immediately succeeding 1870.

We then trace the economic laws determining the
distribution of the annual income amongst Natural.
Agent, Labour, and Capital owners, and show that the


PREFACE. TO

present rate of wages would be oonsidefaMY h^;her
were it not for the undue thrift of the ridiermembers
of the Community, and the oonsequoit continuous
and persistent over-supply.

Our first point of divergence from the orthodox
school is thus to be found in our refutation of the
doctrine that saving does not reduce the aggr^^ate
consumed, but merely varies the consumers. We ,
show this doctrine to be founded on the wages-fund
theory, and we demonstrate that it is not tenable and
must be replaced by the simple formula —

Production — Saving = Consumption ;
Le.f the aggregate of Production teing given every
increase in saving diminishes by its exact total the
aggregate consumed.

Showing that the use of Natural Agents, Labour,
and Capital, creates utilities and conveniences, we are
able to prove that the money paid for these utilities
and conveniences is paid for the use of the Natural
Agents, Labour, and Capital concerned, and that the
quantity of such use demanded is determined by the -
quantity of these utilities and conveniences consumed.
We are, in consequence, at issue with that school of
economists who assert that " Demand for Commodities " -


/


viii PREFACE.

(utilities and conveniences) " is not Demand for
Labour."

Reaching our main conclusion, that the undue
saving of individuals impoverishes the Community,
simultaneously lowering Rent, Profit, or Interest and
Wages, we contradict the generally accepted dogmas
that the saving of the individual must always and
necessarily enrich the Community, that the indivi-
dual seeking his own advantage necessarily works for
that of the Community, and that wages can only rise
at the expense of profit, or profit at the expense of
wages, or both at the expense of rent.

In Chapter VII. we examine the contention of the
currency school, that Depression in Trade is due
either to insufficiency in the quantity of gold in
existence, or to an increase in the cost of producing
it, and we show that this theory is absolutely unten-
able. In the last chapter we glance briefly at some
of the practical conclusions to which our theory leads,
and note how effectual combination amongst labourers
would enable them to very materially improve their
position, a theoretic conclusion which has received
some slight practical illustration by the recent action
taken by labour combinations in various parts of this


PREFACE.


country. We also note that the charge of com-
mercial imbecility, so freely laimched by orthodox
economists against our American cousins and other
Protectionist Communities, can no longer be mainV
tained by any of the Free trade arguments hitherto
adduced, since all these are based on the assumption
that over-supply is impossible.

In order to render our main argument easier to
follow we have carefully excised minor qualifications,
reservations, and explanations, and though this doubt-
less exposes us to misconstruction and adverse criti-
cism on minor details, we think this disadvantage
more than balanced by the greater clearness with
which it enables us to present our theory as a whole.

With the same object in view, we have placed,
after the table of contents, a series of definitions
which will enable our readers to easily and at once
ascertain the exact meaning which is to be attributed
to the terms employed.


(tonttnti.


cHArTEi; I.
Scope of 1*roductiox.

PAGE

What is Prcxluctioii ? 1

Consumition the cause of all commercial activity . . . G

Distribution 1>

Objects of Political Economy 10

Commoditi«js 15

CHAPTER II.
Quantitative Relation of Wealth to Consumption.

Definition of Wealth 20

Quantitative relation between aggi*egate of wealth and con-
sumption 23

Definition of Capital 83

The limits to Saving 37

Refutation of the theory of the possibility of infinite saving . 37

CHAPTER III.

The Physiology of Production.— The Law of Supply
AND Demand.

Supply and Demand —

in relation t3 individuals and the community . . .56

Purchasing power . 58

Demand for commodities cannot diminish capital ... 61
— causes the production of new forms of wealth . . 63


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Labourers not subsisted out of capital, but out of the value

they create 71

Capital exists continuously 76

The individual can consume his capital, the community cannot 78

Demand for capital explained 79

The law of price . 80

Quantitative relation of consumption and capital, how main-
tained 82

Incomes received as the price of the use of a requisite of pro-
duction 88

Demand for commodities distributed as income to producers . 90

Depression in Trade identified with insufficient consumption . 96

and with excessive thrift 98


CHAPTER IV.
Ovee-Peoduction and Economic Checks.

Alleged power of production to force consumption . . .100

The object of saving is to increase capital 104

The individual by saving can avoid future labour . . .106

The community cannot 108

No practical limit to the effective thrift of the individual . .Ill
Limit to the effective thrift of the community . . . .112
A fall in general prices cannot increase consumption . .117
A fall in money incomes necessarily coincident with a fall in

prices 121

A fall in profit will not increase consumption . . . .130
will limit production 131

CHAPTER V.
Expansion and Contraction of Trade.

The economic effects of the Franco-German War . . . 133

on saving . • . . . . • 134

on the distribution of the ultimate product between

makers and traders « . 136


CONTENTS. ^ xiU


Commercial cnsis . ■ 142

General effects of under-consumption 143

Competition in retail trade 145

Effect upon thenumber of retailers 154

Importance of fluctuations in wholesale prices relatively to

retail 159

Effect on Wages of this fluctuation 161


CHAPTER VI.
The Law ot thS LiMitiKo Requisite.

The Interests of Labour, Capital and Natural Agents not

antagonistic 164

The law of distribution 166

Advantage possessed by the Limiting Requisite . . . .171
Natural Agents, Capital, Labour, considered respectively as the

Limiting Requisite 173

In the absence of under-consumption, Labour would be the

Limiting Requisite 178

Labourers the chief sufferers from under-consumption . .182

CHAPTER VII.
Scarcity of Gold as an Economic Factor.

The arguments of the currency school 186

The origin of Purchasing Power 187

The use of money 188

Scarcity of gold currency measured by Bank rate of discount . 190
Scarcity of gold cuWency not the cause of low prices . .192
Cost of production of gold does not determine price levels . 194

but is determined by price levels 195

Prices determined exclusively by the quantity of Purchasing

Power exerted - 197

Entry of gold into circulation . . . . . ' . .198
Extent of its effect on prices 201


CONTENTS,


CHAPTER VIII.
Practical Considebations.

PAGE

Limitations imposed by the scope of our inquiry . . , 202

Incidence of taxation . « 20$

The basis of the Fre^ Tratle argument ... . . . 205

how modified by the theory of under-consumption . . 207

illustrated by figures 208

The interests of the labourers : 200

Methals by which labourers may mitigate the worst effects of

under-consun^ption 211


1^t^nxtion»,


Pboduction is the work of endowing material or immaterial furm*
with Exchange Value.

Pkoducebs are those engaged in the work of Protluction, and are
divisible into two classes : —

I. Makers (Agriculturists, Manufacturers, and all who create
Value by changing Shape).

II. Tbaders (Merchants, Wholesale or Retail Vendors, and
all who create Value by changing Place).

Requisites of Production are those instruments which, by their
Use, contribute to the work of Production. They are three in
number: Natural Agents, Capital, Labour. [Capital includes-
all Plant, Raw Material, and articles embodying value which
have not yet reached their final destination.]

Consumption is the sudden or gradual destruction of a valuable
article obtained from a retail trader or other final producer.

Consumers are those who obtain possession of valuable articles^
in order to destroy them for the direct satisfaction of their own.
desires ; i,e., not as a means to producing other things.


xvi DEFINITIONS.


Commodities are valuable articles in the possession of (or in the
act of passing into the possession of) Consumers.

Goods are valuable articles in the various stages of production
between Raw Material and Commodity. Goods in the hands of
Retailers are Shop-goods.

Rent is the payment for the Use of Natural Agents paid to their
owner.

Peofit is the payment for the Use of Capital paid to its owner.
The Profit or payment for the Use of Money is called Interest.

Wages are the payment for the Use of the bodily or mental Abilities
of the Labourer ; this use is termed Labour.

Quantity Demanded is —

(1.) In relation to an Individual or a Class — the quantity
bought by such individual or class.

(2.) In relation to the Community — the quantity bought by
Consumers.

Quantity Supplied is identical with Quantity Demanded, regarded
from the point of view of the Selling Individual, Class, or Com-
munity.

Demand is the quantity of money paid for the Quantity De-
manded.

Supply is —

(1.) In relation to an Individual or a Class — the quantity
of articles offered for Sale by such individual or class.

(2.) In relation to the Community — the aggregate of articles
available for Sale to Consumers,


DEFINITIONS. xvii


Money Income (Income)—

(1.) Of the Individual — is the excess of money values pos-
sessed by him at the end of the year, plus the money spent
during the year, over the sum of money values possessed by him
at the beginning of the year.

(2.) Of the Community— the aggregate of the Money Incomes
of all individuals in the Community.

Real Income—

(1.) Of the Individual — is that portion of the stock of wealth
of the Community which his money income would purchase.

(2.) Of the Community — is the total wealth consumed during
the year, plus any increase in Capital,


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.


\^


CHAPTER L


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.

Since the science of economics is concerned with
matters which engross the thoughts and conversation
of the large mass of unscientific men, special heed is
required in the adoption and use of those common
terms current in the world of commerce. In no other
realm of knowledge have ' masked words ' wrought
such confusion : the name ' idols of the market ' has
a peculiar fitness when applied to those loose and
deceptive commercial phrases the unmasking of which
has formed the chief occupation of economic thinkers.
Even now it is impossible to approach the study-
without perceiving the entrance beset with terms and
phrases respecting the use of which nearly all pre-
vious writers are at variance, and which each separate
writer finds it hard to employ for any long argument
without unconsciously shifting the sense.

The production, the distribution, and the exchange
of wealth are the three objects of investigation which
most modem writers ^ set before them ; others, and
generally the older economists, add the term con-
sumption.

* B.g., Mill, * Principles of Pol. Econ.,' p. 14 ; Fawcett, Book I., Ch. I. ;
Sidgwick, Ch. II.

A


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.


Now the setting forth on an equal footing of these
three or four objects of consideration, and the attempt
at a separate treatment of them, have been a fruitful
source of confusion not only to the readers but to the
writers of economic treatises.

The loose use of the word distribution has caused
the most trouble. Following the term production,
and used in close association with the term exchange,
it would naturally suggest the work or process
whereby the products which had received their final
shape were conveyed from the place where they
were manufactured in order to be retailed to the final
consumers. This meaning would easily accommo-
date itself to the general use of the term production,
which is confined to the transmutation and trans-
formation of material objects, and does not include
their conveyance to the placfe where they are wanted.
Now, though writers like Mill and Fawcett do not
go so far as to directly authorise this extremely
narrow use of the term production, they do distinctly
represent distribution as a process which follows the
process of production, and furnishes employment for
certain classes of labourers. Thus Mill, in the very
chapter ^ where he is treating of labour as an agent
in production, expressly distinguishes the producing
class from the distributing class, including upder the
latter all " dealers and traders." The ' class of labourers
employed in rendering the things produced accessible'
are styled by him 'distributors.' It is clear, then,
that with him the work of production ends when the
products are stored in the factory in a completed
shape, and that the work of distribution then begins.

» » Principles of Pol. Econ.,' Book I., Ch. II., s. 6.


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.


Mill further 1 regards exchange as "the instrumentality
by which distribution is effected," thus emphasising
his view of distribution as a process following pro-
duction. Although Fawcett does not follow Mill in
narrowing the producing class so as to exclude
traders and retailers when dealing specifically with
this question, he allows himself later on to distin-
guish the work of exchange and of distribution from
that of production. " It is quite true," he says/
" that commodities are only produced to be ex-
changed for other commodities, and the distribu-
tion of wealth, of course, implies the exchange of
wealth." It is clear that he here falls into the same
narrow use of production which Mill authorises.
Many other passages might be quoted to show how
economists have allowed themselves to be misled by
the common use of the term distribution as a process
contrasted with the process of production.^ It is
only fair to say, however, that neither Mill nor
Fawcett, when they have come to the consideration

• * Pol. Econ.,' Book II., Ch. XVI., s. 6 ; and Book III., Ch. I., s. 1.

*BookIII.. Ch. I.

® Marshall, Book II., Ch. VI., s. I, and Sidgwick, p. 171, escape
this confusion. Prof. Sidgwick, however, does not realise the extent
of the trouble caused by the confusion, and he himself u^es ambigu-
ous language in sp3aking of ' division of aggregate produce ' as the
object of distribution. Distribution, as a branch of economics, has
nothing to do with the commercial process of division, but only, as
Prof. Sidgwick himself points out (p. 175), with the * laws,' according
to which ' the increment of new commodities is shared among the
different classes of persons' who have * co-operated in providing it.'
He, however, appears to include under the -forms of wealth with the
division of which * distribution ' is concerned, ' additions to Indus*
trial capital.' The laws of distribution are rightly concerned only
with the apportionment of what Prof. Sidgwick terms ' consumers'
wealth,* which will be found to be the sole source of the real income
of the community.


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION,


of distribution, have dealt with it as a process sub-
sequent to production. The questions they there
propound and discuss have no relation to the
process of distributing or the means of distribu-
tion, but relate exclusively to the principles which
regulate the proportion of the created utilities which
falls to the respective parties who have assisted to
produce them. Since it is clear that to this final
apportionment distribution alone rightly refers, it is a
great misfortune that a term should have been selected
to express it which has been able to deceive the very
elect.

We have already noted the tendency in Fawcett ^
to make of exchange another process separate from
production, although in his discussion of the agents
of production he would include all those engaged
in the work of exchange. The same tendency, induced
by an unconscious adherence to the vulgar, narrow
use of production, may be observed in the writings of
.other economists. For example, in Mr. Amasa
Walker's able manual, ' Science of Wealth ' (p. 36),
after dealing with " production of wealth," the author
proceeds : "Since men have different capacities and
tastes, their products will be different ; and yet since
jail men desire nearly the same objects, an interchange
of their respective commodities will become a neces-
sity. Hence arises that department of mdustry
called exchange!' Thus we see production and ex-
change as two separate 'departments of industry.'
That the ordinary man of business should distinguish
production, distribution, and exchange as three pro-
cesses involving a separate machinery for each, is no


> E.g., Book I., Ch. III.


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION,


matter of surprise, though even he must find some
difficulty in distinguishing the machinery of distribu-
tion from the machinerj^ of exchange. But that
professed economists should have sanctioned this
commercial division is extremely regretable, involv-
ing as it does a loose and inadequate idea of the unity
of production.

What is production ? involves the further ques-
tion, What is produced ? The answer is, value —
exchange value. The whole work or process of pro-
ducing value is termed production. Dealing for the
present exclusively with the outer world of matter
we next ask, How is value given to matter? By
change of form or place. By change of form man
gives value to agricultural or manufactured goods; he
adds further value by moving them to the place
where they are most wanted. The value thus created
by the work of production must be regarded as an
attribute bestowed upon and resident in the matter.
Thus matter continually gathers value as it passes
from the condition of raw material towards the con-
dition of a utility, each step in the process adding to
this value. The material does not cease accumulating
value when it is turned out of the factory in a so-
called finished state. The merchants, wholesale
dealers, and shopkeepers through whose hands it
passes afterwards on its way to the consumer, are dis-
tinct contributors to its final value equally with those
whose work gave it a finished shape. In the one
case, it acquires value by changing shape ; in the
other, by changing place. The latter value, just as
the former, must be reckoned as value inherent in
the article, even as it is found fully represented in


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION,


the money price. Now all this, of course, no recent
economist would straightly deny, but most of them
by narrowing their use of the terms production and
producer so as to exclude traders and shopkeepers,
have implicitly denied it, and have lent themselves
on this account to a fallacy subtler, and therefore
perhaps even more disastrous than the mercantile
theory which gave the earlier economists such pains.

Although it is obvious that the end of production is
to supply " necessaries and conveniences of life " ^ to
consumers, this end, consumption, has been lost sight
of by almost all economic writers, who content them-
selves with a merely formal recognition of the place
which consumption occupies in the economic system.
Mill and Fawcett consider that political economy is
concerned with the production, distribution, and ex-
change of wealth, apparently considering'that labour
has fully attained its end in producing articles which
are distributed and exchanged.*^

Other writers give a formal prominence to the
element of consumption, which leads one to expect
a systematic treatment of the subject. Professor
Jevons went so far as to say that "the whole theory
of economics must begin with a correct theory of
consumption."^ The words of Laveleye are even
more significant : " The aim of production is the con-
sumption of its products in the satisfaction of rational
wants. Consumption is thus essential to production

* * Wealth of Nations,' Introduction, p. 1.

* The only use they have for the term consumption is to found a
theory of capital upon a generic distinction in the method of con-
sumption. This theory we discuss at length later on.

» Jevons, ' Theory of Pol. Econ.,' Ch. II., p. 43.


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.


and the final cause of all economic activity." * Pro-
fessor Sidgwick announces in an early place in his
hook * that his inquiry will deal with " the general
facts of the consumption of wealth so far as these are
associated with the former/' i.e., with '^ production,
distribution, and exchange." But the questions of
consumption with which these writers are concerned
deal with the wisdom or the folly, the pleasure and
the pain, the net advantages and disadvantages of
different kinds of consumption : they blend ethical
and psychological considerations with economics, dis-
cussing the quality of consumption to the entire
neglect of quantitative considerations.^ In their insis-
tence on the right use of wealth these authors give
much sound ethical advice, though none of them
points his moral so skilfully as Ruskin, who defines
wealth as ** a supply of really useful things for those
who can use them ; " if the things are not really use-
ful or fall into wrong hands they cease to be wealth
and become ** illth." *

This utter neglect of the question of a quantitative
relation between production and consumption, to-
gether with an inadequate grasp of the full meaning
of production, has led economists to give their
authority to the common impression that the real end
of commerce is to produce the largest amount of
goods in a finished shape, and that therein consists
the real guarantee of commercial prosperity. The

> Laveleye, * Pol. Econ.,' p. 246.

* * Principles of Pol. Ecou.,' p. 30.

' Laveleye attempts to deal very briefly with the quantitative
relation between production and consumption. His argument is
stated below.

♦ * Unto this Last,' p. 126.


THE HCOPi: OF PRODUCTION.


largest rate of production by means of a well-adjusted
co-operation of capital and labour, is the goal to
which they can point, and production means the pro-
cess which is the necessary antecedent of distribution
and exchange. They thus emphasise the value which
is bestowed on raw material by the work which
changes its shape, but neglect the value bestowed on
it by the work which changes its place.

The uneducated mind may be excused for realising
better the value which is accompanied by change in
physical appearance than that which is accompanied
by no such alteration, but the economist tramed to
the recognition of seen and unseen results can claim no
such allowance. Yet the whole tendency of their
teaching is to represent the production of a piece of
finished goods as the end or completion of an act.
When they have thus produced their wealth they
pause, and afterwards proceed to the separate inquiry
of how it shall be exchanged and distributed. Just
as the mercantile theory made the acquisition of
' treasure' the test and measure of national commerce,
so our modern economists have practically raised
finished goods into the same position. Their fallacy
is at bottom the same. We hear quite enough in
elementary text-books of the bag of gold which
Robinson Crusoe found. Yet in pressing the moral
that the bag of gold was no wealth to the worthy
mariner because he had no use for it, they neglect to
drive home the deeper lesson that it is the use of all
forms of wealth which enables them to reach their
end. A finished piece of goods before it is ' ex-
changed and distributed ' is no more a ' utility ' or a
^convenience' than was Crusoe's gold. But why


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.


dwell on this point, which everj^one is ready to recog-
nise ?. Because economists by narrowing and obscur-
ing the. meaning of production have lost the idea of
the essential unity of the process. What we, on the
other hand, wish to enforce is this, that the process
by which a piece of raw material becomes a useful
commodity is one process ; that the raw material
gathers value continuously by work done upon it,
not up to the time when it is said to be ' produced,'
but up to the time when it is handed over to the con-
sumer. The term production should and must rightly
apply to the whole process, the wholesale merchant
and the shopkeeper are just as rightly termed pro-
ducers as the farmer or the manufacturer. This failure
to clearly recognise that a commodity is being pro-
duced until it is consumed, this tendency to split up
the history of its growth into several processes, are
the reasons why economists have so lamentably failed
to grasp and represent the entirety and the unity of
the mechanism of commerce.

So far as the history of commodities is concerned
there are but two phases. Commodities are produced
and are consumed. There is no separate act of distri-
bution which figures in their lives. Even the act of
handing them over the counter to a purchaser is,
strictly speaking, nothing but the final act in their
production, is represented in their final value and paid
for in their price. The laws of distribution, to use
the unfortunate economic term, relate exclusively to
the separate questions. Who shall consume? and
In what proportion? and are concerned not directly
with the apportionment of commodities but of pur-
chasing power.


10 THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.

The laws of distribution thus regard the principles
which regulate the proportion of command over final
products which falls to the various agents in produc-
tion, landlord, capitalist, labourer. If the proportion
which holds to-day were changed to-morrow, so that
labour received twice what it does at present and
capital only half, the so-called ' work of distribution '
would not necessarily be affected ; the change might
only mean that the same set of purchases will be
made by a different set of persons. If we were to
retain the term distribution for the work done by
merchants and retailers, we should be obHged to dis-
tinguish the laws of production and of distribution as
follows : —

The laws of production relate to the method of the
work of production ; the laws of distribution relate
not to the method of the work of distribution, but to
the final distribution of the produce. But this course
would cause the direst confusion in dealing with facts
of commerce, so that it will be found better, if pos-
sible, to dispense entirely with the term distribution
in the analysis of commercial phenomena.

Regarding political economy, then, as the science
which deals with the method of furnishing 'neces-
saries and conveniences ' to the community, we find
that it is concerned with three chief facts * : —

^ These three economic facts will be found to be generally related
in the following way : — When any value is created a general power
to purchase to an equivalent extent is portioned out amongst those
who have helped to create this value (with the equity of this
apportionment we are not here concerned). This general power of
purchase may be or may not be at once exercised. The results of its
exercise or non-exercise are facts which fall under the head of con-
sumntion.


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION. 11

Production of necessaries and conveniences (in-
cluding all the work of transportation and
arrangement for the convenience of expected
pin-chasers, commonly termed work of exchange
and distribution).
Apportionment of power to purchase these neces-
saries and conveniences.
Consumption, or the use made of the power to

purchase.
The first step in political economy is to establish a
clear recognition of the unity of commerce in the
work of production, the lack of which has caused such
grave trouble in economic writing. To do this we
will briefly trace the histor}^ of the production of a
' utility ' from its first beginning to its final state. In
this history we need take no account of the second of
the three elements, apportionment of power to purchase,
since we have already seen that it has no place in the
history of a commodity. Consumption, as the final
goal towards which production moves, requires a
recognition in the history of a utility, but only as
serving to furnish a mark for measuring the progress
of the work of production. A favourite example with
writers on economics is a pair of shoes, presumably
because they are formed from a single raw material,
instead of requiring a combination of different materials
partly wrought. Now the raw material of a pair of
shoes is the hide of live cattle, and the first producer
of the shoes must be considered to be the butcher
who purchases and kills the cattle ; by these pre-
liminary acts he has imparted a value to the hide
which it did not possess when it was a part of the
live animal. Then comes the tanner, who purchases


12 THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.

the hide from the butcher and treats it, adding a further
element of value. Then the shoe manufactiu'er, who
puts it through various processes, each one of which
adds distinctly to its value, and turns it out a finished
pair of shoes so far as shape is concerned. But this
pair of shoes is not yet either a utility or a convenience,
lying, as it does, amid a pile of other shoes in a factory.
A wholesale merchant buys it with a quantity of others
and sells it again to a small retailer ; by doing this he
adds to its value, bringing it nearer to the reach of a
would-be purchaser. The small retail shopkeeper
keeps it, displays it, and finally wraps it up, and hands
it over the counter to a purchaser ; thus imparting to
the pair of shoes their final element of value, he is
rightly to be esteemed the last producer of the pair of
shoes. The shopkeeper is the man who by his labour
exercised on the shoes assists them to take the final
step which makes them a 'utility or convenience.'
Continuously through the whole progress we have
described, the raw material has been gathering value
by change of form or change of place ; the attainment
of its full value is simultaneous with the grasp of the
purchaser. The work of production has now reached
its end, the work of consumption begins. Now it is
absolutely essential that we should have some term* to
distinguish the article in the hands of a consumer,
having already attained its full value, from the article
in the process of acquiring this value and approaching
this state. It is required to distinguish the pair of
shoes in the hands of a purchaser, in the first place
from a pair of shoes in the factory, in the second place
from the shoemaking machinery' which is not destined
for consumption as a personal ' utility or convenience.*


THE SCOPE OF PROOrrT/Oy, 13


Now there is no tenn set apart either by eamomics or
by popular usage for this purpose. As it is deemed
objectionable to invent terms, we are driven to the
alternative of selecting some existing term, and
restricting its use to suit our purpose. Etymological
accuracy suggests the word commodity as being fit to
represent an article which is in the hands of a con-
sumer as a personal utility or convenience. We
propose, therefore, to use the term commodity ex-
clusively in this sense.' Raw material which has
reached its final shape (e.g., a jmir of shoes after pass-
ing through the shoemaking processes) we shall term
goods ; goods in the hands of retailers we shall term
shop-goods. This distinction, artificial as it sounds, is
essential to the exposition of our theorj' of commerce.
The historj'^ of a commodity expressed in these terms,
then, will consist of a series of continuous steps, leading
from raw material to goods, from goods to shop-
goods, from shop-goods to commodities. The number
of steps which lie between raw material and goods of
course differs widely in different cases, as also the
number of steps between goods and shop-goods. Again,
in taking the history of a pair of shoes, we have as-
sumed that each productive step in the progress from
raw material (hide) to goods (shoes) has been
registered in a change of shape of the material. This,

* Prof. Sidgwick uses the terms * consumers' wealth ' and * producers'
wealth ' to make this same distinction between the wealth which is
* directly available for satisfying human wants and desires,' and the
wealth which is * useful indirectly as a means of obtaining the other.'
(Principles of * Pol. Econ.,' p. 86.) He does not, however, sharply
mark the limits of the two classes by a definition of the term * directly
available ' in such a way as to exclude everything not actually in the
hands of consumers.


U THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION,

however, is not always so. The hides may be bought
by a hide merchant who does not treat the hides him-
self, but sells them to the tanner. So, too, the finished
leather may pass through a merchant's hands, receiving
no change of shape before it enters the shoe-factory.
Thus, productive operations which give change of
place to material may be sandwiched in between the
operations which change its shape from raw material
to finished goods. To make the historic process clear
we may mark the various steps or stages in the
development of a commodity as follows, using the
abbreviation R. M. for raw material, R. M.* for the
first stage in production, and so on.

R. M. . . . (Hide on cattle).

(Raw hides).

(Prepared hides).

(Leather).

(Shoes).

(Shoes in exporter's hands).

(Shoes in merchant's hands).
Shop G. . (Shoes in shop).
Com. . . . (Shoes in use).
There may have been one or more intermediate
step between R. M. * and R. M.^ or between R. M.*
and R. M.*, or, indeed, at any point in the history of
production of the commodity. In the particular com-
modity we selected, a pair of shoes, the work of
change of shape for the most part precedes the work
of change of place ; but in the history of other com-
modities it is different. If we took the history of a
loaf of bread, the steps of production which consist
in change of place will be found almost to alternate
with those steps which consist in change of shape.


R.M.i
R.M.-^
R.M.3
Goods
G.» . .


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION. 15

The merchant's work, or, more generally speaking,
the work of transportation, here may come in after
the grain is produced, after it has been ground into
flour, after the flour has been made into bread. Thus
the history of a loaf of bread will present often a
larger number of distinct steps than those which we
have traced in the case of a pair of shoes. In other
cases the steps are much fewer, and are not infre-
quently performed by the work of a single man, as
where our supply of milk for household use is ftir-
nished directly by the farmer.

Although an explicit declaration of our intention to
confine the term commodities to the sum of those
'utilities and conveniences' to provide which is ac-
knowledged to be the sole end of commerce, might
seem a sufficient definition, it wnll, perhaps, be wiser
to guard against confusion by a ftirther statement of
what commodity includes.

While in one way we are narrowing the common
use of the word, in another way we are assigning it
a wider meaning. We are narrowing it in so far as
we apply it only to that portion of material wealth
which is in the hands of persons who use or consume
it for their own benefit or pleasure, thus excluding
not only raw material in its several stages, but also
finished goods in warehouse or shop, and all plant
and machinery used to forward production. Thus,
neither a piece of leather, a pair of boots in a shop,
or a last is a commodity. On the other hand, we are
extending the meaning of the term to cover those
utilities and conveniences which consist in services
rendered by other persons, or by material objects
belonging to other persons, in return for pay. Thus


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.


the song of an opera singer and the advice of a phy-
sician will be included under the head of commodities,
as also the transmission of a letter for which we pay
a penny stamp.

It must, however, be frankly acknowledged that
this extension of the term commodity to include
those non-material utilities and conveniences com-
monly called 'services,' though absolutely essential
to a full understanding of the whole productive
system, involves many difficulties, and affords ample
scope for the exercise of casuistic criticism. For
instance, it may be lu^ged that as we would include
conveyance in a hired carriage as a commodity, so we
must include conveyance in our own private carriage
under the same head; it will then follow that a
private carriage is not itself a commodity, but only
a machine producing the commodity 'conveyance,'
unless we admit that one commodity can produce
another. So, too, as a hired house is to be regarded
as an instrument producing a commodity shelter, for
which we pay the purchase-money rent, our own
house should not be regarded as a commodity. But
if oiir house is not a commodity, but only an instru-
ment or machine continually producing a commodity
shelter, might we not in like manner regard our
clothes as an instrument producing the commodities
warmth, decency, ornament, &c. ? Thus we should
be driven to admit that even food was not a com-
modity, but only the producer of a commodity,
satisfaction of hunger, pleasure of taste, &c. The
difficulties all spring from the fact that it must be
admitted logically and in the last resort that all
' utilities and conveniences ' are non-material ; that is


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION, 17

to say, they consist of the 'services' rendered by
instruments. When thus tracked dowTi, commodities
will be found to be forms or modes of satisfaction
produced or induced by instruments which may be
material or immaterial. Now, if we were to regard
these modes of satisfaction as the only commodities
with which we could deal, we should find that no
practical object could be gained by an attempt to
analyse or give quantitative value to production. For
we should have to acknowledge that these com-
modities must be estimated differently, according to
the particular person to whose service they were
applied, and depended as regards quantity in a large
measure upon the passing physical or mental condi-
tion of the recipient. In fact, the foundation of
political economy would be laid in those deep and
dark recesses of psychology which can never be
sufficiently explored to admit of exact quantitative
measurements. If, then, we are not prepared to
regard shelter, warmth, satisfaction of hunger, and
the other countless modes of satisfaction or pleasure
as the real commodities with which production is
concerned, are we prepared to apply the term exclu-
sively to the instruments which produce these modes
of feeling ^ In that case a carriage will be a com-
modity, whether it belongs to a carriage-owner who
lets it out on hire or to a private person who uses it
exclusively for his own pleasure ; a house will be a
commodity, whether hired or owned by the occupier ;
a steamship will be a commodity, whether it belong
to a great company and is used as part of their capital
for conveyance of goods or passengers, or whether it
be a private pleasure boat. Now, if we were to

A 2


18 THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION.

adopt this meaning, we should not attain the object
which we sought by a term which should express the
final result of the whole process of production as
distinguished, on the one hand, from the machinery
of production, and, on the other hand, from the inter-
mediate stages through which a piece of wealth
passed before it became a useful or pleasant object to
a consumer. Thus, neglecting the accurate logical
inquiry whether the object which renders a service
or the service rendered has a better claim to be called
a commodity, we propose to make the test one of
possession, so as to include under commodity any
material object or any service which has been bought
for the exclusive use of the purchaser or of his friends
to whom he may present it.

It is, of course, true that persons who buy houses
or carriages for their own use change their minds and
sell these commodities, or the unconsumed portion of
them, or use them as a means of getting an income.
So, too, certain commodities which are extremely
durable, such as houses or even furniture, may be
handed down from father to son, and the use of them
or the consumption of a part of them regarded as
part of the income of the temporary possessor. But
it is convenient and even necessary not to go behind
the immediate intentions of the purchaser of commo-
dities, and to consider that he who purchases any
commodity with the immediate desire to use it,
demands, and from the point of view of economics,
consumes the whole of the commodity .^

* The extent of the inaccuracy of economic treatment of com-
modities is well pointed out by Professor Sidgwick in his * Principles
of Pol. Econ.,' Book II., Ch. I. •


THE SCOPE OF PRODUCTION. 19

Commodities will thus admit of the follownng
classification : —

1. All material wealth in the possession of a

consumer of which the consumption is an
immediate utility or convenience, e.g., food.

2. All material wealth in possession of a consumer

of which the use (consumption being indirect
or protracted) produces a utility or conve-
nience, e.g., houses, carriages, clothes, furni-
ture, coal, &c.

3. All services rendered — (i) By another person,

e.g., the waiting of a servant, the advice of a
physician ; (2) By material wealth belonging
to another, e.g., conveyance in a train or hired
carriage.


20 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.


CHAPTER 11.


THE BALANCE OF PRODUCTION AND
CONSUMPTION.

Since the end and object of commerce is to produce
those 'necessaries and conveniences' to which the
term commodity is applied, it is useful to have some
further term which shall include all these repositories
of value, together with all those things which have
contributed to form their value. Since everything
which is a means' to the production of value itself
possesses value, the term which is required will apply
to all things possessing value. The word most suit-
able to express the sum of all values is wealth. This
use of the word is wider than either the ordinary
average meaning of the word, or the various meanings
which economists have thought fit to attach to it. It
includes not only all ' necessaries and conveniences,'
material or immaterial, but all valuable things which

* The term * means ' is not intended to be synonymous with * con-
dition.' An atmosphere, and various other positive and negative
conditions, material or non-material, may be essential to the produc-
tion of commodities and they may possess no * value.'


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION, 21

are on the way to become 'necessaries and con-
veniences/ and also all valuable things which assist
these latter in their progress towards the goal of com-
modity.

Economists have been led into difficulties in defining
wealth through their desire to keep as close as possible
to the ordinary average meaning of the word. Since
this ordinary meaning is approximately though not
precisely confined to material objects of value, it has
generally been thought best to exclude both services
and abilities from wealth. This exclusion has caused
much trouble in dealing with the use of capital and of
labour, and especially in dealing with income. The
exclusion is in fact quite illegitimate in any reasonable
theory of economics. There are no doubt practical
conveniences subserved by excluding them. They are
incapable of exact measurement, and thus cannot be
set off as value against a quantity of material goods.
It makes political economy simpler to exclude all con-
siderntions save those of material values. But such
simplicity is only attained by the sacrifice of logical
method and practical usefulness alike. A political
economy which takes account of the direct increase of
material wealth brought about by the aggregation of
masses of workers in large cities, but which takes no
account of the effects of this change upon the physique
and morale of the community, can have no claim to
be a science capable of reaching truths which are of any
practical importance to any State or any individual.

The illogicality of excluding human abilities is
peculiarly patent. Though inseparable from the
persons of their owners, their use is saleable.
Laboiu'-power must be regarded as an agent in


22 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

production on the same footing with inanimate ma-
chinery ; the two are constantly changing places as
well as co-operating in production, and it is essential
that they should be brought under some common
term expressive of the element of productive value
which they both possess.

In order to realise clearly the fuller meaning here
assigned to wealth, we may adopt the following
classification : —

I. All commodities, or things on the way to become
commodities {Le,y a. raw materials, /3. unfinished goods,
7. finished goods, 8. commodities). These objects of
commerce may be sub-divided into —

A. Material, e.g., shoes in their finished or earlier

stages of production.

B. Non-material, e.g., a song or a professional

opinion in its final or earlier stages of pro-
duction.
II. The agents in production of commodities :

A. Material : consisting in,

(...) Natural agents, including land, mines,
&c.

(b.) Plant : buildings and machinery of
commerce, either finally constructed,
or in process of construction. Money
as part of the machinery of exchange
comes under this head.

B. Non-material : labour-power, comprising man-

ual strength and skill, intelligence, honesty,
&c., of those men engaged in the work of
production, either of commodities or of the
material machinery, or of those engaged in
the furtherance of effective labour-powder.


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 23

Keeping still in view the fact that the whole
structure of commerce is designed to supply commodi-
ties to consiuners, and returning to the division of the
various phases in the production of commodities
which we have already noticed, we shall obtain a
clear idea of a certain necessary apportionment of the
various forms of wealth in accordance with the work
they are to do as agents or material of production.
The commercial necessity which compels every com-
modity to pass through a number of earlier stages of
existence in the gradual acquisition of its full value,
requires also that at each stage there shall be situate a
supply of machinery of production to assist it in its
onward journey. Thus the whole organism of com-
mercial life may be rightly represented in relation to
the work of producing commodities, and will present
the following picture : —

R. M. (Natural Agents. — Plant.— -Labour).

R.M.1

R.M.-^

Goods

Shop G.

Com.

At each step in the process there will be a portion
of the raw material on its way to become a com-
modity, a portion of natural agents in the shape of
land, &c. (important in production of agricultural
commodities, less important in other cases), a portion
of plant in the shape of factories, storehouses, and
machinery, and a portion of human labour.

In a well-organised industrial society it is evident


24 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

that these three agents, in production (natural agei.ts,
plant, labour) will have a definite relation to the
work they are to do at each stage in the process of
production ; that is to say, they will bear, both as a
whole and singly, a definite proportion to the quantity
of raw material in its various stages which it is their
business to assist. Given the amount of R. M.' or
R. M.*^ on its way to become commodities, a certain
definite amount of each of the agents in production
will be required to assist in furthering the work. An
excess of all or any of these agents in production at
any stage in the process is useless, and will not exist
in a perfectly constructed commercial society, a defi-
ciency of all or any of the same will impede the
proper progress of some portion of raw material and
will render useless a portion of agents at the further
stages corresponding in amount to the deficiency. If,
for example, to return to the process of producing
shoes, there at any time existed more shoemaking
machinery than was required for working into shoes
the leather in stock, there would be a mere waste of
so much machinery ; if, on the other hand, there were
a deficiency in the same machinery', not only would a
certain amount of leather remain unmade into shoes,
but a certain proportion of the capital of shoe mer-
chants and retailers which was to have been occupied
in bringing these shoes into the condition of commo-
dities will be rendered useless. We are here, of
course, assuming a stable condition of the manufac-
turing arts. If a new kind of shoemaking machine
be discovered which costs no more to produce, but
which will turn out twice as many shoes as the old
machines, the amount of capital required at this stage


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 26

in the production of shoes is half what it was before.
But, assuming this stabihty in the arts of production,
the amount of capital required at each stage bears an
exact and fixed relation to the amount of consump-
tion of commodities, and any excess or deficiency
throws out of gear the whole machinery of produc-
tion.

Excess or deficiency in natural agents or in labour
at any point in the process will produce a similar
result. In the actual world of commerce it is true
that this exact relation between the agents in pro-
duction and the raw material is seldom reached and
never long maintained, but in so far as the actual state
errs from this ideal there is a loss of economic
energy.

The next step is to clearly recognise that there is
a definite quantitative relation between the raw
material at the different stages in production (the
total amount of raw material, including under the
term all goods short of commodity), and the total
of commodities. If we were to assume that all raw
material on its way to become commodities were
obliged to pass through all those stages we have
named, R. M., R. M. \ &c., it is clear that in order to
supply a definite quantity of commodities there must
have been a certain definite and precise amount of
R. M., which afterwards assumed the form R. M,',
then R. M.*, and so on right through the series. In
that case a given total of commodities at any time
would enable us to tell the exact quantity of R. M.
which had previously existed at each of the successive
stages in production. Any excess above this amount
would have been useless for the proximate end pro-


26 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

duction of commodities, any deficiency would have
been impossible. But the simplicity of this calcula-
tion is marred by the fact that all commodities are
not forced to pass through the same number of stages
in production. Some pass straight from R. M. to
goods, or have only one intermediate stage ; many
goods pass straight into shop-goods without passing
through the stages G.^ G.*. Hence a mere knowledge
of the quantity of commodities produced would not
enable one to tell the quantitative relation which had
previously existed between the raw material at its
different stages. , To tell this accurately we should
also have to know the character of the commodities
produced, so as to clearly recognise through what
stages each had passed. Possessing this knowledge
of the quantity and nature of any given quantity of
commodities, it would be theoretically possible to
give an acciu*ate description of the previous condition
of the points R. M., R. M.^ R. M.^ &c., so far as the
quantity of raw material situate at each of them were
concerned. But we have previously admitted that a
definite economic relation must exist between the
quantity of raw material at each point and the quan-
tity of agents in production. We now, therefore,
reach this further step, that a given quantity of com-
modities of a known nature determines absolutely
the amount of raw material, plus agents in production,
previously existent at each stage in the. process of
production. But the raw material in 'its various
states and the agents in production constitute the
whole wealth of a community. Therefore a given
quantity of commodities of a known nature deter-
mines the amount of wealth previously existent at


PROUUCTlOX AXD OjXSlJiPTI^fX. iT

eadi stage so far as the production of these commodi-
ties is ocHicenied. It follows, then, that a knovrletlge
of the total of commodities produced at any time in
a country would enable us to tell the exact amount
of wealth which had previously existed at each stage
in the work of production. But if we know the
amount of wealth at each stage we know the total
amount of wealth. Therefore a knowledge of the
total of commodities produced at any time will
enable us to tell the total amount of we;ilth which
has previoush' been engaged or used in the produc-
tion of these commodities. Since the only use of
wealth from the economic standpoint is to assist in
producing commodities, the knowledge of the quantity
of commodities produced in a community will enable
us to tell the total amount of wealth which has had
an economic * existence in the past. We may then
state our conclusion thus :

There is a definite quantitative relation between
the total amoimt of commodities produced in the
present, and the total amoimt of wealth in various
shapes which has usefully existed in the past. But
the total amount of commodities produced in the
present means, as we have seen, nothing else than
the present rate of consumption, for a commodity is
only finally produced when it is handed over to a
consumer. We arrive then at the statement that

* By the term * economic existence ' as applied to wealth, we moan
to cover such products as actually function as wealth, excludiiiff any
temporary surplus which could have at the time no economic use
either for consumption or production. This surplus wo consider
later.


28 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

there exists at any time a fixed quantitative relation ^
between the present rate of consumption and the
aggregate of wealth which has had an economic
existence in the immediate past.

This is such an obvious truth that it may seem
unnecessary to dwell upon it so emphatically.
But it is, in fact, due chiefly to the neglect of this
obvious truth that writers on economics have failed
to construct a system which recommends itself with
convincing force. We are, therefore, at the risk of
being tedious, obliged to reiterate. The law of quan-
titative relation applies not only to the relation of
the mass of consumption to the mass of wealth,
but of the mass of consumption to the several parts
of the process of production. If the raw material
situate at any time at R. M. does not regularly
advance to R. M. ', and in due order pass through all
the stages until it becomes commodities, it must
accumulate somewhere, and such accumulation will
tend to decay, or at any rate stand useless. For
example, the stock of milk and eggs possessed by a
dairyman at any given time must bear a definite due
proportion to his sales of milk, eggs, &c. It is of no
use for him to increase his stock of these articles if
his sales do not increase. Similarly, the stock of

^ It must be borne in mind, however, that this law of quantitative
relation does not imply that the same quantity of commodities
always requires the same quantity of wealth to assist in producing
it. The changes in effectiveness of human or machine labour, owing
to new inventions, greater manual skill, improved organisation of
labour, &c., are continually altering the proportion of agents in pro-
duction required to assist in producing a given quantity of commo-
dities.


pRonrcTiox ASD 0'X>rjiiPT:'»\\ ^

milch cows, bens, &C-. kept by tbe nanner must bear
a due proportion to his sales of milk, eggs, poultn*.
&c. ; if his sales increase, so must his stock ; if his
sales decrease, so must his stock. What holds of one
trade holds of all trades ; the aggregate stock at each
stage of production must bear a due relation to the
sales eflected. In a word, the quantity of wealth in
existence and functioning as wealth cannot increase
or diminish except in a constant relation with inmie-
diately future constmiption.

It must be borne in mind, however, that the rate
of consumption is not the only thing which limits
the amount of wealth which can exist in the form of
R. M. or goods or machiner\\ The number of avail-
able labourers or the amount of a^-ailable natural
agents may limit the amount of goods or machinery
which can be used for production. It is true that the
limit of natural agents is generally not absolute, but
in accordance with the law of diminishing return to
labour and capital employed in agriculture; but a
particular manufacture might be absolutely limited
by the amount of R. M. which could be procured*
The limit of labourers is an absolute limit. Assuming
that all available labourers are working with the
utmost skill and energy the maximum quantity of
the best machinery, the economic existence of any
larger quantity of machinery or of more goods is
clearly impossible. Under our definition of wealth
we had included commodities, R. M. in its various
stages, natural agents and plant, and lastly, labour-
power.

Since, however, a quantitative relation must exist
between consumption and wealth, it is evident that


30 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

consumption and production must be similarly related.
Every product must either be consumed or added to
accumulated wealth, and the fact that a quantitative
relation exists between consumption and wealth in-
volves the existence of a more or less definite relation
between consumption and production.

There are two alternative theories of the relation
between production and consumption, each of which
is theoretically possible. The first is that almost
universally accepted by the best-known writers on
political economy, viz., that production determines
consumption under all circumstances, resting on the
assumptions that whatever is so produced must be con-
sumed, and that nothing can be consumed which
has not been produced. The other possible theory
is that consumption determines production in that the
final cause or end of a process may be rightly said to
determine the earlier steps in that process. Now, we
state these two theories lest it should be thought
that the law of quantitative relation between produc-
tion and consumption depends for its validity upon
one or other of them. In truth, it depends on
neither, but is consistent with and required by both.
We are not at present concerned with the discussion
whether the amount consumed is determined or
caused by the amount produced or the amount pro-
duced by the amount consumed, but merely assert
that there must exist a quantitative relation between
the two.

We have now to introduce the much-debated term,
capital. It would be useless to attempt a full discus-
sion of the various definitions of capital. In endea-
vouring to give a satisfactory meaning to the word


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION 31

two things are necessan'. First, that the word shall
cover certain definite kinds of wealth ; second, that
its meaning shall be kept as near as possible to the
ordinal*)^ average meaning, for unless it is so kept it
would be better even to invent some new collocation
of letters rather than introduce a term which is
bound to cause confusion. Most definitions of eco-
nomists have proved futile because they have aimed
at fulfilling too exactly the logical function of defini-
tion, and have embodied either a reference to the
origin of capital or to the purpose for which it is to
be used.

It has been described as ' the result of saving ' by
those who have not yet explained what 'saving'
means, and who afterwards appear to include in
savings the food which is not saved but consumed by
labourers. It is also described as wealth which is
'destined' or 'devoted' to assist future production,
so that 'the distinction between capital and not
capital does not lie in the kind of commodities,
but in the mind of the capitalist,' * and depends
on his intention. If we are unable to say whether a
particular piece of wealth which exists is or is not at
the present time capital, it is absurd to maintain that
our term capital can be a useful part of our economic
nomenclature.

As our object is to give a definite meaning to the
term which shall enable our readers to know exactly
what things are and are not capital, we offer what is
rather a description than a definition, and say that /
capital is that wealth which by its use directly assists^
production. But even this description is far too wide,

» MUl, ' Pol. Econ.,' Book I., Ch. IV., b. 1.


32 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

and it will presently be necessary to exclude certain*
kinds of wealth in order to trim our term to a closer
accord with the ordinary meaning of the term.
What are the kinds of wealth which, by their use,
directly assist production ? They would seem to in-
clude : — I. Plant and all machinery. 2. Raw material
and goods in their various stages of development.

3. Labour-power (including skill, honesty, &c.)

4. Natural agents, land, mines, &c. 5. Commodi-
ties which, by their consumption, assist to produce
labour-power. Now it is clear that if capital is to
include all these forms, not only will it have passed
far beyond the bounds of its ordinary use, but we
shall require another term when we come to deal
with the relations between the landowner, the
employer of labour, and the labourer in regard to the
sharing of the commodities they assist to produce.
This broad meaning would include all wealth except
luxuries in the hands of consumers ; that is to say,
those commodities which, by their consumption, do
not minister either directly or indirectly to our pro-
ductive energy, and which, since they cannot be
entirely without effect, must be considered rather as
impairing that energy, and deserving rather the appel-
lation of 'illth' than that of wealth. The absurd
attempt to include under capital the food and clothing
of labourers, so far as it conduces to assist labour-
power, sins both by making it impossible to say
whether a particular piece of wealth is capital, and
by militating against the common commercial meaning
of the term.

Let us now turn to the different kinds of wealth
which seem to fall under our description of capital,


PR0DUCTI0\anD eONSUMPTION. 33

and by excluding what is necessary, restore the
term to its most convenient economic use. Since
both convenience of economic treatment and com-
mon usage exclude labour-power from capital, it is
clear that it must be excluded. Since commodities
consumed by producers only affect production in-
directly, through their effect on labour-power, they
must also be excluded. The case of land and
other natural agents is rather different. It should
be remarked that none of the economic defini-
tions of capital have succeeded in excluding the
value of land. For not only is land in large measure
' destined ' to assist the production of wealth, but its
value is, in fact, 'the result of past labour.' Not only
does this last statement apply to the value put into
land by landlords' or tenants' improvements, but also
to the value created by the growth and activity of
the community which forms what is now commonly
known as the 'unearned increment.' Thus the whole
value of land, alike that for which economic rent is
paid and that which gets the average return of profit
on capital invested, is the result of the work either of
individuals or of the whole community, and may be
said to be 'saved' or stored to assist future produc-
tion. But while no definition can of right banish
land value from capital, expediency may and does
demand that it be treated separately, at least so far
as that value not due to recent improvements is
concerned. In so far as land and other natural
agents stand distinct from the body of capital, and it
is found convenient to treat them separately, in
economic theory as in the actual calculations of
commerce, we shall exclude them from our meaning

B


34 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION,

of capital. We are now' in a position to sum up the
kinds of wealth which it is convenient to include
under capital. They are, in fact, the first two of the
five groups which fell under our former description,
namely — (i) Raw material and goods in their various
stages of development, including shop-goods ; (2)
plant and all machinery.

The distinction between what is capital and what
is not capital, so far as the production of material
forms of commodities is concerned, will be now quite
clear; but, with regard to the production of non-
material commodities, there occurs a difficulty for
which I10 adequate solution can be found. Should
the singing-lessons which assist in that voice-produc-
tion which is to produce a commodity, songs, be
regarded as labour or as non-material machinery ? If
the former, it is not capital ; if the latter, it is. Or,
again, is the work of examination-crammers to be
regarded as a machine for producing passes, for these
last are both commodities and instruments? The
same difficulty applies to all that class of commodi-
ties commonly called services. So far as the efforts
which produce them are concerned, the latter may
be regarded either as labour or as non-material
machinery. It would be more consistent with our
theory to regard them as machinery, but common
parlance would be inclined to describe them as forms
of labour. Since, however, the theory of production
and consumption is best illustrated from material
forms of wealth, we may be contejit to leave it an
open question whether the operations which produce
services shall be classed as labour or as capital.

Having now assigned a clear meaning to the term


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION 35

capital, we must bring the latter into relation with
consumption. We have already seen that the dif-
ferent portions of this capital which function at the
various stages in the process of production stand
in a definite quantitative relation to the amoimt
of immediately future consimiption. We are there-
fore entitled to say that this future consimiption
limits the amoimt of capital which can economically
exist in the present. If more capital should at any
time exist than is required to assist in supplying
future consumption, this excess is not real capital, as
it cannot perform the true function of capital ; it is
merely nominal capital. That such excess of capital
in any single trade may exist is, of course, readily
acknowledged. The surplus may sometimes escape
our notice from the fact that it does not necessarily
stand quite idle. If in a certain factory there are
twice as many machines as are required to do the
work, either half of them may stand idle or all of
them may be used for half-time or at half-pressure ;
in either case we should say that the real capital
consisted in half the machines, the other half being
surplus or nominal capital.

Now, whether this distinction is, in fact, applicable
to commerce as a whole we are not yet in a position
to assert. We can, however, say that, assuming it to
be possible that the capital of a community at any
time is more than is economically required to supply
the commodities which that community consents to
consume in the future, that excess will not be real
but nominal capital. This distinction assumes a
greater importance when it is applied to the fund
from which capital is drawn, savings. If future con-


36 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

sumption assigns a limit to real capital in the present,
it must also assign a limit to .real saving. Now, the
idea of any possible limit to the present efficient
thrift of a community imposed by the condition of
future consumption is one which almost all economic
writers have steadily refused to entertain. We must,
however, maintain that, assuming it to be possible
that some capital can exist in excess of what is
required and be merely nominal capital, it would
follow that the saving which provided that capital
was not real but nominal saving.

What is saving ? If a community consumes annually
as much wealth as it produces, it obviously does not
save. If it consumes less than it produces, the dif-
ference accumulates, and is called ' savings. ' Savings,'
then, are the difference between what is produced
and what is consumed. The correct formula is as fol-
lows. Production — consumption = savings. Since we
can conceive production indefinitely increased and
consumption maintained at a minimum, it is clear that
this formula places no limit on savings. But just as
real capital is capital for which there is a use, so real
savings are savings for which there is a use, and,
assuming that any portion of this difference between
production and consumption goes to furnish merely
nominal capital, it would obviously not find a use,
and would be rightly distinguished as nominal
saving.

Now, we are fully aware that almost all writers on
economics will scoff at this distinction between real
and nominal capital and saving as ' mere moonshine,'
so firmly rooted is their conviction that whatever is
produced v/ill be consumed, and that there is np pos-


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 37

sible limit to the amount of capital that is wanted in
a country. They utterly refuse to entertain the
notion that any wealth which is ' saved ' in the sense
of being kept from immediate consumption can be
useless for the purpose of assisting production. Thrift
is the source of national wealth, and the more thrifty
a nation is the more wealthy it becomes. Such is
the common teaching of almost all economists ; many
of them assume a tone of ethical dignity as they
preach the infinite value of thrift ; this note alone in
all their dreary song has caught the favour of the
public ear. It is not, however, with the ethical value
of saving that we are concerned, but with the economic
doctrine of the possibility of infinite saving and the
use of infinite capital.

To all who have followed our argument thus far,
as, indeed, to all who have ever considered the func-
tion of capital, it should be clear that the capital of a
community cannot be advantageously increased with-
out a subsequent increase in consumption of com-
modities. A belief in the infinite possibility of saving
implies, therefore, a belief in the infinite increase of
consumption. In Chapter IV. we shall deal with the
assertion that an increase in production forces a cor-
responding increase in consumption. But here we
would call attention to the fact that there is a school
of economic writers who have signally failed to
recognise that every increase in saving and in capital | /
requires, in order to be effectual, a corresponding in-
crease in immediately future consumption. They will
not admit that if people wish to save more now they
must consent to spend more in the future. Since
Mr. Mill, more than any other, is responsible for the


38 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION

popularity of this theory of the possibility of infinite
saving and infinite capital, it will be worth while here
to briefly examine his position.

Mr. Mill has two positions on the subject of saving.
One is tjhat saving may increase indefinitely without
reference to increased consumption ; the other, depen-
dent on the former, consists in a contradiction of the
assertion, ' production — consumption = saving,' by
maintaining that "everything which is produced is
consumed, both what is saved and what is said to be
spent." * Now, by increase of saving, Mill only means
one thing — addition to the wages-fund. If his capi-
talists refuse to consume their usual luxuries, the result
of their abstinence, the savings, go to swell the wages-
fund; either more labourers are employed, or the
labourers already employed get higher wages. If
there are no more labourers to employ, ' the whole
of what was previously expended in luxuries, by
capitalists and landlords, is distributed among the
existing labourers in the form of additional wages.
We will assume them to be already sufficiently sup-
plied with necessaries. What follows ? That the
labourers become consumers of luxuries ; and the
capital previously employed in the production of
luxuries is still able to employ itself in the same
manner, the difference being that the luxuries are shared
among the community generally, instead of being con-
fined to a few.' * It is clear that this process is capable of
indefinite expansion ; the wages-fund is a bottomless
fund into which any quantity of savings may be
poured. If all savings (beyond what is required to

' MUl's ' Pol. Econ.,' Book I., Ch. V., s. 3 and s. 6.
.. « Book I., Ch. v., 8. 3.


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION 39

make such additions to plant and R. M. as increase
in consumption may render desirable) goes into wages-
fund, and for that reason ranks as economic saving
and economic capital, it is clear that there is no limit
assigned to saving and capital by any consideration of
future consumption. If a mere addition to wages-
fund is effectual saving, not only does future con-
sumption place no limit on capital, but not even does
production. An increase in the wages-fund, the result
of which is to enable labourers to consume luxuries,
obviously adds nothing to their producing power.
Mill's theory, then, admits an indefinite expansion of
capital, without any effect either on production or
consumption. It is true he is not consistent in his
language, but speaks in one passage of ' an increased
production,' which apparently is to follow 'the in-
creased accumulation,' and which ' might, rigorously
speaking, continue, until every labourer had every
indulgence of wealth consistent with continuing to
produce.' ^ But why or how this increase of produc-
tion should take place he does not explain. He does
not assume, nor would he have any right to assume,
a surplus of unemployed labour. How, then, can
the increase of wages-fund have any result in in-
creasing production ? If it cannot increase produc-
tion, what' motive can induce capitalists to save?
The only conceivable motive at work could be a
desire to present to their labourers the luxuries which
they refused to consume themselves. And this act of
amiable and foolish philanthropy is what Mill means
by ' saving.' His process of reasoning is apparently

' Book I., Ch. v., s. 3.


^


40 riiODVCTLON AND COSSIMPTIGX.

this: the wages-fund, however large or small, is
always productively employed, for it is used to assist
labour to produce wealth; by abstaining from my
usual luxuries I can increase the wages-fund ; there-
fore I can add to the productive employment of
wealth. It is evident that Mill's ' savings,' which go
to increase the luxuries of the 'working man, are not
real or economic savings.
To ascertain the exact point at which Mill's argu-
f ment is vitiated by error, it is only necessary to test
his extreme hypothesis (quoted above) by assuming
that a farming landowner gains as rent and profit
from his land ;^. i,ioo a-year, and that he pays away
to twenty labourers ;^. i,ooo a-year (;^.50 a-year
each). The gross income derived from the land is
thus ;^. 2,100 a-year, and the whole of this sum is
distributed to all concerned and consumed. Subse-
quent to the supposed abstinence, the farming land-
owner, instead of taking ;^. i,ioo for himself and
paying his labourers £, 50 a-year each, distributes
the gross income of the farm, ;^. 2,100, amongst
the twenty-one individuals concerned (the twenty
labourers and himself) equally, each receiving £, 100
a-year. It is evident that, under these circumstances,
Mill is quite right in asserting that there is no decrease
in consumption. The labourers consume just as much
more as the landowner consumes less, or, as Mill puts
it, ' luxuries are shared among the community gene-
rally instead of being confined to a few.' But it is
evident that Mill is wrong when he infers, as his
argument requires, that the landowner is saving
£. 1,000 a year (the sum by which he has reduced his
personal expenditure). The gross income derived from


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION, 41

the farm is £. 2,100 a-year, and the whole of this sum
is expended as absolutely and completely in the one
case as the other, and it is quite evident that the
landowner saves nothing by his abstinence. If, as
Mill's argument requires, he saves £. 1,000 a-year, then
the aggregate consumption must be reduced to jf. 1,100
a-year ; but if this is the case, the labourers' wages
are not raised, and they derive no direct benefit from
the landowners' saving operations. Mill, therefore,
is incorrect when he states that in this hypothesis
the ' rich ' lay by, from conscientious motives, the
surplus of their profits : the rich do nothing of the
sort ; they cease to expend their incomes themselves
and hand over these unexpended incomes as a free
gift to their labourers, but they effect no saving of
any sort, and nothing is ' laid by.' The hypothesis,
therefore, fails absolutely to answer the problem
with which Mill is dealing, whether, ' if consumers
were to save and convert into capital more than a
limited portion of their income, and were not to
devote to unproductive consumption an amount of
means bearing a certain ratio to the capital of the
country, the extra accumulation would be merely so
much waste.' All that the hypothesis proves is, that
if some individuals cease to spend the whole of their
incomes themselves, and give away the surplus por-
tions to others who do expend them, then no undue
accumulations will result, a conclusion with which we
entirely agree.

Mill, in fact, does not merely ignore the considera-
tion of how his increased capital is represented in an
increase of production and consumption, but he
further contradicts the self-evident proposition, ' pro-


42 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION

duction — consumption = saving/ by maintaining
the tenet that 'what is saved is consumed equally
with what is spent.' His words are these : ' Every-
thing which is produced is consumed ; both what is
saved and what is said to be spent, and the former
quite as rapidly as the latter.' * 'The word saving does
not imply that what is saved is not consumed, nor
even necessarily that its consumption is deferred ; but
only that if consumed immediately it is not consumed
by the person who saves it.' '^ It might at first appear
that when Mr. Mill maintained that savings were
consumed, he meant those savings accumulated in the
shape of plant, machinery, &c., the material forms
of which are gradually destroyed in the use made of
them ; ' consumed,' in this sense, would be synony-
mous with ' used.' But when he adds that ' what is
saved' is consumed ' quite as rapidly as what is spent,'
it is clear that he is thinking only of those savings
which go to swell the wages-fund. Now, in what
sense can these be said to be saved ? Mr. Mill
would reply that they are saved in the sense that
they form a part of capital and are productively con-
sumed. That which goes into the wages-fund is,
ipso facto J ' productively consumed.' The capitalists
abstain from consuming luxuries, thereby increasing
the wages-fund, so that the labourers consume the
luxuries which the capitalists denied themselves. This
consumption of luxuries by the labourers is to be
productive consumption, though the consumption of
the same articles by the capitalists is unproductive
consumption. The only difference is, that the same
luxuries are in the one case consumed by one class

' Book I., Ch. V^ s. 6. ' « I., V., s. 5.


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 43

of people ; in the other case, by another class. The
formal act of having formed a part of a wage-fund
entitles these articles to rank as wealth which has
been productively consumed. In what sense were
they productively consumed ? True, they are con-
sumed by a class of ' producers/ but we must not
forget that the capitalist is also a producer. They
are not any more than before consumed in such a
way as to assist production. Mr. Mill has shown no
way in which an indefinite increase of his wages-fund
increases production ; he has not made good his con-
tention that 'every increase of capital gives, or is
capable of giving, additional employment to in-
dustry.' y The same wealth is used in the same
way by two different classes of people ; in the
one case it is said to be spent, in the other to be

* I., v., 8. 3. Prof. Fawcett, though he follows Mill, as usual, in
reckoning as capital everything which has formed part of a wages-fund,
admits that there is a difference between this nominal capital and real
capital; in fact, that there is capital which cannot function as
capital. * It has been shown in this chapter that the capital which
at any time exists in a country is always sufficient to administer to
the production of a much greater amount of wealth than that
which is produced ; in other words, the production of wealth which
actually takes place might be effected with the aid of much less

capital than the amount which is applied ' * For instance, every

shilling of the labourers' wages which is expended upon anything
but the mere necessaries of life might be destroyed without affecting
the industrial efficiency of the labourer, and consequently without
diminishing the future production of wealth ' (* Pol. Econ.,* Book I.,
Ch. IV.). But Mr. Fawcett does not explain why he speaks of this
portion of the wages as capital at all : it is not covered by his defi-
nition of capital as ' the wealth which is not immediately consumed
unproductively, and which may, consequently, be devoted to assist
the future production of wealth ' (p. 19). There is no possible way
open whereby this portion of the labourers' wages can assist the
future production of wealth.


44 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTJON,

saved. It is clear that if \^:ealth be added to the
wages-fund which cannot be productively used, it
cannot be rightly said to be saved. It is consumed
just as soon, in the same manner and with no different
results, whether it be labourers' luxuries or capitalists'
luxuries. It is, in fact, neither saved nor produc-
tively consumed. What motive can have induced
capitalists to thus increase the wages-fund without
increasing the amount of production or the sum of
gross profits for themselves, it is impossible to
imagine. Mr. Mill himself acknowledges that *' when
these classes turn their income- into capital they do
not thereby annihilate their power of consumption ;
they do but transfer it from themselves to the
labourers, to whom they give employment." But he
does not seem to recognise that by thus increasing
the wages-fund they give no more employment ; that,
in fact, the wealth they hand over is consumed just as
unproductively as before, and is in no sense saved.

Of course throughout this argument we have
accepted Mill's supposition, that there is no new
or unemployed class of labourer whose work and
wants are to be considered. But even in the state-
ment of this alternative case Mill's argument is
confused and incorrect. His words are as fol-
lows : — 'Either there is or is not an increase of
their numbers {i.e., of labourers) proportional to the
increase of capital. If there is, the case presents no
difficulty. The production of necessaries for the new
population takes the place of the production of
luxuries for a proportion of the old, and supplies
exactly the amount of employment which has been
lost.' Now, in the first place, this idea, that before a


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION, 45

new population can be set to work at all a separate
stock of necessaries has to be got together and added
to the previous wages-fund, will be seen to be totally
erroneous. In the second place, assume that this
stock of necessaries were added to the wages-fund
and used to employ the new labourers, the difficulty
is only got over for the moment. A new difficulty
arises. What about the wealth produced by the new
labourers ? How is it to be consumed ? The new
labourers have already got a stock of necessaries pro-
vided for them in the new wages-fund, constantly
maintained by a continuance of the former abstinence
of the capitalists. The wealth, then, which the new
labourers produce must either go to provide luxuries
for themselves or for the old class of labourers, or it
must provide luxuries for the capitalists, who will thus
be obliged to revoke their vow of abstinence. To
one or two or all of these uses it must be put, and in
any case it will be unproductively consumed in the
shape of luxuries.

It follows, then, alike from the d priori principle
embodied in the law of quantitative relation and
from consideration of its application in the cases
adduced by Mr. Mill, that an indefinite increase of
effective saving and of capital is impossible, unless a
corresponding increase in immediately future con-
sumption takes place.

It is easy to understand how Mill, and those who
held with him the theory of a special wages-fund,
could see no necessity for assigning a limit to the
amount of effectual saving which a community might
accomplish. This wages-fund was a bottomless
vessel into which you might go on pouring any


46 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION

amount of saving without any chance of an overflow
or surplus. If the class of saving individuals were
content to abstain from consuming, and to hand over
continually to productive labourers their command
over commodities without seeking anything in return,
there is no reason why they should not do so, and
call it ' saving,' if they prefer the term. But most
modem economists have rejected this theory, recog-
nising that no motive was provided which could
invite saving individuals to increase indefinitely this
wages-fund, since labourers would not thereby become
more productive, and if they did the saving indivi-
duals would not be willing to consume the increase
of products. But, strange to say, those who have
most distinctly repudiated the wage-fund theory have
retained the theory of the possibility of infinite saving
which depended on it. We still hear from econo-
mists constant commendation of indiscriminate thrift ;
with a steady fall of profit before their face they do
not recognise th^ possibility of an excess of saving ;
that however much is saved all can find a ftill
economic use in assisting further production, is
accepted as an axiom of their economics. The fol-
lowing sentences of Mill still represent the accepted
theory of saving : " The fund from which saving can
be made is the surplus of the produce of labour after
supplying the necessaries of life to all concerned in
the production ; as much as this, though it never is
saved, always might be." '' The amount of this fund,
this net produce, this excess of production over the
physical necessaries of the producers, is one of the
elements that determine the amount of saving. The
greater the produce of labour after supporting the la-


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 47

bourers, the more there is which can be saved." * Now,
we would ask our readers to put the question clearly
to themselves. Could a community save all it could
produce with the exception of necessaries of life ? If
saving be taken merely to mean ' not consuming/ it
is obvious that this is possible. But saving means
something more than this. It signifies not only
abstention from consumption, but application as a
means of further production. If the whole of this
surplus can be saved, it must be necessary then to
show that it can be used to produce other things
which are wanted. If it is not used to assist in pro-
ducing other, things, or if the other things are not
wanted, the saving is in vain, or rather, it is not saving
but mere waste.

Turning to the sentence quoted from Mill, let us sup-
pose the totalproduceof a community to be represented
by one hundred, and that out of this forty sufficed to
supply ' the necessaries of life to all concerned in the
production,' and that the other sixty were hitherto
consumed as luxuries, would it be possible, instead of
consuming these sixty as luxuries, to save them and
apply them in assisting further production ? To the
question thus put the answer is plain. Not merely is
there already sufficient capital to aid production of
' the necessaries of all concerned in the production,'
but capital previously applied to produce the luxuries ;
the result would be that not merely is there no use
for the new increment of capital, but of that pre-
viously existing the portion hitherto devoted to the
production of luxuries can no longer be used. Con-

Mill, * Vrin. Pol. Econ.,' Book I., Ch. XL, s. 1.


48 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

sumption being reduced from one hundred to forty,
it is obvious that either production must be reduced
in like proportion, in which case the aggregate of
capital required will be similarly reduced, or articles
will be produced for which there is no use present or
prospective.

Again, let us look at the effects, in a more concrete
form, of a general endeavour to save the whole of
the surplus of the produce of labour. Consumption,
which previously included (i), the necessaries of pro-
ductive labourers ; (2), the necessaries of others than
productive labourers ; (3), all luxuries ; would now be
confined to the first of these three classes. It is evi-
dent, in the first place, that all the portion of the
stock of the community which previously served to
satisfy the desire for luxuries can no longer be so ap-
plied, and since there is no other use for it present or
prospective, this stock must be absolutely valueless,
and the fortunes or savings of individuals which existed
in these forms of capital must be extinguished. Thus,
for example, let it be assumed that ever)'- form of
potable alcohol is included in the term ' luxury,' the
existing stocks of wine, beer, and spirits will now be
absolutely without value, and the fortunes, savings,
&c., which they represent will be destroyed. Simi-
larly, all other materials of luxury will become as
worthless as alcohol to a community of rigid tee-
totallers. The value of a commodity depends upon
the present or prospective existence of a consumer,
who will be able to give an equivalent for it. So, if
all consumption of luxuries ceased, the value of all
existing materials of luxmy is destroyed.

As to the second class, comprising the necessaries


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 49

of Others than productive labourers, this will be
equally void of value under the new condition. For
those necessaries cannot be applied to increase the
stock of necessaries of productive labourers, for this
stock is already sufficient, and any increase would be
either in the form of waste or luxury.

Since the only commodities to be consumed or
enjoyed are the necessaries of productive labourers,
there could be no object in producing anything but
these necessaries. Now, the plant already in existence
sufficed to replace the current consumption of all
necessaries of producers and non-producers and all
luxuries. All that portion of this plant not devoted
to aiding the production of necessaries for producers
is now rendered absolutely valueless, and the fortunes
and savings represented therein are destroyed.

It will thus seem obvious that if the community
limits its consumption to the necessaries of produc-
tive labourers, the only stock which can be of use is a
stock of these necessaries, and the only plant which
can be of use is the plant required to replace the
necessaries consumed. The accumulated wealth per
head of the population will thus be reduced to the
lowest sum compatible with its continued existence.
If we assume that in such a community as England
one-half of the consumption consists of luxuries, the
reduction in accumulated wealth per head thus brought
about would be one-half, and, until the consumption
per head of the community again increased, could not
exceed that amoimt. The whole of the argument
contained in this contention is so brief and so simple,
it ought to require to be stated only once to find
ready acceptance. If the community ceased to wear


50 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

clothes, and limited its consumption to bread and
cheese, what stock or what plant could be required
or could possess exchange value other than that
required to replace the current withdrawals of bread
and cheese?

Neither Mill nor the English economists since Mill,
who have dealt with the increase of capital, have
pointed out how any increase in economic capital is
thus absolutely limited by the condition of future
consumption of commodities. And when we say
future consumption, we do not refer to a future of
ten, twenty, or fifty years hence, but to a future that
is but httle removed from the present. If we con-
sider that part of capital which is devoted to retail-
ing, it is evident that so soon as the stock of shop
goods exceeds the quantity required to enable con-
sumers to purchase the exact articles they require,
with the maximum convenience to all concerned, the
excess is over-supply. For instance, if x shop goods
are sufficient to enable the current consumption to be
supplied, any stock in excess of this total would be
over-supply. If the stock of shop goods increases, a
corresponding increase in consumption must at once
take place, or the stock of shop goods will exceed the
total that is economically desirable and over-supply will
exist. When we follow back the processes of pro-
duction, it is true a larger time element intervenes,
but even here it must not be forgotten that the habits
of the community are more or less regular and
settled. If saving is being effected, not merely
during one day or one week, but regularly and
habitually, the constantly increasing total of capital
thus brought about will require a regular and habitual


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 51

increase in the rate of consumption to prevent over-
supply in the earlier stages of production. * In addi-
tion to the limit imposed by the rate of consumption
there is further the limit imposed by the other two
requisites of production ; so soon as every labourer is
provided with the plant and raw material requisite to
his most efficient labour, or so soon as all the plant,
&c., is provided requisite to the most efficient appli-
cation of all the natural agents available, it is evident
that no further accumulations of capital can be used,
and must, if accumulated, remain idle and exist as
over-supply.

If increased thrift or caution induces people to save
more in the present, they must consent to consume
more in the future. If they refuse to assent to this
condition, they may persist in heaping up new
material forms of capital, but the real effective capital
will be absolutely limited by the actual extent of their
future consumption. It is necessary to strenuously
insist on this conclusion, since the want of a clear
recognition of it prevents not only business men, but
students of economics, from a proper understanding of
the machinery of commerce. Our distinction between"^^
real and nominal capital is, then, as follows : — The
nominal capital is a mere body, the real capital the
same body so far as it is animated by productive
force in economical work ; the same amount of this
productive force may occupy a larger or a smaller
number of material forms. If the future consump-

* Maintaining the existing stock of plant in repair and replacing
it with new when worn out is not saving, it is merely keeping the
existing total of capital intact. No individual or community can be
said to save unless it increases its aggregate total of capital.


52 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION

tion which limits the amount of real capital which
can exist in the present be x., we shall have at each
of the stages in the process of production, viz.,
R. M., R. M. ', R. M. *, &c., a certain definite amount
of capital, both in the form of material of production
and of machinery. This we will denote by y. The
following, then, will denote the actual economic con-
dition of commerce at any given time : —

R.M. R.M.' R.M.'^ Goods. G.' Shop Goods. Commocl.

y- y. y- y- y. y. x.

Now, while x. represents a definite quantity of
forms of commodity for consumption, the number of
material forms which constitute y. at any point may
be greater or smaller in accordance with the strictness
of economy which marks the process of production.
The supply of x. commodities onjy requires that a
certain number of forms of material should be trans-
formed from R. M. to R. M.», and from R. M.» to R. M.^
and so on, and only requires the working of the
smallest amount of machinery which suffices to perform
this work. But at any of these points there may be
found more than this requisite quantity of material
forms or machines. In this case there is not more
real capital than there would otherwise have been,
but the same amount of real capital is distributed
over a larger number of forms, the same quantity
-of producing power animates more faintly a
larger number of producing bodies. Of course, if,
owing to such excess of forms, any number of these
forms stood absolutely idle, they could, hardly, be
recognised to have any claim to be called capital. But
it is possible that there should be an excess of forms


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION. 53

of material or machine capital at any jwint, and that
none of this should stand absolutely, or in any degree,
idle. To return to our old example of the production
of shoes, it is jwssible that there may be twice as much
hides and twice as much machinerj" engaging in tan-
ning as is required for the production of leather com-
modities for future consumption. It is not even
necessar)'^ to suppose that the whole of the machinery
does not work at full force. Double the amount of
work and double the amount of production may go
on at this point, but the amount of real capital
employed there, from the point of view of the produc-
tion and consumption of the community, is just the
same as if half the work had been done with half the
hides and half the tanning machiner}\ We are not
saying that the capital is the same from the point of
view of the individual tanner, or of the whole body of
tanners. We shall presently see that capital and
saving is, or may be, entirely different, as we look at
them from the individual point of view and that of
the community. Here we are only concerned with
the production and consumption of the entire com-
munity. The production and consumption of the
community only requires that a certain definite amount
of tanning work should be done, and the real tanning
capital from its point of view is the smallest amount
of hides and machines requisite to do this amount of
tanning. Assuming that more than this requisite
amount of the forms of capital exists, it is nominal
capital in excess of what the community requires ; it is,
in a word, over-supply. That such over-supply or
excess of capital might exist at any one stage, or in-
deed in all the stages, in the production of one or more


54 PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION.

commodities, is generally conceded, but that it can exist
in every line of production at the same time, assuming
the form of a general over-supply, is pronounced im-
possible. But our law of quantitative relation between
production and future consumption imposes no such
qualification. As we deduced from it the possibility
of over-supply in one branch of production, we can
deduce with equal logical precision the possibility of a
simultaneous over-supply at every point, that is, of
general over-supply. Just as y. may at any one point
in the productive process be embodied in a larger
number of material forms of capital than is economi-
cally required, so it may be embodied at all points.
We are, then, here entitled to affirm the theoretic
possibility of general over-supply.

If there should exist at any time a larger number of
forms of capital at any point or points in the process
of production than is economically required for the
current rate of consumption, this excess will figure as
over-supply. But suppose that every increase in pro-
duction, or every temporary or slight excess in these
forms of capital, has power to force a corresponding
increase of consumption, it is clear that this general
over-supply can only exist as such for a merely
nominal length of time, and that, when it has produced
its effect by increasing consumption, it will figure as
real capital with a full economic use.

In the next chapter we shall examine the actual
phenomena of trade, and, instead of replying to this
question by purely theoretic reasoning, we shall base
our answer on admitted commercial facts.

In this chapter it has been shown that an exact
quantitative relation nmst exist between the amount of


PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION 55

useful capital and the rate of consumption. In
Chapter IV. it will be shown that, in any period of
depression in trade, the rate of consumption actually
determines the amount of useful capital, and that,
in such periods, only by first increasing the demand
for commodities is it possible to increase the amount
of real capital in the community.


56 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.


CHAPTER III.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

Few terms have caused more trouble in economics
than supply and demand. It is necessary, therefere,
to clearly emphasise the meanings which are given
to them in this book. Taken in relation to an
act of sale, they bear a different meaning according
as they are regarded from the point of view of an
individual or group of individuals and from that of
the whole community. From the point of view of
the individual member of a commercial community,
ever}^ sale of any kind of goods is a quantity sup-
plied and every purchase a quantity demanded.
Thus, if a farmer goes to market with a quantity of
wheat and sells it to a merchant, so far as the farmer
is concerned the wheat has been demanded. If, how-
ever, the merchant still offers this same wheat for
sale at the same market, it is evident that the quantity
of wheat offered at the market has not been affected.
The same aggregate of wheat is still offered, the only
difference being that the ownership of a part of it
has been transferred from the farmer to the merchant.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 57

If, however, a miller purchases this wheat, it is with-
drawn from the market, and no longer forms a part
of the stock there offered ; it has, so far as the market
is concerned, been demanded and supplied. But when
the community is considered as a whole, it is evident
that this wheat is still offered for sale by the miller
in the form of flour ; in its new shape, with added
value, it still constitutes a part of the general stock,
and has not, so far as the community is concerned,
been demanded and supplied. The community in-
cludes the farmer, the merchant, the miller, and the
baker ; and if the wheat is a part of the general stock
when in the hands of the farmer, it must equally be
so when in the hands of the merchant, the miller, or
the baker. So soon, however, as the bread is bought
by a consumer and consumed, the aggregate stock is
affected ; it is reduced by the exact total of such a
purchase. The stock possessed by the community is
decreased, so that as regards the whole community
the wheat, in its final form of bread, has been de-
manded.

If, therefore, by the 'quantity demanded' be meant
the quantity withdrawn from the general stock,
demand can only mean that demand exercised by
consumers, and does not include the inter-purchases
and sales effected by the various classes of producers.
It is necessary to insist upon this strict distinction.
Wheat is habitually sold by one dealer to another,
and passes through the hands of the miller and the
baker before it is consumed in the form of loaves.
If it were to count as supply on each occasion of its
sale, and were said to be supplied and demanded
each time, each bushel would reckon as a supply of


58 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

as many bushels as the number of times it had been
sold. The aggregate supply of wheat could thus
be indefinitely increased by interposing additional
'middlemen' between the tarmer and the baker, a
conclusion which is absurd.

Thus, while from the point of view of an individual,
or a class of individuals, the quantity of wealth
bought or sold by such individuals or classes of
individuals may be considered to be supplied and
demanded, from the point of view of the community
only those commodities which are bought by con-
sumers can be said to be supplied or demanded.
Since political economy is concerned primarily with
the interests, not of private individuals, but of the
whole community, the definition of such terms as
supply and demand when used without qualification
must evidently be made to accord with the larger
point of view. Supply can now be defined with-
out ambiguity as 'the aggregate of all goods
(shop-goods) available for sale to consumers.'
Demand is an ambiguous term, and it will be
well to define separately 'quantity demanded' and
' demand,' in order that the latter may have only one
meaning. ' Quantity demanded ' is ' the aggregate of
all shop-goods ^ bought by consumers.' ' Demand ' *^
is ' the quantity of purchasing power ' applied to pur-
chase the ' quantity demanded.'

' Since, when shop-goods have been bought they are commodities, it
would be more accurate to use the term commodity here, but to do
so would introtluce a possible misunderstanding as regards the rela-
tions of * supply ' and ' quantity demanded.'

^ ' Demand ' is more than ambiguous as a term in political
economy. It seems to be used in at least four senses : —

1. As the equivalent of ' quantity demanded.'


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 59

But while political economy deals primarily with
the production and consumption of wealth by the
whole community, it is also necessary to examine
the relation in which individuals and groups of indi-
viduals stand to one another ; that is to say, to treat
wealth from the point of view of narrower interests
than that of the whole community. The addition to
or abstraction from the wealth of an individual is,
from his point of view, analogous to the addition to
or abstraction from the total wealth of the com-
munity. We shall, therefore, be justified in using
the convenient terms, * supply' and 'demand,' in
speaking of the purchases made from other producers
than retail shopkeepers. So we shall speak of the
supply of wheat and the demand for wheat, as well
as the supply of loaves and the demand for loaves,
although the exercise of a demand for wheat by the
miller does not diminish the stock of wealth of the
community, while a corresponding exercise of demand
for loaves by the consumer does this. If there existed
other convenient terms by which the two acts of
purchase might be rightly distinguished, it would
doubtless be less embarrassing; but since there are
no other terms to describe the stock of incomplete
commodities and the amount of purchasing power
which is used to purchase them than supply and
demand, we are compelled to apply these terms.

2. As purchasing power in general, whether actually applied to

purchase shop-goods or not.

3. Purchasing power applied to purchase shop-goods (the definition

here accepted).

4. The desire to obtain various forms of wealth, a conception

which removes it out of all possible relation with supply as a
quantity offered.


60 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

It must, however, be understood that when the
terms are used without previous qualification they
apply to the purchase of shop-goods or finished pro-
ducts.

It has already been seen that the only act of pur-
chase or exercise of purchasing power which dimi-
nishes the stock of wealth of the community is
the demand for shop-goods or finished products.
Now, what is this purchasing power? The most
convenient form of purchasing power is, of course,
money ; but every form of wealth contains a
specialised form of this power, which can be
exchanged for the general form of money. To
the maker and the trader goods, raw material,
plant, &c., are valued exclusively for the more
or less of this purchasing power which they afford
their owners. The owner is indifferent whether
this purchasing power is embodied in the shape of
otto of roses or guano, a steam-engine or a travelling
panorama ; the one point he considers is the market
value, the purchasing power which such possessions
give. From the point of view of the individual
tradesman, all acts of sale and purchase are primarily
exchanges of forms of this purchasing power. When
a baker sells bread for money he exchanges pur-
chasing power in the shape of bread for purchasing
power in the shape of money, and when he buys
flour from the miller he exchanges purchasing power
in the shape of money for purchasing power in the
shape of flour. The baker considers himself equally
rich; indeed, considers himself to possess just as
much ' money,' whether he possesses one thousand
sovereigns or a stock of flour which, at current prices.


^mmmmssm


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 61

is worth £. i,ooo. Again, from the point of view ol:
the whole community, it will be evident that the
aggregate amount of purchasing power possessed by
the community is in no wise affected by sales and
purchases of unfinished goods, of raw material, or of
plant. In such acts of trade each individual retains
a constant amount of purchasing power, and merely
changes the shape in which he holds it.

So soon, however, as the consumer buys shop-
goods or finished products the case is different. In this
act a quantity of purchasing power is annihilated and
ceases to exist. Take the case of the man who pur-
chases a loaf for his consumption, paying 6 d, to the
baker. It is true the baker has merely exchanged
one form of purchasing power, a loaf, for another
form, 6rf., but the consumer, who previously had
6 d., has now nothing, for that which he got in ex-
change he has consumed. Thus, we have identified
the act of demand for a commodity with the extinc-
tion of purchasing power and the consumption of a
portion of the total stock of wealth of the com-
munity.

The next step is to establish clearly the following
propositions: — Firstly, that an exercise of demand
(for commodities) cannot diminish capital ; secondly,
that an exercise of demand, though it consumes a
portion of previously existent wealth and annihilates
a portion of purchasing power, causes the production
of an equivalent amount of new forms of wealth and
purchasing power.

From what has been already said respecting purchas-
ing power it will be evident that the capital of an indi-
vidual shopkeeper cannot be diminished by the pur-


62 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

chases of his customers at current prices. For every
loaf a baker sells he receives money sufficient to buy
flour and make another loaf, together with an element
of profit which is not yet within our scope of inquiry.
Whether the baker does or does not apply this
money to replace the loaf he has sold, it cannot be
said that his capital is diminished by the act of pur-
chase. For capital is always reckoned in money
values without consideration as to what quantity of
it at any given time exists in the form of money,
goods, or plant. Let us assume that it is a grocer
with ;^. 2,000 of grocery stores; this ;^. 2,000 forms
his capital, which he rigorously refuses to spend or
consimie. In three months' time every form in which
this capital existed, every ounce of sugar, pound of
tea, or side of bacon, will have been consumed, and
may not even have been replaced in similar propor-
tions of quantity ; but in some shape or other, in new
forms of goods, or in money in the till or at his
bankers, this £. 2,000 of capital will continue to exist.
This is the meaning of commercial capital, in using
which all merchants, statisticians, and political econo-
mists are in complete accord. So far as the capital of
individuals is concerned, we shall not, therefore, ask
for any other test than that of money estimate.
From the individual's point of view it is the money
value which he applies to the acquisition of an
income. Since, then, the purchase of shop-goods by a
consumer at current prices does not diminish the
capital of the retailer, so the purchases of a retailer
from a wholesale merchant, or of the latter from a
manufacturer, do not diminish for a moment the
capital which belongs to each respectively. Thus, it


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 63

will appear that the normal rate of demand can have
no effect in diminishing the stock of capital at any
point in the organisation of industry. It has already
been shown in the last chapter that no more capital
can economically exist at any point in the productive
process than is required to furnish commodities
for the current rate of consumption. Hence, it
is clear that a normal demand for commodities
keeps in continuous existence the same amount of
capital.

. It now remains to establish the second point, that
a normal exercise of demand causes the production
of an amount of new forms of wealth equivalent to
those consumed ; that is to say, not only does capital
enjoy a continuous existence, but the number of forms
of each kind of capital exist continuously. It is
clear that every individual form of capital perishes :
if it is raw material or goods, it passes into the form
of commodity, and is thus consumed ; if it is plant
or machinery, it is worn out by use or superseded
by newer and more efficient forms. Is there any
economic force which induces the production of fresh
forms of capital to take the place of those which
parish?

When shop-goods are piurchased by a consumer, the
price paid for them under normal conditions of trade
is sufficient to enable the shopkeeper to replace the
articles sold, and to yield him a margin of gain.
This 'margin of gain,' or 'retailer's profit,' as it is
sometimes loosely called, represents the whole dif-
ference between the wholesale and the retail price.
It furnishes a fund out of which is paid the profit of
the shopkeeper upon the capital in his business, his


64 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

own wages, the wages of his employes, and the rent
of his shop, &c. This * margin of gain' provides, in
fact, the income received by all those who assist pro-
duction in the retail stage. But at this point in our
argument it is only necessary to recognise that out of
this margin of gain comes the element of personal
gain or profit which is the inducement to the shop-
keeper to ply his trade. The price received by the
shopkeeper is sufficient, then, to enable him to replace
the article he has sold and to retain a margin of
gain.

But is there any influence at work which compels
him to spend the money in replacing the article he
has sold rather than retain the purchasing power in
its shape of money or apply it to buy commodities
for his own consumption ? Yes, he is a tradesman,
and as such seeks an income which is made of the
profit on his sales, and in no other way. Thus, it is
his interest to maintain his stock of shop-goods intact,
so as to provide for expected sales. His capital is
just as great if, instead of using the money he has
received to purchase a similar article to that which
he has sold, he keeps the money in his till, but his
capital is not in the most advantageous form for the
conduct of his trade and the getting of future profit.
Hence, the shopkeeper is impelled by a force which
is not the less natural and insuperable because it
acts through the operation of his will, to continually
replace the goods he sells to consumers by applying
the price he receives (minus the margin of gain)
as a demand for like goods from the store of the
wholesale trader. The wholesale trader is impelled
by the same force to replenish his diminished store by


1


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 65

using the money he receives from the shopkeeper
(again, minus his margin of gain) in purchasing a like
quantity of articles from the manufacturer. And so
the impulse passes along the^ whole line of produc-
tion, compelling each producer to replace the form of
goods which he has passed on to a further stage in
production by using the money he has received for
it to replace it by a similar form of goods. It will
presently appear that he is compelled out of reason-
able consideration for his own interest not only to keep
the same number of forms of goods to meet the
expected continuance of the present rate of sales,
but also to replace every form of plant or machinery
which is worn out in the course of production. To
make this position clear let us take the production of
some one commodity, say pianos. If we suppose
the quantity of pianos demanded to be a regular one,
we shall be justified in concluding that at any given
time there will be a number of pianos in more and
less finished states from the condition of raw material
(wood, iron, &c.) to the condition of finished shop-
goods, and that there will be a fixed relation between
the amount of these piano-goods at the various
stages of development. Now, if I go into a piano-
shop and purchase a piano, the shopkeeper, seeking
the profit which comes by selling pianos, will use the
money I pay him to obtain another piano from the
wholesale merchant so as to maintain his full stock ;
the merchant will use the money he receives to pur-
chase another piano from the manufacturer, and so
on. Thus, the money I pay the shopkeeper for a
piano will be handed down along the whole line of

c


66 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

production, each recipient abstracting a portion which
shall serve as profit to himself, as wages to his
labourers,^ as a fund to repair the wear-and-tear of
machinery and plant, and as rent for natural agents
whose use he enjoys. The effect of this transmission
of money along the whole line will be to move a
portion of piano-material at each stage one further
step, so as to fill the vacancy occasioned by my
demand.

Since, further, my demand forms merely a portion of
the ordinary current demand, it will have been expected
and provided for all along the line. Thus, the shop-
keeper, anticipating that he will on that day sell a
piano, has ordered from the merchant a new piano to
replace it. The merchant, anticipating this and
other shopkeepers' orders, has ordered new pianos
to replace them from the maker, and the maker,
anticipating these orders, has engaged labour and pro-
vided the raw material requisite to execute them.
Every individual engaged in the trade expects to sell
every day a certain quantity of goods, and makes
the necessary arrangements for supplying them. If
the shopkeeper sells three pianos daily, on the
average, he will order from the merchant three pianos
daily, or say eighteen pianos a-week, and similarly
with the merchant and manufacturer, so that each
of these successive purchases do not reduce the
stock of any of the traders in the line, but merely
cause a general advance of piano-material, a shop-

* The term * labourer ' is used here to cover aU those producers who
receive wages from capitalists.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,


67


goods piano passing into commodity, and new raw
material being created, thus : —


Previous to purchase.

R.M.
R. M.>-
R-M."
R.M.'
G. .
S.G.


After purchase.

R. M. Newly created.

-R.M.^

R.M.*
-R.M.^

G.

S.G.

Commodity.

Thus the condition of piano material after my pur-
chase will be precisely the same as before my purchase.
Thus a continuity in the forms of piano goods is
secmred automatically by the natural result of an act
of pin^chase of a shop good. Since the moving on of
piano material at the various stages in production
requires and employs a certain amount of forms of
machinery and labour, in so far as this work of move-
ment wears out the forms of machinery, it must set
in operation a force which shall bring about the con-
stant replenishment of these forms if the continuous
demand for pianos is to be satisfied. As we saw that
the piano seller was impelled by his own interest to
employ the bulk of the price paid for a piano in
purchasing another piano from the wholesale merchant,
by the same consideration he is compelled to use
another fraction of the price in maintaining his shop
and premises in good repair, in advertising, and in
otherwise maintaining his business in proper condition*
So, also, the merchant is compelled to use a portion
of the price he receives in keeping his warehouses in


68 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

good repair. In the case of traders, this element of
price which is spent in repairs of plant and machinery-
is often slight, but when we come to the makers it is
more important. In order to get his usual rate of
profit by maintaining his rate of sales, the maker
must keep his machinery in good repair, and just as
his interest impels him to replace goods he has sold, so
it impels him to use a portion of the price he receives
to repair machinery worn out in use. Thus a part of
the price which comes to the piano manufacturer out
of the price I paid for my piano must go to the makers
or traders of new machinery, which is constantly
required to replace worn-out machinery. As we con-
ceived that there were pianos in every stage of
development, so we must conceive that the machinery
required in making pianos exists in every stage of
development. So that as my purchase of a piano
preserved the continuity of the forms of capital con-
sisting of piano material in its various stages, so it will
preserve the continuity of the forms of capital consist-
ing in machinery and plant required to assist in
forwarding piano production at the different points,
by moving on the more or less finished forms of
machinery towards the condition of completed
machines, so as to satisfy the constant requirements.^


' It is, of course, not strictly true that the same amount of produc-
tion always requires the same amount of forms of machinery to assist.
New inventions and improvements in the arts constantly vary
the number of forms of machinery required to do any given total of
work. But, in dealing with the broad general results of demand
for commodities, it is necessary to assume a stable condition of the
arts, just as we assume a stable condition of demand.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.


69


be ^

§ %

2 S

7^ O

H ^

(D CO

-3 -H


CO

O O
'^ S


O .


a


■*^


s


S


1«
s


.g


00

1


^
2


2


o


1


O


ft


1


ft


1-1


1


1

p.

O


c


Q^M


CO


o


-j-j


p


<D


U)


1


^


• •s


a


•M


T3


-S


to


o


O


j-i


^


-M


O


<D


SP


2

^


biO

O


1


.g


2


^


<D


° §


^ .bo


CO


V


5 -3
ft 2


o « S


ft ^

O «•*='


O 2.


si A'S'?


o ^

it


« 1


II


if


^1


Impel
Maohi


51

s

h


S3


It


^i


Impel
Machi


o «

a
1 .


■fi >»


•H >>


>..


8 £


a -9


•g s


Imperf
Machin

1


»2


S


1^


1^


"o S)


•C fl


a*o8


« 1


^1


-^s


s^


!?i


70 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

It will be evident from the previous argument that
my demand for a piano to pass from the last stage in
production, viz., shop goods into commodity, sets in
operation a force which acts not only at every point,
along the direct line from R. M. to Com., but at every
point in each of the perpendicular lines, impelling the
raw material of machinery to advance one step to-
wards finished machinery. It is needless to remark
that the effect of my exercise of demand on the per-
pendicular lines is extremely slight as compared with
the effect on the straight line of production, inas-
much as the wear and tear of machinery in assisting
to produce one piano would be extremely small, but,
for all that, the effort should not be overlooked. The
regular demand for pianos keeps in continuous exist-
ence an equal number of forms of piano material at
various stages, and an equal number of forms of plant
and machinery. We have taken here the instance of
the piano trade, but what holds there holds of trade in
general. If we neglect the specific piano element in
the above illustration, and read it to indicate the whole
mechanism of commerce which is concerned in pro-
moting the production of utilities and conveniences,
we shall see that demand for commodities gives con-
tinuity and employment to the whole machine.

Thus we see that not only does the exercise of
demand for commodities fail to diminish the real
capital stationed at the various stages in production ,
but that it keeps in continuous existence the same
quantity of capital in the various shapes necessarj\

Each individual form of capital perishes, but only
on condition that the spirit which has animated it
pass into another form, which performs a service


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 71

like unto the former one. This continuity of capital
is analogous to the continuity of a community ; each
individual dies in his turn, but the community is the
same ; each individual continually grows older, but the
average age of the individual in the community
remains the same, and there are always the same
proportion of individuals at any given age. Or the
individual forms of capital may be likened to drops of
water in a river ; each in turn passes down the course
and is lost in the ocean, but the river never grows less,
its continuity is never lost.

Thus far the argument has brought us to two
important conclusions. First, that in a condition
of steady consumption the continuous existence of
capital, and of the same number of forms of capital,
is maintained by a force which owes its impetus
to a constant demand for commodities. Second,
that the profits which form the money incomes of
all capitalists concerned in production, the wages of
all the labourers concerned, and the rent of all the
natural agents required, are, in a regular condition
of commerce, paid out of the prices paid by con-
sumers, that is, out of retail prices.

Before we pass from investigating the results of a
normal rate of demand for commodities to an exami-
nation of the effects of a growing rate of demand, it
will be well to draw attention to one or two conclu-
sions which may be regarded as corollaries of the
argument above.

(a.) It has been often asserted that labourers are
maintained out of capital; that they eat, drink, and
wear capital, replacing its value by productive
labour.


72 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

Since the definition of capital here accepted ex-
cludes all commodities, it will be obvious that the
food, clothing, &c., enjoyed by labourers is no part
of the capital of the community.

But since it still appears to be held by some eco-
nomists that an individual capitalist owns a ' susten-
tation fund,' which to all intents consists of food,
clothing, shelter, and that he provides labourers with
these desirable things while they are labouring, it
may be well to state distinctly the facts. Labourers
do not receive wages until they have embodied the
value of their wages in new products. But if the
capitalist obtains a new value of £, i before he parts
with £. I in the form of wages, it is evident that the
£. I paid to his labourer is no part of the capitalist's
capital. At the beginning of the week, if the capital-
ist possessed this sovereign, it will rightly have been
regarded as a portion of his capital. But his capital,
so far as it was embodied in the sovereign, has now
moved out of that embodiment into something
wholly or partly produced by his labourer. Thus,
if a capitalist possesses £. loo, and buys labour, at the
end of the week he possesses the value produced by
the labour ; his capital is now embodied in this
newly produced value, and no part of his capital is
paid to the labourers when he pays them the £, loo.
The labourers have produced £, loo value, and
receive £, loo in exchange; the capitalist still retains
his £. 100 capital, though in an altered shape.

If there is in no case an advance of wages on the
part of the capitalist, and if the act of paying wages
is an act of exchange by which the capitalist becomes
possessed of certain value created by the labourer,


^-


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 73

for which he pays an agreed price (wages), whence
comes the notion of a sustentation fund ? The
answer would appear to be this : a capitalist, to con-
duct his business successfully, must have his capital
stored in different shapes. Part of it is in the shape
of machinery and other plant, part of it in the shape
of raw material, and raw material in each and every
stage in which it is his business to deal with
it. Now, when he starts in business, he will pur-
chase his machinery and plant and his raw material ;
but, as he does not yet possess raw material in every
stage up to goods, his capital is not complete. To
supply himself with these further forms of capital, he
has to purchase labour to advance raw material till
he possesses it in every stage. For some weeks,
therefore, he must have a fund of money out of
which he can continuously purchase the labour neces-
sary to advance his raw material to the various stages
necessary to make his capital complete. These
labourers at first sight appear to be subsisted out of a
sustentation fund possessed by the capitalist, and this
idea has been seized on by some economists and ela-
borated into a sort of incipient wages-fund theory ; it
is, however, evident that this is wholly unjustifiable.
The capitalist possesses certain capital, money (or we
may say certain capital, food, and necessaries of
labourers), and this form, or these forms, of capital he
wishes to exchange for forms suitable to the conduct
of his business ; he, therefore, agrees to exchange
them with labourers for the labour requisite to con-
vert his raw material into a line of raw material in
every stage of production up to the goods he sells.
So soon as his capital is complete his weekly sales of


74 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

^oods provide him with the money requisite to pay
his labourers' weekly wages, his rent, and his own
profit- All, therefore, that the capitalist possesses is
the capital requisite to carry on his business ; no funds
of any sort are set apart as a sustentation fund.

But it will, perhaps, be objected that there is an
element of risk in all production ; the result may
turn out to have no market value, or the forms in which
the labour is stored may be accidentally destroyed;
these risks, it will, perhaps, be said, are undertaken by
the capitalist, and involve the necessity of his possess-
ing a sustentation fund, out of which his labourers'
wages may at such periods be paid. But on exami-
nation this contention is seen to be equally baseless
with that already examined. The capitalist in each
of these cases has purchased from the labourers a
oertain total of labour, and pays in money for this
labour- If the capitalist has directed the labourers to
embody their labour in useless fonns, or if, though
embodied in useful forms, he does not guard against
their accidental destruction, he has in either case lost
a portion of his capital. The capital has not been
^ven to, and consumed by, the labourers, but the par-
ticular forms in which it exists have, in the first
ease, no market value, and in the other have been
destroyed. The labourers sold a certain specific
total of labour for a certain specific price, and the
purchase and payment is exactly equivalent to the
purchase and payment for the use of land or capital.
Though individuals may, and frequently do, lose
-'money' by hiring a farm, no one suggests that a
landowner is subsisted out of a sustentation fund, and
because individuals may similarly lose money by


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 75

hiring labourers, it is equally absiu-d to suggest that
this proves them to be subsisted out of a sustentation
fund.

But it will, perhaps, be suggested that, as sales of
goods are more or less irregular, the capitalist must
possess a susten.ation fund, out of which to pay his
labourers' wages at any period when the sale of his
good» temporarily ceases. Though the arguments
we have used really answer this objection, it is as
well to glance briefly at it. What has really hap-
pened in this case is, that the capitalist has put part
of his capital into temporarily useless forms. To
conduct his business he must, therefore, be provided
with certain additional capital. Thus, if we assume
he requires £, 20,000 of forms of capital to conduct
his business, but, owing to lack of foresight, occa-
sionally gets £. 5,000 into temporarily useless forms,
then he must have £. 25,000 forms of capital in all.
Did he possess perfect foresight he would never
purchase any labour other than that requisite to
enable him to just finish the production of the arti-
cles he sells at the exact moment when they are
sold, and in this case he would only require £. 20,000
of forms of capital. Owing to the fact that capi-
talists possess varying degrees of foresight, the quan-
tity of capital required by them for the due conduct
of any business varies ; but this does not afford any
grounds for resuscitating any part of the wages fund
doctrine under a new name, but merely shows that
more capital is actually requisite than would be the
case if capitalists were endowed with perfect foresight.

The fact of certain additional capital being requisite
may, perhaps, suggest that this capital is of the


76 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

nature of a ' risk fund/ but, if so, the ' risk fund ' is not
paid away to the laboiu-ers as wages. The capitalist
still possesses his risk fund intact ; true, he has
directed his labourers to embody it in a temporarily
useless form, but none the less it is as wholly and
absolutely his as before the purchase of the labour.
This being the case it is obvious that no fraction of
this * risk fund ' has been paid away to the labourers.

We may conclude, therefore, that labourers are
paid out of the value they assist in producing. Their
wages are their share of this value, and their wages
are no more advanced from any special fund than the
landlord's rent or the capitalist's profit.^ It is, of
course, evident that ' sustentation fund ' may be de-
fined so as to cover the whole fund which is divisible
as income among the members of the community.
If so defined, we have no objection to it ; it is only
when used to differentiate the source of labourers'
incomes from the source of the incomes of other
members of the community, and to embody part or
all of the wages fund doctrine, that it is necessary to
object to it.

(b.) Capital is not consumed in the wear and tear
of machinery, but constantly passes out of disused or
worn-out forms into new forms.

Karl Marx has argued that machinery is worked
up into the products it helps to produce, and is thus
consumed in the commodities. He wishes to main-
tain the claim of living present labour to be the sole
productive agent ; hence he maintains that the only
service done by machinery consists in the value it

* For the similar conclusion of Marx, see his " Capital," Part VII..
Ch. XXII [.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 11

adds to raw materials by being worked up in con-
junction with it to form commodities. Thus the
reward paid to a machinery owner ought not to
exceed the total cost of production of the machine.
In reply to this we may briefly urge : —

1. That it is not literally true that the material

of the machine passes into the commodity.

2. That if the statement is to be understood

metaphorically, it is equally true of the
labourer. He is used up to make commo-
dities, and the siun of wages received during
his life should, in accordance with Marx's
argument, not exceed his cost of produc-
tion. This last element in a slave commu-
nity would be easily ascertained.

3. It has been shown that the real capital, either

from the point of view of the community or
of the individual capitalist, is not for one
moment diminished by the constant process
of wear and tear. His capital is not worked
up into anything, but remains intact and
embodied in the same number of various
forms all the time.
While the community is unable to consume its
capital, to consume its fields, railways, factories,
steam-engines, shops, and iron foundries, to eat its
growing com, or wear its unspun cotton and unwoven
wool, the individual suffers from no such disability.
He can convert his fields or houses, his ironworks
or growing crops, into champagne and truffles with
the utmost facility. To explain the apparent paradox,
that any individual can accomplish what the aggre-
gate of all individuals cannot accomplish, it is only


78 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

necessary to consider what the aggregate consumable
income of the community actually is. This consum-
able income is the annual output of 'subsistence,
conveniences, and amusements ; ' this is the sum total
of what the community actually receives in exchange
for its various efforts and labours. The individual's
income is the particular share of this total to which
such individual is, under the present social arrange-
ments, entitled. Thus, the aggregate of all individuals'
incomes exactly equals the community's income.
Now, since the community, as a whole, can never
consume more ' subsistence, conveniences, and amuse-
ments ' than it has actually produced, it is obvious
that the community' can never live beyond its
income. If, therefore, any given individual wishes to
live beyond his income, he can only do so provided
that some other individual or individuals will consent
to consume as much less of their income or incomes
as he wishes to consume more, and will hand over to
him this excess in exchange for the machinery or raw
material which he possesses.. Thus the extravagant
individual consumes his neighbours' incomes, whilst
these thrifty neighbours become possessed of the
capital which he previously owned. Therefore,
although it is usual to speak of an individual as con-
suming or living upon his capital, it is evident that
this is, so far as the community is concerned, not
accurate. No capital is destroyed ; all that happens
is that certain capital which previously belonged to
A. has been transferred to B., and certain income

* It may here be well to remind the reader again that community
means the whole industrial public. A nation, as an individual, may
live beyond its income for a time.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 79

accumulated by B. as savings has been transferred to
A. and consumed by him.

Having thus seen that in no case can the com-
munity's capital be demanded and consumed, we have
next to ascertain what is meant by the common term
* demand for capital.' When A. offers at the end of
the year to repay to B. £. 105 for every £. 100 B. now
lends A., he is said to demand capital. It is, how-
ever, obvious that this term is incorrectly apphed^
A. does not obtain any part of B.'s capital ; all that
he gets is the use of ;^. 100 of it for one year.
Similarly, A. does not give B. £.10^ \ for of this sum
;^. 100 is, and always has been, B.'s ; all he gives B,
is ;^.5. What really has happened is, therefore, that
A. obtains the use of B.'s ;t. 100 for one year, and
pays for this use £.^. Now this £,s is called inte-
rest ; interest, therefore, is payment for the use of
money.

Similarly, when A. hires a cotton factory from B.,.
and agrees not merely to maintain it in good repair,,
to replace all worn-out machinery by new, &c., but^
in addition, to give B. £, 500 a-year, this £. 500 is-
paid for the use of B.'s capital. B. never parts with
the ownership of any part or fraction of his factory ;
all that A. gets is the use of it, and for this use he
pays B. £. 500. If, in addition, A. borrows the raw
material and other funds requisite to enable him ta
work the factory, and promises to return all those
funds to B. at the end of the year, together with a
sum of £. 500, then it is obvious that this £. 500 is
paid to B. as the price of the use of B.'s capitaL
These prices are demand for the use of capital, and
in commercial language are known as interest, profit^^


80 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

or rent ; the first of these terms being appHed to the
demand for the use of money, the second to the
demand for the use of raw material, goods, &c., and
the third to the demand for the use of factories, ware-
houses, stores, houses, &c. ; in fact, to all forms of
capital with which any portion of natural agents are
inseparably connected. We need not, however,
trouble ourselves with any elaborate discussion of the
propriety of these terms. All we have to insist on
is the central fact, that each and all of these funds
are paid for the use either of capital or of natural
agents ; that they are the demand for the use of
capital or natural agents.

Returning now to the main purport of our argu-
ment, we have next to examine the effect of an
increasing demand for commodities in its relation to
a fixed supply. The generally accepted economic
law of market price is this : ' That when the demand
for an article tends to exceed the supply, the price
rises ; when the supply tends to exceed the demand,
the price falls.' To this statement of the law there
are two objections. First, a tendency towards such
excess could have no result ; no producer will put up
his price until he actually has, or believes that he
will shortly have, more bids at current prices than he
can supply. Secondly, the use of the word ' demand '
here is particularly ambiguous, as it seems to denote
either the amount of desire to possess on the part
of consumers, or the quantity of money which they
would pay at present prices to satisfy this desire.

Now, there is no common measure by which desire
may be related to the quantity of supply, so that the
first meaning of ' demand ' will not be of any service.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 81

On the other hand, to say that price varies as the
quantity of money offered varies in relation to a fixed
supply, is no law of price, but merely an expansion of
the statement that ' price varies/ The true relation
involved in the law of price is between quantity
demanded and quantity offered, Le., supply, and the
exact statement of the law is as follows: 'When the
quantity demanded in the present exceeds the quantity
demanded in the past, in relation to a fixed supply,
prices rise ; when the quantity demanded in the pre-
sent falls below that demanded in the past, prices fall/
This is the simplest statement of the mode of price
change. Whatever economic causes, such as increase
or decrease in cost of production, affect prices, will be
found to operate through the medium of changes in
the relation of quantity demanded and supply.

It is indeed obvious that so long as sellers can sell
everything they wish to sell at the current price,
they will resolutely refuse to take less than this price ;
so long, therefore, as the quantity demanded does
not decrease relatively to supply, the price cannot
fall. It is equally obvious that if sellers cannot clear
everything they wish to sell at the current price, they
will sooner or later consent to accept less than this .
price rather than continue to accumulate an unsold .
surplus ; so soon, therefore, as the quantity demanded
decreases relatively to supply, prices will fall.

Similarly, if sellers find that they could sell more
than they have to offer at the current price, they
will raise their prices. The seller wishes to get the
highest price possible consistent with selling all the
goods he has to offer, and he will only cease raising
his prices when he finds he can only just effect this

C 2


82 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

object. So soon, therefore, as the quantity demanded
increases relatively to supply, the price must rise.

It will doubtless be urged that we are here taking
merely a superficial and altogether too simple a view
of price. Instead of asking the immediate cause of a
rise or fall, we should seek its ultimate cause, and
wander back into the mazes and mysteries of normal
price, cost of production, and the various other abstrac-
tions which have proved a veritable Serbonian bog to
adventurous economists. But our particular object in
reaching a law of price does not require an exploration
of these remote and doubtful regions ; it is sufficient
for us to know that if the price of any article falls,
this fall demonstrates that the quantity of such articles
demanded has decreased relatively to the quantity
offered for sale. If it be admitted that any producer
who can sell all he has to offer at the current price,
will absolutely refuse to take less than this price, it
must also be admitted that if the price falls it demon-
strates that producers offer more such articles for sale
than purchasers will buy at the old price. Were it
not so, why should producers take less ? But if it be
so then a fall in price shows that supply has increased
relatively to quantity demanded.'

We have next to consider what takes place when
any community increases its rate of consumption, as,
for instance, the United States is now doing. Does
this constantly increasing consumption .empty the
shops and warehouses, deplete the stocks in hands of
manufacturers, and sweep the flocks and herds from
the broad plains of the far West ? The answer is

' The arguments of the currency school of Economists are dealt
with in Ch. VII.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 83

known to the world, it does none of these things ;
the growth in consumption is accompanied by a
corresponding growth in retail and wholesale stocks,
in raw material undergoing the processes of manufac-
ture, and by an equal or more than equal increase in
the flocks and herds, in the land under cultivation,
and in all the plant and machinery of manufacture, of
transport, of storage and retailing. Whilst, however,
these broad facts are matters of general knowledge,
and have been quantitatively related to each other in
Chapter II., it is desirable to ascertain the link which
in actual commerce connects these two phenomena
(increasing consumption and increasing capital). This
link is to be found in price.

Before a consumer can consume any article he
must buy it, and the price which he pays must always
on the average suffice —

a. To enable the retailer to purchase a new and in

all respects equivalent article from the manu-
facturer.

b. To pay all the expenses incidental to the storage

and sale, and, in addition, to yield him such a

profit as will induce him to keep a sufficient

stock of such articles to enable consumers to

effect their purchases.

It is evident that no retailer would sell an article

in current demand unless the price he receives will

enable him to buy a new and equivalent article from

the makers. For instance, a hatter would not sell a

hat for ten shillings if he had at once to pay eleven

shillings to the maker for a new hat to replace the

one sold. In addition to this, it is evident that the

price he receives must repay his outlay on rent and


84 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

wages, and must also yield him a sufficient profit to
induce him to apply his capital and energies to the
trade. Did it not suffice for these purposes, the
retailers would not keep a stock, and if they did not
keep a stock consumers could not buy and consume.
But if each purchase must always provide the
retailer with sufficient funds to replace the article
sold, and, in addition, repay all his expenses and leave
him a profit sufficient to induce him to keep the
requisite stock of such articles, no matter how vigo-
rously consumers may press their demands, they will
never deplete his stock. This stock is, we can see,
protected by the price he charges, and this price is
an effective guarantee that no undue consumption
should ever take place. This is no mere theoretical
conclusion ; it is a truism of commerce. The more
any retailer's trade increases, the larger will be the
stock he keeps. Instances are within everyone's
experience. The trade of a particular shop or locality
increases, and with every such increase comes an en-
largement of premises and an increase in the quantity
of stock offered for sale.

The argument which applies to retailers applies
equally to manufacturers ; taking the price received
by the manufacturer, that is to say, portion a of the
retail price, we find that this price is likewise divisible
into two parts, it must suffice —

c. To enable the manufacturer to replace the raw

material of his trade ;

d. To pay all the expenses of manufacture (wages

and rent), and, in addition, yield the manufac-
turer such a profit as will induce him to appty
his capital and energies to the trade.


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 86

It is evident that no manufacturer will usually and
habitually sell an article in current demand for less
than it costs to produce. If at the present price of
cotton yams, the present rates of wages and rent,
&c., it costs him one shilling to make a yard of
calico, he will not sell a yard of calico for ten pence.
But even if he could get one shilling a yard, he would
not consent to trade on these terms ; in addition to
this one shilling he must receive a profit that will
induce him to apply his capital and energies to the
trade. Now, so soon as he finds that he could obtain
this profit on a larger output of goods, he will seek
to borrow or otherwise obtain the use of the funds
requisite to enable him to enlarge his manufactory
and to increase the quantities of raw material under-
going manufacture. This increase in his manufac-
turing operations involves the purchase of new
machinery, &c., the erection of new buildings,
&c., and not impossibly the construction of new
means of communication (railways, ships, and the
like). Whilst the replacement of worn-out machinery
is a comparatively trifling matter, the creation of new
plant to supply an increase in consumption requires
no small proportion of the productive energies of a
community. The plant required to produce any
individual commodity by modem methods vastly
exceeds in value the individual commodity itself, and
we certainly do not over-estimate this difference if
we assume that an increase of ten per cent, in the
annual consumption of any community would require
an increase of fifty per cent, in the production of that
community during the year of increase.

If, for instance, the increase in consumption takes
the form of bread or meat, it will be necessary to


86 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

bring fresh land into cultivation, to fence and drain it,
make roads and bridges, build bams, stables, and
farmhouses, and to provide the means of transport,
&c., &c. It will further be necessary to build mills
for grinding the larger total of wheat, to construct
new bakehouses and additional shops for its baking
and distribution, and similarly with meat. The value
embodied in all these various classes of plant will
vastly exceed the value of a week's or even of a year's
output of the bread and meat they have assisted to
produce. So soon, however, as the new forms of
capital have been once created, a continuance of the
increased consumption would only require the cor-
responding ten per cent, increase in production. Thus,
if a community increases its consumption from lo x
wealth to 1 1 X wealth a year, production must during
the year when this increase takes place exceed con-
sumption by 4 X wealth in order to accumulate the
additional forms of capital required; that is to say,
production must during this year amount to 15 x
wealth. So soon, however, as consumption, having
reached 1 1 x wealth annually, no longer increases, a
production of 1 1 x wealth annually is alone required.*
We thus see that the quantitative relation between
capital and consumption which we showed in Chap. 11.
must exist, is maintained through the medium of price
and profit.

If it be objected that perhaps no capital may be
available to increase the powers of production at the
various stages, or that production is hmited, not by
capital, but by the quantity of natural agents or of

* Repairs of existing machinery and other forms of plant are paid
for out of the prices of the commodities they assist in producing, and
must be regarded as part of the production of those commodities.


' i:.-,,.


THE PHYS10L0(>^.QF PRODUCTION. 87

labour available for use, then we reply, no increase in
consumption is possible. Retailers being unable to
replace the articles sold will raise their prices until
the quantity demanded is brought into proper econo-
mic relation with supply. The fact that in such com-
munities as the United States consumption is rapidly
increasing simultaneously with an equally rapid in-
crease in its capital, demonstrates that the capital can
be accumulated. Our present inquiry is, therefore,
limited to ascertaining how the quantitative relation
between these two quantities (consumption and
capital) is maintained. We do not make the ridi-
culous assertion that consumption can always in-
crease, but merely that if it increases capital will of
necessity simultaneously increase.

The fact that a price is paid guarantees that the
consumption of the article purchased shall in no wise
deplete capital. It guarantees that in no case shall
consumption exceed the total that is economically
desirable. When, however, consumption is effected
without the payment of a price, as, for instance, by the
devastation of war, by the exactions of a conqueror
or a tyrant, then these guarantees are lacking, and
consumption may and probably will deplete capital.'

We might carry on this analysis of trade till we
reached the producers of the raw material, and we
should then find that the whole of the price received
by them was divisible as rent, wages, and profit or
interest, but the argument is so simple and obvious
that no advantage would be gained by so doing.

Similarly, when we consider a decreasing consump-
tion, it is evident that as the retailers' sales decrease,
their profits decrease, and with every such decrease
the inducement to keep stock decreases. Thus, when


88 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

we find a shop or town suffering from a rapid decline
of trade, this decline does not cause an accumulation
of stock, but, on the contrary, the stock offered for
sale decreases more or less in proportion.

The same holds good of the manufacturer. If a
manufacturer finds his sales decreasing, he decreases
the quantities of raw material under treatment, and
does not even maintain the whole of his plant in
efficient repair. Every contraction in the quantity
demanded, therefore, operating through price and
profit, reduces the stock of shop goods and raw
material, and causes portions of the existing plant to
be no longer maintained. No matter how much
capital may be available for use, the inducement to
use it depends exclusively on the demand for com-
modities, and if this demand decreases a force is set
in operation which, working through price and profit
at each stage in the process of production, de-
creases the quantity of forms of capital in existence.
This decrease is in no wise due to any difficulty in
maintaining and keeping these forms in order or in
replacing them by new ones, but is due exclusively to
the fact that no one has any inducement to maintain
them or to replace them by new ones.

Although it has been shown in the preceding argu-
ment that the money income of the community, being
composed of the margins of gain at different points
in the productive process, varies with consumption,
it is important to identify the actual money paid by
consumers for commodities as the ultimate source of
all incomes. If we consider the individual in a
community, it is evident that his income is received
by him as payment for the use of that requisite of
production which he owns. If he be a labourer, he


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 89

receives his income (wages) as. a demand for the use
of his labour ; if he owns land, mines, &c., he receives
his income (rent) as payment for the use of the
same ; if he owns capital, he receives his income
(profit) as payment for the use of his capital.

Directly or indirectly every individual's income is
derived from one or other of these funds ; whether
he be mortgagee or annuitant, shareholder or what
not, his income can invariably be referred back, either
to the rent of a natural agent, to the profit on capital,
or to the wages of labour J

The individual sells a given total of the use of a
requisite of production owned by him, and the price
he receives for this use is his income. Thus the land-
owner sells the use of his land for a year, and the
price he receives for this use is his income (rent).
The labourer sells the use of his mental and bodily
abilities for a day, a week, or a year, and the price he
receives for this use is his income (wages). The
capitalist sells the use of his capital, and the price he
receives for this use is his income (profit or interest).
Since, however, every individual's income may be
referred back to one or other of these funds,* it
follows that the sum of these prices is the aggregate
money income of the community. That is to say the
aggregate demand, or prices paid, for the use of the
requisites of production is the aggregate money income
of all the individuals composing the community.

' We include under the head of wages all payments made for ser-
vices, those of the highly-trained professional man equally with
those of the mechanic.

^ We are here again following Prof. Caimes, who shows that aU
incomes are necessarily derived from production. (See ' Some
Leading Prin. Pol. Ec.,' Chap. II.)


90 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION.

It has already been seen that consumption of
commodities is the ultimate cause which determines
the extent of the use of these requisites of produc-
tion. It remains, therefore, only to illustrate more
precisely in what way the payment for these uses
of requisites of production is derived from the pay-
ment for commodities by consumers. So far as the
actual money received as income by the owners of
requisites of production is concerned, there is little
difficulty. This money received as income is con-
tinually applied to purchase shop-goods, and is paid
into the till of retail traders ; these traders pay in
their cash to the banks, daily or weekly, and this
cash is again withdrawn by capitalists, and applied
by them to pay wages, rent, and profit. To illus-
trate more clearly the actual series of payments that
take place, we will assume that a certain town spends
jf. 30,000 a- week in bread; the ;^. 30,000, we may
assume, will be distributed as follows : —

£. . £.

Bakers receive weekly f oi bread - 30,000 All concerned in the baking and
and pay weekly to millers retailing of bread receive

for flour, £. 20,000. " weekly as income - - - 10,000

Millers receive weekly for flour All concerned in the milling of

from bakers - - - - 20,000 the wheat .... 2,000

and pay weekly to merchants
for com, &. 18,000.
Merchants receive weekly for All concerned in tlie transport

com from millers - - - 18,000 and warehousing of the com - 1,000

and pay weekly to farmers
for corn, £. 17,000.
Farmers receive weekly for corn, All concerned in the growing,

£. 17,000 from merchants - 17,000 tlireshing, <tc., of the wheat - 17,000

30,000

We thus see that the whole £. 30,000 is distributed
as rent, wages, and profit amongst all concerned in
the production of the commodity bread. The baker


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 91

pays the miller, and the miller the merchant, and the
merchant the farmer simultaneously. The baker
draws a cheque for £. 20,000, which he gives to the
miller; the miller draws a cheque for ;^. 18,000,
which he gives to the merchant ; and the merchant
a cheque for £. 17,000, which he gives to the farmer.
But it may be asked. How can all these cheques be
met ? There are only 30,000 sovereigns, and cheques
are drawn for £, 55,000. The answer is clear. The
baker, having drawn a cheque for j^. 20,000, must
pay in to his banker £. 20,000 out of his £. 30,000,
retaining merely £. 10,000 with which to pay the
rent of his bakehouse, shop, &c., the wages of his
men, and his own profits and wages. The miller,
who receives £, 20,000, having to meet his cheque ot
£. 18,000 paid to the merchant, cannot draw in cash
more than £. 2,000 ; with this £, 2,000 he must pay
his rent, men's wages, and his owm income. The
merchant, having to meet the cheque for jf. 17,000
he has given the farmer, can only draw £. 1,000, and
out of this sum he must pay for the transport of the
wheat, rent of hi$ stores, '&c., and his own income.
The farmer, however, has no cheque to meet, so he
can devote his whole £. 17,000 to the payment of
rent, labourers' wages, and his own income.

The only sums in money withdrawn from the bank
are, therefore, the miller's £. 2,000, the merchant's
£, 1,000, and the farmer's ;^. 17,000 ; that is to say,
that exact £. 20,000 paid in by the baker to meet his
cheque for that sum. These sums are evidently the
demand or purchasing power exerted for the use of
the various requisites of production concerned in
the production of bread. If we assume the demand


92 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

for bread suddenly increased by one-half, it is clear
that each of these totals would be increased simul-
taneously ; the baker would have to buy more flour,
the miller more wheat, the merchant more wheat,
and the farmer would find himself provided with the
funds requisite to hire more land and labour. It
may, perhaps, be urged that the farmer cannot
supply more wheat than formerly. In that case the
merchant, the miller, and the baker will each and all
be limited to the sale of the old amount of wheat,
flour, and bread ; the increased demand will expend
itself in raising the price, and though the farmer sells
no more wheat than before, he will receive the addi-
tional funds requisite to enable him to increase his
purchases of the use of land and labour.

Mill rightly contended that the demand for shop
goods was not the demand for the labour which had
previously produced them, because the money I pay
to-day cannot have provided the wages which were
paid last year to the man who sowed the particular
grains of wheat from which my loaf has sprung. But
while it is true that the present demand for shop
goods is not the source from which past demand for
labour proceeded, it by no means follows that present
demand for shop goods is not the source of present
demand for labour. Take the case of a tanner, who
is also a shoe manufacturer and a retailer. The only
rnoney he can receive is from the custom of his retail
shop, Le., is the demand for boots. With this money
he pays the weekly wages of his ' shoe hands,' his
' leather finishers and dressers,' his ' yard-hands,' and
all concerned in the preparation of the leather and
its manufacture into boots. Part of the money he


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 93

receives daily as demand for boots he distributes
daily as demand for the use of labour. If the
demand for boots decreased, his demand for the use
of labour must necessarily decrease. If, on the other
hand, it increased, he would want more boots got
ready, more leather dressed, and more hides tanned,
and he would be provided with the fimds requisite to
hire the additional labour required. The money
which his workmen receive as wages is part of the
money which his customers pay for boots. The
demand for boots is the source from which his
labourers' wages, his landlord's rent, and his own
income are drawn.

' It is clear in the above case that rent, profits, and
wages are not paid by the tanner out of any fimd
either of money or other property he has previously
become possessed of, but out of the proceeds of each
week's production. That is to say, the value put into
raw material is divided up when each piece of raw
material reaches the stage of commodity, and the
proceeds of the division are paid as rent, profit, wages.
The fact that rent, profit, wages are not paid in boots
but in general purchasing power does not impair the
value of this statement, for general purchasing power
is only effective on the supposition that a steady work
of production has been carried on in other branches
of industry similar in character to the work of the
tanning trade.

Or, again, to illustrate the same point, let us take
the whole work of a community conducted according
to an ideally uniform pattern. Let us assume that
every commodity has passed through ten processes,
occupying each a day, before it is finished, and that


94 THE PHYSIOLOG ¥ OF PROD UCTION,

the demand for each kind of commodity does not
vary from day to day, so that at the end of each
day's labour there are just so many loaves (or poten-
tial loaves^) in each of the ten stages which must be
passed to make a finished loaf, so many coats (or
potential coats) in each of the ten stages which must
be passed to make a finished coat, and so with every
other kind of commodity. Let us further assume
that each labourer assists in advancing one piece of
wealth each day a single step towards becoming a
commodity. Lastly, suppose labour and capital
contribute equally towards the daily advance. Then
each body of ten labourers, working in conjunction
with capital, will bring one piece of wealth each day
into a state of commodity, and will (or should) receive
one-half at the end of the day in wages. Each man
will thus get one-twentieth of a commodity as his
day's wage, the capitalist also receiving one-twentieth
for each labourer employed. If we now suppose that
each commodity is handed over to consumers as soon
as produced, there will be at the beginning of each
day no finished products in the hands of the capitalist.
The latter will simply have his plant and raw material
in all stages short of commodity. In such a community
it would be obvious that the commodities paid as
profit and wages were paid out of the results of the
production of each day. It is true that nine-tenths
of the value of the actual commodities handed over
in profit and wages at the end of the day was created
in the nine previous days, but it is only handed over
on condition of having been replaced by an equivalent
value stored in other forms of wealth on their way to
become commodities. Here the whole of the com-


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 96

modities given as profit and wages are in effect the
creation of the one day's work.

The demand for labour and use of capital is here
obviously constituted by the commodities daily pro-
duced. The requisites of production owned by the
labourers and capitalist daily produce a certain total
of value, and this total of value is daily distributed to
all concerned as payment for the use of these requi-
sites. The labourers and capitalist daily demand
• one piece, of wealth/ and this ' one piece of wealth *
daily demands the use of the requisites of production
owned by them. That is to say, the demand for com-
modities, and the demand for use of requisites of
production is the same phenomenon regarded from
different points of view.

In short, the use of natural agents, capital and
labour produces commodities, and demand for these
commodities is demand for the use of the requisites
of production.

In all periods, therefore, when the rate of consump-
tion does not vary, as assumed in our illustration
above, the quantity of commodities demanded is the
quantity of the. use of the requisites of production
demanded, or in other words consumption equals pro-
duction. Variations in the rate of consumption,
however, comphcate the problem somewhat. We saw,
(p. 85), that when consumption increases, this increase
can only take place concurrently with a proportionate
increase in capital, an increase which is brought about
through the medium of price and profit, and which
at any given period is quantitatively related to the
increase in consumption.

The quantity of the use of the requisites of


96 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

production demanded will during such periods con-
sist—

a. Of the quantity required to produce the commo-
dities demanded.

$. Of the quantity required to produce the addi-
tional capital rendered necessary by the
increase in a.

Though in this case the quantity of commodities
demanded is not identical with the quantity of the
use of the requisites of production demanded; it
nevertheless determines the more or less of this latter
quantity. Every increase in a involving more than an
equivalent increase, and every decrease in a involving
more than an equivalent decrease in the quantity of
the use of the requisites of productiori demanded.

We saw (p. 88), that every individual receives his
income as demand for the use of a requisite of pro-
duction owned by him, and that the aggregate
demand for the use of the requisites of production is
the aggregate money income of the community.
Each individual's income being the price paid for a
given total of the use of a requisite of production
owned by him, it follows from the law of price
deduced on page 8i that any fall in this price shows
that the quantity of such use demanded has decreased
relatively to the quantity offered.

We now propose to show that such a fall has taken
place. To effect this purpose it is necessary to analyse
the phenomenon known as depression in trade.

This depression may be defined as a general
reduction in the rate of incomes. Whatever form
the particular complaint may take, a little analysis
will always reduce it to this. When workmen com-


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION. 97

plain that they cannot get work, it does not mean
that they feel an insatiable desire for prolonged hours
of toil, but that they want wages and cannot get
them. They would even prefer wages without work,
if it were possible. Similarly, when the trader com-
plains that * there is nothing doing,' it does not mean
that he derives happiness from the constant and rapid
manipulation of his capital, but merely that he wishes
for the profit which that proceeding would presum-
ably afford him. And the landowner, likewise, when
he asserts that ' the country is going to the dogs,' and
that foreign wheat is responsible for this, does not
really hate foreign wheat, but only objects to the
reduction in rent which such wheat causes. Thus, in
each case it is a reduction of income that causes
individuals to inveigh against the evil times that
have befallen them.

Now, the individual's income, we have seen, is the
price paid for a given total of the use of a requisite of
production owned by him. This price, we have seen,
can only fall if the quantity of such uses demanded
has decreased relatively to the supply of such uses
offered. Depression in trade is, therefore, a decrease
in the quantity of the uses of the requisites of pro-
duction demanded relatively to ihe supply available,
and is resolvable into an insufficiency in the quantity
of the use of the requisites of production demanded.
But the quantity of commodities demanded deter-
mines the quantity of the uses of the requisites oi
production demanded ; if, therefore, this latter quan-
tity is insufficient, this insufficiency is due exclusively
to an insufficiency in the former ; that is to say, in
consumption. The only cause, however, which can

D


98 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION,

lead to an insufficiency in consumption is the undue
exercise of the habit of thrift or saving, and this habit,
therefore, and depression in trade are merely different
phases of one phenomenon.

Or our argument may be stated in inverse order in
the following propositions : —

1. Depression in trade is a general fall in the rate of

incomes {i.e,y a given total of a requisite of
production yields its owner a less income).

2. A general fall in the rate of incomes proves that

the quaniity of the use of the requisites of
production demanded has decreased relatively
to the supply.

3. The quantity of the use of the requisites of pro-

duction demanded is determined by the quan-
tity of commodities demanded (consumption).

4. Consumption would always equal the maximum

possible, were it not for the habit of saving or
thrift.

Whence we conclude depression in trade and
excessive thrift are terms describing different phases
// of the same phenomenon.

Excluding from consideration the complexities
introduced by an increase in the rate of consumption,
and consequently in the quantity of capital required,
we may summarise our theory thus : the community
considered as the recipient of money incomes pro-
duces consumable articles ; the community considered
as the spender of money incomes buys and consumes
these articles. If, owing to its desire to save, it
refrains from spending the whole of its money
income, the whole of the consumable articles pro-
duced cannot be sold. Over-supply is, in consequence,


//


THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PRODUCTION, 99

caused, and prices and incomes continually fall until
the production of consumable articles is reduced to the
total actually consumed.

It is important to note that this conclusion does
not rest on abstract theory, but is founded on the
admitted commercial fact of depression in trade.
The identification of depression in trade with insufWi
cient consumption or excessive thrift is, we ventur^/
• to assert, unassailable. In Chapter II. we showed
that the habit of saving might lead to an insufficiency
in the rate of consumption, or, as economists prefer
to call it, to over-supply ; in this chapter we have
shown that it actually has done so.

This conclusion is of critical importance to the
community; it means neither more nor less than
that the community could at once and permanently
enjoy a larger income. It means that the East-end
problem, with its concomitants of vice and misery,
is traced to its economic cause, and that this economic
cause is the most Respectable and highly extolled h
virtue of thrift. ^ '


100 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS,


CHAPTER IV.


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC
CHECKS.

Most modem economists deny that consumption
could by any possibility be insufficient. To suggest
that there may be an excess of forms of capital, over-
production of goods, general fall of prices, reduction
of incomes, and all the evils on which we have
dwelt, is regarded as an absurdity too obvious to
need refutation. Is it reasonable to assume that any
community will be so foolish as to attempt to save
too much ? Can we find any economic force at work
which might incite a community to this excess, and
if there be any such forces are there not efficient
checks provided by the mechanism of commerce ?
These are the questions asked by economists, and to
which the present chapter provides an answer.

It will be shown, firstly, that in every highly
organised industrial society there is constantly at
work a force which naturally operates to induce
excess of thrift ; secondly, that the checks alleged
to be provided by the mechanism of commerce are
either wholly inoperative or are inadequate to pre-


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 101

vent grave commercial evil. But before setting
closely to this task, it is necessary to draw attention
to the extreme negligence and indifference with which
most modern writers have treated the theory of
General Over-production. So firm is their confidence
in the value of the automatic machinery of commerce
that they are unable to listen with patience to any
criticism of the construction of that machinery. If
anything goes wrong with the working, there is a
system of checks and balances which will be sure to
set it right again, or, at any rate, prevent the evil from
becoming serious. Hence they have deemed it
necessary to do httle more than assign a casual re-
cognition to what they call the exploded doctrine of
Over-production.

It appears to them a mere absurdity to suppose
that in a community where the only possible motive
to produce is the desire to consume, an increase in
production will not at once be followed by a corre-
sponding increase in consumption. The wants of man-
kind are infinite ; if you increase the amount that can
be produced, you increase, ipso facto, the amount that
will be consumed. The brief answer which Ricardo
gave to the contentions of Malthus and Chalmers
seems to have been accepted as sufficient by most
later economists. " Productions are always bought by
productions or by services ; money is only the medium
by which the exchange is effected. Hence the in-
creased production being always accompanied by a
correspondingly increased ability to get and consume,
there is no possibility of Over-production."^ That

* Ricardo, * Prin. of Pol. Econ.,' p. 362.


1


102 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

Commodities are purchased by Commodities, and that
along with everything that is produced the power to
purchase and consume it is produced have become
mere commonplaces of economics.^ But it must be
observed that a further assumption underiies Ricardo's
argument, viz., that the power to purchase which is
produced must always be exercised. The old notion
that it was possible for goods to remain unpurchased
and unconsumed because there was no money to buy
them, has disappeared before a clearer understanding
of the function of money. But though this power to
' purchase and consume whatever is produced always
exists, is it equally certain that this power must
always be exerted ? To the question put in this form
it will be readily replied that a certain portion of the
Power to Purchase commodities must be withheld in
order that sufficient saving may occur to provide
any new capital which may be required to meet any


* This argument is specifically adopted by Mill, who says : * What
constitutes the means of payment for commodities is simply com-
modities. Each person's means of paying for the productions of
other people consists of those which he himself possesses. All sellers
are inevitably, and by the meaning of the word^ buyers. Could we
suddenly double the productive powers of the country, we should
double the supply of commodities in every market ; but we should,
by the same stroke, double the purchasing power. Everybody would
bring a double demand as well as supply ; everybody would be able
to buy twice as much, because everyone would have twice as much
to ofEer in exchange.' (Mill, * Prin. Pol. Ec.,' Book III., Chap. XIV.,
8. 2.) To this Prof. Marshall, alone amongst economists, takes ex-
ception, and pertinently remarks : ' But though men have the power
to purchase, they may not choose to use it.' (* Economics of In-
dustry,' Book III., Chap. I., s. 4.) But he fails to grasp the critical
importance of this fact, and appears to limit its action to periods
of * crisis.'


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 103

expected increase in Consumption/ But with the
exception of this needful provision for future pro-
duction, the whole of what is produced must always
be consumed. If we ask why it must be consumed,
we are met once more with the answer that it is
absurd to suppose that people will go on producing
unless they consume what they produce, when the
only end or object of work is the satisfaction of
wants. Thus, the very fact that people produce is
proof positive that the Power to Purchase and con-
sume what they produce is actually exercised. " The
error is in not perceiving that though all who have ■
an equivalent to give might bp fully provided with |
every consumable article which they desire, the fact
that they go on adding to the production proves that
that is not actually the case."^

"We said before that whoever brings additional
commodities to the market, brings an additional power
of purchase ; we now see that he brings also an

* Economists usually assert that saving is necessary to maintain
the fixed capital in repair, and to replace such of it as may from
time to time be worn out. This is, however, an incorrect use of the
word saving ; no saving is effected unless the aggregate of capital is
increased. If the community at the end of the year only possesses
exactly the same total of capital that it had at the beginning, how
can it be said to have saved ?

* Here, again, Mr. Mill's Wage-fund theory comes in as a * deus ex
machinal Suppose that certain individuals really have more * Pur-
chasing Power ' than they care, either at once or in the future, to use,
all they have to do is to apply it * productively ' (?) by adding it to
the Wages-fund ; the labourers will then consent to use the Purchas-
ing Power instead of them. What would happen if the labourers
were content with their previous necessaries Mill never stops to
ask. Suppose that they tried to save this Purchasing Power handed
on to them, what would happen ? Mill seems to assign to Capitalists
a monopoly of the folly of saving without any object to gain.


104 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS,

additional desire to consume, since if he had not that
desire he would not have troubled himself to pro-
duce."^ This is a complete expression of the rough-
and-ready general opinion which pronounces Over-
production impossible. It rests entirely upon the
correctness of the assumption that the sole motive to
production is the desire of the producer to consume
what he has produced or what he can get for it. Now,
of course, if it were the case that immediately any
commodity was produced the person or persons con-
cerned in the production insisted on immediately
consuming it or consuming what they could get in
exchange for it, it would be impossible to conceive of
such a thing as Over-production. It is clear that
Robinson Crusoe alone on his island would never
produce anything which he did not desire to consume ;
he would never be guilty of such a folly as Over-pro-
duction, for his only motive to produce is the desire to
consume. But is this equally true of individuals in a
fully organised industrial society ? Is the only motive
which induces them to work the desire to consume
Twhat they produce ? No ! there is another motive
present, the desire to save. This is as real an acting
motive as the other. But, it will be urged, the desire
to save only means a desire to consume at some
future time. We reply, Yes ; but to consume what ?
Not as a rule to consume what is saved, or any
existing value, but to consume something which
shall in the future be produced by the assistance of
that which is saved. In a word, the real, direct; im-
mediate object of such production is the establish-

' MiU, < Prin. Pol. Econ./ Til., Chap. IV., s. 3. For the similar view
of Mr. F. A. Walker, see his ' Pol. Ec.,' 3r(l ed., p. 318.


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 105

ment of that which is produced as a source of future
income. In order to achieve this object the producer
seeks to add this ' Saving ' to the total of existing
Capital. It should clearly be recognised that though
there may be present in his mind an intention to
consume in the future the return which this piece of
Capital may bring in, the original motive £0 produc-
tion was not the desire to consume what was produced
or what he could get in exchange for it. Thus the
desire of individuals to consume what they produce,
considered by itself, furnishes no limitation to their
willingness to produce. The desire to save may lead
them to increase their rate of production indefinitely
beyond the desire for present or immediately future
consumption. Mill, then, has no right to conclude
that the very fact of a thing being produced is a proof
that the power to consume it will be exercised. The
desire to save and store up purchasing power is as
genuine a motive to production in the individual as
the desire of immediate consumption.^ ' But how will
this lend a possibility to Over-production ?' It may
be urged, ' You have already shown that it is impos-
sible to effectually save more than suffices to minister
to future Consumption, why, then, will a community
be so foolish as to try to save more than this ?' The
answer to these questions discloses the fundamental
fallacy which underlies the Economist's view of
Saving, the assumption that the interests of the Com-
munity must always be identical with the interests of
its several members. The statement of Adam Smith,^

' Mr. Walker quite overlooks this in his account of the motives
to produce, see his *Pol. Econ.,' 3rd ed., pp. 318 to 328.
« 'Wealth of Nations,' Bk. IV., Chap. II., s. 1.


106 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS,

" What is prudence in the conduct of a private family-
can scarce be folly in that of a great nation," has been
taken too generally for a gospel truth. This view, that
a community means nothing more than the addition
of a number of individual units, and that the interests
of Society can be obtained by adding together the in-
terests of individual members, has led to as grave
errors in Economics as in other branches of Sociology .
The confident assumption, that if individuals look
carefully after their own private interests, the welfare
of the whole community will be incidentally secured,
is the true explanation of the indilBFerence with which
students of the mechanism of commerce have regarded
all such criticism of the construction of that machine
as is contained in theories of Over-production. Now,
it is important to look closely into this assumption,
for it does more than explain why economists have
slighted all theories of Over-Supply. The disclosure
of the falsehood on which this assumption rests will
also disclose the existence and nature of that force
which gives to Over-Supply an actual existence in the
world of commerce.

If the interests of each individual in a community
were always identical with the interest of the com-
munity there could be no such thing as over-supply.
It is impossible to suppose that a company of men,
producing in common for the common good, would at
any time produce more than was required for con-
sumption in the present or near future. It is, in fact,
the clash of interests between the community as a
whole and the individual members in respect to
Saving, that is the cause of Over-Supply. In order
to understand this diversity of interest, it is necessary


OVER-PRODUCTIOy AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 107

clearly to ascertain what the limits- of available thrift
are, for the individual and for society. First, let us
look at the individual in respect to the power of
Saving. An able and industrious man may be able by
working hard for twenty years to retire from business
and live during the rest of his life upon his savings ;
that is to say, he may during the earlier part of his
life anticipate the work he would have otherwise been
obliged to spread over his whole life. It matters not
for our present consideration whether he has kept his
Savings in the form of money stored in a stocking at
home, or has invested it so as to gain an income.
The eJBFect of his action has been to escape the
necessity of future labour by an excess of labour in
the past.

Doing more work than was sufficient to satisfy his
present wants, he gave that extra work to others,
receiving in return certain money tokens. The posses-
sion of these tokens, which he has hoarded up at home,
or invested abroad, so as to increase their number, will
enable him, when he retires from business, to compel
other people to give him the products of their past
labour, or to do actual work for him without his
doing any work in return. His past production has
provided him with a lien upon future production. He
has to all intents and purposes been enabled to store
up past labour for future use. But how has he been
enabled to effect this ? The actual material forms in
which his past labour has been stored have not sur-
vived during the interval between the exercise of the
labour and the future use of it. The fact that others
had an immediate use for the forms of his past labour
was what enabled him to succeed in storing up the


108 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

value of his work and usin; it in the future. If he
had been obliged to store up, not the money tokens
he received for the immediate use of his work, but the
actual forms in which his work stood until he wished
after twenty years to use them, or to exchange them
for other 'utilities or conveniences,' he would find
himself unable to do so, unless he were engaged in
work of exceptional durability (such as diamond
cutting), and even then changes in fashion and the
introduction of cheaper methods of production would
be liable to impair the value of his savings. How-
ever, by giving up the produce of his labour to some
one who has a present use for it, and receiving money
tokens in its place, it is possible to escape the neces-
sity of doing any work in the future by a sufficient
amount of productive energy in the past. His past
work will enable him to obtain any kind of wealth or
service in the future without any present exertion on
his part.

This is what an individual can do. Can a Com-
munity do the same ? There is no limit to efficacious
thrift on the part of an individual. Is there any limit
to the efficacious thrift of a Community ? We saw
that an individual might so work in the past as to
avoid all work in the future. Does this hold of a
Community? Obviously net. There are certain
forms of work which a Community cannot anticipate,
certain forms of productive labour which cannot be
stored at all.

a. A large part of the labour of producing perish-
able gotds cannot be anticipated. In so far as the
term ' perishable ' applies in a greater or less degree
to all forms of Commodities, this restriction has a


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 109

general bearing. With regard to the vast amount of
labour engaged in producing articles of Food the limi-
tation is almost absolute. The greater part of the
work of producing food cannot be stored by the com-
munity. The same rule applies in a less degree to
the production of clothing and other more enduring
forms of material commodities. Rust and moths, the
dangers of destruction by fire or other accident,
changes of fashion, &c., cause a total or partial loss of
value in the case of all kept commodities. Generally,
it may be said that such labour can only be antedated
within certain time limits, and even then subject to
considerable losses.

This consideration imposes an absolute limit on
what may be called ' anticipatory production ' in a
society organised on commercial principles. No man
will spend twenty shiUings in producing an article
for future consumption, if by retaining the twenty
shillings and producing the article at a later period
immediately prior to its consumption, a larger price
can be obtained. It pays better to retain the money
and to produce in the future rather than to produce
in the present for future consumption.

/3. The greater part of that labour, which con-
sists not in impartmg new shape or qualities to
material objects, but in moving them to the exact
place where they are wanted, cannot be anticipated,
but requires to be freshly exercised in accordance
with the requirements of each moment and each
consumer.

7. Most of that labour which is used to produce
non-material commodities is incapable of being stored,
e,g.y most intellectual or artistic labour, e.g., of Actors,


110 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

Singers, Preachers, &c. Under this head may also
come most of the work of Domestic Service.

Some forms of intellectual and artistic labour, it is
true, may be more effectually stored than any
material objects, and may form icr»?juara Ic act, but
most of the less exalted forms demand constant
renewal.

8. The work of repairing loss of machinery caused
by waste or accident cannot be stored.

€. The whole labour of supplying new wants can-
not be stored.

Thus it appears that a large part of the total of
productive labour must be done continuously, and is
incapable of being stored. A whole community is
thus incapable of doing what we saw an individual
can do. A community cannot by working extra hard
in the present avoid the necessity of doing any work
in the future. Our law of Quantitative Relation
asserted a fixed relation between the Amount of
Present Production and the Amount of Future Con-
sumption. We now further see that this Productive
work of providing for Future Consumption cannot be
achieved by a series of bursts of productive activity,
followedbyperiodsof idleness, that any tendency to
this spasmodic action is attended by a loss in the value
of the work. It follows, that the economically effi-
cient mode of Production, from the point of view of a
Community, is a continuous even exercise of pro-
ductive energy directed to the supply of immediately
future Consumption, and that any attempt on the
part of the commimity to do work before it is econo-
mically required must be paid for by a certain loss in
the value of the work.


over-production and economic checks. 111

Thus we see that while there is no limit to the
effective thrift of an individual, there is a limit to
that of the community. But the thrift of the com-
munity is composed of the thrift of individuals. It
is clear, then, that if the united thrift of individuals
passes the limit imposed by the interests of the com-
munity, thrift ceases to be as elBFectual as before, even
from the individual's point of view ; that is to say,
though any individual may anticipate all ftiture
labour, every individual cannot. If every individual
were seized with a desire to work harder this
year in order to have a complete holiday next
year, they could not effect this object, though any
one or more might succeed in doing so. But though
in reality the number of individuals required to do
the amount of saving which is economically useful is
limited, this restriction does not act as a deterrent in
the case of any individual desirous to save. For
whether the amount of thrift at present practised
in a community is or is not sufficient, the individual
can always save. If it is not sufficient, his savings
will have a full economic value with the savings
of others ; if it is sufficient, he nms a certain risk
of finding that his savings are not wanted, but he
has always the chance of ousting the savings of
another.

The only absolute limit to the amount that an indi-
vidual could save would be the total Capital which
the Community can profitably use. It is abstractedly
conceivable that an individual or small group of indi-
viduals should by thus possessing themselves of the
total capital negative all the value of the thrift of
other individuals in the community. There is thus


112 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

nothing to limit the proportion of the total efficient
thrift of a community which may be exercised by
any individual. If the Community xNnshes to increase
its Capital, it must consent to increase its Consump-
tion ; but the individual need not increase his Con-
sumption in order to increase his Capital ; indeed,
the simplest and most usual method is to decrease
his consumption, and this is the method which
1 1 philanthropists and economists invariably urge. The
limitation of National Thrift assigns no absolute limit
to the effectiveness of individual thrift. So much
Saving can be done by the community, how much of
it shall be done by this individual ? It is not to the
interests of the community that there should be more
Saving done than is just sufficient to furnish the
requisite quantum of Capital. In a Communistic
Society, where the interests of individuals were iden-
tical, it is clear that no more Saving would be
attempted than this requisite quantity ; but the case
is different in an individualistic Society. Each is com-
peting against the other ; each is seeking to do
himself the largest portion of the useful Saving. An
individual can always save.

Now, it is just this spirit of competition among
individuals which supplies the force that operates to
bring about Over-production. If the full number
of material forms of machinery, raw material, and
goods requisite to complete the economic Capital
of the community is already present, is it not still
open to the individual to save and create new
forms, and apply them so as to oust the forms
of his competitors ? A certain amount of ma-
chinery may be economically required to supply the


^^:\ar


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 113

number of shoes for the retail market. The full
amount of this machinery may be already in exist-
ence. But that will not prevent me from applying
my Saving to the production of other shoemaking
machines if I think that I can produce the more
efficient machines, which will render useless some of
those existing at present and do the work which they
would otherwise have done ; or if, with similar
machinery, I can produce more cheaply, by using
brown paper in the place of leather, or by beating
down the wages of my workpeople, and thus force
some of the previously existing machinery to stand
idle.

It is true that I may fail in my attempt. I may
produce machines inferior to those already in use,
or otherwise fail to produce more cheaply. In that
case I shall have tried to save, have stored up the
material forms of Savings, but have effected no real
Saving for myself. But whether I succeed or fail, it
is clear that my thrift in no wise affects the total
economic thrift of the community, but only deter-
mines whether a particular portion of the total thrift
shall have been exercised by myself or by somebody
else. It is, of course, true that the inducement to in-
dividuals to save is by no means always the same.^

If a community is provided with the smallest num-
ber of forms of Capital requisite to supply future
Consumption, each of these forms must be considered
to have a full and equal value in the aid it renders
production ; all parts of the total capital are put to

^ In Chapter VI. we shall show how the thrift of one part of the
community has power to force another part to live beyond their
income. See pages 185 and 186.

D 2


114 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

a full economic use. Since this Capital is the result
of previous thrift of individuals, we may say this,
that the thrift of individuals has a ftill and even
economic value, and the reward of that thrift will be
full and equal. This is what may be termed the
normal healthy condition of commerce, where every
piece of Savings applied as Capital has a ftill use, and
returns a ftill profit to its owner. But as soon as
competition among individuals leads to the applica-
tion of a larger number of forms of Capital than are
required, it is clear that the average productive work
done by each form of Capital is now smaller than
before. Either all the forms of Capital are now
less fully used than before, or some of the old forms
are displaced by new forms, and are no longer used at
all. In either case this creation of excessive number
of forms of Capital has lowered the average value of
each form.

The operation of this spirit of competition among
individuals in an industrial community may be fairly
illustrated by the conditions of a competitive exami-
nation for a limited number of posts or prizes^ A
dozen posts are offered for open competition to the
most successful among fifty candidates, sixty per cent,
of marks being required as a qualification. So far
as the examination is concerned, it is only requisite
that twelve out of the fifty candidates should do
enough work to obtain each sixty per cent, of the
marks. All the work done in excess of this by the
twelve successful candidates and the whole of the
work done by the thirty-eight unsuccessful candidates
is entirely void of result so far as the examination is
concerned ; that is to say, if it had not been done,


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 115

the result would have been just the same. Now, if
these candidates were, before they began to prepare
for the examination, to come to a mutual agreement
with a view to so arranging matters that they should,
as a company, do the least possible work consistent
with obtaining the desired result, they would select
the twelve among them who were at the present
time most advanced in attainments, and who could,
therefore, presumably be coached most easily, so as to
obtain the requisite minimum of marks ; these twelve
would do what work was required, the other thirty-
eight would do no work.

But what occurs under ordinary conditions of com-
petition is this. The consideration of the number of
vacant posts and of the minimum of marks required
have no hmiting effect on the amount of work the
candidates do. Each candidate has, or thinks he has,
a chance of success, and this chance stimulates him
to work. Thus the total of work done is far
in excess of that which the conditions of the ex-
amination required. It is further to be observed
that in proportion as the chance of success is
theoretically smaller, the stimulus to work is greater.
If there be fifty candidates for twelve posts, the
amount of work done by each candidate tends
to be greater than if there were only thirteen
candidates for the same number of posts. There
is, no doubt, a limit to the operation of this law.
When the disproportion of candidates to places
reaches a certain height, the smallness of the
hope of success which the average candidate feels
will diminish rather than stimulate his energy ; but,
in any case, the amount of work done will be vastly


116 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

beyond the measure of the actual work which has an
efficient value in determining success.

So with the trade competition in an ordinary com-
mercial society. Though the amount of thrift which
can be effectually exercised by the whole society is
strictly limited, this limit imposes no such absolute
restriction upon the thrift of any individual. The
thrift of the individual consists in getting possession
of the material forms of capital ; whether or to what
extent these forms are economically required, or will
be actually and fully used to assist future production,
is dependent on facts which are not immediately and
clearly before the eyes of the individual when he is
seeking to save.

,It may be well here to call attention to an im-
portant fact which has a bearing upon the relation
between the economically desirable rate of saving
and the rate of consumption. The quantity of capital
stored in Machinery and Plant at each stage in pro-
duction required to assist a given rate of production
of Commodities is by no means fixed. The constant
tendency of improvements in the arts of manufacture,
and even in the arts of storage of goods and retailing,
is to lessen the amount of real Capital required at the
different stages in production. Thus, assuming that
the rate of consumption in a community remained
the same, the amount of effectual saving which could
be stored in forms of capital would continually
diminish ; that is to say, the present rate of pro-
duction could be carried on with a smaller amount of
Capital.

In Chapter II. we have proved —

That the existence of a distinct Quantitative Rela-


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS. 117

tion between the rate of Present Production and the
rate of immediately Future Consumption implies a
theoretic possibility of general Over-Supply (or Under-
Demand).

We have now proved —

That the competition among individuals in an or- / /
dinary commercial society tends continually to the//
establishment of actual Over-Supply.

We have now to examine two considerations, which,
according to most modem economists, furnish efficient
checks to a condition of Over-Supply.

These are —

I. A fall in general prices, which, by causing an
increased demand for Commodities, is alleged to pro-
vide an economic use for what would otherwise have
been Over-Supply.

II. Such a fall in the rate of interest (or profit) as
will act as a check upon Saving, and restore the proper
relation between production and consumption.*

* So persistent is the assumption among economic writers that the
machinery of commerce is a self-adjusting one which cannot get
much out of working order, that they seldom take the trouble to
distinctly state the nature of the economic checks to Over-Produc-
tion. But the general tenour of their reasoning is in complete
accord with the following statement of Laveleye ; — * When there is
a lack of equilibrium between production and consumption certain
influences come into play, which tend to restore this in the following
way : — Too many shoes are made. To sell the surplus shoemakers
will lower their prices. This will have two results : First, the fall
of price will increase the number of consumers ; secondly, shoe-
makers, finding themselves at a loss, will make fewer shoes, until
the ^uilibrium is here again established.' (Laveleye, * Elements of
Pol. Econ.,* p. 99.) This argument, irrefutable as applied to the
interests of any single branch of production, is considered a sufficient
answer to those who have asserted the possibility of general Over-
production.


118 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

Before passing to a closer examination of the value
of these two checks, one point must be clearly-
marked. The fall in retail prices and the fall in rate
of interest, which are the operative forces in these
alleged checks, are both acknowledged to be results
, brought about by an actual condition of Over-Supply.
I However small this amount may be, there must be
' some Over-Supply actually existent before either of
these alleged preventives can be set in motion. No
mere tendency to Over-Supply can have any effect.^
Much false argument in economics is based upon a
wrong use of the term tendency. Loose thinkers
are sometimes induced by their perception, that the
main forces with which Economics deal are often
checked or turned aside in practice, to speak of these
forces as tendencies, meaning by the term forces
which would act if they could. Now, such a ten-
dency has no value and could have no effect ;
it has no real existence, and can work none of
the miracles imputed to it. A force which does
not act as it would otherwise have acted because
its action is subject to the interference of another
force does not therefore lapse into a tendency ;
it is just as real a force as before. There is no
such thing as a tendency to Over-Supply. Either
there is under supply of the forms of capital eco-
nomically requisite to assist in producing what
people would be willing to consume, or there is
exactly the right number of forms, or there is
Over-Supply. There is in no case any commercial

* Malthus clearly recognised that if a fall in profits was to serve
as a relief to * a glut of Commodities,' there must be an actual glut.
See Malthus, * Pol. Econ.,' Ch. I., s. III.


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS. 119

fact which answers to the name, ' tendency to
Over-Supply/

Let us now turn to the examination of the opera-
tion of the first of the two alleged preventive checks,
that of faUing prices.

The fuller statement of this economic argument is
as follows : — The smallest quantity of general Over-
Supply will cause a fall in general prices ; this fall in
general prices will increase the quantity of com-
modities demanded, and will continue to act in this
manner until the quantity demanded has assumed the
same relation to the increased Supply as the old
quantity demanded bore to the old Supply.

So beautifully simple is this argument that econo-
mists who have thought it worth while to deal argu-
mentatively with the theory of general Over-Supply
have generally put it forward as the briefest and most
complete refutation of a foolish heresy. Yet, when
we come to a closer examination of this argument,
the fallacy it rests upon will seem equally simple and
palpable. In the first place, it might well be urged
that the general Over-Supply may exist merely in
the earlier stages of production ; the excessive accu-
mulation will most naturally at first take the shape
of an excessive number of unfinished or finished
goods, or of the machinery which operates at the
early stages of production. In that case it would be
possible to urge that, although the prices of unfinished
or finished goods might fall owing to this excess, the
prices of retail commodities might remain as before,
the retailers reaping the whole advantage of the fall
in wholesale prices.

It will, in fact, be shown later {vide Chapter VI.)


)/


120 OVEB-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

that this is what actually occurs in commercial com-
munities; that the fall of wholesale prices is not
immediately followed by a corresponding fall in retail

I ' prices ; that the latter is slow of operation, and does
not, when it occurs, exactly reflect the changes in
wholesale prices.

But, in order that the fallacious nature of the main
contention may be more apparent, we will not press
this point here, but will assume that wherever the
pressure of general Over-Supply may make itself felt
the fall in prices which it brings about is straightway
reflected in a corresponding fall of retail or shop
prices. The simple question which is before us is
this : Will the general fall of retail prices stimulate
an increased demand for shop goods, and thus
remedy the congestion due to over-production ? If
retail prices fall, it would seem as if purchasers ought
to be able to purchase more than they did before,
and that thus they will be tempted to raise their
standard of living. But before a person makes a
purchase he looks at two things : the price of the
article and the condition of his purse. If he finds
that he has less command of money than before, he
may not be more able or more willing to increase
his purchases, although the price of articles has
fallen.

We have assumed a general fall in wholesale and
retail prices. Before we can rightly ascertain whether
this will serve to stimulate demand, we must ask
another question. What is the effect of a general

' fall of prices on the Income of the Community ? We
are not here speaking of the real income of the Com-
munity, which is the sum of values created during


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS. 121

the year, but of the money income of the Com-
munity.

We have seen that the money income* of each
individual in an industrial community, whether re-
ceived in the form of wage profit or rent, is ultimately
paid out of the money received by retailers for the
sale of commodities. If the amount of money re-
ceived by retailers rises, the general money income
of the community rises ; and if the amount received
by retailers falls, the general money income falls '^ ^
with it. Thus every rise and fall in retail prices (the , t* ' * ^
money received by retailers) will mean a corxQ- j ^
sponding rise or fall of the money income of ther
community.* How, then, will a general decline of
retail prices act as an effective stimulus to increased
demand for Commodities, when the average income
of consumers has fallen correspondingly? A man

* It is true that in commerce it is usual to include in a man's
income not only the margin of profit upon sales effected, but also an
estimated value of unsold goods, &c. But although it is convenient
and reasonable that these should be taken into account in estimating
the money income of the individual, they cannot rightly be con-
sidered in estimating the money income of the community, for if
these unsold goods had been put into the market so as to force a sale,
this sale could only have been effected by causing a still further
reduction in general prices, and the total money received from the
whole amount of sales would not have been greater than that from
the smaller number.

* We are here assuming that a community is entirely composed of
producers whose incomes are derived directly from sales of different
kinds. It is, however, clear that people in receipt of fixed money
incomes are enabled to raise their demand for commodities with
every fall in retail prices. In so far, however, as certain individuals
do not feel the effects of the general reduction of money incomes,
others must feel it more severely. Thus, for example, if the mort-
gagee stiU gets his interest, the landlord suffers more severely in
proportion.


122 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

who had previously an income of £. 500 per annum
will not be induced to raise his standard of living by
a fall of fifty per cent, in retail prices when he per-
ceives that his income has fallen to the level of
;f . 250 a year.

There is one objection to the argument, which
though it has been answered in effect by the proof
that all incomes are derived from, and dependent on,
retail sales, it may be well to deal with explicitly.
The objection will take the following shape : — ' Re-
tail prices will only fall because the supply of Shop
goods is greater than before, while the demand is
supposed to remain the same. But the greater supply
of Shop goods implies a larger number of sales effected
at each preceding stage in the process of production.
Now it is true that each of these sales has been
effected at a lower price than previously, but it does
not follow that the money income derived by makers
and wholesale traders from their business is any less
than before, for the increase in number of sales may
be very well considered to compensate for the lower
prices received. If, then, the money incomes of
these men remain the same as before, or do not fall
correspondingly with the fall of prices, when retail
prices are touched they will be able to take advantage
of the cheaper prices of shop goods, and will increase
their demand.*

To this objection there is the following answer : —
Along with the fall of retail prices will come a fall of
the total receipts or incomes of all concerned in pro-
duction. Assuming that up to the time when retail
prices are affected, the incomes of makers and mer-
chants were the same as before, immediately retail


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 123

prices are affected the number of purchases from
makers and merchants, even at the lower prices, is
diminished, so that the latter find their incomes fall-
ing equally with the rate of fall of retail prices. The
slightest decline in retail prices which has been sup-
posed to induce those who up to the present moment
have been in receipt of their usual money income, to
increase their retail purchases, is found by them to
equally affect their own incomes, so that though they
would have increased their retail purchases had their
income stood steady, they will not now attempt to do
so. The real question at issue is one of time. If,
when the maker and merchant learn that retail prices
are falling, th^y look merely at their last month's
receipts, they will say, ' Well, our income, though
made out of more sales at lower prices, is steady ; now
that retail prices are falling we can afford to raise our
standard of living.' But if, as is more probable,
they look at the actual present and the probable
future, they will see that with each fall in retail prices
the demand for the goods they are selling is growing
less, that orders are falling off, and wholesale prices
falling still lower, and that their money income is
actually shrinking in strict accord with the fall in
retail prices. For it must be remembered that it
takes no time for the effect of a fall in retail prices to
operate along the whole process of production ; im-
mediately the receipts of retailers fall, the demands
at each point in production fall correspondingly ; the
effects are, in effect, simultaneous. We can, therefore,
assume no interval, even of a day, during which the
maker or the merchant can feel justified by present con-
siderations in increasing his demand for commodities.


124 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

But one final point remains for consideration. Sup-
pose that the community, or any large proportion of
the community, neglecting the corresponding shrink-
age of their incomes, insisted on taking advantage of
the fall in retail prices brought about by Over-Supply
to increase their number of purchases of Commodi-
ties, what would be the result? Let us first note
precisely the nature of the action we impute to them.
Prices have fallen, say, twenty-five per cent., and all
incomes have fallen twenty-five per cent., for we may
assume for the purpose of argument that all incomes,
whether received as wages, profit, or rent, are equally
affected (though we shall see later on that this is not
actually the case, and that we are only entitled to
say that the average income has fallen twenty-five
percent.). Yet, notwithstanding the fact that they are
no better off than before, we will assume that a con-
siderable number of persons, looking only at the fall of
prices, increase their demand for commodities with-
out considering that by doing so they seem likely to
cut down their normal rate of savings, or even to
exceed their yearly income by running into debt. As
they thus thoughtlessly and blindly increase their
demand for commodities, they will find their money
income rising with each increase of demand. For, in
the first place, assuming the low retail prices were
untouched by the increased demand, the number of
retail sales has now increased, and with it the money
incomes of retail traders ; retail traders now increase
their orders of wholesale goods, and once more,
assuming the low prices stood, the income of whole-
sale merchants rises from the increasednumber of sales.
In like manner, at every stage in production there is a


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS. 125

rise of income through an increase of sales. But this
is not the only way in which the reckless demand for
Commodities raises incomes. As the fall of retail prices
was caused by the growing excess of supply over
quantity demanded at former prices, so the increased
demand for commodities will raise retail prices again
towards the old level. This old level will not, however,
be reached until supply is once more brought into the
normal, the old relation to quantity demanded ; that
is to say, until the whole of that Over-Supply of Shop
goods, which was the immediate cause of the decline
of prices, has been completely swallowed up. If we
suppose that consumers insist on increasing their con-
sumption of Commodities until this normal condition
of prices has actually been restored, what will be their
condition as regards money income and saving power ?
They will find their apparent recklessness to have the
force of a well-founded faith. Their money income
will rise apace with their increased consumption ; the
more they consume the more they will be able to
consume. This will continue until they have con-
sumed all that existed in the form of over-production
and have restored prices to the normal level. If they
do not stop even here, but, smitten with the desire
for constantly improving their standard of comfort,
continue to increase their demand beyond the former
level, they will find that prices will rise, that money
incomes will rise along with prices, and that produc-
tion at every point will strain every nerve in order to
keep pace with the increasing desire to consume,
giving full economic emplojonent to as much labour,
capital, and natural agents as can be brought to bear
upon the arts of production. Nor is this all. Having


I


126 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS,

by an act of economic faith increased their consump-
tion without regard to the virtue of thrift, they will
find that along with every increase in consumption
more thrift becomes feasible. For thrift is only
operative when more forms of capital are economi-
cally required. So long as there existed Over-Supply
there was no room for thrift, as this Over-Supply is
removed by an increased rate of consumption, there is
once more place for new forms of Capital, and thrift
is again effectual. If the increased demand does not
stop with the return to previous conditions, but con-
tinues to grow so as to strain the productive machine,
there is an ever-growing use for more saving and more
thrift. And not only is more thrift possible, but it is
necessary.

If people would consume more they must save
more ; unless, indeed, their increased desire for con-
sumption is a momentary freak, and has not the dura-
bility of a rational resolve. But can they save
more ? When people increase their consumption
more saving may be required, but who will exercise
it ? The answer is a simple one. The people who
are consuming more. And it is precisely because
they are consuming more that they can save more.
This is a paradox, but unlike most paradoxes which
gain credence for a falsehood by tickling the ear
with a pointed antithesis, it contains a truth which
will bear the closest scrutiny. As the community
can only increase its consumption by increasing its
saving, it cannot increase its consumption without a
proportionate increase to its saving fund. So long
as there still exists any portion of Over-Supply, this
increase of saving is not required, but the moment


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS, 127

Supply is once more brought to the normal relation
with quantity demanded, any increase in the latter
requires a corresponding increase in the former, and
every increase in the former requires more Saving.
But Saving is the result of the operation of motives on
individuals. If people are bent on increasing as fast .
as possible their standard of consumption, how will
they be induced to save more ? In the following
way. As they take advantage of the lower retail
prices to increase their demand for Commodities, they
will find that prices begin to rise ; but they will also
find that their money incomes are rising at a more
rapid rate than the rise of prices, because it is not! '^
only affected proportionately by every rise of price,! I »
but also by the increased number of times the higher \ I
price is paid, that is by the increased number of sales.
Thus, every individual will find that the money value
of his income has risen, that he is able both to con-
sume more and to save more. Of course it is open
under such circumstances for any individual to use all
his increased income as demand for commodities, and
to save none of it ; but he will pursue this course in
the teeth of a constantly growing stimulus to save.
Saving will be easier for him, because it can be
effected not only without pinching, but along with an
increasing rate of personal consumption, and it will
be more advantageous for him, because it will be pro-
ductive of the maximum of profit. For when in-
creased consumption acts as a constant strain upon
the productive aid of capital, it has been seen that
each form of capital, each embodiment of saving, has
a full economic value, and brings the maximum return
of profit to its owner. If any considerable portion of


128 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

the community still persist in neglecting the oppor-
tunity to save, and spend all their increased money
incomes in demand for Commodities, they are thereby
increasing the possibility of effective saving for others
who are less extravagantly inclined, and will force the
latter to save a larger proportion of their incomes by
the incentive of a rise of profit, until the less extra-
vagant are induced not only to do their own share of
the necessary saving, but the share which the more
extravagant refused to do.

It must, of course, always be borne in mind that
so soon as all the labourers available for work are
fully employed, or so soon as all the natural agents
available for use are fully used, no further increase in
consumption or in capital can take place. Since
unused natural agents, whatever may be the case in
the future, exist at present in practically unlimited
quantities, we may exclude them from consideration.
The limit to which we refer will be a limit to the
aggregate of capital ; in a given condition of the
productive arts, each labourer can only efficiently co-
operate with a certain maximum amount of capital ;
if there could be brought into existence more forms
of capital than sufficed to furnish the maximum for
every labourer, the surplus must be waste. So soon,
therefore, as saving has accumulated this total, pro-
duction will be limited by the aggregate of labour
available for use. In this case consumption will be
hmited by production, and can only increase if the
number of labourers increases, or if advances in the
mechanical arts enable the existing number of la-
bourers to effect the production of a larger quantity
of wealth.


OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS. 129

This is a correct account of what would happen if
a whole community were to seize the opportunity of
a general fall of retail prices, occasioned by Over-
Supply, to increase the rate of consumption. It must,
of course, be distinctly understood that if a single
person, or a few persons alone in the community,
raise their demand for commodities, they will not
find their income rising with each increase in their
consumption, nor will they find that they can save
more as they spend more. The effect of their action
will be spread over the whole community ; so far as
their increased consumption increases the general
demand, it will operate in producing a slight rise in
general prices, and in the incomes of all members of
the community, but they themselves will reap no
special benefit. It is only on the assumption that
the community, as a whole, is incited to increase
its consumption that the beneficial results above
described will ensue. An individual who should thus
increase his consumption while the rest of the com-
munity stood firm, would, no doubt, be conferring a
slight public benefit, but, so far as his own interests
were concerned, his act would be one of private
extravagance.

It has been important to examine what would
happen if the result of a fall of retail prices were an
increase in the consumption of the community. But
it has been seen that, paying regard to the ordinary
motives that operate with men, there is no reason to
hope that a fall of retail prices, which brought with it
a corresponding fall in money incomes, would operate
in this way.

Having shown that the first economic check which

£


130 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

is supposed to prevent any evil effects of over-pro-
duction is entirely ineffectual, and tends rather to
aggravate the evil, let us pass to the second check,
which acts through the motive power of a fall in
interest or profit.

It is alleged that a fall in the profit upon existing
capital will remedy the evil of Under-Demand by
restoring the proper economic relations between
Production and Consumption. If people find that
they cannot get the usual return for the use of their
savings, they will not save so much, it is urged.

Now, if a fall of Profit is to induce people to save
less, it must operate in one of two ways, either by
inducing them to spend more or by inducing them to
produce less.

First, let us ask, will a fall in Profit increase the
amount of Consumption ? Let us assume, for purposes
of convenience, that there is an even fall in all profits.
How will this fact cause increased consumption ? Will
the Capitalist consume more ? A fall in profit means
to him a fall in income, and it is absurd to suppose
that he will be induced to increase his expenditure in
the teeth of a falling income. The knowledge that
he can get a smaller return than before for the same
exertion of thrift will not induce him to put on an
extra carriage and increase his household expenses
when his books show a declining income. Will the
working-classes consume more ? Supporters of Mr.
Mill's wage-fund theory would, no doubt, reply in
the affirmative ; each fall in profit means to them a
rise in wages, and they might reasonably urge that
the working-classes would spend their increased
income in raising their standard of living ; that is, in
increasing the aggregate of Consumption. But the


over-production and economic checks. 131

fallacy of the wages-fund has been already sufficiently
exposed. There is no ground for assuming that a fall
in profit implies a rise in wages ; on the contrary, it
has been seen that a fall in profit caused by the
existence of excessive capital is only one aspect of a
larger phenomenon. It was seen that Under-consump-
tion, acting through the agency of Over-supply, reduced
not the income of one class of producers, but the
fund from which all incomes were paid at each point
in the line of production ; that is to say, the aggre-
gate income of the community was reduced. We
cannot suppose that when the average rate of in-
comes is falling, individuals will be induced to increase
their rate of consumption by the fact that the premium
upon thrift is correspondingly diminished.

Since a fall in profit cannot reasonably be expected
to operate by increasing consumption, we are
obliged to look for its effect in diminishing produc-
tion. It is so far from being our intention to deny
that a fall of profit, due to Over-Supply, will check
production, that the admission of the operation of |
this check forms the very centre of our argument.
We shall show in the succeeding chapters how this
check upon production does not imply a diminution
in the use of the forms of capital and labour, but
a wasteful use of these same forms due to a
derangement of the proper economic relations
between the amounts of capital and labour, function-
ing at different points in the industrial machine. In
the diminished production which is here adduced, as
the result of this economic check of a fall of profit,
we shall see the most pernicious form of the disease
called Depression in Trade.


132 OVER-PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC CHECKS.

To sum up the results arrived at in this chapter,
we have seen that though the community can have
no interest in creating a condition of general Over-
supply or Under-consumption, the result may be
brought about by the conflicting interests of individuals,
because, though there is a strict limit to the amount
of saving which a community may do in a given state
of general demand, there is no such limit to the
saving power of the individual. We have exa-
mined the two economic checks which are alleged
to be efficient preventives of any evil results which
might arise from an excessive rate of production. It
has been seen that an actual condition of Over-pro-
duction must exist before either of these economic
forces can be set in operation. The first force, that
of a general fall of prices, we have proved can have
no power to restore a right relation between produc-
tion and consumption. The second force, that of
falling profit, is seen to operate by acting as a check
upon production, and can only act by thus lowering
the source of all incomes. The fall of average income
thus brought about has been already identified with
the phenomena called Depression of Trade. It is,
therefore, clear that the self-acting checks on which
Political Economy has hitherto relied to prevent any
evil results which might arise from an increase of
production without a corresponding increase of con-
sumption, are unable to achieve this end. The one
check, that of falling prices, is entirely inoperative ;
the other, that of falling profit, is the immediate
cause of the very malady which it is supposed to
prevent.


EXPANSION AND CONrUACTION OF TRADE, 133


CHAPTER V.


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF
TRADE.

In economics, where we are shut off from the possi-
bility of strictly scientific experiment, there are only
two ways of appealing to experience in attestation of
the validity of an argument. We may appeal to
statistics, and by careful collection, selection, and
application support and illustrate the truth we wish to
impress ; but the path of statistical inquiry is a
slippery one, and we are frequently confronted with
the fact of two equally competent authorities with
the same figures at their disposal arriving at totally
different conclusions. The other way is to take an
extreme case, where the force or phenomenon whose
operation we are investigating assumes a quite
abnormal importance. History, even the history of
trade, sometimes affords us a striking example which
serves to bring out in dramatic proportion the true
bearings of a case, and, carefully treated, throws
clearer light upon the subject than the largest and
most reliable array of statistical facts.

In the previous chapters we have shown how an


134 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

increase or a decrease in consumption acted respec-
tively as a stimulus or a check to Production, and
we related the phenomenon of Depression in Trade
to the phenomenon of Under-Consumption as
manifested in the attempt of the community to save
a larger proportion of its income than was required to
furnish the capital necessary to maintain the desired
rate of production. It is now our object to illustrate
from the period of the Franco-German war the opera-
tion of a sudden large increase in consumption followed
-by a sudden return to a normal condition of consump-
tion.

From an economic point of view the Franco-
German war may be regarded as a sudden and enor-
mous increase of consumption or quantity of com-
modities demanded combined with a sudden and
enormous withdrawal of the Requisites of Production
from use. Not merely were the belligerent states
purchasers of large quantities of all kinds of produce,
such as food, clothing, vehicles, guns, ammimition,
and all the apparatus of war, but the mills, machinery,
and other plant in these states were compelled to
stand wholly or partially idle by reason of the ab-
straction of the labourers to serve as soldiers.

Now, the first effect of this enormous new Demand
of the belligerent Governments which we have to
note, has relation to Saving. It has been shown that
Saving is only effective in proportion as there is a
present demand for the use of the wealth which is
saved. To save is to create a hen or claim upon
future production, and one method of effecting this
purpose is by giving up existing commodities to others
to consume in the present, subject to the condition


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 135

that these ' others ' shall at any desired future time
return to the lender an equivalent of newly-created
wealth. The more, therefore, that others, able to
give effective liens on the future, are willing to
consume in the present, the more the liens that
can be established on the future, that is, the more
saving. When a thrifty saving folk can find a
responsible Government ready to accept enormous
quantities of beef, butter, shoes, coats, &c., and
to promise to provide the owners of them with
dinners, clothing, &c., through all future time, they
are willing to provide these commodities. The
method by which this Saving is effected is briefly
this : The thrifty saving folk habitually pay the
money they save into the banks ; these banks, either
directly or through other bankers, hand over this
money to the belligerent powers in the shape of a
loan ; the latter immediately pass on the money to
traders and received commodities in return. The
commodities thus received represent the 'Saving*
which was able to be effected because of the increased
demand for commodities exerted by the belligerent
Governments. The commodities which had been
paid in to the community's ' Stock ' against the ' pur-
chasing power ' paid to the saving folk were received
by the belUgerent powers, and the liens or debts
created by these powers were received by the saving
folk. Under these circumstances no Over-Supply
could possibly accumulate. Some individual or other
possesses the power to purchase every commodity
that is offered for sale ; if he does not wish to use that
power he will wish to save and accumulate it ; in
this case he hands it over in a money shape to the


136 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

banks which are furnishing purchasing power to the
belligerent states; these states exercise all the pur-
chasing power they can get hold of as a demand for
commodities. Thus, no over-supply could possibly
exist, for whether individual producers wished to
consume or to save, the commodities were equally
demanded for consumption. Since the demand for
commodities must always suffice to induce their re-
placement by new products, and since there is no
limit to the quantity demanded, there is likewise no
limit to the amount of production other than the limit
imposed by the Requisites of Production themselves.
No matter how much was produced, no fall in price
could occur, for the quantity demanded was of neces-
sity always the utmost that could be suppUed.

It is next important to note the results of this
rise in quantity demanded and the stimulus it gave
to production, upon the gain of those engaged in
productive work.

How does this desire on the part of consumers to
consume as much as can possibly be produced affect
profits ? In answering this question we have to use
for the first time the broad distinction between the
two classes of producers, the makers (producers in
the narrow loose sense) and the traders. What pro-
portion of the total value of the commodity will fall
to the maker, and what to the trader in the case of
this enlarged demand ? It is clear that everything the
maker can make he can find a trader to buy at the
current price, and everything that a trader holds he
can find a consumer to buy at the current price. It
might, therefore, appear at first sight that neither
maker nor trader possessed any advantage over the


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE 137

other. But is this so ? The maker can sell all he
makes, the amount each particular maker sells is only-
limited by the absolute limits of his power to shape
material ; he is in no wise affected by the competition
of other makers, who can all likewise sell everything
they can make. But with the trader it is different ; he,
too, can sell all that he can get hold of, but the
amount he can get hold of is not absolutely limited
save by the total amount which is produced ; each
trader is able to dispose of as large a proportion
of this total as he can get into his own hands ;
but this amount is limited by the desire of every
other trader to do the same. Thus, while the
maker in effecting sales is not hampered by the
competition of other makers, the trader is hampered
by the continual competition of other traders seeking
to sell as large a share as possible of the increased
production to consumers. Traders will thus outbid
one another in purchasing from makers, raising their
offers to the point which leaves to them the barest
margin of profit for which they are willing to continue
their work. Paying higher prices to makers, it might
appear that they would be able to recoup themselves,
by raising the prices to consumers. But if they
succeed in raising the prices to consumers they will
still be unable to keep a larger profit for themselves,
for the competition by which each will seek to effect
as many sales as possible will oblige them to offer
increased prices to makers, who wculd thus reap the
whole advantage of the rise. It is this power of
makers to secure for themselves the whole value of
the commodity, minus the least fraction for which
traders are willing to conduct their trade, at all


138 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

times when the quantity of commodities demanded
is the utmost that can be supplied, that accounts for
the rise of wholesale prices and of makers' profits
which occurred in the years 1871, 1872, 1873. The
traders wished to buy more goods than makers could
supply, and the only limit to the inter-competition of
traders was their refusal to give makers more than
the price they would receive from consumers. The
maker could, in effect, say, ' The retail price of this
commodity is so much ; I will allow you a bare
minimum of profit and no more ; if you are not con-
tent with that, your neighbour will be.' The trader
had no alternative, he must content himself with this
minimum of profit, or receive nothing. Makers, under
these circumstances, received within a fraction of the
whole value produced, that is to say, the money they
received would when exchanged by them for ' sub-
sistence conveniences and amusement' buy back the
full equivalent of the commodities produced, minus
the traders' least profit. Under these circumstances
all available capital and labour engaged itself in
making, all traders who were able became makers, or
added a ' making ' department to their trading house.
The number of traders tended to fall to the minimum
required for the work of effectively distributing goods,
and the productive powers of the community were
taxed to the utmost. Never was there a period of such
marked activity in production, initiated by the vast
increase in expenditure of the belligerent powers.
This extreme activity was plainly visible in every
commercial country which had direct or indirect trade
relations with France or Germany. For example, it
is indisputable that the immense prosperity enjoyed


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE, 139

by English producers during the Franco-German war,
and for some time afterwards, must be attributed
directly to the prodigious waste of wealth which that
war occasioned. The full extent of what was meant
by the demand for commodities involved in this un-
productive expenditure of war should be clearly
realised. This increased demand for commodities
was not merely a demand that a larger amount
of raw material should be turned into food, guns,
saddles, clothes, &c., for consumption ; it was also
a demand which was effective in calling into ex-
istence new and immense quantities of machinery
and plant required to assist in the work of in-
creased production of commodities. This latter
fact has an important special significance, for it
serves to explain how it was that the wonderful
activity in trade did not collapse as soon as the
abnormal demand for commodities was remitted,
that is at the close of the war. A larg^ part of
the saving stimulated by the increased war demand
found a natural investment in the construction of
machinery and plant to assist production and in
other machinery and plant to assist the production
of the first machinery, and so forth. The enormous
quantity of new plant which stood in France and
other European countries at the close of 1873 repre-
sented actual savings that had been effected during
the years immediately subsequent to this great war.
The huge war debt incurred by France, and paid in
the next few years, extended her war expenditure
considerably beyond the actual period of the war,
and provided a combined use for the saving and the
mass of forms of capital in which it had been stored.


'\


140 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

But even when the abnormal consumption engen-
dered by the war declined, the full effects were not
felt at once, or suddenly. Even after the Govern-
ment had ceased to demand war supplies, and to
create debts which furnished investments for the
savings of the thrifty, and provided work for the
enormous increase of plant, the full-blown phe-
nomenon of Over-Supply was not visible at once.
The plant and machinerj^ in process of construc-
tion was advanced step by step towards comple-
tion, although its use was no longer wanted, for
speculators had not realised the glut they were
creating. The impetus of saving still continued ;
when no investments of the old order were fea-
sible, there sprang up a series of bubble companies
which offered bogus investments and swallowed
up and consumed the savings of the unwary just
as effectually as had the war expenditure, save
that the paper they left in the hands of investors
was waste-paper instead of representing sound liens
upon, future production. An examination of a few of
the prospectuses of the companies actually floated
in 1872 and 1873 justifies the assumption that at a
period when such concerns could find promoters and
investors, there can have been no opening for invest-
ment in any sort of Plant or Stock required to supply
the current consumption.

We have now passed through an industrial phase,
in which an abnormal consumption aroused the full
productive powers of the community, provided the
fullest employment for all capital and labour, and
stimulated the creation of wealth to the utmost
extent. We proceed to examine the further phase,


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 141

when this extraordinary consumption had ceased, and
the amount of capital, the rate of production, and the
rate of saving were all in excess of what was econo-
mically required to supply the amount of commodities
the community^ was content to consume. In order
to clearly understand what happened, it is best to
look first at the money aspect of the case. For
although, if we consider the community as a whole,
natural agents, capital and labour, are the requi-
sites of production, if we consider the individual,
money is the only requisite. With money he can
procure the use of plant and labour, and can pro-
duce what commodity he likes ; without money he
can do nothing. Now, look at the period of the
Franco-German war and the years following from
the point of view of the capitalist manufacturer. So
long as the demand for commodities continued,
money had been constantly and rapidly returned to
capitalist makers in the ordinary process of trade.
The portion of the income (money) of the com-
munity spent by each member in the purchase of
'utilities and conveniences' was returned into the
hands of ' makers ' as a demand for the replacement
of retailing stock, the portion of the income that was
' saved ' passed into the makers' hands by the inter-
vention of the lien-creating government as payment
for the materials of war or other commodities whose
consumption increased the aggregate of the quantity
demanded, and when these demands had ceased,

* We have used the term community because the industrial com-
munity of the world is one, and the effects here described were felt
in a more or less degree by all European countries and the United
States.


142 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE,

it still reached capitalist makers' hands as demand for
the new forms of capital, i.e., machinery, ships,
railways, &c., which, owing to the abnormal war
demand, had appeared to be necessary. Thus all
the money distributed by capitalist makers as De-
mand for the Use of Requisites of Production
{Le.y wages, rent, profits) was constantly returned to
them as demand for more goods. This lasted so long
as the extra consumption strained to the utmost the
productive powers of the community. But when the
relaxed consumption began to exhibit a glut of the
different forms of capital, and saving individuals
began to refuse to invest their savings directly in
any scheme that could be suggested, but preferred
to retain the savings in their own hands, the capi-
talist maker no longer received sufficient money to
continue their demand for the use of the requisites
of production at the old rate. Individuals no longer
embarked their savings on their own account in the
work of aiding production, but paid them in to
banks. At first no very obvious change ensued.
Though capitalist makers no longer received the
money in the ordinary course of trade, they could
obtain what they wanted fi-om bankers. Thus for
some httle time, so long as they could offer to the
banks what seemed fair security for repayment, they
could obtain the money requisite to maintain the
current rate of production. But when, owing to the
reduction in quantity demanded, they were unable
to maintain their previous rate of sales, their stock
of goods accumulated in the warehouses constantly
grew, while at the same time their liabilities to the
banks grew correspondingly. Sooner or later a crisis


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE, 143

was inevitable. The moment bankers refused to con-
tinue increasing their loans to capitalist makers and
speculators, and, on the contrary, pressed for repay-
ment of their advances, the holders of this surplus
stock of goods were forced to sell at any price they /
could get in order to escape or postpone bankruptcy. M
Traders, finding that any price they chose to offer
was accepted, rapidly lowered their offers. The fall
in wholesale prices thus begim continued until the
profit of makers fell so low that a sufficient number
refused to continue making, and by ceasing to make
restored the equation between production and con-
sumption. This process of economic adjustment
between the rate of Production and Consumption is,
of course, extremely slow, and while it is going on
all those phenomena which indicate Depression in
Trade are exceptionally visible.

First, we have to note a complete reversal of the
previous apportionment of profits. We saw that
while the special demand occasioned by the war
operated, the productive work of makers was re-
warded by the whole of the commodities produced,
with the exception of that minimum which sufficed
to induce traders to continue their work of distribu-
tion. Now that demand is relaxed, and more is
being produced than is required to supply the cur-
rent rate of consumption, the case is very different.
Formerly every maker could sell all he made, and
no competition of his fellow-makers brought down
his prices. Now makers wish to sell more than
traders are willing to buy ; every trader can easily
buy as much as he wants at current prices, while
every trader is competing with his fellows to sell as


144 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE,

many of his goods as possible. The hmit is no
longer the rate of possible production, but the rate
of consumption. This gives to the traders an ad-
vantage precisely equivalent to that which makers
formerly possessed. Wholesale prices fall until they
barely cover the cost of production, reducing the
profits of makers to the minimum for which they
will consent to continue producing, or, more strictly
speaking, the former rate of profit is turned into such
a rate of loss as will gradually operate in driving
a sufficient number of makers from the work of
making. Just as the maker was formerly able to
reduce the trader's profit to a minimum, so now the
trader is able to say to the maker : ' I will pay you
for your goods the bare cost of production ; if you
do not care to take it, I can find other makers who
will.' The maker has no alternative, for he has got
goods which he does not want, and their price,
money, is essential to enable him to meet his current
expenses. If he does not accept the trader's offer
he knows that other makers, still more in need of
money, will do so.

Thus it appears that one speedy result of such a
decline of wholesale prices as results from a relaxed
demand is the elevation of traders' profits. It is
true that a fall in retail prices will eventually follow
the fall in wholesale prices, but it will subsequently
be shown that this operation is a slow one. Mean-
while we have a period in which traders reap
immense profits. It is well known that in the period
from 1873 onward, while makers were being ruined
on all sides, merchants and retail tradesmen were
making large fortunes.


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 145

It has already been proved that the whole value of
the commodity produced is returned in the form of
profit, wages, and rent, to those who have assisted in
producing it. Taking the largest division of pro-
ducers, makers and traders, we are now able to lay
down the following law with regard to the portion of
the commodity which falls to the two classes respec-
tively : — ' When the rate of consumption gives full
employment to the existing requisites of production,
the makers get the whole value of the commodity,
less the minimum for which traders will consent to
continue trade. When the rate of consumption fails
to give full employment to the existing requisites of
production, the traders get the whole value of the
commodity, less the minimum for which makers will
consent to continue making.' This conclusion must
be borne in mind when the fuller investigation of the
effects of an industrial crisis on the various classes of
producers is opened.

The rise in traders' profits and the fall in makers'
profits will naturally result in a gradual withdrawal
of capital and labour from making and its applica-
tion to trading. Much capital and labour cannot
be so withdrawn, but new savings seeking an invest-
ment and fresh labour entering the market will
employ itself in the more profitable form of trading,
and as much of the old capital and labour as can be
withdrawn will be applied to trading. Now, in con-
nection with this increase in the number of traders,
there are two important points to notice.

First. It might appear as if the increased com-
petition thus introduced among retailers ought to
operate in rapidly reducing the retail prices to cor-

E 2


145 EXPAXSIOX AND COXTRACTIOX OF TRADE.

respond with the reduction of wholesale prices. But
the fact that retail prices do not, in fauct, seem to
respond to variations in wholesale prices has been
noticed by Mill, who also incidentally assigns the
true cause. '* Retail price, the price paid by the
actual consumer, seems to feel xery slowly and
imperfectly the eflfects of competition, and when
competition does exist, it often, instead of lowering
the prices, merely divides the gains of the high price
among a greater number of sellers. Hence it is
that of the price paid by the consumer so large a
proportion is absorbed by the gains of retailers, and
anyone who inquires into the amount which reaches
the hands of those who made the things he buys
will often be astonished at its smallness.*' (Mill, II.,
Ch. IV., s. 3.)

As soon as the retailing ranks are swelled by
deserters from manufacture, and by the addition of
new-bom labour, instead of a large and rapid reduc-
tion in retail prices, the old prices are for the most
part maintained, each trader doing, on the average,
a smaller business than before. It is not here main-
tained that no fall in retail prices eventually occtu^,
but only that the fall is slow in operating, and when
it does come does not correspond in extent to the
fall in wholesale prices. The same cause which fre-
quently induces fishmongers and fruiterers to destroy
a portion of their stock in preference to selling it at
reduced prices operates in regard to the whole of
retail trade. Traders will prefer to do a smaller
business, gaining a higher profit on each sale, than
by successftil competition with their fellows to do a
larger business, with lower profits on each sale. But


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 147

these reasons, while they may serve to explain why
the fall of retail prices is slow to follow the fall in
wholesale prices, do not furnish a sufficient expla-
nation of the fact that retail prices do not eventually
fall in a corresponding degree with wholesale prices.

That wholesale prices fluctuate much more suddenly
and violently than retail prices is a well-recognised
industrial fact. Moreover, not only are those fluctu-
ations more rapid, but they represent a much larger
divergence from average prices.

The reasons for this comparative want of flexibility
in retail prices reside in the detailed conditions of
retail trade. If the average consumer had as intimate
a knowledge of all the details affecting the prices of
every kind of commodity he buys, as the trader has of
the special goods he buys from makers ; if he were
as keen in ascertaining and taking full advantage of
the slightest fall of price ; if he were absolutely inde-
pendent of locality ; and, most important of all, if
he were able to fully seize the opportunity of a fall
in prices to lay in a large stock of commodities, we
might have the same rapid and large fluctuations in
retail prices as in wholesale. But competition among
retailers is, in a large measure, confined by locality,
and even in that locality a slight rise or fall of any
tradesman's prices will but slightly affect the bulk of
his trade, because his customers do not compare
prices, even inside the limited radius, as carefully as
tradesmen do the prices of makers. But while the
consumer suffers from ignorance of prices, he suffers
still more from incapacity to recognise differences of
quality in goods. While he gives some attention,
at least, to rises and falls of price, as a rule he


148 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

is extremely slow to recognise the most marked
changes in quality. If a tradesman, instead of
raising his prices, substitutes inferior articles for what
he sold formeriy, he can raise his profits without
^ running much risk of losing his custom. In short,
the trader is a specialist with regard to the prices and
qualities of the things he buys from makers; the
consumer, who buys not one but every kind of thing
from traders, is not a specialist, and suffers accord-
ingly. The tradesman knows that if he lowered his
prices to the frill extent which a fall in wholesale
prices would justify him in doing, he would not
thereby be enabled to get hold of all the trade of his
neighbours as would be the case in an ideal state of
competition. He recognises, on the contrary, that
such a fall of prices would not bring an increase
in custom sufficient to increase the profits of his
business. Hence, the tradesman never lowers his
price more than the comparatively slight competition
of surrounding tradesmen obliges him to do. When
a fall in wholesale prices has thus raised the profits
of retail trade, is the tradesman able to retain his
superior position ? No ; the higher gains of retail
trade, as has been said, attract fresh capital and labour
into that branch of production. A retail business
can be started more quickly, with less capital, and
with less knowledge, as a rule, than a wholesale or
manufacturing business. Hence it arises that while
existing makers reap the full advantage of a rise of
profits so long as quantity demanded equals the
utmost that can be supplied, any rise of retail profits
is quickly checked by a rapid increase of that
limited form of competition which acts upon retailers.


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 149

This rapid and easy increase of retailers operates in
this way : the newcomers establishing themselves in
convenient localities, not too close to their compe-
titors, take the current prices and try to make a cus-
tom for themselves out of the customers of their
neighbours, not trusting so much to the inducement
of lower prices as to other attractions and conve-
niences of neighbourhood, affabihty, shop front, adver-
tisements, &c. Hence it arises that, instead of
lowering retail prices, the competition engendered by
high retail gains ' merely divides the gains of the
high price among a greater number of sellers/

That the retail vendor of commodities has gene-
rally a distinct advantage in knowledge over his
customers, and that the ordinary process of barter
and competition cannot be relied upon to determine
prices, is generally acknowledged. It is, indeed, this
truth which furnishes the reasonable basis of much
modem legislation. Even the strictest of the ortho-
dox economists would hesitate to pose as an advocate
of unrestricted competition in cab fares.

It is at once recognised that the purchaser is,
owing to the smallness of the purchase, to lack of
time, and to ignorance of important details, quite
unable to hold his own with the seller, and the State
steps in and protects him by special regulations.
Similarly, it has been found that purchasers, even
when poor, and with every inducement to see that
they get 'their money's worth,' are not merely
unable to judge of quality, but even of so simple a
matter as quantity ; and the law has, in order to pre-
vent grave abuses of the power which the retailer
possesses, to order that retailers of coal, bread, &c.


150 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

should sell by weight, and appoints inspectors to see
that this is actually done, and enforces penalties
against those who fail to observe the regulations.
Against fraudulent descriptions of goods we have
similariy a list of enactments dealing with such
articles as milk, butter, meat, fish, vegetables, and
the like, the raison d'Hre of these Acts being that the
purchaser is not merely unable to judge whether the
article supplied to him is what it professes to be, but
even whether it is fit for human food. If, how-
ever, it is admitted that the purchaser does not know
what he is buying from the retailer, and cannot in
many cases even determine the quantity that he gets,
it is obvious that the law of competition no longer
applies. The purchaser can only estimate the quality
of goods by the price, and if a retailer lowers his
prices, his customers assume immediately that the
quality is proportionately lower. In small grocers'
shops it is habitual to get two or three qualities of
butter out of a single tub, and the purchasers of the
higher-priced butter never for a moment suspect that
the lower-priced is identical in every respect. The
fact that regulations of the character noticed above
have been passed by a representative Parliament, and
have hardly been resisted even by the most deter-
mined upholders of free competition, points irresistibly
to the conclusion that, in the opinion of the mass of the
community, the purchaser is not on terms of equality
with the retailer, and it necessarily follows that no
free competition can take place. Where, however,
prices are not determined by competition, custom is
usually the determinant. In retail prices, therefore,
custom reigns almost supreme, merely modified by


EXPAySrON AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 151

the slow and partial effects of competition at such
points and to such extent as the purchaser learns
something of the real value of the articles he buys.

The existence of co-operative societies, the fact that
wholesale dealers are also purchasers at retail prices,
and similar causes, slowly and imperceptibly leaven
the great mass of purchasers, and a corresponding
adjustment of retail and wholesale prices tends to be
produced, provided, of course, that no further varia-
tion in wholesale price again upsets the adjustment,
and leaves the slow process to be again repeated.

To the same cause, custom, we may ascribe the
fact that when wholesale prices are rising the retailer
is unable to raise his price to a corresponding degree.
For while the consumer is not induced to change his
grocer or his tailor, from the fact that A. and B.,
another grocer and another tailor, have reduced their
prices, because he is apt to attribute the conduct of
the latter to a lowering in the quality of their goods,
yet if his grocer or his tailor raise their prices while
the prices of A. and B. remain unchanged, he will at
once be apt to consider that his grocer and tailor are
outrageous in their charges, and will forthwith trans-
fer his custom to A. and B. Hence we get the curious
conclusion that if a tradesman lowers his price twenty
per cent, he will not compensate his loss by the
increase of his sales, but if he raises his price twenty
per cent, his gain on each sale will be more than
compensated by a falling-off in sales. The average
consumer living, as he considers, just within his
income, is more affected by a rise of price than by a
fall. A fall of prices will not readily induce him to
raise his standard of living to a corresponding extent ;


i


152 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

a rise of prices, on the other hand, will act as an
almost immediate check. When men who are in
the habit of spending a certain number of pounds
a-year find a sudden considerable rise in general
prices, they are ready and believe themselves com-
pelled to reduce the aggregate of their purchases.^

' The fact that retail prices are Eot wholly competition prices,
and do not flnctoate with every fluctuation in the wholesale market,
has been universally recognised by economists. The foUowing quo-
tations will serve to iUustrate the fact of this recognition. It
should, however, be observed that economists, one and all, have
failed signaUy to recognise the important economic results which
attend this want of correspondence in the movement of wholesale
and retail prices. The critical importance of this will be mani-
fested in the subsequent development of our argument.

"On one side is the merchant, who, by frequent resort to the
wholesale dealer, is kept advised of the conditions of the market.
On the other side is the * customer,* a creature of custom, as the
term implies ; often ignorant, in the widest sense of the word, unin-
telligent, and untrained ; always and necessarily ignorant in the
special sense of being unacquainted with the conditions which
should determine price, not knowing what a commodity ought to
cost, and in the case of many classes of commodities, unable to
judge of the quality of the goods offered ; perhaps at the mercy of
the dealer in the matter of the measure or weight. The merchant,
again, is the possessor of capital, and can wait to dispose of his goods
at the best time. The customer, on the other hand, is generally in
urgent need of commodities for immediate use, and frequently poor,
80 that he must buy in smaU quantities ; perhaps even in debt, so
that he feels under a strong constraint to trade only with his cre-
ditor, who thus holds him at a double disadvantage, for how can he
quarrel, as to quality, measure, or price, with the man whom he is
not able to pay for goods already had and consumed ?" (Mr. F. A.
Walker, * Pol. Ec.,' 3rd ed., pp. 108, 109.)

" The transactions " (retail) " do not take place between dealers
possessing, or with opportunities of acquiring, equal knowledge
respecting the commodities dealt in, but between experts on one
side, and on the other, persons in most cases wholly ignorant of the
circumstances at the time affecting the market. Between persons


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 153

Second. It has been seen that the result of the col-
lapse of wholesale prices which followed the commer-

80 qualified the game of exchange, if the rules be rigorously
enforced, is not a fair one ; and it has consequently been recognised,
universally in England, and very extensively among the better class
of retail dealers in continental countries, as a principle of commer-
cial morality, that the dealer should not demand from his customer
a higher price for his commodity than the lowest he is prepared to
take." (Prof. Cairnes, ' Some Leading Principles Pol. Ec.,* pp. 113,
114.)

'* Retail prices fluctuate less than wholesale prices. The reason of
this is that the retailer can keep his customers if he satisfies them
that on the whole his prices are fair. They do not watch the market
closely ; they do not know whether in each separate charge he has
made proper allowance for the fluctuations of the market. But in
large wholesale transactions the purchaser examines each bargain on
its own merits. In important transactions the higgling and bar-
gaining of the market are a flt occupation for business men ; but in
most retail transactions it is a waste of time and energy to bar-
gain." (Prof. Marshall, 'Economics of Industry,' Book III., Chap.
III., s. 9.)

'• Suppose that the services of any particular class of labourers
receive, on the average, a disproportionately high remuneration as
compared with those of other classes ; there are two ways in which
this excess can be reduced ; either —

" (1) By lowering the price of a given quantity of the utilities
produced by the workers in question ; or

" (2) By increasing the number of persons competing to produce
such utilities, without augmenting their aggregate produce,
owing to the increased difficulty that each has in finding
customers.

" So far as this latter takes place, the effect of competition on
production is positively disadvantageous.

" In actual experience this effect seems to occur most conspicuously
in the case of services of which the purchasers are somewhat deficient
in commercial keenness and activity ; so that each producer thinks
himself likely to gain more, on the whole, by keeping up the price of
his services, rather than by lowering it to attract custom,

" An example of this Mnd is furnished by retail trade, especially
the retail trade of the smaller shops to which the poorer classes
chiefly resort ; since the remarkable success of the co-operative


154 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE,

cial crisis of 1873, due to the cessation of the creation
of new plant and raw material, induced by the ab-
normal war consumption, was a large and rapid in-
crease of the retailing class. When production was
stimulated to the utmost, and when everything that
was produced readily found consumers, the retailing
class was kept down to the narrowest limit sufficient
to distribute what was made. Now that consump-
tion has diminished and more can be produced than
can find a market, makers have become retailers, and
the number of retailers relatively to makers has con-
siderably increased. The point of importance is to
notice the effect which this change has brought about
upon the total of the commodities created, and its
relation to the use of requisites of production stored
in them. When demand was pulling tight the reins
of production, and capital and labour were strained
to the utmost endeavour, each form of capital and
every labourer found a full economic use stored in the
form of wealth which went to satisfy the large
demand. When the decline in demand slackened
the reins of production, a large amount of the capital
and labour engaged at each point in the productive
machinery became superfluous. This superfluity of

stores of artizans implies a considerable waste of shopkeepers' time
and labour under the system previously universal.

" But, again, the importance to each individual of finding pur-
chasers for his commodity also leads to a further waste, socially
speaking, in the expenditure incurred for the sole purpose of attain-
ing this result.

'•A large part of the cost of advertisements, of agents and
* travellers,' of attractive shop-fronts, &c., come under this head."
(Sidgwick, ' Prin. Tol. Ec.,' Book III., Chap. II., pp. 416, 417.)


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 155

the requisites of production was first manifested in
the closure of some mills and factories, in the half-
time or irregular working of others, and in a general
slackening of the activity of those engaged in making.
The same effect was not, however, visible in Retailing.
It is true that as many goods did not pass through
the hands of each retailer as before, when there was
more retailing to be done, while, on the other hand,
the number of retailers was constantly growing by
fresh accessions from the ranks of makers who had
failed, or were attracted by the apparent prosperity
of retailers. Yet all this increased body of retailers
appeared to be busy. The less retailing there was for
each one to do, the keener the competition to do as
much as possible. Where there was one retailer
before to do a given quantity of retailing, there were
now two. The two were just as busy, worked just
as hard as the one formerly, the extra labour being
swallowed up in the work of competing. This was
the era of touting and advertising. There were more
merchants, more agents, more shops, more shopmen
in each shop, all strenuously exerting themselves to
secure the same quantity of trade formerly conducted
by a smaller quantity of labour. So, too, the plant
of every kind engaged in assisting this trade was
greater than before. It is not, indeed, fair to describe
this increase of retailing work as absolutely wasted.
In so far as the extra advertising and touting assists
not to deceive and swindle consumers, but to enable
them to learn more precisely what they want and
where to get it ; in so far as the more numerous shops
and shopmen enable them more quickly and easily to
satisfy these wants, the extra labour must be con-


156 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE,

sidered to perform a service which has distinct value
as a commodity. If there are two attendants in a
shop it is obvious that customers can be more quickly
and efficiently served than if there is only one ; if
there are four the service will be better than if there
were two ; if there were eight, better still, and so on.
But it is equally clear that when a certain limit of num-
ber is reached, each additional hand is of less and less
value, and that as you increase the number you ap-
proach nearer to a point where any additional work
would only have a nominal value . Or, again, if you have
two grocers' shops in a particular street competing
for the surrounding customers, the wants of the neigh-
bourhood will be adequately supplied ; if two more
grocers open shops in the same street, dividing the
custom with the two previous ones, the advantage to
the neighbourhood will be extremely small ; in fact,
it might be said that the capital and labour of two of
the four establishments was wasted. Look at it from
the point of view of labour, for that of capital is less
important. In making an article it is not economically
possible that more than a certain amount of labour
should be used ; in every order for goods that is exe-
cuted the manufacturer takes care that the minimum
of labour shall be employed. But when articles are
turned out of the factory they are not fully produced
commodities ; the productive work of making has to
be supplemented by the productive work of trading.
Now, it appears that while there is a limit to the
amount of labour expended in making a certain
quantity of goods, there is no such limit to the labour
expended in advancing these goods to the position of
commodities, and placing them in a finished state in


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE, 157

the hands of consumers. Now, let us compare the
average productiveness of labour when a high rate of
consumption stimulates making and keeps the number
of retailers at a minimum, with the condition brought
about when a relaxed demand has increased the
number of retailers at the expense of makers. In the
former condition each commodity placed in the hands
of a consumer had packed into it the smallest quantity
of Uses of Requisites of Production that was possible,
the productive energy of the community was taxed
to the utmost, and the most rigid economy of labour
was practised. But in the other case it is quite dif-
ferent. Each commodity had the same amount of
making energy packed into it, but the amount of
retailing work contained in it and paid for in the
price was much greater than before. Looking at it
from the point of view of the worker, it may be
said that, assuming the retailing class to be already
adequate to distribute with fair regularity and speed
the goods that are made, every worker who is
driven out of the making business into the retailing
business is driven from a more productive to a less ty
productive Use of his labour. What holds of labour y
holds to a less extent of capital and natural agents.
The comparatively useless stores and shops, &c.,
represent a comparative waste of capital and land.
Thus, it may be concluded that when a high rate of
consumption keeps tense the productive energies of the
nation, there is packed in each commodity the mini-
mum of Use of each of the Requisites of Production,
and that when the rate of production tends to exceed
the rate of consumption, there is the maximum of use
of each of these Requisites of Production in each


1


158 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE.

commodity. But it has been admitted that each
commodity ultimately furnishes the payment for the
use of the Requisites of Production it contains ; that
is to say, that out of each commodity is paid the
wages, profits, rent of all those who have assisted in
producing it. It follows that where each commodity
contains a large amount of the Uses of Requisites of
Production, the scale of payment is proportionately
small. Labour, capital, land, are more valuable and
get larger return for their use when the smallest
amount of that use suffices to assist the production
of a commodity. In other terms, the same amount
of labour, capital, land, produces a greater quantity
of commodities when the rate of consumption is on
a level with the greatest possible rate of produc-
tion, a smaller quantity of commodities when the
rate of consumption is below that of possible pro-
duction. In short, wages, profits, rent are high when
consumption is high relatively to what could be pro-
duced, low when consumption is low relatively to
what could be produced. Whether the several Requi-
sites of Production gain equally by a rise in con-
sumption relative to production ; or if not, what laws
regulate the difference in their respective gains, are
questions which receive a separate investigation in
the next chapter.

By using as an illustration an abnormal period of
industrial history we have endeavoured to show how
a large increase in quantity demanded or consumption
operated in providing a full use for all the superfluous
capital which tended to congest the industrial body, in
stimulating to the utmost the productive powers of the
community, calling forth increased creation of wealth


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE, 159

and providing a use for it, and paying the highest
prices in the form of wages, profits, rent to the owners
of Requisites of Production. We have also shown
how, when the demand collapsed, and the rate of
consumption relatively to production fell, a commer-
cial crisis followed, causing a great dislocation of
trade, forms of capital being wasted, and labour
thrown out of employment ; that afterwards there
was a gradual drifting of labour into retaihng, which
swelled abnormally the number of traders, issuing in
a condition of depressed trade, wherein a smaller
quantity of commodities came to be divided as pay-
ment of wages, profits, rents, making a general fall
of income in the community.

To make the importance of this argument clearer
let us assume that in a healthy state of commerce
9-ioths of an article go to the makers and i-ioth to
the retailer ; we assume that the price is ten shillings,
then the makers receive nine shiUings and the retailers
one shilling. Now if, owing to over-supply, the whole-
sale price falls to eight shillings, it is obvious that
makers will only receive eight shillings and the retailers
will receive two shillings ; under these circumstances
the makers only get 8-ioths of the ultimate product
instead of 9-ioths as formerly. Since makers derive
their money income exclusively from making, it is
obvious that this fall in wholesale prices reduces the
value to them of the articles they make by i-pth ;
that is to say, if they turn out x goods, receiving in
exchange y commodities, they will now receive only

8 V

—=2- commodities in exchange for the old total of

goods (x).


160 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE,

The same argument holds good if we assume that
though retail prices fall, they do not fall to the same
extent as wholesale ; thus, if we assume a fall of 33 J
per cent, in wholesale prices (less than the fall that
has actually taken place between* 1873 and to-day),
whilst retail prices have only fallen ten per cent.,
then the ten-shilling article will be retailed at nine
shillings ; but as the wholesale price of this article has
fallen from nine shillings to six shillings (33 J per cent.),
the maker will only receive 6-9ths of the ultimate
product instead of 9-ioths as formerly. The fall in
wholesale prices relatively to retail is evidently the
difference in the rates of fall (the difference between
33 j per cent, and ten per cent. = 23 J per cent.). We
may, therefore, for the purposes of this argument,
assume that retail prices are unchanged, and that
wholesale prices have fallen 23 J per cent.

Now, if we assume that the Requisites of Produc-
tion are distributed between making and retailing, in
accordance with the reward derived from the two
classes of trade, it follows that in the healthy condi-
tion of commerce 9-ioths of these requisites are
applied to making and i-ioth to retailing ; in the
abnormal or unhealthy state, 6-9ths making and
3-9ths retailing. Now, if we assumed capital to be
equally distributed amongst the individual members
of the community, we can see (assuming each maker
to make one article a day) that in a healthy state of
commerce each individual would receive 9-ioths of
an article daily, or, to get rid of fractions, every
thirty individuals would receive twenty-seven arti-
cles. In the unhealthy state each individual would
receive 6-9ths of an article, or every thirty individuals


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE. 161

would receive twenty articles daily. Applying these
figures to England, and assuming that there is no
variation in prices and that the annual income is
£. 1,000,000,000, in a healthy condition of commerce
the annual income would be £. 1,350,000,000. Since,
for reasons subsequently to be examined, the major
part of this difference would be added to labourers'
wages, and since such wages are estimated to amount
to only ;f. 300,000,000 annually, the great import-
ance of variations in wholesale prices relatively to
retail to the working classes is sufficiently obvious.
We do not argue that the fall in wholesale prices
that has admittedly occurred does in actual fact
mean a fall in wholesale prices relatively to retail of
23 J per cent. ; it may mean more or it may mean
less, but we do insist on the enormous importance of
such variations, and on the fact, that would not, we
apprehend, be denied, that wholesale prices are lower
relatively to retail to-day than they were in 1873,
and that to this extent the working classes must be
injured by the fall.

It will be noticed that the increased total produced
in a healthy commercial state over that produced in
an unhealthy one does not involve the existence of
more labourers or more capital, but merely that the
old total is more effectively employed.

In concluding this chapter we wish to guard
against any misconception of that portion of our
argument which has assigned the Franco-German
War as a cause of commercial prosperity. War is
not necessarily 'good for trade' ; in a healthy com-
mercial condition of society, where the productive
energies are vigorously engaged in keeping pace

F


162 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE,

with a constantly growing consumption, war can be
nothing else than an unmitigated evil. Only where and
when there is a tendency towards an undue multipli-
cation of forms of capital through an excessive desire
to save, does War perform a real service to com-
merce by giving a temporary use to the otherwise
useless and excessive forms of capital. By dwelling
on this contingent advantage we claim to have
offered a more satisfactory explanation than has
hitherto been given of the extraordinary rapidity with
which national commerce appears to recover from the
terrible losses inflicted by long and disastrous wars.
We are far from advocating war as a convenient
remedy for commercial depression, but just as an
artificial mode of depletion may on occasion be useful
in ridding the physical body of excessive and un-
healthy growths, so the commercial body, swollen
with an undue accumulation of capital, may be
relieved by being thus 'let blood.' Just as men
who live a moderate and healthy life, neither over-
feeding nor over-exerting themselves, and thus main-
taining a true proportion between the production and
consumption of animal flesh and force, are only in-
jured by such violent and artificial modes of depletion,
so a nation which, while exerting its productive
powers to the full, is willing to raise its consumption
continually, so as to keep pace with the increased
rate of production, is in a healthy commercial condi-
tion, and needs no artificial outlet for its productive
energy. If, however, a nation or a commimity will
not consent to consume all it can produce (allowing
for due cautious reservations) in the ordinary ways
of expenditure, the congestion brought about must


EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF TRADE, 163

vent itself in some extraordinary way, or the com-
munity sniFers incessantly from the functional diseases
which such congestion brings.

It is, of course, obvious that if the community, in-
stead of expending its surplus accumulations in the
endeavoiu" to cut its memlDers' throats, consented to
increase its consumption of luxuries, or appUed the
surplus funds to the improvement of the condition of
the working classes or the sanitation of its great
towns, all the contingent economic advantages of a
war would be reaped, and the direct advantage of in-
creased consumption of luxuries, of an improved con-
dition of labourers, or of sanitary towns would be
obtained.


164 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.


CHAPTER VI.


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

In the emphasis laid by most economists upon the
fundamental antagonism between the interests of
Labour, Capital, and Natural Agents, one most im-
portant factor in the problem has been slighted or
altogether overlooked. In so far as the prime object
of an income is to provide utilities and conveniences
to its recipient, it is clear that the income of the
community must vary with the amount of these
utilities or conveniences that are produced ; that is
to say, must vary with the total of Commodities. If
a full and economical use of the Requisites of Pro-
duction enlarges the aggregate of production, as was
the case in the period of the Franco-German War,
the income of the Community rises ; if a more waste-
ful use of these Requisites of Production diminishes
the aggregate of production, as in the years of Depres-
sion subsequent to 1873, the income of the Com-
munity falls. It would seem naturally to follow that,
inasmuch as Labour, Capital, and Natural Agents co-
operate in the production of Commodities, they would


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE. 165

share the gain or loss ensuant on the rise or fall of that
fund out of which is paid the income each of them
receives ; that is to say, the total of Commodities
produced forms a single wages-profits-rent fund, and
it would be reasonable to think that all those who
were paid for work done in common out of this com-
mon fund would gain by every rise and lose by every
fall in the amount of this fund. This identity of
interests has been affirmed by economic experience
as often as it has been denied by economic theory.
Those who have maintained a clash of interests
traceable to a fundamental law have been continually
brought face to face with commercial facts which give
them the lie. Holding that as profits rise wages fall,
and, vice versa, that as rent rises profits fall, and so
forth, they have been everywhere confironted with
bursts of prosperity and adversity in which the gain
or suffering has been shared by all three, or with
instances of slow and steady advances or declines of
commerce which seemed to affect Labour, Capital,
and Land in the same way and in something like the
same proportion. But here, as elsewhere, the com-
plexity in the working of commercial forces makes it
almost impossible to use experience so as to form
legitimate inductions. In dealing with any larger
economic subject we have not that thorough know-
ledge of conditions, that power of isolating pheno-
mena, or, in general, that large and accurate record
of series of facts, which are indispensable to the
just application of the inductive method. It is for
this reason that the most valuable and, rightly speak-
ing, the most practical work in economics has been
conducted on what logicians term the 'deductive


166 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE,

method/ experience being used to verify or confute
the conclusions derived from the appUcation of large
and universally recognised premisses.

Applying this method to our present subject of
inquiry, we have to ask ourselves whether the fact
that Wages, Profits, Rent, the sources of all individual
income, are paid by partition of the total amount of
commodities produced, is a sufficient guarantee that
the interests of the three are identical. If we find
that wages, profit, rent, do all rise with the amount
of Commodities, we have further to ask if all gain
in the same proportion. One question really underiies
these two inquiries. What determines the proportion
of the total Income which falls to Labour, Capital,
Land, respectively ? Now, it has been shown that
Wages, Profits, Rent, are in every case payment for
the Use of a Requisite of Production. Let us take
a single commodity, a pair of boots. We have seen
that when a pair of boots is sold to a consumer the
price of it is divided and given as payment to all
those who assist in replacing it. In so far as the
labourers or capitalists who have assisted to pro-
duce a pair of boots have been paid for their ser-
vices before the particular pair of boots was sold by
the retailer, they will none the less receive their share
of the money paid for this particular pair of boots as
profit or wages for value put into another pair of
boots in the ordinary course of trade, and the actual
amount they will receive for value imparted to the
second pair of boots is determined by the amount of
purchase-money received by the retailer for the first
pair For we have seen that it is the Demand of the
consumer and the money by which he enforces his


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE, 167

demand that determines and provides all the money
incomes of those who in any way assist in producing
the commodity he buys. Although, therefore, as
a fact in commercial history, the money paid to the
shoe-seller may be paid over to labourers at dif-
ferent points as wages for labour put into other
pairs of shoes, it is none the less right to insist
that these labourers receive a portion of the value
of the pair of boots which has been sold by the
retailer.

This division and payment is obscured by the
complex nature of commerce, but it is an economic
fact. Owners of Labour, Capital, and Natural
Agents have all contributed to the production of
this pair of boots by providing the Use of a Requi-
site of Production. In what proportion is the value
of the pair of boots divided amongst them ? It will
be clear that this proportion depends on two con-
ditions : —First, the amount of the Use of the Requisite
of Production which each has contributed ; second, the
market price of the use of such Requisite of Pro-
duction.

First. If a general improvement in bootmaking
machinery rendered every £. loo worth of machinery
able to turn out twice as many boots as before, it
is clear that the amount of use of machinery stored
in each pair of boots would be halt as much as for-
merly. Hence, assuming a full competition, the
share of the value of the pair of shoes which fell to
the Shoe manufacturer would be half what it was
before. So, if by some miracle the efficiency of each
workman were doubled so that he could by the
same effort {Le., by the same amount of use of his


168 THE LA W OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

Requisite of Production) assist in producing twice
the number of boots, the proportion of each pair
which fell to him as wages would be half what it
was before. Conversely, if twice as much of the
use of any Requisite of Production were put in a
commodity, the amount returned in payment for
this use would be doubled. To this fact is due
that large difference between retail and wholesale
prices during periods of depressed trade. When
two persons give their full energies to selling
the same amount of goods which one person
sufficed to sell before, the amount of retail
labour represented in each article sold is twice
what it was before. Thus, each pair of shoes
sold contains twice as much use of retail
labour as before, and consequently a larger pro-
portion of the price paid by the purchaser goes
to retail trade. So, previously, when the sudden
increased Demand of the war stimulated making and
reduced retailing to a minimum, the amount of retail
labour in each commodity was very slight, and the
difference between wholesale and retail price was
very slight. But although, other things being equal,
the amount of Use of each particular Requisite of
Production stored in a commodity determines the
proportion which is paid to the owner of that
Requisite, it must be remembered that it does not
follow that a high rate of payment to the owner of
any Requisite means a high income for him. The
amount of his income depends on the proportion
he gets of each commodity he helps to produce, •
multiplied by the number of those commodities.
When the total number of Commodities is much


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE. 169

diminished, it is possible for the owner of any-
Requisite of Production to get an increased propor-
tion of the value of each commodity, and at the
same time to receive a less aggregate income, because
he is not able to use his Requisite of Production
in assisting the production of as many Commodities
as he did before.

Second. But there is another consideration allied
closely with the preceding, another condition which
operates, along with the one described, to determine
the rate of incomes received as Wages, Profits, Rent.
In paying for the Use of a Requisite of Production,
as in every other payment, we do not always pay
the same price for the same amount. So the amount
of each Requisite of Production stored in a Com-
modity is not the only consideration which regulates
the apportionment of the Commodity among those
who have helped to produce it. The market price
of the Use of a Requisite of Production varies in
accordance with the same law which, acting primarily
on the price of Commodities, regulates the price of
all things which are the subject of purchases —the
Law of Supply and Demand. This Law applies in
this wise : If the Quantity of the Use of Labour or
Capital or Natural Agents demanded would exceed the
Supply at the current price, the price. Wages, Profits, or *
Rent, rises ; if the Supply at the current price would fi
exceed the Quantity demanded, the price falls. Since ■
every increase in Consumption or Quantity of Com-
modities demanded is an increased quantity of the use
of each and all of the Requisites of Production
demanded, it follows that every increase in Con-
sumption should raise the prices of the Use of all


170 THE LA W OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

three Requisites of Production. And this we find
attested beyond all doubt by the facts of commerce.
The increased demand of 1870-73 brought to all
owners of Requisites of Production higher prices as
payment for their use, wages were high, profits were
high, rent was high. And this continued as long as
the abnormal demand lasted. When the depression
set in there followed a corresponding decline of
wages, profits, rent. This decline was, as we have
seen, due to an insufficiency of consumption, or, in
other words, to a refusal of consumers to exert the
full purchasing power that they possessed. The dif-
ference in the rate of incomes of the Community at
the height of prosperity and the lowest depths of
the depression was exactly represented by the dif-
ference in the amount of Commodities produced and
consumed relatively to the quantity that could have
been produced and consumed.

But although in the period of prosperity each
owner of a Requisite of Production got larger pay-
ment because the use of his Requisite of Production
was embodied in a larger quantity of Commodities,
of each of which he received his due share, it by
no means follows that the respective owners of the
three Requisites of Production gained equally by the
increased demand. When an increased Demand for
Commodities calls for a proportionate increase of
Requisites of Production by raising the price for their
use, it does not follow that this price rises at an
- equal rate in all three cases. What makes the difFer-
y ence is the comparative ease or difficulty of increasing
' the Supply of each Requisite of Production respec-
tively. If the increased quantity of Labour or Capital


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE. 171

can be brought into use almost as easily as the
quantity already in use, the price of the use of it will
rise but sHghtly ; if it is more difficult to increase
the quantity of Capital than of Labour the price of -
the use of Capital will rise more quickly. The
comparative difficulty of increasing the quantity of
equally effective Natural Agents has been long re-
cognised as the cause of the rise of rent. When
the increased demand acts as a strain upon the re-
sources of existing Requisites of Production, the com-
parative tenseness of this strain is the measure of the
rise in price of the use of each Requisite of Produc-
tion. In other words, if there is one of the three
Requisites of Production which cannot be reproduced
or increased in quantity as rapidly as the other
two, any increase of Consumption soon makes it-
self felt as a strain upon this Requisite of Produc-
tion exclusively, and since the tenseness of the strain
is the measure of the rise of price, the whole rise of
price will be monopolised by that Requisite of Pro-
duction which comes alone to bear this strain. If
labour and capital are capable of easy and indefinite
increase, while Natural Agents are less expansive,
then the last may be said to form the barrier or limit
to increase in production, and the whole increase in
price of Commodities will be swallowed up in in-
creased rent. This is the assumption on which the
disciples of Henry George base their theory. If
Natural Agents are practically without limit as to
quantity and easy access, and the growth of population
and the increased economy of labour due to the
inventiveness of man makes it easy to get fresh
labour, while Capital cannot be so easily increased,


172 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

it is clear that Capital forms the limiting Requisite
of Production, and that all increase in prices will
eventually fall to Capital in increased Profits. This
is the contention of Lasalle, Karl Marx, and those
who hold the Iron Law of Wages.

Lastly. If Natural Agents and Capital admit of

f easy increase at a more rapid rate than Labour, the

last will form the Limiting Requisite, and swallow up

the rise of prices, that comes from increased demand,

in higher wages.

This view of the relation of the three Requisites is
what may be called the Law of the Limiting Requisite
in Production.

It often happens that a sudden large increase in
Consumption of some manufactured article makes itself
felt almost equally as a strain upon the amount of
Capital and of Labour already engaged in that manu-
facture, or readily available for such emplojonent.
Then the rise of price brought abput by the increased
Demand will cause an equal rise in the rate of wages
and profits. As long as it continues equally diffi-
cult to increase the amount of Capital and of Labour
in the requisite proportion which they economically
bear, so long will the equal strain upon the two requi-
sites be represented by an equal rise in wages and
profits. When this rise is effectual in bringing an
influx of new capital and new labour into the manu-
facture, it will generally be found that one flows in
more freely than the other. Suppose that the
labour is one which required special skill only
to be acquired by an expensive training and years
of practice, it is probable that a rise of profits
would speedily attract as much capital as was required,


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE, 173

while the rise of wages would act much more tardily
in attracting labourers. In that case the strain which
had at first been felt equally by Capital and Labour
would subsequently fall exclusively on labour, and the
latter would reap the whole advantage of any further
rise up to the point when the height of wages would
induce a flow of fresh labour, which was as free as the
flow of capital into the new employment.

It is important to realise how this Law of the
Limiting Requisite acts as a determinant of the rates
of Wages, Profits, Rent. It is probable that when
three Requisites of such a diverse character are essen-
tial to Production, that one or other of them will
always, relatively to the others, be in short supply.
Let us turn to Manufacture, and for the moment, set-
ting aside considerations of rent, confine ourselves to
the relations of Capital and Labour. First assume
that production is limited by Capital, and that more
labour is available than is required to work the various
factories, railways, mines, &c., possessed by the com-
munity. Under these circumstances it is clear that
the reward of the labourer, his wages, will not depend
upon the gross amount of that portion of the stock of
commodities which falls to those engaged in Manu-
facture, but solely upon the competition of those
labourers who are out of employ. All those anxious I
to work cannot be employed because the Capital
essential to their effective labour does not exist ; these
surplus labourers will therefore persistently continue]
to imderbid those employed till wages have fallen to
such a level that the unemployed surplus refuses to
compete further. In all such period, then, wages
will be determined by the alternative means of sub-


174 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

sistence which labourers have at their disposal. If
these alternatives are more desirable, as in the colonies,
where labourers can ' squat ' or settle on unoccupied
land, wash for gold, &c., the minimum of wages
received will be relatively high. If these alternatives
are less desirable, as in the East, where starvation is
frequently the only alternative, the minimum of wages
will be relatively low.' Since wages are, in all such
periods, determined wholly without respect to the
proportion of the total of Commodities which falls to
Makers, and is represented by the wholesale price, it
is evident that in the case of any increase in this pro-
portion such increase will be retained by Capitalists
in a rise of Profits.

If, on the other hand, production is limited by
Labour, Capital existing in excess of the utmost
required to assist the work of existing labourers, a
section of Capitalists (those owning the unemployed or
partially employed forms of Capital) will be unable to
derive a reward, or the full reward, for the use of their
Capital. These owners of surplus Capital will per-
sistently compete for the assistance of labour (by
raising wages) until so nearly the whole reward for
production is paid to the labourers that Capitalists no
longer care whether their Capital is used or not. In
this case the labourers receive the whole of the whole-
sale price excepting the smallest fraction which a
sufficient number of Capitalists will accept in prefer-
ence to receiving nothing. In such a period it is

* It is generally acknowledged that the effect which the workhouse
exerts on wages is very considerable ; it prevents them from being
driven below the point at which labour outside the House is less
desirable than residence within it.


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE. 175

evident that the whole of any increase in the propor-
tion of the total of Commodities which falls to Makers
will be taken by the Labourers in higher wages.
Lastly, suppose Natural Agents, or, for convenience,
say Land, to be the Limiting Requisite. First take
the simplest case of a community, entirely self-con-
tained, occupying a country where all the good land is
under cultivation and well worked. What would be
the effect of a sudden increase in the quantity con-
sumed ? If we suppose there is plenty of labour
and capital, either not fully used or which can be
easily procured, of a quality equal or almost equal to
that in use, the strain will come upon the land. That
land which is already well cultivated will be worked
still more thoroughly with a diminishing return to
each portion of the fresh work applied to it, and
inferior land will be put into cultivation. Until
sufficient land has by these means been obtained to
assist in supplying the increased Demand, the gradual
rise of price occasioned by the strain upon existing
Supply will be entirely swallowed up by the rise of
rent, the payment for the use of the Limiting Requi-
site. Suppose that the quantity of inferior land, some
of which is now brought into cultivation, is practically
without limit, rent will not rise higher than this point,
that is to say, when this inferior land begins to be
called into use Land will cease to be the Limiting
Requisite. Capital or Labour will now lay down the
limit, and if the Demand still grows, any further rise
of price will be swallowed up in higher profits or
higher wages. Or, again, to come more nearly to
existing facts, suppose that unappropriated Natural
Agents, unlimited in quantity and of quality equal to


176 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

those in use but situated in far-distant countries, can
be had for the asking, in case of an increased Demand
Land will continue to be the limiting requisite only up
to the point where the rise of rent is equal to the sum
necessary to induce the cultivation of this incon-
veniently situated land, and to pay for the transport
of the products to the place where they are required.
This is clearly illustrated in the development of
English commerce. So long as our foreign trade was
/ slight, any sudden increase in Demand for Commodi-
/ ties found the Limiting Requisite in Land ; Labour
and Capital were, comparatively speaking, plentiful,
hence the rent of land continually rose. When the
increased com trade with America sprang up, agricul-
tural rent in England was determined by the cost of
producing com in America of equal quality, //w5 the
cost of transportation, //w5 the amount of the duty on
imported com. Now that the com duty has been
abohshed, cost of transport diminished, new and large
tracts of com-growing country opened, the rent of
' English agricultural land has fallen, because it is no
longer the requisite limiting our commercial growth.
Land supplies the Raw Material out of which all
manner of goods (including Agricultural produce) are
formed, and the Machinery that helps to form them ;
so long as it is easier to obtain increased quantities of
this Raw Material than it is to obtain increased
quantities of either Labour or Capital, Land will not
be a Limiting Requisite. The rent of land in or near
towns has risen while agricultural rents have fallen,
for the simple reason that convenience of position is
more important in the one case than the other. The
owner of land in a town has a monopoly, in so much


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE, 111

as he can obtain, in addition to agricultural rent, that
sum which competing tradesmen or other occupants
are willing to pay in order that their factory or house
may be in the centre of a large population, in pre-
ference to building it on land to be obtained outside a
town at the agricultural rate.

If we look more in detail at commercial experience
we shall find that the strain caused by an increase in
consumption does not necessarily disclose at once
the ultimate Limiting Requisite, but that at different
stages of any such period each of the three Re-
quisites may, in turn, form for a time the Limiting
Requisite, may feel the tenseness of the strain,
and may reap the reward of this pressure in an
increased rate of payment. Reverting once more to
the Franco-German War, let us note the order in
which the strain was felt. As soon as Consumption
(including the war waste) tended to exceed the utmost
which Makers could replace, we saw that Makers
received within a fraction of the whole value produced.
But this did not show itself in an immediate and
equivalent rise in the wages, profits, and rent of those
who owned the Requisites of Production.

The first to reap the advantage was the Capitalist ;
profits rose enormously, while wages did not im- '
mediately rise to any considerable extent. Since the )
whole, or nearly the whole, of the enhanced wholesale/
price was retained by the Capitalist in a higher rate I
of profits, we may safely conclude that Capital at first(
formed the Limiting Requisite, and that there was in/
existence an unemployed surplus of labour which
could be obtained for the same, or nearly the same,
price as that received by labourers already in employ-

F 2


178 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

ment. It must be remembered that in tracing the
commercial effects of the Franco-German War we are
not looking so much at the belligerent countries them-
selves, as at the effects produced in England and other
non-belligerent portions of the trading community.
Capital figured as the one limiting requisite at the
beginning of the increase in quantity demanded. So
soon, however, as the labour demanded to construct
fresh Plant, together with that demanded to work the
fresh Plant, had absorbed the unemployed surplus of
labourers, and all existing labour power obtained the
fullest use. Capital no longer figured as the Limiting
Requisite. Labour found itself in that position, and
] wages began to rise rapidly, moving towards that
( point when labourers would receive in wages the
I whole of the ultimate produce, less a minimum com-
' mission to retailers, and the minimum profit which
Capitalists would consent to receive in preference to
allowing their capital to stand idle. Before that
point was reached, however, the decrease in quantity
demanded, and consequent panic of 1873, brought
about a collapse in prices the effects of which have
already been noticed. If the war-rate of Consumption
had continued or increased there is every reason to
believe that labour would have continued to be the
limiting requisite, and that wages would have reached
and maintained a level far higher than that which
they actually attained.

When the actual forms of Capital are considered, it
is obvious that Capital does not possess that fluidity,
or apphcability to various purposes, assumed for it
by economists. Thus a particular form of Capital, say
a sewing machine, can only be apphed to aid the pro-


THE LAW OF rks^XlMlTINGyftEQUISITE. 179


duction of clothing ; or a particular form of Capital,
raw cotton, can only be applied to the production of
a particular class of commodities, and that class alone.
There is in actual fact no fluidity whatever in forms
of Capital ; the general impression of fluidity which
Capital gives being due, in part, to the rapidity with
which new forms can be created, and in part to the
facility with which individuals can exchange with each
other the particular forms they own.

In dealing with the Franco-German War period
we have seen how the increase in the quantity of par-
ticular classes of commodities demanded raised prices
and profits, causing particular {classes of forms of
Capital to be the Requisites of Production limiting
Industry. We have also seen how the desire to gain
these high profits led saving individuals to demand the
creation of these highly remunerated forms of Capital,
and by so doing to continuously widen the circle of
Requisites of Production which experienced the in-
creased demand ; and we have seen that the general
rise in wages which marked 1872 and 1873 was due
to the fact that the quantity of labour demanded : —
{a) to work the Capital actually in existence (b) to
create new Capital (open mines, reclaim land, con-
struct railways, &c., &c.), exceeded the supply offered
at the current price.

Though, therefore, certain special forms of capital
held at the outset the position of limiting Requisite,
this position was soon lost by Capital and gained by
Labour, and had the quantity of Commodities de-
manded still reached the total economically desirable,
the labourers would have been the Requisite of
Production limiting Industry. They could then


180 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

have dictated their own terms to the owners of
Capital, terms limited only by the necessity that
^ wages must not exceed the whole of the ultimate
product, but must afford a margin of gain to the
' Capitalist sufficient to induce him to apply his Capital
( to aid production in preference to leaving it idle and
receiving nothing.* So soon, however, as Production is
limited, not by the total of any one or other of the
Requisites of Production available for use, but by the
aggregate that consumers will consent to buy and
consume, there is no Requisite of Production which
limits Industry. Surplus Labour, Capital, and Natural
Agents exist, and the rates of wages, interest and
profit, and rent are determined at the point at which
a sufficiency, and no more, of each of these Requisites
is offered for use, a point so low that the owners of
the unused Labour, Capital, and Natural Agents no
longer compete with those actually employed. The
most efficient labourers, the most skilfully manipu-
lated Capital, and the best Natural Agents are alone
used ; the less efficient Labour, Capital, and Natural
Agents are an unused Surplus, and their owners must
subsist otherwise than on these surplus and unused
Requisites.

Since the experience of 1870, 1871, 1872, and 1873
has shown that Capital and Natural Agents would
not, in the present state of society, be able to long
maintain the position of limiting Requisites, it is
obvious that a period of Depression in Trade does
not materially injure their owners, though it is true

* Their position relatively to natural agents would have been that
usually ascribed to them by economists, following the principle set
forth in Ricardo s law of rent*


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE, 181

that if more Production were effected, more Capital
and more Natural Agents would be used. But even
in this latter case the rate of reward obtainable on
any given total of Natural Agents or Capital would
not presumably be largely affected for more than a
very short period. Labour, however, is affected,
and disastrously affected, by insufficiency in the
quantity demanded. From being the Requisite of
Production, limiting industry and receiving in conse-
quence within a fraction of the whole of the ultimate \
product, it becomes a non-limiting Requisite, and /
receives the smallest fraction of the ultimate product ^
which a section of its owners will accept in preference
to receiving nothing and remaining idle.

Or, to state it otherwise, the limiting Requisite
suffers from no competition ;. the quantity of its use
that would be demanded is necessarily always in
excess of the quantity offered, and, as a consequence,
its owners have no need to compete with each other.
When Labour is the limiting Requisite, the one limit
to wages is the whole of the ultimate product, less
certain minimum deductions. So soon, however, as
Industry is restricted by reason of insufficient con-
sumption, labourers are thrown out of work, and the
rate of wages is fixed at the point at which even
imemployed labourers cease to compete further; and,
as we have seen, this point is determined wholly
irrespective of the more or less of the ultimate
product, and exclusively by the more or less desirable
alternative methods of subsistence open to this un-
employed surplus.^

* See page 173,


182 THE LA W OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

We are thus able to understand why all the
modem improvements in machinery and the me-
thods of production have failed to hghten the day's
work of the labourer, or to have materially in-
creased his control of subsistence, conveniences, and
amusement.

The labourers' wages are determined in all periods
of insufficient demand by the iron law, which says
that, of the labourers able and willing to work, a
section shall not work, and that those who work
shall receive wages so low that those out of work
would refuse to accept them. Wages, under these
circumstances, are determined at the lowest con-
ceivable point, and, so long as quantity demanded is
insufficient, wages must remain there. The labourers,
therefore, are the chief sufferers from the saving
habits of the rich, and, in so far as evil proceeds from
poverty, the highly-extolled virtues of thrift, par-
simony, and saving are the cause.

In concluding, it may be well to sum up briefly the
argument by which excessive Thrift has been thus
related to Depression in Trade.

All money received by individuals in a commercial
community is received as payment for the Use of
Natural Agents, or Capital, or Labour engaged in
forwarding the production of Commodities. A cer-
tain portion of this money must constantly be applied
to replace the machinery and goods engaged in pro-
duction at different points in the industrial machine,
so as to maintain the present rate of production. So
far as individuals fail to perform this task, and instead
use the money in buying commodities, they are
rightly described as living on their capital. All the


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE, 183

rest of the money received, after the necessary de-
duction is made, is the money income. This money
income may be employed either in acquiring posses-
sion of Commodities for personal consumption, or a
portion only may be used in this way, while the rest
is employed in obtaining possession of Plant, Ma-
chinery, and Raw Material, so as to produce a new
set of Commodities in excess of that produced before.
But though any individual may spend any proportion
of his income in this last way, which is called Saving,
the community, as a whole, can only spend a certain
proportion of its income thus with advantage. For
the utility of thus saving a portion of its income
depends upon its willingness to spend another portion
in buying for consumption the increased stock of
ComiDodities which this ' Saved income ' is engaged
in producing. Thus the community can effect no
useful end by saving and putting into the forms of
capital a larger proportion of its income than is re-
quired to assist in producing what it is willing to
purchase and consume with the other portion of its
income. Yet we have seen that there is a force,
namely, the individual desire of accumulation, which
may impel a community, through the action of its indi-
vidual members, to save a larger proportion of its
income than is desirable. We have further seen
that the increase of production thus brought about
has no natural power to force such an increased
consumption in the future as shall justify this
apparent excess of saving by providing a fresh
demand for the products which it assists to create.
Thus the Over-Production engendered by exces-
sive thrift can only be cured by a decline in the


184 THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE.

rate of production slowly brought about by a fall
in profits. Such a decline in rate of production
throws out of employment a portion of existing
forms of capital, a portion of the natural agents
formerly in use, and a number of labourers whose
labour has no longer any use. Thus the incomes of
the owners of all these requisites of production is
diminished; that is, Rent, Wages, Profits fall, and
we reach that industrial condition described as De-
pression of Trade.

In this Depression the owners of that Requisite
which would othen^nse have been the Requisite
' limiting Production suffer most severely. We have
seen that the experience of the Franco-German War
period conclusively shows that at the present period
this Requisite would be Labour, and it is, therefore,
the Labourers who have most to lose by the economic
evils resulting from the excessive desire to amass for-
tunes.

Before quitting this subject we may just explain
the apparent paradox, that while any individual can
always save by reducing his consumption, the com-
munity, as a whole, cannot do so. The explanation
is this : The reduction in consumption caused by the
saving of the thrifty reduces all incomes, and this
reduction of all incomes continuously proceeds until
the least thrifty section of the community ceases to
live on its incomes and begins to spend its Capital.
So soon as this occurs an unlimited field of invest-
ment is opened to the thrifty. The forms of "Capital
previously owned by these 'extravagant' folk are
purchased by the saving individuals, and form excel-
lent investments for their savings. Since it is always


THE LAW OF THE LIMITING REQUISITE, 185

possible for any individual to be more thrifty than his
neighbours, it is always possible for an individual to
save. It is quite true that such saving is not a saving
as regards the whole community; but it does not
matter to the accumulator of a fortune whether his
fortune is an addition to the aggregate wealth of the
community, or whether it is embodied in the forms
previously belonging to other individuals, whom, by
his saving operations, he has forced to live on their
Capital. To make the operation of this law clearer,
we will take the simplest possible case — that of a
number of peasant proprietors paying a fixed money
tax either to the State or to Landlords. Undue thrift
in such a case would accumulate a surplus of all sorts
of farm produce, and consequently prices would con-
tinuously fall ; sooner or later the less thrifty of the
peasants would be unable to provide the constantly
increasing amounts of farm produce that would have
to be sold to meet their fixed money payments ; so
soon as this occurred they would have to borrow
from their more thrifty neighbours, and little by little
the saving operations of these thrifty folk would
eject them from their holdings, and reduce them to
the position of labourers or tramps.


186 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR,


CHAPTER VII.


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC
FACTOR.

It is asserted by economists of the currency school
that price changes are induced by changes in the in-
herent value of gold, and that these price changes are
the cause of depression in trade. ,We purpose in this
chapter to ascertain whether there is any foundation
for this contention in the facts, figures, and arguments
on which and by which it is supported.

The arguments of this school are two in number :
the first, that gold is scarce, and that this scarcity en-
hances its value ; the second, that the cost of pro-
ducing gold has risen, and that consequently the value
of all the gold in existence has correspondia^y risen.
Taking the first of these contentions, we will en-
deavour to see whether scardty of gold and low prices,
and a plethora of gold and high prices, are, in actual
fact, simultaneous phenomena.

At the outset of the inquiry, however, we must
brush away any lingering traces of the old mercantile
theory, which asserts that purchasing power, the
power to purchase 'subsistence, conveniences, and
amusement ' inheres in gold. ' Purchasing power,' says
Professor Caimes, and no one, we believe, would
dispute this statement, 'owes its existence to the


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR. 187

production of a commodity, and, the conditions of in-
dustry being given, can only be increased by increasing
the quantity of commodities offered for sale/ For
instance, when a doctor is said to make /. 1,500 a
year, it means that he gives professional advice, &c.,
which he exchanges with his patients for that sum.
When he goes into a shop and buys any article, he
really pays for it by the professional services he has
previously rendered some other individual. He,
every year, produces professional services valued at
;^. 1,500, and he, every year, receives commodities
valued at £. 1,500 a year ; or, if he prefers it, he, in-
stead of taking his whole income in commodities, may
take part in capital, and thus ' save for future ad-
vantage/ The value of his services temporarily
stored up in coins, or in a banker's credit, he transfers
to the sellers of such articles as he desires ; in other
words, he spends or exerts the purchasing power he
has created. Similarly, the incomes of all other in-
dividuals (excluding gold miners) can invariably be
shown to be derived from production, the money being
merely the cart or vehicle which conveys this purchas-
ing power from its producers to the particular fraction
of supply on which they desire to exert it as a demand.
This carting or conveyance of purchasing power
from one individual to another is the only use of
currency. It is for this purpose, and this alone, that
banks, with all their apparatus of bills and cheques,
and drafts and acceptances, &c.j &c., exist. It is for
this purpose, and this alone, that governments mint
the gold and silver into coins. It is for this purpose,
and this alone, that the national banks store up the
great masses of bullion which they call reserves.


188 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR.

The one object of production being to get useful
and convenient things into the hands of consumers,
money assists the process in the following way.
When an individual has produced a useful or con-
venient thing which he does not want to consume
himself, money enables the community to enjoy the
consumption of it at once, without waiting for the
producer to find some one else who wants the article,
and who at the same time has in his possession some-
thing else which the first-mentioned individual desires
to have. To prevent the delay and trouble of a
system of direct barter, it is arranged that when a
person has produced anything he shall give it up to
the use of any other member of the community who
shall give him a guarantee, which shall enable him, at
any future time, to obtain from some other person
that which he would be willing to take in exchange
for what he has sold. Money, then, assists in convey-
ing ownership by means of a system of guarantees.
Products are still exchanged for products, but by
means of money each exchanging party is able to get
the equivalent of the product he offers in any form
and at any time, instead of taking it in one form and
at the time when some one else desires it, who has
something he wants. Products possess purchasing
power, but when this power exists in a special form
it is not fully and easily operative. The sale of a
product for money is, on the part of the seller, the
exchange of a special form of purchasing power for a
general form of purchasing power, conveyed in the
form of that token called money. The service ren-
dered the community by money is, therefore, though
of great importance, of a strictly limited character. It


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR. 189

facilitates exchanges, enabling the clumsy and tedious
system of direct barter to be replaced by the easy and
convenient system of indirect barter, i.e., selling for
money and purchasing with money. It must, how-
ever, never be forgotten that this money system is
only an elaborated barter system. Products still
exchange for products, though the exchange is not
direct, but consists of products for money and money
for products. Money, while it obscures, in no wise
changes the facts of barter, and its use is limited to
the aid it gives to the exchange of commodities.

It is next necessary to ascertain whether gold is, as
alleged by the Bimetallists, scarce. For this purpose
we will first consider what is the meaning of the
term ' demand for money.' We have seen (Chapter
III.) that the only demand which the community can
exert is a demand for consumable articles by con-
sumers, all other so called demands being resolvable,
when regarded from the community's point of view,
into mere changes in individual ownership. Currency,
therefore, cannot be demanded ; the community
possesses exactly the same number of sovereigns
whether any given sovereign is in the pocket of A. or
B., or C, or in the cellars of the Bank of England.
What, then, is meant by ' demand for money '? The
answer is plain ; it is a demand for the use of money.
Just as we showed that what is commonly but erro-
neously called demand for capital is really a demand
for the use of capital, so we now see that the so-called
demand for money is a demand for the use of money.
Banks sell the use of money and they piu'chase the
use of money ; the price of this use they term the
rate of discount (or more usually Bank rate). Now,
applying our law of price, we can see that if the


190 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR.


quantity of this use demanded increases relatively to
the supply, Bank rate rises ; if the quantity of this use
demanded decreases relatively to the supply, Bank
rate falls. The correspondence of Bank rate, or the
price of the use of money, with variations in the
quantity of the use of gold currency demanded
relatively to the supply available, is well illustrated by
the following table, taken from Mr. GifFen's ' Essays
in Finance :' —


Reserve in Millions Sterling.


Rate


Year.


of


Above


Below


Discount.


Average.


Average.


£. 8. d.


1872 -


—


12-1


4 2


1873 -


—


12-0


4 15 10


1874 -


—


110


3 14 1


1875 -


—


11-5


3 4 8


1876 -


15-9


—


2 12 1


1877 -


—


12-4


2 18


1878 -


—


10-8


3 15 8


1879 -


18-4


—


2 7 6


1880 -


160


—


2 15


1881 -


13-7


—


3 10


1882 -


—


11-8


4 2 6


1883 -


—


12-4


3 11 3


1884 -


"~*


13-3


2 19


A comparison with earlier figures adduced by Mr.
GifFen serves most strongly to emphasise the point
which the figures above sufficiently indicate, that
during the years of Scarcity of Gold, when the Bank
Reserve has been abnormally low, the rate of dis-
count has been high ; and that within this period the
rate of discount has generally varied inversely with
the amount of the Reserve. It may be observed that
exact correspondence between rate of discount and


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR, 191

amount of Reserve is not to be expected, for the
former is strictly determined by the risk attending
loans, and this risk is determined not exclusively by
the condition of the Bank Reserve, but is also
affected by considerations which relate to the general
condition of trade and the average credit of bor-
rowers. But the main fact that scarcity of Gold
currency raises the rate of discount is clearly estab-
lished.

Now, the only ground on which it appears pos-
sible to argue that gold is scarce, is on the assump-
tion that the quantity of gold available for use as
currency is less than the quantity which it is desirable
should be so available. Gold currency is obviously
of no use unless used, and a ' scarcity ' of gold must
mean that there is a lack or insufficiency of gold
for currency purposes. The 'scarcity' of gold,
therefore, which the Bimetallists and others argue
is the cause of the present low range of prices and
Depression in Trade, can only mean that the quantity
of gold currency available for use is less than the quan-
tity of gold currency which it is desirable should
be available for use. If this 'scarcity' is the cause
of low prices, the converse must be equally true,
and high prices must be caused by a relative plethora
of gold currency. We have already seen that the
Bank rate of discount is the price of the use of gold
currency, and, reverting to our law of price, we can
assert that if the quantity of this use demanded in-
creases relatively to the supply available (if, in short,
gold is scarce), Bank rate must rise ; if, on the other
hand, the quantity of this use demanded decreases
relatively to the supply, Bank rate must fall,
' Scarcity/ therefore, will be accurately gauged by


192 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR.


Bank rate ; if gold currency is relatively scarce, Bank
rate will be high ; if it be relatively plentiful, Bank
rate will be low. To ascertain whether low prices
and scarce gold, and high prices and plentiful gold, are,
as the Bimetallists and others urge, interdependent
phenomena, we will again borrow from Mr. GifFen,the
most influential exponent of this doctrine, and show
by his own figures that, on the contrary, scarce gold
and high prices, and plentiful gold and low prices, are
in actual fact invariably co-existent : —


Year.


Index No.


Bank Reserve

in Millions

Sterling.


Rate

of

Discount.


-


6-7


£. 8. d.
4 15 4

6 19


1865


1866


- OOlit —


1867


- 3024


12-9


. 2 10 9


1868


- 2682


11-9


. 2 1 11


1869


- 2662


10-3


3 4 2


1870


- 2689


12-4


3 2


1871


- 2590

. 2835


141


. 2 17 8


1872


-420


1873
1874


- 2891


12-0

11-0


• 4 15 10
3 14 1


1875


- 2778


11-5


3 4 5


1876


- 2711


15-9


. 2 12 1


1877


- 2715


12-4


2 18


1878


- 2554


10-8


3 15 8


1879


- 2202


18-4


.276


1880


- 2538

- 2376


16-0


. 2 15


1881


13-7

1 1 lO ^., __


3 10


1882


■ 4 2 6


1883


- 2342


12-4


3 11 3


1884


. 2221


13-3


2 19


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR. 193

The column of Index Numbers represents the con-
dition of general prices, and is obtained by taking
averages of the prices of representative products
during the year. The other columns require no
explanation. The black line is drawn to denote years
in which the rate of discount is above £. 4. It will
here be seen that the high rate of discount has in
every case co-existed with a higher price level than
in the neighbouring years of low discount. The
dotted lines denote years in which the bank reserve
averaged above fourteen millions ; in three cases out of
four prices were lowest when bank reserve was
highest. The five years of highest bank-rate (average
of five years, £.4. 18 s. 11 d.) give a price level of
3,071, while the six years of lowest bank-rate (average,
of six years, £.2 10 s. gd.) give a price level of 2,624^
The bank reserve during these same years averages
14*8 for the price level of 2,624 and 10*2 for the price
level of 3,071.

In the face of facts like these, can it be argued that
insufficiency of gold causes low prices ? or, that
plethora of gold causes high prices ? or, that high
rate of discount lowers prices, while low rate raises,
them ? Mr. Giffen appears to be partly aware that his
figures do not adequately support his theory, and en-
deavours to argue that the eff*ect of a fall in discount
will not be felt immediately on prices ; a rise of dis-
count to-day to ten per cent, would not, he contends,
cause me and other traders to take lower prices to-day,
but to take lower prices next year, or in two or three
years' time, when the rate of discount has, perhaps,
fallen to two per cent. But this extraordinary conten-
tion is, we take it, only the result of Mr. Giffen finding

G


194 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR.

that his figures do not tally with his theory. If he had
found low prices actually coincident with high rates of
discount and the converse, we should have heard
nothing of any reason why the effects should be post-
poned. Any impartial examiner of the figures we
have quoted will come to the conclusion that scarcity
of gold and high rates of discount are not the cause
of low prices.*

We have seen that the only demand which can be
exerted for gold currency is a demand for its use, and
that the price of this use falls when other prices fall,
and rises when other prices rise. The reason is obvious ;
^old is a mere tool, or machine, to aid and facilitate
the work of production, and the same cause which
•depresses the prices paid for the uses of the other
requisites of production, depresses the price paid for
the use of currency. We are not here dealing with
the very involved problem of how the normal rate
of interest is determined, but merely with those
temporary fluctuations on which the Bimetallists rely
for an explanation both of depression in trade and low
prices.

We have next to consider the second theory
advanced by the BimetaUists, that the cost of pro-
ducing gold has increased, and that consequently the
value of all the gold in existence has risen. They

* Since this was written, Mr. Giffen has receded from the position
taken by him in his " Essays on Finance ;" he now asserts the conclu-
sion to which our argument leads, i,e, : " There is a relation between
the quantity of money and prices, but it is rather one in which prices
assist in determining the quantity of the precious metals to be used
as money, and not one in which prices are themselves determined by
that quantity." ** A Problem in Money." Mr. Giffen, " Nineteenth
Century," November 1889.


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR, 195

argue in this wise : the cost of producing the most
expensively-grown wheat required to supply the
'' last margin of consumption " determines the price
of wheat. They then apply this argument to cur-
rency gold, without, however, perceiving that its
validity rests exclusively on the assumption that the
most expensively produced gold is required "to supply
the last margin of consumption." Now, we have seen
that currency gold is not consumed ; all that is con-
sumed is its use, and so far is it from the fact that this
most expensively produced gold is required for use,
Le., is required " to supply the last margin of com-
sumption," that, on the contrary, gold currency has
been persistently more abundant relatively to the
quantity required for use, during the years marked
by low prices and Depression in Trade than during
the years marked by high prices," and a " prosperity
advancing by leaps and bounds." The most expen-
sively produced gold has not, therefore, been pro-
duced, as the Bimetallists fondly imagine, to supply
the "last margin of consumption," but has been
produced to lie idle in the vaults of the great national
banks, and the cost of producing it has, therefore^
had nothing to do with the value of gold.

While, however, the cost of producing gold does
not determine prices, prices do determine the cost of
producing gold. For instance, if the product of the
use of certain capital and labour sells for one ounce
weight of gold, and if similar totals of the use of
capital and labour applied to crushing quartz yielding
one ounce of gold to the ton of stone would produce
one ounce of gold in the same time and with the
same effort, then. it will be indififerent to the capi-


196 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR.

talist and labourers whether they crush quartz or
produce commodities. In either case they obtain
equal totals of gold, and consequently of general
purchasing power. If, however, general prices fall
to one-half, the labour and capital applied to the
production of commodities will only produce a pro-
duct selling for half an ounce of gold, and it will in
consequence ' pay ' these requisites of production to
crush any quartz that yields more than half an ounce
of gold to the ton. By producing commodities they
only get half an ounce of gold. So long, therefore, as
quartz yielding more than this half ounce can be
found, capital and labour will be devoted to work it.
But the application of labour, &c., to the crushing of
inferior quartz is, of course, equivalent to a rise in the
cost of production of gold, a fall in general prices is,
therefore, immediately operative in raising the cost of
producing gold, and were prices to fall to one-tenth
of their present level, quartz which required ten times
as much expenditure of the use of capital and labour
would be brought into requisition. So it would still
be found that the most expensively produced gold
only just paid its cost of production. There is abso-
lutely no limit to the cost at which gold could be pro-
duced, and what this cost shall be is determined and
determined exclusively by the general retail price
level.

The law of price asserted on page 8i is, we can
thus see, irrefutable by either of the arguments of the
currency school. So long as the sellers of commodi-
ties can sell all they have to offer at the current price,
prices cannot fall, and this holds good equally,
whether gold is scarce or plentiful. Sellers do not


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR, 197

trouble to ask any question as to the state of the
Bank reserve, or the cost at which gold is being pro-
duced. All they care to know is, whether they can
sell everything they have to offer at the current price.
If they believe they can, neither scarcity of gold, nor
cost of gold, nor anything to do with gold, will induce
them to take a lower price. If, on the other hand,
they believe that they will not be able to sell all they
have to offer at the current price, then prices will fall,
no matter how plentiful gold may be, or to what
depth its cost of production may have fallen.

It does not matter how much money there may
be in existence or in the banks, or even in the pockets
of private individuals, prices are affected only by
the application of purchasing power as a Demand.

The mere fact of an increase or decrease in the
amount of existing money in a community can have
no effect on prices. If the amount of money in
everyone's purse were miraculously doubled, why
should that fact oblige anyone to pay more for a loaf
of bread or a hat ? The baker sold me a loaf for
threepence before ; how will he be able now to
induce me to pay sixpence, or even fourpence ? He
will make his usual profit on the sale if I pay him
threepence as before, and the competition of other
bakers will prevent him making more than the usual
profit. So with the hatter. If everyone resolves to
use no more money than before this miraculous
increase and behaves as if he had not got it, no
rise in price will occur. It is only when the posses-
sion of more money induces people to try to buy
more loaves or more hats, to apply more purchasing
power to buy goods at current prices, that they will


198 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR.

find these prices rise. It is only when these shop-
keepers perceive that they could sell at current prices
more goods than they have got that they raise their
prices, and sell all they have at a little higher price.
So a fall of price will only be brought about when
the shopkeeper perceives that a smaller number of
people than usual are offering to buy loaves or hats
at the usual prices. When the case is thus concretely
put it will be obvious that no change of price can
come in any other way than by an alteration in the
ratio which Supply bears to the Quantity demanded.

Though the more or less of the gold currency in
existence has nothing to do wnth the determination of
general price levels, the entry of gold into circulation
does to some extent affect them. It is, therefore,
desirable, before quitting this subject, to glance at the
method in which such effects are caused, and to note
the limitations to which they are necessarily subject.

The way in which gold comes into circulation is
this: Governments give to gold miners or their
representatives an amount of general purchasing
power, in the shape of money or notes, in return
for the gold they bring. This general purchasing
power, according as it is used or is not used by the
miners, has its effect in increasing or diminishing the
aggregate quantity of commodities demanded upon
which prices depend.

If in any given year the same body of gold
producers doubles the amount of gold they furnish
the Government, and consequently receive twice as
much power to purchase as before, the full exercise
of this increased power to demand will raise prices
to the extent necessary to restore the proper ratio


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FA CTOR, 199

between the aggregate supply and the aggregate
demanded. In the same way any decrease in
the amount of gold added to the currency in any
year will so far affect prices in that it diminishes the
amount of quantity demanded to an extent corre-
sponding with the amount of the decrease. Thus, if
in any year the amount of gold added to that available
for currency purposes exceeds the average amount
by two millions, the only effect on price is through
an increase in quantity demanded to the extent Oj
two millions, assuming supply to be stable. If, as is
actually alleged, during the last fifteen years the
yearly addition of gold to our currency is £, 2,000,000
less than it ought to be in order to maintain the same
proportion between gold currency and volume of
trade, the general effect on prices is limited to the
effect produced by a decline of £, 2,000,000 in quan-
tity demanded in relation to a fixed supply. This
diminution of /. 2,000,000 in quantity demanded
represents a fall in the aggregate amount of pur-
chasing power handed over to gold miners in return
for gold, and it presumes that the same amount
of capital and labour has been engaged in the pro-
duction of the smaller amount of gold as was
formerly engaged in producing a larger amount.

But, suppose that those engaged in the production
of gold, finding that they can no longer produce the
same amount of gold as before with the same expen-
diture of capital and labour, that the amount they are
able to supply to England has sunk from 3 j millions
to if millions, act in accordance with the general
action of commerce, what will be the result ? An
amount of which capital and labour, formerly was


200 SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR.

able to produce £. 2,000,000 of gold, is gradually
removed from gold production,' and is applied to
some other productive work, whereby we have a
right to assume £. 2,000,000 worth of new supply is
created. These quondam gold miners now possess
the same amoimt of purchasing power as they did
when they were engaged in producing gold, say,
£. 2,000,000, and the total amount of purchasing power
possessed by the community is the same as before.
On the other hand, the aggregate of supply (exclud-
ing gold) has been increased by the /. 2,000,000
fresh supply contributed by our quondam gold
miners. Hence the total disturbance in the rela-
tions of supply and quantity demanded is still limited
to £. 2,000,000.

Assuming that when gcfld production falls from 3I
millions to i J millions, the same amount of the re-
quisites of production are still employed in producing
this smaller aggregate result, while the aggregate
supply of the community (excluding gold) remains
as before, the total purchasing power and, assuming
it to be all used, the total quantity demanded, is
decreased by two millions. On the other hand, sup-
pose the requisites of production formerly engaged
in gold production are applied with equal efficacy to
some other production, the total producing power
and the total quantity demanded remain as before,
but supply is increased by two millions. Thus the
direct effect of this fall off in gold production upon price

* If it be objected by * practical ' readers that capital invested in
mines cannot be removed, we need only remind them that as the
forms of capital need constant renewal, the abstention from such
renewal comes to the same thing as the actual withdrawal of existing
capital.


SCARCITY OF GOLD AS AN ECONOMIC FACTOR. 201

is in no case greater than is to be accounted for by an
addition of £. 2,000,000 to the total supply, or a sub-
traction of the same amount from the total of quan-
tity demanded.

Now, let us ask to what extent this can affect
prices? The total income of the United King-
dom has been estimated by Mr. Leone Levi to
be about £. 1,270,000,000, and Mr. Giflfen accepts
that figure as a minimum.^ This sum then,
represents the total purchasing power, the demand
power of the community; and, assuming a stable
condition of supply, any increase or decrease of
this sum will affect general prices proportionately.
Now, the whole alleged effect of the scarcity of gold
is to diminish this grand total by £. 2,000,000. The
fall of prices thus brought about could only be to the

extent of — ? — or less than ^th per cent., for by that
1270, ® ^ ' -^

amount alone is the aggregate quantity demanded

reduced. Yet the scarcity in gold has been adduced

as an explanation of a general fall in prices amounting

to not less than thirty per cent.* between the years

1872 and 1885.'

* Giffen " Essays in Finance," p. 460 (note).
» Giifen " Essays in Finance," p. 19.


202 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.


CHAPTEK VIII.


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.

Anyone who has carefully perused the foregoing
chapters will perceive that the theory therein set forth
will, if it be correct, admit and indeed demand certain
practical applications which are opposed to the whole
tenour of economic legislation. With regard to the
statement of these practical considerations we are in
the following dilemma. If we refrain from all such
statement we shall lay ourselves open to the imputa-
tion of being blind to certain practical issues which
will seem on first sight to furnish a reductio ad
absiirdum reply to our argument. On the other hand,
if we attempt to lay much stress upon what we hold
to be inevitable practical deductions from our theory,
we shall be driven into long and intricate lines of
defence which, from the verj^mportance of the issues
with which they deal, will divert the attention of the
reader from the theoretic basis of the earlier chapters.
Moreover, while we feel confident that the theoretic
basis of this work A^ill stand the test of close criticism,
we are by no means sure that, in attempting to apply


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 203

these principles fairly to the intricate system of com-
mercial facts, we shall successfully avoid all those
fallacies which all economists find in the work of their
fellows, and which, when disclosed, are often unjustly,
though not unnaturally, held to impair the correctness
of the main principles from which they are incorrectly
deduced.

It has, therefore, seemed wisest to us to make
a brief and general statement of those practical
tendencies and conclusions which seem justified by
our theory, and to leave the fuller exposition and
defence of them for a future occasion. If these prac-
tical considerations seem to involve much that is
startling and somewhat that is retrograde, we would
urge that we have endeavoured, in accordance with
the advice of Plato, 'to follow whithersoever the argu-
ment shall lead us.'

I. It will be evident that the question of method of
taxation, in so far as it bears upon the rate of con-
sumption and of saving, will be directly affected by the
foregoing theory. In all periods of under-consumption
(Le., of low prices and depressed trade) taxation should 1 1
clearly be directed so as to be the smallest check upon '
consumption. Since under-consumption has been
traced to an excessive desire to save, a rational method
of taxation will aim at restricting the motive to save, ^ '
while offering every encouragement to the desire to
spend.

The tendency of taxation in England is based upon
the opposite principle ; it seeks to restrict consump-
tion by artificially raising the price of certain com-
modities classed under the name of luxuries. Beer,
wine, spirits, tobacco, tea, plate, carriages, horses,


204 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.

railway-tickets, &c., are all more or less heavily taxed,
in most cases with the avowed intention of checking
consumption. So, again, the income-tax is levied so
as to operate in the same way. If an individual will
consent to save a portion of his income and apply it
to insuring his life, this portion of his income is
exempted from income-tax with the avowed object of
encouraging thrift. The indirect and unintentional
effect of the mode of levying the income-tax makes
in the same direction. The expenditure of an indivi-
dual attracts the attention of the assessors, and ensures
the full assessment ; on the other hand, an individual
who lives penuriously frequently evades the tax
merely because he is a saving man. Thus we see that
our methods of direct and indirect taxation operate to
check expenditure and encourage saving. When the
existence of under-consumption proves the operation of
an excessive desire to save, it is evident that taxation
should rightly be directed to check saving, and not
expenditure, and should fall on that portion of the in-
dividual's income which he refuses to spend. Other
legislative enactments which operate in the same
manner are the laws of entail and settlement. The
only possible advantages which can be claimed for
these laws are that individuals are thereby prevented
from spending more than their incomes ; they are
deterrents of extravagance and waste.

Since the supposition of a state of under-consump-
tion implies that any increase in the quantity de-
manded, whatever be the nature of the commodities
demanded, will have a beneficial effect upon com-
merce by providing a use for an increased quantity of
the Requisites of Production, it will follow that the


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS, 205

full stress of all taxation should fall on accumulated
property, so as to check the creation of fresh stocks
of unneeded and injurious Capital. To put it in a //
single phrase, all forms of Savings should be taxed.

Any reader who, without troubling himself with
the preceding argument should turn to the last
chapter to see ' what the book is about,' should cast
his eye upon this sentence, will doubtless pronounce
the notion preposterous, and will read no more.
But all who have followed the course of the pre-
ceding chapters will be compelled to the acceptance of
this first practical application. Where Under-consump-
tion exists. Savings should be taxed. We have shown ^
above that Under-consumption is no mere term to
describe a momentary and occasional crisis, but rather
describes a commercial malady which is chronic in the
industrial life of modem European nations.

Without entering at length into the large question
of Free Trade, it is right to indicate the bearing
which the theory of Under-consumption has upon the
practical issues involved. The advantage claimed for
Free Trade rightly rests on the assumption that, in
just proportion as there is freedom of competition
among individuals, groups of individuals, or nations,
in respect of production, the various Requisites of
Production will be put to an effective use ; that
capital and labour, left without the artificial guidance
and attraction of protective tariffs or bounties, will
tend to employ themselves in those forms of produc-
tion in which they can be used most effectively, Le.,
in which they will produce the largest amount of
wealth. Left free to find thedr own level, that em-
ployment which engages them by higher profits and


206 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS,

higher wages will be the employment which will
enable them to contribute most to the aggregate pro-
duction of wealth of the community. Just as indi-
viduals left free in the use of their productive powers
will find, on the average, that their own greatest gain
lies in that work which contributes most to the gain
of the community, so, if there were absolute equality
of competition amongst a group of nations, each
nation would so employ its productive powers as to
produce its maximum of wealth with its minimum of
exertion. Thus, in proportion as one or more nations
adopt protective measures, either in the shape of tax
or bounty, the protected industries use an excessive
amount of requisites of production in their work, and
lessen the aggregate of wealth produced, damaging
their own interests, and to a less extent the interests
of other nations belonging to the industrial com-
munity. This is the theory of free trade stated in its
broad principles. Now, with this theory, taken in
vacuo, we have no quarrel ; jt is perfectly correct as a
theory of exchange in an ideal industrial community.
But, as a working principle of practical economics, it
.involves one important assumption.

Free Trade requires for its advantageous working a
perfectly healthy condition of commerce, where the
demand always keeps pace with the possibility of
Supply ; in a word, it assumes that whatever caw be
produced will be produced, and that whatever is pro-
duced is consumed. In such a condition it will be
evident that any species of Protection will lessen
the amount of possible production by increasing the
average quantity of requisites of production packed in
each Commodity, and will restrict the amount of Con-


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 207

sumption. But in a diseased state of Commerce,
where Under-consumption, acting by the pressure of
Over-supply, has so congested the retail-system that
an excessive amount of the requisites of production is
already packed in each commodity, it by no means
follows that a Protective System will have the same
noxious result.

A protective tariff imposed in such a state so as
to increase the average cost of making (i.e., the
average amount of uses of requisites of production) of
each piece of goods, would act as a preventive check to
that process whereby requisites of production formerly
engaged in Making passed into Retailing. For the
congestion of Retail trade was seen to have been
brought about in the following manner:— A larger
quantity of requisites of production existed than were
economically required to produce the quantity of com-
modities the community would consent to consume.
Since the amount of requisites of production which can
be occupied in making cannot for any length of time
exceed the minimum which the conditions of pro-
duction require, while the work of trading can be
easily distended so as to provide employment for any
quantity of requisites of production, any excess of re-
quisites of production which from time to time may
occur in the making departments (whether by a fall
off in consumption or by an application of more
economic methods in manufacturing) is continually
expelled from the making department and compelled
to take refuge in the trading department, which, we
have seen, becomes congested with excessive forms of
capital and labour. In such a condition of affairs it
is evident that any legislative restriction which might


208 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.

artificially increase the quantity of requisites of pro-
duction whose use was required in making would
to that extent act as a preventive of the further con-
gestion of retail trade. In short, certain requisites
of production, which would otherwise have passed on
to increase the quantity of requisites of production
engaged in retailing, will be kept employed in
making.

To illustrate roughly, by figures, let us suppose
that, in order to supply the current rate of consump-
tion in a community, it is necessary that 9 x requisites
of production be engaged in making and i jv in
retailing. Now, suppose that by saving, growth of
population, and opening of new lands, 12 x requisites
of production have come into existence. If this
growth of the requisites of production has been
coincident with a corresponding growth of consump-
tion, all is well. But assume that the rate of con-
sumption has remained the same, inducing that state
of over^supply which is chronic in modem commu-
nities, what will happen ? Under a condition of
Free Trade internal competition will (as we have
shown. Chapter VI.) force the excessive 2 x requi-
sites of production into retailing until 3 x requisites
of production are swallowed up in performing the
work which could economically be done by i x. If,
instead of conceding Free Trade, we assume a tariff
which compels makers to devote themselves to kiijds of
making which require 11^ requisites of production in
order to produce the same quantity of goods for-
merly produced by 9 a: requisites of production, it is
clear that, instead of the 2 x requisites of production
engaging themselves in retail trade, they will be com-


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 209

pelled to engage in making in order that the actual
demand may be supphed. Tl>us, the only result of 1 1
Protection would be that an excess of requisites of
production would be employed in making instead of
in retailing. In other words, we claim to have clearly
shown that, in a state of depressed trade, a large
amount of requisites of production is forced into re-
tailing which is not there required, and which, how-
ever busily employed, performs no valuable service.
The result of protective measures would, by pro-
viding employment for a larger quantity of requisites
of production in the processes of making, prevent
this unhealthy expansion of retail trade. If it be
urged that the effect would only be to substitute
waste in one point of the industrial machine for)*
waste in another point, we admit the truth of this
contention. The point on which we lay stress is
simply this, that, in a condition of depressed trade,
Protective measures do not inflict the damage which
the orthodox Freetraders assign to them.

The theory of the Limiting Requisite set forth in
Chapter VI. will, of course, suggest various practical
considerations of importance to the largest class of
the community, those whose sole requisite of produc-
tion is labour. The question for them is how to
keep labour in the position of limiting requisite. It
is evident that so long as the quantity of labour
offered for use exceeds the total required, the
wages of labour will be kept at the minimum for
which such quantity of labour will be supplied.
To limit the available quantity of labour not abso-
lutely but relatively to the quantity of labour

H


I'


210 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS,

required, will therefore be the interest of the labour-
ing classes. This end they may achieve by the fol-
lowing means : —

a. By doing all in their power to increase the
general consumption they will be increasing the
/ quantity of the use of all the requisites of production
in current demand. In ordinary circumstances, it has
been seen, it is easier to increase the available amount
of capital and natural agents than to increase the
available amount of labour. Thus, every absolute
increase of the quantity consumed in a community
tends to strengthen the control of labour over pro-
duction. If in a community there exists surplus
labour to the smallest appreciable extent, say five per
cent., ordinary wages are kept to a minimum. But if
in such an industrial condition there was a desire
to add ten per cent, to consumption, and therefore
to the demand for the use of each requisite of
production, it is clear that labour, being unable to
supply more than five per cent, increase, would,
from the difficulty and slowness of any further in-
crease, be placed in the position of hmiting requisite,
and would take in wages the whole result of pro-
duction, minus that fraction for which the owners of
capital and natural agents would consent to use their
possessions.

But though labour will theoretically be enabled at
last to secure the full advantage of any such increase
in consumption, it has been pointed out that the in-
tricate and slow operation of such commercial move-
ments will, in fact, divide the immediate benefit
among the owners of all the requisites of production.


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 211

as was illustrated by what occurred during the swollen
consumption of the Franco-Gemian war period. Any
increase in general consumption will increase the
total fund out of which profits, rent, wages are paid,
and all will gain by such increase, though not in the
same proportion.

j3. Labour may mitigate the worst effect of under-
consumption, without causing any increase in general
consumption.

I. If the labourer has open to him an alternative
method of subsistence, whether this be squatting on
vacant land, workhouse accommodation, or facilities
for emigration, it is universally admitted that such
alternative measures the minimum of wages which he
can receive for selling the use of his labour to the
capitalist.

The effect of any of these alternatives is that the
labourers will never accept lower wages for their
labour than the equivalent ofthe best alternative open
to them ; for instance, if they would prefer the work-
house to ten shillings a week, then wages cannot fall
below ten shillings a week, or if the workhouse
accommodation were so improved that the average
labourer regarded it as worth fifteen shillings a week,
then wages could never fall below fifteen shillings a
week.

Thus, labourers, if by legislative or other measures
they can raise the standard of the alternative
method of subsistence, can continually raise the
minimum of wages. Nor is it true, as economists often
maintain, that by so doing they are killing the goose
with the golden eggs. Assuming that there is


212 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS.

under-consumption, the effect of such increase
would be simply to divert into the pockets of the
labourers certain funds which would otherwise be
wasted in an undue multiplication of the retailing
classes.

2. It is also open to labourers by various methods
to so limit their numbers as to keep themselves in the
position of owners of the Limiting Requisite. What
can be done in this way has recently been shown by
the dock labourers. These labourers refused to work
below a certain minimum price, and a general strike,
that is to say, a withdrawal of the whole supply of
labour, promptly put the labourers in the position of
the requisite of production limiting production in
that particular district and trade. This action issued
in a general rise in the wages of the London dock
labourers. So soon as labourers resolutely refuse to
compete for work below a certain given hourly or
weekly price, wages cannot fall below that point. What
holds of the labourers of a single trade will here hold
of the labourers of a Community or Nation. If the
labourers of any nation are liable to have brought
into the arena of competition a class of foreign
labourers who will consent to work for less wages
than the minimum to which they have been accus-
tomed, it is evident that in any period of under-con-
sumption the introduction of such foreigners will
reduce the rate of wages to the point at which the
labourers with the lowest standard of comfort will
just consent to work. Thus the instinct which has
led Americans and Australians to refuse to permit
immigration of Chinese was a true instinct, and is justi-


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 213

fied by economic theory. Of course, if full economic
demand existed, so that consumption kept pace with
any possible increase of production, the competition
of Chinese or other foreign labour would, as the eco-
nomists urge, be harmless ; for in this case the foreign
labourers' wages would rise to the higher standard,
instead of depressing the higher standard to its own.
But it must not be forgotten that even in this case,
supposing the new labour to be practically unlimited
in quantity, it might put either capital or natural agents
in the position of the requisite of production limiting
production, and though the aggregate of wealth pro-
duced would be largely increased, a less share of
this wealth would fall to the labourers.

What holds of Chinese immigration to America, of
course holds also of the immigration of foreign
paupers to this country. If German labourers will
work for two shillings a day, the free admission of these
will, assuming a continuance of under-consumption,
eventually bring down English wages to this level.
Thus, it is clearly for the interest of the English
labourers to prevent, by legislation if necessary, such
free influx of foreign labour as shall enable the quantity
of labour demanded to be supplied at an unduly low
rate of wages.

Although it may not be at first sight obvious, the
same result will follow from any legal restriction of
number of hours of labour, provided it be accom-
panied by absolute prohibition of imported labour.
The effect of a law fixing the maximum hours of
labour at eight per diem, instead of, say, ten, would
be the same, so far as wages are concerned, as a law


214 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS,

which expelled from the community one-fifth of the
available labourers. Since each labourer will now
only produce four-fifths of what he produced before
(setting aside the vexed question of the effect of
shorter hours upon the quality of labour), five
labourers are now required where four were pre-
viously, and looking at the lowest kind of work, we
must conclude that each of the five labourers has to
be paid the same amount of wages as each of the four
were paid before.

It is, however, necessary to bear in mind that an
eight hours' bill must be universal. If otherwise (un-
less the nation enacting it isolated itself from all other
nations by tariffs) the competition of other nations
would undersell the eight hours' nation, ruin its capi-
tahsts, and so reduce the quantity of labour demanded
as to force either a general emigration of the la-
bourers, the repeal of the law, or its systematic and
general evasion.

Assuming, however, that the eight hours' labour law
is universal and that there is Under-consumption, the
increased sum paid to labourers as demand for the use
of labour will be deducted from the total of retail
profits. Or, to put it otherwise, the increased num-
ber of labourers required for certain of the stages of
production will be withdrawn from the number
unnecessarily engaged (directly or indirectly) in re-
tailing. Whilst, therefore, the total of production
will not be affected, the aggregate of labour actually
exerted will be reduced in the proportion of ten
to eight. In any period of full demand it is evident
that the aggregate produced would be reduced ; in all


PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS, 215

such periods, therefore, it would be desirable to relax
any limits that might be imposed restricting the
hours of labour, unless it appeared that the ad-
vantages of increased leisure more than counter-
balanced the loss of wages which in such periods
would result.

/■^\': '


3(


RETURN CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT
ToZm^ 202 Mom Library
LOAN PERIOD I [^

HOME USE


ALL BOOKS MAY BE KCALLeO AFTEB 7 DAYS


DUE AS STAMPED BEL OW.


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY {
FORM NO. DD6, 60m, 1/83 BERKELEY, CA 94720 ^


MQV 30 tBBS


liD ai-100l»i-V33


-YB 60739


BEMEBAL LIBRARY. U.C. BERKELEY

llllllllllll


Iji-^ /- U
