Imperialism: A Study
John A. Hobson (1902)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): John A. Hobson's 'Imperialism: A Study' (first published London, 1902). Sourced from the Allen & Unwin reprint scan via Internet Archive (Digital Library of India), reproducing the 1902 text with the author's Preface to the First Edition. Later publisher's front matter trimmed. The 1902 work is in the public domain.

========================================================================

IMPERIALISM


A S tu  dy

by

J.  A.  HOBSON


LONDON

GEORGE  ALLEN  & UNWIN  LTD

MUSEUM  STREET


Kir st  published  its  1902
K our  eh  Impression  1 948
Kifth  Impression  1954
Sijcth  Impression.  1961


PREf ACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION


THIS  study  of  modern  Imperialism  is  designed  to  give
more  precision  to  a term  which  is  on  everybody’s
lips  and  which  is  used  to  denote  the  most  powerful  move-
ment in  the  current  politics  of  the  Western  world.  Though
Imperialism  has  been  adopted  as  a more  or  less  conscious
policy  by  several  European  States  and  threatens  to  break
down  the  political  isolation  of  the  United  States,  Great
Britain  has  travelled  so  much  faster  and  farther  along  this
road  as  to  furnish  in  her  recent  career  the  most  profitable
guidance  or  warning.

While  an  attempt  is  made  to  discover  and  discuss  the
general  principles  which  underlie  imperialist  policy,  the
illustration  of  that  policy  is  mainly  derived  from  the  pro-
gress of  British  Imperialism  during  the  last  generation,  and
proceeds  rather  by  diagnosis  than  by  historical  description.

In  Part  I the  economic  origins  of  Imperialism  are  traced,
with  such  statistical  measurements  of  its  methods  and
results  as  are  available.

Part  II  investigates  the  theory  and  the  practice  of
Imperialism  regarded  as  a “ mission  of  civilization,”  in
its  effects  upon  “ lower  ” or  alien  peoples,  and  its  political
and  moral  reactions  upon  the  conduct  and  character  of
the  Western  nations  engaging  in  it.

The  book  is  addressed  to  the  intelligence  of  the  minority
who  are  content  neither  to  float  along  the  tide  of  political
opportunism  nor  to  submit  to  the  shove  of  some  blind
“ destiny,”  but  who  desire  to  understand  political  forces
in  order  that  they  may  direct  them.


PREFACE


Those  readers  who  hold  that  a well-balanced  judgment
consists  in  always  finding  as  much  in  favour  of  any  political
course  as  against  it  will  be  discontented  with  the  treatment
given  here.  For  the  study  is  distinctively  one  of  social
pathology,  and  no  endeavour  is  made  to  disguise  the  nature
of  the  disease.

The  statistics  given  in  Part  I are  derived,  when  the
source  is  not  stated,  from  the  “ Statistical  Abstracts  ”
published  by  the  Government,  reinforced  in  some  instances,
by  figures  derived  from  the  Statesman's  Tear  Book .

I am  indebted  to  the  editor  of  the  Financial  Reform
Almanac  for  permission  to  reproduce  the  valuable  dia-
gram illustrative  of  British  expenditure  from  1870,  and
to  the  editors  of  the  Speaker,  the  Contemporary  Review ,
the  Political  Science  Quarterly , and  the  British  Friend  for
permission  to  embody  in  chapters  of  this  volume  articles
printed  in  these  magazines.

I desire  also  to  express  my  gratitude  to  my  friends  Mr.
Gilbert  Murray  and  Mr.  Herbert  Rix  for  their  assistance
in  reading  most  of  the  proof-sheets  and  for  many  valuable
suggestions  and  corrections.

JOHN  A.  HOBSON.

August , 1902.


vi


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  PACE

Preface  v

Nationalism  and  Imperialism  3

Part  I

THE  ECONOMICS  OF  IMPERIALISM

I The  Measure  of  Imperialism  1 5

II  The  Commercial  Value  of  Imperialism  28

hi  Imperialism  as  an  Outlet  for  Population  41

iv  Economic  Parasites  of  Imperialism  46

v Imperialism  based  on  Protection  64

vi  The  Economic  Taproot  of  Imperialism  7 1

vii  Imperialist  Finance  94

Part  II

THE  POLITICS  OF  IMPERIALISM

I The  Political  Significance  of  Imperialism  1 1 3

II  The  Scientific  Defence  of  Imperialism  153

hi  Moral  and  Sentimental  Factors  196

iv  Imperialism  and  the  Lower  Races  223

v Imperialism  in  Asia  285

vi  Imperial  Federation  328

vii  The  Outcome  356

APPENDICES

1 Area  and  Population  of  the  British  Empire,  1933-4  369

n 369

hi  370

iv  Trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  : Percentages  of  Total  Values  370

v Percentages  of  Imports  and  Exports  371

vi  British,  Imperial  and  Foreign  Trade,  1934-35  371

vii  Percentage  of  Imports  and  Exports  by  Value  to  and  from  the  United

Kingdom  371

viii  Value  of  Exports  and  Imports  from  and  into  Great  Britain  372

vii


CONTENTS


CHAPTER


PAGE


ix  Number  of  Outward-bound  British  Passengers  from  the  United

Kingdom  to  the  Following  Countries

x Income  from  British  Investments  Overseas

xi  Total  (Nominal)  British  Investments  Overseas

XII

xiii  Exports  of  United  States

xiv  Expenditures  of  the  Great  Powers  on  Defence,  1934

xv  Great  Britain:  Military  and  Other  Expenditure,  1 904-193 1
Index


374

375

375

376


379

381


vm


IMPERIALISM:  A STUDY


NATIONALISM  AND  IMPERIALISM

A MID  the  welter  of  vague  political  abstractions  to  lay
^ ^ one’s  finger  accurately  upon  any  “ ism  ” so  as  to
pin  it  down  and  mark  it  out  by  definition  seems  impossible.
Where  meanings  shift  so  quickly  and  so  subtly,  not  only
following  changes  of  thought,  but  often  manipulated  arti-
ficially by  political  practitioners  so  as  to  obscure,  expand,
or  distort,  it  is  idle  to  demand  the  same  rigour  as  is  expected
in  the  exact  sciences.  A certain  broad  consistency  in  its
relations  to  other  kindred  terms  is  the  nearest  approach
to  definition  which  such  a term  as  Imperialism  admits.
Nationalism,  internationalism,  colonialism,  its  three  closest
congeners,  are  equally  elusive,  equally  shifty,  and  the
changeful  overlapping  of  all  four  demands  the  closest
vigilance  of  students  of  modern  politics.

During  the  nineteenth  century  the  struggle  towards
nationalism,  or  establishment  of  political  union  on  a basis
of  nationality,  was  a dominant  factor  alike  in  dynastic  move-
ments and  as  an  inner  motive  in  the  life  of  masses  of
population.  That  struggle,  in  external  politics,  sometimes
took  a disruptive  form,  as  in  the  case  of  Greece,  Servia,
Roumania,  and  Bulgaria  breaking  from  Ottoman  rule,  and
the  detachment  of  North  Italy  from  her  unnatural  alliance
with  the  Austrian  Empire.  In  other  cases  it  was  a unifying
or  a centralising  force,  enlarging  the  area  of  nationality,
as  in  the  case  of  Italy  and  the  Pan-Slavist  movement  in
b 3


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


Russia.  Sometimes  nationality  was  taken  as  a basis  of
federation  of  States,  as  in  United  Germany  and  in  North
America.

It  is  true  that  the  forces  making  for  political  union
sometimes  went  further,  making  for  federal  union  of  diverse
nationalities,  as  in  the  cases  of  Austria-Hungary,  Norway
and  Sweden,  and  the  Swiss  Federation.  But  the  general
tendency  was  towards  welding  into  large  strong  national
unities  the  loosely  related  States  and  provinces  with  shifting
attachments  and  alliances  which  covered  large  areas  of
Europe  since  the  break-up  of  the  Empire.  This  was  the
most  definite  achievement  of  the  nineteenth  century.
The  force  of  nationality,  operating  in  this  work,  is  quite
as  visible  in  the  failures  to  achieve  political  freedom  as
in  the  successes  ; and  the  struggles  of  Irish,  Poles,  Finns,
Hungarians,  and  Czechs  to  resist  the  forcible  subjection
to  or  alliance  with  stronger  neighbours  brought  out  in  its
full  vigour  the  powerful  sentiment  of  nationality.

The  middle  of  the  century  was  especially  distinguished
by  a series  of  definitely  “ nationalist  ” revivals,  some  of
which  found  important  interpretation  in  dynastic  changes,
while  others  were  crushed  or  collapsed.  Holland,  Poland,
Belgium,  Norway,  the  Balkans,  formed  a vast  arena  for
these  struggles  of  national  forces.

The  close  of  the  third  quarter  of  the  century  saw  Europe
fairly  settled  into  large  national  States  or  federations  of
States,  though  in  the  nature  of  the  case  there  can  be  no
finality,  and  Italy  continued  to  look  to  Trieste,  as  Germany
still  looks  to  Austria,  for  the  fulfilment  of  her  manifest
destiny.

This  passion  and  the  dynastic  forms  it  helped  to  mould
and  animate  are  largely  attributable  to  the  fierce  prolonged
resistance  which  peoples,  both  great  and  small,  were  called
on  to  maintain  against  the  imperial  designs  of  Napoleon.

4


NATIONALISM  AND  IMPERIALISM


The  national  spirit  of  England  was  roused  by  the  tense-
ness of  the  struggle  to  a self-consciousness  it  had  never
experienced  since  “ the  spacious  days  of  great  Elizabeth.”
Jena  made  Prussia  into  a great  nation ; the  Moscow
campaign  brought  Russia  into  the  field  of  European
nationalities  as  a factor  in  politics,  opening  her  for  the
first  time  to  the  full  tide  of  Western  ideas  and  influences.

Turning  from  this  territorial  and  dynastic  nationalism
to  the  spirit  of  racial,  linguistic,  and  economic  solidarity
which  has  been  the  underlying  motive,  we  find  a still  more
remarkable  movement.  Local  particularism  on  the  one
hand,  vague  cosmopolitanism  upon  the  other,  yielded  to
a ferment  of  nationalist  sentiment,  manifesting  itself
among  the  weaker  peoples  not  merely  in  a sturdy  and
heroic  resistance  against  political  absorption  or  territorial
nationalism,  but  in  a passionate  revival  of  decaying  customs,
language,  literature  and  art  ; while  it  bred  in  more  domi-
nant peoples  strange  ambitions  of  national  “ destiny  ”
and  an  attendant  spirit  of  Chauvinism.

The  true  nature  and  limits  of  nationality  have  never
been  better  stated  than  by  J.  S.  Mill.

“ A portion  of  mankind  may  be  said  to  constitute  a
nation  if  they  are  united  among  themselves  by  common
sympathies  which  do  not  exist  between  them  and  others.
This  feeling  of  nationality  may  have  been  generated  by
various  causes.  Sometimes  it  is  the  effect  of  identity  of
race  and  descent.  Community  of  language  and  community
of  religion  greatly  contribute  to  it.  Geographical  limits
are  one  of  the  causes.  But  the  strongest  of  all  is  identity
of  political  antecedents,  the  possession  of  a national  history
and  consequent  community  of  recollections,  collective  pride
and  humiliation,  pleasure  and  regret,  connected  with  the
same  incidents  in  the  past.”1

* Representative  Government , chap.  xvi.

s


imperialism:  a study


It  is  a debasement  of  this  genuine  nationalism,  by
attempts  to  overflow  its  natural  banks  and  absorb  the
near  or  distant  territory  of  reluctant  and  unassimilable
peoples,  that  marks  the  passage  from  nationalism  to  a spurious
colonialism  on  the  one  hand,  Imperialism  on  the  other.

Colonialism,  where  it  consists  in  the  migration  of  part
of  a nation  to  vacant  or  sparsely  peopled  foreign  lands,
the  emigrants  carrying  with  them  full  rights  of  citizenship
in  the  mother  country,  or  else  establishing  local  self-govern-
ment in  close  conformity  with  her  institutions  and  under
her  final  control,  may  be  considered  a genuine  expansion
of  nationality,  a territorial  enlargement  of  the  stock,
language  and  institutions  of  the  nation.  Few  colonies
in  history  have,  however,  long  remained  in  this  condition
when  they  have  been  remote  from  the  mother  country.
Either  they  have  severed  the  connexion  and  set  up  for
themselves  as  separate  nationalities,  or  they  have  been
kept  in  complete  political  bondage  so  far  as  all  major
processes  of  government  are  concerned,  a condition  to
which  the  term  Imperialism  is  at  least  as  appropriate  as
colonialism.  The  only  form  of  distant  colony  which  can
be  regarded  as  a clear  expansion  of  nationalism  is  the  self-
governing  British  colony  in  Australasia  and  Canada,  and
even  in  these  cases  local  conditions  may  generate  a separate
nationalism  based  on  a strong  consolidation  of  colonial
interests  and  sentiments  alien  from  and  conflicting  with
those  of  the  mother  nation.  In  other  “ self-governing  ”
colonies,  as  in  Cape  Colony  and  Natal,  where  the  majority
of  whites  are  not  descended  from  British  settlers,  and
where  the  presence  of  subject  or  “ inferior  ” races  in  vastly
preponderating  numbers,  and  alien  climatic  and  other
natural  conditions,  mark  out  a civilization  distinct  from
that  of  the  “ mother  country,”  the  conflict  between  the
colonial  and  the  imperial  ideas  has  long  been  present  in

6


NATIONALISM  AND  IMPERIALISM


the  forefront  of  the  consciousness  of  politicians.  When
Lord  Rosmead  spoke  of  the  permanent  presence  of  the
imperial  factor  as  “ simply  an  absurdity,”  and  Mr.  Rhodes
spoke  of  its  “ elimination,”  they  were  championing  a
“ colonialism  ” which  is  more  certain  in  the  course  of  time
to  develop  by  inner  growth  into  a separate  “ nationalism  ”
than  in  the  case  of  the  Australasian  and  Canadian  colonies,
because  of  the  wider  divergence,  alike  of  interests  and
radical  conditions  of  life,  from  the  mother  nation.  Our
other  colonies  are  plainly  representative  of  the  spirit  of
Imperialism  rather  than  of  colonialism.  No  considerable
proportion  of  the  population  consists  of  British  settlers
living  with  their  families  in  conformity  with  the  social  and
political  customs  and  laws  of  their  native  land  : in  most
instances  they  form  a small  minority  wielding  political
or  economic  sway  over  a majority  of  alien  and  subject
people,  themselves  under  the  despotic  political  control  of
the  Imperial  Government  or  its  local  nominees.  This,
the  normal  condition  of  a British  colony,  was  well-nigh
universal  in  the  colonies  of  other  European  countries.
The  “ colonies  ” which  France  and  Germany  established
in  Africa  and  Asia  were  in  no  real  sense  plantations  of  French
and  German  national  life  beyond  the  seas  ; nowhere,  not
even  in  Algeria,  did  they  represent  true  European  civiliza-
tion ; their  political  and  economic  structure  of  society  is
wholly  alien  from  that  of  the  mother  country.

Colonialism,  in  its  best  sense,  is  a natural  overflow  of
nationality ; its  test  is  the  power  of  colonists  to  transplant
the  civilization  they  represent  to  the  new  natural  and  social
environment  in  which  they  find  themselves.  We  must
not  be  misled  by  names  ; the  “ colonial  ” party  in  Germany
and  France  is  identical  in  general  aim  and  method  with
the  “ imperialist  ” party  in  England,  and  the  latter  is  the
truer  title.  Professor  Seeley  well  marked  the  nature  of

7


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


Imperialism.  “ When  a State  advances  beyond  the  limits
of  nationality  its  power  becomes  precarious  and  artificial.
This  is  the  condition  of  most  empires,  and  it  is  the  condition
of  our  own.  When  a nation  extends  itself  into  other
territories  the  chances  are  that  it  cannot  destroy  or  com-
pletely drive  out,  even  if  it  succeeds  in  conquering,  them.
When  this  happens  it  has  a great  and  permanent  difficulty
to  contend  with,  for  the  subject  or  rival  nationalities
cannot  be  properly  assimilated,  and  remain  as  a permanent
cause  of  weakness  and  danger.”1

The  novelty  of  recent  Imperialism  regarded  as  a policy
consists  chiefly  in  its  adoption  by  several  nations.  The
notion  of  a number  of  competing  empires  is  essentially
modem.  The  root  idea  of  empire  in  the  ancient  and
mediaeval  world  was  that  of  a federation  of  States,  under
a hegemony,  covering  in  general  terms  the  entire  known
recognized  world,  such  as  was  held  by  Rome  under  the  so-
called  pax  Romana . When  Roman  citizens,  with  full  civic
rights,  were  found  all  over  the  explored  world,  in  Africa
and  Asia,  as  well  as  in  Gaul  and  Britain,  Imperialism
contained  a genuine  element  of  internationalism.  With
the  fall  of  Rome  this  conception  of  a single  empire  wielding
political  authority  over  the  civilized  world  did  not  dis-
appear. On  the  contrary,  it  survived  all  the  fluctuations
of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire.  Even  after  the  definite  split
between  the  Eastern  and  Western  sections  had  taken
place  at  the  close  of  the  fourth  century,  the  theory  of  a
single  State,  divided  for  administrative  purposes,  survived.
Beneath  every  cleavage  or  antagonism,  and  notwithstanding
the  severance  of  many  independent  kingdoms  and  provinces,
this  ideal  unity  of  the  empire  lived.  It  formed  the  conscious
avowed  ideal  of  Charlemagne,  though  as  a practical  ambition
confined  to  Western  Europe.  Rudolph  of  Habsburg  not

1 “ Expansion  of  England/’  lect.  iii.

8


NATIONALISM  AND  IMPERIALISM


merely  revived  the  idea,  but  laboured  to  realize  it  through
Central  Europe,  while  his  descendant  Charles  V gave  a
very  real  meaning  to  the  term  by  gathering  under  the  unity  of
his  imperial  rule  the  territories  of  Austria,  Germany,  Spain,
the  Netherlands,  Sicily,  and  Naples.  In  later  ages  this
dream  of  a European  Empire  animated  the  policy  of  Peter
the  Great,  Catherine,  and  Napoleon.  Nor  is  it  impossible
that  Kaiser  Wilhelm  III  held  a vision  of  such  a world-power.

Political  philosophers  in  many  ages,  Vico,  Machiavelli,
Dante,  Kant,  have  speculated  on  an  empire  as  the  only
feasible  security  for  peace,  a hierarchy  of  States  conforming
on  the  larger  scale  to  the  feudal  order  within  the  single
State.

Thus  empire  was  identified  with  internationalism,  though
not  always  based  on  a conception  of  equality  of  nations.
The  break-up  of  the  Central  European  Empire,  with  the
weakening  of  nationalities  that  followed,  evoked  a new
modern  sentiment  of  internationalism  which,  through  the
eighteenth  century,  was  a flickering  inspiration  in  the
intellectual  circles  of  European  States.  “ The  eve  of  the
French  Revolution  found  every  wise  man  in  Europe —
Lessing,  Kant,  Goethe,  Rousseau,  Lavater,  Condorcet,
Priestley,  Gibbon,  Franklin — more  of  a citizen  of  the  world
than  of  any  particular  country.  Goethe  confessed  that
he  did  not  know  what  patriotism  was,  and  was  glad  to  be
without  it.  Cultured  men  of  all  countries  were  at  home
in  polite  society  everywhere.  Kant  was  immensely  more
interested  in  the  events  of  Paris  than  in  the  life  of  Prussia.
Italy  and  Germany  were  geographical  expressions  ; those
countries  were  filled  with  small  States  in  which  there  was
no  political  life,  but  in  which  there  was  much  interest  in
the  general  progress  of  culture.  The  Revolution  itself
was  at  bottom  also  human  and  cosmopolitan.  It  is,  as
Lamartine  said,  ‘ a date  in  the  human  mind,’  and  it  is

9


imperialism:  a study


because  of  that  fact  that  all  the  carping  of  critics  like
Taine  cannot  prevent  us  from  seeing  that  the  character  of
the  men  who  led  the  great  movements  of  the  Revolution
can  never  obliterate  the  momentous  nature  of  the  Titanic
strife.  The  soldiers  of  the  Revolution  who,  barefooted
and  ragged,  drove  the  insolent  reactionaries  from  the  soil
of  France  were  fighting  not  merely  for  some  national  cause,
but  for  a cause  dimly  perceived  to  be  the  cause  of  general
mankind.  With  all  its  crudities  and  imperfections,  the
idea  of  the  Revolution  was  that  of  a conceived  body  of
Right  in  which  all  men  should  share.”1

This  early  flower  of  humane  cosmopolitanism  was
destined  to  wither  before  the  powerful  revival  of  national-
ism which  marked  the  next  century.  Even  in  the  narrow
circles  of  the  cultured  classes  it  easily  passed  from  a noble
and  a passionate  ideal  to  become  a vapid  sentimentalism,
and  after  the  brief  flare  of  1848  among  the  continental
populace  had  been  extinguished,  little  remained  but  a dim
smouldering  of  the  embers.  Even  the  Socialism  which
upon  the  continent  retains  a measure  of  the  spirit  of  inter-
nationalism is  so  tightly  confined  within  the  national  limits,
in  its  struggle  with  bureaucracy  and  capitalism,  that  “ the
international  ” expresses  little  more  than  a holy  aspiration,
and  has  little  opportunity  of  putting  into  practice  the
genuine  sentiments  of  brotherhood  which  its  prophets  have
always  preached.

Thus  the  triumph  of  nationalism  seems  to  have  crushed
the  rising  hope  of  internationalism.  Yet  it  would  appear
that  there  is  no  essential  antagonism  between  them.  A
true  strong  internationalism  in  form  or  spirit  would  rather
imply  the  existence  of  powerful  self-respecting  nationalities
which  seek  union  on  the  basis  of  common  national  needs
and  interests.  Such  a historical  development  would  be  far

1 W.  Clarke,  Progressive  Review,  February,  1897.

IO


NATIONALISM  AND  IMPERIALISM


more  conformable  to  laws  of  social  growth  than  the  rise  of
anarchic  cosmopolitanism  from  individual  units  amid  the
decadence  of  national  life.

Nationalism  is  a plain  highway  to  internationalism,
and  if  it  manifests  divergence  we  may  well  suspect  a per-
version of  its  nature  and  its  purpose.  Such  a perversion
is  Imperialism,  in  which  nations  trespassing  beyond  the
limits  of  facile  assimilation  transform  the  wholesome
stimulative  rivalry  of  varied  national  types  into  the  cut-
throat struggle  of  competing  empires.

Not  only  does  aggressive  Imperialism  defeat  the  move-
ment towards  internationalism  by  fostering  animosities
among  competing  empires  : its  attack  upon  the  liberties
and  the  existence  of  weaker  or  lower  races  stimulates  in
them  a corresponding  excess  of  national  self-consciousnestf.
A nationalism  that  bristles  with  resentment  and  is  all
astrain  with  the  passion  of  self-defence  is  only  less  perverted
from  its  natural  genius  than  the  nationalism  which  glows
with  the  animus  of  greed  and  self-aggrandisement  at  the
expense  of  others.  From  this  aspect  aggressive  Imperialism
is  an  artificial  stimulation  of  nationalism  in  peoples  too
foreign  to  be  absorbed  and  too  compact  to  be  permanently
crushed.  We  welded  Africanderdom  into  just  such  a
strong  dangerous  nationalism,  and  we  joined  with  other
nations  in  creating  a resentful  nationalism  until  then
unknown  in  China.  The  injury  to  nationalism  in  both
cases  consists  in  converting  a cohesive,  pacific  internal
force  into  an  exclusive,  hostile  force,  a perversion  of  the
true  power  and  use  of  nationality.  The  worst  and  most
certain  result  is  the  retardation  of  internationalism.  The
older  nationalism  was  primarily  an  inclusive  sentiment  ;
its  natural  relation  to  the  same  sentiment  in  another
people  was  lack  of  sympathy,  not  open  hostility ; there
was  no  inherent  antagonism  to  prevent  nationalities  from


ii


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


growing  and  thriving  side  by  side.  Such  in  the  main  was
the  nationalism  of  the  earlier  nineteenth  century,  and  the
politicians  of  Free  Trade  had  some  foundation  for  their
dream  of  a quick  growth  of  effective,  informal  inter-
nationalism by  peaceful,  profitable  intercommunication  of
goods  and  ideas  among  nations  recognizing  a just  harmony
of  interests  in  free  peoples.

The  overflow  of  nationalism  into  imperial  channels
quenched  all  such  hopes.  While  co-existent  nationalities
are  capable  of  mutual  aid  involving  no  direct  antagonism
of  interests,  co-existent  empires  following  each  its  own
imperial  career  of  territorial  and  industrial  aggrandisement
are  natural  necessary  enemies.  The  full  nature  of  this
antagonism  on  its  economic  side  is  not  intelligible  without
a close  analysis  of  those  conditions  of  modern  capitalist
production  which  compel  an  ever  keener  “ fight  for  markets,”
but  the  political  antagonism  is  obvious.

The  scramble  for  Africa  and  Asia  virtually  recast  the
policy  of  all  European  nations,  evoked  alliances  which  cross
all  natural  lines  of  sympathy  and  historical  association,
drove  every  continental  nation  to  consume  an  ever-growing
share  of  its  material  and  human  resources  upon  military
and  naval  equipment,  drew  the  great  new  power  of  the
United  States  from  its  isolation  into  the  full  tide  of
competition  ; and,  by  the  multitude,  the  magnitude,  and
the  suddenness  of  the  issues  it  had  thrown  on  to  the  stage
of  politics,  became  a constant  agent  of  menace  an4  of
perturbation  to  the  peace  and  progress  of  mankind.  The
new  policy  exercised  the  most  notable  and  formidable
influence  upon  the  conscious  statecraft  of  the  nations
which  indulge  in  it.  While  producing  for  popular  con-
sumption doctrines  of  national  destiny  and  imperial  missions
of  civilization,  contradictory  in  their  true  import,  but
subsidiary  to  one  another  as  supports  of  popular  Imperialism,


12


NATIONALISM  AND  IMPERIALISM


it  evoked  a calculating,  greedy  type  of  Machiavellianism,
entitled  “ real-politik  ” in  Germany,  where  it  was  made,
which  remodelled  the  whole  art  of  diplomacy  and  erected
national  aggrandisement  without  pity  or  scruple  as  the
conscious  motive  force  of  foreign  policy.  Earth  hunger
and  the  scramble  for  markets  were  responsible  for  the
openly  avowed  repudiation  of  treaty  obligations  which
Germany,  Russia,  and  England  had  not  scrupled  to  defend.
The  sliding  scale  of  diplomatic  language,  hinterland,  sphere
of  interest,  sphere  of  influence,  paramountcy,  suzerainty,
protectorate,  veiled  or  open,  leading  up  to  acts  of  forcible
seizure  or  annexation  which  sometimes  continue  to  be
hidden  under  “ lease,”  “ rectification  of  frontier,”  “ con-
cession,” and  the  like,  was  the  invention  and  expression  of
this  cynical  spirit  of  Imperialism.  While  Germany  and
Russia  were  perhaps  more  open  in  their  professed  adoption
of  the  material  gain  of  their  country  as  the  sole  criterion  of
public  conduct,  other  nations  were  not  slow  to  accept  the
standard.  Though  the  conduct  of  nations  in  dealing  with
one  another  has  commonly  been  determined  at  all  times
by  selfish  and  shortsighted  considerations,  the  conscious,
deliberate  adoption  of  this  standard  at  an  age  when  the
intercourse  of  nations  and  their  interdependence  for  all
essentials  of  human  life  grow  ever  closer,  is  a retrograde  step
fraught  with  grave  perils  to  the  cause  of  civilization.


13


PART  I


THE  ECONOMICS  OF  IMPERIALISM

CHAPTER  I

THE  MEASURE  OF  IMPERIALISM

OUIBBLES  about  the  modern  meaning  of  the  term
Imperialism  are  best  resolved  by  reference  to  concrete
facts  in  the  history  of  the  last  sixty  years.  During  that
period  a number  of  European  nations,  Great  Britain  being
first  and  foremost,  annexed  or  otherwise  asserted  political
sway  over  vast  portions  of  Africa  and  Asia,  and  over  numerous
islands  in  the  Pacific  and  elsewhere.  The  extent  to  which
this  policy  of  expansion  was  carried  on,  and  in  particular
the  enormous  size  and  the  peculiar  character  of  the  British
acquisitions,  were  not  adequately  realized  even  by  those
who  pay  some  attention  to  Imperial  politics.

The  following  lists,  giving  the  area  and,  where  possible,
the  population  of  the  new  acquisitions,  are  designed  to
give  definiteness  to  the  term  Imperialism.  Though  derived
from  official  sources,  they  do  not,  however,  profess  strict
accuracy.  The  sliding  scale  of  political  terminology  along
which  no-man’s  land,  or  hinterland,  passes  into  some  kind
of  definite  protectorate  is  often  applied  so  as  to  conceal
the  process  ; “ rectification  ” of  a fluid  frontier  is  continually
taking  place  ; paper  “ partitions  ” of  spheres  of  influence
or  protection  in  Africa  and  Asia  are  often  obscure,  and  in
some  cases  the  area  and  the  population  are  highly  speculative.

In  a few  instances  it  is  possible  that  portions  of  territory
put  down  as  acquired  after  1870  may  have  been  ear-marked
by  a European  Power  at  some  earlier  date.  But  care  is
taken  to  include  only  such  territories  as  have  come  within
this  period  under  the  definite  political  control  of  the  Power

XS


IMPERIALISM  *.  A STUDY


to  which  they  are  assigned.  The  figures  in  the  case  of
Great  Britain  are  so  startling  as  to  call  for  a little  further
interpretation.  I have  thought  it  right  to  add  to  the
recognized  list  of  colonies  and  protectorates1  the  “ veiled
Protectorate  ” of  Egypt,  with  its  vast  Soudanese  claim,
the  entire  territories  assigned  to  Chartered  Companies,
and  the  native  or  feudatory  States  in  India  which  acknow-
ledged our  paramountcy  by  the  admission  of  a British
Agent  or  other  official  endowed  with  real  political  control.

All  these  lands  are  rightly  accredited  to  the  British
Empire,  and  if  our  past  policy  is  still  pursued,  the  intensive
as  distinct  from  the  extensive  Imperialism  will  draw  them
under  an  ever- tightening  grasp.8

In  a few  other  instances,  as,  for  example,  in  West  Africa,
countries  are  included  in  this  list  where  some  small  dominion
had  obtained  before  1870,  but  where  the  vast  majority  of
the  present  area  of  the  colony  is  of  more  recent  requisition.
Any  older  colonial  possession  thus  included  in  Lagos  or
Gambia  is,  however,  far  more  than  counter-balanced  by
the  increased  area  of  the  Gold  Coast  Colony,  which  is  not
included  in  this  list,  and  which  grew  from  29,000  square
miles  in  1873  to  39,000  square  miles  in  1893.

The  list  is  by  no  means  complete.  It  takes  no  account
of  several  large  regions  which  passed  under  the  control  of
our  Indian  Government  as  native  or  feudatory  States,  but
of  which  no  statistics  of  area  or  population,  even  approxi-
mate were  available.  Such  are  the  Shan  States,  the  Burma
Frontier,  and  the  Upper  Burma  Frontier,  the  districts  of
Chitral,  Bajam,  Swat,  Waziristan,  which  came  under  our

1 The  Statistical  Abstract  for  British  Empire  in  1903  (Cd.  2395,  Pub-  1905),
gives  an  area  of  9,631,100  sq.  miles  and  a population  of  360,646,000.

* The  situation  is  that  of  1905.  The  transfer  of  large  regions  from  the  control
of  our  Foreign  Office  to  that  of  our  Colonial  Office  is  a register  of  the  tightening
process.  Northern  and  Southern  Nigeria  underwent  this  change  in  1900,  the
E.  African  Protectorate,  Uganda,  and  Somaliland  in  1904.

l6


THE  MEASURE  OF  IMPERIALISM


Date  of  Area

Acquisition.  Square  Miles.


Evbopi —

Cyprus  ....  1878

Africa —

Zanzibar  and  Pemba  . . 1888  1

East  Africa  Protectorate  1895  J

Uganda  Protectorate  . 1894-1896

Somali  Coast  Protectorate  . 1884-1885

British  Central  Africa  Pro-
tectorate . . . 1889

Lagos  ....  to  1899

Gambia  ....  to  1888

Ashantee  ....  1896-1901

Niger  Coast  Protectorate  . 1885-1898

Egypt  ....  1882

Egyptian  Soudan  . . 1882

Griqualand  West  . . 1871-1880

Zululand  ....  *879-1 897

British  Bechuanaland  . 1885

Bechuanaland  Protectorate  1891

Transkei  ....  1879-1885

Tembuland  . . . 1885

Pondoland  . . . 1894

Griqualand  East  . . 1879-1885

British  South  Africa  Charter  1889

Transvaal  . . . 1900

Orange  River  Colony  . 1900

Asia —

Hong  Kong  (littoral)  1898

Wei-hai-wei  ...  —

Socotra  ....  1886

Upper  Burma  . . . 1887

Baluchistan  . . . 1876-1889

Sikkim  ....  1890

Raj  pu tana  (States)  .

Burma  (States)  . . > since  1881

Jammu  and  Kashmir  . J

Malay  Protected  States  . 1883-1895

North  Borneo  Co.  . . 1881

North  Borneo  Protectorate.  1888

Sarawak  ....  1888

British  New  Guinea  . . 1888

Fiji  Islands  . . . 1874


1,000,000


4*, 217

21.000

3)55°

70.000

400.000
to

500.000

400.000

950.000

*S,'97

10,521

5*)424

275.000

35
55


750,000

M7>732

50,000


2.500.000

3.800.000


25.000. 000
to

40.000. 000

9»734j4°5


321,000

i>3  54, 200


12,186,352


500.000

350.000
120,124


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


“ sphere  of  influence  ” in  1893,  and  have  been  since  taken
under  a closer  protectorate.  The  increase  of  British  India
itself  between  1871  and  1891  amounted  to  an  area  of
IQ4,993  square  miles,  with  a population  of  25,330,000,
while  no  reliable  measurement  of  the  formation  of  new
native  States  within  that  period  and  since  is  available.
Many  of  the  measurements  here  given  are  in  round  numbers,
indicative  of  their  uncertainty,  but  they  are  taken,  when-
ever available,  from  official  publications  of  the  Colonial
Office,  corroborated  or  supplemented  from  the  Statesman9 s
Tear  Book . They  will  by  no  means  comprise  the  full
tale  of  our  expansion  during  the  thirty  years,  for  many
enlargements  made  by  the  several  colonies  themselves  are
omitted.  But  taken  as  they  stand  they  make  a formidable
addition  to  the  growth  of  an  Empire  whose  nucleus  is  only
120,000  square  miles,  with  40,000,000  population.

For  so  small  a nation  to  add  to  its  domains  in  the  course
of  a single  generation  an  area  of  4,754,000  square  miles1
with  an  estimated  population  of  88,000,000,  is  a historical
fact  of  great  significance.

Accepting  Sir  Robert  Giffen’s  estimate2  of  the  size  of
our  Empire  (including  Egypt  and  the  Soudan)  at  about
13,000,000  square  miles,  with  a population  of  some  400
to  420  millions  (of  whom  about  50,000,000  are  of  British
race  and  speech),  we  find  that  one-third  of  this  Empire,
containing  quite  one-fourth  of  the  total  population  of  the
Empire,  was  acquired  within  the  last  thirty  years  of  the
nineteenth  century.  This  is  in  tolerably  close  agreement
with  other  independent  estimates.3


1 Sir  R.  Giffen  gives  the  figures  as  4,204,690  square  miles  for  the  period
1 870-1898.

1 “ The  Relative  Growth  of  the  Component  Parts  of  the  Empire,”  a paper
read  before  the  Colonial  Institute,  January,  1898.

•See  table,  "British  Colonies  and  Dependencies,”  on  page  20.

18


THE  MEASURE  OF  IMPERIALISM

The  character  of  this  Imperial  expansion  is  clearly
exhibited  in  the  list  of  new  territories.

Though,  for  convenience,  the  year  1870  has  been  taken
as  indicative  of  the  beginning  of  a conscious  policy  of
Imperialism,  it  will  be  evident  that  the  movement  did  not
attain  its  full  impetus  until  the  middle  of  the  eighties.
The  vast  increase  of  territory,  and  the  method  of  whole-
sale partition  which  assigned  to  us  great  tracts  of  African
land,  may  be  dated  from  about  1884.  Within  fifteen
years  some  three  and  three-quarter  millions  of  square  miles
were  added  to  the  British  Empire.1

Nor  did  Great  Britain  stand  alone  in  this  enterprise.
The  leading  characteristic  of  that  modern  Imperialism,  the
competition  of  rival  Empires,  was  the  product  of  this  same
period.  The  close  of  the  Franco-German  war  marked  the
beginning  of  a new  colonial  policy  in  France  and  Germany,
destined  to  take  effect  in  the  next  decade.  It  was  not
unnatural  that  the  newly-founded  German  Empire,
surrounded  by  powerful  enemies  and  doubtful  allies,  and
perceiving  its  more  adventurous  youth  drawn  into  the
United  States  and  other  foreign  lands,  should  form  the  idea
of  a colonial  empire.  During  the  seventies  a vigorous
literature  sprang  up  in  advocacy  of  the  policy2  which  took
shape  a little  later  in  the  powerful  hands  of  Bismarck.
The  earliest  instance  of  official  aid  for  the  promotion  of
German  commerce  abroad  occurred  in  1880  in  the  Govern-
ment aid  granted  to  the  “ German  Commercial  and  Planta-
tion Association  of  the  Southern  Seas.”  German  connexion
with  Samoa  dates  from  the  same  year,  but  the  definite
advance  of  Germany  upon  its  Imperialist  career  began  in
1884,  with  a p°Bcy  of  African  protectorates  and  annexations

1 Liberalism  and  the  Empire , p.  341.

* Fabri’s  Bedarf  Deutschland  der  Colonien  was  the  most  vigorous  and  popular
treatise.


C


*9


imperialism:  a study


BMTMH  COLONin  AND  DlPtNDCNClU,  190a*


Area

Square  Miles.

Estimated  *
Population.

European  Dxfknoxncxki

Asiatic  Dxpkndxncixs —

India  (1,800,258  square  miles,  287,223431

inhabitants)

Others  (27,321  square  miles,  4,363,257

inhabitants)

Aral  can  Colonies  ....

American  Colonies  ....
Australasian  Colonies

ll9

j-  1.827.579

535.39*

3.952.572

3>I75.*4°

204421

291,586,688

6,773,36o

7.260,169

5,009,181

Total

9)49,)5°*

310,833,919

Protectorates —

Asia

Africa  (including  Egypt,  Egyptian  Soudan)
Oceania

120400

3»53<>,«x>

800

1,200,000

54,730,000

30,000

Total  Protectorates

3,651,100

55,960,000

Grand  total  ....

13,142,70*

366,793,919

of  Oceanic  islands.  During  the  next  fifteen  years  she
brought  under  her  colonial  sway  about  1,000,000  square
miles,  with  an  estimated  population  of  14,000,000.  Almost
the  whole  of  this  territory  was  tropical,  and  the  white
population  formed  a total  of  a few  thousands.

Similarly  in  France  a great  revival  of  the  old  colonial
spirit  took  place  in  the  early  eighties,  the  most  influential
of  the  revivalists  being  the  eminent  economist,  M.  Paul
Leroy-Beaulieu.  The  extension  of  empire  in  Senegal  and
Sahara  in  1880  was  followed  next  year  by  the  annexation
of  Turn*,  and  France  was  soon  actively  engaged  in  the
scramble  for  Africa  in  1884,  while  at  the  same  time  she
was  fastening  her  rule  on  Tonking  and  Laos  in  Asia.  Her

1 Compiled  from  Morris’  History  of  Colonization,  voi.  ii,  p.  87,  and  Statesman's
Tear  Book , 1900.  Figures  for  1933-4  are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  369.

20


THE  MEA8URE  OF  IMPERIALISM


acquisitions  between  1880  and  1900  (exclusive  of  the
extension  of  New  Caledonia  and  its  dependencies)  amounted
to  an  area  of  over  three  and  a half  million  square  miles,  with
a native  population  of  some  37,000,000,  almost  the  whole
tropical  or  sub-tropical,  inhabited  by  lower  races  and
incapable  of  genuine  French  colonization.

Italian  aspirations  took  similar  shape  from  1880  onwards,
though  the  disastrous  experience  of  the  Abyssinian  expedi-
tions gave  a check  to  Italian  Imperialism.  Her  possessions
in  East  Africa  are  confined  to  the  northern  colony  of  Eritrea
and  the  protectorate  of  Somaliland.1

Of  the  other  European  States,  two  only,  Portugal1  and
Belgium,  enter  directly  into  the  competition  of  this  new
Imperialism.  The  African  arrangements  of  1884-6  assigned
to  Portugal  the  large  district  of  Angola  on  the  Congo  Coast,
while  a large  strip  of  East  Africa  passed  definitely  under
her  political  control  in  1891.  The  anomalous  position
of  the  great  Congo  Free  State,  ceded  to  the  King  of  Belgium
in  1883,  and  growing  since  then  by  vast  accretions,  must
be  regarded  as  involving  Belgium  in  the  competition  for
African  empire.

Spain  may  be  said  to  have  definitely  retired  from  imperial
competition.  The  large  and  important  possessions  of
Holland  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  though  involving
her  in  imperial  politics  to  some  degree,  belong  to  older
colonialism  : she  takes  no  part  in  the  new  imperial  expansion.

Russia,  the  only  active  expansionist  country  of  the
North,  stood  alone  in  the  character  of  her  imperial  growth,
which  differed  from  other  Imperialism  in  that  it  was
principally  Asiatic  m its  achievements  and  proceeded  by
direct  extension  of  imperial  boundaries,  partaking  to  a
1 In  the  year  1905.

* Portugal’s  true  era  of  Imperialism  in  Africa,  however,  dates  back  two
centuries.  See  Theal's  fascinating  story  of  the  foundation  of  a Portuguese
Empire  in  Beginnings  of  South  African  History  (Fisher  Unwin).

21


imperialism:  a study


larger  extent  than  in  the  other  cases  of  a regular  colonial
policy  of  settlement  for  purposes  of  agriculture  and  industry.
It  is,  however,  evident  that  Russian  expansion,  though
of  a more  normal  and  natural  order  than  that  which
characterises  the  new  Imperialism,  came  definitely  into
contact  and  into  competition  with  the  claims  and  aspirations
of  the  latter  in  Asia,  and  was  advancing  rapidly  during  the
period  which  is  the  object  of  our  study.

The  entrance  of  the  powerful  and  progressive  nation
of  the  United  States  of  America  upon  Imperialism  by  the
annexation  of  Hawaii  and  the  taking  over  of  the  relics  of
ancient  Spanish  empire  not  only  added  a new  formidable
competitor  for  trade  and  territory,  but  changed  and
complicated  the  issues.  As  the  focus  of  political  attention
and  activity  shifted  more  to  the  Pacific  States,  and  the
commercial  aspirations  of  America  were  more  and  more
set  upon  trade  with  the  Pacific  islands  and  the  Asiatic
coast,  the  same  forces  which  were  driving  European  States
along  the  path  of  territorial  expansion  seemed  likely  t^  act
upon  the  United  States,  leading  her  to  a virtual  abandon-
ment of  the  principle  of  American  isolation  which  hitherto
dominated  her  policy.

The  comparative  table  of  colonisation  (page  369),  compiled
from  the  Statesman's  Tear  Book  for  1900  by  Mr.  H.  C.
Morris,1  marked  the  expansion  of  the  political  control
of  Western  nations  in  1905. 2

The  political  nature  of  British  Imperialism  may  be
authoritatively  ascertained  by  considering  the  governmental
relations  which  the  newly  annexed  territories  have  held
with  the  Crown.

Officially,8  British  “ colonial  possessions  ” fall  into  three

1 Cf.  his  History  of  Colonization , vol.  ii,  p.  318  (Macmillan  & Co.).

1 Figure*  for  the  year*  1934-5  are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  369.

1 See  the  “ Colonial  Office  Lilt.”

22


THE  MEASURE  OF  IMPERIALISM


■s®

Area.  Square  Miles.

Population.

P

Mother

Colonies,

Mother

Colonies,

Country.

&c.

Country.

&c.

United  Kingdom

5°

120,979

11,605,238

40,559,954

345,222,239

France

33

204,092

3,74°,756

38,5 ‘7,975

56,401,860

Germany  .

13

208,830

1,027,120

52,279,90!

14,687,000

Netherlands

3

12,648

782,862

5,074,632

35»i!5»7n

Portugal  .

9

36,038

801,100

243,877

5,049,729

9,‘48,7°7

Spain

3

197,670

17,56 5,632

136,000

Italy

2

110,646

188,500

3 ',856, 675

850,000

Austria-Hungary

241,032

23,570

41,244,811

1,568,092

Denmark  .

15,289

86,634

2, «85,335

114,229

Russia

8,660,395

255>55°

128,932,173

15,684,000

Turkey  .

Mil, 741

M3M41

465,000

23,834,500

14,956,236

China

H

2,881,560

386,000,000

16,680,000

U.S.A.  .

■

3,557,000

172,091

77,000,000

10,544,617

Total

136

15,813,201

22,273,858

850,103,317

521,108,791

classes — (i)  “ Crown  colonies,  in  which  the  Crown  has
the  entire  control  of  legislation,  while  the  administration
is  carried  on  by  public  officers  under  the  control  of  the
Home  Government ; (2)  colonies  possessing  representative
institutions,  but  not  responsible  government,  in  which
the  Crown  has  no  more  than  a veto  on  legislation,  but  the
Home  Government  retains  the  control  of  public  affairs ;
(3)  colonies  possessing  representative  institutions  and  respon-
sible government,  in  which  the  Crown  has  only  a veto  on
legislation,  and  the  Home  Government  has  no  control  over
any  officer  except  the  Governor.”

Now,  of  the  thirty-nine  separate  areas  which  were  annexed
by  Great  Britain  after  1870  as  colonies  or  protectorates,
not  a single  one  ranks  in  class  3 and  the  Transvaal  alone  in
class  2.

The  new  Imperialism  established  no  single  British  colony
endowed  with  responsible  self-government.  Nor,  with  the

23


imperialism:  a study


THE  MEASURE  OF  IMPERIALISM


*5


imperialism:  a study


exception  of  the  three  new  States  in  South  Africa,  where
white  settlers  lived  in  some  numbers,  is  it  seriously  pretended
that  any  of  these  annexed  territories  was  being  prepared
and  educated  for  representative,  responsible  self-govern-
ment ; and  even  in  these  South  African  States  there  is
no  serious  intention,  either  on  the  part  of  the  Home
Government  or  of  the  colonists,  that  the  majority  of  the
inhabitants  shall  control  the  government.

It  is  true  that  some  of  these  areas  enjoy  a measure  of
self-government,  as  protectorates  or  as  feudatory  States,
under  their  own  native  princes.  But  all  these  in  major
matters  of  policy  are  subject  to  the  absolute  rule  of  the
British  Government,  or  of  some  British  official,  while  the
general  tendency  is  towards  drawing  the  reins  of  arbitrary
control  more  tightly  over  protectorates,  converting  them
into  States  which  are  in  substance,  though  not  always  in
name,  Crown  colonies.  With  the  exception  of  a couple  of
experiments  in  India,  the  tendency  everywhere  has  been
towards  a closer  and  more  drastic  imperial  control  over  the
territories  that  have  been  annexed,  transforming  pro-
tectorates, company  rule,  and  spheres  of  influence  into
definite  British  States  of  the  Crown  colony  order.

This  is  attributable,  not  to  any  greed  of  tyranny  on  the
part  of  the  Imperial  Government,  but  to  the  conditions
imposed  upon  our  rule  by  considerations  of  climate  and
native  population.  Almost  the  whole  of  this  new  territory
is  tropical,  or  so  near  to  the  tropics  as  to  preclude  genuine
colonisation  of  British  settlers,  while  in  those  few  districts
where  Europeans  can  work  and  breed,  as  in  parts  of  South
Africa  and  Egypt,  the  preoctupation  of  the  country  by
large  native  populations  of  “ lower  races  ” precludes  any
considerable  settlement  of  British  workers  and  the  safe
bestowal  of  the  full  self-government  which  prevails  in
Australasia  and  Canada.


26


THE  MEASURE  OF  IMPERIALISM

The  same  is  true  to  an  even  more  complete  extent  of
the  Imperialism  of  other  continental  countries.  The  new
Imperialism  nowhere  extended  the  political  and  civil
liberties  of  the  mother  country  to  any  part  of  the  vast
territories  which,  after  1870,  fell  under  the  government  of
Western  civilized  Powers.  Politically,  the  new  Imperialism
was  an  expansion  of  autocracy.

Taking  the  growth  of  Imperialism  as  illustrated  in  the
expansion  of  Great  Britain  and  of  the  chief  continental
Powers,  we  find  the  distinction  between  Imperialism  and
colonisation  closely  borne  out  by  facts  and  figures,  and
warranting  the  following  general  judgments  : —

First — Almost  the  whole  of  this  imperial  expansion  was
occupied  with  the  political  absorption  of  tropical  or  sub-
tropical lands  in  which  white  men  will  not  settle  with  their
families.

Second — Nearly  all  the  lands  were  thickly  peopled  by
“ lower  races.”

Thus  this  recent  imperial  expansion  stands  entirely
distinct  from  the  colonization  of  sparsely  peopled  lands
in  temperate  zones,  where  white  colonists  carry  with  them
the  modes  of  government,  the  industrial  and  other  arts
of  the  civilization  of  the  mother  country.  The  “ occupa-
tion ” of  these  new  territories  was  comprised  in  the  presence
of  a small  minority  of  white  men,  officials,  traders,  and
industrial  organisers,  exercising  political  and  economic  sway
over  great  hordes  of  population  regarded  as  inferior  and  as
incapable  of  exercising  any  considerable  rights  of  self-
government,  in  politics  or  industry.


27


CHAPTER  II


THE  COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF
IMPERIALISM

THE  absorption  of  so  large  a proportion  of  public
interest,  energy,  blood  and  money  in  seeking  to
procure  colonial  possessions  and  foreign  markets  would
seem  to  indicate  that  Great  Britain  obtained  her  chief
livelihood  by  external  trade.  Now  this  was  not  the  case.
Large  as  was  our  foreign  and  colonial  trade  in  volume  and
in  value,  essential  as  was  much  of  it  to  our  national  well-
being, nevertheless  it  furnished  a small  proportion  of  the
total  industry  of  the  nation.

According  to  the  conjectural  estimate  of  the  Board  of
Trade  “ the  proportion  of  the  total  labour  of  the  British
working  classes  which  was  concerned  with  the  production
of  commodities  for  export  (including  the  making  of  the
instruments  of  this  production  and  their  transport  to  the
ports)  was  between  one-fifth  and  one-sixth  of  the  whole.”1

If  we  suppose  the  profits,  salaries,  etc.,  in  connexion
with  export  trade  to  be  at  the  same  level  with  those  derived
from  home  trade,  we  may  conclude  that  between  one-fifth
and  one-sixth  of  the  income  of  the  nation  comes  from  the
production  and  carriage  of  goods  for  export  trade.

Taking  the  higher  estimate  of  the  magnitude  of  foreign
trade,  we  should  conclude  that  it  furnished  employment
to  one-fifth  of  our  industrial  factors,  the  other  four-fifths
being  employed  in  supplying  home  markets.

But  this  must  not  be  taken  as  a measure  of  the  net  value


* Cd.  1761,  p.  361.


28


COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF  IMPERIALISM


of  foreign  trade  to  our  nation,  or  of  the  amount  of  loss
that  would  have  been  sustained  by  a diminution  of  our
foreign  markets.  We  are  not  entitled  to  assume  that  a
tariff-policy  or  some  other  restrictive  policy  on  the  part  of
foreign  nations  which  gradually  reduced  our  export  trade
would  imply  an  equivalent  loss  of  national  income,  and  of
employment  of  capital  and  labour  in  Great  Britain.  The
assumption,  sometimes  made,  that  home  demand  is  a fixed
amount,  and  that  any  commodities  made  in  excess  of  this
amount  must  find  a foreign  market,  or  remain  unsold,  is
quite  unwarranted.  There  is  no  necessary  limit  to  the
quantity  of  capital  and  labour  that  can  be  employed  in
supplying  the  home  markets,  provided  the  effective  demand
for  the  goods  that  are  produced  is  so  distributed  that  every
increase  of  production  stimulates  a corresponding  increase
of  consumption.

Under  such  conditions  a gradual  loss  of  foreign  markets
would  drive  more  capital  and  labour  into  industries  sup-
plying home  markets ; the  goods  this  capital  and  labour
produced  would  be  sold  and  consumed  at  home.  Under
such  circumstances  some  loss  would  normally  be  sustained,
because  it  could  be  reasonably  assumed  that  the  foreign
market  that  was  lost  was  a more  profitable  one  than  the
new  home  market  which  took  its  place  ; but  that  loss  would
certainly  be  much  smaller  than  the  aggregate  of  the  value
of  trade  thus  transferred ; it  would,  in  fact,  be  measured
by  the  reduction  in  profit,  and  perhaps  in  wages,  attending
the  substitution  of  a less  remunerative  home  market  for  a
more  remunerative  foreign  market.

This  argument,  of  course,  does  not  imply  that  Great
Britain  could  dispense  with  her  external  markets,  and  be
no  great  sufferer  in  trade  and  income.  Some  considerable
foreign  markets,  as  we  know,  are  an  economic  necessity  to
her,  in  order  that  by  her  exports  she  may  purchase  foods  and

29


imperialism:  a study


materials  which  she  cannot  produce,  or  can  only  produce  at
a great  disadvantage.

This  fact  makes  a considerable  external  market  a matter
of  vital  importance  to  us.  But  outside  the  limit  of  this
practical  necessity  the  value  of  our  foreign  markets  must
rightly  be  considered  to  be  measured,  not  by  the  aggregate
value  of  the  goods  we  sell  abroad,  but  by  the  superior
gain  from  selling  them  abroad  as  compared  with  selling
them  (or  corresponding  quantities  of  other  goods)  at  home.
To  assume  that  if  these  goods  are  not  sold  abroad,  neither
they  nor  their  substitutes  could  be  sold,  even  at  lower
prices,  in  the  home  market,  is  quite  unwarranted.  There
is  no  natural  and  necessary  limit  to  the  proportion  of  the
national  product  which  can  be  sold  and  consumed  at  home.
It  is,  of  course,  preferable  to  sell  goods  abroad  where  higher
profit  can  be  got  by  doing  so,  but  the  net  gain  to  national
industry  and  income  must  be  measured  not  by  the  value  of
the  trade  done,  but  by  its  more  profitable  nature.

These  reflections  are  required  to  make  us  realize  (i)  that
the  importance  of  external  trade  is  not  rightly  measured
by  the  proportion  its  volume  and  value  bear  at  any  given
time  to  those  of  home  trade  ; and  (2)  that  it  is  by  no  means
essential  to  the  industrial  progress  of  a nation  that  her
external  trade  should  under  all  conditions  keep  pace  with
her  home  trade.

When  a modern  nation  has  attained  a high  level  of
development  in  those  industrial  arts  which  are  engaged  in
supplying  the  first  physical  necessaries  and  conveniences  of
the  population,  an  increasing  proportion  of  her  productive
energies  will  begin  to  pass  into  higher  kinds  of  industry,
into  the  transport  services,  into  distribution,  and  into
professional,  official  and  personal  services,  which  produce
goods  and  services  less  adapted  on  the  whole  for  international
trade  than  those  simpler  goods  which  go  to  build  the  lower

30


COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF  IMPERIALISM


Year.

Trade  (in
Millions).

Value  per
Head  of
Population.

Year.

Trade  (in
Millions).

Value  per
Head  of
Population.

C >■  i-

£ s.  4.

1870

547

1885

642

1871

615

1886

619

1872

66q

1887

643

1873

682

18S8

686

■874

668

1889

743

Average  .

636

19  19  3

Average  .

666

18  4 j

1875

mm

1890

749

1876

MM

1891

744

1877

1892

7i5

1878

mm

1893

682

1879

mm

1894

682

Average  ,

632

18  16  6

Average  .

7X5

l8  14  IO

1880

697

*895

703

1881

694

1896

738

1S82

720

1897

745

1883

1898

76 4

1884

1899

805

Average  .

706

20  1 3

| Average  .

753

18  1$  6

Figures  for  the  years  19 10-1934  are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  370.


stages  of  a civilization.1  If  this  is  true,  it  would  appear  that,
whereas  up  to  a certain  point  in  the  development  of  national
life  foreign  trade  will  grow  rapidly,  after  that  point  a
decline,  not  in  absolute  size  or  growth  but  in  relative  size
and  growth,  will  take  place.

There  is  some  reason  to  hold  that  Great  Britain  had,
in  1905,  reached  an  industrial  level  where  external  trade,
though  still  important,  will  be  relatively  less  important  in
her  national  economy.

Between  1870  and  1900,  as  the  above  table  shows,  the

1 Sec  Contemporary  Review , August,  1905,  in' which  the  author  illustrates  this
tendency  by  the  statistics  gf  Qccupations  in  various  nations.

31


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


value  of  our  foreign  trade  had  not  grown  so  fast  as  our
population.  Whereas  upon  the  generally  accepted  estimate
the  growth  of  the  income  of  the  nation  during  these  three
decades  was  from  about  £1,200,000,000  to  £1,750,000,000,
yielding  an  increase  of  about  10  per  cent,  in  the  income
per  head  of  the  population,  the  value  of  foreign  trade  per
head  had  positively  shrunk.

Although  the  real  increase  in  volume  of  external  trade
was  considerable  when  the  general  fall  of  prices  after  1870
is  taken  into  account,  it  remains  quite  evident  that  neither
volume  nor  value  of  external  trade  had  kept  pace  during
this  period  with  volume  and  value  of  internal  trade.1

Next,  let  us  inquire  whether  the  vast  outlay  of  energy
and  money  upon  imperial  expansion  was  attended  by  a
growing  trade  within  the  Empire  as  compared  with  foreign
trade.  In  other  words,  does  the  policy  tend  to  make  us
more  and  more  an  economically  self-sufficing  Empire  i
Does  trade  follow  the  flag  ?

The  figures  in  the  table  facing  represent  the  proportion
which  our  trade  with  our  colonies  and  possessions  bears
to  our  foreign  trade  during  the  last  half  of  the  nineteenth
century.

A longer  period  is  here  taken  as  a basis  of  comparison
in  order  to  bring  out  clearly  the  central  truth,  viz.,  that
Imperialism  had  no  appreciable  influence  whatever  on  the
determination  of  our  external  trade  until  the  protective  and
preferential  measures  taken  during  and  after  the  Great  War.
Setting  aside  the  abnormal  increase  of  exports  to  our
colonies  in  1900-1903  due  to  the  Boer  War,  we  perceive
that  the  proportions  of  our  external  trade  had  changed

1 The  lour  yean  subsequent  to  1899  show  a considerable  increase  in  value  of
foreign  trade,  the  average  value  per  head  for  1900-1903  working  out  at  zs.  5 d.
But  this  is  abnormal,  due  partly  to  special  colonial  and  foreign  expenditure  in
connexion  with  the  Boer  War,  partly  to  the  general  rite  of  prices  as  compared
with  the  earlier  level.


3*


COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF  IMPERIALISM


PSRCBNTAGXS  Of  TOTAL  VALUES.


Annual  Averages.

Imports  into

Great  Britain  from

Exports  from

Great  Britain  to

Foreign

Countries.

British

Possessions.

Foreign

Countries.

British

Possessions.

i855-,*59

765

23-5

68-5

31*5

I860-1864

71  *2

288

66*6

33*4

I865-X869

76*0

24-0

72*4

27*6

1870-1874

78*0

22*0

74*4

25*6

1875-1879

77-9

22*1

67*0

33.0

I880-I884

76-5

23*5

65*5

34*5

I885-1889

22*9

65*0

35’°

I89O-I894

22*9

66-5

33*5

1895-1899

21*6

66*o

34*0

1900-1903

mm

20*7

63-0

37'°

This  table  (Cd.  1761  p.  407)  refers  to  merchandise  only,  excluding  bullion.
From  the  export  trade,  ships  and  boats  (not  recorded  prior  to  1897)  are  excluded.
In  exports  British  produce  alone  is  included.  Figures  for  the  yean  up  to  1934
are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  371.


very  little  during  the  half  century ; colonial  imports
slightly  fell,  colonial  exports  slightly  rose,  during  the  last
decade,  as  compared  with  the  beginning  of  the  period.
Although  since  1870  such  vast  additions  have  been  made
to  British  possessions,  involving  a corresponding  reduction
of  the  area  of  “ Foreign  Countries,”  this  imperial  expansion
was  attended  by  no  increase  in  the  proportions  of  intra-
imperial trade  as  represented  in  the  imports  and  exports  of
Great  Britain  during  the  nineteenth  century.

From  the  standpoint  of  the  recent  history  of  British
trade  there  is  no  support  for  the  dogma  that  u Trade  follows
the  Flag.”  So  far  we  have  examined  the  question  from  the
point  of  view  of  Great  Britain.  But  if  we  examine  the
commercial  connexion  between  Great  Britain  and  the
colonies  from  the  colonial  standpoint,  asking  whether  the
external  trade  of  our  colonies  tends  to  a closer  union  with
the  mother  country  what  result  do  we  reach  i

33


IMPERIALISM  : A STUPY


The  elaborate  statistical  investigation  of  Professor  Alleyne
Ireland  into  the  trade  of  our  colonial  possessions  strikes  a
still  heavier  blow  at  the  notion  that  trade  follows  the  flag.
Taking  the  same  period,  he  establishes  the  following  two
facts : —

“ The  total  import  trade  of  all  the  British  colonies  and
possessions  has  increased  at  a much  greater  rate  than  the
imports  from  the  United  Kingdom.”  “ The  total  exports
of  all  the  British  colonies  and  possessions  have  increased
at  a much  greater  rate  than  the  exports  to  the  United
Kingdom.”1

The  following  table2  shows  the  gradual  decline  in  the
importance  to  the  colonies  of  the  commercial  connexion
with  Great  Britain  since  1872-75,  as  illustrated  in  the
proportion  borne  in  the  value  of  their  exports  from  and
their  imports  to  Great  Britain  as  compared  with  the  value
of  the  total  imports  and  exports  of  the  British  colonies  and
possessions  : — 1


Four-Yearly  Averages.

Percentages  of
Imports  into
Colonies,  &c.,  from
Great  Bn  tarn.

Percentages  of
Exports  from
Colonies,  &c.,  into
Great  Britain.

1856-1859

46.5

57.1

1860-1863

41*0

65-4

1864-1867

38-9

57.6

1868-1871

3941

534

1872-1875

43‘6

54-o

1876-1879

417

50-3

1880-1883

42-8

48*1

1884-1887

38*5

43'°

1888-1891

36-3

397

1892-1895

32’4

36-6

1896-1899

.

32J

319

1 Tropical  Colonization , Page  125.

* Founded  on  the  tables  of  Professor  Ireland  (T ropical  Colonization , pp.  98-101),
and  revised  up  to  date  from  figures  in  the  Statistical  Abstract  of  Colonial
Possessions,  Cd.  307.

1 Figures  for  the  years  1913-4,  1924-9,  1933-4  are  given  in  the  Appendix,
PP-  372~3*


34


COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF  IMPERIALISM


In  other  words,  while  Great  Britain’s  dependence  on
her  Empire  for  trade  was  stationary,  the  dependence  of  her
Empire  upon  her  for  trade  was  rapidly  diminishing.

The  actual  condition  of  British  trade  with  foreign
countries  and  with  the  chief  groups  of  the  colonies  respec-
tively may  be  indicated  by  the  following  statement1  for  the
year  ending  December,  1901  : —


Imports  from.

Exports  to.

Value.

Per-

cent-

age.

Value.

Per-

cent-

age.

Foreign  Countries  .

c

417,615,000

80

L

178,4^0,000

631

British  India  ....

38.001.000

34.682.000

mm

39»753,ooo

H

Australasia  ....

mm

26,932,000

9*

Canada  ....

19,775,000

■9

7,797,000

3

British  South  Africa

5,155,000

mm

1 7,006,000

6

Other  British  Possessions  .

7,082,000

■

10,561,000

4

Total  ....

522,310,000

100

280,499,000

100

It  is  thus  clearly  seen  that  while  imperial  expansion
was  attended  by  no  increase  in  the  value  of  our  trade  with
our  colonies  and  dependencies,  a considerable  increase  in
the  value  of  our  trade  with  foreign  nations  had  taken
place.  Did  space  permit,  it  could  be  shown  that  the
greatest  increase  of  our  foreign  trade  was  with  that  group
of  industrial  nations  whom  we  regard  as  our  industrial
enemies,  and  whose  political  enmity  we  were  in  danger  of
arousing  by  our  policy  of  expansion — France,  Germany,
Russia,  and  the  United  States.

One  more  point  of  supreme  significance  in  its  bearing
on  the  new  Imperialism  remains.  We  have  already  drawn

1 “ Cobden  Club  Leaflet,”  123,  by  Harold  Cox.  Figures  for  the  year  1934-5
are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  371.


D


35


imperialism:  a study


attention  to  the  radical  distinction  between  genuine
colonialism  and  Imperialism.  This  distinction  is  strongly
marked  in  the  statistics  of  the  progress  of  our  commerce
with  our  foreign  possessions.

The  results  of  an  elaborate  investigation  by  Professor
Flux1  into  the  size  of  our  trade  respectively  with  India,
the  self-governing  colonies  and  the  other  colonies  may  be
presented  in  the  following  simple  table : — 2


Percentages  of
imports  from
Great  Britain.

Percentage  of
Exports  to

Great  Britain.

1867-71.

1892-96.

1867-71.

1892-96.

India

69-2

71*9

526

33*2

Self-governing  Colonies  .

57*5

59-2

55*4

70*3

Other  Colonies

34*3

26*4

464

29*3

Professor  Flux  thus  summarises  the  chief  results  of  his
comparisons : “ The  great  source  of  growth  of  Britain’s
colonial  trade  is  very  clearly  shown  to  be  the  growth  of
trade  with  the  colonies  to  which  self-government  has  been
granted.  Their  foreign  trade  has  nearly  doubled,  and
the  proportion  of  it  which  is  carried  on  with  the  mother
country  has  increased  from  about  $6$  per  cent,  to  65  per  cent.

Later  statistics8  distinguishing  British  trade  with  India,
the  self-governing  colonies  and  other  colonies  and  possessions
impress  the  same  lesson  from  the  standpoint  of  Great
Britain  in  an  even  more  striking  manner.

1 “ The  Flag  and  Trade/'  Journal  of  Statistical  Society , September,  1899.
Vol.  lxii,  pp.  496-98.

* Figure*  for  the  years  1 91 3-4,  1924-9  and  1933-4  are  given  in  the  Appendix,
p.  371.

* Statistical  Abstract  for  the  British  Empire  from  1889  to  1903.  (Cd.  2395
pp.  25-28).  Full  tables  of  the  Export  and  Import  trade  of  Great  Britain  with
the  several  parts  of  the  Empire  for  the  years  1904  to  1934,  are  given  in  the
Appendix,  pp.  372-3.


36


COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF  IMPERIALISM


Value  or  Imports  into  Great  Britain  prom  the  Several  Parts  or  the
Empire  (000,000  Omitted).


1889

1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

1895

1896

1898

1899

1900*

1901

1902

Self-governing

Colonies

5i

3a

F

58

58

62

67

64

77

80

80

69

68

7i

84

India

37

33

33

□

m

31

29

27

26

□

29

3i

34

32

37

Other  possessions  .

*5

23

16

0

15

1 7

16

16

16

16

x8

19

17

19

16

Value  or  Exports  prom  Great  Britain  into  the  Several  Parts  or  the
Empire


1889

1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

1893

1896

1897

2898

2899

1900

1901

1902

1903

Self-governing

Colonies

48

44

43

37

35

43

47

45

44

48

55

59

68

66

India

40

43

39

37

38

36

31

38

37

38

40

4i

46

42

45

Other  possessions

15

17

25

14

14

J5

24

23

23

25

17

18

18

17

18

These  tables  show  that  whereas  the  import  and  the
export  trade  with  our  self-governing  colonies  exhibited  a
large  advance,  our  import  trade  alike  with  India  and  the
“ other  possessions  ” was  virtually  stagnant,  while  our
export  trade  with  these  two  parts  shows  a very  slight  and
very  irregular  tendency  to  increase.

Now  the  significance  of  these  results  for  the  study  of
modern  Imperialism  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  whole
trend  of  this  movement  was  directed  to  the  acquisition  of
lands  and  populations  belonging  not  to  the  self-governing
order  but  to  the  “ other  possessions.”  Our  expansion  was
almost  wholly  concerned  with  the  acquisition  of  tropical
and  sub-tropical  countries  peopled  by  races  to  whom  we
have  no  serious  intention  of  giving  self-government.
With  the  exception  of  the  Transvaal  and  the  Orange  River

1 Fall-off  in  imports  from  self-governing  colonies  1900-2  is  due  entirely  to
stoppage  in  gold  imports  from  South  Africa.

37


imperialism:  a study


Colony,  none  of  our  acquisitions  since  1870  belonged,  even
prospectively,  to  the  self-governing  group,  and  even  in  the
case  of  the  two  South  African  states,  the  prospective  self-
government  was  confined  to  a white  minority  of  the
population.  The  distinctive  feature  of  modern  Imperialism,
from  the  commercial  standpoint,  is  that  it  adds  to  our
empire  tropical  and  sub-tropical  regions  with  which  our
trade  is  small,  precarious  and  unprogressive.

The  only  considerable  increase  of  our  import  trade  since
1884  is  from  our  genuine  colonies  in  Australasia,  North
America,  and  Cape  Colony ; the  trade  with  India  has  been
stagnant,  while  that  with  our  tropical  colonies  in  Africa
and  the  West  Indies  has  been  in  most  cases  irregular  and
dwindling.  Our  export  trade  exhibits  the  same  general
character,  save  that  Australia  and  Canada  show  a growing
resolution  to  release  themselves  from  dependence  upon
British  manufactures ; the  trade  with  the  tropical  colonies,
though  exhibiting  some  increase,  is  very  small  and  very
fluctuating.

As  for  the  territories  acquired  under  the  new  Imperialism,
except  in  one  instance,  no  serious  attempt  to  regard  them
as  satisfactory  business  assets  is  possible.

The  following  table  (page  39)  gives  the  official  figures  of
the  value  of  our  import  and  export  trade  with  our  tropical
and  sub-tropical  possessions  for  the  beginning  of  the  present
century.  Bullion  and  specie  are  included  in  both  accounts.

The  entire  volume  of  our  export  trade  with  our  new
protectorates  in  Africa,  Asia  and  the  Pacific  amounted  to
not  more  than  some  nine  millions  sterling,  of  which  more
than  six  millions  took  place  with  the  Malay  Protected
States,  and  was  largely  through  traffic  with  the  Far  East.
The  entire  volume  of  the  import  trade  consisted  of  about
eight  millions  sterling,  half  of  which  is  with  the  same  Malay
States.  At  whatever  figure  we  estimate  the  profits  in  this

38


COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OF  IMPERIALISM


British  Trade  with  New  Possessions.1

Imports  from

Exports  to

i

L

Cyprus  ......

83,842

131,445

Zanzibar  Protectorate

114,088

**,777

British  East  Africa  Protectorate
(including  Uganda)

123,006

I7i274

Somaliland  .....

389,414*

333, *4**

Southern  Nigeria  Protectorate  .

1,228,959

922,657

Northern  Nigeria  Protectorate  .

240,110

68,442

Lagos

641,203

366,171

Gambia  .....

142,560

»5,'5*

British  North  Borneo

275,000

368,000

Malay  Protected  States  .

4,100,000  !

6,211,000

Fiji  ......

30,567

10,161

British  Solomon  Islands  Protectorate

—

Gilbert  and  Ellice  Islands  Protectorate

20,359

British  New  Guinea

Leeward  Islands  ....

168,700

Windward  Islands  ....

739j°95

3°5>224

trade,  it  forms  an  utterly  insignificant  part  of  our  national
income,  while  the  expenses  connected  directly  and  indirectly
with  the  acquisition,  administration  and  defence  of  these
possessions  must  swallow  an  immeasurably  larger  sum.

Apart  from  its  quantity,  the  quality  of  the  new  tropical
export  trade  was  of  the  lowest,  consisting  for  the  most  part,
as  the  analysis  of  the  Colonial  Office  shows,  of  the  cheapest
textile  goods  of  Lancashire,  the  cheapest  metal  goods  of
Birmingham  and  Sheffield,  and  large  quantities  of  gun-
powder, spirits,  and  tobacco.

Such  evidence  leads  to  the  following  conclusions  bearing
upon  the  economics  of  the  new  Imperialism.  First,  the
external  trade  of  Great  Britain  bore  a small  and  diminishing
proportion  to  its  internal  industry  and  trade.  Secondly,
of  the  external  trade,  that  with  British  possessions  bore
a diminishing  proportion  to  that  with  foreign  countries.

1 Cd.  2395  and  Cd.  2337.

1 Trade  with  British  possessions  as  well  as  with  Great  Britain  is  here  included.

39


IMPERIALISM:  A STUDY


Thirdly,  of  the  trade  with  British  possessions  the  tropical
trade,  and  in  particular  the  trade  with  the  new  tropical
possessions,  was  the  smallest,  least  progressive,  and  most
fluctuating  in  quantity,  while  it  is  lowest  in  the  character
of  the  goods  which  it  embraces.


40


CHAPTER  III


IMPERIALISM  AS  AN  OUTLET
FOR  POPULATION

THERE  is  a widely  prevalent  belief  that  imperial
expansion  is  desirable,  or  even  necessary,  in  order
to  absorb  and  utilize  the  surplus  of  our  ever-growing
population,  “The  reproductive  powers  of  nature,”  runs
the  argument,  “ brook  no  restraint : the  most  dominant
force  in  history  is  the  tendency  of  population  to  overflow  its
ancient  banks,  seeking  fuller  and  easier  subsistence.  Great
Britain  is  one  of  the  most  congested  areas  in  the  world  ;
her  growing  population  cannot  find  enough  remunerative
occupation  within  these  islands ; professional  and  working-
classes  alike  find  it  more  and  more  difficult  to  earn  a decent
and  secure  living,  every  labour  market  is  overstocked,
emigration  is  a prime  economic  necessity.  Now,  those  who
under  such  pressure  leave  our  shores  consist  largely  of  the
strongest  and  most  energetic  stuff  the  nation  contains.  Many
of  these  people,  whose  permanent  alienation  would  be  a
heavy  loss,  have  been  saved  to  the  Empire  by  the  policy
of  imperial  expansion : they  have  settled  either  in  vacant
places  of  the  earth  which  they  have  seized  and  kept  under
British  rule,  or  in  places  where  they  have  set  up  a definitely
British  supremacy  over  lower  races  of  existing  inhabitants.
It  is  our  most  urgent  national  interest  that  this  surplus
emigrant  population  shall  settle  in  lands  which  are  under
the  British  flag,  and  we  must  therefore  maintain  a constant
policy  of  extending  the  political  control  of  Great  Britain
so  as  to  cover  the  new  homes  to  which  these  people  betake


imperialism:  a study

themselves  in  pursuit  of  employment.”  This  motive  is
closely  linked  with  other  economic  motives  relating  to  trade
and  investments.  The  establishment  of  British  trade,  and
especially  of  British  capital,  in  foreign  lands  naturally
attracts  a certain  British  population  ; traders,  engineers,
overseers,  and  mechanics  are  needed  as  entrepreneurs  and
managers.  So  wherever  a new  area  was  opened  up  to  our
trade  and  capital  the  nucleus  of  an  outlander  population  was
formed.  Hence,  of  necessity,  sprang  up  a crop  of  political
issues,  an  outlander  problem  : the  British  outlanders,  not
satisfied  with  the  foreign  rule,  demanded  the  intervention
of  their  home  Government.  Thus  the  duty  of  protecting
British  subjects  in  a foreign  country  has  been  identified
with  the  duty  of  protecting  British  property,  not  merely
the  personal  property  of  the  outlanders,  often  a trivial  matter,
but  the  far  larger  stakes  of  the  home  investors.  But  apart
from  these  cases  of  special  interest,  wherever  any  con-
siderable number  of  British  subjects  settles  in  a savage  or
semi-civilized  country  they  have  a “ right  ” to  British
protection,  and  since  that  protection  can  seldom  be  made
effective  without  the  exercise  of  direct  British  authority,
the  imperial  aegis  of  Great  Britain  must  be  spread  over  all
such  areas,  when  a convenient  occasion  for  such  expansion
should  present  itself.

Such  has  been  the  accepted  theory  and  practice.  What
validity  did  it  possess  as  an  argument  for  imperial  expansion  ?
Let  me  first  ask : Was  England  over-populated,  and  was
the  prospect  of  further  increase  such  as  to  compel  us  to
“ peg  out  claims  for  posterity  ” in  other  parts  of  the  world  f
The  facts  are  these.  Great  Britain  is  not  and  was  not  so
thickly  populated  as  certain  prosperous  industrial  areas  in
Germany,  the  Netherlands,  and  China  : along  with  every
recent  growth  of  population  has  come  a far  greater  growth
of  wealth  and  of  the  power  to  purchase  food  and  other

4*


IMPERIALISM  AS  AN  OUTLET


subsistence.  The  modern  specialization  of  industry  has
caused  a congestion  of  population  upon  certain  Spots  which
may  be  injurious  in  some  ways  to  the  well-being  of  the
nation,  but  it  cannpt  be  regarded  as  over-population  in  the
sense  of  a people  outgrowing  the  means  of  subsistence.
Nor  have  we  reason  to  fear  such  over-population  in  the
future.  It  is  true  that  our  manufactures  and  commerce
may  not  continue  to  grow  as  rapidly  as  in  the  past,  though
we  have  no  clear  warrant  from  industrial  statistics  for  this
judgment : but  if  this  be  so,  neither  is  our  population
likely  to  increase  so  fast.  Of  this  we  have  clear  statistical
evidence  : the  diminution  of  the  rate  of  growth  of  our
population,  as  disclosed  by  the  recent  censuses,  is  such  as  to
justify  the  conclusion  that,  if  the  same  forces  continue  to
operate,  the  population  of  Great  Britain  will  be  stationary
by  the  middle  of  the  century.

There  exists,  then,  no  general  necessity  for  a policy  of
expansion  in  order  to  provide  for  over-population,  present
or  prospective.  But  supposing  it  had  been  necessary  for
3 n increasing  surplus  of  our  population  to  emigrate,  was
it  necessary  for  us  to  spend  so  large  a part  of  our  national
resources,  and  to  incur  such  heavy  risks,  in  seizing  new
territory  for  them  to  settle  upon  ?

The  total  emigration  of  Britons  represents  no  large
proportion  of  the  population  ; that  proportion  during  the
years  of  imperial  expansion  perceptibly  diminished  : of  the
emigrants  less  than  one-haif  settled  in  British  possessions,
and  an  infinitesimally  small  fraction  settled  in  the  countries
acquired  under  the  new  Imperialism.  These  most  in-
structive facts  are  established  by  the  following  official  table,
giving  the  statistics  of  emigration  from  1884  to  1903,  the
year  from  which  the  full  tide  of  imperial  expansion  is  to  be
dated  : —


43


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


Number  or  Outward  Bjdund  Passengers  or  British  and  Irish  Origin,  from
the  United  Kingdom  to  Countries  out  or  Europe.1


Passengers  to

Year.

United

States.

British

North

America.

Australia
and  New
Zealand.

Cape  of
GooaHope
and  Natal.

Other

Places.

Total.

1884

■55,280

3>,>34

44,255


11,510

1885

>37.6*7

19,828

39,395

—

10,724

1886

152,710

24,745

43,076

3, *97

8,472

232,900

1887

201,526

32,025

34,>*3

4,909

8,844

281,487

1888

195,986

34, *53

3*,*27

6,466

11,496

279,928

1889

>68,77*

28,269

*8,294

>3,884

*4,577

253,795

1890

>5*,4»3

22,520

21,179

10,321

11,683

218,116

218,507

1891

>56.395

21,578

1 9,547

9,090

11,897

1892

I50,039

23,254

>5,95°

9,*9>

10,908

210,042

1893

148,949

24,732

11,203

*3,097

«°,*33

208,814

1894

104,001

*7,459

10,917

*3, *77

>0,476

156,030

1895

126,502

16,622

>5,267

10,567

20,234

>1,256

185,181

1896

98,92'

*o,354

24,594

12,7*9

161,925

1897

*5,3*4

>5,57>

12,061

10,693

21,109

>2,395

146,460

1898

80,494

>7,640

*9,756

12,061

*40,644

>*99

92,482

16,410

11,467

*4,432

**,57*

146,362

1900

>02,797

>*,443

14,922

20,815

11,848

168,825

1901

>04,195

>5,757

*5,35°

23, *43

*3,270

*7*, 7*5

1902

108,498

*6,293

*4,345

43,206

*3,37°

205,662

*9°3

>23,663

59,65*

*2,375

50,206

*4,054

259,950

Regarded  as  a measure  of  the  outflow  of  “ surplus 99
population,  even  these  figures  are  excessive  in  two  ways.
In  the  first  place,  they  include  considerable  numbers  of
travellers  and  casual  visitors  who  were  not  real  emigrants,
Secondly,  to  measure  aright  the  net  emigration,  we  must
set  against  these  figures  the  immigration  figures.  The  net
reduction  of  our  population  by  emigration  is  thus  reduced
to  an  average,  during  the  years  1895-1900  to  31,474  per
annum.

The  “ boom  ” in  North-West  Canada  and  in  the  colonies

1 Number  of  passenger*  for  the  year*  191 2-1934  are  given  in  the  Appendix,
P-  374-


44


IMPERIALISM  AS  AN  OUTLET

of  South  Africa  perceptibly  increased  the  flow  at  the  turn
of  the  century.  But  the  rest  of  our  Empire  has  absorbed
a very  small  proportion  of  our  emigrants.  The  number
sailing  for  “ other  parts  99  of  the  Empire  in  1903  was  8,719,
and  of  these  the  number  of  actual  settlers  in  the  new  tropical
dominions  would  be  a mere  handful.

A certain  quantity  of  military  and  official  employment
is  afforded  by  the  new  Imperialism  to  the  influential  upper
classes,  a few  engineers,  missionaries,  prospectors,  and
overseers  of  trading  and  industrial  undertakings  get  tem-
porary posts,  but  as  a contribution  towards  the  general
field  of  employment  the  new  Imperialism  is  an  utterly
insignificant  factor.

No  substantial  settlement  of  Britons  was  taking  place  in
1905  upon  any  of  the  areas  of  the  Empire  acquired  since  1870,
excepting  the  Transvaal  and  the  Orange  River  Colony,  nor
was  it  likely  that  any  such  settlement  would  take  place.
The  tropical  character  of  most  lands  acquired  under  the
new  Imperialism  renders  genuine  colonisation  impossible  :
there  was  no  true  British  settlement  in  these  places  ; a small
number  of  men  spent  a short  broken  period  in  precarious
occupations.  The  new  Empire  was  even  more  barren  for
settlement  than  for  profitable  trade.


45


CHAPTER  IV


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM

I

OEEING  that  the  Imperialism  pf'  the  last  six  decades
^ is  clearly  condemned  as  a business  policy,  in  that  at
enormous  expense  it  has  procured  a small,  bad,  unsafe
increase  of  markets,  and  has  jeopardised  the  entire  wealth
of  the  nation  in  rousing  the  strong  resentment  of  other
nations,  we  may  ask,  “ How  is  the  British  nation  induced
to  embark  upon  such  unsound  business  ? ” The  only
possible  answer  is  that  the  business  interests  of  the  nation
as  a whole  are  subordinated  to  those  of  certain  sectional
interests  that  usurp  control  of  the  national  resources  and
use  them  for  their  private  gain.  This  is  no  strange  or
monstrous  charge  to  bring ; it  is  the  commonest  disease  of  all
forms  of  government.  The  famous  words  of  Sir  Thomas
More  are  as  true  now  as  when  he  wrote  them : “ Every-
where do  I perceive  a certain  conspiracy  of  rich  men  seeking
their  own  advantage  under  the  name  and  pretext  of  the
commonwealth.”

Although  the  new  Imperialism  has  been  bad  business
for  the  nation,  it  has  been  good  business  for  certain  classes
and  certain  trades  within  the  nation.  The  vast  expenditure
on  armaments,  the  costly  wars,  the  grave  risks  and  em-
barrassments of  foreign  policy,  the  checks  upon  political
and  social  reforms  within  Great  Britain,  though  fraught
with  great  injury  to  the  nation,  have  served  well  the  present
business  interests  of  certain  industries  and  professions.

46


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


It  is  idle  to  meddle  with  politics  unless  we  clearly  recognise
this  central  fact  and  understand  what  these  sectional
interests  are  which  are  the  enemies  of  national  safety  and
the  commonwealth.  We  must  put  aside  the  merely
sentimental  diagnosis  which  explains  wars  or  other  national
blunders  by  outbursts  of  patriotic  animosity  or  errors  of
statecraft.  Doubtless  at  every  outbreak  of  war  not  only
the  man  in  the  street  but  the  man  at  the  helm  is  often
duped  by  the  cunning  with  which  aggressive  motives  and
greedy  purposes  dress  themselves  in  defensive  clothing.
There  is,  it  may  be  safely  asserted,  no  war  within  memory,
however  nakedly  aggressive  it  may  seem  to  the  dispassionate
historian,  which  has  not  been  presented  to  the  people  who
were  called  upon  to  fight  as  a necessary  defensive  policy,  in
which  the  honour,  perhaps  the  very  existence,  of  the  State
was  involved.

The  disastrous  folly  of  these  wars,  the  material  and
moral  damage  inflicted  even  on  the  victor,  appear  so  plain
to  the  disinterested  spectator  that  he  is  apt  to  despair  of
any  State  attaining  years  of  discretion,  and  inclines  to
regard  these  natural  cataclysms  as  implying  some  ultimate
irrationalism  in  politics.  But  careful  analysis  of  the  existing
relations  between  business  and  politics  shows  that  the
aggressive  Imperialism  which  we  seek  to  understand  is  not
in  the  main  the  product  of  blind  passions  of  races  or  of  the
mixed  folly  and  ambition  of  politicians.  It  is  far  more
rational  than  at  first  sight  appears.  Irrational  from  the
standpoint  of  the  whole  nation,  it  is  rational  enough  from
the  standpoint  of  certain  classes  in  the  nation.  A com-
pletely socialist  State  which  kept  good  books  and  presented
regular  balance-sheets  of  expenditure  and  assets  would
soon  discard  Imperialism  ; an  intelligent  laissez-faire  de-
mocracy which  gave  duly  proportionate  weight  in  its  policy
to  all  economic  interests  alike  would  do  the  same*  But

47


imperialism:  a study


a State  in  which  certain  well-organised  business  interests
are  able  to  outweigh  the  weak,  diffused  interest  of  the
community  is  bound  to  pursue  a policy  which  accords  with
the  pressure  of  the  former  interests.

In  order  to  explain  Imperialism  on  this  hypothesis  we
have  to  answer  two  questions.  Do  we  find  in  Great  Britain
any  well-organised  group  of  special  commercial  and  social
interests  which  stand  to  gain  by  aggressive  Imperialism  and
the  militarism  it  involves  ? If  such  a combination  of
interests  exists,  has  it  the  power  to  work  its  will  in  the
arena  of  politics  ?

What  is  the  direct  economic  outcome  of  Imperialism  ?
A great  expenditure  of  public  money  upon  ships,  guns,
military  and  naval  equipment  and  stores,  growing  and
productive  of  enormous  profits  when  a war,  or  an  alarm
of  war,  occurs  ; new  public  loans  and  important  fluctuations
in  the  home  and  foreign  Bourses ; more  posts  for  soldiers
and  sailors  and  in  the  diplomatic  and  consular  services  ;
improvement  of  foreign  investments  by  the  substitution  of
the  British  flag  for  a foreign  flag  ; acquisition  of  markets  for
certain  classes  of  exports,  and  some  protection  and  assistance
for  British  trades  in  these  manufactures ; employment  for
engineers,  missionaries,  speculative  miners,  ranchers  and
other  emigrants.

Certain  definite  business  and  professional  interests  feeding
upon  imperialistic  expenditure,  or  upon  the  results  of  that
expenditure,  are  thus  set  up  in  opposition  to  the  common
good,  and,  instinctively  feeling  their  way  to  one.  another,
are  found  united  in  strong  sympathy  to  support  every  new
imperialist  exploit.

If  the  £60,000, ooo1  which  may  now  be  taken  as  a minimum
expenditure  on  armaments  in  time  of  peace  were  subjected
to  a close  analysis,  most  of  it  would  be  traced  directly  to

1 In  1905  ; now,  in  1938,  £200,000,000.

48


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


the  tills  of  certain  big  firms  engaged  in  building  warships
and  transports,  equipping  and  coaling  them,  manufacturing
guns,  rifles,  ammunition,  ’planes  and  motor  vehicles
of  every  kind,  supplying  horses,  waggons,  saddlery,  food,
clothing  for  the  services,  contracting  for  barracks,  and  for
other  large  irregular  needs.  Through  these  main  channels
the  millions  flow  to  feed  many  subsidiary  trades,  most  of
which  are  quite  aware  that  they  are  engaged  in  executing
contracts  for  the  services.  Here  we  have  an  important
nucleus  of  commercial  Imperialism.  Some  of  these  trades,
especially  the  shipbuilding,  boilermaking,  and  gun  and
ammunition  making  trades,  are  conducted  by  large  firms
with  immense  capital,  whose  heads  are  well  aware  of  the  uses
of  political  influence  for  trade  purposes.

These  men  are  Imperialists  by  conviction ; a pushful
policy  is  good  for  them.

With  them  stand  the  great  manufacturers  for  export
trade,  who  gain  a living  by  supplying  the  real  or  artificial
wants  of  the  new  countries  we  annex  or  open  up.  Man-
chester, Sheffield,  Birmingham,  to  name  three  representative
cases,  are  full  of  firms  which  compete  in  pushing  textiles
and  hardware,  engines,  tools,  machinery,  spirits,  guns,  upon
new  markets.  The  public  debts  which  ripen  in  our  colonies,
and  in  foreign  countries  that  come  under  our  protectorate
or  influence,  are  largely  loaned  in  the  shape  of  rails,  engines,
guns,  and  other  materials  of  civilization  made  and  sent  out
by  British  firms.  The  making  of  railways,  canals,  and  other
public  works,  the  establishment  of  factories,  the  development
of  mines,  the  improvement  of  agriculture  in  new  countries,
stimulate  a definite  interest  in  important  manufacturing
industries  which  feeds  a very  firm  imperialist  faith  in  their
owners.

The  proportion  which  such  trade  bears  to  the  total
industry  of  Great  Britain  is  not  great,  but  some  of  it  is

49


imperialism:  a study


extremely  influential  and  able  to  make  a definite  impression
upon  politics,  through  chambers  of  commerce,  Parliamentary
representatives,  and  semi-political,  semi-commercial  bodies
like  the  Imperial  South  African  Association  or  the  China
Society.

The  shipping  trade  has  a very  definite  interest  which
makes  for  Imperialism.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the
policy  of  State  subsidies  now  claimed  by  shipping  firms
as  a retainer,  and  in  order  to  encourage  British  shipping
for  purposes  of  imperial  safety  and  defence.

The  services  are,  of  course,  imperialist  by  conviction
and  by  professional  interest,  and  every  increase  of  the  army,
navy  and  air  force  enhances  the  political  power  they  exert.
The  abolition  of  purchase  in  the  army,  by  opening  the
profession  to  the  upper  middle  classes,  greatly  enlarged  this
most  direct  feeder  of  imperial  sentiment.  The  potency
of  this  factor  is,  of  course,  largely  due  to  the  itch  for  glory
and  adventure  among  military  officers  upon  disturbed  or
uncertain  frontiers  of  the  Empire.  This  has  been  a most
prolific  source  of  expansion  in  India.  The  direct  pro-
fessional influence  of  the  services  carries  with  it  a less
organised  but  powerful  sympathetic  support  on  the  part  of
the  aristocracy  and  the  wealthy  classes,  who  seek  in  the
services  careers  for  their  sons.

To  the  military  services  we  may  add  the  Indian  Civil
Service  and  the  numerous  official  and  semi-official  posts
in  our  colonies  and  protectorates.  Every  expansion  of  the
Empire  is  also  regarded  by  these  same  classes  as  affording
new  openings  for  their  sons  as  ranchers,  planters,  engineers,
or  missionaries.  This  point  of  view  is  aptly  summarised  by  a
high  Indian  official,  Sir  Charles  Crossthwaite,  in  discussing
British  relations  with  Siam.  “ The  real  question  was  who
was  to  get  the  trade  with  them,  and  how  we  could  make
the  most  of  them,  so  as  to  find  fresh  markets  for  our  goods

SO


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM

and  also  employment  for  those  superfluous  articles  of  the
present  day,  our  boys.”

From  this  standpoint  our  colonies  still  remain  what
James  Mill  cynically  described  them  as  being,  “ a vast
system  of  outdoor  relief  for  the  upper  classes.”

In  all  the  professions,  military  and  civil,  the  army,  diplo-
macy, the  church,  the  bar,  teaching  and  engineering,  Greater
Britain  serves  for  an  overflow,  relieving  the  congestion  of
the  home  market  and  offering  chances  to  more  reckless
or  adventurous  members,  while  it  furnishes  a convenient
limbo  for  damaged  characters  and  careers.  The  actual
amount  of  profitable  employment  thus  furnished  by  our
recent  acquisitions  is  inconsiderable,  but  it  arouses  that
disproportionate  interest  which  always  attaches  to  the
margin  of  employment.  To  extend  this  margin  is  a
powerful  motive  in  Imperialism.

These  influences,  primarily  economic,  though  not  un-
mixed with  other  sentimental  motives,  are  particularly
operative  in  military,  clerical,  academic,  and  Civil  Service
circles,  and  furnish  an  interested  bias  towards  Imperialism
throughout  the  educated  circles.


II

By  far  the  most  important  economic  factor  in  Imperialism
is  the  influence  relating  to  investments.  The  growing
cosmopolitanism  of  capital  has  been  the  greatest  economic
change  of  recent  generations.  Every  advanced  industrial
nation  has  been  tending  to  place  a larger  share  of  its  capital
outside  the  limits  of  its  own  political  area,  in  foreign
countries,  or  in  colonies,  and  to  draw  a growing  income
from  this  source.

No  exact  or  even  approximate  estimate  of  the  total  amount
of  the  income  of  the  British  nation  derived  from  foreign

e 51


imperialism:  a study


investments  is  possible.  We  possess,  however,  in  the  income
tax  assessments  an  indirect  measurement  of  certain  large
sections  of  investments,  from  which  we  can  form  some
judgment  as  to  the  total  size  of  the  income  from  foreign  and
colonial  sources,  and  the  rate  of  its  growth.

These  returns  give  us  a measure  of  the  amount  and
growth  of  the  investments  effected  by  British  citizens
in  foreign  and  colonial  stocks  of  a public  or  semi-public
character,  including  foreign  and  colonial  public  securities,
railways,  etc.  The  income  from  these  sources  is  computed
as  follows  : — 1


L

1884

33,8*9,124

1888

♦6.978,37*

1892

54,728,770

1896

54,9°i,°79

1900

60,266,886

63,828,7*5

I9°3

From  this  table  it  appears  that  the  period  of  energetic
Imperialism  coincided  with  a remarkable  growth  in  the
income  for  foreign  investments.

These  figures,  however,  only  give  the  foreign  income
which  can  be  identified  as  such.  The  closer  estimates
made  by  Sir  R.  Giffen  and  others  warrant  the  belief  that
the  actual  income  derived  from  foreign  and  colonial  invest-
ments amounted  to  not  less  than  £100,000,000,  the  capital
value  of  the  same  reaching  a sum  of  about  £2,000,000,000.®
Income  tax  returns  and  other  statistics  descriptive  of
the  growth  of  these  investments  indicate  that  the  total
amount  of  British  investments  abroad  at  the  end  of  the
nineteenth  century  cannot  be  set  down  at  a lower  figure

1 Figures  for  the  yean  1929-1933  are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  375.

1 See  Appendix,  p.  375.


5*


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


than  this.  Considering  that  Sir  R.  Giffen  regarded  as
“ moderate  ” the  estimate  of  £1,700,000,000  in  1892,  the
figure  here  named  is  probably  below  the  truth.

Now,  without  placing  any  undue  reliance  upon  these
estimates,  we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  that  in  dealing  with
these  foreign  investments  we  are  facing  the  most  important
factor  in  the  economics  of  Imperialism.  Whatever  figures
we  take,  two  facts  are  evident.  First,  that  the  income
derived  as  interest  upon  foreign  investments  enormously
exceeded  that  derived  as  profits  upon  ordinary  export  and
import  trade.  Secondly,  that  while  our  foreign  and
colonial  trade,  and  presumably  the  income  from  it,  were
growing  but  slowly,  the  share  of  our  import  values  repre-
senting income  from  foreign  investments  was  growing  very
rapidly.

In  a former  chapter  I pointed  out  how  small  a proportion
of  our  national  income  appeared  to  be  derived  as  profits
from  external  trade.  It  seemed  unintelligible  that  the
enormous  costs  and  risks  of  the  new  Imperialism  should  be
undertaken  for  such  small  results  in  the  shape  of  increase
to  external  trade,  especially  when  the  size  and  character  of
the  new  markets  acquired  were  taken  into  consideration.
The  statistics  of  foreign  investments,  however,  shed  clear
light  upon  the  economic  forces  which  dominate  our  policy.
While  the  manufacturing  and  trading  classes  make  little
out  of  their  new  markets,  paying,  if  they  knew  it,  much  more
in  taxation  than  they  get  out  of  them  in  trade,  it  is  quite
otherwise  with  the  investor.

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  modern  foreign
policy  of  Great  Britain  has  been  primarily  a struggle  for
profitable  markets  of  investment.  To  a larger  extent  every
year  Great  Britain  has  been  becoming  a nation  living  upon
tribute  from  abroad,  and  the  classes  who  enjoy  this  tribute
have  had  an  ever-increasing  incentive  to  employ  the  public

S3


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

policy,  the  public  purse,  and  the  public  force  to  extend
the  field  of  their  private  investments,  and  to  safeguard  and
improve  their  existing  investments.  This  is,  perhaps,  the
most  important  fact  in  modern  politics,  and  the  obscurity  in
which  it  is  wrapped  has  constituted  the  gravest  danger  to
our  State.

What  was  true  of  Great  Britain  was  true  likewise  of
France,  Germany,  the  United  States,  and  of  all  countries  in
which  modern  capitalism  had  placed  large  surplus  savings
in  the  hands  of  a plutocracy  or  of  a thrifty  middle  class.  A
well-recognised  distinction  is  drawn  between  creditor  and
debtor  countries.  Great  Britain  had  been  for  some  time
by  far  the  largest  creditor  country,  and  the  policy  by  which
the  investing  classes  used  the  instrument  of  the  State  for
private  business  purposes  is  most  richly  illustrated  in  the
history  of  her  wars  and  annexations.  But  France,  Germany,
and  the  United  States  were  advancing  fast  along  the  same
path.  The  nature  of  these  imperialist  operations  is  thus
set  forth  by  the  Italian  economist  Loria :

“ When  a country  which  has  contracted  a debt  is  unable,
on  account  of  the  slenderness  of  its  income,  to  offer  sufficient
guarantee  for  the  punctual  payment  of  interest,  what
happens  ? Sometimes  an  out-and-out  conquest  of  the
debtor  country  follows.  Thus  France’s  attempted  conquest
of  Mexico  during  the  second  empire  was  undertaken  solely
with  the  view  of  guaranteeing  the  interest  of  French  citizens
holding  Mexican  securities.  But  more  frequently  the
insufficient  guarantee  of  an  international  loan  gives  rise  to
the  appointment  of  a financial  commission  by  the  creditor
countries  in  order  to  protect  their  rights  and  guard  the
fate  of  their  invested  capital.  The  appointment  of  such  a
commission  literally  amounts  in  the  end,  however,  to  a
veritable  conquest.  We  have  examples  of  this  in  Egypt,
which  has  to  all  practical  purposes  become  a British  province,

54


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


and  in  Tunis,  which  has  in  like  manner  become  a dependency
of  France,  who  supplied  the  greater  part  of  the  loan.  The
Egyptian  revolt  against  the  foreign  domination  issuing  from
the  debt  came  to  nothing,  as  it  met  with  invariable  opposi-
tion from  capitalistic  combinations,  and  Tel-el-Kebir’s
success  bought  with  money,  was  the  most  brilliant  victory
wealth  has  ever  obtained  on  the  field  of  battle.”1

But,  though  useful  to  explain  certain  economic  facts,
the  terms  “ creditor  ” and  “ debtor,”  as  applied  to  countries,
obscure  the  most  significant  feature  of  this  Imperialism.
For  though,  as  appears  from  the  analysis  given  above,  much,
if  not  most,  of  the  debts  were  “ public,”  the  credit  was
nearly  always  private,  though  sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of
Egypt,  its  owners  succeeded  in  getting  their  Government
to  enter  a most  unprofitable  partnership,  guaranteeing  the
payment  of  the  interest,  but  not  sharing  in  it.

Aggressive  Imperialism,  which  costs  the  taxpayer  so
dear,  which  is  of  so  little  value  to  the  manufacturer  and
trader,  which  is  fraught  with  such  grave  incalculable
peril  to  the  citizen,  is  a source  of  great  gain  to  the  investor
who  cannot  find  at  home  the  profitable  use  he  seeks  for
his  capital,  and  insists  that  his  Government  should  help
him  to  profitable  and  secure  investments  abroad.

If,  contemplating  the  enormous  expenditure  on  arma-
ments, the  ruinous  wars,  the  diplomatic  audacity  or  knavery
by  which  modern  Governments  seek  to  extend  their
territorial  power,  we  put  the  plain,  practical  question,  Cui
bono  ? the  first  and  most  obvious  answer  is,  the  investor.

The  annual  income  Great  Britain  derives  from  com-
missions on  her  whole  foreign  and  colonial  trade,  import
and  export,  was  estimated  by  Sir  R.  Giffen2  at  £18,000,000  for
1899,  ta^en  at  Per  cent.,  upon  a turnover  of  £800,000,000.

1 Loria,  The  Economic  Foundations  of  Politics , p.  2 73  (George  Allen  Sc  Unwin).

* Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society , vol.  xlii,  p.  9.

55


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

policy,  the  public  purse,  and  the  public  force  to  extend
the  field  of  their  private  investments,  and  to  safeguard  and
improve  their  existing  investments.  This  is,  perhaps,  the
most  important  fact  in  modern  politics,  and  the  obscurity  in
which  it  is  wrapped  has  constituted  the  gravest  danger  to
our  State.

What  was  true  of  Great  Britain  was  true  likewise  of
France,  Germany,  the  United  States,  and  of  all  countries  in
which  modern  capitalism  had  placed  large  surplus  savings
in  the  hands  of  a plutocracy  or  of  a thrifty  middle  class.  A
well-recognised  distinction  is  drawn  between  creditor  and
debtor  countries.  Great  Britain  had  been  for  some  time
by  far  the  largest  creditor  country,  and  the  policy  by  which
the  investing  classes  used  the  instrument  of  the  State  for
private  business  purposes  is  most  richly  illustrated  in  the
history  of  her  wars  and  annexations.  But  France,  Germany,
and  the  United  States  were  advancing  fast  along  the  same
path.  The  nature  of  these  imperialist  operations  is  thus
set  forth  by  the  Italian  economist  Lori  a :

“ When  a country  which  has  contracted  a debt  is  unable,
on  account  of  the  slenderness  of  its  income,  to  offer  sufficient
guarantee  for  the  punctual  payment  of  interest,  what
happens  ? Sometimes  an  out-and-out  conquest  of  the
debtor  country  follows.  Thus  France’s  attempted  conquest
of  Mexico  during  the  second  empire  was  undertaken  solely
with  the  view  of  guaranteeing  the  interest  of  French  citizens
holding  Mexican  securities.  But  more  frequently  the
insufficient  guarantee  of  an  international  loan  gives  rise  to
the  appointment  of  a financial  commission  by  the  creditor
countries  in  order  to  protect  their  rights  and  guard  the
fate  of  their  invested  capital.  The  appointment  of  such  a
commission  literally  amounts  in  the  end,  however,  to  a
veritable  conquest.  We  have  examples  of  this  in  Egypt,
which  has  to  all  practical  purposes  become  a British  province,

54


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


and  in  Tunis,  which  has  in  like  manner  become  a dependency
of  France,  who  supplied  the  greater  part  of  the  loan.  The
Egyptian  revolt  against  the  foreign  domination  issuing  from
the  debt  came  to  nothing,  as  it  met  with  invariable  opposi-
tion from  capitalistic  combinations,  and  Tel-el-Kebir’s
success  bought  with  money,  was  the  most  brilliant  victory
wealth  has  ever  obtained  on  the  field  of  battle.”1

But,  though  useful  to  explain  certain  economic  facts,
the  terms  “ creditor  ” and  “ debtor,”  as  applied  to  countries,
obscure  the  most  significant  feature  of  this  Imperialism.
For  though,  as  appears  from  the  analysis  given  above,  much,
if  not  most,  of  the  debts  were  “ public,”  the  credit  was
nearly  always  private,  though  sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of
Egypt,  its  owners  succeeded  in  getting  their  Government
to  enter  a most  unprofitable  partnership,  guaranteeing  the
payment  of  the  interest,  but  not  sharing  in  it.

Aggressive  Imperialism,  which  costs  the  taxpayer  so
dear,  which  is  of  so  little  value  to  the  manufacturer  and
trader,  which  is  fraught  with  such  grave  incalculable
peril  to  the  citizen,  is  a source  of  great  gain  to  the  investor
who  cannot  find  at  home  the  profitable  use  he  seeks  for
his  capital,  and  insists  that  his  Government  should  help
him  to  profitable  and  secure  investments  abroad.

If,  contemplating  the  enormous  expenditure  on  arma-
ments, the  ruinous  wars,  the  diplomatic  audacity  or  knavery
by  which  modern  Governments  seek  to  extend  their
territorial  power,  we  put  the  plain,  practical  question,  Cui
bono  ? the  first  and  most  obvious  answer  is,  the  investor.

The  annual  income  Great  Britain  derives  from  com-
missions on  her  whole  foreign  and  colonial  trade,  import
and  export,  was  estimated  by  Sir  R.  Giffen2  at  £18,000,000  for
1899,  taken  at  2f  per  cent.,  upon  a turnover  of  £800,000,000.

1 Loria,  The  Economic  Foundations  of  Politics , p.  273  (George  Allen  & Unwin).

a Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society , vol.  xlii,  p.  9.

55


imperialism:  a study


This  is  the  whole  that  we  are  entitled  to  regard  as  profits
on  external  trade.  Considerable  as  this  sum  is,  it  cannot
serve  to  yield  an  economic  motive-power  adequate  to  explain
the  dominance  which  business  considerations  exercise  over
our  imperial  policy.  Only  when  we  set  beside  it  some
£90,000,000  or  £100,000,000,  representing  pure  profit  upon
investments,  do  we  understand  whence  the  economic
impulse  to  Imperialism  is  derived.

Investors  who  have  put  their  money  in  foreign  lands,
upon  terms  which  take  full  account  of  risks  connected
with  the  political  conditions  of  the  country,  desire  to  use
the  resources  of  their  Government  to  minimise  these  risks,
and  so  to  enhance  the  capital  value  and  the  interest  of
their  private  investments.  The  investing  and  speculative
classes  in  general  have  also  desired  that  Great  Britain  should
take  other  foreign  areas  under  her  flag  in  order  to  secure
new  areas  for  profitable  investments  and  speculation.


Ill

If  the  special  interest  of  the  investor  is  liable  to  clash
with  the  public  interest  and  to  induce  a wrecking  policy,
still  more  dangerous  is  the  special  interest  of  the  financier,
the  general  dealer  in  investments.  In  large  measure  the
rank  and  file  of  the  investors  are,  both  for  business  and  for
politics,  the  cat’spaws  of  the  great  financial  houses,  who  use
stocks  and  shares  not  so  much  as  investments  to  yield
them  interest,  but  as  material  for  speculation  in  the  money
market.  In  handling  large  masses  of  stocks  and  shares,
in  floating  companies,  in  manipulating  fluctuations  of  values,
the  magnates  of  the  Bourse  find  their  gain.  These  great
businesses — banking,  broking,  bill  discounting,  loan  floating,
company  promoting — form  the  central  ganglion  of  inter-
national capitalism.  United  by  the  strongest  bonds  of

56


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


organisation,  always  in  closest  and  quickest  touch  with  one
another,  situated  in  the  very  heart  of  the  business  capital
of  every  State,  controlled,  so  far  as  Europe  is  concerned,
chiefly  by  men  of  a single  and  peculiar  race,  who  have
behind  them  many  centuries  of  financial  experience,  they  are
in  a unique  position  to  manipulate  the  policy  of  nations.  No
great  quick  direction  of  capital  is  possible  save  by  their
consent  and  through  their  agency.  Does  any  one  seriously
suppose  that  a great  war  could  be  undertaken  by  any
European  State,  or  a great  State  loan  subscribed,  if  the
house  of  Rothschild  and  its  connexions  set  their  face
against  it  ?

Every  great  political  act  involving  a new  flow  of  capital,
or  a large  fluctuation  in  the  values  of  existing  investments,
must  receive  the  sanction  and  the  practical  aid  of  this  little
group  of  financial  kings.  These  men,  holding  their  realised
wealth  and  their  business  capital,  as  they  must,  chiefly  in
stocks  and  bonds,  have  a double  stake,  first  as  investors,  but
secondly  and  chiefly  as  financial  dealers.  As  investors,  their
political  influence  does  not  differ  essentially  from  that  of
the  smaller  investors,  except  that  they  usually  possess  a
practical  control  of  the  businesses  in  which  they  invest.
As  speculators  or  financial  dealers  they  constitute,  however,
the  gravest  single  factor  in  the  economics  of  Imperialism.

To  create  new  public  debts,  to  float  new  companies,
and  to  cause  constant  considerable  fluctuations  of  values
are  three  conditions  of  their  profitable  business.  Each
condition  carries  them  into  politics,  and  throws  them  on
the  side  of  Imperialism.

The  public  financial  arrangements  for  the  Philippine
war  put  several  millions  of  dollars  into  the  pockets  of
Mr.  Pierpont  Morgan  and  his  friends  ; the  China-Japan
war,  which  saddled  the  Celestial  Empire  for  the  first
time  with  a public  debt,  and  the  indemnity  which  she

57


imperialism  : a study


will  pay  to,  her  European  invaders  in  connexion  with  the
recent  conflict,  bring  grist  to  the  financial  mills  in  Europe ;
every  railway  or  mining  concession  wrung  from  some
reluctant  foreign  potentate  means  profitable  business  in
raising  capital  and  floating  companies.  A policy  which
rouses  fears  of  aggression  in  Asiatic  states,  andv  which
fans  the  rivalry  of  commercial  nations  in  Europe,  evokes
vast  expenditure  on  armaments,  and  ever-accumulating
public  debts,  while  the  doubts  and  risks  accruing  from
this  policy  promote  that  constant  oscillation  of  values  of
securities  which  is  so  profitable  to  the  skilled  financier.
There  is  not  a war,  a revolution,  an  anarchist  assassination,
or  any  other  public  shock,  which  is  not  gainful  to  these
men  ; they  are  harpies  who  suck  their  gains  from  every
new  forced  expenditure  and  every  sudden  disturbance  of
public  credit.  To  the  financiers  “ in  the  know  ” the
Jameson  raid  was  a most  advantageous  coup,  as  may  be
ascertained  by  a comparison  of  the  “ holdings  ” of  these
men  before  and  after  that  event ; the  terrible  sufferings
of  England  and  South  Africa  in  the  war,  which  was  a sequel
of  the  raid,  has  been  a source  of  immense  profit  to  the  big
financiers  who  have  best  held  out  against  the  uncalculated
waste,  and  have  recouped  themselves  by  profitable  war
contracts  and  by  “ freezing  out  ” the  smaller  interests  in
the  Transvaal.  These  men  are  the  only  certain  gainers
from  the  war,  and  most  of  their  gains  are  made  out  of
the  public  losses  of  their  adopted  country  or  the  private
losses  of  their  fellow-countrymen.

The  policy  of  these  men,  it  is  true,  does  not  necessarily
make  for  war ; where  war  would  bring  about  too  great  and
too  permanent  a damage  to  the  substantial  fabric  of  industry,
which  is  the  ultimate  and  essential  basis  of  speculation,  their
influence  is  cast  for  peace,  as  in  the  dangerous  quarrel
between  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  regarding

58


EOONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM

Venezuela.  But  every  increase  of  public  expenditure,  every
oscillation  of  public  credit  short  of  this  collapse,  every
risky  enterprise  in  which  public  resources  can  be  made  the
pledge  of  private  speculations,  is  profitable  to  the  big
money-lender  and  speculator.

The  wealth  of  these  houses,  the  scale  of  their  operations,
and  their  cosmopolitan  organisation  make  them  the  prime
determinants  of  imperial  policy.  They  have  the  largest
definite  stake  in  the  business  of  Imperialism,  and  the
amplest  means  of  forcing  their  will  upon  the  policy  of
nations.

In  view  of  the  part  which  the  non-economi c factors
of  patriotism,  adventure,  military  enterprise,  political
ambition,  and  philanthropy  play  in  imperial  expansion,  it
may  appear  that  to  impute  to  financiers  so  much  power
is  to  take  a too  narrowly  economic  view  of  history.  And
it  is  true  that  the  motor-power  of  Imperialism  is  not
chiefly  financial : finance  is  rather  the  governor  of  the
imperial  engine,  directing  the  energy  and  determining  its
work  : it  does  not  constitute  the  fuel  of  the  engine,  nor
does  it  directly  generate  the  power.  Finance  manipulates
the  patriotic  forces  which  politicians,  soldiers,  philan-
thropists, and  traders  generate ; the  enthusiasm  for
expansion  which  issues  from  these  sources,  though  strong
and  genuine,  is  irregular  and  blind  ; the  financial  interest
has  those  qualities  of  concentration  and  clear-sighted
calculation  which  are  needed  to  set  Imperialism  to  work.
An  ambitious  statesman,  a frontier  soldier,  an  overzealous
missionary,  a pushing  trader,  may  suggest  or  even  initiate
a step  of  imperial  expansion,  may  assist  in  educating
patriotic  public  opinion  to  the  urgent  need  of  some  fresh
advance,  but  the  final  determination  rests  with  the  financial
power.  The  direct  influence  exercised  by  great  financial
houses  in  “ high  politics  ” is  supported  by  the  control  which

59


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

they  exercise  over  the  body  of  public  opinion  through
the  Press,  which,  in  every  “ civilised  ” country,  is  becoming
more  and  more  their  obedient  instrument.  While  the
specifically  financial  newspaper  imposes  “ facts  ” and
“ opinions  ” on  the  business  classes,  the  general  body  of
the  Press  comes  more  and  more  under  the  conscious  or
unconscious  domination  of  financiers.  The  case  of  the
South  African  Press,  whose  agents  and  correspondents
fanned  the  martial  flames  in  this  country,  was  one  of  open
ownership  on  the  part  of  South  African  financiers,  and
this  policy  of  owning  newspapers  for  the  sake  of  manu-
facturing public  opinion  is  common  in  the  great  European
cities.  In  Berlin,  Vienna,  and  Paris  many  of  the  influential
newspapers  have  been  held  by  financial  houses,  which  used
them,  not  primarily  to  make  direct  profits  out  of  them,
but  in  order  to  put  into  the  public  mind  beliefs  and  senti-
ments which  would  influence  public  policy  and  thus  affect
the  money  market.  In  Great  Britain  this  policy  has  not
gone  so  far,  but  the  alliance  with  finance  grows  closer  every
year,  either  by  financiers  purchasing  a controlling  share  of
newspapers,  or  by  newspaper  proprietors  being  tempted
into  finance.  Apart  from  the  financial  Press,  and  financial
ownership  of  the  general  Press,  the  City  has  notoriously
exercised  a subtle  and  abiding  influence  upon  leading
London  newspapers,  and  through  them  upon  the  body
of  the  provincial  Press,  while  the  entire  dependence  of  the
Press  for  its  business  profits  upon  its  advertising  columns
has  involved  a peculiar  reluctance  to  oppose  the  organised
financial  classes  with  whom  rests  the  control  of  so  much
advertising  business.  Add  to  this  the  natural  sympathy  with
a sensational  policy  which  a cheap  Press  always  manifests,
and  it  becomes  evident  that  the  Press  has  been  strongly
biased  towards  Imperialism,  and'  has  lent  itself  with  great
facility  to  the  suggestion  of  financial  or  political  Imperialists

60


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM


who  have  desired  to  work  up  patriotism  for  some  new  piece
of  expansion.

Such  is  the  array  of  distinctively  economic  forces  making
for  Imperialism,  a large  loose  group  of  trades  and  professions
seeking  profitable  business  and  lucrative  employment  from
the  expansion  of  military  and  civil  services,  and  from  the
expenditure  on  military  operations,  the  opening  up  of
new  tracts  of  territory  and  trade  with  the  same,  and  the
provision  of  new  capital  which  these  operations  require,
all  these  finding  their  central  guiding  and  directing  force
in  the  power  of  the  general  financier.

The  play  of  these  forces  does  not  openly  appear.  They
are  essentially  parasites  upon  patriotism,  and  they  adapt
themselves  to  its  protecting  colours.  In  the  mouth  of  their
representatives  are  noble  phrases,  expressive  of  their  desire
to  extend  the  area  of  civilisation,  to  establish  good  govern-
ment, promote  Christianity,  extirpate  slavery,  and  elevate
the  lower  races.  Some  of  the  business  men  who  hold  such
language  may  entertain  a genuine,  though  usually  a vague,
desire  to  accomplish  these  ends,  but  they  are  primarily
engaged  in  business,  and  they  are  not  unaware  of  the  utility
of  the  more  unselfish  forces  in  furthering  their  ends.  Their
true  attitude  of  mind  was  expressed  by  Mr.  Rhodes  in  his
famous  description  of  “ Her  Majesty’s  Flag  ” as  “ the
greatest  commercial  asset  in  the  world.”1

APPENDIX

Sir  R.  Giffen  estimated  the  income  derived  from  foreign
sources  as  profit,  interest  and  pensions  in  1882  at  £70,000,000,
and  in  a paper  read  before  the  Statistical  Society  in  March,
1899  he  estimated  the  income  from  the  same  sources  for  the

1 It  will  be  observed  that  this,  like  not  a few  other  words  of  revelation,  has
been  doctored  in  the  volume,  Cecil  Rhodes  : bis  Political  Life  and  Speeches , by
“ Vindex  ” (p.  823).

61


imperialism:  a study


current  year  at  £90,000,000.  It  is  probable  that  this  last
figure  is  an  underestimate,  for  if  the  items  of  foreign  income
not  included  as  such  under  the  income-tax  returns  bear
the  same  proportion  to  those  included  as  in  1882,  the  total
of  income  from  foreign  and  colonial  investments  should  be
£120,000,000  rather  than  £90,000,000.  Sir  R.  Giffen
hazarded  the  calculation  that  the  new  public  investments
abroad  in  the  sixteen  years  1882-1898  amounted  to  over
£800,000,000,  “ and  though  part  of  the  sum  may  have
been  nominal  only,  the  real  investment  must  have  been
enormous.”

Mr.  Mulhall  gave  the  following  estimate  of  the  size  and
growth  of  our  foreign  and  colonial  investments  after  1862  :


Year.

Amount.

Annual  Increase.

1862  ....

1

144,000,000

Per  cent.

1872  ....

600.000. 000

875.000. 000

45-6

1882  ....

1893  ....

1,698,000,000

MM

This  last  amount  is  of  especial  interest,  because  it  repre-
sents the  most  thorough  investigation  made  by  a most
competent  economist  for  the  Dictionary  of  Political  Economy.
The  investments  included  under  this  figure  may  be  classified
under  the  following  general  heads : —


Loans.

Million

<c-

Railways.

Million

£•

Sundries.

Million

£•

Foreign

U.S.A.

B

Banks

50

Colonial

Colonial

B9

Lands

100

Municipal  .

20

Various

B9

Mines,  Ac.  .

390

770

388

540

62


ECONOMIC  PARASITES  OF  IMPERIALISM

In  other  words,  in  "1893  the  British  capital  invested  abroad
represented  about  15  per  cent,  of  the  total  wealth  of  the
United  Kingdom  ; nearly  one-half  of  this  capital  was  in  the
form  of  loans  to  foreign  and  colonial  Governments ; of
the  rest  a large  proportion  was  invested  in  railways,  banks,
telegraphs,  and  other  public  services,  owned,  controlled,
or  vitally  affected  by  Governments,  while  most  of  the
remainder  was  placed  in  lands  and  mines,  or  in  industries
directly  dependent  on  land  values.1

1 Total  (Nominal)  British  investments  overseas  for  the  years  1929-1933  are
given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  375.


63


CHAPTER  V


IMPERIALISM  BASED  ON  PROTECTION

A BUSINESS  man  estimating  the  value  of  an  extension
of  his  business  will  set  the  increased  costs  against
the  increased  takings.  Is  it  unreasonable  that  a business
nation  should  adopt  the  same  course  ? From  this  stand-
point our  increased  military  and  naval  expenditure  during
recent  years  may  be  regarded  primarily  as  insurance  premiums
for  protection  of  existing  colonial  markets  and  current
outlay  on  new  markets.

In  order  to  test  the  finance  of  the  new  Imperialism,  let
us  compare  the  growth  of  expenditure  on  armaments  and
wart  since  1884  with  the  increased  value  of  colonial  trade1
(page  65).

Now,  though  there  are  no  means  of  ear-marking  the
expenditure  which  might  rank  as  insurance  upon  old  markets
or  that  which  is  spent  upon  acquiring  new  markets,  it  is  not
unreasonable  to  saddle  the  new  Imperialism  with  the  whole
of  the  increase  and  to  set  against  it  the  value  of  the  trade
of  the  new  acquisitions.  For  though  it  might  be  claimed
that  the  aggressive  commercialism  of  rival  European  States
raised  the  insurance  rate  upon  the  old  markets,  it  cannot
be  contended  that  Great  Britain’s  expenditure  on  arma-
ments need  have  increased  had  she  adopted  firmly  and
consistently  the  full  practice  of  Cobdenism,  a purely  defen-
sive attitude  regarding  her  existing  Empire  and  a total
abstinence  from  acquisition  of  new  territory.  The  increased
hostility  of  foreign  nations  towards  us  in  the  last  thirty

1 Figures  for  the  jean  1 904-193 1 are  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  376.

64


IMPERIALISM  BASED  ON  PROTECTION


Year.

Armaments
and  War.

Colonial  Trade.
Import  and
Export  Trade
with  Possessions.

1884  ....

£

27,864,000

£

184,000,000

1885  ....

30,577,0°°

39,538,000

170,000,000

1886  ....

164,000,000

1887  ....

31,768,000

166,000,000

1888  ....

30,609,000

179,000,000

1889  ....

30,536,000

188,000,000

1890  ....

32,772,000

191,000,000

1891  ....

33,488,000

i93,°o,oooo

1892  ....

33,312,000

179,000,000

1893  ....

33,423,000

170,000,000

1894  ....

33,566,000

172,000,000

1895  ....

35*5935°°°

38,334,000

172,000,000

1896  ....

184,000,000

1897  ....

41, 453, ooo

183,000,000

1898  ....

40, 395, ooo

190,000,000

1899  ....

64,283,000

201,000,000

1900  ....

69,815,000

212,000,000

1901  ....

121.445.000

123.787.000

219,000,000

1902  ....

223,000,000

1903 .

100,825,000

232,000,000

years  of  the  nineteenth  century  may  be  regarded  as  entirely
due  to  the  aggressive  Imperialism  of  those  years,  and  the
increased  expenditure  on  armaments  may,  therefore,
reasonably  rank  in  a business  balance-sheet  as  a cost  of
that  policy.

So,  taken,  this  new  expenditure  was  nothing  else  than  a
huge  business  blunder.  An  individual  doing  business  in
this  fashion  could  not  avoid  bankruptcy,  and  a nation,
however  rich,  pursuing  such  a policy  is  loaded  with  a
millstone  which  must  eventually  drag  her  down.

In  total  contravention  of  our  theory  that  trade  rests  upon
a basis  of  mutual  gain  to  the  nations  that  engage  in  it,  we
undertook  enormous  expenses  with  the  object  of  “ forcing  ”
new  markets,  and  the  markets  we  forced  were  small,  pre-

65


imperialism:  a study

carious,  and  unprofitable.  The  only  certain  and  palpable
result  of  the  expenditure  was  to  keep  us  continually  embroiled
with  the  very  nations  that  were  our  best  customers^  and
with  whom,  in  spite  of  everything,  our  trade  made  the  most
satisfactory  advance.

Not  only  were  these  markets  not  worth  what  they  cost
us,  but  the  assumption  that  our  trade  would  have  been
proportionately  less  had  they  fallen  into  the  hands  of  rival
and  Protectionist  nations  is  quite  groundless.  If,  instead
of  squandering  money  upon  these  territorial  acquisitions,
we  had  let  any  or  all  of  them  pass  into  the  possession  of
France,  Germany,  or  Russia,  in  order  that  these  countries
might  spend  their  money,  instead  of  us  spending  our  money,
in  acquiring  and  developing  them,  is  it  certain  that  our
foreign  trade  would  not  have  grown  by  at  least  as  much
as  our  colonial  trade  might  have  shrunk  ? The  assumption
that  there  is  only  a given  quantity  of  trade,  and  that  if  one
nation  gets  any  portion  of  it  another  nation  loses  just  so
much,  shows  a blind  ignorance  of  the  elements  of  inter-
national trade.  It  arises  from  a curiously  perverse  form  of
separatism  which  insists  upon  a nation  keeping  a separate
account  with  every  other  nation,  and  ignoring  altogether
the  roundabout  trade  which  is  by  far  the  most  important
business  of  an  advanced  industrial  nation.

France  seizing  Madagascar  practically  extirpated  direct
British  trade  with  the  Malagasy  ; Germany,  by  her  occupa-
tion of  Shan-tung,  deprived  us  of  all  possibility  of  trade
with  this  Chinese  province.  But  it  by  no  means  followed
that  France  and  Germany  could  or  would  keep  to  themselves
the  whole  advantage  of  these  new  markets.  To  make
any  such  supposition  implies  a complete  abandonment  of
the  principles  of  Free  Trade.  Even  were  the  whole  of  China
portioned  out  among  the  other  industrial  nations,  each
imposing  tariffs  which  virtually  prohibited  direct  trade

66


IMPERIALISM  BASED  ON  PROTECTION


between  Great  Britain  and  China — the  most  extreme
assumption  of  a hostile  attitude — it  by  no  means  follows
that  England  would  not  reap  enormous  benefits  from  the
expansion  of  her  foreign  trade,  attributable  in  the  last  resort
to  the  opening  up  of  China.  Even  the  feeblest  recognition
of  the  intricacies  of  foreign  trade  should  make  us  aware  that
an  increased  trade  with  France,  Germany,  or  Russia,  either
directly  or  through  other  nations  trading  with  them  might
have  given  us  our  full  share  of  the  wealth  of  Chinese  trade,
and  proved  as  beneficial  as  any  direct  share  of  trade  with
China  which  at  great  expense  and  peril  we  might  have
secured.  The  assignment  of  spheres  of  influence  in  China
or  in  Africa  to  France,  Germany,  or  Russia,  which  they
might  have  sought  to  monopolise  for  purposes  of  trade,  does
not  imply,  as  seems  to  be  believed,  a corresponding  loss
of  markets  to  England.  The  intricate  and  ever-growing
industrial  co-operation  of  the  civilized  nations  through
trade  does  not  permit  any  nation  to  keep  to  herself  the
gain  of  any  market  she  may  hold.  It  is  not  difficult  to
conceive  cases  where  another  nation  might  enjoy  a larger
share  of  the  results  of  a trade  than  the  nation  which  owned
the  private  markets  of  this  trade.

These  were  the  commonplaces  of  the  economics  of  Free
Trade,  the  plainest  lessons  of  enlightened  common  sense.
Why  were  they  forgotten  ?

The  answer  is  that  Imperialism  repudiates  Free  Trade,
and  rests  upon  an  economic  basis  of  Protection.  Just  in
so  far  as  an  Imperialist  is  logical  does  he  become  an  open
and  avowed  Protectionist.

If  the  fact  of  France  or  Germany  seizing  for  its  exclusive
use  a market  which  we  might  have  seized  necessarily  reduces
our  aggregate  external  trade  by  the  amount  of  this  market,
it  is  only  reasonable  that  when  we  seize  a territory  we  should
take  the  same  means  to  keep  its  market  for  ourselves.

67


F


imperialism:  a study


Imperialism,  when  it  shakes  off  the  “ old  gang  ” of  politicians
who  had  swallowed  Free  Trade  doctrine  when  they  were
young,  openly  adopts  the  Protectionism  required  to  round
off  this  policy.

Imperialism  naturally  strives  to  fasten  to  the  mother
country  the  markets  of  each  new  territorial  acquisition,
convinced  that  only  by  such  separate  increments  can  the
aggregate  of  our  trade  grow ; and  by  the  success  of  this
policy  it  must  justify  the  enormous  national  outlay  which
Imperialism  involves.  Free  Trade  trusts  for  the  increase
of  our  foreign  trade  to  the  operation  of  the  self-interest  of
other  trading  nations.  Her  doctrine  is  that,  though  it
were  better  for  us  and  for  them  that  they  should  give  us  free
admission  to  their  colonial  and  home  markets,  their  protec-
tive tariff,  even  though  it  prohibits  us  from  trading  directly
with  their  colonies,  does  not  shut  us  out  from  all  the  benefits
of  their  colonial  development.  Through  the  ordinary
operation  of  competition  in  European  markets  the  rubber
trade  which  France  does  in  East  Africa  helps  to  increase
the  supply  and  to  keep  down  the  price  of  rubber  for  English
consumers,  just  as  the  bounties  which  continental  countries
pay  to  sugar  producers  enable  British  boys  and  girls  to
enjoy  cheap  sweets.

There  is,  then,  nothing  vaguely  hypothetical  about  these
indirect  gains.  Every  business  man  can  trace  certain
concrete  advantages  of  goods  and  prices  which  come  to  us
from  the  development  of  colonies  by  Protectionist  countries.
The  “ open  door  ” is  an  advantage  to  our  trade,  but  not  a
necessity.  If  we  have  to  spend  vast  sums  and  incur  vast
risks  in  keeping  “ doors  open  ” against  the  wishes  of  our  best
customers,  it  is  more  profitable  to  let  them  close  these  doors
and  take  our  gain  by  the  more  indirect  but  equally  certain
processes  of  roundabout  trade.  At  present  Great  Britain
is  in  a stronger  position  than  any  other  nation  to  practise

68


IMPERIALISM  BASED  ON  PROTECTION


this  policy  of  abstinence,  because  she  possesses  in  her
carrying  trade  by  sea  a most  effective  guarantee  that  she
will  obtain  an  adequate  share  of  the  net  gains  from  new
markets  opened  up  by  foreign  nations.  Though  no  complete
statistics  are  available,  it  is  known  that  a very  large  pro-
portion of  the  trade,  not  only  between  England  and  foreign
countries,  but  between  foreign  countries  trading  among
themselves  and  with  their  possessions,  is  carried  by  British
ships.  So  long  as  this  continues,  England,  apart  from  her
share  obtained  in  roundabout  trade,  must  participate  directly
and  in  a most  important  manner  in  the  trade  advantages  of
foreign  markets  belonging  to  our  European  trade  competitors.

These  considerations  ought  to  make  us  willing  that  other
nations  should  do  their  share  of  expansion  and  development,
well  contented  to  await  the  profit  which  must  accrue  to  us
from  every  increase  of  world-wealth  through  ordinary
processes  of  exchange.  We  have  done  our  share,  and  more,
of  the  costly,  laborious,  and  dangerous  work  of  opening  up
new  countries  to  the  general  trade  of  Western  industrial
nations ; our  later  ventures  were  more  expensive  and  less
profitable  to  us  than  the  earlier  ones,  and  further  labours
of  expansion  seemed  to  conform  to  a law  of  diminishing
returns,  yielding  smaller  and  more  precarious  increments
of  trade  to  a larger  outlay  of  material  and  intellectual  capital.
Had  we  not  reached,  or  even  passed,  the  limit  of  the  most
profitable  outlay  of  our  national  energy  and  resources  ?
Will  not  enlightened  self-interest  impel  us  to  leave  to  other
active  and  ambitious  nations — France,  Russia,  Germany,
Japan — the  work  of  developing  new  tropical  or  sub-tropical
countries  ? If  it  is  necessary  that  Western  industrial
civilization  shall  undertake  the  political  and  commercial
management  of  the  whole  world,  let  these  nations  take
their  share.  Why  should  we  do  all  the  work  and  get  so
little  from  it  ? On  the  assumption  that  backward  countries

69


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


must  be  developed  by  foreign  countries  for  the  general  good,
a reasonable  economy  of  power  will  apportion  the  work
which  remains  to  the  “ Imperialism  ” of  other  nations.  Even
if  these  other  nations  were  disposed  to  shirk  their  share,  it
would  pay  us  better  to  persuade  them  to  undertake  it  rather
than  further  to  load  our  overladen  shoulders.  Since  these
other  nations  are  not  only  eager  to  do  their  share,  but  by
their  jealousy  at  our  undertaking  their  work  continually
threaten  to  wreck  the  peace  of  Europe,  it  seems  sheer
madness  for  Great  Britain  to  weaken  herself  politically  and
financially  by  any  further  process  of  expansion.


70


CHAPTER  VI


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF
IMPERIALISM

NO  mere  array  of  facts  and  figures  adduced  to  illustrate
the  economic  nature  of  the  new  Imperialism  will
suffice  to  dispel  the  popular  delusion  that  the  use  of  national
force  to  secure  new  markets  by  annexing  fresh  tracts  of
territory  is  a sound  and  a necessary  policy  for  an  advanced
industrial  country  like  Great  Britain.1  It  has  indeed  been
proved  that  recent  annexations  of  tropical  countries,
procured  at  great  expense,  have  furnished  poor  and  pre-
carious markets,  that  our  aggregate  trade  with  our  colonial
possessions  is  virtually  stationary,  and  that  our  most
profitable  and  progressive  trade  is  with  rival  industrial
nations,  whose  territories  we  have  no  desire  to  annex,  whose
markets  we  cannot  force,  and  whose  active  antagonism  we
are  provoking  by  our  expansive  policy.

But  these  arguments  are  not  conclusive.  It  is  open
to  Imperialists  to  argue  thus : “ We  must  have  markets  for
our  growing  manufactures,  we  must  have  new  outlets  for  the
investment  of  our  surplus  capital  and  for  the  energies  of  the
adventurous  surplus  of  our  population  : such  expansion  is  a
necessity  of  life  to  a nation  with  our  great  and  growing
powers  of  production.  An  ever  larger  share  of  our  popula-
tion is  devoted  to  the  manufactures  and  commerce  of  towns,
and  is  thus  dependent  for  life  and  work  upon  food  and  raw

1 Written  in  1905.

71


imperialism:  a study


materials  from  foreign  lands.  In  order  to  buy  and  pay  for
these  things  we  must  sell  our  goods  abroad.  During  the  first
three-quarters  of  the  nineteenth  century  we  could  do  so
without  difficulty  by  a natural  expansion  of  commerce  with
continental  nations  and  our  colonies,  all  of  which  were  far
behind  us  in  the  main  arts  of  manufacture  and  the  carrying
trades.  So  long  as  England  held  a virtual  monopoly  of  the
world  markets  for  certain  important  classes  of  manufactured
goods,  Imperialism  was  unnecessary.  After  1870  this  manu-
facturing and  trading  supremacy  was  greatly  impaired  :
other  nations,  especially  Germany,  the  United  States,  and
Belgium,  advanced  with  great  rapidity,  and  while  they  have
not  crushed  or  even  stayed  the  increase  of  our  external  trade,
their  competition  made  it  more  and  more  difficult  to  dispose
of  the  full  surplus  of  our  manufactures  at  a profit.  The
encroachments  made  by  these  nations  upon  our  old  markets,
even  in  our  own  possessions,  made  it  most  urgent  that  we
should  take  energetic  means  to  secure  new  markets.  These
new  markets  had  to  lie  in  hitherto  undeveloped  countries,
chiefly  in  the  tropics,  where  vast  populations  lived  capable
of  growing  economic  needs  which  our  manufacturers  and
merchants  could  supply.  Our  rivals  were  seizing  and
annexing  territories  for  similar  purposes,  and  when  they
had  annexed  them  closed  them  to  our  trade.  The  diplomacy
and  the  arms  of  Great  Britain  had  to  be  used  in  order  to
compel  the  owners  of  the  new  markets  to  deal  with  us  : and
experience  showed  that  the  safest  means  of  securing  and
developing  such  markets  is  by  establishing  ‘ protectorates  *
or  by  annexation.  The  value  in  1905  of  these  markets
must  not  be  taken  as  a final  test  of  the  economy  of  such  a
policy;  the  process  of  educating  civilized  needs  which  we
can  supply  is  of  necessity  a gradual  one,  and  the  cost  of  such
Imperialism  must  be  regarded  as  a capital  outlay,  the  fruits
of  which  posterity  would  reap.  The  new  markets  might


72


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


not  be  large,  but  they  formed  serviceable  outlets  for  the
overflow  of  our  great  textile  and  metal  industries,  and,  when
the  vast  Asiatic  and  African  populations  of  the  interior
were  reached,  a rapid  expansion  of  trade  was  expected
to  result.

“ Far  larger  and  more  important  is  the  pressure  of  capital
for  external  fields  of  investment.  Moreover,  while  the
manufacturer  and  trader  are  well  content  to  trade  with
foreign  nations,  the  tendency  for  investors  to  work  towards
the  political  annexation  of  countries  which  contain  their
more  speculative  investments  is  very  powerful.  Of  the  fact
of  this  pressure  of  capital  there  can  be  no  question.  Large
savings  are  made  which  cannot  find  any  profitable  investment
in  this  country;  they  must  find  employment  elsewhere,
and  it  is  to  the  advantage  of  the  nation  that  they  should
be  employed  as  largely  as  possible  in  lands  where  they  can
be  utilized  in  opening  up  markets  for  British  trade  and
employment  for  British  enterprise.

“ However  costly,  however  perilous,  this  process  of
imperial  expansion  may  be,  it  is  necessary  to  the  continued
existence  and  progress  of  our  nation  j1  if  we  abandoned  it
we  must  be  content  to  leave  the  development  of  the  world
to  other  nations,  who  will  everywhere  cut  into  our  trade,
and  even  impair  our  means  of  securing  the  food  and  raw
materials  we  require  to  support  our  population.  Imperialism
is  thus  seen  to  be,  not  a choice,  but  a necessity.”

The  practical  force  of  this  economic  argument  in  politics
is  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  later  history  of  the  United
States.  Here  is  a country  which  suddenly  broke  through
a conservative  policy,  strongly  held  by  both  political  parties,


1 “ And  why,  indeed,  are  wan  undertaken,  if  not  to  conquer  colonies  which
permit  the  employment  of  fresh  capital,  to  acquire  commercial  monopolies,  or
to  obtain  the  exclusive  use  of  certain  highways  of  commerce  ? ” (Loria,  Economic
Foundations  of  Society , p.  267).


73


imperialism:  a study


bound  up  with  every  popular  instinct  and  tradition,  and
flung  itself  into  a rapid  imperial  career  for  which  it  possessed
neither  the  material  nor  the  moral  equipment,  risking  the
principles  and  practices  of  liberty  and  equality  by  the
establishment  of  militarism  and  the  forcible  subjugation  of
peoples  which  it  could  not  safely  admit  to  the  condition  of
American  citizenship.

Was  this  a mere  wild  freak  of  spread-eaglism,  a burst  of
political  ambition  on  the  part  of  a nation  coming  to  a sudden
realization  of  its  destiny  ? Not  at  all.  The  spirit  of
adventure,  the  American  “ mission  of  civilization,”  were  as
forces  making  for  Imperialism,  clearly  subordinate  to  the
driving  force  of  the  economic  factor.  The  dramatic
character  of  the  change  is  due  to  the  unprecedented  rapidity
of  the  industrial  revolution  in  the  United  States  from  the
eighties  onwards.  During  that  period  the  United  States,
with  her  unrivalled  natural  resources,  her  immense  resources
of  skilled  and  unskilled  labour,  and  her  genius  for  invention
and  organization,  developed  the  best  equipped  and  most
productive  manufacturing  economy  the  world  has  yet  seen.
Fostered  by  rigid  protective  tariffs,  her  metal,  textile,  tool,
clothing,  furniture,  and  other  manufactures  shot  up  in
a single  generation  from  infancy  to  full  maturity,  and,
having  passed  through  a period  of  intense  competition,
attained,  under  the  able  control  of  great  trust-makers,  a
power  of  production  greater  than  has  been  attained  in  the
most  advanced  industrial  countries  of  Europe.

An  era  of  cut-throat  competition,  followed  by  a rapid
process  of  amalgamation,  threw  an  enormous  quantity  of
wealth  into  the  hands  of  a small  number  of  captains  of
industry.  No  luxury  of  living  to  which  this  class  could
attain  kept  pace  with  its  rise  of  income,  and  a process  of
automatic  saving  set  in  upon  an  unprecedented  scale.  The
investment  of  these  savings  in  other  industries  helped  to

74


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


bring  these  under  the  same  concentrative  forces.  Thus
a great  increase  of  savings  seeking  profitable  investment
is  synchronous  with  a stricter  economy  of  the  use  of  existing
capital.  No  doubt  the  rapid  growth  of  a population,
accustomed  to  a high  and  an  always  ascending  standard  of
comfort,  absorbs  in  the  satisfaction  of  its  wants  a large
quantity  of  new  capital.  But  the  actual  rate  of  saving,
conjoined  with  a more  economical  application  of  forms  of
existing  capital,  exceeded  considerably  the  rise  of  the
national  consumption  of  manufactures.  The  power  of
production  far  outstripped  the  actual  rate  of  consumption,
and,  contrary  to  the  older  economic  theory,  was  unable  to
force  a corresponding  increase  of  consumption  by  lowering
prices.

This  is  no  mere  theory.  The  history  of  any  of  the
numerous  trusts  or  combinations  in  the  United  States  sets
out  the  facts  with  complete  distinctness.  In  the  free
competition  of  manufactures  preceding  combination  the
chronic  condition  is  one  of  “ over-production,”  in  the  sense
that  all  the  mills  or  factories  can  only  be  kept  at  work  by
cutting  prices  down  towards  a point  where  the  weaker
competitors  are  forced  to  close  down,  because  they  cannot
sell  their  goods  at  a price  which  covers  the  true  cost  of
production.  The  first  result  of  the  successful  formation  of
a trust  or  combine  is  to  close  down  the  worse  equipped  or
worse  placed  mills,  and  supply  the  entire  market  from  the
better  equipped  and  better  placed  ones.  This  course  may
or  may  not  be  attended  by  a rise  of  price  and  some  restriction
of  consumption : in  some  cases  trusts  take  most  of  their
profits  by  raising  prices,  in  other  cases  by  reducing  the  costs
of  production  through  employing  only  the  best  mills  and
stopping  the  waste  of  competition.

For  the  present  argument  it  matters  not  which  course
is  taken ; the  point  is  that  this  concentration  of  industry

75


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


in  “ trusts,”  “ combines,”  etc.,  at  once  limits  the  quantity
of  capital  which  can  be  effectively  employed  and  increases
the  share  of  profits  out  of  which  fresh  savings  and  fresh
capital  will  spring.  It  is  quite  evident  that  a trust  which
is  motived  by  cut-throat  competition,  due  to  an  excess  of
capital,  cannot  normally  find  inside  the  “ trusted  ” industry
employment  for  that  portion  of  the  profits  which  the  trust-
makers  desire  to  save  and  to  invest.  New  inventions  and
other  economies  of  production  or  distribution  within  the
trade  may  absorb  some  of  the  new  capital,  but  there  are
rigid  limits  to  this  absorption.  The  trust-maker  in  oil  or
sugar  must  find  other  investments  for  his  savings  : if  he
is  early  in  the  application  of  the  combination  principles  to
his  trade,  he  will  naturally  apply  his  surplus  capital  to
establish  similar  combinations  in  other  industries,  econo-
mising capital  still  further,  and  rendering  it  ever  harder
for  ordinary  saving  men  to  find  investments  for  their
savings.

Indeed,  the  conditions  alike  of  cut-throat  competition
and  of  combination  attest  the  congestion  of  capital  in  the
manufacturing  industries  which  have  entered  the  machine
economy.  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  any  theoretic
question  as  to  the  possibility  of  producing  by  modern
machine  methods  more  goods  than  can  find  a market.  It
is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  the  manufacturing  power  of
a country  like  the  United  States  would  grow  so  fast  as  to
exceed  the  demands  of  the  home  market.  No  one  acquainted
with  trade  will  deny  a fact  which  all  American  economists
assert,  that  this  is  the  condition  which  the  United  States
reached  at  the  end  of  the  century,  so  far,  as  the  more
developed  industries  are  concerned.  Her  manufactures
were  saturated  with  capital  and  could  absorb  no  more.
One  aftei  another  they  sought  refuge  from  the  waste  of
competition  in  “ combines  ” which  secure  a measure  of

76


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM

profitable  peace  by  restricting  the  quantity  of  operative
capital.  Industrial  and  financial  princes  in  oil,  steel,  sugar,
railroads,  banking,  etc.,  were  faced  with  the  dilemma  of
either  spending  more  than  they  knew  how  to  spend,  or
forcing  markets  outside  the  home  area.  Two  economic
courses  were  open  to  them,  both  leading  towards  an
abandonment  of  the  political  isolation  of  the  past  and  the
adoption  of  imperialist  methods  in  the  future.  Instead  of
shutting  down  inferior  mills  and  rigidly  restricting  output
to  correspond  with  profitable  sales  in  the  home  markets,
they  might  employ  their  full  productive  power,  applying
their  savings  to  increase  their  business  capital,  and,  while
still  regulating  output  and  prices  for  the  home  market,
may  “ hustle  ” for  foreign  markets,  dumping  down  their
surplus  goods  at  prices  which  would  not  be  possible  save
for  the  profitable  nature  of  their  home  market.  So  like-
wise they  might  employ  their  savings  in  seeking  investments
outside  their  country,  first  repaying  the  capital  borrowed
from  Great  Britain  and  other  countries  for  the  early
development  of  their  railroads,  mines  and  manufactures,
and  afterwards  becoming  themselves  a creditor  class  to
foreign  countries.

It  was  this  sudden  demand  for  foreign  markets  for  manu-
factures and  for  investments  which  was  avowedly  responsible
for  the  adoption  of  Imperialism  as  a political  policy  and
practice  by  the  Republican  party  to  which  the  great  industrial
and  financial  chiefs  belonged,  and  which  belonged  to  them.
The  adventurous  enthusiasm  of  President  Theodore  Roose-
velt and  his  “ manifest  destiny  99  and  “ mission  of  civiliza-
tion 99  party  must  not  deceive  us.  It  was  Messrs.  Rockefeller,
Pierpont  Morgan,  and  their  associates  who  needed  Imperial-
ism and  who  fastened  it  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  great
Republic  of  the  West.  They  needed  Imperialism  because
they  desired  to  use  the  public  resources  of  their  country

77


imperialism:  a study


to  find  profitable  employment  for  their  capital  which
otherwise  would  be  superfluous.

It  is  not  indeed  necessary  to  own  a country  in  order  to
do  trade  with  it  or  to  invest  capital  in  it,  and  doubtless  the
United  States  could  find  some  vent  for  their  surplus  goods,
and  capital  in  European  countries.  But  these  countries
were  for  the  most  part  able  to  make  provision  for  them-
selves : most  of  them  erected  tariffs  against  manufacturing
imports,  and  even  Great  Britain  was  urged  to  defend
herself  by  reverting  to  Protection.  The  big  American
manufacturers  and  financiers  were  compelled  to  look  to
China  and  the  Pacific  and  to  South  America  for  their  most
profitable  chances ; Protectionists  by  principle  and  practice,
they  would  insist  upon  getting  as  close  a monopoly  of  these
markets  as  they  can  secure,  and  the  competition  of  Germany,
England,  and  other  trading  nations  would  drive  them  to  the
establishment  of  special  political  relations  with  the  markets
they  most  prize.  Cuba,  the  Philippines,  and  Hawaii  were
but  the  hors  d’ceuvre  to  whet  an  appetite  for  an  ampler
banquet.  Moreover,  the  powerful  hold  upon  politics  which
these  industrial  and  financial  magnates  possessed  formed
a separate  stimulus,  which,  as  we  have  shown,  was  operative
in  Great  Britain  and  elsewhere ; the  public  expenditure
in  pursuit  of  an  imperial  career  would  be  a separate  immense
source  of  profit  to  these  men,  as  financiers  negotiating  loans,
shipbuilders  and  owners  handling  subsidies,  contractors
and  manufacturers  of  armaments  and  other  imperialist
appliances.

The  suddenness  of  this  political  revolution  is  due  to  the
rapid  manifestation  of  the  need.  In  the  last  years  of  the
nineteenth  century  the  United  States  nearly  trebled  the
value  of  its  manufacturing  export  trade,  and  it  was  to  be
expected  that,  if  the  rate  of  progress  of  those  years  continued,
within  a decade  it  would  overtake  our  more  slowly  advancing

78


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


export  trade,  and  stand  first  in  the  list  of  manufacture-
exporting nations.1

This  was  the  avowed  ambition,  and  no  idle  one,  of  the
keenest  business  men  of  America ; and  with  the  natural
resources,  the  labour  and  the  administrative  talents  at
their  disposal,  it  was  quite  likely  they  would  achieve  their
object.1  The  stronger  and  more  direct  control  over  politics
exercised  in  America  by  business  men  enabled  them  to
drive  more  quickly  and  more  straightly  along  the  line  of
their  economic  interests  than  in  Great  Britain.  American
Imperialism  was  the  natural  product  of  the  economic
pressure  of  a sudden  advance  of  capitalism  which  could  not
find  occupation  at  home  and  needed  foreign  markets  for
goods  and  for  investments.

The  same  needs  existed  in  European  countries,  and,  as  is


1 Export  Trade  op  United  Statu,  1890-1900.


Year.

Agriculture.

1890  ....

£

115,756, °°°

£

31,435,000

£

13,019,000

1891  ....

146,617,000

33,720,000

11,731,000

1892  ....

142,508,000

30,479,000

II,660,000

1893  ....

123,810,000

35,484,000

11,653,000

1894  ....

,I4>737»°oo

35>557>«x>

II,l68,000

189s  ....

I04,i43,°°o

40,230,000

12,174,000

1896  ....

132, 992, ooo

50,738,000

13,639,000

1897  ....

146,059,000

55,923,000

13,984,000

1898  ....

170,383,000

61,585,000

•♦.743»ooo

1899  ....

156.427.000

180.931.000

1

76,157,000

18,002,000

21,389,000

1900  ....

88,281,000

1 Pott-war  conditions,  with  the  immense  opportunities  afforded  for  exports
of  American  goods  and  capital  brought  a pause  and  a temporary  withdrawal
from  imperialist  policy.

*“  Wc  hold  now  three  of  the  winning  cards  in  the  game  for  commercial
greatness,  to  wit — iron,  steel  and  coal.  We  hare  long  been  the  granary  of  the
world,  we  now  aspire  to  be  its  workshop,  then  we  want  to  be  its  clearing-house.'*
(The  President  of  the  American  Bankers’  Association  at  Denver,  1898.)

79


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


admitted,  drove  Governments  along  the  same  path.  Over-
production in  the  sense  of  an  excessive  manufacturing  plant,
and  surplus  capital  which  could  not  find  sound  investments
within  the  country,  forced  Great  Britain,  Germany,
Holland,  France  to  place  larger  and  larger  portions  of  their
economic  resources  outside  the  area  of  their  present  political
domain,  and  then  stimulate  a policy  of  political  expansion  so
as  to  take  in  the  new  areas.  The  economic  sources  of  tins
movement  are  laid  bare  by  periodic  trade-depressions  due
to  an  inability  of  producers  to  find  adequate  and  profit-
able markets  for  what  they  can  produce.  The  Majority
Report  of  the  Commission  upon  the  Depression  of  Trade
in  1885  put  the  matter  in  a nutshell.  “ That,  owing  to  the
nature  of  the  times,  the  demand  for  our  commodities  does
not  increase  at  the  same  rate  as  formerly  ; that  our  capacity
for  production  is  consequently  in  excess  of  our  require-
ments, and  could  be  considerably  increased  at  short  notice  ;
that  this  is  due  partly  to  the  competition  of  the  capital
which  is  being  steadily  accumulated  in  the  country.”  The
Minority  Report  straightly  imputed  the  condition  of  affairs
to  “ over-production.”  Germany  was  in  the  early  1900’s
suffering  severely  from  what  is  called  a glut  of  capital  and
of  manufacturing  power  : she  had  to  have  new  markets  ;
her  Consuls  all  over  the  world  were  “ hustling  ” for  trade ;
trading  settlements  were  forced  upon  Asia  Minor ; in  East
and  West  Africa,  in  China  and  elsewhere  the  German
Empire  was  impelled  to  a policy  of  colonization  and
protectorates  as  outlets  for  German  commercial  energy.

Every  improvement  of  methods  of  production,  every
concentration  of  ownership  and  control,  seems  to  accentuate
the  tendency.  As  one  nation  after  another  enters  the
machine  economy  and  adopts  advanced  industrial  methods,
it  becomes  more  difficult  for  its  manufacturers,  merchants,
and  financiers  to  dispose  profitably  of  their  economic

80


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM

resources,  and  they  are  tempted  more  and  more  to  use  their
Governments  in  order  to  secure  for  their  particular  use
some  distant  undeveloped  country  by  annexation  and
protection.

The  process,  we  may  be  told,  is  inevitable,  and  so  it  seems
upon  a superficial  inspection.  Everywhere  appear  excessive
powers  of  production,  excessive  capital  in  search  of  invest-
ment. It  is  admitted  by  all  business  men  that  the  growth
of  the  powers  of  production  in  their  country  exceeds  the
growth  in  consumption,  that  more  goods  can  be  produced
than  can  be  sold  at  a profit,  and  that  more  capital  exists  than
can  find  remunerative  investment.

It  is  this  economic  condition  of  affairs  that  forms  the
taproot  of  Imperialism.  If  the  consuming  public  in  this
country  raised  its  standard  of  consumption  to  keep  pace
with  every  rise  of  productive  powers,  there  could  be  no
excess  of  goods  or  capital  clamorous  to  use  Imperialism  in
order  to  find  markets : foreign  trade  would  indeed  exist,
but  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  exchanging  a small
surplus  of  our  manufactures  for  the  food  and  raw  material
we  annually  absorbed,  and  all  the  savings  that  we  made
could  find  employment,  if  we  chose,  in  home  industries.

There  is  nothing  inherently  irrational  in  such  a supposition.
Whatever  is,  or  can  be,  produced,  can  be  consumed,  for  a
claim  upon  it,  as  rent,  profit,  or  wages,  forms  part  of  the
real  income  of  some  member  of  the  community,  and  he
can  consume  it,  or  else  exchange  it  for  some  other  consumable
with  some  one  else  who  will  consume  it.  With  everything
that  is  produced  a consuming  power  is  born.  If  then  there
are  goods  which  cannot  get  consumed,  or  which  cannot  even
get  produced  because  it  is  evident  they  cannot  get  consumed,
and  if  there  is  a quantity  of  capital  and  labour  which  cannot
get  full  employment  because  its  products  cannot  get  con-
sumed, the  only  possible  explanation  of  this  paradox  is  the

81


imperialism:  a study


refusal  of  owners  of  consuming  power  to  apply  that  power  in
effective  demand  for  commodities.

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  an  excess  of  producing
power  might  exist  in  particular  industries  by  misdirection,
being  engaged  in  certain  manufactures,  whereas  it  ought
to  have  been  engaged  in  agriculture  or  some  other  use.
But  no  one  can  seriously  contend  that  such  misdirection
explains  the  recurrent  gluts  and  consequent  depressions
of  modern  industry,  or  that,  when  over-production  is
manifest  in  the  leading  manufactures,  ample  avenues  are
open  for  the  surplus  capital  and  labour  in  other  industries.
The  general  character  of  the  excess  of  producing  power  is
proved  by  the  existence  at  such  times  of  large  bank  stocks
of  idle  money  seeking  any  sort  of  profitable  investment  and
finding  none.

The  root  questions  underlying  the  phenomena  are
clearly  these  : “ Why  is  it  that  consumption  fails  to  keep  pace
automatically  in  a community  with  power  of  production  ? ”
“ Why  does  under-consumption  or  over-saving  occur  ? ”
For  it  is  evident  that  the  consuming  power,  which,  if
exercised,  would  keep  tense  the  reins  of  production,  is  in
part  withheld,  or  in  other  words  is  “ saved  ” and  stored  up
for  investment.  All  saving  for  investment  does  not  imply
slackness  of  production  ; quite  the  contrary.  Saving  is
economically  justified,  from  the  social  standpoint,  when
the  capital  in  which  it  takes  material  shape  finds  full  employ-
ment in  helping  to  produce  commodities  which,  when
produced,  will  be  consumed.  It  is  saving  in  excess  of  this
amount  that  causes  mischief,  taking  shape  in  surplus  capital
which  is  not  needed  to  assist  current  consumption,  and
which  either  lies  idle,  or  tries  to  oust  existing  capital  from
its  employment,  or  else  seeks  speculative  use  abroad  under
the  protection  of  the  Government.

But  it  may  be  asked,  “ Why  should  there  be  any  tendency

82


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


to  over-saving  ? Why  should  the  owners  of  consuming
power  withhold  a larger  quantity  for  savings  than  can  be
serviceably  employed  ? ” Another  way  of  putting  the
same  question  is  this,  “ Why  should  not  the  pressure  of
present  wants  keep  pace  with  every  possibility  of  satisfying
them  ? ” The  answer  to  these  pertinent  questions  carries
us  to  the  broadest  issue  of  the  distribution  of  wealth.  If
a tendency  to  distribute  income  or  consuming  power
according  to  needs  were  operative,  it  is  evident  that
consumption  would  rise  with  every  rise  of  producing  power,
for  human  needs  are  illimitable,  and  there  could  be  no
excess  of  saving.  But  it  is  quite  otherwise  in  a state  of
economic  society  where  distribution  has  no  fixed  relation
to  needs,  but  is  determined  by  other  conditions  which  assign
to  some  people  a consuming  power  vastly  in  excess  of  needs
or  possible  uses,  while  others  are  destitute  of  consuming
power  enough  to  satisfy  even  the  full  demands  of  physical
efficiency.  The  following  illustration  may  serve  to  make  the
issue  clear.  “ The  volume  of  production  has  been  constantly
rising  owing  to  the  development  of  modern  machinery.
There  are  two  main  channels  to  carry  off  these  products —
one  channel  carrying  off  the  product  destined  to  be  con-
sumed by  the  workers,  and  the  other  channel  carrying  off  the
remainder  to  the  rich.  The  workers’  channel  is  in  rock-
bound  banks  that  cannot  enlarge,  owing  to  the  competitive
wage  system  preventing  wages  rising  fro  rata  with  increased
efficiency.  Wages  are  based  upon  cost  of  living,  and  not
upon  efficiency  of  labour.  The  miner  in  the  poor  mine
gets  the  same  wages  per  day  as  the  miner  in  the  adjoining
rich  mine.  The  owner  of  the  rich  mine  gets  the  advantage
— not  his  labourer.  The  channel  which  conveys  the  goods
destined  to  supply  the  rich  is  itself  divided  into  two  streams.
One  stream  carries  off  what  the  rich  4 spend  9 on  them-
selves for  the  necessities  and  luxuries  of  life.  The  other
g 83


imperialism:  a study


is  simply  an  ‘ overflow  ’ stream  carrying  off  their  i savings/
The  channel  for  spending,  i.e.  the  amount  wasted  by  the
rich  in  luxuries,  may  broaden  somewhat,  but  owing  to  the
small  number  of  those  rich  enough  to  indulge  in  whims
it  can  never  be  greatly  enlarged,  and  at  any  rate  it  bears
such  a small  proportion  to  the  other  channel  that  in  no
event  can  much  hope  of  avoiding  a flood  of  capital  be  hoped
for  from  this  division.  The  rich  will  never  be  so  ingenious
as  to  spend  enough  to  prevent  over-production.  The
great  safety  overflow  channel  which  has  been  continuously
more  and  more  widened  and  deepened  to  carry  off  the
ever-increasing  flood  of  new  capital  is  that  division  of  the
stream  which  carried  the  savings  of  the  rich,  and  this  is  not
only  suddenly  found  to  be  incapable  of  further  enlarge-
ment, but  actually  seems  to  be  in  the  process  of  being
dammed  up.”1

Though  this  presentation  over-accentuates  the  cleavage
between  rich  and  poor  and  over-states  the  weakness  of  the
workers,  it  gives  forcible  and  sound  expression  to  a most
important  and  ill-recognised  economic  truth.  The  “ over-
flow ” stream  of  savings  is  of  course  fed  not  exclusively
from  the  surplus  income  of  “ the  rich  99  ; the  professional
and  industrial  middle  classes,  and  to  some  slight  extent  the
workers,  contribute.  But  the  “ flooding  ” is  distinctly
due  to  the  automatic  saving  of  the  surplus  income  of  rich
men.  This  is  of  course  particularly  true  of  America,  where
multi-millionaires  rise  quickly  and  find  themselves  in
possession  of  incomes  far  exceeding  the  demands  of  any
craving  that  is  known  to  them.  To  make  the  metaphor
complete,  the  overflow  stream  must  be  represented  as  re-
entering the  stream  of  production  and  seeking  to  empty
there  all  the  “ savings  99  that  it  carries.  Where  competition
remains  free,  the  result  is  a chronic  congestion  of  productive
1 7 be  Significance  oj  the  Trust,  by  H.  G.  WiUhire.

8+


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


power  and  of  production,  forcing  down  home  prices,
wasting  large  sums  in  advertising  and  in  pushing  for  orders,
and  periodically  causing  a crisis  followed  by  a collapse,
during  which  quantities  of  capital  and  labour  lie  unemployed
and  unremunerated.  The  prime  object  of  the  trust  or
other  combine  is  to  remedy  this  waste  and  loss  by  substituting
regulation  of  output  for  reckless  over-production.  In
achieving  this  it  actually  narrows  or  even  dams  up  the
old  channels  of  investment,  limiting  the  overflow  stream
to  the  exact  amount  required  to  maintain  the  normal
current  of  output.  But  this  rigid  limitation  of  trade,
though  required  for  the  separate  economy  of  each  trust,
does  not  suit  the  trust-maker,  who  is  driven  to  compensate
for  strictly  regulated  industry  at  home  by  cutting  new
foreign  channels  as  outlets  for  his  productive  power  and  his
excessive  savings.  Thus  we  reach  the  conclusion  that
Imperialism  is  the  endeavour  of  the  great  controllers  of
industry  to  broaden  the  channel  for  the  flow  of  their  surplus
wealth  by  seeking  foreign  markets  and  foreign  investments
to  take  off  the  goods  and  capital  they  cannot  sell  or  use  at
home.

The  fallacy  of  the  supposed  inevitability  of  imperial
expansion  as  a necessary  outlet  for  progressive  industry
is  now  manifest.  It  is  not  industrial  progress  that  demands
the  opening  up  of  new  markets  and  areas  of  investment,
but  mal-distribution  of  consuming  power  which  prevents
the  absorption  of  commodities  and  capital  within  the
country.  The  over-saving  which  is  the  economic  root
of  Imperialism  is  found  by  analysis  to  consist  of  rents,
monopoly  profits,  and  other  unearned  or  excessive  elements
of  income,  which,  not  being  earned  by  labour  of  head  or
hand,  have  no  legitimate  raison  d'etre.  Having  no  natural
relation  to  effort  of  production,  they  impel  their  recipients
to  no  corresponding  satisfaction  of  consumption : they

*5


imperialism:  a study


form  a surplus  wealth,  which,  having  no  proper  place  in  the
normal  economy  of  production  and  consumption,  tends
to  accumulate  as  excessive  savings.  Let  any  turn  in  the
tide  of  politico-economic  forces  divert  from  these  owners
their  excess  of  income  and  make  it  flow,  either  to  the
workers  in  higher  wages,  or  to  the  community  in  taxes,  so
that  it  will  be  spent  instead  of  being  saved,  serving  in
either  of  these  ways  to  swell  the  tide  of  consumption —
there  will  be  no  need  to  fight  for  foreign  markets  or  foreign
areas  of  investment.

Many  have  carried  their  analysis  so  far  as  to  realise  the
absurdity  of  spending  half  our  financial  resources  in  fighting
to  secure  foreign  markets  at  times  when  hungry  mouths,  ill-
clad  backs,  ill-furnished  houses  indicate  countless  unsatisfied
material  wants  among  our  own  population.  If  we  may
take  the  careful  statistics  of  Mr.  Rowntree1  for  our  guide,
we  shall  be  aware  that  more  than  one-fourth  of  the  popula-
tion of  our  towns  is  living  at  a standard  which  is  below  bare
physical  efficiency.  If,  by  some  economic  readjustment,
the  products  which  flow  from  the  surplus  saving  of  the
rich  to  swell  the  overflow  streams  could  be  diverted  so  as
to  raise  the  incomes  and  the  standard  of  consumption  of
this  inefficient  fourth,  there  would  be  no  need  for  pushful
Imperialism,  and  the  cause  of  social  reform  would  have
won  its  greatest  victory.

It  is  not  inherent  in  the  nature  of  things  that  we  should
spend  our  natural  resources  on  militarism,  war,  and  risky,
unscrupulous  diplomacy,  in  order  to  find  markets  for  our
goods  and  surplus  capital.  An  intelligent  progressive
community,  based  upon  substantial  equality  of  economic
and  educational  opportunities,  will  raise  its  standard  of
consumption  to  correspond  with  every  increased  power
of  production,  and  can  find  full  employment  for  an  un-

1 Poverty  : A Study  of  7 own  Life .


86


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


limited  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  within  the  limits
of  the  country  which  it  occupies.  Where  the  distribution
of  incomes  is  such  as  to  enable  all  classes  of  the  nation  to
convert  their  felt  wants  into  an  effective  demand  for
commodities,  there  can  be  no  over-production,  no  under-
employment of  capital  and  labour,  and  no  necessity  to
fight  for  foreign  markets.

The  most  convincing  condemnation  of  the  current
economy  is  conveyed  in  the  difficulty  which  producers
everywhere  experience  in  finding  consumers  for  their
products  : a fact  attested  by  the  prodigious  growth  of
classes  of  agents  and  middlemen,  the  multiplication  of  every
sort  of  advertising,  and  the  general  increase  of  the  dis-
tributive classes.  Under  a sound  economy  the  pressure
would  be  reversed : the  growing  wants  of  progressive
societies  would  be  a constant  stimulus  to  the  inventive  and
operative  energies  of  producers,  and  would  form  a constant
strain  upon  the  powers  of  production.  The  simultaneous
excess  of  all  the  factors  of  production,  attested  by  frequently
recurring  periods  of  trade  depression,  is  a most  dramatic
exhibition  of  the  false  economy  of  distribution.  It  does
not  imply  a mere  miscalculation  in  the  application  of
productive  power,  or  a brief  temporary  excess  of  that  power  ;
it  manifests  in  an  acute  form  an  economic  waste  which  is
chronic  and  general  throughout  the  advanced  industrial
nations,  a waste  contained  in  the  divorcement  of  the  desire
to  consume  and  the  power  to  consume.

If  the  apportionment  of  income  were  such  as  to  evoke
no  excessive  saving,  full  constant  employment  for  capital
and  labour  would  be  furnished  at  home.  This,  of  course,
does  not  imply  that  there  would  be  no  foreign  trade.  Goods
that  could  not  be  produced  at  home,  or  produced  as  well
or  as  cheaply,  would  still  be  purchased  by  ordinary  process
of  international  exchange,  but  here  again  the  pressure

87


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


would  be  the  wholesome  pressure  of  the  consumer  anxious
to  buy  abroad  what  he  could  not  buy  at  home,  not  the
blind  eagerness  of  the  producer  to  use  every  force  or  trick
of  trade  or  politics  to  find  markets  for  his  “ surplus  ”
goods.

^The  struggle  for  markets,  the  greater  eagerness  of  pro-
ducers to  sell  than  of  consumers  to  buy,  is  the  crowning
proof  of  a false  economy  of  distribution.  Imperialism
is  the  fruit  of  this  false  economy ; “ social  reform  ” is  its
remedy.  The  primary  purpose  of  “ social  reform,”  using
the  term  in  its  economic  signification,  is  to  raise  the  whole-
some standard  of  private  and  public  consumption  for  a
nation,  so  as  to  enable  the  nation  to  live  up  to  its  highest
standard  of  production.  Even  those  social  reformers  who
aim  directly  at  abolishing  or  reducing  some  bad  form  of
consumption,  as  in  the  Temperance  movement,  generally
recognise  the  necessity  of  substituting  some  better  form
of  current  consumption  which  is  more  educative  and
stimulative  of  other  tastes,  and  will  assist  to  raise  the
general  standard  of  consumption.

There  is  no  necessity  to  open  up  new  foreign  markets ;
the  home  markets  are  capable  of  indefinite  expansion.
Whatever  is  produced  in  England  can  be  consumed  in
England,  provided  that  the  “ income  ” or  power  to  demand
commodities,  is  properly  distributed.  This  only  appears
untrue  because  of  the  unnatural  and  unwholesome  specialisa-
tion to  which  this  country  has  been  subjected,  based
upon  a bad  distribution  of  economic  resources,  which  has
induced  an  overgrowth  of  certain  manufacturing  trades
for  the  express  purpose  of  effecting  foreign  sales.  If  the
industrial  revolution  had  taken  place  in  an  England  founded
upon  equal  access  by  all  classes  to  land,  education  and
legislation,  specialisation  in  manufactures  would  not  have
gone  so  far  (though  more  intelligent  progress  would  have

88


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


been  made,  by  reason  of  a widening  of  the  area  of  selection
of  inventive  and  organising  talents)  ; foreign  trade  would
have  been  less  important,  though  more  steady ; the  standard
of  life  for  all  portions  of  the  population  would  have  been
high,  and  the  present  rate  of  national  consumption  would
probably  have  given  full,  constant,  remunerative  employ-
ment to  a far  larger  quantity  of  private  and  public  capital
than  is  now  employed.1  For  the  over-saving  or  wider
consumption  that  is  traced  to  excessive  incomes  of  the
rich  is  a suicidal  economy,  even  from  the  exclusive  standpoint
of  capital ; for  consumption  alone  vitalises  capital  and  makes
it  capable  of  yielding  profits.  An  economy  that  assigns
to  the  " possessing  99  classes  an  excess  of  consuming  power
which  they  cannot  use,  and  cannot  convert  into  really
serviceable  capital,  is  a dog-in-the-manger  policy.  The
social  reforms  which  deprive  the  possessing  classes  of  their
surplus  will  not,  therefore,  inflict  upon  them  the  real  injury
they  dread ; they  can  only  use  this  surplus  by  forcing  on
their  country  a wrecking  policy  of  Imperialism.  The  only
safety  of  nations  lies  in  removing  the  unearned  increments
of  income  from  the  possessing  classes,  and  adding  them  to
the  wage-income  of  the  working  classes  or  to  the  public
income,  in  order  that  they  may  be  spent  in  raising  the
standard  of  consumption.

Social  reform  bifurcates,  according  as  reformers  seek  to
achieve  this  end  by  raising  wages  or  by  increasing  public
taxation  and  expenditure.  These  courses  are  not  essentially


1 The  clatsical  economists  of  England,  forbidden  by  their  theories  of  parsimony
and  of  the  growth  of  capital  to  entertain  the  notion  of  an  indefinite  expansion
of  home  markets  by  reason  of  a (Constantly  rising  standard  of  national  comfort,
were  early  driven  to  countenance  a doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  finding  external
markets  for  the  investment  of  capital.  So  J.  S.  Mill : “ The  expansion  of  capital
would  soon  reach  its  ultimate  boundary  if  the  boundary  itself  did  not  continually
open  and  leave  more  space  ’*  (Political  Economy).  And  before  him  Ricardo  (in
a letter  to  Malthus) : “ If  with  every  accumulation  of  capital  we  could  take  a
piece  of  fresh  fertile  land  to  our  island,  profits  would  never  fall.**

89


imperialism:  a study

contradictory,  but  are  rather  complementary.  Working-
class  movements  aim,  either  by  private  co-operation  or  by
political  pressure  on  legislative  and  administrative  govern-
ment, at  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  national  income
which  accrues  to  labour  in  the  form  of  wages,  pensions,
compensation  for  injuries,  etc.  State  Socialism  aims  at
getting  for  the  direct  use  of  the  whole  society  an  increased
share  of  the  “ social  values  ” which  arise  from  the  closely
and  essentially  co-operative  work  of  an  industrial  society,
taxing  property  and  incomes  so  as  to  draw  into  the  public
exchequer  for  public  expenditure  the  “ unearned  elements  ”
of  income,  leaving  to  individual  producers  those  incomes
which  are  necessary  to  induce  them  to  apply  in  the  best
way  their  economic  energies,  and  to  private  enterprises
those  businesses  which  do  not  breed  monopoly,  and  which
the  public  need  not  or  cannot  undertake.  These  are  not,
indeed,  the  sole  or  perhaps  the  best  avowed  objects  of  social
reform  movements.  But  for  the  purposes  of  this  analysis
they  form  the  kernel.

Trade  Unionism  and  Socialism  are  thus  the  natural
enemies  of  Imperialism,  for  they  take  away  from  the
" imperialist  ” classes  the  surplus  incomes  which  form  the
economic  stimulus  of  Imperialism.

This  does  not  pretend  to  be  a final  statement  of  the  full
relations  of  these  forces.  When  we  come  to  political
analysis  we  shall  perceive  that  the  tendency  of  Imperialism
is  to  crush  Trade  Unionism  and  to  “ nibble  ” at  or
parasitically  exploit  State  Socialism.  But,  confining  our-
selves for  the  present  to  the  narrowly  economic  setting,
Trade  Unionism  and  State  Socialism  may  be  regarded  as
complementary  forces  arrayed  against  Imperialism,  in  as
far  as,  by  diverting  to  working-class  or  public  expenditure
elements  of  income  which  would  otherwise  be  surplus
savings,  they  raise  the  general  standard  of  home  consumption

9°


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM


and  abate  the  pressure  for  foreign  markets.  Of  course,  if  the
increase  of  working-class  income  were  wholly  or  chiefly
“ saved,”  not  spent,  or  if  the  taxation  of  unearned  incomes
were  utilised  for  the  relief  of  other  taxes  borne  by  the
possessing  classes,  no  such  result  as  we  have  described
would  follow.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  anticipate
this  result  from  trade-union  or  socialistic  measures.
Though  no  sufficient  natural  stimulus  exists  to  force  the
well-to-do  classes  to  spend  in  further  luxuries  the  surplus
incomes  which  they  save,  every  working-class  family  is
subject  to  powerful  stimuli  of  economic  needs,  and  a reason-
ably governed  State  would  regard  as  its  prime  duty  the
relief  of  the  present  poverty  of  public  life  by  new  forms  of
socially  useful  expenditure.

But  we  are  not  here  concerned  with  what  belongs  to  the
practical  issues  of  political  and  economic  policy.  It  is  the
economic  theory  for  which  we  claim  acceptance — a theory
which,  if  accurate,  dispels  the  delusion  that  expansion  of
foreign  trade,  and  therefore  of  empire,  is  a necessity  of
national  life.

Regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  economy  of  energy,
the  same  “ choice  of  life  ” confronts  the  nation  as  the
individual.  An  individual  may  expend  all  his  energy  in
acquiring  external  possessions,  adding  field  to  field,  barn
to  barn,  factory  to  factory — may  “ spread  himself  ” over
the  widest  area  of  property,  amassing  material  wealth
which  is  in  some  sense  “ himself  ” as  containing  the  impress
of  his  power  and  interest.  He  does  this  by  specialising
upon  the  lower  acquisitive  plane  of  interest  at  the  cost
of  neglecting  the  cultivation  of  the  higher  qualities  and
interests  of  his  nature.  The  antagonism  is  not  indeed
absolute.  Aristotle  has  said,  “ We  must  first  secure  a
livelihood  and  then  practise  virtue.”  Hence  the  pursuit
of  material  property  as  a reasonable  basis  of  physical  comfort

9*


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


would  be  held  true  economy  by  the  wisest  men ; but  the
absorption  of  time,  energy,  and  interest  upon  such  quantita-
tive expansion  at  the  necessary  cost  of  starving  the  higher
tastes  and  faculties  is  condemned  as  false  economy.  The
same  issue  comes  up  in  the  business  life  of  the  individual :
it  is  the  question  of  intensive  versus  extensive  cultivation.
A rude  or  ignorant  farmer,  where  land  is  plentiful,  is  apt
to  spread  his  capital  and  labour  over  a large  area,  taking
in  new  tracts  and  cultivating  them  poorly.  A skilled,
scientific  farmer  will  study  a smaller  patch  of  land,  cultivate
it  thoroughly,  and  utilise  its  diverse  properties,  adapting  it
to  the  special  needs  of  his  most  remunerative  markets.
The  same  is  true  of  other  businesses  ; even  where  the
economy  of  large-scale  production  is  greatest  there  exists
some  limit  beyond  which  the  wise  business  man  will  not  go,
aware  that  in  doing  so  he  will  risk  by  enfeebled  management
what  he  seems  to  gain  by  mechanical  economies  of  production
and  market.

Everywhere  the  issue  of  quantitative  versus  qualitative
growth  comes  up.  This  is  the  entire  issue  of  empire.  A
people  limited  in  number  and  energy  and  in  the  land  they
occupy  have  the  choice  of  improving  to  the  utmost  the
political  and  economic  management  of  their  own  land,
confining  themselves  to  such  accessions  of  territory  as  are
justified  by  the  most  economical  disposition  of  a growing
population  ; or  they  may  proceed,  like  the  slovenly  farmer,
to  spread  their  power  and  energy  over  the  whole  earth,
tempted  by  the  speculative  value  or  the  quick  profits  of
some  new  market,  or  else  by  mere  greed  of  territorial
acquisition,  and  ignoring  the  political  and  economic  wastes
and  risks  involved  by  this  imperial  career.  It  must  be
clearly  understood  that  this  is  essentially  a choice  of  alterna-
tives ; a full  simultaneous  application  of  intensive  and
extensive  cultivation  is  impossible.  A nation  may  either,

92


THE  ECONOMIC  TAPROOT  OF  IMPERIALISM

following  the  example  of  Denmark  or  Switzerland,  put
brains  into  agriculture,  develop  a finely  varied  system  of
public  education,  general  and  technical,  apply  the  ripest
science  to  its  special  manufacturing  industries,  and  so  support
in  progressive  comfort  and  character  a considerable  popula-
tion upon  a strictly  limited  area  ; or  it  may,  like  Great
Britain,  neglect  its  agriculture,  allowing  its  lands  to  go
out  of  cultivation  and  its  population  to  grow  up  in  towns,
fall  behind  other  nations  in  its  methods  of  education  and
in  the  capacity  of  adapting  to  its  uses  the  latest  scientific
knowledge,  in  order  that  it  may  squander  its  pecuniary
and  military  resources  in  forcing  bad  markets  and  finding
speculative  fields  of  investment  in  distant  corners  of  the
earth,  adding  millions  of  square  miles  and  of  unassimilable
population  to  the  area  of  the  Empire.

The  driving  forces  of  class  interest  which  stimulate  and
support  this  false  economy  we  have  explained.  No  remedy
will  serve  which  permits  the  future  operation  of  these  forces.
It  is  idle  to  attack  Imperialism  or  Militarism  as  political
expedients  or  policies  unless  the  axe  is  laid  at  the  economic
root  of  the  tree,  and  the  classes  for  whose  interest  Im-
perialism works  are  shorn  of  the  surplus  revenues  which
seek  this  outlet.


93


CHAPTER  VII


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE

THE  analysis  of  economic  forces  in  the  foregoing  chapter
explains  the  character  which  public  finance  assumes
in  States  committed  to  an  imperialist  policy.  Imperialism,
as  we  see,  implies  the  use  of  the  machinery  of  government
by  private  interests,  mainly  capitalists,  to  secure  for  them
economic  gains  outside  their  country.  The  dominance  cf
this  factor  in  public  policy  imposes  a special  character
alike  upon  expenditure  and  taxation.

The  accompanying  diagram1  brings  into  clear  light  the
main  features  of  the  national  expenditure  of  Great  Britain
during  the  last  three  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century.

The  first  feature  is  the  rate  of  growth  of  national  ex-
penditure taken  as  a whole.  This  growth  has  been  far
faster  than  the  growth  of  foreign  trade.  For  whereas  the
average  yearly  value  of  our  foreign  trade  for  1870-75,
amounting  to  £636,000,000,  increased  in  the  period  1895-
1903  to  £868,000,000,  the  average  public  expenditure
advanced  over  the  same  period  from  £63,160,000  to
£155,660,000.  It  is  far  faster  than  the  growth  of  the
aggregate  national  income,  which,  according  to  the  rough
estimates  of  statisticians,  advanced  during  the  same  period
from  about  £1,200,000,000,  to  £1,750,000,000.  The  rate
of  growth  has  greatly  quickened  during  the  latter  half  of
the  period  in  question,  for,  leaving  out  of  consideration
war  expenditure,  the  rise  of  ordinary  imperial  expenditure
has  been  from  £87,423,000  in  1888  to  £128,600,000  in  1900.

1 Appendix,  p.  379.


94


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE


The  most  salient  feature  of  the  diagram  is  the  small  and
diminishing  proportion  of  the  national  revenue  expended
for  what  may  be  regarded  as  directly  productive  purposes
of  government.  Roughly  speaking,  over  two-thirds  of  the
money  goes  for  naval  and  military  expenditure,  and  for  the
payment  of  military  debts,  about  six  shillings  in  the  pound
being  available  for  education,  civil  government,  and  the
dubious  policy  of  grants  in  aid  of  local  taxation.1

The  only  satisfactory  incident  disclosed  by  the  table
was  the  growing  amount  and  proportion  of  public  money
spent  on  education.  A substantial  part  of  the  sum  expended
as  aid  to  local  taxation  has  simply  gone  as  a dole  to  landowners.

The  direct  military  and  naval  expenditure  during  the
period  has  increased  faster  than  the  total  expenditure,  the
growth  of  trade,  of  national  income,  or  any  other  general
indication  of  national  resources.  In  1875  the  army  and
navy  cost  less  than  244  millions  out  of  a total  expenditure
of  65  millions ; in  1903  they  cost  nearly  79  millions  out  of
a total  of  140  millions.

The  enormous  expehditure  upon  the  South  African  war
was  followed  by  a large  permanent  increase  in  these  branches
of  expenditure,  amounting  to  an  addition  of  not  less  than
£32,000,000  per  annum.

This  growth  of  naval  and  military  expenditure  from
about  25  to  79  millions  in  a little  over  a quarter  of  a century
is  the  most  significant  fact  of  imperialist  finance.  The
financial,  industrial,  and  professional  classes,  who,  we  have
shown,  form  the  economic  core  of  Imperialism,  have  used
their  political  power  to  extract  these  sums  from  the  nation
in  order  to  improve  their  investments  and  open  up  new
fields  for  capital,  and  to  find  profitable  markets  for  their

lA  portion  of  the  money  expended  under  the  head  National  Debt  should,
however,  be  regarded  as  productively  expended,  since  it  has  gone  towards  reduction
of  the  debt.  Between  1875  and  1900  a reduction  of  £140,000,000,  equal  to
about  £5,800,000  per  annum,  ha*  been  effected.

95


imperialism:  a study


surplus  goods,  while  out  of  the  public  sums  expended  on
these  objects  they  reap  other  great  private  gains  in  the
shape  of  profitable  contracts,  and  lucrative  or  honourable
employment.

The  financial  and  industrial  capitalists  who  have  mainly
engineered  this  policy,  employing  their  own  genuine  con-
victions to  conceal  their  ill-recognised  business  ends,  have
also  made  important  bribes  or  concessions  to  other  less
directly  benefited  interests  in  order  to  keep  their  sympathy
and  ensure  their  support.

This  explains  the  large  and  growing  grants  in  aid  of  local
taxation,  almost  the  whole  of  which,  interpreted  by  a
scientific  regard  to  incidence  of  taxation,  must  be  considered
as  a subsidy  to  landowners.  The  support  of  the  Church
and  of  the  liquor  trade  has  been  more  cheaply  purchased ;
the  former  by  relief  of  rates  on  tithes  and  increased  grants
for  Church  schools,  the  latter  by  a policy  of  masterly
inaction  in  the  matter  of  temperance  reforms  and  special
consideration  in  regard  to  taxation.

In  making  the  capitalist-imperialist  forces  the  pivot  of
financial  policy,  I do  not  mean  that  other  forces,  industrial,
political,  and  moral,  have  no  independent  aims  and
influences,  but  simply  that  the  former  group  must  be
regarded  as  the  true  determinant  in  the  interpretation  of
actual  policy.

We  have  identified  almost  all  the  organised  interests,
commonly  summed  under  the  head  of  Capitalism,  including
land-capital,  with  Imperialism.  Most  of  them  participate
directly  in  one  or  other  of  the  two  sorts  of  gain  which  attend
this  policy : the  interest,  trade  profits,  or  employment
furnished  by  the  imperialist  policy,  or  the  interest,  profit,  or
employment  connected  with  military  and  civil  expenditure
itself.

It  cannot  be  too  clearly  recognised  that  increasing  public

96


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE


expenditure,  apart  from  all  political  justification,  is  a direct
source  of  gain  to  certain  well-organised  and  influential
interests,  and  to  all  such  Imperialism  is  the  chief  instrument
of  such  increasing  expenditure.

While  the  directors  of  this  definitely  parasitic  policy
are  capitalists,  the  same  motives  appeal  to  special  classes
of  the  workers.  In  many  towns  most  important  trades
are  dependent  upon  Government  employment  or  contracts  ;
the  Imperialism  of  the  metal  and  shipbuilding  centres  is
attributable  in  no  small  degree  to  this  fact.  Members  of
Parliament  freely  employ  their  influence  to  secure  con-
tracts and  direct  trade  to  their  constituents,  and  every
growth  of  public  expenditure  enhances  this  dangerous  bias.

The  clearest  significance  of  imperialist  finance,  however,
appears  on  the  side,  not  of  expenditure,  but  of  taxation.
The  object  of  those  economic  interests  which  use  the  public
purse  for  purposes  of  private  gain  is  in  large  measure  de-
feated if  they  have  first  to  find  the  money  to  fill  that  purse.
To  avert  the  direct  incidence  of  taxation  from  their  own
shoulders  on  to  those  of  other  classes  or  of  posterity  is  a
natural  policy  of  self-defence.

A sane  policy  of  taxation  would  derive  the  whole  or  the
main  part  of  the  national  revenue  from  unearned  increments
of  land  values  and  from  profits  in  trades  which,  by  virtue  of
some  legal  or  economic  protection  screening  them  from
close  competition,  are  able  to  earn  high  rates  of  interest
or  profit.  Such  taxation  would  be  borne  most  easily,
falling  upon  unearned  elements  of  incomes,  and  would  cause
no  disturbance  of  industry.  This,  however,  would  imply  the
taxation  of  precisely  those  elements  which  constitute
the  economic  taproot  of  Imperialism.  For  it  is  precisely
the  unearned  elements  of  income  which  tend  towards  an
automatic  process  of  accumulation,  and  which,  by  swelling
the  stream  of  surplus  capital  seeking  markets  of  investment

97


imperialism:  a study

or  markets  for  the  surplus  goods  it  helps  to  make,  direct
political  forces  into  Imperialism.  A sound  system  of  taxation
would,  therefore,  strike  at  the  very  root  of  the  malady.

On  the  other  hand,  were  the  capitalist-imperialist  forces
openly  to  shift  the  burden  of  taxation  on  to  the  shoulders
of  the  people,  it  would  be  difficult  under  popular  forms
of  government  to  operate  such  an  expensive  policy.  The
people  must  pay,  but  they  must  not  know  they  are  paying,
or  how  much  they  are  paying,  and  the  payment  must  be
spread,  over  as  long  a period  as  possible.

To  take  a concrete  example.  The  medley  of  financial
and  political  interests  which  inveigled  Great  Britain  into
spending  some  two  hundred  millions  of  public  money,  in
order  to  obtain  for  them  control  of  the  land  and  mineral
resources  of  the  South  African  Republics,  could  not  possibly
have  achieved  their  object  if  they  had  been  compelled  to
raise  the  money  by  sending  round  a tax-gatherer  to  take
from  every  citizen  in  hard  cash  the  several  pounds  which
constituted  his  share  of  the  taxes — the  share  which  by
more  crooked  ways  was  to  be  got  out  of  him.

To  support  Imperialism  by  direct  taxation  of  incomes
or  property  would  be  impossible.  Where  any  real  forms
of  popular  control  existed,  militarism  and  wars  would  be
impossible  if  every  citizen  was  made  to  realise  their  cost
by  payments  of  hard  cash.  Imperialism,  therefore,  makes
everywhere  for  indirect  taxation  ; not  chiefly  on  grounds
of  convenience,  but  for  purposes  of  concealment.  Or
perhaps  it  would  be  more  just  to  say  that  Imperialism
takes  advantage  of  the  cowardly  and  foolish  preference
which  the  average  man  everywhere  exhibits  for  being
tricked  out  of  his  contribution  to  the  public  funds,  using
this  common  folly  for  its  own  purposes.  It  is  seldom
possible  for  any  Government,  even  in  the  stress  of  some
grave  emergency,  to  impose  an  income-tax ; even  a property-

98


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE


tax  is  commonly  evaded  in  cases  of  personal  property,
and  is  always  unpopular.  The  case  of  England  is  an
exception  which  really  proves  the  rule.

The  repeal  of  import  duties  and  the  establishment
of  Free  Trade  marked  the  political  triumph  of  the  new
manufacturing  and  commercial  plutocracy  over  the  land-
owning aristocracy.  Free  Trade  was  so  profitable  to  the
former  classes  in  securing  cheap  importation  of  raw  materials,
and  in  cheapening  the  subsistence  of  labour  at  a time  when
England’s  priority  in  new  industrial  methods  offered  an
indefinitely  rapid  expansion  of  trade,  that  they  were  willing
to  support  the  reimposition  of  the  income-tax  which  Peel
proposed  in  1842  in  order  to  enable  him  to  repeal  or  reduce
the  import  duties.  When  the  sudden  financial  stress  of  the
Crimean  war  came  on  the  country  the  Free  Trade  policy
was  in  the  prime  of  its  popularity  and  success,  and  a Liberal
ministry,  in  preference  to  a reversion  to  Protection  which
would  otherwise  have  been  inevitable,  gave  permanency  to
the  tax,  extending  the  area  of  its  application  and  making
its  removal  more  difficult  by  further  repeals  of  import
duties.  No  Government  could  now  remove  it,  for  the
new  unpopularity  caused  by  finding  adequate  substitutes
would  have  outweighed  the  credit  gained  by  its  removal,
while  its  productivity  and  calculability  are  advantages  shared
in  an  equal  degree  by  no  other  mode  of  taxation.

Some  allowance  may  also  be  made  for  the  principles
and  personal  convictions  of  political  financiers  trained  in
the  English  science  of  political  economy,  and  still  more
for  the  temptation  of  competing  parties  to  seek  the  favour
of  the  newly  enfranchised  populace  by  a well-paraded  policy
of  class  taxation.  The  seething  revolutionism  of  the  mid-
century throughout  Europe,  the  rapid  growth  of  huge
industrial  centres  throughout  England,  with  their  masses  of
ill-explored  poverty  and  their  known  aptitude  for  ignorant
h 99


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


agitation,  made  the  establishment  of  formal  democracy
seem  a most  hazardous  experiment,  and  both  parties  were
in  a mood  to  conciliate  the  new  monster  by  doles  or  bribery.
When  the  break-up  of  the  old  Liberal  party  in  1885-86
had  for  the  first  time  thrown  the  vast  preponderance  of
personal  property  on  to  the  same  side  as  real  property,  a
genuinely  democratic  budget  with  a progressive  income-tax
and  a substantial  death  duty  became  possible  and  seemed
expedient.  It  is  not  necessary  to  deny  that  Sir  William
Harcourt  and  his  colleagues  were  sincerely  convinced  of  the
justice  as  well  as  the  expediency  of  this  policy  ; but  it  must
be  remembered  that  no  alternative  was  open,  in  face  of  the
need  of  increased  funds  for  Imperialism  and  education,
except  a volte  face  upon  the  Free  Trade  principles  they  had
most  stoutly  championed,  and  a dangerous  attack  upon
trade  interests  which  might  recoil  upon  the  working  classes,
whose  cause  they  were  anxious  to  espouse.  The  financial
attack  on  “ property,”  embodied  in  the  progressive  income
tax  and  death  duties,  must  be  regarded,  then,  as  an  excep-
tional policy,  due  mainly  to  a combination  of  two  causes —
the  difficulty  of  reverting  suddenly  to  the  abandoned
practice  of  Protection,  and  the  desire  to  conciliate  the
favour  of  the  new  unknown  democracy.

Hence  the  anomaly  of  Imperialism  attended  by  direct
taxation.  In  no  other  country  have  the  political  conditions
operated  so.  Upon  the  Continent  Militarism  and  Im-
perialism have  thriven  upon  indirect  taxation,  and  have
enabled  the  agricultural  and  manufacturing  interests  to
defeat  easily  any  movement  towards  Free  Trade  by  urging
the  needs  of  revenue  through  tariffs.  In  Great  Britain  it
seems  unlikely  that  the  policy  of  direct  taxation  upon
property  and  income  for  imperial  purposes  will  be  carried
any  further.  The  Government  of  the  propertied  classes
has  shaken  itself  free  from  the  traditions  of  Free  Trade;

100


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE

the  leaders  and  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  rank
and  file  are  avowed  Protectionists  so  far  as  agriculture
and  certain  staple  industries  are  concerned.  They  are  no
longer  seriously  frightened  by  the  power  of  the  people  as
implied  by  a popular  franchise,  nor  are  they  prepared
to  conciliate  it  by  further  taxes  upon  property;  they
have  experimented  with  the  temper  of  44  the  monster,”
and  they  think  that  by  the  assistance  of  44  the  trade  ” and
the  Church  he  is  quite  manageable,  and  can  be  cajoled
into  paying  for  Imperialism  through  protective  duties.
44  Panem  et  circenses  ” interpreted  into  English  means
cheap  booze  and  Mafficking.  Popular  education,  instead  of
serving  as  a defence,  is  an  incitement  towards  Imperialism  ;
it  has  opened  up  a panorama  of  vulgar  pride  and  crude
sensationalism  to  a great  inert  mass  who  see  current  history
and  the  tangled  maze  of  world  movements  with  dim,
bewildered  eyes,  and  are  the  inevitable  dupes  of  the  able
organised  interests  who  can  lure,  or  scare,  or  drive  them
into  any  convenient  course.

Had  the  Liberal  party  stood  by  the  principles  of  peace,
retrenchment,  and  reform,  refusing  to  go  beyond  the  true
“ colonialism  ” of  such  men  as  Molesworth,  and  rejecting
the  temptations  to  a “ spirited  foreign  policy  ” dictated  by
bond-holders,  they  might  have  been  able  to  resist  the  attack
upon  Free  Trade.  But  a Liberal  party  committed  to  a
militant  Imperialism  whose  rapidly  growing  expense  is
determined  chiefly  by  the  conduct  of  foreign  Powers  and
the  new  arts  of  scientific  warfare  was  in  a hopeless  dilemma.
Its  position  as  a buffer  party  between  the  propertied  classes
organised  as  Conservatism  and  the  unorganised  pressure
of  a loose  set  of  forces  striving  to  become  a Socialist  labour
party  dictated  moderation,  and  the  personnel  of  its  leaders,
still  drawn  from  the  propertied  classes,  prevented  it  from
making  any  bold  attempt  to  work  Imperialism  upon  a basis

IOI


imperialism:  a study


of  direct  taxation  upon  property,  raising  the  income  and
proper  taxes  to  cover  every  increasing  need  of  imperialist
finance.  It  had  neither  the  pluck  nor  the  principle  to
renounce  Imperialism  or  to  insist  that  the  classes  who  seek
to  benefit  by  it  shall  pay  for  it.

There  is  then  no  reason  to  impute  to  Liberalism  either
the  desire  or  the  power  to  defray  the  expenses  of  militant
Imperialism  by  a further  pursuance  of  progressive  taxation
of  incomes  and  property.  While  the  conveniences  of  finance
may  have  prevented  the  repeal  of  taxation  which  was  so
productive,  it  would  not  be  carried  further  ; when  expendi-
ture is  placed  again  upon  a normal  footing  the  income-tax
would  be  reduced  and  all  increase  of  normal  expenditure
(estimated  by  a statistical  authority  at  £20,000000  for
military  services  alone)  will  be  defrayed  by  indirect  taxation.

Now  any  considerable  calculable  increase  of  revenue  by
indirect  taxation  means  the  abandonment  of  Free  Trade.
A large  steady  income  of  such  a kind  can  only  be  raised
by  duties  upon  imports  of  necessaries  and  prime  conveniences
of  life  and  trade.  It  is  of  course  quite  immaterial  to  urge
that  taxation  for  revenue  is  not  Protection.  If  import
duties  are  raised  on  sugar  and  tea,  if  they  are  imposed
upon  wheat  and  flour,  foreign  meat  and  raw  materials  of
our  staple  manufactures,  or  upon  finished  manufactured
goods  competing  in  our  market,  it  matters  not  that  the
object  be  revenue,  the  economic  effect  is  Protection.

It  is  probable  that  imperialist  finance  is  not  yet  prepared
to  admit  the  name  or  the  full  economic  policy  of  Protection.1
The  preparatory  steps  can  find  other  names.  A counter-
vailing duty  upon  beet-sugar  poses  as  an  instrument  of
Free  Trade : once  admitted,  it  introduces  a whole  train  of
countervailing  duties  by  parity  of  reasoning.  A tax  on

1 The  ensuing  discussion  of  Protection  relates  to  the  probabilities  of  the  year
of  this  study,  1905.


103


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE

prison-made  goods,  on  the  ground  that  they  are  subsidised
and  so  produced  under  “ cost  ” price,  is  logically  followed
by  similar  protection  against  all  products  of  “ sweated  ”
foreign  industry.  An  export  duty  upon  coal  may  well  be
followed  by  similar  duties  on  the  export  of  engines  and
machinery,  which  similarly  aid  the  growth  of  our  manu-
facturing rivals.  But  the  most  formidable  mask  of  Protection
will  take  the  shape  of  military  necessity.  A military  nation
surrounded  by  hostile  empires  must  have  within  her
boundaries  adequate  supplies  of  the  sinews  of  war,  efficient
recruits,  and  a large  food  supply.  We  cannot  safely  rely
upon  the  fighting  capacities  of  a town-bred  population,  or
upon  food  supplies  from  foreign  lands.  Both  needs  demand
that  checks  be  set  upon  the  excessive  concentration  of  our
population  in  towns,  and  that  a serious  attempt  be  made
to  revive  agriculture  and  restore  the  people  to  the  soil.

There  are  two  methods  which  seem  possible.  The  one
is  a large  radical  scheme  of  land  reform  interfering  with  the
rights  of  landowners  by  compulsory  purchase  or  leasing  on
the  part  of  public  bodies,  with  powers  to  establish  large
numbers  of  small  farmers  on  the  soil  with  loans  of  capital
sufficient  to  enable  them  to  live  and  work  upon  the  soil.
The  other  method  is  Protection,  the  re-imposition  of  taxes
on  imported  grain,  cattle,  fruit,  and  dairy  produce,  with  the
object  of  stimulating  agriculture  and  keeping  the  population
on  the  soil.

Given  the  political  sway  of  the  possessing  classes,  it  is
certain  that  the  latter  course  will  be  preferred.  The  land-
owning and  the  industrial  interests  are  now  sufficiently
blended  to  render  it  impossible  for  the  town  industrialist
to  refuse  assistance  to  the  rural  landowner.  The  dole  in
relief  of  rates  is  a convincing  testimony  to  this  truth.
Political  economists  may  prove  that  the  chief  result  of
“ Protection,”  in  as  far  as  it  protects,  is  to  raise  the  rent

103


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

of  land,  that  a corn  tax  will  raise  the  price  of  bread,  and  by
raising  real  wages  injure  profits,  and  that  if  the  tax  really
succeeded  in  stimulating  intensive  cultivation  and  self
sufficiency  for  food  supply  it  would  not  assist  the  revenue.
The  Protectionist  will  not  be  dismayed  by  the  contradictory
positions  he  is  required  to  hold,  for  he  will  be  aware  that
the  people  whose  votes  he  craves  cannot  hold  two  arguments
in  their  heads  at  the  same  time  for  purposes  of  comparison.

The  demand  for  agricultural  protection  in  order  to  keep
upon  the  soil  a peasantry  with  sound  physique  and  military
aptitudes  is  likely  to  outweigh  all  economic  objections  in
the  near  future,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  Protection
may  here  be  tempered  by  such  carefully  devised  land  reforms
as  shall  place  a new  “ yeoman  ” class  upon  British  soil,  and
a substantial  sum  as  purchase  money  plus  compensation  for
disturbance  in  the  pockets  of  British  landlords.

One  other  secret  avenue  to  Protection  is  through  the
shipbuilding  trade.  Here  is  a case  not  for  taxation  but  for
bounties.  If  England  is  to  be  strong  for  contest  in  war
and  trade  she  must  keep  open  for  herself  the  highways  of
commerce,  and  must  own  ships  and  men  adaptable  for
purposes  of  defence.  England’s  great  foreign  trade  was
undoubtedly  built  up  in  the  first  instance  by  the  aid  of  the
navigation  laws,  and  the  same  combination  of  political
exigencies  and  commercial  interests  will  make  towards  a
revival  of  this  policy.  Such  are  the  main  streams  of  ten-
dency towards  Protection.  But  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  policy  will  be  confined  to  agriculture,
sugar  and  other  subsidised  imports,  export  duties  upon
coal,  and  bounties  on  shipbuilding.  The  leading  branches  of
the  textile,  metal,  and  other  staple  manufactures  whose
monopoly  even  in  the  home  market  is  threatened  by  the
progressive  industries  of  Germany,  Holland,  and  the  United
States  had  long  lost  that  confident  reliance  on  Free  Trade

104


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE

which  they  entertained  when  England’s  paramountcy  in
the  manufacturing  arts  was  unquestioned.  The  local
specialization  of  industries  places  a most  formidable  weapon
in  the  hands  of  the  protectionist  politician.  In  spite  of
the  financial  and  intellectual  aid  given  to  the  Free  Trade
movement  by  certain  manufacturing  interests,  Protection
stands  as  the  producer’s  policy,  Free  Trade  as  the  con-
sumer’s. The  specialization  of  localities  enables  a politician
to  appeal  to  the  separate  trade  interests  of  a single  town
or  neighbourhood,  and  to  convince  not  only  its  capitalists
but  its  workers  of  the  gain  that  would  accrue  to  them  if
their  trade  was  protected  against  what  is  termed  unfair
competition  of  foreigners  : nothing  is  said'  about  what  they
will  lose  as  consumers  in  the  diminished  purchasing  power
of  their  profits  and  wages,  the  result  of  Protection  to  the
trades  of  other  localities.  This  appeal  made  to  the  separate
interests  of  producers  is  almost  certain  to  be  successful  in
a people  of  low  education  and  intelligence.  Any  attempt
to  put  the  other  side  by  representing  the  result  of  Protection
to  be  a general  rise  of  prices  is  commonly  met  by  a confident
denial  that  this  result  will  follow,  though  it  is  commonly
admitted  that  wages  and  profits  will  rise  in  the  particular
local  trade  to  whose  self-interest  the  protectionist  appeal
is  addressed.

It  is,  however,  probable  that  an  attempt  will  be  made  to
conceal  the  whole  character  of  the  protectionist  policy  by
a misty  atmosphere  of  Imperialism.  Protection  will  not
be  Protection,  but  Free  Trade  within  the  Empire ; a pro-
tectionist tariff  will  hide  its  exclusive  side  and  masquerade
as  an  Imperial  Zollverein.  Great  economic  changes,
requiring  the  use  of  political  machinery,  invent  that
machinery.  The  Imperialism  of  England,  essentially  though
not  exclusively  an  economic  thing,  will  strive  to  cover  the
protective  system  of  finance  it  favours,  by  a great  political

105


imperialism:  a study

achievement,  entitled  Federation  of  the  Empire.  This
avenue  to  Protection  would  in  any  case  have  been  essayed
by  Imperialism,  as  indeed  the  curious  attempt  of  Mr.
Chamberlain  in  1897  testifies.  The  abnormally  rapid
swelling  of  financial  needs  due  to  the  disastrous  policy  in
South  Africa  merely  precipitates  this  policy  and  gives  it
political  occasion.  It  will  be  sought  to  exploit  the  en-
thusiastic loyalty  of  the  colonists  exhibited  in  their  rally
round  the  mother  country  in  the  South  African  war  for
purposes  of  formal  federation  on  a basis  which  shall  bind
them  to  contribute  money  and  men  to  the  protection  and
expansion  of  the  Empire.  The  probability  of  success  in
this  attempt  to  secure  imperial  federation  is  a matter  for
separate  consideration.  It  is  here  named  as  one  of  the
avenues  to  Protection.

In  many  ways  it  thus  appears  that  Protection  is  the
natural  ally  of  Imperialism.

The  economic  root  of  Imperialism  is  the  desire  of  strong
organized  industrial  and  financial  interests  to  secure  and
develop  at  the  public  expense  and  by  the  public  force
private  markets  for  their  surplus  goods  and  their  surplus
capital.  War,  militarism,  and  a “ spirited  foreign  policy  ”
are  the  necessary  means  to  this  end.  This  policy  involves
large  increase  of  public  expenditure.  If  they  had  to  pay
the  cost  of  this  policy  out  of  their  own  pockets  in  taxation
upon  incomes  and  property,  the  game  would  not  be  worth
the  candle,  at  any  rate  as  far  as  markets  for  commodities
are  concerned.  They  must  find  means  of  putting  the
expense  upon  the  general  public.  But  in  countries  where
a popular  franchise  and  representative  government  exist
this  cannot  be  successfully  done  in  an  open  manner.  Taxa-
tion must  be  indirect  and  must  fall  upon  such  articles  of
consumption  or  general  use  as  are  part  of  the  general
standard  of  consumption  and  will  not  shrink  in  demand

106


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE

or  give  way  to  substitutes  under  the  process  of  taxation.
This  protection  not  only  serves  the  purposes  of  imperial
finance,  taxing  the  impotent  and  ignorant  consumer  for
the  imperial  gains  of  the  influential  economic  interests,  but
it  seems  to  furnish  them  a second  gain  by  securing  to  them
as  producers  their  home  market  which  is  threatened  by
outside  competition,  and  enabling  them  to  raise  their  prices
to  the  home  consumers  and  so  reap  a rise  of  profits.  To
those  who  regard  foreign  trade  in  its  normal  condition  as
a fair  interchange  of  goods,  and  services,  it  may  seem  difficult
to  understand  how  these  economic  interests  expect  to
exclude  foreign  goods  from  their  market,  while  at  the  same
time  pushing  their  goods  in  foreign  markets.  But  we  must
remind  such  economists  that  the  prime  motive  force  here
is  not  trade  but  investment : a surplus  of  exports  over
imports  is  sought  as  the  most  profitable  mode  of  investment,
and  when  a nation,  or  more  strictly  its  investing  classes,
is  bent  on  becoming  a creditor  or  parasitic  nation  to  an
indefinite  extent,  there  is  no  reason  why  its  imports  and
exports  should  balance  even  over  a long  term  of  years.  The
whole  struggle  of  so-called  Imperialism  upon  its  economic
side  is  towards  a growing  parasitism,  and  the  classes  engaged
in  this  struggle  require  Protection  as  their  most  serviceable
instrument.

The  nature  and  object  of  Protection  as  a branch  of
imperialist  finance  is  best  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Great
Britain,  because  the  necessity  of  subverting  an  accepted
Free  Trade  policy  lays  bare  the  different  methods  of  Pro-
tection and  the  forces  upon  which  it  relies.  In  other
nations  committed  to  or  entering  upon  an  imperialist  career
with  the  same  ganglia  of  economic  interests  masquerading
as  patriotism,  civilization,  and  the  like,  Protection  has  been
the  traditional  finance,  and  it  has  only  been  necessary  to
extend  it  and  direct  it  into  the  necessary  channels.

107


imperialism:  a study


Protection,  however,  is  not  the  only  appropriate  financial
method  of  Imperialism.  There  is  at  any  given  time  some
limit  to  the  quantity  of  current  expenditure  which  can  be
met  by  taxing  consumers.  The  policy  of  Imperialism  to
be  effective  requires  at  times  the  outlay  of  large  unforeseen
sums  on  war  and  military  equipment.  These  cannot  be
met  by  current  taxation.  They  must  be  treated  as  capital
expenditure,  the  payment  of  which  may  be  indefinitely
deferred  or  provided  by  a slow  and  suspensible  sinking  fund.

The  creation  of  public  debts  is  a normal  and  a most
imposing  feature  of  Imperialism.  Like  Protection,  it  also
serves  a double  purpose,  not  only  furnishing  a second  means
of  escaping  taxation  upon  income  and  property  otherwise
inevitable,  but  providing  a most  useful  form  of  investment
for  idle  savings  waiting  for  more  profitable  employment.
The  creation  of  large  growing  public  debts  is  thus  not  only
a necessary  consequence  of  an  imperialist  expenditure  too
great  for  its  current  revenue,  or  of  some  sudden  forced
extortion  of  a war  indemnity  or  other  public  penalty.  It
is  a direct  object  of  imperialist  finance  to  create  further
debts,  just  as  it  is  an  object  of  the  private  money-lender
to  goad  his  clients  into  pecuniary  difficulties  in  order  that
they  may  have  recourse  to  him.  Analysis  of  foreign  invest-
ments shows  that  public  or  State-guaranteed  debts  are
largely  held  by  investors  and  financiers  of  other  nations ;
and  history  shows,  in  the  cases  of  Egypt,  Turkey,  China,
the  hand  of  the  bond-holder,  and  of  the  potential  bond-
holder, in  politics.  This  method  of  finance  is  not  only
profitable  in  the  case  of  foreign  nations,  where  it  is  a chief
instrument  or  pretext  for  encroachment.  It  is  of  service
to  the  financial  classes  to  have  a large  national  debt  of  their
own.  The  floating  of  and  the  dealing  in  such  public  loans
are  a profitable  business,  and  are  means  of  exercising
important  political  influences  at  critical  junctures.  Where

108


IMPERIALIST  FINANCE


floating  capital  constantly  tends  to  excess,  further  debts
are  serviceable  as  a financial  drainage  scheme.

Imperialism  with  its  wars  and  its  armaments  is  undeniably
responsible  for  the  growing  debts  of  the  continental  nations,
and  while  the  unparalleled  industrial  prosperity  of  Great
Britain  and  the  isolation  of  the  United  States  have  enabled
these  great  nations  to  escape  this  ruinous  competition
during  recent  decades,  the  period  of  their  immunity  is  over  ;
both,  committed  as  they  seem  to  an  Imperialism  without
limit,  will  succumb  more  and  more  to  the  moneylending
classes  dressed  as  Imperialists  and  patriots.1

1 The  later  passages  of  this  chapter  describing  the  probable  plunge  towards
Protection  are  left  as  written  in  1901,  two  years  before  Mr.  Chamberlain's  dramatic
espousal  of  a full  Protection.


IO9


PART  II


THE  POLITICS  OF  IMPERIALISM


CHAPTER  I


THE  POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE
OF  IMPERIALISM

I

THE  curious  ignorance  which  prevails  regarding  the
political  character  and  tendencies  of  Imperialism
cannot  be  better  illustrated  than  by  the  following  passage
from  a learned  work  upon  “ The  History  of  Colonization  :
“ The  extent  of  British  dominion  may  perhaps  be  better
imagined  than  described,  when  the  fact  is  appreciated  that,
of  the  entire  land  surface  of  the  globe,  approximately  one-
fifth  is  actually  or  theoretically  under  that  flag,  while  more
than  one-sixth  of  all  the  human  beings  living  in  this  planet
reside  under  one  or  the  other  type  of  English  colonization.
The  names  by  which  authority  is  exerted  are  numerous,
and  processes  are  distinct,  but  the  goals  to  which  this  mani-
fold mechanism  is  working  are  very  similar.  According
to  the  climate,  the  natural  conditions  and  the  inhabitants
of  the  regions  affected,  procedure  and  practice  differ.  The
means  are  adapted  to  the  situation  ; there  is  not  any  irrevo-
cable, immutable  line  of  policy ; from  time  to  time,  from
decade  to  decade,  English  statesmen  have  applied  different
treatments  to  the  same  territory.  Only  one  fixed  rule  of
action  seems  to  exist  j it  is  to  promote  the  interests  of  the
colony  to  the  utmost,  to  develop  its  scheme  of  government
as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  eventually  to  elevate  it  from  the
position  of  inferiority  to  that  of  association.  Under  the
charm  of  this  beneficent  spirit  the  chief  colonial  establish-

1 Morris,  toI.  ii,  p.  80.

113


imperialism:  a study


ments  of  Great  Britain  have  already  achieved  substantial
freedom,  without  dissolving  nominal  ties ; the  other
subordinate  possessions  are  aspiring  to  it,  while,  on  the
other  hand,  this  privilege  of  local  independence  has  enabled
England  to  assimilate  with  ease  many  feudatory  States
into  the  body  politic  of  her  system.”  Here  then  is  the
theory  that  Britons  are  a race  endowed,  like  the  Romans,
with  a genius  for  government,  that  our  colonial  and  im-
perial policy  is  animated  by  a resolve  to  spread  throughout
the  world  the  arts  of  free  self-government  which  we  enjoy
at  home,1  and  that  in  truth  we  are  accomplishing  this  work.

Now,  without  discussing  here  the  excellencies  or  the
defects  of  the  British  theory  and  practice  of  representative
self-government,  to  assert  that  our  “ fixed  rule  of  action  ”
has  been  to  educate  our  dependencies  in  this  theory  and
practice  is  quite  the  largest  misstatement  of  the  facts  of
our  colonial  and  imperial  policy  that  is  possible.  Upon  the
vast  majority  of  the  populations  throughout  our  Empire  we
have  bestowed  no  real  powers  of  self-government,  nor  have
we  any  serious  intention  of  doing  so,  or  any  serious  belief
that  it  is  possible  for  us  to  do  so.

Of  the  three  hundred  and  sixty-seven  millions  of  British
subjects  outside  these  isles,  not  more  than  eleven  millions,
or  one  in  thirty-four,  have  any  real  self-government  for
purposes  of  legislation  and  administration.1

Political  freedom,  and  civil  freedom,  so  far  as  it  rests  upon
the  other,  are  simply  non-existent  for  the  overwhelming
majority  of  British  subjects.  In  the  self-governing  colonies
of  Australasia  and  North  America  alone  is  responsible
representative  government  a reality,  and  even  there  con-
siderable populations  of  outlanders,  as  in  West  Australia,

1 “ The  British  Empire  it  a galaxy  of  free  States/’  laid  Sir  W.  Laurier  in  a
speech,  July  S,  1902.

1 Figures  for  the  period  of  this  study,  ca.  1903.

1 14


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


or  servile  labour,  as  in  Queensland,  have  tempered  the
genuineness  of  democracy.  In  Cape  Colony  and  Natal
events  testify  how  feebly  the  forms  and  even  the  spirit  of
the  free  British  institutions  have  taken  root  in  States  where
the  great  majority  of  the  population  were  always  excluded
from  political  rights.  The  franchise  and  the  rights  it  carries
remain  virtually  a white  monopoly  in  so-called  self-governing
colonies,  where  the  coloured  population  was,  in  1903,  to  the
white  as  four  to  one  and  ten  to  one  respectively.

In  certain  of  our  older  Crown  colonies  there  exists  a
representative  element  in  the  government.  While  the
administration  is  entirely  vested  in  a governor  appointed
by  the  Crown,  assisted  by  a council  nominated  by  him,  the
colonists  elect  a portion  of  the  legislative  assembly.  The
following  colonies  belong  to  this  order  : Jamaica,  Barbados,
Trinidad,  Bahamas,  British  Guiana,  Windward  Islands,
Bermudas,  Malta,  Mauritius,  Ceylon.

The  representative  element  differs  considerably  in  size  and
influence  in  these  colonies,  but  nowhere  does  it  out-number
the  non-elected  element.  It  thus  becomes  an  advisory
rather  than  a really  legislative  factor.  Not  merely  is  the
elected  always  dominated  in  numbers  by  the  non-elected
element,  but  in  all  cases  the  veto  of  the  Colonial  Office
is  freely  exercised  upon  measures  passed  by  the  assemblies.
To  this  it  should  be  added  that  in  nearly  all  cases  a fairly
high  property  qualification  is  attached  to  the  franchise,
precluding  the  coloured  people  from  exercising  an  elective
power  proportionate  to  their  numbers  and  their  stake  in
the  country.

The  entire  population  of  these  modified  Crown  colonies
amounted  to  5,700,000  in  1898.1

The  overwhelming  majority  of  the  subjects  of  the  British

1 In  all  essential  features  India  and  Egypt  are  (1903)  to  be  classed  as  Crown
colonies.

“5


I


imperialism:  a study


Empire  are  under  Crown  colony  government,  or  under
protectorates.1  In  neither  case  do  they  enjoy  any  of  the
important  political  rights  of  British  citizens  ; in  neither
case  are  they  being  trained  in  the  arts  of  free  British  institu-
tions. In  the  Crown  colony  the  population  exercises  no
political  privileges.  The  governor,  appointed  by  the
Colonial  Office,  is  absolute,  alike  for  legislation  and  adminis-
tration ; he  is  aided  by  a council  of  local  residents  usually
chosen  by  himself  or  by  home  authority,  but  its  function
is  merely  advisory,  and  its  advice  can  be  and  frequently
is  ignored.  In  the  vast  protectorates  we  have  assumed  in
Africa  and  Asia  there  is  no  tincture  of  British  representative
government ; the  British  factor  consists  in  arbitrary  acts  of
irregular  interference  with  native  government.  Exceptions
to  this  exist  in  the  case  of  districts  assigned  to  Chartered
Companies,  where  business  men,  animated  avowedly  by
business  ends,  are  permitted  to  exercise  arbitrary  powers  of
government  over  native  populations  under  the  imperfect
check  of  some  British  Imperial  Commissioner.

Again,  in  certain  native  and  feudatory  States  of  India
our  Empire  is  virtually  confined  to  government  of  foreign
relations,  military  protection,  and  a veto  upon  grave  internal
disorder,  the  real  administration  of  the  countries  being  left
in  the  hands  of  native  princes  or  headmen.  However
excellent  this  arrangement  may  be,  it  lends  little  support
to  the  general  theory  of  the  British  Empire  as  an  educator  of
free  political  institutions.

Where  British  government  is  real,  it  does  not  carry
freedom  or  self-government ; where  it  does  carry  a certain
amount  of  freedom  and  self-government,  it  is  not  real.
Not  five  per  cent,  of  the  population  of  our  Empire  are
possessed  of  any  appreciable  portion  of  the  political  and
civil  liberties  which  are  the  basis  of  British  civilization.

1 Situation  in  1903.

Il6


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

Outside  the  eleven  millions  of  British  subjects  in  Canada,
Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  no  considerable  body  is
endowed  with  full  self-government  in  the  more  vital  matters,
or  being  “ elevated  from  the  position  of  inferiority  to
that  of  association.”1

This  is  the  most  important  of  all  facts  for  students  of  the
present  and  probable  future  of  the  British  Empire.  We
have  taken  upon  ourselves  in  these  little  islands  the  respon-
sibility of  governing  huge  aggregations  of  lower  races  in
all  parts  of  the  world  by  methods  which  are  antithetic  to  the
methods  of  government  which  we  most  value  for  ourselves.

The  question  just  here  is  not  whether  we  are  governing
these  colonies  and  subject  races  well  and  wisely,  better
than  they  could  govern  themselves  if  left  alone,  or  better
than  another  imperial  European  nation  could  govern  them,
but  whether  we  are  giving  them  those  arts  of  government
which  we  regard  as  our  most  valuable  possessions.

The  statement  in  the  passage  which  we  quoted,  that
underneath  the  fluctuations  of  our  colonial  policy  through-
out the  nineteenth  century  lay  the  “ fixed  rule  ” of  educating
the  dependencies  for  self-government,  is  so  totally  and
manifestly  opposed  to  historical  records  and  to  the  testimony
of  loyal  colonial  politicians  in  all  our  colonies  as  to  deserve
no  further  formal  refutation.  The  very  structure  of  our
party  government,  the  ignorance  or  open  indifference  of
colonial  ministers  of  the  elder  generations,  the  biassed  play
of  colonial  cliques  and  interests,  reduced  the  whole  of  our
colonial  government  for  many  decades  to  something  between
a see-saw  and  a game  of  chance  : the  nearest  approach  to
any  “ fixed  rule  ” was  the  steady  prolonged  pressure  of
some  commercial  interest  whose  political  aid  was  worth
purchase.  That  any  such  “ beneficent  spirit  ” as  is  recorded

1 All  the  facts  and  figures  given  here  and  elsewhere  relate  to  the  period  of  this
study,  1903.


117


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


consciously  presided  over  the  policy  applied  to  any  class  of
colonies  during  the  larger  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  is
notoriously  false.  To  those  statesmen  to  whom  the  colonies
were  not  a tiresome  burden,  they  were  a useful  dumping-
ground  for  surplus  population,  including  criminals,  paupers
and  ne’er-do-weels,  or  possible  markets  for  British  trade.
A few  more  liberal-minded  politicians,  such  as  Sir  W.
Molesworth  and  Mr.  Wakefield,  regarded  with  sympathetic
interest  the  rising  democracies  of  Australasia  and  Canada.
But  the  idea  of  planning  a colonial  policy  inspired  by  the
motive  of  teaching  the  arts  of  free  representative  self-
government  not  merely  was  not  the  cc  fixed  rule,”  but  was
not  present  as  a rule  at  all  for  any  responsible  Colonial
Secretary  in  Great  Britain.

When  the  first  dawn  of  the  new  Imperialism  in  the
seventies  gave  fuller  political  consciousness  to  " empire,”  it
did  indeed  become  a commonplace  of  Liberal  thought  that
England’s  imperial  mission  was  to  spread  the  arts  of  free
government,  and  the  examples  of  Australia  and  Canada
looming  big  before  all  eyes  suggested  that  we  were  doing
this.  The  principles  and  practices  of  representative  govern-
ment were  “ boomed  ” ; Liberal  pro-consuls  set  on  foot
imposing  experiments  in  India  and  in  the  West  Indies ;
the  progress  of  the  South  African  colonies  suggested  that
by  fairly  rapid  degrees  the  various  populations  of  the
Empire  might  attain  substantial  measures  of  self-govern-
ment ; and  the  larger  vision  of  a British  Empire,  consisting
in  the  main  or  altogether  of  a union  of  self-governing  States,
began  to  dazzle  politicians.

Some  persons — though  a diminishing  number — still
entertain  these  notions  and  believe  that  we  are  gradually
moulding  the  British  Empire  into  a set  of  substantially
self-governing  States.  Our  position  in  India  is  justified,
they  think,  by  the  training  we  are  giving  the  natives  in  good

118


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

government,  and  when  they  hear  of  “ representative  ”
elements  in  the  government  of  Ceylon  or  of  Jamaica  they
flatter  themselves  that  the  whole  trend  of  imperial  govern-
ment is  directed  to  this  end.  Admitting  the  facts  regarding
the  small  proportion  of  present  political  liberty  throughout
the  Empire,  they  urge  that  this  arises  from  the  necessary
regard  we  have  to  the  mode  of  educating  lower  races  : the
vast  majority  of  our  subjects  are  “ children  99  and  must
be  trained  slowly  and  carefully  in  the  arts  of  responsible
self-government .

Now  such  persons  arc  suffering  from  a great  and  demon-
strable delusion  if  they  suppose  that  any  appreciable  number
of  the  able  energetic  officials  who  practically  administer  our
Empire  from  Downing  Street,  or  on  the  spot,  either  believe
that  the  populations  which  they  rule  are  capable  of  being
trained  for  effective  free  self-government,  or  are  appreciably
affected  in  their  policy  by  any  regard  to  such  a contingency
in  the  near  or  remote  future.  Very  few  British  officials  any
longer  retain  the  notion  that  we  can  instruct  or  are  success-
fully instructing  the  great  populations  of  India  in  the
Western  arts  of  government.  The  general  admission  or
conviction  is  that  experiments  in  municipal  and  other
government  conducted  under  British  control  on  British  lines
are  failures.  The  real  success  of  our  Indian  Government
admittedly  consists  in  good  order  and  justice  administered
autocratically  by  able  British  officials.  There  is  some
training  of  native  officials  for  subordinate,  and  in  rare
instances  for  high  offices,  but  there  is  no  pretence  that  this
is  the  chief  or  an  important  aim  or  end,  nor  is  there  the
least  intention  that  these  native  officials  shall  in  the  future
become  the  servants  of  the  free  Indian  nation  rather  than  of
the  bureaucratic  Imperial  Government.

In  other  instances,  as  in  Egypt,  we  have  used  natives  for
certain  administrative  work,  and  this  training  in  lower  offices

u9


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


is  doubtless  not  without  its  value.  Our  practical  success
in  preserving  order,  securing  justice  and  developing  the
material  resources  of  many  of  our  colonies  has  been  largely
due  to  the  fact  that  we  have  learnt  to  employ  native  agents
wherever  possible  for  detailed  work  of  administration,  and
to  adapt  our  government,  where  it  can  be  safely  done,  to
native  conditions.  The  retention  of  native  laws  and
customs  or  of  the  foreign  system  of  jurisprudence  imposed
by  earlier  colonists  of  another  race,1  while  it  has  complicated
government  in  the  final  court  of  the  Privy  Council,  has
greatly  facilitated  the  detailed  work  of  administration
upon  the  spot.

Indeed  the  variety,  not  only  of  laws  but  of  other  modes
of  government  in  our  Empire,  arouses  the  enthusiastic
admiration  of  many  students  of  its  history.  “ The  British
Empire,”  we  are  told,  “ exhibits  forms  and  methods  of
government  in  almost  exuberant  variety.  The  several
colonies  at  different  times  of  their  history  have  passed
through  various  stages  of  government,  and  in  1891  there
are  some  thirty  or  forty  different  forms  operating  simul-
taneously within  our  Empire  alone.  At  this  moment  there
are  regions  where  government  of  a purely  despotic  kind  is
in  full  exercise,  and  the  Empire  includes  also  colonies  where
the  subordination  of  the  colonial  government  has  become
so  slight  as  to  be  almost  impalpable.”2


1 “ Every  country  conquered  or  ceded  to  the  Crown  of  England  retains  such
laws  and  such  rules  of  law  (not  inconsistent  with  the  general  law  of  England
affecting  dependencies)  as  were  in  force  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  or  cession,
until  they  are  repealed  by  competent  authority.  Now,  inasmuch  as  many
independent  States  and  many  dependent  colonies  of  other  States  have  become
English  dependencies,  many  of  the  English  dependencies  have  retained  wholly
or  in  part  foreign  systems  of  jurisprudence.  Thus  Trinidad  retains  much  of  the
Spanish  law ; Demarara,  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  Ceylon  retain  much  of  the
Dutch  law ; Lower  Canada  retains  the  French  civil  law  according  to  the
“ coutume  de  Paris  ” ; St.  Lucia  retains  the  old  French  law  as  it  existed  when  the
island  belonged  to  France  ” (Lewis,  Government  of  Dependencies , p.  198).

1 Caldecott,  English  Colonization  and  Empire , p.  121.

120


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


Whether  this  is  a striking  testimony  to  the  genius  for
“ elasticity  ” of  our  colonial  policy,  or  an  instance  of
haphazard  opportunism,  one  need  not  here  discuss.1

The  point  is  that  an  examination  of  this  immense  variety
of  government  disposes  entirely  of  the  suggestion  that  by
the  extension  of  our  Empire  we  have  been  spreading  the
type  of  free  government  which  is  distinctively  British.

The  present  condition  of  the  government  under  which  the
vast  majority  of  our  fellow-subjects  in  the  Empire  live  is
eminently  un-British  in  that  it  is  based,  not  on  the  consent

1 What  “ elasticity  ” actually  signifies  in  Colonial  Office  government  may
be  illustrated  by  the  following  testimony  of  Miss  Kingsley  in  regard  to  West
Africa.  u Before  taking  any  important  steps  the  West  African  governor  is
supposed  to  consult  the  officials  at  the  Colonial  Office,  but  as  the  Colonial  Office
is  not  so  well  informed  as  the  governor  himself  is,  this  can  be  no  help  to  him  if
he  is  a really  able  man,  and  no  check  on  him  if  he  is  not  an  able  man.  For,  be
he  what  he  may,  he  is  the  representative  of  the  Colonial  Office ; he  cannot,  it
is  true,  persuade  the  Colonial  Office  to  go  and  involve  itself  in  rows  with  European
continental  Powers,  because  the  Office  knows  about  them  j but  if  he  is  a strong-
minded  man  with  a fad,  he  can  persuade  the  Colonial  Office  to  let  him  try  that
fad  on  the  natives  or  the  traders,  because  the  Colonial  Office  does  not  know  the
natives  nor  the  West  African  trade.  You  see,  therefore,  you  have  in  the  governor
of  a West  African  possession  a man  in  a bad  position.  He  is  aided  by  no  council
worth  having,  no  regular  set  of  experts  j he  is  held  in  by  another  council  equally
non-expert,  except  in  the  direction  of  continental  politics.  ...  In  addition  to
the  governor  there  are  the  other  officials,  medical,  legal,  secretarial,  constabulary,
and  customs.  The  majority  of  them  are  engaged  in  looking  after  each  other  and
clerking.  Clerking  is  the  breath  of  the  Crown  colony  system,  and  customs  what
it  feeds  on.  Owing  to  the  climate  it  is  practically  necessary  to  have  a double
staff  in  all  these  departments — that  is  what  the  system  would  have  if  it  were
perfect  j as  it  is,  some  official’s  work  is  always  being  done  by  a subordinate  j it
may  be  equally  well  done,  but  it  is  not  equally  well  paid  for,  and  there  is  no
continuity  in  policy  in  any  department,  except  those  which  are  entirely  clerk,
and  the  expense  of  this  is  necessarily  great.  The  main  evil  of  this  want  of
continuity  is,  of  course,  in  the  governors — a governor  goes  out,  starts  a new  line
of  policy,  goes  home  on  furlough  leaving  in  charge  the  colonial  secretary,  who
does  not  by  any  means  always  feel  enthusiastic  towards  that  policy,  so  it  languishes.
The  governor  comes  back,  goes  at  it  again  like  a giant  refreshed,  but  by  no  means
better  acquainted  with  local  affairs  for  having  been  away ; then  he  goes  home
again  or  dies,  or  gets  a new  appointment ; a brand-new  governor  comes  out,
he  starts  a new  line  of  policy,  perhaps  has  a new  colonial  secretary  into  the  bargain  :
anyhow  the  thing  goes  on  wavering,  not  advancing.  The  only  description  I
have  heard  of  our  policy  in  West  African  colonies  that  seems  to  me  to  do  it  justice
is  that  given  by  a medical  friend  of  mine,  who  said  it  was  a coma  accompanied
by  fits/* — {JV est  African  Studies , pp.  328-330).

121


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


of  the  governed,  but  upon  the  will  of  imperial  officials ; it
does  indeed  betray  a great  variety  of  forms,  but  they  agree
in  the  essential  of  un-freedom.  Nor  is  it  true  that  any  of
the  more  enlightened  methods  of  administration  we  employ
are  directed  towards  undoing  this  character.  Not  only
in  India,  but  in  the  West  Tndies,  and  wherever  there  exists
a large  preponderance  of  coloured  population,  the  trend,
not  merely  of  ignorant,  but  of  enlightened  public  opinion,
is  against  a genuinely  representative  government  on  British
lines.  It  is  perceived  to  be  incompatible  with  the  economic
and  social  authority  of  a superior  race.

When  British  authority  has  been  forcibly  fastened  upon
large  populations  of  alien  race  and  colour,  with  habits  of
life  and  thought  which  do  not  blend  with  ours,  it  is  found
impossible  to  graft  the  tender  plants  of  free  representative
government,  and  at  the  same  time  to  preserve  good  order  in
external  affairs.  We  are  obliged  in  practice  to  make  a choice
between  good  order  and  justice  administered  autocratically
in  accordance  with  British  standards,  on  the  one  hand,  and
delicate,  costly,  doubtful,  and  disorderly  experiments  in
self-government  on  British  lines  upon  the  other,  and  we
have  practically  everywhere  decided  to  adopt  the  former
alternative.  A third  and  sounder  method  of  permitting
large  liberty  of  self-government  under  a really  loose  pro-
tectorate, adopted  in  a few  instances,  as  in  Basutoland,
part  of  Bechuanaland,  and  a few  Indian  States,  meets  with
no  great  favour  and  in  most  instances  seems  no  longer
feasible.  It  cannot  be  too  clearly  recognised  that  the  old
Liberal  notion  of  our  educating  lower  races  in  the  arts  of
popular  government  is  discredited,  and  only  survives  for
platform  purposes  when  some  new  step  of  annexation  is
urged  upon  the  country.

The  case  of  Egypt  is  a locus  classicus . Here  we  entered
the  country  under  the  best  auspices,  as  deliverers  rather


122


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


than  as  conquerors ; we  undoubtedly  conferred  great
economic  benefits  upon  large  sections  cf  the  people,  who
are  not  savages,  but  inheritors  of  ancient  civilised  traditions.
The  whole  existing  machinery  of  government  is  virtually
at  our  disposal,  to  modify  it  according  to  our  will.  We
have  reformed  taxation,  improved  justice,  and  cleansed  the
public  services  of  many  corruptions,  and  claim  in  many
ways  to  have  improved  the  condition  of  the  fellaheen.
But  are  we  introducing  British  political  institutions  in  such
wise  as  to  graft  them  on  a nation  destined  for  progress  in
self-government  ?

The  following  statement  of  Lord  Milner  may  be  regarded
as  typical,  not  of  the  fossilised,  old-world  official,  but  of  the
modern,  more  enlightened,  practical  Imperialist : —

“ I attach  much  more  importance,  in  the  immediate
future  of  Egypt,  to  the  improvement  of  the  character  and
intelligence  of  the  official  class  than  I do  to  the  development
of  the  representative  institutions  with  which  we  endowed  the
country  in  1883.  As  a true  born  Briton  (sicf),  I,  of  course
take  off  my  hat  to  everything  that  calls  itself  Franchise,
Parliament,  Representation  of  the  People,  the  Voice  of  the
Majority,  and  all  the  rest  of  it.  But,  as  an  observer  of  the
actual  condition  of  Egyptian  society,  I cannot  shut  my  eyes
to  the  fact  that  popular  government,  as  we  understand  it,
is  for  a longer  time  than  any  one  can  foresee  at  present  out
of  the  question.  The  people  neither  comprehend  it  nor
desire  it.  They  would  come  to  singular  grief  if  they  had  it.
And  nobody,  except  a few  silly  theorists,  thinks  of  giving
it  to  them.”1

Yet  here  we  went  into  this  country  upon  the  express
understanding  that  we  should  do  precisely  what  Lord
Milner  says  we  have  no  intention  of  doing,  viz.  teach  the

1 England  in  Egypt , pp.  378,  379.

123


imperialism:  a study


people  to  govern  themselves  within  the  space  of  a few
years  and  then  leave  them  to  work  their  government.

I am  not  here,  however,  concerned  to  discuss  either
the  value  of  the  governmental  work  which  we  are  doing
or  our  right  to  impose  our  authority  upon  weaker  popula-
tions. But  the  fact  is  plain  that  the  British  Empire  is  not
to  any  appreciable  extent  a training  ground  in  the  British
arts  of  free  government.

In  the  light  of  this  inquiry,  directed  to  the  Empire  as  a
whole,  how  do  we  regard  the  new  Imperialism  ? Almost
the  whole  of  it,  as  we  have  seen,  consists  of  tropical  or
sub-tropical  territory,  with  large  populations  of  savages  or
“ lower  races  ” ; little  of  it  is  likely,  even  in  the  distant
future,  to  increase  the  area  of  sound  colonial  life.  In  the
few  places  where  English  colonists  can  settle,  as  in  parts  of  the
South  African  States,  they  will  be  so  largely  outnumbered
by  dark  populations  as  to  render  the  adoption  of  free
representative  government  impracticable.

In  a single  word,  the  New  Imperialism  has  increased  the
area  of  British  despotism,  far  outbalancing  the  progress  in
population  and  in  practical  freedom  attained  by  our  few
democratic  colonies.

It  has  not  made  for  the  spread  of  British  liberty  and  for
the  propagation  of  our  arts  of  government.  The  lands
and  populations  which  we  have  annexed  we  govern,  in  so
far  as  we  govern  them  at  all,  by  distinctively  autocratic
methods,  administered  chiefly  from  Downing  Street,  but
partly  from  centres  of  colonial  government,  in  cases  where
self-governing  colonies  have  been  permitted  to  annex.


II


Now  this  large  expansion  of  British  political  despotism
is  fraught  with  reactions  upon  home  politics  which  are

124


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


deserving  of  most  serious  consideration.  A curious  blind-
ness seems  to  beset  the  mind  of  the  average  educated
Briton  when  he  is  asked  to  picture  to  himself  our  colonial
Empire.  Almost  instinctively  he  visualises  Canada,  Austra-
lasia, and  South  Africa — the  rest  he  virtually  ignores.  Yet
the  Imperialism  which  is  our  chief  concern,  the  expansion
of  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century,  has  nothing
in  common  with  Canada  and  Australasia,  and  very  little
with  “ white  man’s  Africa.”

When  Lord  Rosebery  uttered  his  famous  words  about
“ a free,  tolerant  and  unaggressive  Empire,”  he  can  scarcely
have  had  in  mind  our  vast  encroachments  in  West  and
Central  Africa,  in  the  Soudan,  on  the  Burmese  frontier,
or  in  Matabeleland.  But  the  distinction  between  genuine
Colonialism  and  Imperialism,  important  in  itself,  is  vital
when  we  consider  their  respective  relations  to  domestic
policy.

Modern  British  colonialism  has  -been  no  drain  upon  our
material  and  moral  resources,  because  it  has  made  for  the
creation  of  free  white  democracies,  a policy  of  informal
federation,  of  decentralisation,  involving  no  appreciable
strain  upon  the  governmental  faculties  of  Great  Britain.
Such  federation,  whether  it  remains  informal  with  the
slight  attachment  of  imperial  sovereignty  which  now  exists,
or  voluntarily  takes  some  more  formal  shape,  political  or
financial,  may  well  be  regarded  as  a source  of  strength,
political  and  military.

Imperialism  is  the  very  antithesis  of  this  free,  wholesome
colonial  connection,  making,  as  it  ever  does,  for  greater
complications  of  foreign  policy,  greater  centralisation  of
power,  and  a congestion  of  business  which  ever  threatens
to  absorb  and  overtax  the  capacity  of  parliamentary
government.

The  true  political  nature  of  Imperialism  is  best  seen

125


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

by  confronting  it  with  the  watchwords  of  progress  accepted
in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  by  moderate  men
of  both  great  parties  in  the  State,  though  with  interpreta-
tions, varying  in  degree — peace,  economy,  reform,  and
popular  self-government.  Even  now  we  find  no  formal
abandonment  of  the  principles  of  government  these
terms  express,  and  a large  section  of  professed  Liberals
believe  or  assert  that  Imperialism  is  consistent  with  the
maintenance  of  all  these  virtues.

This  contention,  however,  is  belied  by  facts.  The
decades  of  Imperialism  have  been  prolific  in  wars ; most
of  these  wars  have  been  directly  motived  by  aggression
of  white  races  upon  “ lower  races,”  and  have  issued  in
the  forcible  seizure  of  territory.  Every  one  of  the  steps
of  expansion  in  Africa,  Asia,  and  the  Pacific  has  been
accompanied  by  bloodshed  ; each  imperialist  Power  keeps
an  increasing  army  available  for  foreign  service  ; rectification
of  frontiers,  punitive  expeditions,  and  other  euphemisms  for
war  have  been  in  incessant  progress.  The  Pax  Britannic  a,
always  an  impudent  falsehood,  has  become  a grotesque
monster  of  hypocrisy ; along  our  Indian  frontiers,  in  West
Africa,  in  the  Soudan,  in  Uganda,  in  Rhodesia  fighting  has
been1  well-nigh  incessant.  Although  the  great  imperialist
Powers  kept  their  hands  off  one  another,  save  where  the  rising
empire  of  the  United  States  found  its  opportunity  in  the
falling  empire  of  Spain,  the  self-restraint  has  been  costly
and  precarious.  Peace  as  a national  policy  is  antagonized
not  merely  by  war,  but  by  militarism,  an  even  graver
injury.  Apart  from  the  enmity  of  France  and  Germany,
the  main  cause  of  the  vast  armaments  which  have  drained
the  resources  of  most  European  countries  is  their  conflicting
interests  in  territorial  and  commercial  expansion.  Where
thirty  years  ago  there  existed  one  sensitive  spot  in  our

1 The  situation  in  1903.


126


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


relations  with  France,  or  Germany,  or  Russia,  there  are  a
dozen  now ; diplomatic  strains  are  of  almost  monthly
occurrence  between  Powers  with  African  or  Chinese  interests,
and  the  chiefly  business  nature  of  the  national  antagonisms
renders  them  more  dangerous,  inasmuch  as  the  policy  of
Governments  passes  under  the  influence  of  distinctively
financial  juntos.

The  contention  of  the  si  pacem  vis  para  bellum  school,
that  armaments  alone  constitute  the  best  security  for
peace,  is  based  upon  the  assumption  that  a genuine  lasting
antagonism  of  real  interests  exists  between  the  various
peoples  who  are  called  upon  to  undergo  this  monstrous
sacrifice.

Our  ^economic  analysis  has  disclosed  the  fact  that  it
is  only  the  interests  of  competing  cliques  of  business  men —
investors,  contractors,  export  manufacturers,  and  certain
professional  classes — that  are  antagonistic ; that  these
cliques,  usurping  the  authority  and  voice  of  the  people,  use
the  public  resources  to  push  their  private  interests,  and  spend
the  blood  $nd  money  of  the  people  in  this  vast  and  disastrous
military  game,  feigning  national  antagonisms  which  have
no  basis  in  reality.  It  is  not  to  the  interest  of  the  British
people,  either  as  producers  of  wealth  or  as  tax-payers,  to
risk  a war  with  Russia  and  France  in  order  to  join  Japan  in
preventing  Russia  from  seizing  Corea  ; but  it  may  serve  the
interests  of  a group  of  commercial  politicians  to  promote
this  dangerous  policy.  The  South  African  war,  openly
fomented  by  gold  speculators  for  their  private  purposes,
will  rank  in  history  as  a leading  case  of  this  usurpation  of
nationalism.

War,  however,  represents  not  the  success,  but  the  failure
of  this  policy;  its  normal  and  most  perilous  fruit  is  not
war,  but  militarism.  So  long  as  this  competitive  expansion
for  territory  and  foreign  markets  is  permitted  to  misrepresent

127


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

itself  as  “ national  policy  ” the  antagonism  of  interests  seems
real,  and  the  peoples  moist  sweat  and  bleed  and  toil  to  keep
up  an  ever  more  expensive  machinery  of  war.

Were  logic  applicable  in  such  cases,  the  notion  that  the
greater  the  preparation  for  war  the  smaller  the  probability  of
its  occurrence  might  well  appear  a reductio  ad  absurdum  of
militarism,  implying,  as  it  does,  that  the  only  way  to  secure
an  eternal  world  peace  is  to  concentrate  the  entire  energy
of  all  nations  upon  the  art  of  war,  which  is  thus  rendered
incapable  of  practice.

With  such  paradoxes,  however,  we  need  not  concern
ourselves.  The  patent  admitted  fact  that,  as  a result  of
imperial  competition,  an  ever  larger  proportion  of  the
time,  energy,  and  money  of  “ imperialist  ” nations  is  ab-
sorbed by  naval  and  military  armaments,  and  that  no  check
upon  further  absorption  is  regarded  as  practicable  by
Imperialists,  brings  “ militarism  ” into  the  forefront  of
practical  politics.  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States,
which  have  hitherto  congratulated  themselves  on  escaping
the  militarism  of  continental  Europe,  are  now  rapidly
succumbing.  Why  ? Does  any  one  suggest  that  either
nation  needs  a larger  army  for  the  protection  of  its  own
lands  or  of  any  of  its  genuine  white  settlements  in  other
lands  ? Not  at  all.  It  is  not  pretended  that  the  militariza-
tion of  England  is  required  for  such  protective  work.
Australia  and  New  Zealand  are  not  threatened  by  any
power,  nor  could  a British  army  render  them  adequate
assistance  if  they  were ; equally  impotent  would  British
land  forces  be  against  the  only  Power  which  could  con-
ceivably attack  our  Canadian  Dominion ; even  South
Africa,  which  lies  on  the  borderland  between  colony  and
tropical  dependency,  cannot  ultimately  be  secured  by  the
military  power  of  England.  It  is  our  mistaken  annexation
of  tropical  and  sub-tropical  territories,  and  the  attempt  to

128


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


govern  “ lower  races,”  that  is  driving  us  down  the  steep
road  to  militarism.

If  we  are  to  hold  all  that  we  have  taken  since  1870  and
to  compete  with  the  new  industrial  nations  in  the  further
partition  of  empires  or  spheres  of  influence  in  Africa  and
Asia,  we  must  be  prepared  to  fight.  The  enmity  of  rival
empires,  openly  displayed  throughout  the  South  African
war,  is  admittedly  due  to  the  policy  by  which  we  have  fore-
stalled, and  are  still  seeking  to  forestall,  these  rivals  in  the
annexation  of  territory  and  of  markets  throughout  the
world.  The  theory  that  we  may  be  compelled  to  fight  for
the  very  existence  of  our  Empire  against  some  combination
of  European  powers,  which  is  now  used  to  scare  the  nation
into  a definite  and  irretrievable  reversal  of  our  military  and
commercial  policy,  signifies  nothing  else  than  the  intention
of  the  imperialist  interests  to  continue  their  reckless  career
of  annexation.  In  1896  Lord  Rosebery  gave  a vivid
description  of  the  policy  of  the  last  two  decades  of  the
century,  and  put  forth  a powerful  plea  for  peace.

“ The  British  Empire  . . . needs  peace.  For  the  last
twenty  years,  still  more  during  the  last  twelve,  you  have
been  laying  your  hands,  with  almost  frantic  eagerness,  on
every  tract  of  territory  adjacent  to  your  own  or  desirable
from  any  other  point  of  view  which  you  thought  it  desirable
to  take.  That  has  had  two  results.  I daresay  it  has  been
quite  right,  but  it  has  had  two  results.  The  first  result  is
this,  that  you  have  excited  to  an  almost  intolerable  degree
the  envy  of  other  colonizing  (sic  J)  nations,  and  that,  in  the
case  of  many  countries,  or  several  countries  rather,  which
were  formerly  friendly  to  you,  you  can  reckon — in  conse-
quence of  your  colonial  policy,  whether  right  or  wrong —
not  on  their  active  benevolence,  but  on  their  active  male-
volence. And,  secondly,  you  have  acquired  so  enormous  a
mass  of  territory  that  it  will  be  years  before  you  can  settle

129


imperialism:  a stud*y


it  or  control  it,  or  make  it  capable  of  defence  or  make  it
amenable  to  the  acts  of  your  administration.  ...  In
twelve  years  you  have  added  to  the  Empire,  whether  in  the
shape  of  actual  annexation  or  of  dominion,  or  of  what  is  called
a sphere  of  influence,  2,600,000  square  miles  of  territory
...  to  the  120,000  square  miles  of  the  United  Kingdom,
which  is  part  of  your  Empire,  you  have  added  during  the  last
twelve  years  twenty-two  areas  as  large  as  that  United
Kingdom  itself.  I say  that  that  marks  out  for  many  years
a policy  from  which  you  cannot  depart  if  you  would.  You
may  be  compelled  to  draw  the  sword — I hope  you  may  not
be ; but  the  foreign  policy  of  Great  Britain,  until  its
territory  is  consolidated,  filled  up,  settled,  civilized,  must
inevitably  be  a policy  of  peace.”1

After  these  words  were  uttered,  vast  new  tracts  of  un-
digested empire  were  added  in  the  Soudan,  in  East  Africa,
in  South  Africa,  while  Great  Britain  was  busily  entangling
herself  in  obligations  of  incalculable  magnitude  and  peril
in  the  China  seas,  and  the  prophet  who  spoke  this  warning
was  himself  an  active  instrument  in  the  furtherance  of  the
very  folly  he  denounced.

Imperialism — whether  it  consists  in  a further  policy  of
expansion  or  in  the  rigorous  maintenance  of  all  those  vast
tropical  lands  whiph  have  been  ear-marked  as  British  spheres
of  influence — implies  militarism  now  and  ruinous  wars  in
the  future.  This  truth  is  now  for  the  first  time  brought
sharply  and  nakedly  before  the  mind  of  the  nation.  The
kingdoms  of  the  earth  are  to  be  ours  on  condition  that  we
fall  down  and  worship  Moloch.

Militarism  approaches  Great  Britain  with  the  following
dilemma.  If  the  army  needed  for  defence  of  the  Empire
is  to  remain  upon  a voluntary  basis,  consisting  of  selected
material  obtained  by  application  of  economic  inducements,

1 Edinburgh,  October  9,  1896.

130


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


a considerable  increase  either  of  the  regular  forces  or  the
militia  can  only  be  obtained  by  a rise  of  pay  so  large  as  to
tempt  men,  not  from  the  unskilled  labour  market  or  the
agricultural  districts  as  heretofore,  but  from  the  skilled
artisan  classes  of  the  towns.  It  requires  but  slight  considera-
tion to  perceive  that  every  fresh  increment  of  the  army  will
involve  an  appeal  to  a class  accustomed  to  a higher  standard
of  wage,  and  that  the  pay  for  the  entire  army  must  be
regulated  by  the  rate  of  pay  needed  to  secure  this  last
increment.  Recruiting  in  time  of  war  is  always  brisker  than
in  time  of  peace,  other  motives  blending  with  the  distinctly
economic  motive.  Every  increase  of  our  forces  on  a peace
footing  will  involve  a far  more  than  proportionate  increase
in  the  rate  of  pay — how  large  an  increase  experiment  alone
can  teach.  It  seems  quite  likely  that  in  a period  of  normally
good  trade  our  voluntary  army  could  only  be  increased
50  per  cent,  by  doubling  the  former  rate  of  pay,  or  by  other
improved  conditions  of  employment  involving  an  equivalent
rise  of  cost,  and  that,  if  we  required  to  double  the  size  of
our  standing  army,  we  should  have  to  treble  the  rate  of  pay.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  prospect  of  some  such  enormous
increase  of  military  expenditure  should  lead  us  to  abandon
the  purely  voluntary  basis,  and  have  recourse  to  conscription
or  some  other  form  of  compulsory  service,  we  could  not
fail  to  suffer  in  average  fighting  calibre.  Such  selection  of
physique  and  morale  as  prevailed  under  the  voluntary
system  would  now  disappear,  and  the  radical  unfitness
of  a nation  of  town-dwellers  for  arduous  military  service
would  be  disclosed.  The  fatuous  attempt  to  convert
ineffective  slum-workers  and  weedy  city  clerks  into  tough
military  material,  fit  for  prolonged  foreign  service,  or
even  for  efficient  home  defence,  would  be  detected,  it
may  be  hoped,  before  the  trial  by  combat  with  a military
Power  drawing  its  soldiers  from  the  soil.  A nation,  70  per

K 131


imperialism:  a study


cent,  of  whose  inhabitants  are  denizens  of  towns,  cannot
afford  to  challenge  its  neighbours  to  trials  of  physical
force,  for  in  the  last  resort  war  is  determined  neither  by
generalship  nor  superiority  of  weapons,  but  by  those
elements  of  brute  endurance  which  are  incompatible  with
the  life  of  industrial  towns.

The  full  danger  of  the  dilemma  of  militarism  is  only
perceived  when  the  indirect  is  added  to  the  direct  expendi-
ture. An  army,  volunteer  or  conscript,  formed  out  of
town  material  would  take  longer  training  or  more  frequent
exercise  than  a peasant  army  ; the  waste  of  labour  power,
by  withdrawing  the  youth  of  the  nation  from  their  early
training  in  the  productive  arts  in  order  to  prepare  them
for  the  destructive  art,  would  be  greater,  and  would  impair
more  grievously  the  skilled  industries  than  in  nations
less  advanced  in  the  specialized  trades  and  professions.
The  least  of  these  economic  injuries  would  be  the  actual
loss  of  labour  time  involved  in  the  withdrawal ; far  graver
would  be  the  damage  to  industrial  skill  and  character  by
withdrawing  youths  at  the  period  of  best  docility  and
aptitude  for  skilled  work  and  subjecting  them  to  a distinc-
tively mechanical  discipline,  for  though  the  slum-dweller
and  the  clodhopper  may  gain  in  smartness  and  alertness  by
military  training,  the  skilled  labouring  classes  will  lose  more
by  the  crushing  of  individual  initiative  which  professional
militarism  always  involves.

At  a time  when  the  call  for  free,  bold  initiative  and
individual  enterprise  and  ingenuity  in  the  assimilation  of
the  latest  scientific  and  technical  knowledge  for  the  arts
of  industry,  for  improved  organization  and  methods  of
business,  becomes  most  urgent  to  enable  us  to  hold  our
own  in  the  new  competition  of  the  world — at  such  a time
to  subject  the  youth  of  our  nation  to  the  barrack  system,
or  to  any  form  of  effective  military  training,  would  be

132


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


veritable  suicide.  It  is  to  no  purpose  to  reply  that  some  of
our  keen  commercial  competitors,  notoriously  Germany,
are  already  saddled  with  this  burden ; the  answer  is  that,
if  we  can  hardly  hold  our  own  with  Germany  while  she
bears  this  burden,  we  shall  hand  over  to  her  an  easy  victory
if  we  assume  a still  heavier  one.1  Whatever  virtues  are
attributed  to  military  discipline  by  its  apologists,  it  is
admitted  that  this  training  does  not  conduce  to  industrial
efficiency.  The  economic  cost  of  militarism  is  therefore
twofold ; the  greatly  increased  expense  of  the  army  must
be  defrayed  by  an  impoverished  people.

So  far,  I have  regarded  the  issue  on  its  narrowly  economic
side.  Far  more  important  are  the  political  implications
of  militarism.  These  strike  at  the  very  root  of  popular
liberty  and  the  ordinary  civic  virtues.  A few  plain
reflections  serve  to  dispel  the  sophistical  vapours  which  are
used  to  form  a halo  round  the  life  of  the  soldier.  Resfice
Jinem . There  exists  an  absolute  antagonism  between  the
activity  of  the  good  citizen  and  that  of  the  soldier.  The
end  of  the  soldier  is  not,  as  is  sometimes  falsely  said,  to
die  for  his  country ; it  is  to  kill  for  his  country.  In  as  far
as  he  dies  he  is  a failure  ; his  work  is  to  kill,  and  he  attains
perfection  as  a soldier  when  he  becomes  a perfect  killer.
This  end,  the  slaughter  of  one’s  fellow-men,  forms  a pro-
fessional character,  alien  from,  and  antagonistic  to,  the
character  of  our  ordinary  citizen,  whose  work  conduces
to  the  preservation  of  his  fellow-men.  If  it  be  contended
that  this  final  purpose,  though  informing  and  moulding  the
structure  and  functions  of  an  army,  operates  but  seldom
and  slightly  upon  the  consciousness  of  the  individual
soldier,  save  upon  the  battlefield,  the  answer  is  that,  in
the  absence  from  consciousness  of  this  end,  the  entire
routine  of  the  soldier’s  life,  his  drill,  parades,  and  whole

1 Refers,  of  course,  to  the  situation  in  1903.

133


imperialism:  a study


military  exercise,  is,  a useless,  purposeless  activity,  and  that
these  qualities  exercise  a hardly  less  degrading  influence
on  character  than  the  conscious  intention  of  killing  his
fellow-men.

The  psychical  reactions  of  military  life  are  indeed
notorious ; even  those  who  defend  the  utility  of  an  army
do  not  deny  that  it  unfits  a man  for  civil  life.  Nor  can  it
be  maintained  that  a shorter  general  service,  such  as  suffices
for  a citizen  army,  escapes  these  reactions.  If  the  service
is  long  and  rigorous  enough  to  be  effective,  it  involves  these
psychical  reactions,  which  are,  indeed,  part  and  parcel  of
military  efficiency.  How  clearly  this  is  set  forth  by  Mr.
March-Phillips  in  his  admirable  appreciation  of  the  common
soldier’s  life !

“ Soldiers  as  a class  (I  take  the  town-bred,  slum-bred
majority,  mind)  are  men  who  have  discarded  the  civil
standard  of  morality  altogether.  They  simply  ignore  it.
This  is,  no  doubt,  why  civilians  fight  shy  of  them.  In  the
game  of  life  they  don’t  play  the  same  rules,  and  the  con-
sequence is  a good  deal  of  misunderstanding,  until  finally
the  civilian  says  he  won’t  play  with  the  Tommy  any  more.
In  soldiers’  eyes  lying,  theft,  drunkenness,  bad  language,
etc.,  are  not  evils  at  all.  They  steal  like  jackdaws.  As  to
language,  I used  to  think  the  language  of  a merchant  ship’s
fo’c’sle  pretty  bad,  but  the  language  of  Tommies,  in  point
of  profanity,  quite  equals,  and,  in  point  of  obscenity,  beats
it  hollow.  This  department  is  a speciality  of  his.  Lying
he  treats  with  the  same  large  charity.  To  lie  like  a trooper
is  quite  a sound  metaphor.  He  invents  all  sorts  of  elaborate
lies  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  inventing  them.  Looting,
again,  is  one  of  his  perpetual  joys.  Not  merely  looting  for
profit,  but  looting  for  the  sheer  fun  of  the  destruction,
etc.”1  The  fidelity  of  this  description  is  attested  by  the

1 With  Remington , by  L.  March-PhiUip*,  pp.  131,  132.

*34


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


sympathy  which  the  writer  displays  with  the  soldierly
attributes  that  accompany,  and,  in  his  opinion,  atone  for,
these  breaches  of  the  civilian  rules.

“ Are  thieving  and  lying  and  looting  and  bestial  talk
very  bad  things  ? If  they  are,  Tommy  is  a bad  man.  But,
for  some  reason  or  other,  since  I got  to  know  him,  I have
thought  rather  less  of  the  iniquity  of  these  things  than  I
did  before.”

This  judgment  is  itself  a striking  comment  on  militarism.
The  fact  that  it  should  be  given  by  a man  of  sterling
character  and  culture  is  the  most  convincing  testimony  to
the  corrupting  influence  of  war.

To  this  informal  witness  may  be  added  the  significant
evidence  of  Lord  Wolseley’s  Soldier's  Pocket-book .

“ As  a nation,  we  are  brought  up  to  feel  it  a disgrace
to  succeed  by  falsehood ; the  word  * spy  * conveys  in  it
something  as  repulsive  as  slave.  We  will  keep  hammering
away  with  the  conviction  that  honesty  is  the  best  policy,
and  that  truth  always  wins  in  the  long  run.  These  pretty
little  sentences  do  well  enough  for  a child’s  copy-book,  but
the  man  who  acts  upon  them  in  war  had  better  sheathe  his
sword  for  ever.”

The  order  and  progress  of  Great  Britain  during  the  nine-
teenth century  was  secured  by  the  cultivation  and  practise
of  the  ordinary  civic  and  industrial  virtues,  assisted  by
certain  advantages  of  natural  resources  and  historical
contingencies.  Are  we  prepared  to  substitute  the  military
code  of  ethics  or  to  distract  the  national  mind  and  conduct
by  a perpetual  conflict  of  two  warring  principles,  the  one
making  for  the  evolution  of  the  good  citizen,  the  other  for
the  evolution  of  the  good  soldier  ?

Ignoring,  for  the  present,  distinctively  moral  degradation
of  this  reversion  from  industrial  to  military  ethics,  we
cannot  but  perceive  that  the  damage  done  to  commercial

135


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

morality  must  react  disastrously  upon  the  wealth-producing
power  of  the  nation,  and  sap  the  roots  of  imperial  expenditure.

But  one  loophole  of  escape  from  this  dilemma  presents
itself,  an  escape  fraught  with  still  graver  peril.  The  new
Imperialism  has  been,  we  have  seen,  chiefly  concerned  with
tropical  and  sub-tropical  countries  where  large  " lower
races  ” are  brought  under  white  control.  Why  should
Englishmen  fight  the  defensive  or  offensive  wars  of  this
Empire,  when  cheaper,  more  numerous,  and  better-
assimilated  fighting  material  can  be  raised  upon  the  spot,  or
transferred  from  one  tropical  dominion  to  another  ? As
the  labour  of  industrial  development  of  tropical  resources
is  put  upon  the  “ lower  races  ” who  reside  there,  under
white  superintendence,  why  should  not  militarism  be
organized  upon  the  same  basis,  black  or  brown  or  yellow
men,  to  whom  military  discipline  will  be  “ a wholesome
education,”  fighting  for  the  British  Empire  under  British
officers  ? Thus  can  we  best  economize  our  own  limited
military  material,  keeping  most  of  it  for  home  defence.
This  simple  solution — the  employment  of  cheap  foreign
mercenary  armies — is  no  new  device.  The  organization
of  vast  native  forces,  armed  with  “ civilized  ” weapons,
drilled  on  “ civilized  ” methods,  and  commanded  by
“ civilized  99  officers,  formed  one  of  the  most  conspicuous
features  of  the  latest  stages  of  the  great  Eastern  Empires,
and  afterwards  of  the  Roman  Empire.  It  has  proved  one
of  the  most  perilous  devices  of  parasitism,  by  which  a
metropolitan  population  entrusts  the  defence  of  its  lives
and  possessions  to  the  precarious  fidelity  of  “ conquered
races,”  commanded  by  ambitious  pro-consuls.

One  of  the  strangest  symptoms  of  the  blindness  of
Imperialism  is  the  reckless  indifference  with  which  Great
Britain,  France,  and  other  imperial  nations  embarked
on  this  perilous  dependence.  Great  Britain  has  gone

136


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


farthest.  Most  of  the  fighting  by  which  we  have  won  our
Indian  Empire  was  done  by  natives ; in  India,  as  later
in  Egypt,  great  standing  armies  were  placed  under  British
commanders  ; almost  all  the  fighting  associated  with  our
African  dominions,  except  in  the  southern  part,  was  done
for  us  by  natives.  How  strong  the  pressure  was  to  reduce
the  proportion  of  British  soldiers  employed  in  these  countries
to  a bare  minimum  of  safety  is  amply  illustrated  in  the  case
of  India,  when  the  South  African  emergency  drove  us  to
reduce  the  accepted  minimum  by  more  than  fifteen  thousand
men,  while  in  South  Africa  itself  we  established  a dangerous
precedent  by  employing  large  numbers  of  armed  natives
to  fight  against  another  white  race.

Those  best  acquainted  with  the  temper  of  the  British
people  and  of  the  politicians  who  have  the  direct  deter-
mination of  affairs  will  understand  how  readily  we  may  be
drawn  along  this  perilous  path.  Nothing  short  of  the
fear  of  an  early  invasion  of  these  islands  will  induce  the
British  people  to  undergo  the  onerous  experience  of  a
really  effective  system  of  compulsory  military  service  ; no
statesman  except  under  the  shadow  of  a serious  menace
of  invasion  will  dare  to  press  such  a plan.  A regular
provision  for  compulsory  foreign  service  will  never  be
adopted  when  the  alternative  of  mercenary  native  armies
remains.  Let  these  “ niggers  ” fight  for  the  empire  in
return  for  the  services  we  render  them  by  annexing  and
governing  them  and  teaching  them  “ the  dignity  of  labour,”
will  be  the  prevailing  sentiment,  and  “ imperialist  ” states-
men will  be  compelled  to  bow  before  it,  diluting  with  British
troops  ever  more  thinly  the  native  armies  in  Africa  and
Asia.

This  mode  of  militarism,  while  cheaper  and  easier  in
the  first  instance,  implies  less  and  less  control  from  Great
Britain.  Though  reducing  the  strain  of  militarism  upon

137


imperialism:  a study


the  population  at  home,  it  enhances  the  risks  of  wars,
which  become  more  frequent  and  more  barbarous  in
proportion  as  they  involve  to  a less  degree  the  lives  of
Englishmen.  The  expansion  of  our  Empire  under  the  new
Imperialism  has  been  compassed  by  setting  the  “ lower
races  ” at  one  another’s  throats,  fostering  tribal  animosities
and  utilising  for  our  supposed  benefit  the  savage  propensities
of  the  peoples  to  whom  we  have  a mission  to  carry
Christianity  and  civilization.

That  we  do  not  stand  alone  in  this  ignominious  policy
does  not  make  it  better,  rather  worse,  offering  terrible
prophetic  glimpses  into  a not  distant  future,  when  the
horrors  of  our  eighteenth  century  struggle  with  France  in
North  America  and  India  may  be  revived  upon  a gigantic
scale,  and  Africa  and  Asia  may  furnish  huge  cock-pits  for
the  struggles  of  black  and  yellow  armies  representing  the
imperialist  rivalries  of  Christendom.  The  present  tendencies
of  Imperialism  plainly  make  in  this  direction,  involving  in
their  recoil  a degradation  of  Western  States  and  a possible
dibdcle  of  Western  civilization.

In  any  event  Imperialism  makes  for  war  and  for  mili-
tarism, and  has  brought  a great  and  limitless  increase  of
expenditure  of  national  resources  upon  armaments.  It
has  impaired  the  independence  of  every  nation  which  has
yielded  to  its  false  glamour.  Great  Britain  no  longer
possesses  a million  pounds  which  it  can  call  its  own  ; its
entire  financial  resources  are  mortgaged  to  a policy  to  be
dictated  by  Germany,  France,  or  Russia.  A move  from
any  of  these  Powers  can  force  us  to  expend  upon  more
battleships  and  military  preparations  the  money  we  had
designed  to  use  for  domestic  purposes.  The  priority  and
reckless  magnitude  of  our  imperial  expansion  has  made
the  danger  of  an  armed  coalition  of  great  Powers  against
us  no  idle  chimera.  The  development  of  their  resources

138


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


along  the  lines  of  the  new  industrialism,  on  the  one  hand,
by  driving  them  to  seek  foreign  markets,  brings  them  in
all  parts  of  the  world  against  the  vexatious  barriers  of
British  possessions  ; on  the  other,  has  furnished  them  with
ample  means  of  public  expenditure.  The  spread  of
modern  industrialism  tends  to  place  our  “ rivals  ” on  a
level  with  ourselves  in  their  public  resources.  Hence,  at
the  very  time  when  we  have  more  reason  to  fear  armed
coalition  than  formerly,  we  are  losing  that  superiority  in
finance  which  made  it  feasible  for  us  to  maintain  a naval
armament  superior  to  any  European  combination.

All  these  perils  in  the  present  and  the  future  are  the
fruits  of  the  new  Imperialism,  which  is  thus  exposed
as  the  implacable  and  mortal  enemy  of  Peace  and  Economy.
How  far  the  military  aspect  of  Imperialism  has  already
eaten  into  the  resources  of  modern  European  States  may
be  judged  by  the  following  table  showing  the  growth  of
expenditure  of  the  various  great  European  States  on
military  equipment  in  the  last  generation  : —


Military  Expenditure  or  Gr*  at  European  Powers.1


j

1869-1870.

2897-1898.

Great  Britain

France  ......

Russia

Germany  ......

Austria

Italy

Totals

L

22.440.000

23)554,000

15.400.000

11.217.000

9.103.000

7.070.000

c

40.094.000
37,000,000

35.600.000

32.800.000

16.041.000

13.510.000

88,784,000

175,045,000

For  the  whole  body  of  European  States  the  increase  has  been  from
£105,719,000  in  1869-1870  to  £208,877,000  in  1897-1898.


1 See  Appendix,  p.  378,  for  expenditure  of  the  Powers  on  Defence  in  1934*

139


imperialism:  a study


III

There  are  those  who  deny  the  antagonism  of  Imperialism
and  social  reform.  “ The  energy  of  a nation  like  ours,
they  urge,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a fixed  quantity,  so  that
every  expenditure  upon  imperial  expansion  implies  a
corresponding  restriction  for  purposes  of  internal  progress  ;
there  are  various  sorts  of  energy  demanding  different
outlets,  so  that  the  true  economy  of  British  genius  requires
many  domestic  and  external  fields  of  activity ; we  are
capable  at  one  and  the  same  time  of  imperial  expansion  in
various  directions,  and  of  a complex  energy  of  growth  in
our  internal  economy.  The  inspiration  of  great  achieve-
ments throughout  the  world  reacts  upon  the  vitality  of  the
British  nation,  rendering  it  capable  of  efforts  of  internal
progress  which  would  have  been  precluded  by  the  ordinary
course  of  smug  insular  self-development.”

Now  it  is  needless  to  argue  the  incompatibility  of  social
reform  with  imperialism  on  any  abstract  principle  regarding
the  quantity  of  national  energy.  Though  limits  of  quantity
exist  underneath  the  finest  economy  of  division  of  labour,
as  indeed  is  illustrated  on  the  military  plane  by  the  limits
which  population  imposes  upon  the  combination  of  aggressive
expansion  and  home  defence,  these  limits  are  not  always
easy  to  discover  and  are  sometimes  capable  of  great  elasticity.
It  cannot,  therefore,  be  contended  that  the  sound  intellectual
stuff  which  goes  into  our  Indian  Civil  Service  involves  a
corresponding  loss  to  our  home  professions  and  official
services,  or  that  the  adventurous  energy  of  great  explorers,
missionaries,  engineers,  prospectors  and  other  pioneers  of
empire  could  and  would  have  found  as  ample  a field  and
as  sharp  a stimulus  for  their  energies  within  these  islands.
The  issue  we  are  considering — that  of  Imperialism — does
not  in  its  main  political  and  social  effects  turn  upon  any

140


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


such  exact  considerations  of  quantitative  economy  of
energy,  nor  does  the  repudiation  of  Imperialism  imply  a
confinement  within  rigid  territorial  limits  of  any  individual
or  co-operative  energy  which  may  find  better  scope  abroad.
We  are  concerned  with  economy  of  governmental  power,
with  Imperialism  as  a public  policy.  Even  here  the  issue
is  not  primarily  one  of  quantitative  economy,  though,  as
we  shall  see,  that  is  clearly  involved.  The  antagonism  of
Imperialism  and  social  reform  is  an  inherent  opposition
of  policy  involving  contradictory  methods  and  processes  of
government.  Some  of  the  more  obvious  illustrations
of  this  antagonism  are  presented  by  considerations  of  finance.
Most  important  measures  of  social  reform,  the  improvement
of  the  machinery  of  public  education,  any  large  handling
of  the  land  and  housing  questions  in  town  and  country,
the  public  control  of  the  drink  traffic,  old-age  pensions,
legislation  for  improving  the  condition  of  the  workers,
involve  considerable  outlay  of  public  money  raised  in
taxation  by  the  central  or  local  authorities.  Now  Imperialism,
through  the  ever-growing  military  expenditure  it
involves,  visibly  drains  the  public  purse  of  the  money  which
might  be  put  to  such  purposes.  Not  only  has  the  Exchequer
not  sufficient  money  to  expend  on  public  education,  old-age
pensions,  or  other  State  reforms ; the  smaller  units  of  local
government  are  similarly  crippled,  for  the  taxpayers  and  the
ratepayers  are  in  the  main  the  same  persons,  and  when  they
are  heavily  mulcted  by  taxes  for  unproductive  State
purposes  they  cannot  easily  bear  increased  rates.

Every  important  social  reform,  even  if  it  does  not
directly  involve  large  public  expenditure,  causes  financial
disturbances  and  risks  which  are  less  tolerable  at  times
when  public  expenditure  is  heavy  and  public  credit
fluctuating  and  embarrassed.  Most  social  reforms  involve
some  attack  on  vested  interests,  and  these  can  best  defend

!4l


imperialism:  a study

themselves  when  active  Imperialism  absorbs  public  atten-
tion. When  legislation  is  involved,  economy  of  time  and
of  governmental  interest  is  of  paramount  importance.
Imperialism,  with  its  “ high  politics,”  involving  the  honour
and  safety  of  the  Empire,  claims  the  first  place,  and,  as  the
Empire  grows,  the  number  and  complexity  of  its  issues,
involving  close,  immediate,  continuous  attention,  grow,
absorbing  the  time  of  the  Government  and  of  Parliament.
It  becomes  more  and  more  impossible  to  set  aside  parlia-
mentary time  for  the  full  unbroken  discussion  of  matters
of  most  vital  domestic  importance,  or  to  carry  through
any  large  serious  measure  of  reform.

It  is  needless  to  labour  the  theory  of  this  antagonism
when  the  practice  is  apparent  to  every  student  of  politics.
Indeed,  it  has  become  a commonplace  of  history  how
Governments  use  national  animosities,  foreign  wars  and
the  glamour  of  empire-making,  in  order  to  bemuse  the
popular  mind  and  divert  rising  resentment  against  domestic
abuses.  The  vested  interests,  which,  on  our  analysis,  are
shown  to  be  chief  prompters  of  an  imperialist  policy,  play
for  a double  stake,  seeking  their  private  commercial  and
financial  gains  at  the  expense  and  peril  of  the  common-
wealth. They  at  the  same  time  protect  their  economic
and  political  supremacy  at  home  against  movements  of
popular  reform.  The  city  ground  landlord,  the  country
squire,  the  banker,  the  usurer,  and  the  financier,  the  brewer,
the  .mine-owner,  the  ironmaster,  the  shipbuilder,  and  the
shipping  trade,  the  great  export  manufacturers  and
merchants,  the  clergy  of  the  State  Church,  the  universities,
and  great  public  schools,  the  legal  trade  unions  and  the
services  have,  both  in  Great  Britain  and  on  the  Continent,
drawn  together  for  common  political  resistance  against
attacks  upon  the  power,  the  property,'  and  the  privileges
which  in  various  forms  and  degrees  they  represent.  Having

142


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


conceded  under  pressure  the  form  of  political  power  in
the  shape  of  elective  institutions  and  a wide  franchise  to
the  masses,  they  are  struggling  to  prevent  the  masses  from
gaining  the  substance  of  this  power  and  using  it  for  the
establishment  of  equality  of  economic  opportunities.  The
collapse  of  the  Liberal  party  upon  the  Continent,  and  now
in  Great  Britain,  is  only  made  intelligible  in  this  way.
Friends  of  liberty  and  of  popular  government  so  long  as  the
new  industrial  and  commercial  forces  were  hampered  by
the  economic  barriers  and  the  political  supremacy  of  the
noblesse  and  the  landed  aristocracy,  they  have  come  to
temper  their  “ trust  ” of  the  people  by  an  ever-growing
quantity  of  caution,  until  within  the  last  two  decades1  they
have  either  sought  political  fusion  with  the  Conservatives
or  have  dragged  on  a precarious  existence  on  the  strength
of  a few  belated  leaders  with  obsolescent  principles.  Where
Liberalism  preserves  any  real  strength,  it  is  because  the
older  struggle  for  the  franchise  and  the  primary  liberties
has  been  delayed,  as  in  Belgium  and  in  Denmark,  and  a
modus  vivendi  has  been  possible  with  the  rising  working-
class  party.  In  Germany,  France,  and  Italy  the  Liberal
party  as  a factor  in  practical  politics  has  either  disappeared  or
is  reduced  to  impotence  ; in  England  it  now  stands  convicted
of  a gross  palpable  betrayal  of  the  first  conditions  of
liberty,  feebly  fumbling  after  programmes  as  a substitute
for  principles.  Its  leaders,  having  sold  their  party  to  a
confederacy  of  stock  gamblers  and  jingo  sentimentalists,
find  themselves  impotent  to  defend  Free  Trade,  Free  Press,
Free  Schools,  Free  Speech,  or  any  of  the  rudiments  of  ancient
Liberalism.  They  have  alienated  the  confidence  of  the
people.  For  many  years  they  have  been  permitted  to
conduct  a sham  fight  and  to  call  it  politics ; the  people
thought  it  real  until  the  South  African  war  furnished  a

1 Referring  to  the  lait  twenty  yean  of  the  nineteenth  century.

*43


imperialism:  a study

decisive  dramatic  test,  and  the  unreality  of  Liberalism
became  apparent.  It  is  not  that  Liberals  have  openly
abandoned  the  old  principles  and  traditions,  but  that  they
have  rendered  them  of  no  account  by  dallying  with  an
Imperialism  which  they  have  foolishly  and  futilely  striven
to  distinguish  from  the  firmer  brand  of  their  political
opponents.  This  surrender  to  Imperialism  signifies  that
they  have  preferred  the  economic  interests  of  the  possessing
and  speculative  classes,  to  which  most  of  their  leaders  belong,
to  the  cause  of  Liberalism.  That  they  are  not  conscious
traitors  or  hypocrites  may  be  readily  conceded,  but  the
fact  remains  that  they  have  sold  the  cause  of  popular  reform,
which  was  their  rightful  heritage,  for  an  Imperialism  which
appealed  to  their  business  interests  and  their  social  pre-
possessions. The  mess  of  pottage  has  been  seasoned  by
various  sweeter  herbs,  but  its  u stock  ” is  class  selfishness.
The  majority  of  the  influential  Liberals  fled  from  the  fight
which  was  the  truest  test  of  Liberalism  in  their  generation
because  they  were  “ hirelings,”  destitute  of  firm  political
principle,  gladly  abandoning  themselves  to  whatever  shallow
and  ignoble  defences  a blear-eyed,  raucous  “ patriotism  ”
was  ready  to  devise  for  their  excuse.

It  is  possible  to  explain  and  qualify,  but  this  remains
the  naked  truth,  which  it  is  well  to  recognise.  A Liberal
party  can  only  survive  as  a discredited  or  feeble  remnant
in  England,  unless  it  consents  definitely  to  dissever  itself
from  that  Imperialism  which  its  past  leaders  as  well  as
their  opponents,  have  permitted  to  block  the  progress  of
domestic  reforms.

There  are  individuals  and  sections  among  those  who
have  comprised  the  Liberal  party  whose  deception  has
been  in  large  measure  blind  and  involuntary,  because
they  have  been  absorbed  by  their  interest  in  some  single
important  issue  of  social  reform,  whether  it  be  temperance,

144


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

land  tenure,  education,  or  the  like.  Let  these  men  now
recognize,  as  in  honesty  they  can  scarcely  fail  to  do,  that
Imperialism  is  the  deadly  enemy  of  each  of  these  reforms,
that  none  of  them  can  make  serious  advance  so  long  as
the  expansion  of  the  Empire  and  its  satellite  (militarism)
absorb  the  time,  the  energy,  the  money  of  the  State.  Thus
alone  is  it  still  possible  that  a strong  rally  of  Liberals  might,
by  fusion  or  co-operation  with  the  political  organisations
of  the  working  classes,  fight  Imperialism  with  the  only
effectual  weapon,  social  reconstruction  on  the  basis  of
democracy.


IV

The  antagonism  with  democracy  drives  to  the  very
roots  of  Imperialism  as  a political  principle.  Not  only  is
Imperialism  used  to  frustrate  those  measures  of  economic
reform  now  recognized  as  essential  to  the  effectual  working
of  all  machinery  of  popular  government,  but  it  operates  to
paralyse  the  working  of  that  machinery  itself.  Representa-
tive institutions  are  ill  adapted  for  empire,  either  as  regards
men  or  methods.  The  government  of  a great  heterogeneous
medley  of  lower  races  by  departmental  officials  in  London
and  their  nominated  emissaries  lies  outside  the  scope  of
popular  knowledge  and  popular  control.  The  Foreign,
Colonial,  and  Indian  Secretaries  in  Parliament,  the  per-
manent officials  of  the  departments,  the  governors  and
staff  who  represent  the  Imperial  Government  in  our
dependencies,  are  not,  and  cannot  be,  controlled  directly
or  effectively  by  the  will  of  the  people.  This  subordination
of  the  legislative  to  the  executive,  and  the  concentration  of
executive  power  in  an  autocracy,  are  necessary  consequences
of  the  predominance  of  foreign  over  domestic  politics.  The
process  is  attended  by  a decay  of  party  spirit  and  party

HS


imperialism:  a study


action9  and  an  insistence  on  the  part  of  the  autocracy,
whether  it  be  a Kaiser  or  a Cabinet,  that  all  effective  party
criticism  is  unpatriotic  and  verges  on  treason.  An  able
writer,  discussing  the  new  foreign  policy  of  Germany,
summarises  the  point  of  view  of  the  expansionists : “ It  is
claimed  by  them  that  in  foreign  affairs  the  nation  should
stand  as  one  man,  that  policies  once  entered  upon  by  the
Government  should  not  be  repudiated,  and  that  criticism
should  be  avoided  as  weakening  the  influence  of  the  nation
abroad.  ...  It  is  evident  that  when  the  most  important
concerns  of  a nation  are  thus  withdrawn  from  the  field  of
party  difference,  party  government  itself  must  grow  weak,
as  dealing  no  longer  with  vital  affairs.  . . . Thus,  as  the
importance  of  the  executive  is  enhanced,  that  of  the
legislative  is  lowered,  and  parliamentary  action  is  looked
down  upon  as  the  futile  and  irritating  activity  of  unpractical
critics.  If  the  governmental  measures  are  to  be  adopted
inevitably,  why  not  dispense  with  the  irritating  delay  of
parliamentary  discussion  ?

The  Kaiser’s  speech  at  Hamburg,  October  19,  1899,
condenses  the  doctrine  thus : “ The  face  of  the  world  has
changed  greatly  during  the  last  few  years.  What  formerly
required  centuries  is  now  accomplished  in  a few  months.
The  task  of  Kaiser  and  Government  has  consequently  grown
beyond  measure,  and  a solution  will  only  be  possible  when
the  German  people  renounce  party  divisions.  Standing
in  serried  ranks  behind  the  Kaiser,  proud  of  their  great
fatherland,  and  conscious  of  their  real  worth,  the  Germans
must  watch  the  development  of  foreign  States.  They  must
make  sacrifices  for  their  position  as  a world-power,  and,
abandoning  party  spirit,  they  must  stand  united  behind
their  prince  and  emperor.”

Autocratic  government  in  imperial  politics  naturally

1 World  Politics , by  P.  S.  Reixuch,  pp.  300,  301  (Macmillan  Sc  Co.).

146


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


reacts  upon  domestic  government.  The  intricacy  of  the
departmental  work  of  the  Home  Office,  the  Board  of  Trade,
of  Education  and  other  important  offices  has  favoured  this
reaction,  which  has  taken  shape  in  government  by  adminis-
trative orders  in  accordance  with  large  powers  slipped
into  important  statutes  and  not  properly  challenged  or  safe-
guarded amid  the  chaotic  hurry  in  which  most  governments
are  driven  in  legislation.  It  is  noticeable  that  in  America  a
still  more  dangerous  practice  has  sprung  up,  entitled
“ government  by  injunction,”  in  which  the  judiciary  is
virtually  empowered  to  issue  decrees  having  the  effect  of
laws  with  attendant  penalties  for  specific  acts.

In  Great  Britain  the  weakening  of  u party  ” is  visibly
attended  by  a decline  of  the  reality  of  popular  control.
Just  in  proportion  as  foreign  and  colonial  policy  bulks
more  largely  in  the  deliberative  and  administrative  work
of  the  State  is  government  necessarily  removed  from  the
real  control  of  the  people.  It  is  no  mere  question  of  economy
of  the  time  and  energy  of  Parliament,  though  the  dwindling
proportion  of  the  sessions  devoted  to  consideration  of
domestic  questions  represents  a corresponding  decline
of  practical  democracy.  The  wound  to  popular  govern-
ment penetrates  far  deeper.  Imperialism,  and  the  military,
diplomatic,  and  financial  resources  which  feed  it,  have
become  so  far  the  paramount  considerations  of  recent
Governments  that  they  mould  and  direct  the  entire  policy,
give  point,  colour  and  character  to  the  conduct  of  public
affairs,  and  overawe  by  continual  suggestions  of  unknown
and  incalculable  gains  and  perils  the  nearer  and  more
sober  processes  of  domestic  policy.  The  effect  on  parlia-
mentary government  has  been  great,  quick,  and  of  palpable
import,  making  for  the  diminution  of  the  power  of  repre-
sentative institutions.  At  elections  the  electorate  is  no
longer  invited  to  exercise  a free,  conscious,  rational  choice
L 147


imperialism:  a study


between  the  representatives  of  different  intelligible  policies ;
it  is  invited  to  endorse,  or  to  refuse  endorsement,  to  a
difficult,  intricate,  and  hazardous  imperial  and  foreign  policy,
commonly  couched  in  a few  well-sounding  general  phrases,
and  supported  by  an  appeal  to  the  necessity  of  solidarity
and  continuity  of  national  conduct — virtually  a blind  vote
of  confidence.  In  the  deliberations  of  the  House  of
Commons  the  power  of  the  Opposition  to  oppose  has  been
seriously  and  progressively  impaired : partly  by  alteration
in  the  rules  of  the  House,  which  have  diminished  the  right
of  full  discussion  of  legislative  measures  in  their  several
stages,  and  impaired  the  privileges  of  the  Commons,  viz.,
the  right  of  discussing  grievances  upon  votes  of  Supply,
and  of  questioning  ministers  regarding  the  conduct  of  their
offices  ; partly  by  a forcible  encroachment  of  the  Govern-
ment upon  the  rights  and  privileges  formerly  enjoyed  by
private  members  in  moving  resolutions  and  in  introducing
bills.  This  diminution  of  the  power  of  opposition  is  only  the
first  of  a series  of  processes  of  concentration  of  power.  The
Government  now  claims  for  its  measures  the  complete
disposal  of  the  time  of  the  House  whenever  it  judges  such
monopoly  to  be  desirable.

Within  the  Government  itself  the  same  centripetal
forces  have  been  operative.  “ There  can,”  writes  Mr.
Bryce,  “ be  no  doubt  that  the  power  of  the  Cabinet  as
against  the  House  of  Commons  has  grown  steadily  and
rapidly,  and  it  appears  (1901)  to  be  still  growing.”1

So  the  Cabinet  absorbs  the  powers  of  the  House,  while
the  Cabinet  itself  has  been  deliberately  and  consciously
expanded  in  size  so  as  to  promote  the  concentration  of
real  power  in  an  informal  but  very  real  “ inner  Cabinet,”
retaining  some  slight  selective  elasticity,  but  virtually
consisting  of  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Foreign  and

1 Studies  in  History  and  Jurisprudence , Vol.  i,  p.  177.

148


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


Colonial  Secretaries  and  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.
This  process  of  centralisation  of  power,  which  tends  to
destroy  representative  government,  reducing  the  House
of  Commons  to  be  little  more  than  a machine  for  the
automatic  registration  of  the  decrees  of  an  unelected  inner
Cabinet,  is  chiefly  attributable  to  Imperialism.1  The
consideration  of  delicate,  uncertain  intelligence  affecting
our  relations  with  foreign  Powers,  the  accepted  necessity  of
secrecy  in  diplomacy,  and  of  expeditious,  unobtrusive  action,
seem  to  favour  and  even  to  necessitate  a highly  centralised
autocratic  and  bureaucratic  method  of  government.

Amid  this  general  decline  of  parliamentary  government
the  “ party  system  ” is  visibly  collapsing,  based  as  it  was  on
plain  cleavages  in  domestic  policy  which  have  little  signifi-
cance when  confronted  with  the  claims  and  powers  of
Imperialism.  If  the  party  system  is  destined  to  survive
in  British  politics,  it  can  only  do  so  by  the  consolidation
of  all  sections  opposed  to  the  “ imperialist ” practices  to
which  Liberal  as  well  as  Conservative  ministries  have
adhered  during  recent  years.  So  long  as  Imperialism
is  allowed  to  hold  the  field,  the  only  real  political  conflict
is  between  groups  representing  the  divergent  branches  of
Imperialism,  the  men  upon  the  spot  and  the  Home  Govern-
ment, the  Asiatic  interests  of  India  and  China  and  the
forward  policy  in  Africa,  the  advocates  of  a German  alliance
or  a Franco-Russian  alliance.

1 An  experienced  observer  thus  records  the  effect  of  these  changes  upon  the
character  and  conduct  of  members  of  Parliament : “ For  the  most  part,  as  in
the  country,  so  in  the  House,  the  political  element  has  waned  as  a factor.  The
lack  of  interest  in  constitutional  matters  has  been  conspicuous.  . . . The
* Parliament  man  ’ has  been  disappearing ; the  number  of  those  desirous  of
furthering  social  and  industrial  reforms  has  been  waning.  On  the  other  hand,
those  who  have  been  anxious  to  grasp  such  opportunities  of  various  kinds  outside
its  work  and  duties  as  are  afforded  by  membership  of  the  House  of  Commons,
and  who  are  willing  to  support  the  Government  in  the  division  lobby  without
being  called  upon  to  do  much  more,  came  up  in  large  numbers  in  1895  and  1900,
and  now  form  a very  large  proportion,  if  not  the  majority,  of  the  House  of
Commons  ” (Mr.  John  E.  Ellis,  M.P.,  The  Speaker , June  7,  1902).

*49


imperialism:  a study


V

Imperialism  and  popular  government  have  nothing
in  common : they  differ  in  spirit,  in  policy,  in  method.
Of  policy  and  method  I have  already  spoken ; it  remains
to  point  out  how  the  spirit  of  Imperialism  poisons  the
springs  of  democracy  in  the  mind  and  character  of  the
people.  As  our  free  self-governing  colonies  have  furnished
hope,  encouragement,  and  leading  to  the  popular  aspira-
tions in  Great  Britain,  not  merely  by  practical  successes
in  the  arts  of  popular  government,  but  by  the  wafting  of
a spirit  of  freedom  and  equality,  so  our  despotically  ruled
dependencies  have  ever  served  to  damage  the  character  of  our
people  by  feeding  the  habits  of  snobbish  subservience,  the
admiration  of  wealth  and  rank,  the  corrupt  survivals  of  the
inequalities  of  feudalism.  This  process  began  with  the
advent  of  the  East  Indian  nabob  and  the  West  Indian
planter  into  English  society  and  politics,  bringing  back
with  his  plunders  of  the  slave  trade  and  the  gains  of  corrupt
and  extortionate  officialism  the  acts  of  vulgar  ostentation,
domineering  demeanour  and  corrupting  largesse  to  dazzle
and  degrade  the  life  of  our  people.  Cobden,  writing  in
i860  of  our  Indian  Empire,  put  this  pithy  question  : “ Is
it  not  just  possible  that  we  may  become  corrupted  at  home
by  the  reaction  of  arbitrary  political  maxims  in  the  East
upon  our  domestic  politics,  just  as  Greece  and  Rome  were
demoralised  by  their  contact  with  Asia  ?

Not  merely  is  the  reaction  possible,  it  is  inevitable.  As
the  despotic  portion  of  our  Empire  has  grown  in  area,  a larger
and  larger  number  of  men,  trained  in  the  temper  and  methods
of  autocracy  as  soldiers  and  civil  officials  in  our  Crown
colonies,  protectorates,  and  Indian  Empire,  reinforced  by
numbers  of  merchants,  planters,  engineers,  and  overseers,
whose  lives  have  been  those  of  a superior  caste  living  an

1 Morley,  Life  of  Cobden , Vol.  ii,  p.  361.

150


POLITICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


artificial  life  removed  from  all  the  healthy  restraints  of
ordinary  European  society,  have  returned  to  this  country,
bringing  back  the  characters,  sentiments,  and  ideas  imposed
by  this  foreign  environment.  The  South  and  South-West
of  England  is  richly  sprinkled  with  these  men,  many  of
them  wealthy,  most  of  them  endowed  with  leisure,  men
openly  contemptuous  of  democracy,  devoted  to  material
luxury,  social  display,  and  the  shallower  arts  of  intellectual
life.  The  wealthier  among  them  discover  political  ambitions,
introducing  into  our  Houses  of  Parliament  the  coarsest  and
most  selfish  spirit  of  “ Imperialism,”  using  their  imperial
experience  and  connexions  to  push  profitable  companies
and  concessions  for  their  private  benefits,  and  posing  as
authorities  so  as  to  keep  the  yoke  of  Imperialism  firmly
fixed  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  “ nigger.”  The  South
African  millionaire  is  the  brand  most  in  evidence : his
methods  are  the  most  barefaced,  and  his  success,  social
and  political,  the  most  redoubtable.  But  the  practices
which  are  writ  large  in  Rhodes,  Beit,  and  their  parliamentaiy
confederates  are  widespread  on  a smaller  scale ; the  South
of  England  is  full  of  men  of  local  influence  in  politics  and
society  whose  character  has  been  formed  in  our  despotic
Empire,  and  whose  incomes  are  chiefly  derived  from  the
maintenance  and  furtherance  of  this  despotic  rule.  Not
a few  enter  our  local  councils,  or  take  posts  in  our  constabu-
lary or  our  prisons  : everywhere  they  stand  for  coercion  and
for  resistance  to  reform.  Could  the  incomes  expended  in  the
Home  Counties  and  other  large  districts  of  Southern  Britain
be  traced  to  their  sources,  it  would  be  found  that  they
were  in  large  measure  wrung  from  the  enforced  toil  of  vast
multitudes  of  black,  brown,  or  yellow  natives,  by  arts
not  differing  essentially  from  those  which  supported  in
idleness  and  luxury  imperial  Rome.

It  is,  indeed,  a nemesis  of  Imperialism  that  the  arts

IS*


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


and  crafts  of  tyranny,  acquired  and  exercised  in  our  unfree
Empire,  should  be  turned  against  our  liberties  at  home.
Those  who  have  felt  surprise  at  the  total  disregard  or  the
open  contempt  displayed  by  the  aristocracy  and  the  pluto-
cracy of  this  land  for  infringements  of  the  liberties  of  the
subject  and  for  the  abrogation  of  constitutional  rights  and
usages  have  not  taken  sufficiently  into  account  the  steady
reflux  of  this  poison  of  irresponsible  autocracy  from  our
“ unfree,  intolerant,  aggressive  ” Empire.

The  political  effects,  actual  and  necessary,  of  the  new
Imperialism,  as  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the  greatest  of
imperialist  Powers,  may  be  thus  summarised.  It  is  a
constant  menace  to  peace,  by  furnishing  continual  tempta-
tions to  further  aggression  upon  lands  occupied  by  lower
races  and  by  embroiling  our  nation  with  other  nations  of
rival  imperial  ambitions  ; to  the  sharp  peril  of  war  it  adds
the  chronic  danger  and  degradation  of  militarism,  which  not
merely  wastes  the  current  physical  and  moral  resources  of
the  nations,  but  checks  the  very  course  of  civilization.  It
consumes  to  an  illimitable  and  incalculable  extent  the
financial  resources  of  a nation  by  military  preparation,
stopping  the  expenditure  of  the  current  income  of  the
State  upon  productive  public  projects  and  burdening
posterity  with  heavy  loads  of  debt.  Absorbing  the  public
money,  time,  interest  and  energy  on  costly  and  unprofitable
work  of  territorial  aggrandisement,  it  thus  wastes  those
energies  of  public  life  in  the  governing  classes  and  the
nations  which  are  needed  for  internal  reforms  and  for  the
cultivation  of  the  arts  of  material  and  intellectual  progress
at  home.  Finally,  the  spirit,  the  policy,  and  the  methods  of
Imperialism  are  hostile  to  the  institutions  of  popular  self-
government,  favouring  forms  of  political  tyranny  and  social
authority  which  are  the  deadly  enemies  of  effective  liberty
and  equality.


152


CHAPTER  II


THE  SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF
IMPERIALISM

I

THOUGH  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  the  ambitions  of
individuals  or  nations  have  been  the  chief  conscious
motives  in  Imperialism,  it  is  possible  to  maintain  that
here,  as  in  other  departments  of  human  history,  certain
larger  hidden  forces  operate  towards  the  progress  of
humanity.  The  powerful  hold  which  biological  conceptions
have  obtained  over  the  pioneers  in  the  science  of  sociology
is  easily  intelligible.  It  is  only  natural  that  the  laws  of
individual  and  specific  progress  so  clearly  discerned  in  other
parts  of  the  animal  kingdom  should  be  rigorously  applied
to  man  ; it  is  not  unnatural  that  the  deflections  or  reversals
of  the  laws  of  lower  life  by  certain  other  laws,  which  only
attain  importance  in  the  higher  psychical  reaches  of  the
genus  homo,  should  be  underrated,  misinterpreted,  or  ignored.
The  biologist  who  enters  human  history  often  finds  himself
confronted  by  intellectual  antagonists  who  regard  him  as  an
interloper,  and  seek  to  raise  the  barrier  between  human
and  animal  development.  Indeed,  from  the  ranks  of  the
biological  profession  itself,  scientists  of  such  eminence  as
Huxley  and  A.  R.  Wallace  have  lent  themselves  to  this
separatism,  distinguishing  the  ethical  or  spiritual  progress
of  the  human  race  from  the  general  cosmic  process,  and
endowing  men  with  qualities  and  with  laws  of  action
different  in  kind  from  those  which  obtain  in  the  rest  of  the
animal  kingdom.  A reaction  against  the  abrupt  dogmatism

*53


imperialism:  a study


of  this  position  has  led  many  others  to  an  equally  abrupt  and
equally  dogmatic  assertion  of  the  laws  of  the  lower  forms  of
physical  struggle  and  selection  which  explain  or  describe
progress  in  lower  animals  as  sufficient  for  all  purposes  of
sociology.

Sociologists  have  shown  themselves  in  some  cases  eager
to  accept  this  view,  and  apply  it  to  defend  the  necessity,  the
utility,  and  even  the  righteousness  of  maintaining  to  the
point  of  complete  subjugation  or  extermination  the  physical
struggle  between  races  and  types  of  civilization.

Admitting  that  the  efficiency  of  a nation  or  a race  requires
a suspension  of  intestine  warfare,  at  any  rate  & Voutrance ,
the  crude  struggle  on  the  larger  plane  must,  they  urge,  be
maintained.  It  serves,  indeed,  two  related  purposes.  A
constant  struggle  with  other  races  or  nations  is  demanded
for  the  maintenance  and  progress  of  a race  or  nation  ;
abate  the  necessity  of  the  struggle  and  the  vigour  of  the
race  flags  and  perishes.  Thus  it  is  to  the  real  interest  of  a
vigorous  race  to  be  “ kept  up  to  a high  pitch  of  external
efficiency  by  contest,  chiefly  by  way  of  war  with  inferior
races,  and  with  equal  races  by  the  struggle  for  trade  routes
and  for  the  sources  of  raw  material  and  of  food  supply.”
“ This,”  adds  Professor  Karl  Pearson,  “ is  the  natural  history
view  of  mankind,  and  I do  not  think  you  can  in  its  main
features  subvert  it.”1

Others,  taking  the  wider  cosmic  standpoint,  insist  that  the
progress  of  humanity  itself  requires  the  maintenance  of  a
selective  and  destructive  struggle  between  races  which
embody  different  powers  and  capacities,  different  types  of
civilization.  It  is  desirable  that  the  earth  should  be  peopled,
governed,  and  developed,  as  far  as  possible,  by  the  races
which  can  do  this  work  best,  i.e.  by  the  races  of  highest
“ social  efficiency  ” ; these  races  must  assert  their  right  by

1 National  Life  from  the  Standpoint  of  Science , p.  44  (Black,  1901).

*54


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

conquering,  ousting,  subjugating,  or  extinguishing  races  of
lower  social  efficiency.  The  good  of  the  world,  the  true
cause  of  humanity,  demands  that  this  struggle,  physical,
industrial,  political,  continue,  until  an  ideal  settlement  is
reached  whereby  the  most  socially  efficient  nations  rule  the
earth  in  accordance  with  their  several  kinds  and  degrees
of  social  efficiency.  This  principle  is  clearly  enunciated  by
M.  Edmond  Demolins,  who  describes  it  as  being  “ as  in-
disputable as  the  law  of  gravitation.

“ When  one  race  shows  itself  superior  to  another  in
the  various  externals  of  domestic  life,  it  inevitably  in  the
long  run  gets  the  upper  hand  in  public  life  and  establishes
its  predominance.  Whether  this  predominance  is  asserted
by  peaceable  means  or  feats  of  arms,  it  is  none  the  less,  when
the  proper  time  comes,  officially  established,  and  afterwards
unreservedly  acknowledged.  I have  said  that  this  law  is
the  only  thing  which  accounts  for  the  history  of  the  human
race,  and  the  revolutions  of  empires,  and  that,  moreover,  it
explains  and  justifies  the  appropriation  by  Europeans  of
territories  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  Oceania,  and  the  whole  of
our  colonial  development.,,1

The  western  European  nations  with  their  colonies  repre-
sent the  socially  efficient  nations,  in  various  degrees.  Some
writers,  American  and  English,  such  as  Professor  Giddings
and  Mr.  Kidd,  believe  that  the  Teutonic  races,  and  in
particular  the  Anglo-Saxon  branches,  represent  the  highest
order  of  efficiency,  in  which  notion  they  are  supported  by
a little  group  of  Anglophil  Frenchmen.

This  genuine  and  confident  conviction  about  c<  social
efficiency  ” must  be  taken  as  the  chief  moral  support  of
Imperialism.  “ Human  progress  requires  the  maintenance
of  the  race  struggle,  in  which  the  weakest  races  shall  go  under
while  the  * socially  efficient  ’ races  survive  and  flourish :

1 Boers  or  British  f p.  24.


>55


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


of  this  position  has  led  many  others  to  an  equally  abrupt  and
equally  dogmatic  assertion  of  the  laws  of  the  lower  forms  of
physical  struggle  and  selection  which  explain  or  describe
progress  in  lower  animals  as  sufficient  for  all  purposes  of
sociology.

Sociologists  have  shown  themselves  in  some  cases  eager
to  accept  this  view,  and  apply  it  to  defend  the  necessity,  the
utility,  and  even  the  righteousness  of  maintaining  to  the
point  of  complete  subjugation  or  extermination  the  physical
struggle  between  races  and  types  of  civilization.

Admitting  that  the  efficiency  of  a nation  or  a race  requires
a suspension  of  intestine  warfare,  at  any  rate  d Voutrance ,
the  crude  struggle  on  the  larger  plane  must,  they  urge,  be
maintained.  It  serves,  indeed,  two  related  purposes.  A
constant  struggle  with  other  races  or  nations  is  demanded
for  the  maintenance  and  progress  of  a race  or  nation  ;
abate  the  necessity  of  the  struggle  and  the  vigour  of  the
race  flags  and  perishes.  Thus  it  is  to  the  real  interest  of  a
vigorous  race  to  be  “ kept  up  to  a high  pitch  of  external
efficiency  by  contest,  chiefly  by  way  of  war  with  inferior
races,  and  with  equal  races  by  the  struggle  for  trade  routes
and  for  the  sources  of  raw  material  and  of  food  supply.”
“ This,”  adds  Professor  Karl  Pearson,  “ is  the  natural  history
view  of  mankind,  and  I do  not  think  you  can  in  its  main
features  subvert  it.”1

Others,  taking  the  wider  cosmic  standpoint,  insist  that  the
progress  of  humanity  itself  requires  the  maintenance  of  a
selective  and  destructive  struggle  between  races  which
embody  different  powers  and  capacities,  different  types  of
civilization.  It  is  desirable  that  the  earth  should  be  peopled,
governed,  and  developed,  as  far  as  possible,  by  the  races
which  can  do  this  work  best,  i.e.  by  the  races  of  highest
“ social  efficiency  ” ; these  races  must  assert  their  right  by
1 National  Lift  from  the  Standpoint  of  Science , p.  44  (Black,  1901).

154


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

conquering,  ousting,  subjugating,  or  extinguishing  races  of
lower  social  efficiency.  The  good  of  the  world,  the  true
cause  of  humanity,  demands  that  this  struggle,  physical,
industrial,  political,  continue,  until  an  ideal  settlement  is
reached  whereby  the  most  socially  efficient  nations  rule  the
earth  in  accordance  with  their  several  kinds  and  degrees
of  social  efficiency.  This  principle  is  clearly  enunciated  by
M.  Edmond  Demolins,  who  describes  it  as  being  u as  in-
disputable as  the  law  of  gravitation.

“ When  one  race  shows  itself  superior  to  another  in
the  various  externals  of  domestic  life,  it  inevitably  in  the
long  run  gets  the  upper  hand  in  public  life  and  establishes
its  predominance.  Whether  this  predominance  is  asserted
by  peaceable  means  or  feats  of  arms,  it  is  none  the  less,  when
the  proper  time  comes,  officially  established,  and  afterwards
unreservedly  acknowledged.  I have  said  that  this  law  is
the  only  thing  which  accounts  for  the  history  of  the  human
race,  and  the  revolutions  of  empires,  and  that,  moreover,  it
explains  and  justifies  the  appropriation  by  Europeans  of
territories  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  Oceania,  and  the  whole  of
our  colonial  development.”1

The  western  European  nations  with  their  colonies  repre-
sent the  socially  efficient  nations,  in  various  degrees.  Some
writers,  American  and  English,  such  as  Professor  Giddings
and  Mr.  Kidd,  believe  that  the  Teutonic  races,  and  in
particular  the  Anglo-Saxon  branches,  represent  the  highest
order  of  efficiency,  in  which  notion  they  are  supported  by
a little  group  of  Anglophil  Frenchmen.

This  genuine  and  confident  conviction  about  “ social
efficiency  ” must  be  taken  as  the  chief  moral  support  of
Imperialism.  “ Human  progress  requires  the  maintenance
of  the  race  struggle,  in  which  the  weakest  races  shall  go  under
while  the  ‘ socially  efficient  ’ races  survive  and  flourish :

1 Boers  or  British  t p.  24.


15s


imperialism:  a study


we  arc  the  ‘ socially  efficient  ’ race.”  So  runs  the  imperialist
argument.

Now,  thus  closely  stated,  the  meaning  of  the  term
“ socially  efficient  ” becomes  evident.  It  is  simply  the
antithesis  of  " weak,”  and  is  equivalent  to  “ strong  in
the  struggle  of  life.”  Taken  at  the  first  blush  it  suggests
admitted  moral  and  intellectual  virtues  of  some  broad
general  kind,  and  is  afterwards  taken  to  imply  such  qualities.
But  applied  in  the  present  “ natural  history  ” sense  it  signifies
nothing  more  or  less  than  capacity  to  beat  other  races,  who,
from  their  failure,  are  spoken  of  as  “ lower.”  It  is  merely
a repetition  of  the  phrase  “ survival  of  the  fittest,”  the
meaning  of  which  is  clear  when  the  question  is  put,  “ Fittest
to  do  what  ? ” and  the  answer  follows,  “ Fittest  to  survive.”

It  is  true  that  “ social  efficiency  ” seems  to  imply  much
more  than  mere  fighting  capacity  in  war  and  trade,  and,  if  we
were  to  take  into  account  all  qualities  which  go  to  make
a good  society,  we  should  include  much  more  ; but  from  our
present  “ natural  history  ” standpoint  it  is  evident  that
these  must  be  excluded  and  only  those  included  which  aid
directly  in  the  struggle.

Giving,  then,  the  proper  value  to  the  terms,  it  simply
comes  to  this.  “In  the  history  of  man,  as  throughout
nature,  stronger  races  have  continually  trampled  down,
enslaved,  and  exterminated  other  races.”  The  biologist
says : “ This  is  so  rooted  in  nature,  including  human

nature,  that  it  must  go  on.”  He  adds : “ It  has  been  the
prime  condition  and  mode  of  progress  in  the  past,  therefore
it  is  desirable  it  should  go  on.  It  must  go  on,  it  ought  to  go
on.”

So  easily  we  glide  from  natural  history  to  ethics,  and
find  in  utility  a moral  sanction  for  the  race  struggle.  Now,
Imperialism  is  nothing  but  this  natural  history  doctrine
regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  one’s  own  nation.  We

156


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


represent  the  socially  efficient  nation,  we  have  conquered  and
acquired  dominion  and  territory  in  the  past : we  must  go  on,
it  is  our  destiny,  one  which  is  serviceable  to  ourselves  and
to  the  world,  our  duty.

Thus,  emerging  from  natural  history,  the  doctrine  soon
takes  on  a large  complexity  of  ethical  and  religious  finery,
and  we  are  wafted  into  an  elevated  atmosphere  of  u imperial
Christianity,”  a “ mission  of  civilization,”  in  which  we  are  to
teach  “ the  arts  of  good  government  ” and  “ the  dignity
of  labour.”


II

That  the  power  to  do  anything  constitutes  a right
and  even  a duty  to  do  it,  is  perhaps  the  commonest,  the
most  “ natural  ” of  temperamental  fallacies.  Even
Professor  Pearson  does  not  avoid  it,  when,  after  an  able
vindication  of  the  necessity  of  intra-race  selection  and  of
race  struggle,  he  speaks  of  “ our  right  to  work  the  unutilised
resources  of  earth,  be  they  in  Africa  or  in  Asia.”1

This  belief  in  a “ divine  right  ” of  force,  which  teachers
like  Carlyle,  Kingsley,  Ruskin  did  so  much  to  foster,  is
primarily  responsible  for  the  transmutation  of  a natural
history  law  into  a moral  enthusiasm.

Elsewhere  I have  dwelt  with  so  much  insistence  on  the  more
sordid  and  calculating  motives  which  direct  Imperialism
that  I am  anxious  here  to  do  justice  to  the  nobler  aspects
of  the  sentiment  of  Imperialism,  interpreted  through  a
naive  rendering  of  science  into  a gospel  of  arduous  chivalry.
Such  a revelation  is  conveyed  in  the  charming  nature
and  buoyant  career  of  Hubert  Hervey,  of  the  British  South
African  Chartered  Company,  as  rendered  by  his  fellow-
adventurer,  Earl  Grey.  In  his  career  we  have  Imperialism
at  its  best  in  action,  and  what  is  better  for  our  purpose,  a

1 National  Lift , p.  46.


1 57


imperialism:  a study
most  ingenuous  and  instructive  attempt  to  set  forth  the
gist  of  the  imperialist  philosophy.

“ Probably  every  one  would  agree  that  an  Englishman
would  be  right  in  considering  his  way  of  looking  at  the
world  and  at  life  better  than  that  of  the  Maori  or  Hottentot,
and  no  one  will  object  in  the  abstract  to  England  doing
her  best  to  impose  her  better  and  higher  view  on  those
savages.  But  the  same  idea  will  carry  you  much  farther.
In  so  far  as  an  Englishman  differs  in  essentials  from  a Swede
or  Belgian,  he  believes  that  he  represents  a more  perfectly
developed  standard  of  general  excellence.  Yes,  and  even
those  nations  nearest  to  us  in  mind  and  sentiment — German
and  Scandinavian — we  regard  on  the  whole  as  not  so
excellent  as  ourselves,  comparing  their  typical  characteristics
with  ours.  Were  this  not  so,  our  energies  would  be  directed
to  becoming  what  they  are.  Without  doing  this,  however,
we  may  well  endeavour  to  pick  out  their  best  qualities  and
add  them  to  ours,  believing  that  our  compound  will  be
superior  to  the  foreign  stock.

“ It  is  the  mark  of  an  independent  nation  that  it  should
feel  thus.  How  far  such  a feeling  is,  in  any  particular  case,
justified,  history  alone  decides.  But  it  is  essential  that
each  claimant  for  the  first  place  should  put  forward  his
whole  energy  to  prove  his  right.  This  is  the  moral  justi-
fication for  international  strife  and  for  war,  and  a great
change  must  come  over  the  world  and  over  men’s  minds
before  there  can  be  any  question  of  everlasting  universal
peace,  or  the  settlement  of  all  international  differences  by
arbitration.  More  especially  must  the  difficulty  caused  by
the  absence  of  a generally  recognised  standard  of  justice
be  felt  in  the  case  of  contact  between  civilized  and  un-
civilized races.  Is  there  any  likelihood  of  the  gulf  between
the  white  and  the  black  man  being  bridged  within  any
period  of  time  that  we  can  foresee  ? Can  there  be  any

iS8


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

doubt  that  the  white  man  must,  and  will,  impose  his
superior  civilization  on  the  coloured  races  ? The  rivalry
of  the  principal  European  countries  in  extending  their
influence  over  other  continents  should  lead  naturally  to  the
evolution  of  the  highest  attainable  type  of  government  of
subject  races  by  the  superior  qualities  of  their  rulers.”1

Here  is  the  undiluted  gospel  of  Imperialism,  the  fact  of
physical  stuggle  between  white  races,  the  fact  of  white
subjugation  of  lower  races,  the  necessity  based  upon  these
facts,  the  utility  based  upon  the  necessity,  and  the  right  or
duty  upon  the  utility.  As  a revelation  of  the  purer  spirit
of  Imperialism  it  is  not  to  be  bettered.  The  Englishman
believes  he  is  a more  excellent  type  than  any  other  man  ;
he  believes  that  he  is  better  able  to  assimilate  any  special
virtues  others  may  have  ; he  believes  that  this  character
gives  him  a right  to  rule  which  no  other  can  possess.  Mr.
Hervey  admits  that  the  patriotic  Frenchman,  the  German,
the  Russian  feels  in  the  same  way  his  sense  of  superiority
and  the  rights  it  confers  on  him ; so  much  the  better  (and
here  he  is  in  line  with  Professor  Pearson),  for  this  cross-
conviction and  these  cross-interests  intensify  the  struggle
of  white  races,  and  ensure  the  survival  and  progressive
fitness  of  the  fittest.

So  long  as  we  regard  this  Imperialism  exclusively  from
the  standpoint  of  the  English,  or  any  other  single  nation,
its  full  rationale  escapes  us.  It  is  essential  to  the  mainten-
ance of  the  struggle  of  nations,  which  is  to  quicken  vigour
and  select  the  fittest  or  most  efficient,  that  each  competitor
shall  be  stimulated  to  put  forth  his  fullest  effort  by  the
same  feelings  regarding  the  superiority,  the  destiny,  the
rights  and  imperial  duties  of  his  country  as  the  English
imperialist  entertains  regarding  England.  And  this  is
just  what  we  seem  to  find.

1 Memoir  of  Hubert  Hervey,  by  Earl  Grey  (Arnold,  1899).

*59


imperialism:  a study


The  Englishman  is  genuinely  confident  in  the  superior
fitness  of  England  for  any  work  she  may  essay  in  the  civiliza-
tion of  the  world.  This  is  the  supreme  principle  of  the
imperialist  statesman,  so  well  expressed  in  Lord  Rosebery’s
description  of  the  British  Empire  as  “ the  greatest  secular
agency  for  good  the  world  has  ever  seen,”  and  in  Mr.
Chamberlain’s  conviction1  that  “ the  Anglo-Saxon  race
is  infallibly  destined  to  be  the  predominant  force  in  the
history  and  civilization  of  the  world.”  Of  the  superior
competence  of  Englishmen  for  all  purposes  of  government,
quite  irrespective  of  climatic,  racial,  or  any  other  conditions,
there  is  no  touch  of  doubt  in  the  average  man.  “ Why,  I
suppose  you  imagine  we  could  undertake  to  govern  France
better  than  Frenchmen  can  govern  her  ? ” I heard  put  as
an  ironical  poser  in  a discussion  on  British  capacity.  The
triumphant  retort,  “ Why,  of  course  I do,”  was  no
rhetorical  paradox,  but  a perfectly  genuine  expression  of
the  real  conviction  of  most  Englishmen.

Now,  the  French  Chauvinist,  the  German  colonialist,
the  Russian  Pan-Slavist,  the  American  expansionist,  enter-
tain the  same  general  conviction,  with  the  same  intensity,
regarding  the  capacity,  the  destiny,  the  rights  of  their  own
nation.  These  feelings  have,  perhaps,  come  more  clearly
into  the  forefront1  of  our  national  consciousness  than  in  the
case  of  any  other  nation,  but  events  are  rapidly  educating
the  same  imperial  aspirations  in  all  our  chief  industrial  and
political  competitors.

“ In  our  own  day  Victor  Hugo  declares  France  ‘ the
saviour  of  nations,’  and  bursts  out,  c Non,  France,  l’univers
a besoin  que  tu  vives ! Je  le  redis,  la  France  est  un  besoin
des  hommes.’  Villari,  echoing  the  illustrious  Gioberti,
claims  for  Italy  the  primacy  among  nations.  The  Kaiser
tells  his  people,  ‘ Der  alte  gute  Gott  has  always  been  on

1 Foreign  and  Colonial  Speeches , p.  6.

160


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


our  side.’  M.  Pobyedonostseff  points  to  the  freedom  of
Russia  from  the  shibboleths  of  a decadent  civilization,  and
looks  to  the  young  and  vigorous  Slavonic  stock  as  the
residuary  legatee  of  the  treasures  and  conquests  of  the  past.
The  Americans  are  not  less  confident  than  in  the  days  of
Martin  Chuzzlewit  that  it  is  their  mission  to  ‘ run  this
globe’”1

Nor  are  these  barren  sentiments ; in  various  parts  of  the
world  they  have  inspired  young  soldiers,  politicians,  and
missionaries  to  a practical  direction  of  the  resources  of
France,  Germany,  Italy,  Russia,  the  United  States  towards
territorial  expansion.

We  are  now  in  a position  to  restate  and  test  the  scientific
basis  of  Imperialism  regarded  as  a world-policy.  The
maintenance  of  a military  and  industrial  struggle  for  life
and  wealth  among  nations  is  desirable  in  order  to  quicken
the  vigour  and  social  efficiency  of  the  several  competitors,
and  so  to  furnish  a natural  process  of  selection,  which  shall
give  an  ever  larger  and  intenser  control  over  the  govern-
ment and  the  economic  exploitation  of  the  world  into  the
hands  of  the  nation  or  nations  representing  the  highest
standard  of  civilization  or  social  efficiency,  and  by  the
elimination  or  subjugation  of  the  inefficient  shall  raise  the
standard  of  the  government  of  humanity.

This  statement  withdraws  the  issue  from  the  purely
national — political,  and  from  the  distinctively  ethical  stand-
points, referring  it  back  to  its  scientific  basis  in  the  laws  or
analogies  of  biology.

Here  we  can  profitably  start  from  a statement  of  Professor
K.  Pearson.  “ History  shows  me  one  way,  and  one  way
only,  in  which  a high  state  of  civilization  has  been  produced,
namely,  the  struggle  of  race  with  race,  and  the  survival  of
the  physically  and  mentally  fitter  race.  If  men  want  to

1 G.  P.  Gooch  in  Tbe  Heart  of  the  Empire , p.  333
l6l


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


know  whether  the  lower  races  of  man  can  evolve  a higher
type,  I fear  the  only  course  is  to  leave  them  to  fight  it  out
among  themselves,  and  even  then  the  struggle  for  existence
between  individual  and  individual,  between  tribe  and  tribe,
may  not  be  supported  by  that  physical  selection  due  to  a
particular  element,  on  which,  probably,  so  much  of  the
Aryans’  success  depended.”

Now,  assuming  that  this  is  a true  account  of  the  evolution
of  civilization  during  the  past,  is  it  essential  that  the  same
methods  of  selection  must  dominate  the  future  ? or  are
there  any  forces  which  have  been  coming  into  play  during
the  later  periods  of  human  history  that  deeply  modify,
suspend,  and  even  reverse  the  operations  of  selective  forces
that  dominate  the  rest  of  nature  ?

In  the  very  work  from  which  I quote,  Professor  Pearson
furnishes  a complete  answer  to  his  own  contention  for  the
necessity  of  this  physical  struggle  between  races.

In  the  last  sentence  of  the  passage  given  above,  he  seems
to  recognize  the  utility  in  lower  races  of  the  physical  struggle
for  life  between  “ individuals  ” in  the  same  tribe.  But
his  general  position  as  a " socialist  **  is  very  different.  In
order  that  a tribe,  a nation,  or  other  society  may  be  able
to  compete  successfully  with  another  society,  the  individual
struggle  for  life  within  the  society  itself  must  be  suspended.
The  conpetitive  vigour,  the  social  efficiency,  of  the  nation
requires  a saving  of  the  friction  of  individual  competition
for  life  or  for  the  means  of  life.  Now  this  is  in  itself  a
reversal  of  the  generally  recognized  law  of  progress  through-
out the  animal  world,  in  which  the  struggle  for  food  and
other  livelihood  is  held  to  be  essential  to  the  progress  of
the  species,  and  this  though  every  species  is  engaged  in
more  or  less  direct  competition  for  food,  etc.,  with  other
species.  Co-operation,  social  solidarity,  is  indeed  recognized
as  an  adjunct  of  progress  in  many  of  the  higher  species,

\6l


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

but  the  struggle  between  individuals  for  a restricted  supply
of  food  or  other  necessaries  is  maintained  as  a leading
instrument  of  progress  by  rejection  of  the  physically  unfit.

Now  Professor  Pearson  justly  recognizes  and  boldly
admits  the  danger  which  attends  the  humanitarianism
that  has  in  large  measure  suspended  the  “ struggle  for
life  ” among  individuals,  and  has  incited  modern  civilized
nations  to  secure  for  all  individuals  born  in  their  midst  the
food,  shelter,  and  other  necessaries  enabling  them  to  grow
to  maturity  and  to  propagate  their  kind.

He  sees  quite  clearly  that  this  mere  suspension  of  the
individual  struggle  for  life  not  only  is  not  essential  to  the
solidarity  and  efficiency  of  the  nation,  but  that  it  impairs
those  virtues  by  burdening  society  with  a horde  of  physical
and  moral  weaklings,  who  would  have  been  eliminated
under  earlier  forms  of  the  struggle  for  life.  He  rightly
enforces  the  doctrine  that  a nation  which  is  reproduced
from  its  bad  stock  more  than  from  its  better  stock  is  doomed
to  deterioration  of  physique  and  morale.  It  is  as  essential
to  the  progress  of  man  as  to  that  of  any  other  animal,  as
essential  in  the  future  as  in  the  past,  that  reproduction
shall  be  from  the  better  stock  and  that  the  worst  stock
shall  be  eliminated.  Humanitarianism  and  the  sense  of
social  solidarity  by  no  means  recognize,  or  even  admit,
that  this  condition  should  be  sacrificed ; they  merely
impose  new  methods  on  the  process  of  selection.

Irrational  nature  selects  wastefully  and  with  the  maximum
of  pain  and  misery,  requiring  innumerable  individuals  to
be  born  in  order  that  they  may  struggle  and  perish.  Rational
humanity  would  economize  and  humanize  the  struggle
by  substituting  a rational,  social  test  of  parenthood  for  the
destruction  of  children  by  starvation,  disease,  or  weakness.

To  prevent  reproduction  from  bad  stock,  however  difficult
and  dangerous  it  may  be,  is  obviously  the  first  duty  of
u 163


imperialism:  a study


an  organized  society,  acting  alike  in  its  own  self-defence
and  for  the  interests  of  its  individual  members.  It  is  not
necessary  for  the  safety  and  progress  of  society  that  “ unfit  ”
children  •'hould  die,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  not  be
born,  and  ultimately  the  society  which  prospers  most  in
the  character  of  its  members  will  be  the  one  which  best
fulfils  this  preventive  duty.

Yet,  when  Professor  Pearson  passes  from  a society  of
individuals  to  the  society  of  nations,  which  we  call  humanity,
he  insists  upon  retaining  the  older,  cruder,  irrational  method
of  securing  progress,  the  primitive  struggle  for  physical
existence.  Why  ? If  it  is  profitable  and  consistent  with
progress  to  put  down  the  primitive  struggle  for  life  among
individuals  with  one  another,  the  family  and  tribal  feuds
which  survive  even  in  fairly  developed  societies,  and  to
enlarge  the  area  of  social  internal  peace  until  it  covers  a
whole  nation,  may  we  not  go  farther  and  seek,  with  hope,
to  substitute  international  peace  and  co-operation,  first
among  the  more  civilized  and  more  nearly  related  nations,
and  finally  throughout  the  complete  society  of  the  human
race  ? If  progress  is  helped  by  substituting  rational  selection
for  the  struggle  for  life  within  small  groups,  and  afterwards
within  the  larger  national  groups,  why  may  we  not  extend
the  same  mode  of  progress  to  a federation  of  European
States,  and  finally  to  a world-federation  ? I am  not  now
concerned  with  the  grave  practical  difficulties  besetting
such  an  achievement,  but  with  the  scientific  theory.

Although  a certain  sort  of  individual  efficiency  is  sacrificed
by  repressing  private  war  within  a tribe  or  nation,  it  is
rightly  judged  that  the  gain  in  tribal  or  national  unity  and
efficiency  outweighs  that  loss.  May  not  a similar  biological
and  rational  economy  be  subserved  by  substituting  govern-
ment for  anarchy  among  nations  ? We  admit  that  a nation
is  strengthened  by  putting  down  internecine  tribal  warfare ;

164


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

what  finality  attaches  to  the  arbitrary  social  group  we  term
a “ nation  ” which  obliges  us  to  reverse  the  economy  appli-
cable to  tribes  when  we  come  to  deal  with  nations  ?

Two  objections  are  raised  against  this  idea  of  inter-
nationalism. One  is  historical  in  its  nature ; it  consists
in  a denial  that  a society  of  nations  does  or  can  exist  at
the  present  time  or  in  any  future  which  concerns  us.  The
physical  and  psychical  relations  which  exist  between  nations,
it  is  urged,  have  no  real  analogy  with  those  existing  between
individuals  or  tribes  within  a nation.  Society  is  dependent
on  a certain  homogeneity  of  character,  interests,  and
sympathies  of  those  who  form  it.  In  the  ancient  world
this  was  seldom  found  of  sufficient  strength  save  among
close  neighbours,  and  the  city-state  was  the  true  social
type  ; the  actual  and  positive  relations  of  these  city-states
with  one  another  were  commonly  those  of  war,  modified  by
transitory  compacts,  which  rarely  led  them  into  any  truly
national  unity.  In  such  a condition  close-welded  co-
operation of  citizens  was  essential  as  a condition  of  civic
survival  and  progress,  and  a struggle  for  life  between  the
several  city-states  was  a means  of  progress  in  accordance
with  the  biological  law.  The  nation-state  stands  now
where  the  city-state  stood  in  ancient  Greece  or  mediaeval
Italy;  there  remains  the  same  historical  and  even  ethical
necessity  to  retain  the  struggle  between  nations  now  as
to  retain  the  inter-civic  struggle  in  earlier  times.

Social  psychologists  attempt  to  fortify  this  position  by
laying  emphasis  upon  the  prime  psychical  condition  of  a
national  life.  The  possible  area  of  a genuine  society,  a
nation,  is  determined  by  the  extension  of  a “ consciousness
of  kind,”  an  “ ethical  like-mindedness.”1  This  may  be
applied  as  a limiting  condition  by  a “ little  Englander  ” or
as  an  expansive  principle  to  justify  imperial  expansion,

1 Professor  Giddings,  Empire  and  Democracy , pp.  io,  51,

165


imperialism:  a study


according  to  the  quantity  and  quality  of  like-mindedness
taken  as  the  basis  of  social  unity  in  a “ nation  ” or  an
“ empire.”  The  most  precise  statement  of  this  doctrine
in  its  application  as  a barrier  to  ethical  and  political  inter-
nationalism is  that  of  Dr.  Bosanquet.  “ The  nation-state
is  the  widest  organization  which  has  the  common  experience
necessary  to  found  a common  life.”*  He  carries  the
finality  of  the  national  type  of  society  so  far  as  virtually  to
repudiate  the  ethical  fact  and  the  utility  of  the  conception
of  humanity.  “ According  to  the  current  ideas  of  our
civilization,  a great  part  of  the  lives  which  are  being  lived
and  have  been  lived  by  mankind  are  not  lives  worth  living,
in  the  sense  of  embodying  qualities  for  which  life  seems
valuable  to  us.  This  being  so,  it  seems  to  follow  hat  the
object  of  our  ethical  idea  of  humanity  is  not  really  mankind
as  a single  community.  Putting  aside  the  impossibilities
arising  from  succession  in  time,  we  see  that  no  such  identical
experience  can  be  pre-supposed  in  all  mankind  as  is
necessary  to  effective  membership  of  a common  society
and  exercise  of  a general  will.”1  Though  a subtle  qualifica-
tion follows,  based  on  the  duty  of  States  to  recognize
humanity,  not  as  a fact  but  as  a type  of  life,  “ and  in  accord-
ance with  it  to  recognize  and  deal  with  the  rights  of  alien
individuals  and  communities,”  the  real  upshot  of  this  line
of  thought  is  to  emphasise  the  ethical  self-sufficiency  of  a
nation  and  to  deny  the  validity  of  any  practical  standard
of  the  conduct  of  nations  towards  one  another,  at  any  rate
so  far  as  the  relations  between  higher  and  lower,  or  eastern
and  western,  nations  are  concerned.

This  view  is  stoutly  supported  by  some  sociologists  and
statesmen  from  the  juridical  standpoint.  There  can,  we
are  told,  be  no  real  “ rights  ” of  nations  because  there
exists  no  “ sanction,”  no  recognized  tribunal  to  define  and

1 The  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State , p.  320.  1 Op.  cit.  p.  329.

166


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


enforce  rights.1  The  legal  rigour  of  this  position  I am
not  greatly  concerned  to  question.  It  may  here  suffice  to
say  that  the  maintenance  under  ordinary  conditions  of
treaty  relations,  international  credit  and  exchange,  a
common  postal,  and  within  narrower  limits,  a common
railway  system,  not  to  mention  the  actual  machinery  of
conventions  and  conferences  for  concerted  international
action,  and  the  whole  unwritten  law  of  war  and  inter-
national courtesies,  embassies,  consulates,  and  the  like — all
these  things  rest  upon  a basis  of  recognition  of  certain
reciprocal  duties,  the  neglect  or  violation  of  which  would  be
punished  by  forfeiture  of  most  favoured  nations*  treatment
in  the  future,  and  by  the  reprobation  and  the  possibly
combined  intervention  of  other  States.

Ill

We  have  here  at  least  a real  beginning  of  effective  inter-
national federation,  with  the  rudiments  of  legal  sanction
for  the  establishment  and  enforcement  of  rights.

The  studied  ignoring  of  those  vital  facts  in  the  more
recent  statecraft,  and  the  reversion,  alike  of  legal  theorists
and  high  politicians  of  the  Bismarck  school,  to  a nationalism
which  emphasises  the  exclusive  rather  than  the  inclusive
aspect  of  patriotism  and  assumes  the  antagonism  of  nations
as  an  all-important  and  a final  fact,  form  the  most  dangerous
and  discreditable  factor  of  modem  politics.  This  conduct
in  politics  we  have  already  in  part  explained  in  our  analysis
of  the  economic  driving  forces  that  exhibit  certain  sectional
interests  and  orders  within  the  nation  usurping  the  national
will  and  enforcing  their  private  advantages,  which  rest  upon
international  antagonism,  to  the  detriment  of  the  national
advantage,  which  is  identical  with  that  of  other  nations.

1 On  this  point  see  the  admirable  chapter  “ International  Rights  ” in  L.  T.
Hobhouse's  Democracy  and  Reaction  (Unwin,  1904).

167


imperialism:  a study

This  obstinate  halt  in  the  evolution  of  such  relations
at  the  limit  of  political  nationality  now  reached  will  be
recognized  as  the  most  difficult  of  all  present  political
phenomena  for  the  future  historian  to  explain.  The
community  of  interests  between  nations  is  so  great,  so
multifarious,  and  so  obvious,  the  waste,  pain,  and  damage  of
conflicts  so  gross  and.  palpable,  that  to  those  who  do  not
understand  the  strong  sectional  control  in  every  modern
State  it  may  well  appear  that  some  natural  barriers,
race,  boundaries,  or  colour  make  any  real  extension  of
“ society  ” outside  the  area  of  nationality  impossible.

But  to  ascribe  finality  to  nationalism  upon  the  ground
that  members  of  different  nations  lack  “ the  common
experience  necessary  to  found  a common  life  ” is  a very
arbitrary  reading  of  modern  history.  Taking  the  most
inward  meaning  of  experience,  which  gives  most  importance
to  the  racial  and  traditional  characters  that  mark  the
divergences  of  nationality,  we  are  obliged  to  admit  that
the  fund  of  experience  common  to  peoples  of  different
nationality  is  growing  with  great  rapidity  under  the
numerous,  swift,  and  accurate  modes  of  intercommunication
which  mark  the  latest  phases  of  civilization.  It  is  surely
true  that  the  dwellers  of  large  towns  in  all  the  most
advanced  European  States,  an  ever-growing  proportion  of
the  total  population,  have,  not  merely  in  the  externals  of
their  lives,  but  in  the  chief  formative  influences  of  their
reading,  their  art,  science,  recreation,  a larger  community
of  experience  than  existed  a century  ago  among  the  more
distant  members  of  any  single  European  nation,  whether
dwelling  in  country  or  in  town.  Direct  intercommunica-
tion of  persons,  goods,  and  information  is  so  widely  extended
and  so  rapidly  advancing  that  this  growth  of  “ the  common
experience  necessary  to  found  a common  life  ” be/ond
the  area  of  nationality  is  surely  the  most  mark-worthy

1 68


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

feature  of  the  age.  Making,  then,  every  due  allowance  for
the  subjective  factors  of  national  character  which  temper
or  transmute  the  same  external  phenomena,  there  surely
exists,  at  any  rate  among  the  more  conscious  and  more
educated  sections  of  the  chief  European  nations,  a degree
of  true  “ like-mindedness,1 ” which  forms  the  psychical
basis  of  some  rudimentary  internationalism  in  the  field  of
politics.  Indeed  it  is  curious  and  instructive  to  observe
that  while  some  of  those  most  insistent  upon  “ like-minded-
ness ” and  “ common  experience,”  as  the  tests  of  a true
social  area,  apply  them  in  defence  of  existing  nationalities
and  in  repudiation  of  attempts  to  absorb  alien  nationalities,
others,  like  Professor  Giddings,  apply  them  in  the  advocacy
of  expansion  and  Imperialism.

Surely  there  is  a third  alternative  to  the  policy  of  national
independence  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  right  of  conquest
by  which  the  more  efficient  nation  absorbs  the  less  efficient
nation  on  the  other,  the  alternative  of  experimental  and
progressive  federation,  which,  proceeding  on  the  line  of
greatest  common  experience,  shall  weave  formal  bonds
of  political  attachment  between  the  most  “ like-minded  ”
nations,  extending  them  to  others  as  common  experience
grows  wider,  until  an  effective  political  federation  is
established,  comprising  the  whole  of  “ the  civilized  world,”
i.e.  all  those  nations  which  have  attained  a considerable  fund
of  that  “ common  experience  ” comprised  under  the  head
of  civilization.

This  idea  does  not  conflict  with  the  preservation  of  what
is  really  essential  and  valuable  in  nationalism,  nor  does  it
imply  a suspension  or  abolition  of  any  form  of  struggle  by
which  the  true  character  of  a nation  may  express  itself,
in  industry,  in  politics,  in  art  or  literature.

If  it  be  objected  that  the  requisite  amount  of  “ like-
mindedness  ” or  u common  experience  ” does  not  exist

169


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


even  among  the  nations  most  subjected  to  modem  assimil-
ative influences,  that  the  forces  of  racial  and  national
antagonism  even  there  preclude  any  truly  effective  union,
I can  only  repeat  that  this  is  a matter  for  experiment,  and
that  the  experiment  has  never  been  tried.  Racial  and
national  antagonisms  have  been  so  fed,  fostered,  and
inflamed,  for  the  class  and  personal  ends  and  interests
which  have  controlled  politics,  that  the  deeper  underlying
sympathies  and  community  of  different  peoples  have
never  been  permitted  free  expression,  much  less  political
assertion.  The  most  potent  and  pervasive  forces  in  the
industrial,  intellectual,  and  moral  life  of  most  European
races,  so  far  as  the  masses  of  the  peoples  are  concerned,  have
so  rapidly  and  closely  assimilated  during  the  last  century
as  of  necessity  to  furnish  a large  common  body  of  thought
and  feeling,  interests  and  aspirations  which  furnish  a
“ soul  ” for  internationalism.

The  main  economic  conditions  affecting  the  working  life
of  the  masses  of  the  peoples,  both  in  town  and  country,
on  the  one  hand,  the  matter  and  methods  of  education
through  the  school,  the  church,  the  press  upon  the  other,
show  features  of  similarity  so  much  stronger  and  more
numerous  than  those  of  difference  as  to  make  it  a safe
assertion  that  th£  “ peoples  ” of  Europe  are  far  closer  akin
in  actual  interests  than  their  governments,  and  that  this
common  bond  is  already  so  strong  as  to  furnish  a solid  and
stable  foundation  for  political  federal  institutions,  if  only
the  obstruction  of  class  governments  could  be  broken  down
and  the  real  will  of  the  peoples  set  in  the  seat  of  authority.
To  take  the  commonest  of  concrete  instances,  it  is  at  least
probable  that  the  body  of  the  workers  in  different  countries
who  fight  and  pay  for  wars  would  refuse  to  fight  and  pay  in
the  future  if  they  were  allowed  to  understand  the  real
nature  of  the  issues  used  to  inflame  them.


170


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


If  this  view  is  correct,  the  mere  facts  that  wars  still  occur
and  that  national  animosities  are  continually  flaring  up
must  not  be  taken  as  proof  that  sufficient  common  sympathy
and  experience  does  not  exist  between  the  different  nations
to  render  impossible  a suspension  of  physical  conflict  and
the  establishment  of  a political  machinery  required  to
maintain  peace.

To  hold  this  position  it  is  not  necessary  to  exaggerate
the  extent  of  this  international  community  of  interests.
If  any  considerable  amount  of  real  community  exists,  it
furnishes  the  spirit  which  should  and  might  inform  a body
of  political  institutions.  Here  is  the  significance  of  the
recent1  Hague  Conference,  alike  in  its  successes  and  its
failure.  Its  success,  the  mere  fact  that  it  was  held  and  the
permanent  nucleus  of  internationalism  it  created,  attests  a
real  and  felt  identity  of  interests  among  different  nations
in  the  maintenance  of  peace  ; its  failure  and  the  open
derision  expressed  by  many  politicians  merely  indicate  the
presence  in  high  places  of  cliques  and  classes  opposed  in
their  interests  and  feelings  to  those  of  the  peoples,  and  the
necessity  of  dethroning  these  enemies  of  the  people  if  the
new  cause  of  internationalism  is  to  advance.  Secure  popular
government,  in  substance  and  in  form,  and  you  secure
internationalism  : retain  class  government,  and  you  retain
military  Imperialism  and  international  conflicts.

IV

In  following  out  the  psychical  argument  against  regarding
nations  as  final  social  areas,  I seem  to  have  wandered
very  far  from  the  biological  basis,  the  alleged  necessity
of  maintaining  conflicts  between  nations  for  purposes  of
“ natural  selection.”  In  reality  I have  come  round  precisely


imperialism:  a study


to  the  point  of  divergence.  Assuming  it  were  possible  to
enthrone  the  will  of  the  peoples  and  so  to  secure  institutions
of  internationalism  with  a suspension  of  war,  would  the
individuality  of  a nation  suffer,  would  it  lose  vigour,  become
less  efficient  and  perish  ? Is  the  maintenance  of  physical
conflict  essential  to  the  “ natural  selection  ” of  nations  ?

Turn  to  the  suspension  of  the  cruder  physical  struggle
which  takes  place  in  the  evolution  of  tribal  or  national
solidarity.  As  such  national  organization  becomes  stronger
and  more  skilful  the  ravages  of  intestine  strife,  starvation,
and  certain  diseases  cease  to  be  selective  instruments,  and
the  kind  of  individual  fitness  which  was  tested  by  them
is  superseded ; the  vast  expenditure  of  individual  energy
formerly  engaged  in  protecting  life  and  in  securing  necessaries
of  life  is  reduced  to  insignificant  dimensions ; but  the  struggle
for  individual  life  is  not  abated,  it  is  simply  shifted  on  to
higher  planes  than  that  of  bare  animal  existence,  nourishment
and  propagation.  Instead  of  struggling  for  these  simpler
vital  ends,  individuals  now  struggle  with  all  the  extra  energy
spared  from  the  earlier  struggles  for  other  ends  of  an  enlarged
and  more  complex  life,  for  comfort  and  wealth,  for  place
and  personal  honour,  for  skill,  knowledge,  character,  and
even  higher  forms  of  self-expression,  and  for  services  to  their
fellow-men,  with  whom  they  have  identified  themselves
in  that  expanded  individuality  we  term  altruism  or  public
spirit.

Individuality  does  not  suffer  but  greatly  gains  by  the
suppression  of  the  lower  struggle  ; there  is  more  energy,
greater  scope  for  its  expression,  a wider  field  of  close
competitors ; and  higher  and  more  varied  forms  of  fitness
are  tested  and  evoked.  It  is  not  even  true  that  the  struggle
ceases  to  be  physical ; the  strain  and  the  support  of  the
higher  forms  of  struggle,  even  in  the  topmost  intellectual
and  moral  planes,  are  largely  physical ; the  health  and

172


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

nervous  energy  which  take  part  in  the  struggles  of  the
law  or  literature  or  on  any  intellectual  arena  are  chief
requisites  if  not  the  supreme  determinant  of  success.  In
all  the  higher  forms  of  struggle  an  elimination  of  the
physically  unfit  is  still  maintained,  though  the  criteria  of
physical  unfitness  are  not  quite  the  same  as  in  the  primitive
human  struggles.  How  arbitrary  are  the  convenient
distinctions  between  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral
qualities  and  defects  is  nowise  better  illustrated  than  in  the
elaborate  methods  which  modern  complex  civilization
evolves  for  the  detection,  degradation,  and  final  extinction
of  bad  stock  whose  “ degeneracy  ” is  attested  not  less  by
physical  than  by  mental  and  moral  stigmata.  The  struggle
for  physical  fitness  never  flags,  but  the  physical  forms  part
of  a higher  and  more  complex  test  of  character  determined
by  a higher  standard  of  social  utility.  The  point  is  this  :
national  government,  or  State  socialism,  using  the  term
in  its  broad  sense,  as  a coercive  and  educative  force,  does
not,  in  so  far  as  it  is  wisely  exercised,  diminish  the  individual
struggle,  repress  individual  vigour,  reduce  the  arena  for  its
display.  It  does  just  the  opposite  ; it  quickens  and  varies
the  struggle ; by  equalising  certain  opportunities  it  keeps  a
fairer  ring,  from  which  chance  or  other  factors  alien  to
personal  fitness  are  excluded  ; it  admits  on  more  equal  terms
a larger  number  of  competitors,  and  so  furnishes  a better
test  of  fitness  and  a more  reliable  selection  of  the  fittest.

Professor  Pearson  rightly  urges  that  truly  enlightened
national  government  will  insist  on  mending  the  slow,  painful,
and  irregular  elimination  of  bad  stock  which  goes  on  through
progressive  degeneracy  by  substituting  some  rational  control
of  parentage,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  preventing  through
public  education,  or  if  necessary  by  law,  the  propagation
of  certain  surely  recognized  unfitnesses.

Does  a nation  thus  firmly  planted  in  rational  self-

173


imperialism:  a study


government,  with  individual  competition  within  its  ranb
conducted  most  keenly  upon  a wide  variety  of  different
fields,  furnishing  the  keenest  incentive  to  the  education  and
display  of  every  kind  of  personal  originality,  really  require  a
maintenance  of  the  crude  form  of  physical  struggle  with
other  nations  in  order  to  maintain  its  character  and  progress  ?
If  individuality  does  not  disappear  with  the  removal  of
the  cruder  struggle  for  life  within  the  nation,  why  should
the  valid  force  of  nationality  disappear  if  a corresponding
change  takes  place  in  the  nature  of  international  conflict  ?

Biology  furnishes  no  reason  for  believing  that  the
competition  among  nations  must  always  remain  a crude
physical  struggle,  and  that  the  substitution  of  “ rational  ” for
“ natural  ” selection  among  individual  members  of  a nation
cannot  be  extended  to  the  selection  of  nations  and  of  races.


V

The  history  of  past  nations  indeed  gives  an  appearance
of  natural  necessity  to  imperial  expansion  and  to  the  military
policy  which  is  its  instrument,  and  many  who  deplore  this
necessity  accept  it.  An  American  writer  in  a brilliant
monograph1  argues  the  perpetual  necessity  of  wars  of
conquest  and  of  the  Imperialism  which  such  wars  express,
as  following  from  “ the  law  of  decreasing  returns.”  A
population  on  a limited  area  of  land  not  only  tends  to  grow
but  actually  grows  faster  than  the  food  supply  that  is
available ; improvement  in  the  arts  of  cultivation  does
not  enable  a people  to  obtain  full  subsistence  for  its  growing
population,  hence  a natural  and  necessary  pressure  for
access  to  new  rich  land,  and  conflicts  with  and  victories
over  neighbours  who  seek  to  hold  their  own,  or  are  even

1 44  War  and  Economics, ” by  Professor  E.  van  Dyke  Robinson,  Political  Science
Quarterly , Dec.  1900.


m


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


actuated  by  the  same  needs  of  territorial  expansion.  Hunger
is  a necessary  spur  to  migration,  and  where  emigrants,
planting  themselves  successfully  upon  new  fertile  lands,
formerly  unoccupied  or  occupied  by  people  whom  they
have  subjugated,  desire  to  retain  the  political  union  with
the  mother  country,  an  unlimited  expansion  of  national
areas  ensues.  Whether  such  expansion  takes  shape  in
genuine  colonization  or  in  what  is  here  properly  distin-
guished as  Imperialism,  involving  centralized  government
and  forcible  control  of  “ inferior  races,”  matters  little  to
this  wide  argument.  The  essence  of  this  policy  is  the
acquisition  of  an  expanding  area  for  food  supply.  A nation
with  growing  population  must  either  send  a constant  flow
of  population  into  other  lands  to  grow  food  for  themselves,
or,  failing  this,  it  must  produce  at  home  an  ever-growing
surplus  of  manufactures  which  evade  the  law  of  decreasing
returns  and  find  markets  for  them,  so  as  to  obtain  payment
in  food  from  foreign  lands,  which,  in  their  turn,  are  thus
forced  more  quickly  to  experience  the  pinch  of  the  same
natural  law.  As  more  nations  pursue  this  course  they
either  realize  directly  the  pressure  of  the  law  driving  them
to  find  new  lands  for  their  surplus  population,  or  they  find
themselves  embroiled  in  an  ever  fiercer  competition  with
rival  manufacturing  nations  seeking  a share  in  an  over-
stocked or  too  slowly  expanding  market  for  manufactures.
Imperialism  lies  in  both  directions,  and  cannot  be  avoided.
“ The  cause  of  war  is  as  permanent  as  hunger  itself,  since
both  spring  from  the  same  source,  the  law  of  diminishing
returns.  So  long  as  that  persists,  war  must  remain,  in  the
last  analysis,  a national  business  undertaking,  designed  to
procure  or  preserve  foreign  markets,  that  is,  the  means  of
continued  growth  and  prosperity.  4 Chacun  doit  grandir
ou  mourir\  991

1 Robinson,  Political  Science  Quarterly , p.  622.

175


imperialism:  a study

Now  the  finality  of  this  alleged  necessity  has  often  been
subjected  to  incidental  criticism,  so  far  as  Great  Britain
is  concerned.  Imperialism,  it  has  been  shown,  is  not  in
fact  necessitated  in  order  to  obtain  by  trade  an  increased
food  supply  which  should  keep  pace  with  the  growth  of
British  population,  nor  has  it  chiefly  been  engaged  in
forwarding  such  trade  ; still  less  is  it  engaged  in  finding
land  upon  which  our  surplus  population  may  subsist  and
multiply.

But  the  validity  of  the  whole  argument  from  natural
history  is  contestable.  As  man  grows  in  civilization,  i.e.
in  the  art  of  applying  reason  to  the  adjustment  of  his
relations  with  his  physical  and  social  environment,  he
obtains  a corresponding  power  to  extricate  himself  from  the
necessity  which  dominates  the  lower  animal  world.  He  can
avoid  the  necessity  of  war  and  expansion  in  two  ways,  by
a progressive  mitigation  of  the  law  of  diminishing  returns
in  agriculture  and  the  extractive  arts,  and  by  limiting  the
rate  of  growth  of  population.  The  tendency  of  rational
civilization  is  to  employ  both  methods.  It  may  fairly  be
maintained  that  reason  is  educated  in  individual  men,  and
is  applied  to  further  a co-operative  policy,  chiefly  by  acts
of  choice  which  are  directed  to  avoid  the  hardships  and
perils  of  war  and  the  expansive  practices.  In  animal  life,
and  in  man  just  so  far  as  he  resembles  other  animals,  war
and  extension  of  territory  form  the  only  means  of  providing
for  a growth  of  population  which  is  determined  by  a mere
interaction  of  sexual  instincts  and  physical  conditions  of
environment.  But  from  very  early  times  this  dominion
of  irrational  forces,  which  finds  direct  expression  in  “ the
law  of  diminishing  returns,”  is  qualified  by  two  sets  of
checks.  On  the  one  hand,  improvements  in  agriculture
and  the  beginnings  of  trade  increase  the  quantity  of  human
life  which  a given  piece  of  land  is  able  to  support ; on  the

176


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

other,  customs  relating  to  marriage  and  maintenance  of
children,  often  of  a degraded  character,  such  as  exposure
or  infanticide,  are  added  to  the  “ natural  ” checks  upon
increase  of  population.  Both  forces  represent  the  crude
beginnings  of  “ reason  ” or  conscious  human  policy  in  its
struggle  to  overcome  the  play  of  the  non-rational  forces
of  nature.  Throughout  history,  so  far  as  it  is  known,  these
rational  forces  have  been  so  slow  and  feeble  in  their  applica-
tion as  only  to  moderate  or  postpone  the  operation  of
“ the  law  of  decreasing  returns.”  But  this  need  not  always
continue  to  be  the  case.  There  is  some  ground  to  believe
that  both  sets  of  rational  checks  may  in  the  future  be  amply
adequate  to  suspend  or  overcome  the  limitations  of  matter
so  far  as  the  food  supply  of  a nation  on  a given  area  is
concerned.  Progress  in  agriculture  even  of  the  most
progressive  nations  of  the  past  was  very  slow : modern
science,  which  has  achieved  such  marvels  in  revolutionizing
the  manufacturing  and  transport  industries,  is  beginning
more  and  more  to  concentrate  its  power  on  agriculture  in
such  wise  that  the  pace  of  progress  in  this  art  may  be  vastly
accelerated.  When  the  sciences  of  agricultural  chemistry
and  botany  are  adequately  reinforced  by  mechanics,  scientific
method  being  duly  guided  and  enriched  by  garnering  the
empirical  wisdom  of  great  agricultural  races  whose  whole
practical  genius  has  been  centred  for  countless  ages  on
minute  cultivation,  like  the  Chinese,  and  when  to  such
improved  knowledge  of  agricultural  arts  is  added  a per-
fection of  co-operative  labour  for  those  processes  where
this  yields  a true  economy,  the  possibilities  of  intensive
cultivation  are  virtually  unlimited.  These  new  conditions
of  a national  policy  of  agriculture  are  themselves  so  important
as  to  make  it  easily  conceivable  that  a nation  keenly  set  upon
utilizing  them  might  for  a long  time  to  come  reverse
the  operation  of  “ the  law  of  diminishing  returns  ” extracting

*77


IMPERIALISM  I A STUDY


from  its  own  proper  lands  an  increasing  stock  of  food  to
meet  its  “ natural  ” growth  of  population  withQut  a
more  than  proportionate  increase  of  labour  engaged  in
agriculture.  In  face  of  recent  experiments  in  intensive
and  scientific  agriculture  and  the  practical  substitution  of
skilled  gardening  for  unskilled  farming,  it  is  impossible  to
deny  that  such  a triumph  of  the  laws  of  mind  over  the  laws
of  matter  is  probable  in  the  most  highly  intelligent  peoples.
There  are  already  manifested  throughout  Gteat  Britain
certain  signs  of  such  a set  towards  agriculture  as  took  place
in  England  during  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century
and  led  them  to  relatively  great  improvements  in  crop
growing  and  stock  breeding.  If  a brief  fashion  and  sportive
interest  on  the  part  of  a small  well-to-do  class  could  then
produce  what  is  not  wrongly  described  as  an  “ agricultural
revolution,”  what  might  not  be  achieved  now  by  vastly
greater  numbers,  capital,  and  intelligence  directed  in  a
public  policy  and  wielding  the  accumulated  knowledge  of
modern  science  ? Many  causes  consciously  contribute
towards  such  a brilliant  revival  of  British  agriculture.  The
growing  sense  of  the  hygienic  and  military  perils  which
attend  a nation  of  town  dwellers,  whose  powers  of  forcible
resistance  are  impaired  in  just  proportion  as  their  depen-
dence upon  precarious  foreign  supplies  of  food  increases,  is
driving  the  issue  of  restoring  a people  to  the  land  into
the  forefront  of  politics.  Modern  scientific  transport,
hitherto  centripetal  in  its  main  economy,  now  seems  to
tend  more  to  become  centrifugal,  while  the  wider  spread
of  culture  does  something,  and  may  do  much,  to  cause  a
moral  and  esthetic  revolt  against  the  life  and  work  of  towns.
A careful  and  drastic  system  of  land  reform  which  should
aim  at  the  net  economy  of  individual  enterprise  and  co-
operative aid  for  agriculture  is  of  course  in  Great  Britain  a
prior  condition  to  all  rapid  and  effective  progress.  All

178


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

these  conditions  are  within  the  power  of  man,  and  belong
to  rational  policy;  once  secured,  it  is  at  least  probable
that  private  incentives  to  gain,  bringing  brain  and  capital
to  bear  upon  the  land,  might  in  this  or  any  other  industrial
country  produce  so  vast  an  increase  of  the  productiveness
of  the  soil  as  to  destroy  completely  all  speciousness  which
history  attaches  to  the  necessity  of  expansion  for  purposes
of  food  supply.

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  discuss  the  part  played
respectively  by  public  policy  and  private  initiative  in  the
development  of  this  economy  of  intensive  cultivation.  It
is  sufficient  to  insist  that  it  furnishes  the  larger  half  of  a
complete  answer  to  the  alleged  natural  necessity  of  expansion.
The  other  half  has  reference  to  a rational  control  of  the
growth  of  population,  which  must  in  any  sound  national
economy  tend  more  and  more  to  replace  the  wasteful  and
cruel  prodigality  which  nature  unchecked  by  reason  here  as
elsewhere  displays.  However  difficult  it  may  be,  rational
control  of  the  quantity  and  quality  of  population  is  quite
essential  to  the  physical  and  moral  progress  of  a species
which  has  striven  successfully  to  suspend  or  stay  the  cruel
and  wasteful  checks  which  disease,  famine,  pestilence,
internecine  warfare,  and  early  savage  usages  employed
in  the  struggle  for  existence.  To  stay  the  “ natural  ”
checks,  and  to  refuse  to  substitute  “ rational  ” checks,
is  to  promote  not  merely  the  unrestricted  growth  of
population,  but  the  survival  and  multiplication  of  the
physically  and  morally  unfit,  the  least  effective  portion  of
the  population,  which  is  able  to  be  born,  reared,  and  to
propagate  its  kind.  How  far  the  operation  of  the  great
public  policy  of  preventing  the  propagation  of  certain
definite  forms  of  unfitness  can  best  be  left  to  the  free  play
of  individual  interest  and  discretion,  illuminated  by  the
growing  knowledge  of  biological  science,  or  how  far  such

N 179


imperialism:  a study


private  determination  must  be  reinforced  by  public  pressure,
is  a matter  with  which  we  need  not  here  concern  ourselves.

But  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  both  quantitative
and  qualitative  checks  upon  the  “ natural  ” growth  of
population  are  already  operative  in  modern  civilized  com-
munities, that  they  are  already  appreciably  affecting  the
general  growth  of  population,  and  that  their  operation  is
likely  to  continue  in  the  future.  With  the  spread  of
biological  and  moral  education  the  methods  of  moderating
the  growth  of  population  may  be  expected  to  come  more
truly  “ rational,”  and  in  particular  the  increasing  economic
liberty  and  enlightenment  of  women  will  contribute  to  the
efficacy  of  this  reasonable  self-restraint.  This  second  check
upon  the  false  necessity  assigned  to  the  law  of  decreasing
returns  is  not  unrelated  to  the  first.  It  is,  in  fact,  its  true
complement.  Taken  by  itself  the  improvement  in  methods
of  obtaining  food  might  not  suffice  to  do  more  than  to
postpone  or  hold  in  check  for  a period  the  law  of  limitation
of  the  food  supply  obtainable  from  a national  area.  But  if
the  same  forces  of  human  reason  which  substitute  intensive
for  extensive  cultivation  of  the  soil  are  at  work  imposing
the  same  substitution  in  the  cultivation  of  the  species,
checking  the  merely  quantitative  increase  in  order  to  secure
a higher  quality  of  individuation,  this  mutual  reinforcement
may  secure  the  triumph  of  rational  policy  over  the  untamed
forces  of  natural  history.

I have  laboured  this  issue  at  some  length  because  it  is
required  in  order  to  bring  home  the  distinctively  rational
character  of  that  choice  of  national  life  against  which
Imperialism  sins  so  fatally.  There  is  no  natural  necessity
for  a civilized  nation  to  expand  the  area  of  its  territory,
in  order  either  to  increase  its  production  of  food  and  other
forms  of  material  wealth,  or  to  find  markets  for  its  increased
products.  Progress,  alike  for  the  nation  and  for  the  indi-

180


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


vidual,  consists  in  substituting  everywhere  an  intensive
or  qualitative  for  an  extensive  or  quantitative  economy.
The  low-skilled  farmer  is  given  to  spread  his  capital  and
labour  over  a large  area  of  poorly  cultivated  land,  wherever
a large  quantity  of  free  or  cheap  land  is  available ; the
skilled,  competent  farmer  obtains  a larger  net  return  by
concentrating  his  productive  power  upon  a smaller  area
scientifically  cultivated,  recognizing  that  the  best  use  of  his
productive  resources  imposes  a limit  on  the  size  of  his  farm.
So  with  the  economy  of  national  resources — the  craving  and
the  necessity  of  expansion  are  signs  of  barbarism ; as
civilization  advances  and  industrial  methods  become  more
highly  skilled  and  better  differentiated,  the  need  for
expansion  of  territory  is  weakened,  the  progress  of  the
nation  concerns  itself  more  and  more  with  the  intensive
or  qualitative  development  of  its  national  resources.  Size
of  territory  can  never  be  eliminated  as  a condition  of  progress,
but  it  becomes  relatively  less  important  with  each  step
from  barbarism  to  civilization,  and  the  idea  of  indefinite
expansion  as  necessary  or  good  is  opposed  to  reason  and
sane  policy.  This  was  recognized  by  the  most  profound  of
ancient  thinkers.  “ There  is,”  wrote  Aristotle,  “ a certain
degree  of  greatness  fit  for  States  as  for  all  other  things,
living  creatures,  plants,  instruments,  for  each  has  its  proper
virtue  and  faculty,  when  neither  very  little  nor  yet  excessively
great.”1  That  the  tendency  has  ever  been  to  excess  is  the
commonplace  of  history.  The  true  greatness  of  nations
has  been  educated  by  the  concentrated  skill  in  the  detailed
development  of  limited  national  resources  which  the
contracted  area  of  the  State  has  developed  in  them.  “ It
is  to  the  burning  vitality  of  compact,  independent  nations,
the  strong  heart  in  the  small  body,  to  Judaea  and  to  Athens,
to  Rome  the  republic,  to  the  free  cities  of  Italy,  Germany,

1 Politics , vii.  4.

181


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


and  Flanders,  to  France,  to  Holland,  and  to  England  the
island,  that  we  owe  the  highest  achievements  in  the  things,
that  make  life  most  worth  living.”1

If  imperial  expansion  were  really  nothing  other  than  a
phase  of  the  natural  history  of  a nation  it  would  be  as  idle
to  protest  against  it  as  to  argue  with  an  earthquake.  But
the  policy  of  civilized  States  differs  from  that  of  uncivilized
States  in  resting  more  largely  upon  deliberate  conscious
choice,  partaking  more  definitely  of  the  character  of  conduct.
The  same  growth  of  collective  reason  which  makes  it
technically  possible  for  a nation  to  subsist  and  prosper  by
substituting  an  intensive  for  an  extensive  economy  of
national  resources  enables  it  by  deliberate  exercise  of  will
to  resist  the  will  of  the  older  “ destiny  ” by  which  nations
attaining  a certain  degree  of  development  were  led  by  a
debilitating  course  of  Imperialism  to  final  collapse.


VI

Thus  met,  the  biological  argument  is  sometimes  turned
on  to  another  track.

“ If  these  nations,”  it  is  argued,  “ are  no  longer  called
upon  to  struggle  for  food,  and  check  their  growth  of
population  while  they  increase  their  control  over  their
material  supplies,  they  will  become  effete  for  purposes  of
physical  struggle ; giving  way  to  an  easy  and  luxurious  life,
they  will  be  attacked  by  lower  ra^es  multiplying  freely  and
maintaining  their  military  vigour,  and  will  succumb  in  the
conflict.”  This  is  the  danger  indicated  by  Mr.  C.  H.
Pearson  in  his  interesting  book  National  Life  and  Character .
The  whole  argument,  however,  rests  on  a series  of  illusions
regarding  actual  facts  and  tendencies.

It  is  not  true  that  the  sole  object  and  result  of  the

1 Imperium  et  Libertas , by  Bernard  Holland,  p.  12.

182


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

stoppage  of  individual  warfare  has  been  to  increase  the
efficiency  of  the  nation  for  the  physical  struggle  with  other
nations.  As  man  has  grown  from  barbarism  towards
civilization,  the  struggle  to  adapt  his  material  and  social
environment  to  purposes  of  better  livelihood  and  life  has
continuously  tended  to  replace  the  physical  struggle  for  the
land  and  food  supply  of  other  nations.  This  is  precisely
the  triumph  of  intensive  over  extensive  cultivation  : it
implies  a growing  disposition  to  put  that  energy  which
formerly  went  to  war  into  the  arts  of  industry,  and  a growing
success  in  the  achievement.  It  is  the  need  of  peaceful,
steady,  orderly  co-operation  for  this  work,  as  the  alternative
to  war,  and  not  the  needs  of  war  itself,  that  furnishes  the
prime  motive  towards  a suspension  of  internecine  struggles,
at  any  rate  in  most  societies.  This  is  a matter  of  pivotal
importance  in  understanding  social  evolution.  If  the
sole  or  main  purpose  of  suspending  individual  conflict  was  to
strengthen  the  purely  military  power  of  a tribe  or  nation,
and  the  further  evolution  of  society  aimed  at  this  sort  of
social  efficiency,  it  might  well  be  attended  by  the  decay  of
individual  freedom  and  initiative,  by  the  sacrifice  of
individuality  to  a national  life.  The  fact  that  this  result
has  not  occurred,  that  in  modern  civilized  nations  there
exist  far  more  individual  freedom,  energy,  and  initiative
than  in  more  primitive  societies,  attests  the  truth  that
military  efficiency  was  not  the  first  and  sole  object  of  social
organization.  In  other  words,  the  tendency  of  growing
civilization  on  the  national  scale  has  been  more  and  more
to  divert  the  struggle  for  life  from  a struggle  with  other
nations  to  a struggle  with  environment,  and  so  to  utilize
the  fruits  of  reason  as  to  divert  a larger  and  larger  proportion
of  energy  to  struggles  for  intellectual,  moral,  and  aesthetic
goods  rather  than  for  goods  which  tax  the  powers  of  the
earth,  and  which,  conforming  to  the  law  of  diminishing

183


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


returns  are  apt  to  bring  them  into  conflict  with  other
nations.

As  nations  advance  towards  civilization  it  becomes
less  needful  for  them  to  contend  with  one  another  for  land
and  food  to  support  their  increasing  numbers,  because
their  increased  control  of  the  industrial  arts  enables  them
to  gain  what  they  want  by  conquering  nature  instead  of
conquering  their  fellow-men.

This  truth  does  not  indeed  disclose  itself  readily  with
its  full  brilliancy  to  the  eyes  of  modern  civilized  peoples,
whose  greed  for  foreign  wealth  and  foreign  lands  seems
as  fruitful  a source  of  war  as  in  more  primitive  times.
The  illusion  that  it  is  necessary  and  advantageous  to  fight
for  new  territory  and  distant  markets,  while  leaving  most
imperfectly  developed  the  land  and  markets  of  their  own
nation,  is  slow  to  be  dispelled.  Its  sources  have  been
already  explored  ; it  has  been  traced  to  the  dominance  of
class  interests  in  national  politics.  Democracy  alone,  if  it
be  attainable,  will  serve  to  fasten  on  the  national  mind
the  full  economy  of  substituting  the  inner  struggle  with  the
natural  environment  for  the  outer  struggle  with  other
nations.

If,  as  seems  possible,  the  civilized  white  nations,  gradually
throwing  off  the  yoke  of  class  governments  whose  interests
make  for  war  and  territorial  expansion,  restrict  their
increase  of  population  by  preventing  reproduction  from  bad
stock,  while  they  devote  their  energies  to  utilizing  their
natural  resources,  the  motives  of  international  conflict
will  wane,  and  the  sympathetic  motives  of  commerce  and
friendly  intercourse  will  maintain  permanent  peace  on  a
basis  of  international  union.

Such  a national  economy  would  not  only  destroy  the  chief
motives  of  war,  it  would  profoundly  modify  the  industrial
struggle  in  which  governments  engage.  Democracies  chiefly

184


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM

concerned  with  developing  their  own  markets  would  not
need  to  spend  men  and  money  in  fighting  for  the  chance
of  inferior  and  less  stable  foreign  markets.  Such  rivalry
as  was  retained  would  be  the  rivalry  not  of  nations  but  of
individual  manufacturers  and  merchants  within  the  nation  ;
the  national  aspect  of  industrial  warfare,  by  tariffs  and
bounties  and  commercial  treaties,  would  disappear.  For
the  dangers  and  hostilities  of  national  commercial  policies
are  due,  as  we  have  seen,  almost  entirely  to  the  usurpation
of  the  authority  and  political  resources  of  the  nations  by
certain  commercial  and  financial  interests.  Depose  these
interests,  and  the  deep,  true,  underlying  harmonies  of
interest  between  peoples,  which  the  prophets  of  Free  Trade
dimly  perceived,  will  manifest  themselves,  and  the  necessity
of  permanent  industrial  warfare  between  nations  will  be
recognized  as  an  illusion  analogous  in  nature  and  origin  to
the  illusion  of  the  biological  necessity  of  war.

The  struggle  for  life  is  indeed  a permanent  factor  in  social
progress,  selection  of  the  physically  fit  is  a necessity,  but  as
men  become  more  rational  they  rationalize  the  struggle,
substituting  preventive  for  destructive  methods  of  selection,
and  raising  the  standard  of  fitness  from  a crudely  physical
robustness  to  one  which  maintains  physical  endurance
as  the  raw  material  of  higher  psychical  activities.  Thus,
while  men  no  longer  fight  for  food,  their  personal  fitness
is  maintained,  the  struggle  and  the  fitness  are  both  raised
to  a higher  plane.  If  this  can  take  place  in  the  struggle
of  individuals,  it  can  take  place  in  the  struggle  of  nations.
The  economy  of  internationalism  is  the  same  as  that  of
nationalism.  As  individuality  does  not  disappear,  but  is
raised  and  quickened  by  good  national  government,  so
nationality  does  not  disappear  but  is  raised  and  quickened
by  internationalism.

War  and  commercial  tariffs  are  the  crudest  and  most

185


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


wasteful  forms  of  national  struggles,  testing  the  lowest
forms  of  national  fitness.  Let  international  government
put  down  wars  and  establish  Free  Trade,  the  truly  vital
struggles  of  national  expression  will  begin.  As  in  the  case
of  individuals,  so  now  of  nations,  the  competition  will  be
keener  upon  the  higher  levels ; nations  having  ceased  to
compete  with  guns  and  tariffs  will  compete  with  feelings  and
ideas.

Whatever  there  is  of  true  original  power  and  interest  in
the  Celtic,  the  Teutonic,  the  various  blends  of  Latin  and
Slavonic  races  can  only  bear  its  fruit  in  times  of  peace.

So  far  as  nationality  or  race  has  any  distinct  character
or  value  for  itself  and  for  the  world,  that  value  and  character
are  expressed  through  work.  Hitherto  the  absorption  of
so  much  national  energy  upon  military,  and  in  later  times
rude  industrial  occupations,  has  checked  the  higher  forms
of  national  self-expression  ; while  the  permanent  hostility
of  international  relations  has  chilled  the  higher  intercourse
and  prevented  what  is  really  great  and  characteristic  in  the
national  achievements  of  art,  literature,  and  thought  from
penetrating*  other  nations,  and  so  by  subtle  educative
processes  laying  the  foundation  of  true  feelings  of  humanity,
based,  as  such  feelings  must  be,  not  on  vague  imaginative
sympathy,  but  upon  common  experience  of  life  and  a
common  understanding.  Peaceful  intercourse  between
nations  is  thus  not  merely  the  condition,  but  the  powerful
stimulus  of  national  energy  and  achievement  in  the  higher
arts  of  life ; for  the  self-appreciation  of  national  pride  can
never  furnish  so  wholesome  an  incentive  or  so  sound  a
criterion  of  human  excellence  as  the  impartial  judgment
of  civilized  humanity,  no  longer  warped  by  baser  patriotic
prejudices,  but  testing  what  is  submitted  to  it  by  the
impartial  universal  standard  of  humanity.  A few  rare
individual  men  of  genius  in  art  and  literature,  a few  more

1 86


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


in  science  and  in  religion,  have  broken  the  barriers  of
nationality  and  have  become  fertilizing,  humanizing  forces
in  other  nations — such  men  as  Jesus,  Buddha,  Mahomet,
Homer,  Shakespeare,  Plato,  Aristotle,  Kant,  Copernicus,
Newton,  Darwin.  A larger  number  of  great  men  have
exercised  some  real  and  abiding  influence  upon  the  little
world  of  science  and  letters  which  in  the  middle  ages  had
attained  an  internationalism  lost  in  the  rise  of  militant
nationalism  and  being  slowly  rediscovered  in  our  own  age.

But  outside  these  conquests  of  personal  genius  the  broad
streams  of  national  influence  and  achievement  which  might
have  fertilized  the  wide  plains  of  the  intellectual  world  have
been  confined  within  their  narrow  national  channels.
Nationalism  as  a restrictive  and  exclusive  force,  fostering
political  and  industrial  enmities  and  keeping  down  the
competition  of  nationalities  and  races  to  the  low  level  of
military  strife,  has  everywhere  checked  the  free  intercourse
requisite  for  the  higher  kinds  of  competition,  the  struggle  of
languages,  literatures,  scientific  theories,  religious,  political,
and  social  institutions,  and  all  the  arts  and  crafts  which  are
the  highest  and  most  important  expressions  of  national  as
of  individual  life.


VII

This  thought  unearths  the  lowest  root  fallacy  of  the  crude
biological  sociology,  the  assumption  that  there  is  one  sort  of
national  efficiency  and  that  it  is  tested  by  a contest  of  military
or  commercial  power.  The  only  meaning  that  can  be  given
to  the  “ social  efficiency  ” of  a nation  identifies  it  with  the
power  it  displays  of  adapting  itself  to  its  physical  environ-
ment and  of  altering  that  environment  to  help  the  adapta-
tion ; the  attainments  in  religion,  law,  politics,  intellectual
life,  industry,  etc.,  are  the  expressions  of  this  social  efficiency.
Bearing  this  in  mind,  it  is  evident  that  for  concrete  purposes

is?


imperialism:  a study


of  comparison  there  are  many  kinds  of  social  efficiency,  and
that  the  notion  that  civilization  is  a single  beaten  track,  upon
which  every  nation  must  march,  and  that  social  efficiency,
or  extent  of  civilization,  can  be  measured  by  the  respective
distances  the  nations  have  gone,  is  a mischievous  delusion.

The  true  social  efficiency,  or  civilization,  of  a nation
only  shows  itself  in  its  more  complex  achievements  and
activities.  The  biologist  who  understood  his  science  would
recognize  that  a true  test  of  the  efficiency  of  nations
demanded  that  the  conflict  of  nations  should  take  place  not
by  the  more  primitive  forms  of  fight  and  the  ruder  weapons
in  which  nations  are  less  differentiated,  but  by  the  higher
forms  of  fight  and  the  more  complex  intellectual  and 'moral
weapons  which  express  the  highest  degree  of  national
differentiation.  This  higher  struggle,  conducted  through
reason,  is  none  the  less  a national  struggle  for  existence,
because  in  it  ideas  and  institutions  which  are  worsted  die,
and  not  human  organisms.  The  civilization  of  the  world
can  only  proceed  upon  the  higher  planes  on  condition  that
this  struggle  of  national  ideals  and  institutions  is  waged
by  a free  field  of  competitors,  and  this  struggle  cannot  be
effectively  maintained  unless  the  lower  military  and  industrial
struggles  cease.

Biology  always  demands  as  a condition  of  progress  the
competition  of  individuals,  but  as  reason  grows  in  the
nation  it  closes  the  ring  and  imposes  laws,  not  to  stop  the
struggle,  but  to  make  it  a fairer  test  of  a fuller  form  of
individual  fitness.  Biology  demands  as  a condition  of
world-progress  that  the  struggle  of  nations  or  races  continue  ;
but  as  the  world  grows  more  rational  it  will  in  similar  fashion
rationalize  the  rules  of  that  ring,  imposing  a fairer  test  of
forms  of  national  fitness.

The  notion  of  the  world  as  a cock-pit  of  nations  in  which
round  after  round  shall  eliminate  feebler  fighters  and  leave

1 88


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


in  the  end  one  nation,  the  most  efficient,  to  lord  it  on  the
dung-hill,  has  no  scientific  validity.  Invoked  to  support
the  claims  of  militant  nationalism,  it  begins  by  ignoring
the  very  nature  and  purposes  of  national  life,  assuming  that
uniformity  of  character  and  environment  which  are  the
negation  of  nationalism.

The  belief  that  with  the  stoppage  of  war,  could  it  be
achieved,  national  vigour  must  decay,  is  based  on  a complete
failure  to  recognize  that  the  lower  form  of  struggle  is
stopped  for  the  express  purpose  and  with  the  necessary
result  that  the  higher  struggle  shall  become  possible.  With
the  cessation  of  war,  whatever  is  really  vital  and  valuable
in  nationality  does  not  perish  ; on  the  contrary,  it  grows  and
thrives  as  it  could  not  do  before,  when  the  national  spirit
out  of  which  it  grows  was  absorbed  in  baser  sorts  of  struggle.

Internationalism  is  no  more  opposed  to  the  true  purposes
of  nationalism  than  socialism  within  the  nation,  rightly
guided,  is  hostile  to  individualism.  The  problem  and  its
solution  are  the  same.  We  socialize  in  order  that  we  may
individuate  ; we  cease  fighting  with  bullets  in  order  to  fight
with  ideas.

All  the  essentials  of  the  biological  struggle  for  life  are
retained,  the  incentive  to  individual  vigour,  the  intensity
of  the  struggle,  the  elimination  of  the  unfit  and  the  survival
of  the  fittest.

The  struggle  has  become  more  rational  in  mode  and
purpose  and  result,  and  reason  is  only  a higher  form  of
nature.


VIII

The  shortsightedness  of  this  school  of  biological  sociologists
is  nowhere  more  strikingly  displayed  than  by  the  exclusive
attention  they  pay  to  the  simpler  form  of  struggle,  the
direct  conflict  of  individuals  and  species,  to  the  exclusion

189


imperialism:  a study


of  the  important  part  played  by  “ crossing  ” as  a means  of
progress  throughout  organic  life.

The  law  of  the  fertility  of  “ crosses  ” as  applied  to
civilization  or  u social  efficiency  ” alike  on  the  physical  and
psychical  plane  requires,  as  a condition  of  effective  operation,
internationalism.  It  is  of  course  true  that  throughout
history  the  “ crossing  ” of  national  types  has  been  largely
achieved  by  means  of  war,  conquest,  and  subjugation.
But  this,  though  subserving  progress  in  the  long  run,  has
been  a most  wasteful,  indirect,  and  unsafe  method,  the
selection  being  determined  by  no  clear  view  of  the  future
or  of  any  higher  purpose  of  social  efficiency.  Just  in
proportion  as  internationalism  promotes  free  intercourse
between  nations  for  higher  purposes  of  peaceful  interest,
will  blending  of  races  by  intermarriage  be  determined  on
grounds  of  affinity  more  fruitful  of  improved  racial  efficiency,
and  new  modifications  of  species  more  numerous  and
more  novel  will  compete  with  one  another  as  factors  in
the  civilization  of  the  world,  raising  the  character  and
intensity  of  the  competition  and  enhancing  the  pace  of
human  progress.

Nay,  we  may  carry  the  biological  analogy  still  farther,
following  the  insistence  of  Professor  Pearson  regarding  the
necessity  of  bringing  direct  social  pressure,  of  public  opinion
or  of  law,  to  prevent  the  fatal  process  of  breeding  from
“ bad  stock.”  If  the  ordinary  processes  of  physical  de-
generacy within  the  nation  do  not  suffice  for  the  elimination
of  bad  stock,  but  must  be  supplemented  by  some  direct
prohibition  of  bad  parentage,  it  might  be  necessary  in  the
interests  of  humanity  that  similar  measures  should  be
enforced  upon  the  larger  scale  by  the  mandates  of  organized
humanity.  As  lower  individuals  within  a society  perish  by
contact  with  a civilization  to  which  they  cannot  properly
assimilate  themselves,  so  “ lower  races  ” in  some  instances

190


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


disappear  by  similar  contact  with  higher  races  whose  diseases
and  physical  vices  prove  too  strong  for  them.  A rational
stirpiculture  in  the  wide  social  interest  might,  however,
require  a repression  of  the  spread  of  degenerate  or  un-
progressive  races,  corresponding  to  the  check  which  a nation
might  place  upon  the  propagation  from  bad  individual  stock.
With  the  other  moral  and  practical  issues  involved  in  such
a proposal  we  need  not  here  concern  ourselves ; regarded
exclusively  from  a biological  standpoint,  that  course  would
seem  to  follow  from  the  application  of  direct  rational
rejection  of  bad  stock  upon  the  smaller  scale  of  national  life.
The  importance  of  this  consideration  rests  upon  the  fact
that  this  rejection  of  unsound  racial  stock  implies  the
existence  of  an  international  political  organization  which
has  put  down  war  and  has  substituted  this  rational  for  the
cruder  national  selection  and  rejection  of  races.

Whether  a nation  or  a society  of  nations  will  ever  proceed
as  far  as  this,  or,  going  farther,  will  attempt  the  fuller  art
of  stirpiculture,  encouraging  useful  “ crosses  ” of  families  or
races,  may  be  matter  of  grave  doubt  ; but  if  the  maintenance
and  improvement  of  the  national  stock  ever  warranted  such
experiments,  we  are  entitled  to  insist  that  logic  would
justify  the  application  of  the  same  rule  in  the  society  of
nations.

Again,  while  it  is  questionable  how  far  the  law  of  the  utility
of  cross-fertilization  is  transferable  from  the  world  of  physical
organisms  to  the  psychical  realm  in  its  literal  bearing,  the
more  general  applicability  cannot  be  disputed.  That
scientific  theories,  religious,  social,  and  political  arts  and
institutions  gain  by  free,  friendly,  vital  intercourse  with
other  theories,  arts  and  institutions,  undergoing  serviceable
accretions,  excretions,  and  modifications,  is  a commonplace
of  intellectual  life.  Whether,  therefore,  we  regard  the
contact  of  ideas  and  feelings  and  the  arts  they  animate  as  a

191


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


direct  struggle  for  existence,  in  which  the  worse  or  falser
perish  and  the  better  and  truer  survive,  or  as  a friendly
intercourse  in  which  each  selects  and  assimilates  something
from  the  others,  internationalism  is  as  essential  to  the
efficiency  of  these  processes  as  nationalism  itself.

It  is  only  when  we  realize  the  true  nature  of  this  spread
and  fertilization  of  ideas,  arts,  and  institutions,  the  riper
fruits  of  the  spirit  of  a nation,  that  we  realize  the  legitimate
as  distinguished  from  the  illegitimate  expansion,  the  valid
significance  of  empire.  When  nations  compete  to  take  one
another’s  lives  or  land  or  trade,  the  dominion  which  the
conqueror  establishes  has  no  element  of  permanence ;
another  turn  of  the  military  or  commercial  tide  wipes  out
the  victory  and  leaves  scarce  a ripple  in  the  sands.  But  the
influence  exerted  through  acts  of  peace  is  more  lasting,
more  penetrating,  and  more  glorious.  Shakespeare,  Byron,
Darwin,  and  Stevenson  have  done  incomparably  more  for
the  influence  of  England  in  the  history  of  the  world  than
all  the  statesmen  and  soldiers  who  have  won  victories  or
annexed  new  provinces.  Macaulay  has  well  said  it,  “ There
is  an  empire  exempt  from  all  natural  sources  of  decay — that
empire  is  the  imperishable  empire  of  our  art  and  our  morals,
our  literature  and  our  law.”  This  antagonism  between
the  extensive  empire  and  the  intensive  empire  is  not
rhetorical,  it  is  grounded  upon  biological  necessities.

The  essential  conditions  of  the  lower  struggle  for  the  life
and  land  and  trade  of  others  preclude  the  higher  and  more
profitable  competition  of  ideas  by  which  the  empire  of  the
national  mind  is  extended  : it  is  not  merely  the  economy
of  energy  which  determines  that  the  national  vigour  cannot
at  the  same  time  engage  effectively  in  both  struggles  ; but,
far  more  important,  the  very  nature  of  the  lower  struggle
drives  each  nationality  to  feed  upon  itself  in  insolent,
exclusive  pride,  inhibiting  the  receptivity  of  other  nations.

192


SCIENTIFIC  DEFENCE  OF  IMPERIALISM


Effective  internationalism  is  the  only  sound  basis  of
competition  and  rational  selection  among  nations.  In  the
cruder  form  of  the  human  struggle,  accident,  or  numbers,
or  some  primitive  force  or  cunning,  may  secure  the  success
of  a people  whose  “ social  efficiency  ” is  of  a low  order,
impermanent  and  unproductive,  while  it  stamps  out  or
checks  the  growth  of  a people  whose  latent  powers  of
achievement  and  capacities  of  progress  arc  far  superior.
Only  in  proportion  as  racial  or  national  selection  is  rationally
guided  and  determined  does  the  world  gain  security  against
such  wastes  and  such  calamities.  An  international  govern-
ment alone  can  furnish  adequate  protection  to  weak  but
valuable  nationalities,  and  can  check  the  insolent  brutality
of  powerful  aggressors,  preserving  that  equality  of  oppo-
tunities  for  national  self-expression  which  is  as  essential  to
the  commonwealth  of  nations  as  to  the  welfare  of  the  several
nations.

Only  by  raising  the  crude,  fragmentary,  informal,  often
insincere  beginning  of  international  government  into  a
stronger,  more  coherent,  and  more  complex  authority  can
the  struggle  for  life  proceed  upon  the  highest  arena  of
competition,  selecting  the  finest  forms  of  social  efficiency.

One  further  objection  to  the  final  efficacy  of  a federation
of  civilized  nations  demands  consideration.  Suppose  a
federal  government  of  Western  nations  and  their  colonial
offspring  to  be  possible  in  such  wise  that  internal  conflicts
were  precluded,  this  peace  of  Christendom  would  be
constantly  imperilled  by  the  “ lower  races,”  black  and
yellow,  who,  adopting  the  arms  and  military  tactics  now
discarded  by  the  “ civilized  races,”  would  overwhelm  them
in  barbarian  incursions,  even  as  the  ruder  European  and
Asiatic  races  overwhelmed  the  Roman  Empire.  We  cannot
get  the  whole  world  to  the  level  of  civilization  which  will
admit  it  into  the  alliance ; the  Powers  outside  will  be  a

193


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


constant  menace,  and  if  the  main  purpose  of  federation  is  to
eliminate  militarism  from  the  economy  of  national  life,  the
attainment  of  this  purpose  will  render  effective  resistance  to
such  invaders  no  longer  possible.  This  has  been  the  universal
fate  of  Empires  in  the  past ; what  talisman  could  this  latest
federal  Empire  possess  enabling  it  to  escape  ? To  this
objection  we  may  make  this  preliminary  answer.  Two
factors  in  the  older  Empires  have  primarily  contributed  to
weaken  their  powers  of  resistance  against  outside  “ bar-
barians,” and  to  strengthen  and  stimulate  the  zeal  of  the
invaders.  There  is  first  the  habit  of  economic  parasitism,
by  which  the  ruling  State  has  used  its  provinces,  colonies,
and  dependencies  in  order  to  enrich  its  ruling  class  and  to
bribe  its  lower  classes  into  acquiescence.  This  bleeding
of  dependencies,  while  it  enfeebles  and  atrophies  the  energy
of  the  imperial  people,  irritates  and  eventually  rouses  to
rebellion  the  more  vigorous  and  less  tractable  of  the  subject
races ; each  repression  of  rebellion  rankles  in  the  blood,
and  gradually  a force  of  gathering  discontent  is  roused
which  turns  against  the  governing  Power.

The  second  factor,  related  to  the  first,  consists  in  that
form  of  “ parasitism  ” known  as  employment  of  mercenary
forces.  This  is  the  most  fatal  symptom  of  imperial
infatuation,  whereby  the  oppressor  at  once  deprives  himself
of  the  habit  and  instruments  of  effective  self-protection  and
hands  them  over  to  the  most  capable  and  energetic  of  his
enemies.

This  fatal  conjunction  of  folly  and  vice  has  always
contributed  to  bring  about  the  downfall  of  Empires  in
the  past.  Will  it  prove  fatal  to  a federation  of  Western
States  ?

Obviously  it  will,  if  the  strength  of  their  combination
is  used  for  the  same  parasitic  purposes,  and  the  white  races,
discarding  labour  in  its  more  arduous  forms,  live  as  a sort

*94


Scientific  defence  of  imperialism

of  world-aristocracy  by  the  exploitation  of  “ lower  races,”
while  they  hand  over  the  policing  of  the  world  more  and
more  to  members  of  these  same  races.  These  dangers  would
certainly  arise  if  a federation  of  European  States  were  simply
a variant  of  the  older  Empires,  using  a pax  Europ&a  for
similar  purposes  and  seeking  to  maintain  it  by  the  same
methods  as  those  employed  under  the  so-called  pax  Romana .
The  issue  is  a great  one,  furnishing,  in  fact,  the  supreme  test
of  modern  civilization.

Is  it  possible  for  a federation  of  civilized  States  to  maintain
the  force  required  to  keep  order  in  the  world  without  abusing
her  power  by  political  and  economic  parasitism  ?


O


*95


CHAPTER  III


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS

I

ANALYSIS  of  the  actual  course  of  modern  Imperialism
has  laid  bare  the  combination  of  economic  and
political  forces  which  fashions  it.  These  forces  are  traced
to  their  sources  in  the  selfish  interests  of  certain  industrial,
financial,  and  professional  classes,  seeking  private  advantages
out  of  a policy  of  imperial  expansion,  and  using  this  same
policy  to  protect  them  in  their  economic,  political,  and
social  privileges  against  the  pressure  of  democracy.  It
remains  to  answer  the  question,  “ Why  does  Imperialism
escape  general  recognition  for  the  narrow,  sordid  thing
it  is  ? ” Each  nation,  as  it  watches  from  outside  the
Imperialism  of  its  neighbours,  is  not  deceived ; the  selfish
interests  of  political  and  commercial  classes  are  seen  plainly
paramount  in  the  direction  of  the  policy.  So  every  other
European  nation  recognizes  the  true  outlines  of  British
Imperialism  and  charges  us  with  hypocrisy  in  feigning
blindness.  This  charge  is  false;  no  nation  sees  its  own
shortcomings;  the  charge  of  hypocrisy  is  seldom  justly
brought  against  an  individual,  against  a nation  never.
Frenchmen  and  Germans  believe  that  our  zeal  in  promoting
foreign  missions,  putting  down  slavery,  and  in  spreading
the  arts  of  civilization  is  a false  disguise  conveniently  assumed
to  cover  naked  national  self-assertion.  The  actual  case  is
somewhat  different.

There  exists  in  a considerable  though  not  a large  pro-

196


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS

portion  of  the  British  nation  a genuine  desire  to  spread
Christianity  among  the  heathen,  to  diminish  the  cruelty
and  other  sufferings  which  they  believe  exist  in  countries
less  fortunate  than  their  own,  and  to  do  good  work  about
the  world  in  the  cause  of  humanity.  Most  of  the  churches
contain  a small  body  of  men  and  women  deeply,  even
passionately,  interested  in  such  work,  and  a much  larger
number  whose  sympathy,  though  weaker,  is  quite  genuine.
Ill-trained  for  the  most  part  in  psychology  and  history,
these  people  believe  that  religion  and  other  arts  of  civiliza-
tion are  portable  commodities  which  it  is  our  duty  to  convey
to  the  backward  nations,  and  that  a certain  amount  of
compulsion  L justified  iti  pressing  their  benefits  upon  people
too  ignorant  at  once  to  recognize  them.

Is  it  surprising  that  the  selfish  forces  which  direct
Imperialism  should  utilize  the  protective  colours  of  these
disinterested  movements  ? Imperialist  politicians,  soldiers,
or  company  directors,  who  push  a forward  policy  by
portraying  the  cruelties  of  the  African  slave  raids  or  the
infamous  tyranny  of  a Prempeh  or  a Theebaw,  or  who
open  out  a new  field  for  missionary  enterprise  in  China  or
the  Soudan,  do  not  deliberately  and  consciously  work  up
these  motives  in  order  to  incite  British  public.  They
simply  and  instinctively  attach  to  themselves  any  strong,
genuine  elevated  feeling  which  is  of  service,  fan  it  and
feed  it  until  it  assumes  fervour,  and  utilize  it  for  their
ends.  The  politician  always,  the  business  man  not  seldom,
believes  that  high  motives  qualify  the  political  or  financial
benefits  he  gets : it  is  certain  that  Lord  Salisbury  really
believed  that  the  South  African  war,  for  which  his  Govern-
ment was  responsible,  had  been  undertaken  for  the  benefit
of  the  people  of  South  Africa,  and  would  result  in  increased
liberty  and  happiness  ; it  is  quite  likely  that  Earl  Grey
thought  that  the  Chartered  Company  which  he  directed

*97


IMPERIALISM  I A STUDY


was  animated  by  a desire  to  improve  the  material  and
moral  condition  of  the  natives  of  Rhodesia,  and  that  it  was
attaining  this  object.

So  Leopold,  King  of  the  Belgians,  claimed  for  his
government  of  the  Congo — “ Our  only  programme  is  that
of  the  moral  and  material  regeneration  of  the  country.”
It  is  difficult  to  set  any  limit  upon  the  capacity  of  men  to
deceive  themselves  as  to  the  relative  strength  and  worth
of  the  motives  which  affect  them  : politicians,  in  particular,
acquire  so  strong  a habit  of  setting  their  projects  in  the
most  favourable  light  that  they  soon  convince  themselves
that  the  finest  result  which  they  think  may  conceivably
accrue  from  any  policy  is  the  actual  motive  of  that  policy.
As  for  the  public,  it  is  only  natural  that  it  should  be
deceived.  All  the  purer  and  more  elevated  adjuncts  of
Imperialism  are  kept  to  the  fore  by  religious  and  philan-
thropic agencies  : patriotism  appeals  to  the  general  lust
of  power  within  a people  by  suggestions  of  nobler  uses,
adopting  the  forms  of  self-sacrifice  to  cover  domination
and  the  love  of  adventure.  So  Christianity  becomes
“ imperialist  ” to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  a M going
out  to  all  the  world  to  preach  the  gospel  ” ; trade  becomes
" imperialist  ” in  the  eyes  of  merchants  seeking  a world
market.

It  is  precisely  in  this  falsification  of  the  real  import  of
motives  that  the  gravest  vice  and  the  most  signal  peril  of
Imperialism  reside.  When,  out  of  a medley  of  mixed
motives,  the  least  potent  is  selected  for  public  prominence
because  it  is  the  most  presentable,  when  issues  of  a policy
which  was  not  present  at  all  to  the  minds  of  those  who
formed  this  policy  are  treated  as  chief  causes,  the  moral
currency  of  the  nation  is  debased.  The  whole  policy  of
Imperialism  is  riddled  with  this  deception.  Although  no
candid  student  of  history  will  maintain  for  a moment  that

198


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


the  entrance  of  British  power  into  India,  and  the  chief  steps
leading  to  the  present  British  Empire  there,  were  motived
by  considerations  other  than  our  own  political  and  com-
mercial aggrandisement,  nothing  is  more  common  than  to
hear  the  gains  which  it  is  alleged  the  natives  of  the  country
have  received  from  British  rule  assigned  as  the  moral
justification  of  our  Indian  Empire.  The  case  of  Egypt
is  a still  more  striking  one.  Though  the  reasons  openly
assigned  for  the  British  occupation  of  Egypt  were  military
and  financial  ones  affecting  our  own  interests,  it  is  now
commonly  maintained  that  we  went  there  in  order  to
bestow  the  benefits  which  Egyptians  have  received  from
our  sway,  and  that  it  would  be  positively  wicked  of  us
to  keep  the  pledge  we  gave  to  withdraw  within  a short
term  of  years  from  the  country.  When  the  ordinary
Englishman  reads  how  “ at  no  previous  period  of  his
history  has  the  fellah  lived  under  a Government  so  careful
to  promote  his  interests  or  to  preserve  his  rights,”1  he
instinctively  exclaims,  “ Yes,  that  is  what  we  went  to
Egypt  for,”  though,  in  point  of  fact,  the  play  of  “ Imperial-
ism ” which  carried  us  there  was  determined  by  quite  other
considerations.  Even  if  one  supposes  that  the  visible
misgovernment  of  Egypt,  in  its  bearing  on  the  life  of  the
inhabitants,  did  impart  some  unselfish  element  to  our
conduct,  no  one  would  suggest  that  as  an  operative  force
in  the  direction  of  our  imperial  policy  such  motive  has  ever
determined  our  actions.2  Not  even  the  most  flamboyant

1 England  in  Egypt , p.  97.

* How  far  the  mystification  of  motives  can  carry  a trained  thinker  upon  politics
may  be  illustrated  by  the  astonishing  argument  of  Professor  Giddings,  who,  in
discussing  44  the  consent  of  the  governed  M as  a condition  of  government,  argues
that 41  if  a barbarous  people  is  compelled  to  accept  the  authority  of  a state  more
advanced  in  civilization,  the  test  of  the  rightfulness  or  wr9ngfulness  of  this
imposition  of  authority  is  to  be  found,  not  at  all  in  any  assent  or  resistance  at  the
moment  when  the  government  begins,  but  only  in  the  degree  of  probability  that,
after  full  experience  of  what  the  government  can  do  to  raise  the  subject  population
to  a higher  plane  of  life,  a free  and  rational  consent  will  be  given  by  those  who  have

199


imperialism:  a study


Imperialist  contends  that  England  is  a knight-errant,  every-
where in  search  of  a quest  to  deliver  oppressed  peoples  from
oppressive  governments,  regardless  of  her  own  interests
and  perils.  Though  perhaps  not  so  inefficient,  the  Russian
tyranny  was  quite  as  oppressive  and  more  injurious  to  the
cause  of  civilization  than  the  government  of  the  Khedive,
but  no  one  proposed  that  we  should  coerce  Russia,  or  rescue
Finland  from  her  clutches.  The  case  of  Armenia,  again,
attests  the  utter  feebleness  of  the  higher  motives.  Both
the  Government  and  the  people  of  Great  Britain  were
thoroughly  convinced  of  the  atrocious  cruelties  of  Turkey,
public  opinion  was  well  informed  and  thoroughly  incensed.
Great  Britain  was  expressly  pledged  by  the  Cyprus  Conven-
tion to  protect  Armenia  ; but  the  “ cause  of  humanity  ”
and  the  " mission  of  civilization  99  were  powerless  either  for
interference  or  for  effective  protest.

Aggressive  Imperialism,  as  our  investigation  has  shown,
is  virtually  confined  to  the  coercion  by  stronger  or  better-
armed  nations  of  nations  which  are,  or  seem  to  be,  weaker
and  incapable  of  effective  resistance ; everywhere  some
definite  economic  or  political  gain  is  sought  by  the  imperial
aggressor.  The  chivalrous  spirit  of  Imperialism  leads
neither  Great  Britain  nor  any  other  Western  nation  to  assail
a powerful  State,  however  tyrannous,  or  to  assist  a weak
State  reputed  to  be  poor.

The  blending  of  strong  interested  with  weak  disinterested
forces  is  indeed  characteristic  of  the  age.  It  is  the  homage
which  Imperialism  pays  to  humanity.  But  just  as  the

come  to  understand  all  that  has  been  done  ” ( Empire  and  Democracy , p.  265).
Professor  Giddings  does  not  seem  to  recognize  that  the  entire  weight  of  the
ethical  validity  of  this  curious  doctrine  of  retrospective  consent  is  thrown  upon
the  act  of  judging  the  degree  of  probability  that  a free  and  rational  consent  torn  be
fiven,  that  his  doctrine  furnishes  no  sort  of  security  for  a competent,  unbiassed
judgment,  and  that,  in  point  of  fact,  it  endows  any  nation  with  the  right  to
seize  and  administer  the  territory  of  any  other  nation  on  the  ground  of  a self-
ascribed  superiority  and  self-imputed  qualifications  for  the  work  of  civilization.


200


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


mixture  known  as  “ philanthropy  and  5 per  cent.”  is  dis-
trusted in  the  ordinary  business  world,  so  in  the  larger
policy  of  nations  the  same  combination  is  by  right  suspect.
When  business  is  harnessed  with  benevolence  the  former  is
commonly  allowed  to  determine  the  direction  and  to  set
the  pace.  Doubtless  it  says  something  for  the  moral  sensi-
bility of  a nation  that  a gainful  course  is  rendered  more
attractive  by  a tincture  of  disinterestedness.  But  the
theory  and  the  practice  in  modern  history  often  border  so
closely  on  hypocrisy  that  we  cannot  feel  surprise  that
unfriendly  foreigners  apply  the  term  to  them.  What,  for
example,  can  we  say  of  the  following  frank  description
of  Imperialism  by  Sir  George  now  Lord  Baden-Powell  ?
“ The  ultimate  unit,  the  taxpayer — whether  home  or  colonial
— looks  for  two  groups  of  results  as  his  reward.  On  the
one  hand,  he  hopes  to  see  Christianity  and  civilization  pro
tanto  extended  ; and,  on  the  other,  to  see  some  compensating
development  of  industry  and  trade.  Unless  he,  or  ‘ his
servants  the  Government,’  secure  either  or  both  these
results,  the  question  must  be  plainly  asked,  Has  he  the
right,  and  is  he  right,  to  wage  such  wars  ? m

What  is  the  mode  of  equating  the  two  groups  of  results  ?
how  much  Christianity  and  civilization  balance  how  much
industry  and  trade  ? are  curious  questions  which  seem  to
need  an  answer.  Is  not  the  ultimate  unit  in  his  capacity
of  taxpayer  liable  to  lay  more  stress  upon  the  asset  which
admits  of  monetary  measurement,  and  to  undervalue  the
one  that  evades  arithmetic  ?

“ To  combine  the  commercial  with  the  imaginative  ”
was  the  aim  which  Mr.  Rhodes  ascribed  to  himself  as  the
key  of  his  policy.  The  conjunction  is  commonly  described
by  the  word  “ speculation,”  a word  whose  meaning  becomes
more  sinister  when  politics  and  private  business  are  so
1 Addendum  to  7 be  Downfall  of  Premptb.

201


imperialism:  a study

inextricably  interwoven  as  they  were  in  the  career  of  Mr.
Rhodes,  who  used  the  legislature  of  Cape  Colony  to  support
and  strengthen  the  diamond  monopoly  of  De  Beers,  while
from  De  Beers  he  financed  the  Raid,  debauched  the  con-
stituencies of  Cape  Colony,  and  bought  the  public  press,
in  order  to  engineer  the  war,  which  was  to  win  him  full
possession  of  his  great  “ thought  ” the  North.1

II

It  may  safely  be  asserted  that,  wherever  “ the  com-
mercial ” is  combined  with  “ the  imaginative  ” in  any
shape  or  sort,  the  latter  is  exploited  by  the  former.  >There
is  a brand  of  “ Christian  Imperialist  ” much  commended
in  certain  quarters,  the  “ industrial  missionary,”  who  is
designed  to  float  Christianity  upon  an  ocean  of  profitable
business,  inculcating  theological  dogmas  in  the  intervals
of  teaching  the  material  arts  and  crafts.  “ To  the  sceptical
Chinese  the  interest  manifested  by  a missionary  in  business
affairs  would  go  far  towards  dispelling  the  suspicions  which
now  attach  to  the  presence  in  their  midst  of  men  whose
motives  they  are  unable  to  appreciate,  and  therefore  con-
demn as  unholy.”  “ Immense  services  might  be  rendered
to  our  commercial  interests  if  only  the  members  of  the
various  missions  in  China  would  co-operate  with  our  Consuls
in  the  exploitation  of  the  country,  and  the  introduction
of  commercial  as  well  as  of  purely  theological  ideas  to  the
Chinese  intelligence.”1  This  revelation  of  the  mercantile
uses  of  Christianity  by  a British  Consul  leaves  little  to
be  desired  in  point  of  frankness.  Its  full  significance  is,
however,  only  perceived  when  it  is  reinformed  by  the  naive
confession  of  Lord  Hugh  Cecil.  “ A great  many  people

1 “ The  North  it  my  thought  ” ( Cecil  Rhodes  : His  Political  Lift  and  Speeches ,
p.  613.).

• Passages  from  a recent  report  of  the  British  Coastal  at  Canton.

202


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


were  most  anxious  to  go  with  their  whole  hearts  into
what  might  be  called  the  imperial  movement  of  the  da y,
but  had,  as  it  were,  a certain  uneasiness  of  conscience
whether,  after  all,  this  movement  was  quite  as  unpolluted
by  earthly  considerations  as  they  would  desire  it  to  be.
He  thought  that  by  making  prominent  to  our  own  minds
the  importance  of  missionary  work  we  should  to  some  extent
sanctify  the  spirit  of  Imperialism.”1

We  are  well  aware  that  most  British  missionaries  are  quite
untainted  by  admixture  of  political  and  commercial
motives,  and  that  they  set  about  their  work  in  a single  spirit
of  self-sacrifice,  eager  to  save  the  souls  of  the  heathen,  and
not  a whit  concerned  to  push  British  trade  or  “ sanctify  the
spirit  of  Imperialism.”  Indeed,  it  is  quite  evident  that,
just  in  proportion  as  the  suspicions  of  worldly  motives
appear  in  missionary  work,  so  the  genuinely  spiritual  influence
evaporates.  The  whole  history  of  missionary  work  in  China
is  one  long  commentary  on  this  text.  The  early  Catholic
missionaries,  relying  on  the  authority  of  their  holy  lives
and  teaching,  won  not  only  security,  but  wide  influence,
both  among  the  masses  and  in  the  governing  circles,
introducing  not  only  Christianity,  but  the  elements  of
Western  science.  Though  they  made  no  large  numbers
of  converts,  they  constituted  a powerful  factor  in  the
civilization  of  the  great  Eastern  Empire.  But  the  intro-
duction in  the  nineteenth  century  of  national  and  sectarian
competition  in  missionary  enterprise,  each  mission  using
freely  the  diplomatic  and  even  the  military  resources  of  some
European  State  for  its  defence  or  propagation,  has  inhibited
the  play  of  spiritual  forces,  generating  suspicions  which,
only  too  well  grounded,  have  changed  the  early  receptiveness
into  a temper  of  fanatical  hostility.

1 An  address  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the
Got  pci,  May  4,  1900.


203


imperialism:  a study


" It  must  be  very  difficult,”  writes  an  educated  China-
man, “ for  the  mandarins  to  dissociate  the  missionaries
from  the  secular  power,  whose  gunboats  seem  ever  ready
to  appear  on  behalf  of  their  respective  Governments.  . . .
The  Chinese  have  watched  with  much  concern  the  sequence
of  events — first  the  missionary,  then  the  Consul,  and  at
last  the  invading  army.  They  had  scarcely  forgotten  the
loss  of  Annam  in  this  way  when  the  German  action  in
Shan-tung  created  a profound  sensation  amongst  all  classes
of  the  literati.”  “ We  cannot  wonder  that  the  Chinese
officials  should  hate  the  missionaries.  Their  Church  is
an  imperium  in  imperio , propagating  a strange  faith  and
alienating  the  people  from  that  of  their  ancestors.  The
missionaries  are  not  amenable  to  Chinese  laws,  and  in
some  cases  have  acted  in  a high-handed  manner  in  the
protection  of  their  converts.  In  this  lies  one  of  the  secrets
of  the  mysterious  hatred  entertained  against  ‘the* friends
of  China  * as  the  missionaries  call  themselves.”1

How  injurious  to  the  cause  “ whose  kingdom  is  not
of  this  earth  ” is  this  alliance  with  politics  and  armaments
might  appear  too  obvious  for  discussion.  Yet  it  is  quite
evident  that  sincere  men  are  prepared  to  support  the  use
of  political  and  military  force  in  order  to  open  fields  for
missionary  enterprise,  and  that  the  missionary,  who  is  by
turns  trader,  soldier,  and  politician,  seems  a most  desirable
instrument  of  civilization.

How  close  in  motive  and  in  conduct  this  combination  really
is  may  be  thus  illustrated  from  the  history  of  the  Soudan.

“ Detachments  of  officers  and  men  from  every  regiment,
British  and  Egyptian,  were  conveyed  across  the  Nile  in
the  gunboats  to  take  part  in  the  Gordon  memorial  service,
and  to  witness  the  hoisting  of  the  British  flag  on  the  ruins

1 The  Chinese  Crisis  from  Within , by  Wen  Ching,  pp.  10,  12,  14  (Grant
Richards).


204


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


of  Khartoum.  . . . Surrounded  by  the  soldiers  he  had
directed  with  terrible  and  glorious  effect,  the  successful
general  ordered  the  flags  to  be  hoisted.  . . . The  officers
saluted,  the  men  presented  arms,  and  the  band  played  the
Egyptian  National  Anthem  and  our  own.  Then  the  Sirdar
called  for  three  cheers  for  Her  Majesty.  . . . The  memorial
service  followed,  and  the  solemn  words  of  the  English
Prayer  Book  were  read  in  that  distant  garden.  . . . The
bands  played  their  dirge  and  Gordon’s  favourite  hymn,
‘ Abide  with  Me  ’ ; a gunboat  on  the  river  crashed  out
the  salute.  . . . The  Highlanders  played  a long  lament,
and  thus  the  ceremony  was  duly  fulfilled.  Nine  thousand
of  those  who  would  have  prevented  it  lay  dead  on  the
plain  of  Omdurman.  Other  thousands  were  scattered
in  the  wilderness,  or  crawled  wounded  to  the  river  for
water.”1  While  the  writer  of  this  passage  omits  the  final
touch,  the  deliberate  ^hooting  of  wounded  crawlers  by
troops  under  British  commanders,  the  picture  is  profoundly
suggestive,  with  its  strange  amalgam  of  the  British  flag,
“ Abide  with  Me,”  and  the  avenging  of  Gordon.

Yet  it  is  evident  that  those  who  ascend  to  the  misty
heights  of  Imperialism  are  able  to  unite  these  diverse
jarring  factors  in  “ a higher  synthesis,”  and  while  deploring,
often  in  earnest,  the  necessity  of  the  maxim  and  the  gun-
boat, find  a glorious  justification  in  the  higher  ends  of  a
civilization  promoted  by  such  means.  The  Western  nations
are,  according  to  this  gospel,  rapidly  realizing  a beneficent
control  of  the  earth  which  will,  in  the  near  future,  secure
general  peace  and  the  industrial,  scientific,  and  moral
supremacy  of  Western  arts.

Fly,  happy,  happy  sails,  and  bear  the  Press,

Fly,  happy  with  the  mission  of  the  Cross,

Knit  land  to  land,  and  blowing  heavenward,

Enrich  the  markets  of  the  golden  year.

1 The  River  War>  by  Winston  Churchill,  vol.  ii,  pp.  204-206.

205


imperialism:  a study

This  is  the  benevolent  theory.  Let  Sir  Charles  Dilke’s
estimate  of  our  acquisitions  in  tropical  Africa . serve  for
commentary.

“ If  we  cannot  make  the  most  fertile  of  the  West  India
Islands  pay,  how  can  we  expect  to  make  countries  which  are
far  less  healthy  and  less  fertile  in  the  very  heart  of  Africa,
return  a profit  ? Our  people  have  been  interested  in  Africa
through  their  traditional  desire  to  suppress  the  evils  of  the
slave  trade,  and  to  pay  conscience  money  in  these  days  for
the  sins,  in  connexion  with  slavery,  of  their  predecessors  ;
but  it  is  probable  that  we  have  done  more  harm  by  pro-
moting the  partition  of  Africa  and  the  creation,  in  the  name
of  liberty,  of  such  governments  as  that  of  the  Congo  Free
State  than  the  harm  which  our  grandfathers  did  to  Africa,
by  their  participation  in  African  slavery  and  the  slave
trade.”1


Ill

The  psychical  problem  which  confronts  us  in  the
advocates  of  the  mission  of  Imperialism  is  certainly  no
case  of  hypocrisy,  or  of  deliberate  conscious  simulation  of
false  motives.  It  is  partly  the  dupery  of  imperfectly
realized  ideas,  partly  a case  of  psychical  departmentalism.
Imperialism  has  been  floated  on  a sea  of  vague,  shifty,  well-
sounding phrases  which  are  seldom  tested  by  close  contact
with  fact.  “ It  is  not  in  size  and  variety  alone  that  English
dominion  is  unique.  Its  crowning  glory  is  its  freedom,”*
writes  Mr.  Henley,  doubtless  believing  what  he  says.  The
suggestion  of  these  words  is  that  the  “ freedom  ” we
enjoy  in  these  isles  is  common  to  our  fellow-subjects
throughout  the  British  Empire.  This  suggestion  is  false,
as  we  have  seen,  but  phrase-mongering  Imperialism  does
not  recognize  its  falsehood.  The  largest  and  most  essential

1 The  British  Empire , p.  114.  * Imperialism , p.  7.


206


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


facts  of  Imperialism,  political,  economic,  moral,  are  com*
monly  unknown  to  the  average  “ educated  ” Briton.  To
him  our  Empire  is  composed  of  a number  of  free,  self-
governing  States,  which  are  in  close  and  growing  industrial
relations  with  us ; individual  and  racial  freedom  and  equal
justice  prevail  everywhere ; Christianity  and  British  moral
ideals  are  rapidly  winning  their  way  over  the  vast  popula-
tions of  the  lower  races,  which  gladly  recognize  the  superiority
of  our  ideas  and  characters  and  the  benefits  which  they
receive  from  British  rule.  These  vague,  hasty  notions  are
corrected  by  no  close  study  of  facts  and  figures : the  only
substance  which  they  commonly  possess  is  the  assertion  of
some  friends  or  relatives  who  are  “ on  the  spot  ” in  some
British  possessibns  and  whose  individual  testimony  is  made
to  sustain  a pile  of  imperialist  notions.  How  many  persons,
during  the  South  African  war,  based  their  convictions
regarding  the  “ outlander  grievances  ” and  the  character
and  motives  of  the  Boer  Government  upon  the  impassioned
statement  of  some  single  dweller  in  Johannesburg,  who
had  virtually  no  contact  with  Boers  and  knew  nothing  of
grievances,  excepting  through  the  Rhodesian  press,  which
fashioned  them  !

To  what  extent  Imperialism  lives  upon  “ masked  words  ”l
it  is  difficult  to  realize  unless  we  turn  to  the  language
of  diplomacy,  the  verbal  armoury  of  Imperialism.  Para-
mount power,  effective  autonomy,  emissary  of  civilization,
rectification  of  frontier,  and  a whole  sliding  scale  of

l"  There  are  masked  words  droning  and  skulking  about  us  in  Europe  just
now  which  nobody  understands,  but  which  everybody  uses  and  most  people  will
also  fight  for,  live  for,  or  even  die  for,  fancying  they  mean  this  or  that  or  the
other  of  things  dear  to  them.  There  never  were  creatures  of  prey  so  mischievous,
never  diplomatists  so  cunning,  never  poisons  so  deadly,  as  thele  masked  words ;
they  are  the  unjust  stewards  of  all  men's  ideas  j whatever  fancy  or  favourite
instinct  a man  most  cherishes  he  gives  to  his  favourite  masked  word  to  take  care
of  for  him ; the  word  at  last  comes  to  have  an  infinte  power  over  him,  and  you
cannot  get  at  him  but  by  its  ministry  " (Ruskin,  Sasan u and  Lilias,  p.  29).

207


imperialism:  a study


terms  from  “ hinterland  ” and  “ sphere  of  interest  ” to
“ effective  occupation  ” and  “ annexation  ” will  'serve  as
ready  illustrations  of  a phraseology  devised  for  purposes
of  concealment  and  encroachment.  The  Imperialist  who
sees  modern  history  through  these  masks  never  grasps  the
“ brute  ” facts,  but  always  sees  them  at  several  removes,
refracted,  interpreted,  and  glozed  by  convenient  renderings.
Some  measure  of  responsibility  for  his  ignorance  he  retains,
for  he  must  often  be  aware  that  the  truth  is  not  told  him
and  that  he  is  refusing  to  penetrate  the  disguises.  This
persistent  evasion  of  naked  truth  endows  him  sometimes  with
an  almost  preternatural  power  of  self-deceit.  Mr.  Lecky
writes : “ Of  all  forms  of  prestige,  moral  prestige  is  the
most  valuable,  and  no  statesman  should  forget  that  one  of
the  chief  elements  of  British  power  is  the  moral  weight  that
is  behind  it.”1  The  vast  majority  of  “ educated  ” English-
men genuinely  believe  that  England’s  greatest  gain  from
the  Boer  war  is  an  enhancement  of  her  “ moral  prestige  ” !

An  error  so  monstrous  is  only  made  intelligible  by  reference
to  another  curious  psychical  factor.  Nowhere  is  the
distrust  of  what  is  termed  “ logic  ” as  a guide  for  public
conduct,  so  firmly  rooted  as  in  England : a course  of
conduct  which  stands  out  sharply  “ logical  ” is  in  itself
suspect.  The  practice  of  “ party  ” government  has  so
commonly  made  “ compromises  ” a necessity  that  we
have  come  to  believe  that  our  national  progress  is  due  to
this  necessity,  and  that  if  the  sharper  and  more  rapid
application  of  “ ideas  ” had  been  feasible,  we  should,  by
following  them,  have  been  led  into  false  paths  involving
much  trouble  of  retracing  steps,  or  over  the  brink  of  some
revolutionary  peril.  Though  sound  “ compromise  ” is
no  wise  illogical,  but  is  simply  logic  applied  within  certain
limits  of  time  and  environment,  it  easily  degenerates  into

'The  Map  of  Life,


208


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS

the  opportunism  of  an  idle  policy  of  short-range  utility.
The  complexity  of  modern  politics  in  such  a country  as
Great  Britain,  reacting  on  the  exigencies  and  temptations
of  a party  system,  has  driven  the  habit  of  “ compromise  ”
to  such  foolish  extremes  as  to  corrupt  the  political  intelli-
gence of  the  nation.  Elsewhere  the  same  tendency  has  been
operative,  but  has  been  checked  or  modified  by  a narrow
and  more  consciously  definite  policy  on  the  part  of  a ruling
monarch  or  a ruling  class,  by  the  limits  of  a written  constitu-
tion, and,  in  some  of  the  Latin  nations,  by  an  inherent  and
widespread  belief  in  the  value  of  ideas  as  operative  forces
in  politics.  In  England,  and  indeed  throughout  Anglo-
Saxondom,  a sort  of  cheery  optimism  has  commonly  usurped
the  seat  of  intelligent  direction,  a general  belief  in  “ national
destiny,”  which  enables  us  “ somehow  to  muddle  through,”
and  advises  us  “ to  do  the  best  we  can  and  not  look  too
far  ahead.”  Now,  with  the  disdain  of  history  and  the
neglect  of  sociological  laws  which  this  implies  I am  not  here
so  much  concerned  as  with  the  injurious  reaction  wrought
upon  the  mind  of  the  citizen  confronted  with  some  new
event  which  challenges  his  judgment.  Our  rough-and-
ready,  hand-to-mouth,  “ take-what-you-can-get  ” politics
have  paralysed  judgment  by  laming  the  logical  faculty  of
comparison.  Not  being  required  to  furnish  to  ourselves  or
others  clear,  consistent  reasons  for  our  short-range  ex-
pediencies of  public  conduct,  we  have  lost  all  habit  of  mental
consistency,  or,  putting  it  conversely,  we  have  developed
a curious  and  highly  dangerous  aptitude  for  entertaining
incompatible  and  often  self-contradictory  ideas  and  motives.

One  or  two  extreme  concrete  instances  will  serve  as
illustrations  of  the  damage  done  to  the  public  intelligence
by  the  absence  of  all  sense  of  clear  logical  order  in  the
conduct  of  affairs.  At  the  beginning  of  the  South  African
war  the  numerical  insignificance  of  the  Boers  was  regarded

209


imperialism:  a study

as  an  aggravation  of  their  insolence  in  entering  upon  strife
with  the  greatest  Empire  of  the  world.  But  the  numerical
smallness  did  not  in  the  least  interfere  with  the  equally
genuine  belief  and  feeling  that  we  were  contending  with  a
Power  as  large,  numerically,  as  ourselves,  which  were
required  to  support  the*ense  of  triumph  when  we  won  a
victory,  or  to  turn  the  edge  of  shame  when  our  tiny  adversary
inflicted  a defeat  upon  us.  The  shifts  of  detailed  mendacity
and  curious  invention  to  which  we  were  driven  in  the  course
of  the  war  by  the  necessity  of  keeping  up  this  double  and
contradictory  belief  will  doubtless  attract  the  attention  of
the  psychological  historian,  how  the  numbers  alternately  and
automatically  expanded  and  contracted  according  as  it  was
sought  to  impress  upon  the  nation  the  necessity  of  voting
large  supplies  of  troops  and  money,  or  else  to  represent  the
war  as  “ nearly  over  ” and  as  having  lapsed  into  a trifling
guerilla  struggle.  Or  take  another  instance.  It  was  possible
for  informed  politicians  to  maintain  at  one  and  the  same
time  that  our  conduct  in  providing  food  and  shelter  to  the
families  whose  property  we  had  destroyed  in  South  Africa
was  an  act  of  unprecedented  generosity,  and  to  defend
the  right  to  sell  by  public  auction  their  farms  in  order  to
defray  the  very  cost  of  keep  which  was  the  ground  for  our  self-
commendation. These  two  contentions  could  be  uttered'in
the  House  of  Commons  by  the  same  minister  and  accepted
by  the  nation  without  any  recognition  of  their  inconsistency.
Why  i Simply  from  a practical  inhibition  of  the  faculty
of  comparison.  A line  of  action  is  pursued  from  the  felt
pressure  of  some  close  expediency : afterwards  some
“ reasons  ” must  be  found  for  it,  some  justification  given  :
no  attempt  is  made  before  or  after  the  action  to  see  it
as  a whole  with  its  causes  and  its  consequences,  and  so
there  is  no  clear  comparison  of  actual  motives  and  results.
This  genius  of  inconsistency,  of  holding  conflicting  ideas

210


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


or  feelings  in  the  mind  simultaneously,  in  watertight
compartments,  is  perhaps  peculiarly  British.  It  is,  I repeat,
not  hypocrisy ; a consciousness  of  inconsistency  would  spoil
the  play:  it  is  a condition  of  the  success  of  this  conduct
that  it  should  be  unconscious.  For  such  inconsistency  has
its  uses.  Much  of  the  brutality  and  injustice  involved  in
“ Imperialism  ” would  be  impossible  without  this  capacity.
If,  for  example,  the  British  mind  had  been  sufficiently
consistent  to  have  kept  clearly  before  it  the  fact  that  400
millions  of  people  were  contending  with  a body  less  than  a
quarter  of  a million,  whatever  view  was  held  as  to  the
necessity  and  justice  of  the  war,  much  of  its  detailed
barbarism  and  all  the  triumphant  exultation  on  success
would  kave  been  impossible.

There  is  of  course  much  more  than  this  in  the  psychology  of
Imperialism,  but  there  are  two  main  factors,  the  habit  and
capacity  of  substituting  vague  and  decorative  notions,
derived  through  “ masked  words,”  for  hard  naked  facts,
and  the  native  or  acquired  genius  of  inconsistency.  Great
Britain  would  be  incapable  of  this  policy  if  she  realized  in
clear  consciousness  the  actual  play  of  motives  and  their
results.  Most  of  the  men  who  have  misled  her  have  first
been  obliged  to  mislead  themselves.  There  is  no  enthusiasm
in  hypocrisy,  and  even  bare-faced  greed  furnishes  no  adequate
stimulus  to  a long  policy.  Imperialism  is  based  upon  a
persistent  misrepresentation  of  facts  and  forces,  chiefly
through  a most  refined  process  of  selection,  exaggeration,
and  attenuation,  directed  by  interested  cliques  and  persons
so  as  to  distort  the  face  of  history.

The  gravest  peril  of  Imperialism  lies  in  the  state  of  mind
of  a nation  which  has  become  habituated  to  this  deception
and  which  has  rendered  itself  incapable  of  self-criticism.

For  this  is  the  condition  which  Plato  terms  “ the  lie
in  the  soul  ” — a lie  which  does  not  know  itself  to  be  a lie.
p 211


imperialism:  a study


One  of  the  marks  of  this  diseased  condition  is  a fatal  self-
complacency.  When  a nation  has  succumbed  to  it,  it  .easily
and  instinctively  rejects  all  criticism  of  other  nations  as
due  to  envy  and  malice,  and  all  domestic  criticism  is
attributed  to  the  bias  of  anti-patriotism.  In  more  primitive
nations  the  lusts  of  domination  and  material  acquisition
which  underlie  Imperialism  express  themselves  freely  and
unconsciously : there  is  little  self-complacency  because
there  is  little  self-consciousness.  But  nations  which  have
grown  in  self-consciousness  as  far  as  the  Western  European
nations  seek  to  stimulate  and  feed  their  instinctive  lusts
by  conscious  reflection.  Hence  the  elaborate  weaving  of
intellectual  and  moral  defences,  the  ethics  and  sociology
of  empire  which  we  have  examined.

The  controlling  and  directing  agent  of  the  whole  process,
as  we  have  seen,  is  the  pressure  of  financial  and  industrial
motives,  operated  for  the  direct,  short-range,  material
interests  of  small,  able,  and  well-organized  groups  in  a
nation.  These  groups  secure  the  active  co-operation  of
statesmen  and  of  political  cliques  who  wield  the  power  of
“ parties,”  partly  by  associating  them  directly  in  their
business  schemes,  partly  by  appealing  to  the  conservative
instincts  of  members  of  the  possessing  classes,  whose  vested
interest  and  class  dominance  are  best  preserved  by  diverting
the  currents  of  political  energy  from  domestic  on  to  foreign
politics.  The  acquiescence,  even  the  active  and  enthusiastic
support,  of  the  body  of  a nation  in  a course  of  policy  fatal
to  its  own  true  interests  is  secured  partly  by  appeals  to  the
mission  of  civilization,  but  chiefly  by  playing  upon  the
primitive  instincts  of  the  race.

The  psychology  of  these  instincts  is  not  easy  to  explore,
but  certain  prime  factors  easily  appear.  The  passion  which
a French  writer  describes  as  kilometritis,1  or  milo-mania,

1 M.  Novicov,  La  Federation  de  l* Europe,  p.  158*

212


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS

the  instinct  for  control  of  land,  drives  back  to  the  earliest
times  when  a wide  range  of  land  was  necessary  for  a food
supply  for  men  or  cattle,  and  is  linked  on  to  the  “ trek  ”
habit,  which  survives  more  powerfully  than  is  commonly
supposed  in  civilized  peoples.  The  “ nomadic 99  habit
bred  of  necessity  survives  as  a chief  ingredient  in  the
love  of  travel,  and  merges  into  " the  spirit  of  adventure  ”
when  it  meets  other  equally  primitive  passions.  This
“ spirit  of  adventure,”  especially  in  the  Anglo-Saxon,
has  taken  the  shape  of  “ sport,”  which  in  its  stronger  or
“ more  adventurous  ” forms  involves  a direct  appeal  to  the
lust  of  slaughter  and  the  crude  struggle  for  life  involved  in
pursuit.  The  animal  lust  of  struggle,  once  a necessity,
survives  in  the  blood,  and  just  in  proportion  as  a nation
or  a class  has  a margin  of  energy  and  leisure  from  the
activities  of  peaceful  industry,  it  craves  satisfaction  through
“ sport,”  in  which  hunting  and  the  physical  satisfaction
of  striking  a blow  are  vital  ingredients.  The  leisured  classes
in  great  Britain,  having  most  of  their  energy  liberated
from  the  necessity  of  work,  naturally  specialize  on  “ sport,”
the  hygienic  necessity  of  a substitute  for  work  helping  to
support  or  coalescing  with  the  survival  of  a savage  instinct.
As  the  milder  expressions  of  this  passion  are  alone  permissible
in  the  sham  or  artificial  encounters  of  domestic  sports,  where
wild  game  disappears  and  human  conflicts  more  mortal
than  football  are  prohibited,  there  is  an  ever  stronger
pressure  to  the  frontiers  of  civilization  in  order  that  the
thwarted  “ spirit  of  adventure  ” may  have  strong,  free
play.  These  feelings  are  fed  by  a flood  of  the  literature
of  travel  and  of  imaginative  writing,  the  security  and
monotony  of  the  or4inary  civilized  routine  imparting  an
ever-growing  fascination  to  the  wilder  portions  of  the  earth.
The  milder  satisfactions  afforded  by  sport  to  the  upper
classes  in  their  ample  leisure  at  home  are  imitated  by  the

213


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


industrial  masses,  whose  time  and  energy  for  recreation
have  been  growing,  and  who,  in  their  passage  from  rural  to
town  conditions,  have  never  abandoned  the  humbler  sports
of  feudal  country  life  to  which  from  time  immemorial  they
had  been  addicted.  “ Football  is  a good  game,  but  better
than  it,  better  than  any  other  game,  is  that  of  man-
hunting.”1

The  sporting  and  military  aspects  of  Imperialism  form,
therefore,  a very  powerful  basis  of  popular  appeal.  The
desire  to  pursue  and  kill  either  big  game  or  other  men  can
only  be  satisfied  by  expansion  and  militarism.  It  may
indeed  be  safely  said  that  the  reason  why  our  army  is  so
inefficient  in  its  officers,  as  compared  with  its  rank  and  file,
is  that  at  a time  when  serious  scientific  preparation  and
selection  are  required  for  an  intellectual  profession,  most
British  officers  choose  the  army  and  undertake  its  work
in  the  spirit  of  “ sport.”  While  the  average  “ Tommy  ”
is  perhaps  actuated  in  the  main  by  similar  motives,  “ science  ”
matters  less  in  his  case,  and  any  lack  of  serious  professional
purpose  is  more  largely  compensated  by  the  discipline
imposed  on  him.

But  still  more  important  than  these  supports  of  militarism
in  the  army  is  the  part  played  by  “ war  ” as  a support  of
Imperialism  in  the  non-combatant  body  of  the  nation.
Though  the  active  appeal  of  “ sport  ” is  still  strong,  even
among  townsmen,  clear  signs  are  visible  of  a degradation
of  this  active  interest  of  the  participant  into  the  idle
excitement  of  the  spectator.  How  far  sport  has  thus
degenerated  may  be  measured  by  the  substitution  every-
where of  a specialized  professionalism  for  a free  amateur
exercise,  and  by  the  growth  of  the  attendant  vice  of  betting,
which  everywhere  expresses  the  worst  form  of  sporting
excitement,  drawing  all  disinterested  sympathy  away

1 Baden-Powell,  Aids  to  Scouting , p.  124.

214


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS

from  the  merits  of  the  competition,  and  concentrating  it
upon  the  irrational  element  of  chance  in  combination  with
covetousness  and  low  cunning.  The  equivalent  of  this
degradation  of  interest  in  sport  is  Jingoism  in  relation  to  the
practice  of  war.  Jingoism  is  merely  the  lust  of  the  spectator,
unpurged  by  any  personal  effort,  risk,  or  sacrifice,  gloating
over  the  perils,  pains,  and  slaughter  of  fellow-men  whom  he
does  not  know,  but  whose  destruction  he  desires  in  a blind  and
artificially  stimulated  passion  of  hatred  and  revenge.  In
the  Jingo  all  is  concentrated  on  the  hazard  and  blind  fury
of  the  fray.  The  arduous  and  weary  monotony  of  the  march,
the  long  periods  of  waiting,  the  hard  privations,  the  terrible
tedium  of  a prolonged  campaign,  play  no  part  in  his
imagination ; the  redeeming  factors  of  war,  the  fine  sense
of  comradeship  which  common  personal  peril  educates,  the
fruits  of  discipline  and  self-restraint,  the  respect  for  the
personality  of  enemies  whose  courage  he  must  admit  and
whom  he  comes  to  realize  as  fellow-beings — all  these
moderating  elements  in  actual  war  are  eliminated  from
the  passion  of  the  Jingo.  It  is  precisely  for  these  reasons
that  some  friends  of  peace  maintain  that  the  two  most
potent  checks  of  militarism  and  of  war  are  the  obligation  of
the  entire  body  of  citizens  to  undergo  military  service  and
the  experience  of  an  invasion.

Whether  such  expensive  remedies  are  really  effectual
or  necessary  we  are  not  called  on  to  decide,  but  it  is  quite
evident  that  the  spectatorial  lust  of  Jingoism  is  a most
serious  factor  in  Imperialism.  The  dramatic  falsification
both  of  war  and  of  the  whole  policy  of  imperial  expansion
required  to  feed  this  popular  passion  forms  no  small  portion
of  the  art  of  the  real  organizers  of  imperialist  exploits,
the  small  groups  of  business  men  and  politicians  who  know
what  they  want  and  how  to  get  it.

Tricked  out  with  the  real  or  sham  glories  of  military

2is


imperialism:  a study


heroism  and  the  magnificent  claims  of  empire-making.
Jingoism  becomes  a nucleus  of  a sort  of  patriotism  Which
can  be  moved  to  any  folly  or  to  any  crime.’


IV

Where  this  spirit  of  naked  dominance  needs  more  dressing
for  the  educated  classes  of  a nation,  the  requisite  moral
ans  intellectual  decorations  are  woven  for  its*,  use ; the
church,  the  press,  the  schools  and  colleges,  the  political
machine,  the  four  chief  instruments  of  popular  education,
are  accommodated  to  its  service.  From  the  muscular
Christianity  of  the  last  generation  to  the  imperial  Christianity
of  the  present  day  is  but  a single  step  ; the  temper  of
growing  sacerdotalism  and  the  doctrine  of  authority  in
the  established  churches  well  accofd  with  militarism  and
political  autocracy.  Mr.  Goldwin  Smith  has  rightly
observed  how  M force  is  the  natural  ally  of  superstition,
and  superstition  knows  it  well.,,1  As  for  the  most  potent
engine  of  the  press,  the  newspaper,  so  far  as  it  is  not  directly
owned  and  operated  by  financiers  for  financial  purposes
(as  is  the  case  to  a great  extent  in  every  great  industrial
and  financial  centre),  it  is  always  influenced  and  often
dominated  by  the  interests  of  the  classes  which  control
the  advertisements  upon  which  its  living  depends  ; the
independence  of  a paper  with  a circulation  so  large  and
firm  as  to  “ command  ” and  to  retain  advertisements  in
the  teeth  of  a policy  disliked  by  the  advertising  classes  is
becoming  rarer  and  more  precarious  every  year,  as  the
cluster  of  interests  which  form  the  business  nucleus  of
Imperialism  becomes  more  consolidated  and  more  conscious
in  its  politics.  The  political  machine  is  “ an  hireling,”

1 Letter  in  The  Manchester  Guardian , October  14,  1900.

2l6


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


because  it  is  a machine,  and  needs  constant  repair  and
lubrication  from  the  wealthy  members  of  the  party ; the
machinist  knows  from  whom  he  takes  his  pay,  and  cannot
run  against  the  will  of  those  who  are  in  fact  the  patrons
of  the  party,  the  tightening  of  whose  purse-strings  will
automatically  stop  the  machine.  The  recent  Imperialism
both  of  Great  Britain  and  America  has  been  materially
assisted  by  the  lavish  contributions  of  men  like  Rockefeller,
Hanna,  Rhodes,  Beit  to  party  funds  for  the  election  of
“ imperialist  ” representatives  and  for  the  political  instruction
of  the  people.

Most  serious  of  all  is  the  persistent  attempt  to  seize  the
school  system  for  Imperialism  masquerading  as  patriotism.
To  capture  the  childhood  of  the  country,  to  mechanize  its
free  play  into  the  routine  of  military  drill,  to  cultivate  the
savage  survivals  of  combativeness,  to  poison  its  early
understanding  of  history  by  false  ideals  and  pseudo-heroes,
and  by  a consequent  disparagement  and  neglect  of  the
really  vital  and  elevating  lessons  of  the  past,  to  establish
a u geocentric  99  view  of  the  moral  universe  in  which  the
interests  of  humanity  are  subordinated  to  that  of  the
“ country  99  (and  so,  by  easy,  early,  natural  inference,  that
of  the  “ country  ” to  that  of  the  “ self  ”),  to  feed  the  always
overweening  pride  of  race  at  an  age  when  self-confidence
most  commonly  prevails,  and  by  necessary  implication  to
disparage  other  nations,  so  starting  children  in  the  world
with  false  measures  of  value  and  an  unwillingness  to  learn
from  foreign  sources — to  fasten  this  base  insularity  of
mind  and  morals  upon  the  little  children  of  a nation  and
to  call  it  patriotism  is  as  foul  an  abuse  of  education  as  it  is
possible  to  conceive.  Yet  the  power  of  Church  and  State
over  primary  education  is  being  bent  consistently  to  this
purpose,  while  the  blend  of  clericalism  and  autocratic
academicism  which  dominates  the  secondary  education  of

217


imperialism:  a study

this  country  pours  its  enthusiasm  into  the  same  evil  channel.1
Finally,  our  centres  of  highest  culture,  the  universities,
are  in  peril  of  a new  perversion  from  the  path  of  free  inquiry
and  expression,  which  is  the  true  path  of  intellectual  life.
A new  sort  of  “ pious  founder  ” threatens  intellectual
liberty.  Our  colleges  are,  indeed,  no  longer  to  be  the
subservient  defenders  of  religious  orthodoxy,  repressing
science,  distorting  history,  and  moulding  philosophy  to
conserve  the  interests  of  Church  and  King.  The  academic
studies  and  their  teachers  are  to  employ  the  same  methods
but  directed  to  a different  end  : philosophy,  the  natural
sciences,  history,  economics,  sociology,  are  to  be  employed
in  setting  up  new  earthworks  against  the  attack  of  the
disinherited  masses  upon  the  vested  interests  of  the  pluto-
cracy. I do  not  of  course  represent  this  perversion  as
destructive  of  the  educational  work  of  the  colleges : the
services  rendered  in  defence  of  “ conservatism  ” may  even
be  regarded  in  most  cases  as  incidental : only  perhaps  in
philosophy  and  economics  is  the  bias  a powerful  and
pervasive  one,  and  even  there  the  individuality  of  strong
independent  natures  may  correct  it.  Moreover,  it  is  need-
less to  charge  dishonesty  against  the  teachers,  who  commonly
think  and  teach  according  to  the  highest  that  is  in  them.
But  the  actual  teaching  is  none  the  less  selected  and
controlled,  wherever  it  is  found  useful  to  employ  the
arts  of  selection  and  control,  by  the  business  interests
playing  on  the  vested  academic  interests.  No  one  can
follow  the  history  of  political  and  economic  theory  during
the  last  century  without  recognizing  that  the  selection  and
rejection  of  ideas,  hypothesis,  and  formulas,  the  moulding
of  them  into  schools  or  tendencies  of  thought,  and  the
propagation  of  them  in  the  intellectual  world,  have  been
plainly  directed  by  the  pressure  of  class  interests.  In  political
1 For  striking  illustrations  cf.  Spencer's  Facts  and  Comments,  pp.  126-7.

218


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS


economy,  as  we  might  well  suspect,  from  its  close  bearing
upon  business  and  politics,  we  find  the  most  incontestable
example.  The  44  classical  ” economics  in  England  were
the  barely  disguised  formulation  of  the  mercantile  and
manufacturing  interests  as  distinguished  from,  and  opposed
to,  the  landowning  interest  on  the  one  hand,  the  labouring
interest  on  the  other,  evoking  in  later  years  other  class
economics  of  44  protection  ” and  of  44  socialism  ” similarly
woven  out  of  sectional  interests.

The  real  determinants  in  education  are  given  in  these
three  questions : 44  Who  shall  teach  f What  shall  they
teach  ? How  shall  they  teach  ? ” Where  universities
are  dependent  for  endowments  and  incomes  upon  the
favour  of  the  rich,  upon  the  charity  of  millionaires,  the
following  answers  will  of  necessity  be  given  : 44  Safe  teachers.
Safe  studies.  Sound  (i.e.  orthodox)  methods.”  The  coarse
proverb  which  tells  us  that  44  he  who  pays  the  piper  calls
the  tune  ” is  quite  as  applicable  here  as  elsewhere,  and  no
bluff  regarding  academic  dignity  and  intellectual  honesty
must  blind  us  to  the  fact.

The  interference  with  intellectual  liberty  is  seldom  direct,
seldom  personal,  though  both  in  the  United  States  and
Canada  some  instances  of  the  crudest  heresy-hunting  have
occurred.  The  real  danger  consists  in  the  appointment
rather  than  in  the  dismissal  of  teachers,  in  the  determination
of  what  subjects  shall  be  taught,  what  relative  attention
shall  be  given  to  each  subject,  and  what  text-books  and
other  apparatus  of  instruction  shall  be  used.  The  sub-
servience to  rank  and  money,  even  in  our  older  English
universities,  has  been  evinced  so  nakedly,  and  the  demands
for  monetary  aid  in  developing  new  faculties  necessarily
looms  so  large  in  academic  eyes,  that  the  danger  here
indicated  is  an  ever-growing  one.  It  is  not  so  much  the
weight  of  the  44  dead  hand  ” that  is  to  be  feared  as  that  of

219


imperialism:  a study

the  living : a college  so  unfortunate  as  to  harbour  teachers
who,  in  handling  vital  issues  of  politics  or  economics,  teach
truths  deeply  and  obviously  antagonistic  to  the  interests  of
the  classes  from  whom  financial  aid  was  sought,  would  be
committing  suicide.  Higher  education  has  never  been
economically  self-supporting ; it  has  hardly  ever  been  fully
organized  from  public  funds ; everywhere  it  has  remained
parasitic  on  the  private  munificence  of  wealthy  persons.
The  peril  is  too  obvious  to  need  further  enforcement : it
is  the  hand  of  the  prospective,  the  potential  donor  that
fetters  intellectual  freedom  in  our  colleges,  and  will  do  so
more  and  more  so  long  as  the  duty  of  organizing  public
higher  education  for  a nation  out  of  public  funds  fails  of
recognition.

The  area  of  danger  is,  of  course,  far  wider  than  Imperialism,
covering  the  whole  field  of  vested  interests.  But,  if  the
analysis  of  previous  chapters  is  correct,  Imperialism  stands
as  a first  defence  of  these  interests  : for  the  financial  and
speculative  classes  it  means  a pushing  of  their  private
businesses  at  the  public  expense,  for  the  export  manu-
facturers and  merchants  a forcible  enlargement  of  foreign
markets  and  a related  policy  of  Protection,  for  the  official
and  professional  classes  large  openings  of  honourable  and
lucrative  employment,  for  the  Church  it  represents  the
temper  and  practice  of  authority  and  the  assertion  of
spiritual  control  over  vast  multitudes  of  lower  people,
for  the  political  oligarchy  it  means  the  only  effective
diversion  of  the  forces  of  democracy  and  the  opening  of
great  public  careers  in  the  showy  work  of  empire-making.

This  being  so,  it  is  inevitable  that  Imperialism  should
seek  intellectual  support  in  our  seats  of  learning,  and
should  use  the  sinews  of  education  for  the  purpose.  The
millionaire  who  endows  Oxford  does  not  buy  its  men  of
learning  outright,  need  not  even  stipulate  what  should  be

220


MORAL  AND  SENTIMENTAL  FACTORS

taught.  But  the  practical  pressure  of  Imperialism  is  such
that  when  a professional  appointment  is  made  in  history
it  is  becoming  more  difficult  for  a scholar  with  the  intellectual
outlook  of  a John  Morley,  a Frederick  Harrison,  or  a Goldwin
Smith  to  secure  election,  or  for  a political  economist
with  strong  views  on  the  necessity  of  controlling  capital
to  be  elected  to  a chair  in  economics.  No  formal  tests  are
necessary;  the  instinct  of  financial  self-preservation  will
suffice.  The  price  which  universities  pay  for  preferring
money  and  social  position  to  intellectual  distinction  in
the  choice  of  chancellors  and  for  touting  among  the  million-
aires for  the  equipment  of  new  scientific  schools  is  this
subservience  to  the  political  and  business  interests  of  their
patrons  : their  philosophy,  their  history,  their  economics,
even  their  biology  must  reflect  in  doctrine  and  method
the  consideration  that  is  due  to  patronage,  and  the  fact
that  this  deference  is  unconscious  enhances  the  damage
done  to  the  cause  of  intellectual  freedom.

Thus  do  the  industrial  and  financial  forces  of  Imperialism,
operating  through  the  party,  the  press,  the  church,  the
school,  mould  public  opinion  and  public  policy  by  the  false
idealization  of  those  primitive  lusts  of  struggle,  domination
and  acquisitiveness,  which  have  survived  throughout  the
eras  of  peaceful  industrial  order,  and  whose  stimulation
is  needed  once  again  for  the  work  of  imperial  aggression,
expansion,  and  the  forceful  exploitation  of  lower  races.  For
these  business  politicians  biology  and  sociology  weave  thin
convenient  theories  of  a race  struggle  for  the  subjugation  of
the  inferior  peoples,  in  order  that  we,  the  Anglo-Saxon,
may  take  their  lands  and  live  upon  their  labours ; while
economics  buttresses  the  argument  by  representing  our
work  in  conquering  and  ruling  them  as  our  share  in  the
division  of  labour  among  nations,  and  history  devises
reasons  why  the  lessons  of  past  empire  do  not  apply  to  ours


221


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


while  social  ethics  paints  the  motive  of  “ Imperialism  ”
as  the  desire  to  bear  the  “ burden  ” of  educating  and  elevating
races  of  “ children.”  Thus  are  the  “ cultured  ” or  semi-
cultured  classes  indoctrinated  with  the  intellectual  and
moral  grandeur  of  Imperialism.  For  the  masses  there  is  a
cruder  appeal  to  hero-worship  and  sensational  glory,
adventure  and  the  sporting  spirit : current  history  falsified
in  coarse  flaring  colours,  for  the  direct  stimulation  of  the
combative  instincts.  But  while  various  methods  are
employed,  some  delicate  and  indirect,  others  coarse  and
flamboyant,  the  operation  everywhere  resolves  itself  into
an  incitation  and  direction  of  the  brute  lu£ts  of  human
domination  which  are  everywhere  latent  in  civilized
humanity,  for  the  pursuance  of  a policy  fraught  with  material
gain  to  a minority  of  co-operative  vested  interests  which
usurp  the  title  of  the  commonwealth.


222


CHAPTER  IV


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

I

r I ''HE  statement,  often  made,  that  the  work  of  imperial
expansion  is  virtually  complete  is  not  correct.  It  is
true  that  most  of  the  “ backward  ” races  have  been  placed
in  some  sort  of  dependence  upon  one  or  other  of  the
“ civilized  ” Powers  as  colony,  protectorate,  hinterland,  or
sphere  of  influence.  But  this  in  most  instances  marks  rather
the  beginning  of  a process  of  imperialization  than  a definite
attainment  of  empire.  The  intensive  growth  of  empire
by  which  interference  is  increased  and  governmental
control  tightened  over  spheres  of  influence  and  protectorates
is  as  important  and  as  perilous  an  aspect  of  Imperialism
as  the  extensive  growth  which  takes  shape  in  assertion  of
rule  over  new  areas  of  territory  and  new  populations.

The  famous  saying,  attributed  to  Napoleon,  that  “ great
empires  die  of  indigestion  ” serves  to  remind  us  of  the
importance  of  the  imperialist  processes  which  still  remain
after  formal  “ expansion  ” has  been  completed.  During  the
last  twenty  years  of  the  last  century  Great  Britain,  Germany,
France,  and  Russia  had  bitten  off  huge  mouthfuls  of  Africa
and  Asia  which  are  not  yet  chewed,  digested,  or  assimilated.
Moreover,  great  areas  still  remain  whose  independence,
though  threatened,  is  yet  unimpaired.1

Vast  countries  in  Asia,  such  as  Persia,  Thibet,  Siam,

1 The  reader  is  reminded  that  this  and  ensuing  remarks  relate  to  the  situation
at  the  beginning  of  the  centuiy.


223


imperialism:  a study


Afghanistan,  are  rapidly  forging  to  the  front  of  politics
as  likely  subjects  of  armed  controversy  between  European
Powers  with  a view  to  subjugation  ; the  Turkish  dominions
in  Asia  Minor,  and  perhaps  in  Europe,  await  a slow,  pre-
carious process  of  absorption ; the  paper  partition  of
Central  Africa  teems  with  possibilities  of  conflict.  The
entrance  of  the  United  States  into  the  imperial  struggle
throws  virtually  the  whole  of  South  America  into  the  arena  ;
for  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  that  European  nations,
with  settlements  and  vast  economic  interests  in  the  southern
peninsula,  will  readily  leave  all  this  territory  to  the  special
protection  or  ultimate  absorption  of  the  United  States,  when
the  latter,  abandoning  her  old  consistent  isolation,  has
plunged  into  the  struggle  for  empire  in  the  Pacific.

Beyond  and  above  all  this  looms  China.  It  is  not  easy
to  suppose  that  the  lull  and  hesitancy  of  the  Powers  will
last,  or  that  the  magnitude  and  manifest  risks  of  disturbing
this  vast  repository  of  incalculable  forces  will  long  deter
adventurous  groups  of  profit-seekers  from  driving  their
Governments  along  the  slippery  path  of  commercial  treaties,
leases,  railway  and  mining  concessions,  which  must  entail  a
growing  process  of  political  interference.

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  examine  here  the  entanglement
of  political  and  economic  issues  which  each  of  these  cases
presents,  but  simply  to  illustrate  the  assertion  that  the
policy  of  modem  Imperialism  is  not  ended  but  only  just
begun,  and  that  it  is  concerned  almost  wholly  with  the
rival  claims  of  Empires  to  dominate  “ lower  races  99  in
tropical  and  sub-tropical  countries,  or  in  other  countries
occupied  by  manifestly  unassimilable  races.

In  asking  ourselves  what  are  the  sound  principles  of  world
policy  and  of  national  policy  in  this  matter,  we  may  at  first
ignore  the  important  differences  which  should  affect  our
conduct  towards  countries  inhabited  by  what  appear  to  be

224


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


definitely  low-typed  unprogressive  races,  countries  whose
people  manifest  capacity  of  rapid  progress  from  a present
low  condition,  and  countries  like  India  and  China,  where
an  old  civilization  of  a high  type,  widely  differing  from  that
of  European  nations,  exists.

Before  seeking  for  differences  of  policy  which  correspond
to  these  conditions,  let  us  try  to  find  whether  there  are  any
general  principles  of  guidance  in  dealing  with  countries
occupied  by  " lower  ” or  unprogressive  peoples.

It  is  idle  to  consider  as  a general  principle  the  attitude
of  mere  laissez  fair e.  It  is  not  only  impracticable  in  view
of  the  actual  forces  which  move  politics,  but  it  is  ethically
indefensible  in  the  last  resort.

To  lay  down  as  an  absolute  law  that  <€  the  autonomy  of
every  nation  is  inviolable  ” does  not  carry  us  very  far.
There  can  no  more  be  absolute  nationalism  in  the  society
of  nations  than  absolute  individualism  in  the  single  nation.
Some  measure  of  practical  internationality,  implying  a
“ comity  of  nations,”  and  some  relations  of  “ right  ” and
“ duty  ” between  nations,  are  almost  universally  admitted.
The  rights  of  self-government,  implied  by  the  doctrine  of
autonomy,  if  binding  in  any  sense  legal  or  ethical  on  other
nations,  can  only  possess  this  character  in  virtue  of  some
real  international  organization,  however  rudimentary.

It  is  difficult  for  the  strongest  advocate  of  national  rights
to  assert  that  the  people  in  actual  occupation  or  political
control  over  a given  area  of  the  earth  are  entitled  to  do
what  they  will  with  “ their  own,”  entirely  disregarding  the
direct  and  indirect  consequences  of  their  actions  upon  the
rest  of  the  world.

It  is  not  necessary  to  take  extreme  cases  of  a national
policy  which  directly  affects  the  welfare  of  a neighbouring
State,  as  where  a people  on  the  upper  reaches  of  a river
like  the  Nile  or  the  Niger  might  so  damage  or  direct  the

225


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

flow  as  to  cause  plague  or  famine  to  the  lower  lands  belonging
to  another  nation.  Few,  if  any,  would  question  some  right
of  interference  from  without  in  such  a case.  Or  take  another
case  which  falls  outside  the  range  of  directly  other-regarding
actions.  Suppose  a famine  or  flood  or  other  catastrophe
deprives  a population  of  the  means  of  living  on  their  land,
while  unutilized  land  lies  in  plenty  beyond  their  borders
in  another  country,  are  the  rulers  of  the  latter  entitled  to
refuse  an  entrance  or  a necessary  settlement  ? As  in  the
case  of  individuals,  so  of  nations,  it  will  be  generally  allowed
that  necessity  knows  no  laws,  which,  rightly  interpreted,
means  that  the  right  of  self-preservation  transcends  all  other
rights  as  the  prime  condition  of  their  emergence  and
exercise.

This  carries  us  on  an  inclined  plane  of  logic  to  the  real
issue  as  ably  presented  by  Mr.  Kidd,  Professor  Giddings,
and  the  “ Fabian  ” Imperialists.  It  is  an  expansion  of  this
plea  of  material  necessity  that  constitutes  the  first  claim
to  a control  of  the  tropics  by  “ civilized  ” nations.  The
European  races  have  grown  up  with  a standard  of  material
civilization  based  largely  upon  the  consumption  and  use
of  foods,  raw  materials  of  manufacture,  and  other  goods
which  are  natural  products  of  tropical  countries.  The
industries  and  the  trade  which  furnish  these  commodities
are  of  vital  importance  to  the  maintenance  and  progress
of  Western  civilization.  The  large  part  played  in  our
import  trade  by  such  typically  tropical  products  as  sugar,
tea,  coffee,  indiarubber,  rice,  tobacco,  indicates  the  depen-
dence of  such  countries  as  Great  Britain  upon  the  tropics.
Partly  from  sheer  growth  of  population  in  temperate  zones,
partly  from  the  rising  standard  of  material  life,  this
dependence  of  the  temperate  on  the  tropical  countries  must
grow.  In  order  to  satisfy  these  growing  needs  larger  and
larger  tracts  of  tropical  country  must  be  cultivated,  the

226


IMPERIALISM  AN  I*  THE  LOWER  RACES


cultivation  must  be  better  and  more  regular  and  peaceful
and  effective  trade  relations  with  these  countries  must  be
maintained.  Now  the  ease  with  which  human  life  can  be
maintained  in  the  tropics  breeds  indolence  and  torpor  of
character.  The  inhabitants  of  these  countries  are  not
“progressive  people”;  they  neither  develop  the  arts  of
industry  at  any  satisfactory  pace,  nor  do  they  evolve  new
wants  or  desires,  the  satisfaction  of  which  might  force  them
to  labour.  We  cannot  therefore  rely  upon  the  ordinary
economic  motives  and  methods  of  free  exchange  to  supply
the  growing  demand  for  tropical  goods.  The  resources  of
the  tropics  will  not  be  developed  voluntarily  by  the  natives
themselves.

“ If  We  look  to  the  native  social  systems  of  the  tropical
East,  the  primitive  savagery  of  Central  Africa,  to  the  West
Indian  Islands  in  the  past  in  process  of  being  assisted  into
the  position  of  modern  States  by  Great  Britain,  or  the
black  republic  of  Hayti  in  the  present,  or  to  modern  Liberia
in  the  future,  the  lesson  seems  everywhere  the  same ; it  is
that  there  will  be  no  development  of  the  resources  of  the
tropics  under  native  government.”1

We  cannot,  it  is  held,  leave  these  lands  barren ; it  is  our
duty  to  see  that  they  are  developed  for  the  good  of  the
world.  White  men  cannot  “ colonize  ” these  lands  and,
thus  settling,  develop  the  natural  resources  by  the  labour
of  their  own  hands  ; they  can  only  organize  and  superintend
the  labour  of  the  natives.  By  doing  this  they  can  educate
the  natives  in  the  arts  of  industry  and  stimulate  in  them
a desire  for  material  and  moral  progress,  implanting  new
“ wants  ” which  form  in  every  society  the  roots  of  civilization.

It  is  quite  evident  that  there  is  much  force  in  this
presentation  of  the  case,  not  only  on  material  but  on  moral
grounds ; nor  can  it  be  brushed  aside  because  it  is  liable

1 Kidd,  7 bo  Control  of  tbt  Tropics,  p.  $3  (Macmillan  It  Co.).

Q 227


imperialism:  a study

to  certain  obvious  and  gross  abuses.  It  implies,  however,
two  kinds  of  interference  which  require  justification.  To
step  in  and  utilize  natural  resources  which  are  left  un-
developed is  one  thing,  to  compel  the  inhabitants  to  develop
them  is  another.  The  former  is  easily  justified,  involving
the  application  on  a wider  scale  of  a principle  whose  equity,
as  well  as  expediency,  is  recognized  and  enforced  in  most
civilized  nations.  The  other  interference  whereby  men
who  prefer  to  live  on  a low  standard  of  life  with  little  labour
shall  be  forced  to  harder  or  more  continuous  labour,  is  far
more  difficult  of  justification.

I have  set  the  economic  compulsion  in  the  foreground,
because  in  point  of  history  it  is  the  causa  causans  of  the
Imperialism  that  accompanies  or  follows.

In  considering  the  ethics  and  politics  of  this  interference,
we  must  not  be  bluffed  or  blinded  by  critics  who  fasten
on  the  palpable  dishonesty  of  many  practices  of  the  gospel
of  “ the  dignity  of  labour  99  and  “ the  mission  of  civilization.”
The  real  issue  is  whether,  and  under  what  circumstances,
it  is  justifiable  for  Western  nations  to  use  compulsory
government  for  the  control  and  education  in  the  arts  of
industrial  and  political  civilization  of  the  inhabitants  of
tropical  countries  and  other  so-called  lower  races.  Because
Rhodesian  mine-owners  or  Cuban  sugar-growers  stimulate
the  British  or  American  Government  to  Imperialism  by
parading  motives  and  results  which  do  not  really  concern
them,  it  does  not  follow  that  these  motives  under  proper
guidance  are  unsound,  or  that  the  results  are  undesirable.

There  is  nothing  unworthy,  quite  the  contrary,  in  the
notion  that  nations  which,  through  a more  stimulative
environment,  have  advanced  further  in  certain  arts  of
industry,  politics,  or  morals,  should  communicate  these  to
nations  which  from  their  circumstances  were  more  back-
ward, so  as  to  aid  them  in  developing  alike  the  material

228


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

resources  of  their  land  and  the  human  resources  of  their
people.  Nor  is  it  clear  that  in  this  work  some  “ induce-
ment, stimulus,  or  pressure  ” (to  quote  a well-known  phrase)
or  in  a single  word,  “ compulsion,”  is  wholly  illegitimate.
Force  is  itself  no  remedy,  coercion  is  not  education,  but
it  may  be  a prior  condition  to  the  operation  of  educative
forces.  Those,  at  any  rate,  who  assign  any  place  to  force
in  the  education  or  the  political  government  of  individuals
in  a nation  can  hardly  deny  that  the  same  instrument  may
find  a place  in  the  civilization  of  backward  by  progressive
nations.

Assuming  that  the  arts  of  “ progress,”  or  some  of  them,
are  communicable,  a fact  which  is  hardly  disputable,  there
can  be  no  inherent  natural  right  in  a people  to  refuse  that
measure  of  compulsory  education  which  shall  raise  it  from
childhood  to  manhood  in  the  order  of  nationalities.  The
analogy  furnished  by  the  education  of  a child  is  prima  facie
a sound  one,  and  is  not  invalidated  by  the  dangerous  abuses
to  which  it  is  exposed  in  practice.

The  real  issue  is  one  of  safeguards,  of  motives,  and  of
methods.  What  are  the  conditions  under  which  a nation
may  help  to  develop  the  resources  of  another,  and  even
apply  some  element  of  compulsion  in  doing  so  ? The
question,  abstract  as  it  may  sound,  is  quite  the  most
important  of  all  practical  questions  for  this  generation.  For
that  such  development  will  take  place,  and  such  compulsion,
legitimate  or  illegitimate,  be  exercised,  more  and  more
throughout  this  new  century  in  many  quarters  of  this
globe,  is  beyond  the  shadow  of  a doubt.  It  is  the  great
practical  business  of  the  country  to  explore  and  develop,
by  every  method  which  science  can  devise,  the  hidden
natural  and  human  resources  of  the  globe.

That  the  white  Western  nations  will  abandon  a quest
on  which  they  have  already  gone  so  far  is  a view  which  does

229


imperialism:  a study


not  deserve  consideration.  That  this  process  of  development
may  be  so  conducted  as  to  yield  a gain  to  world-civilization,
instead  of  some  terrible  Ob&cle  in  which  revolted  slave  races
may  trample  down  their  parasitic  and  degenerate  white
masters,  should  be  the  supreme  aim  of  far-sighted  scientific
statecraft.


' II

To  thbse  who  utter  the  single  cry  of  warning,  “ laissez
faire , hands  off,  let  these  people  develop  their  resources
themselves  with  such  assistance  as  they  ask  or  hire,  un-
disturbed by  the  importunate  and  arrogant  control  of
foreign  nations,”  it  is  a sufficient  answer  to  point  out  the
impossibility  of  maintaining  such  an  attitude.

If  organized  Governments  of  civilized  Powers  refused
the  task,  they  would  let  loose  a horde  of  private  adventurers,
slavers,  piratical  traders,  treasure  hunters,  concession
mongers,  who,  animated  by  mere  greed  of  gold  or  power,
would  set  about  the  work  of  exploitation  under  no  public
control  and  with  no  regard  to  the  future ; playing  havoc
with  the  political,  economic,  and  moral  institutions  of  the
peoples,  instilling  civilized  vices  and  civilized  diseases,
importing  spirits  and  firearms  as  the  trade  of  readiest
acceptance,  fostering  internecihe  strife  for  their  own
political  and  industrial  purposes,  and  even  setting  up  private
despotisms  sustained  by  organized  armed  forces.  It  is
unnecessary  to  revert  to  the  buccaneering  times  of  the
sixteenth  century,  when  a “ new  world  ” was  thrown  open
to  the  plunder  of  the  old,  and  private  gentlemen  of  Spain
or  England  competed  with  their  Governments  in  the  most
gigantic  business  of  spoliation  that  history  records.  The
story  of  Samoa,  of  Hawaii,  and  a score  of  South  Sea  Islands
in  quite  recent  years,  proves  that,  at  a time  when  every  sea
is  a highway,  it  is  impossible  for  the  most  remote  land  to

230


IMPERIALISM  AND  TH£  LOWER  RACES


escape  the  intrusion  of  “ civilized  ” nations,  represented
by  precisely  their  most  reckless  and  debased  specimens,  who
gravitate  thither  in  order  to  reap  the  rapid  fruits  of  licence.
The  contact  with  white  races  cannot  be  avoided,  and  it  is
more  perilous  and  more  injurious  in  proportion  as  it  lacks
governmental  sanction  and  control.  The  most  gigantic
modern  experiment  in  private  adventure  slowly  yielded  its
full  tale  of  horrors  in  the  Congo  Free  State,  while  the
handing  over  of  large  regions  in  Africa  to  the  virtually
unchecked  government  of  Chartered  Companies  has  exposed
everywhere  the  dangers  of  a contact  based  on  private
commercialism . 1

To  abandon  the  backward  races  to  these  perils  of  private
exploitation,  it  is  argued  forcibly,  is  a barbarous  dereliction
of  a public  duty  on  behalf  of  humanity  and  the  civilization
of  the  world.  Not  merely  does  it  leave  the  tropics  to  be  the
helpless  prey  of  the  offscourings  of  civilized  nations  ; it  opens
grave  dangers  in  the  future,  from  the  political  or  military
ambitions  of  native  or  imported  rulers,  who,  playing  upon
the  religious  fanaticism  or  the  combative  instincts  of  great
hordes  of  semi-savages,  may  impose  upon  them  so  effective
a military  discipline  as  to  give  terrible  significance  to  some
black  or  yellow  “ peril.”  Complete  isolation  is  no  longer
possible  even  for  the  remotest  island  ; absolute  self-sufficiency
is  no  more  possible  for  a nation  than  for  an  individual : in  each
case  society  has  the  right  and  the  need  to  safeguard  its
interests  against  an  injurious  assertion  of  individuality.

1 Chartered  Company  government  is  not  necessarily  bad  in  its  direct  results.
It  is,  in  fact,  little  else  than  private  despotism  rendered  more  than  usually
precarious  in  that  it  has  been  established  for  the  sake  of  dividends.  A “ managing
director  ” may  be  scrupulous  and  far-sighted,  as  Sir  G.  T.  Goldie  in  the  Niger
Company,  or  unscrupulous  and  short-sighted,  as  Mr.  Rhodes  in  the  South  African
Chartered  Company.  The  unchecked  tyranny  of  the  managing  director  may  be
illustrated  by  the  evidence  of  the  Duke  of  Abercom,  tendered  to  the  South
African  Committee.  “ Mr.  Rhodes  had  received  a power  of  attorney  to  do
precisely  what  he  liked  without  consultation  with  the  Board,  he  simply  notifying
what  was  done/*


231


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


Again,  though  there  is  some  force  in  the  contention  that
the  backward  natives  could  and  would  protect  themselves
against  the  encroachments  of  private  adventurers,  if  they
had  the  assurance  that  the  latter  could  not  call  upon
their  Government  for  assistance  or  for  vengeance,  history
does  not  lead  us  to  believe  that  these  powers  of  self-protection
however  adequate  against  forcible  invasions,  would  suffice
to  meet  the  more  insidious  wiles  by  which  traders,  pros-
pectors, and  political  adventurers  insinuate  their  poisons
into  primitive  societies  like  that  of  Samoa  or  Ashanti.

So  far,  we  have  established  two  tentative  principles.
First,  that  all  interference  on  the  part  of  civilized  white
nations  with  “ lower  races  ” is  not  prima  facie  illegitimate.
Second,  that  such  interference  cannot  safely  be  left  to  private
enterprise  of  individual  whites.  If  these  principles  be
admitted,  it  follows  that  civilized  Governments  may  under-
take the  political  and  economic  control  of  lower  races — in
a word,  that  the  characteristic  form  of  modern  Imperialism
is  not  under  all  conditions  illegitimate.

What,  then,  are  the  conditions  which  render  it  legitimate  ?
They  may  be  provisionally  stated  thus : Such  interference
with  the  government  of  a lower  race  must  be  directed
primarily  to  secure  the  safety  and  progress  of  the  civilization
of  the  world,  and  not  the  special  interest  of  the  interfering
nation.  Such  interference  must  be  attended  by  an  improve-
ment and  elevation  of  the  character  of  the  people  who*  are
brought  under  this  control.  Lastly,  the  determination  of
the  two  preceding  conditions  must  not  be  left  to  the
arbitrary  will  or  judgment  of  the  interfering  nation,  but
must  proceed  from  some  organized  representation  of
civilized  humanity.

The  first  condition  is  deduced  directly  from  the  principle
of  social  utility  expanded  to  its  widest  range,  so  as  to  be
synonymous  with  “ the  good  of  humanity.”  Regarding

232


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


the  conduct  of  one  nation  towards  another  we  can  find  no
other  standard.  Whatever  uncertainty  or  other  imperfection
appertains  to  such  a standard,  regarded  as  a rule  for  inter-
national policy,  any  narrower  standard  is,  of  necessity,  more
uncertain  and  more  imperfect.  No  purely  legal  contentions
touching  the  misapplication  of  the  term  “ right  ” to  inter-
national relations,  in  the  absence  of  any  form  of  “ sanction,”
affects  our  issue.  Unless  we  are  prepared  to  re-affirm  in
the  case  of  nations,  as  the  all-sufficient  guide  of  conduct,
that  doctrine  of  “ enlightened  selfishness  99  which  has  been
almost  universally  abandoned  in  the  case  of  individuals,
and  to  insist  that  the  unchecked  self-assertion  of  each
nation,  following  the  line  of  its  own  private  present  interest,
is  the  best  guarantee  of  the  general  progress  of  humanity,
we  must  set  up,  as  a supreme  standard  of  moral  appeal,  some
conception  of  the  welfare  of  humanity  regarded  as  an  organic
unity.  It  is,  however,  needless  to  insist  upon  the  analogy
between  the  relation  of  an  individual  to  the  other  individuals
of  his  society,  and  that  of  one  society  towards  another  in  the
commonwealth  of  nations.  For,  though  cynical  statesmen
of  the  modern  Macchiavelli  school  may  assert  the  visible
interest  of  their  country  as  the  supreme  guide  of  conduct,
they  do  not  seriously  suggest  that  the  good  of  humanity  is
thus  attained,  but  only  that  this  wider  end  has  no  meaning
or  appeal  for  them.  In  the  light  of  this  attitude
all  discussion  of  general  principles  “ justifying  ” conduct
is  out  of  place,  for  “ just  ” and  “ justice  ” are  ruled  out
ab  initio . The  standard  here  proposed  would  not,  however,
in  point  of  fact,  be  formally  rejected  by  any  school  of
political  thinkers  who  were  invited  to  find  a general  law  for
the  treatment  of  lower  races.  No  one  would  assert  in  so
many  words  that  we  had  a right  to  sacrifice  the  good  of  any
other  nation,  or  of  the  world  at  large,  to  our  own  private
national  gain.


233


imperialism:  a study


In  England*  certainly,  Lord  Rosebery’s  declaration  that
the  British  Empire  is  “ the  greatest  secular  agency  for  good
known  to  the  world  ” would  everywhere  be  adopted'  as  the
fundamental  justification  of  empire.

Lord  Salisbury  expressly  endorsed  the  principle,  asserting
that  “ the  course  of  events,  which  I should  prefer  to
call  the  acts  of  Providence,  have  called  this  country  to
exercise  an  influence  over  the  character  and  progress  of
the  world  such  as  has  never  been  exercised  in  any  Empire
before  ” ; while  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  propounded
a doctrine  of  “ imperial  Christianity  ” based  upon  the  same
assumptions.  It  may,  then,  fairly  be  understood  that
every  act  of  “ Imperialism  ” consisting  of  forcible  inter-
ference with  another  people  can  only  be  justified  by  showing
that  it  contributes  to  “ the  civilization  of  the  world.”

Equally,  it  is  admitted  that  some  special  advantage
must  be  conferred  upon  the  people  who  are  the  subject  of
this  interference.  On  highest  ground  of  theory,  the
repression,  even  the  extinction,  of  some  unprogressive
or  retrogressive  nation,  yielding  place  to  another  more
socially  efficient  and  more  capable  of  utilizing  for  the
general  good  the  natural  resources  of  the  land,  might  seem
permissible,  if  we  accepted  unimpaired  and  unimproved
the  biological  struggle  for  existence  as  the  sole  or  chief
instrument  of  progress.  But,  if  we  admit  that  in  the
highest  walks  of  human  progress  the  constant  tendency  is
to  substitute  more  and  more  the  struggle  with  natural  and
moral  environment  for  the  internecine  struggle  of  living
individuals  and  species,  and  that  the  efficient  conduct  of
this  struggle  requires  the  suspension  of  the  lower  struggle
and  a growing  solidarity  of  sentiment  and  sympathy
throughout  entire  humanity,  we  shall  perceive  two  important
truths.  First,  “ expansion,”  in  order  to  absorb  for  the
more  “ progressive  ” races  an  ever  larger  portion  of  the

234


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


globe,  is  not  the  “ necessity  ” it  once  appeared,  because
progress  will  take  place  more  and  more  upon  the  qualitative
plane,  with  more  intensive  cultivation  alike  of  natural
resources  and  of  human  life.  The  supposed  natural
necessity  for  crowding  out  the  lower  races  is  based  on  a
narrow,  low,  and  purely  quantitative  analysis  of  human
progress.

Secondly,  in  the  progress  of  humanity,  the  services  of
nationality,  as  a means  of  education  and  of  self-develop-
ment, will  be  recognized  as  of  such  supreme  importance
that  nothing  short  of  direct  physical  necessity  in  self-defence
can  justify  the  extinction  of  a nation.  In  a word,  it  will
be  recognized  that  “ le  grand  crime  internationnel  est  de
d£truire  une  nationality.”1  But  even  those  who  would
not  go  so  far  in  their  valuation  of  the  factor  of  nationality
will  agree  that  it  is  a sound  practical  test  of  conduct  to
insist  that  interference  with  the  freedom  of  another  nation
shall  justify  itself  by  showing  some  separate  advantage
conferred  upon  the  nation  thus  placed  in  an  inferior
position  : partly,  because  it  seems  obvious  that  the  gain
to  the  general  cause  of  civilization  will  chiefly  be  contained
in  or  compassed  by  an  improvement  in  the  character  or
condition  of  the  nation  which  is  the  subject  of  interference  ;
partly,  because  the  maxim  which  recognizes  the  individual
person  as  an  end,  and  requires  State  government  to  justify
itself  by  showing  that  the  coercion  it  exercises  does  in
reality  enlarge  the  liberty  of  those  whom  it  restrains,  is
applicable  also  to  the  larger  society  of  nations.  Without
unduly  pressing  the  analogy  of  individual  and  nation  as
organisms,  it  may  safely  be  asserted  that  imperial  inter-
ference with  a “ lower  race  ” must  justify  itself  by  showing
that  it  is  acting  for  the  real  good  of  the  subject  race.  Mr.
Chamberlain  is  no  sentimentalist,  and  his  declaration  may

1 M.  Brunetifere,  quoted  Edinburgh  Review,  April,  1900.

235


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


rank  as  a locus  classicus  upon  this  matter.  “ Our  rule  over
the  territories  [native]  can  only  be  justified  if  we  can
show  that  it  adds  to  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  the
people.”

The  moral  defence  of  Imperialism  is  generally  based  upon
the  assertion  that  in  point  of  fact  these  two  conditions
are  fulfilled,  viz.  that  the  political  and  economic  control
forcibly  assumed  by  “ higher  ” over  “ lower  races  ” does
promote  at  once  the  civilization  of  the  world  and  the
special  good  of  the  subject  races.  The  real  answer,  upon
which  British  Imperialists  rely  in  defending  expansion,
is  to  point  to  actual  services  rendered  to  India,  Eygpt,
Uganda,  etc.,  and  to  aver  that  other  dependencies  where
British  government  is  less  successful  would  have  fared  worse
if  left  either  to  themselves  or  to  another  European  Power.

Before  considering  the  practical  validity  of  this  position,
and  the  special  facts  that  determine  and  qualify  the  work
of  “ civilizing  ” other  races,  it  is  right  to  point  out  the
fundamental  flaw  in  this  theory  of  “ Imperialism,”  viz.
the  non-fulfilment  of  the  third  condition  laid  down  above.
Can  we  safely  trust  to  the  honour,  the  public  spirit,  and
the  insight  of  any  of  the  competing  imperial  races  the
subordination  of  its  private  interests  and  ends  to  the  wider
interests  of  humanity  or  the  particular  good  of  each  subject
race  brought  within  its  sway  ?

No  one,  as  we  point  out,  contends  that  so  perfect  a
natural  harmony  exists  that  every  nation,  consciously
following  its  own  chief  interest,  is  “ led  ” as  “ by  an
invisible  hand  ” to  a course  of  conduct  which  necessarily
subserves  the  common  interest,  and  in  particular  the
interest  of  the  subject  race.  What  security,  then,  can
possibly  exist  for  the  practices  of  a sound  Imperialism
fulfilling  the  conditions  laid  down  ? Does  any  one  contend
that  the  special  self-interest  of  the  expanding  and  annexing

236


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

nation  is  not  a chief,  or  indeed  the  chief  conscious  deter-
minant in  each  step  of  practical  Imperialism  ? Prima  facie
it  would  seem  reasonable  to  suppose  that  many  cases  would
occur  in  which  the  special  temporary  interests  of  the
expanding  nation  would  collide  with  those  of  the  world-
civilization,  and  that  the  former  would  be  preferred.  It
is  surely  unreasonable  to  take  as  proof  of  the  fulfilment  of
the  conditions  of  sane  Imperialism  the  untested  and
unverified  ipse  dixit  of  an  interested  party.

Ill

While  it  is  generally  agreed  that  the  progress  of  world-
civilization  is  the  only  valid  moral  ground  for  political
interference  with  “ lower  races,”  and  that  the  only  valid
evidence  of  such  progress  is  found  in  the  political,  industrial,
and  moral  education  of  the  race  that  is  subjected  to  this
interference,  the  true  conditions  for  the  exercise  of  such
a “ trust  ” are  entirely  lacking.

The  actual  situation  is,  indeed,  replete  with  absurdity.
Each  imperialist  nation  claims  to  determine  for  itself  what
are  the  lower  races  it  will  take  under  its  separate  protection,
or  agrees  with  two  or  three  neighbours  to  partition  some
huge  African  tract  into  separate  spheres  of  influence ; the
kind  of  civilization  that  is  imposed  is  never  based  on  any
sober  endeavour  to  understand  the  active  or  latent  pro-
gressive forces  of  the  subject  race,  and  to  develop  and
direct  them,  but  is  imported  from  Europe  in  the  shape  of
sets  arts  of  industry,  definite  political  institutions,  fixed
religious  dogmas,  which  are  engrafted  on  alien  institutions.
In  political  government  progress  is  everywhere  avowedly
sacrificed  to  order,  and  both  alike  are  subservient  to  the
quick  development  of  certain  profitable  trading  industries,
or  to  the  mere  lust  of  territorial  aggrandisement.  The

237


imperialism:  a study

beginning  with  the  Berlin  African  Conference  of  1885,
which  fixed  a standard  for  the  “ amicable  division  ” of
West  African  territory,  and  the  similar  treaty  in  1890,
fixing  boundaries  for  English,  German  and  Italian  encroach-
ments in  East  Africa,  doubtless  mark  a genuine  advance
in  the  relations  of  the  European  Powers,  but  the  objects
and  methods  they  embody  throw  a strange  light  upon  the
trust  theory.  If  to  the  care  of  Africa  we  add  that  of  China,
where  the  European  Powers  took  common  action  in  “ the
interests  of  civilization,”  the  future  becomes  still  more
menacing.  While  the  protection  of  Europeans  was  the
object  in  the  foreground,  and  imposed  a brief  genuine
community  of  policy  upon  the  diverse  nations,  no  sooner
was  the  immediate  object  won  than  the  deeper  and  divergent
motives  of  the  nations  became  manifest.  The  entire
history  of  European  relations  with  China  in  modem  times
is  little  else  than  one  long  cynical  commentary  upon  the
theory  that  we  are  engaged  in  the  civilization  of  the  Far
East.  Piratical  expeditions  to  force  trade  upon  a nation
whose  one  principle  of  foreign  policy  was  to  keep  clear  of
foreigners,  culminating  in  a war  to  compel  the  reception
of  Indian  opium ; abuse  of  the  generous  hospitality  given
for  centuries  to  peaceful  missionaries  by  wanton  insults
offered  to  the  religious  and  political  institutions  of  the
country,  the  forcible  exaction  of  commercial  and  political
“concessions  ” as  punishment  for  spasmodic  acts  of  reprisal,
the  cold-blooded  barter  of  murdered  missionaries  for  the
opening  of  new  treaty  ports,  territory  at  Kiao  Chow,  or  a
new  reach  of  the  Yang-Tse  for  British  trading  vessels ; the
mixture  of  menace,  cajolery,  and  bribery  by  which  England,
Russia,  Germany,  France,  and  Japan  laboured  to  gain  some
special  and  separate  railway  or  mining  concessions,  upon
terms  excluding  or  damaging  the  interest  of  the  others ;
the  definite  assumption  by  Christian  bishops  and  missionaries

240


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


of  political  authority,  and  the  arrogant  and  extensive  use
of  the  so-called  right  of  “ extra-territoriality,”  whereby
they  daim,  not  only  for  themselves  but  for  their  alleged
converts  and  prot6g6s,  immunity  from  the  laws  of  the  land —
all  these  things  sufficiently  expose  the  hollowness  in  actual
history  of  the  claims  that  considerations  of  a trust  for
civilization  animate  and  regulate  the  foreign  policy  of
Christendom,  or  of  its  component  nations.  What  actually
confronts  us  everywhere  in  modern  history  is  selfish,
materialistic,  short-sighted,  national  competition,  varied  by
occasional  collusion.  When  any  common  international
policy  is  adopted  for  dealing  with  lower  races  it  has  partaken
of  the  nature,  not  of  a moral  trust,  but  of  a business  “ deal.”

It  seems  quite  likely  that  this  policy  of  “ deals  ” may
become  as  frequent  and  as  systematic  in  the  world  of
politics  as  in  the  world  of  commerce,  and  that  treaties  and
alliances  having  regard  to  the  political  government  and
industrial  exploitation  of  countries  occupied  by  lower  races
may  constitute  a rude  sort  of  effective  internationalism  in
the  early  future.

Now,  such  political  arrangements  fall  short  in  two
important  respects  of  that  genuine  trust  for  civilization  which
alone  could  give  moral  validity  to  a “ civilized  ” control
of  lower  peoples.  In  the  first  place,  its  assignment  of  a
sphere  of  interest  or  a protectorate  to  England,  to  Germany,
or  Russia,  is  chiefly  determined  by  some  particular  separate
interest  of  that  country  by  reason  of  contiguity  or  other
private  convenience,  and  not  by  any  impartial  considera-
tion of  its  special  competence  for  the  work  of  civilization.
If,  for  example,  European  Powers  were  really  animated
by  the  desire  to  extend  Western  civilization  to  China  for
her  own  good  and  that  of  the  world,  they  might  more
favourably  essay  this  task  by  promoting  the  influence  of
Japan  than  by  inserting  their  own  alien  occidentalism.

241


imperialism:  a study

But  no  one  proposes  to  delegate  to  Japan  this  “ trust  ” ;
every  nation  thinks  of  its  own  present  commercial  interests
and  political  prestige.

Secondly,  the  civilization  of  the  lower  races,  even
according  to  accepted  Western  lights,  is  nowhere  adopted
as  the  real  aim  of  government.  Even  where  good  political
order  is  established  and  maintained,  as  in  Egypt  or  India,  its
primary  avowed  end,  and  its  universally  accepted  standard
of  success,  are  the  immediate  economic  benefits  attributed
thereto.  The  political  government  of  the  country  is
primarily  directed  everywhere  to  the  rapid,  secure,  effective
development  of  the  national  resources,  and  their  profitable
exploitation  by  native  labour  under  white  management.
It  is  maintained  and  believed  that  this  course  is  beneficial
to  the  natives,  as  well  as  to  the  commerce  of  the  controlling
power  and  of  the  world  at  large.  That  Indians  or  Egyptians
are  better  off  to-day  than  they  were  before  our  autocratic
sway,  not  merely  in  economic  resources  but  in  substantial
justice,  may  be  quite  true ; it  may  even  be  accredited  to
us  that'  many  of  our  governors  and  officials  have  displayed
some  disinterested  concern  for  the  immediate  well-being
of  the  races  committed  (by  ourselves)  to  our  trust.  But  it
can  nowhere  be  sincerely  contended  that  either  we  or  any
other  Christian  nation  are  governing  these  lower  races  upon
the  same  enlightened  principles  which  we  profess  and  some-
times practise  in  governing  ourselves.  I allude  here  not  to
methods  of  government,  but  to  ends.  In  the  more  en-
lightened European  States  and  their  genuine  colonies,  though
present  economic  considerations  bulk  largely  enough,  they  do
not  absorb  the  present  and  the  future  of  public  policy;
provision  is  made  for  some  play  of  non-economic  forces,  for
the  genuine  culture  of  human  life  and  character,  for  progress
alike  in  individual  growth  and  in  the  social  growth  which
comes  by  free  processes  of  self-government.  These  are

242


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


regarded  as  essential  conditions  of  the  healthy  growth  of  a
nation.  They  are  not  less  essential  in  the  case  of  lower
nations,  and  their  exercise  demands  more  thought  and  more
experiment.  The  chief  indictment  of  Imperialism  in  relation
to  the  lower  races  consists  in  this,  that  it  does  not  even
pretend  to  apply  to  them  the  principles  of  education  and  of
progress  it  applies  at  home.


IV

If  we  or  any  other  nation  really  undertook  the  care  and
education  of  a " lower  race  ” as  a trust,  how  should  we  set
about  the  execution  of  the  trust  ? By  studying  the  religions,
political  and  other  social  institutions  and  habits  of  the
people,  and  by  endeavouring  to  penetrate  into  their  present
mind  and  capacities  of  adaptation,  by  learning  their  language
and  their  history,  we  should  seek  to  place  them  in  the  natural
history  of  man ; by  similar  close  attention  to  the  country
in  which  they  live,  and  not  to  its  agricultural  and  mining
resources  alone,  we  should  get  a real  grip  upon  their
environment.  Then,  carefully  approaching  them  so  as  to
gain  what  confidence  we  could  for  friendly  motives,  and
openly  discouraging  any  premature  private  attempts  of
exploiting  companies  to  work  mines,  or  secure  concessions,
or  otherwise  to  impair  our  disinterested  conduct,  we  should
endeavour  to  assume  the  position  of  advisers.  Even  if  it
were  necessary  to  enforce  some  degree  of  authority,  we
should  keep  such  force  in  the  background  as  a last  resort,
and  make  it  our  first  aim  to  understand  and  to  promote  the
healthy  free  operations  of  all  internal  forces  for  progress
which  we  might  discover.

Natural  growth  in  self-government  and  industry  along
tropical  lines  would  be  the  end  to  which  the  enlightened
policy  of  civilized  assistance  would  address  itself.

R 243


imperialism:  a study


Now,  what  are  the  facts  ? Nowhere  has  any  serious
organized  attempt  been  made,  even  by  Great  Britain,  by
far  the  largest  of  the  trustees,  to  bring  this  scientific  dis-
interested spirit  of  inquiry  to  bear  upon  the  races  whose
destiny  she  dominates.1  The  publications  of  the  Aborigines
Protection  Society,  and  the  report  of  the  Native  Races
Committee,  dealing  with  South  Africa,  indicate  the  vast
range  of  unexplored  knowledge,  and  the  feeble  fumblings
which  have  hitherto  taken  the  place  of  ordered  investiga-
tions.2 It  is  natural  that  this  should  be  so.  White  pioneers
in  these  countries  are  seldom  qualified  to  do  the  work
required  ; the  bias  of  the  trader,  the  soldier,  or  the  pro-
fessional traveller,  is  fatal  to  sober,  disinterested  study  of
human  life,  while  the  missionary,  who  has  contributed  more
than  the  rest,  has  seldom  been  endowed  with  a requisite
amount  of  the  scientific  spirit  or  the  scientific  training.

Even  the  knowledge  which  we  do  possess  is  seldom  utilized
for  light  and  leading  in  our  actual  government  of  native
races.  There  have  indeed  been  signs  of  an  awakening
intelligence  in  certain  spots  of  our  Empire  ; administrators
like  Sir  George  Grey,  Lord  Ripon,  and  Sir  Marshall  Clarke
brought  sympathy  and  knowledge  to  the  establishment  of
careful  experiments  in  self-government.  The  forms  of
protectorate  exercised  over  Basutoland  and  Khama’s
Country  in  South  Africa,  the  restoration  of  the  province  of
Mysore  to  native  government,  and  the  more  careful
abstention  from  interference  with  the  internal  policy  of
feudatory  States  in  India,  were  favourable  signs  of  a more
enlightened  policy.

In  particular,  the  trend  of  liberal  sentiment  regarding

1 The  formation  of  an  African  Society,  in  memory  of  Mist  Mary  Kingsley
for  the  study  of  the  races  of  that  continent,  was  a move  in  the  right  direction.

* No  slight  is  here  intended  upon  the  excellent  work  of  the  Society  and  the
Committee  here  named.  They  have  handled  well  and  accurately  their  material.
It  is  the  work  of  original  research  that  is  so  lacking.

244


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


government  of  lower  races  was  undergoing  a marked  change.
The  notion  that  there  exists  one  sound,  just,  rational  system
of  government,  suitable  for  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,
embodied  in  the  elective  representative  institutions  of  Great
Britain,  and  that  our  duty  was  to  impose  this  system  as
soon  as  possible,  and  with  the  least  possible  modifications,
upon  lower  races,  without  any  regard  to  their  past  history
and  their  present  capabilities  and  sentiments,  was  tending  to
disappear  in  this  country,  though  the  new  headstrong
Imperialism  of  America  was  still  exposed  to  the  taunt  that
“ Americans  think  the  United  States  has  a mission  to  carry
1 canned  9 civilization  to  the  heathen.”  The  recognition
that  there  may  be  many  paths  to  civilization,  that  strong
racial  and  environmental  differences  preclude  a hasty
grafting  of  alien  institutions,  regardless  of  continuity  and
selection  of  existing  agencies  and  forms — these  genuinely
scientific  and  humane  considerations  are  beginning  to  take
shape  in  a demand  that  native  races  within  our  Empire
shall  have  larger  liberty  of  self-development  assured  to  them,
and  that  the  imperial  Government  shall  confine  its  inter-
ference to  protection  against  enemies  from  without,  and
preservation  of  the  elements  of  good  order  within.

The  true  “ imperial  ” policy  is  best  illustrated  in  the  case
of  Basutoland,  which  was  rescued  in  1884  from  the  aggressive
designs  of  Cape  Colony,  stimulated  by  industrial  exploiters.

Here  British  imperial  government  was  exercised  by  a
Commissioner,  with  several  British  magistrates  to  deal
with  grave  offences  against  order,  and  a small  body  of  native
police  under  British  officers.  For  the  rest,  the  old  political
and  economic  institutions  are  preserved — government  by
chiefs,  under  a paramount  chief,  subject  to  the  informal
control  or  influence  of  public  opinion  in  a national  assembly ;
ordinary  administration,  chiefly  consisting  in  allotment  of
land,  and  ordinary  jurisdiction  are  left  to  the  chiefs.

*45


imperialism:  a study


“ As  far  back  as  1855  Moshesh  forbade  the  * smelling-out 9
of  witches, -and  now  the  British  authorities  have  suppressed
the  more  noxious  or  offensive  kinds  of  ceremonies  practised
by  the  Kaffirs.  Otherwise,  they  interfere  as  little  as  possible
with  native  ways,  trusting  to  time,  peace,  and  the  mission-
aries to  secure  the  gradual  civilization  of  the  people.”
“ No  Europeans  are  allowed  to  hold  land,  and  a licence  is
needed  even  for  the  keeping  of  a store.  Neither  are  any
mines  worked.  European  prospectors  are  not  permitted
to  come  in  and  search  for  minerals,  for  the  policy  of  the
authorities  has  been  to  keep  the  country  for  the  natives,
and  nothing  alarms  the  chiefs  so  much  as  the  occasional
appearance  of  these  speculative  gentry,  who,  if  admitted,
would  soon  dispossess  them.”1

These  sentences  serve  to  point  the  path  by  which  most
of  our  Imperialism  has  diverged  from  the  ideal  of  a “ trust
for  civilization.”

The  widest  and  ultimately  the  most  important  of  the
struggles  in  South  Africa  is  that  between  the  policy  of
Basutoland  and  that  of  Johannesburg  and  Rhodesia ; for
there,  if  anywhere,  we  lay  our  finger  on  the  difference
between  a “ sane  ” Imperialism,  devoted  to  the  protection,
education,  and  self-development  of  a “ lower-race,”  and  an
“ insane  ” Imperialism,  which  hands  over  these  races  to  the
economic  exploitation  of  white  colonists  who  will  use  them
as  “ live  tools  ” and  their  lands  as  repositories  of  mining
or  other  profitable  treasure.


V

It  is  impossible  to  ignore  the  fact  that  this  “ saner  ”
Imperialism  has  been  vitiated  in  its  historic  origins  in  almost
every  quarter  of  the  globe.  Early  Imperialism  had  two

1 Mr.  Bryce,  Imprest  ions  of  South  Africa , p.  422.

246


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


main  motives,  the  lust  of  “ treasure  ” and  the  slave  trade.

Gold  and  silver,  diamonds,  rubies,  pearls,  and  other
jewels,  the  most  condensed  forms  of  portable  and  durable
wealth  by  which  men  in  a single  hazardous  adventure,  by
fortune,  fraud,  or  force,  might  suddenly  enrich  themselves
— these  from  the  ancient  days  of  Tyre  and  Carthage  have
directed  the  main  current  alike  of  private  and  national
exploration,  and  have  laid  the  foundation  of  white  dominion
over  the  coloured  races.  From  Ophir,  Golconda,  and  the
Orinoco  to  Ashanti,  Kimberley,  Klondike,  the  Transvaal
and  Mashonaland  it  is  the  same  story  : to  the  more  precious
metals,  tin  and  copper  were  early  added  as  motives  of  nearer
and  less  hazardous  trading  ventures,  and  the  machine
economy  of  recent  generations  has  lifted  coal  and  iron
deposits  to  the  rank  of  treasures  worth  capture  and  exploita-
tion by  civilized  nations.  But  gold  still  holds  its  own  as
the  dramatic  centre  of  gravitation  for  Imperialism.

But  along  with  these  motives,  and  of  even  wider  operation,
has  been  the  desire  to  obtain  supplies  of  slave  or  serf
labour.  The  earliest,  the  most  widely  prevalent,  and  the
most  profitable  trade  in  the  history  of  the  world  has  been
the  slave  trade.  Early  forms  of  imperial  expansion  were
directed  less  to  any  permanent  occupation  and  government
of  foreign  countries  than  to  the  capture  of  large  supplies  of
slave  labour  to  be  transmitted  to  the  conquering  country.
The  early  Imperialism  of  the  Greek  States  and  of  Rome  was
largely  governed  by  this  same  motive.  Greeks  and  Romans
did  not  often  effect  large  permanent  settlements  among
the  barbarians  they  conquered,  but,  contenting  themselves
with  keeping  such  military  and  magisterial  control  as
sufficed  to  secure  order  and  the  payment  of  tribute,  drafted
large  numbers  of  slaves  into  their  countries  in  order  to
utilize  their  labour.  The  Greek  cities  were  mostly  mari-
time, commercial,  and  industrial,  and  the  slaves  they  drew

HI


imperialism:  a study


from  Eastern  trade  or  from  the  Scythian  and  Thracian
“ hinterlands  ” they  employed  upon  their  ships  and  docks,
in  their  mines,  and  as  artisans  and  labourers  in  their  towns  :
Rome,  the  capital  of  an  agricultural  State,  used  her  slaves
on  a “ plantation  system,”  ousting  by  this  cheap  forced
labour  the  peasantry,  who,  driven  into  Rome,  were  subsisted
chiefly  upon  public  charity,  defrayed  out  of  the  tribute  of
their  foreign  conquests.1

Now  modern  Imperialism  in  its  bearing  on  the  “ lower
races  ” remains  essentially  of  the  same  type : it  employs
other  methods,  other  and  humaner  motives  temper  the
dominance  of  economic  greed,  but  analysis  exposes  the
same  character  at  bottom.  Wherever  white  men  of
“ superior  races  ” have  found  able-bodied  savages  or  lower
races  in  possession  of  lands  containing  rich  mineral  or
agricultural  resources,  they  have,  whenever  strong  enough,
compelled  the  lower  race  to  work  for  their  benefit,  either
organizing  their  labour  on  their  own  land,  or  inducing
them  to  work  for  an  unequal  barter,  or  else  conveying  them
as  slaves  or  servants  to  another  country  where  their  labour-
power  could  be  more  profitably  utilized.  The  use  of
imperial  force  to  compel  u lower  races  ” to  engage  in  trade
is  commonly  a first  stage  of  Imperialism  ; China  is  here
the  classic  instance  of  modern  times,  exhibiting  the  sliding
scale  by  which  sporadic  trade  passes  through  “ treaties,”
treaty  ports,  customs  control,  rights  of  inland  trading,
mining  and  railway  concession,  towards  annexation  and
general  exploitation  of  human  and  natural  resources.

The  slave  trade  or  forcible  capture  and  conveyance  of
natives  from  their  own  to  a foreign  land  has  in  its  naked
form  nearly  disappeared  from  the  practice  of  Western
nations  (save  in  the  case  of  Belgium  in  the  Congo),  as  also


1 Cf.  Mr.  Gilbert  Murray  in  Liberalism  and  the  Empire , pp.  126-129  (Brimley
Johnson).


248


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

the  working  of  conquered  people  as  slaves  in  their  own
country.

The  entire  economic  basis  of  the  industrial  exploitation
of  inferior  races  has  shifted  with  modern  conditions  of  life
and  industry.  The  change  is  a twofold  one : the  legal
status  of  slave  has  given  place  to  that  of  wage-labourer,  and
the  most  profitable  use  of  the  hired  labour  of  inferior  races
is  to  employ  them  in  developing  the  resources  of  their  own
lands  under  white  control  for  white  men’s  profit.

“ In  ancient  times  the  employer  would  not,  if  he  could,
go  away  from  his  own  country  to  employ  Libyans  or
Scythians  in  their  native  places.  If  he  left  home,  it  was  not
so  easy  to  come  back.  He  was  practically  in  exile.  In  the
second  place,  he  was  not  sufficiently  master  of  his  slaves  in
their  own  country.  If  they  were  all  of  one  nation  and  all
at  home,  they  might  rebel  or  break  loose.  If  a strong
Government  prevented  that,  it  was  at  any  rate  much  easier
for  individual  slaves  to  escape — a consideration  always  of
the  utmost  importance.  In  modern  times,  the  increasing
ease  of  communication  has  enabled  white  men  to  go  abroad
to  all  parts  of  the  earth  without  suffering  much  real  exile
and  without  losing  the  prospect  of  returning  home  at  will.
Our  Governments,  judged  by  ancient  standards,  are
miraculously  strong ; our  superior  weapons  make  rebellions
almost  impossible.  Consequently  we  do  not  attempt  to
import  blacks,  coolies,  and  Polynesians  into  Great  Britain.
The  opposition  of  the  working  classes  at  home  would  be


1 In  the  British  Protectorate  of  Zanzibar  and  Pemba,  however,  slavery  still
(1902}  exists  (notwithstanding  the  Sultan’s  decree  of  emancipation  in  1897)  and
British  courts  of  justice  recognize  the  status.  Miss  Emily  Hutchinson,  who  was
associated  with  the  Friends’  Industrial  Mission  at  Pemba,  said  it  was  five  years
since  the  legal  status  of  slavery  was  abolished  in  Zanzibar  and  Pemba.  Every
one,  including  those  who  were  most  anxious  that  the  liberation  should  proceed
slowly,  was  dissatisfied  with  the  present  state  of  affairs.  Out  of  an  estimated
population  of  25,000  slaves  in  Pemba  less  than  5,000  had  been  liberated  so  far
under  the  decree  (Anti- Slavery  Society  Annual  Meeting,  April  4,  1902).

249


imperialism:  a study


and  organization  of  native  labour  on  the  land,  the  plantation
system,  play  a more  prominent  part  in  the  policy  of  new
companies,  and  the  British  North  Borneo  Company,  the
Sierra  Leone  Company,  the  Royal  Niger  Company,  the
East  Africa  Company,  the  British  South  Africa  Company,
are  no  longer  chiefly  trading  bodies,  but  are  devoted  more
and  more  to  the  control  and  development  of  agricultural
and  mining  resources  by  native  labour  under  white  manage-
ment to  supply  Western  markets.  In  most  parts  of  the
world  a purely  or  distinctively  commercial  motive  and
conduct  have  furnished  the  nucleus  out  of  which  Imperialism
has  grown,  the  early  trading  settlement  becoming  an
industrial  settlement,  with  land  and  mineral  concessions
growing  round  it,  an  industrial  settlement  involving  force,
for  protection,  for  securing  further  concessions,  and  for
checking  or  punishing  infringements  of  agreement  or
breaches  of  order  ; other  interests,  political  and  religious,
enter  in  more  largely,  the  original  commercial  settlement
assumes  a stronger  political  and  military  character,  the  reins
of  government  are  commonly  taken  over  by  the  State  from
the  Company  and  a vaguely  defined  protectorate  passes
gradually  into  the  form  of  a colony.  Sierra  Leone,  Uganda,
and,  at  no  distant  date,  Rhodesia,  will  serve  for  recent
instances  of  this  evolution.


VI

The  actual  history  of  Western  relations  with  lower
races  occupying  lands  on  which  we  have  settled  throws,
then,  a curious  light  upon  the  theory  of  a “ trust  for  civiliza-
tion.” When  the  settlement  approaches  the  condition
of  genuine  colonization,  it  has  commonly  implied  the
extermination  of  the  lower  races,  either  by  war  or  by
private  slaughter,  as  in  the  case  of  Australian  Bushmen,

252


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


African  Bushmen  and  Hottentots,  Red  Indians,  and  Maoris,
or  by  forcing  upon  them  the  habits  of  a civilization  equally
destructive  to  them.1  This  is  what  is  meant  by  saying
that  “ lower  races  ” in  contact  with  “ superior  races  ”
naturally  tend  to  disappear.  How  much  of  “ nature  ”
or  “ necessity  ” belongs  to  the  process  is  seen  from  the
fact  that  only  those  “ lower  races  ” tend  to  disappear  who
are  incapable  of  profitable  exploitation  by  the  superior
white  settlers,  either  because  they  are  too  “ savage  ” for
effective  industrialism  or  because  the  demand  for  labour
does  not  require  their  presence.

Whenever  superior  races  settle  on  lands  where  lower
races  can  be  profitably  used  for  manual  labour  in  agriculture,
mining,  and  domestic  work,  the  latter  do  not  tend  to
die  out,  but  to  form  a servile  class.  This  is  the  case,  not
only  in  tropical  countries  where  white  men  cannot  form
real  colonies,  working  and  rearing  families  with  safety
and  efficiency,  and  where  hard  manual  work,  if  done  at
all,  must  be  done  by  “ coloured  men,”  but  even  in  countries
where  white  men  can  settle,  as  in  parts  of  South  Africa  and
of  the  southern  portion  of  the  United  States.

As  we  entered  these  countries  for  trade,  so  we  stay
there  for  industrial  exploitation,  directing  to  our  own
profitable  purposes  the  compulsory  labour  of  the  lower
races.  This  is  the  root  fact  of  Imperialism  so  far  as  it
relates  to  the  control  of  inferior  races  ; when  the  latter
are  not  killed  out  they  are  subjected  by  force  to  the  ends
of  their  white  superiors.

With  the  abolition  of  the  legal  form  of  slavery  the

1Mr.  Bryce  (Romanes  Lecture,  1902,  p.  32)  says:  “I  was  told  in  Hawaii
that  the  reduction  of  the  native  population,  from  about  300,000  in  Captain
Cook's  time  to  about  30,000  in  1883,  was  largely  due  to  the  substitution  of  wooden
houses  for  the  old  wigwams,  whose  sides,  woven  of  long  grass,  had  secured  natural
ventilation,  and  to  the  use  of  clothes,  which  the  natives,  accustomed  to  nothing
more  than  a loin  cloth,  did  not  think  of  changing  or  drying  when  drenched  with
rain."


253


imperialism:  a study


economic  substance  has  not  disappeared.  It  is  no  general
question  of  how  far  the  character  of  slavery  adheres  in
all  wage  labour  that  I am  pressing,  but  a statement  that
Imperialism  rests  upon  and  exists  for  the  sake  of  “ forced
labour,”  i.e.  labour  which  natives  would  not  undertake
save  under  direct  or  indirect  personal  compulsion  issuing
from  white  masters.

There  are  many  methods  of  “ forcing  ” labour.

Wherever  the  question  of  industrial  development  of
tropical  or  sub-tropical  lands  for  agricultural  or  mining
purposes  comes  up,  the  same  difficulty  confronts  the
white  masters.  The  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of
the  House  of  Commons  in  1842  on  the  state  of  the  West
Indies,  subsequent  to  the  emancipation  of  slaves,  states
the  problem  most  succinctly : “ The  labourers  are  enabled
to  live  in  comfort  and  to  acquire  wealth  without,  for  the
most  part,  labouring  on  the  estates  of  the  planters  for
more  than  three  or  four  days  in  a week,  and  from  five  to
seven  hours  in  a day,  so  that  they  have  no  sufficient  stimulus
to  perform  an  adequate  amount  of  work.”  The  reason
of  this  inadequate  amount  of  work  (how  many  white  men
in  the  West  Indies  put  in  a five  to  seven  hours’  working-
day  ?)  is  that  they  can  get  high  wages,  and  this  is  attributed
“ to  the  easy  terms  upon  which  the  use  of  land  has  been
obtainable  by  negroes.”  In  a word,  the  Committee  con-
sidered “ that  the  cheapness  of  land  has  been  the  main
cause  of  the  difficulties  which  have  been  experienced,  and
that  this  cheapness  is  the  natural  result  of  the  excess  of
fertile  land  beyond  the  wants  of  the  existing  population.”

The  negro  would  only  put  in  a five  to  seven  hours’  day
at  high  pay  because  he  had  the  option  of  earning  his  liveli-
hood on  fertile  land  of  his  own.  The  same  trouble  confronts
the  white  master  everywhere  where  the  lower  races  are  in
possession  of  agricultural  land  sufficient  for  their  low

254


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

and  unprogressive  standard  of  comfort ; they  either  wiH
not  work  at  all  for  wages,  or  will  not  work  long  enough  or
for  low  enough  pay.

“ The  question,  in  a few  words,”  writes  Professor  Ireland,
“ is  this — What  possible  means  are  there  of  inducing
the  inhabitants  of  the  tropics  to  undertake  steady  and
continuous  work  if  the  local  conditions  are  such  that  from
the  mere  bounty  of  nature  all  the  ambitions  of  the  people
can  be  gratified  without  any  considerable  amount  of
labour  ? *n

There  are  only  two  genuinely  economic  forces  which
will  bring  such  labour  more  largely  into  the  labour  market :
The  growth  of  population  with  increased  difficulty  in  getting
a full  easy  subsistence  from  the  soil  is  one  ; the  pressure  of
new  needs  and  a rising  standard  of  consumption  is  the  other.

These  may  be  regarded  as  the  natural  and  legitimate
inducements  to  wage  labour,  and  even  in  most  tropical
countries  they  exercise  some  influence,  especially  where
white  settlements  have  taken  up  much  of  the  best  land.
In  the  lowest  races,  where  the  increase  of  population  is
kept  down  by  high  mortality,  aggravated  by  war  and
infanticide,  and  where  new  wants  are  slowly  evolved,  these
inducements  are  feeble  ; but  in  more  progressive  peoples
they  have  a fair  amount  of  efficacy.  Unfortunately,  these
natural  forces  are  somewhat  slow,  and  cannot  be  greatly
hastened  ; white  industrialists  are  in  a hurry  to  develop
the  country,  and  to  retire  with  large,  quick  profits.  The
case  of  South  Africa  is  typical.  There  many  of  the  Bantu
races  are  fairly  educable  in  new  needs,  and  are  willing  to
undertake  wage  labour  for  their  satisfaction  ; many  of  them,
notably  the  Basutos,  are  becoming  overcrowded  on  their
reserved  lands,  and  are  willing  to  go  far  for  good  wages.
But  the  demands  of  a vast  mining  industry,  growing  within

1 Tropical  Colonization , p.  155  (The  Macmillan  Co.).

255


imperialism:  a study


a few  years  to  gigantic  proportions,  cannot  await  the  working
of  these  natural  stimuli ; the  mine-owners  want  an  un-
natural accession  to  the  labour  market.  The  result  is  frantic
efforts  to  scour  the  continents  of  Africa  and  Asia,  and  bring
in  masses  of  Zanzibari,  Arabs,  Indian  coolies,  or  Chinese,  or
else  to  substitute  for  natural  economic  pressure  various
veiled  modes  of  political  or  private  compulsion.

The  simplest  form  of  this  compulsion  is  that  of  employing
armed  force  upon  individual  natives  to  “ compel  them  to
come  in,”  as  illustrated  by  the  methods  of  the  South
Africa  Chartered  Company  before  1897,1  which,  when  the
chiefs  failed  to  provide  labour,  sent  out  native  police  to
“ collect  the  labour.”  Save  its  illegal  character,  there  is
nothing  to  distinguish  this  from  the  corvie  or  legalized
forced  labour  imposed  on  natives  in  Natal,  or  the  Com-
pulsory Labour  Ordinance  passed  by  the  Gold  Coast
Legislature  in  December  1895,  reviving  the  lapsed  custom
under  which  it  was  “ obligatory  on  persons  of  the  labouring
class  to  give  labour  for  public  purposes  on  being  called
out  by  their  chiefs  or  other  native  superiors,”  and  authorizing
the  Government  to  compel  native  chiefs  to  furnish  as  many
carriers  as  were  needed  for  the  projected  expedition  to
Kumasi.*

Military  service,  borrowing  a semblance  of  “ civilized  ”
usage  from  the  European  system  of  conscription,  is  utilized,
not  merely  for  emergencies,  as  in  the  Kumasi  expedition,

1 Sir  Richard  Martin  in  hit  report  states  his  conviction  “ that  the  Native
Commissioners,  in  the  first  instance,  endeavoured  to  obtain  labour  through  the
Indunas,  but  failing  that,  they  procured  it  by  force."

Howard  Hensman,  defending  the  administration  of  the  Company  in  his
History  of  Rhodesia  (Blackwood  & Sons),  admits  the  practice,  thus  describing  it :
“ In  Rhodesia  a native  who  declined  to  work  ” (i.e.  for  wages)  **  was  taken  before
the  Native  Commissioners  and  sent  off  to  some  mine  or  public  work  dose  at  hand,
paid  at  what,  to  him,  were  very  high  rates,  fed  and  housed,  and  then  at  the  end
of  three  months  he  was  allowed  to  return  to  his  kraal,  where  he  was  permitted
to  remain  for  the  rest  of  the  year  ” (p.  257).


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


and  in  our  South  African  campaign,  where  native  labour
had  everywhere  been  44  pressed,”  when  ordinary  economic
motives  failed,  but  for  regular  industrial  labour.  The
classical  instance  is  that  of  the  Congo  Free  State,  where  a
“ militia  ” levy  was  made  upon  the  population,  nominally
for  defence,  but  really  for  the  State  and  Chartered  Company
service  in  the  44  rubber  ” and  other  industries.

In  face  of  unrepealed  decrees  according  44  une  protection
speciale  aux  noirs,”  and  prescribing  that  44  Pesclavage,
meme  domestique,  ne  saurait  etre  reconnu  officialement,”
a system  of  44  voluntary  ” and  44  militia  ” levies  has  been
instituted  to  be  used  44  in  the  establishment  of  plantations
and  the  construction  of  works  of  public  utility.”  The
accuracy  of  Mr.  Fox  Bourne’s  commentary  is  attested  by
numerous  witnesses.  44  The  4 force  publique  ’ with  its
4 agriculteurs  soldats 9 and  others  subordinate  to  it,  when
not  employed  on  military  expeditions,  are  used  as  overseers
of  what  are  virtually  slave-gangs  or  as  collectors  of  4 tribute  ’
from  the  luckless  aborigines,  whose  right  to  live  in  their
own  country,  without  paying  heavily  for  the  privilege,  is
denied.”1

So  far  as  44  forced  labour  ” is  designed  merely  as  a mode
of  revenue  to  the  State,  a system  of  44  taxation  in  kind,”
it  cannot  be  condemned  as  essentially  unjust  or  oppressive,
however  liable  it  may  be  to  abuses  in  practice.  All  taxation
is  44  forced  labour,”  whether  the  tax  be  levied  in  money,
in  goods,  or  in  service.  When  such  44  forced  labour  ” is
confined  to  the  needs  of  a well-ordered  government,  and
is  fairly  and  considerately  administered,  it  involves  no
particular  oppression.  Such  44  servitude  ” as  it  involves
is  concealed  under  every  form  of  government.

The  case  is  quite  different  where  governmental  regulations
and  taxation  are  prostituted  to  purposes  of  commercial

1 Simmy  and  its  Substitutes  in  Africa,  p.  1 1.

257


imperialism:  a study


profit ; where  laws  are  passed,  taxes  levied,  and  the  machinery
of  public  administration  utilized  in  order  to  secure  a large,
cheap,  regular,  efficient,  and  submissive  supply  of  labourers
for  companies  or  private  persons  engaged  in  mining,
agricultural,  or  other  industries  for  their  personal  gain.

Where  white  settlers  find  “ lower  races  ” in  occupation
of  lands  rich  in  agricultural,  mineral,  or  other  resources,
they  are  subject  to  a double  temptation.  They  want
possession  of  the  land  and  control  of  a cheap  native  supply
of  labour  to  work  it  under  their  control  and  for  their  gain.
If  the  “ natives  ” are  of  too  low  an  order  or  too  untamable
to  be  trained  for  effective  labour  they  must  be  expelled  or
exterminated,  as  in  the  case  of  the  “ lower  nomads  ” the
Bushmen  of  Australia  and  South  Africa,  the  Negritos,
Bororos,  Veddahs,  etc.,  and  even  the  Indians  of  North
America.  War,  murder,  strong  drink,  syphilis  and  other
civilized  diseases  are  chief  instruments  of  a destruction
commonly  couched  under  the  euphemism  “ contact  with
a superior  civilization.’’  The  land  thus  cleared  of  natives
passes  into  white  possession,  and  white  men  must  work
it  themselves,  or  introduce  other  lower  industrial  peoples
to  work  it  for  them,  as  in  the  case  of  slave  labour  introduced
into  the  United  States  and  West  Indies,  or  indentured
labour  into  Natal,  British  Guiana,  etc.

But  where  the  “ lower  races  ” are  capable  of  being  set
to  profitable  labour  on  their  own  land,  as  agriculturists,
miners,  or  domestics,  self-interest  impels  the  white  to
work  a “ forced-labour ” system  for  their  private  ends.
In  most  tropical  or  sub-tropical  countries  the  natives  can
by  their  own  labour  and  that  of  their  families  get  a tolerably
easy  subsistence  from  the  land.  If  they  are  to  be  induced
to  undertake  wage  labour  for  white  masters,  this  must  be
put  a stop  to.  So  we  have  pressure  brought  upon  govern-
ment to  render  it  impossible  for  the  natives  to  live  as

258


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


formerly  upon  the  land.  Their  land  and,  when  they  are
a pastoral  people,  their  cattle  are  objects  of  attack.

The  Torrens  Act,  by  which  in  1852  the  doctrine  of
u eminent  domain  99  was  applied  to  South  Australia  in
such  wise  as  to  make  all  the  country  virtually  Crown  land,
though  not  ill-meant,  has  furnished  a baneful  precedent,
not  only  for  encroachment  of  British  settlers,  but  for  the
still  more  flagrant  abuses  of  Belgian  adventurers  on  the
Congo.  White  settlers  or  explorers,  sometimes  using
legal  instruments,  sometimes  private  force  or  fraud,  con-
stantly encroach  upon  the  fertile  or  mineralized  lands  of
natives,  driving  them  into  less  fertile  lands,  crowding
them  into  reserves,  checking  their  nomadic  habits,  and
otherwise  making  it  more  difficult  for  them  to  obtain  a
livelihood  by  the  only  methods  known  to  them.

A chief  object  and  a common  result  of  this  policy  is
to  induce  or  compel  natives  to  substitute  wage  labour,
altogether  or  in  part,  for  the  ancient  tribal  life  upon  the
land.  Those  ignorant  of  the  actual  conditions  involved
often  suppose  that  the  alienation  of  lands  or  mineral
rights,  or  the  contracts  for  labour,  are  negotiated  in
accordance  with  ordinary  methods  of  free  bargain.

The  modern  history  of  Africa,  however,  is  rich  in  instances
to  the  contrary.

The  history  of  competitive  knavery  and  crime,  by  which
Lobengula  was  inveigled  into  signing  away  “ rights  ”
which  he  neither  owned  nor  understood  to  the  Chartered
Company,  cannot  yet  be  written  completely,  but  its  outlines
are  plain  and  profitable  reading.

A “ free  contract,”  implying  voluntary  action,  full
knowledge  and  approximate  equality  of  gain  to  both
parties,  is  almost  unknown  in  the  dealings  of  superior  with
inferior  races.  How  political  treaties  and  industrial  con-
cessions are  actually  obtained  may  be  described  for  us  by

s 259


imperialism:  a study


sible  officials.  Alike  in  the  Boer  Republics  and  in  Cape
Colony,  the  seizures  of  land  and  labour  have  been  chief
motives  of  the  border  warfare  constantly  recurring  in  the
history  of  South  Africa.  The  encroachments  of  Boers  or
British  colonists  upon  native  territory  or  reserves,  or  the
seizure  of  cattle  on  border  land  by  one  party  or  the  other,
had  led  to  punitive  expeditions,  the  result  of  which  has
been  further  confiscation  of  land  and  capture  of  prisoners,
who,  formerly  held  as  slaves,  have  in  more  recent  times  been
kept  to  labour  as  “ apprentices  ” or  indentured  labourers.

The  case  of  Bechuanaland  in  1897  affords  a serviceable
illustration.  A small  local  riot  got  up  by  a drunken  native
sub-chief  on  a trifling  grievance,  and  involving  armed
resistance  on  the  part  of  a few  hundred  Kaffirs,  easily  put
down  by  a small  body  of  armed  volunteers,  was  exaggerated
into  a u rebellion,”  and  was  made  a pretext  for  driving
some  8,000  natives  from  the  lands  “ inalienably  ” secured  to
them  by  the  Bechuanaland  Annexation  Act  of  1895,  and  for
confiscating  these  lands  for  British  occupation,  while  the
rest  of  the  population,  some  30,000,  were  to  be  gradually
removed  from  their  settlements,  and  given  “ equivalent
land  ” in  some  other  district.  In  the  speech  introducing
the  confiscation  measure  in  the  Cape  Parliament,  Sir
Gordon  Sprigg  explained  that  this  was  “ very  valuable
land,  and  probably  would  be  cut  up  into  very  small  farms,  so
that  there  might  be  a considerable  European  population
established  in  that  part  of  the  country.”  There  was  no
pretence  that  most  of  those  who  were  deprived  of  their
lands  or  deported  were  proved  to  have  taken  part  in  the
“ rebellion.”  The  sequel  of  this  clearing  is  most  significant.
What  was  to  become  of  the  people  taken  from  their  land  ?
They  were  offered  a choice  between  prosecution  u on  a
charge  of  sedition  ” and  “ service  in  the  colony  upon  such
conditions  and  with  such  rates  of  wages  as  the  Government

262


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


might  arrange  for  a term  of  five  years.”  The  Government,
in  thus  proposing  to  compound  a felony,  was  well  aware  of
the  extreme  difficulty  of  proving  “ sedition  ” in  a court  of
justice,  and,  in  point  of  fact,  in  two  cases  which  were  put
on  trial  the  Public  Prosecutor  declined  to  bring  the  case
before  a jury.  The  object  of  the  threat  of  trial  was  to
coerce  into  the  acceptance  of  “ indentured  labour,”  and  in
fact  584  men,  with  three  times  as  many  women  and  children
were  handed  over  to  serve  under  colonial  farmers,  wages
being  fixed  at  10/.  a month  for  able-bodied  men  and
7 j.  6d.  for  women.

Thus  did  covetous  colonials  kill  two  birds  with  one  stone,
obtaining  the  land  and  the  labour  of  the  Bechuana  “ rebels.”1
It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  such  incidents  are
deliberately  planned  : where  empire  is  asserted  over  lower
races  in  the  form  of  protectorate,  the  real  government
remaining  in  native  hands,  offences  must  from  time  to
time  arise,  local  disturbances  which  can  by  rash  or  brutal
treatment  be  fanned  into  “ rebellion,”  and  form  the  pretext
for  confiscation  and  a forcing  of  the  landless  rebels  into
“ labour.”


1 The  details  of  this  business,  recorded  in  Blue-book  C.  8,797,  relating  to  native
disturbances,  are  most  instructive  to  the  student,  of  Imperialism.

The  inspector  of  Native  Locations  in  his  report  of  the  affair  distinctly  asserts  :
44  That  it  was  not  a general  rising  of  the  Mashowing  people  is  certain,  because
there  were  not  more  than  100  natives  engaged  in  the  Kobogo  fight/'  Yet  the
whole  of  the  Mashowing  territory  was  confiscated  and  all  the  population  treated
as  rebels.

While  only  some  450  men  were  taken  with  arms,  3,793  men,  women,  and
children  were  arrested  and  deported,  1,871  being  afterwards  44  indentured  4t  in
the  colony.  Seven-eighths  of  the  prisoners  were  women,  children,  or  unarmed
men.  Even  of  the  men  who  were  taken  in  arms  at  the  Langeberg  Sir  A.  Milner
wrote  (January  5,  1898) : 44 1 am  inclined  to  think  that  in  many  other  cases,  if
the  prisoners  had  chosen  to  stand  their  ground,  the  same  difficulty  (as  in  two
cases  taken  to  trial)  would  have  been  found  in  establishing  legal  evidence  of  treason.
It  is  probable  that,  of  the  men  who  surrendered  at  the  Langeberg,  some  had
never  fought  against  the  Government  at  all,  while  many  others  had  done  so
reluctantly.  To  bring  home  treasonable  intent  to  any  large  number  of  them
would,  I conceive,  have  been  a difficult  matter 44  (p.  48).

263


imperialism:  a study


Among  African  tribes  the  most  vulnerable  point  ns  the
cattle,  which  form  their  most  important,  often  their  only,
property.  To  encroach  upon  this  is  a sure  way  of  pro-
voking hostility.  The  Bechuana  riot  seems  to  have  arisen
from  an  injudicious  handling  of  precautions  needed  to  deal
with  the  rinderpest.  The  second  Matabele  war,  with  its
murders  of  white  settlers  and  the  wholesale  slaughter  in
reprisal,  was  directly  instigated  by  the  seizure  of  cattle
belonging  to  the  tribesmen,  on  the  unproven  theory  that
all  cattle  belonged  to  the  king  and  thus  came  into  the
possession  of  the  Chartered  Company.  As  a sequel  of  the
first  Matabele  war  large  quantities  of  cattle  had  been
stolen  by  white  settlers  to  stock  the  farms  which  had  just
been  pegged  out  for  them  in  the  land  they  had  taken,  and
the  further  threat  of  a wholesale  confiscation  of  cattle,
though  not  carried  into  full  effect,  lay  at  the  root  of  the
subsequent  rebellion.1

Everywhere  these  attacks  upon  the  land  and  cattle  of
lower  races,  provoking  reprisals,  followed  by  further
confiscation  and  a breaking-up  of  the  old  tribal  life  upon
the  soil,  have  as  a related  secondary  object  the  provision
of  a supply  of  cheap  labour  for  the  new  white  masters,  to
be  employed  in  farming,  on  mines,  or  for  military  service.

1 Here  it  the  account  of  a Rhodesian  writer,  defending  the  British  policy : —

“ Seeing  that  Lobengula  only  allowed  his  followers  to  own  cattle  on  sufferance
as  it  were,  all  the  herds  in  the  country  might  be  said  to  be  the  property  of  the
late  king,  and  that  was  the  view  which  the  British  South  Africa  Company  took.
The  number  of  cattle  in  the  country  at  this  time  was  estimated  at  not  less  than  a
quarter  of  a million  head,  and  the  indunas  were  ordered  at  once  to  drive  in  the
cattle  from  the  districts  over  which  they  had  control  to  Buluwayo.  Some  of  the
indunas  duly  complied  with  this  demand,  in  which  they  saw  nothing  more  than
what  was  to  be  expected  as  the  outcome  of  the  war  j but  others,  and  those  chiefly
who  had  not  taken  any  part  in  the  fighting,  declined  to  do  so,  and  hid  the  cattle
away  out  of  reach  of  the  Native  Commissioners.  As  the  cattle  did  not  come  in
in  such  numbers  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  the  Government  ordered  the  Native
Commissioners  to  collect  and  send  in  each  month  a certain  number  of  cattle.  . . .
This  step  proved  a highly  unpopular  one  among  the  natives  ” ( History  of  Rbodosio ,
by  H.  Hensman,  p.  165).


264


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


Such  labour  commonly  preserves  a semblance  of  free
contract, . engagements  “ voluntarily  ” entered  into  for  a
fixed  period  at  agreed  wages.  The  amount  of  real  freedom
depends  partly  upon  the  amount  of  personal  pressure  brought
to  bear  by  the  chief  through  whom  bargains  are  commonly
struck,  still  more  on  the  amount  of  option  which  remains
to  get  a living  from  the  land.

This  last  is  the  vital  matter  in  an  understanding  of
“ forced  labour.”  In  one  sense  all  labour  is  “ forced  ” or
“ unfree,”  where  it  is  not  open  to  the  “ proletariat  ” to
get  a living  by  cultivation  of  the  soil : this  is  the  normal
condition  of  the  vast  majority  of  the  people  in  Great  Britain
and  in  some  other  white  man’s  countries.  What  is  peculiar
to  the  system  of  “ forced  labour,”  as  here  tised,  is  the
adoption  by  a white  ruling  race  of  legal  measures  designed
expressly  to  compel  the  individual  natives  to  whom  they
apply  to  quit  land,  which  they  occupy  and  by  which  they
can  live,  in  order  to  work  in  white  service  for  the  private
gain  of  the  white  man.  When  lands  formerly  occupied
by  natives  are  confiscated,  or  otherwise  annexed  for  white
owners,  the  creation  of  a labour  supply  out  of  the  dis-
possessed natives  is  usually  a secondary  object.  But  this
“ forcing  ” becomes  a system  when  measures  are  devised
by  Government  for  the  express  purpose  of  “ compelling  ”
labour.


VII

The  simplest  method,  that  of  “ slavery,”  is  generally
abolished  by  European  nations.  Corvie , the  Congo  and
former  Rhodesian  methods  are  seldom  openly  advocated
or  defended ; but  the  adoption  of  various  forms  of  public
compulsion  in  order  to  drive  natives  into  private  service  is
generally  approved  by  “ colonials,”  and  is  sanctioned  by
imperialist  statesmen.  A chief  instrument  of  this  indirect

265


imperialism:  a study


compulsion  is  taxation.  There  is  nothing  essentially  un-
reasonable in  imposing  a hut  or  a poll-tax  upon  natives  to
assist  in  defraying  the  expenses  of  government,  provided
that  care  is  taken  in  the  modes  of  assessment  and  collection,
and  due  allowance  made  for  the  fluctuating  economic
circumstances  of  agricultural  populations  with  narrow
markets  and  small  use  of  money.  But  theSe  taxes  are  not
infrequently  applied  so  as  to  dispossess  natives  of  their
land,  force  them  to  work  for  wages  and  even  to  drive  them
into  insurrections  which  are  followed  by  wholesale  measures
of  confiscation.

The  case  of  the  risings  in  Sierra  Leone  during  1898  attests
the  nature  of  this  impolicy,  and  the  following  passage  from
the  report  of  the  Special  Commissioner,  Sir  David  Chalmers,
deserves  attention.  His  conclusions  as  to  the  causes  of
the  insurrection  are  thus  summarized  : —

“ The  hut-tax,  together  with  the  measures  used  for  its
enforcement,  were  the  moving  causes  of  the  insurrection.
The  tax  was  obnoxious  to  the  customs  and  feelings  of  the
people.  A peremptory  and  regularly  recurring  impost  is
unknown  in  their  own  practices  and  tradition.  The
English  Government  has  not  as  yet  conferred  any  such
benefits  as  to  lead  to  a burden  of  a strange  and  portentous
species  being  accepted  willingly.  There  was  a widespread
belief  that  it  was  a means  of  taking  away  their  rights  in  their
country  and  in  their  property.”1 * *  “ The  amount  of  the
tax  is  higher  than  the  people,  taken  together,  can  pay,
and  the  arrangements  by  which  liability  is  primarily  placed

1 Mist  Mary  Kingsley  regards  this  44  widespread  belief  ” as  justified.

44  It  hat  been  said  that  the  Sierra  Leone  hut-tax  war  is  a 4 little  Indian  Mutiny  ’ ;

those  who  have  said  it  do  not  seem  to  have  known  how  true  the  statement  is,  for
these  attacks  on  property  in  the  form  of  direct  taxation  are,  to  the  African,
treachery  on  the  part  of  England,  who,  from  the  first,  has  kept  on  assuring  the
African  that  she  does  not  mean  to  take  hh  country  from  him,  and  then,  as  soon

as  she  is  strong  enough,  in  his  eyes,  deliberately  starts  doing  so  ” {West  African
Studies , p.  372  ; Macmillan  & Co.).

266


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

on  the  chiefs  to  make  good  definite  amounts  on  demand
are  unworkable.”  “ The  mode  of  enforcing  payment
provided  by  the  law  would  probably  prove  abortive,
whether  used  to  meet  inability  or  unwillingness  to  pay.”
“ Repugnance  to  the  tax  was  much  aggravated  by  the  sudden,
uncompromising  and  harsh  methods  by  which  it  was
endeavoured  to  be  brought  into  operation  not  merely  by
the  acts  of  native  policemen,  but  in  the  whole  scheme
adopted  by  the  colonial  authorities.”

Here  Sir.  D.  Chalmers  condenses  all  the  familiar
grievances  of  monetary  taxes  imposed  by  strong  expensive
white  Governments  upon  poor  “ native  ” races.  White
government,  if  good,  is  expensive,  hence  taxation  tends  to  be
heavy  in  amount ; fixed  in  amount,  it  must  be  paid  out
of  very  fluctuating  industries  ; levied  in  money,  it  forces
self-subsisting  families  or  tribes  to  find  markets  for  their
goods  or  labours ; collected,  as  it  must  be,  by  native
authorities,  it  breeds  extortion,  corruption,  and  cruelty.  But
Sir  D.  Chalmers  lays  his  finger  on  the  central  vice  when  he
names  “ a widespread  belief  that  it  was  a means  of  taking
away  their  rights  in  their  country  and  in  their  property.”1 * *

Where  there  exists  a large  growing  demand  for  native
labour  this  method  of  compelling  natives  to  pay  money
taxes  is  seen  to  have  a new  importance.  They  can  only
earn  money  by  undertaking  labour  contracts.  Hence  a
system  of  direct  taxation  imposed  by  hut,  poll,  or  labour-
taxes  is  devised.  Everywhere,  as  we  have  seen,  under
free  popular  government,  the  tendency  is  to  subordinate
direct  to  indirect  taxation.  “ Imperialism  ” alone  favours


1 Compare  the  pathetic  plaint  of  the  natives  in  Rhodesia,  as  voiced  by  Sir

Richard  Martin  in  his  official  report.  14  The  natives  practically  said : 4 Our

country  is  gone  and  our  cattle ; we  have  nothing  to  live  for.  Our  women  are
deserting  us ; the  white  man  does  as  he  likes  with  them.  We  are  the  slaves  of

the  white  man ; we  are  nobody,  and  have  no  rights  or  laws  of  any  kind ' ”
(Cd.  S547).

*67


imperialism:  a study


direct  taxation  of  the  working  classes.  It  does  not,  however,
propose  a general  system  of  direct  taxation  applicable  alike
to  white  and  blacks.  The  direct  taxes  with  which  we  are
here  concerned  are  applied  exclusively  to  the  “ subject  ”
races.

In  South  Africa  their  chief  avowed  aim  is,  not  to  provide
revenue,  but  to  compel  labour.  The  hut  and  labour
taxation  is  not  strongly  developed  in  Cape  Colony  or  in
Natal,  because  the  break-up  of  old  tribal  life,  and  the
substitution  of  individual  economic  family  life  favouring
wage  labour,  have  hitherto  furnished  a sufficient  supply  of
labour  to  countries,  mainly  agricultural,  thinly  peopled  by
white  settlers,  and  only  in  one  district,  that  of  Kimberley,
developing  a considerable  centralized  demand  for  native
labour.  The  hut-tax  in  these  colonies  has,  therefore,  not
proved  an  oppressive  burden.  Only  when  the  diamond
fields  found  difficulties  in  obtaining  a ready  supply  of  native
labour,  and  wages  rose,  did  Mr.  Rhodes,  a chief  proprietor,
use  his  public  position  as  Cape  Premier  to  procure  an  Act
designed  to  assist  De  Beers  in  obtaining  cheap  labour.  By
this  statute,  the  Glen  Grey  Act,  it  Was  enacted  that  every
male  native  in  districts  where  the  Act  was  adopted,  should
pay  a “ labour-tax ” of  ios.  per  annum,  unless  he  could
prove  that  during  three  months  of  each  year  “ he  has  been
in  service  or  employment  beyond  the  borders  of  the
district.”  No  secret  was  made  of  the  fact  that  this  measure
was  designed,  not  to  provide  revenue,  but  to  compel  to
labour.  “ If  they  could  make  these  people  work  they
would  reduce  the  rate  of  labour  in  the  country,”  said  Mr.
Rhodes ; and  in  another  speech  in  Parliament : “ It  was
wrong  that  there  should  be  a million  natives  in  that  country,
and  yet  that  they  should  be  paying  a sum  equal  to  about
£1  a week  for  their  labour,  while  that  labour  was  absolutely
essential  for  the  proper  development  of  the  country.”

268


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

The  “ labour-tax  ” has  not,  however,  operated  oppres-
sively in  Cape  Colony ; for  the  diamond  industry,  being
limited  in  output,  has  not  demanded  more  native  labour  than
could  be  easily  supplied  by  ordinary  economic  inducements.

It  is  in  the  Transvaal  and  Rhodesia  that  taxation  of
natives  ripens  into  a plan  for  forcing  labour.  The  mine-
owners  of  the  Transvaal  are  agreed  as  to  their  right  and
their  need  to  compel  the  natives  to  undergo  the  dignity
of  labour,  and  they  regard  taxation  as  one  important
instrument.  The  testimony  of  witnesses  before  the
Industrial  Commission  in  1897  was  unanimous  in  favouring
such  compulsion,  and  Mr.  Rudd,  of  the  Consolidated
Goldfields,  stated  the  demand  very  plainly  at  the  annual
meeting  of  his  company.1  “ If  we  could  only  call  upon
one-half  of  the  natives  to  give  up  three  months  of  the  year
to  work,  that  would  be  enough.  We  should  try  some
cogent  form  of  inducement,  or  practically  compel  the  native
through  taxation  or  in  some  other  way,  to  contribute  his
quota  to  the  good  of  the  community,  and  to  a certain
extent  he  should  then  have  to  work.”  The  general  feeling
of  the  “ Outlanders  ” in  the  Transvaal  has  favoured  the
oppressive  hut-tax  of  £z>  imposed  by  the  Republic  in  1895,
and  has  only  complained  of  its  inadequate  enforcement.

Similarly,  in  Rhodesia,  where  mines  require  a larger
supply  of  labour  than  can  be  obtained  from  natives  by
ordinary  economic  motives,  an  increase  of  the  hut-tax
and  a labour-tax  are  an  integral  part  of  the  public  policy.
Earl  Grey,  recent  administrator  and  director  of  the  Chartered
Company,  thus  states  the  case  : " Means  have  to  be  found
to  induce  the  natives  to  seek,  spontaneously  (sic  /),  employ-
ment at  the  mines,  and  to  work  willingly  for  long  terms
of  more  or  less  continuous  employment.  An  incentive  to
labour  must  be  provided,  and  it  can  only  be  provided  by  the
1 November  x%  1S99.


2 69


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

imposition  of  taxation.  I look  forward  to  the  imposition
of  a hut-tax  of  £i  per  hut  in  conformity  with  the  practice
which  exists  in  Basutoland,  and  I also  hope  that  we  may,
with  the  permission  of  the  imperial  authorities,  be  able  to
establish  a labour-tax,  which  those . able-bodied  natives
should  be  required  to  pay  who  are  unable  to  show  a certificate
of  four  months*  work.”

It  remains  to  add  that  one  “ imperial  authority  ” of
some  importance  has  expressly  endorsed  this  policy  of
using  public  finance  for  private  profit-making  purposes.
In  a speech  in  the  House  of  Commons  dealing  with  the
Chartered  Company1  Mr.  Chamberlain  said  : “ When  you
say  to  a savage  people  who  have  hitherto  found  their  chief
occupation  in  war,  ‘ You  shall  no  longer  go  to  war ; tribal
war  is  forbidden,*  you  have  to  bring  about  some  means
by  which  they  may  earn  their  living  in  place  of  it,  and  you
have  to  induce  them  to  adopt  the  ordinary  means  of  earning
a livelihood  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow.  But  with  a race
of  this  kind  I doubt  very  much  whether  you  can  do  it  merely
by  preaching.  I think  that  something  in  the  nature  of  an
inducement,  stimulus  or  pressure  is  absolutely  necessary
if  you  are  to  secure  a result  which  is  desirable  in  the  interests
of  humanity  and  civilization.**

A far  more  thorough  and  logical  application  of  the  policy
of  taking  natives  from  their  life  upon  the  land  in  order  to
perform  wage  labour  is  devised  by  the  Transvaal  mine-
owners.  The  native  labour  problem  there  differs  widely
from  the  case  of  Kimberley,  where  only  some  12,000  natives
under  strict  control  are  required  for  the  diamond  industry.
The  intention  of  working  out,  with  the  utmost  rapidity,  the
gold  of  the  Rand  can  only  be  accomplished  by  securing  a vast
and  a growing  supply  of  native  labour  on  the  spot.  In  1899,
with  great  difficulty  and  at  heavy  expense,  less  than  100,000

1 May  7,  1898.


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


natives  were  secured  for  work  upon  the  mines.  If  twice
or  thrice  this  number  are  to  be  procured  and  at  lower
prices,  this  can  only  be  accomplished  by  using  taxation,
coercion  and  persuasion  to  induce  large  numbers  of  Kaffirs
to  come  and  settle  down  with  their  families  upon  locations
in  the  mining  districts,  where  the  amount  of  land  provided
does  not  enable  them  to  get  a living  from  agriculture,  and
where  they  will  consequently  be  dependent  on  wage  labour
at  the  mines,  and  will  breed  a permanent  supply  of  young
labour  on  the  spot.  The  wages  paid  will  be  determined,  not
by  competition,  but  by  the  Chamber  of  Mines  ; the  houses
they  will  occupy  will  be  the  property  of  the  mines,  as  also  the
shops  where  they  will  be  compelled  to  deal.  This  has  been
the  policy  advocated  by  the  chief  mining  experts.

Break  up  the  tribal  system  which  gives  solidarity  and
some  political  and  economic  strength  to  native  life ; set
the  Kaffir  on  an  individual  footing  as  an  economic  bargainer,
to  which  he  is  wholly  unaccustomed,  take  him  by  taxation
or  other  “ stimulus  ” from  his  locality,  put  him  down  under
circumstances  where  he  has  no  option  but  to  labour  at
the  mines — this  is  the  plan  which  mine-owners  propose  and
missionaries  approve.1

1 This  hat  been  the  policy  of  the  Glen  Grey  Act,  and  the  following  passage
from  the  official  report  of  a resident  magistrate  in  a district  of  Cape  Colony  (Mr.
W.  T.  Brownlie  of  Butterworth)  makes  its  main  economic  motive  transparent :
“ I have  long  held  and  still  hold  that  the  labour  question  and  the  land  question
are  indissolubly  bound  together.  In  my  opinion  it  is  of  little  use  framing
enactments  to  compel  unwilling  persons  to  go  out  to  work.  It  is  like  the  old  saw
about  leading  a horse  to  the  water ; you  can  take  him  there,  but  you  cannot
make  him  drink.  In  the  same  way  you  may  impose  your  labour-tax,  but  you
cannot  make  your  unwilling  persons  work.  Create  a healthy  thirst  in  your  horse
and  he  will  drink  fast  enough.  Similarly  create  the  necessity  for  the  native  to
work  and  he  will  work,  and  none  better.

“ Hitherto,  under  our  commercial-tenure  system,  there  has  been  little  absolute
necessity  for  our  young  natives  to  leave  their  homes  to  work.  The  land  supplies
them  with  food,  and  a few  shillings  will  buy  a blanket,  and  as  soon  as  the  young
man  marries  he  is  entitled  to  receive  his  lot  of  arable  land ; but  once  this  is
stopped — and  it  will  be  stopped  by  the  survey  and  individual  tenure — a young
man  before  he  marries  a wife  will  have  to  be  in  a position  to  support  a wife,  and

271


imperialism:  a study


This  system  of  “ native  locations,”  fortified  by  hut  and
labour-taxes,  and  by  pass  laws  which  interfere  with  freedom
of  travel  and  practically  form  a class  of  ascripti  glebes , was
the  method  devised  before  the  war  by  the  missionaries  for
dealing  with  the  labour  problem  in  the  Transvaal  mines1 :
it  is  the  method  still  advocated  by  the  South  African
Native  Affairs  Commission,  reporting  in  1905*.  To
limit  the  access  of  the  growing  Kaffir  population  to  the
land  and  to  impose  taxes  with  the  object  of  compelling  them
to  wage  labour,  still  remains  the  sheet-anchor  of  the  South
African  labour  policy.  The  drafting  in  of  large  numbers
of  Chinese  is  supplementary  to  this  policy,  used  partly  to
afford  an  increased  supply,  partly  to  give  mine-owners  a
better  pick  of  Kaffir  labour  at  a reduced  price.


VIII

The  introduction  of  large  numbers  of  Chinese  into  the
Transvaal  mines  under  the  Labour  Ordinance  of  1904,  has
given  great  prominence  to  the  indentured  labour  system
which  is  widely  operative  in  our  tropical  dominions.

As  regards  the  actual  conditions  of  employment,  there  is
reason  to  believe  that  where  this  system  is  practised  under
imperial  protection  as  applied  to  Indian  coolie  labour  it

to  obtain  this  he  mutt  work,  and  once  having  married  her  he  mutt  ttill  work  to
maintain  her  and  himself,  and  once  the  necessity  of  work  is  created  there  will  be
no  lack  of  men  ready  and  willing  to  work  ” (Blue-book  on  Native  Affairs , C.  31,
p-  75)-

1 Cf.  the  Report  of  the  Chamber  of  Mines  for  1898  (quoted  Cd.  9,345,  p.  31),
and  the  Report  of  the  Industrial  Commission,  Johannesburg,  1897,  passim.

■ The  gist  of  the  44  economic  ” recommendations  of  this  Commission  it  that
“ squatting  ” of  natives  upon  unoccupied  public  lands  be  stopped,  that  existing
native  locations  for  agriculture  should  be  defined  and  that  no  more  land  should  be
reserved  for  the  use  of  the  growing  population  of  natives ; that  outside  these
restricted  areas  no  land  should  be  purchased  or  leased  by  natives,  that  a minimum
poll  tax  of  £1  per  head  should  be  imposed  on  all  adult  male  natives  except  those
employed  in  wage  labour  or  paying  rates  in  towns.

272


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


has  been  free  from  the  worst  abuses  of  “ forced  labour.”
British  Guiana,  Mauritius,  and  Trinidad  are  the  West
Indian  possessions  where  the  system  of  importing  Indian
coolie  labour  has  been  most  practised,  and  where  the  system
is  being  tested.

The  law1  governing  indentured  labour  in  British  Guiana
provided  against  most  of  the  abuses  which  beset  the
economic  relations  of  white  employers  towards  “ lower
races,”  and  appears  to  be  well  administered.  Here  the
Imperial  Government  in  India  approves  all  contracts  with
immigrants,  and  these  contracts  not  only  contain  a full
statement  of  time,  wages,  and  other  conditions  of  labour
and  of  living  for  the  immigrant  and  his  family,  but  provide
for  his  return,  if  necessary  at  the  public  expense,  at  the  end
of  his  time.  During  the  term  of  his  indenture  in  British
Guiana  he  is  under  the  protection  of  authorities  appointed
and  controlled  by  the  governor  alone.  An  immigration
agent-general,  with  a staff  of  agents,  who  visit  all  plantations
where  indentured  labourers  are  employed,  hear  privately
all  complaints,  and  bring  them,  if  necessary,  into  the  courts,
retaining  counsel  and  acting  in  all  cases  as  the  principals.
Employers  of  indentured  labour  are  obliged  to  keep  and
produce  full  and  accurate  books  of  accounts  under  heavy
penalties,  and  are  forbidden  to  pay  wages  below  a certain
sum  or  to  overwork  their  labourers.  No  punishment  of  any
kind  can  be  imposed  by  employers  without  recourse  to  the
courts.  It  is  contended  by  Professor  Ireland,  who  has  had
long  experience  as  an  overseer,  that  this  system  operates
with  remarkable  success  both  economically  and  socially1
in  British  Guiana  and  in  other  West  Indian  islands ; and
in  Natal,  though  “ coolies  ” are  regarded  with  anything


1 As  existing  in  1903.

* Tropical  Colonization , chap,  v,  by  Professor  Ireland,  gives  a full  and  detailed
account  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  indentured  labour  in  British  Guiana.

273


imperialism:  a study


but  favour  by  large  sections  of  the  population,  substantially
the  same  protective  legislation  is  in  force,  and  there  is  every
reason  to  suppose  that  indentured  labourers  are  well
protected  as  regards  wages  and  other  economic  conditions.

But  the  very  encomium  passed  upon  this  well-administered
system  of  indenture  shows  how  defective  is  the  grasp  of  the
magnitude  and  the  real  nature  of  the  issues  involved  in  the
control  of  tropical  labour.

It  seems  a light  and  natural  thing  that  large  bodies  of
men,  with  or  without  their  families,  should  be  driven  by
economic  pressure  to  quit  their  native  soil  in  our  Indian
Empire  or  in  China,  and  absent  themselves  for  ten  years
at  a time  in  some  unknown  and  remote  colony.  Migration
to,  and  colonization  of,  sparsely  peopled  lands  by  inhabitants
of  thickly  peopled  lands  is  a natural  and  wholly  beneficial
movement,  but  the  break-up  of  settled  life,  implied  by
long  periods  of  alienation,  is  fraught  with  grave  injuries
to  both  countries  alike.  A country  which  relies  for  its
economic  development  on  continual  influxes  of  foreign
labourers  who  will  not  settle  is  impaired  in  its  natural
process  of  industrial  and  political  self-development  by  this
mass  of  unassimilated  sojourners,  while  the  country  which
they  have  abandoned  suffers  a corresponding  injury.

Why  is  it  necessary  or  desirable  that  large  bodies  of  our
Indian  fellow-subjects  should  desert  their  native  land,
removing  for  long  periods  their  industrial  services  in  order
to  develop  another  country  which  is  not  theirs  ? If  India
is  over-populated,  permanent  colonization  is  surely  the
remedy ; if  it  is  not,  this  practice  of  “ indentured  labour  ”
seems  to  testify  to  misgovernment  and  bad  husbandry  of
our  Indian  resources.  To  break  up  considerable  areas  of
Indian  society,  and  remove  its  able-bodied  males  for  ten
years  at  a time,  in  order  that  these  men  may  bring  back
some  “ savings  ” at  the  end  of  their  term,  seems  at  best  a

27+


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


wanton  sacrifice  of  the  stability  and  normal  progress  of
Indian  society  to  a narrow  consideration  of  purely  monetary
gain.  History  teaches,  in  fact,  that  a peasant  people  living
on  soil  which  they  own  will  not  consent  thus  to  alienate
themselves  for  purposes  of  slight  economic  gain,  unless  they
are  compelled  by  excessive  taxation  on  the  part  of  Govern-
ment, or  by  extortions  of  money-lenders,  which  deprive
them  in  large  measure  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of
their  labour  on  their  land.

However  well  administered  this  system  of  indentured
labour  may  be,  it  seems  vitiated  in  origin  by  its  artificial
character  and  its  interference  with  normal  processes  of  self-
development. It  involves  a subordination  of  wider  social
considerations  to  purposes  of  present  industrial  exploitation.
What  is  true  of  the  system,  as  applied  in  the  West  Indies
and  elsewhere  for  agricultural  work,  is  still  more  true  of
industrial  labour  in  mining  processes.  When  “ civilized  ”
Kaffirs  choose  to  quit  their  individual  farms  in  the  Transkei,
or  elsewhere,  in  order  to  earn  extra  money  by  three  months’
service  in  the  mines,  no  particular  harm  may  offset  their
monetary  gain  ; but  when  labour  agents  are  employed  to
break  up  tribal  life  and  tempt  “ raw  ” Kaffirs  away  from
their  kraals  and  the  restraints  of  their  habitual  life  into  the
utterly  strange  and  artificial  life  upon  the  mines,  the
character  of  the  Kaffir  goes  to  pieces ; he  becomes  a victim  to
drink  if  he  can  get  it,  and  often  succumbs  to  the  vices  of  the
crowded,  laborious,  unhealthy  life  to  which  he  has  sold
himself,  while  the  arbitrary  restrictions  under  which  he
works  and  lives,  however  justified,  degrade  and  damage  his
personality.  According  to  the  evidence  of  most  experienced
and  competent  investigators,  he  returns  home  a “ damaged  ”
man,  and  often  by  his  example  a damage  to  his  neighbours.1

1 Cf.  Capo  Colony  Blue-books  on  Native  Affairs,  G.  31,  1899,  pp.  5,  9,  72,  75,
91,  etc.  5 G.  42,  1898,  pp.  13,  14,  58,  82.

T 275


imperialism:  a study


The  least  reflection  will  expose  the  dangers  which  must
arise  from  suddenly  transferring  men  from  a semi-savage,
tribal,  agricultural  life  to  a great  modern,  elaborate,  industrial
business  like  that  of  diamond  and  gold  mining.

What  is  true  of  the  uncivilized  Kaffir  is  equally  true  of
the  more  highly  developed  Chinaman.  These  men  are
introduced  into  the  Transvaal  as  mere  economic  machines,
not  as  colonists  to  aid  the  industrial  and  social  development
of  a new  country.  Their  presence  is  regarded  as  a social
danger ; they  are  kept  in  “ compounds,”  denied  the  right
to  acquire  property  or  even  to  remain  in  the  country  as  free
settlers  on  the  termination  of  their  service.  Hordes  of
able-bodied  males,  without  any  women,  huddled  in  close
barracks,  rigorously  guarded  during  work  and  at  leisure,
kept  continually  at  hard  routine  manual  labour,  deprived
of  all  the  educative  influences  of  self-direction  in  a free
civilized  society,  however  well-fed,  however  highly  paid,
these  men  are  inevitably  degraded  in  morals  by  the  conditions
of  this  service,  and  damage  the  society  to  which  they
return.

Nor  is  this  all.  The  effect  upon  the  Transvaal  is  to
substitute  for  a normal  gradual  and  natural  development,
a hasty  artificial  abnormal  development,  to  complicate  the
already  grave  racial  and  economic  problems  of  the  country
by  introducing  a new  factor  of  dangerous  character  and
dimensions,  a supply  of  cheap  labour  designed  expressly  to
diminish  the  demand  for  white  settlers  and  for  black  wage-
earners.  It  is  difficult  to  overestimate  the  gravity  of  the
case  in  its  bearing  on  the  future  of  South  Africa.

The  mining  industry  of  the  Transvaal  is  by  far  the  most
important  industry  in  the  whole  country ; so  far  as  British
interests  are  concerned,  the  whole  future  depends  on
husbanding  and  developing  these  resources  so  as  to  keep  a
large  growing  number  of  permanent  British  colonists  in

276


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


the  country.  Now  the  cheapest  and  most  profitable
exploitation  of  the  mines  involves  a minimum  employment
of  white  British  labour  and  a short  period  of  over-stimulated
industrial  activity.  Although  it  is  clearly  the  interest  and
the  intention  of  the  mine-owners,  in  defiance  of  the  condi-
tions in  the  ordinance,  to  displace  by  skilled  Chinese  labour
most  of  the  white  labour  formerly  required  for  working  the
mines,  it  is  possible  that  a considerable  though  fluctuating
demand  for  British  labour  in  other  industrial  and  commercial
undertakings  may  be  furnished  during  this  artificially
shortened  life  of  the  richer  mines.  But  upon  such  an
economic  foundation  no  secure  fabric  of  industrial  and
political  civilization  can  be  erected  : after  a single  generation
of  feverish  gold-getting,  in  which  British  supremacy  is
maintained  by  a constantly  changing  majority  of  temporary
town  residents,  the  industrial  strength  of  the  country  must
steadily  and  surely  decline,  returning  not  to  the  more
primitive  condition  of  wholesome  agriculture  from  which  it
temporarily  emerged,  but  to  a prolonged  miserable  struggle
of  trade  and  manufactures  in  a country  strewn  with  the
decaying  wreckage  of  disused  mines  and  rotting  towns.
Hebrew  mining  speculators,  American  and  Scotch  engineers,
Chinese  miners,  German  traders  will  evacuate  the  country
they  have  sacked,  leaving  behind  them  a population  of
Boers  spoiled  in  large  part  by  their  contact  with  a gambling
and  luxuriant  European  civilization,  and  a host  of  Kaffirs
broken  from  their  customary  life  of  agriculture  and  hanging
around  the  cities  of  South  Africa — a chronic  pest  of
vagabonds  and  unemployed.

Such  are  some  of  the  reactions  of  the  indentured  labour
system  in  South  Africa.  The  legitimate  and  wholesome
means  of  developing  a country  is  by  utilizing  the  labour-
power  of  its  inhabitants,  inducing  them  by  ordinary  economic
stimuli  to  settle  where  remunerative  employment  is  afforded.

277


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


If  such  a country  is  under-peopled,  emigration  is  rightly
encouraged  from  more  thickly-peopled  lands.  But  such
emigration  should  bring  genuine  colonists,  people  intending
to  become  citizens  of  their  adopted  country,  social  as  well  as
economic  units.  In  such  fashion,  by  free  flow  of  populations
from  less  desirable  to  more  desirable  regions,  the  civilization
of  the  world  is  forwarded,  and  the  social  safety  and  future
prosperity  of  the  newly  developed  countries  are  best  sub-
served. An  indentured  labour  system,  however  well
administered,  sins  against  the  fundamental  laws  of  civilization
because  it  treats  the  labourers  primarily  as  instruments  and
not  as  men.  Badly  operated,  without  proper  safeguards  of
impartially  administered  law,1  it  is  a source  of  grave  damage
to  the  political,  social  and  industrial  prosperity  of  the
country  where  it  is  applied.

It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  there  is  a net  gain  to  the
civilization  of  the  world  by  increasing  the  supply  of  gold
and  diamonds  at  such  a price.


IX

It  may  be  said : “ Whatever  the  motives  of  employers
may  be,  it  is  surely  a good  thing  to  take  natives,  by  persuasion
or  even  by  force,  from  a life  of  idleness  and  habituate  them
to  labour,  which  educates  their  faculties,  brings  them  under
civilizing  influences,  and  puts  money  into  their  pockets.”

Now  while  the  statement  that  such  Kaffirs,  West  Africans,

V

and  other  tropical  or  semi-tropical  men,  left  to  themselves,
lead  an  idle  life,  is  commonly  a gross  exaggeration,  due
largely  to  the  fact  that  their  work  is  more  irregular  and
capricious  than  that  of  their  women,  it  must  be  admitted

1 The  wont  of  many  evil  features  in  the  Chinese  Indentured  Labour  System
of  the  Transvaal  is  that  here  alone  within  the  dominions  of  Great  Britain  a large
body  of  residents  are  deprived  of  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  common  law  as
administered  in  the  Courts  of  Justice.

278


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


that  the  repression  of  internecine  warfare  and  the  restriction
of  hunting  do  set  free  a large  quantity  of  male  energy  which
it  is  really  desirable  should  be  utilized  for  industrial  purposes.
But  for  whose  industrial  purposes  ? Surely  it  is  far  better
that  the  “ contact  with  civilization  ” should  lead  these  men
to  new  kinds  of  industry  on  their  own  land,  and  in  their
own  societies,  instead  of  dragging  them  off  to  gang-labour
on  the  lands  or  mining  properties  of  strangers.  It  can  do
this  in  two  ways  : by  acquainting  them  with  new  wholesome
wants  it  can  apply  a legitimate  stimulus,  and  by  acquainting
them  with  new  industrial  methods  applicable  to  work  in
their  own  industries  it  can  educate  them  to  self-help.
Where  native  peoples  are  protected  from  the  aggressive
designs  of  white  profit-mongers,  this  salutary  evolution
operates.  In  large  districts  of  Basutoland  and  in  certain
reserves  of  Zululand  the  substitution  of  the  plough  for  the
primitive  hoe  or  pick  has  led  to  the  introduction  of  male
labour  into  the  fields  every  encouragement  in  stock-
raising,  dairy-farming,  or  other  occupations  connected
with  animals  enhances  male  employment  among  natives  j
the  gradual  introduction  of  new  manufacturing  industries
into  village  life  leads  to  men’s  taking  a larger  share  in
those  industries  in  or  near  the  kraal  which  were  formerly
a monopoly  of  women.

So  far  as  Imperialism  seeks  to  justify  itself  by  sane
civilization  of  lower  races,  it  will  endeavour  to  raise  their
industrial  and  moral  status  on  their  own  lands,  preserving
as  far  as  possible  the  continuity  of  the  old  tribal  life  and
institutions,  protecting  them  against  the  force  and  deceit  of
prospectors,  labour  touts,  and  other  persons  who  seek  to
take  their  land  and  entice  away  their  labour.  If  under  the
gradual  teaching  of  industrial  arts  and  the  general  educational

1 Cf.  Report  of  South  African  Native  Races  Commission , p.  52,  etc. ; also  The
Labour  Question  in  South  Africa , by  Miss  A.  Werner  (The  Reformer , December

I9oj).

279


imperialism:  a study


influences  of  a white  protectorate  many  of  the  old  political,
social,  and  religious  institutions  decay,  that  decay  will  be
a natural  wholesome  process,  and  will  be  attended  by  the
growth  of  new  forms,  not  forced  upon  them,  but  growing
out  of  the  old  forms  and  conforming  to  laws  of  natural
growth  in  order  to  adapt  native  life  to  a changed
environment.

But  so  long  as  the  private,  short-sighted,  business  interests
of  white  farmers  or  white  mine-owners  are  permitted,  either
by  action  taken  on  their  own  account  or  through  pressure
on  a colonial  or  Imperial  Government,  to  invade  the  lands
of  “ lower  peoples,”  and  transfer  to  their  private  profitable
purposes  the  land  or  labour,  the  first  law  of  “ sane  ”
Imperialism  is  violated,  and  the  phrases  about  teaching
“ the  dignity  of  labour  ” and  raising  races  of  “ children  ”
to  manhood,  whether  used  by  directors  of  mining  companies
or  by  statesmen  in  the  House  of  Commons,  are  little  better
than  wanton  exhibitions  of  hypocrisy.  They  are  based  on
a falsification  of  the  facts,  and  a perversion  of  the  motives
which  actually  direct  the  policy.


X

In  setting  forth  the  theory  which  sought  to  justify
Imperialism  as  the  exercise  of  forcible  control  over  lower
races,  by  regarding  this  control  as  a trust  for  the  civilization
of  the  world,  we  pointed  out  three  conditions  essential  to
the  validity  of  such  a trust : first,  the  control  must  be
directed  to  the  general  good,  and  not  to  the  special  good
of  the  “ imperialist 99  nation ; secondly,  it  must  confer
some  net  advantage  to  the  nation  so  controlled ; lastly,
there  must  exist  some  organization  representative  of  inter-
national interests,  which  shall  sanction  the  undertaking
of  a trust  by  the  nation  exercising  such  control.

280


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES

The  third  condition,  which  is  fundamental  to  the  validity
of  the  other  two,  we  saw  to  be  unfulfilled,  inasmuch  as  each
nation  claiming  to  fulfil  the  trust  of  governing  lower  races
assumed  this  control  upon  its  own  authority  alone.

The  practice  of  Imperialism,  as  illustrated  in  a great
variety  of  cases,  exhibits  the  very  defects  which  correspond
with  the  unsound  theory.  The  exclusive  interest  of  an
expanding  nation,  interpreted  by  its  rulers  at  some  given
moment,  and  not  the  good  of  the  whole  world,  is  seen  to  be
the  dominant  motive  in  each  new  assumption  of  control
over  the  tropics  and  lower  peoples ; that  national  interest
itself  commonly  signifies  the  direct  material  self-interest  of
some  small  class  of  traders,  mine-owners,  farmers,  or
investors  who  wish  to  dispose  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the
lower  peoples  for  their  private  gain.  Other  more  dis-
interested motives  woven  in  may  serve  to  give  an  attractive
colouring  to  each  business  in  hand,  but  it  is  impossible  to
examine  the  historic  details  in  any  important  modern
instance  without  recognizing  the  supremacy  of  economic
forces.  At  best  it  is  impossible  to  claim  more  than  this,
that  some  consideration  is  taken  of  justice  and  humanity
in  the  exercise  of  the  authority  assumed,  and  that  inci-
dentally the  welfare  of  the  lower  race  is  subserved  by  the
play  of  economic  and  political  forces  not  primarily  designed
to  secure  that  end.

Everywhere,  in  the  white  administration  of  these  lower
races,  considerations  of  present  order  are  paramount,  and
industrial  exploitation  of  the  land  and  labour  under  private
management  for  private  immediate  gain  is  the  chief  operative
force  in  the  community,  unchecked,  or  inadequately  checked,
by  imperial  or  other  governmental  control.  The  future
progress  of  the  lower  race,  its  gradual  education  in  the
arts  of  industrial  and  political  self-government,  in  most
instances  do  not  at  all  engage  the  activity  of  imperial

281


imperialism:  a study


government,  and  nowhere  are  such  considerations  of  the
welfare  of  the  governed  really  paramount.

The  stamp  of  “ parasitism  ” is  upon  every  white
settlement  among  these  lower  races,  that  is  to  say,  nowhere
are  the  relations  between  white  and  coloured  people
such  as  to  preserve  a wholesome  balance  of  mutual  services.
The  best  services  which  white  civilization  might  be
capable  of  rendering,  by  examples  of  normal,  healthy,  white
communities  practising  the  best  arts  of  Western  life,  are
precluded  by  climatic  and  other  physical  conditions  in  almost
every  case  : the  presence  of  a scattering  of  white  officials,
missionaries,  traders,  mining  or  plantation  overseers,  a
dominant  male  caste  with  little  knowledge  of  or  sympathy
for  the  institutions  of  the  people,  is  ill-calculated  to  give
to  these  lower  races  even  such  gains  as  Western  civilization
might  be  capable  of  giving.

The  condition  of  the  white  rulers  of  these  lower  races  is
distinctively  parasitic ; they  live  upon  these  natives,  their
chief  work  being  that  of  organizing  native  labour  for  their
support.  The  normal  state  of  such  a country  is  one  in
which  the  most  fertile  lands  and  the  mineral  resources
are  owned  by  white  aliens  and  worked  by  natives  under
their  direction,  primarily  for  their  gain : they  do  not
identify  themselves  with  the  interests  of  the  country  or  its
people,  but  remain  an  alien  body  of  sojourners,  a “ parasite  ”
upon  the  carcass  of  its  “ host,”  destined  to  extract  wealth
from  the  country  and  retiring  to  consume  it  at  home.  All
the  hard  manual  or  other  severe  routine  work  is  done  by
natives ; most  of  the  real  labour  of  administration,  or  even
of  aggression,  is  done  by  native  overseers,  police  and  soldiery.
This  holds  of  all  white  government  in  the  tropics  or  wherever
a large  lower  population  is  found.  Even  where  whites  can
live  healthily  and  breed  and  work,  the  quantity  of  actual
work,  physical  or  mental,  which  they  do  is  very  small,  where

282


IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  LOWER  RACES


^ large  supply  of  natives  can  be  made  to  work  for  them.
Even  in  the  parts  of  South  Africa  where  whites  thrive  best,
the  life  they  lead,  when  clearly  analyzed,  is  seen  to  be
parasitic.  The  white  farmer,  Dutch  or  British,  does  little
work,  manual  or  mental,  and  tends  everywhere  to  become
lazy  and  “ unprogressive  ” ; the  trading,  professional  or
official  classes  of  the  towns  show  clear  signs  of  the  same
laxity  and  torpor,  the  brief  spasmodic  flares  of  energy  evoked
by  dazzling  prospects  among  small  classes  of  speculators
and  business  men  in  mushroom  cities  like  Johannesburg
serving  but  to  dazzle  our  eyes  and  hide  the  deep  essential
character  of  the  life.

If  this  is  true  of  South  Africa,  much  more  is  it  true  of
countries  where  climate  inhibits  white  settlement  and  white
energy,  the  general  condition  of  those  countries  which
represent  the  expansion  of  modern  Imperialism.

Nowhere  under  such  conditions  is  the  theory  of  white
government  as  a trust  for  civilization  made  valid ; nowhere
is  there  any  provision  to  secure  the  predominance  of  the
interests,  either  of  the  world  at  large  or  of  the  governed
people,  over  those  of  the  encroaching  nation,  or  more
commonly  a section  of  that  nation.  The  relations  subsisting
between  the  superior  and  the  inferior  nations,  commonly
established  by  pure  force,  and  resting  on  that  basis,  are
such  as  preclude  the  genuine  sympathy  essential  to  the
operation  of  the  best  civilizing  influences,  and  usually
resolve  themselves  into  the  maintenance  of  external  good
order  so  as  to  forward  the  profitable  development  of  certain
natural  resources  of  the  land,  under  “ forced  ” native  labour,
primarily  for  the  benefit  of  white  traders  and  investors,  and
secondarily  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  of  white  Western
consumers.

This  failure  to  justify  by  results  the  forcible  rule  over  alien
peoples  is  attributable  to  no  special  defect  of  the  British  or

283


imperialism:  a study


other  modern  European  nations.  It  is  inherent  in  the  nature
of  such  domination.  “ The  government  of  a people  by
itself  has  a meaning  and  a reality,  but  such  a thing  as
government  of  one  people  by  another  does  not  and  cannot
exist.  One  people  may  keep  another  as  a warren  or  preserve
for  its  own  use,  a place  to  make  money  in,  a human  cattle-
farm,  to  be  worked  for  the  profits  of  its  own  inhabitants  ;
but  if  the  good  of  the  governed  is  the  proper  business  of  a
government,  it  is  utterly  impossible  that  a people  should
directly  attend  to  it.”1

1 J.  S.  Mill  Representative  Government , p.  326.


284


CHAPTER  V


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA
I

THE  great  test  o f Western  Imperialism  is  Asia,  where
vast  peoples  live,  the  inheritors  of  civilizations  as
complex  as  our  own,  more  ancient  and  more  firmly  rooted
by  enduring  custom  in  the  general  life.  The  races  of  Africa
it  has  been  possible  to  regard  as  savages  or  children,  “ back-
ward ” in  their  progress  along  the  same  general  road  of
civilization  in  which  Anglo-Saxondom  represents  the  van-
guard, and  requiring  the  help  of  more  forward  races.  It
is  not  so  easy  to  make  a specious  case  for  Western  control
over  India,  China,  and  other  Asiatic  peoples  upon  the  same
ground.  Save  in  the  more  recent  developments  of  the
physical  sciences  and  their  application  to  industrial  arts,
it  cannot  be  contended  that  these  peoples  are  “ backward,”
and  though  we  sometimes  describe  their  civilizations  as
“ arrested  ” or  “ unprogressive,”  that  judgment  either  may
imply  our  ignorance  of  the  pace  at  which  civilizations  so
much  older  than  our  own  must  continue  moving,  or  it
may  even  afford  unconscious  testimony  to  a social  progress
which  has  won  its  goal  in  securing  a well-nigh  complete
adjustment  between  human  life  and  its  stable  environment.

The  claim  of  the  West  to  civilize  the  East  by  means  of
political  and  military  supremacy  must  rest  ultimately  upon
the  assumption  that  civilizations,  however  various  in  their
surface  growths,  are  at  root  one  and  the  same,  that  they
have  a common  nature  and  a common  soil.  Stripped  of

285


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


metaphor,  this  means  that  certain  moral  and  intellectual
qualities,  finding  embodiment  in  general  forms  of  religion,
law,  customs,  and  arts  of  industry,  are  essential  to  all  local
varieties  of  civilization,  irrespective  of  race,  colour,  climate,
and  other  conditions ; that  Western  nations,  or  some  of
them,  possess  these  qualities  and  forms  of  civilization  in  a
pre-eminent  degree,  and  are  able  to  impart  them  to  Eastern
nations  by  government  and  its  accompanying  political,
religious,  and  industrial  education.  It  certainly  seems  as
if  “ humanity  ” implies  such  common  factors.  The  ethics
of  the  Decalogue  appears  to  admit  of  a wide  common  applica-
tion ; certain  rights  of  the  individual,  certain  elements  of
social  justice,  embodied  in  law  and  custom,  appear  capable
of  universal  appeal ; certain  sorts  of  knowledge  and  the
arts  of  applying  them  appear  useful  to  all  sorts  and  conditions
of  men.  If  Western  civilization  is  richer  in  these  essentials,
it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  West  can  benefit
the  East  by  imparting  them,  and  that  her  government  may
be  justified  as  a means  of  doing  so.

The  British  Empire  in  India  may  be  taken  as  the  most
serviceable  test.  We  did  not,  indeed,  go  there  in  the  first
instance  for  the  good  of  the  Indians,  nor  have  our  various
extensions  of  political  power  been  motived  primarily  by
this  consideration  ; but  it  is  contended  that  our  government
of  India  has  in  point  of  fact  conferred  upon  the  people  the
benefits  arising  from  our  civilization,  and  that  the  conferring
of  these  benefits  has  of  later  years  played  a larger  and  a
larger  part  in  our  conscious  policy.  The  experiment  has
been  a long  and  varied  one,  and  our  success  in  India  is
commonly  adduced  as  the  most  convincing  argument  in
favour  of  the  benefits  accruing  to  subject  races  from
Imperialism.

The  real  questions  we  have  to  answer  are  these  : “ Are
we  civilizing  India  ? ” and  “ In  what  does  that  civilization

286


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA

consist  ? ” To  assist  in  answering  there  exists  a tolerably
large  body  of  indisputable  facts.  We  have  established  a
wider  and  more  permanent  internal  peace  than  India  had
ever  known  from  the  days  of  Alexander  the  Great.  We
have  raised  the  standard  of  justice  by  fair  and  equal
administration  of  laws;  we  have  regulated  and  probably
reduced  the  burden  of  taxation,  checking  the  corruption
and  tyranny  of  native  princes  and  their  publicans.  For
the  instruction  of  the  people  we  have  introduced  a public
system  of  schools  and  colleges,  as  well  as  a great  quasi-
public missionary  establishment,  teaching  not  only  the
Christian  religion  but  many  industrial  arts.  Roads,  rail-
ways, and  a network  of  canals  have  facilitated  communication
and  transport,  and  an  extensive  system  of  scientific  irrigation
has  improved  the  productiveness  of  the  soil ; the  mining
of  coal,  gold,  and  other  minerals  has  been  greatly  developed  ;
in  Bombay  and  elsewhere  cotton  mills  with  modern
machinery  have  been  set  up,  and  the  organization  of  other
machine  industries  is  helping  to  find  employment  for  the
population  of  large  cities.  Tea,  coffee,  indigo,  jute,  tobacco,
and  other  important  crops  have  been  introduced  into
Indian  agriculture.  We  are  gradually  breaking  down  many
of  the  religious  and  social  superstitions  which  sin  against
humanity  and  retard  progress,  and  even  the  deeply  rooted
caste  system  is  modified  wherever  British  influence  is  felt.
There  can  be  no  question  that  much  of  this  work  of
England  in  India  is  well  done.  No  such  intelligent,  well-
educated,  and  honourable  body  of  men  has  ever  been
employed  by  any  State  in  the  working  of  imperial  govern-
ment as  is  contained  in  the  Civil  Service  of  India.  Nowhere
else  in  our  Empire  has  so  much  really  disinterested  and
thoughtful  energy  been  applied  in  the  work  of  government.
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  line  of  great  statesmen  sent
out  from  England  to  preside  over  our  government  in  India. .

287


imperialism:  a study


Our  work  there  is  the  best  record  British  Imperialism  can
show.  What  does  it  tell  us  about  the  capacity  of  the  West
to  confer  the  benefits  of  her  civilization  on  the  East  l

Take  first  the  test  of  economic  prosperity.  Are  the
masses  of  the  people  under  our  rule  wealthier  than  they
were  before,  and  are  they  growing  wealthier  under  that
rule  ? There  are  some  who  maintain  that  British  govern-
ment is  draining  the  economic  life-blood  of  India  and
dragging  her  population  into  lower  and  more  hopeless
poverty.  They  point  to  the  fact  that  one  of  the  poorest
countries  in  the  world  is  made  to  bear  the  cost  of  a govern-
ment, which,  however  honestly  administered,  is  very
expensive ; that  one-third  of  the  money  raised  by  taxation
flows  out  of  the  country  without  return  ; that  India  is  made
to  support  an  army  admittedly  excessive  for  purposes  of  self-
defence,  and  even  to  bear  the  cost  of  wars  in  other  parts  of
the  Empire,  while  nearly  the  whole  of  the  interest  on  capital
invested  in  India  is  spent  out  of  the  country.  The  statistical
basis  of  this  argument  is  too  insecure  for  much  reliance  to
be  placed  on  it : it  is  probably  untrue  that  the  net  cost  of
British  government  is  greater  than  the  burden  of  native
princes  which  it  has  largely1  superseded,  though  it  is  certainly
true  that  the  extortionate  taxation  under  native  rule  was
expended  in  the  country  on  productive  work  or  unproductive
native  services.  Whether  the  increasing  drain  of  wheat
and  other  food-stuffs  from  India  exceeds  the  gain  from
improved  irrigation,  and  whether  the  real  income  of  the
“ ryot 99  or  other  worker  is  increasing  or  diminishing,  cannot
be  established,  so  far  as  the  whole  country  is  concerned,
by  any  accurate  measure.  But  it  is  generally  admitted,
even  by  British  officials  strongly  favourable  to  our  rule,  that
we  have  not  succeeded  in  giving  any  considerable  economic

1 About  threc-eighthi  of  the  country  it  ttill  under  native  government,  with
British  tupervition.


283


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


prosperity  to  India.  I quote  from  a source  strongly
favourable  to  our  rule  :

“ The  test  of  a people’s  prosperity  is  not  the  extension  of
exports,  the  multiplication  of  manufactures  or  other
industries,  the  construction  of  cities.  No.  A prosperous
country  is  one  in  which  the  great  mass  of  the  inhabitants
are  able  to  procure,  with  moderate  toil,  what  is  necessary
for  living  human  lives,  lives  of  frugal  and  assured  comfort.
Judged  by  this  criterion,  can  India  be  called  prosperous  ?

“ Comfort,  of  course,  is  a relative  term.  ...  In  a tropical
country,  like  India,  the  standard  is  very  low.  Little  clothing
is  required  there.  Simple  diet  suffices.  Artificial  wants  are
very  few,  and,  for  the  most  part  are  not  costly.  The  Indian
Empire  is  a peasant  Empire.  Ninety  per  cent,  of  the  people
live  upon  the  land.  ...  An  unfailing  well  of  water,  a
plot  of  land,  and  a bit  of  orchard — that  will  satisfy  his
heart’s  desire,  if  indeed  you  add  the  cattle  needful  to  him,

‘ the  ryot’s  children,’  as  they  are  called  in  many  parts.  Such
is  the  ryot’s  ideal.  Very  few  realize  it.  An  acre  may  stand
for  the  modus  agri , the  necessary  plot  of  ground.  A man
to  an  acre,  or  640  men  to  the  square  mile,  is  the  utmost
density  of  population  which  India  can  comfortably  support,
except  near  towns  or  in  irrigated  districts.  But  millions
of  peasants  in  India  are  struggling  to  live  on  half  an  acre.
Their  existence  is  a constant  struggle  with  starvation,  ending
too  often  in  defeat.  Their  difficulty  is  not  to  live  human
lives — lives  up  to  the  level  of  their  poor  standard  of  comfort —
but  to  live  at  all  and  not  die.  . . . We  may  truly  say  that
in  India,  except  in  the  irrigated  tracts,  famine  is  chronic —
endemic.”1

A century  of  British  rule,  then,  conducted  with  sound
ability  and  goodwill,  had  not  materially  assisted  to  ward
off  the  chronic  enemy,  starvation,  from  the  mass  of  the
1 India  and  its  Problem,  by  W.  S.  Lilly,  pp.  284,  285  (Sandi  A Co.).


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


liberation  of  great  popular  forces  finding  expression  in
scientific  education  and  in  political  democracy : it  has
been  an  important  phase  of  the  great  movement  of
popular  liberty  and  self-government.  In  India,  and  else*
where  in  the  East,  there  is  no  such  compensation.

An  industrial  system,  far  more  strongly  set  and  more
closely  interwoven  in  the  religious  and  social  system  of
the  country  than  ever  were  the  crafts  and  arts  in  Europe,
has  been  subjected  to  forces  operating  from  outside,  and
unchecked  in  their  pace  and  direction  by  the  will  of  the
people  whose  life  they  so  vitally  affected.  Industrial
revolution  is  one  thing  when  it  is  the  natural  movement  of
internal  forces,  making  along  the  lines  of  the  self-interests
of  a nation  and  proceeding  pari  passu  with  advancing  popular
self-government ; another  thing  when  it  is  imposed  by
foreign  conquerors  looking  primarily  to  present  gains  for
themselves,  and  neglectful  of  the  deeper  interests  of  the
people  of  the  country.  The  story  of  the  destruction  of
native  weaving  industry1  for  the  benefit  of  mills  started  by
the  Company  will  illustrate  the  selfish,  short-sighted
economic  policy  of  the  late  eighteenth  and  early  nineteenth
centuries.  “ Under  the  pretence  of  Free  Trade,  England
has  compelled  the  Hindus  to  receive  the  products  of  the
steam-looms  of  Lancashire,  Yorkshire,  Glasgow,  etc.,  at
mere  nominal  duties  ; while  the  hand-wrought  manufactures
of  Bengal  and  Behar,  beautiful  in  fabric  and  durable  in  wear,
have  had  heavy  and  almost  prohibitive  duties  imposed  on
their  importation  to  England.”2  The  effect  of  this  policy,
rigorously  maintained  during  the  earlier  decades  of  the
nineteenth  century,  was  the  irreparable  ruin  of  many  of
the  most  valuable  and  characteristic  arts  of  Indian  industry.

1 Cj.  the  careful  summary  of  official  evidence  in  Mr.  Romesh  Dutt’i  Economic
History  of  British  India , chap.  xv.  (Kegan  Paul).

1 Eastern  India , by  Montgomery  Martin  (London,  1838),  vol.  iii.  Introd.
(quoted  Romesh  Dutt,  p.  290).


292


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA

“ In  India  the  manufacturing  power  of  the  people  was
stamped  out  by  Protection  against  her  industries,  and  then
Free  Trade  was  forced  on  her  so  as  to  prevent  a revival.”1

When  we  turn  from  manufacture  to  the  great  industry
of  agriculture,  which  even  now  occupies  nine-tenths  of  the
population,  the  difficulty  of  alien  administration,  with
whatever  good  intention,  is  amply  illustrated.  Not  a few
of  our  greatest  Indian  statesmen,  such  as  Munro,  Elphin-
stone,  and  Metcalfe,  have  recognized  in  the  village  com-
munity the  true  embodiment  of  the  spirit  of  Eastern
civilization.

“ The  village  communities,”  wrote  Sir  C.  Metcalfe,2
“'are  little  republics,  having  nearly  everything  that  they
can  want  within  themselves,  and  almost  independent  of
any  foreign  relations.  They  seem  to  last  where  nothing
else  lasts.  Dynasty  after  dynasty  tumbles  down ; revolu-
tion succeeds  to  revolution ; Hindu,  Pathan,  Moghul,
Mahratta,  Sikh,  English,  are  masters  in  turn ; but  the
village  communities  remain  the  same.”  “ The  union
of  the  village  communities,  each  one  forming  a separate
little  State  in  itself,  has,  I conceive,  contributed  more  than
any  other  cause  to  the  preservation  of  the  people  of  India
through  all  revolutions  and  changes  which  they  have
suffered,  and  it  is  in  a high  degree  conducive  to  their
happiness  and  to  the  enjoyment  of  a great  portion  of
freedom  and  independence.  I wish,  therefore,  that  the
village  constitutions  may  never  be  disturbed,  and  I dread
everything  which  has  a tendency  to  break  them  up.”

Yet  the  whole  efforts  of  British  administration  have  been
directed  to  the  destruction  of  this  village  self-government
in  industry  and  politics.  The  substitution  of  the  individual
ryot  for  the  community  as  the  unit  of  revenue  throughout

1 Romesh  Dutt,  p.  302.

* Letter  to  the  Board  of  Revenue,  April,  1838  (quoted  Romesh  Dutt,  p.  386).

*93


imperialism:  a study


Bombay  and  Madras  struck  a fatal  blow  at  the  economic
life  of  the  village,  while  the  withdrawal  of  all  real  judicial  and
executive  powers  from  the  zemindars  or  headmen,  and  their
concentration  in  British  civil  courts  and  executive  officers,
virtually  completed  the  destruction  of  the  strongest  and
most  general  institution  of  India — the  self-governing  village.

Both  these  important  steps  were  taken  in  furtherance
of  the  new  Western  idea  of  individual  responsibility  as  the
only  sound  economic  basis,  and  centralized  government
as  the  most  efficacious  mode  of  political  machinery.  The
fact  that  it  should  be  considered  safe  and  profitable  suddenly
to  subvert  the  most  ancient  institutions  of  India,  in  order
thus  to  adapt  the  people  to  English  modes  of  life,  will  be
taken  by  sociologists  as  one  of  the  most  amazing  lessons  of
incompetence  in  the  art  of  civilization  afforded  by  modern
history.  Indeed  the  superior  prosperity  of  a large  part  of
Bengal,  attributable  in  part  at  any  rate  to  the  maintenance
of  a local  landlord  class,  who  served  as  middlemen  between
the  State  and  the  individual  cultivators,  and  mitigated  the
mechanical  rack-rent  of  the  land-tax,  is  a sufficiently
remarkable  testimony  to  the  injury  inflicted  upon  other
parts  of  India  by  sudden  ill-advised  application  of  Western
economic  and  political  methods.1


II

When  we  turn  from  industry  to  the  administration  of
justice  and  the  general  work  of  government  in  which  the
ability  and  character  of  British  officialism  finds  expression,
we  are  led  to  further  questioning.  Is  Great  Britain  able

1 The  prosperity  of  districts  under  the  Bengal  settlement,  as  compared  with
other  parts  of  British  India,  must  however  be  imputed  largely  to  the  fact  that
this  settlement  enables  Bengal  to  evade  its  full  proportion  of  contribution  to  the
revenue  of  India,  and  throws  therefore  a disproportionate  burden  upon  other
parts.

294


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


to  Anglicize  the  government  of  India,  is  she  doing  so,  and
is  she  thereby  implanting  Western  civilization  in  India  ?
How  much  a few  thousand  British  officials,  endowed  with
the  best  ability  and  energy,  can  achieve  in  stamping  British
integrity  and  efficiency  upon  the  practical  government
of  three  hundred  million  people  of  alien  race  and  character
it  is  difficult  to  judge.  Numbers  are  not  everything,  and
it  is  probable  that  these  diffused  units  of  British  authority
exercise  directly  and  indirectly  a considerable  influence
upon  the  larger  affairs  of  government,  and  that  this  influence
may  sometimes  permeate  far  down  among  native  official
circles.  But  it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  those  few  British
officials  are  rarely  born  in  India,  have  seldom  any  perfect
understanding  of  the  languages  of  the  people,  form  a dose
“ caste,”  never  mingling  in  free  social  intercourse  with  those
whom  they  govern,  and  that  the  laws  and  regulations  they
administer  are  largely  foreign  to  the  traditionary  institutions
of  the  Indian  peoples.  When  we  remember  how  large
a share  of  real  government  is  the  personal  administration  of
detail,  the  enforcement  of  law  or  regulation  upon  the
individual  citizen,  and  that  in  the  overwhelming  majority
of  cases  this  work  must  always  be  left  to  native  officials,  it
is  evident  that  the  formal  virtues  of  British  law  and  justice
must  admit  much  elasticity  and  much  perversion  in  the
actual  processes  of  administration.

“ No  one  can  deny  that  this  system  of  civil  and  criminal
administration  is  vastly  superior  to  anything  which  India
ever  possessed  under  former  rulers.  Its  defects  arise  chiefly
from  causes  extraneous  to  it.  The  unblemished  integrity
and  unswerving  devotion  to  duty  of  the  officials,  whether
English  or  Indian,  who  occupy  the  higher  posts,  no  one
will  call  in  question.  The  character  of  the  subordinate
officials  is  not  always  so  entirely  above  suspicion,  and  the
course  of  justice  is  too  often  perverted  by  a lamentable

295


imperialism:  a study

characteristic  of  the  Oriental  mind.  4 Great  is  the  rectitude
of  the  English,  greater  is  the  power  of  a lie  9 is  a proverbial
saying  throughout  India.  Perhaps  the  least  satisfactory
of  the  government  departments  is  the  police.  A recent
writer  says,  4 It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  a department
can  be  more  corrupt.’  This,  too,  may  be  an  over-state-
ment. But,  taken  on  the  whole,  the  rank  and  file  of  the
Indian  police  are  probably  not  of  higher  integrity  and
character  than  those  of  New  York.”1  Now  one  sentence
of  this  statement  deserves  special  attention.  44  Its  defects
arise  chiefly  from  causes  extraneous  to  it.”  This  is  surely
incorrect.  It  is  an  essential  part  of  our  system  that  the
details  of  administration  shall  be  in  native  hands  : no  one
can  contemplate  any  considerable  displacement  of  lower
native  officials  by  English ; the  latter  could  not  do  the
work  and  would  not  if  they  could,  nor  could  the  finances,
always  precarious,  possibly  admit  of  so  huge  an  increase  of
expenditure  as  would  be  involved  by  making  the  govern-
ment of  India  really  British  in  its  working.  The  tendency,
in  fact,  is  all  the  other  way,  and  makes  for  the  more  numerous
employment  of  natives  in  all  but  the  highest  grades  of  the
public  service.  If  it  is  true  that  corruption  and  mendacity
are  deeply  rooted  in  all  Eastern  systems  of  government,
and  that  the  main  moral  justification  of  our  rule  consists
in  their  correction  by  British  character  and  administration,
it  is  pretty  clear  that  we  cannot  be  performing  this  valuable
work,  and  must  in  the  nature  of  tne  case  be  disabled  from
even  understanding  where  and  how  far  we  fall  short  of  doing
so.  The  comment  made  by  Mr.  Lilly  upon  Indian  police
is  chiefly  significant  because  this  is  the  one  department
of  detailed  practical  government  where  special  scandals
are  most  likely  to  reveal  the  failure  of  our  excellent  intentions
as  embodied  in  criminal  codes  and  judicial  procedure.

1 India  and  its  Problem,  p.  182.


296


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


One  would  wish  to  know  whether  the  actual  native  officer
-who  collects  the  land-tax  or  other  dues  from  the  individual
ryot  practises  the  integrity  of  his  British  superior  official
or  reverts  to  the  time-honoured  and  universal  practice  of
the  East.

How  much  can  a handful  of  foreign  officials  do  in  the
way  of  effectual  check  and  supervision  of  the  details  of
government  in  a country  which  teems  with  populations
of  various  races,  languages,  creeds,  and  customs  ? Probably
not  very  much,  and  ex  hypothesi  they,  and  so  we,  cannot
know  their  failures.

The  one  real  and  indisputable  success  of  our  rule  in  India,
as  indeed  generally  through  our  Empire,  is  the  maintenance
of  order  upon  a large  scale,  the  prevention  of  internecine
war,  riot,  or  organized  violence.  This,  of  course,  is  much,
but  it  is  not  everything ; it  is  not  enough  in  itself  to
justify  us  in  regarding  our  imperial  rule  as  a success.
Is  British  justice,  so  far  as  it  prevails,  and  British  order
good  for  India  ? will  seem  to  the  average  Briton  a curious
question  to  ask.  But  Englishmen  who  have  lived  in  India,
and  who,  on  the  whole,  favour  the  maintenance  of  our
authority,  sometimes  ask  it.  It  must,  in  the  first  place,
be  remembered  that  some  of  the  formal  virtues  of  our  laws
and  methods  which  seem  to  us  most  excellent  may  work
out  quite  otherwise  in  practice.  The  rigorous  justice  in
the  exaction  of  the  land-tax  and  in  the  enforcement  of  the
legal  claims  of  userers  is  a striking  instance  of  misapplied
notions  of  equity.  Corrupt  as  the  practice  of  Eastern
tax-gatherers  has  ever  been,  tyrannical  as  has  been  the
power  of  the  userer,  public  opinion,  expediency,  and  some
personal  consideration  have  always  qualified  their  tyranny ;
the  mechanical  rigour  of  British  law  is  one  of  the  greatest
sources  of  unpopularity  of  our  government  in  India,  and  is
probably  a grave  source  of  actual  injury.

297


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


There  is  even  some  reason  to  suspect  that  Indians  resent
less  the  illegal  and  irregular  extortion  of  recognized  native
autocrats,  whose  visible  authority  is  familiarly  impressed
on  their  imaginations,  than  the  actually  lighter  exactions
of  an  inhuman,  irresistible  and  immitigable  machine,  such
as  the  British  power  presents  itself  to  them.

It  is  pretty  clear  that,  so  far  as  the  consent  of  the  governed
in  any  active  sense  is  a condition  of  success  in  government,
the  British  Empire  in  India  has  not  succeeded.  We  are
deceived  by  Eastern  acquiescence,  and  our  deception  may
even  be  attended  by  grave  catastrophe  unless  we  under*
stand  the  truth.  Mr.  Townsend,  who  has  brought  close
thought  to  bear  upon  the  conditions  of  our  hold  of  India,
writes  thus : —

“ Personal  liberty,  religious  liberty,  equal  justice,  perfect
security — these  things  the  Empire  gives ; but  then  are
these  so  valued  as  to  overcome  the  inherent  and  incurable
dull  distaste  felt  by  the  brown  men  to  the  white  men  who
give  them  ^ I doubt  it  greatly.”1

The  reasons  he  gives  for  his  doubt  are  weighty.  The
agricultural  populace,  whom  we  have,  he  holds,  materially
benefited,  is  an  inert  mass : the  active  classes  endowed
with  initiative,  political  ambition,  patriotism,  education,
are  silently  but  strongly  hostile  to  our  rule.  It  is  natural
this  should  be  so.  We  have  spoiled  the  free  career  open  to
these  classes  under  native  government ; the  very  order  we
have  imposed  offends  their  instincts  and  often  thwarts
their  interests.  The  caste  system,  which  it  is  the  boast
of  our  more  liberal  laws  and  institutions  to  moderate  or
disregard,  is  everywhere  consciously  antagonistic  to  us  in
self-defence,  and  deeply  resents  any  portion  of  our  educative
influences  which  impairs  its  hold  upon  the  minds  of  the
people.  This  force  is  well  illustrated  by  the  almost

1 Asia  and  Europe^  p.  ioi.

298


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


complete  failure  of  our  energetic  Christian  missions  to  make
converts  out  of  any  members  of  the  higher  castes.  The
testimony  of  one  of  the  most  devoted  of  Roman  Catholic
missionaries  after  thirty  years  of  missionary  labours  deserves
attention : —

“ During  the  long  period  I have  lived  in  India  in  the
capacity  of  a missionary,  I have  made,  with  the  assistance
of  a native  missionary,  in  all  between  two  and  three  hundred
converts  of  both  sexes.  Of  this  number  two-thirds  were
Pariahs  or  beggars,  and  the  rest  were  composed  of  Sudras,
vagrants  and  outcasts  of  several  tribes,  who,  being  without
resources,  turned  Christians  in  order  to  form  connexions,
chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  marriage,  or  with  some  other
interested  views.”1

This  view  is  borne  out  in  the  general  treatment  of
Christian  missions  in  Mr.  Barrie’s  report  on  the  census  in
1891.  “ The  greatest  development  (of  Christianity)  is  found

where  the  Brahmanic  caste  system  is  in  force  in  its  fullest
vigour,  in  the  south  and  west  of  the  Peninsula,  and  among
the  hill  tribes  of  Bengal.  In  such  localities  it  is  naturally
attractive  to  a class  of  the  population  whose  position  is
hereditarily  and  permanently  degraded  by  their  own
religion.”

If  British  Christianity  and  British  rule  were  welcomed
by  large  bodies  of  the  ryots  and  the  low-caste  and  Pariah
populations,  the  opposition  of  the  native  “ classes  ” might
seem  a strong  testimony  to  the  beneficence  of  our  rule,  as  an
instrument  for  the  elevation  of  the  poorer  working  people
who  always  form  the  great  majority.  Unfortunately  no
such  result  can  seriously  be  pretended.  There  is  no  reason
to  suppose  that  we  hold  the  allegiance  of  any  large  section
of  the  people  of  India  by  any  other  bond  than  that  of
fear  and  respect  for  our  external  power.  Mr.  Townsend
1 Quoted  Lilly,  India  and  its  Problems , p.  163.

299


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


puts  the  matter  in  a nutshell  when  he  affirms  : “ There  is
no  corner  in  Asia  where  the  life  of  a white  man,  if  un-
protected by  force,  either  actual  or  potential,  is  safe  for  an
hour ; nor  is  there  an  Asiatic  State  which,  if  it  were  prudent,
would  not  expel  him  at  once  and  for  ever.”1  There  are,
according  to  this  view,  no  psychical  roots  to  the  civilization
we  are  imposing  upon  India  : it  is  a superficial  structure
maintained  by  force,  and  not  grafted  on  to  the  true  life
of  the  nation  so  as  to  modify  and  educate  the  soul  of  the
people.  Mr.  Townsend  is  driven  with  evidently  deep
reluctance  to  the  conclusion  that  “ the  Empire  hangs  in
air,  supported  by  nothing  but  the  minute  white  garrison
and  the  unproved  assumption  that  the  people  of  India
desire  it  to  continue  to  exist.”2  It  was  indeed  pointed  out
by  Professor  Seeley,  and  is  generally  admitted,  that  our
Empire  in  India  has  only  been  rendered  possible  by  the
wide  cleavages  of  race,  language,  religion  and  interests
among  the  Indian  populations,  first  and  foremost  the
division  of  Mohammedan  and  Hindu.

But  it  may  be  fairly  contended  that  the  forcible  founda-
tion of  our  rule  and  the  slowness  and  reluctance  of  the
natives  to  appreciate  its  benefits  are  no  proof  that  it  is  not
beneficial,  or  that  in  process  of  time  we  may  not  infuse  the
best  principles  of  Western  civilization  into  their  life.

Are  we  doing  this  ? Is  the  nature  of  our  occupation
such  as  to  enable  us  to  do  it  ? Apart  from  the  army,  which
is  the  aspect  of  the  Empire  most  in  evidence,  there  is  a
British  population  of  some  1 35,000, 1 less  than  I to  every
2,000  of  the  natives,  living  neither  the  normal  life  of  their
own  country  nor  that  of  the  foreign  country  which  they
occupy,  in  no  sense  representative  units  of  British  civiliza-
tion, but  exotics  compelled  to  live  a highly  artificial  life  and
unable  to  rear  British  families  or  to  create  British  society

1 Asia  and  Europe , p.  98.  * Asia  and  Europe , p.  89.  * At  about  1900.

300


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


of  such  a sort  as  to  embody  and  illustrate  the  most  valuable
contents  of  our  civilization.

It  is  certain  that  the  machinery  of  government,  how-
ever excellent,  can  of  itself  do  little  to  convey  the  benefits
of  civilization  to  an  alien  people.  The  realjforces  of  civiliza-
tion can  only  be  conveyed  by  contact  of  individual  with
individual.  Now  the  conditions  of  free,  close,  personal
contact  between  British  and  Indians  are  virtually  non-
existent. There  is  no  real,  familiar,  social  intercourse  on
equal  terms,  still  less  is  there  inter-marriage,  the  only
effective  mode  of  amalgamating  two  civilizations,  the  only
safeguard  against  race  hatred  and  race  domination.  “ When
inter-marriage  is  out  of  the  question,”  writes  Dr.  Goldwin
Smith,  “ social  equality  cannot  exist ; without  social
equality  political  equality  is  impossible,  and  a republic  in
the  true  sense  can  hardly  be.”1

The  vast  majority  of  whites  admittedly  live  their  own
life,  using  natives  for  domestic  and  industrial  service,  but
never  attempting  to  get  any  fuller  understanding  of  their
lives  and  character  than  is  required  to  exact  these  services
from  them  or  to  render  official  services  in  return.  The  few
who  have  made  some  serious  attempt  to  penetrate  into
the  Indian  mind  admit  their  failure  to  grasp  with  any
adequacy  even  the  rudiments  of  a human  nature  which
differs,  in  its  fundamental  valuations  and  its  methods  of
conduct,  so  radically  from  our  own  as  to  present  for  its
chief  interest  a series  of  baffling  psychological  puzzles.
It  is  indeed  precisely  from  these  students  that  we  come
to  understand  the  impossibility  of  that  close,  persistent,
interactive  contact  of  mind  with  mind  which  is  the  only
method  by  which  that  “ mission  of  civilization  ” which  we
profess  is  capable  of  fulfilment.  Even  those  English
writers  who  seem  to  convey  most  forcibly  what  is  called

1 Commonwealth  or  Empire  (Macmillan  & Co.).

301


imperialism:  a study


the  spirit  of  the  East  as  it  shows  forth  in  the  drama  of  modern
life,  writers  such  as  Mr.  Kipling  and  Mrs.  Steel,  • hardly
do  more  than  present  a quaint  alluring  atmosphere  of  un-
intelligibility; while  study  of  the  great  Indian  literature
and  art  which  may  be  taken  as  the  best  expression  of  the
soul  of  the  people  exhibits  the  hitherto  unbridgeable
divergence  of  the  British  conception  of  life  from  the  Indian.
The  complete  aloofness  of  the  small  white  garrison  is  indeed
in  no  small  measure  due  to  an  instinctive  recognition  of  this
psychical  chasm  and  of  their  inability  to  enter  into  really
vital  sympathy  with  these  members  of  an  " inferior  ” race.
They  are  not  to  blame,  but  rather  the  conditions  which  have
brought  them  there  and  imposed  on  them  a task  essentially
impossible,  that  of  implanting  genuine  white  civilization
on  Asiatic  soil.  It  must  clearly  be  understood  that  it  is
not  a question  of  the  slowness  of  a process  of  adaptation  :
the  really  vital  process  of  change  is  not  taking  place.  We
are  incapable  of  implanting  our  civilization  in  India  by
present  methods  of  approach  : we  are  only  capable  of
disturbing  their  civilization.1  Even  the  external  life  of  the
vast  bulk  of  the  population  we  hardly  touch;  the  inner
life  we  do  not  touch  at  all.  If  we  are  deceived  by
the  magnitude  of  the  area  of  our  political  control  and
the  real  activity  of  the  machinery  of  government  into
supposing  that  we  are  converting  the  Indian  peoples

1 The  effect*  of  thi»  disturbance,  however,  may  be  of  considerable  importance.
If,  a*  it  maintained  by  tome  Hindoo  politicians  of  the  new  school,  our  influence
it  tentibly  undermining  the  antagonism  between  Hindoo  and  Mohammedan,
and  it  gradually  breaking  down  the  rigour  of  “ caste  ” among  Hindoo*,  it  it
tolerably  manifett  that  we  are  tapping  the  tources  of  our  political  rule,  by  removing
the  mott  powerful  obstacle*  to  the  growth  of  “ nationalism  ” in  India.  If  the
levelling  influence  of  our  Western  ideas,  operating  through  religious,  literary,
political  and  social  institutions  on  the  minds  of  the  people,  goes  beyond  a certain
distance  in  breaking  down  the  racial,  religious  and  linguistic  barriers  which  have
always  divided  and  subdivided  India,  the  rise  of  a national  self-consciousness
upon  a basis  of  common  interests  and  common  antagonisms  may  raise  the  demand
of  “ India  for  the  Indians  ” above  the  margin  of  vague  aspiration  into  a region
of  organized  political  and  military  endeavour.

302


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA

to  British  Christianity,  British  views  of  justice,  morality,
and  to  the  supreme  value  of  regular  intense  industry,
in  order  to  improve  the  standard  of  material  comfort,
the  sooner  we  face  the  facts  the  better.  For  that  we
are  doing  none  of  these  things  in  an  appreciable  degree  is
plain  to  most  British  officials.  Of  the  nearest  approaches
to  such  success  they  are  openly  contemptuous,  condemning
outright  the  Eurasian  and  ridiculing  the  “ stucco  civiliza-
tion of  the  baboo.”  The  idea  that  we  are  civilizing  India
in  the  sense  of  assisting  them  to  industrial,  political,  and
moral  progress  along  the  lines  either  of  our  own  or  their
civilization  is  a complete  delusion,  based  upon  a false
estimate  of  the  influence  of  superficial  changes  wrought  by
government  and  the  activity  of  a minute  group  of  aliens.
The  delusion  is  only  sustained  by  the  sophistry  of  Imperial-
ism, which  weaves  these  fallacies  to  cover  its  nakedness  and
the  advantages  which  certain  interests  suck  out  of  empire.

This  judgment  is  not  new,  nor  does  it  imply  the  spirit
of  a “ little  Englander.”  If  there  is  one  writer  who,  more
than  another,  is  justly  accredited  with  the  stimulation  of
large  ideas  of  the  destiny  of  England,  it  is  the  late  Professor
Seeley.  Yet  this  is  his  summary  of  the  value  of  the
“ imperial  ” work  which  we  have  undertaken  in  India  : —

“At  best  we  think  of  it  as  a good  specimen  of  a bad
political  system.  We  are  not  disposed  to  be  proud  of  the
succession  of  the  Grand  Mogul.  We  doubt  whether,  with
all  the  merits  of  our  administration,  the  subjects  of  it  are
happy.  We  may  even  doubt  whether  our  rule  is  preparing
them  for  a happier  condition,  whether  it  may  not  be
sinking  them  lower  in  misery ; and  we  have  our  misgivings
that  perhaps  a genuine  Asiatic  Government,  and  still  more
a national  Government  springing  up  out  of  the  Hindu
population  itself,  might,  in  the  long  run,  be  more  beneficial,
because  more  congenial,  though  perhaps  less  civilized,

303


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


than  such  a foreign,  unsympathetic  Government  as  our
own.”1


Ill

While  India  presents  the  largest  and  most  instructive
lesson  in  distinctively  British  Imperialism,  it  is  in  China
that  the  spirit  and  methods  of  Western  Imperialism  in
general  are  likely  to  find  their  most  crucial  test.  The  new
Imperialism  differs  from  the  older,  first  in  substituting  for
the  ambition  of  a single  growing  empire  the  theory  and
the  practice  of  competing  empires,  each  motived  by  similar
lusts  of  political  aggrandisement  and  commercial  gain ;
secondly,  in  the  dominance  of  financial  or  investing  over
mercantile  interests.

The  methods  and  motives  of  the  European  Powers  are
not  open  to  serious  dispute.  The  single  aim  of  Chinese
policy  from  time  immemorial  had  been  to  avoid  all  dealings
with  foreigners  which  might  lead  to  the  establishment  of
inter-governmental  relations  with  them.  This  did  not
imply,  at  any  rate  until  recently,  hostility  to  individual
foreigners  or  a reluctance  to  admit  the  goods  or  the  ideas
which  they  sought  to  introduce.  Arabs  and  other  Asiatic
races  of  the  West  had  traded  with  China  from  very  early
times.  Roman  records  point  to  intercourse  with  China
as  early  as  Marcus  Aurelius.  Nor  were  their  relations  with
the  outside  world  confined  to  trade.  Christianity  was
introduced  some  fifteen  hundred  years  ago  by  the  Nestorians,
who  propagated  their  religious  views  widely  in  the  Central
Kingdom  ; Buddhist  foreign  missionaries  were  well  received,
and  their  teaching  found  wide  acceptance.  Indeed  few
nations  have  displayed  so  much  power  of  assimilating
foreign  religious  notions  as  the  Chinese.  Roman  Catholic

1 T be  Expansion  of  England , pp.  273,  274.

304


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA

missionaries  entered  China  during  the  Mongol  dynasty,
and  later  in  the  Ming  dynasty.1  Jesuits  not  only
propagated  Christianity,  but  introduced  Western  science
into  Pekin,  attaining  the  climax  of  their  influence  during
the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Not  until
the  arrival  of  the  Dominicans  introduced  an  element
of  religious  faction,  attended  by  political  intrigue,  did
Christianity  come  into  disrepute  or  evoke  any  sort  of
persecution.  With  the  introduction  of  Ptotestant  missions
during  the  nineteenth  century,  the  trouble  has  grown  apace.
Though  the  Chinese  as  a nation  have  never  displayed
religious  intolerance,  they  have  naturally  mistrusted  the
motives  of  Westerns  who,  calling  themselves  Christians,
quarrelled  amongst  themselves,  and  by  their  tactless  zeal
often  caused  local  rioting  which  led  to  diplomatic  or  armed
interference  for  their  protection.  Almost  all  lay  European
authorities  in  China  bear  out  the  following  judgment  of
Mr.  A.  J.  Little  : —

“ The  riots  and  consequent  massacres  resulting  from
mission  work  throughout  Indo-China  may  be  justified  by
the  end ; but  it  is  certain  our  relations  with  the  Chinese
would  be  far  more  cordial  than  they  are,  were  we  not  sus-
pected of  an  insidious  design  to  wean  them  from  such  habits
of  filial  piety  and  loyalty  as  they  possess,  to  our  advantage.”1

The  main  outlines  of  Chinese  policy  are  quite  intelligible.
Though  not  averse  from  incidental  contact  with  Europeans
or  with  other  Asiatics,  traders,  travellers,  or  missionaries,
they  have  steadily  resisted  all  attempts  to  disturb  their
political  and  economic  system  by  organized  pressure  of
foreign  Powers.  Possessing  in  their  enormous  area  of
territory,  with  its  various  climatic  and  other  natural
conditions,  its  teeming  industrial  population,  and  its

1 A.D.  II38  to  1644.

1 Through  the  Yang-Tse  Gorges , edition  1888,  p.  334.

3°s


imperialism:  a study


endowed  with  an  extraordinary  capacity  of  steady  labour,
with  great  intelligence  and  ingenuity,  inured  to  a low
standard  of  material  comfort,  in  occupation  of  a country
rich  in  unworked  minerals  and  destitute  of  modern
machinery  of  manufacture  or  of  transport,  opens  up  a
dazzling  prospect  of  profitable  exploitation.

In  our  dealings  with  backward  races  capable  of  instruc-
tion in  Western  industrial  methods  there  are  three  stages.
First  comes  ordinary  commerce,  the  exchange  of  the
normal  surplus  produce  of  the  two  countries.  Next,
after  Great  Britain  or  some  other  Western  Power  has
acquired  territory  or  invested  capital  in  the  foreign  country
with  the  aim  of  developing  the  resources,  she  enjoys  a
period  of  large  export  trade  in  rails,  machinery,  and  other
forms  of  capital,  not  necessarily  balanced  by  the  import
trade  since  it  really  covers  the  process  of  investment.
This  stage  may  continue  long,  when  capital  and  business
capacity  cannot  be  obtained  within  the  newly  developed
country.  But  a third  stage  remains,  one  which  in  China
at  any  rate  may  be  reached  at  no  distant  period,  when
capital  and  organizing  energy  may  be  developed  within
the  country,  either  by  Europeans  planted  there  or  by
natives.  Thus  fully  equipped  for  future  internal  develop-
ment in  all  the  necessary  productive  powers,  such  a nation
may  turn  upon  her  civilizer,  untrammelled  by  need  of
further  industrial  aid,  undersell  him  in  his  own  market,
take  away  his  other  foreign  markets  and  secure  for  herself
what  further  developing  work  remains  to  be  done  in  other
undeveloped  parts  of  the  earth.  The  shallow  platitudes
by  which  the  less  instructed  Free  Trader  sometimes  attempts
to  shirk  this  vital  issue  have  already  been  exposed.  It  is
here  enough  to  repeat  that  Free  Trade  can  nowise  guarantee
the  maintenance  of  industry  or  of  an  industrial  population
upon  any  particular  country,  and  there  is  no  consideration,

308


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


theoretic  or  practical,  to  prevent  British  capital  from
transferring  itself  to  China,  provided  it  can  find  there  a
cheaper  or  more  efficient  supply  of  labour,  or  even  to
prevent  Chinese  capital  with  Chinese  labour  from  ousting
British  produce  in  neutral  markets  of  the  world.  What
applies  to  Great  Britain  applies  equally  to  the  other
industrial  nations  which  have  driven  their  economic  suckers
into  China.  It  is  at  least  conceivable  that  China  might
so  turn  the  tables  upon  the  Western  industrial  nations,
and,  either  by  adopting  their  capital  and  organizers  or,
as  is  more  probable,  by  substituting  her  own,  might  flood
their  markets  with  her  cheaper  manufactures,  and  refusing
their  imports  in  exchange  might  take  her  payment  in  liens
upon  their  capital,  reversing  the  earlier  process  of  investment
until  she  gradually  obtained  financial  control  over  her
quondam  patrons  and  civilizers.  This  is  no  idle  speculation.
If  China  in  very  truth  possesses  those  industrial  and  business
capacities  with  which  she  is  commonly  accredited,  and
the  Western  Powers  are  able  to  have  their  will  in  developing
her  upon  Western  lines,  it  seems  extremely  likely  that  this
reaction  will  result.


IV

The  inner  significance  of  the  joint  attack  of  Western
Powers  in  China  lies  here.  It  is  the  great  speculative  coup
of  international  capitalism  not  fully  ripened  for  inter-
national co-operation,  but  still  hampered  by  the  necessity
under  which  the  groups  of  capitalists  lie,  of  using  national
feelings  and  policies  to  push  their  special  interests.  So
long  as  it  is  necessary  to  use  diplomatic  pressure  and  armed
force  in  order  to  secure  some  special  field  of  investment  in
railroads,  mining  rights,  or  other  developments,  the  peace
of  Europe  is  endangered  by  national  intrigues  and  bickering.
Though  certain  areas  may  be  considered  as  more  or  less

309


imperialism:  a study


definitely  allocated,  Manchuria  to  Russia,  the  southern
provinces  of  Tonking,  with  Hainan  to  France,  Shan-tung
to  Germany,  Formosa  and  Fokien  to  Japan,  for  industrial
exploitation  and  for  political  control,  there  are  large  areas
where  the  industrial  and  future  political  control,  as  spheres
of  influence,  is  likely  to  cause  grave  discord.  Yunnan  and
Quan-tung  on  the  southern  boundary  are  disputed  territory
between  England  and  France,  the  Chinese  Government
having  given  to  each  of  these  Powers  a similar  assurance
that  these  provinces  should  not  be  alienated  to  any  other
Power.  Great  Britain’s  claim  to  the  vast  indefinite  area
known  as  the  Yang-Tse  basin  as  her  separate  sphere  of
influence  for  industrial  concessions  and  political  dominance
is  now  exposed  to  the  serious  avowed  encroachments  of
Germany,  while  Corea  remains  an  open  sore  between  Russia
and  Japan.  The  United  States,  whose  interest  in  China
for  investment  and  for  trade  is  developing  faster  than  that
of  any  European  Power,  will  certainly  insist  upon  an  open
door,  and  will  soon  be  in  a position  to  back  her  claim  by
strong  naval  force.  The  present1  epoch,  therefore,  is  one
of  separate  national  policies  and  special  alliances,  in  which
groups  of  financiers  and  capitalists  urge  their  Governments
to  obtain  leases,  concessions,  or  other  preferences  over
particular  areas.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  conflicts  of
national  Imperialism  thus  provoked,  skilfully  used  for  self-
defence  by  the  Chinese  Government,  may  retard  for  a long
time  any  effective  opening  up  of  China  by  Western  enter-
prise, and  that  China  may  defend  herself  by  setting  her
enemies  to  fight  among  themselves.

But  it  is  idle  to  suppose  that  the  industrial  attack  on
China  can  be  ultimately  evaded.  Unless  China  can  be
roused  quickly  from  the  sleep  of  countless  centuries  of
peace  and  can  transform  herself  into  a powerful  military

1 The  author  write*  of  1903.

310


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


nation,  she  cannot  escape  the  pressure  of  the  external
powers.  To  suppose  that  she  can  do  this,  because  her
individual  citizens  show  a capacity  for  drill  and  discipline,
is  to  mistake  the  issue.  The  whole  genius  of  the  Chinese
peoples,  so  far  as  it  is  understood,  is  opposed  to  militant
patriotism  and  to  the  strongly  centralized  government
required  to  give  effect  to  such  a policy.  The  notion  of
China  organizing  an  army  of  six  millions  under  some  great
general,  and  driving  “ the  foreign  devil 99  out  of  the  country,
or  even  entering  herself  upon  a career  of  invasion  and
conquest,  ignores  the  chief  psychological  and  social  factors  of
Chinese  life.  At  any  rate  this  is  the  least  likely  of  all  early
issues  in  the  Far  East.

Far  more  reasonable  is  it  to  suppose  that  capitalism,
having  failed  to  gain  its  way  by  national  separatist  policies
issuing  in  strife  of  Western  peoples,  may  learn  the  art  of
combination,  and  that  the  power  of  international  capitalism,
which  has  been  growing  apace,  may  make  its  great  crucial
experiment  in  the  exploitation  of  China.  The  driving  force
of  the  competing  Imperialism  of  Western  nations  has  been
traced  to  the  interests  of  certain  small  financial  and  industrial
groups  within  each  nation,  usurping  the  power  of  the
nation  and  employing  the  public  force  and  money  for  their
private  business  ends.  In  the  earlier  stage  of  development,
where  the  grouping  of  these  forces  is  still  distinctively
national,  this  policy  makes  for  wars  in  pursuit  of  “ national 99
markets  for  investments  and  trade.  But  the  modern
science  of  militarism  renders  wars  between  “ civilized  ”
Powers  too  costly,  and  the  rapid  growth  of  effective  inter-
nationalism in  the  financial  and  great  industrial  magnates,
who  seem  destined  more  and  more  to  control  national
politics,  may  in  the  future  render  such  wars  impossible.
Militarism  may  long  survive,  for  that,  as  has  been  shown,
is  serviceable  in  many  ways  to  the  maintenance  of  a pluto-

311


imperialism:  a study

cracy.  Its  expenditure  furnishes  a profitable  support  to
certain  strong  vested  interests,  it  is  a decorative  element
in  social  life,  and  above  all  it  is  necessary  to  keep  down
the  pressure  of  the  forces  of  internal  reform.  Everywhere
the  power  of  capital  in  its  more  concentrated  forms  is  better
organized  than  the  power  of  labour,  and  has  reached  a
further  stage  in  its  development ; while  labour  has  talked
of  international  co-operation,  capital  has  been  achieving
it.  So  far,  therefore,  as  the  greatest  financial  and  com-
mercial interests  are  concerned,  it  seems  quite  probable
that  the  coming  generation  may  witness  so  powerful  an
international  union  as  to  render  wars  between  the  Western
nations  almost  impossible.  Notwithstanding  the  selfish
jealousies  and « the  dog-in-the-manger  policies  which  at
present  weaken  European  action  in  the  Far  East,  the  real
drama  will  begin  when  the  forces  of  international  capitalism,
claiming  to  represent  the  civilization  of  united  Christendom,
are  brought  to  bear  on  the  peaceful  opening  up  of  China.
It  is  then  that  the  real  “ yellow  peril  ” will  begin.  If  it  is
unreasonable  to  expect  that  China  can  develop  a national
patriotism  which  will  enable  her  to  expel  the  Western
exploiters,  she  must  then  be  subjected  to  a process  of
disintegration,  which  is  more  aptly  described  as  “ the
break-up  ” of  China  than  by  the  term  “ development.”

Not  until  then  shall  we  realize  the  full  risks  and  folly
of  the  most  stupendous  revolutionary  enterprise  history
has  known.  The  Western  nations  may  then  awaken  to
the  fact  that  they  have  permitted  certain  little  cliques  of
private  profit-mongers  to  engage  them  in  a piece  of
Imperialism  in  which  every  cost  and  peril  of  that  hazardous
policy  is  multiplied  a hundred-fold,  and  from  which  there
appears  no  possibility  of  safe  withdrawal.  The  light-
hearted, casual  mood  in  which  the  nations  have  been  drawn
on  to  the  opening  up  of  a country  with  a population  almost

312


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA

as  large  as  that  of  Europe,  nineteen-twentieths  of  whom
are  perfectly  unknown  to  us,  is  the  crowning  instance  of
irrational  government.  In  large  measure  such  an  enter-
prise must  rank  as  a plunge  in  the  dark.  Few  Europeans
even  profess  to  know  the  Chinese,  or  to  know  how  far  the
Chinese  they  do  know  are  representative  of  the  nation  as
a whole.  The  only  important  fact  upon  which  there  is
universal  agreement  is  that  the  Chinese  are  of  all  the
“ lower  races  ” most  adaptable  to  purposes  of  industrial
exploitation,  yielding  the  largest  surplus  product  of  labour
in  proportion  to  their  cost  of  keep.  In  a word  the  investors
and  business  managers  of  the  West  appear  to  have  struck
in  China  a mine  of  labour  power  richer  by  far  than  any  of
the  gold  and  other  mineral  deposits  which  have  directed
imperial  enterprise  in  Africa  and  elsewhere  ; it  seems  so
enormous  and  so  expansible  as  to  open  up  the  possibility
od  raising  whole  white  populations  of  the  West  to  the
position  of  “ independent  gentlemen,”  living,  as  do  the  small
white  settlements  in  India  or  South  Africa,  upon  the
manual  toil  of  these  laborious  inferiors.  For  a parasitic
exploit  so  gigantic  the  competing  groups  of  business  men
who  are  driving  on  their  respective  Governments  might
even  abate  their  competition  and  co-operate  in  the  forceful
steps  required  in  starting  their  project.  Once  encompass
China  with  a network  of  railroads  and  steamer  services,
the  size  of  the  labour  market  to  be  tapped  is  so  stupendous
that  it  might  well  absorb  in  its  development  all  the  spare
capital  and  business  energy  the  advanced  European  countries
and  the  United  States  can  supply  for  generations.  Such
an  experiment  may  revolutionize  the  methods  of  Imperial-
ism ; the  pressure  of  working-class  movements  in  politics
and  industry  in  the  West  can  be  met  by  a flood  of  China
goods,  so  as  to  keep  down  wages  and  compel  industry,  or,
where  the  power  of  the  imperialist  oligarchy  is  well  set,

3*3


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


by  menaces  of  yellow  workmen  or  of  yellow  mercenary
troops,  while  collaboration  in  this  huge  Eastern  development
may  involve  an  understanding  between  the  groups  of  business
politicians  in  the  Western  States  close  enough  and  strong
enough  to  secure  international  peace  in  Europe  and  some
relaxation  of  militarism.

This  would  drive  the  logic  of  Imperialism  far  towards
realization ; its  inherent  necessary  tendencies  towards
unchecked  oligarchy  in  politics,  and  parasitism  in  industry,
would  be  plainly  exhibited  in  the  condition  of  the  “ im-
perialist ” nations.  The  greater  part  of  Western  Europe
might  then  assume  the  appearance  and  character  already
exhibited  by  tracts  of  country  in  the  South  of  England,  in
the  Riviera,  and  in  the  tourist-ridden  or  residential  parts
of  Italy  and  Switzerland,  little  clusters  of  wealthy  aristocrats
drawing  dividends  and  pensions  from  the  Far  East,  with
a somewhat  larger  group  of  professional  retainers  and
tradesmen  and  a large  body  of  personal  servants  and  workers
in  the  transport  trade  and  in  the  final  stages  of  production
of  the  more  perishable  goods : all  the  main  arterial
industries  would  have  disappeared,  the  staple  foods  and
manufactures  flowing  in  as  tribute  from  Asia  and  Africa.1
It  is,  of  course,  idle  to  suppose  that  the  industrialization
of  China  by  Western  methods  can  be  achieved  without
effective  political  control,  and  just  in  proportion  as  Western
Europe  became  dependent  economically  upon  China  would
the  maintenance  of  that  joint  imperial  control  react  upon
Western  politics,  subordinating  all  movements  of  domestic
reform  to  the  need  of  maintaining  the  Empires,  and  check-


1 Mr.  Bryce,  in  his  Romanes  Lecture,  p.  9,  seems  to  hint  at  the  probability  of
such  a development.  “ It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  for  economic  purposes
all  mankind  is  fast  becoming  one  people,  in  which  the  hitherto  backward  nations
are  taking  a place  analogous  to  that  which  the  unskilled  workers  have  held  in
each  one  of  the  civilized  nations.  Such  an  event  opens  a new  stage  in  world
history/*


v >4


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


mating  the  forces  of  democracy  by  a skilful  use  of  a highly
centralized  bureaucracy  and  army.

How  far  the  advent  of  Japan  into  the  status  of  a first
rank  political  and  industrial  power  will  affect  the  problem
of  Imperialism  in  Asia  is  a question  which  presses  ever  more
vigorously  upon  the  consideration  of  Western  nations.  It
is,  however,  impossible  to  deny  that  the  recent  manifestation
of  Japan  as  an  Eastern  nation  equipped  with  all  the  effective
practical  arts  of  Western  civilization  is  likely  to  alter  pro-
foundly the  course  of  Asiatic  history  in  the  near  future.

Regarding  as  the  most  important  issue  the  economic
development  of  China  upon  Western  lines,  we  cannot  fail
to  see  that  Japan  has  great  advantages  over  Western
powers  for  doing  this  work  and  securing  the  profits  which
it  will  yield.  These  advantages  are  partly  derived  from
certain  energies  of  mind  which  the  Japanese  exhibit,  partly
from  the  geographical  and  racial  factors  in  the  situation.
Summarizing  the  acknowledged  facts,  the  Japanese,  as  a
people,  seem  to  have  assimilated  within  two  generations
all  those  mechanical  and  political  sciences  of  the  West
which  contribute  to  the  military,  commercial  and  social
strength  of  a nation,  while  they  can  operate  these  instruments
of  civilization  quite  as  accurately  and  more  economically
from  the  standpoint  of  the  common  good  than  any  of  the
nations  which  have  been  their  teachers.  If  this  is  “ imita-
tion ” it  is  thoroughly  intelligent  imitation,  for  it  is  admitted
that  the  Japanese  have  exercised  fine  judgment  in  selecting
the  weapons,  machines,  laws  and  customs  which  they  have
adopted,  and  that  they  work  their  political,  social  and
economic  institutions  easily  and  efficiently.  The  wonderful
success  of  Japan  appears  to  be  in  large  measure  due  to  two
inner  sources  of  economy.  In  the  first  place  they  appear
to  be  able  to  give  out  a great  quantity  of  mental  energy  in
the  complex  operations  of  modern  life  without  sustaining

315


imperialism:  a study


the  amount  of  nervous  waste  perceptible  in  Western  peoples  :
they  appear  to  do  more  easily  a larger  quantity  of  cerebral
work.  Secondly,  a more  widely  diffused,  a more  intense
and  a more  sustained  public  spirit  appears  to  produce  a
better  co-operation  of  individual  activities  for  the  common
good  than  is  found  in  any  Western  people  : there  is  less
waste  from  indolence,  corruption  and  other  diseases  of
officialism,  while  a high  consideration  of  public  service
pervades  the  popular  mind.  This  intense  patriotism  and
self-sacrifice  may  be  only  a psychical  survival  from  an  old
social  order  which  is  passing  away,  but  so  long  as  it  endures,
it  supplies  a great  operative  force  for  further  activity.

The  proximity  of  Japan  to  North  China,  the  associations
of  race,  language,  religion,  literature,  modes  of  life  must
give  Japan  an  immense  advantage  over  any  European  race
in  the  economic  development  of  China.  If,  as  seems  likely,
the  peace  following  the  Russo-Japanese  war  opens  an  era
of  rapid  commercial  expansion  for  Japan,  and  capitalism
advances  swiftly  within  her  islands,  China  will  be  the
natural  outlet  for  the  investment  of  her  capital  and  for  the
employment  of  her  organizing  energy  in  business  and  in  the
public  services.  Whether  Japan  will  be  dominated  by  the
same  spirit  of  territorial  aggrandisement  and  political
empire  as  European  nations  have  exhibited  depends  in
large  measure  upon  the  part  played  by  the  latter  in  the
opening  up  of  China.  If  the  Western  powers  keep  their
political  and  military  hands  off  China,  content  to  encourage
private  companies  to  build  railways,  start  mining  and
manufacturing  operations  and  open  up  commercial  inter-
course with  the  interior,  keeping  the  policy  of  “ an  open
door,”  Japan  will  play  this  same  game,  but  more  successfully
because  of  the  better  cards  she  holds,  and  the  prestige  of
her  successful  war  will  stand  her  in  good  stead.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  there  is  closing  of  doors,  ear-marking,  and

316


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


further  political  absorption  of  chosen  areas  by  the  Western
powers,  Japan  will  be  driven  to  enter  this  sort  of  competition,
and  with  her  better  understanding  of  the  conditions  of
success,  and  her  superior  faculty  for  managing  the  Chinese,
is  likely  to  get  the  better  of  her  European  and  American
competitors.

Should  European  nations  resent  the  growing  industrial
or  perhaps  political,  supremacy  of  Japan  in  China  and  adopt
some  concerted  action  to  defend  their  “ spheres  of  influence  ”
or  their  extorted  “ concessions,”  it  is  not  wholly  improbable
that  Japan  may  organize  a great  military  and  naval  power
in  which  she  will  utilize  the  latent  force  of  China  to  drive
the  Western  nations  out  of  the  China  seas.

Such  an  opportunity  for  playing  a great  new  part  in
imperial  history  may  be  open  to  Japan  : if  so,  her  temporary
alliances  with  European  powers  are  not  likely  to  divert
her  from  a course  which  will  seem  to  her  people  as  plain
an  instance  of  “ manifest  destiny  ” as  any  of  the  exploits
of  imperialism  in  the  annals  of  England  or  the  United
States.

In  speculating  on  the  chances  of  this  new  chapter  of
world-history,  a great  deal  depends  upon  how  far  Japan
maintains  her  financial  independence  and  is  enabled  to
avoid  becoming  a catspaw  of  cosmopolitan  capitalism  in  the
great  work  of  developing  China.  Should  the  future  indus-
trialization of  Japan  and  China  be  conducted  in  the  main
out  of  their  own  resources  of  capital  and  organizing  skill,
passing  quickly  through  a short  period  of  dependence  upon
Europe  for  capital  and  instruction,  the  great  industrial
power  of  the  Far  East  may  quickly  launch  itself  upon  the
world-market  as  the  biggest  and  most  effective  competitor
in  the  great  machine  industries,  taking  to  itself  first  the
trade  of  Asia  and  the  Pacific,  and  then  swamping  the
markets  of  the  West  and  driving  these  nations  to  a still

3U


imperialism:  a study


more  rigorous  Protection  with  its  corollary  of  diminished
production.  Lastly,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  powerful
industrial  and  financial  classes  of  the  West,  in  order  better
to  keep  the  economic  and  political  master y at  home,  may
combine  to  reverse  the  policy  which  has  hitherto  been
gaining  ground  in  the  United  States  and  in  our  white
colonies,  and  may  insist  upon  the  free  importation  of  yellow
labour  for  domestic  and  industrial  service  in  the  West.  This
is  a weapon  which  they  hold  in  reserve,  should  they  need  to
use  it  in  order  to  keep  the  populace  in  safe  subjection.

Those  who  regard  with  complacency  the  rapid  develop-
ment of  China,  because  of  a general  conviction  that  the
liberation  of  these  great  productive  forces  must  by  ordinary
processes  of  commercial  intercourse  be  beneficial  to  the
Western  nations,  entirely  miss  the  issue.  The  peaceful,
equitable  distribution  over  the  industrial  world  of  the
increase  of  world-wealth  rising  from  the  development  of
China  implies  a successful  movement  of  industrial  democracy
in  the  Western  nations,  yielding  not  merely  increased  pro-
ductivity of  their  national  resources,  but  a continual  rise
in  standard  of  consumption  of  the  peoples.  Such  a condition
might,  by  securing  ordinary  processes  of  world-exchange,
enrich  the  nations  with  a legitimate  share  of  the  prosperity
of  China.  But  the  economic  raison  d?itre  of  Imperialism
in  the  opening  up  of  China  is,  as  we  see,  quite  other  than
the  maintenance  of  ordinary  commerce : it  consists  in
establishing  a vast  new  market  for  Western  investors,  the
profits  of  which  will  represent  the  gains  of  an  investing
class  and  not  the  gains  of  whole  peoples.  The  normal
healthy  processes  of  assimilation  of  increased  world-wealth
by  nations  are  inhibited  by  the  nature  of  this  Imperialism,
whose  essence  consists  in  developing  markets  for  investment,
not  for  trade,  and  in  using  the  superior  economies  of  cheap
foreign  production  to  supersede  the  industries  of  their  own

318


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


nation,  and  to  maintain  the  political  and  economic
domination  of  a class.


V

So  far  the  influence  of  the  “ opening  ” or  “ break-up  ”
of  China  upon  the  Western  world  has  been  the  subject  of
inquiry.  Let  us  now  ask  what  this  u break-up  ” means
for  China.  Certain  plain  features  stand  out  in  the  structure
of  Chinese  society.  China  has  never  been  a great  Empire,
or  had  any  strong  national  existence  in  the  European  sense.
The  central  government  has  always  been  very  slight,
virtually  confined  to  a taxing  power  exercised  through  the
provincial  government,  and  to  a small  power  of  appointment
of  high  officials.  Even  the  provincial  government  has,  in
ordinary  times,  touched  the  actual  life  of  the  mass  of  the
people  lightly  and  at  few  points.  China  may  be  described
properly  as  a huge  nest  of  little  free  village  communes,  self-
governing,  and  animated  by  a genuine  spirit  of  equality.
Mr.  Colquhoun  names  the  faculty  of  local  self-government
as  “ a main  source  of  national  vitality.”  “ Groups  of
families  constitute  villages,  which  are  self-governing,  and
the  official  who  ventures  to  trench  on  their  immemorial
rights  to  the  point  of  resistance  is,  according  to  an  official
code  not  confined  to  China,  disavowed  by  his  superiors,  and
generally  finds  a change  of  scene  imperative.  “ The
family  system,  with  its  extension  to  village  and  town  groups,
is  the  cheapest  form  of  government  extant,  for  it  dispenses
with  police,  while  disposing  effectually  of  offenders  against
the  peace  or  respectability  of  the  community.”1  Similarly
the  great  German  explorer  Richthofen  : “ No  people  in  the
world  are  more  exempt  from  official  interference.”

“ The  great  fact,”  says  Colquhoun,  “ to  be  noted  as
between  the  Chinese  and  the  Government  is  the  almost

1 Transformation  in  China , by  A.  R.  Colquhoun,  p.  176.

319


imperialism:  a study


unexampled  liberty  which  the  people  enjoy,  and  the
infinitesimally  small  part  which  Government  plays  in  the
scheme  of  national  life.”1

The  family  is  the  political,  economic,  and  moral  unit  of
society,  the  village  commune  being  either  a direct  enlarge-
ment of  a single  family  or  a group  of  closely  related  families.
Sometimes  communal  ownership  is  maintained,  but  usually
a division  takes  place  with  each  growth  of  family,  and  the
operative  principle  in  general  vogue  is  an  occupying  owner-
ship of  small  proprietors,  paying  a low  land-tax  to  the
State,  the  sole  landlord,  in  return  for  a lease  in  perpetuity.
The  land-tax  is  based  on  profitable  use,  and  unoccupied  lands
revert  to  the  community.  Patrimonial  institutions  prevent
accumulation  of  large  properties.  Numerous  provisions
of  law  and  custom  provide  against  land-grabbing  and
monopoly.  “ Nowhere  in  China  would  it  be  possible  for
a rich  man  to  take  possession  of  a spring  and  convey  its
water  to  his  pond  by  subterranean  drains,  leaving  dry  the
fields  under  which  it  passed.  Water  is  as  indispensable  to
life  as  air  and  land.  No  individual  has  the  right  to  say
1 It  is  mine,  it  belongs  to  me.’  This  feeling  is  very  strongly
rooted  in  China.”1

A family  council,  partly  elective,  partly  hereditary,
settles  most  important  issues,  punishing  crimes,  collecting
the  taxes,  and  settling  divisions  of  property;  recourse  to
legal  processes  is  rare,  the  moral  authority  of  the  family
commonly  sufficing  to  preserve  order.

This  moral  factor  is,  indeed,  the  one  great  vital  principle
in  Chinese  life.  It  not  only  governs  economic  relations,
and  presents  a substitute  for  wider  politics,  but  it  figures
prominently  in  the  education  and  the  religious  or  ethical
system  of  the  people.  “ Life  seems  so  little  worth  living  to
a man  outlawed  from  family  and  home  that  even  capital

1 Transformation  in  China,  by  A.  R.  Colquhoun,  p.  296.  9 Colquhoun.

320


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


sentences  are  executed  by  consent  ” ;l  and  where  growth  of
population  drives  male  members  to  seek  employment  in  the
towns,  the  closest  family  associations  are  retained.  The
reverence  for  family  history  and  for  the  moral  obligations
it  entails  constitutes  the  kernel  of  national  culture  and  the
great  stimulus  to  individual  education  and  ambition  in  life.

Upon  this  basis  is  built  one  of  the  most  extraordinary
civilizations  the  world  has  known,  differing  in  certain  very
vital  matters  from  the  civilization  of  the  West.

Two  points  merit  particular  attention,  because  they  drive
down  into  the  roots  of  Chinese  civilization.  The  first  is  the
general  recognition  of  that  “ dignity  of  labour  ” which  in
the  West  has  degenerated  into  a cant  phrase  so  far  as  the
common  forms  of  work  are  concerned.  Manual  labour  is
not  only  a necessary  means  of  livelihood,  but  a genuinely
absorbing  personal  interest  for  the  entire  body  of  the  nation  ;
with  simple  tools,  and  scarcely  any  use  of  machinery,  minute
personal  skill  is  applied  to  agriculture  and  the  manufactures  ;
most  workers  have  some  considerable  variety  of  occupation,
and  see  and  enjoy  the  useful  results  of  their  toil.  The  whole
economic  system  stands  on  a broad  basis  of  “ bread  labour,”
applied  in  intensive  cultivation  of  the  land  ; destitute  of
Western  science  or  Western  machinery,  the  detailed
empirical  study  of  agriculture  has  been  carried  farther  than
in  any  other  country,  and  this  “ gardening  ” life  is  the
most  prominent  factor  in  the  external  civilization  of  the
country.

The  second  point  is  the  wide  diffusion  of  some  sort  of
literary  education  and  a genuine  reverence  for  “ things  of
the  mind.”  The  high  respect  in  which  a narrow  conserva-
tive and  pedantic  literary  system  is  held,  the  extraordinary
importance  attached  to  verbal  memory  and  trivialities  of
ritual  in  their  culture,  have  not  unnaturally  aroused  much
1 Simcox,  Primitive  Civilizations , vol.  II.

321


imperialism:  a study


astonishment  and  some  contempt  among  educated  Westerns.
But  the  general  prevalence  of  schools  and  libraries,  the
democratization  of  the  machinery  of  education,  the  opening
of  the  highest  offices  of  State  to  a free  competition  of  the
people,  conducted  on  an  intellectual  test,  are  indicative  of  a
standard  of  valuation  which  entitles  China  to  rank  high
among  the  civilizations  of  the  world.  In  no  Western  nation
do  the  man  of  learning  and  the  gardener  rank  higher  in  the
common  regard  of  the  people  than  the  soldier.  These
valuations,  economic  and  intellectual,  lie  firmly  rooted  in
the  Chinese  mind,  and  have  helped  through  countless  genera-
tions to  mould  the  social  institutions  of  the  people.  The
civilization,  sprung  up  under  these  conditions,  manifests
some  serious  defects,  compared  with  the  best  standards  of
the  West.  Life  and  conduct  seem  unduly  cramped  by
detailed  conventions ; outside  officialism  there  seems  little
scope  for  individual  distinction ; beyond  the  range  of
family,  emotional  life  appears  attenuated ; the  fine  arts
have  never  flourished,  literature  is  conventional,  morals
are  closely  practical ; the  rigorous  economy  of  material  life
seems  attended  by  a less  sensitive,  nervous  organization
than  that  of  any  Western  nation,  and  individual  life  seems
to  run  upon  a somewhat  lower  level  of  consciousness,  and  to
be  valued  proportionately  less.

But  it  should  be  recognized  that  the  merits  of  this  civiliza-
tion are  better  attested  than  the  defects,  for  the  fruits
of  Chinese  industry,  honesty,  orderly  behaviour,  and  high
regard  for  learning,  are  easily  discernible  by  foreigners,
while  the  more  serious  defects  might  vanish  or  be  deeply
modified  by  a more  intimate  understanding  of  Chinese
psychology  than  any  foreigner1  is  likely  to  possess.  The
“ barbarities  ” which  have  commonly  won  for  China  an  ill-
fame  in  Western  lands,  the  savage  punishments  inflicted
on  criminals,  the  exposure  of  female  infants,  the  brutal

322


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


assaults  on  foreigners,  are  no  normal  part  of  the  conduct
of  the  nation,  but  rather  sporadic  survivals  of  brute  habits
and  instincts,  not  more  to  be  regarded  as  final  tests  of  the
civilization  of  China  than  negro-lynching  of  that  of  America
or  wife-kicking  of  that  of  England.

If  this  brief  conspectus  of  the  essential  features  of  Chinese
civilization  is  substantially  correct,  it  is  evident  that  “ the
break-up  ” brought  about  by  the  forces  of  Western  nations
will  destroy  the  very  foundations  of  the  national  order.

Its  first  fruits  have  been  to  impair  security  of  life,  peaceful
industry  and  property  over  large  areas  of  territory,  to
arouse  a disorderly  spirit  of  guerilla,  to  erect  large  public
debts  and  so  to  enhance  the  burden  of  central  government
upc  u the  body  of  the  people,  diminishing  their  communal
independence.  As  the  Western  economic  forces  make
further  way,  they  must,  partly  by  increased  taxation  needed
for  an  expensive  central  government  with  armies,  elaborate
civil  services  and  military  debts,  partly  by  the  temptation
of  labour  agents,  draw  large  numbers  of  the  workers  from
the  position  of  independent  little  farmers  into  that  of  town
wage-earners.  This  drain  of  population  into  industrial
cities  and  mining  districts,  and  the  specialization  of  agri-
culture for  large  markets,  will  break  up  the  communal  land
system  with  its  fixed  hereditary  order  and  will  sap  the
roots  of  family  solidarity,  introducing  those  factors  of
fluidity,  minute  subdivision,  and  concentration  of  labour
which  are  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  Western  industry.
The  economic  and  social  equality  which  belongs  to  ordinary
Chinese  life  will  disappear  before  a new  system  of  industrial
caste  which  capitalism  will  entail.  The  decay  of  morals,
which  is  so  noticeable  in  the  declasses  Chinese,  will  spread
with  the  decay  of  the  family  power,  and  an  elaborate
judicial  and  punitory  machinery  will  replace  the  rule  of  the
self-governing  family.  This  collapse  of  local  status  will

x 3*3


imperialism:  a study

react  upon  the  habit  of  commercial  integrity  attested
throughout  China  by  the  inviolability  of  business  pledges ;
the  new  credit  system  of  elaborate  Western  commerce  will
involve  a network  of  commercial  law  and  an  education  in
that  habit  of  litigiousness  which  exercises  so  dangerous  a
fascination  over  some  other  Asiatic  peoples.  The  increase
of  wealth  which  this  new  industrialism  would  bring  would
either  flow  in  economic  tribute  to  the  West,  or  would  go  to
the  endowment  of  a new  powerful  capitalist  caste  in  China
itself,  who,  following  the  Western  lines,  would  ally  them-
selves with  imperialist  politics  in  order  to  protect  their
vested  interests.  Capitalism,  centralized  government,
militarism,  protection,  and  a whole  chain  of  public  regula-
tions to  preserve  the  new  order  against  the  rising  of  old
conservative  traditional  forces — such  would  be  the  inevitable
outcome.  The  changes  of  external  environment  which
have  come  with  dangerous  rapidity  on  Europe  during  the
nineteenth  century,  forced  still  more  rapidly  on  China  by
foreign  profit-seekers,  would  produce  reactions  of  incalculable
peril  upon  the  national  life  and  character.

It  would  seem  to  imply  no  less  than  the  destruction  of
the  existing  civilization  of  China  and  the  substitution  in  its
place  of  what  ? There  has  been  no  serious  pretence  that
European  nations  can  impose  or  inculcate  the  essentials  of
their  civilization  on  China.  The  psychology  of  the  Chinese
is  a terra  incognita : the  most  experienced  European  resi-
dents are  those  who  are  the  frankest  in  declaring  their
inability  to  grapple  with  the  mysteries  of  Chinese  character
and  Chinese  morality ; where  less  discreet  writers  venture
on  generalizations,  their  pages  are  riddled  with  the  wildest
contradictions  and  inconsistencies.  What  is,  however,
pretty  clear  is  this : the  Chinaman  who  detaches  himself
from  the  family  bond  and  its  moral  associations  and  adopts
European  manners  is  distrusted  alike  by  his  fellow-country-

324


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


men  and  by  his  new  patrons  ; Christianity  makes  no  way
among  “ respectable  ” Chinese,  the  educated  classes  pre-
senting no  ground  of  appeal  for  any  form  of  supernaturalism  ;
though  Western  science  may  hope  in  time  to  make  a
legitimate  impression  upon  the  intellectual  life  of  China,
the  process  will  be  one  of  slow  absorption  from  within
and  cannot  be  imposed  by  alien  instruction  from  without.

That  the  squabbles  of  European  potentates  for  territorial
expansion,  the  lusts  of  merchants  or  financiers,  the
ludicrously  false  expectations  of  missionaries,  the  catch-
words of  political  parties  in  European  elections,  should  be
driving  European  nations  to  destroy  the  civilization  of  a
quarter  of  the  human  race  without  possessing  the  ability  or
even  recognizing  the  need  to  provide  a substitute,  ought
surely  to  give  pause  to  those  Imperialists  who  claim  to
base  their  policy  on  reason  and  the  common  good.

No  thinking  man  can  seriously  question  the  immense
importance  of  free  intercourse  between  the  West  and  the
East,  or  doubt  the  gain  that  would  accrue  to  the  civilization
of  the  world  by  a wise  communication  to  the  Eastern  mind
of  those  arts  which  peculiarly  represent  Western  civilization,
the  laborious,  successful  study  of  the  physical  sciences  and
their  application  to  the  arts  of  industry,  the  systematic
development  of  certain  definite  principles  and  practices  of
law  and  government,  and  the  thought  and  literature  which
are  the  conscious  flowering  of  this  growth  of  practical
achievement.

That  Europe  could  in  this  way  render  an  invaluable
service  to  Asia  is  certain.

“ Some  strange  fiat  of  arrest,  probably  due  to  mental
exhaustion,  has  condemned  the  brown  men  and  the  yellow
men  to  eternal  reproduction  of  old  ideas.”1  To  revivify  the
mind  of  Asia,  to  set  it  working  again  along  new  lines  of  rich

1 Asia  and  Europe,  p.  9.

325


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY

productivity,  this  might  be  the  boon  of  Europe.  And  for
this  service  she  too  might  take  a rich  reward.  The  brooding
mind  of  Asia  gave  to  sluggish  Europe  in  past  ages  the  great
momenta  in  religion  and  philosophy  and  in  the  mathe-
matics ; even  in  its  sleep,  or  what  appears  to  us  the  sleep  of
many  centuries,  it  may  have  had  its  noble  and  illuminative
dreams.  The  reason  of  the  West  may  yet  need  the  insight
of  the  East.  A union  so  profitable  in  the  past  may  not
be  barren  for  the  future.  It  is  the  right  condition  of  this
wholesome  intercourse  which  is  of  supreme  importance  to
the  cause  of  civilization.  Now  one  thing  at  least  is  certain.
Force  and  the  pushful  hand  of  material  greed  inhibit  the
free  interaction  of  mind  and  mind  essential  to  this  inter-
course. The  ancient  civilizations  of  India  and  China,  whose
duration  bears  testimony  to  inherent  qualities  of  worth,
have  not  been  directed  chiefly  to  the  attainment  of  progress
in  the  arts  of  material  wealth,  though  the  simpler  industries
have  in  parts  of  China  and  India  attained  a high  perfection,
but  rather  to  the  maintenance  of  certain  small  types  of
orderly  social  life,  with  a strong  hierarchy  of  social  and
industrial  ranks  in  India,  with  a fundamentally  democratic
character  in  China.

The  energy  spared  from  political  and  industrial  struggles,
and  in  China  from  military  practises,  has  gone,  partly  to  the
cultivation  of  certain  simple  qualities  of  domestic  life  and
personal  conduct,  partly  to  the  wide  diffusion  of  a certain
real  life  of  the  soul,  animated  by  profound  religious  and
philosophic  speculations  and  contemplations  in  India,  or
by  the  elaboration  of  a more  practical,  utilitarian  wisdom
in  China.  These  Eastern  civilizations  alone  have  stood  the
test  of  time ; the  qualities  which  have  enabled  them  to
survive  ought  surely  to  be  matter  of  deep  concern  for  the
mushroom  civilizations  of  the  West.  It  may  even  be  true
that  the  maintenance  of  these  younger  and  more  unstable

326


IMPERIALISM  IN  ASIA


civilizations  depends  upon  unlocking  the  treasure-house  of
the  wisdom  of  the  East.  Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  the
violent  breaking  down  of  the  characteristic  institutions  of
Asia  to  satisfy  some  hasty  lust  of  commerce,  or  some  greed
of  power,  is  quite  the  most  fatally  blind  misreading  of  the
true  process  of  world- civilization  that  it  is  possible  to
conceive.  For  Europe  to  rule  Asia  by  force  for  purposes
of  gain,  and  to  justify  that  rule  by  the  pretence  that  she
is  civilizing  Asia  and  raising  her  to  a higher  level  of  spiritual
life,  will  be  adjudged  by  history,  perhaps,  to  be  the
crowning  wrong  and  folly  of  Imperialism.  What  Asia  has
to  give,  her  priceless  stores  of  wisdom  garnered  from  her
experience  of  ages,  we  refuse  to  take ; the  much  or  little
which  we  could  give  we  spoil  by  the  brutal  manner  of  our
giving.  This  is  what  Imperialism  has  done,  and  is  doing,
for  Asia.


327


CHAPTER  VI


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION

I

THE  imperial  policy  of  Great  Britain  after  1870,  and
more  particularly  after  1885,  was  almost  entirely
absorbed  in  promoting  the  subjugation  and  annexation  of
tracts  of  territory  where  no  genuine  white  settlement  of  any
magnitude  was  contemplated.  This  policy,  as  we  have
seen,  differs  essentially  from  colonization;  and  from  the
standpoint  of  government  it  implies  a progressive  diminution
of  freedom  in  the  British  Empire  by  constantly  increasing
the  proportion  of  its  subjects  who  are  destitute  of  real  power
of  self-government.

It  is  important  to  consider  how  this  new  Imperialism
reacts,  and  is  likely  in  the  future  to  react,  upon  the
relations  between  Great  Britain  and  her  self-governing
colonies.  Will  it  stimulate  these  colonies  to  an  assertion
of  growing  independence  and  final  formal  severance  from
the  mother  country,  or  will  it  lead  them  to  form  a closer
political  union  with  her  upon  a basis,  no  longer  of  Empire,
but  of  a Federation  of  equal  States  ? This  is  a vital  issue,
for  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  present1  relations  will  not  be
maintained.

Hitherto  the  tendency  has  been  towards  a steady  con-
sistent increase  of  self-government,  and  a growing  relaxation
of  Empire  in  the  shape  of  control  exercised  by  the

*1903.


328


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


home  Government.  In  Australasia,  North  America,  and
South  Africa  seventeen  self-governing  colonies  have  been
established,  endowed  with  reduced  types  of  the  British
constitution.  In  the  case  of  Australia  and  of  Canada
the  growth  of  self  - government  has  been  formally  and
actually  advanced  by  acts  of  federation,  which  have,  in
fact,  especially  in  Australia,  compensated  the  restriction
of  the  power  of  the  federated  States  by  a more  than
equivalent  increase  of  governing  power  vested  in  the  federal
Government.

Great  Britain  has  in  the  main  learned  well  the  lesson  of
the  American  Revolution ; she  has  not  only  permitted  but
favoured  this  growing  independence  of  her  Australian  and
American  colonies.  During  the  very  period  when  she  has
been  occupied  in  the  conscious  policy  of  extending  her
Empire  over  lands  which  she  cannot  colonize  and  must  hold
by  force,  she  has  been  loosening  her  " imperial  ” hold  over
her  white  colonies.  While  1873  removed  the  last  bond  of
economic  control  which  marked  the  old  “ plantation  ”
policy,  by  repealing  the  Act  of  1850  which  had  forbidden
Australian  colonies  from  imposing  differential  duties  as
between  the  colonies  and  foreign  countries,  and  permitting
them  in  future  to  tax  one  another’s  goods,  the  Australian
Commonwealth  Act  of  1900  has,  by  the  powers  accorded
to  its  Federal  Judicature,  reduced  to  the  narrowest  limits
yet  attained  the  constitutional  control  of  the  Privy  Council,
and  has  by  the  powers  enabling  the  Federal  Government
to  raise  a central  armed  force  for  defence  obtained  a new
substantial  basis  for  a possible  national  independence  in  the
future.  Though  it  is  unlikely  for  some  time  to  come  that
the  federal  Government  which  is  contemplated  for  British
South  Africa  will  be  accorded  powers  equivalent  to  those
of  the  Australian  or  even  the  Canadian  Federations,  the
same  tendency  to  increase  self-government  has  in  the  past

329


imperialism:  a study


steadily  prevailed  in  Cape  Colony  and  Natal,  and  it  is
tolerably  certain  that,  if  the  racial  animosities  between  the
two  white  races  are  abated,  a South  African  Commonwealth
would  soon  be  found  in  possession  of  a far  larger  measure
of  real  self-government  than  the  British  colonies  which  enter
it  have  hitherto  possessed.1

But  while  the  trend  of  British  colonialism  has  uniformly
been  towards  increased  self-government  or  practical  inde-
pendence, and  has  been  appreciably  strengthened  by  the
process  of  federating  colonial  States,  it  is  evident  that  the
imperial  statesmen  who  have  favoured  most  this  federa-
tion policy  have  had  in  view  some  larger  recasting  of  the
political  relations  with  the  mother  country,  which  should
bind  parent  and  children  in  closer  family  bonds,  not  merely
of  affection  or  of  trading  intercourse,  but  of  political  associa-
tion. Though  imperial  federation  for  British  purposes  is
no  modern  invention,  Lord  Carnarvon  was  the  first  Colonial
Secretary  to  set  it  before  him  as  a distinct  object  of  attain-
ment, favouring  federation  in  the  various  groups  of  colonies
as  the  first  step  in  a process  which  should  federate  the
Empire.  The  successful  completion  in  1873  of  the  process
of  federation  which  formed  the  Dominion  of  Canada  doubt-
less stimulated  Lord  Carnarvon,  entering  office  the  next
year,  to  further  experiments  along  similar  lines.  Unfor-
tunately he  laid  hands  upon  South  Africa  for  his  forcing
process,  and  suffered  a disastrous  failure.  Twenty  years
later  Mr.  Chamberlain  resumed  the  task,  and,  confronted
by  the  same  essential  difficulties,  the  forcible  annexation
of  the  two  Dutch  Republics,  and  the  coercion  of  Cape
Colony,  carried  his  federation  policy  in  South  Africa  on
the  road  towards  completion,  while  the  establishment  of
the  Australian  Commonwealth  marks  another  and  a safer
triumph  of  the  federation  principle.

1 This  relates  to  the  situation  in  1903.

330


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


The  process  of  federation,  as  bearing  on  the  relations
of  the  federating  colonies,  is  of  course  a triumph  for  the
centripetal  forces  ; but,  by  securing  a larger  measure  of
theoretical  and  practical  independence  for  the  federal
Governments,  it  has  been  centrifugal  from  the  standpoint
of  the  Imperial  Government.  The  work  of  securing  an
effective  political  imperial  federation  implies,  therefore,
a reversal  of  hitherto  dominant  tendencies.

It  is  quite  evident  that  a strong  and  increasing  desire
for  imperial  federation  was  growing  among  a large  number
of  British  politicians.  So  far  - as  Mr.  Chamberlain  and
some  of  his  friends  were  concerned,  it  dates  back  to  the
beginning  of  the  struggle  over  Mr.  Gladstone’s  Home
Rule  for  Ireland  policy.  Speaking  on  Mr.  Gladstone’s
Home  Rule  Bill  in  1886,  Mr.  Chamberlain  said  : “ I should
look  for  the  solution  in  the  direction  of  the  principle  of
federation.  My  right  honourable  friend  has  looked  for
his  model  to  the  relations  between  this  country  and  her
self-governing  and  praciically  independent  colonies.  I
think  that  is  of  doubtful  expediency.  The  present  connexion
between  our  colonies  and  ourselves  is  no  doubt  very  strong,
owing  to  the  affection  which  exists  between  members  of
the  same  nation.  But  it  is  a sentimental  tie,  and  a senti-
mental tie  only.  ...  It  appears  to  me  that  the  advantage
of  a system  of  federation  is  that  Ireland  might  under  it
really  remain  an  integral  part  of  the  Empire.  The
action  of  such  a scheme  is  centripetal  and  not  centri-
fugal, and  it  is  in  the  direction  of  federation  that  the
democratic  movement  has  made  most  advances  in  the
present  century.”

Now,  it  is  quite  true  that  the  democratic  movement,
both  now  and  in  the  future,  seems  closely  linked  with  the
formation  of  federal  States,  and  the  federation  of  the
parts  of  the  British  Empire  appears  to  suggest,  as  a next

33*


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


step  and  logical  outcome,  the  federation  of  the  whole.

Holding,  as  we  must,  that  any  reasonable  security  for
good  order  and  civilization  in  the  world  implies  the  growing
application  of  the  federation  principle  in  international
politics,  it  will  appear  only  natural  that  the  earlier  steps
in  such  a process  should  take  the  form  of  unions  of  States
most  closely  related  by  ties  of  common  blood,  language,
and  institutions,  and  that  a phase  of  federated  Britain  or
Anglo-Saxondom,  Pan-Teutonism,  Pan-Slavism,  and  Pan-
Latinism  might  supervene  upon  the  phase  already  reached.
There  is  perhaps  a suspicion  of  excessive  logic  in  such  an
order  of  events,  but  a broad  general  view  of  history  renders
it*  plausible  and  desirable  enough.  Christendom  thus  laid
out  in  a few  great  federal  Empires,  each  with  a retinue  of
uncivilized  dependencies,  seems  to  many  the  most  legitimate
development  of  present  tendencies  and  one  which  would
offer  the  best  hope  of  permanent  peace  on  an  assured  basis  of
inter-imperialism.  Dismissing  from  our  mind  the  largest
aspect  of  this  issue,  as  too  distant  for  present  profitable
argument,  and  confining  our  attention  to  British  imperial
federation,  we  may  easily  agree  that  a voluntary  federation
of  free  British  States,  working  peacefully  for  the  common
safety  and  prosperity,  is  in  itself  eminently  desirable,  and
might  indeed  form  a step  towards  a wider  federation  of
civilized  States  in  the  future.

The  real  issue  for  discussion  is  the  feasibility  of  such  a
policy,  and,  rightly  stated,  the  question  runs  thus  : “ What
forces  of  present  or  prospective  self-interest  are  operative
to  induce  Great  Britain  and  her  colonial  groups  to  reverse
the  centrifugal  process  which  has  hitherto  been  dominant  ? ”
Now,  there  are  many  reasons  for  Great  Britain  to  desire
political  federation  with  her  self-governing  colonies,  even
upon  terms  which  would  give  them  a voice  proportionate
to  their  population  in  a Parliament  or  other  council  charged

33*


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION

with  the  control  of  imperial  affairs,  provided  the  grace
difficulties  involved  in  the  establishment  of  such  a repre-
sentative, responsible,  governing  body  could  be  overcome.
The  preponderance  of  British  over  colonial  population
would  enable  the  mother  country  to  enforce  her  will  where
any  conflict  of  interest  or  judgment  arose  in  which  there
was  a sharp  line  of  division  between  Great  Britain  and  the
colonies : the  distribution  of  imperial  burdens  and  the
allocation  of  imperial  assistance  would  be  determined  by
Great  Britain.  If  the  Crown  colonies  and  other  non-self-
governing  parts  of  the  Empire  were  represented  in  the
imperial  council,  the  actual  supremacy  of  the  mother
country  would  be  greater  still,  for  these  representatives,
either  nominated  by  the  Crown  (the  course  most  consonant
with  Crown  colony  government),  or  elected  on  a narrow
franchise  of  a small  white  oligarchy,  would  have  little  in
common  with  the  representatives  of  self-governing  colonies,
and  would  inevitably  be  more  amenable  to  pressure  from
the  home  Government.  A chief  avowed  object  of  imperial
federation  is  to  secure  from  the  colonies  a fair  share  of
men,  ships,  and  money  for  imperial  defence,  and  for
those  expansive  exploits  which  in  their  initiation  almost
always  rank  as  measures  of  defence.  The  financial  basis
of  imperial  defence  in  1903  is  one  which,  on  the  face  of
it,  seems  most  unfair ; Great  Britain  is  called  upon  to
support  virtually  the  whole  cost  of  the  imperial  navy,
and,  with  India,  almost  the  whole  cost  of  the  imperial
army,  though  both  these  arms  are  at  the  service  of  any
of  our  self-governing  colonies  that  is  threatened  by  external
enemies  or  internal  disorders.  In  1899,  while  the  popula-
tion of  these  colonies  was  close  upon  one-third  of  that  of
the  United  Kingdom,  their  revenue  nearly  one-half,  and  the
value  of  their  sea-borne  commerce  one-fifth  of  the  entire
commerce  of  the  Empire,  the  contribution  they  were

333


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


making  to  the  cost  of  the  naval  defence  of  the  Empire  was
less  than  one-hundredth  part.1  These  colonies  raised  in
1903  no  regular  or  irregular  military  force  available  for  the
general  defence  of  the  Empire,  though  they  have  supported
small  contingents  of  imperial  troops  quartered  upon  them
by  the  Imperial  Government,  and  have  maintained
considerable  militia  and  volunteer  forces  for  home  defence.
The  colonial  contingents  taking  part  in  the  South  African
war,  though  forming  a considerable  volunteer  force,  fell
far  short  of  an  imperial  levy  based  upon  proportion  of
population,  and  their  expenses  were  almost  entirely  borne
by  the  United  Kingdom.  From  the  standpoint  of  the
unity  of  the  British  Empire,  in  which  the  colonies  are
presumed  to  have  an  interest  equivalent  to  that  of  the
United  Kingdom,  it  seems  reasonable  that  the  latter  should
be  called  upon  to  bear  their  fair  share  of  the  burden  of
imperial  defence  ; and  an  imperial  federation  which  was
a political  reality  would  certainly  imply  a provision  for  such
equal  contribution.  Whatever  were  the  form  such  federa-
tion took,  that  of  an  Imperial  Parliament,  endowed  with
full  responsibility  for  imperial  affairs  under  the  Crown,  or
of  an  Imperial  Council,  on  which  colonial  representatives
must  sit  to  consult  with  and  advise  the  British  ministry,
who  still  retained  the  formal  determination  of  imperial
policy,  it  would  certainly  imply  a compulsory  or  quasi-
compulsory  contribution  on  the  part  of  the  colonies
proportionate  to  that  of  the  United  Kingdom.


1 1899.

Population.

Revenue.

Trade.

Naval

Contribution.

United  \

Kingdom  f
Self-govern-  \
mg  Colonies  j

39jOoo,ooo

12,000,000

£104,000,000

46,000,000

£766,000,000

222,000,000

1

,£*♦.734.°°°

177,000

334


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


Now  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  self-governing  colonies
will  not  enter  such  an  association,  involving  them  in  large
new  expenses,  out  of  sentimental  regard  for  the  British
Empire.  The  genuineness  and  the  warmness  of  the  attach-
ment to  the  British  Empire  and  to  the  mother  country
are  indisputable,  and  though  they  were  not  called  upon
to  make  any  considerable  self-sacrifice  in  the  South  African
campaign,  it  is  quite  evident  that  their  sentiments  are  such
as  would  lead  them  voluntarily  to  expend  both  blood  and
money  where  they  thought  the  existence,  the  safety,  or
even  the  honour  of  the  Empire  was  at  stake.  But  it  would
be  a grave  error  to  suppose  that  the  blaze  of  enthusiastic
loyalty  evinced  at  such  a period  of  emergency  can  be
utilized  in  order  to  reverse  the  general  tendency  towards
independence,  and  to  “ rush  ” the  self-governing  colonies
into  a closer  formal  union  with  Great  Britain,  involving
a regular  continuous  sacrifice.  If  the  colonies  are  induced
to  enter  any  such  association,  they  must  be  convinced  that
it  is  essential  to  their  individual  security  and  prosperity.
In  1903  they  get  the  protection  of  the  Empire  with  out
paying  for  it ; as  long  as  they  think  they  can  get  adequate
protection  on  such  terms  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  they
would  enter  an  arrangement  which  required  them  to  pay,
and  which  involved  an  entire  recasting  of  their  system  of
revenue.  The  temper  of  discussions  in  the  Australian
and  Canadian  Parliaments,  amid  all  the  enthusiasm  of  the
South  African  war,  makes  it  quite  clear  that  no  colonial
ministry  could  in  time  of  peace  persuade  the  colonists  to
enter  such  a federation  as  is  here  outlined  unless  they  had  been
educated  to  the  conviction  that  their  individual  colonial
welfare  was  to  be  subserved.  Either  Australia  and  Canada
must  be  convinced  that  imperial  defence  of  Australia  or
Canada  upon  the  present1  basis  is  becoming  more  inadequate.


imperialism:  a study


and  that  such  defence  is  essential  to  them,  or  else  they  must
be  compensated  for  the  additional  expense  which  federation
would  involve  by  new  commercial  relations  with  the  United
Kingdom  which  will  give  them  a more  profitable  market
than  they  possess  already.

Now  the  refusal  of  the  self-governing  colonies  hitherto
to  consider  any  other  contribution  to  imperial  defence  than
a small  voluntary  one  has  been  based  upon  a conviction
that  the  virtual  independence  they  hold  under  Great
Britain  is  not  likely  to  be  threatened  by  any  great  Power,
and  that,  even  were  it  threatened,  though  their  commerce
might  suffer  on  the  sea,  they  would  be  competent  to  prevent
or  repel  invasion  by  their  own  internal  powers  of  self-defence.
The  one  exception  to  this  calculation  may  be  said  to  prove
the  rule.  If  Canada  were  embroiled  in  war  with  her  great
republican  neighbour,  she  is  well  aware  that  though  the
British  navy  might  damage  the  trade  and  the  coast  towns  of
the  United  States,  she  could  not  prevent  Canada  from
being  over-run  by  American  troops,  and  ultimately  from
being  subjugated.

But,  it  may  at  least  be  urged,  the  importance  of  main-
taining a British  navy  adequate  to  protect  their  trade  will
at  least  be  recognized ; the  colonies  will  perceive  that  in
face  of  the  rising  wealth  and  naval  preparations  of  rival
Empires,  in  particular  Germany,  France,  and  the  United
States,  the  United  Kingdom  cannot  bear  the  financial
strain  of  the  necessary  increase  of  ships  without  substantial
colonial  assistance.  This  is  doubtless  the  line  of  strongest
pressure  for  imperial  federation.  How  far  is  it  likely  to
prove  effective  ? It  is  certain  to  educate  colonial  politicians
to  a closer  consideration  of  the  future  of  their  colony ;
it  will  force  them  to  canvass  most  carefully  the  net
advantages  or  disadvantages  of  the  imperial  connexion.
Such  consideration  seems  at  least  as  likely  to  lead  them

336


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


towards  that  definite  future  severance  from  Great  Britain
which,  until  now,  in  1903,  none  of  them  has  seriously
contemplated,  as  it  is  to  bring  them  into  a federation.
This  consummation,  if  it  ultimately  comes  about,  will
arise  from  no  abatement  of  natural  good  feeling  and  affection
towards  the  United  Kingdom,  but  simply  from  a conflict
of  interests.

If  the  movement  towards  imperial  federation  fails,  and
the  recent  drift  towards  independence  on  the  part  of  the
self-governing  colonies  is  replaced  by  a more  conscious
movement  in  the  same  direction,  the  cause  will  be  Im-
perialism. A discreet  colonial  statesman,  when  invited  to
bring  his  colony  closer  to  Great  Britain,  and  to  pay  for
their  common  support  while  leaving  to  Great  Britain  the
virtual  determination  of  their  common  destiny,  is  likely  to
put  the  following  pertinent  questions : Why  is  Great  Britain
obliged  to  increase  her  expenditure  in  armaments  faster
than  the  growth  of  trade  or  income,  so  that  she  is  forced  to
call  upon  us  to  assist  ? Is  it  because  she  fears  the  jealousy
and  the  hostility  of  other  Powers  ? Why  does  she  arouse
these  ill  feelings  ? To  these  questions  he  can  hardly
fail  to  find  an  answer  ? “ It  is  the  new  Imperialism

that  is  wholly  responsible  for  the  new  perils  of  the  Empire,
and  for  the  new  costs  of  armaments.”  He  is  then  likely
to  base  upon  this  answer  further  questions.  Do  we  self-
governing  colonies  benefit  by  this  new  Imperialism  ? If
we  decide  that  we  do  not,  can  we  stop  it  by  entering  a
federation  in  which  our  voices  will  be  the  voices  of  a small
minority  f May  it  not  be  a safer  policy  for  us  to  seek
severance  from  a Power  which  so  visibly  antagonizes  other
Powers,  and  may  involve  us  in  conflict  with  them  on
matters  in  which  we  have  no  vital  interest  and  no  deter-
minant voice,  and  either  to  live  an  independent  political  life,
incurring  only  those  risks  which  belong  to  us,  or  (in  the  case

337


imperialism:  a study


policy  implying  a reversal  of  the  general  tendency  of  half  a
century.  Admitting  the  obvious  political  and  military  gain
of  co-operative  action  in  the  face  of  an  enemy,  the  colonists
will  ask  whether  this  gain  is  not  offset  by  an  increased
likelihood  of  having  to  face  enemies,  and  when  they  reflect
that  they  are  really  invited  to  federate,  not  merely  with
the  England  whom  they  love  and  admire,  but  with  an
ever-growing  medley  of  savage  States,  the  balance  of
judgment  seems  likely  to  turn  against  federation,  unless
other  special  inducements  can  be  applied.


II

There  are  two  special  inducements  which  might  bring
the  self-governing  colonies,  or  some  of  them,  to  favour  a
closer  political  union  with  Great  Britain.  The  first  is  a
revision  of  the  commercial  and  financial  policy  of  the
mother  country,  so  as  to  secure  for  the  colonies  an  increased
market  for  their  produce  in  Great  Britain  and  in  other
parts  of  the  British  Empire.  In  discussion  of  this  issue
it  is  customary  to  begin  by  distinguishing  the  proposal
to  establish  an  Imperial  Zollverein,  or  Customs  Union,
from  the  proposal  for  a preferential  tariff.  But  very  little
reflection  suffices  to  perceive  the  futility  of  the  former  with-
out the  latter  as  an  appeal  to  the  self-interest  of  the  colonies.
Will  these  colonies  assimilate  their  financial  policy  to  that
of  Great  Britain,  abolishing  their  protective  tariffs  and
entering  a full  Free  Trade  career  ? The  most  sanguine
Free  Trader  suggests  no  such  possibility,  nor  indeed  would
such  a course  afford  any  real  guarantee  of  increasing  the
commercial  inter-dependence  of  the  Empire.  It  would
simply  force  the  colonies  upon  processes  of  direct  taxation
repugnant  to  their  feelings.  Is  Free  Trade  within  the

34°


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


Empire,  with  a maintenance  of  the  status  quo  as  regards
foreign  countries,  really  more  feasible  ? It  would  simply
mean  that  the  colonies  gave  up  the  income  they  obtained
from  taxing  the  goods  of  one  another  and  of  Great  Britain,
each  getting  in  return  a remission  of  tariffs  from  the  other
colonies  with  which  its  trade  is  small  and  no  remission  from
Great  Britain,  which  would  continue  to  receive  its  goods
free  as  before.

It  is  now  admitted  that  the  colonies  will  not,  and  indeed
cannot  remit  or  greatly  reduce  their  taxes  upon  imported
goods  from  Great  Britain  and  from  one  another.  They
are  prepared  to  give  British  goods  a preferential  treatment
upon  two  conditions  : first,  that  such  preference  does  not
involve  any  net  reduction  of  their  income  from  customs ;
secondly,  that  it  does  not  make  British  goods  to  compete
more  effectively  with  their  own  manufactures.  A prefer-
ential tariff  constructed  under  these  conditions  implies
that  any  net  reductions  of  the  duty  upon  classes  of  British
imports  must  be  compensated  by  a general  rise  of  the  tariff
in  regard  to  other  imports,  and  that  where  British  imports
compete  with  colonial  products  there  can  be  no  reduction
of  the  duty,  but  only  an  increased  tax  in  foreign  as  compared
with  British  goods.

If  it  does  not  cost  anything  to  the  exchequer  of  the
Dominion  and  the  Commonwealth,  or  considerably  raise
prices  to  colonial  consumers,  Canada  and  Australia  are
willing  to  oust  foreign  goods  in  favour  of  British,  but  the
tendency  will  be  to  do  this  by  raising  the  duty  against
foreigners,  and  not  by  lowering  it  against  Great  Britain.
Moreover,  the  nature  of  British  imports  into  these  countries
(i.e.  highly  manufactured  goods)  generally  involves  some
amount  of  competition  with  home  products,  so  that  any
actual  reduction  of  duty  is  inconsistent  with  protection  of
home  industries.  Thus  the  principles  of  Canadian  protection

34*


imperialism:  a study


oblige  her  to  maintain  a higher  average  duty  upon  British
goods  than  upon  American  and  other  foreign  goods,  many
of  which  are  raw  materials  or  semi-manufactured  goods
which  do  not  compete  appreciably  with  Canadian  products.
Thus,  though  the  preferences  given  by  Canada  to  the
mother  country  in  1897  and  1900  have  checked  the  rapid
decline  in  the  growth  of  British  as  compared  with  foreign
imports  into  Canada,  they  have  not  prevented  foreign
trade  from  increasing  at  a slightly  faster  pace  than  British,
while  the  importation  (largely  of  free  raw  materials)  from
the  United  States  continues  to  grow  faster  than  the
importation  from  Great  Britain.  Moreover,  the  powerful
organized  opposition  of  Canadian  manufacturers  against
favoured  British  competition  is  a factor  of  increasing
importance  now  that  Canada  is  putting  more  of  her  own
and  American  capital  into  manufacturing  industry.  The
tendency  will  be  more  and  more  towards  an  encouragement
of  Canadian  manufactures  by  higher  duties  upon  imports,
so  that  a show  of  British  preference  can  only  be  maintained
by  a general  raising  of  duties  on  imported  manufactures.
What  holds  of  Canada  holds  also  of  Australia.  Both
nations  look  forward  to  a great  manufacturing  future  which
will  give  them  that  self-sufficing  character  which  is  the
protectionist  ideal ; more  and  more  will  their  desire  to
favour  the  mother  country  conflict  with  their  higher  sense
of  duty  towards  their  own  manufactures.  The  notion
that  they  will  abstain  from  setting  up  any  manufacture
which  they  can  successfully  establish  out  of  consideration
for  the  English  manufacturers  who  have  hitherto  supplied
these  goods  is  puerile.  These  being  the  conditions,  such
preferences  as  they  give  to  British  imports  must  be  slight
and  temporary.

To  purchase  this  small  boon,  Great  Britain  must  give  in
return  preferential  treatment  involving,  first,  a reversal

342


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


of  our  Free  Trade  policy ; secondly,  taxes  upon  foreign
food  and  raw  materials.  Grain  and  flour,  cattle  and  meat,
wool,  timber,  and  iron  would  form  the  chief  commodities
which,  in  the  supposed  interests  of  our  colonies,  would  be
taxed  first.  Unless  this  preference  raised  prices  it  could
have  no  effect  in  enabling  colonial  producers  to  displace
foreign  producers : the  tariff,  to  be  operative  at  all,  must
remove  all  profit  from  some  portion  of  foreign  goods  pre-
viously imported,  and,  by  preventing  such  goods  from
entering  our  markets  in  the  future,  reduce  the  total  supply  :
this  reduction  of  supply  acts  of  necessity  in  raising  the
price  for  the  whole  market.  This  well-recognized  automatic
operation  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  makes  it  certain
that  English  consumers  would  pay  in  enhanced  prices  a
new  tax,  part  of  which  would  be  handed  over  to  colonists
in  payment  for  their  new  “ loyalty,”  part  would  go  to  the
British  exchequer,  part  to  defray  expenses  of  collection,  and
the  rest  in  enhanced  rent  to  British  landowners.

Nor  is  this  all,  or  perhaps  the  worst.  By  this  very
method  of  binding  our  colonies  closer  to  us  we  take  the
surest  way  of  increasing  the  resentment  of  those  very
nations  whose  political  and  military  rivalry  impels  us  to
abandon  Free  Trade.  The  vast  and  increasing  trade  we
have  with  France,  Germany,  Russia,  and  the  United  States
is  the  most  potent  guarantee  of  peace  which  we  possess.
Reduce  the  volume  and  the  value  of  our  commerce  with
these  nations,  by  means  of  the  re-establishment  of  a tariff
avowedly  erected  for  the  purpose,  and  we  should  convert  the
substantial  goodwill  of  the  powerful  financial,  mercantile,
and  manufacturing  interests  in  these  countries  into  active
and  dangerous  hostility.  It  would  be  far  better  for  us
that  we  had  never  been  a Free  Trade  country  than  that  we
relapsed  into  a protective  system  motived  by  the  desire  to
weaken  our  commercial  bonds  with  the  political  and  com-

343


imperialism:  a study


mercial  Powers  whose  rivalry  we  have  most  to  fear.  By  the
statistics  of  an  earlier  chapter1  it  has  been  shown  that  not
merely  is  our  trade  with  these  foreign  nations  far  greater
than  the  trade  with  the  self-governing  colonies,  but  that  it
is  growing  at  a faster  rate.  To  offend  and  antagonize  our
better  customers  in  order  to  conciliate  our  worse  is  bad
economy  and  much  worse  politics.

The  shrewder  politicians  in  our  colonies  might  surely  be
expected  to  look  such  a gift-horse  in  the  mouth.  For  the
very  bribe  which  is  designed  to  win  them  for  federation  is
one  which  enhances  for  them  enormously  and  quite  incal-
culably the  perils  of  a new  connexion  by  which  they  throw
in  their  lot  irrevocably  with  that  of  Great  Britain.  A
monopoly  of  the  imperial  market  for  their  exports  may  be
bought  too  dear,  if  it  removes  the  strongest  pledge  for  peace
which  England  possesses,  at  a time  when  that  pledge  is
needed  most.  Nor  would  these  colonies  share  only  the
new  peril  of  England  ; their  own  discriminative  tariffs
would  breed  direct  ill-feeling  against  them  on  the  part  of
foreigners,  and  would  drag  them  into  the  vortex  of  European
politics.  Finally,  by  distorting  the  more  natural  process
of  commercial  selection,  which,  under  tariffs  equally
imposed,  has  in  the  past  been  increasing  the  proportion  of
the  trade  done  by  these  colonies  with  foreign  countries,
and  reducing  the  proportion  done  with  Great  Britain,  we
shall  be  forcing  them  to  substitute  a worse  for  a better  trade,
a course  by  which  they  will  be  heavy  losers  in  the  long  run.


Ill

In  face  of  such  facts  it  will  be  impossible  for  Great  Britain
to  offer  the  self-governing  colonies  a sufficient  commercial

1 Cf.  Part  I,  chap.  iL


344


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


inducement  to  bring  them  into  imperial  federation.  Is
there  any  other  possible  inducement  or  temptation  ? There
is,  I think,  one,  viz.,  to  involve  them  on  their  own  account
in  Imperialism,  by  encouraging  and  aiding  them  in  a policy
of  annexation  and  the  government  of  lower  races.  Inde-
pendently of  the  centralized  Imperialism  which  issues  from
Great  Britian,  these  colonies  have  within  themselves  in
greater  or  less  force  all  the  ingredients  out  of  which  an
Imperialism  of  their  own  may  be  formed.  The  same  con-
spiracy of  powerful  speculators,  manufacturing  interests
and  ambitious  politicians,  calling  to  their  support  the
philanthropy  of  missions  and  the  lust  for  adventure  which
is  so  powerful  in  the  new  world,  may  plot  the  subversion  of
honest,  self-developing  democracy,  in  order  to  establish
class  rule,  and  to  employ  the  colonial  resources  in  showy
enterprises  of  expansion  for  their  own  political  and  com-
mercial ends.

Such  a spirit  and  such  a purpose  was  plainly  operative
in  South  Africa  for  many  years.  That  which  appears  to  us
as  an  achievement  of  British  Imperialism,  viz.,  the  acquisition
of  the  two  Dutch  Republics  and  the  great  North,  is  and
always  has  appeared  something  quite  different  to  a powerful
group  of  business  politicians  in  South  Africa.  These  men
at  the  Cape,  in  the  Transvaal  and  in  Rhodesia,  British  or
Dutch,  have  fostered  a South  African  Imperialism,  not
opposed  to  British  Imperialism,  willing  when  necessary  to
utilize  it,  but  independent  of  it  in  ultimate  aims  and  purposes.
This  was  the  policy  of  “ colonialism  ” which  Mr.  Rhodes
espoused  so  vehemently  in  his  earlier  political  career,  seeking
the  control  of  Bechuanaland  and  the  North  for  Cape  Colony
and  not  directly  for  the  Empire.  This  has  been  right
through  the  policy  of  an  active  section  of  the  Africander
Bond,  developing  on  a large  scale  the  original  “ trek  ” habit
of  the  Dutch.  This  was  the  policy  to  which  Sir  Hercules

345


imperialism:  a study

Robinson  gave  voice  in  his  famous  declaration  of  1889
regarding  Imperialism : “ It  is  a diminishing  quantity,
there  being  now  no  longer  any  permanerit  place  in  the
future  of  South  Africa  for  direct  imperial  rule  on  any  large
scale.”  A distinctively  colonial  or  South  African  expansion
was  the  policy  of  the  politicians,  financiers,  and  adventurers
up  to  the  failure  of  the  Jameson  Raid ; reluctantly  they
sought  the  co-operation  of  British  Imperialism  to  aid  them
in  a definite  work  for  which  they  were  too  weak,  the  seizure
of  the  Transvaal  mineral  estates ; their  absorbing  aim
hereafter  will  be  to  relegate  British  Imperialism  to  what
they  conceive  to  be  its  proper  place,  that  of  an  ultima  ratio
to  stand  in  the  far  background  while  colonial  Imperialism
manages  the  business  and  takes  the  profits.  A South
African  federation  of  selfTgoverning  States  will  demand  a
political  career  of  its  own,  and  will  insist  upon  its  own
brand  of  empire,  not  that  of  the  British  Government,  in
the  control  of  the  lower  races  in  South  Africa.

Such  a federal  State  will  not  only  develop  an  internal
policy  regarding  the  native  territories  different  from,
perhaps  antagonistic  to,  that  of  British  Imperialism,  but
its  position  as  the  “ predominant  ” State  of  South  Africa
will  develop  an  ambition  and  a destiny  of  expansion  which
may  bring  it  into  world  politics  on  its  own  account.

Australasia  similarly  shows  signs  of  an  Imperialism  of
her  own.  She  has  recently  taken  over  New  Guinea,  and
some  of  her  sons  are  hankering  after  a " Monroe  doctrine  ”
applicable  throughout  the  South  Pacific,  the  opening  step
of  which  would  consist  of  the  assignation  cf  our  Pacific
Islands  to  Australia  and  New  Zealand  for  administrative
purposes.  “ The  same  principle,”  it  is  suggested,  “ is
applicable  to  the  connexion  between  Canada  and  the  British
West  Indies.  Economically  the  latter  are  important  to
Canada,  as  furnishing  a tropical  market  of  the  kind  which

346


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


the  United  States  possess  within  their  own  borders,  and
also  in  their  newly  acquired  dependencies.  Strategically,
also,  the  islands  are  becoming  important  to  Canada  as  a base
for  the  protection  of  her  growing  interests,  especially  in
connexion  with  the  Panama  Canal,  so  that  here  the  privilege
of  administration  would  enforce  the  sense  of  responsibility
for  naval  defence.”1

If  Great  Britain  is  prepared  to  guarantee  to  Australasia,
Canada  and  South  Africa  a special  imperial  career  of  their
own,  placing  the  entire  federal  resources  of  the  Empire  at
the  disposal  of  the  colonial  federal  States,  to  assist  them
in  fulfilling  an  ambition  or  a destiny  which  is  directed  and
determined  by  their  particular  interests  and  will,  such  a
decentralization  of  Imperialism  might  win  the  colonies  to
a closer  federal  union  with  the  mother  country.  For
Great  Britain  herself  it  would  involve  great  and  obvious
dangers,  and  some  considerable  sacrifice  of  central  imperial
power ; but  it  might  win  the  favour  and  support  of  am-
bitious colonial  politicians  and  capitalists  desirous  to  run
a profitable  Imperialism  of  their  own  and  to  divert  the
democratic  forces  from  domestic  agitation  into  foreign
enterprises.

If  Australasia  can  get  from  Great  Britain  the  services
of  an  adequate  naval  power  to  enforce  her  growing  “ Monroe
doctrine  ” in  the  Pacific  without  paying  for  it,  as  British
South  Africa  has  obtained  the  services  of  our  land  forces,
she  will  not  be  likely  to  enter  closer  formal  bonds  which
will  bind  her  to  any  large  financial  contribution  towards
the  expenses  jf  such  a policy.  But  if  Great  Britain  were
willing  to  organize  imperial  federation  upon  a basis  which
in  reality  assigned  larger  independence  to  Australia  and
Canada  than  they  have  at  present,  by  giving  them  a call
upon  the  imperial  resources  for  their  own  private  imperial
1 Colonial  Nationalism , by  Richard  Jebb,  pp.  306-7.

347


imperialism:  a study

career  in  excess  of  their  contribution  towards  the  common
purse,  business  instincts  might  lead  them  to  consider
favourably  such  a proposal.

How  fraught  with  peril  to  this  country  such  imperial
federation  would  be  it  is  unnecessary  to  prove.  Centralized
Imperialism,  in  which  the  Government  of  Great  Britain
formally  reserves  full  control  over  the  external  policy  of
each  colony,  and  actually  exercises  this  control,  affords  some
considerable  security  against  the  danger  of  being  dragged
into  quarrels  with  other  great  Powers : the  decentralized
Imperialism,  involved  in  imperial  federation,  would  lose
us  this  security.  The  nascent  local  Imperialism  of
Australasia,  Canada  and  South  Africa  would  be  fed  by  the
consciousness  that  it  could  not  be  checked  or  overruled
in  its  expansive  policy  as  it  is  now ; and  the  somewhat
blatant  energy  of  self-expression  in  the  Australasian  Govern-
ments would  be  likely  to  entangle  us  continually  with
Germany,  Japan  and  the  United  States  in  the  Pacific,
while  Canada  and  Newfoundland  would  possess  a greatly
enhanced  power  to  embroil  us  with  France  and  the  United
States.  If  it  be  urged  that  after  all  no  serious  steps  in
Australian,  Canadian  or  South  African  “ Imperialism  ”
could  be  taken  without  the  direct  conscious  consent  of
Great  Britain,  who  would,  by  virtue  of  population  and
prestige,  remain  the  predominant  partner,  the  answer  is
that  the  very  strengthening  of  the  imperial  bond  would
give  increased  efficacy  to  all  the  operative  factors  in  Im-
perialism. Even  as  matters  stand  now  there  exists  in  Great
Britain  a powerful  organized  business  interest  which  is
continually  inciting  the  Imperial  Government  to  a pushful
policy  on  behalf  of  our  colonies : these  colonies,  the
Australasian  in  particular,  are  heavily  mortgaged  in  their
land  and  trade  to  British  financial  companies ; their  mines,
bank,  and  other  important  commercial  assets  are  largely

348


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


owned  in  Great  Britain ; their  enormous  public  debts1
are  chiefly  held  in  Great  Britain.  It  is  quite  evident  that
the  classes  in  this  country  owning  these  colonial  properties
have  a stake  in  colonial  politics,  different  from  and  in  some
cases  antagonistic  to  that  of  the  British  nation  as  a whole :
it  is  equally  evident  that  they  can  exercise  an  organized
pressure  upon  the  British  Government  in  favour  of  their
private  interests  that  will  be  endowed  with  enhanced
efficacy  under  the  more  equal  conditions  of  an  imperial
federation.

Whether  the  bribe  of  a preferential  tariff,  or  of  a delegated
Imperialism,  or  both,  would  suffice  to  bring  the  self-
governing  colonies  into  a closer  formal  political  federation
with  Great  Britain  may,  however,  well  be  doubted.  Still
more  doubtful  would  be  their  permanent  continuance  in  such
a federation.  It  is  at  least  conceivable  that  the  colonial
democracies  may  be  strong  and  sane  enough  to  resist
temptation  to  colonial  Imperialism,  when  they  perceive  the
dangerous  reaction  of  such  a course.  Even  were  they
induced  to  avail  themselves  of  the  ample  resources  of  the
Empire  to  forward  their  local  imperial  policy,  they  would,
in  Australia  as  in  South  Africa,  be  disposed  to  break  away
from  such  a federation  when  they  had  got  out  of  it  what
advantages  it  could  be  made  to  yield,  and  they  felt  strong
enough  for  an  independent  Empire  of  their  own.

It  is  no  cynical  insistence  upon  the  dominance  of  selfish


1 In  1900  the  public  debts  of  the  Australasian  colonial  Governments  amounted
to  £194,812,289,  for  a population  of  3,756,894  ; while  the  New  Zealand  debt  was
£46,930,077  for  a population  of  756,510  Statesman* s Tear  Book , 1901).

New  South  Wales £65,332,993


Victoria
Queensland
South  Australia
West  Australia
Tasmania


4s.774.8S5

34.33*.4>4
26,156,180
u, 804,178
8.395.639


,£194,812,289


349


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


interests  which  leads  us  to  the  conviction  that  the  historic
drift  towards  independence  will  not  be  reversed  by  any
sentiments  of  attachment  towards  Great  Britain.  . “ My
hold  of  the  colonies/*  wrote  Burke,  u is  the  close  affection
which  grows  from  common  names,  from  kindred  blood,
from  similar  privileges,  and  equal  protection.  These  are
ties  which,  though  light  as  air,  are  as  strong  as  links  of
iron.”1  But  in  these  ties,  save  the  last  only,  there  is
nothing  to  demand  or  to  ensure  political  union.  The  moral
bonds  of  community  of  language,  history  and  institutions,
maintained  and  strengthened  by  free  social  and  commercial
intercourse,  this  true  union  of  hearts,  have  not  been
weakened  by  the  progress  towards  political  freedom  which
has  been  taking  place  in  the  past,  and  will  not  be  weakened
if  this  progress  should  continue  until  absolute  political
independence  from  Great  Britain  is  achieved.

It  is  quite  certain  that  the  issue  must  be  determined  in
the  long  run  by  what  the  colonies  consider  to  be  their  policy
of  net  utility.  That  utility  will  be  determined  primarily
by  the  more  permanent  geographical  and  economic
conditions.  These  have  tended  in  the  past,  so  far  as  they
have  had  free  play,  towards  political  independence  : they
will  have  a freer  play  in  the  future,  and  it  seems,  therefore,
unlikely  that  their  tendency  will  be  reversed.  Though
the  element  of  distance  between  the  parts  of  an  Empire
is  now  less  important  than  formerly  as  a technical  difficulty
in  representation,  the  following  pithy  summary  of  American
objections  to  schemes  of  imperial  federation  in  the
eighteenth  century,  as  recorded  by  Pownall,  still  has
powerful  application  : —

" The  Americans  also  thought  that  legislative  union
would  be  unnecessary,  inexpedient,  and  dangerous,  because —

“ (i)  They  had  already  sufficient  legislatures  of  their  own.

1 Conciliation  with  America .


35°


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION


“ (2)  If  the  colonies  were  so  united  to  England  they
would  share  the  burden  of  British  taxes  and  debt.

“ (3)  Representatives  in  England  would  be  too  far  from
their  constituents,  and  the  will  of  the  colonies  would,
therefore,  be  transferred  out  of  their  power,  and  involved
in  that  of  a majority  in  which  the  proportion  of  their
representatives  would  hold  no  balance.”1

While  then  it  is  conceivable,  perhaps  possible,  that,  for
a time  at  any  rate,  the  self-governing  colonies  might  be  led
into  an  imperial  federation  upon  terms  which  should  secure
their  private  industrial  and  political  ambitions  as  colonies,
it  is  far  more  reasonable  to  expect  that  Canada  would  drift
towards  federation  with  her  southern  neighbour,  and
Australasia  and  South  Africa  towards  independent  political
entities,  with  a possible  future  re-establishment  of  loose
political  relations  in  an  Anglo-Saxon  federation.

It  is  no  aspersion  on  the  genuineness  and  the  strength
of  the  “ loyalty  ” and  affection  entertained  by  the  colonies
towards  England  to  assert  that  these  sentiments  cannot
weigh  appreciably  in  the  determination  of  the  colonial
“ destiny  ” against  the  continuous  pressure  of  political,
industrial,  and  financial  forces  making  towards  severance.
Though  a few  politicians,  or  even  a party  in  these  colonies,
may  coquet  with  the  notion  of  close  federation  on  an  equal
basis,  the  difficulties,  when  the  matter  is  resolved,  as  it
must  be,  into  financial  terms,  will  be  found  insuperable.
The  real  trend  of  colonial  forces  will  operate  in  the  same
direction  as  before,  and  more  persistently,  when  the  nature
of  the  burdens  they  are  invited  to  undertake  is  disclosed
to  them.

The  notion  that  one  great  result  of  the  South  African
war  has  been  to  generate  a large  fund  of  colonial  feeling
which  will  materially  affect  the  relations  of  the  colonies

1 Holland,  Imferium  Libertas>  p.  82.

351


imperialism:  a study

with  Great  Britain  is  an  amiable  delusion  based  upon
childish  psychology.  While  the  rally  of  sentiment  has
been  genuine,  so  has  been  the  discovery  of  the  perils  of  the
mother  country  which  have  made  colonial  assistance  so
welcome  and  caused  it  to  be  prized  so  highly  that  imperial
statesmen  essay  to  turn  the  tide  of  colonial  development
by  means  of  it.

Reflection,  which  follows  every  burst  of  sentiment,  cannot
fail  to  dwell  upon  the  nature  of  the  peril  which  besets  an
empire  so  vast,  so  heterogeneous,  and  so  dispersed  as  the
British  Empire.  When  the  glamour  of  war  has  passed
away,  and  history  discloses  some  of  the  brute  facts  of  this
sanguinary  business  which  have  been  so  carefully  kept
from  the  peoples  of  Australia,  New  Zealand  and  Canada,
their  relish  for  the  affair  will  diminish : they  will  be  more
suspicious  in  the  future  of  issues  whose  character  and
magnitude  have  been  so  gravely  misrepresented  to  them
by  the  Imperial  Government.1  But  the  discovery  likely  to
weigh  most  with  the  colonial  democracies  is  the  unsubstantial
assets  of  the  new  Imperialism.  It  is  one  thing  to  enter  a
federation  of  free  self-governing  States  upon  an  equal
footing,  quite  another  to  be  invited  to  contribute  to  the
maintenance  and  acquisition  of  an  indefinitely  large  and
growing  number  of  dependencies,  the  property  of  one  of  the
federating  States.  The  more  clearly  the  colonies  recognize
the  precarious  nature  of  the  responsibilities  they  are  asked  to
undertake,  the  more  reluctant  will  they  show  themselves.
Unless  the  democratic  spirit  of  these  colonies  can  be  broken
and  they  can  be  driven  to  “ Imperialism  ” upon  their  own
account,  they  will  refuse  to  enter  a federation  which,

1 Public  feeling  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand  was  of  a particularly  simple
manufacture  in  the  autumn  of  1899.  Mr.  Chamberlain  communicated  the
“ facts  ” of  the  South  African  war  to  the  Premiers  of  the  colonies  and  they  served
them  out  to  the  press.  This  official  information  was  not  checked  by  any  really
independent  news.


35*


IMPERIAL  FEDERATION

whatever  be  the  formal  terms  of  entrance,  fastens  on
them  perils  so  incalculable.  The  new  Imperialism  kills  a
federation  of  free  self-governing  States : the  colonies  may
look  at  it,  but  they  will  go  their  way  as  before.

The  sentimental  attractions  which  the  idea  may  at  first
present  will  not  be  void  of  practical  results.  It  may  lead
them  to  strengthen  their  preparation  for  internal  defence,
and  to  develop,  each  of  them,  a firmer  national  spirit  of
their  own.  The  consciousness  of  this  gain  in  defensive
strength  will  not  the  more  dispose  them  to  closer  formal
union  with  Great  Britain ; it  is  far  more  likely  to  lead
them  to  treat  with  her  upon  the  terms  of  independent
allies.  The  direction  in  which  the  more  clear-sighted
colonial  statesmen  are  moving  is  and  always  has  been
tolerably  clear.  It  is  towards  a slighter  bond  of  union
with  Great  Britain,  not  a stronger.  The  near  goal  is  one
clearly  marked  out  for  the  American  colonies  by  Jefferson
as  early  as  1774,  and  one  which  then  might  have  been
attained  if  England  had  exercised  discretion.  Jefferson
thus  describes  his  plan  in  the  draft  of  instructions  to  dele-
gates sent  by  Virginia  to  Congress  : “ I took  the  ground
that  from  the  beginning  I had  thought  the  only  one
orthodox  or  tenable,  which  was  that  the  relation  between
Great  Britain  and  those  colonies  was  exactly  the  same  as  that
of  England  and  Scotland  after  the  accession  of  James  and
until  after  the  Union,  and  the  same  as  the  present  relation
with  Hanover,  having  the  same  executive  chief,  but  no
other  necessary  political  connexion.”1  This  same  project,
that  of  narrowing  down  the  imperial  connexion  to  the
single  tie  of  a common  monarchy,  was  avowed  by  the
“ Reformers  ” who  in  Upper  Canada  usually  made  a
majority  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  during  1830-40,  and
underlies  the  conscious  or  unconscious  policy  of  all  our

1 Quoted  Jmperium  et  Libertas , p.  70.

353


CHAPTER  VII


THE  OUTCOME

I

IF  Imperialism  may  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a blind
inevitable  destiny,  is  it  certain  that  imperial  expansion
as  a deliberately  chosen  line  of  public  policy  can  be  stopped  1
We  have  seen  that  it  is  motived,  not  by  the  interests  of
the  nation  as  a whole,  but  by  those  of  certain  classes,  who
impose  the  policy  upon  the  nation  for  their  own  advantage.
The  amalgam  of  economic  and  political  forces  which
exercises  this  pressure  has  been  submitted  to  close  analysis.
But  will  the  detection  of  this  confederacy  of  vicious  forces
destroy  or  any  wise  abate  their  operative  power  i For
this  power  is  a natural  outcome  of  an  unsound  theory  in
our  foreign  policy.  Put  into  plain  language,  the  theory  is
this,  that  any  British  subject  choosing,  for  his  own  private
pleasure  or  profit,  to  venture  his  person  or  his  property  in
the  territory  of  a foreign  State  can  call  upon  this  nation  to
protect  or  avenge  him  in  case  he  or  his  property  is  injured
either  by  the  Government  or  by  any  inhabitant  of  this
foreign  State.  Now  this  is  a perilous  doctrine.  It  places
the  entire  military,  political,  and  financial  resources  of  this
nation  at  the  beck  and  call  of  any  missionary  society  which
considers  it  has  a peculiar  duty  to  attack  the  religious
sentiments  or  observances  of  some  savage  people,  or  of
some  reckless  explorer  who  chooses  just  those  spots  of  earth
known  to  be  inhabited  by  hostile  peoples  ignorant  of  British
power;  the  speculative  trader  or  the  mining  prospector

356


THE  OUTCOME


gravitates  naturally  towards  dangerous  and  unexplored
countries,  where  the  gains  of  a successful  venture  will  be
quick  and  large.  All  these  men,  missionaries,  travellers,
sportsmen,  scientists,  traders,  in  no  proper  sense  the  ac-
credited representatives  of  this  country,  but  actuated  by
private  personal  motives,  are  at  liberty  to  call  upon  the
British  nation  to  spend  millions  of  money  and  thousands  of
lives  to  defend  them  against  risks  which  the  nation  has  not
sanctioned.  It  is  only  right  to  add  that  unscrupulous
statesmen  have  deliberately  utilized  these  insidious  methods
of  encroachment,  seizing  upon  every  alleged  outrage  inflicted
on  these  private  adventurers  or  marauders  as  a pretext  for  a
punitive  expedition  which  results  in  the  British  flag  waving
over  some  new  tract  of  territory.  Thus  the  most  reckless
and  irresponsible  individual  members  of  our  nation  are
permitted  to  direct  our  foreign  policy.  Now  that  we  have
some  four  hundred  million  British  subjects,  any  one  of  whom
in  theory  or  in  practice  may  call  upon  the  British  arms
to  extricate  him  from  the  results  of  his  private  folly,  the
prospects  of  a genuine  pax  Britannica  are  not  particularly
bright.

But  these  sporadic  risks,  grave  though  they  have  some-
times proved,  are  insignificant  when  compared  with  the
dangers  associated  with  modern  methods  of  international
capitalism  and  finance.  It  is  not  long  since  industry  was
virtually  restricted  by  political  boundaries,  the  economic
intercourse  of  nations  being  almost  wholly  confined  to  com-
mercial exchanges  of  goods.  The  recent  habit  of  investing
capital  in  a foreign  country  has  now  grown  to  such  an  extent
that  the  well-to-do  and  politically  powerful  classes  in  Great
Britain  to-day  derive  a large  and  ever  larger  proportion
of  their  incomes  from  capital  invested  outside  the  British
Empire.  This  growing  stake  of  our  wealthy  classes  in
countries  over  which  they  have  no  political  control  is  a

357


imperialism:  a study


revolutionary  force  in  modem  politics  ; it  means  a constantly
growing  tendency  to  use  their  political  power  as  citizens  of
this  State  to  interfere  with  the  political  condition  of  those
States  where  they  have  an  industrial  stake.

The  essentially  illicit  nature  of  this  use  of  the  public
resources  of  the  nation  to  safeguard  and  improve  private
investments  should  be  clearly  recognized.  If  I put  my
savings  in  a home  investment,  I take  into  consideration
all  the  chances  and  changes  to  which  the  business  is  liable,
including  the  possibilities  of  political  changes  of  tariff,
taxation,  or  industrial  legislation  which  may  affect  its
profits.  In  the  case  of  such  investment,  I am  quite  aware
that  I have  no  right  to  call  upon  the  public  to  protect  me
from  loss  or  depreciation  of  my  capital  due  to  any  of  these
causes.  The  political  conditions  of  my  country  are  taken
into  calculation  at  the  time  of  my  investment.  If  I invest
in  consols,  I fully  recognize  that  no  right  of  political  inter-
ference with  foreign  policy  affecting  my  investment  is
accorded  to  me  in  virtue  of  my  interest  as  a fund-holder.
But,  if  I invest  either  in  the  public  funds  or  in  some  private
industrial  venture  in  a foreign  country  for  the  benefit  of
my  private  purse,  getting  specially  favourable  terms  to  cover
risks  arising  from  the  political  insecurity  of  the  country
or  the  deficiencies  of  its  Government,  I am  entitled  to
call  upon  my  Government  to  use  its  political  and  military
force  to  secure  me  against  those  very  risks  which  I have
already  discounted  in  the  terms  of  my  investment.  Can
anything  be  more  palpably  unfair  ?

It  may  be  said  that  no  such  claim  of  the  individual
investor  upon  State  aid  is  admitted.  But  while  the
theory  may  not  have  been  openly  avowed,  recent  history
shows  a growth  of  consistent  practice  based  upon  its  tacit
acceptance.  I need  not  retrace  the  clear  chain  of  evidence,
consisting  chiefly  of  the  admissions  of  the  mining  capitalists,

358


THE  OUTCOME


by  which  this  claim  to  use  public  resources  for  their  private
profit  has  been  enforced  by  the  financiers  who  seduced  our
Government  and  people  into  our  latest  and  most  costly
exploit.  This  is  but  the  clearest  and  most  dramatic  instance
of  the  operation  of  the  world-wide  forces  of  international
finance.  These  forces  are  commonly  described  as  capitalistic,
but  the  gravest  danger  arises  not  from  genuine  industrial
investments  in  foreign  lands,  but  from  the  handling  of  stocks
and  shares  based  upon  these  investments  by  financiers.
Those  who  own  a genuine  stake  in  the  natural  sources  or
the  industry  of  a foreign  land  have  at  least  some  substantial
interest  in  the  peace  and  good  government  of  that  land  ;
but  the  stock  speculator  has  no  such  stake  : his  interest  lies
in  the  oscillations  of  paper  values,  which  require  fluctuation
and  insecurity  of  political  conditions  as  their  instrument.

As  these  forms  of  international  investment  and  finance
are  wider  spread  and  better  organized  for  economic  and
political  purposes,  these  demands  for  political  and  military
interference  with  foreign  countries,  on  the  ground  of
protecting  the  property  of  British  subjects,  will  be  more
frequent  and  more  effective  ; the  demands  of  investors  will
commonly  be  backed  by  personal  grievances  of  British
outlanders,  and  we  shall  be  drawn  into  a series  of  inter-
ferences with  foreign  Governments,  which,  if  we  can  conduct
them  successfully,  will  lead  to  annexation  of  territory  as
the  only  security  for  the  lives  and  property  of  our  subjects.

That  this  policy  marks  a straight  road  to  ruin  there  can
be  no  doubt.  But  how  to  stop  it  ? What  principle  of  safety
can  we  lay  down  ? Only  one — an  absolute  repudiation  of
the  right  of  British  subjects  to  call  upon  their  Government
to  protect  their  persons  or  property  from  injuries  or  dangers
incurred  on  their  private  initiative.  This  principle  is
just  and  expedient.  If  we  send  an  emissary  on  a public
mission  into  a foreign  country,  let  us  support  and  protect

359


IMPERIALISM  : A STUDY


him  by  our  public  purse  and  arms ; if  a private  person,  or
a company  of  private  persons,  place  their  lives  or  property
in  a foreign  land,  seeking  their  own  ends,  let  them  clearly
understand  that  they  do  so  at  their  own  risk,  and  that  the
State  will  not  act  for  their  protection.

If  so  complete  a reversal  of  our  consistent  policy  be
regarded  as  a counsel  of  perfection  involving  a definite
abandonment  of  domiciliary,  trading,  and  other  rights
secured  by  existing  treaties  or  conventions  with  foreign
States,  upon  the  observance  of  which  we  are  entitled  to
insist,  let  us  at  any  rate  lay  down  two  plain  rules  of  policy.
First,  never  to  sanction  any  interference  on  the  part  of
our  foreign  representatives  on  general  grounds  of  foreign
misgovernment  outside  the  strict  limits  of  our  treaty
rights,  submitting  interpretation  of  such  treaty  rights  to
arbitration.  Secondly,  if  in  any  case  armed  force  is  applied
to  secure  the  observance  of  these  treaty  rights,  to  confine
such  force  to  the  attainment  of  the  specific  object  which
justifies  its  use.


II

Analysis  of  Imperialism,  with  its  natural  supports,
militarism,  oligarchy,  bureaucracy,  protection,  concentra-
tion of  capital  and  violent  trade  fluctuations,  has  marked
it  out  as  the  supreme  danger  of  modern  national  States.
The  power  of  the  imperialist  forces  within  the  nation  to  use
the  national  resources  for  their  private  gain,  by  operating
the  instrument  of  the  State,  can  only  be  overthrown  by
the  establishment  of  a genuine  democracy,  the  direction
of  public  policy  by  the  people  for  the  people  through
representatives  over  whom  they  exercise  a real  control.
Whether  this  or  any  other  nation  is  yet  competent  for  such
a democracy  may  well  be  matter  of  grave  doubt,  but  until
and  unless  the  external  policy  of  a nation  is  “ broad-based

360


THE  OUTCOME


upon  a people’s  will  ” there  appears  little  hope  of  remedy.
The  scare  of  a great  recent  war  may  for  a brief  time  check
the  confidence  of  these  conspirators  against  the  common-
wealth, and  cause  them  to  hold  their  hands,  but  the
financial  forces  freshly  generated  will  demand  new  outlets,
and  will  utilize  the  same  political  alliances  and  the  same
social,  religious,  and  philanthropic  supports  in  their  pressure
for  new  enterprises.  The  circumstances  of  each  new
imperialist  exploit  differ  from  those  of  all  preceding  ones :
whatever  ingenuity  is  requisite  for  the  perversion  of  the
public  intelligence,  or  the  inflammation  of  the  public
sentiment,  will  be  forthcoming.

Imperialism  is  only  beginning  to  realize  its  full  resources,
and  to  develop  into  a fine  art  the  management  of  nations :
the  broad  bestowal  of  a franchise,  wielded  by  a people
whose  education  has  reached  the  stage  of  an  uncritical
ability  to  read  printed  matter,  favours  immensely  the
designs  of  keen  business  politicians,  who,  by  controlling
the  press,  the  schools,  and  where  necessary  the  churches,
impose  Imperialism  upon  the  masses  under  the  attractive
guise  of  sensational  patriotism.

The  chief  economic  source  of  Imperialism  has  been  found
in  the  inequality  of  industrial  opportunities  by  which  a
favoured  class  accumulates  superfluous  elements  of  income
which,  in  their  search  for  profitable  investments,  press
ever  farther  afield : the  influence  on  State  policy  of  these
investors  and  their  financial  managers  secures  a national
alliance  of  other  vested  interests  which  are  threatened  by
movements  of  social  reform : the  adoption  of  Imperialism
thus  serves  the  double  purpose  of  securing  private  material
benefits  for  favoured  classes  of  investors  and  traders  at  the
public  cost,  while  sustaining  the  general  cause  of  conservatism
by  diverting  public  energy  and  interest  from  domestic
agitation  to  external  employment.

361


imperialism:  a study

The  ability  of  a nation  to  shake  off  this  dangerous
usurpation  of  its  power,  and  to  employ  the  national  resources
in  the  national  interest,  depends  upon  the  education  of
a national  intelligence  and  a national  will,  which  shall
make  democracy  a political  and  economic  reality.  To  term
Imperialism  a national  policy  is  an  impudent  falsehood :
the  interests  of  the  nation  are  opposed  to  every  act  of  this
expansive  policy . Every  enlargement  of  Great  Britain
in  the  tropics  is  a distinct  enfeeblement  of  true  British
nationalism.  Indeed,  Imperialism  is  commended  in  some
quarters  for  this  very  reason,  that  by  breaking  the  narrow
bounds  of  nationalities  it  facilitates  and  forwards  inter-
nationalism. There  are  even  those  who  favour  or  condone
the  forcible  suppression  of  small  nationalities  by  larger  ones
under  the  impulse  of  Imperialism,  because  they  imagine
that  this  is  the  natural  approach  to  a world-federation  and
eternal  peace.  A falser  view  of  political  evolution  it  is
difficult  to  conceive.  If  there  is  one  condition  precedent  to
effective  internationalism  or  to  the  establishment  of  any
reliable  relations  between  States,  it  is  the  existence  of  strong,
secure,  well-developed,  and  responsible  nations.  Inter-
nationalism can  never  be  subserved  by  the  suppression
or  forcible  absorption  of  nations ; for  these  practices  react
disastrously  upon  the  springs  of  internationalism,  on  the
one  hand  setting  nations  on  their  armed  defence  and  stifling
the  amicable  approaches  between  them,  on  the  Other
debilitating  the  larger  nations  through  excessive  corpulence
and  indigestion.  The  hope  of  a coming  internationalism
enjoins  above  all  else  the  maintenance  and  natural  growth
of  independent  nationalities,  for  without  such  there  could
be  no  gradual  evolution  of  internationalism,  but  only  a
series  of  unsuccessful  attempts  at  a chaotic  and  unstable
cosmopolitanism.  As  individualism  is  essential  to  any  sane
form  of  national  socialism,  so  nationalism  is  essential  to

362


THE  OUTCOME


internationalism : no  organic  conception  of  world-politics
can  be  framed  on  any  other  supposition.

Just  in  proportion  as  the  substitution  of  true  national
governments  for  the  existing  oligarchies  or  sham  demo-
cracies becomes  possible  will  the  apparent  conflicts  of
national  interests  disappear,  and  the  fundamental  co-
operation upon  which  nineteenth-century  Free  Trade
prematurely  relied  manifest  itself.  The  present  class
government  means  the  severance  or  antagonism  of  nations,
because  each  ruling  class  can  only  keep  and  use  its  rule  by
forcing  the  antagonisms  of  foreign  policy : intelligent
democracies  would  perceive  their  identity  of  interest,  and
would  ensure  it  by  their  amicable  policy.  The  genuine
forces  of  internationalism,  thus  liberated,  would  first  display
themselves  as  economic  forces,  securing  more  effective
international  co-operation  for  postal,  telegraphic,  railway,
and  other  transport  services,  for  monetary  exchange  and
for  common  standards  of  measurement  of  various  kinds,  and
for  the  improved  intercommunication  of  persons,  goods,
and  information.  Related  and  subsidiary  to  these  purposes
would  come  a growth  of  machinery  of  courts  and  congresses,
at  first  informal  and  private,  but  gradually  taking  shape  in
more  definite  and  more  public  machinery : the  common
interests  of  the  arts  and  sciences  would  everywhere  be
weaving  an  elaborate  network  of  intellectual  internationalism,
and  both  economic  and  intellectual  community  of  needs  and
interests  would  contribute  to  the  natural  growth  of  such
political  solidarity  as  was  required  to  maintain  this  real
community.

It  is  thus,  and  only  thus,  that  the  existing  false  antagon-
isms of  nations,  with  their  wastes  and  perils  and  their
retardation  of  the  general  course  of  civilization,  can  be
resolved.  To  substitute  for  this  peaceful  discovery  and
expression  of  common  interests  a federal  policy  proceeding

363


imperialism:  a study


The  Italian  farmers,  at  first  drawn  frbm  rural  into
military  life,  soon  found  themselves  permanently  ousted
from  agriculture  by  the  serf  labour  of  the  latifundia , and
they  and  their  families  were  sucked  into  the  dregs  of  town
life,  to  be  subsisted  as  a pauper  population  upon  public
charity.  A mercenary  colonial  army  came  more  and  more
to  displace  the  home  forces.  The  parasitic  city  life,  with
its  lowered  vitality  and  the  growing  infrequency  of  marriage,
to  which  Gibbon  draws  attention,1  rapidly  impaired  the
physique  of  the  native  population  of  Italy,  and  Rome  sub-
sisted more  and  more  upon  immigration  of  raw  vigour  from
Gaul  and  Germany.  The  necessity  of  maintaining  powerful
mercenary  armies  to  hold  the  provinces  heightened  con-
tinually the  peril,  already  manifest  in  the  last  years  of  the
Republic,  arising  from  the  political  ambitions  of  great  pro-
consuls  conspiring  with  a moneyed  interest  at  Rome  against
the  Commonwealth.  As  time  went  on,  this  moneyed
oligarchy  became  an  hereditary  aristocracy,  and  withdrew
from  military  and  civil  service,  relying  more  and  more  upon
hired  foreigners : themselves  sapped  by  luxury  and  idleness,
and  tainting  by  mixed  servitude  and  licence  the  Roman
populace,  they  so  enfeebled  the  State  as  to  destroy  the
physical  and  moral  vitality  required  to  hold  in  check  and
under  government  the  vast  repository  of  forces  in  the
exploited  Empire.  The  direct  cause  of  Rome’s  decay  and  fall
is  expressed  politically  by  the  term  “ over-centralization,”
which  conveys  in  brief  the  real  essence  of  Imperialism  as
distinguished  from  national  growth  on  the  one  hand  and
colonialism  upon  the  other.  Parasitism,  practised  through
taxation  and  usury,  involved  a constantly  increasing
centralization  of  the  instruments  of  government,  and  a
growing  strain  upon  this  government,  as  the  prey  became
more  impoverished  by  the  drain  and  showed  signs  of  restive-

1 Chap.  xii.


366


THE  OUTCOME


ness.  “ The  evolution  of  this  centralized  society  was  as
logical  as  every  other  work  of  nature.  When  force  reached
the  stage  where  it  expressed  itself  exclusively  through  money,
the  governing  class  ceased  to  be  chosen  because  they  were
valiant  or  eloquent,  artistic,  learned  or  devout,  and  were
selected  solely  because  they  had  the  faculty  of  acquiring
and  keeping  wealth.  As  long  as  the  weak  retained  enough
vitality  to  produce  something  which  could  be  absorbed,
this  oligarchy  was  invariable ; and,  for  very  many  years
after  the  native  peasantry  of  Gaul  and  Italy  had  perished
from  the  land,  new  blood,  injected  from  more  tenacious
races,  kept  the  dying  civilization  alive.  The  weakness
of  the  moneyed  class  lay  in  this  very  power,  for  they  not
only  killed  the  producer  but  in  the  strength  of  their
acquisitiveness  they  failed  to  propagate  themselves.”1

This  is  the  largest,  plainest  instance  history  presents  of
the  social  parasitic  process  by  which  a moneyed  interest
within  the  State,  usurping  the  reins  of  government,  makes
for  imperial  expansion  in  order  to  fasten  economic  suckers
into  foreign  bodies  so  as  to  drain  them  of  their  wealth  in
order  to  support  domestic  luxury.  The  new  Imperialism
differs  in  no  vital  point  from  this  old  example.  The  element
of  political  tribute  is  now  absent  or  quite  subsidiary,  and  the
crudest  forms  of  slavery  have  disappeared  : some  elements  of
more  genuine  and  disinterested  government  serve  to  quality
and  mask  the  distinctively  parasitic  nature  of  the  later  sort.
But  nature  is  not  mocked : the  laws  which,  operative
throughout  nature,  doom  the  parasite  to  atrophy,  decay,
and  final  extinction,  are  not  evaded  by  nations  any  more
than  by  individual  organisms.  The  greater  complexity
of  the  modern  process,  the  endeavour  to  escape  the  parasitic
reaction  by  rendering  some  real  but  quite  unequal  and
inadequate  services  to  “ the  host,”  may  retard  but  cannot

1 Adams,  Civilization  and  Decay , p.  44.

367


imperialism:  a study


finally  avert  the  natural  consequences  of  living  upon  others.
The  claim  that  an  imperial  State  forcibly  subjugating
other  peoples  and  their  lands  does  so  for  the  purpose  of
rendering  services  to  the  conquered  equal  to  those  which
she  exacts  is  notoriously  false  : she  neither  intends  equivalent
services  nor  is  capable  of  rendering  them,  and  the  pretence
that  such  benefits  to  the  governed  form  a leading  motive
or  result  of  Imperialism  implies  a degree  of  moral  or
intellectual  obliquity  so  grave  as  itself  to  form  a new  peril
for  any  nation  fostering  so  false  a notion  of  the  nature  of
its  conduct.  “ Let  the  motive  be  in  the  deed,  not  in  the
event,”  says  a Persian  proverb.

Imperialism  is  a depraved  choice  of  national  life,  imposed
by  self-seeking  interests  which  appeal  to  the  lusts  of
quantitative  acquisitiveness  and  of  forceful  domination
surviving  in  a nation  from  early  centuries  of  animal  struggle
for  existence.  Its  adoption  as  a policy  implies  a deliberate
renunciation  of  that  cultivation  of  the  higher  inner  qualities
which  for  a nation  as  for  an  individual  constitutes  the
ascendency  of  reason  over  brute  impulse.  It  is  the  besetting
sin  of  all  successful  States,  and  its  penalty  is  unalterable
in  the  order  of  nature.


368


APPENDIX  I


Aria  and  Population  op  thx  British  Empire,  1933-4.


Area  (sq.  miles).

Population.

Dominions,  Colonies,  and

TO  RATES —

Europe

Asia  ....
Africa  ....
America

Australasia  .

Protec-

30.709

*,113,679

3,093.949

4, 008, *14
3,1**405

3,5*9,000

364,012,000

51.583.000

13.091.000
8,887,000

Total

•

•

'*>434,956

441,162,000

Mandated  Territories —
Asia  ....
Africa  ....
Australasia  .

•

•

9, 000
7*«, 3*5
90,512

1.036.000

6.412.000
768,000

Total

•

•

8*5, *37

8,216,000

Grand  Total

.

.

I39*7°»793

449,378,000

Compiled  from  the  Statesman's  Tear  Book  for  1934.


APPENDIX  II


Area  in  Square  Miles.

Population.

Mother

Country.

Dependencies.

Mother

Country.1

Dependencies.*

Great  Britain .

94,633

139*70,793

46,610,000

449,378,000

France  .

212,75°

4,617,5*4

41,880,000

65,179,000

Germany

181,822

—

65,350,000

—

Netherlands  .

13,1*8

79*.907

8,290,000

60,971,000

Austria  .

3**34

—

6,750,00°

—

Hungary

35.909

—

8,841,000

—

Denmark

16,603

***,395

3,640,000

4*. 000

Italy  .

1 19,696

906,213*

42,217,000

2»393>ooo*

Portugal

35>«99

807,637

7,090,000

8,426,000

Spain  .

194,216

1 0»993

24,242,000

1,000,000

Czechoslovakia

54,056

—

1 5,020,000

—

United  States

3,026,200

711,7*6*

126,000,000

15,014,000*

1 Estimates  for  31.xii.33.  1 Estimates  for  as  near  the  above  date  as  possible.
9 Excluding  Abyssinia.  4 Including  Alaska.


Figures  from  the  Statesman's  Tear  Book  for  1935,  the  Armaments  Tear  Book
for  1935,  and  the  League  of  Nations  Tear  Book  for  1934-5.

369


APPENDIX  III

United  Kingdom  or  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland.


APPENDIX  IV

Trade  or  the  United  Kingdom  : Percentages  or  Total  Values.


Imports  from

Exports  to

Foreign

Countries.

British

Empire.

Foreign

Countries.

British

Empire.

75-1

24*9

67-.

32*9

694

30*6

409

71*2

28*8

411

63-1

36.9

WM

4«*

1913  •

Average  1924-9
1931  .

»933  •


370


APPENDIX  V


Percentages  of  Imports
into  British  Empire
from  United  Kingdom.

Percentages  of  Exports
from  British  Empire
into  United  Kingdom.

1913-4

Average  1924-9  .

*933-4  ....

Figures  from  Statistical  Abstract  for  the  United  Kingdom  for  1934,  and  Sir
George  Schuster,  “Empire  Trade  Before  and  After  Ottawa,”  Economist ,
November  3rd,  1934.


APPENDIX  VI

British,  Imperial  and  Forxign  Trade,  1934-35.


Imports  from

Exports  to

Value

tt’s).

Percent-

age.

Value

(£’«)•

m

Foreign  Countries

£

460,129,000

6272

£

210,412,000

53'S

British  India

42,102,000

574

36,675,000

9.3O

Australasia

90,368,000

12*30

37,681,000

950

South  Africa1

16,446,000

2*24

32,509,000

8*20

Canada  ....

50,390,000

6*90

19,726,000

5*00

Other  British  Dependencies

74,102,000

10*10

58,982,000

1485

Total  .

733, 537, 000

100-00

395,985,000

100*00

1 Including  Rhodesia.

Figures  from  Statistical  Abstract  for  the  United  Kingdom  for  1934.


APPENDIX  VII


Percentage  of  Imports
by  Value  from

United  Kingdom.

Percentage  of  Exports
by  Value  to

United  Kingdom.

I9I3”4

Average.

1924-9

*933-4

1913-4

Average.

1924-9

1933-4

India  ....

65*4

48*9

41*2

11

227

ESI

Self  Governing  Dominions
Other  Parts  of

39.0

36*5

41*9

1

46*0

m

British  Empire1

45*o

23*6

22*8

42*2

20*2

21*4

1 Including  Crown  Colonies,  Sudan,  Southern  Rhodesia,  and  Malaya  and
Hong  Kong  (except  1913-4).

Figures  from  Statistical  Abstract  for  the  United  Kingdom  for  1934,  and
Sir  George  Schuster,  “ Empire  Trade  Before  and  After  Ottawa,”  Economist ,
November  3rd,  1934.

A2  371


APPENDIX  VIII


Vaiui  or  Exports  from  Grxat  Britain  (U.K.)  in  £*.


Year.

Dominions.

India.

Other

British

Possessions*

I9°4  *

52,094,444

40,641,277

*9,687,997

1905  ..  .

5*1*04,63*

4*, 996,366

19,016423

1906

56,923,891

45,181,307

*9,904,287

,9°7  •

64,104,666

5*, 0*7, *21

22,011,879

1908

56422,882

494*6,7*3

20,923,432

1909  ..  .

61,585,480

43, 5»*, 5°*

22,071, *03

1910  .

75»4°*»799

45,998,500

23,902,643

1911  .

80,585,992

52,245,604

26,012,488

1912  .

90,183,258

57,6*6,ioi

29,283,279

*9*3  .

9V*7,7  54

70,273,145

33,745,909

*9*4  •

79,268,272

62,888,506

29472,720

*9*5  •

69,9*3>56*

45,603,791

32,892,330

1916

89,116,567

52,787,920

44,27*, 384

*9*7  •

64,5*^97

59,965,373

48,170,946

1918  .

70,879,622

49,180,830

58,301,670

*9*9  •

7', *4343*

70,860,991

63,618,037

1920  .

1 6°, 97*  ,37*

1*1,239,634

*39,2594*7

1921

109,843,563

108,868,548

79,904,522

1922

>*5,769446

92,104,778

67,694,300

1923  .

133,686,453

86,246,488

80,669,685

1924  .

*39,356,994

9°, 577, *48

107,530,219

1925  .

141,365,814

86,047,757

*07,700,581

1926

140,286,071

8*. 755, 046

94,810,310

*927  .

*40, 35o»373

85,044,84*

101,254,995

1928  .

140,910,867

83,900,440

*02,856,595

*929  .

*43, *71,966

78,227,208

*03,05*, 3°*

*930  .

*°5,*45,*3*

52,944,447

90,255,381

1931  .

68,131,620

31,188,579

70,252,593

*93*  •

64,*95,734

34,088,361

66,528,185

*933  .

71,686,278

33,402404

58,428,581

*934  •

87,626,611

36,674,58*

6*47', 842

372


APPENDIX  VIII —contd.


Valui  or  Imposts  into  Great  Britain  (U.K.)  in  £i.


Year.

Dominions.

India.

Other

British

Possessions.

1904  ..  .

70,526,674

42,704,004

12,916,861

*9°5  •

77.* 58.417

36,039,789

20,212,314

1906

88,43i,°3o

37,7**1*35

22,940,401

1907  ..  .

94,5* *>*93

43,9**1588

25,110,466

1908  .

80,177,264

*9,5*8,187

*2»9 77,77*

1909  •

9*,593,°58

35430*77*

*4,398,063

1910  .

103,726,165

4*, 763, 7*5

3*, *5°, 753

1911

99.5*7,676

45,4*3,3*6

34,585,7*3

1912  .

103,660,165

5*. *♦*, 731

39, *94, 383

1913  .

* *3,*797*93

48,420490

41, 902,295

>9*4  .

107,622,853

43,348,176

4*, 301, 442

*9*5  •

129,282,519

62,213,614

81,981,097

1916  .

143,646,423

72,366,184

91,940,009

1917  •

1 951*76, 5* 1

66,836,578

103,014,290

I9l8  .

**3,*6*,757

88,54*1**7

128,294,040

1919  .

313,699,316

108,213,961

17*, 193, 212

1920  .

*83, 339, *'5

95,7*i,4*o

288,075,222

1921

*98, 5g7, *25

44,307,74*

89,022,436

1922  .

188,242,235

47,7*9,039

85, *3*, 35*

1923  .

*67, 33*, 394

66,950,068

98,316,894

1924  .

196,411^35

78, 87*, 953

H9,o*7,o35

*9*5  •

227,230,222

80,099,083

129,4*1,94*

1926  .

*99,9*4,304

57,638,068

127,808,804

1927  .

185,073,00*

65,840,065

1*5,056,495

1928  .

*89,694,*  5*

64, 47*, 793

*16,135,59*

i9*9  -

182,271,186

6*, 844, 796

121,903,815

*93°  •

*5*1502,896

5*,°44,435

103,248,648

*93*  •

**7,339,0*6

36,711,288

81,290,012

*93*  •

*4*, 099, 5*°

32,308,273

74,376,155

*933  .

*46,444,670

37,35i,9*9

65,43148*

*934  •

*53,99*4*8

42,102,298

76,533,361

This  includes  Straits  Settlements  and  Dependencies  at  well  as  British  India.


373


APPENDIX  XII

Gkiat  Britain,  1904-31.


Armaments
and  War.

Colonial  Trade :
Import  and  Export
Trade  with  the
Empire.

1904  ...

£ooo’>

66,055

*3*. 57'

05  ...

62,150

247,628

06  .

27l,i°3

°7  ...

58,256

301,678

08  .

59,028

259,508

09  ...

63,043

278,660

1910  ....

67,*35

3*6,044

II  .

7°»5°7

338,371

12  ,

72,432

372,196

13  ...

86,028

361,156

398,809

14  ...

364,902

15  ...

421,897

l6  .

1,414,281

494,1*8

17  ...

',767,55°

537,785

l8  ...

',977,75'

608,460

19  ...

959,192

799,7*9

1920  ....

386,491

1,072,885

21  .

178,300

630,536

22  .

Il8,000

607,369

23  ...  ■

112,400

633,213

24  .

Il6,900

731,9*1

25  ...  .

121,500

773,351

26  .

117,400

704,449

27  ...

Il8,60O

705,004

28  ...

115,700

699,771

29  ...  .

115,000

693,620

1930  ....

112,700

556,984

31  ...

111,400

4*0,833

Figures  from  the  Statistical  Abstract  for  the  United  Kingdom  for  1914,
1922,  and  1934.


376


APPENDIX  XIII

Exports  op  United  States.

Figures  in  thousands  of  dollars.  Specie  values.


1871-1875

1876-1880

1881-1885

1886-1890

1891-1895

1896-1900

1901-1905

1906-1910


486,128

663,650

774^

725,685

876,326

1,136,039


Crude  Crude  Manu-  Semi*  j Finished

material.  food_  factured  manu-

ma  enais.  foodstuffs,  factures.  I factures.


2**»449  75>*°6

213,989  158,853
261,645  162,714
276,703  108,708
295,087  150,846

296,664  214,778

432,027  173,972
554,754  155,8*8

720,6ll  103,402

73', 164  99,899

740,290  181,907
799,838  137495
591,282  506,993


815,693  421,284  648,039

832,827  508,762  806,941

972407  547,436  1405,8*0
1,623,085  678,363  1,962,616
1,882,530  917,991  1,116,605


4,378,9*8


9*3,553  673,334  685,025

9*8,456  458,611  587,987

4,090,71511,20*468  257478  583,292

',33*, 746  39*, 69'  573,49*


4, 7", 7*'


335,063  503,005

421,107  463,299

5,030,099  I ',*93, *57  I *94,677  465,8"

1,142,352  I 269,590  484,304

178,533  36*, 650


I,Il6,605


127,072  246,814  317,647
89,419  152,118  196,727


377


APPENDIX  XIV

Expenditure  or  the  Great  Powers  on  Defence,  1934.


Great  Britain  .

In  millions  of  P 8

1142

France

00-0

Germany  .

43-8

Italy

46-4

Russia

242-6

United  States  .

I4S-2

From  the  Peace  Tear  Book  for  1935.


378


379


Obtained  from  British  Budgets  (MaUet  & George)  1887-1913,  1913-1921,  1921-193*-


INDEX


Abercom,  Duke  of,  231
Aborigine!'  Protection  Society,  244
Abyssinian  Expedition,  21
Adams,  Brooks,  Civilization  and
Decay , 365,  367
Afghanistan,  224

Africa,  10,  15,  19,  20,  1 16,  124,  126,
237,  250,  256;  African  Empire,
21 ; three  new  states  in,  26 ; West
16,  126 ; slave  trade,  197,  206 ;
Central,  224,  227;  Berlin  Con-
ference, 240 ; acquisitions  in,  206.
See  also  South  Africa
Africa  Company,  Royal,  251
African  Society,  244
Algeria,  5

America.  See  United  States
Angola,  21
Annam,  Loss  of,  204
Anti-Slavery  Society,  249
Arabs,  256

Aristotle,  Politics  quoted , 181
Armaments  Tear  Book , 369
Armenia,  200
Ashanti,  232

Asia  and  Europe  quoted , 290,  298, 299,
300.325

Australasia,  4, 5,  26,  38, 1 18,  329, 346,
348

Australia,  38,  117,  128,  250,  252,  238,

*59*  3*9. 330,  335.  34*.  34*
Austria-Hungary,  2
Austrian  Empire,  17;  Germany  and
the,  2


Barrie,  Mr.,  299

Basutoland  and  the  Basutos,  122, 244-
*46, 255, 270, 279
Bechuanaland,  122, 262-264, 34$

Beit,  A.,  151,  217

Belgium,  2, 21, 72, 98, 143, 248, 259
Benares,  290
Bermudas,  115

Birdwood,  Sir  G.,  Industrial  Arts  of
India,  290
Birmingham,  39,  49
Bismarck,  167
Board  of  Trade,  28,  147
Boer  Republics,  262
Boer  War,  207,  209
Bombay,  291

Borneo,  250 ; Borneo  Company
British,  251
Bororas,  258

Bosanquet,  Dr.  B.,  quoted , 166
Bourne,  H.  R.  Fox,  Whites  and  Blacks
in  S.  Africa , 256,  257
British  Guiana,  115,  258, 273
British  South  Africa  Chartered  Com-
pany, 157,  252,  264
Brownlie,  W.  T.,  271
BrunetiSre,  M.,  235
Bryce  J.,  Studies  in  History  and  Juris-
prudence, 148  ; Impressions  of  South
Africa , 246 ; Romanes  Lecture , 253,
3*4

Bulgaria,  1

Burke,  Edmund,  quoted,  350
Burma,  16,  250
Burmese  Frontier,  125


Baden-Powell,  Lord,  201  j Aids  to
Scouting , 124
Bahamas,  115
Bajam,  16
Balkans,  the,  2

Barbados,  115  ; London  Company  in,
251


Caldecott,  A*,  English  Colonization  and
Empire , 120

Canada,  4, 5, 26, 38, 44, 1x7, 118, 329,

335.  336.  341.  34*.  347
Canterbury,  Archbishop  of,  198, 234
Canton,  238


381


INDEX


Cape  Colony,  4, 38, 115, 202,  245,  262,
268,  269,  330,  34s
Carlyle,  T.,  157
Carnarvon,  Lord,  330
Catherine,  7

Cecil,  Lord  Hugh,  quoted,  202
Ceylon,  115,  119
Chalmers,  Sir  D.,  266,  267
Chamberlain,  Mr.,  106,  109,  160,  270,
33o,  33!»  35^

Charlemagne,  6
Charles  V,  7

Chartered  Companies,  116,  157,  197
231, 252, 256, 257, 259, 26+,  270
China,  9, 42, 66, 67, 108, 177, 197, 202-
204, 224, 225, 238, 240, 241, 248,
250, 256, 272, 274, 277-278, 305-
306,308-326,364,365
China-Japan  War,  57
China  Society,  50
Chitral,  16

Churchill,  Winston,  The  River  War ,
205

Clarke,  Sir  M.,  244
Clarke  W.,  Progressive  Review,  8
Cobden,  R.,  quoted , 1 50
Colquhoun,  A.  R.,  Transformation  in
China , 319,  320
Colville,  Col.,  260
Condorcet,  7

Congo  Free  State,  21,  198,  206,  231,
248,  257,  259

Consolidated  Gold  Fields,  269

Corea,  127

Cox,  Harold,  35

Crossth waite,  Sir  C.,  50

Cuba,  78  $ Cuban  sugar-growers,  228

Cyprus  Convention,  200

Czechs,  Policital  Freedom  of  the,  2


Dante,  7

De  Beers,  202,  268
Demolins,  M.  E.,  155
Denmark,  143

Depression  of  Trade,  Report  of  Com-
mission on,  80

Dictionary  of  Political  Economy , 62
Dilke,  Sir  C.,  The  British  Empire , 206
Dutch  Republics,  330,  343


Dutt,  Romesh,  Economic  History  j
British  India , 292,  293


East  Africa,  68,  240
East  India  Company,  251
Economic  Foundations  of  Society , 55,  73
Egypt,  16,  26,  54,  108,  122,  236,  242}
revolt  of,  55 ; British  occupation
of,  199;  government  of  the
Khedive,  200 ; Gordon  Memorial
Service,  204-5  ; Khartoum,  205  j
Omdurman,  205
Ellis,  J.  E.,  149
Elphinstone,  293
Eritrea,  21

Fabri’s  Bedarj  Deutschland  der  Col -
onien , 19

Finns,  political  freedom  of  the,  2
Flux,  Prof.,  36

France,  54,  66,  69,  80,  126,  127,  143,
223,  251  ; colonies  of,  5 ; French
Revolution,  7,  8 j colonial  policy,
20,  21  j attempted  conquest  of
Mexico  by,  54 ; and  Tunis,  54 ;
and  Madagascar,  66,  67 ; rubber
trade  in  East  Africa,  68
Franklin,  B.,  7

Frayven,  mission  house  at,  238


**  German  Commercial  and  Plantation
Association  of  the  Southern  Seas,*’
*9

Germany,  7,  n,  54,  66,  67,  69,  72,  80,
126,  127,  133,  143,  223,  241 ; and
Austria,  2 ; German  colonies,  5 ;
industrial  areas  in,  42;  colonial
policy,  80 ; progressive  industries
of,  104  j foreign  policy  of,  146  ;
missionaries  in  China,  238,  240;
action  in  Shan-tung,  204 ; en-
croachments in  E.  Africa,  240
Gibbon,  7

Giddings,  Prof.,  155 ; Empire  and
Democracy,  165, 169, 199,  200,  226
Giffen,  Sir  R.,  estimate  of  Empire,  18,
52,  53  ; trade  profits,  55  ; invest-
ments, 62


382


INDEX


Gioberti,  160
Gladstone,  W.  E.,  331
Glen  Grey  Act,  268,  271
Goethe,  7

Gold  Coast,  16,  251,  256
Goldie,  Sir  G.  T.,  231
Gooch,  G.  P.,  The  Heart  of  the  Empire ,
161

Gordon,  Gen.,  Memorial  Service,  204,
205

Greece,  1,  165

Grey,  Earl,  1 57,  261 ; Memoir  of
Hubert  Hervey,  159;  and  the
Chartered  Company,  197,  269
Grey,  Sir  G.,  244


Habsbuig,  Rudolph  of,  6
Hague  Conference,  1 71,  239
Hanna,  M.A.,  217
Harcourt,  Sir  W.,  100
Hawaii,  22,  78,  230,  253
Hayti,  227

Henley,  Imperialism , 206
Hensman,  H.,  History  of  Rhodesia , 256
264

Hervey,  Hubert,  1 57,  1 59
Hobhouse,  L.  T.,  Democracy  and
Reaction , 167

Holland,  2,  21,  80,  104,  251
Holland,  Bernard,  1 82 ; Imperium  et
Libertas,  351,  353
Home  Office,  147
Hottentots,  1 58,  253
Hudson's  Bay  Company,  251
Hugo,  Victor,  160

Hungarians,  political  freedom  of  the,  2
Hutchinson,  Mist  E.,  249
Huxley,  T.  H.,  153


Imperial  South  African  Association,  50
India,  26, 118, 122, 137,  225,  236,  242,
256,  274,  286,  292,  295-303;
feudatory  states  in,  16,  244 ; trade
with,  36  5 expansion  in,  50  ; Civil
Service,  50,  118,  140,  225,  287;
government  of,  119,  273  ; British
rule  in,  199

India  and  its  Problems , 296


Industrial  Commission,  269
Ireland,  Alleyne,  Tropical  Coloniza-
. tion>  34*  255,  273
Irish,  political  freedom  of  the,  2
Italy,  1,  2,  143,  165;  Imperialism
checked,  21  ; encroachments  in
East  Africa,  240


Jamaica,  115,  1 19

Japan,  69,  127,  240-242,  307,  315-317
Jebb,  R.,  Colonial  Nationalism , 347
Jefferson,  quoted,  353
J«a,  3

Johannesburg,  207,  246
Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,  338


Kaffir.,  246,  271,  272,  275-276,  278
Kaiser,  Wilhelm  III,  7,160;  speech
at  Hamburg,  146
Kant,  7

Khama's  country,  244
Khartoum,  205

Kidd,  B.,  155,  226;  Control  of  the
Tropics , 227
Kimberley,  268,  270
Kindersley,  Sir  R.,  375
Kingslev,  C.,  157

Kingsley,  Miss  M.  H.,  West  African
Studies , 12 1,  244,  266
Kumasi,  256

Kwang-tung,  missions  in,  238


Lamartine,  7
Lancashire,  39
Laos,  20

Laurier,  Sir  W.,  1 14
Lavater,  7

League  of  Nations  Tear  Book,  369
Lecky,  W.  E.  H.,  Map  of  Life , 208
Leopold,  King,  198
Leroy-Beaulieu,  P.,  20
Lessing,  7

Lewis,  Sir  G.  C.,  Government  of
Dependencies,  120

Liberalism  and  the  Empire,  19,  248, 250
Liberia,  227


383


INDEX


Lilly,  W.  S.,  289,  296,  299
Little,  A.  J.,  305

Lobenguela,  259

Loria,  Achille,  Economic  Foundations  of
Society , 54,  55,  73


Macaulay,  Lord,  192

Machiavelli,  7,  233

Madagascar,  66

Malay  Protected  States,  38

Mallet  and  George,  British  Budgets ,

379

Malta,  ti$

Manchester,  49
Maoris,  158,  253
March-Phillips,  L.,  134
Martin,  M.,  Eastern  India , 292
Martin,  Sir  R.,  256,  267
Massachusetts  Bay  Company,  251
Matabeleland,  125,  264
Mauritius,  1 1 5,  273
Metcalfe,  Sir  C.,  293
Mexico,  attempted  conquest  of,  54
Mill,  James,  51

Mill,  J.  S.,  Representative  Government ,
3,  89,  284

Milner,  Lord,  England  in  Egypt,  123,
263

Molesworth,  Sir  W.}  1 18

Monroe  doctrine,  346

More,  Sir  T.,  46

Morgan,  Pierpoint,  57,  77

Morley  J.,  Life  of  Cobden,  1 50

Morris,  History  of  Colonisation,  20,  22,

Moscow  campaign,  3
Moshesh,  246

Mulhall,  M.  G.,  estimate  of  invest-
ments, 62
Munro,  293

Murray,  Gilbert,  Liberalism  and  the
Empire,  19,  248,  250
Mysore,  244


Naples,  7

Napoleon,  2, 7

Natal,  4,  ”5»  *5°i  258

Native  Races  Committee,  244,  279


Negritos,  258

Netherlands,  the,  7, 42

New  Caledonia,  21 ; French,  250

New  Guinea,  250

New  Zealand,  117, 128

Niger  Company,  Royal,  231

North  America,  329

North  American  Indians,  258

Norway,  2

Novicow,  M.,  La  Federation  de
r Europe,  212


Oceania,  250
Omdurman,  205
Orange  River  Colony,  37,  45
Ottoman  rule,  1


Pan-Slavism,  1,  160
Panama  Canal,  347
Peace  Tear  Book,  378
Pearson,  C.  H.,  National  Life  and
Character , 182

Pearson,  Prof.  K.,  154,  157,  159,  161-
164,173,190

Pemba,  Friends*  Industrial  Mission  at,
249

Persia,  223
Peter  the  Great,  7
Philippine  War,  57
Philippines,  78
Plato,  21  x

Plymouth  Companies,  251
Pobyedonostseff,  161
Poland,  2

Poles,  political  freedom  of  the,  2

Polynesians,  249,  250

Portugal,  21

Priestley,  7

Privy  Council,  119

Poverty  : a Study  of  Town  Life , 86

Pownall,  350

Prussia,  3


Queensland,  servile  labour  in,  115 ;

British  Colony  of,  250


384


INDEX


Rand,  the,  270
Red  Indiant,  253
Reinsch,  P.  S.,  World  Politics,  146
Representative  Government , 3,  284
Rhodes,  Cedi,  5, 61, 151, 201, 202, 217*
231,  268,  345

Rhodesia,  126,  207,  246,  252,  256,  261,
265,  269 ; Rhodesian  mineowners,
228

Ricardo,  D.,  89
Richthofen,  319
Ripon,  Lord,  244

Robinson,  Prof.  E.  van  Dyke,  174,  175

Robinson,  Sir  H.,  346

Rockefeller,  77,  217

Rome,  empire  of,  6

Roosevelt,  President,  77

Rosebery,  Lord,  125, 129, 130, 160, 234

Rosmead,  Lord,  5

Rothschild,  57

Roumania,  1

Rousseau,  7

Rowntree,  B.  S.,  Poverty  : a Study  of
Town  Life,  86
Rudd,  Mr.,  269
Ruikin,  J.,  157,207
Russia,  11,  21-22,  66-67,  69,  127,  223,
240,  241 ; Pan-Slavist  movement
in,  1,  160 ; Moscow  campaign,  3 ;
tyranny  of,  200
Russo-Japanese  War,  316


Sahara,  20

Salisbury,  Lord,  197,  234
Samoa,  230,  232
Schuster,  Sir  C.,  371
Seeley,  Sir  J.  R.,  Expansion  of  Eng-
land, 5,  6,  304
Senegal,  20
Servia,  1
Shan  States,  16
Shan-tung,  66
Sheffield,  39, 49

Siam,  223  ; British  relations  with,  50
Sicily,  7

Sierra  Leone,  266
Sierra  Leone  Company,  251


Sim  cox,  Edith  J.,  Primitive  Civilin «**
tions , 321

Smith,  Goldwin,  216 ; Commonwealth
of  Empire , 301
Soldier’s  Pocket  Book , 135
Somaliland,  21
Soudan,  125-126, 130
South  Africa,  26,  38,  45,  58,  98,  106,
1x8,  124,  128,  129,  137,  209-210,
*53i  *55>  *57-*5«>  *62,  a68>  *7**
*77>  **3>  329>  3545  war  in,  14J,
197,  207;  Chartered  Company,
231,  256

South  Africa  Native  Races  Committee,
244;  Native  Affairs  Commission,
272

South  America,  224
South  Sea  Islands,  230
Spain,  7,  at,  *30
Spencer,  Herbert,  218
Sprigg,  Sir  G.,  262

Statistical  Society,  Journal  of  the,  36,
Statesman's  Tear  Book,  18, 20, 22,  349,


Swat,  16
Sweden,  2
Swiss  Federation,  2


Taine,  H.  A.,  8
Tel-el-Kebir,  55

Theal,  G.  M.,  Beginnings  of  S.  African
History,  21
Thibet,  223
Thurston,  Maj.,  260
Times,  The,  footed,  238,  307
Tongking,  20
Torrens  Act,  259

Townsend,  M.,  Asia  and  Europe , 290,
298, 299, 300

Trantvaal,  23, 37, «,  58, 250, 261, 269,
276,278;  mine,,  272,  275
Trieste,  z
Trinidad,  115,  273
Tropical  Coloninatum,  34,  255,  273
Tunii,  20,  55
Turkey,  108,  200,  224

385


INDEX


Uganda,  126,  236,  252
United  State*,  10,  22,  54,  58,  72,  74,
75. 7«>  79.  IO+>  ***,  **4.  *45.  *53.
*S*>  336


Veddahs,  258
Venezuela,  59

Vico,  7
Villari,  160


Wakefield,  E.  G.,  u8
Wallace,  A.  R.,  153
Waxiristan,  16

Wen  Ching,  7b*  Chinese  Crisis  from
Within  , 204


Werner,  Miu  A.,  279
West  Indiet,  21,  118,  122,  227,  251,
258,  275 ; Report  of  Committee
on,  254

Willcox  and  Ferencxi,  International
Migration , 374
Wilihire,  H.  G.,  84
Windward  Islands,  115
Wolseley,  Lord,  135


Yang-Tse,  240


Zanzibar,  249,  256
Zululand,  279


386


