THE CRISIS OF LIBERALISM: NEW
ISSUES OF DEMOCRACY


rhe  Crisis  of  Liberalism  :
New  Issues  of  Democracy


BY

J. A. HOBSON

AUTHOR OF "THE INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM"; "  THE
KVOLUTION  OF  MODKRN  CAPITALISM,"'tTC.


LONDON :

P.  S.  KING  &  SON

ORCHARD HOUSE,  WESTMINSTER

1909


\


CONTENTS  h(o5


I. DEMOCRACY

The  Crisis  of  Liberalism _ _  _  _  _  i

The  Lords  OR  THE  Referendum  ? -  -  -  -  i?

The  Swiss  Referendum- - -  -  -  -  50

The  Re-statement  of  Democracy -  -  -  -  71

n. LIBERALISM  AND  SOCIALISM

The  Vision  of  Liberalism - -  -  -  -91

Equality  of  Opportunity - -  -  -  -  96

Collectivism  in  Industry - -  -  -  -  114

Socialism  in  Liberalism - -  -  -  -  '33

The  Psychology  of  Public  Enterprise  -  -  -  '39

III. APPLIED  DEMOCRACY

Poverty  : Its  Causes  and  Cures -  -  -  -  '59

The  Higher  Tactics  of  Conservatism  -  -  -176

The  Social  Philosophy  of  Charity  Organisation  -  192

Millionaire  Endowments - -  -  -  -  218

South  Africa  : A  Lesson  of  Empire  -  -  -  233

The  Morality  ok  Nations -----  24.8

The  Task  of  Reconstruction -  -  -  -  261


PREFACE

The  constitutional  fracas  caused  by  the  invasion  of  the
ancient  privileges  of  the  House  of  Commons  by  the
House  of  Lords  well  serves  to  indicate,  though  by  no
means  to  comprehend,  the  crisis  with  which  English
Liberalism  is  confronted.  No  English  Liberal  of  the
'seventies  would  have  deemed  it  possible  that  so
evidently  obsolescent  an  organ  of  Government  as  the
House  of  Lords  should,  within  a  single  generation,  have
come  to  show  so  vigorous  a  spirit  of  encroachment.  Nor
could  it,  had  not  Liberalism  itself  shown  defects  of
vision  and  of  purpose  which  sowed  doubt  and  distraction
iimong  its  followers.

i Before  the  great  new  tasks  of  political  reconstruction
i'g.nd  social  reform,  which  lay  along  the  plain  path  of
'progress,  the  party  quailed. The  first  test  issue,  Home
jRule,  was  the  signal,  not  merely  for  open  schism  and
'jwholesale  desertion,  but  for  reluctance  and  despondency
among  large  sections  of  those  who  formally  accepted  the
policy. For  then  for  the  first  time  Liberalism  was  urged
to  apply  the  principles  of  self-government  in  such  a
manner  as  involved  reformation  in  the  ownership  of
property. The  failure  to  carry  through  this  policy  in
the  mid-'eighties  was  a  humiliation  which  bred  self-
distrust. Though  this  period  synchronised  with  fresh
and  full  disclosures  of  poverty  and  sweating  in  our
towns,  of  the  decay  of  rural  industry  and  population,  of
conflicts  of  capital  and  labour  assuming  graver  and  more
dangerous  aspects.  Liberalism  made  no  serious  endeavour
to  formulate  an  organic  policy  of  social  reform. The


Jd  PREFACE  ^

old  laissez  faire  individualism  was  still  too  dominant  a
doctrine  among  her  intellectual  leaders.

For  over  a  quarter  of  a  century  Liberalism  has
wandered  in  this  valley  of  indecision,  halting,  weak,
vacillating,  divided,  and  concessive.  Not  gaining  ground,
it  yielded  it.  For  the  great  arch-enemy  of  the  age,
Imperialism,  found  a  too  facile  entrance  among  the,
ranks  of  her  dejected  followers,  bringing  as  its  natural
ally  Militarism.  No  one,  clearly  analysing  the  play  of
modern  forces,  can  doubt  that  the  course  of  British
Imperialism  which,  swelling  up  in  the  late  'eighties  and
dominating  our  Asiatic  and  African  policy,  found  its
climax  and  its  direct  expression  in  the  Boer  War,  was
exploited  by  Conservatism  to  break  and  dissipate  the
new  forces  of  social  reform  which  were  beginning  to
assert  themselves  in  Liberalism.  The  diversion  was  only
too  successful. '  By  the  close  of  the  century  this
Imperialism,  composed  of  force,  finance,  and  false'
philanthropy,  now  masquerading  as  defence,  now  as
mission,  now  as  commercial  policy,  had  secretly  eaten  its'
way  into  the  vitals  of  the  Liberal  Party.  The  connivance,
condonance,  nay  the  active  participation,  of  Liberals  in
the  wreckage  of  South  Africa  was  a  revelation  of  tha
measure  of  this  betrayal  of  Liberal  principles.  What\
wonder  if  the  champions  of  reaction  should  have  thought
it  an  easy  task  to  recapture  one  by  one  the  constitutional
and  economic  positions  wrested  from  them  in  the
struggles  of  the  nineteenth  century !  Why  should  not  a
nation  which  had'  yielded  so  far  to  Imperialism  and  j
Militarism  be  forced  to  accept  their  natural  ally
Protection,  dressed  out  with  Imperial  trappings  as  its
policy  of  national  finance .?

Shaken  by  the  Free  Trade  victory  of  1906,  the
confidence  of  Conservatism  is  not  broken.  Its  energetic
leaders  do  not  believe  that  Liberalism  contains  within
itself  that  sincerity  of  purpose,  that  clearness  of  vision,
and  that  solidarity  of  movement,  which  will  enable  it
to  carry  out  a  vigorous,  comprehensive,  and  popular


"^^^  //,  PREFACE '^


t)^


IX


policy.  Recognising  among  its  chief  counsellors  men
who  ten  years  ago  betrayed  the  older  Liberalism,  they  .
do  not  accredit  it  with  audacity  or  energy  enough  to  V
travel  far,  or  willingly,  along  the  road  of  a  newer  and  _j|
more  hazardous  Liberalism.  These  men,  they  hold,  have
been  partly  forced  by  circumstances,  partly  manoeuvred
by  more  advanced  companions,  into  a  Social-Radicalism
which  does  not  command  their  inteTTe'cfual  assent  or  their
genuine  sympathy,  and  which  they  will  be  prepared  to
abandon  when  a  favourable  opportunity  presents  itself.  i^O'
Every  really  dangerous  onrush  of  progressive  forces  has
always  been  checked  by  a  free  desertion  of  moderate
Liberals  to  the  enemy.  As  the  new  social-economic
policy  opens  out  into  an  "  attack  on  property  "  there  will
be  a  further  shedding  of  "  the  Whigs."  Although  the
emergency  of  a  Free  Trade  Party,  committed  by  its  own
cowardice  to  heavy  expenditure  on  armaments,  and  by
opportunist  pledges  to  large  measures  of  social  reform,
has  compelled  resort  to  a  "  revolutionary "  Budget,
this  advanced  economic  and  financial  policy  does  not,  in
the  judgment  of  Conservatives,  represent  the  accepted
Liberalism  of  the  future.  Nor,  in  their  judgment,  will
Liberalism  be  able  to  arouse  and  sustain  that  firm
popular  faith  in  its  future  without  which  it  is  not
possible  to  do  great  works.

It is this disbelief in the spiritual strength of
Liberalism, thus  derived, that  explains  why  Conser-
vatism, defeated  in  its  assault  upon  the  fortress  of  Free
Trade,  rallies  again  to  a  more  formidable  attack  upon  the^  "^^
principle  of  popular  representative  government.  ^

To  many  Liberals  this  movement  of  the  Lords  seems
wanton  folly.  But  it  is  not.  It  is  a  half-conscious
recognition  of  the  intrinsic  or  essential  nature  of  the
new  Liberalism,  which  durinq-  the  last  few  years  has
moved  forward  quickly  from  the  shadowy  background
of  the  political  stage  towards  actuality  in  statecraft.  The
reason,  a  quite  sufficient  one,  why  Conservatives  have
decided  to  stake  the  very  constitution  in  the  hazard  of


X  PREFACE

the  present  fight,  Is  that  they  recognise  in  the  New
Liberalism,  to  which  they  think  the  Government  has
been  reluctantly  committed  by  Mr.  George  and  Mr.
Churchill,  the  beginnings  of  an  unceasing  and  an
enlarging  attack  upon  the  system  of  private  property
and  private  industrial  enterprise.  Actuated  rather  by  a
true  instinct  of  self-defence  than  by  a  fully  reasoned
policy,  they  have  decided  to  fight  this  New  Liberalism
before  it  has  captured  the  firm  adhesion  of  the  party
and  the  imagination  of  the  people.  In  the  valuation
clauses  of  the  Budget,  the  higher  graduation  of  estate
duties  and  income  tax,  and  in  the  explicit  assertion  of  a
scrutiny  into  '  origin  '  of  wealth  as  a  test  of  taxable
capacity,  they  read  the  handwriting  on  the  wall.  When
the  essential  distinction  between  earned  and  unearned
income  and  property  is  once  clearly  accepted,  not  merely
as  a  theory  but  as  a  first  principle  of  public  policy,  to  be
applied,  progressively,  as  an  instrument  for  financing
*  social  reform,'  resistance  may  be  too  late.  From  the
standpoint  of  the  '  vested  interests,'  as  from  that  of
Liberalism,  the  situation  is  indeed  '  critical,'  and  the
crisis  is  even  more  momentous  than  is  indicated  by  the
struggle  for  the  '  veto.'  The  forces  of  Conservatism
must  use  every  weapon  in  their  armoury,  constitutional,
legal,  electoral,  educational;everyartof  menace,  cajolery,
misrepresentation,  and  corruption,  which  their  control  of
a  party  machinery,  landlordism,  '  the  trade,'  finance,  the
Press,  the  Church,  '  Society,'  '  sport,'  the  '  services,'
place  at  their  disposal,  will  be  plied  with  unexampled
ardour.  The  House  of  Lords  only  forms  the  first  line
of  trenches.  Behind  it  lies  a  whole  row  of  defences,
represented  by  the  laws  and  the  judiciary,  the  bureau-
cracy, the  Court,  the  electoral  machinery  (favouring  at
every  turn  the  power  of  the  purse),  the  secret  unrepre-
sentative character  and  working  of  Cabinet  Government,
the  maxiipulation  of  electoral  opinion  through  the  public
house,  the  Press,  the  pulpit,  and  those  other  instruments
of  popular  instruction  which  depend  for  their  financial


PREFACE  xi

support upon the charity  of  the  propertied classes.

All  these  forces  will  be  brought  into  action  to  meet ^  •
the  New  Liberalism,  which,  in  the  name  of  '  social
reform,'  proceeds  to  the  attack  upon  '  monopolies  '  and
unearned  property.

Will  Liberalism,  reformed  and  dedicated  to  this  new,
enlarged,  and  positive  task  of  realising  liberty,  carry  its
adherents  with  unbroken  ranks  with  persistent  vigour
along  this  march  of  social  progress  ?

The  real  crisis  of  Liberalism  lies  here,  not  in  the
immediate  capacity  to  resist  the  insolent  encroachment
of  the  unrepresentative  House,  but  in  the  intellectual
and  moral  ability  to  accept  and  execute  a  positive
progressive  policy  which  involves  a  new  conception  of  /
the  functions  of  the  State.

It  is  true  that  no  sudden  reversal  of  policy  is  required  :
the  old  individualism  has  long  since  been  replaced  by
various  enlargements  of  public  activity.  But  hitherto
these  interferences  and  novel  functions  of  the  State  have  ^
been  mostly  unconnected  actions  of  an  opportunist
character :  no  avowed  principle  or  system  has  underlain
them.  This  opportunism,  this  studied  disavowal  of
ulterior  meaning,  disarmed  much  opposition  in  the  ranks
of  Liberalism  :  so  long  as  "  Socialistic  "  measures  were
shown  as  single  moves  in  a  party  game,  played  by  both
sides,  little  offence  was  caused.

Our  crisis  consists  in  the  substitution  of  an  organic
for  an  opportunist  policy,  the  adoption  of  a  vigorous,
definite,  positive  policy  of  social  reconstruction,
involving  important  modifications  in  the  legal  and  ^
economic  institutions  of  private  property  and  private
industry.  For  any  faithful  analysis  of  our  existing
economic  system  will  show  that  nothing  less  can  fulfil
the  demand,  which  Mr.  Churchill  has  expressed,  that
"  property — be  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  mass  of
the  people  with  ideas  of  reason  and  justice."

No  one  who  follows  the  new  crystallisation  of  Liberal
policy,  as  displayed  in  the  anti-destitution  and  insurance


xii  PREFACE

proposals  of  the  Government,  to  which  substance  is
already  given  in  Old  Age  Pensions,  Wages  Boards,  and
Labour  Exchanges,  in  the  public  provision  for  the
development  of  our  natural  resources,  in  the  Small
Holdings  and  Town  Planning  policy,  and  in  the  financial
claims  of  the  State  to  participation  in  "  unearned
increments,"  can  fail  to  recognise  a  coherency  of  purpose,
an  organic  plan  of  social  progress,  which  implies  a
new  consciousness  of  Liberal  statecraft.

The  full  implications  of  this  movement  may  not  be
clearly  grasped,  but  Liberalism  is  now  formally  com-
mitted to  a  task  which  certainly  involves  a  new  conception
of  the  State  in  its  relation  to  the  individual  life  and  to
private  enterprise.  That  conception  is  not  Socialism,  in
any  accredited  meaning  of  that  term,  though  implying  a
considerable  amount  of  increased  public  ownership  and
control  of  industry.  From  the  standpoint  which  best
presents  its  continuity  with  earlier  Liberalism,  it  appears
as  a  fuller  appreciation  and  realisation  of  individual
V)..  liberty  contained  in  the  provision  of  equal  opportunities
for  self-development.  But  to  this  individual  standpoint
must  be  joined  a  just  apprehension  of  the  social,  viz.,
the  insistence  that  these  claims  or  rights  of  self-develop-/
ment  be  adjusted  to  the  sovereignty  of  social  welfarer''^

How  far  the  historical  Liberal  Party  in  the  country
is  capable  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  re-orientation
demanded  for  the  successful  undertaking  of  this
new  career,  is  the  fundamental  issue  at  stake.  In
most  European  countries  Liberalism  has  failed,  because
it  has  tied  itself  too  rigorously  to  a  set  of  narrow
intellectual  principles.  Political  parties  in  this  country
have  never  been  dominated  to  the  same  extent  by  ideas  :
this  logical  weakness,  we  often  boast,  perhaps  with
reason,  has  been  a  source  of  practical  strength.  It
implies  at  any  rate  an  adaptability,  a  plasticity,  perhaps
an  instinctive  virtue  of  adjustment,  that  may  enable
British  Liberalism  to  avoid  the  shipwreck  which  Con-
tinental Liberalism  has  suffered  when  it  was  driven  on


^


PREFACE  xiii

the submerged reefs of  the economic problem in
politics.

This  volume,  though  consisting  of  articles  contributed
to  various  publications  during  recent  years,  has  been
composed  with  the  definite  object  of  relating  the  present
constitutional  struggle  to  the  larger  and  more
important  issue  of  the  future  of  Liberalism  in  this
country.  In  the  First  Part,  I  seek  to  indicate  the  place
which  the  fight  around  the  Lords'  veto  occupies  in  the
larger  struggle  for  democratic  government.  The
destruction  of  the  veto  must  be  accompanied  or  followed
by  other  important  reforms  in  our  electoral  institutions,
and  by  a  measure  which  shall  associate  the  people  more
directly  with  the  art  of  government,  by  assigning  to  it
that  power  of  mandate  which  the  Lords  falsely  pretend
that  it  possesses.  The  case  for  a  Referendum  is  set
forth  with  some  detail  of  argument,  and  the  experience
of  Switzerland  is  cited  in  support  of  it  as  a  serviceable
complement  of  representative  government.  Recognising
that  behind  the  issues  of  Constitutional  Reform  lies  the
policy  of  Social  Reform,  whose  financial  implications
have  precipitated  the  present  struggle  between  the
Houses,  I  have  devoted  the  Second  Part  of  the  volume
to  the  relations  between  New  Liberalism  and  Socialism,
indicating  the  chief  developments  of  the  modern  State
required  to  protect  citizens  against  the  abuses  of  property
and  of  private  industrial  enterprise,  and  to  furnish
substantial  equality  of  economic  and  intellectual
opportunity.

The  last  section  is  devoted  to  a  discussion  of  certain
broader  questions,  in  part  political,  in  part  intellectual
and  ethical,  which  are  bound  up  with  the  substance  of
democracy,  such  as  the  function  of  private  charity,
organised  or  free,  in  its  relation  to  problems  of  Poverty
and  Education,  and  the  new  issues  of  Imperialism  and
national  morality,  with  their  bearings  upon  the  control
of  lower  or  of  backward  peoples.


/


xiv  PREFACE

The  future  of  Liberalism  depends  upon  the  willing-
ness and  the  ability  of  its  professed  adherents  to  confront
/  j  courageously  and  hopefully  these  large  demands  for  the
restatement  of  the  Liberal  creed,  and  its  realisation  in
the  new  economic  and  moral  world  opening  out  before  us.

To  the  Editor  of  the  Manchester  Guardian^  The
Nation^  the  Contemporary  Review,  and  the  English
Review  1  am  indebted  for  kind  permission  to  republish
articles  contributed  to  these  publications.

J.  A.  HOBSON.

Limpsfield,

December  ist,  1909-


Part I
DEMOCRACY


Chapter I
THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Readers  of  Lord  Morley's  "  Life  of  Gladstone  "  will
understand  that  it  was  possible  for  a  great  Liberal
statesman  of  the  Victorian  age  to  conduct  a  long
political  career  of  large  and  fruitful  effort  without
confronting  in  its  full  shape  any  of  those  great  social-
economic  issues  which  now  in  this,  as  in  every  other
civilised  country,  occupy  the  front  places  on  the  stage
of  politics.  The  tenure  of  land  in  Ireland  did  indeed
engage  his  serious  attention,  but  the  hardly  less  urgent
problems  of  rural  and  urban  ownership  in  Great  Britain
never  really  occupied  his  field  of  vision,  while  con-
structive legislation  coping  with  pauperism,  sweating,
unemployment,  old-age  destitution,  or  engaging  the
State  in  constructive  work  for  the  development  of  the
productive  resources  of  our  land  and  labour,  lay
outside  his  conception  of  practical  or  even  legitimate
politics.  Nay,  the  whole  conception  of  the  State
disclosed  by  these  new  issues,  as  an  instrument  for  the
active  adaptation  of  the  economic  and  moral  environ-
ment to  the  new  needs  of  individual  and  social  life,  by
securing  full  opportunities  of  self-development  and
social  service  for  all  citizens,  was  foreign  to  the
Liberalism  of  the  last  generation.  Now,  in  England,  as
elsewhere,  these  positive,  constructive  and  primarily
economic  proposals  are  clamouring  for  consideration.^
The,  old  laissez-faire  Liberalism  is  dead.  Its^^rly
demise  might  indeed  have  been  predicted  from  the  time
when  Cobden  recognised  the  necessity  ©f"  *' freeing  "


4  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  U-)V

the  land  of  England  as  he  had  helped  to  "  free  "  her
trade.  For  the  effective  liberation  of  the  land,  as  we
now  perceive,  involves  large  permanent  measures  of
public  control,  and  brings  in  its  wake  a  long  series  of
further  enlargements  of  State  activity  in  transport,
credit,  housing,  and  other  matters.  The  slow  educa-
tion which  the  land  question  has  conducted  upon  the
nature  of  monopoly  and  socially-created  values,  was
bound  in  time  to  bear  fruit  in  a  growing  recognition  of
similar  elements  of  monopoly  and  social  values  inherent
not  only  in  liquor  licences  and  other  legalised  mono-
polies but  everywhere  throughout  the  industrial  sys-
tem where  competition  is  impeded  or  estopped.  So,
quite  apart  from  any  theoretic  Socialism,  there  has  been
formed  in  the  public  mind  a  firm  conviction  that,
wherever  these  obstructions  to  economic  liberty  are
found,  the  State  must  exert  its  powers,  either  to  restore
free  competition,  or,  where  that  is  impracticable  or
unwise,  to  substitute  a  public  monopoly  in  which  all
share  for  a  private  monopoly  the  profits  of  which  pass!
to  a  favoured  few.

The  New  Liberalism  has  absorbed  this  teaching  and
is  preparing  to  put  it  into  practice.  '  These  legal  or
economic  privileges,  which  impede  or  cancel  competi-
tion, are  also  recognised  to  be  responsible  for  the
degrading  toil  and  poverty  of  the  lower  strata  of  our
population  and  the  equally  degrading  idleness  and
luxury  of  the  upper  strata,  the  two  counterparts  of  the
same  economic  facts.  These  truths  are  constantly
becoming  clearer  to  a  larger  number  of  our  citizens
and  are  generating  increased  energy  for  political  reform.

But  when  the  people,  possessed  by  this  new  energy,
seek  to  realise  their  objects  by  political  endeavour,  they
continually  find  themiselves  thwarted  by  certain  seen
and  other  unseen  obstacles.  The  ^demands  even  for
redress  of  crying  grievances  are  denied,  delayed,  or
side-tracked,  or  else  conceded  in  some  trivial,  unsatisfy-
ing form. Hence  a  huge  waste  of  reform  energy,  bitter  |


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  5

disappointment,  and  a  sense  of  impotency  which  more
than  all  else  paralyses  the  popular  spirit  of  reform.

What  are  these  obstacles?  For  the  most  part  they
consist  of  economic  interests  firmly  entrenched  at
certain  coigns  oTvanfage  along  the  march  of  political
achievement.  Every  one  of  the  social-economic  reforms
to  which  I  have  alluded  has  to  fight  its  way  through  a
series  of  electoral,  legislative,  administrative  and  judicial
processes  in  any  one  of  which  it  is  liable  to  meet  the
open  or  the  secret  opposition  of  a  powerful  party,
class  or  clique  which  believes  the  proposal  to  be
injurious  to  its  interests.  Sometimes  this  opposition  of
an  economic  interest  is  complicated  and  screened  by
some  other  feeling  or  judgment,  of  a  social,  patriotic
or  even  a  reliq-ious  character,  which  serves  to  hide  even
from  those  who  are  the  strongest  opponents  the  naked
force  of  the  self-interest  which  directs  their  opposition.

Now  the  main  importance  of  the  present  crisis  in
English  politics  consists  in  the  fact  that  a  strong  search-
light has  thrown  out  in  the  most  vivid  colours  one
persistent  barrier  to  reform.  The  House  of  Lords  has
come  out  into  the  open.  Under  the  thin  and  quite
ridiculous  pretence  of  thought-reading  the  national
will,  they  have  substituted  the  economic  and  social
interests  of  their  order  for  the  national  welfare  which
they  profess  to  serve.  Every  measure  sent  to  them
by  the  Commons  which  directly  affected  property  or
the  control  of  property,  especially  in  land,  houses,  and
licences,  those  forms  of  property  most  strongly  repre-
sented in  their  House,  they  have  either  destroyed  or
mutilated,  and  encouraged  by  success  they  have  even
dared,  in  the  defence  of  their  property,  to  invade  the
region  of  financial  legislation  reserved  by  long  constitu-
tional usage  for  the  sole  control  of  the  House  of
Commons.

The  first  effect  of  this  action  has  been  to  convince
social  and  economic  reformers  of  the  folly  of  endeavour-
ing to  pluck  the  fruits  of  democracy  before  the  tree


6  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

which  should  bear  them  has  been  shaped  and  grown.
The  false  pretence  that  democracy  exists,  has  proved
the  subtlest  defence  of  privilege.  The  belief  that  the
popular  will  is  realisable  effectively  through  the  repre-
sentative system  in  England,  France  or  the  United
States,  has  caused  a  greater  waste  of  reform  energy
than  any  other  single  cause.  For  so  long  as  this  belief
prevails,  reformers  will  refuse  to  undertake  the  laborious
work  of  perfecting  the  constitutional  machinery  of
democracy.  In  England,  as  elsewhere  where  a  fervid
passion  of  social  reform  has  arisen,  reformers  have  been
indignant  at  the  suggestion  that  it  may  be  more
economical  to  postpone  the  immediate  realisation  of
their  proposals  until  they  have  removed  obstructions
in  electoral  and  legislative  institutions.  They  are  tired,
they  say,  of  tinkering  with  political  machinery;  a
popular  franchise  already  exists,  the  people  can  now  get
their  will  if  they  stand  together  and  shout  loud  enough.
Now  all  who  have  made  a  close  study  of  the  actual
operation  of  the  so-called  democratic  machinery,  in
Europe  or  in  America,  perceive  that  this  view  is  false.
Ostrogorski's  study  of  the  mechanics  of  the  party
system  in  the  United  States  and  in  Great  Britain  shows
to  what  perilous  abuses  the  forms  of  representative
government  are  exposed,  and  how  feebly  and  irregularly
the  real  spirit  of  democracy  pulses  through  them.  The
defects  of  representation  are  not  the  same  in  the  two
countries.  In  America  it  is  the  "  spoils,"  corrupting
the  party  system  from  the  national  convention  down  to
the  ward  "  primary,"  and  the  rigours  of  a  written  con-
stitution which  preclude  amendment.  In  England  it
is  the  refusal  to  give  completeness  to  the  representative
forms  and  to  provide  democratic  safeguards  against
abuses  of  them.

The  experience  of  our  Liberal  Government  during
the  last  four  years  has  forced  upon  us  an  era  of  consti-
tutional reform.  But  there  is  even  yet  little  realisation
of  the  magnitude  and  the  variety  of  the  constitutional


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  7

changes  that  must  ensue  if  democratic  government  is
to  be  achieved  in  Great  Britain.  So  deeply  ingrained
has  been  the  very  principle  of  Opportunism  in  our
politics,  that  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the  great  majority  of
our  reformers  at  present  ask  nothing  more  than  the
destruction  of  the  veto  of  the  House  of  Lords,  while
many  even  would  be  well  contented  with  such  structural
reforms  of  the  Second  Chamber  as  would  subordinate
the  hereditary  to  a  new  representative  element  drawn
from  the  official  and  professional  classes.  Though
feeling  for  the  moment  may  run  high  against  the
insolence  of  a  body  of  landowners  and  rich  men  pre-
suming to  encroach  upon  the  prerogatives  of  the
representative  House,  there  will  be  serious  risk,
after  the  preliminary  battle  has  been  won  by  the
Commons,  of  a  compromise  which  shall  still  leave  an
effective  veto  upon  ordinary  legislation  to  a  sham
representative  Second  Chamber.  When  the  first  line
of  trenches  has  been  carried  by  the  democratic  attack,
a  stout  rally  will  be  made  for  a  reformed  Second
Chamber,  retaining  the  same  constitutional  powers  as
the  present  House  of  Lords,  only  abandoning  all  claim
to  interference  with  finance.  A  whole  crop  of  specious
proposals  will  be  raised  for  a  Senate  of  great,  wise,  and
eminent  persons,  not  elected  by  the  direct  vote  of  the
people,  but  appointed  by  methods  which  will  ensure  a
permanent  majority  of  members  who,  by  instinct,
training,  economic  interests  and  social  connections,  can
be  relied  upon  to  defend  vested  interests  and  to  check
the  "  extravagances  "  of  a  popularly  elected  chamber.
But  suppose  more  drastic  counsels  should  prevail,  and
that  no  reformed  Second  Chamber  should  be  left  with
an  efi^ective  veto.  Shall  we  then  have  grot  real  demo-
cracy  ?  Will  the  great  measures  of  social  reform  which
are  pressing  move  forward  surely  and  swiftly  towards
achievement  ?  Not  at  all.  There  can  be  no  more
foolish  error  than  to  represent  the  veto  of  the  House  of
Lords  as  the  only,  or  even  the  chief  barrier  to  the  free


8  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

realisation  of  the  will  of  the  people  in  this  country.
The  true  importance  of  this  present  crisis  is  that  it  must
furnish  an  introduction  to  the  far  larger  task  of  restating
the  principles  of  democracy  and  recasting  the  forms
which  shall  express  them.  To  this  task  the  destruction
of  the  Lords'  veto  is  but  the  prelude.  Suppose  this
destruction  is  accomplished,  in  what  case  does  demo-
cracy stand  ^  In  name  we  have  a  single-chamber
Government,  an  all-powerful  elected  House  of  Com-
mons, the  chosen  representatives  of  the  people.  These
men  are  supposed  to  initiate  and  determine  legislation,
to  control  the  executive  government,  and  to  decide  what
revenue  shall  be  raised  and  how  it  shall  be  spent.  Do
they  really  and  effectively  exercise  these  powers.?  Not
at  all.  Though  much  has  been  said  of  the  very  real
encroachments  made  by  the  House  of  Lords  upon  the
power  of  the  Commons  during  Liberal  Administrations
of  the  last  quarter  of  a  century,  little  attention  has
been  drawn  to  the  continuous  encroachments  made
upon  the  privileges  of  the  House  of  Commons  during
the  same  period  by  the  Cabinet.  "  The  English
system,"  writes  Professor  Lowell,*  "  seems  to  be
approximating  more  and  more  to  a  condition  where
the  Cabinet  initiates  everything,  frames  its  own  policy,
submits  that  policy  to  a  searching  criticism  in  the
House,  and  adopts  such  suggestions  as  it  deems  best;
but  where  the  House,  after  all  this  has  been  done,
must  accept  the  acts  and  proposals  of  the  Government
as  they  stand,  or  pass  a  vote  of  censure,  and  take  the
chances  of  a  change  of  Ministry  or  a  dissolution."
Nor  does  this  express  the  full  measure  of  Cabinet
control.  For  the  party  whip,  often  enforced  by  pressure
through  the  local  caucus  and  the  use  of  party  funds,
commonly  confines  all  "  searching  criticism,"  except  in
rare  instances  of  independence,  to  the  Opposition,
relieving  the  ordinary  "  follower  "  of  the  Government

•"The  Government  of  England,"  vol.  i.  p.  327,


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  9

from  any  real  part  in  shaping  the  measures  to  which  he
gives  his  formal  assent.  The  ordinary  Parliamentarian,
it  matters  not  upon  which  side  of  the  House  he  sits,
has  virtually  no  opportunity  of  introducing  any  Bill
with  a  chance  of  carrying  it  into  law;  the  time  placed
at  the  disposal  of  private  Members  has  been  continually
reduced;  the  liberty  of  taking  part  effectively  in
debate  has  been  curtailed  at  the  discretion  of  the
Government;  while  large  restrictions  have  been  placed
upon  the  ventilation  of  grievances  by  questions.  Almost
the  whole  time  and  energy  of  legislation  in  the
Commons  are  placed  at  the  well-nigh  absolute  disposal
of  the  Cabinet  which  decides  what  measures  shall  be
introduced,  what  time  shall  be  allotted  to  them,  what
portions  of  them  shall  be  discussed  adequately  or  at
all,  and  which  shall  be  dropped  or  presented  to  the
House  of  Lords.  On  foreign  affairs  the  House  of
Commons  has  become  virtually  impotent.  The  Foreign
Secretary  needs  rarely  appear  in  the  House  of  Commons,
needs  seldom  answer  questions,  and  can  take  the  most
-revolutionary  steps  in  foreign  relations  without  seeking
even  the  formal  assent  of  the  representatives  of  the
people  and  without  troubling  himself  to  give  them
full  information  afterwards.  Since  foreign  policy
determines  in  the  main  our  naval  and  military  expendi-
ture and  policy,  this  autocracy  in  foreign  affairs
virtually  restricts  the  power  of  the  Commons  over
finance  and,  through  finance,  over  the  whole  range  of
domestic  policy.

I  am  well  aware  of  the  explanations  that  are  given
for  this  enlaro^ement  of  Cabinet  control.  The  com-
plexity  of  the  modern  work  of  central  government  is
such,  we  are  told,  that  the  most  rigorous  economy  of
the  time  of  Parliament  is  needed  to  execute  it :  the
new  Cabinet  control  is  not  a  planned  invasion  of  old
parliamentary  liberties  but  an  expedient  necessary  for
the  conduct  of  public  business.  This  may  well  be  true,
but  none  the  less  the  process  marks  a  diminution  of


lo  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

representative  government  and  a  failure  of  democracy.
For  the  shifting  of  control  from  the  House  of  Commons
to  the  Cabinet  must  at  best  be  taken  to  mean  the
functioning  of  the  popular  will  at  two  removes  instead
of  one.  But  it  means  more  than  this.  The  Cabinet  is
seldom  a  just  reflection  or  representation  of  the
majority  of  the  Commons  in  which  the  Government
is  nominally  vested.  Though  it  must  be  sufficiently
representative  to  command  the  faithful  allegiance  of
the  party,  that  consideration,  interpreted  in  the  light  of
the  facts  adduced  above,  adinits  considerable  licence.
No  one  would,  for  example,  contend  that  the  Liberal
majority  returned  at  the  polls  four  years  ago  would  have
chosen  a  Cabinet  composed,  as  was  the  actual  Cabinet,
if  a  party  vote  by  secret  ballot  had  been  taken.

Thus  the  great  practical  increase  of  Cabinet  power
in  legislative  and  executive  work,  however  expedient
for  other  reasons,  must  be  regarded  as  a  reduction  of
popular  self-government.  In  point  of  fact  the  sub-
stance of  this  grievance  is  even  heavier  than  the  form.
For  rank,  social  position,  and  tradition  still  weigh  so
heavily,  even  in  Liberal  Administrations,  that  a
comparatively  small  number  of  ruling  families  are
always  largely,  often  dominantly,  represented  upon  the
front  bench,  without  real  reference  to  personal  ability.
Though  such  a  statement  is  necessarily  insusceptible  of
proof,  no  one  acquainted  with  the  personnel  of  recent
Governments  is  likely  to  dispute  it.  It  implies  a  very
real  distortion  of  representative  government.

It  will  doubtless  be  said,  and  private  Members  often
comfort  themselves  by  repeating  it,  that  though  the
Cabinet  does  make  all  important  decisions,  it  con-
siders and  consults  the  party,  listens  to  deputations  of
Members  and  moulds  its  policy  accordingly.  Here,  of
course,  we  are  again  in  the  region  of  immeasurable
influences.  But  while  a  Government  with  a  small
majority  must  evidently  be  careful  not  to  alienate  votes,
a  situation which  gives importance to cave-men or


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  ii

"  kickers,"  a  strong  Government  is  able  to  defy  any
ordinary  recalcitrance  and  usually  browbeats  grumblers
into  submission.  And  the  whole  tendency  of  our  party
system,  working  upon  the  present  exaggerated  swing
of  the  electoral  pendulum,  favours  strong  Governments.

But  it  is  not  alone  the  encroachments  of  Cabinet
rule  that  have  curtailed  the  authority  and  liberty  of
the  House  of  Commons. The  caucus  system  and  the
growth  of  organisations  for  the  promotion  of  particular
reforms,  or  for  the  furtherance  of  special  trading  or
other  interests, have, by exacting pledges, gone far
towards changing a Member of Parliament from a J^
representative  into  a  delegate. Now,  while  genuine  'i.  -■
delegacy  is  a  defensible  mode  by  which  the  popular
will  may  obtain  expression,  the  sort  of  delegacy  now
imposed  is  definitely  undemocratic. Under  it small
well-organised  local  minorities  are  freauently  enabled  to
obtain  a  body  of  pledged  support  in  Parliament  far  in ,  ,/
excess  of  that  to  which  their  numbers  entitle them. 0
The  illusory  character  of  many  of  these  pledges,  though S^
averting  the  worst  consequences  of  this  abuse  of  our
representative  system,  does  not  prevent  them  from  exer- j^y^
cising  a  most  demoralising  influence  upon  the  course
of  politics. Moreover,  this  practice  excludes  from  Parlia-
mentary life  many  men  whose  independent  character
forbids  them  to  give  the  pledges  necessary  to  secure
election.

Were  the  proposed  destruction  of  the  Lords'  veto
to  leave  the  House  of  Commons  vested  with  supreme
authority  of  government,  a  large  stride  towards  effective
democracy  might  seem  to  have  been  taken.  By  securing
an  extended  franchise,  shorter  parliaments  and  adetp:iate
refoi'ms  of  electoral  machinery,  the  representative
assembly  might  at  least  become  a  genuine  expression
of  the  popular  will.  There  would  no  doubt  be  many
even  among  Liberals,  distrustful  of  uni-cameral
government,  where  the  absence  of  a  written  constitution
would  confer  upon  a  single  chamber,  possibly  elected  on


12  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

some  heated  party  issue,  an  unlimited  power  to  change
the  very  foundations  and  fabric  of  government.  But
this  danger  is  under  the  present  system  greatly  enhanced
by  the  fact  that  the  mere  abolition  of  the  veto  would
establish  not  the  supremacy  of  the  House  of  Commons,
but  a  Cabinet  autocracy  qualified  in  certain  electoral
conditions  by  the  power  of  some  enclave  or  "  cave  "  in  a
party.  There  are  circumstances  under  which  this  state
of  affairs  might  easily  lead  to  Cassarism,  where  a
magnetic  party  leader  either  succeeded  in  capturing  the
imagination  of  the  populace  or  in  engineering  a
supremacy  among  competing  politicians.

The  consideration  of  the  wider  issues  of  democracy
cannot  be  postponed.  Though  in  pursuance  of  our
customary  method  of  dealing  with  "  one  thing  at  a
time  "  we  may  first  proceed  to  abolish  the  Lords'  veto,
we  cannot  halt  there.  That  change,  as  we  perceive,
will  not  leave  other  things  as  they  were,  but  will  demand
a  thorough-going  many-sided  reconstruction  of  our
representative  system,  unless  we  wish  to  abandon  the
cause  of  political  self-government.

Several  reforms  are  needed,  besides  the  destruction
of  the  Lords'  veto,  in  order  to  convert  the  present
representative  system  into  an  effective  instrument  of
democracy.  The  House  of  Commons  must  be  made
more  accurately  representative,  and  representative
government  must  be  supplemented  by  a  measure  of
direct  democratic  control.  In  order  to  make  the  House
of  Commons  representative  of  the  will  of  the  people,
it  must  be  in  direct  and  frequent  contact  with  the  needs,
aspirations,  and  experience  of  the  whole  people.
Though  capacity  to  serve  the  State  is  the  true  basis  of
the  suffrage,  and  this  capacity  must  be  greater  in  some
citizens  than  in  others,  no  safe  method  of  enforcing
this  theoretically  justifiable  discrimination  is  discover-
able. Adult  suffrage  is  the  only  practicable  expedient
for  securing  the  required  contact  between  representa-
tives and  people. In  every  country  where  democracy


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  13

has  taken  root  the  basis  of  representation  has  broadened
towards  this  shape.  The  admission  of  women  to  an
equal  voice  with  men  thus  needs  no  separate  argument.
It  inheres  in  the  very  nature  of  democracy.  For  a
democracy  maimed  by  the  exclusion  of  the  direct
representation  of  the  needs,  aspirations,  and  experience
of  half  the  people  would  be  a  mere  androcracy.

With  the  same  object  of  rendering  the  House  of
Commons  a  truer  expression  of  the  popular  will,  some
form of proportional representation must be incor-
porated in  our  electoral  system. Three  definite  evils
are  traceable  to  the  defective  working  of  the  present
system. First,  there  is  the  party  majority  in  the  House
of  Commons  exaggerated  beyond  all  proper  proportion
to  the  aggregate  electoral  majority  in  the  country,  and
lending  itself,  as  we  have  seen,  to  Cabinet  autocracy.
Secondly,  there  is  the  abuse  of  pledges  Imposed  upon
candidates by minorities which, under proportional
representation  with  fairly  large  areas,  would  spend  their
electoral  strength  upon  electing  a  few  zealous  supporters
of  their  special  causes. Thirdly,  there  is  the  loss  to ., .
the  State  of  many  of  her  ablest  and  most  honourable  --^  \j)*'
legislators  who  cannot  hope  or  desire  to  obtain  election \S^ .
under the existing system of polling. The single ,,  ^
transferable  vote,  applied  in  areas  of  sufficient  size  to -^ JJ
enable  every  considerable  minority  to  be  represented,  is
so  simple  and  so  manifestly  just  a  reform  that  it  could
not  fail  to  win  popular  acceptance,  if  a  fair  opportunity
were  secured  for  the  recasting  of  our  electoral  machinery, ^i/  ,^

If  to  these  major  reforms  we  added  the  destruction -J-
of  the  present  plural  vote  and  the  payment  of  members •
and  electoral  expenses  out  of  public  funds,  we  should  ^  ] \
have  secured  the  forms  of  sound  representation. But  ' ,  ^^-^
two  democratic  requirements  would  still  remain  unful-
filled. Though proportional representation would
mitigate  the  tyranny  of  majority  rule,  and  would  curb
to  some  extent  the  autocracy  of  Governments,  astute  ^^f*

party  management  or  personal  ambition  might  generate


14  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

new  abuses  such  as  attend  the  play  of  the  group  system
in  some  continental  legislatures.  Moreover,  it  is
unlikely  that  the  reforms  of  electoral  institutions,  here
proposed,  would  of  themselves  so  strengthen  the  House
of  Commons  as  to  reverse  the  tendency  towards  in-
creased Cabinet  control.  A  real  and  firm  check  upon
abuse  of  power  on  the  part  of  a  Cabinet  and  a  House
of  Commons  called  upon  to  deal  with  new  and  urgent
issues  upon  which  the  electorate  had  not  been  consulted,
is  an  essential  of  democracy.  Nor  are  such  the  only
occasions  which  require  a  check.  Elected  legislators,
mostly  amateurs,  will  of  necessity  be  influenced
strongly,  sometimes  predominantly,  by  those  able
permanent  officials  who,  in  the  intricate  processes  of
modern  government,  must  necessarily  come  to  play  a
growing  part  in  the  construction  and  administration
of  laws.  Now  this  oflficial  mind,  eminently  serviceable,
has  its  inevitable  defects;  authoritative,  excessively
conservative,  mechanical,  and  usually  contemptuous  of
the  lay  civic  mind,  it  is  apt  to  use  every  opportunity  to
impose  itself  upon  new  legislative  proposals,  and  to
substitute,  as  far  as  possible,  the  official  will  for  the
representative  will.  Now,  though  in  nine  cases  out  of
ten  this  co-operation  of  the  skilled  official  may  be
highly  beneficial,  there  will  be  certain  cases  where  his
determinant  influence  will  definitely  conflict  with  the
wisdom  of  the  will  of  the  people.  This  is  no  matter
of  mere  theory.  The  fact  cannot  be  blinked  that,  for
some  time  to  come,  high  officials  in  this  country  will,
by  their  economic  interests,  their  upbringing,  and  their
social  habits,  be  in  most  imperfect  sympathy  with  the
aspirations  of  democracy.  Consciously,  or  more  often
unconsciously,  these  class  sentiments  or  interests  will
obtrude  themselves  into  the  advisory  and  formative
work  of  legislation  and  administration  which  falls  to
them.  How  should  it  be  otherwise.'*  Until  a  far
fuller  measure  of  equality  of  economic  and  intellectual
opportunity  exists  than  now,  a  powerful  support  must


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM  15

continue  to  be  rendered  by  the  higher  bureaucracy  to
the  defence  of  vested  interests  upon  the  political  field.

The  only  effective  check  upon  these  defects  or  abuses
of  representative  government  is  a  direct  appeal  to  the
people.  This  Referendum  is  based  upon  a  recognition
that  no  form  of  representation  is  perfect,  and  that  certain
particular  defects  in  representative  government  can
best  be  met  by  a  special  and  direct  appeal  to  the  fount
of  government.  The  will  or  consent  of  the  people  is
in  Fact  always  claimed  on  behalf  of  every  important
measure  of  our  lemslature.  But  there  exists  no  means
of  testing  this  claim.  Electoral  pledges,  or  post-
electoral  resolutions  of  caucuses  or  of  other  gatherings
of  electors,  are,  as  we  have  seen,  ineffective  and  often
injurious  methods  of  conveying  a  mandate  or  a  consent.
But  the  growing  part  they  play  in  politics  must  be  in-
terpreted as  an  instinctive  endeavour  of  the  popular
will  to  express  particular  judgments  and  to  supplement
the  purely  representative  principle  by  some  closer  and
more  intimate  control.

In  every  "  democratic  "  country  there  is  evinced  this
growing  desire  of  the  people  to  register  its  will  through
certain  determinant  acts  of  judgment  upon  concrete
issues.  The  desire  is  commonly  fed  by  a  distrust  of
the  efficacy  of  a  representative  system  which  so  often
lends  itself  to  the  manipulation  of  business  or  class
interests  or  falls  under  the  too  complete  control  of
professional  politicians.  But  the  roots  of  the  desire  lie
far  deeper  down  in  the  nature  of  democracy.  There  is
in  every  people  a  half-conscious  recognition  of  the  fact
that  the  will  of  the  people  is  not  really  operative  unless
it  is  able  to  perform  concrete  acts  of  government.  The
instinctive  craving  for  self-realisation  through  respon-
sible conduct  is  a  collective  as  well  as  an  individual
feeling.  This  feeling  is  not  satisfied  by  the  act  of
choosing  a  representative  once  in  five  or  six  years.  The
instinct  of  self-government  is  starved  on  such  a  fare.
As  an  individual  needs  the  responsibility  for  concrete


IM  f^^


V

^


1 6  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

acts  of  conduct  in  order  to  maintain  and  educate  his
y  personality,  so  it  is  with  the  collective  personality  of  a
nation.  This  is  no  revolutionary  demand,  but  one
enforced  by  the  sober  study  of  national  psychology.
An  electorate  will  remain  little  better  than  a  "  mob  "
so  long  as  it  is  treated  like  a  mob,  deprived  of  all
opportunity  of  sober  reflection  and  judgment  upon
intelligible  issues,  and  goaded  at  intervals  to  orgies  of
electoral  excitement  in  which  passion,  prejudice,  busl^
ness  and  sporting  instincts  are  set  to  determine  the
representation  of  the  people.

It  is  not,  however,  my  purpose  here  to  argue  the  case
for  Adult  Suffrage,  Proportionate  Representation,  and
the  Referendum,  nor  to  consider  the  important  effects
which  such  measures  would  involve  in  the  working  of
our  party  system.  I  merely  desire  to  insist  that  a
surgical  operation  upon  the  veto  of  the  Lords  must
entail  important  after-treatment  in  the  shape  of  con-
structive constitutional  reforms,  and  that  such  pro-
posals as  are  here  set  forth  must  at  an  early  date  be
brought  into  the  forefront  of  practical  politics.  The
evolution  of  democracy  would  have  proceeded  far  more
slowly  had  the  veto  of  the  Lords,  following  the  Royal
Prerogative,  slowly  narrowed  down  from  precedent  to
precedent  until  it  had  passed  into  the  limbo  of  rudi-
mentary survivals.  The  reversal  of  this  process  during
the  last  two  generations,  for  the  political  defence  of
vested  interests,  has  brought  fuller  consciousness  and
purpose  into  the  struggle  for  popular  government.
The  application  of  constitutional  force  against  the  un-
constitutional conduct  of  the  Lords  will  compel  the
people  to  heal  the  breach  they  will  have  made  by  large
considered  measures  of  reform.  It  is  of  profound
importance  that  the  necessity  of  this  constructive  work
should  be  clearly  recognised,  and  that  thoughtful
pohticians  should  set  themselves  without  delay  to  the
educative  work  that  it  entails.


Chapter  II
THE LORDS OR THE REFERENDUM?

I

The  grave  constitutional  struggle  now  opening
between  the  Commons  and  the  Lords  has  long  been
recognised  as  an  inevitable  incident  in  the  history  of
British  democracy.  No  theoretical  objection  to  an
hereditary  house  of  legislature  as  inconsistent  with  the
principles  or  practice  of  popular  self-government  has
provoked  the  struggle.  The  temper  of  our  people  is
such  that  it  will  acquiesce  in  the  retention  of  the
strangest  anomalies,  the  most  glaring  inconsistencies,
until  they  are  recognised  to  be  the  immediate  causes
of  present  urgent  grievances.  So  it  has  been  with  the
House  of  Lords.  The  incompatibility  of  the  principle
of  an  hereditary  control,  to  which  it  belonged,  with  the
modern  doctrine  of  the  paramountcy  of  the  will  of  the
people  has  been  quite  apparent  ever  since  the  Reform
Bill  of  1832.  From  that  time,  too,  has  dated  a  steadily
growing  opposition  between  the  Houses  upon  all  issues
of  reform.  "Although,"  said  Mr.  Gladstone  in  1893,
"  there  was  contrariety  between  the  House  of  Lords
and  the  House  of  Commons  before  the  Reform  Bill  of
1832,  there  never  was  conflict.  When  the  Reform
Bill  became  law,  and  for  the  first  time  the  great  principle
was  established  that  no  man  must  sit  in  the  House  of
Commons  except  by  the  voice  of  the  constituency —
then  it  was  plain  that  this  contrariety  of  the  two  Houses
must  develop,  must  sharpen  into  more  pronounced
difi^erences  and  conflicts  between  the  two  Houses."

»7


1 8  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

The  real  essence  of  this  conflict  consists,  however,
in  the  attitude  assumed  by  the  Lords  towards  the  two
great  poHtical  parties  and  their  policies.  Since  1832
the  House  of  Lords  has  definitely  and  continuously
maintained  the  status  of  an  appanage  of  the  Con-
servative Party.  When  the  electorate  has  returned
a  majority  of  Conservative  members  to  the  Lower
House,  and  a  Conservative  Government  has  taken
office,  the  conduct  of  the  House  of  Lords  has  been  little
else  than  a  formal  registration  of  the  Ministerial  will;
when  the  same  electorate  has  placed  in  office  a  Liberal
Government  the  Lords  have  become  a  recognised  and
permanent  instrument  of  opposition.  The  alternatives
of  acquiescence  and  antagonism  have  been  a  constant
shock  and  hindrance  to  the  free  play  of  our  system  of
party  government;  under  Conservative  Ministers  the
consultatory  and  revising  functions  of  a  Second  Chamber
have  been  suspended,  and  unicameral  government  has
virtually  prevailed;  under  Liberal  Ministers  the  House
of  Lords  has  been  used  as  a  party  engine  of  obstruction.
The  "  cup  "  has  been  "  filling  "  for  three-quarters  of  a
century;  the  legicidal  record  of  the  Lords  is  long  and
various,  extending  over  the  entire  area  of  political,
social,  and  economic  progress.  Take  a  list  of  the  most
representative  acts  of  legislative  reform  relating  to  re-
ligious liberty,  freedom  of  the  press,  purity  of  elections,
improvements  in  municipal  government;  turn  to  the
long  array  of  reforms  of  our  criminal  and  civil  codes,
the  building  up  of  our  public  system  of  education,  the
structure  of  Factory  and  Workshop  Acts  and  of  other
laws  relating  to  the  protection  of  workers,  sanitary
legislation,  Irish  legislation,  and  in  particular  laws
attempting  to  repeal  or  modify  the  power  of  landlordism,
and  to  secure  to  the  people  of  Great  Britain  or  Ireland  a
freer  access  to  and  fuller  use  of  their  native  land — there
will  be  found  hardly  a  single  important  measure  belong-
ing to  any  of  these  orders  which  in  its  endeavour  to
express the popular  will that gave it birth has not


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  19

suffered  death  or  mutilation  at  the  hands  of  the  House
of  Lords.

There  may  be  those  who  would  make  the  duration
of  this  grievance  a  reason  for  delaying  any  present
drastic  remedy,  holding  that  what  has  been  endured
so  long  can  be  endured  still  longer.  It  is  therefore
needful  to  recognise  that  two  changes  have  taken  place
in  recent  years  which  render  the  earlier  arts  of
accommodation  practised  by  Liberal  Governments  to
secure  some  modicum  of  progressive  legislation  no
longer  feasible.

Since.  l8 8 5  the  Conservative  majority  in  the  Lords
has  been  overwhelming  in  magnitude.  The  rejection  of
the  fifsrReform  Bill,  in  1831,  was  carried  in  the  Lords
by  199  to  158,  a  majority  of  only  41.  Even  a  genera-
tion later,  in  i860,  the  rejection  of  the  Paper  Duty
Repeal  Bill  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  only  89.  But
in_2_885  the  Lords  threw  out  the  Home  Rule  Bill  by  no
less  than  419  votes  to  41.  From  that  time  to  this  the
number  of  avowed  and  active  Liberals,  in  a  House  of
Lords  containing  about  600  members,  has  remained
about  45.  Such  an  access  of  brute  force  is,  of  course,
iiTitself^a  danger,  making  it  easier  for  any  little  group
of  wreckers,  out  of  party  bias,  class  feeling,  or  economic
interest,  to  kill  even  those  humbler  measures  of  public
utility  which  in  former  times  often  got  through  alive.

The  other  novel  factor  in  the  situation  is  the  demand
for  strono;er  measures  of  social-economic  reform  which
stands  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle  of  Liberalism.  Land
ownership,  the  Church,  "  the  trade,"  and  other  powerful
"vested  interests"  are  subjected  to  direct  attacks,  and
are  organising  co-operative  methods  of  defence  towards
which'it  is  natural  that  the  House  of  Lords  should
be-expected  to  contribute.  The  more  "  Socialistic  "
character  of  modern  Radicalism  forces  the  Lords  to  the
defence  of  their  economic  entrenchments.  The  fear  of
the  early  success  of  some  "confiscatory"  policy  is  for  the
first  time  really  felt  by  the  abler  Conservative  leaders.


20  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

and  if  the  legicidal  power  of  the  Lords  is  left  intact  they
will  be  impelled  to  a  use  of  it  even  more  ruthless  than  in
past  times,  because  they  will  be  more  conscious  of
fighting  for  their  "  rights  "  and  "  privileges."

Unless  Liberalism  is  to  be  sterilised  for  effective
action,  it  is  therefore  manifest  that  Liberals  must  now
"  face  the  music."  We  have  to  destroy  the  power  of
the  Lords  to  kill,  mutilate,  or  unduly  delay  Liberal
measures.  What  is  that  power  .-^  What  is  it  that  the
Lords  claim  to  have  a  right  to  do.''  Upon  this  point
there  is  some  popular  misapprehension  that  requires
removal.  It  has  not  for  a  long  time  been  claimed  by
the  Lords  that  they  possess  the  same  full  power  of
accepting  and  rejecting  Bills  as  the  House  of  Commons.
It  is,  of  course,  notorious  that  they  may  not  amend
money  bills.  This  power  they  lost  as  the  result  of  a
resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1678.  Though
formally  they  still  retain  the  power  of  rejecting  money
bills,  the  practice  and  probably  the  power  to  do  so  was
lost  in  i860  in  the  famous  struggle  over  the  Paper
Duties  Repeal  Act,  to  which  we  shall  make  further
reference.

But  it  is  most  important  to  realise  that  in  ordinary
legislation  the  powers  of  the  Lords  are  limited  by
precedent  and  authority.  Even  at  the  period  of  the
Reform  struggle,  in  1832,  an  unlimited  arbitrary  power
of  rejection  without  reference  to  the  popular  will  was
not  claimed.  The  Duke  of  Wellincyton's  contention
then  was  almost  identical  with  the  doctrine  affirmed
recently  by  The  Times  in  these  words  : — "  It  claims  the
right  of  asking  the  country  to  judge  between  the  two
Houses."  The  passing  of  the  Reform  Bill  indisputably
curtailed  the  power  of  the  Lords,  though  Mr.  Bagehot's
statement  that  "  since  the  Reform  Act  the  House  of
Lords  has  become  a  revising  and  suspending  House"  is
a  somewhat  extreme  description  of  the  actual  change.
The  following  more  precise  statement  by  the  same
authority  may  be  considered  a  sound  account  of  the


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  21

real  constitutional  position  in  the  mid-Victorian  days :
"  It  can  alter  bills,  it  can  reject  bills  on  which  the  House
of  Commons  is  not  yet  thoroughly  determined.  Their
veto  is  a  sort  of  hypothetical  veto."  Advancing  a
generation,  we  may  append  the  brief  commentary  of
Professor  Dicey  (1886),  who  holds  that  the  Lords
must  give  way  "  whenever  it  is  clearly  proved  that  the
will  of  the  House  of  Commons  represents  the  deliberate
will  of  the  nation."

It  may  well  appear  that  the  recent  conduct  of  the
Lords  and  their  defence  of  it  during  the  present
Parliament  is  substantially  opposed  to  this  constitutional
definition,  and  marks  a  new  encroachment  or  endeavour
to  recover  powers  of  arbitrary  rejection  which  had
already  passed  away.  This  is  in  substance  true.  The
Lords  are  encroaching,  and  the  Commons  in  resenting
this  encroachment  pursue  a  conservative  policy.  But
it  must  be  noted  that  the  encroachment  is  covered  by  a
defence  which  though  false  in  substance  is  correct  in
form.  The  Lords,  we  are  told,  fully  admit  that  the
"  will  of  the  people  "  should  operate  in  legislation,  but
they  claim  to  use  an  equal  right  with  the  Commons
to  determine  whether  a  particular  bill  does  or  does  not
express  the  popular  will.  Both  Mr.  Balfour  and  Lord
Lansdowne  have  recently  restated  this  position  in  lan-
guage which  is  memorable  for  its  frankness.  The  former,
addressing  the  Junior  Carlton  Club  on  November  28  th,
1906,  said  :  "  I  do  not  for  one  moment  believe  that  the
Lords,  in  the  exercise  of  the  high  functions  entrusted
to  them  by  the  Constitution,  will  waver  in  their  duty.
Their  duty  is  not  to  thwart  the  will  of  the  nation,  but  to
see  that  its  will  is  really  and  truly  carried  out."  The
Plural  Voting  Bill  and  some  of  the  chief  provisions  of  the
Education  Bill  did  not,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Lords,
express  "  the  will  of  the  nation  ;  "  hence  they  were
entitled  and  required  to  reject  them.  The  same  doctrine
was  consistently  applied  in  still  more  instructive  fashion
in  the  acceptance  of  the  Trades  Disputes  Bill. This


22  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

measure,  though  denounced  by  Lord  Lansdowne  and
Lord  Halsbury  as  "  disastrous,"  "  calamitous,"  "  un-
just," and  "  tyrannical,"  was  accepted  on  the  express
ground  that  "  the  constituencies "  demanded  such  a
measure.  "  If  your  lordships,"  said  Lord  Lansdowne,
"were  to  refer  this  bill  back  to  the  country,  what  would
be  the  result  ?  Can  we  have  any  doubt  as  to  the  answer
the  constituencies  would  give?  I  believe  we  should
find  a  demand  for  a  similar  bill  renewed  with  greater
intensity,  and  in  a  form  embittered  by  the  suggestion
that  the  House  of  Lords  was  in  conflict  with  the  general
desire  of  the  working  men  of  this  country."  One  other
passage  in  this  remarkable  speech  deserves  to  be  put  on
record  as  a  statement  of  this  doctrine  of  the  mandate :
"  I  believe  it  is  the  duty  of  your  lordships'  House  to
arrest  the  progress  of  such  measures  when  we  believe
they  have  not  been  properly  considered,  and  are  not  in
accord  with  the  judgment  of  the  country."

It  is  this  claim  of  the  Lords  to  veto  measures  or  parts
of  measures  which  have  not  been  properly  considered
and  which  have  not  behind  them  a  popular  mandate
that  is  the  point  at  issue.  The  Government  denies
in  toto  the  validity  of  this  claim,  on  the  grounds,  first,
that  no  such  mandate  as  is  here  pretended  is  in  fact
requisite  for  legislation;  secondly,  that  there  exists  no
method  whereby  the  House  of  Lords  can  ascertain
whether  a  particular  bill  possesses  a  mandate;  and,
lastly,  that  the  application  of  this  principle  by  the
Lords  to  bills  passed  respectively  by  a  Liberal  or  a
Conservative  House  of  Commons  is  such  as  to  mve  the
lie  to  any  claim  that  their  policy  is  genuinely  deter-
mined by  any  such  consideration.  How  can  a  House
of  Lords  claim  to  be  guided  exclusively  by  its  reading
of  popular  mandates  when  it  accepts  every  important
controversial  measure  proposed  by  a  Conservative
Government  and  rejects  almost  every  measure  of
similar  character  proposed  by  a  Liberal  Government  ?


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  23

II

To  represent  the  Constitutional  issue  that  has  arisen
as  confined  to  the  adjustment  of  the  relations  between
the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  is  to  underestimate  its
scope  and  difficulties.  The  governmental  function  of
the  people  is  directly  involved,  for  the  radical  complaint
is  that  the  popular  will,  seeking  expression  through
legislation,  is  impeded  or  perverted  through  the  defects
of  Parliamentary  machinery.  In  considering  remedies
for  these  defects  we  must  not  confine  ourselves  to  some
measure  for  the  easing  of  the  immediate  situation,  but
must  seek  some  basis  of  more  enduring  settlement.
That  any  remedy  involves  some  alteration  of  the
structure  of  the  Constitution  is  tolerably  apparent.  Such
an  experiment  cannot  be  lightly  undertaken,  and  its
delicacy  and  its  unknown  risks  demand  that  the  im-
mediate measure  of  reform  shall  be  such  as  to  involve
the  smallest  amount  of  organic  change  consistent  with
the  attainment  of  the  desired  end,  viz.,  the  rendering  of
the  popular  will  effective  through  the  use  of  Parliamen-
tary government.  Since  the  immediate  grievance  is  the
abuse  of  the  power  of  veto  contained  in  the  legislative
function  of  the  House  of  Lords,  the  first  and  simplest
remedy  has  appeared  to  some  to  be  that  the  Commons
should,  by  resolution  and  by  legislative  action,  aim  to
destroy  this  power  of  veto  in  the  Lords  or  to  reduce  it
to  a  harmless  weapon  of  delay.  In  a  few  quarters  there
is  talk  of  "  ending  "  the  Lords  or  of  destroying  outright
their  "  veto  "  by  passing  through  a  House  packed  for
this  purpose  a  measure  enacting  that  a  law  passed  by
the  House  of  Commons  shall  forthwith  be  presented  to
the  King  for  the  Royal  Assent,  the  assent  of  the  Lords
being  no  longer  necessary.  But  the  advocates  of  such
direct  proposals  of  les;islation  by  a  single  Chamber  are
comparatively  few.  A  far  wider  vogue  belongs  to  the
proposal  to  crush  the  legicidal  efficacy  of  the  Lords'
veto  by  placing  a  short time-limit  on its  operation.


24  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Those  who  favour  this  form  of  remedy  usually  suggest
the  duration  of  the  existing  session  or  of  the  existing
Parliament  for  the  operative  power  of  the  veto.  If  this
change  were  effected  the  Commons  would  over-ride  the
rejection  of  a  measure  by  the  Lords  by  a  formal
re-introduction  of  the  rejected  Bill  at  the  beginning  of
the  following  session,  or  at  such  other  short  interval
as  might  be  prescribed.

Now,  upon  these  proposals  of  a  short  time  suspen-
sory veto  we  have  one  plain  judgment  to  express.  The
veto  they  leave  is  not  a  substantial  power  to  deny  or  to
delay.  To  reduce  the  power  of  rejection  in  the  Lords
to  a  sessional  or  parliamentary  veto  is  virtually  to
destroy  our  two-Chamber  system  of  legislation  and  to
substitute  a  single-Chamber  system.  In  measures  of
first-class  legislative  import — and  it  is  the  treatment  of
such  measures  by  the  Lords  that  is  in  question — delay
of  a  few  months,  or  even  years,  cannot  be  regarded  as
of  material  consequence.  The  real  aim  and  result  of
such  a  reform  would  be  to  make  the  House  of  Commons
the  sole  effective  instrument  of  legislation.  It  is  right
that  the  suspensory  veto  proposal,  when  regarded  as  the
sole  and  sufficient  method  of  "  dealing  with  the  Lords,"
should  be  seen  in  its  true  light,  that  of  a  proposal  to
give  omnipotence  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  law-
makino:.  We  are  thus  enabled  to  confront  the
important  question  whether  a  single-Chamber  legisla-
ture in  this  country  is  safe,  desirable,  and  in  accordance
with  the  wishes  of  the  people.  Single-Chamber
governments  are  not  unknown.  Greece  and  a  few  South
American  States  are  governed  by  single  Chambers  at
the  present  time.  But  no  representative  House  has
ever  possessed  an  extent  of  power  comparable  to  that
which  the  British  House  of  Commons  would  possess
if  the  check  of  the  Lords  were  removed  and  no  new
check  introduced.  In  most  representative  Houses
some  legislative  powers  are  reserved  by  a  written  or
an unwritten constitution, and wherever a written


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  25

constitution  exists  in  a  modern  democratic  State  the  power
of  the  representative  assembly  to  effect  constitutional
changes  is  limited.  Our  House  of  Commons,  thus  rid
of  the  veto  of  the  Lords,  would  stand  in  the  unique
position  of  having  sucked  into  itself  by  a  gradual
process  of  absorption  all  those  legislative  powers  which
once  belonged  to  the  Crown  and  to  the  Peers,  besides
those  powers  which  in  most  democratically-ordered
States  are  still  reserved  to  the  veto  of  the  people.

Do  we  seriously  desire  to  endow  the  House  of  Com-
mons with  an  absolutism  which  is  only  checked  by  an
intrusion  of  the  popular  will  at  intervals  of  five  or  six
years,  the  time  and  distinctive  circumstances  of  which
are  determined  by  the  same  supreme  body.''  It  may  be
said  that  British  democracy  is  irrevocably  committed
to  the  principle  of  representation,  that  the  House  of
Commons  embodies  this  principle,  and  that  therefore
no  extension  of  the  powers  of  the  Commons  can  be
regarded  as  a  dangerous  excess.  But  the  representative
principle  is  susceptible  of  various  applications  and
modifications  in  practice.  In  most  forms  of  popular
government  two  focuses  of  representation  are  applied,
so  as  to  yield  two  elected  assemblies  serving  as  a  check
or  balance  to  one  another,  or  frequent  periodical  retire-
ments of  laro-e  sections  of  one  or  both  assemblies  enable
the  popular  will  constantly  to  renew  its  impress  upon  the
Legislature.  In  this  country  the  effect  of  the  virtual
cancelment  of  the  Lords'  veto  as  the  sufficient  remedy
for  present  grievances  would  simply  mean  that  every
government  would  be  endowed  with  that  same  power
of  defying  public  opinion  and  disregarding  public
interests  exhibited  by  the  Parliament  which  sat  during
the  years  1902-5.  It  is  idle  in  face  of  recent  experience
to  pretend,  by  means  of  general  references  to  the  repre-
sentative principle,  that  the  application  of  that  principle
to  the  election  of  a  House  of  Commons  affords  security
against  the  gravest  abuses  of  governmental  power.
Moreover,  we  cannot  ignore  the  notorious  fact  that


26  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  growth  of  the  power  of  the  Cabinet  in  recent  years,
involving  as  it  does  the  diminution  of  the  control  of  the
body  of  the  Commons  over  the  course  of  legislation,
implies  a  weakening  of  the  representative  system.
Taken  at  the  best,  the  Cabinet  is  representative  at  two
removes;  at  its  worst  it  may,  and  does,  imply  that  the
actual  course  of  legislation  in  the  House  of  Commons
is  determined  by  a  small  committee  which  is  not  even
an  approximately  accurate  reflex  of  the  feelings  and
interests  of  the  party  majority  in  the  House,  and  whose
relation  to  the  electorate  is  so  slight  and  distant  as  to
be  almost  nep-lio^ible.  The  exigencies  of  modern
Parliamentary  government  have  combined  to  diminish
the  legislative  power  directly  wielded  by  the  House  of
Commons  and  to  increase  that  wielded  by  the  Cabinet.
To  destroy  the  Lords'  veto  would  be,  then,  to  establish
that  same  qualified  Cabinet  autocracy  in  a  Liberal
Government  which,  with  a  quiescent  House  of  Lords,
has  long  prevailed  under  Conservative  Governments.
It  may  well  be  held  that  a  Liberal  Government,  with
its  fuller  trust  in  the  people,  will  be  disposed  to  main-
tain a  more  genuinely  representative  spirit  in  its
legislative  action.  But  in  considering  an  enduring
basis  of  reform  we  must  take  under  our  survey  all
sorts  of  Governments — a  Government  raised  to  a  long
spell  of  power  in  a  moment  of  artfully  stimulated
passion  as  well  as  one  elected  to  carry  out  a  series  of
carefully  discussed  and  widely  demanded  reforms.  In
other  words,  are  the  conditions  under  which  the  popular
will  expresses  itself  in  legislation  through  the  House
of  Commons  so  satisfactory  as  to  justify  the  conviction
that  we  may  safely  bestow  a  plenary  power  of  law-
making upon  a  single  Chamber  so  elected  and  so  con-
trolled for  periods  of  seven  years  .'^

It  is  doubtless  true  that  a  House  of  Commons  after
its  election  maintains  some  sympathetic  contact  with
the  electorate,  and  is  bound  to  pay  some  sort  of  regard
to  public  opinion. So  likewise  the  Cabinet  and  the


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  27

Ministry,  though  not  elected  by  the  House  and  con-
taining often  a  large  element  of  the  peerage,  cannot
disregard  the  feelings  and  views  of  the  party  in  the
Commons,  whose  Members  habitually  employ  their
opportunities  of  informing,  urging,  warning,  and  even
menacing  Ministers.  But  when  we  put  the  plain
question,  "  Does  this  method  of  representation  afford
such  reasonably  full  security  for  the  interpretation  of
the  will  of  the  people  through  acts  of  legislation  that
we  are  prepared  to  stake  the  working  of  our  demo-
cratic Government  upon  its  success?"  an  affirmative
answer  is  seen  to  be  impossible.

Nor  is  it  merely  that  the  House  of  Commons,  as  the
single  instrument  of  representative  government,  is
defective.  It  is  also  felt  to  be  unsafe.  There  exists  a
very  widespread  feeling  that  the  conditions  under  which
a  general  election  takes  place  are  liable  to  be  those  of
a  rush  of  feeling  and  a  falsification  of  political  issues.
The  people  require  and  desire  some  protection  against
the  grave  dangers  of  misrepresentation  involved
therein,  lest  they  should  have  committed  themselves
too  rashly  to  a  long  line  of  policy  which  was  in  no  true
sense  their  will.  The  nation  will  not  support  any  pro-
posal formally  or  virtually  to  establish  in  this  country
a  single-Chamber  Legislature.  The  possibilities  of
an  abuse  of  power  are  too  great  and  the  consequences
of  such  abuse  too  grave.  The  following  words  of
J.  S.  Mill  are  as  true  to-day  as  when  he  wrote  them  :
"  The  consideration  which  tells  most  in  my  judgment
in  favour  of  two  Chambers  is  the  evil  effect  produced
upoQ  the  mind  of  any  holder  of  power,  whether  an
individual  or  an  assembly,  by  the  consciousness  of
having  only  themselves  to  consult."

Ill

Many  of  those  who  favour  the  proposal  to  establish
single-Chamber  legislation  by  reducing  the  Lords'  veto


28  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

to  a  power  of  delay  for  one  or  more  sessions  are  ready
to  concede  that  the  House  of  Commons,  as  at  present
constituted,  is  not  so  faithful  a  reflection  of  popular
opinion  and  aspirations  as  it  might  be.  They  recog-
nise that  the  absorption  of  the  control  of  public  business
by  the  Cabinet,  with  its  corresponding  diminution  of
the  liberty  of  ordinary  Members  to  initiate  and  carry
laws,  to  take  part  in  discussions,  and  even  to  raise
grievances,  implies  some  decline  of  the  efi^ective  repre-
sentative character  of  the  people's  House.  It  is  not
desirable,  such  men  admit,  to  remedy  the  Liberal  griev-
ance against  the  Lords  by  imparting  to  every  Govern-
ment that  power  to  disregard  the  plainest  intimations
of  the  popular  will  which  was  subject  to  such  grave
abuse  by  the  1900  Government  during  its  last  years  of
office.  "  But,"  it  is  contended,  "  once  crush  the  Lords'
veto  upon  Liberal  legislation,  and  it  will  be  possible  to
effect  great  reforms,  electoral  and  constitutional.
Shorter  Parliaments  can  curb  excesses  of  independence;
the  second  ballot,  or  the  adoption  of  proportionate
representation,  will  check  that  exaggerated  swing  of
the  pendulum  which  tends  to  make  every  House  a
caricature  of  the  state  of  feeling  in  the  country;  large
devolution  of  legislative  and  administrative  business
from  the  Imperial  Parliament  upon  provinces  and
smaller  areas  of  local  government,  relieving  the  present
congestion  of  business  in  the  House  of  Commons,  will
restore  some  of  the  liberties  of  legislation  and  debate
which  have  been  curtailed."  But  granted  that  such
reforms  of  the  House  are  in  themselves  desirable  and
can  be  compassed,  the  question  still  remains,  Is  the
nation  prepared  to  assign  unlimited  powers  of  legisla-
tive change  to  a  single  elected  Chamber  for  a  term  of
years  ?  Shall  we  consent  to  put  all  our  legislative  eggs
in  one  basket .''  is  the  accepted  form  in  which  the  ques-
tion will  present  itself  to  the  ordinary  citizen,  and  the
answer  will  be  a  clear,  decisive  negative.  To  entrust  to
a  single  elected  Assembly  greater  unchecked  powers


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  29

than  have  ever  before  been  entrusted  will  be  realised  as
too  hazardous  an  undertaking.

The  conservative  instincts  of  the  nation  will,  unless
we  are  mistaken,  express  themselves  in  two  demands —
first,  that  a  Second  Chamber  shall  continue  to  exist,
possessing;  some  measure  of  real  legislative  influence,
though not the present absolute power of veto;
secondly,  that  the  people  shall  be  endowed  with  some
more  effective  control  over  the  course  of  legislation
than  is  provided  by  the  machinery  of  a  general  election.
The  maintenance  of  a  second  advisory  Chamber,  with
power to influence the course of legislation, will
generally  be  approved,  and  innumerable  schemes  for
the  construction  of  such  a  second  House  have  been
propounded, the more conservative based upon the
idea  of  converting  the  existing  House  of  Lords  into  a
more effective instrument by various processes of
selection,  rejection,  and  appointment,  the  more  radical
aiming  at  the  substitution  of  an  entirely  new  sort  of
elected  House. Any  attempt  here  to  distinguish  and
discuss  the  comparative  merits  of  these  diverse  struc-
tures would  bewilder  and  impede  us  in  our  main  object
— that  of  discovering  the  safest  and  most  profitable
distribution  of  legislative  powers. But  we  may  take  it
for  granted  that  public  opinion  will  favour  the  erection
of  a  Second  Chamber  capable  of  exercising,  by  initiative,
consultation,  and  authoritative  weight,  a  genuine  and
valuable influence upon the  legislative work of the
Government. To  do  this  implies  a  combination  of  two
conditions. Such  a  Second  Chamber  must  gather  within
itself  men  of  superior  and  acknowledged  intellect  and
character,  many  of  them  possessed  of  experience  in  the
making  and  administration  of  laws. At  the  same  time  it
should  possess  a  fuller  public  confidence  and  a  closer  and
more  sympathetic  relation  to  the  body  of  the  people
than  consorts  with  the  idea  of  a  Chamber  of  hereditary
or  of  merely  nominated  members. In  other  words,  the
prime  essential  of  an  eff^ective  Senate  is  that,  in  the


30  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

main  at  any  rate,  it  should  be  composed  of  elected  per-
sons, but  that  the  mode  and  qualifications  for  election
and  for  the  holding  of  office  should  be  such  as  to  secure
high  qualities  of  political  experience,  intellect,  and
public  spirit.  This  might  be  compassed  by  a  process  of
direct  popular  election,  with  larger  electoral  areas,  and
on  a  proportional  plan  which  would  secure  a  great
variety  of  political  opinions  and  less  party  attachment
than  is  found  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Or  the
electorate  for  the  Second  Chamber  might,  as  Mr.  A.  R.
Wallace  suggested  in  the  Fortnightly  Review^  be  con-
fined to  the  members  of  the  various  parish,  district,
borough,  and  county  councils  throughout  the  country.
There  would  be  some  advantage  in  securing  for  Mem-
bers of  this  House  a  longer  and  a  safer  tenure  of  office
than  is  requisite  or  desirable  for  the  House  of  Commons.
It  would  not  be  proposed  to  transfer  to  this  new  Second
Chamber  the  full  power  over  legislation  enjoyed  by  the
present  House  of  Lords.  To  set  up  a  new  Second
Chamber,  with  whatever  safeguards  of  election,
possessed  of  the  absolute  veto  of  the  present  House  of
Lords,  would  not,  indeed,  meet  the  necessities  of  the
case  for  reform.  For  such  senate  of  statesmen,  consist-
ing, as  it  is  desirable  it  should,  largely  of  men  of  official
experience,  will  of  necessity  lean  unduly  towards  Con-
servatism, and  will  almost  certainly  be  weighted  with
class  feelings  and  view-points.  Such  will  be  the
inevitable  defects  of  its  qualities,  whatever  the  methods
of  election  or  appointment.  To  leave  to  such  a  Chamber
an  absolute  veto  would  be  to  misconceive  the  public
service  it  is  capable  of  rendering  and  endow  it  with  a
harmful  power  of  hindering  popular  legislation.  The
same  objection,  though  in  a  milder  degree,  is  applicable
to  the  proposal  that,  where  a  difference  of  judgment  upon
a  Bill  has  arisen  between  the  two  Chambers,  they  should,
following  the  precedent  of  France,  and  of  some  of  our
own  colonies,  sit  together  and  determine  the  issue  by  a
joint vote. The advantage of some provision for


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  31

conference  between  the  Chambers  in  such  cases  is  great
and  evident;  but  if  we  are  right  in  our  conviction  that
the  sort  of  Second  Chamber  most  serviceable  for  advice
and  criticism  will  of  necessity  remain  predominantly-
conservative  in  judgment  and  in  action,  any  provision
securing  equal  efficacy  for  a  vote  of  the  Member  of  the
Second  Chamber  with  that  of  a  Member  of  the  House
of  Commons,  will  prove  a  drag  upon  progressive
legislation.

The  true  functions  of  the  reformed  Second  Chamber
should  be  purely  advisory  and  deliberative,  and  its  influ-
ence should  reside  not  in  the  "  brute  force  "  of  a  veto,
but  in  the  dignity  and  authority,  intellectual  and  moral,
which  the  character  of  its  composition  and  deliberations
will  command.  The  rough-and-tumble  of  party  play  in
the  House  of  Commons  leaves  ample  scope  for  work  of
incomparable  worth  in  detailed  criticism  of  Bills.  More-
over, there  is  no  reason  why  the  initiation  of  measures
in  the  Second  Chamber  should  be  curtailed.  Such  an
Assembly  as  is  here  contemplated  would  find,  perhaps,
its  most  useful  work  in  that  skilled  draughtsmanship
which  is  so  lacking  in  many  measures  that  originate  in
the  haste  and  turmoil  of  the  House  of  Commons.

But  is  this  Chamber  of  statesmen  to  be  allowed  to
exercise  no  determinant  influence  whatever  upon  the
course  of  legislation  }  Is  it  not  to  support  its  intellectual
and  moral  authority  by  any  formal  power.?  We  have
already  indicated  the  nature  of  the  reply  to  this  vital
question.  Some  check  upon  the  legislative  freedom  of
the  Commons  must  remain  with  the  Second  Chamber,
but  that  check  must  not  be  an  absolute  veto.

This  proposal  of  a  suspensory  veto  over  a  general
election,  though  less  likely  to  become  a  weapon  of  Con-
servative obstruction  under  a  reformed  and  elected
Second  Chamber,  will  appear  to  most  men  an  excessive
check  upon  progressive  legislation.  In  substance,  indeed,
it  difi^ers  little,  if  at  all,  from  the  power  nominally
claimed  for  the  existino-  House  of  Lords  under  the


32  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

theory  of  the  "  mandate  "  as  recently  expounded.  The
House  of  Lords,  we  are  told,  only  claims  the  right  to
compel  the  Commons  to  obtain  a  "  mandate  "  for  its
measure  by  submitting  it  as  a  definite  issue  at  a  general
election.  The  larger  power  of  "  suspensory  veto "
suggested  for  a  reformed  Upper  House  recalls  too
forcibly  the  possibility  of  similar  abuse  to  make  it  likely
that  such  a  veto  will  be  accorded  to  any  Second  Chamber,
however  constituted.  The  real  grievance  of  the  posses-
sion of  an  unpopular  obstructive  instrument  in  the  shape
of  a  permanently  Conservative  Second  Chamber  will  not
have  been  redressed  until  a  means  is  devised  for  referring
directly  to  the  people  the  determination  of  an  important
difference  of  judgment  between  the  two  Chambers.
The  formal  legislative  power  left  to  the  new  Second
Chamber  should  be  the  power  of  causing  a  Bill  of  the
Commons  which  they  disapprove  to  be  submitted  to  a
separate  vote  of  the  electorate,  in  order  to  test  the  ques-
tion whether  or  not  the  people  desires  that  the  disputed
Bill  should  become  law.


IV

The  proposal  that  a  reformed  Second  Chamber,
wholly  or  mainly  elected  under  conditions  likely  to
secure  Members  of  high  intellectual  calibre,  independent
judgment,  and  political  experience,  should  be  entrusted
with  a  power  of  submitting  to  a  Referendum  any  Bill
passed  by  the  House  of  Commons  which,  in  their  judg-
ment, has  not  received  the  sanction  of  the  popular  will,
has  several  claims  to  our  favourable  consideration  as  an
instrument  of  government.  Its  possession  would  secure
for  the  Second  Chamber  a  real  power  of  checking  hasty,
ill-advised,  or  unauthorised  legislation  by  the  House  of
Commons  or  the  Ministry,  without  leaving  it  any  final
right  of  causing  rejection  or  considerable  delay.  It
might  even  be  permissible  for  the  Second  Chamber  to
reject  a  measure  once,  or  to  amend  it,  so  that  the  House


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  33

of  Commons  might  have  the  opportunity  of  reconsider-
ing the  Bill  in  the  light  of  the  criticism  of  the  Second
Chamber.  But  the  Bill  as  presented  a  second  time  must
either  receive  the  formal  assent  of  the  Second  Chamber,
or,  in  case  this  assent  is  refused,  must  be  submitted  in
due  form,  and  after  a  short  but  sufficient  interval  to  a
vote  of  the  entire  electorate  of  the  country,  whose
acceptance  or  refusal  shall  determine  whether  the  mea-
sure is  presented  for  the  Royal  assent,  and  so  passes  into
law,  or  is  dropped.

The  first  and  principal  advantage  of  this  proposal  is
that  it  provides  an  effective  curb  upon  any  legicidal  or
obstructive  tendencies  which  even  a  reformed  Second
Chamber  less  immediately  in  contact  with  popular  feel-
ings and  ideas  might  exhibit,  while  at  the  same  time
meeting  the  objections  raised  against  single-Chamber
government.  The  effect  would  be,  of  course,  to  transfer
the  veto  from  the  Second  Chamber  to  the  people,  while
leaving  to  this  Second  Chamber  the  considerable  power
which  the  right  of  forcing  an  appeal  from  the  Commons
to  the  electorate  will  reserve  for  it.  For  in  preparing
any  measure  and  in  passing  it  through  the  Commons  any
Government  would  still  have  to  consider  its  probable
reception  by  the  Second  Chamber,  and  would  be  disposed
to  make  reasonable  modifications  to  meet  anticipated
opposition  and  to  accept  such  proposed  amendments  as
are  not  destructive,  so  as  to  avoid  the  trouble  and  the
risks  necessarily  attendant  on  the  popular  voting.  On
the  other  hand,  the  opponents  of  the  measure  in  the
Second  Chamber  would  be  inspired  by  similar  motives
of  moderation  and  concession;  they  would  not  care  to
kill  or  mutilate  a  Bill  when  the  result  of  their  violence
might  be  to  pass  into  law  by  the  popular  vote  the  original
unqualified  measure,  which  they  might  have  modified
if  they  had  shown  more  forbearance.  Thus  the  best
fruits  of  the  two-Chamber  legislative  method  could  be
retained,  though  the  ultimate  act  of  ratification  is  taken
from  the  Lords  and  given  to  the  people.


34  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

A  considerable  argument  in  favour  of  this  mode  of
settling  differences  between  the  two  Houses  is  that  it  is
the  most  reasonable  method  of  applying  that  doctrine
of  the  "mandate"  which  Mr.  Balfour,  Lord  Lansdowne,
and  other  defenders  of  the  Lords'  veto  have  adduced  in
support  of  the  course  taken  by  the  Upper  House.  The
House  of  Lords  exists,  they  tell  us,  as  a  legislative  body
to  ensure  that  no  Bill  of  the  House  of  Commons  shall
pass  into  law  which  has  not  behind  it  a  clear  mandate
of  the  people.  But  the  existing  Constitution  furnishes
no  method  of  obtaining  a  clear  mandate  for  any  single
measure.  The  present  contention  of  the  House  of
Lords  appears  to  be  that  it  has  the  right  to  force  a  disso-
lution and  an  appeal  to  the  country  by  rejecting  a  Bill
like  the  Education  Bill,  the  Plural  Voting  Bill,  or  even
the  Finance  Bill.  On  this  hypothesis  we  are  placed  in  the
following  dilemma.  Either  a  Liberal  Government  must
dissolve  every  time  an  important  Bill  is  rejected  by  the
Lords  and  go  to  the  country  on  this  isolated  issue,  a
condition  obviously  as  impracticable  as  it  would  be
unreasonable,  or  else  it  must  wait  until  a  number  of
important  Bills  have  been  rejected  and  then  dissolve,
placing  before  the  electorate  the  question  of  endorsing
these  several  Bills  together  with  other  prospective  acts  of
policy.  In  this  latter  case,  the  actual  case  of  a  Liberal
Government  which  goes  to  the  country,  what  possible
method  does  our  general  election,  with  its  medley  of
measures,  party  cries,  and  personalities,  provide  for
ascertaining  whether  a  particular  Bill  or  policy  possesses
a  clear  mandate  ?  The  least  reflection  makes  it  evident
that,  if  it  is  a  function  of  the  Second  Chamber  to  ensure
that  a  Bill  has  a  popular  mandate,  the  only  way  of  ful-
filling this  function  is  to  submit  the  particular  measure
by  itself  to  a  separate  popular  vote.  Here  is  a  method
of  doing  it  which  is  the  valid  application  of  the  consti-
tutional power  claimed  as  a  prerogative  of  the  House  of
Lords,  but  for  the  proper  exercise  of  which  no  provi-
sions exist  in  the  present  Constitution. The  "  right  "


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  35

of  the  Lords  to  "  test  "  the  "  mandate  "  can  only  be
exercised  by  providing  a  means  of  submitting  to  the
people  the  separate  issues  that  are  contested  between  the
Houses.

We  are,  of  course,  aware  that  there  are  those  to  whom
this  doctrine  of  the  popular  mandate,  though  by  no
means  novel,  is  anathema.  Ours,  they  say,  is,  or  ought
to  be,  a  purely  representative  system  of  government;
a  House  of  Commons  consists  not  of  instructed  dele-
gates, but  of  Members  empowered  to  use  their  free
judgment  in  passing  such  laws,  and  in  performing  such
other  acts  of  government  as  they  think  most  conducive
to  the  public  interest.  The  party  allegiance  they  profess
and  the  general  statement  of  policy  they  make  are  not  to
be  understood  as  bindinor  them  to  concrete  legislative
proposals;  they  are  not  the  vehicles  of  any  such  man-
dates as  the  theory  of  the  defenders  of  the  Lords  implies.
But  all  practical  politicians  are  aware  that  this  is  not  a
correct  presentation  of  our  electoral  methods  of  to-day.
Pure  representation — i.e.,  the  election  of  the  "  best
man"  on  general  grounds  of  imputed  competency — does
not  hold,  perhaps  never  has  held,  the  field.  The  strict
"  party  "  method  of  election  is  itself  a  "  mandate  "  of  a
broad  sort  not  leavino-  to  the  elected  Member  an  unfet-
tered  judgment.  But  in  recent  times  specific  pledges
are  extorted,  undertakings  are  given  in  order  to  win
the  support  of  definite  interests,  which  convey  real
"  mandates  "  of  varying  degrees  of  rigour.  By  formal
pledges,  deputations,  petitions,  the  electorate  has  con-
siderably qualified  the  representative  system,  ingrafting
a  variety  of  sorts  of  "  mandate."  These  mandates  are
often  illusory  and  ineffective,  and  in  their  present  shape
they  often  undermine  in  an  injurious  way  the  independ-
ence of  the  Member.  Worse  still,  they  often  enable
small  minorities  to  exert  an  excessive  influence  upon  the
structure  of  Bills,  and  even  on  the  course  of  legislation.
In  the  present  illicit  or  informal  operation  of  the
mandate  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  Bills  from  passing


36  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  House  of  Commons,  by  the  votes  of  "  pledged  "
Members,  which  have  behind  them  not  "  the  will  of  the
people "  but  the  pertinacious  fanaticism  of  little
organised  groups  representing  a  small  minority  of  the
electorate.  This  forms  a  serious  and  a  growing  danger
to  democracy.  To  substitute  an  open,  full,  and  formal
mandate  of  the  people  for  this  secret  and  insidious
operation  would  be  a  distinct  contribution  to  the
honesty  as  well  as  to  the  efficiency  of  popular  govern-
ment. In  other  words,  our  system  is  not,  and  cannot
be  made,  "  purely  representative  ";  the  use  in  elections
of  "  causes  "  and  of  single-issue  leagues  to  "  bind  "
elected  persons  exists  and  is  growing;  it  implies,  in  fact,
the  insistence  of  a  more  educated  and  intelligent  people
upon  taking  a  larger,  a  more  direct,  and  a  more  con-
tinuous part  in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs.

All  this  is  inherent  in  the  growth  of  modern  demo-
cracy. This  instinctive  demand  for  direct  self-govern-
ment is  an  wholesome  sign  of  modern  democracy.  Its
dangers  and  inconveniences  arise  from  the  defects  of  our
present  political  machinery.  It  is  important  to  provide
safe  and  adequate  instruments  for  its  expression.  If  our
contention  is  correct  that  the  people  will  not  be  satisfied
with  those  solutions  of  the  problem  which  either  retain
a  power  of  absolute  veto  for  a  permanently  Conser-
vative House,  or  else  give  unlimited  power  to  a  single
elected  Chamber,  the  most  satisfactory  alternative  is  to
use  the  instrument  of  the  direct  popular  mandate,  which
is  a  clean  implication  of  modern  democracy,  in  order  to
displace  the  veto  of  the  hereditary  House.  Before
discussing  the  other  practical  advantages  and  difficulties
of  this  course  one  preliminary  objection,  however,  must
be  met.

It  may  be  urged  that  a  Referendum,  set  in  operation
by  the  Lords,  will  leave  a  Liberal  Government  still  at
a  disadvantage  as  compared  with  a  Conservative  Govern-
ment. To  bestow  such  a  power  upon  an  unreformed
House  of  Lords  would  virtually  be  to  concede  to  them


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  37

the  claim  made  on  their  behalf  by  Lord  Lansdowne.
Tory  measures  would  go  through  unchallenged.  Every
Liberal  measure  offensive  to  the  interests  or  prejudices
of  the  Members  of  the  Upper  House  might  be  referred
to  the  popular  vote.  Moreover,  if  our  anticipation  be
correct,  a  reformed  Upper  House,  however  appointed
or  elected,  would  be  likely  to  remain  dominantly  Conser-
vative, and  could  use  its  Referendum  power  unequally
as  between  Liberal  or  Conservative  administrations.
The  real  grievance  here,  however,  would  consist  rather
in  a  tendency  to  pass  without  question  Conservative
measures  than  to  reject  without  good  cause  Liberal
measures.  For  to  procure  the  popular  endorsement  by
a  Referendum  of  a  Liberal  measure  they  disliked  would
not  serve  their  real  interests,  and  the  trouble  and  expense
occasioned  by  a  frivolous  appeal  would  strengthen  the
popularity  of  the  measure,  besides  damaging  the  oppo-
sition party  in  the  Commons  with  the  country.

What  is  required  to  secure  substantial  equality  is  a
power  vested  in  a  sufficient  minority  of  the  House  of
Commons,  concurrent  with  the  power  of  the  Lords,  to
procure  a  Referendum.  If  200  Members  of  the  Com-
mons were  able  to  force  the  submission  of  a  Bill  to  the
popular  vote,  it  is  exceedingly  unlikely  that  the  weapon
would  be  abused  or  frequently  used.  For  any  failure  to
secure  a  negative  reply  from  the  electorate  would
seriously  discredit  the  minority  and  would  damage  their
chances  of  return  to  power  at  the  next  General  Election.
There  is,  indeed,  good  reason  to  maintain  that  the
reasonable  check  thus  afforded  to  the  regular  opposition
upon  the  tyranny  of  a  majority  would  go  far  to  remedy
an  abuse  of  power  illustrated  by  several  conspicuous
examples  in  our  time.


To  substitute  a  popular  voting,  or  Referendum,  for
the  veto  of  the  Second  Chamber,  does  not  involve,  as


jm  /n.ifT>ff/*'>0


38  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

is  sometimes  alleged,  any  abandonment  of  representa-
tive government.  The  full  control  of  administration
and  finance,  together  with  the  initiation  and  preparation
of  all  laws,  would  remain  with  the  elected  House  or
Houses;  the  ordinary  course  of  legislation  would  run
through  the  same  forms  as  heretofore,  Bills  passing
into  law  by  the  assent  of  the  two  Houses  and  the  King;
only  controversial  measures  of  great  importance,  proved
by  the  sustained  opposition  of  a  majority  of  the  Upper
House  or  of  a  large  minority  of  the  Lower  House  to  be
of  doubtful  popular  acceptance,  would  be  referred  to
the  popular  vote.  The  frequent  use  of  this  expedient
would  neither  be  desirable  nor  likely  to  occur.  It  could
not  become,  as  seems  possible  at  first  sight,  a  serviceable
weapon  of  obstruction,  for  the  light  use  of  it  in  the
political  game  of  party  or  faction,  difficult  enough  under
the  conditions  of  a  reformed  Upper  House,  would,  by
affording  a  direct  popular  test  of  the  weakness  of  the
opposition,  recoil  against  the  latter,  who  would  reap
the  added  unpopularity  of  causing  needless  trouble  and
expense  to  the  public.  Even  in  Switzerland,  where
no  such  stringent  regulations  for  the  reference  of  laws
exist  as  are  here  proposed,  and  where  30,000  citizens
can,  by  signed  petition,  require  that  any  law  be  sub-
mitted to  the  popular  vote,  this  natural  check  upon
abuse  is  so  far  operative  that  during  thirty-two  years
of  the  existing  Constitution  only  twenty-nine  laws  and
resolutions  were  put  before  the  people.

It  would  be  reasonable,  indeed  necessary,  to  exempt
certain  sorts  of  measures  from  the  operation  of  the
Referendum.  The  most  obvious  exceptions  are  the
Finance  Bill  and  the  related  Appropriation  Bill.  For
these,  though  legislative  in  their  form,  are  in  essence
administrative  acts,  and  both  on  this  account  and  because
of  their  intricate  and  multifarious  character  are  improper
subjects  for  direct  popular  control.  General  finance  is  in
Switzerland  excluded  from  the  operation  of  the  Refer-
endum. It  would  also  be  necessary,  here,  as  again  in


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  39

Switzerland,  to  exclude  certain  measures  of  great
urgency  as  well  as  measures  affecting  foreign  relations.
Bills,  dealing  with  matters  of  small  importance,  or
affecting  small  areas  of  country  or  population,  would
also  be  unsuitable  for  a  national  plebiscite,  though  in
many  cases  provision  for  a  local  Referendum  might  be
inserted  in  the  Act,  as  is  indeed  occasionally  done  now.
Under  the  conditions  here  suo-g-ested  the  number  of
laws  actually  submitted  to  the  popular  vote  would  be
far  fewer  and  at  considerable  intervals.  The  very
practical  difficulty  often  raised  by  politicians  against
the  proposal,  viz.,  the  trouble  and  expense  of  its  admin-
istration, would  be  likely  to  reserve  its  use  for  rare
and  critical  occasions,  when  the  issue  involved  was
keenly  and  closely  contested  both  in  Parliament  and
in  the  country,  and  when  a  direct  and  accurate  measure
of  public  opinion  was  recognised  as  a  prime  condition
of  final  settlement.

But  the  actual  operation  of  this  new  instrument  will
afford  no  measure  of  the  extent  and  value  of  its  influ-
ence. For  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  this
popular  court  of  final  appeal  will  affect  the  whole  course
of  lejrislation,  inducing  both  the  Government  and
individual  legislators  so  far  to  conciliate  the  Opposition
in  Parliament  as  to  diminish  the  probability  of  a  refer-
ence to  the  people,  while  all  measures  will  be  framed
with  a  closer  consideration  of  the  supposed  wishes  of
the  majority  of  the  electorate  than  is  the  case  where  a
Government  possesses  plenary  powers  of  legislation.  In
other  words,  legislation  will  be  made  more  conformable
to  the  will  of  the  people,  though  the  specific  expression
of  that  will  through  the  popular  voting  may  be  seldom
given.  Believers  in  popular  self-government  will  deem
this  a  gain,  though  it  will  doubtless  meet  stout  opposi-
tion among  those  who  profess  the  view  that  elected
persons,  knowing  better  than  the  people  what  the
people  ought  to  want,  should  use  their  legislative  powers
to  put  upon  the  Statute-book  laws  which,  though  not


40  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

acceptable  to  the  people,  are  "  good  for  them."  Now,
those  who  claim  for  the  people  the  right  to  express
their  will  in  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  concrete
measures  of  importance  do  so  upon  two  grounds  of  even
greater  fundamental  importance  than  that  of  finding  a
practical  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  House  of  Lords.
They  hold  that  democracy  is  not  effective  so  long  as
the  representative  system  is  liable  to  work  in  such  a  way
that  laws  can  be  passed  vitally  affecting  the  public  wel-
fare which  do  not  in  fact  possess  the  public  approval.
They  resent  the  "  we-know-better-what-the-people-
want-than-they-know-themselves  "  attitude,  not  because
of  holding  some  abstract  theory  about  popular  govern-
ment, but  because  they  are  aware  that  laws  passed  in
such  a  spirit  are  not  likely  to  be  well  administered  and
well  obeyed.  A  people  endowed  even  with  a  moderate
measure  of  intelligence  will  recognise  the  advisability  of
deferring  to  the  superior  skill  and  knowledge  of  tried
and  trusted  representatives  upon  the  technique  of
legislation,  but  they  will  not  give  to  these  agents  a  per-
fectly free  hand  over  a  term  of  years  to  pass  any  laws
that  seem  good  to  them.  They  will  insist  upon  retain-
ing the  ordinary  customer's  right  to  refuse  "  m:sfits."
In  a  word,  the  fact  that  a  law  is  acceptable  to  the  body
of  the  people  is  a  prime  essential  to  its  "  goodness,"  and
there  is  no  certain  way  of  determining  this  fact  unless
an  opportunity  is  afforded  to  ask  the  people.  Experi-
enced statesmen  in  this  and  other  countries  know,  and
detailed  administrators  know  still  better,  that  many  laws,
embodiments  of  excellent  general  principles  and  con-
structed with  excellent  official  cunning,  fail  to  "  work  "
chiefly  because  of  their  unpopularity  among  the  people
whom  they  were  supposed  to  benefit.  The  annals  of
factory,  temperance,  and  education  legislation  are  full
of  examples  of  this  defect,  due  to  the  desire  of  superior
persons,  representative  or  official,  to  legislate  ahead  of
the  requirements  of  the  people.  The  trust  in  the  people
which  political  Liberalism  professes  must  imply  some


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  41

conviction  that  the  people  knows  what  it  wants,  and
that  it  is  better  to  give  it  what  it  wants  than  something
"  technically  "  better  which  it  does  not  want,  and  will
therefore  misuse  or  neglect.  This  is  no  doctrine
imputing  any  mystic  virtue  to  the  collective  mind,  or
assuming  that  the  people's  will  is  always  wise  and  just;
it  is  merely  the  most  obvious  application  of  the  maxim
that  o-ood  government  involves  "  the  consent  of  the
governed."  If  the  great  body  of  the  electorate  is  as
ignorant  and  as  foolish  as  it  is  often  represented,  it  will
sometimes  make  mistakes,  accepting  or  rejecting  the
wrong  laws  when  submitted  to  its  vote.  But  this  is  a
necessary  incident  in  the  education  of  democracy,  as  in
that  of  the  individual  personality.  If  the  people  are  not
afforded  the  opportunity  of  making  mistakes  and  learn-
ing from  them,  what  sort  of  education  are  they  getting,
and  what  sort  of  progress  can  they  make  ?  It  is  here
that  we  are  brought  to  the  very  kernel  of  the  case  for
the  direct  occasional  participation  of  the  people  in  acts
of  government.  If  it  is  desirable  to  work  towards  the
idea  of  intelligent  responsible  democracy,  a  more  real
duty  must  be  imposed  upon  the  electorate  than  that  of
plunging  into  a  sensational  sporting  contest  once  in  six
years  and  registering  a  single  vote  upon  a  medley  of
personalities  and  party  cries.  The  demand  that  man-
dates shall  issue  from  the  people,  determining  the  fate
of  important  and  disputed  measures,  is  not  only  a  reason-
able way  of  settling  issues  that  may  arise  between  the
two  legislative  Houses;  it  is  the  only  sound  method  of
educating  the  democracy  for  the  work  of  self-govern-
ment. The  demand  for  specific  popular  judgments  in
concrete  cases  stimulates  interest  and  imparts  reality  to
politics.  The  "  people,"  it  is  true,  may  not  understand
the  full  details  of  the  Bills  presented  for  their  judgment,
nor  will  they  be  competent  to  appraise  the  technical
merits  of  the  drafting.  But  they  will  find  trusted
advisers  and  exponents,  skilled  interpreters  who  will
set  forth  effectively  the  substance  of  the  Bills,  and  they


42  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

will  eke  out  their  own  understanding  of  the  measure
by  the  wisdom  of  accepted  guides.  The  result  will  be  a
genuine  though  doubtless  limited  expression  of  the
general  will,  and  an  education  in  practical  politics  that
is  of  inestimable  value.

The  fundamental  objection  to  the  single-Chamber
solution  of  the  problem  was  that  it  poised  the  whole
legislative  fabric  upon  the  narrow  pedestal  of  a  single
dominant  group  within  a  single  House.  The  proposal
to  retain  a  second  reformed  Chamber  with  real
legislative  influence,  but  to  give  the  determinant  voice
in  grave  disputed  issues  to  the  people,  broadens  and
strengthens  the  basis  of  sovereignty  by  distributing  more
widely  the  direct  responsibility  for  legislation.

It  will  help  to  strengthen  the  respect  for  law,  for
people  value  more  that  which  they  have  had  a  hand  in
making;  it  will  also  increase  the  stability  of  law,  for
Acts  upon  which  the  people  have  set  the  express  seal  of
their  approval  present  no  opportunity  for  easy  reversal
on  a  change  of  government.  These  economies  of
legislative  energy  are  attested  by  Swiss  experience  as
attending  the  confirmation  of  critical  acts  of  legislation
by  the  vote  of  the  people.

VI

Advocates  of  the  Referendum  as  the  best  substitute
for  the  veto  of  the  Lords  are  not  obliged  to  show  that
it  is  a  flawless  instrument.  They  need  only  show  that
it  is  better  than  an  unchecked  single-Chamber  Govern-
ment under  our  party  system,  and  that  it  is  more
effective  than  any  other  check  that  is  proposed.

To  destroy  the  Lords'  veto  and  to  do  no  more  is
sometimes  represented  as  if  it  were  nothing  else  than
the  clearing  away  of  an  obstruction.  But  this  is  not
the  case.  Such  a  course  would  confer  upon  the  House
of  Commons  a  new  and  unlimited  power  not  only  to
make  laws  but  to  alter  the  Constitution  of  the  country.


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  43

This  power,  greater  than  any  other  snigle  elective  body
in  the  civilised  world  possesses,  the  people  of  this
country  would  not  be  willing  to  entrust  to  the  House
of  Commons — that  is,  of  course,  to  the  majority  for
the  time  being  of  any  and  every  House  of  Commons —
when  they  understood  what  they  were  asked  to  do.
They  would  refuse  for  three  reasons — first,  because  they
would  hold  it  rash  to  dispense  with  a  second  judgment;
secondly,  because  they  would  know  that  the  real  law-
makers would  not  be  the  freely  voting  representatives
of  the  people  but  a  non-elected  Cabinet;  thirdly,  because
they  are  aware  that  a  general  election  affords  no  oppor-
tunity of  testing  the  popular  will  upon  any  single
legislative  issue  apart  from  other  issues.  Any  other
real  check  that  is  proposed  consists  of  a  reformed  Second
Chamber  endowed  with  more  valid  authority  than  the
present  House  of  Lords.  The  overwhelming  majority
of  Liberals  will  be  convinced,  when  they  look  closely
into  the  various  proposals  for  constituting  such  a
Chamber,  that  under  all  of  them  it  will  possess  a  strong
permanent  conservative  bias.  Though  they  might
desire  to  confer  a  consultative  authority  on  such  a  Second
Chamber,  they  would  not  leave  it  with  a  veto.

If  these  statements  are  correct,  some  sort  of  Refer-
endum seems  to  present  itself  as  the  only  alternative.
In  this  event  the  defects  and  difficulties  which  critics
point  out  in  the  working  of  a  Referendum  in  this  country
may  have  some  substance  and  yet  may  not  dispose  of
its  claim  to  be  the  safest  and  most  feasible  way  out  of
the  impasse.  The  Referendum  will  not  do  everything.
If,  as  is  sometimes  urged,  it  is  only  put  in  operation
when  the  two  Chambers  disagree,  it  seems  likely  to  act
at  present  as  a  one-sided  weapon,  for  it  fails  to  strike
against  the  practical  unicameralism  that  prevails  when
a  Conservative  Government  is  in  office.  It  is  held
inequitable  that  the  Lords  should  have  a  power  to  force
a  Referendum  which  they  would  only  use  when  Liberals
were  in  office. To  this  objection  two  answers  can  be


44  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

given.  The  first  use  of  a  Referendum  would  be  to  force
a  reform  of  the  Second  Chamber  through  the  existing
House  of  Lords.  But  since  even  a  reformed  Second
Chamber  is  bound,  as  we  have  said,  to  have  a  strong
conservative  bias,  something  more  is  needed.  If,  then,
the  Referendum  is  to  be  made  an  instrument  of  even-
handed  justice,  it  must  be  made  competent  not  only  for
the  Second  Chamber  but  for  a  sufficient  minority  in  the
House  of  Commons  to  bring  about  the  popular  appeal.
But  if  either  the  Upper  House  or  the  full  Opposition
in  the  House  of  Commons  can  apply  the  Referendum,
will  not  every  contentious  measure  be  put  to  the
popular  vote  ?  The  answer  is,  No.  Several  motives
will  counteract  such  a  tendency.  The  first  and  chief
is  the  unpopularity  which  would  attend  a  light  or
frequent  use;  such  abuse  would  recoil  injuriously  upon
the  popularity  of  the  party  practising  it.  Again,  the
existence  of  the  popular  reference  would  act  as  a
peace-maker  between  the  two  Houses,  especially  when
the  Upper  House  was  reformed.  Critics  of  the
Referendum  fail  to  take  account  of  one  of  the  most
valuable  effects  of  that  measure — its  reaction  upon  the
nature  of  the  Bills  that  are  constructed.  The  temper
and  discretion  of  the  House  of  Commons  would  dispose
it  to  frame  measures  which  the  consultative  Chamber
would  accept,  and  to  adopt  the  amendments  of  a  body
that  had  no  power  to  compel  adoption.  The  Second
Chamber  would  cease  to  desire  to  be  lee^icidal  now  that
it  had  lost  the  power  to  kill.  Still  more  important,  as
the  experience  of  Switzerland  shows,  is  the  effect
upon  the  structure  of  those  measures  which,  from  the
importance  of  their  character,  are  likely  to  be  submitted
to  a  popular  vote.  The  result  is  an  Act  not  made  to
suit  the  loo;ic  or  the  sentiments  of  some  idealist  reformer
who  claims  to  know  better  than  the  people  what  is  good
for  them  and  what  they  ought  to  want,  but  an  Act  made
to  work,  because  it  is  framed  as  closely  as  possible  in  the
image  of  the  popular  will.


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  45

In  other  words,  a  law  which  rt^iay  be  subjected  to  the
endorsement  of  the  people  will  be  a  different  and  a
better  law  than  one  made  in  the  present  cloudland  of  our
Parliamentary  procedure,  for  the  goodness  of  a  law
depends  very  largely  upon  its  acceptability  by  the  magis-
trates and  other  officials  who  execute  it  and  by  the
citizens  called  upon  to  obey  it.  If,  for  example,  we  had
one  or  two  recently  recorded  judgments  of  the  popular
mind  upon  some  salient  aspect  of  the  land  or  the  drink
problem,  our  Legislature  would  be  far  better  qualified
to  frame  a  Small  Holdings  or  a  Licensing  Bill  that
would  work  successfully  than  now.  Even  had  there
been  no  previous  popular  vote  upon  the  particular  sub-
ject for  legislation,  the  necessity  of  framing  a  Bill  likely
to  be  accepted  by  the  people  would  at  once  give  more
reality  to  the  debates  and  would  produce  more  practical
and  efficacious  laws.

This  will  no  doubt  be  disputed,  but  only  by  those
Liberals  Avho  under  a  professed  or  real  enthusiasm  for
a  "  representative  system  "  conceal  a  deep-seated  distrust
of  democracy.  The  representatives,  they  urge,  are  as
a  rule,  somewhat  wiser  and  better  thah  those  who  elect
them;  they  are  more  competent  to  legislate  than  the
masses;  the  laws  they  pass  are  somewhat  better  than
the  people  would  at  once  be  willing  to  accept.  Now
those  who  hold  the  Referendum  essential  to  popular  self-
government  do  not  deny  the  superior  ability  of  the
representative;  they  desire  to  use  that  ability  in  the
framing  of  measures  designed  to  express  the  popular
will,  but  they  insist  upon  the  right  of  the  people  to  have
the  opportunity  of  declaring  whether  certain  measures
do  express  the  popular  will.  They  wish  to  retain  that
liberty  which  every  wise  man  retains  throughout  life
in  his  dealings  with  specialists  whom  he  invites  to
execute  his  orders — the  right  to  refuse  the  article  on  the
ground  that  it  does  not  carry  out  the  order.  This  does
not  imply  a  narrow  construction  of  delegacy;  the  elected
Legislature under  a  democracy  will  be  entitled not


46  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

merely  to  pass  measures  for  which  they  may  consider
they  have  an  express  popular  mandate,  but  others  which
have  assumed  importance  since  an  election;  their  dis-
cretion will  be  real  and  their  authority  will  carry  weight,
but  they  will  not  regard  it  as  their  duty  to  frame  any
law  which  they  believe  the  majority  of  the  people  would
refuse  to  adopt.

It  is  said  often  that  the  popular  vote  will  be  too  con-
servative, that  it  will  reject  measures  which  are  not  only
good  but  which  if  they  were  allowed  to  become  operative
would  be  generally  recognised  as  good.  There  is  some
force  in  this  objection;  it  is  a  defect  of  the  "  quality  "
of  the  Referendum.  There  is  a  certain  inertia  of  the
popular  will  that  will  retard  the  rate  of  progress,  a
conservatism  if  you  will.  But  this  is  safer  and  better  for
democracy  than  the  alternative  "  faking  "  of  progress  by
pushing  legislation  ahead  of  the  popular  will.  It  is,
upon  the  whole,  far  more  profitable  for  reformers  to  be
compelled  to  educate  the  people  to  a  genuine  acceptance
of  their  reform  than  to  "  work  it  "  by  some  "  pull "  or
"  deal  "  inside  a  party  machine.  Moreover,  it  is  not
true  that  such  practical  experience  as  is  available  shows
that  the  "  Referendum  "  is  a  weapon  of  conservatism.
The  Swiss  people  have  during  the  last  thirty  years  made
by  the  use  of  it  an  advance  in  social  and  industrial
legislation  at  least  as  great  as  that  of  any  other  civilised
country  in  the  world.  The  deduction  from  Swiss
experience  to  the  effect  that  the  Referendum  works
conservatively  because  a  few  more  laws  are  rejected  than
accepted  is  entirely  invalid,  for  a  Referendum  is  only
demanded  for  those  laws  which  it  is  held  likely  will
be  rejected;  the  great  majority  of  laws  are  tacitly
accepted  by  the  people  in  the  form  in  which  they  have
been  adopted  by  the  Legislature.

It  may,  however,  freely  be  admitted  that  when  a
nation  possesses  a  fully  and  accurately  representative
system  the  Referendum  might  be  needed  only  as  a  rare
expedient  for  some  sudden  grave  emergency  when  it


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  47

was  desirable  to  obtain  a  direct  popular  judgment.  But
the  refusal  even  to  consider  the  popular  appeal,  on  the
ground  that  we  already  possess  such  a  representative
system,  is  almost  hypocritical.  The  real  control  of  our
legislation  is  in  the  hands,  not  of  the  body  of  elected
representatives,  but  in  those  of  a  small  Cabinet,  selected
mainly  out  of  a  little  aristo-plutocracy  with  a  leaven  of
successful  lawyers,  and  of  a  powerful  bureaucracy  whose
class  sympathies  are  natural  and  notorious.  The
Referendum  must  be  recognised  not  indeed  as  a  substi-
tute for,  but  as  a  necessary  supplement  to,  representation
in  any  nation  aiming  at  popular  self-government.

The  fears  that  its  adoption  must  damage  the  political
calibre  of  the  legislature  are  quite  groundless.  Only  a
minute  fraction  of  the  work  of  Parliament,  in  such  a
country  as  this,  could  be  actually  submitted  to  the
popular  vote,  and  even  were  it  otherwise,  the  effect,
as  attested  once  more  by  Switzerland,  would  be  to
diminish  the  irrational  fierceness  of  party  and  to  secure
a  longer  and  a  more  continuous  political  career  for  well-
known  and  competent  politicians.  For  a  Swiss  citizen
will  support  the  election  of  a  "  tried  "  man  though  he
may  disapprove  his  views  on  one  or  two  important
topics,  because  he  knows  that  the  "  Referendum  "  will
enable  him  to  correct  any  "  misrepresentation "  on
these  issues.

The  objection  that  an  adverse  vote  would  shake  the
authority  of  a  Government  and  force  frequent  dissolu-
tions disappears  before  a  closer  inspec'tion.  The
Minister  responsible  for  a  defeated  measure  might  be
driven  to  resign,  though  even  that  course  does  not
seem  inevitable.  But  when  the  final  responsibility  was
undertaken  by  the  people,  as  would  be  the  case  when  a
popular  vote  was  taken,  the  responsibility  of  a  Ministry
would  be  proportionately  relieved;  their  action  in
framing  a  difficult  and  doubtful  measure  on  a  matter  of
importance  would  be  regarded  rather  as  tentative  and
experimental, and not  as one on which their  entire


48  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

reputation  was  at  stake.  It  is  no  doubt  possible  that  the
popular  rejection  of  a  measure  of  the  first  importance
might  once  or  twice  in  a  decade  so  damage  the  Govern-
ment that  they  deemed  a  dissolution  advisable.  But  it
is  not  evident  that  this  mode  of  selecting  an  opportunity
for  a  dissolution  would  be  contrary  to  the  public  welfare
or  particularly  inconvenient.

It  is,  however,  right  to  admit  that  the  adoption  of  a
Referendum,  even  for  rare  use,  would  probably  produce
some  important  changes  in  our  unwritten  Constitution,
particularly  as  regards  the  collective  responsibility  of
the  Government.  I  think  it  likely  that  reflection  will
lead  to  the  conviction  that  these  changes  are  likely  on
the  whole  to  be  salutary  rather  than  the  reverse.  The
issue  is,  however,  too  large  and  intricate  for  profitable
discussion  here.  But  those  who  express  such  timidity
about  the  constitutional  reactions  of  the  Referendum
may  be  reminded  that  their  own  proposals,  simply  to
destroy  the  Lords'  veto  and  confer  complete  autocracy
not  on  the  House  of  Commons  but  on  the  Cabinet
would  be  fraught  with  constitutional  consequences  far
graver.

One  word  in  conclusion.  Advocates  of  the  Referen-
dum do  not  claim  that  it  may  not  sometimes  lead  to  the
rejection  of  good  measures  and  the  adoption  of  bad
ones.  But  they  affirm  that  these  acts  of  judgment,
with  their  good  or  evil  consequences,  are  essential  to
the  art  of  self-government  in  a  nation  as  in  an  indi-
vidual. The  summoning  of  the  people  to  express  a
separate  concrete  judgment  and  to  undertake  solemnly
the  responsibility  of  a  piece  of  political  conduct  is
essential  to  the  education  of  democracy.  It  is  not  true
that  the  people  will  be  invited  to  disentangle  and  assess
the  intricate  details  of  legal  formulas.  Those  who  say
this  have  not  studied  the  working  of  the  Referendum.
Though  the  vote  is  taken  on  the  merits  of  an  entire  bill,
the  education  and  discussion  which  precedes  the  vote
are  such  as  to  inform  the  average  citizen  not  merely  of


LORDS  OR  REFERENDUM?  49

the  principles  but  of  the  practical  effects  which  the  law  is
likely  to  produce,  and  thus  evoke  for  legislation  that
general  "  wisdom  of  the  people  "  which,  whether  it  be
great  or  small,  sets  the  true  limit  upon  the  pace  of
popular  progress  through  legislation  or  otherwise.


Chapter III
THE SWISS  REFERENDUM

The  presupposition  of  representative  government  is
that  the  people  are  not  able  or  willing  to  consider  and
determine  concrete  acts  of  polity,  but  that  they  are  able
and  willing  to  select  from  among  themselves  persons
competent  to  consider  and  determine  on  their  behalf,
choosing  these  persons  not  with  particular  reference  to
their  supposed  fitness  for  dealing  with  anyone  or  several
known  issues,  but  for  some  general  capacity  applicable
to  the  whole  range  of  government  that  falls  within  the
scope  of  their  office.

Only  certain  simple  issues  of  the  ward,  the  village,
or  in  some  instances  the  city,  it  is  held,  fall  sufficiently
within  the  cognisance  of  the  mass  of  citizens  to  be  safely
entrusted  to  their  direct  decision.  As  the  area  and
population  of  the  modern  State  expands,  and  the  number,
variety,  and  importance  of  public  functions  increase,  it
appears  essential  that  the  body  of  citizens  should  depend
more  and  more  upon  the  judgment  of  representatives
for  the  makino-  of  laws  and  the  s^eneral  conduct  of
government.  Regarded,  however,  as  a  mode  of  de-
mocracy, this  representative  system  betrays  serious
defects,  and  in  that  country  where  it  is  most  widely

used  the  defects  are  gravest. The  oro-anisation  of  the

1  •  •  •

party,  which  seems  essential  to  the  representative  system,

has  led,  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere,  to  the  con-
struction of  party  "  machines  "  so  strong  and  so  ably
operated  that  instead  of  the  will  of  the  people  flowing
freely  upwards  by  processes  of  delegation  and  election,

50


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  51

and  thus  finding  expression  in  policies  determined  by
men  who  are  the  genuine  choice  of  the  people,  the  will
of  the  machine-politician,  or  his  paymaster,  is  pumped
down  the  machine  from  above  and  comes  up  again
with  a  false  and  merely  formal  register  of  the  popular
will.  For  the  party-manager  is  apt  to  let  out  the
machine  to  the  highest  bidder,  and  those  organised
business  interests  which  have  most  to  gain  by  a  success-
ful manipulation  of  politics  and  most  to  fear  from  the
free  intelligent  expression  of  the  popular  will,  hire  it
and  use  it  to  secure  that  the  chosen  representatives  shall
be  their  creatures,  and  that  their  will  shall  obtain  the
popular  endorsement.

The  extent  of  this  corruption  of  the  representative
system  will,  of  course,  vary  widely  with  local  conditions.
In  some  States  the  crudest  forms  of  bribery  prevail  and
gross  misrepresentation  is  procured;  in  others  the  arts
of  influence  are  subtler  and  less  pervasive.  The
failure  is  everywhere  relative;  the  popular  will  is  not
rendered  impotent;  even  in  States  where  the  party  boss
and  the  machine  are  most  powerful,  known  though
ever-changing  limits  are  set  upon  its  management  of
representatives;  any  transgression  beyond  these  limits
arouses  a  ground-swell  of  popular  feeling  which  throws
out  of  gear  the  machine  and  lifts  into  power,  or  at  least
into  office,  men  who  are  genuine  representatives.  But
this  safety-valve  is  unreliable  and  insufficient.  For,  as
a  rule,  these  popular  movements  are  short-lived;  it  is  a
case  of  the  weak,  diffused  interest  of  the  many  against
the  strong,  concentrated  and  organised  interest  of  the
few.  Wherever  powerful  business  interests  are
founded  upon  or  supported  by  legal  privileges  in  the
shape  of  charters,  tariffs,  or  other  concessions,  wherever
lucrative  offices  are  available  for  party  spoils,  wherever
public  expenditure  can  be  made  a  source  of  private  profit
through  contracts,  loans,  and  subsidies,  this  skilled
manipulation  of  the  representative  system  will  continue.

How  far  these  abuses  of  the  representative  system  can


52  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

be  remedied  by  schemes  of  proportionate  representation
tending  to  displace  the  two-party  by  the  group  system,  or
by  slower  processes  of  educating  the  electorate  so  as  to
weaken  the  dictation  of  the  party-boss,  are  questions
which  cannot  here  be  discussed  with  advantage.  For  a
deeper  issue,  coming  gradually  to  the  front  of  practical
politics  in  modern  democratic  countries,  demands
priority  of  attention,  viz.,  the  tendency  to  question  and
to  qualify  the  practice  of  unrestricted  agency  involved
in  a  representative  system  which  claims  for  elected
Houses  a  carte  blanche  in  legislative  and  other  acts  of
government  for  a  period  extending  over  several  years.
With  the  development  of  explicit  party  programmes,
election  addresses,  party  and  individual  pledges,  the
theory  and  practice  of  unlimited  agency  have  in  this  and
other  countries  been  subjected  to  such  limitations  as
these  methods  of  instruction  admit.  In  other  words,
the  purely  representative  system  is  qualified  by  a  loose
and  extremely  unsatisfactory  form  of  "  mandate."
Though  the  form  of  election  in  such  a  country  as  Great
Britain  still  permits  and  presupposes  that  elected  repre-
sentatives shall  be  absolutely  free  to  exercise  their
legislative  functions  during  a  period  of  not  more  than
seven  years,  every  Government  more  or  less  avowedly
defends  its  concrete  acts  of  policy  as  an  interpretation  of
the  national  will,  expressed  either  through  a  positive
mandate  given  by  a  general  election,  or  through  such
tokens  of  consent  and  approval  as  are  afforded  by  bye-
elections  or  by  less  formal  expressions  of  public  opinion.

A  striking  example  of  the  growing  acceptance  of  this
modification  of  the  representative  system  is  afforded
by  the  present  defence  of  the  legicidal  actions  of  the
House  of  Lords  on  the  ground  that  they  are  the  self-
constituted  defenders  of  the  doctrine  of  a  national
mandate.

Now  if  it  is  desirable,  or  inevitable,  that  the  represen-
tative system  should  be  qualified  by  popular  mandates,
it  is  quite  evident  that  such  a  method  of  conveying


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  S3

mandates  as  exists  in  Great  Britain  is  utterly  defective.
If  the  assent  of  a  majority  of  the  electors  be  regarded
as  the  qualification  of  a  mandate,  the  proceedings  of  a
general  election,  in  which  a  heterogeneous  mass  of  pro-
posals is  thrown  down  for  popular  judgment,  quite
evidently  provide  no  means  of  ascertaining  such  assent.
Even  as  regards  the  one  or  two  measures  which  figure  as
predominant  issues  in  an  election,  there  exists  no
absolutely  certain  mode  of  determining  whether  a
majority,  still  less  what  majority,  of  the  electorate
approves  or  rejects  them;  as  regards  those  of  secondary
or  tertiary  interest,  it  is  idle  to  pretend  that  any  mandate
can  be  thus  conveyed;  while  other  issues,  sometimes  of
supreme  importance,  which  come  up  unforeseen  during
the  lifetime  of  a  parliament,  are  not  susceptible  of  any
sort  of  genuine  mandate.  If  then  a  popular  mandate
is  to  be  a  real  factor  in  representative  government,
some  method  must  be  devised  for  taking  a  separate
popular  vote  upon  a  particular  issue,  thus  giving  order
and  explicitness  to  a  political  force  which  is  at  present
vague  and  irregular  in  application.  Upon  the  working
of  this  popular  mandate  Switzerland  furnishes  the  only
large  body  of  modern  experience.  Of  the  nineteen  full
cantons  and  the  six  half-cantons  comprising  the  federa-
tion, nine  possess  an  obligatory  Referendum,  and  eight  a
facultative  Referendum,  enabling  the  people  to  exercise
a  veto  upon  any  law,  with  certain  rare  exceptions;  six
others  retain  the  primitive  hands  gem  einde  or  State-
Commune,  in  which  all  laws  are  submitted  for  sanction
to  the  assembly  of  citizens;  two  cantons  only,  Fribourg
and  Valais,  retain  a  purely  representative  government.
Where  the  Referendum  is  facultative,  a  valid  demand
for  its  application  requires  the  endorsement  of  a  fixed
number  of  electors,  and  the  law  submitted  is  accepted  or
rejected  by  a  majority  of  those  actually  voting.  An
obligatory  Referendum  exists  for  all  constitutional
changes  in  the  cantons,  a  majority  of  the  actual  voters
finally  determining  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the


54  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

proposed  change,  with  the  exception  of  a  single  canton,
Zug,  where  the  majority  of  registered  voters  must
tender  an  affirmative  vote  to  secure  acceptance.

Federal  laws  passed  by  the  two  Houses  of  Assembly,
the  Council  of  States  and  the  National  Council,  must  be
submitted  to  a  popular  vote  on  the  demand  of  30,000
citizens,  an  absolute  majority  of  recorded  votes  deter-
mining the  acceptance  or  rejection.  Changes  in  the
Federal  Constitution,  general  or  particular,  whether
initiated  by  a  demand  of  50,000  citizens,  or  by  a  House
of  Assembly,  are  finally  submitted  to  a  popular  vote,
acceptance  in  this  case,  however,  involving  an  affirmative
vote  both  of  a  majority  of  the  citizens  actually  voting
and  of  the  cantons.

Thus  it  appears  that  the  people  retains  a  power  of  veto
upon  all  important  constitutional  and  legislative  enact-
ments both  in  the  cantons  and  in  the  confederation.
While  this  Referendum  is  only  a  part  of  the  machinery
of  popular  sovereignty  in  Switzerland,  it  is  much  the
most  important  part,  and  may  legitimately  form  a
subject  for  separate  consideration.  Historians  some-
times trace  its  origins  in  the  political  history  of  the
Grisons  and  Valais,  or  in  customs  prevailing  in  Berne
and  Zurich  duringr  the  fifteentli  and  sixteenth  centuries.
Others  lay  stress  upon  the  influence  of  Rousseau,  whose
Contrat  Social  must  have  deeply  impressed  his  country-
men during  the  period  when  their  old  institutions  were
thrown  by  Napoleon  into  the  melting-pot  to  re-issue
in  new  rational  moulds.  But  though  ancient  precedent
and  modern  philosophic  reflection  may  have  exerted
some  conscious  influence,  the  adoption  of  the  Referen-
dum and  other  accompanying  checks  on  the  newly-
applied  representative  system  must  be  attributed  mainly
to  the  self-protecting  instinct  of  Swiss  social  democracy
in  provising  a  tolerably  obvious  set  of  checks  upon
what  Whitman  termed  "  the  never-ending  audacity  of
elected  persons."

The  history  of  genuine  representative  government


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  55

in  the  cantons  and  the  confederation  was  not  of  long
duration,  perhaps  not  long  enough  fully  to  test  its
potentialities.  Prior  to  the  nineteenth  century  there
was  nothing  that  could  rightly  be  termed  a  federal
constitution,  and  the  actual  power  exercised  through
the  constantly  changing  federal  league  was  slight;
among  the  cantons  which  were  genuinely  self-govern-
ing the  Lands gemeinde  was  the  prevalent  type,  though
in  the  cities  and  certain  dominant  cantons  wielding
power  over  subject  territories  the  government  was
usually  vested  in  representative  bodies,  often  of  an
oligarchic  character.

Although  the  Federal  Agreement  of  1 8 1 5  which  laid
the  basis  for  a  stronger  national  union  gave  an  impetus  to
the  representative  system  in  the  cantons,  that  system  con-
tinued until  1 8  30  to  be  operated  by  local  aristocracies  with
no  real  pretence  of  popular  control.  Thus  it  was  not  until
the  years  following  the  French  Revolution  of  1830  that
the  Swiss  entered  on  their  experiment  of  representative
democracy.  Between  1830  and  1834  almost  all  the
cantons  set  up  single-chamber  legislatures  with  no
presidential  veto,  based  upon  universal  suffrage  and
equal  electoral  districts.  Full  legislative  powers  were
conferred  upon  the  great  councils  thus  elected,  and  the
small  council,  forming  the  executive,  was  entirely
nominated  by  the  members  of  the  great  council.  The
makers  of  these  constitutions  threw  themselves  whole-
heartedly into  the  logic  of  representative  democracy.
Since  the  people  were  to  govern  through  agents  the
latter  must  enjoy  all  the  powers  and  prerogatives  of  the
former.  The  great  council  was,  therefore,  endowed
with  complete  legislative  power  as  regards  all  matters
not  expressly  reserved  by  the  federal  constitution.  It
was  also  the  sole  source  of  executive  and  judicial  power.
No  adequate  safeguards  against  hasty  legislation
existed.  A  bill  moved  quickly  through  the  council,
even  in  those  cantons  where  three  separate  readings
were  required,  and  passed  into  law  without  any  external


56  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

discussion  or  sanction.  Administrative  orders  were
even  exempt  from  these  slight  restrictions  or  delays,  so
that  the  great  council  could,  when  it  chose,  govern  by
executive  authority.

The  results  did  not  prove  satisfactory  to  the  people,
who  having  stripped  themselves  of  every  shred  of
sovereignty,  handing  it  over  to  an  elected  council,  dis-
covered that  the  latter  developed,  in  its  majority,  a  will
which  was  not  that  of  the  people,  but  which  operated
independently  of  and  often  in  antagonism  to  it.  Interests
re-established  themselves  in  the  seat  of  authority;  ill-
considered  laws  got  into  the  Statute-book,  and  elected
persons  without  the  fear  of  the  people  before  their  eyes
neglected  or  abused  their  trust.

The  defenders  of  representation  insisted  that  the  only
essential  remedy  was  shorter  parliaments,  and  they
proposed  to  limit  the  duration  of  an  assembly  to  one  or
two  years,  and  in  some  instances  to  put  in  the  hands  of
the  people  a  right  of  demanding  a  dissolution.  But
the  democrats  refused  to  be  put  off  with  reforms  which
in  their  judgment  were  not  even  half-measures,  and  in
all  the  cantons  a  prolonged  agitation  took  place  in
favour  of  restoring  to  the  people  the  right  of  initiating,
discussing,  and  sanctioning  their  own  laws.  After  a
series  of  timid  experiments  in  the  late  'thirties  and  the
'forties,  the  German  cantons  came  to  adopt  the  obligatory
or  the  facultative  Referendum  as  their  chief  instrument
of  popular  control,  sometimes  coupling  with  it  the
right  of  popular  initiative  which  is  to-day  possessed  by
ten  cantons.  The  French  and  Italian  cantons  fell
slowly  into  line,  until  by  1880  all,  with  the  exception  of
Fribourg,  had  adopted  some  form  of  Referendum  for
ordinary  laws.  In  1874  the  optional  Referendum  was
embodied  in  the  new  federal  constitution.

Although  this  brief  sketch  of  the  movement  in  the
cantons  is  historically  important  in  showing  the  ongms
of  federal  democracy  in  the  instincts  of  local  self-
government,  it  can  hardly  be  pretended  that  a  detailed


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  57

study  of  the  Referendum  in  such  tiny  areas  of  govern-
ment, where  only  in  one  instance  does  the  population
reach  half  a  million,  can  throw  much  serviceable  light
upon  its  virtues  or  defects  as  an  instrument  of  national
democracy,  which  is  the  task  we  have  before  us.

What  is  of  importance  for  us  is  the  fact  that  for  a
third  of  a  century  a  European  nationality,  comprising
now  three  and  a  quarter  millions  of  population,  has
exercised  a  right  ot  final  veto  over  the  legislative  acts
of  its  elective  assemblies  in  a  federal  State  whose  legisla-
tive power  greatly  exceeds  in  competency  that  of  the
American  Union.

The  right  is  thus  laid  down  in  the  Constitution  of
1874  :  "  Federal  laws,  decrees,  and  resolutions  can  only
be  passed  by  the  agreement  of  the  two  councils.
Federal  laws  are  submitted  to  the  people  to  be  accepted
or  rejected  by  them  if  a  demand  be  made  by  30,000
qualified  citizens  or  by  eight  cantons.  Federal  decrees
which  are  of  general  application,  and  which  are  not
specially  urgent,  are  likewise  submitted  upon  demand."
(Art.  89.)

"  The  confederation  shall  by  law  establish  the  forms
and  the  suspensory  intervals  to  be  observed  in  the  case
of  the  popular  votes." (Art.  90.)

It  is  evident  that  a  mode  of  evading  the  popular  vote
is  here  provided.  What  is  a  law  and  what  a  decree,  and
what  decrees  are  "urgent"  or  of  "special"  application.''
No  definitions  of  these  terms  are  provided  either  in  the
constitution  or  in  the  law  of  1874  regulating  the  pro-
cedure of  the  Referendum.  The  determination  of
these  questions  is  conferred  by  the  law  of  1874  upon
the  Federal  Assembly,  which  is  thereby  enabled  to
decide  by  a  majority  vote  that  a  particular  proposal  Is  a
decree  of  such  special  or  urgent  nature  that  it  shall  forth-
with come  into  operation  without  submission  to  the
popular  vote.

Though  no  general  rule  determining  the  matters  with-
held from  the  Referendum  has  been  laid  down,  certain


5§  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

subjects  have  been  reserved  by  custom.  Of  these  the
two  most  important  are  treaties  with  foreign  States  and
federal  finance,  including  under  the  latter  Budget  esti-
mates and  appropriations  for  war  material.  Other
matters  habitually  reserved  are  :  ( i )  Resolutions  upon  in-
dividual cases,  as  for  instance  decisions  of  administrative
disputes;  (2)  resolutions  voting  subsidies  for  urgent
public  works  such  as  protection  of  rivers  and  construction
of  roads.

The  institution  of  the  Referendum  for  ordinary
legislation  involves  a  certain  machinery,  not  merely  of
voting,  but  of  education.  All  ordinary  laws  and  decrees,
therefore,  which  have  been  passed  by  the  Assembly  are
forwarded  to  the  Federal  Council,  which  publishes  them
and  sends  copies  to  the  cantonal  governments  for  circu-
lation among  the  communes.  Thus  the  people  have
brought  directly  to  their  notice  the  bills  and  decrees
which  are  amenable  to  a  Referendum.  The  method  of
demanding  and  applying  the  Federal  Referendum  is  as
follows.

As  we  have  seen,  this  demand  may  be  preferred  by
30,000  voters  or  by  eight  cantons.  The  latter  method  is
so  difficult  as  to  be  virtually  inoperative.  The  party  or
interest  opposed  to  a  law  and  desiring  to  defeat  it  on  a
Referendum  must  within  ninety  days  secure  the  personal
signatures  of  30,000  active  citizens.  This  of  course
implies  organisation  and  canvass,  and  every  signature
must  be  attested  by  the  communal  authorities  of  the
place  where  the  demand  is  signed  as  a  guarantee  of
validity.  When  the  petition  is  sent  in,  it  is  submitted
to  examination  by  the  Federal  Council,  which  is  em-
powered to  cancel  the  votes  when  there  is  any  informality
in  the  declaration  or  the  attestation.  If  the  required
number  of  valid  signatures  is  obtained,  the  Federal
Council  organises  the  popular  voting,  fixes  and  announces
the  day,  informs  the  cantonal  councils  and  secures  the
prompt  circulation  of  the  law  or  decree  to  be  voted  upon.
The  bare  text  of  the  law  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  every


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  59

voter,  with  no  report  of  the  debates  or  other  explanatory
matter.

The  voting  takes  place  simultaneously  throughout
the  whole  country,  and  every  male  citizen  over  twenty
years  of  age  and  qualified  according  to  his  cantonal  law
is  entitled  to  vote.  The  voting  paper  simply  contains
the  question  :  "  Do  you  accept  the  federal  law  relating  to
(here  the  general  title  of  the  law),  Yes  or  No.?"  The
voter  has  simply  to  write  his  "  Yes  "  or  "  No."

In  order  to  save  time  and  trouble  it  is  usual  for
several  votes  to  be  taken  at  the  same  time  and  upon  the
same  voting  paper.

On  the  following  page  is  a  copy  of  a  Federal  Referen-
dum taken  in  1896,  containing  as  its  second  item  the
important  law  on  railroad  accounts  designed  to  lead  up
to  the  nationalisation  of  the  railroad  system.

After  the  voting  each  electoral  district  or  commune
draws  up  its  report  containing  four  columns,  in  which
are  recorded  :  (i)  The  number  of  registered  voters;  (2)
the  number  of  actual  voters;  (3)  the  number  of  those
voting  "  Yes  ";  (4)  the  number  of  those  voting  "  No."
These  reports  are  sent  to  be  examined  and  corrected  by
the  cantonal  government,  which  forwards  them  within
ten  days  to  the  Federal  Council,  which  calculates  the
general  result  of  the  vote.  If  a  majority  of  the  voters
have  approved  of  the  law  or  order,  the  Federal  Council
forthwith  puts  it  into  force,  inserting  it  in  the  official
Statute-book  of  the  confederation.  The  results  of  the
voting  are  in  all  cases  published  in  the  Feuille  Federate^
and  the  Federal  Council  reports  them  to  the  Chambers
at  the  next  session.

The  Federal  Referendum  does  not  imply  that  repre-
sentative institutions  are  destroyed,  but  that  they  are
made  supplementary  to  the  direct  action  of  the  popular
will,  their  functions  being  to  relieve  the  people  of  a
burden  of  public  business  too  heavy  for  them  to  bear,
to  assist  the  popular  will  to  attain  adequate  expression
by  providing  discussion  and  advice,  and  finally  to  form  a


6o


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM


substitute  for  the  people  in  matters  of  emergency  and
particularity.

Those  unfamiliar  with  the  working  of  the  Referen-
dum sometimes  express  alarm  at  the  frequency  of  voting

Bulletin de vote

pour  la

votation  populaire  du  4  octobrc
1896


L

Acceptez-vous la loi federale concernant la
garantie des defauts dans le commerce des
bestiaux? ___.-_

Reponse  :

OUI  ou  NON

IL

Acceptez-vous la loi federale  sur  la  comp-'
tabilite des chemins de fer? -

Reponse :

OUI  ou  NON

IIL

Acceptez-vous  la loi federale sur  les peines
disciplinaires  dans  I'armee  Suisse?

Reponse  :

OUI  ou  NON

Remarque.  On  doit  repondre  separement  a  chaque  question.

which  it  appears  to  involve.  The  tax  upon  the  machin-
ery of  government  and  upon  the  time  and  trouble  of  the
electorate  is  not,  however,  heavy.  From  the  adoption
of  the  Federal  Constitution  in  1874  up  to  June,  1906,
the  optional  Referendum  was  applied  to  twenty-nine


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  6i

laws  and  resolutions,  the  compulsory  Referendum  to
eighteen  constitutional  amendments.  These  forty-seven
votes  were  taken  in  thirty-four  separate  votings,  just  over
one  per  annum  upon  an  average.  Of  the  twenty-nine
laws  submitted  to  the  Referendum,  ten  were  accepted
and  nineteen  rejected;  of  the  eighteen  constitutional
amendments,  twelve  were  accepted  and  six  rejected.

The  large  proportion  of  laws  rejected  is  sometimes
adduced  to  support  the  view  that  the  popular  vote  is  in
fact  an  obstacle  to  progress,  inasmuch  as  it  implies  the
refusal  of  a  number  of  public  measures  which  are
endorsed  by  the  two  Houses  of  Assembly.  The  people,
it  is  said,  prove  to  be  more  conservative  than  their
representatives,  and  it  is  suggested  that  this  "  conser-
vatism "  is  injurious  to  the  cause  of  national  progress
because  of  its  unenlightened  character.  But  though
this  "  conservatism  "  of  the  people  has  an  important
meaning,  very  little  light  is  thrown  upon  it  by  a  mere
appeal  to  the  statistics  of  rejection.  tor  it  will  be
observed,  first,  that  the  people  appear  much  more  favour-
ably inclined  towards  constitutional  amendments  than
towards  laws,  though  most  of  the  amendments  were
really  preliminaries  towards  the  passing  of  some  law
which  previously  lay  outside  the  legislative  competence
of  the  federation.  Of  these  amendments  twice  as  many
were  accepted  as  rejected.  This  is  susceptible  of  two
explanations.  In  the  first  place  it  is  doubtless  easier  to
get  the  assent  of  the  people  to  a  principle  than  to  the
particular  law  devised  to  embody  that  principle.  So,
for  instance,  the  same  people  that  had  bestowed  upon
the  Federal  Government  the  rio-ht  to  legislate  in  a
national  accident  and  sick  insurance  scheme,  rejected  the
particular  scheme  when  it  was  presented  in  a  draft  law.
A  constitutional  amendment  generally  adds  a  new
function  to  the  government,  but  the  particular  exercise
of  that  function  may  quite  reasonably  be  unpopular.

There  is,  however,  another  explanation  of  the  dis-
crepancy in  the  proportion  of  acceptances  and  rejections


62  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

among  laws  and  constitutional  amendments  respectively.
The  Referendum  in  the  latter  is  obligatory,  that  in  the
former  facultative.  This  means,  of  course,  that  only
those  laws  and  decrees  are  submitted  to  a  Referendum
which  have  evoked  the  opposition  of  a  substantial  body
of  citizens  who  conceive  it  possible  that  they  may  win
the  majority  of  the  electorate  to  their  view.

It  is  evident  that  this  consideration  completely  disposes
of  the  notion  that  the  people  are  proved  to  be  hostile  to
progressive  legislation  by  the  fact  that  they  reject  more
laws  than  they  accept.  Of  course  they  do,  for  only  those
laws  which  are  likely  to  be  rejected  are  put  to  the  vote.
In  point  of  fact,  between  1874  and  1906  no  less  than
246  laws  and  resolutions  were  passed  by  the  Federal
Assembly,  almost  all  of  which  might  have  been  put  to
the  people,  if  the  opposition  to  them  had  been  strong
enough  to  secure  the  qualifying  number  for  the  demand,
and  keen  enough  to  press  it  to  a  vote.  Where  no
Referendum  was  demanded  it  may  be  assumed  that  the
people  silently  endorsed  the  act  of  their  Federal  Legisla-
ture, and  that  out  of  the  total  number  of  246  laws  and
resolutions  only  nineteen  met  with  their  distinct
disapproval.

The  Referendum  is  in  essence  a  veto,  and  it  is  there-
fore invalid  to  arofue  its  destructive  character  from  the
fact  that  in  a  majority  of  cases  where  it  is  applied  it
causes  rejections.

But  if  we  direct  our  investigation  to  the  two  related
questions.  How  does  the  Referendum  appear  to  affect
the  course  of  legislation  ? — What  light  does  it  throw
upon  the  operation  of  the  popular  will  in  politics  ? — we
get  some  interesting  information  by  examining  the
widespread  impression  that  the  Referendum  works
"  conservatively."

That  this  "  conservatism  "  is  not  inconsistent  with  a
tolerably  rapid  development  of  the  area  and  powers  of
the  federal  government  and  with  the  passing  of  many
"  advanced  "  laws  is  quite  evident  from  the  history  of


THE  SWISS REFERENDUM  63

the  last  thirty  years,  during  which  the  nationalisation  of
the  railroads  and  of  the  wholesale  trade  in  alcohol,  the
establishment  of  a  federal  bank,  federal  control  of  insur-
ance, and  a  factory  code  more  advanced  than  that  of  any
other  country,  have  been  procured  by  the  vote  of  the
people.

Again,  in  considering  the  rejection  of  certain
"  socialistic  "  measures,  such  as  the  "  Right  to  Labour  "
(1894),  the  Small  Workshops  Act  (1894),  the  Federal
Match  Monopoly,  as  indeed  in  the  recent  rejection  of
the  Federal  Insurance  Law,  the  States  Rioht  feelinsf
with  its  accompanying  distrust  of  central  bureaucracy
must  not  be  interpreted  as  mere  conservatism.  In  not
a  few  instances  it  seems  to  signify,  not  a  mere  rejection
of  the  principle  or  the  policy  of  the  law,  but  a  preference
for  the  canton  over  the  confederation  as  an  instrument
of  government.

That  a  certain  amount  of  popular  ignorance  and
prejudice  is  exhibited  in  the  Referendum  on  issues  which
appeal  to  strong  religious  feelings  (as  in  the  passing  of
the  famous  anti- Jewish  Slaughter  House  Law),  or  to
the  unimaginative  parsimony  of  the  peasant  and  the
petty  bourgeois  (as  in  the  rejection  of  the  vote  for
Foreign  Legations)  must  be  admitted  by  the  stoutest
defenders  of  the  Referendum.  Indeed,  apart  from  such
special  cases,  there  remains  a  residual  truth  in  the  imputa-
tion of  crude  conservatism  to  the  people.  Among  the
less  instructed  portions  of  the  people  there  is  a  certain
tendency  to  reject,  implied  in  the  very  procedure  of  the
Referendum.  A  peasant  in  a  rural  canton  was  asked
why  he  and  his  fellow  villagers  always  seemed  to  vote
against  the  measures  supported  by  the  member  whom
they  continued  to  return  to  the  Legislative  Assembly.
"  Well,  you  see,"  was  the  reply,  "  it  is  like  this  :  If  we
say  'Yes'  it  is  nothing;  but  if  we  say  'No,'  that  is
something  for  us."  The  adverse  vote  alone  appears  to
be  an  exercise  of  power.  Something,  but  not  too  much,
must  be  allowed  for  this.


64  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

In  general,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Referendum  dis-
closes a  truly  serviceable  strain  of  conservatism  in  the
people.  They  will  not  vote  for  any  large  measure  of
centralised  radicalism  suddenly  thrust  before  them.
Their  tendency  is  to  prefer  the  canton  which  they  know
to  the  larger,  vaguer  entity  of  the  federation.  "  My
shirt  is  nearer  to  me  than  my  coat,"  is  their  homely
proverb.  Moreover,  they  are  not  easily  swept  off  their
feet  by  some  taking  theory  into  giving  large  new  powers
to  any  sort  of  government.  They  want  to  feel  sure
how  it  will  work  out,  especially  as  regards  taxation,
revenue,  and  local  industry.

This  sort  of  conservatism  undoubtedly  impresses  itself
upon  legislation  ;  it  must  even  be  admitted  to  place  im-
pediments in  the  path  of  formally  progressive  legislation.

We  are  not,  however,  entitled  to  assume,  as  is
commonly  done,  that  the  fact  that  the  people  reject  a
certain  small  number  of  advanced  laws  passed  by  the
assemblies  proves  them  to  be  less  enlightened  and  pro-
gressive than  their  representatives.  For,  granted  the
existence  of  the  Referendum,  it  must  follow  that  in
many  cases  representatives  who  would  not  be  prepared
to  undertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  validity  to  a
doubtful  new  law  by  their  vote  in  the  assembly,  will  be
willing  to  give  that  vote  when  the  real  significance  of
it  is  that  it  enables  the  issue  to  be  determined  by  the
Referendum,  thus  throwing  the  final  responsibility  on
to  the  people.

But  the  more  important  issue  lies  deeper.  Suppose
it  be  admitted  that  the  representatives  are  more  en-
lightened and  "  progressive  "  than  the  people,  does  the
Referendum  diminish  the  pace  of  progress  or  damage  its
character.''  The  plainest  lesson  afforded  by  investiga-
tion of  the  effect  of  the  popular  vote  has  reference  to
the  structure  of  the  laws  that  are  passed.  The  draft  of
a  law  which  is  likely  to  be  submitted  to  the  popular  vote
must  be  more  closely  accommodated  to  the  actual
feelings  and  felt  needs  of  various  sections  of  the  people


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  6s

than  one  which  can  become  law  by  means  of  a  party
vote  in  a  Legislative  Assembly.  In  other  words,  the
theoretically  "  good  "  law  must  be  stamped  with  the
sort  of  "  goodness  "  required  to  secure  the  approval  of
the  people.  So  much  the  worse  for  the  "  good  law  "  !
it  will  seem  to  some.  But  here  we  touch  the  quick  of
the  democratic  theory.  Is  it  better  to  get  on  to  the
Statute-book  a  theoretically  good  law  accommodated  to
a  people  somewhat  more  homogeneous,  more  public
spirited,  more  intelligent  than  the  actual  people  is  in
fact,  or  a  theoretically  worse  law  which  expresses  the
actual  will  of  the  people  with  some  of  its  larger  prejudices
and  other  defects  of  intelligence  and  feeling  impressed
upon  it  .'^  The  issue  is  not  easy  to  determine.  Sup-
porters of  the  representative  system  urge  that  sound
representation  will  yield  legislation  substantially  con-
sonant with  the  national  will,  but  often  a  little  in
advance  of  the  conscious  expression  of  that  will;  it  will,
in  fact,  reflect  the  superior  wisdom  of  the  representative
over  the  represented.  If  such  laws  are  put  in  operation,
the  public  will  by  gradual  experience  come  to  recognise
their  merits  and  yield  them  a  willing  obedience.  The
presupposition  of  the  Referendum,  on  the  other  hand,
is  that  the  kind  of  skill  possessed  by  representatives  is
not  a  sufficient  guarantee  that  the  laws  they  pass  shall  in
all  cases  be  substantially  consonant  with  the  public  will;
the  option  of  the  Referendum  is  therefore  essential  to
protect  the  people  against  acts  of  grave  and  injurious
misrepresentation.  It  is  further  contended  that  a  net
waste  in  the  art  of  government  is  involved  by  passing
laws  which  are  either  in  advance  of  general  opinion  or
are  insufficiently  accommodated  to  sectional  circum-
stances. The  "  goodness  "  of  a  law  must  always  depend
largely  upon  the  efficiency  of  its  administration;  a
"  worse  "  law,  well  administered  because  it  is  acceptable
to  the  people,  will  usually  be  more  useful  than  a
"  better  "  law  that  is  ill-administered  because  It  is  not
acceptable  to  the  people.


66  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Now  the  Referendum  ensures  that  a  law  is  moulded
into  an  acceptable  shape,  and  can  be  successfully
administered.  The  Swiss  Law  for  the  Federal  Alcohol
Monopoly  well  illustrates  the  point.  There  was  a
public  widespread  feeling  of  alarm  at  the  growth  of
dram-drinking,  strong  enough  to  demand  legislative
interference  but  not  prohibition;  with  this  anti-spirit
feeling  was  mixed  a  desire  among  the  industries  directly
and  indirectly  interested  in  the  production  of  wine,
beer,  and  cider  to  secure  protection  and  preference  for
these  "  home  "  industries;  care  must  also  be  taken  to
exempt  little  local  manufacturers  of  spirits  from  the
operations  of  the  law;  the  restriction  upon  spirits  must
not  make  it  very  difficult  to  get,  or  raise  its  price  too
high;  finally,  the  regulation  of  the  local  trade  must  be
left  to  the  cantons,  and  the  profits  of  the  federal
monopoly  must  be  shared  amongst  them  so  as  to  afford
a  sensible  relief  of  local  taxation.

The  result  is  a  moderate  law,  with  plenty  of  excep-
tions and  special  provisions  directed  to  conciliate  interests
and  abate  prejudices,  which  has  succeeded  in  reducing
enormously  the  consumption  of  spirits,  while  at  the
same  time  dividing  a  considerable  revenue  among  the
cantonal  governments.  The  chief  maker  and  adminis-
trator of  this  law  regards  the  Referendum  as  a  necessary
instrument  for  such  legislation.  The  votes  taken  on  the
Constitutional  Amendment  and  the  Law  enabled  him
not  merely  to  test  the  general  strength  of  public  opinion,
but  to  recognise  exactly  where  and  how  strong  were  the
different  local  interests  and  feelings  which  required
consideration  if  the  law  was  to  be  successfully  operated.

Laws  drafted  with  the  knowledge  that  they  may  be
put  to  the  test  of  a  popular  vote  are  less  rigorous  in  their
form,  and  the  practice  of  this  art  of  accommodation
ensures  a  process  of  investigation  and  discussion  before
the  final  form  of  the  law  is  reached  that  is  far  more
thorough  than  the  procedure  of  a  purely  representative
government  with  full  legislative  powers.


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  67

Again,  a  law  which  has  received  the  direct  sanction  of
a  popular  vote  has  a  higher  degree  of  stability  than  one
passed  by  a  party  vote  in  a  legislative  assembly.  There
is  no  important  instance  of  the  reversal  of  such  a  law;
the  time  and  energy  of  Parliament  is  not  consumed  by
constant  repeals  and  amendments;  the  opposition  in  the
country  collapses  before  the  fait  accompli,  and  the  know-
ledge of  the  irrevocability  of  the  law  not  only  imparts  a
confidence  to  its  administrators  and  to  the  body  of
citizens  that  contributes  to  its  sound  administration,  but
helps  to  build  up  a  general  respect  for  a  Government
which  thus  visibly  emanates  from  the  general  will  of  the
people.

The  sense  of  identity  of  the  State  with  the  people  is
the  strongest  ethical  support  for  democracy,  and  in  no
other  way  is  it  better  evoked  and  sustained  than  by
imposing  upon  the  people  the  responsibility  of  expressing
direct  judgments  upon  important  acts  of  policy.

The  experience  of  Switzerland  discloses  other
economies  of  progress  due  to  the  Referendum.

Revolutionary  action  is  thereby  inhibited.  Where
each  concrete  proposal,  either  of  constitutional  or  legal
reform,  requires  the  separate  sanction  of  the  people,
there  can  be  no  possibility  of  rushing  a  large  revolu-
tionary policy  through  a  legislative  Assembly  which  con-
tains a  snatch  majority  of  avowed  revolutionists  elected
by  a  sudden  swell  of  feeling  in  the  electorate,  or  in  which
a  revolutionist  minority  by  skilful  tactics  compels  a
majority  to  execute  its  will.  The  practical  and  detailed
working  of  Swiss  democracy,  obliging  each  step  to  be
separately  shaped  and  separately  taken,  imposes  on  the
theoretic  revolutionist  a  moderation  which  his  German
and  French  confreres  have  been  much  slower  to  admit.

Not  less  important,  as  a  check  upon  wasteful  methods
of  reform,  is  the  fact  that  the  Referendum  furnishes  a
sharp  indisputable  test  of  the  value  of  political  catch-
words. In  such  a  country  as  England  or  Germany  such
an  issue  as  "  the  right  to  work  "  or  a  "  universal  eight


68  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

hours "  scheme  may  occupy  the  front  place  in  the
radical  movement  for  an  indefinite  period,  because  there
is  no  means  of  ascertaining  with  any  degree  of  accuracy
how  strong  is  the  popular  demand  for  such  a  measure.
In  Switzerland  it  is  competent  either  for  the  friends
or  the  enemies  of  such  a  scheme  to  demand  and  obtain
that  it  shall  be  submitted  to  a  quantitative  expression
of  popular  judgment.  If  this  test  discloses  the  fact
that  a  strong  majority  is  opposed  to  the  measure,  its
advocates  recognise  the  futility  and  waste  of  progressive
energy  involved  in  pressing  it  further  for  the  present,
and  relegate  it  to  the  list  of  reforms  which  require  more
popular  education  before  it  is  ripe  for  practical  politics.
Thus  the  "  Rip:ht  to  Labour  "  was  broup^ht  to  the  test
by  the  Grutliverein  and  the  Labour  Union  in  1894,  and
was  rejected  by  a  popular  vote  of  308,289  against
75,880.  The  result  of  such  a  vote  is  to  divert  the
emphasis  and  energy  of  the  advanced  sections  from  a
measure  which,  however  desirable  in  itself,  has  evidently
no  early  chance  of  acceptance,  to  other  measures  which
may  be  urged  with  more  chance  of  success.

These,  then,  are  the  three  advantages  claimed  for  the

Referendum  in  its  effect  upon  the  course  of  legislation  :

(i)  That  it  provides  a  remedy  for  intentional  or

unintentional misrepresentation on the part of

elected  legislatures  and  secures  laws  conformable  to

the  actual  will  of  the  majority.

(2)  That  it  enhances  the  popular  confidence  in
the  stability  of  law.

(3)  That  it  eliminates  much  waste  of  political
energy  by  enabling  proposals  of  unknown  value  to
be  submitted  separately  to  a  quantitative  test.

Most  students  of  the  Swiss  system  consider  that  these
economies  more  than  offset  the  retarding  influence  of
Conservative  inertia  in  the  less  enlightened  orders  of
citizen,  and  yield  in  the  long  run  a  larger  net  product
of  progressive  legislation  than  would  accrue  from  a
purely  representative  legislature.  There  is,  however,  one


THE  SWISS  REFERENDUM  69

grave  theoretical  and  practical  defect  attaching  to  the
Referendum  regarded  as  a  res^ular  instrument  of  g-overn-
ment,  viz.,  that  it  enforces  a  separatist  rragmentary
treatment  of  policy.  Each  measure  submitted
separately  to  the  people  is  almost  of  necessity  taken
entirely  "  on  its  own  merits."  Now  when  a  law  is  a  link
in  a  chain  of  policy  designed  by  some  far-seeing  states-
men, it  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  separate  merits,  and  to
submit  each  link  in  such  a  chain  for  separate  acceptance
or  rejection  is  to  present  an  artificially-broken  set  of
issues.  It  is  true  that  in  a  legislative  assembly  each
measure  is  separately  discussed  and  determined,  but
there  the  authority  of  leaders  and  the  discipline  of  party
serve  in  some  measure  to  enforce  the  wider  consideration
of  organic  policy.

It  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  expect  that  the
most  intelligent  electorate  will  approve  a  measure  which,
taken  by  itself,  is  unpalatable  or  inconvenient,  on  the
ground  that  it  forms  part  of  a  larger  organic  policy  which
they  approve.

But  this  defect,  grave  as  it  appears  were  the  Referen-
dum used  as  the  general  instrument  of  legislation,  is
greatly  mitigated  when  the  use  is  occasional  and  confined
to  critical  issues.  For  the  heart  of  an  entire  policy  is
often  contained  in  a  single  resolution  or  law;  and  if  the
doctrine  of  the  mandate  has  any  place  in  the  theory  of
Democracy,  it  is  applicable  to  these  pivotal  occasions.
The  issue,  "  Shall  the  Swiss  people  own  and  operate  the
railroads,  acquiring  them  upon  such  and  such  a  pecuniary
basis,  and  managing  them  upon  such  and  such  a  general
plan.""';  or  the  issue,  "Shall  the  control  of  Hours  of
Labour  and  other  conditions  of  employment  form  a
subject-matter  for  federal  legislation  .^" — such  issues  are
eminently  fitted  for  popular  determination.

The  final  and  weightiest  claim  for  the  Referendum,  as
attested  by  Swiss  experience,  is  the  training  in  the  art
of  government  it  gives  to  the  people.  It  may  indeed  be
questioned  whether  a  people  whose  direct  contribution


70


THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM


to  self-government  consists  in  a  single  vote  cast  at  inter-
vals of  several  years,  not  for  a  policy  or  even  for  a
measure,  but  for  a  party  or  a  personality,  can  be  or  is
capable  of  becoming  a  genuinely  self-governing  people.
Some  amount  of  regular  responsibility  for  concrete  acts
of  conduct  is  surely  as  essential  to  the  education  of  a
self-reliant  people  as  of  a  self-reliant  individual.  To  the
intelligent  Swiss  democrat  it  never  occurs  to  base  his
democracy  upon  a  doctrine  of  infallibility  of  the  people.
The  people,  he  is  aware,  make  mistakes;  the  Referendum
offers  more  opportunity  to  make  mistakes,  and  therefore
to  learn  from  their  mistakes  than  is  furnished  under
purely  representative  government.  But  he  holds  that
the  obligation  imposed  on  each  citizen  to  take  a  direct
part  in  the  making  of  the  laws  he  is  called  upon  to  obey
is  essential  to  the  reality  of  popular  self-government.


Chapter IV ^
THE  RE-STATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY

The  question  whether  we  shall  speak  of  a  human
Society  as  an  organism,  is,  of  course,  largely  one  of  con-
venience in  language.  If  society  is  an  organism  it  is
not  quite  the  same  sort  of  organism  as  the  individual
body  of  an  animal,  and  for  some  reasons,  therefore,  it
might  be  best  not  to  adopt  the  same  word  in  describing
them.  But  those  who  jump  from  this  to  the  conclusion
illat  it  is  a  barren,  unprofitable,  academic  question  to
discuss  whether  Society  is  essentially  organic,  are  quite
unjustified.  The  question  is  one  of  supreme  practical
importance,  involving,  among  persons  capable  of
practical  politics,  the  complete  re-adjustment  of  their
conception  of  democracy  and  of  the  means  of  attaining  it.
It  is  not  here  necessary  to  follow  out  in  detail  the
biological  analogy  between  the  animal  organism  and
Society  regarded  as  an  organism.  It  is  sufilicient  to
observe  that  recent  biological  researches  strengthen  the
tendency  to  regard  Society  as  an  organism  even  on  its
physical  side.  The  two  gravest  objections,  put  by
Spencer  and  others,  against  the  organic  view  were,  first,
that  the  separateness  in  space  of  the  individual  members
,,,of  Society,  their  mobility  and  their  power  over  their  own
'  actions,  had  no  analogy  in  the  cellular  life  of  the  units
of  an  organism;  and,  secondly,  that  there  was  nothing
corresponding  to  the  sensorium,  no  central  seat  of  con-
scious life,  in  a  Society.  Now  modern  biology  tends  to
impair  both  of  these  objections,  and  so  to  make  the
conception  of  Society  nearer  to  that  of  an  animal
organism. In  the  first  place  it  shows  that  a  cell  is  a  more

71


72  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

distinct,  a  more  individual  vital  unit  than  was  supposed,
that  it  is  itself  of  an  organic  structure,  that  it  is  not
physically  continuous  with  other  cells,  that  it  performs
what  may  be  termed  free  acts,  giving  out  effort  and
even  exercising^  choice  in  movement  and  in  the  selection
of  its  food  from  its  environment.  Though  most  cells  are
tolerably  closely  fixed  in  local  relation  to  other  cells  (i.e.,
have  status),  others,  connected  with  the  work  of  diges-
tion and  protection  against  disease,  are  endowed  with
great  freedom  of  movement.  Modern  psychophysics
further  tends  to  hold  that  this  separate  cellular  life  is
accompanied  by  some  degree  of  consciousness,  in  other
words,  that  the  specialisation  of  consciousness  to  the
grey  matter  of  the  brain  is  not  complete,  but  that  some
degree  of  cellular  consciousness  pervades  the  body.

The  great  German  scientist,  Virchow,  recently  sum-
marised this  view  in  the  striking-  assertion  that  "  'I  ne
organism  is  not  an  individual  but  a  social  mechanism."

Nor  can  the  other  objection  that  there  is  nothing
corresponding  to  the  sensorium  in  Society  be  considered
fatal.  There  are  in  fact  two  answers.  Turning  to
lower  forms  of  animal  life  we  find  composite  beings,
such  as  the  myxomycetes  and  the  sponges,  which  though
consisting  of  almost  undiff'erentiated  units  with  no  signs
of  a  sensorium,  can  hardly  be  denied  to  be  organisms.
Indeed,  the  whole  evolution  of  organic  life  is  from
forms  in  which  there  is  no  discernible  sensorium  towards
forms  which  are  more  distinctly  specialised  in  this
regard.  If,  then,  we  could  find  no  sensorium  in  Society,
we  are  not  therefore  entitled  to  deny  its  organic  nature,
but  only  to  conclude  that  it  is  as  yet  a  low  order  of  organ-
ism. This,  indeed,  is  the  conclusion  at  which  some
sociologists  {^-g.,  Professor  Lester  Ward)  arrive.

But,  regarding  Society  merely  on  its  physical  side,  it
is  by  no  means  clear  that  there  is  nothing  corresponding
to  a  sensorium  in  the  highly-developed  and  differen-
tiated life  of  the  educated  and  actively-governing
classes. The  great  mass  of  the  people  do  no  more  real


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 73

thinking,  exercise  perhaps  no  more  real  initiative,  than
the  separate  cells  of  the  individual  human  body.

It  is  not,  however,  essential  to  my  purpose  to  insist
that  Society  is  a  highly-evolved  organism  in  a  physical
sense,  or  even  to  insist  that  it  is  to  be  called  a  physica,l
organism  at  all,  though  I  think  this  view  is  justified  and
will  obtain  more  and  more  acceptance.

The  problem  of  Government  with  which  I  am  con-
cerned is  primarily  not  a  physical  but  a  psychical  one,
and  its  solution  depends  upon  the  psychical  relations
between  the  members  of  a  society.  Now,  whatever
view  we  hold  about  Society  on  the  physical  plane  as  a
collection  of  individual  bodies  living  in  some  sort  of
union,  it  can,  I  think,  be  made  quite  clear  that  Society
is  rightly  regarded  as  a  moral  rational  organism  in  the
sense  that  it  has  a  common  psychic  life,  character,  and
purpose,  which  are  not  to  be  resolved  into  the  life,
character,  and  purpose  of  its  individual  members.

It  is  easy  to  see  why  the  organic  life  of  Society  is
more  easily  admitted  on  the  psychic  than  on  the  physical
plane.  Every  man  stands  in  his  own  skin,  with  an
indefinitely  big  and  expansible  belt  of  inorganic  atmo-
sphere between  him  and  any  other  man  who  is  a  member
of  his  Society.  Common  sense  is  therefore  disposed  to
insist  that  physically  Society  is  nothing  but  a  number
of  separate  individuals.  At  first,  no  doubt,  the  same
common  sense  is  disposed  also  to  insist  that  all  the
thinking  and  the  feeling  of  these  individuals  is  done
separately  by  minds  which  are  inside  these  bodies,  and
never  get  into  any  nearer  contact  with  one  another.  But
reflection  and  experiment  oblige  us  to  admit  that  the
contact  between  minds  is  far  more  intimate  and  constant
than  between  bodies,  and  that  the  inter-relations  set
up  are  far  closer.

Turn  to  such  a  work  as  Maeterlinck's  fascinating
study,  "  The  Life  of  the  Bee."  It  is  possible  to  deny
the  organic  unity  of  the  hive,  or  of  the  swarm,  con-
sidered as  a  physical  fact,  or  to  regard  it as  a  mere


74  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

physical  arrangement  or  organisation.  But  what  the
author  terms  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Hive,"  the  mysterious
unity  of  instinct  or  conscious  life,  which  minutely
dominates  the  hive  and  the  will  and  separate  interests  of
the  individual  bees,  is  an  example  of  organic  psychic
unity  which  cannot  be  denied.  All  through  the  animal
kingdom  we  find  examples  of  this  common  purpose  of
the  herd,  the  drove  or  other  social  group,  imposing  itself
upon  the  mind  and  conscious  conduct  of  the  individual
animal,  directing  him  to  actions  often  opposed  to  his
own  interest  or  pleasure,  not  seldom  demanding  the
sacrifice  of  life  itself  for  the  gain  of  the  group  or  the
continuance  of  the  species.

This  Spirit  of  the  Hive  or  of  the  Herd  is  a  true
spirit  of  Society,  a  single  unity  of  purpose  in  the  commu-
nity. Those  who  would  cut  the  Gordian  knot  of  this
problem  by  saying  that  individuals  alone  are  ends,  and
that  Society  is  nothing  but  a  means  to  these  ends,  will
find  it  difficult  to  make  their  theory  square  with  the
facts  of  natural  history  in  which  the  individual  always
appears  as  a  means  to  the  collective  end  of  the  main-
tenance of  the  race.

Those  who  would  distinguish  in  kind  this  social  or
gregarious  instinct  of  the  lower  animals  from  the  indi-
vidual reasonable  consciousness  in  man  have  no  warrant
for  their  distinction.  For  there  is  ample  testimony  that
the  mind  of  man,  in  its  feeling,  its  thinking,  its  will,
is  not  the  separate  thing  it  seems  at  first  to  be.

Setting  aside  all  the  dubious  and  difficult  evidence  of
direct  intentional  impact  of  one  mind  upon  another  by
telepathy,  and  other  similar  methods,  the  growth  and
operations  of  a  common  mind  or  purpose  formed  by  the
direct  interaction  of  many  individual  minds  cannot
seriously  be  questioned.

Even  the  fortuitous  concourse  of  a  crowd  shows  this  :
a  mob  in  the  streets  of  Paris  or  of  London  exhibits  a
character  and  a  behaviour  which  is  uniform,  is  domin-
ated for  the  time  being  by  a  single  feeling  or  idea.


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 75

and  differs  widely  from  the  known  character  and
behaviour  of  its  component  members.  Look  at  the
effect  of  an  orator  upon  a  crowd,  the  power  of  a  sudden
panic,  the  contagion  of  some  quick  impulse  to  action;
it  is  quite  evident  that  the  barriers  which  commonly
encase  the  individual  mind  have  given  way,  that  the
private  judgment  is  inhibited,  and  that  for  a  time  a  mob-
mind  has  been  set  up  in  its  stead,  in  which  the  reasoning
faculties  are  almost  suspended,  and  in  which  the  passions
of  animal  ferocity,  generosity,  credulity,  self-sacrifice,
malignity,  and  courage  express  themselves  unrestrained.

A  great  personality,  a  great  religious  or  political
idea,  a  mere  mis-statement  invented  by  a  lying  Press,
may  weld  into  a  common  desire,  a  common  will,  the
minds  of  a  whole  nation  :  the  result  is  not  intelligible
as  the  added  action  of  the  same  idea  acting  on  so  many
separate  minds  :  it  is  the  inter-action  of  these  minds
growing  by  stronger  social  sympathy  into  fusion  that  is
the  real  phenomenon.  The  mere  fact  of  human  beings
living  in  proximity  to  one  another  produces  a  force  of
neighbourhood  which  for  good  or  evil  is  a  restraint  upon
all  its  members.  There  is  not  a  school,  a  church,  a  club,
even  for  the  lightest  and  most  recreative  object,  em-
bodying some  purpose  or  idea  and  the  common  pursuit
of  it,  which  does  not  impress  a  common  character  upon
its  members.  The  public  opinion  of  any  of  these
bodies  is  produced  by  some  direct  assimilation  of  the
separate  minds,  and  implies  the  formation  of  a  common
consciousness.

For  political  and  social  purposes  in  ancient  and
mediaeval  times,  the  City  has  been  the  largest  and  most
convincing  example  of  this  real  moral  unity.  The
civic  spirit  was  no  mere  phrase  to  describe  the  views  of
the  average  citizen  :  the  City  State  of  the  Greeks  is  only
intelligible  as  a  moral  unity,  or  as  Mr.  Bradley  puts  it,
"  The  armed  conscience  of  the  community."

In  modern  times  the  wider  social  area  of  the  nation
has  for  many  purposes  displaced  the  City  State. As  a


76  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

psychical  organism  it  seldom  presents  so  close  a  unity,
but  that  the  habit  of  common  thought  and  action  among
the  members  of  a  nation  can  take  place  without  creating
and  establishing  a  common  consciousness,  a  common  will
and  common  obligations,  cannot  for  a  moment  be
admitted.  Now,  if  the  habits  of  thinking,  feeling,  and
acting  together  among  members  of  a  nation  thus  bring
their  minds  into  a  single  mind  which  is  dominated  by
\  thouQ-hts  and  feelings  directed  to  the  ends  of  the  whole
f^. body  politic,  then  we  have  the  clear  admission  of  a  social

organism  on  the  psychical  or  moral  side.
■/  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  general  will,  as  I  under-*

1^  stand  it,  which  Rousseau,  among  moderns,  was  the  first
clearly  to  enunciate,  which  has  been  developed  on  its
political  side  by  Hegel  and  his  followers,  and  which  in
English  finds  its  most  masterly  expression  in  Mr.
Bosanquet's  work,  "fThe  Philosophic  Theory  of  the
State."  I  have  approached  the  matter  from  the  psycho-
logical rather  than  from  the  philosophical  standpoint,
and  in  applying  the  term  organism  I  go  beyond  the
judgment  of  some  of  these  thinkers.  But  what  I  seek
to  establish  is  the  admission  that  a  political  society  must
be  regarded  as  "  organic  "  in  the  only  sense  which  gives
a  really  valid  meaning  to  such  terms  as  "  the  will  of
the  people,"  "  national  duty,"  and  "  public  conscience."
The  individual's  feeling,  his  will,  his  ends,  and  interests,
are  not  entirely  merged  in  or  sacrificed  to  the  public
feeling,  will  and  ends,  but  over  a  certain  area  they  are
fused  and  identified,  and  the  common  social  life  thus
formed  has  conscious  interests  and  ends  of  its  own  which
are  not  merely  instruments  in  forwarding  the  progress
of  the  separate  individual  lives,  but  are  directed  prima-
rily to  secure  the  survival  and  psychical  progress  of  the
community  regarded  as  a  spiritual  whole.

To  the  common-sense  objector  who  says,  "  A  nation
does  not  think,  a  nation  does  not  feel,  it  is  individuals
who  xlo  these  things,"  I  would  reply  that  if  you  could
talk  with  a  "  cell  "  of  the  human  body  it  would  tell  you


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 77

it  is  not  we  who  think  and  feel,  but  the  separate  cells,
each  of  which  is  conscious  in  itself  of  such  processes,
but  from  the  nature  of  the  case  is  not  and  cannot  be
conscious  of  the  feeling  and  thinking  which  goes  on  in
the  organism  as  a  whole.

A  nation  does  feel,  and  think,  not  so  fully,  so  whole-
somely, so  happily  as  it  should  and  will,  when  the  pro-
cess of  forming  a  social  organism  has  gone  further,  but
within  the  limits  of  such  conscious  unity  as  it  has
attained.

The  practical  value  of  this  thought  consists  in  the
material  it  yields  for  restating  the  doctrine  of  Demo-
cracy. It  is  quite  evident  that  the  conception  of  Society
as  a  moral  ororanism  neonates  the  old  democratic  idea  of
political  equality  based_ojQ.  tHe  notion  that  every  member
of  a  political  society  had  an  inhefeiirTigh't'to  the  same
power  as  every  other  in  determinating  the  action  of
Society.  The  idea  of  natural  individual  rights  as  the
basis  of  Democracy  disappears.  Take,  for  instance,  the
formula  of  "  No  taxation  without  representation."
From  the  standpoint  of  individualist  Democracy  this  is
understood  to  imply  that,  when  the  State  takes  away
some  of  my  property  by  taxing  me,  I  have  some  right  to  ;
earmark  the  tax  I  pay  and  to  say  what  shall  be  done  with  \  I
it,  or  with  a  corresponding  portion  of  the  public  funds
afterwards.  Now  a  clear  grasp  of  Society  as  an  economic
organism  completely  explodes  the  notion  of  property
as  an  inherent  individual  right,  for  it  shows  that  no
individual  can  make  or  appropriate  anything  of  value
without  the  direct  continuous  assistance  of  Society.  So
the  idea  of  Society  as  a  political  organism  Insists  that  the
general  will  and  wisdom  of  the  Society,  as  embodied  In
the  State,  shall  determine  the  best  social  use  of  all  the
social  property  taken  by  taxation,  without  admitting  any
Inherent  right  of  Interference  on  the  part  of  the  tax-
payer. This  does  not,  indeed,  imply  that  "  No  taxation
without  representation,"  is  an  unsound  maxim  of  govern-
ment :  on  the  contrary,  It  may  be,  and  I  think  is,  strongly


78  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

advisable  that  those  from  whom  taxes  are  levied  shall
watch  and  check  the  use  which  Government  may  make
of  them :  but  the  worth  of  this  practice  is  defensible
not  on  grounds  of  individual  right  but  of  general  expe-
diency, because  persons  who  have  paid  a  tax  will  be
found  to  be  better  guardians  of  the  public  purse  than
those  who  have  not  paid  it.

So  with  the  other  individualist  notion  that  political
power  belongs  as  a  right  to  those  who  have  "  a  stake  in
the  country."  When  "  a  stake  in  the  country  "  meant
property  or  rank  it  brought  class  government.  Demo-
cracy, taking  over  the  phrase,  insisted  that  a  man's  life
was  his  stake,  and  that  since  every  man's  life  was  worth
as  much  as  every  other  man's  life,  political  power  should
be  equally  divided  amongst  all.  The  popular  doctrine,
"  One  man  one  vote,"  is  as  a  theoretical  principle  pure
undiluted  individualism.  It  rests  upon  a  curious  twist
in  the  logic  of  Equality.  Every  man's  life  is  worth  as
much  to  him  as  every  other  man's  life.  Society  consists
of  all  men,  therefore  every  man's  life  is  worth  as  much
to  Society  as  every  other  man's,  and  every  man  ought  to
have  the  same  voice  in  directing  social  conduct  as  every
other  man.

Now  there  is  very  little  meaning  in  the  first  proposi-
tion that  all  men's  lives  are  of  equal  value  to  them;  and
there  is  no  possibility  of  proving  its  validity.  That
every  man's  life  is  of  equal  value  to  Society,  in  the  sense
that  it  can  yield  equal  social  service,  is  not  only  false  but
absurd  :  and,  if  political  power  rightly  varies  with  the
capacity  for  public  service,  the  case  for  equality  of  fran-
chise utterly  collapses.  There  is,  of  course,  a  sense  in
which  the  equal  value  of  life  for  all  is  admitted,  and  is
embodied  in  the  equality  of  all  men  before  the  law.  But
this  equality  of  all  men  as  objects  of  social  conduct  does
not  imply  a  corresponding  equality  as  agents  in  social
conduct.  The  old  individualist  Democracy  did  not
indeed  often  go  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  every  man
was  as  competent  as  every  other  man  to  exercise  a  power


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 79

of  government,  though  the  American  theory  and  prac-
tice, so  far  as  white  men  are  concerned,  have  gone  mar-
vellously near  to  this  position.  It  rested  partly  on  the
notion  of  an  equal  right  in  virtue  of  common  humanity,
and  partly  upon  an  obscure  notion  that  since  each  man
presumably  knew  best  his  own  interest,  or  at  any  rate
what  he  wanted,  the  aggregate,  which  was  what  they
understood  by  "  Society,"  knew  best  the  general  interest.
And  this  would  be  so,  if  Society  were  a  mere  aggregate,
an  accumulation  of  human  atoms,  incapable  of  any  really
organic  action.

The  organic  view  of  Society  entirely  repudiates  any
such  equality  as  a  theoretic  principle.  Even  J.  S.  Mill,
when  he  came  to  apply  his  utilitarianism  to  politics,  left
a  good  deal  of  his  individualism  behind.  "  In  all
human  affairs,"  he  writes,  "  every  person  directly
interested,  and  not  under  positive  tutelage,  has  an
admitted  claim  to  a  voice,  and  when  his  exercise  of  it
is  not  inconsistent  with  the  safety  of  the  whole,  cannot
justly  be  excluded  from  it.  But  though  everyone  ought
to  have  a  voice — that  everyone  ought  to  have  an  equal
voice  is  a  totally  different  proposition.  When  two
persons,  who  have  a  joint  interest  in  any  business,  differ
in  opinion,  does  justice  require  that  both  opinions  should
be  held  in  equal  value  ?"  Though  few  persons,  on
mature  reflection,  are  likely  to  admit  the  examination
test  of  political  competence  which  Mill  suggests,  and
may  not  be  prepared  with  any  alternative  measure  of
such  competence,  they  cannot  deny  the  validity  and
importance  of  his  general  admission  that  political  power
ought  to  be  distributed  in  proportion  to  ability  to  use  it
for  the  public  good.  The  suggestion  of  individualist
Democracy,  that  the  public  good  is  simply  a  bundle  of
private  goods,  and  that  every  man  ought  to  have  a  vote
in  order  that  he  may  keep  an  eye  on  his  particular  contri-
bution to  the  public  good,  was  felt  by  Mill  to  be  unten-
able when  government  was  regarded  as  a  joint  stock
business.


8o  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Mill,  in  fact,  was  feeling  his  way  to  the  true  formula
of  political  as  of  economic  justice,  "  From  each  accord-
ing to  his  powers."  Once  grasp  the  idea  of  the  public
as  a  Social  Organism,  or  even  as  a  Corporation  adminis-
tering a  property  corporately  made,  it  becomes  clear  that
no  right  appertains  to  any  individual  to  administer  any
portion  of  this  property,  because  as  an  individual  he  has
made  no  part  of  it.

But  while  he  has  no  right  as  an  individual,  he  has  a
duty  as  a  member  of  Society  to  contribute  as  best  he  can
to  the  administration  of  the  common  property  for  the
common  good.  His  vote  thus  comes  to  him  primarily
as  a  duty,  and  the  question  of  equality  takes  this  form,
"  Is  the  duty  equal  in  all  cases.'"'  Clearly  not,  for  all
have  not  equally  the  power  to  fulfil  it.  Knowledge,
intelligence,  strength,  good-will,  vary,  and  with  them
varies  the  ability  to  perform  public  duty.  It  is  as
absurd  to  demand  the  same  contribution  to  the  collective
wisdom  of  the  nation  from  all  alike  as  to  demand  the
same  contribution  to  the  collective  purse.  "  From  each
according  to  his  powers."  Tom,  Dick,  and  Harry  have
very  little  powers.  Why  should  the  State  require  of
them  what  they  have  not  got .''

Does  this  imply  that  in  a  properly  ordered  State  the
more  ignorant  masses  are  to  have  no  vote,  no  voice  in
the  Government  of  the  country  ?  Are  we  to  entrust  all
power  to  a  Government  of  experts  ^

Let  us  see  how  far  the  fact  or  the  analogy  of  organism
carries  us.  From  each  member  in  a  biological  organism
are  demanded  certain  functional  activities  for  the  sup-
port of  the  life  of  the  organism,  the  kind  and  quantity
of  this  work  being  determined  by  the  neural  apparatus
and  regulated  in  accordance  with  the  nature  and  strength
of  the  several  organs.  So  when  a  functional  demand  is
made  upon  a  particular  organ,  the  work  is  delegated  to
its  several  parts,  and  is  ultimately  divided  up  among  the
countless  cells  which  are  regarded  as  the  primary  units
of  the  organ. In  a  body  which  is  in  health  and  functions


V*


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 8i

economically,  every  cell  contributes  to  the  life  of  the
organism  according  to  its  powers.  The  direction,  the
demand  for  labour,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  conscious  actions
are  concerned,  comes  from  a  specialised  governing
centre.  But  this  is  only  half  the  truth.  "  From  each
according  to  his  powers,  to  each  according  to  his  needs,"
is  the  full  organic  formula.  In  a  healthy  organism  the
demand  of  functional  energy  from  each  member,  from
each  cell,  is  accompanied  by  a  continual  replacement  of
tissue  and  energy  conveyed  by  a  just  circulation  of  the
blood.  I  use  the  ethical  term  "  just  "  advisedly.  Ruskin,
in  an  eloquent  passage  of  "  Unto  this  Last,"  points  out
that  the  circulation  of  the  blood  is  the  true  type  of
equitable  economic  distribution.  It  also  gives  the  true
significance  to  political  rights.  Each  limb,  each  cell,  has
a  "right"  to  its  due  supply  of  blood.  It  has  a  "right"  to
complain  if  it  does  not  get  it,  and  it  does  complain.  It
is  to  this  right  and  habit  of  complaint  that  we  must
look  for  what  in  social  politics  corresponds  to  the  fran-
chise. So  far  as  the  conscious  polity  of  the  animal
organism  is  concerned,  the  direct  work  of  Government
is  highly  centralised  :  a  highly  specialised  portion  of  the
nervous  system  issues  the  commands,  it  is  the  normal
function  of  the  several  organs  to  obey,  and  in  the
ordinary  course  of  nature  they  do  so.  They  have  had
no  separate  voice  in  determining  the  organic  policy,  or
in  issuing  the  order  which  they  help  to  execute.

Are  the  separate  organs,  the  separate  cells,  then,
politically  powerless  and  destitute  of  rights.'*  It  is
doubtless  to  the  real  interest  of  the  organism  as  a
whole  to  distribute  blood  in  accordance  with  the  needs
of  the  individual  members  and  their  cells.  But,
even  in  the  most  highly-developed  organisms,  such
absolute  and  unchecked  power  is  not  entrusted  to  the
expert  government  of  the  cerebral  cells.  The  entire
afferent  nervous  system  attests  the  contrary :  the  indi-
vidual organs  and  their  cells  are  continuously  engaged  in
transmitting  information  to  the  cerebral  centre  and  in


82  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

offering  suggestions.  This  information  and  these  sug-
gestions are  chiefly  if  not  wholly  self-protective  in  their
purport.  The  ability  of  the  local  centres  to  transmit
stimuli  to  the  cerebral  centres  is  of  course  essential  to  the
politics  of  the  organism.  It  is  equally  important  to
recognise  that  not  merely  is  information  thus  given  to
the  cerebral  centres  for  their  guidance,  but  by  the  same
channels  protest  is  conveyed  against  orders  which  injure
or  oppress  the  organ;  the  right  to  petition  against
grievance  on  the  part  of  the  organs  and  their  cells  is
accompanied  by  an  ultimate  "  veto,"  or  the  right  of
rebellion,  which  is  the  basis  of  popular  government.

Nor  are  these  the  only  "  rights  "  exercised  by  the
"  cells."  When  a  certain  demand  for  functional  activity
is  transmitted  to  the  local  centres,  its  distribution  is
determined  by  an  elaborate  system  of  local  self-govern-
ment, in  which  each  cell  participates,  striving  to  throw
off  upon  its  neighbours  any  disproportionate  strain,  and
they  doing  the  same,  until  in  a  healthy  or^an  the  total
strain  is  divided  economically  in  accordance  with  the
powers  of  the  several  parts.  Understand  that  these
rights  of  the  members  and  their  cells  are  not  in  any  sense
a  qualification  or  denial  of  the  truth  that  the  good  of
the  organism  as  a  whole  is  the  absolute  criterion  of  con-
duct, and  may  in  extreme  cases  require  the  complete
sacrifice  of  an  organ  and  its  cells.  But  it  is  advantageous
to  the  organism  that  these  rights  of  suggestion,  protest,
veto,  and  revolt  should  be  accorded  to  its  members.
Accept  the  view  of  Society  as  an  organism,  correspond-
ing rights  remain  to  its  individual  members,  and  a
political  machinery  for  enforcing  them  must  exist.

There  are  those  who  would  confine  the  direct  political
power  of  the  people  to  a  right  of  revolt  against  intoler-
able oppression.  I  have  seen  it  seriously  argued  that  the
Czar's  Government  rests  upon  the  will  of  the  people,
and  is  sanctioned  by  that  will,  because  no  general  revolu-
tion takes  place  in  Russia.  But  revolt  is  only  the  last
of  a  series  of  "  rights  "  ascribed  to  its  members  by  a


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 83

well-organised  Society.  The  right  continuously  to
convey  information  and  advice,  and  by  protest  to  assist
the  due  distribution  of  work  and  food,  requires  the
maintenance  of  a  system  of  stimuli  from  the  local  cells
to  the  central.  >The  cerebral  centres,  the  expert  govern-
ing class,  determine  the  organic  policy,  but  the  deter-
mination of  this  policy  is  based  upon  a  mass  of
information  conveyed  from  the  members,  while  the
detailed  execution  of  the  policy  is  again  directed  by
the  members  and  their  cells,  which  distribute  the  work
in  accordance  with  adjustments  of  cellular  self-interest
that  are  not  referred  to  the  central  power.

These  considerations  restore  a  good  deal  of  prac-
tical liberty  and  equality  which  at  first  seem  to  disappear
when  the  organic  view  of  Society  is  accepted.  If  it  is
absurd  to  suppose  that  all  classes  and  all  individuals  are
equally  wise  and  good,  and  therefore  equally  qualified
to  contribute  by  vote  and  voice  to  wise  and  good  govern-
ment, it  is  not  absurd  to  suppose  that  every  class  and
every  individual  knows  more  about  the  facts  of  his  own
situation  than  any  other  class  and  individual,  and  can
say  where  the  shoe  pinches.

No  one  contends  that  miners,  cabmen,  or  washerwomen
know  as  much  about  foreign  policy  or  the  general  art  of
government,  as  trained  politicians,  or  even  as  members
of  the  learned  professions.  But  they  do  know  more
about  the  special  group  of  facts  which  enter  their  life,
and  about  the  special  way  in  which  new  legislation  and
administration  will  affect  them  :  about  these  matters  they
are  as  competent  to  judge  as  the  professional  classes  are
about  the  matters  which  concern  them.  Nor  are  these
more  ignorant  or  less  educated  classes  less  important
organs  of  the  social  organism  than  the  better  educated
classes.  It  is  quite  as  important  to  Society  that  the
special  conditions  of  the  mining  or  the  agricultural
labouring  classes  should  be  faithfully  recorded  at  the
governing  centres,  and  that  the  eff^ect  of  legislation  and
administration  upon  their  lives  should  be  known,  as  in


iTi'


84  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  case  of  lawyers  or  schoolmasters.  Upon  this  ground,
and  upon  this  alone,  the  logic  of  the  demand  for
Woman's  Suffrage  is  unimpugnable.

This,  then,  brings  us  back  towards  equality.  Equality
of  franchise  and  of  representation  is  defensible  by  reason
of  a  real  equality  of  contribution  towards  government
from  the  different  classes  and  individuals  who  compose
Society.

But  I  may  be  told  that  here  I  am  reverting  to  aij
essentially  individualistic  view.  Miners  and  lawyers,  in
exercising  a  franchise,  are  not  only  directing  and  safe-
guarding the  interests  of  their  own  classes,  in  regard  to
which  they  may  be  considered  equal,  but  are  helping  to
determine  the  general  policy  of  the  public,  and  here
they  are  unequal  in  knowledge  and  capacity.

This  may  of  course  be  met  by  arguing  that  the  kind
of  mental  training  which  the  learned  professions  and  the
educated  classes  generally  possess,  and  the  sort  of  know-
ledge which  they  own,  does  not  appreciably  increase  their
capacity  to  assist  in  governing  a  nation.  Or  it  may  be
urged,  even  more  plausibly,  that  any  advantage  they
possess  in  knowledge  or  intellect  is  offset  by  strong  bias
of  class  interests,  which  will  lead  them  to  prefer  the
good  of  their  class  or  their  calling  to  the  public  good.
Such  bias  is  not,  it  may  be  urged,  present  to  the  same
extent  in  individual  members  of  the  working  classes  who
have  less  to  gain  by  direct  and  special  manipulation  of
politics.  The  directors  of  an  American  trust  are  far
abler  and  better  educated  men  than  their  employees,  but
in  politics  they  are  a  far  more  dangerous  force,  because
it  is  more  possible  and  more  profitable  for  them  to  handle
politics  for  their  private  gain.

But  though  both  these  arguments  may  be  forcibly
employed  to  defend  equality  of  franchise  and  of  repre-
sentation, a  well-developed  Democracy  would  not  rely
upon  them  in  its  assignment  of  equal  voting  power.

The  real  answer  to  the  claim  of  lawyers,  doctors  and
the  educated  classes  generally  to  have  more  political


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 85

power  because  they  are  better  able  to  use  it,  is  to  deny
the  relevance  of  their  education  and  ability.  A
developed  organic  Democracy  will  have  evolved  a
specialised  "  head,"  an  expert  official  class,  which  shall
draft  laws  upon  information  that  comes  to  them  from
innumerable  sources  through  class  and  local  representa-
tion, and  shall  administer  the  government,  subject  to
protests  similarly  conveyed.  The  superior  knowledge
of  general  politics  which  lawyers  and  teachers  and  other
educated  classes  claim  will  be  no  reason  for  giving  them
an  extra  vote;  for  this  general  knowledge,  if  it  exist  at
all,  will  not  be  wanted,  since  it  will  be  discarded  as
superficial  amateur  knowledge,  whereas  the  public
interest  demands  thorough  professional  knowledge.  On
the  one  hand,  we  should  have  a  trained  body  of  political
specialists  devoted  to  the  public  service,  receiving  gain
and  honour  in  proportion  to  these  public  services,  who
would  take  over  much  of  the  legislative  work  so  badly
done  or  so  badly  left  undone  by  our  elective  assemblies
of  legislative  amateurs.  On  the  other  hand,  we  should
have  the  knowledge  and  desires,  the  will  of  the  people,
transmitted  either  directly  or  informally  by  public  meet-
ings, and  other  methods,  or  formally  through  elected
representatives  who  would  confine  themselves  to  the
work  of  representing,  for  which  they  were  chosen  and
were  competent,  and  not  to  the  technical  work  of
making  laws,  for  which  they  are  utterly  incompetent.
It  is  plain  that  when  a  rational  Democracy  is  formed,
laws,  like  hats,  will  be  made  by  persons  specially  trained
to  make  them,  the  people  "  ordering "  these  laws,
directly  or  through  their  accredited  representatives.

It  may  even  be  affirmed  that  the  important  question,
whether  such  and  such  a  law  shall  be  made  or  not,  will,
in  the  first  instance,  be  left  to  an  expert  political  class.
This  doubtless  could  not  be  safely  done  in  any  country,
until  and  unless  a  public  service  can  be  evolved  which
is  both  capable  and  honest,  and  which  commands  the
genuine  respect  of  a  people enlightened,  capable of


86  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

testing  results,  and  endowed  with  a  real  veto  upon
legislative  failures.

A  permanent  legislative  service  commanding  the  trust
of  the  people  may  seem  a  distant  idea.  But  I  regard  it
as  an  essential  of  a  real  Democracy,  which  must  solve
the  question  of  conjoining  legitimate  authority  and
public  use  of  expert  politicians  with  a  right  and  constant
practice  of  instruction,  suggestion  and  veto  exercised
directly  or  through  representatives.

The  possibility  of  attaining  such  an  ideal  depends
chiefly  upon  the  possibility  of  getting  such  a  general  or
wide  level  of  intelligence  in  a  nation  that  they  can  safely
use  a  specialised  class  of  politicians.  If  a  nation  is
incapable  of  developing  this  self-protective  intelligence,
so  as  to  transmit  accurate  stimuli  to  the  governing  brain,
and  to  exercise  quick,  accurate  checks  and  vetos,  the
form  of  Democracy  which  seems  truly  organic  would
inevitably  lapse  into  a  bureaucratic  tyranny.  But  this
danger  does  not  peculiarly  beset  the  organic  Democracy.
Everywhere  the  individualist  experiments  in  Democracy
exhibit  the  same  features  of  failure,  except  where  they
are  safeguarded  by  the  intelligence  of  a  nation  not  too
big  to  be  bewildered  by  machinery  of  government.
Everywhere  a  selfish  and  often  a  corrupt  bureaucracy
shares  the  power  and  gains  of  government  with  an  indus-
trial and  social  oligarchy.  There  is  grave  danger  of
bureaucracy  under  existing  conditions.  But  this  is  no
reason  for  supposing  that  real  Democracy  can  dispense
with  a  skilled  official  class.  The  chief  dangrer  arises
where  this  official  class  is  drawn  from  a  small  section  of
the  people,  and  is  thus  identified  with  the  interests  of  a
few.  The  conditions  of  a  really  efl^ective  expert
officialism  are  two  :  such  real  equality  of--educational
opportunities  as  shall  draw  competent  officials  from  the
whole  people,  and  such  a  growth  of  public  intelligence
and  conscience  as  shall  establish  the  real  final  control  of
government  for  Society  in  its  full  organic  structure.
Of  all  things  this  last  is  the  most  essential,  the  welding


RESTATEMENT  OF  DEMOCRACY 87

of  public  intelligence  and  morals  into  an  effective  general
will.  This  brings  me  back  in  a  completed  circle  to  my
opening  statement.  A  true  Democracy  is  only  possible
when  Society,  a  true  organism;,  becomes  conscious  in  its
intelligence  and  will,  and  thus  is  capable  of  that  self-
control  which  is  the  essence  of  Democracy,  and  which
contains  the  only  liberty  and  equality  that  are  worth  the
names.


Part II
LIBERALISM AND SOCIALISM


Chapter I
THl  VISION  OF  LIBERALISM

Bacon's  saying  that  "  adversity  does  best  discover
virtues  "  is  of  doubtful  application  to  a  political  party.
Twenty  years  of  almost  unceasing  struggle  against  re-
action have  left  their  traces  upon  Liberal  Parliamen-
tarians in  a  strain  of  timidity  and  even  of  conservatism,
which  is  evidently  a  source  of  moral  and  of  intellectual
weakness.  There  have  always  been  voices  ready  to  pro-
claim that  the  active  mission  of  Liberalism  was  well  nigh
fulfilled,  and  that,  for  the  present,  at  any  rate,  it  was
all-important  to  preserve  what  had  been  won,  to  regain
what  had  been  lost,  and  to  do  just  as  much  or  as  little
tinkering  as  was  needed  to  maintain  the  fabric  of  our
liberties.  We  do  not  for  one  moment  suggest  that  this
has  been  the  conscious  prevailing  sentiment  of  the
majority  in  the  House,  or  in  the  country,  and  the
strenuous  warfare  waged  by  the  Liberal  Government  in
many  fields  will  appear  to  many  a  sufficient  answer  to
such  criticism.  But  without  arguing  the  matter  here,
we  cannot  refrain  from  pointing  out  that  almost  all  the
important  measures  of  domestic  policy  before  this
Parliament  are,  in  substance,  endeavours  to  recover,  for
the  people  and  the  State,  liberties  or  properties  or
privileges  which  had  within  recent  generations  been  lost
or  encroached  upon  by  some  class,  trade,  or  other  vested
interest.

In  this  sense,  the  Trade  Union  Act,  the  Education
and  Licensing  measures,  and  even  the  Government's

91


92  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

land  policy,  in  its  essential  features,  are  conservative.
This  admission  by  no  means  derogates  from  their
importance,  but  it  helps  to  make  us  comprehend  why
Liberalism  appears  in  some  quarters  lacking  in  organic
purpose  and  in  free  enthusiasm.  While  to  Protectionists
and  Socialists  politics  are  real,  positive,  and  fervent
gospels,  stirring  the  imagination  and  evoking  a  fanatical
energy,  the  zeal  of  Liberalism  is  everywhere  chilled  by
doubts  and  difficulties.  No  sooner  are  we  approaching
such  large  issues  of  social  policy  as  are  involved  in  taxa-
tion of  land  values,  pensions,  unemployed  relief,  the
House  of  Lords,  than  everywhere  the  atmosphere  is  kept
abuzz  with  whispers  about  "  sanctity  of  contract,"
confiscation,  pauperisation,  and  those  hints  of  popular
indifference  which  take  the  heart  out  of  reformers.

Does  this  mean  that  coldness  and  placidity  of  purpose
belong  essentially  to  Liberalism  as  a  middle  course,  and
is  Liberalism  committed  to  an  embarrassing  and  dis-
heartening opportunism  ?  No  such  thing.  But  we
have  evidently  reached  a  period  when  a  more  conscious
organisation  of  Liberal  energy  is  demanded.  It  is  a
time  to  follow  Matthew  Arnold's  advice  and  "  Let  our
thought  play  freely  upon  our  stock  notions  and  ideas."
The  first  result  of  such  an  operation  will  be  to  illuminate
our  commonplaces  regarding  the  nature  of  that  liberty  to
the  service  of  which  the  party  is  devoted.  The  negative
conception  of  Liberalism,  as  a  definite  mission  for  the
removal  of  certain  political  and  economic  shackles  upon
personal  liberty,  is  not  merely  philosophically  defective,
but  historically  false.  The  Liberals  of  this  country  as
a  party  never  committed  themselves  either  to  the  theory
or  the  policy  of  this  narrow  laissez  faire  individualism;
they  never  conceived  liberty  as  something  limited  in
quantity,  or  purely  negative  in  character.  But  it  is
true  that  they  tended  to  lay  an  excessive  emphasis  upon
the  aspect  of  liberty  which  consists  in  absen_ce.-oF  res-
traint, as  compared  with  the  other  aspect  which  consists
in  presence  of  opportunity;  and  it  is  this  tendency,  still


THE  VISION  OF  LIBERALISM  93

lingering  in  the  mind  of  the  Liberal  Party,  that  to-day
checks  its  energy  and  blurs  its  vision.  A  more  con-
structive and  a  more  evolutionary  idea  of  liberty  is
needed  to  give  the  requisite  elan  de  vie  to  the  movement;
and  every  cause  of  liberation,  individual,  class,  sex,  and
national,  must  be  recharged  with  the  fresh  enthusiasm
of  this  fuller  faith.

Liberalism  will  probably  retain  its  distinction  from
Socialism,  in  taking  for  its  chief  test  of  policy  the  free-
dom of  the  individual  citizen  rather  than  the  strength  of
the  State,  though  the  antagonism  of  the  two  standpoints
may  tend  to  disappear  in  the  light  of  progressive
experience.  But  it  will  justify  itself  by  two  great
enlarfjements  of  its  liberative  functions.  In  seeking:  to
realise  liberty  for  the  individual  citizen  as  "  equality  of
opportunity,"  it  will  recognise  that,  as  the  area  and
nature  of  opportunities  are  continually  shifting,  so  the
old  limited  conception  of  the  task  of  Liberalism  must
always  advance.  Each  generation  of  Liberals  will  be
required  to  translate  a  new  set  of  needs  and  aspirations
into  facts.  It  is  because  we  have  fallen  so  far  short  of
due  performance  of  this  task  that  our  Liberalism  shows
signs  of  enfeeblement.  We  must  fearlessly  face  as
our  first,  though  not  our  only  question.  What  is  a  free
Englishman  to-day .''  If  we  answer  this  question  faith-
fully, we  shall  recognise  that  it  comprises  many  elements
of  real  liberty  and  opportunity  which  have  not  been
won  for  the  people  as  a  whole.  Is  a  man  free  who  has
not  equal  opportunity  with  his  fellows  of  such  access  to  all
material  and  moral  means  of  personal  development  and
work  as  shall  contribute  to  his  own  welfare  and  that  of  his
society.^  Such  equal  opportunity  at  least  implies  an
equal  access  to  the  use  of  his  native  land  as  a  workplace
and  a  home,  such  mobility  as  will  enable  him  to  dispose
of  his  personal  energies  to  the  best  advantage,  easy  access
to  that  factor  of  capital  or  credit  which  modern  industry
recognises  as  essential  to  economic  independence,  and  to
whatever  new  form  of  industrial  power,  electric  or  other,


94  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

may  be  needed  to  co-operate  with  human  efforts.  A
man  is  not  really  free  for  purposes  of  self-development
in  life  and  work  who  is  not  adequately  provided  in  all
these  respects,  and  no  small  part  of  constructive
Liberalism  must  be  devoted  to  the  attainment  of  these
equal  opportunities.

But  all  such  distinctively  economic  liberties __arc
evidently  barren  unless  accompanied  by  a  far  more
adequate  realisation  of  spiritual  and  intellectual  oppor-
tunity than  is  contained  in  our  miserably  meagre
conception  of  popular  education.  For  education  in  the
large  meaning  of  the  term  is  the  opportunity  of
opportunities,  and  the  virtual  denial  to  the  majority  of
the  people  of  any  real  share  of  the  spiritual  kingdom
which  is  rightly  theirs  must  remain  for  all  true  Liberals
an  incessant  challenge  to  their  elementary  sense  of  justice,
as  well  as  the  most  obvious  impediment  both  to  the
achievement  and  the  utilisation  of  every  other  element
of  personal  liberty.  It  is  this  truth  that  also  underlies
the  great  struggle  against  militarism  and  Imperialism
which  assumes  so  many  shapes  upon  the  stage  of  politics,
and  which,  driven  to  its  last  resort,  will  always  be  dis-
closed as  the  antagonism  between  physical  and  moral
force,  as  the  guardian  and  promoter  of  civilisation.
The  practical  interpretation  and  realisation  of  moral
and  intellectual  liberty  for  the  people  as  the  most  urgent
and  fruitful  of  all  tasks  of  Liberalism,  though  standing
first  in  order  of  importance,  cannot,  however,  be
detached  in  political  endeavour  from  the  other  more
material  liberties.  It  is  the  peril,  as  it  is  the  glory,  of
Liberalism  that  it  is  required  to  drive  several  teams
abreast  along  the  road  of  progress.

Finally,  though  Liberals  must  ever  insist  that  each
enlargement  of  the  authority  and  functions  of  the  State
must  justify  itself  as  an  enlargement  of  personal  liberty,
interfering  with  individuals  only  in  order  to  set  free
new  and  larger  opportunities,  there  need  remain  in
Liberalism  no  relics  of  that  positive  hostility  to  public


THE  VISION  OF  LIBERALISM  95

methods  of  co-operation  which  crippled  the  old  Radical-
ism. When  society  is  confronted,  as  it  sometimes  will
be,  by  a  breakdown  of  competition  and  a  choice  between
private  monopoly  and  public  enterprise,  no  theoretic
objections  to  the  State  can  be.  permitted  to  militate
against  public  safety.  Just  in  proportion  as  education
guides,  enriches,  and  enlightens  the  will  of  the  people,
and  gives  spiritual  substance  and  intellectual  power  to
democracy,  the  presumption  which  still  holds  against
the  adequacy  of  public  as  compared  with  private  co-
operation will  be  weakened,  and  Liberalism  will  come
more  definitely  to  concern  itself  with  the  liberation  and
utilisation  of  the  faculties  and  potencies  of  a  nation  and
a  municipality,  as  well  as  with  those  of  individuals  and
voluntary  groups  of  citizens.  It  surely  belongs  to
Liberalism  to  think  thus  liberally  about  its  mission  and
its  modes  of  progressive  achievement.  Not,  however,
of  fulfilment.  For  it  is  this  illimitable  character  of
Liberalism,  based  on  the  infinitude  of  the  possibilities
of  human  life,  in  its  individual  and  social  aspects,  which
affords  that  vision  without  which  not  only  a  people  but
a  party  perishes,  the  vision  of

"That  untravelled  world  where  margin  fades
For  ever  and  for  ever  when  I  move."


Chapter  II
EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY

What  speciousness  attaches  to  the  charge  of  Socialism
which  is  freely  flung  to-day  against  the  latest  develop-
ments of  Liberal  policy  is  due  to  the  fuller  and  more
positive  interpretation  of  personal  liberty  slowly  forced
by  pressure  of  events  upon  the  Liberal  party.  And  not
upon  the  Liberal  party  alone.  In  a  recent  indictment
of  the  "  Socialism  "  of  the  present  Government,  Lord
Hugh  Cecil  named  three  crucial  instances,  the  Old  Age
Pensions  Act,  the  Development  Bill,  and  certain  pro-
visions of  the  Finance  Bill.  But  the  two  former
measures  have  received  the  sanction  of  all  save  a  small
section  of  Conservative  politicians,  while  the  "Socialism"
of  the  Budget  (if  the  attempt  to  exact  an  increased
contribution  from  certain  "socially"  created  values
merits  that  description)  involves  no  new  principle  in
English  government,  but  merely  an  application  of  a
taxing  and  rating  principle  already  applied  by  the
Governments  of  Conservative  States  like  Germany.

That  the  end  of  good  government  is  to  furnish
individual  liberty  and  opportunity  is  so  firmly  rooted  in
our  habits  of  political  thought  that  it  is  perhaps  difficult
to  conceive  the  easy  displacementof  this  principle  by  that
of  "  the  good  of  society  "  or  any  similar  abstraction.  The
modern  enlargement  of  the  functions  of  our  State  in  the
direction  of  Factory  and  Public  Health  Acts,  Education,
the  extension  of  municipal  public  services,  has  always
been  advocated  primarily  as  a  defence  of  individuals

96


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 97

against  evil  conditions  of  work  or  life  imposed  upon
them  by  the  superior  economic  strength  of  landlords,  ,
employers,  or  private  monopolies,  aided  and  abetted  by  ;
their  own  folly,  ignorance,  and  lack  of  forethought. '
Every  one  of  these  measures,  whether  or  not  regarded  as
Socialistic,  has  been  mainly  directed  so  to  improve  the
physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  or  economic  condition
of  individuals  as  to  secure  for  them  a  larger  measure  of
liberty  in  the  disposal  of  their  lives.

The  phrase  in  which  this  reform  movement  is  most
succinctly  expressed  is  equality  of  opportunity.  Like
most  general  phrases  it  has  its  ambiguities,  but  none  the
less  it  furnishes  the  best  opening  for  an  inquiry  into  the
nature  of  the  fuller  and  more  positive  liberty  to  which
the  Liberalism  of  the  future  must  devote  itself.  This
inquiry  will  best  take  shape  in  an  attempt  to  give  a
simple  dogmatic  answer  to  the  question,  "  What  are
the  equal  opportunities  which  every  Englishman
requires  to-day  in  order  to  secure  real  liberty  of  self-
development  .^"

It  is,  I  think,  plain  that  in  the  front  of  this  charter  of  '
individual  liberty  comes  the  right  of  every  man  to  an
equal  share  with  every  other  in  the  use  of  the  land  and
of  the  other  natural  resources  of  his  native  country.
This  right,  if  it  has  been  alienated  or  compromised,
must  be  restored.  That  the  bulk  of  the  land  of  any
nation  should  continue  to  be  the  property  of  a  few
thousand  persons  who  are  thereby  legally  empowered
to  determine  to  what  use  it  shall  be  put,  or  whether  it
shall  be  put  to  any  use,  and  to  determine  whether  large
numbers  of  their  fellow-citizens  shall  be  free  to  work
and  live  in  the  village  or  the  countryside  where  they  were ;
born  and  bred,  is  a  manifest  infringement  of  this  doc-/
trine  of  equality.  The  legal  status  of  a  landless  man  in
England  to-day  lacks  the  elements  of  personal  liberty :
upon  enclosed  land  (virtually  all  the  land);  he  may  not
trespass  so  as  to  obey  the  primeval  law  bidding  him  earn
his  bread in  the  sweat  of  his  face;  upon  the  public


98  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

thoroughfares  he  may  not  rest,  and  moving  on  con-
tinually he  becomes  a  rogue  and  vagabond.  In  order
to  live  at  all  in  his  native  land  he  must  succeed  in  making
a  bargain  with  some  owner,  who  has  a  "  right  "  to  refuse
him  this  right  to  live.  Competition  between  owners
in  some  part  modifies  the  rigour  of  the  landless  status :
it  never  cancels  the  lack  of  liberty.

Now  what  does  equality  of  opportunity  demand  in
relation  to  the  land  ?  Evidently  not  that  every  man
shall  have  an  equal  sized  parcel  of  land  assigned  to  his
exclusive  use,  for  that  would  be  impracticable,  even  were
it  otherwise  desirable,  in  a  country  so  thickly  and  so
unevenly  peopled  as  ours.  If  every  one  wanted  to
return  to  the  soil,  there  would  not  be  enough,  however
intensive  the  cultivation.  What  is  required  is  that  any
man  who  wants  the  use  of  a  bit  of  land  which  he  is  fit
to  work  shall  have  an  equal  chance  with  every  other  man
of  getting  and  of  keeping  it,  on  terms  regulated  by  a
public  authority  and  not  a  private  owner;  and  that  every
man  can  on  similar  terms  get  a  fixed  home  to  live  in
without  the  liability  of  being  turned  out  at  the  will  of
another.  These  conditions  cannot  ultimately  be
achieved,  as  is  sometimes  fondly  imagined,  by  the
intervention  of  public  bodies  hiring  land  from  private
owners :  no  settled  equity  is  possible  until  by  degrees
private  ownership  in  urban  and  large  portions  of  rural
land  has  given  place  to  public  ownership.

Apart  from  this  equal  access  to  natural  resources  for
individual  use,  the  axiom  of  equality  requires  that,
either  by  means  of  public  ownership,  or  by  taxation,
the  annual  values  of  land,  as  distinct  from  its  improve-
ments, shall  become  a  public  income  to  be  expended  for
the  equal  advantage  of  all  members  of  the  community.
An  equal  stake  in  the  valuable  uses  of  the  land,  with
publicly  guaranteed  security  of  tenure  for  those  who
want  to  work  or  live  upon  a  piece  of  land,  is  now  a
generally  accepted  principle  of  land-reform  among  all
grades  of  thoughtful  Liberals.


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 99

So  important  is  equal  access  to  the  land  as  a  basis  of
individual  liberty  that  it  is  not  unnatural  that  many
reformers  should  call  a  halt  at  this  point,  insisting  that
all  the  elements  of  practical  freedom  are  present,  if  every
man  is  free  to  apply  his  labour  to  the  land,  and  no  one  is
permitted  to  monopolise  the  sources  of  all  material
wealth.  But  most  persons,  on  reflection,  will  perceive
that  full  liberty  of  self-development  involves  other
opportunities,  some  of  which  are  not  related  even
remotely  to  the  ownership  or  lise  of  land.

First  let  us  take  one  form  of  modern  liberty  which  is
in  part  a  land  question.  The  right  to  move  unhin-
dered from  one  place  to  another  is  as  much  an  element
of  freedom  as  the  right  to  stay  where  you  are.  If  a
man  is  to  make  the  best  use  of  his  faculties,  he  must  be
free  to  take  himself  and  his  belongings  from  where  he
is  to  where  he  wants  to  be.  Mobility  is  more  and  more
essential  to  freedom  in  our  modern  industrial  system,
where  local  industrial  conditions  are  continually  chang-
ing, and  where  every  one  must  be  able  to  follow  his
trade  and  to  open  up  new  markets  for  his  personal  skill
or  his  products.

That  this  mobility  belongs  to  individual  liberty  is
indeed  embodied  in  the  most  hallowed  maxim  of  the
individualist  philosopher,  laissez-faire,  laissez-aller.
But  to  tell  a  man  he  has  this  right,  this  liberty  to  go,
is  not  to  give  it  to  him.  The  freedom  to  walk  along
the  high  road  is  not  the  real  mobility  required  for
modern  life.  Effective  liberty  to  travel  involves  the
use  of  railroads,  which  in  substance  are  our  national
highways.  Now  an  ordinary  labourer,  obliged  to  bar-
gain with  a  private  company  for  carriage,  and  disabled
by  his  narrow  means  from  moving  easily,  quickly,  or
far  at  a  time,  is  in  fact  deprived  of  an  opportunity
essential  to  his  full  liberty  of  choice  in  life  and  work,
and  society  is  also  the  loser  by  this  limitation  of  his
power.  Most  civilised  nations  have  already  become
aware  that  it  is  the  business  of  the  nation  to  be  the


loo THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

owners  and  managers  of  its  highways,  and  that  they
cannot  safely  be  left  either  to  the  wasteful  competition
or  the  vexatious  combination  of  private  profit-makers.
In  this  country  the  issue  of  nationalisation  of  the  rail-
ways is  just  coming  into  the  arena  of  practical  policy,
and  it  is  important  to  dissociate  it  from  any  general
Socialism,  recognising  it  as  a  reform  warranted  by  the
most  accepted  principles  of  individual  liberty.  A
dividend-seeking  company  is  justified,  indeed  may  be
compelled,  to  discriminate  in  rates  so  as  to  favour
foreign  importers  as  against  British  producers,  to
shower  advantages  of  cheap  and  rapid  service  upon
thickly  peopled  centres,  while  starving  outlying  and
more  sparsely  populated  regions,  and  in  various  ways  to
help  rich  localities  and  persons  and  injure  poor  ones  in
freight  and  passenger  rates.  A  truly  public  high-road
policy,  designed  to  give  equal  opportunities  to  all  parts
of  the  country  and  all  classes  of  the  people  and  so  to
develop  in  the  fullest  and  the  farthest-sighted  way  the
national  resources,  can  only  be  pursued  by  a  railroad
system  owned  and  operated  by  the  nation.  Absolutely
free  transit  may  not  be  attainable  or  advisable,  but  a
national  railway  system,  which,  by  its  cheap  rates  and
quick  frequent  service,  enables  every  man  to  move  to
and  from  his  work  without  waste  of  time  or  money,
and  to  follow  his  economic  opportunities  wherever  they
may  lead  him,  is  necessary  to-day  to  "  free  "  men  in  a
"  free  "  country.  And  what  holds  of  persons  holds  of
the  produce  of  their  labour.  A  public  railway  system
will  tend  towards  an  equalisation  of  rates  such  as  prevails
in  the  postal  system-for  the  carriage  of  letters,  telegrams,
and  small  parcels,  the  purpose  and  result  of  which  would
be  to  facilitate  access  to  markets  for  local  industries  in  all
parts  of  the  country,  and  so  to  contribute  to  equality
of  opportunity  for  the  persons  dependent  on  these
industries.

Then  comes  another  issue  of  modern  liberty  which
also  has  its  roots  in  Nature  and  man's  equal  access  to


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY loi

natural  powers.  For  most  purposes  of  organised
industry  the  use  of  some  non-human  energy  is  neces-
sary :  civilisation  more  and  more  implies  the  liberation
of  the  muscular  and  nervous  powers  of  man  from  heavy
routine  work,  and  the  substitution  of  mechanical  energy.
In  large  provinces  of  industry  the  time  has  come  when
the  success  or  failure  of  a  man  to  establish  himself  in
business,  and  to  make  a  living  wage  or  profit,  depends
upon  the  terms  upon  which  he  can  get  cheap  and  reliable
access  to  this  energy.  Hitherto  steam  has  been  the
dominant  power,  and  the  wide  distribution  of  our  coal-
fields and  the  competition  of  the  numerous  mines  have
maintained  over  large  industrial  areas  a  substantial
equality  of  access  to  this  power.  But  it  is  tolerably
evident  that  we  are  on  the  eve  of  a  new  industrial
revolution,  which  is  destined  rapidly  to  displace  steam
by  electric  energy  as  the  main  instrument  of  production.
If  all  our  factories  and  workshops  are  to  be  dependent
on  the  supply  of  electricity,  which  may,  by  improved
economy  of  distribution,  decentralise  many  trades,
perhaps  reviving  large  numbers  of  home  industries;  if,
in  addition  to  this  general  industrial  use,  traction,
lighting,  and  other  local  services  become  entirely  electric,
it  is  evident  that  the  question  of  the  generation  and
distribution  of  this  new  power  is  of  supreme  importance.
Should  the  control  of  this  agent  be  allowed  to  pass  into
the  hands  of  great  profit-making  companies,  possessing
virtual  monopolies  of  electric  supply  over  entire  dis-
tricts, the  ordinary  man  of  business  and  the  body  of
citizen-consumers  will  find  themselves  confronted  with
a  new  industrial  tyranny  even  more  oppressive  than  the
so-called  land-monopoly  or  railroad-monopoly  from
which  they  may  have  liberated  themselves.  That
serious  attempts  are  being  made  by  far-sighted  business
men  to  fasten  this  new  yoke  on  the  necks  of  this  and
other  industrial  nations,  before  the  full  significance  of
the  age  of  electricity  is  grasped  by  the  larger  public
mind, there  can  be  no manner  of  doubt. Whether


I02 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

patents  of  secret  processes,  superior  access  to  coal,  water,
or  other  sources  of  power,  monopoly  of  copper  or  of
some  other  dominant  factor  in  electric  processes,  are
made  the  instruments  of  the  new  control,  the  peril  of
allowing  such  power  to  be  utilised  for  purposes  of
private  profit  will  be  apparent  to  any  moderately
thoughtful  person.  If  every  big  or  little  manufacturer
and  every  ordinary  citizen  has  to  make  his  separate  bar-
gain with  the  local  branch  of  some  huge  electric
syndicate  for  leave  to  work  his  mill,  to  turn  his  lathe,  to
light  his  shop,  to  cook  his  dinner,  it  is  clear  that  we  shall
enter  a  new  regime  of  extortion  and  discrimination  far
worse  than  is  exhibited  by  any  railway  in  this  country.
For  the  electric-supply  companies  will  hold  the  keys  of
industry,  and  on  their  policy  and  rates  will  depend  the
prosperity  and  ruin  of  whole  towns  or  trades,  while  the
biggest  manufacturing  concern  may  be  a  mere  pawn  in
this  profitable  game.  The  menace  is  a  very  serious
and  a  pressing  one  :  it  is  one  of  the  chief  tests  of  public
intelligence  in  our  day  whether  our  Parliament  and  our
local  authorities  will,  out  of  ignorance,  apathy,  or  corrupt
connivance,  permit  a  new  economic  despotism  to  arise
which  will  cost  a  mighty  struggle  and  immense  expendi-
ture of  public  money  to  "  buy  out  "  when  its  oppressive
power  has  grown  intolerable.

Since  it  is  possible  that  the  new  physics  and  chemistry
may  in  the  early  future  disclose  new  mineral  sources  of
energy  in  radium  or  other  form  available  for  industrial
uses,  or  may  furnish  a  practical  solution  to  the  difHculties
which  at  present  preclude  us  from  utilising  the  direct
power  of  the  sun  or  the  tides  for  generating  mechanical
energy,  the  modern  State  should  safeguard  society  in
advance  against  new  possibilities  of  economic  tyranny.
This  could  be  done  by  means  of  an  enactment  reserving
to  the  Crown  such  mineral  or  other  sources  of  power
as  are  as  yet  unrecognised  or  unutilised.  It  would  be
sheer  madness  to  hand  over  to  the  owners  of  our  fore-
shores the  right  to  rack-rent  the  community  for  the  use


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 103

of  tidal  energy,  or  to  permit  the  monopolists  of  spots
of  land  rich  in  pitchblend  to  "  hold  up  "  the  national
industries  in  "  an  age  of  radium."

Liberty  of  trade  demands  the  public  ownership  and
operation  of  industrial  power  for  sale  on  equal  terms  to
all  who  want  it.

The  use  of  capital  on  fair  and  equal  terms  is  in  this
country  essential  to  every  man  who  wishes  to  live,  not
as  a  wage-  or  salary-earner,  but  as  an  independent  pro-
ducer or  trader.  For  such  purpose  credit  is  capital,
and  no  man  is  "  free  "  to  use  his  business  skill  unless  he
can  get  a  reasonable  amount  of  credit  upon  easy  terms.
There  are  two  purposes  for  which  a  worker  or  a  small
business  man  wants  an  occasional  advance  of  money.
One  is  to  meet  some  unforeseen  emergency  in  his  busi-
ness or  his  private  life  against  which  adequate  insurance
is  impossible.  Every  one  is  liable  to  such  misfortunes,
and  a  small  man  working  and  living  with  no  margin  is
obliged,  when  they  befall  him,  to  have  recourse  to  the
money-lender.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  next  to
war  and  pestilence  the  greatest  single  source  of  human
misery  in  world-history  has  been  the  oppression  of  usury
forced  on  peasant  cultivators  of  the  soil  by  bad  harvests.
No  serious  land  reformer  here,  or  in  any  other  country,
can  hope  to  set  agriculture  on  a  sound  basis  without
finding  some  way  of  rescuing  the  peasant  from  the
clutches  of  the  money-lender.  But  it  is  not  the  peasant
only  who  is  subject  to  this  peril.  Everywhere  in  our
industrial  towns,  for  lack  of  reasonable  credit,  the  poor
become  entangled  in  debt  to  money-lenders,  shop-
keepers, or  other  richer  persons  who  can  take  advantage
of  their  extremity  of  need  to  drive  hard  bargains.

The  other  need  ofcredit  is,  not  to  meet  an  emergency,
but  to  seize  an  opportunity.  It  is  sometimes  supposed
that  only  a  big  man  with  large  resources  can  set  up  in
business  to-day  with  any  reasonable  prospect  of  success.
But  this  general  supposition  is  unwarranted.  Even  in
some  of  the  staple  manufactures  it  is  often  possible  for


I04 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

a  workman  who  has  got  a  practical  understanding  of
some  branch  of  a  trade  to  set  up  for  himself  with  a
good  prospect  of  doing  well,  if  he  can  get  a  little  business
capital  on  reasonable  terms.  At  present,  as  a  rule,  he  must
either  forego  the  chance  or  else  put  himself  entirely  in
the  hands  of  some  "  trade-furnisher "  or  machine-
making  firm  which  can  squeeze  him  as  it  likes.  Our
ordinary  banking  system,  falling  more  and  more  into
the  hands  of  a  few  great  amalgamated  companies  with
innumerable  local  branches,  and  virtually  compelled  to
run  its  loan  business  by  strict  regulations  as  to  security,
does  not  attempt  to  meet  the  needs  of  these  small  men.
Even  manufacturers  and  traders  of  fair  position  feel
more  and  more  the  lack  of  any  cheap  elastic  credit
system,  and  are  often  driven  to  borrow  upon  usurious
terms  and  under  conditions  which  enslave  them  to
some  bank.  The  machinery  of  credit  and  finance  is  the
dominant  factor  in  our  modern  capitalist  system  :  more
and  more  of  the  practical  control  over  industry,  as  well
as  of  the  profits,  belong,  not  to  the  manufacturer,  the
merchant,  or  other  trade-capitalist,  but  to  the  financier.
I  am  convinced  that  if  a  close  scrutiny  into  the  dis-
tribution of  wealth  were  made,  it  would  be  found  that
in  every  advanced  country  a  rapidly  growing  proportion
of  the  wealth  was  passing  into  the  possession  or  control
of  that  small  class  the  manipulators  of  fluid  capital.
Recent  statistics  showing  the  exceedingly  high  average
rate  of  interest  upon  paid-up  capital  in  British  banking
companies  bear  striking  testimony  to  the  truth  of  this
conjecture.

What  this  restriction  of  credit  means  for  the  ordinary
man  is  this.  If  he  has  got  a  bit  of  land,  and  knows
how  to  put  it  to  advantageous  use,  he  requires  some
money  to  get  manure,  stock,  or  farm  implements :
though  he  may  have  good  personal  credit  he  cannot  get
the  money  upon  fair  terms.  If  he  is  a  small  artisan  with
a  good  idea,  a  shop-foreman  or  an  agent,  anxious  to  set
up  a  little  business  of  his  own,  he  is  in  fact  deprived  of


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 105

the  opportunity  to  apply  his  ability  by  the  absence  of
all  access  to  credit. This  is  a  grave  practical  barrier,
not  merely  to  individual  advancement,  but  to  the  growth
of  national  wealth,  for  it  shuts  out  great  numbers  of  able
enterprising  men  from  contributing  to  industrial  pro-
gress. So  far  as  agriculture  is  concerned,  some  recogni-
tion of  the  difficulty  exists  and  some  remedies  are  in
course  of  experiment :  governmental  loans  have  for  some
time  past  been  made to  distressed  landlords  to  assist
them  in  improving  their  estates  :  Irish  and  now  English
Small  Holdings  Acts  make  some  provision  of  public
loans of capital for specific purposes. In various
countries,  as  is  well  known,  local  co-operative  banks
have  succeeded  in  organising  a  system  of  cheap  credit,
not  only  among  farmers  but  among  industrial  groups  of
town  workers. Whether  private  co-operation  is  com-
petent to  solve  the  problem  in  this  country,  or  whether
a  public  system  of  loan  banks  is  required,  is  a  question
too  intricate  to  be  discussed  with  profit  here. It  is
enough  to  insist  upon  the  prime  importance  of  devising
a  bank  system  which  shall  enable  any  person  who  can
show  that  he  can  make  good  use  of  capital,  giving
personal  or  other  security,  to  obtain  it  upon  the  easiest
terms.  "  Personally  I  believe  that  the  credit  of  the  State
is  of  necessity  so  much  better  than  the  credit  of  any
private  banker  or  money-lender  as  to  indicate  that  the
whole  of  the  money-lending  business  from  the  pawn-
shop up  to  the  largest  discount  operations  will  in  time
pass  into  State  control. Most  of  the  objections  raised
by  business  men  to  such  a  proposal  are  based  either
upon  the  greater  elasticity  of  private  enterprise  in  bank-
ing or  upon  the  supposed  necessity  of  secrecy  in  matters
of  loan-credit. Now  the  first  of  these  advantages  is
rapidly disappearing under the modern branch-bank
system  :  the  second,  the  secrecy,  is  not  an  advantage  at
all,  for  though  the  interest  of  the  individual  borrower
lies  in  secrecy,  that  of  society  lies  in  publicity.

These  considerations,  however,  are  too  nice  for  us


io6 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

here  to  pursue.  I  can  only  repeat  that  credit  is  an  essen-
tial element  of  liberty  and  of  equality  of  competition
in  modern  business,  and  so  becomes  an  item  in  our
charter  of  opportunity.

If  a  man  has  his  fair  use  of  the  land  and  other  natural
resources  of  his  country,  and  of  the  national  highways,
can  get  industrial  power  and  financial  power  upon  equal
terms  with  any  other  man,  he  has  made  large  strides
along  the  road  of  liberty.  But  he  is  not  really  free —
because  he  is  not  secure,  and  the  sense  and  the  substance
of  security  belong  to  a  free  man.  A  working  man,  a
clerk,  a  small  shopkeeper  or  his  assistant,  in  fact,  the
great  majority  of  the  population  in  our  rich  and  civilised
country,  are  conscious  always  of  standing  in  a  precarious
condition.  They  and  their  families  may  be  plunged
into  poverty  and  its  attendant  degradation  and  disease
at  any  time  by  the  ill-health  or  other  disablement  of  the
bread-winner,  by  the  failure  of  an  employer,  by  some
change  of  public  taste,  some  shift  of  market,  some  intro-
duction of  improved  machinery,  or  some  trade  depres-
sion. Few  of  these  emergencies  can  be  foreseen;
against  the  graver  ones  no  adequate  provision  can  be
made,  even  by  the  best-paid  grades  of  workers.  Among
the  middle  classes,  especially  among  the  professional
and  commercial  classes  of  our  towns,  the  competitive
struggle  is  fraught  with  growing  hazard :  it  is  rarely
possible  to  see  far  ahead,  and  the  complexity  of  markets
and  of  price-changes  baffles  the  keenest  foresight.
Though  such  men  may  make  some  fair  provision  against
destitution,  they  cannot  ensure  a  standard  of  comfort
for  themselves  and  their  families,  and  the  wear  and  tear
of  anxiety  is  an  increasing  cost  of  production  in  modern
industry.  The  business  of  insurance  has  sprung  up  to
deal  with  these  conditions,  and  is  grappling  manfully
with  some  of  them.  But  then  insurance  itself  so  often
is  not  sure,  and  this  applies  particularly  to  the  societies
to  which  the  working  classes  have  recourse.  An  enor-
mous proportion  of  the  savings  of  the  workers,  made


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 107

often  at  the  expense  of  some  element  in  their  personal
efBciency,  goes  in  competitive  expenses  of  management,
contributing  nothing  towards  insurance,  while  the  sys-
tem of  weekly  retail  collection  involves  the  maximum
trouble  of  collection.  It  is  quite  evident  that  if  there  is
one  form  of  enterprise  where  the  State  has  an  advantage
over  private  profit-making  companies,  it  is  insurance.
The  intelligence  of  civilised  nations  in  all  parts  of  the
world  is  coming  to  a  clear  recognition  of  this  truth,  and
Governments  are  everywhere  assuming  the  new  respon-
sibility. Organised  Society  must  do  for  its  members
what  they  are  unable,  either  as  individuals  or  as  loose
co-operative  groups,  to  do  for  themselves,  viz.,  to
obtain  such  security  of  employment  and  of  livelihood  as
is  necessary  to  give  them  confidence  and  freedom  in
their  outlook  upon  life.  No  man,  whose  standard  of
life  lies  at  the  mercy  of  a  personal  accident  or  a  trade
crisis,  has  the  true  freedom  which  it  is  the  first  duty
of  the  civilised  State  to  furnish.

How  very  imperfectly  this  prime  duty  of  the  State
is  yet  performed  appears  in  the  administration  of  justice.
We  are  in  the  habit  of  accepting  the  dictum  that  "  all
men  are  equal  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,"  as  if  it  were
equivalent  to  the  statement  that  "  every  man  equally
enjoys  the  protection  of  the  law."  Now  this  latter
statement  is  notoriously  false.  Freedom  and  equality  of
access  to  public  justice  do  not  exist  in  this  country.
Neither  in  a  criminal  nor  in  a  civil  suit  does  a  poor  man
stand  upon  a  level  with  a  rich  man.  So  long  as  the  pre-
paration of  a  case,  the  feeing  of  counsel,  the  expenses  of
witnesses,  court  fees  and  other  costs  of  public  justice
are  charged  against  private  litigants,  the  owner  of  the
long  purse  has  an  evident  advantage,  and  can  beat  down,
choke  off  or  wear  out  his  poorer  adversary.  This
iniquity  is  still  more  monstrous  where,  under  the  false
name  of  public  justice,  the  Crown  with  all  the  public
resources  at  its  call,  in  a  court  of  its  own  selection,  assails
the  life  or  liberty  of  a  poor  and  ignorant  defendant,  who


io8 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

has  neither  the  wit  to  defend  himself  nor  the  money  to
fee  skilled  counsel  and  to  state  his  full  defence.  That
some  courts  have  power  to  provide  counsel  for  persons
suing  or  defending  in  forma  pauperis^  and  to  remit
certain  fees,  I  am  aware,  but  such  provision  is  utterly
inadequate  to  meet  the  demand  for  equal  justice.  The
result  is  that  in  classes  of  cases  where  heavy  expenses  are
involved  in  hiring  counsel,  calling  experts  and  in  appeal-
ing to  higher  courts,  justice  to  all  intents  and  purposes
is  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.  Nor  are  these  by  any
means  the  only  inequalities  of  law  that  need  redress.
The  substance  of  whole  departments  of  our  law  is  still
biassed  in  favour  of  real  property,  the  whole  scale  of
penalties  is  weighted  by  class  interests  and  prejudices,
and  still  worse  the  bulk  of  the  administration  of  the  law
is  entrusted  to  incompetent  and  untrained  amateurs,
drawn  almost  exclusively  from  the  possessing  and
employing  classes.  Under  such  conditions  justice  must
remain  precarious,  and  the  general  implicit  confidence  in
justice  which  is  the  spiritual  foundation  of  a  State  is
grievously  impaired.

I  cannot  here  enter  into  discussion  of  the  precise
remedies  required,  but  must  content  myself  with  for-
mulating a  demand  for  the  free  and  equal  access  of  all
men  to  public  justice.  This  can  only  be  achieved  by
relieving  private  litigants  from  all  expenses  in  the  pre-
paration and  conduct  of  criminal  or  civil  cases,  and  the
removal  of  all  such  work  from  a  private  to  a  public  pro-
fession. The  defence  of  life  and  property  from  internal
attacks  must  be  put  on  the  same  footing  as  external
defence.  Because  the  special  interests  of  individuals
are  involved  in  law-suits,  that  is  no  reason  for  leaving
half  the  work  of  justice  to  private  enterprise  under  con-
ditions of  such  inequality  as  I  indicate.  These  cases  are
undertaken  in  the  interests  of  public  justice,  and  the
public  should  pay  and  provide,  taking  what  precautions
are  necessary  to  safeguard  itself  against  frivolous  or
otherwise  unwarrantable  litigation.


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 109

A  man  might  have  all  the  equal  liberties  which  I
have  named,  access  to  land,  facility  of  travel,  industrial
energy,  credit,  economic  security  and  justice,  all  these
things  might  be  freely  distributed  throughout  the  com-
munity, and  yet  true  equality  of  opportunity  might  be
lacking :  a  society  where  all  these  liberties  were  won
might  be  sunk  in  the  stagnation  of  conservatism,  or
might  even  breed  new  forms  of  inequality  and  tyranny.

For  there  is  one  opportunity  upon  which  the  efficacy
of  all  the  others,  as  instruments  of  self-development  and
of  social  benefit,  depends :  equality  of  access  to  know-
ledge and  culture.  Without  this  every  other  opportu-
nity is  barren  for  the  purposes  of  personal  or  social
progress.  Education  is  the  opportunity  of  opportu-
nities. We,  therefore,  who  are  concerned  not  with
liberty  to  stagnate  but  with  liberty  to  grow,  must  set  the
nationalisation  of  knowledp:e  and  culture  in  the  front  of
our  charter  of  popular  freedom.  It  sometimes  seems  as
if  this  great  secular  struggle  for  popular  enlightenment
were  won,  in  principle  at  any  rate.  Everyone,  we  are
told,  believes  in  opening  wide  the  gates  of  knowledge
that  anyone  who  will  may  enter :  everyone  believes  in
personal  culture,  in  the  extension  of  general  and  technical
education,  in  free  libraries  and  cheap  literature :  most
persons  admit  that  the  State  must  take,  as  it  is  taking,
an  ever  larger  part  in  the  education  of  the  people.  But
the  battle  in  this  country,  at  any  rate,  is  far  from  won.
For  consider  what  equal  opportunity  of  knowledge  and
of  culture  implies.  It  implies  that  neither  poverty,  nor
ignorance  of  parents,  nor  premature  wage-earning,  nor
defects  of  teaching  apparatus,  shall  keep  any  person
from  any  sort  of  learning  which  will  improve  his  under-
standing, elevate  his  character,  and  increase  his  efficiency
as  a  worker  and  a  citizen.  Now  we  have  hardly  begun  to
realise  these  essentials  in  our  system  of  public  education,
where  not  5  per  cent,  of  the  children  of  the  working
classes  get  anything  beyond  the  barest  rudiments.  No
serious  endeavour  is  yet  made  to  bring within  their


no THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

reach  any  appreciable  fraction  of  the  great  world  of
literature  or  science,  or  to  bring  home  to  them  through
history  that  knowledge  of  social  institutions  and  popular
movements  without  which  the  formal  rights  of  citizen-
ship are  little  better  than  an  idle  toy  or  even  a  perilous
tool.

What  is  needed  is  not  an  educational  ladder,  narrowing
as  it  rises,  to  be  climbed  with  difficulty  by  a  chosen
energetic  few,  who  as  they  rise  enter  a  new  social
stratum,  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  another  class,  and
are  absorbed  in  official  and  professional  occupations
which  dissociate  them  from  the  common  life  of  the
people.  It  is  a  broad,  easy  stair,  and  not  a  narrow  ladder,
that  is  wanted,  one  which  will  entice  everyone  to  rise,
will  make  for  general  and  not  for  selected  culture.  I
am  well  aware  that  all  will  not  equally  avail  themselves
of  the  opportunity  for  culture,  but,  unless  the  door  is
held  far  wider  open  than  it  is  at  present,  an  intolerable
wrong  is  done  and  an  immeasurable  waste  of  national
efficiency  and  progress  is  incurred.  The  individual
culture  and  the  social  efficiency  of  every  man  and  woman
are  the  two  related  aims  of  national  education.  Such  an
education  must  be  free,  so  that  poverty  be  no  impedi-
ment, open  to  all  from  the  primary  school  to  the  univer-
sity, disinterested  in  its  aims  and  management.  These
are  the  main  essentials  of  intellectual  economy.  We
are  very  far  from  having  secured  them.  At  present
popular  culture  in  this  country  is  crushed  between  the
upper  millstone  of  public  parsimony  and  the  lower
millstone  of  theoloPfical  intrusion.  We  do  not  believe  in
ideas  as  we  believe  in  force,  as  an  instrument  of  national
security  and  progress.  Otherwise  we  should  not  find  it
so  easy  to  add  ten  millions  of  yearly  public  expenditure
on  warships,  so  difficult  to  find  one  million  for  the
higher  education  of  the  people.  Yet  any  truly  intelligent
public  financier,  looking  ten  or  twenty  years  ahead,
who  merely  concerned  himself  with  the  provision  of
future  public  revenue,  would  recognise  his  wisest  policy


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY iii

to  lie  in  sowing  knowledge  broadcast  in  the  common
mind,  to  ripen  afterwards  in  industrial  efficiency.  And
this  is  but  the  lowest  plea  for  national  culture.  But
short-sighted  parsimony,  proceeding  from  a  lack  of
faith  in  ideas,  is  not  the  gravest  peril  to  our  free
education.  Disinterested  culture  is  what  we  need.  Now
this  is  not  attained  when  a  church,  an  academic  caste,  or  a
social  class,  directs  or  dominates  our  schools  or  colleges.
Popular  self-government  is  as  essential  for  education  as
for  any  other  province  of  public  conduct.  So  long  as
clergymen  are  permitted  to  tamper  with  education,  or
military  patriots  are  allowed  to  inject  their  poison  into
the  minds  of  the  young,  or  authorities  from  the  older
seats  of  learning  are  allowed  to  impose  obsolete  intel-
lectual standards  upon  the  rising  popular  culture,  the
free  intellectual  life  of  the  people  will  be  heavily
impeded.

One  particular  peril  which  immediately  confronts  us
I  cannot  forbear  to  name.  It  lies  in  the  temptation  to  rely
upon  the  financial  patronage  of  rich  men,  millionaire
endowments,  for  the  means  of  establishing  universities
and  colleges  for  the  higher  education  or  the  people.
Now  for  any  nation  to  turn  to  private  charity  for
the  performance  of  its  public  duties  is  a  degradation
and  a  danger.  Education  sustained  by  such  means  will
never  be  really  free,  or  fully  disinterested.  The  history,
the  economics,  the  ethics,  even  the  biology,  taught  in
these  privately  bounty-fed  institutions,  will  carry  in
various  subtle  but  certain  ways  the  badge  of  servitude
to  the  special  business  interests  that  are  their  paymasters.
If  rich  men  can  afford  this  bounty,  the  State  can  by
taxation  obtain  from  them  the  public  income  needed  to
sustain  the  intellectual  needs  of  the  nation.  If  intel-
lectual liberty  in  the  sense  of  free  access  to  disinterested
culture  is  to  become  the  common  heritage  of  all,  public
ownership  and  control  of  the  instruments  of  this
education  is  indispensable.

I  am  particularly  urgent  in  this  matter  because,  not


112 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

merely  is  this  intellectual  and  moral  franchise  essential
to  the  effective  operation  of  the  other  opportunities,  but
it  is  essential  to  their  winning.  We  have  not  yet  got
the  land,  the  railways,  the  public  credit,  the  free  justice,
and  the  other  opportunities.  A  cluster  of  special  interests
stubbornly  defends  each  stronghold  of  monopoly.  The
success  of  the  popular  demand  depends  upon  the  intelli-
gent use  of  the  franchise  and  the  instruments  of  govern-
ment, so  as  to  form  sound  judgments,  to  express  them  in
valid  legal  forms,  to  press  these  demands  through  the
legislative  machinery,  and  to  secure  accurate,  even-
handed  administration  of  the  laws.  Now  an  ignorant,
dull,  capricious  people,  more  interested  in  drink,  sport,
and  gambling  than  in  anything  else,  easily  diverted  from
pressing  their  "  rights "  by  some  artful  appeal  to
military  or  commercial  Jingoism,  and  broken  into  con-
tentious factions  by  any  specious  promises  of  present
gain,  is  incapable  of  a  sustained,  energetic,  and  well-
directed  effort  to  realise  Democracy.  Skilled  sophists  of
the  law,  the  Press,  the  party,  aye  of  the  pulpit  and  the
lecture-room,  become  the  conscious  or  unconscious  tools
of  reaction  and  obstruction,  denouncing  the  illegality,
the  immorality,  the  unreason,  and  the  futility  of  the
popular  demands.  The  greatest  of  immediate  needs,
therefore,  is  the  training  of  popular  leaders  with  the
intelligence,  the  knowledge,  the  discretion  and  the
confidence  required  to  break  down  these  sophistical
defences,  together  with  that  broader  general  intelligence
which  will  enable  the  people  to  choose  able  leaders,  to
resist  scares  and  bribes,  and  to  form  sober  judgments  on
the  broad  issues  of  public  policy  submitted  to  them.

These  are  reasons  why  "  free  education  "  in  the  fullest
sense  of  that  term  must  rank  as  the  first  and  most  urgent
issue  of  our  time.  By  this  I  do  not  mean  that  other
demands  should  be  postponed.  The  field  of  progress  is
best  ploughed  by  driving  many  teams  abreast.  I  only
mean  that  important  as  is  access  to  the  land  and  to  other
economic  liberties, the  intellectual  and  moral  liberty


EQUALITY  OF  OPPORTUNITY 113

which  comes  with  the  cultivation  of  the  mind  is  more
valuable,  not  only  on  its  own  account,  but  because  with-
out it  none  of  the  others  can  be  won,  or  if  won  can  be
securely  held.  That  the  charter  here  drafted  contains
the  full  tale  of  human  rights  and  liberties,  or  that  it
exhausts  the  political  reforms  which  an  enlightened
modern  State  should  strive  to  compass,  I  do  not  profess.
But  I  would  invite  serious  consideration  of  these  two
questions.  First,  is  there  any  one  of  these  great  lines
of  advance  here  indicated  which  would  not  contribute
to  the  positive  enlargement  of  personal  liberty,  and
which,  by  redressing  some  present  inequality  of  oppor-
tunity, would  not  secure  the  better  development  and
more  advanta.o-eous  use  of  the  enermes  of  individual
citizens.^  Secondly,  is  it  not  evident  that  these  reforms
belong  to  Liberalism  and  are  involved  in  that  saner,
more  positive  and  progressive  conception  of  liberty
which  identifies  that  word  not  with  absence  of  restraint
btut  with  presence  of  opportunity  ?

] It  is  true  that  the  attainment  of  this  practical  equali-

I  sation  of  opportunities  involves  a  larger  use  of  the  State

:  and  legislation  than  Liberals  of  an  older  school  recog-

■  nised  as  necessary  or  desirable. But  the  needs  of  our

1  day  are  different  from  theirs,  and  the  modern  State  is

a  different  instrument. There  is  nothing  in  Liberalism

to  preclude  a  self-governing  people from using the

instrument  of  self-government  for  any  of  the  measures

I  have  named  :  on  the  contrary,  to  refuse  to  do  so  is  to

furnish  the  mere  forms  of  liberty  and  to deny  the

substance. Moreover,  there  is  not  one  of  these  great

positive  liberties  that  has  not  been  acknowledged  and

in  large  part  secured  for  the  people  by  some  advanced

State  in  Europe  or  in  our  colonies. Free  land,  free

travel, free  power, free credit, security, justice and

education,  no  man  is  "  free  "  for  the  full  purposes  of

civilised  life  to-day  unless  he  has  all  these  liberties.


Chapter  III
COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY

A  contemptuous  neglect — sometimes  a  boastful
repudiation — of  principles  or  theories  of  social  reform
is  a  characteristic  attitude  of  most  "  social  reformers  "
in  England  to-day.  Rejecting  the  "  scientific  "  claims
of  Social  Democracy  upon  the  double  ground  that  its
analysis  of  economic  problems  is  radically  defective  and
that  it  fails  to  apply  practically  to  the  future  the  con-
ception of  historic  evolution  which  it  recognises  in
interpreting  the  past,  English  "  progressives  "  present
no  alternative  analysis  or  theory,  nor  do  they  recognise
the  need  of  forming  any.  Not  a  few  among  them  have
passed  through  a  period  of  half-intellectual,  half-
emotional  Utopianism,  dreaming  dreams  and  seeing
visions,  but  they  have  come  out  at  the  other  side,  and
pride  themselves  upon  having  sloughed  all  hallucina-
tions and  settled  down  to  the  practical  work  of  detailed
reform.  Most  of  them  frankly  admit  that  along  with
their  early  hallucinations  they  have  shed  all  "  theory  "
or  "  principle  "  as  awkward  encumbrances  which  impede
that  facility  of  compromise  by  which  alone  they  deem
each  separate  measure  of  real  progress  can  be  achieved.

Many  earnest  workers  in  the  cause  of  that  expansion
of  Municipal  and  State  activity,  which  is  termed  Collec-
tivism, are  especially  impressed  by  this  conviction  of  the
futility  of  theories  and  ideas.  Progress  is  for  most  of
them  purely  a  matter  of  detailed  experiment,  which
shall  concern  itself  only  with  the  special  circumstances
^of  each  case. Such  work,  they  hold,  is  best  entrusted

v^  114


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 115

to  men  with  no  particular  intellectual  principles  or  broad
convictions,  or  who,  if  they  have  any,  will  be  careful  not
to  seek  to  bring  them  into  application.  Mazzini,
indeed,  has  told  us  that  "  principles  alone  are  construc-
tive," but  our  practical  reformer  is  sure  that  he  knows
better :  he  sees  how  very  apt  principles  are  to  get  in  the
way  and  to  clog  the  wheels  of  progress.  Whatever  may
be  true  of  France  or  Germany,  English  history,  as  he
reads  it,  proves  that  progress  is  not  governed  by  the
conscious  operation  of  ideas.  This  revolt  against  ideas
is  carried  so  far  that  able  men  have  come  seriously  to
look  upon  progress  as  a  matter  for  the  manipulation  of
wirepullers,  something  to  be  "  jobbed  "  in  committee
by  sophistical  motions  or  other  clever  trickery.  Great
national  issues  really  turn,  according  to  this  judgment,
upon  the  arts  of  political  management,  the  play  of  the
adroit  tactician  and  the  complete  canvasser.  This  is  the
"  work  "  that  tells :  elections,  the  sane  expression  of
the  national  will,  are  won  by  these  and  by  no  other
means.

Nowhere  has  this  mechanical  conception  of  progress
worked  more  disastrously  than  in  the  movement
towards  Collectivism.  Suppose  that  the  mechanism  of
reform  were  perfected,  that  each  little  clique  of
specialists  and  wirepullers  were  placed  at  its  proper  point
in  the  machinery  of  public  life,  will  this  machinery  grind
out  progress  ?  Every  student  of  industrial  history
knows  that  the  application  of  a  powerful  "  motor  "  is  of
vastly  greater  importance  than  the  invention  of  the
special  machine.  Now,  what  provision  is  made  for
generating  the  motor-power  of  progress  in  Collectivism  .f*
Will  it  come  of  its  own  accord.''  Our  mechanical
reformer  apparently  thinks  it  will.  The  attraction  of
some  present  obvious  gain,  the  suppression  of  some
scandalous  abuse  of  monopolist  power  by  a  private
company,  some  needed  enlargement  of  existing
Municipal  or  State  enterprise  by  lateral  expansion —
such  are  the  sole springs  of  action. In  this  way  the


ii6 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Municipalisation  of  public  services,  increased  assertion
of  State  control  over  mines,  railways,  and  factories,  the
assumption  under  State  control  of  large  departments  of
transport  trade,  proceed  without  any  recognition  of  the
guidance  of  general  principles.  Everywhere  the
pressure  of  special  concrete  interests,  nowhere  the
conscious  play  of  organised  human  intelligence!  Yet
the  folly  of  thus  ignoring  ideas  and  the  enthu-
siasm they  can  evoke,  and  of  trusting  entirely  to
the  detailed  pressure  of  felt  needs  and  grievances,  can
be  made  manifest  even  to  the  practical  man  by  pointing
out  how  such  an  expansion  of  Collective  action  by
redress  of  known  long-standing  grievances  not  merely
implies  a  waste  of  Collective  energy  in  the  past,  but
involves  the  grievous  expense  of  compensating  vested
interests  which  a  wiser  regard  for  "  theory  "  would
never  have  permitted  to  grow  up.

My  object  here  is  to  justify  the  practical  utility  of
"  theory "  and  "  principle "  in  the  movement  of
Collectivism  by  showing  that  reformers  who  distrust
the  guidance  of  Utopia,  or  even  the  application  of
economic  first  principles,  are  not  thrown  back  entirely
upon  that  crude  empiricism  which  insists  that  each  case
is  to  be  judged  separately  and  exclusively  on  its  own
individual  merits.

There  are  certain  middle  principles  and  sober
hypotheses  which  are  serviceable  half-way  houses,  built
by  legitimate  generalisation  out  of  past  experience,  to
which  it  is  reasonable  to  appeal.  The  student  of  recent
economic  history  finds  a  plainly  marked  development
of  the  structure  of  business,  which  throws  a  clear  and
powerful  light  upon  the  true  paths  of  progress  in
collective  enterprise.

"  The  Wealth  of  Nations,"  written  upon  the  very
brink  of  the  industrial  revolution,  contains  a  most
instructive  passage  in  which  Adam  Smith  assigns  what
he  held  to  be  the  necessary  economic  limits  to  joint-
stock  enterprise  :


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 117

"  The  only  trades  which  it  seems  possible  for  a  joint-stock  com-
pany to  carry  on  successfully,  without  an  exclusive  privilege,  are
those  of  which  all  the  operations  are  capable  of  being  reduced  to
what  is  called  a  routine,  or  to  such  a  uniformity  of  method  as
admits  of  little  or  no  variation.  Of  this  kind  is,  first,  the  banking
trade  ;  secondly,  the  trade  of  insurance  from  fire  and  from  sea-risk
and  capture  in  time  of  war  ;  thirdly,  the  trade  of  making  and
maintaining  a  navigable  cut  or  canal  ;  and  fourthly,  the  similar
trade  of  bringing  water  for  the  supply  of  a  great  city."*

Now  in  the  first  place  it  will  be  observed  that  all
these  "  trades  "  which  in  the  later  eighteenth  century-
Adam  Smith  saw  ripening  for  joint-stock  enterprise,
together  with  their  allied  branches  of  business,  have
passed  right  through  the  phase  of  joint-stock  enter-
prise, and  are  in  various  places  and  at  various  paces
visibly  moving  towards  the  condition  of  public  busi-
nesses. Not  merely  in  America,  but  all  over  the
civilised  world,  the  growing  use  of  credit-money  and
the  speculative  processes  of  modern  commerce  are
driving  home  the  dangers  of  private  banking,  and  the
support  which  various  governments  are  practically
forced  to  give  to  private  firms  in  financial  emergencies
is  everywhere  strengthening  the  conviction  of  the
necessity  of  a  firm  national  control  of  currency  in  all  its
complex  forms,  which  is  the  normal  development  and
adjustment  to  modern  conditions  of  one  of  the  earliest
and  most  general  functions  of  the  State.  Closely  related
to  the  trade  in  money  is  the  Insurance  trade.  With  the
growth  of  credit  on  a  basis  of  banking  has  grown  a
number  of  risks  against  which  provision  must  be  made.
As  Adam  Smith  truly  foresaw,  this  work  has  proved
suitable  for  joint-stock  enterprise;  but  in  several
countries  private  joint-stock  is  giving  way  before  public
joint-stock.  The  most  pressing  risks  of  old  age  poverty,
disablement  and  death,  are  passing  under  schemes  of
State  insurance,  voluntary  or  compulsory;  the  habit  of


Dock  v.,  chap,  i.,  part  3.


ii8 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

"  pooling  "  risks  of  fire  and  life  among  formally  com-
peting companies,  so  as  to  eliminate  genuine  competi-
tion, is  rapidly  preparing  the  way  for  a  wider  recognition
in  this  country  of  the  economies  of  State  insurance.  The
"  navigable  cut  or  canal  "  was  the  first  fruit  of  large
capitalism  in  the  transport  industry  and  involves  in  its
development  of  structure  that  large  department  of
industry  which  takes  national  shape  in  railways,  postal
service  and  steamship  companies,  and  municipal  shape
in  tramways,  omnibus  companies,  local  telephones  and
railroads.  This  whole  vast  transport  trade  has  fully
ripened  under  companies  :  the  mightiest  member  of
this  industrial  class,  the  railroad,  has  in  most  countries
been  established  by  or  fallen  under  State  management;
or,  as  in  the  United  States,  is  either  drifting  out  of
private  into  public  hands  from  the  pure  pressure  of
economic  circumstances,*  or  is  organising  its  hitherto
competing  members  into  vast  monopolies  wielding  a
dangerous  dominion  over  the  industry  of  whole  States.
The  fourth  of  Adam  Smith's  trades,  that  of  Water
Supply,  is  likewise  the  index  and  forerunner  of  an  ever-
increasing  series  of  industries  for  the  supply  of  common
municipal  needs,  including  gas,  electricity,  etc.,  which
are  being  municipalised  in  all  parts  of  the  civilised  world.
Now,  the  first  lesson  contained  in  these  facts  is  the
plain  testimony  to  a  natural  course  of  growth  by  which
certain  large  classes  of  industry  are  seen  to  pass  from
individual  into  joint-stock  business,  and  again  from
joint-stock  business  into  public  business,  the  limit  of
Collectivism  being  determined  by  the  specific  character
attaching  to  each  work.  So  wide  and  so  multifarious  is
this  movement,  that  it  cannot  fail  to  impress  all
observers  with  that  feeling  of  inevitability  which  is  the
characteristic  of  the  operation  of  "  natural "  laws.
Many  even  among  those  who  both  in  principle  and
practice  have  set  themselves  in  most  stubborn  opposition

*  In  1894,  192  railroads,  containing  nearly  one-fourth  of  the  aggregate  mileage
in  the  United  States,  were  in  the  hands  of  Official  Receivers.


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 119

to  this  current  of  events  are  compelled  to  bear  regretful
testimony  to  the  overpowering  force  of  the  stream.

Some,  again,  have  been  so  powerfully  impressed  by
the  volume  of  this  movement  that  they  derive  from  it  a
general  law  which  they  seek  to  impose  upon  all  industrial
growth.  All  businesses,  they  urge,  pass  from  small
simple  types  into  larger  and  more  complex  types,
outgrowing  first  the  bounds  of  individual  or  family
control,  then,  taking  on  the  joint-stock  or  voluntary
co-operative  structure,  so  increase  in  size  and  strength  as
to  develop  a  monopoly  character,  which  ultimately
compels  the  State,  as  agent  for  the  interests  of  oppressed
consumers,  to  "  titke  them  over."  According  to  this
view,  all  industry  alike  is  moving  along  the  same  road,
at  different  paces,  towards  the  same  goal  of  State
Collectivism.

Is  this  a  just  interpretation  of  the  facts  .'^  If  not,
what  limits  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  operation  of  this
law  ?  To  find  the  answer  to  this  question,  let  us  turn  to
the  pregnant  criticism  of  Adam  Smith.  The  common
character  of  those  businesses  which  in  his  day  were  suit-
able for  joint-stock  enterprise  he  marks  by  the  word
"  routine."  This  furnishes  a  crucial  test.  Trades
which  are  susceptible  of  "  such  a  uniformity  of  method
as  admits  of  little  or  no  variation,"  which  can  be  reduced
to  "  routine,"  are  visibly,  and  in  some  cases  rapidly,
moving  along  the  prescribed  road  to  Collectivism.
"  But,"  it  has  been  said,  "  cannot  all  industry,  sooner  or
later,  be  brought  under  '  routine '  conditions  and
worked  collectively?"  This  question  is  intimately  con-
nected with  another  relating  to  the  limits  of  machinery.
The  machine  has  been  continually  encroaching  upon  the
domain  of  handicraft,  and  has  executed  by  mechanical
"  routine  "  methods  the  work  which  formerly  required
the  exercise  of  individual  skill.  Can  all  work  be  brought
under  the  control  of  the  machine  ?  The  vital  connection
of  the  two  questions  is  marked  by  the  fact  that  the
growing application of machinery, especially to the


I20 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

manufactures  and  the  transport  industries,  has  been  the
most  potent  agent  in  driving  these  industries  towards
joint-stock  enterprise  and  towards  Collectivism.  If,
then,  it  appears  that  there  are  certain  kinds  of  work
which  cannot  be  done  by  machinery,  which  do  not  require
large  capital,  which  are  essentially  and  eternally  incapable
of  reduction  to  "  routine,"  such  work  seems  likely  to
resist  the  movement  to  Collectivism.  Are  there  such
kinds  of  work  ?  For  answer,  turn  to  the  consumer,  for
the  satisfaction  of  whose  needs  the  whole  of  industry
primarily  exists,  and  whose  "  effective  demand  "  controls
alike  its  quantity  and  character.  There  are  certain  needs
which  nature  or  custom  has  imposed  alike  on  all
members  of  a  community,  or  upon  large  sections  of
Society  in  cases  where  economic  resources  are  unequally
apportioned.  There  are  general  human  needs  which
are  satisfied  by  the  production  of  large  quantities  of
goods  of  common  quality  and  common  shapes  and  sizes.
Such  "  routine  "  wants  can  be  supplied  by  "  routine  "
industry,  and  the  very  economic  nature  of  these  wants,
as  we  have  seen,  drives  the  industries  which  are  engaged
in  their  satisfaction  towards  Collectivism.  It  is,  of
course,  this  principle,  which  has  collectivised  the  high
roads  of  all  civilised  countries,  placing  them  under
national  or  local  control  according  as  they  supply  the
common  need  of  the  nation  or  of  the  locality;  and  the
demand  for  nationalisation  of  railways  involves  no  new
principle  of  policy,  but  merely  an  adjustment  of  the
mechanism  of  transport  to  the  modern  conditions  of  the
"  consuming  "  public.  Almost  all  the  means  of  trans-
port, whether  for  persons,  messages,  or  goods,  in
populous  countries  tend  to  pass  into  the  condition  of
"  routine  "  industries.  The  whole  work  of  conveyance
along  common  routes  is  of  a  "  routine  "  and  mechanical
nature.  It  is  true  that  what  is  called  "  routine  "  may
consist  with  great  complexity,  and  with  some  irregularity
of  demand.  But  when  we  are  dealing  with  a  wide  com-
mon demand  this  complexity  may  be  copied  by  complex


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 121

machinery,  and  this  irregularity  discloses  its  own  laws  of
fluctuation.  The  conveyance  of  men  and  goods  is  not
more  irregular  than  the  conveyance  of  letters  and
telegrams.

But  many  of  the  needs  of  ordinary  material  consump-
tion are  of  a  "  routine  "  character,  for  the  whole  or  for
large  sections  of  a  community.  Because  all  citizens  use
water  and  gas,  and  because  there  should  be  only  one
sort  of  water  and  gas  in  use  for  all,  namely,  the  best  and
purest  that  is  attainable,  these  industries  tend  to  pass
into  collective  forms.  It  is  not  quite  Utopian  to  look
forward  to  a  time  when  it  may  be  considered  as
important  that  one  sort  of  milk  should  be  consumed  by
all,  and  when  the  general  demand  for  bread  may  be
brought  within  such  narrow  limits  of  diff^erence  that
these  industries  shall  be  added  to  the  services  of  muni-
cipal supply.  So  far  as  the  body  of  the  public  are
dominated  in  their  needs  by  common  elements  of
humanity,  whether  on  the  material  or  the  mental  plane,
mechanical  and  "  routine  "  methods  which  tend  to  take
on  collective  forms  will  be  more  and  more  adapted  to
their  supply.

In  proportion  as  a  genuine  levelling  up  of  the  standard
of  comfort  for  the  masses  of  a  population  takes  place,
the  number  of  i'ndustries  which  can  thus  be  regulated
economically  upon  the  largest  scale  for  the  satisfaction
of  wants  which,  once  only  common  within  a  narrow
"  class  "  range,  have  now  extended  to  the  whole  popula-
tion, will  be  constantly  increasing.  Thus  an  incessant\
growth  of  Collectivism  is  indicated  by  the  essential  facts
of  common  progress.  '

But  those  who  fix  their  eyes  ecstatically  upon  this
movement  often  ignore  the  other  side  of  the  case.  If
this  law  of  progress  covered  all  the  needs  of  man,  then
no  limits  could  be  set  upon  Collectivism.  But  man  is
not  only  one  with  his  fellows,  but  also  one  by  himself,
not  only  a  partaker  of  common  humanity  but  an  indi-
vidual with  nature  and  conditions  which  evoke  tastes


122 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

and  needs  that  are  his  own  and  his  alone.  Now  such
tastes,  such  needs,  can  never  be  satisfied  by  "  routine  "
industry,  which  for  its  essential  economy  depends  upon
the  production  of  large  quantities  of  similar  goods  for
the  satisfaction  of  common  un-individual  needs.  The
needs  of  an  individual  nature  can  only  be  satisfied  by
the  conscious  activity  of  an  individual  producer.  Here
emerges  the  radical  antithesis  which  utterly  destroys
the  validity  of  all  ideals  of  complete  Collectivism.
It  is  the  antithesis  of  "  routine  "  and  "  individual  "
work,  of  machine  production  and  art.  A  machine
can  be  made  capable  of  satisfying  all  or  any  of
the  needs  which  we  have  in  common  with  all,  or  with  a
large  number  of  our  fellow-men  :  if  those  needs  are  for
material  commodities,  steam-driven  arrangements  of
iron  can  be  devised  for  making  them;  if  they  are  for
intellectual  goods,  they  can  be  turned  out  cheaply  from
the  factories  of  "  schools,"  "  churches  "  or  ''  presses  "
which  are  contrived  for  the  wholesale  production  of
common  intellectual  or  aesthetic  wares  for  the  consump-
tion of  those  who  will  consent  to  merge  the  individuality
of  their  demand  and  consume  these  common  articles.
But  if  I  stand  out  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  wants  in
which  I  differ  from  my  fellow-men,  I  require  not  a
machinist  but  an  artist  to  satisfy  me,  one  who  by  the
conscious  exercise  of  some  individual  skill  of  his  own
can  mould  the  material  on  which  he  works  to  the  satis-
faction of  my  individuality.  Now  the  whole  gist  of  the
matter  lies  here.  Is  the  Collectivism  of  the  future
going  to  impair  the  multiplicity  and  force  of  those  needs
and  tastes  which  mark  off  one  person  from  another  ?  Is
individuality  to  be  swallowed  up  by  humanity.-^  Few
even  among  the  most  advanced  or  fanatical  Col-
lectivists  admit  this  tendency;  most  are  prepared  to  stake
the  value  of  their  Socialism  upon  the  single  test  of  its
active  promotion  of  individuality,  the  increase  of  the
satisfaction  of  those  needs  which  mark  off  each  from  his
fellow. Though  the  absolute  number  of  common  needs


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 123

capable  of  routine  supply  will  grow,  though  much  of  the
higher  satisfaction  which  comes  to  individuals  will
be  derived  from  the  individual  use  of  opportunities
which  are  accessible  to  all,  "  of  joys  in  widest  com-
monalty spread,"  they  are  few  who  do  not  eagerly  insist
that  a  chief  object  and  result  of  such  Collectivism  will  be
to  enable  individuals  more  fully  and  freely  to  cultivate
and  satisfy  their  individual  aspirations.  Now  if  this  is
so,  and  it  seems  incontrovertibly  true,  any  growth  of
Collectivism  based  upon  the  most  economic  use  of
routine  activities  of  nature  and  of  man  must  be  pro-
gressively outweighed  by  the  growth  of  human  activity
devoted  to  those  kinds  of  work  here  broadly  designated
Art.  Under  this  term  will  come  all  handling  of  material
or  intellectual  "  stuff  "  which  involves  individual  skill
and  attention  in  the  worker  imposed  by  the  need  of
executino-  an  individual  order.  The  Fine  Arts  of  course
yield  the  plainest  examples  of  such  work,  but,  as
Ruskin  has  so  admirably  shown,  there  is  no  material
which  does  not  admit  a  genuine  artistic  treatment,  pro-
vided there  exists  some  true  public  appreciation  of  the
excellence  of  the  product.  Metals,  wood,  stone,
leather — every  form  of  matter — will  afford  infinite  scope
for  a  handicraft  which  shall  exhibit  the  truest  and  most
noble  character  of  Art  in  places  where  there  live  lovers
of  beautiful  form  and  colour.  There  are  few  who  will
not  admit  that  the  progress  of  civilisation  in  a  nation
implies  a  constant  rise  in  the  discriminative  character  of
work  and  enjoyment.  Now  if  this  is  so,  it  implies  a  pro-
portionate diminution  in  the  quantity  of  effort  devoted
to  routine  or  common  work  as  compared  with  that
which  is  individual  in  its  execution  and  in  the  enjoyment
it  furnishes.  This,  of  course,  does  not  mean  that  the
enjoyment  of  a  great  picture  by  a  wide  class  of  the
community  is  inconsistent  with  true  progress,  but  that
this  enjoyment,  though  common  to  many  as  enjoyment,
will  be  more  discriminative,  that  is,  more  individual,
in  the  appreciation  and  satisfaction  it  affords.


124 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Now,  there  is  no  evidence  from  the  tenor  of  recent
history  to  show  that  the  fine  arts,  or  any  of  those  arts
which,  not  so  fine,  are  yet  engaged  in  satisfying
individual  tastes,  tend  to  pass  from  small  into  large
businesses  moving  towards  the  goal  of  Collectivism.
The  chief  economies  of  great  industry,  the  adoption  of
mechanical  processes  of  production  and  routine  manage-
ment, do  not  equally  apply  to  them.  Dependent  as  they
are  for  the  most  part  upon  close  constant  individual  care
of  execution,  and  not  upon  that  minute  division  of  labour
which  goes  hand-in-hand  with  machine-production,
most  of  them  do  not  even  take  the  first  step  of  entering
large  business  shapes.  Though  a  work  of  art  in  tailoring
or  millinery,  as  in  statuary,  may  be  erected  upon  a  basis
of  rough  mechanical  work,  the  finer  processes  which  con-
stitute the  art  commonly  defy  the  economy  of  division
of  labour.  "  There  is  no  fit — there  can  be  no  fit — in
a  coat  made  by  the  machine  and  by  sub-divided  and
unskilled  labour,"  writes  Mrs.  Sidney  Webb,  in  dealing
with  the  London  tailoring  trade.  So,  again,  of  the  best
kind  of  clocks,  a  trade  which  still  maintains  its  primitive
form  in  London,  we  are  told  :  "  The  work  of  making
a  clock  is  conducted  under  one  roof,  both  by  hand  and
by  machinery.  The  men  learn  to  make  a  clock  through-
out, and  whatever  their  particular  work  may  be,  they  do
it  with  conscious  reference  to  its  bearing  on  the  action
of  the  whole  clock."  Here  even  in  the  production
of  a  mechanism  survives  the  principle  of  unity  and
individuality.  Not  only  a  poem  and  a  picture,  but  a
well-fitting  coat  and  a  well-made  clock,  is  an  individual,
retaining  the  distinctive  character  of  a  work  of  art,  and
imposing  upon  the  industry  a  corresponding  nature.
Thus  the  two  closely-related  forces,  machine  production
and  division  of  labour,  which  conspicuously  favour  the
big  complex  business  tending  towards  Collectivism,
are  inoperative  where  industry  consists  in  the  satisfac-
tion of  nicer  individual  needs.  Not  only  in  the  most
skilled  branches  of  such  trades  as  cutlery,  bookbinding.


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 125

and  cabinetmaking  do  we  find  the  healthy  survival  of
domestic  industry  or  small  workshops,  but  even  in
trades  where  some  of  the  worst  features  of  sweating
have  appeared,  the  best  work  still  remains  in  businesses
of  a  primitive  type,  e.g.^  boots  and  handmade  ropes.  It
is  not,  however,  always  the  individual  taste  of  the
consumer  which  imposes  the  character  of  art  upon  an
industry.  A  close  investigation  of  the  structure  of  the
textile  trades  will  show  that  the  nature  of  the  raw
material,  as  well  as  the  size  and  uniformity  of  the
demand,  determines  the  character  of  the  industry.  The
silk  trade  and  some  branches  of  the  woollen  trade  have
failed  to  attain  the  full  economies  of  machine  production,
as  much  from  a  certain  irregularity  or  individuality
in  the  raw  material,  which  requires  care  and  judgment
in  its  treatment,  as  from  the  irregularity  and  qualitative
character  of  the  demand.  Sometimes  individualism  will
inhere  not  in  the  material,  but  in  some  condition  of  the
work.  Taking  the  example  of  street  transport,  we  find
that  whereas  trams  and  'busses  are  almost  everywhere
in  the  possession  of  large  companies,  the  cab  business  is
for  the  most  part  in  small  businesses,  though  in  London
and  other  large  towns,  where  the  demand  for  cabs  is
larger  and  more  regular,  the  "  company  "  is  gaining
ground.  Applying  the  "  routine  "  principle,  we  easily
understand  how  trams  and  'busses,  which  run  with  regu-
larity of  routes,  times,  and  prices,  are  far  more  amenable
to  collective  control  than  cabs,  more  dependent  for  their
business  upon  the  will  of  individual  "  fares."

It  is  true  that  where  skilled  work  plays  a  compara-
tively unimportant  part  in  the  aggregate  of  processes,
and  in  general  wherever  there  exists  a  large  and  steady
demand  for  goods  not  widely  difi^ering  in  character,  the
industry  passes  into  large  capitalist  shapes,  the  small
survival  of  skilled  worknianship  being  a  mere  appendage
to  the  big  routine  business.  But  it  is  important  to
recognise  that  a  sharp  and  genuine  antagonism  exists
between industries engaged in the satisfaction of


126 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

quantitative  demand  and  those  engaged  in  satisfying
qualitative  demand.  Whereas  the  former  can  utilise  to
the  full  all  the  economies  of  machinery  and  division  of
labour,  the  latter  cannot.  The  chief  forces  which  are
visibly  making  for  Collectivism  in  material  industries
are  weak  just  in  proportion  as  the  elements  of  skill  and
art  are  strong.  If,  therefore,  we  admit  that  social  pro-
gress will  express  itself  in  increasing  taste,  refinement,
individuality  of  consumption  of  material  goods,  we
admit  a  slackening  of  the  very  forces  which  have  hitherto
been  driving  these  industries  towards  fully-developed
Capitalism.  Though  it  is  probably  true  that  in  a  pro-
gressive society  the  tendency  to  seek  expression  for
individuality  in  ordinary  articles  of  material  consumption
might  not  be  widely  prevalent,  while  fashion  and  the
irregularity  of  demand  which  comes  from  unbridled
caprice  would  be  weakened  by  education  and  an  approxi-
mate equalisation  of  material  resources,  we  cannot  fairly
regard  the  whole  of  material  industry  as  subject  to  a  set
of  economic  forces  driving  irresistibly  towards  the  goal
of  routine  work  and  Collectivism.  It  is,  of  course,
probable,  as  Socialists  would  urge,  that  a  rapproche-
ment would  come  from  the  other  side,  that  a  State  or
Municipality,  confined  at  first  to  the  control  of  the  most
routine  forms  of  industry,  would  become  by  experierce
qualified  to  enter  businesses  where  the  routine  was  less
rigid  and  to  manage  them  successfully.  Such  an  expec-
tation has  a  certain  a  priori  validity  and  some  backing
from  experience.  But  this  admission  does  not  negative
the  main  principle  of  demarcation  between  industries
which  at  any  given  time  are  essentially  Collective,  and
those  which  are  not.  Though  the  signification  which
each  society  and  each  age  may  give  to  the  term
"  routine  "  will  differ  in  degree,  it  is  not  the  less  true
that  a  State  which  is  best  equipped  for  Collective  control
and  unimpeded  by  vested  interests  from  the  exercise  of
such  control  will  nevertheless  limit  that  direct  control
to  industries  which  are  relatively  of  a  routine  character.


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 127

Our  illustrations  have  been  drawn  from  industries
engaged  in  production  of  material  wealth.  But  there  is
no  essential  difference  here  between  the  production  of
material  and  non-material  wealth.  If  our  reasoning  is
sound,  it  applies  equally  to  State  education,  to  State
enterprise  in  art,  science,  or  literature,  as  to  transport
and  manufacture.  Historic  forces  are  not  drivino-  these
activities  wholesale  under  Collective  control,  though
everywhere  the  State  is  encroaching  and  organising  by
social  machinery  the  lower  stages  of  these  "  arts."  As
we  have  already  recognised,  there  is  in  the  "  arts  "  them-
selves a  routine  basis,  certain  work  which  is  relatively
common  or  unskilled,  and  which  can  be  conveniently
executed  by  machine  methods.  Such  education  as  is
directed  to  the  preliminary  training  of  those  faculties
which  belong  to  common  humanity,  physical,  intellec-
tual, and  moral,  the  communication  of  that  great  social
heritage  of  knowledge  which  is  the  rightful  intellectual
possession  of  all  citizens,  the  provision  of  colleges  and
technical  schools,  art  schools,  museums,  theatres,  and  the
completest  machinery  for  the  best  education  of  our
common  life — these  things  will  be  recognised  as  properly
belonging  to  the  routine  department  of  intellectual
production.  This  "  Collective "  work  will  always
remain  the  relatively  "  ruder  "  work,  though  much  of
it  be  far  in  advance  of  the  present  conception  of
"  routine  "  education  in  a  nation  which  does  not  under-
stand education,  or  even  understand  that  it  is  a  thing  to
be  understood.  The  finer  intellectual  work  in  science,
in  the  fine  arts,  in  literature,  will  never  be  directly  con-
trolled by  Collective  machinery.  Whatever  progress
Collectivism  may  make  in  its  capacity  of  skilful,  ener-
getic, and  disinterested  management,  its  methods  must
always  continue  to  be  more  mechanical  than  those  of
private  enterprise,  and  less  successful  in  directing  the
more  individual  elements  of  effort  to  the  satisfaction  of
individual  needs.

This  principle  to  which  we  have  addressed  ourselves,


128 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  antithesis  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  consump-
tion, of  routine  and  art  industry,  in  reality  covers  the
chief  lines  of  advance  to  which  Collectivists  appeal.
Professor  Marshall  has  summed  up  a  remarkable  inves-
tigation of  the  conditions  of  great  industry  by  declaring
that  "  there  is  prima  facie  reason  for  believing  that  the
aggregate  satisfaction,  so  far  from  being  already  a  maxi-
mum, could  be  much  increased  by  collective  action  in
promoting  the  production  and  consumption  of  things  in
regard  to  which  the  law  of  Increasing  Returns  acts  with  a
special  force."*  Now  what  are  those  goods  which  in  their
production  and  distribution  conform  to  the  law  of
Increasing  Returns  .^  They  are  "  routine  "  goods  which
go  to  satisfy  the  common  needs  of  large  numbers  of
consumers.  These  are  the  things,  which,  because  there
is  a  large  and  constant  regular  demand  for  certain  com-
mon forms  and  qualities  of  them,  can  be  produced  and
distributed  more  cheaply  on  a  large  scale  than  on  a  small
scale.  Elaborate  machinery  and  sub-division  of  labour
are  most  fully  utilised  in  keeping  down  the  cost  of
making  them,  while  wholesale  buying  and  selling,  and
large  advertising  assist  in  cheapening  their  distribution,
and  last,  not  least,  expenses  of  direction  and  manage-
ment are  most  fully  economised.  These  economies  of
cost  are  the  very  forces  which  we  have  observed  driving
"  routine "  business  along  the  road  to  Collectivism.
This  judgment  of  Professor  Marshall,  taken  with  the
careful  evidence  upon  which  he  bases  it,  is  a  most
important  testimony  in  favour  of  the  practicability  of
the  Collectivism  of  "  routine  "  industry.  Professor
Marshall  also  recognises,  though  not  so  fully,  the  relation
between  this  tendency  and  the  theory  of  monopoly.
The  polemics  of  Collectivism  are  largely  concerned  with
the  insistence  of  the  need  of  Collective  control  as  a
protection  of  the  interests  of  the  consumer  against
monopolies. Now  monopolies  (using  the  term  in  its

*  "Principles  of  Economics." Vol.  I.,  p.  537  (Ed.  2.).


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 129

broad  sense  to  signify  all  industries  in  which  prices  are  not
regulated  by  "  free  competition  "  of  sellers)  are  of  two
classes;  those  in  which  the  monopolist  power  is  derived
from  control  over  some  source  of  supply  restricted  in
quantity  by  nature  or  by  law,  and  those  in  which  the
power  comes  from  the  superior  economies  of  the  big
over  the  little  business.  Most  of  the  strongest  mono-
polies conjoin  these  two  powers,  resting  partly  upon
monopoly  of  land  or  raw  material,  partly  upon  size  of
capital,  as  in  the  case  of  railways  or  of  such  a  trust  as
that  of  the  Standard  Oil  Company.  But  the  difference
In  source  of  power,  though  both  are  dangerous  to  the
community,  suggests  clearly  that  the  defence  of  Collec-
tive Interests  will  adopt  a  different  attitude  to  the  two
kinds  of  monopoly.  Where  size  of  capital,  underselling
competitors,  and  narrowing  the  area  of  effective  compe-
tition until  some  syndicate  can  be  formed  to  obtain  sole
control  of  the  market.  Is  the  source  of  power,  we  are
dealing  with  a  routine  business  taking  advantage  of  the
operation  of  the  law  of  Increasing  Returns  to  establish  a
private  monopoly.  All  around  us  in  the  most  highly-
developed  industry  such  forms  are  crystallising,  often  not
completely  shaped  and  not  absolute  in  their  monopolist
power.  They  are  not,  as  sometimes  is  pretended,  the
mere  product  of  tariffs,  though  tariffs  have  often
helped  them  to  mature.  They  are  the  normal  necessary
Issue  of  competition  In  business  where  machine-
economy  and  widening  markets  make  size  and  strength
chief  constituents  of  success,  conditions  under  which
competition  must  finally  give  way  to  the  private  mono-
poly of  the  biggest  and  best  placed  competitor.  The
demand  for  public  protection  against  the  powers  which
these  monopolies  exercise  over  the  consumer,  and  over
the  labourers  whose  employment  and  subsistence  they
hold  In  the  hollow  of  their  hand,  is  a  growing  force  in
modern  politics.  In  England  and  upon  the  Continent  of
Europe  there  are  perhaps  no  Industries  which  can  be
considered to have reached the form of perfect


I30 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

monopoly,  from  which  direct  competition  has  perma-
nently disappeared.  But  there  are  many  cases  where
the  dominion  of  organised  capital  exercises  a  serious
restraint  upon  competitive  prices,  and  where  the  mono-
polist power  differs  only  in  degree  from  that  of  the
perfected  "  trust."  It  is  consistent  with  the  historical
tenor  of  progress  that  the  practical  pressure  of  these
dangers  and  grievances  should  be  more  potent  forces
in  the  growth  of  Collectivism  than  any  conscious  recog-
nition of  the  natural  ripening  of  this  class  of  business
towards  a  Collective  form,  or  of  the  ability  of  the  public
to  undertake  such  businesses.  The  contention  of
theoretical  Collectivists,  often  sustained  by  arguments
of  general  utility  or  of  humanitarian  import,  to  the
effect  that  the  State  should  at  any  rate  control  those
industries  engaged  in  producing  the  necessaries  of  the
life  of  the  people,  harmonises  with  the  general  policy
impressed  by  these  structural  considerations.  For  those
industries  which,  by  operation  of  purely  economic  forces,
tend  towards  private  monopoly,  will  generally  be  indus-
tries engaged  in  supplying  the  commonest  and  most
universally-consumed  commodities.  These  "necessaries"
will  be  in  the  largest  regular  demand,  will  be  "  routine  "
commodities,  and  since  an  exercise  of  monopolist  power
will  have  the  least  effect  in  reducing  their  consumption,
it  follows  that  monopolies  in  the  sale  of  them  will  be
most  profitable  to  the  undertakers.  Thus  the  demand
for  a  Collectivist  policy  along  the  line  of  Increased  public
control  over  "  necessaries  "  is  in  general  accord  with  the
wider  principle  upon  which  we  base  the  Collectivist
advance.  This  recognition  of  the  natural  historic
growth  of  private  monopolies  imposes  Collectivism  as
the  sole  substitute.  The  only  alternative  to  private
monopoly  is  public  monopoly.  For  when  a  private
monopoly  is  the  product  of  economic  forces  restricting
competition,  it  is  futile  to  endeavour  to  break  up
forcibly  by  law  the  monopolic  form,  that  competition
may  be  re-established. It  Is  impossible  to  turn  back  the


COLLECTIVISM  IN  INDUSTRY 131

hand  of  the  dial.  A  private  monopoly  built  upon  legal
privilege  may  be  resolved  by  rescinding  the  legal  basis,
but  a  monopoly  evolved  out  of  competitive  conditions
admits  no  other  remedy  than  Collectivism.

In  those  industries  where  elements  of  "  natural  "
monopoly  chiefly  express  themselves,  we  do  not  find  a
general  movement  along  the  same  lines.  The  question
of  large  and  small  culture  still  remains  to  be  fought  out
in  different  departments  of  work  upon  the  soil  and  in
different  social  and  racial  conditions.  In  some  large
industries  the  "  niggardliness  of  nature  "  seems  to  yield
before  the  employment  of  machinery  and  capitalism,
bringing  agriculture,  too,  under  the  law  of  increasing
returns.  Where  this  occurs,  as  on  the  great  Bonanza
farms,  agriculture  is  brought  into  line  with  the  great
manufactures,  and  becomes  a  routine  industry.  But
where  small  culture  survives  (and  the  strong
individualism  which  soil,  climate,  position,  and  other
natural  facts  impose  upon  land  indicates  a  wide  survival),
the  tenor  of  our  argument  does  not  place  agriculture
among  the  mere  routine  industries.  This  seems  to
indicate  a  bifurcation  of  collective  policy  according  as
we  regard  monopolies  established  by  the  operation  of
the  law  of  Increasing  Returns  and  those  established
under  a  law  of  Diminishing  Returns.  While  the  former
tend  to  pass  under  directly  collective  management,  the
latter  may  remain  under  private  control,  the  collective
policy  being  confined  to  securing  for  collective  use  those
economic  rents  due  to  the  special  values  which  public
needs  assign  to  funds  of  natural  supply.

A  policy  built  upon  a  recognition  of  these  principles
of  collectivist  development  is  of  course  in  no  sense  a
compromise.  It  claims  for  collective  action  all  work
which  the  community  can  profitably  undertake;  it  recog-
nises that  the  absolute  area  of  that  work  is  constantly
growing  in  two  directions,  first  and  foremost  by  the
ripening  of  "  routine "  industry  into  the  form  of
private  anti-social  monopolies,  secondly  by  the  growing


132 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

capacity  of  public  management  which  experience  should
evoke  in  public  bodies.  But  it  also  recognises  that
since  the  direct  object  of  collective  action  will  be  so  to
economise  the  claims  which  Society  shall  make  upon
the  Individual  as  to  leave  him  an  ever-increasing  propor-
tion of  his  energies  for  self-expression,  the  amount  of
energy  which  is  organised  directly  for  collective  work
will  be  a  diminishing  proportion  of  the  aggregate
energy  of  individuals,  and  that  therefore  the  field  of
private  enterprise  in  all  departments  of  effort  will  grow
faster  than  the  field  of  Collectivism.

These  are  no  new  principles,  and  this  is  no  new  pre-
sentment of  them.  If  practical  workers  for  social  and
industrial  reforms  continue  to  ignore  principles,  the
inevitable  logic  of  events  will  nevertheless  drive  them
along  the  path  of  Collectivism  here  indicated.  But  they
will  pay  the  price  which  short-sighted  empiricism
always  pays;  with  slow,  hesitant,  and  staggering  steps,
with  innumerable  false  starts  and  backslidings,  they  will
move  in  the  dark  along  an  unseen  track  towards  an
unseen  goal.  Social  development  may  be  conscious
or  unconscious.  It  has  been  mostly  unconscious  in  the
past,  and  therefore  slow,  wasteful,  and  dangerous.  If
we  desire  to  be  swifter,  safer,  and  more  effective  in  the
future,  it  must  become  the  conscious  expression  of  the
trained  and  organised  will  of  a  people  not  despising
theory  as  unpractical,  but  using  it  to  furnish  economy
in  action.


Chapter  IV
SOCIALISM IN  LIBERALISM

The  charge  of  Socialism  brought  against  the  Liberal
and  Progressive  Party  by  their  Conservative  opponents
is  commonly  resented  as  a  merely  tactical  device  to  shift
the  strain  of  political  controversy  from  the  Tariff  issue
and  to  blacken  an  enemy  with  a  vituperative  epithet.
An  effective  technical  answer  is  afforded  by  an  appeal
to  the  party  of  avowed  Socialism  which  still  continues
to  designate  Liberals  here,  as  upon  the  Continent,  a
party  of  capitalists.  But  motives  and  technicalities
apart,  there  is  enough  substance  in  the  charge,  as  applied
to  the  section  of  Liberals  committed  to  advanced  social
reforms,  to  demand  a  fair  examination.  For  the  first
time  in  the  history  of  English  Liberalism,  leaders  with  a
powerful  support  of  the  rank  and  file  have  committed
themselves  with  zeal  and  even  passionate  conviction  to
promote  a  series  of  practical  measures  which,  though  not
closely  welded  in  their  immediate  purport,  have  the
common  result  of  increasing  the  powers  and  resources
of  the  State  for  the  improvement  of  the  material  and
moral  condition  of  the  people.  These  measures,  aiming
to  secure  the  use  and  the  value  of  the  land  for  the  people,
to  obtain  for  municipalities  and  other  public  bodies
increased  ownership  or  control  of  local  services,  to
strengthen  governmental  supervision  of  private  indus-
tries, to  enlarge  the  public  machinery  of  education,  to
afford  increased  public  assistance  to  the  young,  the
sick,  the  aged — such  measures  and  the  policy  of  public

133


134 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

finance  which  they  involve  are  correctly  designated  as
"  socialistic  "  in  their  character.

It  is  true  that  each  measure  is  urged  upon  its  separate
merits,  that  the  pace  of  its  advancement  and  the  spirit
of  compromise  which  dogs  its  footsteps  hide  the  logic  of
the  revolutionary  process  even  from  many  of  its  active
agents.  For  revolutionary  in  one  sense  it  is.  Not  that
it  involves  any  violent  breach  of  continuity  with  Liberal
traditions,  still  less  any  such  sudden  dangerous  distur-
bance of  public  order  or  of  property  as  is  commonly
associated  with  the  term.  But  the  general  underlying
meaning  and  motive  of  the  social  policy,  struggling
now  for  the  first  time  into  clear  consciousness,  is  the
intention  to  use  the  popular  power  of  self-government
to  extirpate  the  roots  of  poverty  and  of  the  diseases,
physical  and  moral,  associated  with  it.  This  process  of
practical  reform,  if  it  is  to  be  eff^ective,  assuredly  demands
an  interference  by  Government  with  existing  rights  of
private  property  and  private  business  enterprise,  and  an
assertion  through  taxation  of  public  rights  of  property,
so  novel  in  character  and  so  considerable  in  size  as  rightly
to  be  considered  revolutionary.  The  real  revolution  is  in
the  minds  of  men.  The  recent  Parliament  contained  some
scores  of  men  passionately  moved  by  a  sense  of  social
wrong,  of  undeserved  poverty  and  riches,  of  baneful
waste  in  the  resources  of  the  commonwealth,  and  eager
to  apply  large  organic  remedies.  It  is  the  strength  of
these  men's  faith  and  the  size  of  the  remedies  they  are
,  willing  to  apply  that  distinguish  their  social  policy  from
i  the  tinkering  devices  of  the  earlier  programmes  of  the
Liberal  Party.  Experience  has  taught  them  the  pro-
found truth  of  John  Mill's  saying  :  "  Small  remedies  for
great  diseases  do  not  produce  small  results :  they
^  produce  no  results."

Will  this  policy  of  social  reconstruction  go  forward  ?
The  last  century  has  shown  several  epochs  of  ebullience
of  the  reform  spirit  in  our  nation.  The  'thirties  and
'forties  were  seething-  with  constructive  Socialism  of  a


SOCIALISM IN  LIBERALISM  135

swift,  idealist  order.  The  Christian  Socialism  of  a
generation  later  was  the  sentimental  utterance  of  popular
protest  against  the  new  miseries  of  city  poverty.  The
Radical  Party  of  the  late  'seventies  and  early  'eighties
gave  in  their  program.mes  a  dim  fragmentary  reflection
of  demands  in  which  the  new  teaching  of  Henry  George
and  of  Continental  Socialism  found  vigorous  expression.
But  these  movements  achieved  almost  nothing;  their
fervour  was  soon  spent,  their  forces  dissipated.  Will  it
be  the  same  with  our  Parliamentary  party  of  social
reform  and  the  popular  enthusiasm  which  swept  them  to
V  the-  fore  ?  Have  they  the  principles,  the  strength  of
1  conviction,  and  the  grit  of  character  demanded  for  the
task  of  constructive  Liberalism  assigned  to  them  ?  The
answer  to  this  question  we  think  depends  upon  how
clearly  the  larger  body  of  the  party  can  be  led  to  realise
the  grave  historic  nature  of  their  task.  Let  them  plainly
L^ecognise  the  truth  that  this  is  the  last  chance  for  English
Liberalism.  Unless  it  is  prepared  for  the  efforts,  risks,
and  even  sacrifices  of  expressing  the  older  Liberal
principles  in  the  new  positive  forms  of  economic  liberty
and  equality  along  the  lines  indicated  in  the  programme
of  its  advanced  guard,  it  is  doomed  to  the  same  sort  of
impotence  as  has  already  befallen  Liberalism  in  most  of
tne  Continental  countries.

We  believe  that  what  we  term  the  advanced  guard  is
well  aware  of  the  historical  crisis  which  confronts  them,
that  they  are  willing  to  make  the  necessary  effort  and  to
undergo  the  necessary  risks.  But  can  they  succeed  in
rallying  round  them  the  genuine  support  of  the  Liberal
"  centre "  in  Parliament  and  in  the  nation  ?  This
"  centre  "  is,  alike  in  sympathy  and  in  formal  policy,
more  advanced  than  it  has  ever  been  before.  But  upon
the  critical  issues  of  social  reform  it  lacks  passion  and
principle,  and  is  continually  disposed  to  enervating  com-
promise. In  Parliament  it  consists  largely  of  well-to-do
men  whose  social  policy  is  weakened  by  fears  of  hig-h
taxation  and  of  encroachments  upon  private  profitable


136  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

enterprise;  in  the  country  this  same  large  class,  well  but
not  vigorously  disposed  towards  social  reforms,  stands
halting  in  opinion,  fearful  of  the  Socialistic  movement,
not  because  of  any  definite  individualism  or  abstract
theory  of  the  limits  of  the  State,  but  because  certain
spectres  and  phrases  have  got  upon  their  nerves.  Hold-
ing, as  most  do,  a  difficult  and  slippery  footing  in  some
business  or  profession,  they  are  nervous  about  attacks  on
property,  disturbance  of  business,  bureaucracy,  corrup-
tion, mob  domination.  Though  not  opposed  to  social
experiments,  they  are  not  prepared  for  efforts  or  for
risks,  and  their  genuine  desire  to  see  improved  conditions
for  the  people  is  invalidated  by  an  excessive  belief  in  the
possibilities  of  narrow  forms  of  self-help,  a  survival  of
the  laissez  faire  Radicalism  of  the  Victorian  age.

Unless  a  sufficient  proportion  of  these  men  can  be

\  won  over,  their  objections  met,  their  fears  dissolved,

their  sense  of  justice  stimulated,  the  Liberal  Party  as  the

historic  instrument  of  social  reform  is  doomed  to  failure.

!  For  a  small  band  of  "  righteous  men  "  will  not  save  a

;  party;  they  must  carry  with  them  the  majority  of  solid

;  Liberals  in  the  centre  if  the  reform  policy  is  to  be

substantial.  Let  it  be  clearly  understood  that  this  policy

cannot  consist  in  mere  economy,  in  good  administration

at  home,  peace  abroad,  in  minor  legislation  for  education,

temperance,  or  even  land  reform. The  volume, the

direction,  the  pace,  and  the  substance  of  the  positive

measures  for  improving  the  economic  condition  of  the

people  must  be  adequate,  and  these  conditions  involve  a

larger  provision  of  public  income  than  is  yet  recognised

by  most  politicians,  a  larger  development  of  interference

with  existingf  landed  and  other  economic  interests  than

••-.is  yet  admitted.

Whether  a  sufficient  Liberal  Party  can  be  brought  to
face  this  task,  with  its  risks  and  difficulties,  depends
upon  the  education  of  this  "  middle  "  section  in  the
principles  of  social  reconstruction.  For  their  real  diffi-
culties are  mainly  of  principle.  Any  Radical  social  policy


SOCIALISM IN  LIBERALISM  137

must,  of  course,  involve  a  shedding  of  Whigs,  even  of  a
few  honest  Radical  individualists,  and  of  some  Liberals
whose  business  interests  too  closely  based  on  privilege
will  dominate  their  policy.  It  is  with  the  large  remainder,
probably  a  majority  of  the  Liberal  Party,  that  we  are
concerned.  The  situation,  as  we  understand  it,  is  this  :
Their  mind  is  at  present  impeded  for  effective  co-opera-
tion in  the  great  work  of  social  reconstruction  by  certain
doubts  and  fears  and  difficulties,  which  are  real  in  the
sense  that  they  are  honestly  held,  and  are  important  in
that  they  rest  not  on  points  of  practical  detail  but  on
deep-seated  notions  respecting  the  meaning  and  effects
of  social  reconstruction.

These  doubts  and  fears  relate,  some  to  Socialism,  some
to  democracy,  and  are  due  in  large  degree  to  the  spirit
and  the  forms  which  social  democracy  have  taken  in  the
programmes  of  the  Socialist  parties,  on  the  Continent
and  here.  Though  Marx  and  the  philosophers  of
Socialism  have  been  little  read  in  this  country,  certain
characteristics  of  their  criticism,  its  materialistic  interpre-
tation of  history,  its  crude  assertion  of  the  rights  and
functions  of  "  labour,"  its  wholesale  repudiation  of  the
legitimacy  of  rent,  interest  and  profit,  and  its  doctrine  of
the  absorption  of  all  industry  by  the  State,  have  become
accepted  formulae  and  have  naturally  been  adopted  as  the
authoritative  exposition  of  the  movement.  While  this
hard-cast  revolutionary  Socialism  has  softened  even  on
the  Continent  and  never  had  much  vogue  in  this  country,
the  milder  and  more  opportunist  brands  suffer  from
excessive  vagueness.  If  the  Radical  policy  of  social
reconstruction  is  to  be  effective  in  this  country  this  lack
of  intelligible  formulation  of  principles  must  be  remedied.
The  real  difficulties  must  be  met;  the  right  limits  of
State  and  municipal  collectivism  must  be  laid  down;  the
questions,  how  far  brains,  how  far  "  labour,"  are  makers
of  wealth,  how  far  freedom  of  private  profitable
enterprise  is  essential  to  secure  the  work  of  "  brains  ";
whether  efficiency  of  labour  can  be  got  out  of  public


138 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

enterprise;  whether  the  tyranny  of  bureaucracy  would
become  unendurable;  whether  the  tendency  of  such
Socialism  will  be  to  dwarf  individuality  and  to  make  for
a  dead  level  of  humanity;  whether  the  general  result  of
impaired  productive  motives  will  lead  to  so  great  a
diminution  of  wealth  as  no  improvement  in  distribution
can  compensate — these  and  other  not  less  radical  questions
which  beset  the  wavering  mind  of  our  "centre"  Liberals
demand  thorough  and  impartial  consideration.  Then
there  is  the  group  of  not  less  serious  questions  relating
to  taxation,  condensed  in  the  charge  that  "  Socialism  "
consists  in  taking  away  the  property  of  the  rich  and
giving  it  to  the  poor,  a  policy  alleged  to  be  unjust  in
itself  and  disastrous  both  to  the  receivers  and  the  tax-
payers. The  timidity  of  the  Liberal  centre  is  based
primarily  upon  fears  engendered  by  these  questions
which  imperatively  demand  intelligible  answers,  if  the
Liberal  Party  hopes  to  press  forward  with  energy  and
confidence  along  the  path  of  social  reconstruction  to
which  it  is  formally  committed,  and  upon  which  its
future  existence  as  a  party  depends.


Chapter  V

THE  PSYCHOLOGY OF  PUBLIC
ENTERPRISE


The  most  serious  difficulties  in  State  Socialism  are
connected  with  the  political  structure  of  the  State.  Can
a  government  conduct  a  number  of  large  complex
business  operations  with  the  requisite  economy,  efficiency,
and  honesty  ?  Though  the  competition  of  private  profit-
mongers  may  involve  much  waste  of  power  by  needless
duplication  and  the  friction  of  industrial  war,  while  a
sweating  economy  may  injure  its  employees,  the  normal
conduct  of  such  businesses,  it  is  maintained,  will  be
energetic  and  economical  and  the  public  will  get  most  of
the  gain  of  industrial  improvements  in  a  fall  of  prices.
Even  when  the  virtual  monopoly  of  one  large  company
or  combination  has  displaced  competition  the  desire  of
the  management  to  earn  high  profits  will  maintain  most
of  the  former  incentives  to  efficiency  and  progress,  and
in  many  instances,  at  any  rate,  considerations  of  maxi-
mum net  profits  will  induce  the  management  to  supply
a  sound  article  at  a  low  price.

But  when  the  State  has  taken  over  such  a  business,
though  it  may  be  theoretically  possible  to  maintain  many
of  the  former  stimuli  to  efficiency,  the  vital  question
whether  they  will  actually  be  maintained  will  be  one  of
political  integrity.  Will  it  be  possible  to  ensure  that
the  public  managers,  upon  whose  personal  control  the

139


I40 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

efficiency  of  the  business  operations  will  chiefly  depend,
will  do  their  duty  to  the  public  with  the  same  honesty
and  zeal  which  they  displayed  when  working  in  the
interests  of  private  capital,  and  will  they  secure  from  the
rank  and  file  of  the  public  employees  an  efficiency  nearly
equal  to  that  obtained  from  ordinary  wage  earners  ?  In
an  ordinary  joint  stock  company  engaged  in  trade  the
body  of  shareholders  in  proportion  to  their  respective
interests  exercise  the  right  of  electing  directors  :  these
directors  control  the  general  policy  of  the  business  and
appoint  the  management,  making  it  responsible  for  the
detailed  efficiency  of  the  business  structure,  and  enforc-
ing this  responsibility  by  the  power  of  dismissal.
Underneath  this  form  of  business  democracy  a  practical
oligarchy  often  exists,  one  or  two  directors  with  the
manager  virtually  determining  the  conduct  of  the
business,  with  very  little  interference  from  the  body  of
investors.  But  taken  as  a  whole  this  business  system
has  worked  well,  securing  honesty,  economy  and
efficiency :  there  is  sufficient  conscious  identity  of
interests  between  shareholders,  directors,  management,
and  employees  to  support  an  effective  co-operation  of
activities.

Take  a  railroad  or  an  electric  engineering  works  from
this  business  form  and  put  it  under  the  operation  of  the
State  or  Municipality.  The  nominal  structure  under-
goes very  little  change.  Instead  of  the  shareholders  you
have  the  body  of  taxpayers  or  ratepayers,  the  electorate
is  responsible  for  financing  the  business  as  the  share-
holders were  before :  they  elect  representatives  to  sit  in
Parliament  or  in  the  City  Council,  part  of  whose  business
it  is  to  see  that  this  railroad  or  engineering  works  is
properly  managed  in  the  public  interest :  these  repre-
sentatives, or  a  Committee  of  them,  appoint  the  manage-
ment and  act  as  directors;  the  permanent  officials  who
actually  administer  the  public  works  are  public  servants
whose  duty  it  is  to  run  the  business  for  the  benefit  of
the  body  of  citizens.


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  141

Why  should  not  such  a  public  business  be  as  efficiently
managed  in  the  public  interest  as  the  company  was  in
the  interests  of  the  shareholders?  Theoretically,  there
is  no  necessity  why  the  State  should  equalise  the  payment
for  all  sorts  and  qualities  of  workers,  or  should  cease  to
apply  the  stimuli  of  personal  gain  in  salary  and  position
which  are  found  effective  under  private  enterprise.  But
practically,  it  is  contended,  these  stimuli  will  not  be  so
effectively  applied.  The  removal  of  the  profit-making
motives  will  in  various  ways  slacken  the  human  energy
which  drives  the  organism  (or  mechanism);  there  will  be
less  efficient  co-operation  between  the  parts,  and  definite
corruption  may  set  in,  introducing  motives  of  secret
illicit  gains.

Such  is  the  charge  against  State  Socialism.  Let  us
examine  it  in  the  light  of  known  facts  and  probabilities.

Though,  as  we  see,  there  is  an  analogy  between  the
structure  of  a  public  and  of  a  joint  stock  business,
certain  differences  must  be  recognised.  If  an  electric
lighting  business  is  taken  over  by  the  Town  from  a
Company,  it  is  true  the  citizens  become  the  shareholders,
taking  their  gain  not  in  dividends  but  in  good  and  cheap
lighting;  the  Committee  of  the  Council  take  the  place  of
the  Board  of  Directors,  representing  the  interests  of  the
civic  shareholders  :  the  management  is  under  the  general
control  of  the  Committee,  as  formerly  under  that  of  the
Directors,  and  the  ordinary  worker  in  the  business  holds
his  appointment  and  receives  his  pay  in  the  same  way  as
before.

But  when  we  regard  the  operation  of  the  business  as
a  complex  arrangement  of  motives  operating  in  the  wills
ot  the  various  co-operating  agents,  we  note  the  following
changes.  The  shareholders  who  elected  directors  had  a
power  of  election  strictly  proportionate  to  the  number
of  their  shares  and  the  gain  they  expected  to  receive :
those  with  a  considerable  stake  at  issue  would  command
a  majority  of  votes  and  could  elect  directors  in  whom
they  placed  confidence,  and  could  determine  the  large


142 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

issues  presented  to  them  at  the  yearly  or  half-yearly
meeting.  These  men  with  the  large  personal  stake
would  give  some  close  study  to  the  conduct  of  the
business :  some  of  them  would  become  directors,  or
would  have  had  other  experience  in  this  line  of  business.
So  far  as  the  nature  of  the  business  enabled  control  to  be
exercised  by  the  shareholders,  that  control  would  be
wielded  by  those  possessing  a  substantial  interest  and
some  amount  of  business  knowlede^e  and  skill.  When
the  business  was  municipalised,  the  control  of  the
citizen-shareholders  would  be  differently  distributed.
There  would  be  no  individuals  among  them  with  an
incentive  of  personal  gain  corresponding  in  strength  to
that  of  the  large  shareholders.  Though  cheap,  good
lighting  would  confer  more  gain  upon  some  than  upon
others,  all  would  have  an  equal  voice  in  electing  the
Council  that  appointed  the  Committee.  Nor  is  the
popular  control  apportioned  with  any  regard  to  the
amount  contributed  to  the  upkeep  of  the  business
through  the  rates.  A  big  ratepayer  has  one  vote  along
with  the  little  ratepayer.  Thus  on  the  appeal  to  material
self-interest  there  appears  a  greatly  diminished  security
for  effective  control  on  the  part  of  the  shareholders.
There  are  no  shareholders  to  whom  the  efficient  manage-
ment of  the  lighting  means  a  considerable  increase  of
their  personal  income,  and  the  few  large  consumers  who
stand  to  gain  or  lose  any  substantial  amount  by  the  good
or  bad  management  of  the  public  lighting  are  fully  aware
fhat  their  votes  count  for  very  little  among  the  general
body  of  the  ratepayers;  to  most  of  them  the  difference
between  dear  and  cheap,  good  and  bad,  electric  light  is
not  a  matter  of  great  urgency.  Moreover  the  issue  is
only  one  among  a  large  tangle  of  issues  presented  at  an
election,  so  that  at  no  time  is  the  real  intelligence  and
interest  of  the  body  of  ratepayers  focussed  upon  the
question  of  lighting  policy.

There  is  one  other  factor  of  considerable  importance
in  municipal  and  state  Socialism. If  the  whole  profit  or


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  143

product  of  the  public  undertaking,  e.g.^  the  municipal
lighting,  were  divided  among  the  rate  or  tax  payers,
even  upon  an  equal  basis,  all  members  of  this  public
would  have  some  personal  interest  in  its  economical  and
efficient  management,  the  interest  represented  by  their
rates  and  taxes.  But,  it  is  contended,  part  of  the  profit
or  product,  the  use  of  the  public  lighting,  goes  to  people
who  pay  no  rates  or  taxes.  Although  these  latter  may
have  no  votes  and  no  voice  in  public  management,  the
part  of  the  public  product  which  p-oes  to  them  for
nothing  is  pro  tanto  a  diminution  of  the  gains  of  the
citizen-shareholders  and  diminishes  their  incentive  to
improve  the  public  work.  If  40  per  cent,  of  the  citizens
pay,  or  think  they  pay,  virtually  the  whole  of  the  rates
which  support  street-lighting,  the  benefits  of  which  the
other  60  per  cent,  enjoy  as  much  as  they,  will  they  be
disposed  to  pay  for  so  good  a  lighting  system  as  if  they
were  going  to  get  the  whole  benefit  themselves  ?

Bearing  in  mind  these  differences  between  share-
holders  as  dividend-receivers  and  as  citizen-ratepayers,
we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  that  a  transfer  from  private
to  public  enterprise  involves  some  loss  of  effective
control  on  the  part  of  those  for  whose  benefit  the
business  is  run,  so  far  as  selfish  personal  interest  is  a
motive  force.  Unless,  therefore,  some  public  spirit  and
intelligence  can  be  evoked  and  educated  to  counteract
this  loss,  a  waste  of  efficiency  in  management  accrues.

So  much  for  shareholders.  Now  for  directors.  Will
the  Committee  of  the  Council  set  to  control  the  lighting
do  it  as  well  as  the  Board  of  Directors  under  the  private
regime .''  Prima  facie  it  is  unlikely  that  they  will,  if  we
confine  our  attention  to  the  play  of  interested  motives.
In  the  first  place,  there  is  a  substitution  of  unpaid  for
paid  services,  and  althoug^h  many  paid  directors  do  little
for  their  money,  the  payment  must  be  considered  a  real
stimulus  to  the  output  of  effective  energy,  and  the
substitution  of  unpaid  Councillors  would  seem  to
indicate  a  loss. When  we  add  that,  in  the  case  of  a


144 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

company,  the  chairman,  and  sometimes  other  directors,
do  often  make  the  affairs  of  the  company  the  chief
concern  of  their  working  hours,  while  it  is  rare  that  the
chairman  or  other  committee  members  under  the  Council
can  afford  to  give  their  full  time  and  best  energies  to
work  which  after  all  must  usually  be  supplementary  to
the  profession  or  business  by  which  they  earn  their  liveli-
hood, we  appear  by  municipalising  a  business  to  have
weakened  appreciably  the  control  exercised  by  the  elected
representatives  of  the  shareholders.  This  loss,  however,
is  not  essential  to  the  Socialistic  system.  There  is  no
reason  why  the  chairman  and  even  the  committee  should
not  be  paid  on  the  same  scale  as  that  on  which  the
directorate  of  the  company  was  paid.  So  far  as  chairmen
or  vice-chairmen  are  concerned  this  is  sometimes  done,
as  the  history  of  the  London  County  Council  testifies.
This  economy  belongs  to  the  larger  issue  of  the  payment
of  representatives.  Here,  however,  the  substitution  of
public  spirit  for  private  gain,  as  a  motive  for  effective
work,  is  easier  and  has  been  more  manifest  than  at  the
lower  stage  which  we  discussed.

There  are  various  kinds  of  public  and  private  motives
which  in  many  departments  of  municipal  and  state  work
do  visibly  evoke  industry  and  energy  of  mind  from
Mayors,  Chairmen  of  Committee,  and  many  other
elected  persons  taking  a  responsible  part  in  the  adminis-
tration of  important  public  businesses.

These  motives  are  not  always  clean,  and  some,  as  we
shall  see,  are  subject  to  grave  anti-public  distortions :
but  they  do  often  yield  a  far  more  effective  power  of
public  government  than  is  consistent  with  a  purely  self-
regarding  theory  of  business  economy.

It  is  often  urged,  and  with  much  force,  that  in  these
arts  of  government,  as  in  all  the  finer  and  humaner  arts,
the  very  best  creative  and  progressive  work  is  got  by
appealing  to  the  unselfish  disinterested  love  of  work  and
of  humanity,  an  appeal  which  is  actually  blurred  and
enfeebled  when  under  a  private  profit-making  company


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  145

great  personal  gain  is  held  out  as  the  main  incentive  to
all  effort.  Moreover,  it  may  be  maintained,  that  in
public  elective  institutions  there  is  some  considerable
chance  of  getting  into  the  Council,  and  from  the  Council
into  the  Committee,  any  man  out  of  the  whole  popula-
tion who  is  willing  and  able  to  contribute  some  such
great  disinterested  service — a  better  chance  than  if  the
business  were  kept  in  the  restricted  circle  of  a  group  of
private  investors.

In  London  government  we  can  very  easily  illustrate
this  consideration.  If,  for  instance,  the  technical  and
elementary  teaching  professions  in  London  had  been  left
to  competing  private  enterprise,  it  is  exceedingly  unlikely
that  such  able,  enlightened  and  essentially  creative  minds
as  those  of  Mr.  Sidney  Webb  and  Mr.  Graham  Wallas
would  have  been  able  to  make  the  large  steady  contribu-
tion to  the  progress  of  our  great  Metropolitan  com-
munity which  they  have  made.

Every  considerable  city  has  its  history  brightened  by
not  a  few  similar  instances  of  able  public-spirited  men
who,  as  citizens,  have  given  better  services  than  could  be
bought  by  a  private  profit-making  company.  But  under
our  present  system  of  competitive  industry  there  can  be,
and  are,  very  few  who  are  in  a  position  to  afford  to  do
such  work.  It  will  be  one  of  the  chief  tasks  of  progres-
sive policy  to  secure  such  conditions  for  an  expanding
proportion  of  the  population  as  shall  enable  these  dis-
interested social  instincts  to  become  operative  in  the
public  service.

At  present,  keeping  closely  to  our  analysis  of  the
structure  and  working  of  a  Municipal  Lighting  Com-
mittee, or  other  public  business,  it  must,  I  think,  be
acknowledged  that  some  loss  in  technical  efficiency  of
control  is  incurred  by  substituting  a  Committee,
appointed  as  most  Committees  are  appointed,  for  the
directorate  of  a  company.  Even  setting  aside  all
questions  of  corruption  or  jobbery,  less  regularity  of
attendance,  less  energy,  less  knowledge  of  the  business

I,


146 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

in  question  may  usually  be  expected  in  a  committee  than
in  a  directorate.  There  are  cases,  however,  where  this
may  not  hold.  Most  railroad  directors  in  this  country
know  less  of  railroading  than  would  a  Standing-  Com-
mittee appointed  by  Parliament.  But  an  industrial
director  generally  knows  more  about  his  business  than
does  a  Committeeman.  If  this  is  so,  it  will  have
some  necessary  reactions  on  the  permanent  officials
to  whom  the  real  concrete  and  detailed  conduct  of  the
business  is  entrusted.  As  a  result  of  the  substitution  of
a  political  for  a  distinctively  economic  system  of  control,
they  will  "  have  a  freer  hand."  Their  masters  in  the
Committee  of  the  Council  will  be  less  able  to  "interfere"
than  the  directors  under  whom  formerly  they  served,  for
both  the  incentive  to  interfere  will  be  less  and  the
knowledoe  makino^  interference  effective  will  be  less.
This  will  rest,  not  merely  on  the  considerations  already
named,  but  upon  the  fact  that  the  personnel  of  the
Committee  will  be  much  less  stable  than  that  of  the
Directorate,  shifting  with  party  and  other  expediencies.
If,  as  often  happens,  a  different  chairman  comes  into
office  every  few  years,  the  control  of  the  Council  over
the  permanent  officials  is  necessarily  weakened.  This
virtually  means  that  instead  of  the  Council  controlling
and  directing  the  permanent  officials,  the  latter  "manage"
the  Council,  suggesting  or  imposing  the  policy  which  is
best  or  most  convenient  for  them.  This  may  mean  a
very  efficient  and  enlightened  policy,  if  an  able,  public-
spirited  or  ambitious  man  gets  into  the  saddle  as  head  of
the  permanent  staff.  So  many  a  town  owes  much  to  a
masterful  Town  Clerk  or  a  go-ahead  Borough  Surveyor.
But  it  is  an  uncontrolled  or  inadequately  controlled
bureaucracy,  subject  to  all  the  dangers  which  attend  this
mode  of  government :  the  essential  defect  being  that  no
real  part  is  taken  in  this  department  of  policy  or
administration  by  the  people  or  their  representatives.

Normally  the  condition  I  have  described  will  mean
that  the  Borough  Surveyor  and  the  manager  of  the


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  147

Electric  Lighting  Works  will  have  their  own  way  with  a
minimum  of  control  from  the  Council :  not  only  current
details  of  management  but  policy  of  development  and
its  finance  will  be  largely  in  their  hands.  A  very
important  factor  in  the  situation  is  that  these  high
officials  will  be  securer  in  their  office  and  their  salary  than
under  a  company,  where,  if  dividends  went  very  wrong,
they  were  in  danger  of  displacement.  So  long  as  they
do  not  get  violently  at  loggerheads  with  the  Committee
and  the  Council  or  commit  some  very  flagrant  act  of
indiscretion,  their  tenure  of  office,  with  a  rise  of  salary
not  closely  related  to  economy  of  management,  is  toler-
ably safe,  safer  than  any  post  in  the  ordinary  business
world  outside.

In  our  preliminary  discussion  of  incentives  under
public  enterprise  we  assumed  that  this  security  with
other  loss  of  direct  selfish  stimulus  would  tend  towards
torpor,  conservatism,  and  slackness.  This,  I  think,  will
be  the  normal  result.  But  there  will  be  exceptions  where
it  will  seem  to  act  in  the  opposite  direction.  Where  an
ambitious  borough  official  gets  the  bit  in  his  teeth,  he
may  seek  free  scope  for  his  energy  and  ambition  by  a
reckless  go-ahead  experimental  policy,  which  he  enjoys
and  for  which  the  town  pays.  This  peril  of  bureaucracy
is  confronted  on  a  larger  scale  in  great  State  departments.
A  magnificent  bureaucrat,  with  a  masterful,  expansive,
and  resourceful  personality,  seeing  the  chance  of  trans-
lating his  inspirations  and  aspirations  into  concrete
realities  at  the  public  expense,  may  plunge  into  all  sorts
of  dubious  novelties.

If  it  be  admitted  that  these  risks  of  undue  conserva-
tism and  torpor  on  the  one  hand,  or  reckless  experimental
plunging  on  the  other,  flow  from  an  insufficiently
controlled  bureaucracy,  it  is  evident  that  their  conse-
quences will  be  felt  all  through  the  public  business,
afl'ecting  in  various  degrees  all  the  employees  and  their
capacities  of  efiFective  co-operation  in  the  public  service.

In  considering  the  relative  efficiency  of  officials  under


148 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

private  and  public  enterprise,  however,  one  point  of
considerable  importance  must  not  be  ignored.  The
assumption  that  the  profit-seeking  character  of  private
enterprise  will  lead  to  a  better  selection  of  administrative
ability  requires  qualifications.  Where  private  capitalism
has  attained  its  highest  structural  development,  efficiency
of  administration  is  often  notoriously  injured  by  an
abuse  of  patronage  in  appointments  and  promotion  of
officials  and  even  of  subordinate  employees.  This  is
particularly  true  of  those  great  branches  of  industry
where  amalo^amation  has  o-one  so  far  as  to  exclude
effective  competition.  In  our  railways  and  great  banks,
for  example,  the  influence  of  directors  and  large  share-
holders is  habitually  used  to  procure  appointments  and
to  obtain  promotion.  If  these  services  were  nationalised
our  civil  service  examination  system  would  certainly
raise  the  level  of  ability  among  the  higher  grades  of
employees,  and  if  this  system  of  appointment  were
extended  to  our  local  Civil  Services  a  similar  gain  might
attend  the  socialisation  of  some  at  any  rate  of  those
municipal  services  which  remain  in  private  hands.

But,  bearing  in  mind  the  manner  in  which  most  public
appointments  are  "  jobbed  "  by  Town  Councils  and
other  local  elected  bodies,  we  are  not  entitled  to  make
large  present  claims  on  this  account  as  any  set-off  against
the  "  patronage  "  system  under  private  enterprise.

The  general  trend  of  this  analysis  of  the  structural
changes  of  industry  involved  in  socialisation  indicates
several  perhaps  considerable  wastes  in  controlling  and
co-ordinating  power  due  to  the  working  of  the  political
method  of  control  of  the  productive  forces,  and  suggests
that  this  net  waste  might  be  disastrous,  unless  the  new
public  possession  generated  a  new  public  spirit  and  new
methods  of  popular  control  which  should  counterbalance
or  prevent  this  loss  of  social  energy.

But  all  this  is  closely  connected  with  a  graver  charge
against  Socialism  which  must  now  be  discussed.  "  Sub-
stitute public  for  private  enterprise  :  a  double  process  of


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  149

corruption  is  generalised.  The  dishonest  use  of  political
power  is  made  possible  and  profitable  in  innumerable
ways  :  party  politics  will  be  rapidly  adapted  to  purposes
of  private  gain,  and  an  elaborate  system  of  *  graft '  will
spread  over  the  whole  body  of  the  public  industries.
Socialism  will  be  a  vast  spoils  system  :  the  struggle
between  capital  and  labour  which  now  goes  on  will  be
transferred  from  competitive  industry  to  the  political
arena  where  it  will  rage  more  destructively  than  ever
with  organised  bodies  of  public  employees  using  their
votes,  not  as  citizens  for  public  purposes,  but  as  wage-
earners  to  extract  higher  pay  and  superior  conditions  of
employment  for  themselves  and  their  particular  trade.
Candidates  will  be  returned  to  Parliament  and  to  other
public  bodies  not  as  independent  persons,  not  even  as
party  delegates,  but  as  '  kept '  politicians  tied  to  a
particular  trade,  and  primarily  devoted  to  seeing  that  this
trade  improves  its  '  pull '  upon  the  public  purse."  You
have,  it  is  suggested,  the  beginnings  of  this  vicious
system  already  operating,  in  the  organised  pressure
brought  by  unions  of  teachers,  postal  employees,  arsenal
workers  upon  Members  of  Parliament  and  the  Govern-
ment to  get  preferential  conditions  of  employment  for
themselves  at  an  increasing  expense  to  the  taxpayers.
Even  now,  where  the  organisations  are  strong  enough,
they  are  constantly  trying  to  interfere  with  the  most
economical  administration  of  the  public  work  in  which
they  are  engaged,  endeavouring  not  merely  to  raise  their
wages,  shorten  their  hours,  and  to  secure  pensions  which
make  their  conditions  of  individual  employment  prefer-
able to  those  in  private  businesses,  but  also  to  secure  an
excessive  amount  of  employment  for  their  particular
branch  of  the  public  service,  and  practically  to  insist
upon  a  permanency  of  work  and  salary  for  the  maximum
number  of  employees.  The  influence  of  Members  of
Parliament  and  of  other  political  bodies  is  used  to  secure
appointments,  to  obtain  advancement,  and  to  prevent
dismissals. The  worst  effect  is  seen  in  the  appointment


ISO THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

and  promotion  to  the  higher  and  more  important
administrative  posts  of  men  chosen  for  political  reasons
who  are  not  fully  competent.

If  these  evils  are  visible  in  a  State  where  not  more
than  2^  per  cent,  of  the  workers  are  public  employees,
what  will  be  the  case  where  the  proportion  has  advanced
to  10,  20,  or  40  per  cent.,  where  all  the  railway  servants,
miners,  dockers  and  other  large  groups  of  organised
workers  are  put  upon  the  public  roll  ?  The  great  mining
districts  of  the  North,  the  Midlands,  and  South  Wales;
such  railway  towns  as  Rugby,  Crewe,  and  Derby,  would
no  longer  return  Members  of  Parliament  to  assist  in  the
general  work  of  m^aking  and  administering  laws  in  the
general  interests  of  the  nation;  even  the  interests  of
party  would  yield  place  to  the  narrowest  form  of  trade
individualism,  and  knots  of  men  would  sit  in  Parliament
pledged  to  devote  themselves  to  the  supreme  end  of
securing  for  the  workers  in  a  particular  industry  a  bigger
pull  upon  the  public  purse  in  pay,  pensions,  or  other
advantages.  As  Socialism  advanced  further,  politics
would  more  and  more  degenerate  into  the  cockpit  of
sectional  industrial  strife,  each  national  trade  seeking  to
advance  itself  at  the  interests  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.
Every  town  would  be  a  Chatham  or  a  Plymouth,  and  the
public  good  would  disappear  in  favour  of  a  number  of
competing  private  goods.  Incidentally  the  re-alignment
of  political  forces  and  issues  would  lend  itself  to  a  fiscal
policy  of  Protection,  as  politics  became  more  and  more
a  game  of  pulls  between  groups  of  producers,  each  of
which  would  be  urgent  to  maintain  for  its  members  the
largest  volume  of  employment  at  the  highest  wage  and
would  insist  on  taxing  or  prohibiting  imports  which
might  impair  this  policy.

In  this  indictment  of  progressive  Socialism  there  are
two  chief  counts  which,  though  connected,  are  distin-
guishable. That  upon  which  I  have  dwelt  presupposes
the  working  of  party  politics  upon  lines  with  which  we
are  familiar  in  this  country. Great  organisations  of


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  151

public  employees,  by  political  pressure,  might  exert  a
tyranny  over  the  general  body  of  the  public,  exacting  an
excessive  pay  for  an  insufficient  service.  But  there  is
^  another  even  graver  danger,  illustrated  in  the  spoils
;  system  of  America,  where  the  entire  structure  of  the
i  democratic  institutions  of  the  nation  has  been  perverted
\by  the  dishonest  disposal  of  public  offices.  A  chief
Dusiness  of  an  American  Cono;ressman  or  Senator  in  the
eyes  of  his  constituents  is  to  secure  assistance  to  local
interests  by  tariffs,  contracts,  appropriations,  or  other
grants  of  public  money  or  special  measures  of  protection  :
in  the  eyes  of  the  local  members  of  the  party  which
elected  him  his  chief  business  is  to  secure  for  them
lucrative  offices.  This  habitual  use  of  the  public
resources  to  feed  local,  party,  and  personal  interests  has
so  corrupted  the  party  organisations  and  the  entire
machinery  of  democracy  in  America  that  the  intelligent
will  of  the  people  does  not  flow  upwards  from  the
electorate,  expressing  itself  in  legislation  and  adminis-
tration based  on  sound  public  policy  :  it  is  pumped  down
from  above  by  party  "  bosses,"  themselves  the  creatures
of  great  business  corporations,  who  mould  the  govern-
ment of  the  country  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  their
paymasters,  disposing  of  the  public  offices  to  evoke  the
necessary  party  activity  out  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the
minor  party  politicians  who  manipulate  in  detail  the
popular  votes.  Though  the  people  reserves  some
"  kick,"  some  power  of  independent  judgment,  expressed
in  occasional  revolts  against  the  tyranny  of  the  machine,
this  constitutes  a  very  real  and  grave  evil  in  American
democracy.  Now,  though  the  system  by  which  in
America  the  great  majority  of  offices  change  ownership
with  every  change  of  party  government,  might  not  be
adopted  here  (and  is  certainly  inconsistent  with  efficient
Socialism),  it  is  evident  that  advancing  Socialism  must
leave  large  numbers  of  new  offices  at  the  disposal  of
Government  and  great  opportunities  for  securing  the
good  will  of  large  bodies  of  voters  by  improving  the
conditions  of  their  employment.


152 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

The  individualist  represents  that  any  party  govern-
ment under  a  popular  franchise  must  succumb  to  these
temptations,  and  that  here,  as  in  America,  the  party
system  will  become  a  highly  elaborated  machine  financed
by  capitalistic  interests  seeking  a  protective  tariff  and
other  large  spoils  for  themselves  and  using  the  socialised
services  as  instruments  for  assuaging  discontent  and
buying  votes.  The  forms  of  democracy  will  survive  :
the  spirit  will  have  disappeared  :  a  vast  system  of  public
corruption  will  have  been  established  for  which  the
unorganised  non-socialised  consumers  and  taxpayers  will
have  to  pay.

Such  is  the  charge.  What  is  the  reply  ?  In  the  first
place,  an  appeal  to  facts  turns  somewhat  the  edge  of  the
attack.  Do  our  existing  socialised  services  display  these
terrible  corruptions  ^  Are  our  postal  employees  and
public  teachers  able  to  exert  this  tyranny,  plundering  the
public  purse  for  their  private  gain,  and  are  these  services
administered  ineffectively  by  reason  of  political  pull.''
It  is  evident  that  they  are  not,  and  that  the  unions  of
these  employees  do  not  exert  the  injurious  power  which
in  theory  they  might  appear  to  possess.

Again,  supposing,  as  is  doubtless  the  case,  that  there
is  a  tendency  for  the  State,  after  taking  over  a  private
industry,  to  yield  to  the  representations  of  the  employees
and  to  raise  the  wages  and  otherwise  improve  their
conditions — such  improvement  of  conditions,  as  we
have  seen,  is  not  necessarily,  or  even  normally,  a  public
loss.  On  the  contrary,  within  certain  limits  it  is  a  public
gain.  The  claim  that  the  State  should  be  a  "  model
employer  "  does  not  merely  rest  upon  the  view  that  it
should  set  a  good  example  and  can  afford  to  do  so
because  it  has  the  public  purse  out  of  which  to  pay.  It
rests  on  the  economic  principle  that  sweating,  or  any
terms  of  employment  injurious  to  the  worker  and  the
efficiency  of  his  family,  are  a  social  injury  entailing  waste
in  the  economy  of  public  resources.  Put  concretely,  it
may  be  said  that  a  large  part  of  the  higher  wage  bill


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  153

under  Socialism  would  be  a  public  profit,  not  a  loss,  a
wise  economy  and  not  a  dole  or  bribe.

But,  it  will  be  retorted,  granting  the  validity  of  this
margin  for  levelling  up,  the  demands  of  public  employees
will  not  stop  there.  They  will  be  continually  asking  for
more  and  will  use  political  pressure  to  get  it.  So  long  as
they  are  numerically  a  small  proportion  of  the  electorate
they  cannot  tyrannise  much.  But  if  the  State  employed
20  or  40  per  cent,  of  the  workers,  many  electoral  districts
would  be  entirely  in  their  hands  :  they  would  become
the  dominant  force  in  party  politics  and  would  work  the
machine  for  their  private  gain.

It  is  no  use  meeting  this  objection  by  imputing  to  the
groups  of  socialised  workers  a  new  and  lofty  spirit  of
social  morality  which  will  enable  them  to  resist  tempta-
tions to  abuse  their  power.  That  spirit  must  be  a  slow
growth;  we  cannot  assume  in  advance  its  effective
operation.  It  is  safer  to  admit  that  they  will  try  to  use
their  power  to  get  for  themselves  all  they  can.  But  how
much  can  they  get  ?  Let  us  assume  that  Socialism  was
advanced  so  far  that  10,  20,  or  even  40  per  cent,  of  the
workers  were  employed  by  the  State,  in  a  variety  of
public  industries,  the  members  of  each  of  which  sought
to  get  as  much  as  possible  for  itself  out  of  the  public
purse.  Either  the  several  public  industries  would  form
separate  unions,  each  playing  for  its  own  hand,  or  they
would  federate  and  form  a  single  force  in  politics.  In
the  former  case  it  is  evident  that  their  power  would  be
strictly  limited.  Even  the  largest  public  industry,  say
the  railway  workers,  would  form  a  small  minority  in  the
whole  electorate,  and  though  through  their  predomin-
ance in  certain  centres  they  might  bring  strong  pressure
to  bear,  where  political  parties  were  closely  balanced,  any
attempt  to  raise  their  economic  position  much  above  the
level  of  other  public  workers  would  arouse  resentment
among  the  latter  as  well  as  among  the  general  public  who
would  have  to  pay  tor  the  "  favouritism  "  accorded  to
the  railway  workers.


154 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Those  who  think  such  jealousy  would  be  a  negligible
factor  can  know  very  little  of  the  workers  of  this
country.  There  is  more  force  in  the  suggestion  that  a
powerful  combination  of  employees  in  the  various  public
services  might  use  their  voting  power  with  great  effect
to  extract  excessive  pay  and  other  advantages  for  their
collective  enjoyment  by  manipulating  party  politics.
This  in  truth  is  a  grave  menace  in  a  socialising  State
which  has  not  developed  its  representative  system  along
truly  democratic  lines.  Under  our  present  artificial  party
system  (artificial  in  that  it  represents  no  clear  actual
cleavage  of  thought,  sentiment,  or  even  interests),  it  is
possible  for  a  very  small  compact  energetic  minority  in  a
constituency,  devoted  to  some  single  issue  such  as
temperance,  anti-vaccination  or  the  like,  to  extort  a
pledge  from  one  or  both  party  candidates  to  support
legislation  :  if  a  sufficient  number  of  successful  candi-
dates  have  given  such  pledges,  the  course  of  legislation
in  a  so-called  representative  assembly  may  be  vitally
influenced  by  what  is  the  will,  not  of  the  public,  nor  of  a
majority,  but  of  a  small  minority.

Small  groups  of  keen  politicians  have  in  this  manner
often  exercised  an  influence  quite  disproportionate  to
their  numbers  in  matters  where  their  policy  is  dictated
by  purely  disinterested  motives.  Will  not  local  and
national  groups  of  miners,  railway  men  or  municipal
employees  utilise  this  flaw  in  our  representative  system
far  more  keenly  and  effectively  in  order  to  extort  legis-
lative or  administrative  measures  fraught  with  direct
material  advantage  to  themselves .''  It  would  be  idle  to
assert  that  public  spirit,  or  contentment  with  the  good
conditions  of  their  employment,  will  deter  them  from
such  a  profitable  course.

Some  practical  Socialists  are  so  alive  to  this  danger  as
to  advocate  the  disenfranchisement  of  all  public
employees.  But  that  is  to  remedy  one  disease  by  intro-
ducing a  worse  one.  The  larger  the  advance  of  Socialism
the  graver  the  injury  such  disqualification  would  inflict


PUBLIC  ENTERPRISE  155

upon  democratic  government.  That  10  or  20  per  cent,
of  the  citizens  should  be  deprived  of  the  right  and  duty
of  contributing  to  government  because  they  were  paid
public  servants  would  be  a  mutilation  of  the  representa-
tive system.  The  fact  that  they  will  indisputably  tend
to  use  their  voting  power  more  for  their  private  advan-
tage, if  they  find  that  thev  can  do  so,  than  for  the  public
good,  is  no  reason  for  disenfranchising  them.  It  is,
however,  a  reason  for  so  reforming  the  representative
system  as  to  deprive  them  of  the  power  effectively  to
abuse  the  franchise.  The  real  danger  which  we  have
described  consists  in  the  power  of  a  compact  minority  to
obtain  a  representation  which  is  excessive,  to  impose  its
will  as  if  it  were  the  will  of  a  majority,  upon  an  elected
assembly.  A  sufficient  remedy  consists  in  proportional
representation,  accompanied  in  certain  cases  of  critical
importance  by  a  referendum.  Proportional  representa-
tion is  no  mere  fad,  not  a  mere  improvement  of  our
existing  mode  of  representation  :  it  is  the  only  method
by  which  the  "  tyranny  of  Socialism  "  can  be  averted.
Under  our  present  misrepresentative  party  system  the
danger  of  an  organisation  of  the  public  services  using
the  public  as  their  milch-cow  is  a  very  real  one.  Well-
organised  unions  of  miners,  railway  workers,  postal
employees,  etc.,  would,  when  they  got  practice,  use  the
party  machines  to  get  far  better  wages  and  far  softer
jobs  than  fall  to  the  body  of  outside  employees;  and
such  capitalistic  interests  as  still  survived  (for  remember
I  am  not  dealing  with  a  completely  Socialistic  State)
would  buy  their  support  for  their  own  political  designs
through  the  party  bosses.

But  once  set  our  systems  of  election  upon  a  properly
proportionate  basis,  no  body  of  public  servants,  owning
special  interests,  could  impose  upon  the  Government  a
policy  unduly  favouring  these  interests.  If  railroads
and  mines  were  nationalised,  strong  centres  of  these
industries  would  return  some  members  chosen  chiefly
to  safeguard  these  special  interests  in  ways  which  might


156 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

sometimes  conflict  with  the  wider  interests  of  the  nation.
But  it  is  right  and  proper  that  these  important  interests
should  be  given  a  fair  amount  of  this  direct  representa-
tion, that  there  should  be  some  men  who  can  speak  with
authority  and  experience  of  the  special  needs  of  special
groups  of  workers.  Even  if  Socialism  had  gone  so  far
that  20  or  more  per  cent,  of  the  electorate  were  public
employees,  this  would  not  give  them  any  of  that  power
to  work  the  party  machine,  and  so  to  loot  the  public
purse,  which  would  be  possible,  and  I  think  probable,
under  the  vicious  system  of  representation  which
prevails  at  present  in  this  country.

The  real  peril  of  advancing  Socialism,  the  fear  of  a
corrupt  use  of  political  power,  is  not  a  vice  of  Socialism
itself,  but  one  which  Socialism  discovers  in  our  crude
realisation  of  democratic  methods.  The  individual
voter  must  be  educated  and  trained  to  use  his  individual
judgment  by  the  larger  choice  of  candidates  and  the
liberation  from  party  trammels  which  a  rational  reform
of  electoral  methods  will  bring.

There  is  no  other  way  of  making  Socialism  safe  than
by  making  democracy  real,  i.e.,  by  securing  representa-
tive assemblies  which  are  just  and  accurate  reflections  of
the  will  of  the  electorate  and  by  testing  through  direct
appeals  that  general  will  in  all  important  cases  where
representation  fails.


Part III
APPLIED DEMOlCRACY


Chapter  I
POVERTY: ITS  CAUSES  AND  CURES

During  the  last  few  years  we  have  been  deluged  with
facts  and  figures  attesting  the  great  material  progress  of
the  working  classes  of  Great  Britain  during  the  last
three-quarters  of  a  century.  Higher  money  wages  are
paid  to  all  classes  of  regular  labour  in  town  or  country;
falling  prices  enable  these  higher  wages  to  secure  in  most
articles  of  food,  clothing,  and  other  goods  a  still  greater
rise  in  the  standard  of  working-class  comfort;  a  larger
proportion  of  the  workers  are  engaged  in  skilled  labour
at  the  higher  standard  wages;  hours  of  labour  are  shorter
than  they  used  to  be;  increased  opportunities  of  free  or
cheap  recreation  and  education  are  open  to  most  workers;
the  modern  development  of  city  life,  the  co-operative
activities  of  the  workers  themselves,  the  charitable  liber-
ality of  the  richer  classes  have  all  contributed  to  lighten
many  of  the  burdens  which  lay  heavy  on  the  workers
and  to  awaken  and  supply  a  variety  of  needs  unknown
to  their  ancestors.  This  general  picture  of  working-
class  progress  is  verified  by  details  showing  the  increased
expenditure  of  workers  upon  flour,  tea,  meat,  and  other
necessaries  and  comforts,  and  the  growth  of  working-
class  savings.

No  one  who  reads  the  history  of  the  "  hungry  forties  "
or  studies  "  the  condition  of  the  people  "  as  set  forth
in  Engels'  Condition  of  the  Working  Class  in  1844  and
the  Report  of  the  Poor  Law  Commission  of  1834,  can
question  seriously  the  reality  and  size  of  the  improve-
ment which  has  taken  place. It  may,  I  think,  be  safely

«S9


i6o THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

said  that  there  is  no  class  of  regular  wage-earners  in  this
country  that  has  not  made  steady  and  substantial  pro-
gress in  its  standard  of  material  comfort  during  the  last
two  generations.

There  are  many  who  take  these  general  admissions
of  working-class  progress  to  mean  that  poverty  is  dis-
appearing by  the  process  of  natural  causes,  that  we  need
not,  perhaps  ought  not,  to  endeavour  to  hasten  this
natural  process :  the  only  duty  that  devolves  upon  the
more  prosperous  classes  is  to  alleviate  the  misfortunes  of
"the  deserving  poor"  by  means  of  charity,  which  should
be  so  carefully  and  charily  bestowed  as  not  to  injure  the
spirit  of  self-help  by  which  all  persons  of  character  and
industry  can  lift  themselves  out  of  the  mire.

The  general  effect  of  this  blend  of  optimism  and
indifference  is  to  induce  the  public  mind  to  shirk  the
grave  issue  which  modern  poverty  presents.  Until
recent  times  poverty  was  regarded  as  the  natural  and
necessary  destiny  of  a  great  mass  of  the  people  of  every
country.  But  two  great  changes  have  come  over  modern
life  which  have  shaken  this  fatalist  creed.

The  first  is  a  change  of  sentiment,  of  moral  attitude,
the  conviction  that  the  good  of  the  people,  not  of  any
special  class,  creed,  or  interest,  must  dominate  all  public
arrangements,  the  tacit  general  acceptance  of  the  demo-
cratic principle  that  government,  both  political  and
industrial,  exists  to  secure  "  the  greatest  good  of  the
greatest  number."

The  second  is  an  economic  revolution,  the  vast  ex-
tension which  modern  science  has  brought  about  in  man's
command  over  Nature  for  the  production  of  wealth.
This  command  over  Nature  means  the  possibility  of
material  comfort  for  all.  It  is  these  considerations
that  give  new  force  to  the  pressure  of  the  problem  of
English  poverty  to-day.

For,  in  spite  of  all  the  general  advance  of  the  working
classes  to  which  I  have  borne  testimony,  there  remains
in  this  land  a  vast  amount  of  grinding  poverty. Mr.


POVERTY  i6i

Booth's  investigations  in  London,  corroborated  by  those
of  Mr.  Rowntree  for  York,  indicate  that  about  30  per
cent,  of  the  town  populations  of  the  United  Kingdorn^
are  living  in  poverty  ;  that  is  to  say,  under  material  ^
conditions  inadequate  to  maintain  them  as  healthy
human  beings  capable  of  efficient  work.  Thirty  per  •
cent,  of  the  general  population  will  mean,  of  course,  a
much  larger  percentage  for  the  working  classes  taken
by  themselves :  it  will  stamp  with  poverty  more  than
one-third  of  the  town  working  population.  Several
recent  inquiries  into  the  conditions  of  agricultural
villages  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  proportion  of
poverty  is  even  larger  in  the  rural  parts.  Agricultural
labour,  at  any  rate  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  country,
has  shared  less  than  any  other  class  of  regular  workers
in  the  rise  of  wages.  The  broad  conclusion  warranted
by  these  researches  is  that  fully  one-third  of  the  work-
ing classes  are  "  poor  "  in  the  sense  that  they  are  ill-fed,
ill-clad,  ill-sheltered,  living  under  conditions  injurious
to  health  and  physical  efficiency.  Some  of  this  poverty
is  due  to  misuse  rather  than  to  insufficiency  of  money
income;  even  this  misuse,  rightly  understood,  ranks  as
a  result  of  poverty,  not  merely  as  a  cause  :  such  is  the
vicious  circle.

It  may  be  true  that  a  smaller  proportion  of  this
poverty  than  in  former  times  approaches  the  actual
starvation  point,  but  it  none  the  less  remains  a  deplorable
and  an  amazing  fact  that  a  third  of  the  working  class
in  the  richest  country  ever  known  in  the  history  of  the
world  should  be  living  in  this  state  of  physical  and
moral  degradation.

For  when  we  survey  the  actual  resources  which
science  and  art  place  at  the  disposal  of  a  modern  civilised
people,  we  recognise  that  poverty  is  no  longer  inevita-
ble, that  we  now  no  longer  wait  for  its  slow  mitigation  by
natural  processes.  An  intelligent  people,  confronting
the  actual  causes  of  poverty  and  guiding  its  conduct
accordingly,  can  abolish  poverty.


1 62 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

There  are  two  fundamental  causes  of  poverty,
related  in  their  nature,  but  here  distinguished  for  con-
venience of  argument :

1 .  Waste  or  human  power.

2.  Inequitable  distribution  of  opportunities.

I.  We  produce  as  a  nation  an  annual  income  of
material  goods  and  services  estimated  at  about
^1,800,000,000  per  annum,  and  this  amount  of  money
income  is  distributed  as  wages,  profits,  interest,  rent,
etc.,  to  those  who  own  labour-power,  business  energy,
land,  or  capital,  which  contributes  to  this  output.  This
sum  of  wealth  (some  of  it,  alas,  is  "illth"!)  sounds
big,  and  is  complacently  compared  with  the  much
smaller  national  income  of  a  genera'tion  ago.  In  reality
it  is  very  little  compared  with  what  we  could  produce
if  we  applied  intelligently  and  economically  our  existing
powers  of  production.

Economists  are  fond  of  dwelling  upon  the  delicate
and  elaborate  mechanism  of  industry  and  commerce,
working  by  intricate  adjustment  of  parts  to  make  and
distribute  commodities  over  the  face  of  the  earth.  In
point  of  fact  the  machine  works  very  clumsily,  with
countless  dislocations,  innumerable  wastes  of  power,
and  almost  intolerable  creaking.

Much  of  this  waste  is  visible.  Wherever  we  look
we  find  during  long  periods  of  time  great  quantities
of  capital  and  labour  lying  idle — unemployed,  under-
employed, or  mis-employed.  Everywhere  the  waste
of  duplication,  new  factories  built  where  the  existing
plant  is  excessive,  new  shops  arising  to  divide  the
custom  of  established  shops,  the  endless  multiplica-
tion of  agents,  branches,  commercial  clerks,  and
travellers,  the  constantly  growing  proportion  of
human  energy  drawn  off  from  effective  production  to
wasteful  competition.  I  do  not  say  all  competition  is
wasteful:  our  present  system  requires  competition.
But  where  six  competing  grocers  in  a  neighbourhood
do  the  distributing  work  which  could  be  done  by  two,


POVERTY  163

the  work  of  the  other  four  is  costly  waste.  This  is  the
normal  state  over  large  areas  of  manufacture  and  of
commerce.

But  the  invisible  wastes,  due  to  a  failure  to  apply
existing  funds  of  knowledge  to  the  actual  work  of
production,  are  still  greater.  Anyone  acquainted  with
the  sciences  of  chemistry  and  mechanics,  who  knows
what  is  being  done  in  various  parts  of  the  world  by  an
intelligent  application  of  these  sciences  to  the  arts  of
manufacture,  by  improved  machinery,  utilisation  of
waste,  economies  of  power,  will  perceive  that  lack  of
efficient  education,  ignorance,  and  apathy,  absence  of
keen  direction  and  bold  experiment,  weigh  down
enormously  the  productivity  of  our  nation.  Take  the
conspicuous  example  of  agriculture  :  read  Kropotkin's
"  Field,  Factory,  and  Workshop,"  see  what  is  done  in
a  score  of  different  lands  by  putting  brains  into  work
upon  the  soil,  in  France,  Belgium,  Switzerland,  nay,  in
China  and  Japan,  you  realise  how  wealth  is  stopped  at
its  very  source  by  failing  to  bring  modern  science  to
bear  upon  that  which  must  ever  remain  the  most
fundamental  of  industries.

Is  it  not  pretty  clear  that  if  England  could  stop  these
visible  and  invisible  wastes,  could  organise  her  actually
available  resources  for  the  production  of  wealth,  she
could  treble  or  quadruple  her  output  of  material  wealth
without  any  increase  of  human  strain  ?

It  is  evident  that  poverty  is  not  any  longer  necessary
because  the  nation  cannot  make  enough  wealth  to  "  go
all  round."

Indeed,  it  is  probable  that  this  analysis  of  waste
appears  to  some  readers  irrelevant  to  the  main  issue.
"  What  has  all  this  talk  about  insufficient  production
to  do  with  poverty .''  There  is  plenty  produced;  poverty
is  obviously  due  to  bad  distribution  of  the  wealth  that
is  produced."  Now,  no  one  is  more  fully  alive  than  I
am  to  the  defects  of  distribution;  but  I  nevertheless
hold it to  be  of  the first  importance  to  realise  the


1 64 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

mistake  of  fastening  the  responsibility  of  poverty  upon
bad  distribution  as  the  sole  sufficient  cause.  No  doubt  it
might  appear  a  simple  cure  for  the  people  of  this  land  to
force  the  Government  to  distribute  the  ^1,800,000,000
equally  in  incomes  for  all  the  population  :  this  levelling
process  would  yield  some  ;^i8o  per  family,  luxury  for
nobody,  but  no  poverty.  But  then  those  wise  defenders
of  things  as  they  are  readily  explain  to  us  how  such  an
attempt  to  level  incomes  would  so  impair  the  stimulus
in  the  professional,  employing,  and  other  brain-working
classes  that  they  would  no  longer  do  their  best  work  for
such  a  pittance  :  so  the  total  income  would  fall  far  below
^1,800,000,000,  and  perhaps  everybody  might  after
all  be  brought  to  poverty.  Now,  nobody  really  pro-
poses this  exact  equalisation  of  incomes,  nor  does  it
need  serious  discussion.  I  mentioned  it  in  order  to  lay
stress  upon  the  central  truth  to  which  it  gives  promi-
nence. The  quantity  of  wealth  available  for  distribu-
tion chiefly  depends  upon  the  stimulus  afforded  to  the
productive  energies  of  man  :  this  stimulus  in  its  turn
depends  chiefly  upon  the  opportunity  open  to  every
member  of  the  community  to  do  his  best  work.

The  main  cause  of  poverty  is  inequality  of  oppor-
tunity, because  such  inequality  implies  a  waste  of  pro-
ductive power  upon  the  one  hand,  bad  distribution  or
waste  of  consuming  power  upon  the  other.

"  Equality  of  opportunity  "  as  a  cure  for  poverty  is  a
familiar  enough  form  of  words,  but  to  many  it  sounds
vague  and  barren.  I  want  to  make  its  meaning  plainer.
But  in  explaining  poverty  as  due  to  inequality  of  oppor-
tunity I  must  first  brush  aside  one  widely  prevalent
fallacy  to  which  the  personal  vanity  of  lucky  or  suc-
cessful men  gives  vogue.

Poverty,  these  are  never  tired  of  telling  us,  is  due
to  personal  inefficiency.  Go  down  among  the  poor,
what  do  you  find.'*  Most  of  them  are  ignorant,
untrained,  feeble,  shiftless,  thriftless,  shirking  hard
steady  work — often  drunkards,  wastrels,  cadgers  upon


POVERTY  165

chanty.  There  is,  they  tell  us,  no  real  lack  of  oppor-
tunity. Opportunities  abound  for  energetic,  honest,
and  industrious  persons :  the  schoolmaster  is  abroad —
emigration  is  cheap — willing,  responsible  workers  can
always  get  good  work  and  a  chance  to  "  rise  " — and
then  actual  instances  are  cited  of  capable  and  steady
men  who  have  risen  from  the  lowest  grades  of  labour
into  comfort  and  independence.  In  personal  efficiency,
education,  moral  elevation  of  individual  cliaracter  lies'
the  slow  but  only  cure  for  poverty !

Now,  while  it  is  quite  true  that  no  cure  for  poverty
will  be  really  effective  unless  it  raises  personality,  it  is
most  unprofitable  to  identify  degraded  personality  as
the  cause  of  poverty.

For  such  analysis  ignores  the  roots  and  the  soil  of
personal  efficiency.  The  factors  of  personal  efficiency,
industry,  sobriety,  energy  of  will,  quickness  of  intelli-
gence cannot  be  got  out  of  ill-born  and  ill-nurtured
children.

The  slum-child  who  personifies  the  problem  of
poverty,  born  with  low  vitality,  reared  by  ignorant  and
poor  parents  on  bad  food,  breathing  bad  air,  exposed  to
countless  degrading  influences,  physical  and  moral,  such
a  child  growing  to  manhood  or  womanhood  has
commonly  lost  the  power  to  grasp  those  opportunities
which  are  said  to  lie  within  its  reach.  Except  in  rare
instances  of  favoured  stock,  personal  efficiency  cannot
grow  in  such  a  soil.  Bad  seed  sown  in  poor  earth  will
not  grow  into  flourishing  and  fruitful  plants,  even  if
carefully  watered,  pruned,  and  protected  as  it  grows.
The  material  conditions  of  poorer  working-class  life  are
hostile  to  the  attainment  of  personal  efficiency :  they
not  merely  stunt  physical  and  intellectual  growth,  but,
still  more  detrimental,  they  maim  the  humarj.  wilTj^
sapping  the  roots,  of  charactd"r.

This  moral  injury  is  the  greatest  sin  committed  by
society  against  the  poor.

But  we  must  go  further. Granting  his  attainment  of


1 66 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

a  fair  standard  of  personal  efficiency,  it  is  not  true  that
an  ordinary  worker  has  a  reasonable  security  against
poverty.

Individual  efficiency  cannot  produce  wealth.  The
"  self-help "  commonly  imputed  to  individuals,  the
ability  to  earn  "  an  independent  livelihood "  when
closely  inspected,  is  seen  to  be  illusory.

Economically,  no  man  liveth  to  himself :  we  are  all
members  of  one  another.  Put  in  its  simplest  terms,
this  means  that  the  worker  requires  the  use  of  land,
tools,  and  plant,  the  co-operation  of  other  labourers,  and
the  skilled  organisation  of  industry  to  give  any  value
to  his  individual  efforts.

Poverty  arises  from  the  unfair  terms  upon  which  he
gets  these  things.  If  he  enjoyed  equal  access  to  all
these  requisites  he  could  get  his  fair  share  of  wealth,
and  his  poverty,  when  it  occurred,  might  be  imputed
reasonably  to  some  personal  defect  or  misfortune  on
his  part.

Practically  he  has  equal  access  to  no  one  of  them.
Take,  first,  land,  "  the  mother  of  wealth."  Not  merely
is  he  born  in  a  country  the  whole  of  which  is  marked
out  as  "  private  property,"  but  he  cannot  even  buy  or
hire  land  in  order  to  put  his  labour  into  it,  except  at
a  prohibitive  price,  and  upon  terms  which  give  him  no
security  that  he  will  get  the  good  of  his  labour.  The
English  land  system  is  the  worst  in  the  civilised  world  :
excluding  the  ordinary  labourer  from  advantageous
work  upon  the  land  it  is  a  perpetual  breeder  of  poverty.
If  a  poor  man  wants  land,  either  to  work  it  or  for  a
dwelling,  he  must  always  bargain  for  its  use  with  an
owner  who  is  economically  stronger  and  can  rackrent
him.  Decade  after  decade  the  burden  of  housing  falls
heavier  upon  the  working-class  population  of  our
towns,  and  is  a  main  factor  in  city  poverty.  In  our
villages  the  housing  question  is  not  less  serious,  for
there  the  land-monopoly  gives  to  one  man,  or  a  few,
the  power  to  determine  whether  men  and  women  shall


POVERTY  167

live  at  all  in  the  place  where  they  are  born  and  bred,  or
shall  be  driven  out  to  sojourn  among  strangers.

The  use  of  some  capital  is  another  essential  to
economic  independence.  No  man  can  work  for  himself
either  on  the  land,  in  a  handicraft,  or  in  any  other  busi-
ness, unless  he  can  get  on  easy  terms  some  small  capital
or  credit  when  he  needs  it.  Everywhere  for  lack  of
cheap  credit  the  poor  are  entangled  in  debt  to  money-
lenders, shopkeepers,  or  other  richer  persons,  who  can
take  advantage  of  their  extremity  of  need  to  drive  hard
bargains.  Again,  the  ordinary  labourer,  untrained  in
busmess  life,  cannot  set  up  for  himself  in  any  business,
or  co-operate  with  his  fellows  to  produce  goods  which
he  can  sell  at  a  profit  in  the  general  market.  He  cannot
buy  the  services  of  an  organiser  or  business  man  so  as
to  utilise  his  labour-power  for  his  own  gain,  but  is
practically  obliged  to  sell  his  labour-power  piecemeal  at
a  "  sacrifice  "  to  a  business  man  to  be  used  for  profit  to
the  latter.

The  labourer,  then,  cannot  get  high  personal
eflfiiciency,  and  must  sell  his  low  efficiency  cheap.
Poverty,  of  course,  is  primarily  due  to  the  terms  of
sale  of  the  labour-power,  which  is  the  only  means  of
living  for  the  great  mass  of  the  people  in  countries
where  there  is  no  "  free  "  land.  The  worker  who  sells
his  labour-power  for  a  living  ordinarily  bargains  for
its  sale  at  a  disadvantage  :  he  must  sell  it  or  he  and  his
family  starve;  the  employer  who  buys  it  will  not  starve,
but  only  lose  some  "  profit  "  if  he  fails  to  buy  it.  This
difference  between  starvation  and  loss  of  profit  means
a  perpetual  handicap  to  the  worker  in  bargaining  for
wages.  He  is  a  weak  seller  of  a  perishable  commodity,
which  he  must  sell  continuously  in  a  fluctuating  market.

As  he  sells  his  labour-power  at  a  disadvantage  so  he
buys  the  goods  he  needs  at  a  disadvantage.  Free  Trade,
with  its  cheap  loaf  and  its  more  or  less  cheap  meat,
mitigates  and  hides  this  truth.  But  it  is  none  the  less
true  that  the  general  fall  of  prices  which has  taken


1 68 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

place  since  1870  has  benefited  the  poorer  grades  of  the
working  classes  less  than  any  other  grade  of  the  com-
munity, the  high  prices  of  shelter,  fuel,  dairy,  and
vegetable  produce  in  the  towns  taking  a  larger  share  of
their  small  incomes  than  in  the  case  of  the  well-to-do
classes.  The  very  poor  notoriously  pay  the  highest
prices  for  the  worst  qualities  of  goods,  compelled  to
buy  in  small  quantities,  and  often  "  tied  "  to  certain
credit  shops.

The  great  mass  of  the  low-skilled  workers  and  their
families  still  lie  on  or  below  the  margin  of  poverty,
subject  to  conditions  of  the  labour  market  which
preclude  them  from  any  reasonable  hope  of  comfort,
security,  or  independence.  The  "  Iron  Law  of  Wages,"
slightly  abated  in  its  rigour,  still  holds  them  down.

This  natural  weakness  of  a  "  proletariat  "  has  been
alleviated  by  organisation  among  the  more  skilled
workers,  those  whose  conditions  of  employment  have
thrown  them  together  and  laid  the  basis  of  effective
association  in  working-class  movements.

This  organisation  has  taken  two  chief  forms  directed
to  remedy  the  two  weaknesses  on  which  I  have  just
dwelt.

In  order  to  strengthen  the  selling-power  of  labour,
workers  have  formed  Trade  Unions  which,  though  they
serve  other  useful  purposes,  are  primarily  engaged  in
substituting  collective  for  individual  bargains  in  the
sale  of  labour-power.  The  general  effect  of  Trade
Unionism  has  been  to  diminish  the  superiority  of
employers  in  buying  labour  by  increasing  the  loss  or
inconvenience  they  suffer  if  they  over-reach  themselves,
and  to  enable  a  group  of  workers  to  refuse  to  sell  at  a
low  price  by  amassing  resources  sufficient  to  keep  them
for  a  time  without  employment.  In  improving  the
conditions  of  employment  this  Trade  Union  organisa-
tion is  materially  assisted  by  the  network  of  Truck,
Factory,  Employers'  Liability  and  other  laws  designed
to  remove  particular  disadvantages  in  labour  contracts.


POVERTY  169

As  Trade  Unionism  seeks  to  improve  the  selling-
power  of  workers,  so  the  Co-operative  movement  in  its
main  branch  has  been  directed  to  improve  the  buying
power  of  their  wages  by  releasing  them  from  credit
shops  and  the  enormous  and  ever-growing  cost  of  a
distributive  system  which  continually  absorbs  a  larger
proportion  of  retail  prices  in  the  profits  of  traders  and
other  middlemen.

Now  large  sections  of  the  workers  have  so  materially
improved  their  condition  by  these  and  other  forms  of
workinor-class  organisation  as  to  induce  enthusiasts  to
hold  out  hopes  that  the  problem  of  poverty  can  be
solved  by  free,  voluntary  co-operation.

I  confess  that  to  myself  this  notion  appears  chimer-
ical. It  is,  indeed,  conceivable  that  groups  of  skilled
workers  might  by  private  co-operation  secure  land,
credit,  education,  and  business  organisation  for  them-
selves, and  so  form  independent,  self-sufficing,
economic  societies  within  the  nation.  This  idea  from
time  to  time  has  floated  before  the  minds,  captivating
the  imagination  of  reformers;  occasional  experiments  of
such  free  working-class  communities  have  been  made,
never  with  durable  success.  It  has  sometimes  been
suggested  that  the  great  genuine  success  of  the  retail
and  wholesale  Co-operative  movement  in  this  country,
gradually  extending  through  the  various  productive  and
transport  processes,  might  eventually  build  up  a  full
economic  independence  for  large  masses  of  working-
class  producers  and  consumers.  Upon  this  speculation
I  cannot  profitably  dwell,  but  will  only  remind  you  how
far  remote  such  possibility  stands  from  the  actual
attainments  of  the  present.  Great  and  worthy  as  the
progress  of  Co-operation  has  been  in  this  country,
immensely  beneficial,to  large  numbers  of  town  workers,
its  advance  has  been  almost  wholly  confined  to  the  dis-
tributive processes.  I  am  well  aware  of  the  successful
businesses  in  productive  Co-operation,  too  often
dependent  upon  outside  capital,  established  in  various


lyo THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

trades  to  the  great  advantage  sometimes  of  workers,
sometimes  of  consumers,  sometimes  of  both.  But
proud  as  co-operators  have  a  right  to  be  of  their
achievement,  they  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  great
capitalist  enterprises  of  our  modern  life  in  mining,
and  staple  manufactures,  in  transport,  banking,  and
finance,  are  scarcely  touched  as  yet  by  Co-operation,  and
it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  working-class  savings  can
grow  large  enough  to  enable  them  to  be  the  real  owners
and  controllers  of  these  fundamental  forms  of  modern
business.

The  large  and  growing  profits  of  the  Co-operative
movement,  amounting  to  some  nine  million  pounds  last
year,  form  about  one  two-hundredth  part  of  the
general  income  of  our  nation.

Moreover,  we  must  not  forget  that  Co-operation  and
Trade  Unionism  have  been  successful  movements
precisely  in  proportion  as  the  more  extreme  forms  of
poverty  have  already  been  got  under.  The  poorer
floating  or  sinking  populations  of  our  great  modern
cities,  the  weak  agricultural  labourers  of  our  villages,
cannot  and  do  not  help  themselves  by  Trade  Unionism
or  Co-operation.  Their  weakness,  ignorance,  inefiBciency,
render  vigorous,  continuous  organisation  for  such
purposes  impracticable.

The  idea  that  the  poor  can  help  themselves,  either  as

individuals  or  collectively,  without  mastering  and  using

1 the  public  organisation  called  Government,  can  only  be

\  maintained  by  those  who  refuse  to  analyse  the  conditions

\  of  poverty. For  the  evil  conditions  which  preclude

the poor from gaining personal efficiency, which

oppress  them  when  they  seek  to  sell  their  labour-power,

and  when  they  seek  access  to  land  or  capital  or  skill  or

knowledge,  are  fastened  upon  them  by  laws  relating  to

the  ownership  and  use  of  the  material  and  intellectual

resources  of  the  nation.

Those  who  share  or  support  the  monopolies,  vested
interests,  or  superiorities  of  bargains,  which I  have


POVERTY  171

named,  usually  deride  the  notion  that  changes  of  law
can  do  much  for  the  poor.  Do  not  be  deceived  by  this
depreciation  of  politics  and  laws.  If  it  is  true,  as  I
maintain,  that  most  of  these  inequalities  of  opportunity
which  oppress  the  poor  are  produced  or  sustained  by
unjust  and  unprofitable  laws,  it  is  folly  to  suggest  that
any  effective  remedy  of  poverty  can  come  without
alteration  of  these  laws.  It  is  true,  that  State  action
in  changes  of  law  will  not  in  itself  cure  poverty,  but  it
can  enable  poverty  to  cure  itself  by  securing  liberty  for
all  to  use  their  powers  to  the  best  advantage  for  their
own  gain  and  for  the  common  good.

There  is  something  pathetic  in  reading  the  history  of
the  great  Chartist  movement  to  recall  the  enthusiastic
confidence  of  the  workers  of  that  day  in  the  immediate
efficacy  of  mere  political  machinery.  Give  us,  they  said,
shorter  Parliaments,  ballot,  etc.,  and  the  will  of  the
people  will  find  free  expression  in  legislation  for  the
common  good.  Most  of  the  six  points  of  the  Charter,
not  all,  have  been  won,  but  now  we  need  a  new
People's  Charter  with  six  new  points  :  —

(a)  The  value  and  the  use  of  land  for  the  People.
Public  ownership  or  full  control  of  the  city  by  the
citizens,  the  village  by  the  villagers,  and  powers  for
local  government  to  acquire  agricultural  land  at
reasonable  prices  and  to  let  it  to  small  holders  with  fair
conditions  of  tenancy.

(b)  Public  ownership  of  the  effective  highways  of
the  country,  railways,  tramways,  canals,  and  suppression
of  the  abuses  of  "  shipping  conferences  "  controlling
transport  on  our  waterways.

(c)  Public  organisation  of  credit  and  insurance,
essentials  of  modern  business. The  largest  of  our

o

national  wastes  is  the  waste  of  public  credit,  and  the
practical  abandonment  of  the  monetary  business,  which
rightly  forms  a  State  function,  to  private  profitable
enterprise.

(d)  Full  freedom  of  education :  equal  access  for  all

J


172 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

to  the  social  fund  of  culture  and  of  knowledge.  The
right  of  the  community  to  secure  for  every  citizen  the
fullest  and  best  use  of  his  individual  gifts  and  powers
should  be  enforced  even  against  the  alleged  rights  of
parents  to  keep  their  children  in  ignorance  or  to  drive
them  prematurely  into  wage-earning.

(e)  Equal  access  to  public  law.  The  entire  cost  of
\^/  justice  to  be  defrayed  out  of  the  public  purse,  and  the
machinery  of  the  law  courts  free  to  all  citizens.  At
present,  whenever  an  issue  arises  between  a  rich  and  a
poor  man,  the  former  enjoys  a  great  advantage  in
utilising  the  machinery  of  the  law,  the  result  being
that  "  justice  "  is  bought  by  the  longer  purse.

(/)  The  assertion  of  the  popular  power  to  tax  or
control  any  new  form  of  monopoly  or  inequality  which
may  spring  up  in  the  changing  conditions  of  modern
communities.  This  point  covers  those  changes  in  the
machinery  of  government  required  to  depose  the  exist-
ing "  class  government  "  and  to  substitute  an  effec-
tive democracy.  It  may  be  called  "  socialisation  of
government  "  to  correspond  with  the  "  socialisation  of
law  "  which  was  just  named.

No  improvements  of  individual  efficiency  by  educa-
tion, temperance,  technical  instruction  (important  as
these  things  are),  no  private  co-operation  under  the
existing  political-economic  system,  can  extirpate  or
greatly  reduce  poverty — except  so  far  as  it  helps  in
working  for  political  and  legal  reforms  which  shall
secure  the  essential  conditions  for  evoking  individual
efficiency  and  for  supporting  it  by  social  opportunity.

This equal opportunity of self-development and

i  social  aid,  so  as  to  live  a  good  and  happy  life,  is  practi-

{^able  Socialism. It differs  from  what  may  be  called

rull  or  theoretic  Socialism  in  the  following  respects  :  —

It  aims  primarily  not  to  abolish  the  competitive
system,  to  socialise  all  instruments  of  production,  dis-
tribution, and  exchange,  and  to  convert  all  workers  into
public  employees — but  rather  to  supply  all  workers  at


POVERTY  173

cost  price  with  all  the  economic  conditions  requisite  to
the  education  and  employment  of  their  personal  powers
for  their  personal  advantage  and  enjoyment.

There  is,  of  course,  no  economic  or  moral  finality  in
such  proposals;  even  if  secured  they  would  not  bring  a
heaven  upon  earth.  But  they  seem  to  me  to  represent  the
measure  of  reform  to  which  those  primarily  concerned  to
stamp  out  poverty  in  England  in  this  generation  should
address  themselves.

It  is  right  to  add  that,  not  even  so  interpreted  can

this  charter  stand  alone. Opportunities  proverbially

/  belong  to  the  young. There  is  a  mass  of  poverty  which

I  is  past  the  age  of  opportunity,  but  which  no  wise  or

I  humane  nation  can  ignore.

For  this  reason  the  curative  policy  here  expounded
needs  to  be  supplemented  by  palliative  measures  which
cannot  be  defended  as  organic  reforms,  but  which
belong  to  the  realm  of  public  charity.  Those  who
realise,  not  merely  as  a  sentimental  phrase  but  as  a
scientific  truth,  the  responsibility  of  society  for  poverty,
will  not  grudge  the  most  generous  outlay  of  public
money  for  dealing  gently  and  humanely  with  the
debilitated  and  often  demoralised  lives  which  form  the
social  wreckage  of  our  nation.  There  are  many  who
cannot  stand  even  in  the  stream  of  equal  competition,
and  who  are  too  feeble  to  grasp  opportunities.  The
aged  and  the  infirm  among  the  poor  should  be  well
cared  for;  the  shirker,  the  loafer,  the  tramp,  and  the
criminal,  must  be  regarded  from  the  newer,  truer  stand-
point of  social  responsibility.  The  degradation  of  our
Poor  Law,  the  brutality  of  our  casual  ward,  the  damn-
able mechanism  with  which  our  prison  system  seeks  to
deal  with  the  most  delicate  problems  of  human  character
must  all  give  way  to  more  humane  and  more  intelligent
modes  of  handling  our  battered  types  of  humanity.
With  one  tithe  of  the  energy  and  the  money,  I  will  not
say  the  science,  which  goes  into  our  armies  and  navies
and engines of destruction, this work of  human


174 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

preservation  might  be  made  to  yield  noble  benefits.
We  are  rich  enough  to  take  care  of  our  weaklings,  our
unfortunates,  our  physical  and  moral  invalids,  and  to
give  them  some  taste  of  the  real  fruits  of  civilisation
from  which  as  wanderers  in  the  wilderness  of  city
poverty  they  have  been  precluded.  We  need  not  be
afraid  of  pauperising  them  with  public  charity :  they
have  a  rio^ht  to  claim  this  alleviative  treatment  at  our
hands;  if  they  do  not  so  understand  this  to  be  the  case
we  do,  and  have  no  call  to  make  a  favour  of  what,
rightly  interpreted,  is  a  meagre  tardy  restitution  of
opportunities  withheld  and  social  benefits  denied  at
times  when  they  might  have  sufiB.ced  to  prevent  the
human  decay  we  are  now  seeking  to  arrest.

But  urgent  as  is  the  need  for  thoughtful  palliatives,
we  require  to  set  our  minds  with  even  more  persis-
tency of  purpose  to  the  application  of  the  organic
remedy  for  poverty — equalisation  of  opportunities.

Once  realised,  this  condition  brings  not  only  a  better
distribution  of  existing  wealth,  but  a  prodigious
increase  of  national  productivity.  Closed  opportunities
mean  torpid  minds,  slack  effort,  routine  activity :  open
opportunities  stimulate  energy,  rouse  initiative,  stir
progress.  We  boast  of  the  pace  of  modern  industrial
progress,  but  this  pace  is  slow  compared  with  what  it
would  become  if  every  man  had  a  full  stimulus  applied
to  evoke  his  best  thought  and  liberate  the  spark  of
talent  which  lies  hid  in  every  soul.  Here  is  the  great
waste  that  would  be  saved  by  securing  for  every  man  a
fair  chance  in  life.  Equality  of  opportunity  would  not
merely  stir  individual  energy,  it  would  fertilise  with
fresh  accessions  of  science  and  of  skill  large  barren  or
backward  tracts  of  industry.

One  final  word  needs  to  be  said.  This  equality  will
not  be  won  without  fighting  for  it.  We  would  that
this  were  not  so  :  gladly  would  we  compass  the  ends  of
justice  by  methods  of  persuasion  or  peaceful  penetra-
tion. But  though  reason  and  moral  appeals  are  in  the


POVERTY  175

long  run  the  true  force  of  progress,  they  cannot  operate
except  through  a  preliminary  stage  of  political  and
economic  struggle.  We  can  only  cure  poverty  by  an
attack  upon  the  sources  of  riches.  Every  rich  man —
though  he  seldom  knows  it — makes  many  poor :
reaping  where  he  has  not  sown  he  devours  the  needed
subsistence  of  many  sowers.  For  riches  can  only  come  in
one  of  two  ways  :  either  by  "  sweating,"  "  grinding  the
faces  of  the  poor  "  in  buying  their  labour  cheap  or
selling  goods  to  them  dear;  or  by  converting  to  his
private  use  and  profit  some  public  property  which  is
needed  for  the  support  and  enrichment  of  the  common
life  of  society.  To  discover,  to  assert,  and  to  achieve
the  claims  of  economic  justice,  this  is  the  only  radical
cure  for  poverty.


Chapter  II
THE  HIGHER  TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM

If  we  consider  the  essence  of  human  progress  to
consist,  not  in  the  increasing  control  of  man  over  his
material  environment,  but  in  the  increasing  realisation
of  reason  and  justice  in  the  conduct  of  human  affairs,
it  is  not  evident  to  all  men  that  progress  is  attainable,
or  that,  if  it  be  attainable,  the  moral  aspirations  of  man-
kind play  any  real  part  in  determining  its  pace  or  course.
The  sceptical  view  is  commonly  based  upon  an  economic
interpretation  of  history  according  to  which  the  acquisi-
tion and  enjoyment  of  class  or  personal  power  based  on
property  is  the  one  continually  dominant  factor,  all  social
institutions  being  moulded  and  directed  by  economic
considerations,  all  the  ideas  and  sentiments  of  religions,
politics,  art,  literature,  and  morals  being  ammunition  in
the  hands  of  warring  economic  interests.  The  inde-
pendence of  the  higher  ideal  aspirations  is  but  illusory  :
examine  closely  the  critical  events  in  the  history  of  any
nation,  their  religious  reformations,  their  political  revo-
lutions, nay,  even  the  rise  and  fate  of  their  architecture
or  drama,  these  are  but  aspects  of  a  conflict  expressing  a
disturbance  in  the  balance  of  economic  power.

"  If  we  examine  the  hidden  mysteries  of  the  social
mechanism,"  writes  an  exponent  of  this  doctrine,  "  we
shall,  I  think,  be  free  to  admit  that  the  sentimental
element  surounding  all  great  social  revolutions  is  after
all  but  an  illusion."*

This  mirage  of  beckoning  ideals,  reason,  liberty,  and
justice,  is  indeed  needed  often  to  impel  the  activities  of

•  Loria,  "Economic  Foundations  of  Society,"  (Sonnenscliein,)  p.  285.

176


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 177

men,  but  the  real  ends  and  the  real  motor-power  lie  in
the  pressure  of  economic  processes.

This  explanation  of  progress  as  the  mere  drive  of  a
vis  a  tergo;  physical  necessity,  is  philosophically — even
biologically — untenable.

But  it  would  be  idle  to  deny  that  it  contains  a  sufficient
element  of  truth,  when  applied  to  modern  social  politics,
to  cause  many  to  doubt  the  possibility  of  achieving
popular  progress  by  any  form  of  reasonable  concerted
action.

So  far,  at  any  rate,  as  the  politico-economic  structure
of  Society  is  concerned,  history  appears  to  show  that  the
preponderant  possession  of  property,  and  the  control
over  the  lives  of  men  given  by  property,  passes  from  one
class  or  order  to  another,  from  king  to  barons,  landowner
to  capitalist,  from  merchant  to  manufacturer,  from
entrepreneur  to  financier,  in  accordance  with  changes  in
the  relative  importance  of  certain  economic  functions.
In  English  history,  it  is  the  scarcity  of  labour  following
the  Black  Death,  the  rise  in  value  of  work  and  the
debasing  of  currency  under  the  Tudors,  the  power  of  the
new  merchant  class  in  the  Stuart  revolutions,  the  rising
power  of  the  manufacturers  of  the  eighteenth  century,
the  substitution  of  corporate  for  individual  capitalism,
and  the  growing  dominion  of  finance  over  industry  in
our  own  time — of  such  nature  seem  to  be  the  critical
events  determining  ever  and  anon  a  fresh  shift  in  the
balance  of  power  among  the  powerful  classes,  a  fresh
composition  of  the  political  and  industrial  control.
Nowhere  are  considerations  of  abstract  justice  or  reason,
or  greatest  happiness  of  greatest  number,  real  determin-
ants in  these  changes;  one  interest,  erown  more  powerful,
asserts  itself  against  another  grown  more  weak  :  king,
pope,  barons,  squirarchy,  capitalists,  entrepreneurs,
financiers,  each  uses  all  the  power  afforded  by  new  cir-
cumstances to  obtain  the  largest  control  of  property,  and
moulds  the  forms  of  political  and  economic  government
to  further  the  maintenance  and  increase  of  its  power.


1 78 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

If  any  progress  in  the  nature  of  extended  liberty  and
wider  diffusion  of  material  property  comes  this  way,  it
is  incidental  and  unintended,  a  dole  or  a  concession
from  the  possessing  or  ruling  classes,  and  in  no  sense  a
product  of  the  reasonable,  intelligent  co-operation  of  the
people.  The  people  cannot  help  themselves;  the  have-
nots  are  powerless  against  the  haves.  If  the  people
possess  the  name  of  political  power  through  the  forms
of  a  liberal  constitution  or  a  democracy,  it  is  because  the
possessing  classes  have  discovered  ways  of  checking,
controlling,  and  dividing  public  opinion,  which  render
the  forms  of  public  government  innocuous.  How  can
it  be  otherwise.''  The  class,  or  classes,  in  control  of  the
material  resources,  have  leisure  to  organise  methods  for
conserving  their  property  and  power,  they  can  buy  men
of  picked  brains  or  strong  bodies  to  defend  their  interests
with  laws  or  guns,  and  to  confuse  or  coerce  their  enemies.

We  say  that,  when  the  people  get  education  and
become  intelligent,  they  will  be  able  to  organise  and
overpower  their  masters.  "  Mighty  men  may  thrash
numbers  for  a  time;  in  the  end  the  numbers  will  be
thrashed  into  the  art  of  beating  their  teachers."*  But
is  this  true  ?  The  sceptic  replies  :  The  means  of  popu-
lar education,  the  machinery  of  popular  organisation
are  themselves  created,  financed,  controlled  by  the
possessing  classes;  the  church,  the  press,  the  school,  the
party  machinery  do  not,  and  cannot  belong  to  the
people,  for  each  of  these  educative  organs  involves  the
maintenance  of  a  profession  and  a  plant  which  are  not
provided  out  of  the  pence  of  the  people,  but  out  of  the
guineas  of  the  well-to-do  and  the  cheques  of  the
millionaires,  and  those  who  pay  the  piper  call  the  tune.
How,  then,  is  it  possible  that  the  people  shall  be
allowed  to  get  such  education  as  shall  furnish  the  intel-
lectual and  moral  sinews  of  an  effective  revolt  against
an  oligarchy  of  vested  interests.''

*  Meredith,  "  Beauchamp'g  Career,"


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 179

Is  it  not  always  open  to  the  makers  of  public  opinion
to  curb,  direct,  or  dissipate  the  forces  of  popular  dis-
content before  they  enter  politics,  or  else  to  employ
them  in  a  futile  rotatory  action  inside  the  machine,  as
they  do  in  the  democracy  of  the  United  States  and  of
Great  Britain?  Or  where  the  popular  temper  and
institutions  of  a  country  are  refractory  before  such  acts  of
management,  it  is  always  possible  to  revert  to  force,  to
suspend  the  forms  of  popular  liberty  and  to  reorganise
the  machinery  of  government  by  a  coup  d^etat.  This
is  the  interpretation  of  the  history  of  South  Africa
during  the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Is  it
inapplicable  here  ?  In  the  last  resort  the  armed  forces  of
the  nation  are  at  the  disposal  of  the  possessing  classes,
whose  political  and  economic  power  represents  that  public
order  and  safety  of  the  commonwealth  which  it  is  the
function  of  an  army  to  safeguard.

Or  turn  from  the  political  to  the  industrial  arena.
"  Labour,"  we  are  told,  "  is  the  basis  of  all  wealth.
Let  the  workers  organise  so  as  to  present  a  united  front
to  the  employing  class,  they  can  enforce  their  demands
for  their  full  share  in  the  product  of  industry."  Can
they  do  this,'^  Is  this  menace  of  a  general  strike  a
feasible  and  a  logically  efficacious  policy.'*  In  the  first
place,  it  may  be  urged,  if  the  capitalist  classes  recognise
the  danger,  they  can  prevent  the  general  organisation
of  the  workers  for  simultaneous  action.  By  the
superior  organisation  which  their  smaller  numbers,
greater  ability,  and  ampler  resources  furnish  they  can
out-general  the  workers,  harrassing  them  in  detail,  cor-
rupting their  leaders,  sowing  dissension  between  the
several  trades  and  localities,  buying  selected  groups  by
profit-sharing  and  other  preferential  schemes  of
employment,  procuring  fresh  legislation  and  adjudi-
cation favourable  to  their  defence  through  lawmakers
and  administrators  bound  by  social  and  economic  bonds
of  sympathy  and  interest  to  support  their  domination.

But  if  such  a  general  organisation  of  labour  for


i8o THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

simultaneous  action  were  feasible  upon  a  national,  or
even  an  international  scale,  a  contingency  scarce  think-
able, its  economic  command  of  the  situation  is  by  no
means  obvious.  Were  Government  merely  to  "  keep
a  ring,"  preserve  public  order  and  leave  capital  and
labour  to  fight  to  a  finish,  the  great  bulk  of  the  exist-
ing stocks  of  food  and  other  necessaries  of  life  would
be  the  legal  property  not  of  the  workers  but  of  the
employers  by  virtue  of  present  ownership  and  com-
mand of  money :  this  stock  could  be  increased  by  the
labour  of  the  capitalists  and  their  entourage  of  servants
and  unorganised  dependents :  to  this  must  be  added
such  "  free  "  labour  as  is  in  all  times  available.  The
straits  employers  would  be  placed  in  would  doubtless
be  serious,  but  nothing  as  compared  with  those  of
the  workers,  if  these  latter  kept  within  the  law :  for
their  actual  command  of  food  would  be  infinitesimally
small,  and  they  could  have  no  recourse  to  the  machinery
of  industry  to  supplement  it,  for  this  machinery
belongs  to  the  employing  class.  The  whole  body  of
organised  workers  would  be  starved  into  submission
— such  at  any  rate  is  the  strict  logic  of  the  situation.
In  no  large  actual  strike  have  the  workers  won  on  the
strength  of  their  own  saved  resources;  they  have  always
drawn  largely  from  the  funds  of  other  Trade  Unions
and  from  the  general  sympathetic  public,  from  both
of  which  resources  they  would  be  excluded  upon  the
hypothesis  we  are  considering.

If  it  is  replied  that  the  workers  would  not  keep
inside  the  limits  of  the  law,  but  would  seize  the  work-
shops and  instruments  of  production  in  order  to  utilise
their  labour-power,  the  struggle  at  once  ceases  to  be
economic  and  becomes  political,  or  rather,  military,  a
conflict  between  the  armed  trained  forces  of  the  State
defending  the  interests  of  capital  and  an  unarmed,
untrained  rabble.  About  the  issue  of  such  a  conflict
there  can  be  no  doubt.

On  the  assumption, then, from  which  we  started,


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM i8i

that  economic  interests  are  the  really  dominant,  and,
ultimately,  determinant  factors,  it  seems  as  if  the  sceptics
had  an  impregnable  position,  and  that  substantial  pro-
gress in  the  sense  of  an  increasing  power  of  reason
and  justice  over  the  direction  of  human  affairs  were
impracticable.  The  progress  seems  to  involve  a  vicious
circle;  popular  progress  is  only  possible  by  means  of
popular  organisation,  organisation  requires  intelligent
direction,  intelligent  direction  depends  upon  education,
and  the  machinery  of  education  is  in  the  control  of
interests  opposed  to  popular  progress.

Such  is,  in  large  outline,  the  sceptical  position.  But
is  it  sound  .^  Is  progress  really  illusory,  the  progres-
sive forces  dissipated  by  this  perpetual  movement  in  a
closed  circle.''  The  very  simplicity  of  the  reasoning
is  entitled  to  arouse  suspicion.  Nowhere  else  does
nature  present  any  instance  of  purely  rotatory  move-
ment. Everywhere  we  are  confronted  in  our  analysis
with  the  same  apparent  antagonism  between  the  vis
inertia  of  the  existing  order,  the  vested  interests,  and
that  power  which  we  conceive  pulsating  through
nature,  and  seeking  to  lift  some  form  of  matter  to  a
more  complex  and  highly  adapted  shape  through
variation.  All  evolution  in  inanimate  and  animate
nature,  is  expressed  in  terms  of  this  conflict,  and
nowhere  does  the  conflict  resolve  itself  into  the  futility  ;
of  mere  rotation.  Are  we  to  suppose,  that  when  this  j
conflict  is  raised  to  the  plane  of  conscious  human  life  ''
and  social  forces,  the  result  is  difl^erent  ?

"  But,"  it  may  be  said,  "  these  fundamental  con-
siderations are  beside  the  point,  no  one  seriously
disputes  the  reality  of  progress  in  general.  The
question  is  whether  we  are  not  confronted  with  an
impasse  in  that  sort  of  progress  which  is  involved  in
the  realisation  of  social  justice."  We  may  have  every
sort  of  progress  that  is  consistent  with  the  maintenance
of  a  selfish  class  government  in  politics  and  industry,  and
yet  the  overthrow  of  that  oligarchy  may  be  unattainable.


1 82 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

But  if  we  test  this  hypothesis  by  an  appeal  to  actual
history,  it  certainly  appears  to  break  down.  Admitting
the  continuance  of  class  ascendency  in  politics  and
industry  in  modern  civilised  states,  it  is  easy  to  show
an  expansion  in  the  political  liberties  of  the  peoples
and  a  corresponding  shrinkage  of  more  direct  and
forcible  control  by  the  political  and  economic  rulers :
the  life  of  the  average  citizen  is  safer  and  larger,  his
command  over  commodities  and  services  is  increasing,
his  intellectual  and  moral  life  freer  and  better  nourished.
It  may,  indeed,  be  replied  :  "  These  liberties  are  con-
cessions of  the  ascendant  classes,  the  old  slave  and  serf
systems  no  longer  pay,  the  modern  domination  is
subtler  and  more  direct,  it  requires  a  higher  standard
of  material  comfort,  a  larger  circuit  of  liberty  and  a
higher  intelligence  on  the  part  of  the  helots :  but
this  improvement  of  the  general  life  of  the  people
does  not  really  diminish  the  real  subjection  in  which
they  are  kept  or  realise  social  ideals  opposed  to  the
interests  of  the  master-class."  It  is  not  easy  to  dis-
prove such  a  contention.  Yet  the  argument  really
contains  in  itself  an  admission  of  positive  progress,
for  the  elevation  of  the  nature  and  instruments  of
domination  is  itself  progress :  to  enforce  control  by
laws  is  an  advance  upon  the  use  of  naked  swords,  to
govern  by  working  political  machines  an  advance  upon
open  menace.  This  is  indeed  the  natural  course  of
progress;  the  vicious  circle  as  it  first  appeared  is  no
closed  circle,  but  an  ascending  spiral.  ,The  spiral  is
rightly  accepted  as  the  mechanical  symbol  of  social
progress,  implying  the  natural  course  of  a  more
powerful  force  deflected  from  a  straight  upward  move-
ment by  resistance  meeting  it  transversely.  The  spiral
form  explains  also  the  illusion  of  the  sceptic  who,
falsely  identifying  the  outlook  at  the  several  eleva-
tions, fails  to  recognise  the  gradual  ascent.

The  most  conclusive  evidence  of  the  growing  power
of  popular  ideas  and  sentiments  is  the  fact  that  the


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 183

vested  interests  base  their  defence  more  and  more  upon
appeals  to  the  supreme  court  of  reason  and  of  morals.

But  do  not,  therefore,  let  us  be  misled  into  sup-
posing that  the  present  immediate  object  of  strife,  the
question  of  victory,  is  higher  education  or  some
elevation  of  the  moral  standard  of  the  people.  Before
a  really  effective  demand  for  the  higher  forms  of
wealth,  the  nobler  means  of  life,  can  be  evoked,  suffi-
ciency and  security  of  the  material  basis  of  personal
efficiency  must  be  won.  Economic  reforms^must  take
precedence  in  time  :  problems  of  housing  and  of  food,
of  regular  remunerative  employment,  of  access  to  the
land,  of  greater  leisure,  of  ease  and  comfort  in  old
age,  everywhere  stand  as  barriers  to  a  higher  life  for
the  people.  Now  the  real  solution  of  every  one  of
these  practical  problems  involves  a  successful  attack
upon  vested  interests :  economic  liberty  can  only  be
won  by  the  rasing  of  the  fortresses  of  monopoly.  The
new  shift  is  not  an  alteration  in  the  objective  of  the
campaign,  but  in  the  methods  of  conducting  it.  It  is
not  merely  the  abandonment  of  the  revolutionary
appeals  to  physical  force;  the  more  thoughtful  leaders
of  popular  reform  perceive  that  even  the  weapons  of
the  franchise^  and  legislative  power  xannot  yet  be  used
with  much  effect.  What  the  present  pressing  interests
of  progress  demand  is  the  organisation  of  the  intelli-^
gence  and  moral  energy  of  the  people  for  the  definite  /
work  of  economic  reform  by  the  overthrow  of  vested/
interests  and  the  establishment  of  economic  equality  of.,
opportunity,  within  the  nation.

This  enables  us  to  understand  the  new  tactics  of
defence  adopted  by  the  possessing  classes.  Their
supreme  object  is  to  prevent  the  popular  organisation
on  a  basis  of  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  problem  of
social  progress. There  are  two  chief  ways  of  doing  this.

The  first  is  to  deny  the  existence  of  social-economic
problems  and  to  urge  the  claims  of  individual  moralisa-
tion  as  the  only  valid  and  effectual  path  of  progress.


1 84 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

If  enough  .individuals  separately  win  salvation  society
is  saved.  ijiVhe  second  is  to  foster  the  combative  com-
petitive instincts  of  the  lower  nature  of  man  by  urging
the  necessity  and  utility  of  industrial  competition
within  the  State  and  military  competition  with  other
.States'.  ,  Thus  the  moral  cohesive  forces  which  would
(^vitalise  an  organised  democracy  can  be  diverted  to
» lower  activities  and  rendered  innocuous.

In  order  thus  to  divide  and  degrade  the  moral  and
intellectual  forces  of  democracy,  an  informal  sociology
is  required.  Those  who  watch  carefully  the  influences
exercised  by  the  possessing  classes  over  our  Univer-
sities, churches,  political  parties,  press,  and  even  our
literature,  art  and  drama,  can  see  how  this  body  of
social  theory  is  consolidated  for  its  defensive  work.
It  is  not  indeed  a  consciously  constructed  or  consistent
system  of  thought  that  is  evolved,  but  rather  an
improvisation  of  social  theory  out  of  the  floating  ideas
and  sentiments  of  the  age.

To  this  sociology  of  the  vested  interests  Biology,

Psychology,  Economics,  Ethics,  Philosophy,  Religion,

/are  all  made  to  contribute  special  aids. But  the  staple

consists  in  an  illicit  extension  of  certain  teachings  of

. biology and a falsification of certain premises of

i  economics. Space will not permit me to describe

\  in  detail  the  composition  of  this  sociology,  but  only  to

vindicate  a  few  of  the  concepts  and  formulse  drawn  from

ithe  several  sources.

From  biology  as  the  science  which  first  formulated
the  modern  conception  of  the  evolution  of  man,  the
central  doctrine  of  the  individual  struggle  for  life  as  the
test  of  fitness  and  the  means  of  progress  transplanted
straight  into  sociology,  has  been  used  to  defend  the
necessity  and  social  utility  of  individual  competition  in
industry  and  racial  competition  in  war  as  instruments  of
national  and  international  progress.  The  deep-rooted
divergence  of  species,  the  strong  dominion  of  heredity,
the  practical  importance  of  chance  individual  variations


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 185

as  means  of  progress,  are  made  to  nourish  theories  of
permanent  racial  and  class  ascendency  based  on
superiority,  and  of  individual  genius  and  effort  as  the
sole  instruments  of  industrial  betterment. Procuress  is

CD

represented  as  the  slow  orderly  play  of  physical  forces
pushing  from  behind,  any  attempt  to  alter  or  accelerate
the  pace  of  which  is  a  baneful  disturbance  of  the  order
of  nature.  Any  proposed  activity  of  the  people  through
legislation  or  otherwise  is  held  to  involve  this  disturbance
and  is  denounced  as  interference  with  nature.

The  neglect  of  the  part  which  mutual  aid  or  conscious
co-operation  plays  in  the  true  biological  conception  of
the  struggle  for  life  is  a  significant  feature  of  the
selective  method  of  this  class  sociology.  Nay,  even
when  the  suspension  of  internecine  struggle  within  the
group  is  recognised  as  a  condition  of  progress,  the  lesson
deduced  is  that  the  suspension  implies  the  fiercer  and
more  effective  struggle  for  life  between  groups,  nations,
or  races.  A  whole  sociology  of  imperialism  is  built  on
this  alleged  necessity,  ignoring  the  true  central  teaching
of  biology  that  as  man  ascends  above  the  rest  of  animal
creation  his  struggles  are  directed  less  and  less  against
his  fellowmen,  more  and  more  for  the  control  of  his
material  environment.

But  the  most  impudent  abuse  of  biology  consists  in
the  assumption  that  the  methods  and  formulae  of  a
science  concerned  with  the  individual  physical  pheno-
mena of  man  can  sufifice  to  interpret  the  social  moral
phenomena  of  human  achievements,  that  individual
animal  evolution  constitutes  the  whole  essence  of  social
evolution.

Since  the  real  battle  is  waged  round  the  fortress  of
economic  privilege,  it  was  only  to  be  expected  that  the
new  plastic_  jcience_ofpoli_tical  economy  should  be
moulded  and  utilisedTor  weapons  of  defence.  And
this  is  indeed  the  case.  That  competition  secures  for
the  workers  in  enhanced  wages  and  improved  conditions
of  work  the  gains  of  all  industrial  improvements  (in  the


1 86 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

long  run);  that  the  great  fortunes  secured  by  entrepre-
neurs, capitalists,  and  speculators,  are  the  just  and
necessary  rewards  of  the  social  services  rendered  by  their
ingenuity,  industry,  foresight,  and  organising  power;
that  capital,  as  the  result  of  thrift,  is  so  mixed  up  with
land  values  that  even  rent  contains  no  certain  elements
of  unearned  increment;  that  the  workers,  as  a  class,
cannot  obtain  higher  wages  without  increasing  their
efficiency;  that  there  exists,  therefore,  no  genuine
divergence  of  interests  between  capital  and  labour,
between  employer  and  employed,  landowner  and
tenant;  that  all  attempts  to  place  increasing  burdens  of
taxation  upon  capital,  or  upon  the  incomes  of  the  rich,
will  recoil  upon  the  workers  by  checking  business  enter-
prise and  the  demand  for  labour;  that  endeavours  to
restrict  private  enterprise  in  alleged  monopolies  by
municipal  or  state  control  or  management  are  alike
unjust,  and  injurious  to  the  common  good.  These  are
a  few  of  the  weapons  of  defence  taken  from  the  arsenal
of  conservative  economics,  and  directed  against  move-
m.ents  of  reform.

What  speciousness  these  doctrines  contain  is  depen-
dent on  two  false  assumptions,  the  first,  that  free
competition,  as  a  general  practice,  actually  exists;  the
second,  that  the  value  of  anything  depends  upon  the
individual  conduct  of  its  owner.

The  theories  about  the  benefits  of  competition,  indi-
vidual efficiency,  and  rights  of  property,  thus  selected
out  of  biology  and  economics,  are  supplemented  by
diverse  doctrmes  drawn  from  other  and  more  elevated
studies.  Psychology  and  ethics  are  summoned  to
support  a  theory  of  social  reform,  which  concerns  itself
entirely  with  the  education  of  the  individual  character,
deprecating  the  dependence  upon  legislative  aids  or  any
artificial  sapping  of  the  self-reliance  and  self-sufficiency
of  the  individual  worker,  who  has  always  capacity,  if  he
uses  his  opportunities  ario^ht,  to  obtain  for  himself  the
share  of  the  general  wealth  which  is  due  to  him,  and


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 187

represents  his  earnings.  The  sole  sufficient  key  to  all
social  problems,  according  to  this  school,  lies  in  the
assertion  of  the  powers  of  individual  character.

The  root  fallacy  here,  of  course,  lies  in  the  false
assumptions  that  any  individual  living  in  a  social-
economic  society  is  capable  of  self-support,  and  that  he
is  endowed  with  a  power  of  will  and  intellect  competent
for  the  effort  which  he  is  supposed  to  be  capable  of
putting  forth.  It  is  bad  psychology,  for  it  ignores  thel
reactions  of  environment  upon  the  springs  of  individual  |
character,  bad  ethics,  because  it  ignores  the  factors  of
society  in  forming  individual  conduct.  ^

Nor  do  the  defenders  of  the  *'  existing  order  "  dis-
dain such  assistance  as  they  can  draw  from  philosophy
and  religion.  For  the  less  cultured  man  the  crude
methods  of  the  orthodox  churches  still  suffice;  contented
with  his  place  in  this  world  let  him  occupy  his  thoughts
with  bright  hopes  of  another;  absorbed  in  the  saving  of
his  particular  soul  he  will  not  worry  himself  about  the
safety  of  the  commonwealth,  but  will  leave  politics  and
economics  to  his  betters.  For  the  more  cultured  a  finer
brand  of  quietism  and  mysticism  is  furnished,  sometimes
infused  with  splendid  ritual  or  subtle  esoteric  appeals,
sometimes  a  colder  and  more  austere  philosophy  couched,
partly  in  the  authoritative  conservatism  of  Hegelian
dogmas,  partly  in  the  later  determinism  distilled  out  of
evolutionary  science.  These  last  are  the  strictly  academic
contribution  to  the  defences  of  vested  interests,  and  are
particularly  calculated  to  sterilise  the  liberal  sympathies
of  young  intellectuals,  so  as  to  deprive  the  progressive
forces  of  that  able  generalship  which  is  essential  to
success.  We  can  observe  how  the  same  selective  and
deterrent  influences  are  brought  to  bear  upon  literature,
art  and  the  drama,  in  a  boycott  of  really  critical  ideas
and  fundamental  social  issues,  and  a  saturation  of  the
public  mind  with  commonplace  sensationalism,  sloppy
sentimentalism,  and  bizarre  frivolity.  The  patronage
of  the  finer  and  the  coarser  arts  of  recreation  is  expressly


1 88 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

directed  to  foster  a  combative  patriotism,  and  its
attendant  forms  of  animalism,  a  snobbish  reverence  for
rank,  fashion  and  the  valuations  of  the  master  class,  and
a  contempt  for  earnestness,  sobriety,  and  reflection  :  a
debased  ideal  of  chivalry  is  set  up  with  reckless  charity
in  the  place  of  justice,  impulse  for  reason  and  passing
expediency  for  principle.

There  is  indeed  no  close  pattern  in  the  texture  of  this
teaching.  It  is  not  deliberately  woven  as  a  scheme  of
defence  by  "  vested  interests,"  but  is  thrown  together
by  the  class  instinct  of  self-preservation.  In  its  higher
intellectual  form  it  approaches  the  dignity  of  a  Sociology,
in  its  lower  it  is  a  mere  appeal  to  the  passions  of  the
animal  self.  But  it  is  always  and  everywhere  animated
by  a  common  purpose,  viz.,  to  check  the  organisation  of
a  popular  movement  for  the  overthrow  of  privileges,
and  the  achievement  of  "  reason  "  in  national  and  inter-
national order.

This  is  no  idly  speculative analysis. Nothing is

easier  than  to  illustrate  in  detail  how  modern  theories  of

Oligarchy,  Protection,  Militarism,  Imperialism,  Property

and  Charity,  chief  buttresses  of  the  present  order,  are

derived  from  the  sources  I  have  named. As  the  popular

movement  for  economic  justice  becomes  more  conscious,

and  is  carried  more  into  intellectual  and  moral  channels,

the  more  urgent  will  it  become  for  the  vested  interests

to  secure  these  defences. More  and  more  will  the

instruments  of  public  education,  press,  platform,  pulpit

and  lecture  room,  be  paid  to  impose  upon  the  public

mind  the  sedatives,  diversions,  and  distractions  which

are  found  serviceable,  and  the  louder  and  more  indignant

will  be  the  genuine  disclaimers  against  the  imputation

of  corruption. But though these grave professors,

right  reverend  fathers,  right  honourable  statesmen,  and

sajracious  editors,  may  not  know  it,  the  finances  which

support their institutions are derived from rents,

monopoly  profits,  and  other  forms  of  unearned  income,

and  they  will  fight  with  such  intellectual  and  spiritual


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 189

weapons  as  they  can  wield  for  defence  of  the  social-
economic  order  which  sustains  them.

They  will  be  required  to  deter  and  to  confuse  a  clear
understanding  of  the  economic  and  spiritual  structure
of  society,  and  of  the  rationalisation  of  progress
dependent  on  this  understanding.  As  an  essential  of
this  defence,  they  must  pretend  and  believe  that  their
teaching  is  disinterested  and  unbiassed,  and  that  their
financial  dependence  does  not  tarnish  their  intellectual
and  spiritual  liberty.

Can  these  defences  of  the  ascendant  classes  be  made
effective  so  as  to  break  or  to  postpone  indefinitely  the
attack  of  an  organised  people.'* I  think  not. There  is
a  certain  growing  irony  in  the  situation. For  while  the
ascendant classes are with one hand building these
elaborate moral defences, with the other they are
supplying  their  assailants  with  the  sinews  of  war. For
the  very  conditions  of  modern  profitable  exploitation
favour  the  physical  and  intellectual  solidaritv  of  the
people : modern  capitalism  makes  directly  for  moral
democracy. The  new  methods of industry  demand
individual  intelligence  and  close  complex  co-operation
among large bodies of  workers : the mere machine
tender  and single-process  man is  not increasing  but
diminishing  in  proportion  to  the  workers  whose  work
involves elements of responsibility and skill. The
large-city  life  imposed  by  modern  industry  is  at  length
beginning  to  bear  fruit  in  a  clearer  civic  consciousness
and  capacity  of  co-operation  for  civic  ends. Modern
industrialism cannot proceed without increasing  co-
operation and  solidarity  of  the  masses  as  workers  and  as
citizens : these  processes  of  formal  integration  cannot
fail  to  generate  and  feed  a  fuller  and  more  intelligent
popular consciousness. It is this consciousness,
enlightened  and  moralised,  that  forms  the  soul  of  the
progressive  movement. Upon  its  growth  depends  the
development  of  plain  popular  ideas  and  sentiments,  of
a  reason  and  a  justice,  which  will  neither  be  coerced,


I90 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

corrupted  nor  bemused,  by  the  defences  set  up  by  the
spiritual  mercenaries  of  the  vested  interests.

If  the  struggle  were  merely  one  of  wits,  a  sophistical
swordplay,  it  might  well  seem  that  the  longer  purse  here,
as  elsewhere,  might  buy  the  better  advocates,  and  so
make  their  defences  always  adequate.  But  justice  is  a
great  ally.  When  the  struggle  is  on  the  plane  of  brute
force,  numbers  and  justice  may  indeed  be  overborne,  but
every  elevation  of  the  plane  of  struggle  raises  their
power.  Thus  the  efficacy  of  the  cause  of  progress  is
logically  justified,  as  it  is  practically  demonstrated,  by
a  growing  use  of  spiritual  weapons.  For  the  great
strength  of  the  cause  of  the  people  lies  in  the  substantial
justice  of  its  demands  for  economic  equality,  and  in
proportion  as  the  popular  intelligence  and  will  are
enlightened  will  they  be  able  to  resist  the  great  tempta-
tion, to  revert  to  the  physical  force  in  which  they
wrongly  imagine  themselves  superior,  and  to  choose  the
higher  struggle,  where  reason  and  justice  will  befriend
them.

Popular  progress  is  not  rightly  measured  in  terms  of
material  prosperity,  nor  does  it  consist  in  the  destruction
of  the  economic  monopolies  of  the  possessing  classes,
but  this  levelling  of  material  opportunities  is  the  first
esential  condition  to  the  free  development  of  the  higher
life  of  the  people :  it  is  the  prime  basis  of  all  true
liberty,  and,  once  substantially  attained,  opens  a  new
economy  of  progress  in  every  field  of  organised  activity.

This  methodology  of  progress,  asserting  a  priority  in
time  for  economic  reforms,  implies  no  disparagement
of  intellectual  and  moral  reforms,  nor  does  it  revert
unconsciously  to  the  narrowly  conceived  economic  inter-
pretation of  history  rejected  at  the  outset  of  this  analysis.
While  it  is  desirable  that  the  main  body  of  our  reforma-
tory forces  should  be  at  present  directed  to  securing
these  economic  bases  of  popular  advance,  this  process  of
direction  is  itself  a  spiritual  movement,  involving  a  rally
and  an  organised  arousal  of  the  latent  intellectual  and


TACTICS  OF  CONSERVATISM 191

moral  energy  of  the  people.  While,  therefore,  in  the
region  of  concrete  reform  work  temporal  priority  must
be  accorded  to  economic  achievement,  or  in  other  words,
we  must  improve  the  soil  before  we  can  hope  to  grow
the  fruits  or  a  higher  humanity,  the  actual  initiative  is
drawn  from  the  domain  of  moral  character  and  intelli-
gence. Moreover,  each  step  in  the  improvement  of
the  economic  environment  of  a  people  or  a  class  is  only
secured  so  far  as  it  is  attended  by  two  results;  first,  a
more  or  less  conscious  and,  therefore,  moral  readjustment
of  the  entire  economic  resources  of  each  group  or  family,
raising  the  quality  as  well  as  the  quantity  of  the
"standard  of  comfort;"  secondly,  an  increased  power  of
assimilating  the  moral  and  intellectual  opportunities
presented  in  that  improved  spiritual  environment  which
it  is  the  function  of  distinctively  religious,  ethical,  and
educational  reformers  to  mould,  for  the  satisfaction  of
the  higher  human  appetites  and  the  erection  of  a  higher
standard  of  life.


Chapter  III

THE SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY OF CHARITY
ORGANISATION

It  must  have  occurred  to  many  to  ask  what  the  writer
of  the  13  th  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinth-
ians would  have  thought  of  charity  that  was  "  organised."
And  yet  the  need  for  some  organisation  is  generally
admitted.  The  narrowing  process  by  which  the  term
"  charity  "  has  passed  from  its  early  place  as  the  expres-
sion of  the  broadest  and  most  elevated  principle  of
spiritual  life  to  describe  the  perfunctory  relief  of  certain
material  needs  has  a  significance  at  once  too  subtle  and
too  large  for  treatment  here.  It  is  not,  however,
difficult  to  mark  the  definite  change  by  which,  even  in
its  narrow  connotation  of  almsgiving,  virtue  has  passed
out  of  it  and  left  it  a  prey  to  those  abuses  which  modern
rational  philanthropy  seeks  to  remedy.  So  long  as  gifts
or  doles  are  the  direct  expression  of  true  human  sym-
pathy with  individual  needs — a  personal  aid  which  is  a
natural  accompaniment  of  neighbourly  feeling,  such
help  as  may  be  bestowed  without  condescension  in  the
giver  or  shame  in  the  receiver — no  injury  attends  the
kindly  service.  The  large  flow  of  reciprocal  charity
which  still  passes  among  many  sections  of  the  poor,
amounting  sometimes  indeed  to  an  incipient  commun-
ism of  goods,  retains  the  true  spirit  of  the  virtue  intact.
Whole  nations  in  a  primitive  condition  of  life,  where
there  exists  an  approximate  uniformity  of  economic
character,  still practise  a  free  hospitality  and  bounty

192


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  193

which  breeds  no  wrong.  Even  where  wider  divergence
of  rank  and  material  power  exists,  as  in  certain  feudal
societies,  aid  could  pass  harmless  from  rich  to  poor
when  it  was  regarded  as  belonging  to  a  social  system
based  on  reciprocity  of  personal  services.

But  under  the  pressure  of  forces  which  break  up
these  old  orders,  charity,  like  other  personal  services,  is
commuted  for  payments  of  money.  This  is  the  origin
of  evil.  The  rise  and  the  segregation  of  a  moneyed
class,  whose  moral  status  seeks  to  reconcile  the  sentiment
of  pity  for  vaguely  known  distress  with  a  sensitive
shrinking  from  closer  personal  contact  with  concrete
cases  of  suffering,  devitalises  charity.  The  outward
acts  are  entirely  severed  from  the  inward  grace,  and
charity  stagnates  and  grows  corrupt.  All  the  specific
defects  of  ill-ordered  charity  arise  from  this  separation
of  the  form  from  the  spirit — misdirection,  waste,  over-
lapping, professional  parasitism  of  every  order  and
degree.

In  setting  itself  to  discover  and  to  stamp  out  per-
nicious forms  of  almsgiving,  to  order,  direct,  and
economise  the  charitable  energy  which  comes  from  the
moneyed  classes  in  gifts  or  endowments  to  unknown
recipients,  the  Charity  Organisation  Society  performs
a  service  of  great  and  easily  recognised  value.

Most  of  the  work  seems  to  be  performed  with  zeal
and  with  discretion.  Accusations  of  hard-heartedness
from  blind  sentimentalists  are  not  unnaturally  treated
by  the  society  as  complimentary  testimony  to  the
saneness  and  rationality  of  its  methods.  In  spite  of  the
unpopularity  which  must  inevitably  attach  to  those  who
are  often  compelled  to  set  reason  against  generous
impulse,  the  society  is  making  in  many  places  a  deep
impression  upon  social  work.  An  ever-widening
recognition  of  the  evils  of  "  indiscriminate  "  charity
and  of  the  need  of  a  thorough  sifting  for  the  discovery
of  "  helpable  "  cases  and  right  modes  of  help,  attests
the  educative  influence  which  the  Charity  Organisation


194 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Society  is  exercising  on  the  public  mind. Even  the
clergy  hear  and  tremble.

The  chief  work  they  have  essayed  is,  by  establishing
a  class  of  expert  middlemen,  to  provide  a  substitute  for
the  broken  personal  nexus  between  donor  and  recipient.
In  the  course  of  such  work,  and  the  study  it  involves,
it  is  only  natural  that  certain  rules  of  general  application
to  classes  of  cases  should  emerge.  For  some  time  the
active  workers  on  branches  of  charity  organisation  have
acknowledged  certain  media  axiomata  as  binding  on
them  in  the  treatment  of  their  cases.  But  of  late  it  has
become  apparent  that  some  of  the  most  active  organisers,
especially  in  the  Metropolis,  are  indulging  more
ambitious  claims.  From  the  narrow  empirical  rules  they
ascend  to  principles,  or  perhaps  it  would  be  more  true  to
say,  they  interpret  their  rules  in  the  light  of  super-
imposed and  externally  derived  principles.  Those
familiar  with  the  tone  and  method  or  their  recent
criticism  of  the  new  social  movements  are  now  aware
that  this  group  of  influential  leaders  in  charity  organisa-
tion work  lay  claim  to  an  exclusive  possession  of  the
right  principles  of  social  reform  in  relation  to  all  pro-
blems of  the  poor.  What  exactly  were  these  principles
it  was  not,  until  lately,  easy  to  ascertain,  though  their
broader  tenor  was  unmistakable.  But  we  have  now  a
book*  which,  from  the  conjunction  of  its  authorship
and  its  avowed  object,  may  be  taken  as  an  authoritative
revelation  of  this  charity  organisation  philosophy.
Covering,  more  or  less,  the  whole  field  of  social  study,
from  the  minutiae  of  Poor  Law  administration  to  the
vague  vastness  of  "  the  general  will,"  it  brings  theory
and  practice  into  contact  in  a  most  instructive  way.  We
are  now  able  for  the  first  time  to  test  the  logic  and  the
"  scientific  "  character  of  charity  organisation.

The  value  of  such inquiry  widely  transcends  any
interest  which  may  attach  to  the  conduct  or  the  personnel

*  "  Aspects  of  the  Social  Problem,"  by  various  writers,  Dr.  Bosanquet,  Mr.  C.
S,  Loch,  Mrs,  McCallum,  Miss  Qcnd^,


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  195

of  the  Charity  Organisation  Society.  For  the  state-
ment of  principles  which  these  writers  make  will  be
discerned  as  the  clear  and  conscious  expression  of  the
repugnance  and  distrust  strongly  but  mistily  conceived
by  the  great  majority  of  the  "  propertied  "  classes,  when
their  attention  is  directed  to  the  claims  which  the  poorer
classes  are  making  for  a  larger  social  support  in  their
efforts  to  attain  decent  material  conditions  of  life.  The
book  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  an  authoritative\
statement  of  the  opposition  of  the  propertied  classes
to  schemes  of  old  age  pensions,  feeding  of  school
children  at  the  public  expense,  public  provision  of  work
for  the  unemployed,  and  other  proposals  of  public  aid
for  the  poor  and  needy.

Such  schemes  are  one  and  all  condemned  with  the
same  condemnation  that  is  meted  out  to  indiscriminate
charity  and  wasteful  doles.  They  sap  the  sense  of
responsibility  in  the  individual,  weaken  his  incentive  to
effective  work,  and  break  up  the  solidarity  and  unity  of
family  life.  With  the  practical  assumptions  which
underHe  this  criticism — i.e.^  that  every  willing  worker
can  get  work  sufficiently  regular  and  well-paid  to  enable
him  to  provide  for  himself  and  his  family  all  that  is
necessary  for  a  decent  life,  to  set  by  enough  to  keep  him
in  old  age,  and  to  secure  him  against  all  the  contingent
misfortunes  and  burdens  of  a  working  life — we  shall
deal  later  on.  It  is  more  convenient  to  approach  the
position  of  this  social  philosophy  by  turning  to  that
theory  of  the  "  dole  "  which  has  arisen  most  naturally
from  charity  organisation  work,  and  by  seeking  to  under-
stand this  theory  in  relation  to  the  wider  principle  of
property  which  is  laid  down  as  the  basis  of  the  social
philosophy  of  this  school  of  thinkers.

It  is  now  commonly  recognised  that  a  dole  is  injurious
in  its  direct  effect  upon  the  recipient,  and  in  its  indirect
effect  upon  others.  It  acts  as  a  "  demand  for  idleness  "
and  thus  weakens  character.  But  why  is  a  dole  injurious
to  the  recipient  and  to  society.'' Why  does  it  degrade


196 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

character?  The  real  answer  is  a  simple  one.  It  is  an
irrational  mode  of  transfer  of  property.  Let  Mr.
Bosanquet  explain.

"  The  point  of  private  property  is  that  things  should
not  come  miraculously  and  be  unaffected  by  your  deal-
ings with  them,  but  that  you  should  be  in  contact  with
something  which  in  the  external  world  is  the  definite
material  representation  of  yourself."  It  is  true  this
passage  occurs  in  an  essay  defending  the  institution  of
private  property,  but  it  casts  so  clear  a  light  upon  the
theory  of  doles  that  I  quote  it  here.  A  dole  is  con-
demnable  because  it  comes  "  miraculously "  to  the
recipient  and  not  as  a  natural  result  of  personal  effort;
it  is  not  a  "  definite  material  representation  "  of  himself.
These  charitable  "  windfalls  "  violate  the  rational  order
of  life,  lead  weakly  human  nature  to  detach  the  idea  of
enjoyment  from  related  effort,  to  expect  an  effect  with-
out a  cause.  Thus  false  notions  are  engrendered  which
break  the  back  of  honest  regular  effort.

Nothing  can  be  more  convincingr  than  this  condem-
nation  of  the  dole,  derived  from  the  theory  of  private
property.  But  why  stop  at  doles  ?  Are  there  no  other
forms  of  private  property  which  should  stand  in  the
dock  with  "doles"  to  the  poor.?  How  about  gifts
and  bequests  to  the  rich  ?  Do  they  too  not  come
"  miraculously  "  ?  Are  they  "  affected  by  your  deal-
ings with  them "  ?  Are  they  "  definite  material
embodiments  "  of  their  owners  ?  Here  no  question
arises  as  to  the  just  limit  of  the  right  of  the  donor  or
legator  over  his  property.  Mr.  Bosanquet  in  his  theory
or  private  property  has  chosen  to  take  his  stand  by
"  origin  ";  his  test  of  valid  property  is  the  way  it  comes
into  the  possession  of  its  holder.  Why  do  the  charity
Organisation  Society  and  their  philosophers  constantly
denounce  small  gifts  to  the  poor,  and  hold  their  peace
about  large  gifts  to  the  rich.?  We  might  press  the
application  of  this  admirable  rule  of  private  property  a
little  further  and  ask  whether  the  economic  rent  of  land


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  197

and  certain  elements  in  the  profits  of  invested  capital,
do  not  come  under  the  same  category  of  the  "  miracu-
lous," or,  whether  they  are  the  natural  results,  the
"  material  representation,"  of  the  productive  efforts  of
the  receivers.  Can  anything  be  more  miraculous  than
that  I  should  wake  up  to-morrow  and  find  certain  shares
which  to-day  are  worth  ^100  are  then  risen  to  ;^i05?
These  gains  which  grow  "  while  men  sleep,"  are  they
sound  forms  of  private  property  according  to  Mr.
Bosanquet  ?  The  positive  defence  of  private  property
rests,  according  to  Mr.  Bosanquet,  upon  the  need  which
every  one  has  for  possessing  "  a  permanent  nucleus  in
the  material  world  "  wherewith  to  help  to  plan  out  his
life  as  a  rational  whole.  I  here  suggest  that  his  view  of
private  property  passes  a  twofold  condemnation  upon
economic  rents  and  other  unearned  elements  of  income.
Firstly,  by  enabling  a  man  to  reap  where  he  has  not
sown,  by  divorcing  satisfaction  from  previous  effort,
they  crush  the  sense  of  independence  in  the  recipient
and  derationalise  his  life.  Secondly,  since  all  "  un-
earned "  elements  of  income  are  truly  the  earnings  of
the  work  of  some  one  else,  or  of  society,  such  individual
or  such  society,  by  losing  the  natural  reward  of  its
effort,  is  disabled  from  realising  itself.  The  ground
landlord  who  "  realises  himself  "  in  the  rents  he  draws
from  his  slum  property  is  preventing  the  docker  and  the
seamstress  from  realising  themselves,  and  is  destroying
for  them  the  possibility  of  rationally  organising  life.
Do  the  Charity  Organisation  thinkers  apply  their
solicitude  for  the  maintenance  of  moral  responsibility
in  these  directions .''  No !  their  logic  makes  a  dead  halt
on  the  other  side  of  this  just  economic  application.
They  are  all  fear  lest  the  poor  should  suffer  from  the
degradation  and  the  ignominy  of  receiving  something
they  have  not  earned.  Yet  they  never  lift  their  voice
to  save  the  characters  of  the  well-to-do  which  are  con-
stantly assailed  by  these  same  demoralising  forces.  It
never  seems  to  occur  to  them  that  charity  is  perhaps  a


198 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

feeble  sort  of  conscience  money,  an  irregular  and  in-
adequate return  of  fragments  of  unearned  income  to
those  who  have  earned  it,  and  who  are  disabled  from
ordering  their  lives  in  decency  and  reasonable  care
because  it  has  passed  from  their  legal  possession  in  those
processes  of  economic  bargain  where  the  poor  are  taken
at  a  disadvantage.  If  there  is  any  truth  in  this,  indis-
criminate and  sentimental  charity  has  a  certain  natural
support  which  can  only  be  destroyed  by  a  full  and
logical  application  of  Mr.  Bosanquet's  theory  of  private
property.

I  have  said  that  Charity  Organisation  thinkers  do  not
face  this  demand  that  one  and  the  same  law  be  applied
to  rich  and  poor.  Mr.  Bosanquet,  however,  is  far  too
keen  a  reasoner  not  to  perceive  the  awkward  pressure
of  this  argument,  and  in  a  single  passage  of  almost
unparalleled  audacity  endeavours  to  turn  it :

"The  Socialist"  he  admits,  "may  say,"  (why  he  should  give  a
monopoly  of  common-jcnsc  to  the  "Socialist"  is  not  clear!):
"  *  Is  not,  at  least,  inherited  or  unearned  property  an  equally
pernicious  subvention  to  the  rich  as  out-relief  to  the  poor  f '  I
point  out  one  distinction,  and  then  give  my  general  answer.  Pro-
perty is  within  the  owner's  control  and  is  a  permission  to  him  to
choose  his  work — of  course,  an  enormous  indulgence.  But  Poor  Law
relief  is  not  in  the  recipient's  control,  is  a  payment  for  idleness,  and
is  not  sufficient  to  set  the  life  free  to  choose  work.  A  large  pension
or  gift  of  property  to  a  man  not  yet  demoralised  would  probably  do
no  harm.  Great  expenditure  which  'sets  a  man  up  '  does  not  as  a
rule  demoralise  ;  it  is  the  small  chronic  subventions,  which  give  no
freedom  and  are  actually  consequent  on  the  failure  of  the  social  will,
that  cause  demoralisation.  I  do  not  think  that  it  can  be  denied
that  property  ma'^  have  a  similar  effect.  Wherever  it  distracts  from
one  social  vocation,  without  forming  the  basis  of  another,  then  it
operates  as  out-relief  pure  and  simple."

Now,  why  is  one  class  to  enjoy  "  an  enormous  indul-
gence "  at  the  expense  of  another  class }  Why  are  some
people  to  have  "  permission  to  choose  their  work  "  and
not  others  .f^  Why  are  we  told  that  property  may
distract  from  work  and  not  that  it  has  a  natural  ten-
dency to  do  so.'' These  are  a  few  of  the  questions


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  199

which  the  effrontery  of  this  argument  evokes.  But  let
us  keep  to  his  main  distinction.  Three  criteria  of  bad
"  subventions'"  are  proposed — insufficiency  for  free-
dom, payment  for  idleness,  absence  of  recipient's  control.
The  first  need  not  detain  us.  It  is  not  the  design  of
Poor  Law  relief"  to  set  the  life  free  to  choose  work;"
but  if  it  were,  Mr.  Bosanquet  would  be  the  last  to  admit
that  out-relief  of  twenty  shillings  a  week  to  all
applicants  sufficed  to  place  out-relief  on  a  common  basis
with  the  "  property "  which  he  champions.  As  to
"  payment  for  idleness,"  this  is  a  slipshod  way  of
describing  poor  relief.  Destitution,  not  idleness,  is  the
direct  condition  of  the  receipt  of  "  relief."  Idleness
may  or  may  not  be  the  cause  of  destitution;  but  the
meagre  sum  paid  as  out-relief  is  not  a  temptation  to  a
state  of  idleness  commensurate  with  the  knowledge  of
the  safe  possession  of  a  private  competency.  Take  a
rough-and-ready  test,  the  only  one  available;  the  life  of
an  average  out-pauper  has  embodied  far  more  painful
effort  for  the  public  good  than  the  life  of  an  average
gentleman  of  independent  means.  The  test  of  results
would  not  show  that  out-relief  as  actually  administered
was  a  demand  for  idleness  to  nearly  the  same  extent  as
the  possession  of  unearned  property.  Lastly,  Mr.
Bosanquet  thinks  that  regularity  and  full  control  on  the
part  of  the  recipient  favours  good  use.  But  if  Poor
Law  relief  were  in  the  recipient's  control,  if  he  had  a
right  to  demand  his  five  or  ten  shillings  weekly,  and  to
receive  it  regularly,  would  this  relief  approximate
towards  sound  property.^  Surely  the  united  voice  of
the  Charity  Organisation  Society  was  clamorous  in  its
repudiation  of  the  enormities  embodied  in  Mr.  Charles
Booth's  Pension  Scheme,  on  the  very  grounds  that  the
pensions  are  proposed  to  be  given  regularly,  and  are  to
be  at  the  free  call  of  the  recipient,  independently  of  those
considerations  of  individual  needs  and  merits  which  are
the  basis  of  the  social  control  vested  in  boards  of
guardians  over  the  payment  of  out-relief. If  Poor  Law


200 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

relief  was  large  enough  to  "  set  up  a  man,"  was  regular
in  its  payments,  and  at  the  call  of  the  recipient — that  is
if  all  the  true  conditions  of  sound  "  private  property  "
were  observed,  we  should  surely  have  a  form  of  Social-
ism the  most  foolish  in  conception  and  the  most
demoralising  in  its  actual  results  that  could  possibly  be
imagined.  Yet  if  Mr.  Bosanquet's  distinction  has  any
meaning,  he  would  be  forced  to  admit  that  these  reforms
would  put  our  poor-relief  on  a  level  with  the  inherited
or  unearned  property  he  is  defending.  If  not,  what
does  he  mean  ?

One  phrase  of  positive  enlightenment  his  argument
contains.  Property  is  bad  when  it  does  not  form  "  the
basis  of  a  social  vocation."  This  brings  us  close  to  the
root  fallacy  of  his  reasoning.  Private  property  he
justifies  solely  by  the  use  to  which  it  is  put.  If  an
owner  uses  his  ground  rents  or  his  monopoly-profits  as
"  the  basis  of  a  vocation,"  returning  to  society  by  his
voluntary  eff^ort  what  he  chooses  to  regard  as  a  quid  pro
quo^  he  is  blameless.  So  "unearned  incomes"  are
treated  as  a  social  "  trust,"  a  "  charge."  To  use  Mr.
Bosanquet's  own  ingenious  words,  "  if  one  has  enough
to  live  on,  that  is  a  charge — something  to  work  with,  to
organise,  to  direct."*  Mark  what  has  taken  place  in
passing  from  the  application  of  the  theory  of  property
in  the  case  of  "  doles  "  to  the  case  of  "  unearned  "  in-
comes. Doles  were  shown  to  be  pernicious  by  reason
of  their  origin,  i.e.,  as  windfalls;  unearned  incomes  are
to  be  tested  not  by  origin  but  by  use.  If  they  are  put
to  a  good  use,  we  are  to  keep  silent  about  their  origin,
and  about  the  injury  which  their  payment  inflicts  upon
those  whose  work  they  represent  and  who  need  them
for  self-realisation.  The  ground  rents  of  London  are
a  trust,  a  "  charge  "  socially  bestowed  upon  the  Dukes
of  Westminster,  Bedford,  Portland,  etc.;  society  has
designed  them  so  as  to  give  these  noblemen  "  something


*  "Civilisation  of  Christendom,"  pp.  334-5.


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  201

to  work  with,"  an  opportunity  to  serve  London  and  to
be  a  glory  and  adornment  of  our  social  life;  if  they
faithfully  execute  this  "  trust,"  fulfill  their  high
"  vocation,"  they  have  earned  their  ground  rents,*  if  not
— well  for  this  not  very  improbable  contingency  Mr.
Bosanquet  and  his  friends  make  no  provision  !  What
are  they  prepared  to  do  when  the  "  trust  "  is  plainly
violated  ?  Will  they  provide  means  for  deposing  the
fraudulent  trustee?  Of  this  we  have  no  word.  To
speak  candidly,  this  talk  about  a  "  charge,"  a  "  trust,"  is
a  wanton  abuse  of  language,  applied  as  it  is  to  describe
elements  of  income  which  pass  to  the  owners  from
exercise  of  sheer  economic  might.  That  this  power  is
generally  exercised  legally  there  is  no  question,  but  that
in  any  true  sense  it  has  received  the  conscious  endorse-
ment of  society  in  consideration  of  services  to  be
rendered,  which  alone  could  justify  its  description  as  a
"  charge  "  or  a  "  trust,"  is  an  absurd  suggestion.  Such
language,  it  is  true,  is  no  invention  of  Charity  Organisa-
tion philosophers.  Its  close  parallel  is  found  in  the
sophistry  by  which  some  of  the  officials  of  the  early
Church  sought  to  reconcile  the  teaching  of  the  Gospel
with  the  tenor  of  economic  practice.  St.  Clement  of
Alexandria  writes :

"  Our  Lord  does  not,  as  some  suppose,  command  the  rich  man  to
throw  away  his  possessions,  but  to  cast  from  his  heart  the  love  of
gold,  with  all  those  cares  and  preoccupations  that  stifle  the  germs  of

life What  new  thing  does  the  Son  of  God  teach  us  in  this  ?

Not  an  exterior  act,  such  as  many  have  performed,  but  something
higher,  more  perfect  and  more  divine,  the  out-rooting  of  passions
from  the  soul  itself  and  the  renunciation  of  all  that  is  alien  to  its

nature Worldly  goods  should  be  considered  as  materials  and

means  to  be  used  for  pious  purposes,  to  be  turned  to  good  account
by  those  who  know  how  to  use  them  skilfully.  "  "j"

How  admirably  is  this  old  teaching  modernised  in
Mr.  Carnegie's  "Gospel  of  Wealth,"  the  notion  that  the

*  The  following  gem  of  academic  phraseology  embodies  this  idea  : "Property
is  mediate  payment  with  responsibility"  (p.  333).
■(■  "  Christian  Socialism." Nitti  p.  70.


202 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

"  millionaire  "  is  a  creature  divinely  ordered  and  en-
dowed to  make  piles  of  money  on  condition  of  spending
it  freely  in  his  lifetime  for  the  public  good,  though  not
always,  I  fear,  in  modes  that  would  satisfy  the  scrutiny
of  the  Charity  Organisation  Society.  This  langauge
indeed  emerges  in  the  philanthropic  cant  of  all  ages.
When  we  are  dealing  with  the  poor,  we  are  to  brace
their  character  and  to  remove  everything  that  enervates
and  induces  to  idleness;  when  we  are  dealing  with  the
rich,  we  must  encourage  them  to  make  a  good  use  of  the
means  which,  in  their  origin,  are  helping  to  maintain
poverty.  We  must  simply  remember  "  if  one  has
enough  to  live  on,  that  is  a  charge."  We  need  not
investigate  too  curiously  how  "  one  "  comes  to  "  have
enough  to  live  on  " !  "  No,  we  are  not  economists,"
say  these  gentlemen,  when  they  are  invited  to  trace
back  "  unearned  incomes  "  to  economic  rents  and  the
superior  bargaining  power  of  the  rich  as  compared  with
the  poor.  The  answer  is  :  "  You  are  economists  when
it  suits  your  purpose;  your  condemnation  of  the  effects
of  indiscriminate  almsgiving,  or  the  operations  of  the
Poor  Law,  is  based  on  '  economic  '  reasoning,  but  your
'  economics '  are  selective  and  partial  in  their  application."
By  trying  to  stop  the  free  flow  of  charity,  while
refusing  to  recognise  the  social  economic  forces  which
cause  poverty.  Charity  Organisation  thinkers  assume
that  dangerous  position  which  is  known  as  "  sitting  on
the  safety  valve."  The  mediaeval  Church  acted  more
wisely,  winking  at  the  practice  of  the  luxury  and
monopolies  which  its  theory  condemned,  on  condition
that  the  rich  beneficiary  gave  lavish  lar2:ess  in  public
and  private  charity.

"  Yet  cease  not  to  give
Without  any  regard  ;
Though  the  beggars  be  wicked,
Thou  shalt  have  thy  reward  "

was the deliberate advice of  a divine like Crowley
writing  in  the  sixteenth  century. With  just  instinct  did


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  203

theologians  recognise  that  the  stoppage  or  even  the
narrow  restriction  of  charity  was  likely  to  endanger  the
fabric  of  feudal  society  by  disclosing  to  the  light  of
day  the  foundations  of  social  and  economic  inequality
which  supported  it.  The  keener  sighted  of  them  saw
then,  as  the  keen-sighted  business  man  sees  now,  that
millionaire  munificence,  by  giving  back  in  doles  a
portion  of  the  profits  of  monopoly,  can  not  only  turn
the  edge  of  public  envy,  but  obscure  the  nature  of  the
true  social  issue  by  the  plausible  suggestion  that  the
social  problem  can  find  a  safe  solution  in  the  "  moralisa-
tion  "  of  the  individual  employer.

The  rejection  of  "  doles  "  as  a  treatment  of  poverty,
combined  with  a  refusal  to  apply  their  method  of
criticism  to  the  economic  structure  of  society  as  a  whole,
drives  the  Charity  Organisation  philosophers  to  that
assertion  of  the  independence  and  responsibility  of  the
individual  family  which  is  their  basic  conception.
Private  charity  or  organised  social  support  by  pensions
or  other  modes  of  subvention  will,  they  think,  crush
this  individal  responsibility  which  is  the  only  source  of
social  progress.  This  brings  us  to  the  crucial  question  :
Is  this  individual  responsibility  an  actual  fact,  and  does
it  yield  a  force  competent  to  the  gradual  solution  of  the
social  problem  ?  Responsibility  implies  ability.  Are
poor  families  able,  each  and  all,  to  gain  for  themselves,
by  the  exertion  of  such  powers  as  they  actually  possess,
a  condition  of  material  comfort  and  moral  decency .''
The  Charity  Organisation  Society's  philosophy  asserts
this  ability,  and  in  support  of  its  assertion  adduces  (i)
evidence  of  fact;  (2)  a  theory  of  moral  autonomy.

Mr.  Loch  holds  that  better  administration  of  the  Poor
Law  has  shown  "  that  the  alleged  impossibility  of  the
poor  to  maintain  themselves  or  provide  for  their  future
has,  in  fact,  disappeared,"  and  that  "  old  age  pauperism
can  be  gradually  eradicated,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  the
result  of  sickness,  incompetency,  or  moral  defect."
Mr.  Bosanquet  says  :  "  I  look  on  the  exceptional  case  of


204 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

destitution  by  pure  misfortune  in  a  manner  analogous  to
that  in  which  I  regard  a  legal  offender  who  is  free,  by
some  accident,  from  moral  responsibility  " — i.e.,  there
are  no  economic  forces  which  at  present  by  their  normal
action  tend  to  maintain  destitution.  Again,  the  latter
writer  informs  us :  "  Material  conditions  are  necessary
to  existence;  but  they  are  themselves  dependent  to  an
enormous  extent  on  the  energy  of  the  mind  which  they
surround."

What  it  all  comes  to  is  this  :  that  the  poor  can  provide
for  themselves,  and  need  not  be  poor  if  they  choose  to
exert  themselves.

Now,  so  far  as  the  assertion  of  this  fact  goes,  it  is
supported,  partly  from  Poor  Law  statistics,  and  partly
from  the  ipse  dixit  of  Charity  Organisation  investiga-
tors, who  allege  that  poverty  is  always,  or  nearly  always,
associated  with  personal  defects.

So  far  as  Poor  Law  statistics  are  concerned,  they  may
be  at  once  ruled  out  on  the  ground  that  pauper  figures
have  no  fixed  or  ascertainable  relation  to  poverty.
"  Pauperism "  can  be  eradicated  by  changes  in  the
administration  of  the  Poor  Law,  but  such  fact  could  be
no  evidence  of  the  disappearance  or  diminution  of
poverty.

The  argument  from  personal  experience  is  vitiated  by
two  fallacies.  First,  the  ancient  fallacy  of  "  any  and
all."  In  American  schools  it  is  not  unusual  to  encourage
the  boys  by  reminding  them  that  by  industry  and
perseverance,  any  one  of  them  may  rise  to  the  position
of  President  of  the  United  States;  but  to  say  that  all  of
them  could  attain  the  position  would  be  plainly  false.
Yet  the  individualist  argument  by  which  our  Charity
Organisation  thinkers  seek  to  show  that  because  A.  or  B.
or  C.  in  a  degraded  class  is  able,  by  means  of  superior
character  or  capacity,  to  rise  out  of  that  class,  no  one
need  remain  there,  contains  the  same  fallacy.  It  assumes
what  it  is  required  to  prove — viz.,  that  there  are  no
economic  or  other  social  forces  which  limit  the  number


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  205

of  successful  rises.  It  assumes  that  every  workman  can
secure  regularity  of  employment  and  good  wages;  that
the  quantity  of  "savings"  which  can  find  safe  and  profit-
able investment  is  unlimited;  and  that  all  can  equally
secure  for  themselves  a  comfortable  and  solid  economic
position  by  the  wise  exertion  of  their  individual  powers.
Now  if  there  exist  any  economic  forces,  in  their  operation
independent  of  individual  control,  which  at  any  given
time  limit  the  demand  for  labour  in  the  industrial  field
and  limit  the  scope  of  remunerative  investment,  these
forces,  by  exercising  a  selective  influence,  preclude  the
possibility  of  universal  success  in  the  field  of  competitive
industry.  All  economists  agree  in  asserting  the
existence  of  these  forces,  though  they  differ  widely  in
assigning  causes  for  them;  all  economists  affirm  the
operation  of  great  tidal  movements  in  trade  which  for
long  periods  limit  the  demand  for  labour  and  thus  oblige
a  certain  large  quantity  of  unemployment.  The  Charity
Organisation  Society's  investigator  naturally  finds  that
the  individuals  thrown  out  of  work  in  these  periods  of
depression  are  mostly  below  the  level  of  their  fellows
in  industrial  or  in  moral  character,  and  attributes  to  this
"  individual  "  fact  the  explanation  of  the  unemploy-
ment; he  wrongly  concludes  that  if  these  unemployed
were  upon  the  same  industrial  and  moral  level  as  their
comrades  who  are  at  work,  there  would  be  work  for  all.
He  does  not  reason  to  this  judgment,  but,  with  infantile
simplicity,  assumes  it.  This  arises  from  a  curious
limitation  which  the  Charity  Organisation  Society  places
upon  the  meaning  of  "  fact."  Professing  to  be  de-
voted lovers  of  "  facts,"  and  to  be  the  exclusive
possessors  of  the  facts  relevant  to  the  study  of  poverty,
they  confine  themselves  wholly  to  facts  in  their  bearing
on  individual  cases,  ignoring  those  facts  which  consist
in  the  relation  of  individual  to  individual,  or,  in  other
words,  "  social  "  facts.  This  "  monadist  "  view  of
society  we  presently  shall  see  illustrated  in  their  theory;
here  we  observe  how  it  vitiates  their  study  of  facts.


2o6 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

All  larger  social  and  economic  facts  are  consistently  ex-
cluded from  this  view.  Thus  they  enable  themselves
to  affirm  the  individual  responsibility  of  the  family  as  a
"  fact,"  in  face  of  all  the  teaching  of  social  science,
which  proves  that  in  all  the  ordinary  economic  issues  of
life,  upon  which  the  stability  and  solidarity  of  family
life  depends — e.g.,  the  price  of  labour,  the  regularity  of
employment,  the  effectiveness  of  saving — the  independ-
ence of  the  family  is  ever  less  and  less.  Such  "  facts  "
do  not  come  within  the  ken  of  the  Charity  Organisation
Society.

The  second  fallacy  rests  upon  another  equally  un-
warranted assumption.  Admitting  not  only  that  any
energetic  individual  may  solve  for  himself  the  social
problem,  but  that  all,  if  equally  energetic,  might  do  so,
is  it  possible  that  this  moral  energy  should  be  generated
in  the  existing  environment  of  poverty .?  Let  us  even
admit  with  Mr.  Bosanquet  that  material  conditions  are
largely  dependent  on  "  the  energy  of  the  mind  which
they  surround,"  we  have  not  proved  the  "  ability  "  to
provide,  which  is  of  the  essence  of  "  responsibility."
A  true  realisation  of  higher  wants  and  the  means  of
attaininp-  them  is  the  drivings  force  in  individual  effort.
The  environment,  material  and  moral,  of  the  residuum,
constantly  thwarts  the  growth  in  consciousness  of  these
higher  wants,  so  that  the  energy,  granting  it  to  exist,
remains  inert.  It  is  futile  to  urge,  "  if  a  man  has  energy
he  can  help  himself  "  when  you  know  that  the  conditions
of  his  upbringing  and  his  whole  life  preclude  the  birth
and  growth  of  that  energy.

The  Charity  Organisation  philosophy,  crystallised  in
the  single  phrase  "  in  social  reform,  then,  character  is  the
condition  of  conditions,"  represents  a  mischievous  half-
truth,  the  other  half  of  which  rests  in  the  possession  of
the  less  thoughtful  section  of  the  Social  Democrats  and
forms  the  basis  of  the  cruder  Socialism.  Neither
individual  character  nor  environment  is  "the  condition
of  conditions." The  true  principle  which  should  replace


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  207

these  half-falsehoods  is  a  recognition  of  the  interdepend-
ence and  interaction  of  individual  character  and  social
character  as  expressed  in  social  environment.  The
eloquent  exponent  of  the  "general  will"  and  the  spiritual
solidarity  of  society,  when  he  comes  to  practical  applica-
tions, ignores  the  need  of  corporate  institutions  of  social
support,  through  which  "  the  general  will  "  may  find
expression  and  achieve  its  ends,  and  relies  for  social
progress  upon  the  unsupported  initiative  of  the
individual  will  considered  as  a  primum  mobile.  The
application  of  this  social  philosophy  by  Mr.  Bosanquet
and  his  friends  makes  it  perfectly  plain  that  the  "  char-
acter "  which  is  the  "  condition  of  conditions "  is
individual  character.  Whatever  some  of  them  may  say
in  more  enlightened  moments,  this  doctrine  underlies
their  practice  and  is  sheer  monadism;  it  looks  upon
society  as  embodied  in  the  separate  action  of  individual
wills,  without  allowance  for  any  organic  relation  among
those  wills,  constituting  spiritual  solidarity.  The
principle  that  individual  "  character  is  the  condition  of
conditions  "  is  much  worse  than  a  half-truth  in  its
application.  For  it  is  used  to  block  the  work  of  practical
reformers  upon  political  and  economic  planes,  by  an
insistence  that  the  moral  elevation  of  the  masses  must
precede  in  point  of  time  all  successful  reforms  of
environment.  Plenty  of  people  are  only  too  willing  to
listen  to  insidious  advice  which  takes  the  form  :  Why
disturb  valuable  vested  interests;  why  trouble  about
ground  values;  why  stir  a  general  spirit  of  discontent  in
the  masses;  why  suggest  "  heroic  "  remedies  for  unem-
ployment, when  all  that  is  needed  just  now  is  a  quiet,
careful,  organised  endeavour  to  induce  habits  of  sobriety
and  cleanliness  in  the  homes  of  the  poor,  to  teach  them
how  to  expend  their  money  more  advantageously,  to
practise  saving  habits,  and  orradually,  by  gentle  persistent
endeavour,  to  build  up  individual  character  ?  To  most
who  have  not  studied  the  industrial  structure  of  society
it  sounds  reasonable  to  suggest  that  such  moral  reforms


2o8 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

should  come  first.  In  reality  it  is  a  falsehood.  In  the
education  of  a  class,  as  of  an  individual  child,  the  historic
priority  of  attention  must  be  to  the  corpus  sanum^  the
material  physical  environment,  in  order  that  the
conditions  of  the  mens  sana  may  exist.  Though  moral
reform  may  be  prior  in  "the  nature  of  things,"  economic
reform  is  prior  in  time.  Each  reform  of  economic  and
social  conditions  can  only  be  effectual,  it  is  true,  if  it  act
as  a  means  of  elevating  character,  and  as  a  stimulus  of
individual  effort,  and  a  general  view  of  the  elevation  of
.an  individual  or  a  class  standard  of  life  will  therefore
present  itself  as  a  constant  interaction  of  improved
conditions  and  improved  character.  When  prime  con-
ditions of  material  comfort  and  security  are  once  attained,
the  conscious  activity  of  the  individual  will  and  energy
will  play  a  larger  part,  and  will  often  operate  as  direct
cause  of  economic  betterment.  But  in  dealing  with  the
inert  nature  of  the  residuum,  direct  social  support  aiming
at  the  improvement  of  material  circumstances  will  play
a  larger  part,  and  while  each  step  in  economic  improve-
ment must  be  accompanied  by  a  moral  rise,  the  external
step  will  precede  in  time.  This  does  not,  as  might
appear,  prejudge  the  issue  whether  the  social  forces  in
their  ultimate  analysis  are  to  be  described  as  moral  or
economic,  does  not  assume  the  Marxian  interpretation
of  proo;ress,  but  simply  affirms  the  fact  that  so  far  as  the
historic  order  of  improvement  of  the  condition  of  the
"  residuum "  is  concerned,  the  earliest  impulses  to
progress  reach  them  in  the  form  of  changes  of  material
environment.  The  fatal  consequences  of  ignoring  this
truth  are  seen  in  Miss  Dendy's  treatment  of  the
occupations  of  "  the  residuum"  which  assigns  the  low
nature  and  irregularity  of  these  occupations  as  the  result
of  the  character  of  the  members  of  that  class,  without
the  faintest  recognition  of  the  larger  truth  that  the  low
skill,  irregularity,  and  inability  to  undertake  hard,  solid,
and  effective  work  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the
education  of  environment. The  interaction  of  the  two


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  209

must  of  course  be  admitted;  but  Miss  Dendy  ignores
what  is  in  the  case  of  these  people  the  chief  interagent.
She  simply  assumes  the  individual  moral  standpoint  and
rules  out  all  larger  economic  factors.  There  are  doubt-
less those  who,  like  Robert  Owen,  have  over-estimated
the  influence  of  economic  environment;  but  the  general
tendency  of  thought  in  the  educated  and  philanthropic
public,  drawn  to  the  study  of  social  reform  by  moral
considerations,  and  untrained  in  economic  science,  makes
for  the  falsehood  of  the  opposite  extreme.  How  much
can  be  achieved  in  the  way  of  social  progress  by  the  aid
ot  forces  primarily  economic,  admits  of  no  general  state-
ment, but  is  a  matter  for  careful  detailed  experiment.
But  the  history  of  modern  Lancashire  is  a  crucial  instance
of  the  power  exercised  by  distinctively  economic  forces
to  stimulate  industrial  and  moral  character  and  to  lift
the  standard  of  life  of  a  working  class.  Better  late  than
never,  our  religious  and  temperance  missionaries  are
coming  to  recognise  the  intimate  dependence  of
drunkenness,  gambling,  and  other  personal  vices  upon
the  economic  conditions  of  industrial  life.  Take  the
signal  example  of  prostitution.  Does  any  experienced
person  really  believe  that  moral  influences  directed  to
the  inculcation  of  personal  chastity  will  have  any  con-
siderable efl^ect,  so  long  as  the  economic  conditions
which  favour  and  induce  prostitution  remain  untouched  ?
Here  is  the  case  of  a  trade  dependent  both  in  volume
and  in  character  upon  supply  and  demand.  So  long  as
the  ill-paid,  precarious  and  degrading  conditions  which
attach  to  the  wage-work  and  home-life  of  many  women
present  prostitution  as  a  superficially  attractive  alterna-
tive, or  a  necessary  supplement,  to  wage-work  or  wife-
dom,  supply  will  be  maintained.  So  long  as  large
numbers  of  men  own  money  not  earned  by  hard  regular
work,  and  not  needed  for  the  purchase  of  legitimate
satisfactions,  and  leisure  in  excess  of  the  wholesome
demands  of  a  natural  life,  while  others  are  deterred  by  the
economic  constitution  of  society  from  the  establishment


2IO THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

of  normal  family  relations,  the  demand  for  prosti-
tution will  continue.  This  analysis  docs  not  deny
the  operation  of  definitely  personal  vicious  forces,  not
closely  connected  with  the  economic  factors;  but  it
affirms  the  latter  as  larger  determinants.  The  refusal  of
the  "  purity  "  party  to  face  definitely  and  fearlessly  the
economic  supports  of  impurity  has  rightly  brought  upon
them  the  imputation  of  shallowness,  or  even  insincerity,
for  shallowness  always  implies  imperfect  sincerity.

Refusing  to  deal  with  social  reform  in  this  wider
scientific  spirit,  and  to  apply  what  they  foolishly  dub
"  heroic  "  remedies  (as  if  a  man  or  a  measure  were  worse
for  being  heroic),  the  Charity  Organisation  thinker  is
driven  to  base  his  positive  measures  of  reform  upon  the
voluntary  action  of  well-meaning  men  and  women  of
the  educated  classes.  The  crux  of  the  individual  moral
method  of  reform  we  found  to  consist  in  the  generation
of  the  necessary  moral  energy  in  the  crushed  or  degraded
member  of  society.  Even  if  this  energy  was  universally
diffused,  we  showed  it  would  not,  could  not  under
existing  economic  conditions,  be  generally  effective.
But,  assuming  its  complete  efficacy,  how  is  it  possible  to
quicken  in  the  inert  and  often  perverted  charac<"er  the
quality  of  true  self-respect,  the  sense  of  decency,  the
higher  tastes  and  aspirations  by  which  the  individual
energy  finds  expression  in  its  reachings  towards  a  better
life.''  It  is  suggested  that  true  charity  may  be  the
generative  force,  that  the  contact  of  the  moral  superior
may  yield  the  necessary  stimulus,  that  each  stronger  man
or  woman  might  help  to  lift  on  to  his  moral  legs  a  weaker
brother  or  sister.  This  is  the  practical  proposal  upon
which  Mr.  Loch  discourses  with  eloquent  faith.  He
wishes  "  to  create  a  charitable  friendship  between  the
family  and  visitor,"*  by  which  the  latter  may  become  a
sort  of  confidential  adviser  and  a  source  of  moral
stimulation  to  the  former.


*  "Charity  Organisation" (Sonnenschein),  p.  82.


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  211

The  conception,  in  itself,  is  a  noble  one,  in  some  rare
cases  capable  of  yielding  the  finest  results,  but  associated
with  the  principles  and  methods  of  the  Charity  Organisa-
tion Society  generally  sterile.  If  all  persons  of  good
strong  character  and  kindly  disposition  could  establish
and  maintain  close  friendly  relations  with  two  or  three
degraded  or  weakly  families,  it  seems  as  if  a  mighty  force
for  good  might  be  established.  But  look  at  the  facts.
How  many  superior  persons  can  be  got  to  do  this  work
in  the  spirit  and  the  methods  of  the  Charity  Organisation
Society  ?  To  generate  the  requisite  initiative  moral  force
in  the  superior  person  is  nearly  as  difficult  (or  quite  as
impossible)  as  to  utilise  it  for  the  elevation  of  the  moral
character  of  the  "  residuum."  There  are  reasons  why
this  must  be  so.  Your  superior  person  is  often  kindly
disposed  and  compassionate.  But  the  views  of  "  pro-
perty "  which  form  the  economic  condition  and  the  basis
of  his  superior  position  and  education  impel  him  to
emotional  and  "  unorganised  "  modes  of  charity.  He
is  often  willing  to  pay  subscriptions,  sometimes  to  sit  on
committees,  occasionally  to  do  actual  "  work  among  the
poor."  But  his  charitable  work  must  yield  direct  results
to  his  sense  of  pity.  This  temperament  is  capable  of
getting  into  kindly  personal  relations  with  poor  people,
but  not  upon  "  scientific  "  lines.

Not  merely  is  it  impossible  to  generate  this  spirit  of
scientific  charity  in  a  sufficient  number  of  superior
persons,  but  when  it  is  generated  it  is  commonly
ineffective.

The  theory  of  the  Charity  Organisation  Society  is  that
they  are  able  to  perform  a  twofold  work  :  (i)  To  find  all
relevant  facts;  (2)  To  stimulate  and  raise  the  individual
moral  character.  In  reality  they  can  do  neither.  The
kind  of  person  satisfied  with  the  narrow  illogical  position
of  the  Charity  Organisation  Society  has  educated  in
himself  a  view  of  human  nature  which  is  a  fatal  barrier
to  the  attainment  of  his  ends.  We  have  already  seen
that though the champions  of Charity Organisation


212 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

profess  to  include  in  their  range  of  study  "  a  full
acquaintance  with  the  wider  social  conditions  and  tend-
encies within  the  limits  of  which  we  work,"  in  reality
they  exclude  all  the  larger  operations  of  economic  forces,
confining  themselves  to  the  study  of  individual  cases.
But  do  they  get  at  the  vital  facts  in  their  "  cases  "  ?  I
doubt  it.  The  highly  cultivated  lady  or  gentleman  of
the  Charity  Organisation  Society,  with  keen  suspicions
and  some  detective  skill,  whose  mind  is  busied  with
knotty  points  of  Poor  Law,  or  delicate  problems  in  the
science  of  character,  is  just  the  person  whom  vital
human  facts  escape.  His  claim  to  be  the  only  skilled
investigator  is  a  ludicrously  foolish  one.  The  detective
qualities  required  for  certain  valuable  portions  of  his
work  are  just  fatal  to  the  attainment  of  the  full  facts.
They  can  only  disclose  certain  hard,  detached,  objective
facts,  the  definite  disqualifications,  which  play  the  largest
part  in  Charity  Organisation  reports.  The  subjective
human  facts  and  their  organic  relation  in  character  escape
record  or  appreciation  because  the  temperament  and
purpose  of  the  visitor  are  material  to  their  discovery.
The  "  case  "  does  not  truly  reveal  itself  because  it  feels
it  is  regarded  as  a  "  case."  The  mere  husks  of  fact,
suitable  for  tabulation  (a  process  which  full  human  facts
never  admit)  are  what  find  their  way  to  the  pigeon-holes
of  the  Charity  Organisation  Society's  oflice.  The  Charity
Organisation  Society's  ofl'icial  may  classify  a  case,
marking  it  out  by  a  number  of  black  dots,  but  he  cannot
and  does  not  understand  a  character.  This  is  the  large
fact  which  he  misses.  He  cannot  help  missing  the  most
material  facts.  The  essentially  "  inhuman  "  and  illogical
view  of  poverty  and  property  which  marks  the  theory  of
the  Charity  Organisation  thinker  vitiates  in  a  thousand
little  unseen  ways  the  quality  of  quick,  instinctive,
uncalculating  sympathy  which  is  somehow  necessary  to
extract  facts  from  the  poor.  The  very  voice  and  mode
of  speech  of  some  of  those  who  boast  their  close  contact
with  "  facts  "  must  be  insuperable  barriers  in  this  work.


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  213

Before  such  outward  signs  of  class  distinction  many-
essential  facts  close  themselves  like  clams.  The  same
opinions  and  moral  propensities  which  shut  from  their
eyes  large  orders  of  social  and  individual  facts  also
disable  them  as  stimulative  or  educative  influences.
There  is  a  strong  and  well  recognised  antagonism
between  the  detective  and  the  educator  even  on  the
plane  of  intellectual  education.  The  man  who  can  best
find  out  what  you  do  not  know  is  seldom  the  man  who
can  stimulate  an  interest  in  acquiring  knowledge,  or  can
best  aid  the  satisfaction  of  that  interest.  I  do  not  mean
that  the  educator  is  to  ignore  the  defects  of  his  pupils,  to
be  utterly  devoid  of  the  detective  faculty.  But  wherever
it  becomes  a  strong  feature  of  his  method  (and  it  is  very
apt  to  grow,  for  it  is  fed  by  constant  self-flattery)  it  eats
away  the  formative  stimulative  influence  which  is  the
teacher's  true  source  of  power.  Much  more  strongly
does  this  hold  of  education  which  is  not  primarily  intel-
lectual but  moral.  Here  the  protrusion  of  the  critical
faculty  is  fatal.

Very  few  persons  who  are  members  of  a  richer  and
better  educated  class  can  really  influence  their  poorer
neighbours  for  good.  Even  a  fairly  close  and  prolonged
experience  in  adult  years  can  seldom  give  direct,  as
distinguished  from  imaginative,  sympathy  with  the  ideas
and  estimates  of  a  poor  family;  the  little  diff"erences  of
manners  and  even  dress  form  an  aloofness  which  chills
the  atmosphere  of  free  familiarity  in  which  alone  the
deeper  individual  facts  emerge,  and  which  is  the  only
medium  of  transference  of  best  moral  influence  from  one
person  to  another.  A  single  breath  of  "  suspicion,"  the
unconscious  emission  of  a  class  point  of  view,  the
betrayal  of  some  little  diff"erence  in  feeling,  and  all  hope
of  influence  is  lost.  A  moral  genius  may  sometimes
descend  from  the  classes  and,  by  linking  himself  closely
to  the  life  of  the  people,  operate  powerfully  for  good
upon  the  minds  of  individuals.  Catholic  priests,  or
others  animated  by  an  absorbing  religious  motive,  have


214 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

done  this.  But  their  success  has  been  chiefly  attributable
to  some  of  those  very  qualities  which  the  Charity
Organisation  Society  repudiate  and  denounce.  They
have  been  enthusiasts,  even  fanatics,  filled  with  that  faith
which  for  its  efficient  working  requires  an  element  of
blindness  to  the  faults  and  foibles  of  others;  their  charity
has  been  temperamental  rather  than  "  organised  "  or
scientific;  their  remedies  have  been  "heroic."  They
have  lived  among  the  people  on  a  level  with  them,  and
have  not  occasionally  come  down  from  a  superior
position  to  dispense  "  moral  doles  "  to  their  inferiors.

A  sense  of  superiority  is  nearly  always  discovered  and
resented.  I  know  that  many  Charity  Organisation
Society  visitors  disown  this  sense  of  superiority.  Doubt-
less they  do  their  best  to  conceal  it.  But  the  unedu-
cated classes  are  preternaturally  keen  in  perceiving
it,  and  it  has  numberless  opportunities  for  oozing
out.  Moreover,  it  cannot  and  ought  not  to  be  concealed
— for  it  is  there.  These  persons  do  feel  they  are  morally
superior;  if  not,  what  is  the  power  which  they  affect  to
use.'*  They  are  not  drunkards;  they  are  not  thriftless;
they  are  not  given  to  petty  pilfering,  or  to  violent  assault
upon  the  person,  or  to  other  common  vices  or  defects  of
the  poorer  classes.  Now,  if  this  sense  of  moral  superiority
were  justified,  its  existence  would  be,  to  some  extent,
admitted  by  the  poor,  and  it  might  act  as  a  moral  lever.
But,  though  they  have  not  reasoned  the  matter  out,  the
poor  feel  and  know  that  they  are  not  fairly  matched  in
opportunity  with  their  "friendly  visitors";  they  feel
"  it  is  all  very  well  "  for  these  well-dressed,  nice-spoken
ladies  and  gentlemen  to  come  down  and  teach  them  how
to  be  sober,  thrifty,  and  industrious;  they  may  not  feel
resentment,  but  they  discount  the  advice  and  they
discount  the  moral  superiority.  In  a  blind,  instinctive
way  they  recognise  that  the  superiority  is  based  on  better
opportunity — in  other  words,  upon  economic  monopoly.
There  is  a  sense  in  which  he  who  would  save  the  souls
of  others  must  lose  his  own. This  saving  power  is


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  215

vigorously  expressed  in  a  little  poem  by  Edward
Carpenter,  which,  for  its  plain-spoken  truth,  might  well
be  pondered  by  the  Charity  Organisation  Society.

WHO ARE YOU  ?

Who  are  you  that  go  about  to  save  those  that  are  lost  ?

Are  you  saved  yourself  ?
Do  you  know  that  who  would  save  his  own  life  must  lose  it  ?

Are  you  then  one  of  the  "  lost  "  ?
Be  sure,  very  sure,  that  each  one  of  those  can  teach
you  as  much  as,  probably  more  than,  you  can  teach  them.
Have  you  then  sat  humbly  at  their  feet,  and  waited  on  their
lips  that  they  should  be  the  first  to  speak —
And  been  reverent  before  these  children —
whom  you  so  little  understand  ?

Have  you  dropped  into  the  bottomless  pit  from  between
yourself  and  them  all  hallucination  of  superiority,
all  flatulence  of  knowledge,  every  shred  of  abhorrence

and  loathing  f
Is  it  equal,  is  it  free  as  the  wind  between  you  ?
Could  you  be  happy  receiving  favours  from  one  of  the  most
despised  of  these  ?

Could  you  be  yourself  one  of  the  lost  ?

Arise,  then,  and  become  a  saviour.

Those  engineers  who  seek  to  lift  the  moral  nature  of
the  masses  by  means  of  a  force  which  they  think  will
emanate  from  their  correct  conduct  and  elevated  tastes
are  apt  to  be  hoist  with  their  own  petard.  Be  sure
your  "  illogic  "  will  find  you  out.  These  persons  are
not  wrong  in  saying  that  poverty  and  the  social  problem
have  a  moral  cause,  and  that  the  force  which  shall  solve
the  problem  may  be  regarded  as  a  moral  force;  but  they
are  wrong  in  the  place  where  they  seek  the  moral  cause.
It  will  be  found  ultimately  to  reside  not  in  the  corrupt
nature  of  the  poor,  worker  or  idler,  but  in  the  moral
cowardice  and  selfishness  of  the  superior  person,  which
prevent  him  from  searching  and  learning  the  economic
supports  of  his  superiority,  and  which  drive  him  to
subtle  theorising  upon  "  the  condition  of  conditions"  in
order  to  avoid  the  discovery  that  his  "  superiority  "  is
conditioned  by  facts  which  at  the  same  time  condition


21 6 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM .

the  "  inferiority  "  of  the  very  persons  whom  he  hopes
to  assist.  The  work  of  gradually  placing  "  property  "
upon  a  just  and  rational  basis,  offering  that  equality  of
opportunity  which  shall  rightly  adjust  effort  to  satis-
faction, is  a  moral  task  of  supreme  importance.  Let
those  who  shirk  such  labour  on  the  plea  that  it  consists
of  mere  external  or  mechanical  reforms,  and  who  prefer
what  they  consider  the  more  perfect  way  of  educating
the  individual  nature  of  the  sunken  masses,  ask  them-
selves the  plain  question,  why  they  fail  to  produce  any
appreciable  result.  They  will  then  find  they  cannot  exert
a  moral  educative  force  which  they  do  not  actually
possess,  and  that  they  do  not  possess  it  because  their
supposed  superiority  .is  not  a  moral,  but  ultimately  an
immoral  superiority  resting  upon  a  monopoly  of
material,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  opportunities.

Only  upon  the  supposition  that  environment  affords
equal  opportunities  for  all  can  we  possess  a  test  of
personal  fitness.  Then  only  should  we  be  justified,  after
due  allowance  for  accidental  causes,  in  attributing  the
evil  plight  of  the  poor  or  the  unemployed  to  personal
defects  of  character;  then  only  would  the  scientific
treatment  consist,  wholly  or  chiefly,  in  the  moral  training
of  the  individual.  As  matters  actually  stand,  the
philosophy  which  finds  the  only  momentum  of  social
reform  in  the  moral  energy  of  the  individual  members
of  the  masses  is  just  that  smart  sophistry  which  the
secret  self-interest  of  the  comfortable  classes  has  always
been  weaving  in  order  to  avoid  impertinent  and  incon-
venient searching  into  the  foundations  of  social
inequality.  This,  of  course,  involves  no  vulgar  imputa-
tion of  hypocrisy.  Most  of  the  men  and  women  who
hold  these  views  are  genuinely  convinced  of  their
accuracy.  But  they  have  permitted  the  subtle,  uncon-
scious bias  of  class  interests  and  class  points  of  view  to
limit  their  survey  of  the  facts  of  the  social  question,  to
warp  their  intelligence  in  the  interpretation  of  the  facts,
and  to  establish  false  theories  of  the  operations  of  moral


CHARITY  ORGANISATION  217

and  economic  forces,  so  as  to  yield  an  intellectual  basis
of  obstruction  to  all  proposals  of  practical  reform  in  the
structure  of  political  and  industrial  institutions.  Their
fault  is  not  that  they  are  too  hardhearted,  but  that  they
are  not  sufficiently  hardheaded  :  it  is  not  a  lack  of
feeling,  but  a  lack  of  logic.  They  are  simply  not  the
scientific  people  that  they  claim  to  be,  for  they  have  not
learned  to  think  straight  against  the  pressure  of  class
interests  and  class  prejudices.  Let  them  apply  the
reasoning  by  which  they  condemn  indiscriminate  charity
to  all  other  modes  of  transfer  of  property.  Let  them
accurately  study  the  nature  of  economic  bargains  in  the
light  afforded  by  the  writings  of  economists.  They  will
then  discover  how  much  truth  underlies  their  assumption
of  the  individual  responsibility  of  the  poor,  and  will
perceive  the  urgent  need  of  thoughtful  reforms  of
industrial  and  political  institutions,  with  the  object  of
securing  that  property  may  not  come  "  miraculously  "
to  any  individuals  or  classes  of  the  community,  and  that
all  equally  may  have  an  opportunity  of  rational  self-
realisation  in  forms  of  property  which  are  the  "  definite
material  representation  "  of  their  own  energy.  The
spurious  antithesis  of  "  moral  "  and  "  economic  "  in
methods  of  reform  they  will  reject  as  a  mere  piece  of
rhetorical  bluff,  recognising  that  every  well-ordered
reform  of  economic  structure  is  an  expression  of  the
moral  force  of  the  community,  the  "  general  will "
finding;  embodiment  in  some  stable  and  serviceable  form
of  social  support.


Chapter  IV
MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS

It  is  now  beginning  to  be  recognised  that  national
efficiency  requires  (among  other  things)  a  very  large
expenditure  of  money  upon  the  building  and  equipment
of  colleges  and  other  apparatus  of  higher  education.  It
is  not  possible  that  the  great  capital  and  current  expendi-
ture involved  in  this  work  can  be  supported  by  a  system
of  voluntary  fees.  In  Great  Britain,  as  indeed  elsewhere,
a  large  part  of  the  cost  of  higher  education  has  always
been  defrayed  out  of  charitable  endowments,  with  the
effect  of  depressing  the  commercial  value  of  the  com-
modity far  below  its  "  natural  "  rate.  So  long  as  higher
education  remained  a  virtual  monopoly  of  the  possessing
classes,  the  full  significance  of  this  dependence  did  not
appear :  it  was  not  felt  to  be  unreasonable  that  an
aristocracy,  resting  on  inherited  wealth  and  the  profitable
control  of  political  machinery,  should  absorb  the  use  of
the  quasi-public  property  devoted  to  purposes  of  an
intellectual  culture  which  seemed  out  of  keeping  with
the  life  of  the  trading  and  working  classes.  This  feeling
was  not  deeply  disturbed  by  the  part  played  by  culture
in  the  education  of  the  learned  professions,  so  long  as
those  professions  were  in  some  sense  an  appendage  of
aristocracy,  and  were  in  their  own  structure  close
corporations,  enjoying  privileges  in  official  salaries  and
other  emoluments  based  in  no  wise  upon  equivalence  of
service  or  the  higgling  of  the  market.  To  classes  living
so  largely  upon  unearned  incomes  and  privileges,  it
could  seem  no  matter  of  surprise,  still  less  of  ignominy,

ziS


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 219

that  they  should  get  their  education  out  of  charity.
But,  now  that  higher  education  is  deemed  no  longer  the
decoration  of  a  leisured  class,  or  merely  a  tool  for  certain
select  grades  of  intellectual  workers,  but  an  essential  of
sound  citizenship  in  a  civilised  state,  it  is  no  longer
possible  to  acquiesce  in  this  easy  virtue  of  a  policy  which
takes  whatever  it  can  get,  without  caring  to  inquire  into
the  implicit  terms  of  this  acceptance.

It  is  well  to  confront  without  flinching  the  first  salient
fact  of  the  situation,  the  utter  lack  of  funds  adequate  to
meet  the  demands  of  higher  education,  the  urgency  of
which  we  already  recognise;  for  it  is  this  urgency  that
constitutes  the  danger.  In  an  age  when  our  national
revenue  is  continually  strained  to  support  what  is
regarded  as  a  necessary  increase  of  expenditure  on
armaments,  the  public  purse  cannot  bear  the  cost  of
higher  education  :  where  millions  are  available  for  force,
thousands  must  suffice  for  culture.  So,  from  a  disbelief
in  the  possibility  of  self-help,  the  public  is  beginning  to
turn  to  private  charity;  rich  men  are  invited  to  make  up
the  deficiency  of  our  public  resources.

The  idea  is  by  no  means  confined  to  higher  education  :
a  whole  crop  of  public  wants  is  growing  up,  which  the
City  or  the  State  appears  to  be  too  poor  to  satisfy.  It
is  desirable  that  our  growing  cities  should  have  parks.
What  more  natural  than  that  some  large  ground  landlord
should  present  the  land.?  Hospitals,  public  baths,
libraries,  technical  schools  are  needed.  Why  not  find
some  rich  brewer,  banker,  manufacturer,  or  speculator,
and  let  him  "  acquire  merit  "  ?  The  ancient  practice  of
the  "  pious  founder  "  is  thus  being  developed  into  a
definite  social  doctrine  which  accords  to  the  millionaire  a
special  function  as  a  saviour  of  society.  The  United
States,  the  classic  soil  of  the  mushroom  millionaire,
exhibits  the  largest  and  most  numerous  examples  of  the
fruits  of  this  "  gospel  of  wealth,"  especially  in  its
application  to  higher  education.  It  has  been  estimated
that  the  annual  flow  of  large  donations  to  educational


220 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

work  during  recent  years  amounts  to  more  than  one
hundred  million  dollars.  Few  names  eminent  in  banking
and  railroad  circles,  as  trust-makers  or  successful  dealers
in  real  estate,  remain  unrecorded  in  some  great  building
devoted  to  the  encouragement  of  higher  learning.  The
huge  pile  of  college  buildings  which  stands  to-day  upon
the  grounds  of  the  Chicago  Exposition,  absorbing  a
portion  of  the  profits  of  the  famous  Oil  Trust,  is  only
the  most  conspicuous  example  of  a  numerous  species  of
collegiate  foundations  scattered  over  the  States,  the
product  of  the  charity  of  millionaires.  Not  only  the
new  colleges  which  in  scores  and  even  hundreds  are
springing  up  in  the  West,  the  Middle- West,  and  the
belated  South,  but  even  the  older  and  more  solidly
formed  universities  of  New  England  and  the  Eastern
States  are  continually  seeking,  and  obtaining,  new  large
bequests  and  donations  from  the  princes  of  industry  or
finance.  To  not  a  few  of  them  funds  have  flowed  so
quickly  that  they  have  difficulty  in  concealing  their
embarrassment  of  riches;  and  expensive  half-used
laboratories  and  other  superfluous  apparatus  of  learning
attest  their  unassimilated  wealth.  Closer  examination
will  doubtless  show  that  over-feeding  in  certain  depart-
ments is  attended  by  starvation  in  others,  that  the
special  interests  or  whims  of  donors  are  represented  by
abnormal  growths,  and  that,  in  particular,  too  much
money  goes  into  bricks  and  mortar  and  the  outward
visible  signs  of  educational  activity,  too  little  into  the
inward  graces  of  the  intellectual  life.  Everywhere  we
find  the  "  campus  "  with  its  huge  departmental  build-
ings, its  law  and  engineering  schools,  museum,  libraries,
laboratories,  gymnasium,  theatre,  the  enormous  staff  of
highly  specialised,  unevenly  equipped,  and  ill-paid
professors  grinding  out  interminable  courses  of  lectures
and  turning  out  sheaves  of  printed  matter  for  the
University  press.  An  ever-swelling  output  of  rapidly
produced  intellectual  commodities,  good,  bad,  and
indifferent,  is  hurriedly  swallowed  by  earnest  hordes  of


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 221

industrious  but  often  ill-grounded  students,  young  men
and  women  fresh  from  farm  or  forcing  city  High
School,  to  be  whirled  through  an  intellectual  factory
which  shall  stock,  shape,  and  stimulate  their  minds,
depositing  them  as  rudimentary  teachers,  lawyers,
engineers,  or  clergymen,  when  they  have  passed  through
the  several  productive  processes.

A  strained  activity  of  academic  machinery,  a  wasteful
competition  in  volume  of  intellectual  output,  and  a
marked  subordination  of  the  slower,  finer,  less  demon-
strable processes  of  disinterested  culture  to  the  quicker,
cruder,  more  showy  forms  of  utilitarian  achievement,
are  plain  effects  of  a  higher  education  which  reflects  the
valuations  of  the  nouveaux  riches  who  supply  the  funds.
It  is  doubtless  true  that  these  defects  of  intellectual
valuation,  imposing  short-range,  quantitative,  utilitarian
tests,  are  not  confined  to  millionaire  influences,  but  are
natural  fruits  of  the  swift  growth  in  mechanical  industry
of  which  America  is  the  foremost  exponent.  But  this
makes  it  only  the  more  exigent  that  the  practical  control
of  the  educative  forces  designed  to  correct  these  defects
of  valuation  shall  not  rest  in  the  hands  of  those  very
men  who,  by  their  pecuniary  achievements,  are  attested
to  be  the  fittest  representatives  of  the  false  standards  of
their  age  and  nation.  The  great  fortunes  in  America  out
ot  which  these  endowments  and  donations  come  to  the
support  of  colleges  are  in  a  few  rare  instances  owned  by
men  or  women  who  have  inherited  them,  and  who  may
claim  to  belong  to  an  educated  leisured  class;  in  the
great  majority  of  cases  they  have  come  to  their  present
owners  as  the  result  of  an  early  and  constant  absorption
in  business  processes,  in  which  assiduity,  economy,  alert-
ness, and  skill  have  been  inextricably  interwoven  with
luck,  fraud,  force,  and  every  sort  of  predatory  practice.
It  is  no  part  of  my  purpose  here  to  analyse  in  detail  the
necessary  origins  of  great  fortunes;  but  there  are  scarcely
any  great  American  fortunes  into  which  corruptly-gotten
charters or tariff-aid, illegal railroad practices, land


222 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

speculation,  over-capitalisation,  Wall  Street  gambling,
do  not  enter  largely  as  ingredients.  There  is  so  much
plasticity,  so  much  apparent  incongruity  in  human
nature,  that  rare  individuals  emerge  from  such  a  struggle
retaining  generous  impulses,  elevated  aspirations,  and  a
desire  to  help  their  fellows  by  a  contribution  of  large
sums  of  money  to  causes  of  social  service.  But  the
conditions  under  which  such  wealth  has  been  acquired
are  such  as  must  normally  disqualify  its  owners  for  a
wise  and  socially  serviceable  administration  of  a  public
"  trust."  If  to  the  rare  instances  where  the  acquisitive
aptitude  is  conjoined  with  some  higher  tastes  and  far-
sighted  discrimination  of  values,  we  add  the  far  more
numerous  cases  where  pride  of  patronage,  pressure  of
public  opinion,  indulgence  of  a  fad,  loose  sentimen-
talism,  are  the  dominant  motives,  we  shall  come  nearer
to  a  recognition  of  the  peril  of  a  higher  education
directed  by  millionaires.

I  am  aware  that  these  general  alarms  will  not  weigh
much  with  most  English  educationists,  who  are  too
deeply  concerned  with  the  troubles  of  poverty  to  heed
those  which  come  from  plethora.  Like  the  Irishman  be-
holding a  man  lying  along  the  roadside  in  a  state  of  com-
plete alcoholic  stupefaction,  they  will  be  inclined  to  wish
for  "  half  his  malady."  So  urgent  is  the  need  for  money
in  the  equipment  of  our  hio^her  educational  system,  that
educationists  seem  generally  willing  to  shut  their  eyes
and  open  their  mouths  in  order  to  receive  whatever  they
can  induce  millionaires  to  give  them.  It  is,  in  their
judgment,  sheer  captiousness  or  ignoble  cynicism  to
look  such  gift-horses  in  the  mouth.  "  What  matter  how
the  money  comes  if  we  have  the  spending  of  it  ?  "
represents  the  "  common-sense  view"  which  is  prevalent.

If  we  adopt  this  "  common-sense  view,"  refusing  to
enter  into  origins  or  motives,  and  accepting  donations
from  all  sources,  we  are  bound  to  defend  the  position
that  origins  and  motives  can  exercise  no  appreciably
injurious  influence  on  uses. Now  is  it  a  true  or  a


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 223

reasonable  proposition  that  dependence  upon  the  large
benefacticjns  of  contemporaries  has  no  tendency  to  injure
the  efficiency  of  a  university,  and  in  particular  to  impair
its  liberty  of  teaching  ?  On  these  important  questions
recent  American  experience  is  closely  relevant.  The
educational  needs  of  our  population,  and  the  economic
interests  and  business  methods  which  produce  great
fortunes,  are  substantially  the  same  in  the  two  countries.
The  existence  in  Great  Britain  of  a  small  number  of
great  families  in  enjoyment  of  inherited  fortunes  from
land  or  trade  does  not  materially  impair  the  analogy,  for,
though  our  older  seats  of  learning  sometimes  court  this
class  with  academic  decorations,  it  is  the  new  rich,  with
their  ampler  superfluity  of  income  over  conventional
expenditure,  that  form  the  real  hope  of  the  educational
anp-ler.  Now  no  student  of  American  hicjher  education
can  fail  to  perceive  that  the  living  hand  is  there  far  more
oppressive  than  the  dead.  A  first  conspicuous  result  of
this  necessity  is  seen  in  the  personnel  of  the  College
President.  An  advertising  presence  and  deportment  for
public  occasions,  personal  weight  and  persuasiveness  in
wealthy  quarters,  plausibility,  tact,  adroitness,  and,  in
general,  the  business  equipment  of  a  successful
"  beggar,"  form  the  first  and  most  indispensable  re-
quisites. Scholarship,  science,  or  philosophy  is  a
decorative  parergon,  the  serious  cultivation  of  which  is
inconsistent  with  the  duties  of  a  president.  Even  the
work  of  internal  administration  must  be  subordinated  to
the  necessity  of  keeping  the  claims  and  needs  of  the
college  before  the  public  in  such  wise  as  to  recommend
it  to  the  favour  of  the  rich.  A  College  President  regards
it  as  an  important  function  of  his  office  to  take  a  leading
part  in  all  sorts  of  non-academic  gatherings,  save  those
closely  associated  with  machine  politics,  and  to  deliver
public  addresses  upon  all  manner  of  "  subjects  of  the
day."  On  morals,  education,  economics,  literature,
civics,  and  politics,  not  merely  in  their  graver  academic
bearings,  but  as  practical  issues  of  current  conduct,  the


224 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

College  President  is  regarded  as  a  standing  counsel  to
the  public. On  the  great  public  questions  of  the  last
few  years,  the  Philippine  annexation,  the  anthracite  coal
strike  and  the  wider  aspects  of  relations  between  capital
and  labour,  the  policy  of  curbing  Trusts,  the  Panama
Question,  and  the  recrudescence  of  race-feeling  in  the
South,  College  Presidents  have  been  incessantly  talking
on  public  platforms,  and  writing  in  the  Press,  not  at  all
in  the  capacity  of  specialists  bringing  some  particular
points  of  academic  learning  to  bear  on  new  events,  but  as
intellectual authorities at large. All this implies a
diversion  of  energy  from  that  work  of  close  internal
administration  which  is  so  all-important  in  the  building
up  of  a  new  edifice  of  learning.  Where  ancient  traditions
prevail,  less  depends  upon  the  personality  of  a  president;
but  in  a  new  seat  of  learning  it  is  a  prime  condition  of
successful  progress  to  secure  a  man  whose  first  aptitude
and  whose  absorbing  interest  are  those  of  an  education-
ist, not  those  of  a  public  character  or  a  skilful  mendicant.
Every  well-informed,  thoughtful  American  can  point
out  a  score  of  ambitious  colleges  which  are  suffering  in
their  early  growth  from  their  showy,  scheming  presi-
dent, whose character is impressed on their plastic
institutions. The  college  dependent  on  private  dona-
tions is  driven  to  cultivate  the  arts  of  advertisement :  it
must  show  numbers  of  students  rather  than  quality  of
work,  it  must  lean  to  utilitarian  studies,  or  captivate  the
imagination  and  the  purse  of  impressionable  benefactors
by  novelty  of  projects  and  experiments. Though  this
spirit  of  novelty  has  advantages  which  I  would  not  decry,
it  certainly  involves  much  waste  and  some  considerable
dangers in the early growth of higher educational
establishments.

The  vulgar  saying  that  "  he  who  pays  the  piper  calls
the  tune  "  is  operative  here  as  elsewhere.  A  college
which  makes  itself  dependent  for  its  capital  or  income
upon  the  munificence  of  rich  donors  will  submit  its
teaching  to  be  moulded  by  the  will  of  these  donors;  and


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 225

this  will  must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  conflict  with
the  true  order  of  educational  growth.  The  real  nature  of
the  growing  control  of  the  American  millionaire  over
the  higher  education  of  America  is  very  subtle;  and  its
subtlety  will  be  imitated  here,  if  we  submit  our  educa-
tional formr^  to  the  same  pressure.  The  explicit  con-
ditions which  may  be  attached  to  large  bequests  or
donations  form  the  least  of  the  dangers.  Most  colleges
of  any  standing  would  have  enough  dignity  or  discretion
to  reject  gifts  accompanied  by  express  conditions  which
visibly  and  grossly  infringed  liberty  of  research  or  of
teaching,  or  imposed  any  palpably  injurious  test.  Though
an  uneven  or  lop-sided  development  of  education  is
often  due  to  conditioned  donations,  this  has  some  ten-
dency to  right  itself  by  directing  subsequent  munificence
to  the  neglected  parts;  and  in  no  case  can  it  be  regarded
as  a  permanently  serious  damage.

Nor  does  the  real  dimension  of  the  danger  appear  in
/any  personal  attempt  of  the  living  founder,  or  other  large

,  benefactor,  to  interfere  with  the  teaching  of  the  college,
though  some  instances  of  such  interference  have  recently

'  disgraced  the  annals  of  higher  education  in  America.
The  dismissal  of  Professor  Bemis  from  his  professorship
of  Political  Economy  at  Chicago  University  for  taking
part,  as  a  citizen,  in  a  movement  for  municipalisation  of
industry  opposed  to  the  interests  of  Mr.  Rockefeller,
the  founder  of  the  University,  and  the  dismissal  of
Professor  Ross  from  the  professorship  of  Sociology  in
the  Leland  Stanford  University  for  expressing  certain
economic  and  political  opinions  which  aroused  the  resent-
ment of  Mrs.  Stanford,  are  the  most  familiar  instances
of  an  extreme  abuse  of  patronage  which  wrought  the
gravest  injury  upon  the  reputation  of  two  important
universities,  and  aroused  a  feeling  of  insecurity  among
scores  of  other  colleges  similarly  fed  out  of  the  profits

' of  monopolies  or  privileged  interests. In  well-informed

'i  academic  circles  in  America  I  have  heard  many  instances
of  less  open and direct interference  with liberty  of


226 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

teaching,  indicating  that  munificent  donors  were  not
indifferent  to  the  uses  to  which  their  donations  were  put.
Why  should  they  be  ?  What  more  natural  than  that  Mr.
Rockefeller,  or  his  confederates  in  the  Oil  Trust,  should
object  to  a  plain  handling  of  the  Trust  issue  with  local
illustrations,  or  should  object  to  their  money  supporting
a  teacher  who  was  engaged  in  helping  to  break  their
control  over  the  gas  monopoly  in  Chicago  ?  Why  is  it
to  be  expected  that  the  widow  of  a  Cali(ornian  million-
aire, who  made  his  rapid  pile  out  of  cheap  Chinese  labour
and  land  speculation,  should  value  perfect  liberty  of
speech  so  highly  as  to  endure  what  seemed  to  her  false
and  pestilent  pronouncements  on  the  Land  and  Immi-
gration Questions.'*

But  these  may  well  be  taken  as  abnormal  instances  of
a  sort  of  interference,  to  which  it  may  seem  extravagant
to  suggest  that  any  English  seat  of  learning  would
consent  to  be  subjected.  Self-respecting  academic
bodies  in  this  country,  it  will  be  urged,  may  be  trusted
to  resent  the  least  approach  to  meddling  on  the  part  of
actual  or  would-be  patrons.  Self-respecting  colleges  in
America  use  similar  language  in  seeking  to  reconcile
economic  dependence  with  academic  liberty.  Rich  men
with  generous  impulses,  touched  by  admiration  of  their
work,  place  large  sums  of  money  at  their  disposal,  which
they  utilise  as  a  public  trust  in  the  sacred  cause  of
education !  Where  conditions  are  attached,  the  limita-
tion commonly  arises  upon  the  suggestion  of  the
college,  which  announces  some  special  need  for  an  exten-
sion of  material  plant  or  teaching  staff.  This,  it  is
stoutly  maintained,  involves  no  loss  of  liberty.  Such  is
the  theory  of  the  function  of  the  millionaire-donor
genuinely  held  by  many  American  educationists;  and,
though  it  ignores  the  arts  of  stimulation  which  commonly
precede  the  "  spontaneous  "  bounty,  it  contains  a  large
element  of  truth.  There  is  little  direct  interference  by
donors,  and  very  little  sense  of  loss  of  liberty.  The
graver  peril  is  a  more  insidious  one. It  is  not  the  past


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 227

or  present,  but  the  future  patron,  whose  influence  curbs
liberty — the  unknown  prospective  donor  whose  good-
will must  be  conciliated,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same
thing,  his  ill-will  averted.  For,  in  order  to  provide  for
educational  growth,  a  constant  succession  of  donations
is  desired.  Now  it  is  idle  to  pretend  that  this  necessity
will  not  impose  upon  college  officials  a  sort  of  discretion
not  exclusively  determined  by  educational  considera-
tions. The  new  rich,  like  others,  have  their  special
interests  and  susceptibilities  in  politics,  in  trade,  and
sometimes  in  religion;  in  special  States  or  cities  these
interests  may  be  rigorously  defined,  and  certain  plain
differences  of  social  and  even  of  ethical  outlook  will
mark  what,  for  convenience,  may  be  called  the  million-
aire class  in  America  or  in  England.  Now,  so  long  as
the  older  educational  traditions  kept  colleges  absorbed
upon  dead  languages,  the  mathematics,  and  those  sciences
which  did  not  nearly  affect  living  human  interests,  no
difficulty  would  arise,  except  an  occasional  flare-up  in
the  department  of  theology.  But  the  new  trend  of
higher  education  is  towards  an  increasing  stress  upon
studies  replete  with  modern  human  issues  and  charged
with  explosive  subject-matter.  A  modern  university
sets  an  ever-growing  importance  upon  modern  history,
economics,  and  other  social  sciences,  while  its  philosophy,
psychology,  and  even  its  biology  seethe  with  political
and  economic  implications.

It  is,  of  course,  possible,  on  paper,  to  mark  out  a
mode  of  academic  handling  which  shall  maximise
the  light  and  minimise  the  heat  of  this  inflammatory
matter.  But  there  can  be  no  way  of  securing  a  live
effective  treatment  of  many  of  the  subjects  which  is  not
liable  to  offend  the  feelings  of  the  donor  class.  This
will  apply  with  peculiar  force  to  the  departments  of
economics  and  sociology.  It  would  be  childish  to  pre-
tend that  a  scientific  analysis  of  the  subjects  of  rents
and  monopolies,  which  exposed  the  economic  and  moral
soil  out  of  which  great  mushroom  fortunes  grow,  will


228 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

recommend  a  university  to  the  munificence  of  the
possessors  of  such  fortunes.  The  soreness  which  appears
everywhere  in  academic  centres  of  America  when  this
question  is  broached,  is  itself  a  strong  testimony  to  the
reality  of  the  danger.  It  is  not  so  much  a  matter  of
heresy-hunting  or  forcible  suppression,  as  of  selection.
The  tendency  is  to  find  "  safe  "  men,  who  will  find
"  safe  "  materials,  for  "  sound  "  handling.  Teachers,
programmes,  text-books  are  all  subjected  to  careful
sifting.  The  process  is  of  course  somewhat  precarious.
In  several  "  kept  "  universities,  men  of  very  advanced
views  are  members  of  the  teaching  staff;  indeed  their
presence  is  commonly  adduced  as  an  answer  to  the  charge
of  millionaire  control.  But  the  fact  is,  that  no  man
known  to  be  of  advanced  views  would  be  appointed  to
such  a  post;  and  considerable  discretion  must  be  exerted
in  the  avoidance  of  the  detailed  subject-matter  which
carries  the  explosives.  Again,  advanced  doctrine  may
be  tolerated,  if  it  is  kept  well  in  the  background  of  pure
theory;  but,  where  it  is  embodied  in  concrete  instances
drawn  from  current  experience,  the  pecuniary  prospects
of  the  college  are  instinctively  felt  to  be  endangered.

Now  it  is  evidently  not  the  function  of  a  teacher  to
assume  the  role  of  a  social  agitator  in  his  class  room;
and  the  difficulty  which  must  arise  in  severing  the  per-
sonality and  duties  of  a  teacher  from  those  or  a  citizen
may  reasonably  be  held  to  impose  special  moderation
upon  a  professor  of  economics  or  politics,  who  takes  an
active  part  in  public  affairs  in  his  capacity  of  citizen.
But  the  attempt  to  argue  that  these  restraints,  imposed
purely  in  the  interests  of  education,  preclude  a  thorough
treatment  of  the  actual  phenomena  of  industry  and
politics,  enforced  by  live  instances  drawn  from  the
"  here  and  now,"  is  a  virtual  repudiation  in  the  depart-
ment of  the  social  sciences  of  what  are  elsewhere
recognised  to  be  the  soundest  scientific  methods  of
instruction.  Again,  to  require  of  men,  whose  know-
ledge and  training  peculiarly  qualify  them  to  give  light


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 229

and  leading  to  their  fellow-citizens,  that  they  shall
abstain  from  active  participation  in  public  movements
where  interests  are  divided  and  strong  feelings  are
evoked,  is  a  policy  of  moral  and  intellectual  mutilation,
as  degrading  to  those  who  are  curtailed  in  their  citizen-
ship, as  it  is  injurious  to  the  public.

It  will  not  be  easy  for  academic  authorities  in  this
country,  wedded  to  antique  standards  of  educational
values  and  admitting  the  new  studies  with  slow  reluct-
ance, to  realise  the  size  of  the  issue.  Oxford  and
Cambridge,  with  their  existing  curricula  of  studies,
might  receive  little  injury  from  the  munificence  of
millionaires;  such  gifts  might  even  help  to  liberalise
and  modernise  their  teaching — within  certain  limits.*
But  our  new  colleges  in  the  industrial  towns  must  found
their  culture  upon  a  more  modern  standard  of  values,  in
which  the  sciences  and  the  literatures  charged  with
current  human  interests  play  a  larger  part,  and  where,
moreover,  the  claims  of  professional  training  will
reinforce  the  modern  movement.  Culture  and  utility
will  conspire  to  give  to  such  studies  as  political  economy,
psychology,  law,  modern  history,  and  modern  literature,
places  or  great  prominence  in  the  higher  education  of
efficient  citizens.

The  intellectual  traditions  and  vested  interests  in  this
country  are  so  conservative,  that  it  will  be  no  easy  matter
for  the  new  studies  to  make  good  a  claim  which  to  our
academic  authorities  will  appear  preposterously  arrogant.
The difficulty of this conflict will  impose sufficient

*  These  limits  are,  however,  tranjgressed  by  the  conditions  attached  to  the  recent
endowment  of  teaching  in  Colonial  History  by  Mr.  Beit  at  Oxford.  The  subject,
as  defined  by  the  donor  and  accepted  by  the  University,  is  one  which  gives  great
prominence  to  the  History  of  the  South  African  Colonies,  in  whose  recent  story
Mr.  Beit  and  his  business  associates  have  played  so  prominent  a  part.  Does  any
thoughtful  person  believe  that,  if  scientific  historians,  appointed  under  this  trust,
apply  their  science  to  a  faithful  analysis  of  the  actual  influences  exerted  upon
politici  m  South  Africa  by  the  financial  combination  of  which  De  Beers,  Wernher,
Beit,  and  Co.,  and  the  Chartered  Company  are  chief  constituents,  the  trust  will  be
renewed  at  the  expiration  of  its  term  of  probation  ?  If  he  does,  a  careful  study  of
the  "educational  propaganda"  conducted  through  the  Press,  the  political  party,
and  the  pulpit,  by  Mr.  Beit  and  his  friends,  during  recent  years,  may  help  to
enlighten  him.


230 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

timidity  upon  the  new  aspirants  in  the  formulation  of
their  studies  and  the  methods  of  their  pursuit.  Unless
there  is  financial  independence,  it  is  easy  to  perceive
that  this  timidity  will  prove  most  detrimental  to
efficiency  of  teaching  and  to  the  progress  of  the  sciences.
If  the  rulers  of  these  new  colleges  are  conscious  of
dependence  on  the  voluntary  favours  of  the  rich  for  the
needed  accessions  to  their  income,  a  secret,  usually
unconscious,  but  persistent  spirit  of  repression  will  per-
vade the  college,  determining  the  choice  of  teachers,
ordering  the  curriculum,  and  making  for  intellectual
quietism  which  will  be  misnamed  "  thoroughness."
Those  studies  will  suffer  most  where  freedom  and  some
measure  of  originality  are  most  needed;  the  wings  of
thought,  kept  clipped,  will  not  pass  beyond  the  careful
barriers  of  orthodoxy.  Let  me  put  the  case  quite
plainly.  The  bolder  thinkers  in  the  forefront  of  the
modern  sciences  which  touch  the  conduct  of  man  and
of  society  are  undermining,  by  newly  organised  know-
ledge, many  of  the  supports  of  the  existing  social
system — religious,  moral,  political,  and  economic;  and
their  analysis  is  being  made  the  basis  of  strong  attacks
upon  the  fortresses  of  privilege.  These  forces  seem  to
many  to  converge  in  a  movement  against  those  organisa-
tions of  capital  and  business  enterprise  which  are
producing  millionaires.  The  rich  are  everywhere
becoming  more  conscious  of  the  perils  of  a  movement
which  represents  itself  to  their  eyes  as  an  attack  upon
the  institution  of  property.  This  danger  they  associate
with  others  threatening  the  ecclesiastical,  political,  and
social  institutions  with  which  they  have  formed  an
instinctive  alliance  for  mutual  defence.  Is  it  likely
that  this  class  will  finance  colleg^es  which  are  free  to
promote  "  revolutionary  "  doctrines  under  the  name  of
science,  philosophy,  or  literature.''  Nay!  Is  it  not
reasonable  that  they  will  use  their  financial  powers  to
purchase  the  sort  of  intellectual  support  they  need,
endow  colleges  which  shall  teach  a  safe  economics  and


MILLIONAIRE  ENDOWMENTS 231

a  sound  sociology,  and  expel  the  organic  conception  of
society  from  ethics  and  philosophy  ?

Those  who  have  studied  the  history  of  the  develop-
ment of  the  classical  political  economy  in  this  country
well  know  how  such  a  class  defence  can  be  secretly  con-
structed, by  persistent  selection  and  rejection  among  the
ideas  and  formulae  of  a  plastic  science.  In  such  a
manipulation  of  intellectual  forces  there  is  little  con-
sciousness attending  the  process,  either  among  the
manipulators  or  the  manipulated.  There  may  be
keen-witted  business  men  who  know  that  it  is  good
business  to  endow  a  School  of  Commerce,  as  it  is  to
build  a  church;  there  may  be  college  professors  who
recognise  that  their  views  are  being  formed  or  modified
by  consideration  for  the  welfare  of  the  college.  But  it
is  quite  unnecessary  to  assume  dishonesty  or  conscious
cunning;  the  instinct  of  self-protection  works  more
surely.  If  the  class  from  which  rich  donations  come
has  any  private  interest  opposed  to  that  of  the  public,
these  donations  will  serve  to  buy  off  close  scrutiny  into
that  interest,  and,  if  necessary,  will  select  thinkers  who
shall  formulate  a  specious  defence  of  its  privileges,  and
teachers  who  shall  propagate  its  views.  Although  the
free  development  and  teaching  of  Political  Economy
would  suffer  most  in  such  colleges,  other  subjects  would
be  exposed  to  similar  corruption  and  retardation,  in
proportion  to  their  capability  of  harbouring  dangerous
doctrine.  Endowments  of  colleges  proceeding  from
vested  interests  will,  in  effect,  be  devoted  to  the  defence
of  those  interests;  and  the  cause  of  education  will  suffer
accordingly.

The  deceitfulness  of  riches  is  such,  that  it  will  induce
colleges  to  a  contemptuous  denial  of  this  inevitable
chain  of  moral  and  economic  causation.  Unless  the
popular  intelligence  can  be  made  alive  to  the  urgency
of  the  danger,  our  new  system  of  higher  education  will
be  a  mortal  enemy  to  the  cause  of  democracy.  If  we
once have established in our  centres of  population


232 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

colleges  which  are  founded  by  millionaires  and  expect  to
be  fed  by  millionaires,  an  era  of  castrated  culture  is  the
inevitable  sequel.  The  doctrine  of  individual  self-help
has  been  dinned  into  our  ears  ad  nauseam  :  it  is  an
essentially  false  doctrine,  because  no  individual  is
capable  of  self-help  in  the  full  sense  that  is  implied.
But  a  city,  a  nation,  is  capable  of  self-help.  If  then  an
individual  is  degraded  by  charity,  if  his  self-reliance  and
energy  are  sapped  by  unearned  and  unmerited  gifts,
how  much  more  is  a  city  or  a  nation  injured  if  she
permits  individual  charity  to  do  for  her  what  she  ought
to  do  and  can  do  for  herself  .f'  Our  national,  our  civic
life  is  surely  demoralised  if  it  is  robbed  of  the  whole-
some effort  required  to  provide  out  of  our  own  resources
for  the  public  needs  of  education.  If  we  do  not,  as  a
nation,  so  value  education  as  to  take  the  course  which
nature  and  morals  alike  mark  out  for  its  attainment,  it
is  far  better,  hard  though  it  may  sound,  to  wait  for  our
colleges.  We  cannot  really  get  our  intellectual  efficiency
by  the  grace  of  millionaires.


Chapter  V
SOUTH  AFRICA :  A  LESSON  OF  EMPIRE

Those  who  ten  years  ago  insisted  with  so  much  assur-
ance upon  the  inevitability  of  war  in  South  Africa,
failed  to  recognise  that  the  sequel  of  the  war  was  equally
inevitable.  That  the  most  redoubtable  Boer  Generals,
who  eight  years  ago  were  in  the  field  against  our  troops,
should  be  in  London  imposing  on  the  British  Govern-
ment the  terms  of  a  national  Constitution  which  will
make  them  and  their  alHes  in  the  Cape  the  rulers  of  a
virtually  independent  South  Africa  is,  indeed,  one  of  the
brightest  humours  of  modern  history.  The  irony  grets  a
broader  touch  of  humour  when  Generals  Smuts  and
Hertzog  are  gravely  summoned  to  advise  in  the  defence
of  the  Empire.  The  general  view  of  the  British  public
towards  this  outcome  is  one  of  mingled  amazement
and  goodwill.  This  popular  sentiment  is  in  part  peni-
tence for  a  half-recognised  misdeed,  in  part  pride  in  our
magnanimity  and  in  part  a  curious  feeling  that  union
has  justified  the  war.  In  fact,  there  are  not  wanting
persons  who  believe  not  merely  that  there  would  have
been  no  union  without  the  war,  but  that  the  sole  motive
of  the  war  was  to  bring  about  the  union.  But  those
who  fasten  their  eyes  on  the  abiding  factors  in  the
history  of  South  Africa  know  that,  war  or  no  war,  the
achievement  of  political  union  between  the  free  self-
governing  States  lay  in  the  early  future  as  a  settled  fact.
Even  before  the  spread  of  railways,  and  the  new  direc-
tion thus  given  to  the  course  of  trade,  the  issue  was
assured. For though the premature endeavour of

233


234 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

British  statesmen  to  force  the  pace  by  pressure  from
without  in  1878,  and  again  by  conspiring  with  financial
politicians  on  the  spot  in  1895,  paralysed  for  a  time  the
internal  forces  working  for  union,  these  latter  had  too
much  vitality  to  suffer  more  than  a  brief  check.  Even
had  there  been  no  war,  the  needs  of  union  were  ripening
so  fast  that  it  is  quite  likely  that  consummation  might
have  been  achieved  as  early,  though  the  Dutch  supre-
macy which  it  embodies  and  assures  would  have
been  less  conspicuous  and  the  form  of  the  union  would
probably  have  been  less  closely  knit.  The  absence  of
strong  national  barriers,  save  in  the  case  of  Natal,  the
similarity  of  racial,  industrial,  political,  and  social  con-
ditions throughout  the  country,  the  free  interchange  for
purposes  of  business  and  or  settlement  between  the
white  inhabitants  of  the  several  States,  the  community
of  interest  in  customs,  transport,  education,  sanitation,
finance,  and  above  all  else,  in  native  policy,  were  forces
whose  acceleration  and  direction  were  constant  and
uniform.  The  devastation  of  the  war,  with  its  fearful
aftermath  of  poverty  and  universal  distress  may,  indeed,
have  precipitated  action  in  its  final  stage.  Adversity
makes  strange  bedfellows  and  perhaps  rendered  easier
that  co-operation  of  Boers  with  Randlords,  Bondmen
with  Progressives,  which  has  been  so  interesting  a
feature  in  the  making  of  the  Constitution.  One  thing  is
certain.  It  welded  into  a  passionate  spirit  of  unity  and
fixed  resolve  that  somewhat  torpid  and  precarious  sym-
pathy between  the  Dutch  of  the  Colony  and  of  the  two
erstwhile  Republics,  which  hitherto  had  failed  to  keep
them  to  any  lasting  co-operation.  So  defective,  indeed,
was  this  sympathy  before  the  war  that  within  a  single
decade  the  members  of  a  race  alleged  to  be  possessed
by  the  single  passion  to  drive  the  British  into  the  sea
were  several  times  upon  the  very  verge  of  an  armed
struggle  among  themselves  over  some  question  of  trade
or  of  right  of  way.  The  war  has  not  made  the  Union,
but  it  has  made  Dutch  mastery  within  the  Union. To


SOUTH  AFRICA  235

some  it  seems  that  the  present  control  of  the  Dutch
in  three  of  the  four  provinces  and  so  in  the  Union  is  the
mere  turn  of  the  scale  in  the  changing  fortunes  of  popular
election.  But  I  feel  sure  that  the  keen-witted  and  loyal
statesmen,  who  ten  years  ago  defeated  our  armies  and
to-day  rule  our  South  African  colonies,  gauge  the  situa-
tion more  truly.  Our  national  sentimentalism  befogs
our  vision.  It  delio;hts  us  to  imae-ine  that  at  the  close  of
a  bloody  and  prolonged  struggle,  in  which  we  wore
down  resistance  by  sheer  dint  of  numbers,  Briton  and
Boer  should  grasp  hands  of  friendship,  mutual  respect
warming  into  affection,  every  past  unpleasantness  at
once  forgotten,  and  all  determined  to  live  together
happily  for  ever  afterwards.  A  nice  propriety  of  loyal
speech  in  some  of  the  Boer  leaders  may,  indeed,  be
adduced  in  support  of  this  romantic  view  of  history.
But  it  is  foolish  for  those  who  wish  to  understand  and
estimate  the  future  of  the  country  where  such  bitter
deeds  were  done  to  accept  at  their  face  value  these  polite
assurances  of  oblivion.  Loyalty  under  a  flag  which  shall
allow  them  perfect  liberty  to  use  their  superior  solidarity
and  persistency  in  shaping  the  destiny  of  the  country
they  regard  as  peculiarly  theirs,  it  is,  indeed,  reasonable
to  expect,  but  forgetfulness  of  the  violence  of  the  con-
quest, of  the  thousands  of  children  whose  death  by
disease  and  starvation  in  the  concentration  camps
blackens  almost  every  family  record  in  the  two  new
colonies,  such  amnesty  is  not  bought  by  the  new  glory
of  entering  an  Empire  upon  which  the  sun  never  sets,
with  its  alien  heritage  of  history.

I  do  not  dwell  upon  this  necessary  imperfection  of
Imperial  sympathy  to  suggest  that  it  is  likely  to  affect
the  practical  relations  between  the  South  African  Union
and  Great  Britain.  When  the  Peace  of  Vereiniging  was
made,  the  future  of  South  Africa  was  marked  out  quite
irrespective  of  the  shifts  of  party  power  either  in  that
country  or  in  this.  If  Lord  Milner  had  looked  before
he  leaped  ten  years  ago,  he  would  have  recognised  that


236 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  surest  way  to  render  certain  for  the  future  that
"  dominion  of  Africanderdom  "  which  he  hated,  was  to
convert  the  two  Republics  by  force  into  two  self-govern-
ing British  Colonies.  For,  even  if  the  Government
which  had  made  the  war  had  kept  the  reins  of  office
afterwards,  with  Lord  Milner  as  their  authoritative
adviser,  the  utmost  they  could  have  achieved  would  have
been  a  postponement  of  complete  self-government  for
a  few  years,  accompanied  with  jerrymandering  of  con-
stituencies designed  to  favour  British  voters;  a  policy
which  might  have  goaded  the  Boers  to  political  reprisals
when  they  entered  on  the  full  colonial  status  which  the
first  entry  of  a  Liberal  Government  in  England  must
have  secured  to  them,  but  which  could  have  had  no
abiding  influence  upon  the  further  course  of  events.

But  though  it  is  probable  that  the  greater  stability
and  the  more  prolific  character  of  the  Dutch  will  make
them  the  chief  formative  stock  in  the  amalgam  of  the
new  South  African  nation,  while  the  persistence  of  the
Taal  and  of  the  Dutch-Roman  law  will  maintain
strongly  distinctive  features  in  this  section  of  our
Empire,  the  trend  of  national  development  will  hot
differ  materially  from  that  of  Canada  or  Australia,  so
far  as  its  relations  towards  Great  Britain  and  her  sister
nations  in  the  Empire  are  concerned.  How  are  these
relations  shaping.?  Among  those  who  accept  as  final
the  sharp  distinction  which  has  hitherto  been  drawn
between  those  white  colonies  ripe  or  ripening  for  self-
government  and  the  unfree  remainder  of  our  Empire,
it  is  natural  that  the  achievement  of  South  African
Union  should  bring  this  question  into  new  prominence.
For  to  Mr.  Chamberlain,  as  twenty  years  before  to  Lord
Carnarvon,  this  union,  however  desirable  upon  its  own
account,  had  its  chief  significance  as  a  step  towards  a
larger  federation,  or  other  reconstitution  of  the  self-
governing  sections  of  the  British  Empire.  Group
federation  was  to  be  followed  by  Imperial  Federation.
The former process is now nearly complete in the


SOUTH  AFRICA  237

Canadian  Dominion,  the  Australian  Commonwealth,
and  the  South  African  Union.  Whether  New  Zealand
elects  still  to  stand  alone,  or,  as  is  not  unlikely,  is  drawn
into  an  Australasian  union  by  the  supreme  need  of  a
strong  pacific  policy,  is  a  question  of  no  present  urgency.
Other  fragments  still  remain  for  inevitable  absorption,
Newfoundland  in  Canada,  Rhodesia  in  the  Soutn
African  Union.  But  does  this  grouping  of  adjoining
colonies  into  nations  evidently  favour  the  ideal  of  a
close  linked  British  Empire  of  which  Imperialists  have
dreamed  ?

Does  the  smaller  centralising  process  imply  the  larger
one  ?  The  general  trend  of  colonial  history  during  the
last  three-quarters  of  a  century  supports  no  such  implica-
tion. As  each  colony  has  grown  in  population,  wealth,
and  enterprise  it  has  persistently  asserted  larger  rights
of  independent  government  which  the  Mother  Country
has,  sometimes  willingly,  sometimes  reluctantly,  con-
ceded :  each  colony  values  among  its  most  prized
traditions  the  successful  resistance  to  some  acts  of
interference  on  the  part  of  the  Imperial  Government
which  it  has  deemed  injurious  to  its  vital  interests  or
offensive  to  its  sense  of  dignity,  some  endeavour  to
restrict  its  territorial  growth,  to  force  upon  it  undesirable
immigrants,  to  coerce  its  commercial  liberty.  But  in
general  the  colonial  lesson  contained  in  the  American
Revolution  has  sufficed  to  teach  us  acquiescence  in  the
continuous  assertion  of  larger  independence.  The
actual  bonds,  alike  political  and  commercial,  between  the
several  colonies  and  the  Mother  Country  have  been
growing  every  decade  weaker,  in  spite  of  the  greater
physical  accessibility  which  the  steamer  and  the  tele-
graph have  brought,  and  in  spite  of  the  great  machinery
of  modern  investment  which  every  colony  has  used  so
freely  to  draw  capital  from  Great  Britain  for  her  own
development.  Nor  is  it  without  significance  that  the
oldest  and  the  nearest  colonies,  and  those  which
federated  first  among  themselves,  have  gone  furthest


238  THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

in  the  practical  assertion  of  an  independence  which  now
leaves  Imperial  control  and  obligations  well-nigh
divested  of  all  corresponding  rights  even  in  issues  of
foreign  policy.

When  the  power  to  place  protective  tariffs  on  our
goods  and  to  make  their  own  commercial  treaties  with
foreign  countries  was  once  conceded,  it  needed  no  undue
insistence  upon  the  economic  interpretation  of  history
to  see  that  a  continual  evolution  both  of  commercial  and
of  political  self-sufficiency  must  follow.  As  each
colony  fell  into  federation  with  its  neighbours,  this
spirit  and  this  practice  of  autonomy  naturally  grew,  and
the  four  nations  now  forming  part  of  our  overseas
Empire  are  firmer  in  their  confident  self-sufficiency  than
ever  were  the  constituent  colonies.  Those  British
Imperialists  who,  with  the  events  of  the  last  few  years
before  their  eyes,  still  imagine  a  closer  Imperial  federa-
tion in  any  shape  or  form  practicable,  are  merely  the
dupes  of  Kiplingesque  sentimentalism.

It  is  true  that  these  colonies  sent  gallant  troops  (at
our  expense)  to  our  assistance  in  the  Boer  War,  and
that  for  purposes  of  Imperial  defence  the  British  Flag
may  remain  a  real  asset,  though,  as  the  recent  Confer-
ence will  clearly  show,  the  same  spirit  of  separatism
exhibited  in  politics  and  in  commerce  demands  that  even
in  defence,  National  shall  always  take  precedence  of
Imperial  interests.  Though  in  each  colony  aspiring
politicians  have  been  found  to  fan  Imperialist  sentiment
to  a  glow  and  to  utilise  the  heat  for  electoral  purposes
or  for  personal  glory,  these  bursts  of  effervescent  feel-
ing, however  genuine  while  they  last,  cannot  be  taken
as  serious  factors  in  the  shaping  of  their  national  policy.
The  pride  in  the  British  connection  may  bring  Canadian,
Australian  and  South  African  statesmen  to  toy  with
suggestions  of  political  or  commercial  federation  on
decorative  occasions  such  as  Imperial  Conferences :  it
may  even  evoke  some  sentimental  dole  of  preference
in  a  colonial  tariff,  or  some  eleemosynary  contribution


SOUTH  AFRICA  239

towards  a  British  fleet,  but  it  will  not  lead  the  people  of
these  countries  on  this  ground  to  abate  one  jot  or  one
tittle  of  their  fixed  determination  to  go  their  own  way,
to  develop  their  own  natural  resources  for  their  own
sole  advantage,  and  to  be  guided  in  all  important  acts  of
policy  by  purely  National,  as  distinct  from  Imperial,
objects.  The  very  notion  that  Canada,  Australia,  New
Zealand,  or  South  Africa  will  even  consider  the  advisa-
bility of  entering  a  close  political  union,  through  the
formation  of  some  Imperial  Council,  which,  whether
vested  with  legislative  powers  or  not,  could  only  act  by
restricting  liberties  hitherto  enjoyed  by  each  colonial
unit,  is  acknowledged  to  be  chimerical  by  most  of  those
who  in  the  'nineties  were  enamoured  of  the  project.

Mr.  Chamberlain  soon  saw  that  the  front-door  of
political  federation  was  shut,  bolted  and  barred.  He
thereupon  sought  the  tradesman's  entrance,  claiming  to
knit  the  colonies  and  the  Mother  Country  into  an  indis-
soluble union  by  means  of  a  set  of  preferences  which  he
hoped  might  eventually  give  free  trade  within  the
Empire.  We  now  perceive  that  the  appeal  to  com-
munity of  trading  interests  is  as  futile  as  was  the  earlier
appeal,  and  for  the  same  reason.  Each  of  our  offspring
nations  is  determined  to  consult  its  own  interests,  and
it  finds  that  these  interests  are  opposed  to  any  commer-
cial union.  This  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  such
commercial  union  to  be  valid  must  imply  some  sub-
ordination of  its  own  immediate  interests  to  the
co-operative  trading  ends  of  the  Empire,  and  to  such
restraint  it  will  not  submit;  secondly,  because  experi-
ence, as  registered  in  trade  statistics,  shows  that  its
commercial  interests  lie  more  in  the  development  of
profitable  trade  relations  with  foreign  countries  than  in
British  or  intra-Imperial  trade.  The  recent  commercial
history  of  Canada  and  Australia  proves  that  each  nation
has  made  up  its  mind  to  utilise  its  tariff  system,  first  for
its  own  industrial  development,  secondly,  for  its  own
financial  needs. If  British  preference  is  retained  at  all,


240 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

it  can  afford  no  substantial  gain  and  no  considerable
bond,  for  British  import  trade  must  neither  compete
with  colonial  industries  nor  hamper  the  colony  in  nego-
tiating special  trade  agreements  with  foreign  countries.
A  detailed  examination  of  Canadian  preference  proves
how  flimsy  is  this  bond  of  union.

It  remains  for  the  future  to  show  whether  Imperial
defence  can  draw  the  Empire  nearer  together,  or
whether  it  also  will  yield  to  the  disintegrating  forces.
One  thing,  however,  is  certain.  If  the  Colonial  Office
is  used  again  as  it  was  used  by  Mr.  Chamberlain  to
procure  offers  of  colonial  aid,  if  British  Governments,
Unionist  or  Liberal,  angle  for  colonial  gift-ships  by
scare-cables  with  crooked  phrases,  all  that  is  generous
and  genuine  in  the  colonial  concern  for  the  old  Mother-
land will  perish.  No  one  can  have  consorted  freely  with
colonial  visitors  last  summer  without  noting  the  tone
of  surprised  contempt  for  the  "  jumpy  "  nerves  evinced
during  the  months  of  the  German  panic.  The  impudent
perversion  of  the  Imperial  Press  Conference  to  the
same  single  purpose  provoked  significant  protests  from
leading  colonial  journalists  whose  indignation  was
aroused  at  the  materialistic  interpretation  given  by
British  statesmen  to  Imperial  unity.  Just  as  partici-
pation in  the  Boer  War  opened  the  eyes  of  Canadian
and  Australian  volunteers  to  the  military  weakness  of
England,  so  this  eager  pleading  for  Imperial  defence
rouses  reflections  upon  the  character  of  the  Empire,  the
risks  it  involves  for  the  self-governing  nations,  and  the
unequal  influence  which  they  will  exercise  in  deter-
mining Imperial  policy.  It  might  well  appear  a  pro-
fitable and  glorious  task  to  co-operate  in  the  protection
of  a  "  free,  tolerant,  unaggressive  Empire."  But
it  is  not  equally  glorious  or  profitable  for  a  free-born
Canadian  or  New  Zealander  to  enter  a  confederation
under  which  a  necessarily  dominant  partner  can  claim
his  blood  and  money  to  help  hold  down  India,  to  quell
some  struggle  for  liberty  in  Egypt,  or  to  procure  some


SOUTH  AFRICA  241

further  step  in  tropical  aggrandisement  at  the  bidding
of  some  mining  or  rubber  syndicate.  In  other  words,
it  is  our  huge,  "  unfree,  intolerant,  aggressive  "  Empire
which  may  well  give  pause  to  our  self-governing
colonies  when  invited  to  enter  a  close  unity  of  Imperial
defence.  For  this  Empire  is  no  real  concern  of  theirs,
they  have  nothing  in  common  with  its  modes  of  auto-
cratic government,  they  are  unwilling  even  to  admit  its
"  British  subjects  "  on  to  their  shores.  Why  then  should
they  feign  enthusiasm  for  an  Imperial  defence  mainly
directed  to  maintain  and  enlarge  this  unfree  Empire
by  quarrels  to  which  they  are  no  willing  parties,  in
which  no  true  interests  of  theirs  will  be  involved,  but  in
which  they  may  be  called  upon  to  squander  their
resources  and  even  risk  their  independence.

Though  the  full  logic  of  the  situation  may  not  yet
be  manifest,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  is  a  sound
prophetic  instinct  which  makes  colonial  statesmen  so
reluctant  to  commit  their  countries  to  any  of  those
schemes  of  close  central  control  which  our  home-made
Imperialists  have  been  so  anxious  to  bind  upon  them.
Nothing  is  more  significant  than  the  determined  way
in  which  the  Colonies,  Canada  leading,  are  urging  the
conditions  of  their  participation  in  Imperial  defence,
viz.,  the  priority  of  Colonial  to  Imperial  defence  with  all
its  necessary  limitations  in  Imperial  strategy,  and  the
retention  of  the  personnel  of  the  command  in  the  hands
of  the  Colonial  Government.

Of  the  real  meaning:  of  this  movement  there  can  be
no  doubt.  As  in  political  self-government  and  in  com-
merce, each  colonial  group  has  long  established  a  vir-
tually complete  autonomy,  so  now  it  is  proposed  to  take
over  the  duty  and  the  right  of  its  armed  defence  from
the  Mother  Country.  As  soon  as  the  so-called  "Imperial
Defence  "  is  consummated,  there  will  be  no  Imperial
troops  or  ships  in  the  "  free  "  colonies,  but  only  national
troops  and  national  ships.  Whatever  language  is
used  to  describe  this  new  movement  of  Imperial  defence

R


242 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

it  is  virtually  one  more  step  towards  complete  national
independence  on  the  part  of  the  colonies.  For  not  only
will  the  consciousness  of  the  assumption  of  this  task  of
self-defence  feed  with  new  vigour  the  spirit  of  nation-
ality, it  will  entail  the  further  power  of  full  control  over
foreign  relations.  This  has  already  been  virtually
admitted  in  the  case  of  Canada,  now  entitled  to  a
determinant  voice  in  all  treaties  or  other  engagements
in  which  her  interests  are  specially  involved.  The
extension  of  this  right  to  the  other  colonial  nations  may
be  taken  as  a  matter  of  course.  Home  rule  in  national
defence  thus  established  reduces  the  Imperial  connec-
tion to  its  thinnest  terms.

To  speculators  upon  the  larger  problems  of  history
it  will  be  a  particularly  interesting  and  delicate  consi-
deration whether  our  colonial  nations  will  best  consult
their  safety  and  their  liberty  in  the  future  by  remaining
formal  members  of  the  Empire,  sharing  both  the  risks
and  the  resources  of  this  association,  or  by  taking  their
destinies  entirely  into  their  own  hands,  forming  their
own  alliances,  and  meeting  out  of  their  own  resources
the  rarer  risks  which  might  attend  such  severance.

But  the  formation  of  the  South  African  Union
emphasises  in  another  way  the  instability  of  the  British
Empire.  "  I  believe  this  Government,"  said  Abraham
Lincoln,  "  cannot  endure  permanently  half  slave,  half
free."  Equally  true  is  it  that  no  abiding  unity  can  be
found  for  an  Empire  half  autocratic  and  half  self-
governing.  One  force  of  dissolution  we  have  already
recognised  in  the  divorce  alike  of  sympathy  and  interest
between  the  self-governing  colonies  and  the  rest  of  the
overseas  dominions  of  the  Crown.  But  the  corruption
of  self-government  itself  in  the  case  of  the  new  nation
is  a  perhaps  more  subtle  sign  of  weakness  and  decay.
The  Constitution  of  the  South  African  Union  is,
indeed,  in  some  respects  a  more  satisfactory  instrument
of  government  than  either  that  of  the  Canadian
Dominion  or  of  the  Australian  Commonwealth. In


SOUTH  AFRICA  243

this country it has been subjected to very little
criticism. Both  parties  appear  to  regard  the  sanction
of  the  Imperial  Parliament  as  an  act  destitute  of  real
responsibility. It is, indeed, understood that the
Colonial  Office  procured  some  minor  modifications  in
the  South  African  proposals. But  all  effective  criticism
or  amendment  was  denied  to  the  House  of  Commons
by a bold and very simple form of bluff. The
South  African  delegates,  who  came  here  to  impose  this
Act  of  Union,  were  well  aware  that  the  denial  of  any
real representation to civilised natives and coloured
people  over  the  greater  part  of  the  Union,  the  imperil-
ling of the  coloured franchise  in the  Cape, and,  in
particular, the formal adoption of a colour-line for
membership  of  the  Union  Assembly,  would  be  unwel-
come  to the majority  of  the members  of  the most
Liberal  Parliament  which  has  ever  sat  in  Westminster.
Aware that  any free  exercise of  Imperial legislative
power  would  amend  their  Act  so  as  to  secure  the  stan-
dard of  equality  formulated  by  Mr.  Rhodes,  "  equal
rights  for  all  civilised  men  south  of  the  Zambesi,"  they
agreed  upon  the  terse  formula  that  any  such  amendment
would  "  wreck  the  Union  " ! The  device  was  well  cal-
culated to secure  its  end. For  though it  is  utterly
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  South  African  States,
each  with such carefully  bargained ends to gain by
union,  would,  in  fact,  withdraw  their  sanction  because
the Imperial Government chose to exercise its un-
doubted right to secure for  the  majority  of  British
subjects  in  South  Africa  the  right  to  qualify  for  civili-
sation, the  firm  assertion  of  this  peril  proved  enough  to
overbear the opposition of all save a negligible
minority. It  was  inevitable  that  this  should  be  so.

The  fast  confederacy  of  Dutch  and  British  politicians
was  certain  to  bear  down  principles  of  Liberalism
already  compromised  and  enfeebled  by  acquiescence  in
the  modes  of  government  applied  in  India  and  Egypt  to
the  subjects  of  our  unfree  Empire.


244 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

So  it  has  come  about  that  a  Government  has  been
established  in  South  Africa,  in  form  resembling  that  of
Canada,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  in  substance  very
different.  To  describe  as  a  self-governing  nation  the
white  oligarchy  that  has,  with  our  connivance,  fenced
itself  against  admission  of  the  ablest  and  most  pro-
gressive members  of  races  living  in  their  midst  and  by
general  admission  capable  of  a  civilisation  at  least  as
high  as  that  of  the  ordinary  white  wage-earner,  is  an
outrage  to  political  terminology.  Deliberately  to  set  out
upon  a  new  career -as  a  civilised  nati.on  with  a  definition
of  civilisation  which  takes  as  the  criterion  race  and
colour,  not  individual  character  and  attainments,  is
nothing  else  than  to  sow  a  crop  of  dark  and  dangerous
problems  for  the  future.  Such  a  government,  such  a
civilisation,  must  fall  between  two  stools.  There  is,
indeed,  no  parallel  without  or  within  the  Empire  for
a  self-government  in  which  five-sixths  of  the  governed
are  excluded  from  all  rights  of  citizenship.  In  other
colonies  where  the  population  is  mainly  composed  of
"  lower  races  "  bureaucracy  is  never  more  than  tempered
by  representation,  and  that  representation  is  mostly  free
from  colour-lines  :  such  government  can  at  least  secure
order,  if  at  the  cost  of  progress.  It  is  conceivable
(though  our  Empire  affords  no  present  instance)  that
sound  order  and  political  security  might  be  obtained  by
a  white  oligarchy  which  kept  in  economic  servitude  the
lower  races  of  inhabitants,  barred  them  from  skilled
industries,  from  any  large  participation  in  modern  city
life,  and  from  religious  and  intellectual  instruction  of
any  kind.  This  was  virtually  the  old  Boer  policy,
though  adopted  as  readily  by  British  settlers  on  the
land;  it  was  absolutely  successful.  But  it  is  not  con-
formable to-day  either  to  the  conditions  or  the  senti-
ments of  the  more  progressive  white  citizens  of  South
Africa,  even  in  Natal.  There  is  no  intention  to  refuse
all  technical  and  intellectual  education  to  Zulus,  Fingos,
and  other  natives  capable  of  profiting  by  it : much  of


SOUTH  AFRICA  245

the  hard  work  which  Europeans  will  continue  to  require
and  will  refuse  to  do  themselves  involves  and  evokes
knowledge,  intelligence,  and  a  sense  of  personal  respon-
sibility. Not  even  the  most  carefully  sophisticated
Christianity  furnished  by  "  kept  "  white  missionaries,
can  prevent  the  democratic  doctrines  of  the  New  Testa-
ment from  doing  this  revolutionary  work.

To  take  away  the  political  liberties  enjoyed  for  a  third
of  a  century  in  Cape  Colony  would  prove  too  dan-
gerous :  to  leave  them  will  be  to  set  a  continuously
growing  ferment  at  work  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of  the  Union.  For  there  are  very  deep  and
very  real  native  grievances.  In  the  Transvaal  and
Orange  River  Colony  the  elementary  freedom  of  move-
ment from  one  place  to  another  is  denied,  the  right  of
buying  and  holding  land  is  denied  :  whenever  in  South
Africa  a  dispute  arises  between  a  white  and  a  coloured
man  it  is  tried  in  a  white  man's  court,  by  white  man's
justice.  Indeed  it  is  needless  to  labour  such  an  issue :
political  rights  are  everywhere  the  indispensable  condi-
tion of  civil  rights,  and  without  them  can  be  no  security
of  life,  liberty  and  property  for  an  "  inferior  "  race  or
class.

I  am  well  aware  that  public  opinion  is  very  unen-
lightened among  the  bulk  of  the  white  population  of
South  Africa.  Many  of  the  political  leaders  confess
themselves  favourable  to  a  carefully  restricted  native
franchise,  but  insist  that  "  the  people  will  not  have  it."
But  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  if  these  statesmen  had
taken  a  little  more  time  to  forecast  the  troubles  which
are  certain  to  arise  from  an  essentially  inconsistent
native  policy,  such  as  I  have  here  described,  they  would
have  thrown  the  full  weight  of  their  personal  authority,
never  likely  to  be  greater  than  now,  against  the  popular
prejudice,  and  have  welcomed  the  aid  of  our  Liberal
Government  to  support  a  Constitution  free  from  this
stain  of  colour.  There  can  be  no  enduring  peace,  no
steady  progress  and  prosperity  in  a  South  Africa  where


246 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  vast  bulk  of  the  work  of  industry  is  done  by  men
who  are  denied  all  opportunity  to  participate,  propor-
tionately to  their  proved  capacity,  in  the  government  of
the  country  which  is  morally  theirs,  in  the  sense  that
they  are  genuinely  interested  in  it,  and  have  put  their
personal  effort  into  its  development.

At  the  best  such  a  South  African  Union  as  is  now
established  will  be  a  close  replica  not  of  Canada,  but  of
the  Southern  States  of  the  American  Commonwealth,
where  the  races  subsist  side  by  side  in  the  same  land
in  no  organic  spiritual  contact  with  one  another,  each
race  suffering  the  moral,  intellectual  and  industrial
penalty  of  this  disunion.  As  the  recent  spread  of  edu-
cation and  of  skilled  industry  among  the  negroes  of
these  Southern  States  has  only  served  to  develop  and
aggravate  the  situation,  so  it  will  be  in  South  Africa.
There,  as  in  the  Southern  States,  the  black  population
grows  at  least  as  fast  as  the  white,  it  cannot  be  expelled
or  put  into  reserves  because  it  is  required  for  white
men's  wants,  it  cannot  be  permanently  kept  in  ignorance,
and  knowledge  means  not  only  power,  but  the  demand
for  rights  and  a  rising  discontent  at  their  denial.

The  higher  mental  calibre  and  capacity  of  many  of
the  Bantu  peoples  and  the  presence  of  considerable
numbers  of  intelligent  Asiatics  will  be  likely  to  ripen  in
South  Africa  even  more  rapidly  than  in  the  Southern
States  this  sense  of  wrong  and  this  demand  for  justice.
This  claim  is  misunderstood  when  it  is  resolved  into
a  race  question.  Though  the  form  of  the  exclusion
gives  it  that  aspect,  it  is  not  at  root  a  race  question,  but
a  question  of  personality.  The  Zulu,  the  Indian,  who
is  denied  a  voice  in  his  country,  does  not  say,  "  Give  me
a  vote  because  a  Zulu,  or  an  Indian,  is  as  good  as  a
white  man."  He  says,  "  Give  me  a  vote  because  by
any  reasonable  test  of  manhood  you  lay  down — work,
knowledge,  personal  character,  even  property — I  am  as
fit  a  man  to  serve  the  State  as  others  whom  you  admit."
Unless  and  until  the  sentiments  of  the  white  peoples


SOUTH  AFRICA  247

in  South  Africa  can  be  adjusted  to  the  acceptance  of  this
humane  and  just  view  of  a  State,  one  which  can  only
operate  by  raising  the  average  standard  of  citizenship,
its  destiny  will  move  upon  an  unstable  axis,  and  it  will
remain  a  source,  not  of  strength,  but  of  weakness  to
the  group  of  self-governing  nationalities  to  which  it
falsely  claims  to  belong.


Chapter  VI
THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS

It  has  never  been  clearly  admitted  that  Nations  are
moral  beings  in  the  same  sense  as  individuals,  having
rights  for  which  they  are  entitled  to  receive  respect  and
obligations  to  respect  the  rights  of  others,  thus  forming
units  in  a  moral  system,  a  Society  of  Nations.  The
general  trend  of  the  conduct  of  States  and  Governments
towards  one  another  has  been  one  of  moral  isolation,
each  concerned  exclusively  with  the  supposed  good  of  its
own  nation  and  only  using  treaties  or  alliances  with
other  nations  as  instruments  to  secure  its  own  gain.
Even  in  recent  times  when  civilised  nations  have  estab-
lished for  their  several  convenience  a  permanent
machinery  of  diplomatic  relations,  and  have  become
inured  to  various  sorts  of  temporary  or  permanent
co-operation,  no  clearly-established  basis  of  moral  obli-
gation supports  this  co-operation.  So  far  as  statesmen
have  ever  brought  the  problem  into  the  region  of
conscious  consideration,  they  have  usually  maintained
the  non-morality  of  international  relations,  confining
the  duty  of  a  ruler  or  government  to  the  area  of  its  own
people.

Though  vague  sentiments  couched  under  such  terms
as  "  Christendom,"  "  The  Cause  of  Civilisation,"  the
"  progress  of  humanity  "  have  operated  to  some  slight
extent  to  cosmopolitanise  individuals  or  little  groups
within  the  nations,  they  have  had  no  perceptible  influence
in securing a moral  basis  of international relations.

248


THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS 249

Though  the  political  principles  of  Hobbes  and  of
Macchiavelli,  in  imposing  the  narrow  self-interest  of
each  State  as  its  supreme  law,  have  sometimes  been  con-
travened by  great  political  theorists,  they  have  dominated
practical  statecraft  through  the  centuries.  While  occa-
sional spasms  of  generosity  or  sympathy  for  struggling
or  oppressed  nations  have  momentarily  modified  the
pure  play  of  national  selfishness,  they  cannot  be  taken
to  imply  any  definite  recognition  of  duty  or  of  rights.
In  the  concrete  art  of  statecraft  the  policy  which  stood
out  naked  and  unashamed  in  Bismarckism  has  always
prevailed  among  politicians;  nor  has  the  mind  of  the
educated  public  or  of  the  populace  adopted  or  conceived
any  other  standard.  Patriotism  is  sometimes  couched  in
the  single  phrase,  "  My  country,  right  or  wrong."  This,
however,  misrepresents  such  patriotism,  which  is  con-
tented with  the  shorter  phrase,  "  My  country  right,"
not  even  contemplating  any  possibility  of  wrongness.

Curiously  enough  a  modern  rationale  is  afforded  to
this  non-moral  view  of  international  relations  by  some
of  our  otherwise  most  enlightened  modern  political
philosophers.  There  is  a  phrase,  to  which  Professor
Giddings  has  given  a  good  deal  of  vogue,  "  conscious-
ness of  kind,"  used  to  imply  the  limitation  of  areas  for
the  play  of  sympathy.  Only  within  such  areas  as  afford
a  common  fund  of  experience  and  a  free  material  and
spiritual  contact,  can  we  say  that  a  group  of  persons  has
this  "  consciousness  of  kind."  Now  this  common  con-
sciousness is  the  essential  basis  for  feelings  of  right  and
obligation;  where  there  is  no  adequate  community  of
experience  and  feelings,  there  can  be  no  real  moral
communion,  no  human  society.  Peoples  living  in
neighbouring  valleys  were  once  so  isolated  in  their  actual
life  as  to  make  them  strangers  or  "  barbarians  "  to  one
another;  meeting  hardly  ever  save  in  strife,  they  recog-
nised no  clear  rights  or  duties  towards  one  another.
Civilisation  has  broken  down  many  barriers,  and  enlarged
the  areas  of  common  experience. With  this  enlargement


ISO THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

has  grown  an  enlargement  of  moral  areas.  But,  urges
Professor  Giddings,  the  nation  is  still  so  rigorous  a  limit
as  to  preclude  any  considerable  "  consciousness  of  kind  "
outside  the  national  area.  For  individuals  or  little  groups
there  may  be  more  community  of  experience,  interest,
and  feeling  outside  the  national  area  than  inside;  but  the
general  and  collective  life  of  one  nation  is  so  separate
From  that  of  another  as  to  furnish  no  sufficient  basis  of
sympathy  on  which  to  build  any  recognition  of  right
and  obligation.  Professor  D.  G.  Ritchie  and  Mr.
Bosanquet  put  what  appears  to  me  to  be  substantially  the
same  point  when  they  urge  that  "  the  general  will  "
cannot  be  deemed  to  have  any  real  meaning  outside  the
nation,  for  there  is  no  adequate  community  of  needs  and
interests  through  which  it  can  function.

The  real  issue  involved  is,  I  think,  better  tested  by
consideration  of  rights  than  of  duties,  for  there  is  a
tendency  among  many  thinkers,  quite  illogical,  to
acknowledge  a  wider  and  looser  range  for  the  play  of
duty  than  of  right.  It  is,  for  instance,  argued  by  Pro-
fessor Ritchie,  that  though  we  as  human  beings  have
duties  towards  animals,  they  cannot  be  said  to  have
corresponding  rights,  or  indeed  any  sort  of  rights.  What  V
the  nature  of  a  duty  is  for  which  no  one  has  a  right  to  -^
claim  fulfilment,  I  cannot  myself  conceive.  But  this
issue  is  one  I  only  raise  in  passing,  because  in  regarding
groups  of  human  beings  it  appears  essential  to  insist  that
any  moral  relations  which  subsist  between  them  must
imply  some  system  of  rights  and  obligations.

As,  in  the  case  of  animals,  the  tightness  of  this
principle  is  shirked  by  substituting  "  kindness "  or
"  humanity,"  or  some  protective  feeling  for  justice,  so
it  is  with  the  claim  which  probably  all  modern  political
thinkers  would  admit,  that  a  strong  nation  has  some
obligation  to  help  a  weaker  nation,  and  that  the  mission
of  civilisation  even  on  the  national  plane  has  a  meaning
and  a  validity.  But,  they  would  be  disposed  to  insist,
no  right  exists  on  the  part  of  a  weak  nation  to  claim  such


THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS 251

kssistance.  Now  I  maintain  that  we  can  never  get  a
/Bound  basis  either  for  individual  or  national  ethics  until
'/this  pestilent  falsehood  of  distinguishing  justice  and
generosity  has  been  got  rid  of.  Ruskin  pricked  it  in
one  of  his  most  penetrating  phrases  when  he  spoke  of
justice  as  including  such  kindnesses  as  we  owe  one
another.  If  we  have  any  sense,  as  a  nation,  that  we  owe
it  to  ourselves  to  help  another  nation  struggling  to  be
free,  that  it  is  a  proper  and  noble  thing  to  do,  that  is  in
effect  an  acknowledgment  of  a  "  right  "  in  that  other
nation  to  claim  our  aid,  an  admission  that  the  two
nations  are  members  of  a  human  society.

What  is  our  present  position  as  a  nation  towards  such
a  nation  as  the  Russian }  Individuals,  perhaps  a  majority
of  the  individuals  of  our  nation,  have  some  genuine
sympathy  with  the  Russian  people  in  their  struggle  for
self-government :  there  is  even  what  must  be  called  a
national  sentiment  in  this  country  favourable  to  that
cause.  But  we  are  told  that  our  State  and  our  Govern-
ment, the  only  instruments  by  which  this  general  wish
of  the  people  could  exercise  any  direct  influence  over  the
Russian  struggle,  have  neither  an  obligation  nor  a  right
to  interfere,  even  to  the  extent  of  withholding  voluntary
manifestations  of  orood  will  towards  a  o:overnment  which
is  one  of  criminal  oppression.  It  is  true  that  this  policy
of  non-intervention  is  not  absolute,  but  the  exception
proves  the  rule,  for  where  a  nation  affords  moral  or
material  support  to  another,  such  conduct  is  always
presumed  to  be  directed  to  secure  some  balance  of  power
or  some  other  interest  of  the  intervening  power.  Such
an  instance  is  afforded  by  the  international  guarantee  of
the  integrity  of  Belgium.  That  there  have  been  cases
where  a  Liberal  statesman,  inspired  by  a  personal
enthusiasm  for  liberty,  has  directed  the  policy  of  his
State  in  disinterested  support  of  struggling  nationalities
is  familiar  to  us  from  the  recent  careers  of  Palmerston
and  Gladstone.  But  such  conduct  is  usually  regarded  as
quixotic,  and  even  those  who  advocate  and  practise  it


352 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

would  admit  that  it  belonged  to  gallantry  and  generosity
rather  than  to  the  realm  of  positive  obligation.  Nor
would  they  be  prepared  to  incur  heavy  risk  or  cost  in
such  charitable  enterprise.  Even  when  the  Turk  was
most  "  unspeakable,"  the  proposal  to  expel  him  "  bag
and  baggage "  hardly  passed  outside  the  region  of
rhetoric,  and  had  it  taken  shape  in  definite  policy  would
have  been  adopted  as  an  interested  measure  of  European
police  rather  than  as  an  obligation  to  the  peoples  under
Turkish  misrule.

But  perhaps  the  most  interesting  test  of  the  rudimen-
tary character  of  international  ethics  is  furnished  by  the
attitude  towards  treaty  obligations.  The  entering  upon
such  agreements  implies  some  recognition  on  the  part  of
governments  that  their  States  are  moral  beings  capable
of  respecting  rights  which  they  have  sanctioned,  and  of
fulfilling  obligations.  A  network  of  such  agreements
may  be  deemed  to  constitute  an  incipient  Society  of
States,  not  bound  indeed  by  any  general  consideration
of  their  common  good,  but  recognising  a  duty  to  carry
out  certain  defined  undertakings.  This  relation  perhaps
serves  best  to  mark  the  comparison  between  the  actual
state  of  individual  and  national  morals.  An  individual
is  not  confined  in  his  obligations  to  benefit  his  fellows  to
the  terms  of  any  contract  which  he  has  entered  with
them,  or  even  to  the  more  numerous  and  larger  obliga-
tions which  the  law  of  the  country  imposes  on  him;  he
admits,  in  theory  at  any  rate,  a  general  duty  to  do  good
to  his  fellow-citizen  and  fellow-man,  and  that  there  is
some  right  vesting  in  the  latter  to  demand  such  services.
This  duty,  he  will  even  allow,  transcends  the  limits  of
nationality,  though  losing  some  force  when  passing  from
neighbours  to  strangers. But  for  States  and  Nations

such  obligations  seem  to  be  confined within  definite

® .  .  .

contracts;  ethical  considerations  based  on  humanity,  are

hardly  held  applicable  to  States.

Nor  is  that  the  only  difference  between  individual  and

national  morality. The  history  of  treaties  shows  that  the


THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS 253

moral  attitude  of  States  towards  their  most  solemn  and
explicit  undertakings  differs  from  that  of  individuals.
Every  civilised  modern  State  is  willing  to  break  or
repudiate  or  neglect  the  performance  of  treaty  contracts
under  the  pressure  of  strong  national  interest,  without
expressing  the  sense  of  shame,  or  evoking  in  other
nations  a  moral  indignation,  at  all  corresponding  in  kind
or  intensity  with  that  which  is  evoked  by  a  similar  act  of
individual  perfidy.  If  a  treaty  obligation  is  of  old  date,
or  some  change  of  circumstances  makes  adhesion  to  it
highly  inconvenient,  or  if  some  slight  undetected  or
permitted  breach  can  be  construed  into  a  precedent,  or
simply  if  the  national  advantage  of  breaking  it  be  large
enough,  an  international  agreement  is  broken.  Even
where  no  absolute  breach  takes  place,  the  failure  to  fulfil
a  quite  definite  promise,  as  in  the  case  of  the  British
evacuation  of  Egypt,  is  treated  on  a  widely  different
moral  footing  from  any  individual  failure  to  carry  out  a
pledge.  This  instance  is,  I  think,  peculiarly  serviceable
in  showing  the  loose  ethics  of  internationalism.  When
the  case  or  our  unfulfilled  promise  to  evacuate  Egypt  is
adduced,  two  demurrers  are  put  in.  First,  it  is  denied
that  any  actual  public  pledge  was  given,  though  the  plain
declaration  of  intention  made  by  our  Government  was
understood  by  everyone  as  an  undertaking  at  the  time
when  it  was  made.  But  the  answer  usually  deemed
relevant  and  adequate  is  that  we  are  remaining  there  for
the  good  of  the  Egyptians  themselves.  Interpreted  in
terms  of  individual  ethics,  this  would  imply  that  one
party  to  a  contract  insists  that  he  has  a  right  to  vary  the
terms  of  the  contract  on  the  ground  that  in  his  judgment
such  variation  is  advantageous  to  the  other  party.  But
though  this  irrelevant  argument  is  usually  adduced  and
accepted,  the  fact  that  it  is  so  accepted  is  a  crucial  instance
of  the  demoralising  effect  of  forcible  Imperialism.  For
it  is  not  the  real  reason  why  England  broke  her  word.
The  real  reason  for  not  quitting  Egypt  is  that  we  deem
it  advantageous  to  continue  to  hold  the  country,  not


2  54 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

advantageous  to  Egypt,  though  incidentally  we  hold  that
also,  but  to  ourselves.  The  hypocrisy  of  pretending  that
we  are  actuated  primarily  by  the  good  of  Egypt  is  simply
the  tribute  that  national  selfishness  pays  to  international
morality.

My  point  is  that  the  actual  history  of  treaty  obliga-
tions indicates  that  a  nation,  as  a  moral  personality,  is  on
a  lower  level  of  development  than  an  individual.  Here
we  come  to  the  central  difficulty.  A  nation,  in  its
political  aspect  as  a  State,  using  as  an  instrument  a
Government,  is  not  fully  realised  as  a  moral  being,  a
personality  at  all.  Much  as  the  ethics  of  business  life
has  indisputably  suffered  certain  injuries  by  the  substitu-
tion for  the  individual  employer  of  a  company,  without
a  soul  to  be  saved,  or  a  body  to  be  kicked,  a  sort  of
"  person  "  which  even  the  law  finds  it  hard  to  bring  to
book,  so  with  all  other  sorts  of  human  aggregates  or
collectivities.

It  is  in  part  the  abstractness  of  a  State  which  seems
to  diminish  its  moral  responsibility,  in  part  it  is  the  lack
of  continuity  in  the  com.position  of  the  Governments
which  wield  its  power.  Where,  as  in  this  nation.
Governments  are  run  on  lines  of  party  politics,  the
notion  that  one  party  Government  should  be  able  to  give
pledges  to  foreign  Governments  which  its  successors  are
bound  to  fulfil  seems  inconsistent  with  the  operation  of
the  party  system.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  secrecy
which  shrouds  the  conduct  of  our  Foreign  Office  is  so
dangerous  to  the  cause  of  political  democracy.  The
power  of  a  Cabinet  to  form  a  Japanese  treaty  or  to  enter
a  Brussels  Sugar  Convention,  without  disclosing  the
nature  of  these  grave  national  undertakings  to  Parlia-
ment and  the  nation,  and  obtaining  their  assent,  is
fraught  with  double  peril.  If  every  succeeding  Govern-
ment felt  bound  to  adhere  to  such  undertakings,  however
damaging  they  deemed  them  to  be,  grave  injury  would  be
inflicted  on  the  liberties  of  representative  Government.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  Government  should  seek  to


THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS 255

evi^e  the  chains  forged  by  its  predecessor,  the  stability
of  tne  personality  of  the  State  is  greatly  impaired.

But  if  the  attitude  of  States  towards  the  performance
of  treaty  obligations  indicates  a  feeble  conception  of
moral  personality,  what  shall  we  say  of  international
morality  as  indicated  by  the  relations  between  stronger
and  weaker,  advanced  and  backward  States.  Stronger
nations  have  everywhere  and  always  been  liable  to
invade,  subdue,  and  impose  their  power  upon  weaker
nations.  They  have  almost  always  acted  so,  because  they
have  deemed  it  advantageous  to  their  own  national
interests  to  do  so.  But  the  fact  that  they  have  generally,
in  modern  times  at  any  rate,  pretended  and  persuaded
themselves  that  their  forcible  encroachment  is  either  an
act  of  reprisal  or  a  preventive  attack,  indicates  some
sense  of  a  "  right  "  to  independence  on  the  part  of  the
weaker  nation,  or  at  any  rate  some  sense  that  other
nations  may  regard  the  forcible  act  as  an  infringement
of  a  right.

There  is  of  course  a  school  which  utterly  repudiates
such  rights,  a  real  politik  which  virtually  regards  weaker
nations  as  legitimate  prey  of  stronger  ones,  and  considers
that  the  sole  moral  duty  of  a  statesman  is  to  promote  the
strength  and  well-being  of  his  own  State,  disregarding
utterly  the  interests  and  so-called  "  rights  "  of  others.
Under  such  a  creed  imperial  aggression  requires  no
justification,  and  admits  of  none.  But  this  politik  is
not  truly  real :  it  does  not  conform  to  actual  State
feelings  and  practices,  which  everywhere,  as  we  have
seen,  admit  some  sense,  however  feeble,  of  ris^ht  and
obligation  even  beyond  the  limits  of  express  contracts.

The  real  issue  of  international  morality  which  lurks
in  modern  Imperialism  consists  in  the  secondary  motives
which  qualify  the  purely  selfish  greed  for  power  and
territory,  trade,  and  riches,  that  is  the  main  propeller.
May  not  one  nation  ever  conquer  and  rule  another  for
its  own  good  and  for  the  wider  good  of  the  civilised
world? Though  few  would  have  the  hardihood  to


256 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

claim  that  our  seizure  of  India  or  Egypt,  or  other  parts
of  our  Empire,  was  mainly  prompted  by  disinterested
considerations  for  the  good  of  these  peoples,  it  is  con-
tended that,  blended  with  our  commercial  and  political
motives,  was  some  genuine  desire  to  extend  the  benefits
of  Christianity  and  the  Western  arts  of  civilisation,  and
to  increase  the  area  of  orderly  government  in  the  int  :rest
of  the  backward  peoples  and  of  humanity  at  large.  If
England,  France,  or  Germany  can  confer  such  benefits
on  backward  peoples  and  on  humanity,  have  they  not  a
right,  a  duty,  a  "  mission  "  to  do  so  ?  And  is  this  right
or  duty  cancelled  because  in  realising  it  they  also  seek  a
private  reward  for  themselves?  The  defender  of  the
doctrine  of  natural  rights  of  nationalities  may  here,
perhaps,  put  in  a  prior  plea,  urging  that  if  even  England
or  France  is  capable  of  improving  the  condition  of
another  people,  and  is  disinterested  in  her  desire  to  do
so,  this  other  people,  by  reason  of  its  inalienable  right
of  independence,  is  entitled  to  cry  "  hands  off,"  and  to
claim  the  "  moral  "  support  of  all  other  nations  in  her
resistance.  A  people  in  actual  possession  of  a  country,
it  may  be  argued,  has  an  inherent  right  to  its  use  and
abuse,  to  let  its  rich  resources  run  to  waste  and  to  main-
tain the  most  degrading  arts  of  life,  so  long  as  it  does
not  injuriously  interfere  with  its  neighbours.  Now,  as
we  have  seen,  a  right  which  implies  no  duty  in  another,
which  pre-supposes  no  sort  of  social  sanction,  is  mean-
ingless :  the  term  "  absolute,"  when  applied  to  natural
rights,  is  as  empty  as  when  applied  in  any  other  way.  If
this  rigorous  view  of  rights  of  independence  means
anything,  it  means  that  the  true  Interests  of  civilisation
are  served  by  allowing  every  nation  to  work  out  its  own
salvation  or  damnation  by  itself,  and  that  the  claim  of
any  nation  to  force  its  assistance  on  another  is  so  certain
to  be  abused  that  it  ought  never  to  be  entertained.  In
other  words,  the  doctrine  of  the  "  sacred  rights  of
nationality  "  implies  that  there  is  at  any  rate  an  incipient
society  of  nations  which  sets  its  sanction  on  this  right.


THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS 257

With  this  interpretation  of  the  "rights  of  nationality,"
I  have  strong  sympathy.  But  can  it  carry  us  so  far
that  we  reject  as  injurious  and  immoral  all  forcible
interference  by  one  nation  with  another?  Is  it  not
relevant  to  the  ethics  of  the  case  to  consider  whether
in  point  of  fact  such  interference  may  not  be  beneficial  to
the  interests  of  the  society  of  nations  and  the  particular
nations  subjected  to  such  force.  In  the  case  of  so-called
civilised  peoples  it  would  easily  be  admitted  that  no
such  benefit  was  likely  to  accrue,  and  that  we  should  be
entitled  to  denounce  as  unwarrantable  any  interference
by  a  stronger  with  a  weaker,  a  larger  with  a  smaller
people  living  on  the  same  general  level  of  civilisation
and  capable  of  following  their  own  line  of  progress.
The  worst  moral  iniquity  in  our  plea  for  conquering  the
Boer  Republics  consisted  in  the  false  and  fatuous  pre-
tence that  British  government  was  essential  to  promote
civilisation  in  those  countries.

But  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  mission  of  civilisation
which  consists  in  the  forcible  subjection  and  govern-
ment of  definitely  lower  peoples  and  the  seizure  of
their  lands?  Setting  aside  the  barbarous  treatment  of
the  American  Indians  as  irrelevant  to  the  essence  of  the
issue,  can  we  assert  that  the  greater  colonisation  of
North  America  was  unjustifiable,  because  a  fev/
hundred  thousand  savages  incapable  of  utilising  the
resources  of  the  country  were  its  wandering  occupants.
Or  taking  as  a  more  recent  instance,  the  partition  of  a
large  part  of  Africa  among  European  powers  by  spheres
of  influence  and  protectorates,  what  is  to  be  our  ethical
interpretation  of  this  act  ?  It  is  admitted  that  in  such
partitions  and  annexations  the  encroaching  powers  are
each  animated  primarily  by  selfish  considerations.  But
if  they  put  in  the  plea  that  humanity,  as  represented  by
the  civilised  peoples  of  the  world,  has  given  a  tacit
sanction  to  this  encroachment  on  the  ground  of  the
incidental  benefits  which  will  accrue  both  to  humanity
and to the subjected people by this extension of


258 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

Imperialism,  must  we  reject  this  plea  as  merely  ^^po-
critical  and  fundamentally  vicious?  It  is  a  moral
problem  of  much  delicacy.  The  Imperialistic
encroaching  State  virtually  says,  or  ought  truthfully  to
say :  "  Although  my  chief  direct  motive  in  forcibly
annexing  this  backward  country  is  my  own  gain,  and
aggrandisement,  I  claim  that,  since  the  methods  of
attaining  these  objects  must  bring  benefits  to  the  world
at  large  and  to  the  subject  people  in  particular,  these
benefits  shall  be  considered  to  compensate  any  damage
which  prima  facie  may  be  considered  to  have  been  in-
flicted by  infringing  the  rights  of  the  invaded  peoples."

More  fully  developed,  this  doctrine  seems  to  run
thus  :  Certain  civilised  white  nations  ap^ree  that  the
common  interests  of  humanity,  as  interpreted  by  them,
imply  that  integrity  of  national  domains  is  among
themselves  a  "  right  "  which  must  not  be  infringed,
either  for  purposes  of  national  gain  or  with  a  view  to
conferring  benefits  by  better  government,  but  only  for
the  purpose  of  repelling  an  actual  or  anticipated
invasion  of  their  "rights";  whereas,  in  the  case  of
uncivilised  peoples,  they  have  a  "  right,"  in  virtue  of
their  higher  standard  of  civilisation,  either  collectively
or  separately,  to  over-ride  the  "rights"  of  such  peoples,
wherever  there  is  reasonable  ground  for  maintaining
that  benefits  will  be  conferred  on  the  world  and  on  the
invaded  people  by  this  course  of  conduct,  and  they  are
entitled  to  judge  whether  there  is  such  reasonable
ground.  Finally,  they  contend  that  this  superior  right
shall  not  be  annulled  by  the  fact  of  any  special  advan-
tages which  may  accrue  to  the  encroaching  nation,  or
even  by  the  fact  that  the  attainment  of  this  advantage
may  be  the  chief  or  the  sole  conscious  directing  motive.

The  slippery  nature  of  this  ethical  justification  of
Imperialism  is  undeniable.  The  admission  that  the
chief  motive  is  one's  own  gain  must  be  held  certain  to
prevent  one  from  discriminating  between  encroach-
ments which  will  in  fact  be  beneficial  to  the  subject


THE  MORALITY  OF  NATIONS 259

peoole,  and  those  which  will  not;  the  conscious  pursuit
ot  pne's  own  gain  as  the  first  consideration  must  certainly
impair  one's  ability  to  secure,  adequately  or  at  all,  the
incidental  advantages  which  were  to  accrue  to  the  subject
people.  Finally,  the  government  by  force,  not  by
consent,  of  another  people,  and  the  chronic  temptation
hypocritically  to  feign  that  the  dominating  motive  in
our  rule  is  their  good,  not  our  own  gain,  may  react  so
powerfully  and  so  insidiously  upon  the  mind  of  an
Imperialist  nation  that  it  loses  the  capacity  not  merely
to  recognise  the  advantage  of  leaving  lower  peoples  to
follow  their  own  paths  of  progress  or  regression,  but  to
perceive  the  fatal  injuries  which  domineering  practices
abroad  inflict  upon  the  efficiency  of  national  self-
government  at  home.  Even  if  Imperialism  can  in  some
instances  make  good  its  claims  to  benefit  certain  lower
races,  and  to  maintain  good  order  in  otherwise  disordered
regions,  such  gain  may  be  purchased  dearly  by  the
damage  done  to  democracy  at  home.  But  the  radical
moral  defect  of  Imperialism  is  due  to  lack  of  any  true
sanction  from  a  society  of  nations  to  the  interference  of
an  Imperialist  nation  with  the  life  of  a  lower  people.  If
there  existed  a  fairly  developed  form  of  international
society,  in  which  all  peoples,  great  and  small,  higher  and
lower,  were  in  some  sense  represented,  and  such  a  society
delegated  England  or  France  in  the  interests  of  civilisa-
tion to  take  under  her  tutelage  some  backward  or
degraded  people  which  lay  on  their  borders,  maintaining
order,  developing  the  natural  resources  of  the  country,
and  helping  to  teach  the  arts  of  civilisation,  this  would
afford  some  moral  basis  for  Imperialism.  Actual
Imperialism  difi^ers  widely  from  this  condition.  Each
Imperialist  nation  claims  to  act  primarily  for  its  own,
not  for  the  general  good;  it  does  not  even  pretend  to
have  received  a  sanction  of  civilised  society  for  its
action,  and  its  own  ipse  dixit  is  its  only  guarantee  of
fitness  to  carry  out  a  civilising  mission.

These  are  the  wide  divergencies  between  the  actual


2  6o THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

ethics  of  individuals  and  those  of  nations.  But  that  does
not  imply  any  essential  difference  in  the  ideal  of  conduct
in  the  two.  It  only  implies  a  feebler  development  of
moral  personality  in  the  Nation,  and  a  feebler  structure
of  international  society.  But  in  both  these  growth  is
going  on,  faster  than  before  and  at  an  accelerating  pace.
Both  the  utility  of  nationality  and  the  recognition  of
that  utility  are  gaining  ground,  and  with  such  recogni-
tion the  rights  and  obligations  appertaining  to  the  moral
personality  of  Nations  become  more  real  facts  and  forces
in  history.  Practical  internationalism  of  various  forms
is  teaching  us  more  clearly  that  co-operation,  not
antagonism,  is  the  distinctive  character  of  national
activity,  that  nations  are  primarily  neighbours,  not
strangers.  This  definite  sense  of  neighbours  in  friendly
co-operation  for  mutual  services  is  the  growing  nucleus
of  that  national  personality  which  is  creating  the  Society
of  Nations.  When  that  Society  is  as  firmly  developed  as
that  of  the  individuals  within  a  national  Society,  and  is
provided  with  a  growth  of  laws,  customs,  and  sentiments
of  corresponding  complexity  and  of  tested  experience,
the  morality  of  nations  will  be  found  to  correspond  on  a
larger  scale  to  the  morality  of  individuals.

This  national  morality  implies  three  plain  obliga-
tions :  (i)  a  recognition  that  it  belongs  to  the  common
good  of  nations  to  leave  each  nation  liberty  to  govern
itself  in  all  matters  where  such  liberty  does  not  directly
and  clearly  contravene  the  common  good;  (2)  a  repudia-
tion of  the  practices  of  parasitic  Imperialism,  or  forcible
interference  with  the  life  of  another  nation  so  as  to
secure  a  gain  in  excess  of  net  services  rendered;  (3)  the
positive  practice  of  mutual  aid  between  nations  upon
equal  terms,  extending  to  the  conduct  of  nations  the
sound  organic  principle  of  moral  conduct  "  from  each
according  to  its  powers,  to  each  according  to  its  needs."
In  such  manner,  as  the  individual  realises  himself  in  a
democratic  nation,  so  the  nation  best  realises  itself  in  a
democratic  society  of  nations.


Chapter  VII
THE TASK OF RECONSTRUCTION

It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  term  rationalism
should  have  acquired  a  destructive  rather  than  a  con-
structive meaning.  Why  this  should  be  so  is  not  at  first
sight  obvious.  Man's  use  of  reason  as  a  guide  of  life
would  seem  to  give  an  equal  value  to  the  selection  of
the  true  and  the  rejection  of  the  false,  and  rather  to  lay
the  stress  upon  the  former  process  as  containing  the
stronger  appeal  to  human  interest.  It  is  no  doubt
intellifjible  and  inevitable  that  the  defenders  of  thinsfs
and  ideas  as  they  are,  finding  their  strongest  support  in
the  emotional  forces  of  usage  and  authority,  should
strive  to  represent  reformers  as  mere  destroyers  and  their
intellectual  engines  as  fitted  only  for  this  work.  But
as  regards  the  later  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century
there  was  considerable  justification  for  this  attitude.
The  spirit  of  the  age  in  the  cultured  circles  of  Europe
was  coldly  sceptical  and  tending  towards  an  ever-
narrower  specialisation.  In  both  these  respects  it  differed
widely  from  the  rationalism  of  the  early  portion  of  the
century,  which  was  still  filled  with  the  enthusiasm  of
revolution  and  with  dreams  of  an  age  of  reason  which,
out  of  the  breakdown  of  the  old  order,  should  establish
at  once  in  politics  and  industry,  in  religion,  education,
art  and  literature,  as  well  as  in  the  practices  of  private
conduct,  a  new  moral  and  intellectual  order.  Such  a
dream  of  rational  humanity  did  not  only  fire  the
imagination  of  the  younger  poets  of  two  generations,
Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, even  Tennyson  : it

261


262 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

possessed  the  minds  of  the  most  representative  thinkers
from  Paine  and  Godwin  to  Owen,  Bentham  and  J.  S.
Mill.  Poetic  prophets,  co-operative  socialists,  utilitarian
theorists  and  philosophic  radicals,  whether  their  primary
impulse  was  drawn  from  romantic  art,  philosophic
reflection,  or  from  some  passion  of  practical  reform,  all
aimed  consciously  and  avowedly  at  a  general  transforma-
tion of  life.  This  vision  of  some  new  harmony  of  life
and  the  glow  of  confidence  in  its  achievement  which
inspired  the  Socialism  of  Owen  and  its  weaker  revival
under  Kingsley  and  Maurice,  which  even  flickered  in
the  earlier  writings  of  Carlyle  and  Ruskin,  had  its
counterpart  in  many  other  movements  of  the  times.
Wordsworth,  with  the  romantic  naturalism  for  which  he
stood,  the  new  literary  force  of  the  novel  in  the  hands
of  idealists  like  Dickens,  Disraeli,  the  young  Bulwer,
the  magnificent  audacity  of  the  Pre-Raphaelite  Brother-
hood, the  infinite  vistas  of  human  power  opened  up
freshly  by  the  new  physical  and  organic  sciences — there
was  no  mere  narrow  intellectualism,  no  economy  of  "  Ca'
canny,"  in  any  of  these  movements.  These  leaders  of
thought  and  action  believed  that  the  time  was  come  for
a  new  general  plan  of  life,  thought  out  afresh  and  freely
carried  out,  in  which  a  clear  assessment  of  the  past  and
the  established  order  should  be  made  so  as  to  secure
"  a  new  moral  universe  "  based  on  a  free  application  of
the  mind  of  man  to  the  control  of  his  destiny  upon  this
earth.  There  were  wide  divergences  in  the  assessments
of  the  new  economy,  according  to  the  materialistic  or
spiritual  standards  of  human  welfare  adopted  :  nor  could
it  be  claimed  that  all  were  equally  or  mainly  rationalistic
in  the  tests  applied.  But  each  of  these  movements  had
what  may  be  regarded  as  its  philosophic  import  and
basis,  it  did  endeavour  to  see  life  steadily  and  to  see  it
whole :  moreover,  it  designed  to  apply  reason  for  con-
structive changes,  and  these  changes  were  conceived,  not
departmentally,  but  in  their  bearing  upon  the  general
life.


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 263

Now  no  sober  student  of  our  intellectual  and  moral
life  during  the  later  nineteenth  century  can  help  recog-
nising that  this  tide  of  intellectual  and  practical  progress
was  checked  and  broken.  Not  that  less  intellectual  and
practical  energy  was  generated  and  applied  :  improved
education  placed  a  great  increase  or  raw  force  for
progress  at  the  disposal  of  the  nation,  and  it  was  applied
along  innumerable  channels  of  detailed  work.  But  the
larger  purpose  had  passed  out  of  it.  Instead  of  flowing
freely  to  the  fertilisation  of  the  whole  kingdom  of
humanity,  it  was  drawn  off  into  numerous  little  channels
to  turn  little  private  mill-wheels  or  to  irrigate  separate
enclosures.  The  whole  idea  of  the  economy  of  progress
had  shifted.  Large  synthetic  schemes  of  thought  and
action  were  renounced  as  wildly,  wastefully  speculative  :
evolution  was  the  new  watchword,  and  its  substitution'
for  revolution  meant  the  assertion,  as  a  primary  doctrine  \
of  general  application,  that  progress  must  be  slow.  This  /
doctrine  was  derived  from  scientific  records  in  fields  of  j
inquiry  where  the  ordered  consciousness  of  man  played
no  part;  but  once  "  discovered  "  it  was  applied  with  easy
confidence  to  human  history.  Related  to  this  doctrine
of  progress  was  another,  viz.,  that  progress  can  only  be
secured  by  rigorous  division  of  labour.  Thus  retarded
and  divided,  the  powers  of  reason  were  no  longer  avail-
able for  co-operation  in  the  great  work  of  human
reconstruction.  Rationalism  almost  inevitably  became
identified  with  destructive  criticism.  For  such  was  the
work  that  came  easiest  to  hand  under  the  new  conditions.
This  is  not  at  first  sight  the  obvious  result  of  the
application  of  evolutionary  formulae  to  the  world  process.
It  might  rather  have  been  expected  that  the  linking  of
the  natural  sciences  by  the  application  of  the  law  of  the
conservation  of  energy,  the  new  conception  of  con-
tinuity secured  by  the  acceptance  of  the  Darwinian
hypothesis  of  the  origin  of  species,  and  especially  the
bridging  of  the  chasm  which  hitherto  had  separated  man
from  Nature,  with  the  finer  application  of  causality  to


264 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

the  innermost  life  of  man,  would  have  bent  the
systematic  thought  of  all  intellectual  workers  towards
the  making  of  a  new  all-embracing  synthesis.  As
Comte,  on  the  very  threshold  of  the  new  scientific  epoch,
so  Spencer,  a  generation  later,  felt  himself  impelled
along  this  plain  road  of  intellectual  duty.  The  failure
of  each  to  win  the  acceptance  or  co-operation  of  more
than  a  scanty  handful  of  followers  in  his  life-time  was
not  due  to  any  flaws  there  may  have  been  in  the  synthetic
system  which  he  presented.  It  was  due  to  certain  forces
which  worked  towards  the  postponement  of  any
synthesis.  What  these  forces  were  it  is  not  now  difficult
to  recognise.  First  one  would  place  the  important
demands  of  material  utility,  the  great  bribes  of  fame  and
gain  by  which  men  of  trained  scientific  intellect  were
harnessed  to  the  trades  and  the  professions.  The  heroic
struggle  of  Herbert  Spencer  to  enlarge  evolution  into  a
cosmic  philosophy  when  what  his  practical  countrymen
required  was  aniline  dyes,  chemical  manures  and  cheap
electric  lighting,  dramatised  the  issue.  Though  the
main  stress  of  this  utilitarian  specialisation  was  com-
mercial, drawn  from  the  rapid  discovery  of  innumerable
profitable  applications  of  the  physical  sciences,  other
more  disinterested  motives  co-operated  with  this
economic  drive.  Biology,  the  keystone  of  the  new
intellectual  system,  fell  too  early  and  too  completely
under  the  sway  of  particularist  research  directed  to  the
solution  of  hygienic  problems.  The  case  of  sociology
was  still  more  significant.  It  may  be  said  to  have  been
taken  from  its  very  cradle  into  the  factory,  forced  before
its  frame  was  set  to  hard  tasks  of  solving  anthropological
conundrums  and  devising  remedies  for  social  diseases.
The  same  is  true  of  psychology,  put  before  it  could  well
stand  to  grind  grist  in  the  educational  mill,  or  to  furnish
sensational  hypotheses  for  alienists  and  criminologists.
No  doubt  a  genuine  though  mistaken  economy  of
scientific  energy  made  in  the  same  direction.  It  required
a  race  of  intellectual  giants  to  handle  the  great  conceptions


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 265

of  such  men  as  Comte  and  Darwin,  and  to  do  the
work  of  re-orientation  they  involved.  No  such  crop
of  giants  rose.  Small  worthy  men,  shrinking  from  so
large  an  adventure,  pleaded  plausibly  the  economy  of
spade-work,  how  bands  of  humble  patient  students,  set
to  work  with  test-tube,  microscope,  and  note-book  in
every  patch  of  ground,  would  best  advance  the  cause  of
learning.  This  doctrine  of  "  thorough,"  under  the
guise  of  modest  industry,  was  in  large  degree  a  cloak
for  intellectual  cowardice.  The  trend  was  everywhere
towards  division  of  labour,  breaking  "  the  one  "  into
"  the  many."  Now  division  of  labour  is  only  a
true  economy  when  a  sound  principle  of  co-operation
underlies  and  dominates  division,  maintaining  the
supremacy  of  the  unity  and  harmony  of  the  whole
process.  Modern  science  has  preserved  no  such
economy.  There  is  no  strong  centralising  force  to
keep  the  special  sciences  in  their  proper  orbits  in  the  in-
tellectual heavens  :  within  each  science  numbers  of  little
un-coordinated  kingdoms  and  principalities  arise  :  local
self-government  is  carried  everywhere  into  a  licentious
extreme.  There  exists  no  proper  intellectual  authority,
correlating  the  work  of  the  innumerable  groups  of
scientific  hodmen,  sifting  their  results  and  forming
them  into  the  material  for  a  higher  grade  of  research,
sostepby  step  working  by  the  inductive  method  towards
great  scientific  laws  which  may  finally  be  incor-
porated in  a  new  intellectual  system.  There  is  no
warrant  for  believing  that  the  notion  that  "  a  simple
system  of  natural  liberty "  and  "  enlightened  self-
interest  "  is  any  better  economy  in  the  intellectual  than
in  the  industrial  world.  Intellectual  individualism  is
quite  as  injurious  as  industrial  individualism.  Neither
indeed  is  anarchy.  In  each  case  there  does  survive
and  operate  some  principle  of  harmony.  But  in  each
case  alike  it  operates  feebly  and  wastefully.  As  in  our
industrial  system  failure  of  central  control  is  responsible
for  the  survival  of  the  twin  monsters  of  luxury  and


266 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

poverty  in  nations  possessing  natural  resources  and
technical  arts  fully  adequate  to  secure  comfort  and
opportunity  for  all,  so  in  our  intellectual  system  a
similar  defect  retards  even  more  disastrously  the  pro-
duction and  distribution  of  the  highest  forms  of  wealth.
It  is  not  that  intellectual  labour  is  over-divided,  but
that  there  is  no  proper  correlation  of  its  specialisms,  no
proper  harvesting  and  assimilation  of  its  fruits.  This
can  only  be  attributed  to  an  abandonment  of  central
intellectual  control.

I  have  discussed  this  tendency  to  sacrifice  unity  to
multiplicity  in  science  at  some  length,  because  the
nature  of  this  false  economy  is  there  more  visible  than
elsewhere  to  the  naked  eye.  But  the  same  tendency  to
prefer  small  specialised  to  large  general  activities  of
mind  is  seen  in  literature  and  the  fine  arts.  And  the
forces  at  work  are  evidently  the  same.  It  is  the
tyranny  of  the  market,  the  demand  for  immediate  crude
utility  in  conventional  enjoyment,  co-operating  with  a
timidity  which  seeks  shelter  in  some  little  bypath  of
expression  whose  peculiarity  may  figure  as  originality,
without  incurring  the  risks  which  attend  audacity,  that
explain  the  failure  of  great  creative  work  in  the  later
years  of  the  last  century.

But  there  still  remains  something  lacking  in  this
explanation  of  the  failure  of  intellectual  synthesis,  and
the  prevalence  of  destructive  rationalism.  It  is  hardly
possible  to  follow  the  early  controversies  to  which  the
startling  doctrines  of  Darwinism  and  Marxism  gave  rise
in  the  middle  century  without  recognising  a  curious
phenomenon,  which,  though  discernible  in  every
civilised  country,  is  studied  to  best  advantage  in
England.  As  soon  as  the  shattering  impact  of  these
new  thoughts  upon  the  established  beliefs  and  institu-
tions had  been  felt,  the  conservative  instincts  began  to
assert  themselves,  not  in  a  formal  repression  or  boycott,
but  in  a  steady  silent  refusal  to  face  the  intellectual
consequences. The familiar  advice tendered  by the


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 267

aged  divine  to  the  young  student  who  inquired  how  he
should  deal  with  the  arguments  of  sceptics,  "Look  them
boldly  in  the  face  and  pass  on  "  is  hardly  needed  in  this
country.  Our  literature  is  full  of  proverbs  expressive
of,  or  rather  concealing,  this  proclivity.  It  is  not  our
habit,  we  boast,  to  cross  a  stream  until  we  come  to  it.
We  might  add  that,  if  the  stream  is  deep  and  strong,
we  do  not  come  to  it.  There  are  three  adjectives  com-
monly recognised  by  foreigners  as  peculiarly  representa-
tive of  English  valuations,  the  terms  "  respectable,"
"  comfortable,"  and  "  shocking."  They  denote  the
inward  fortress  of  conservatism,  primarily  in  conduct,
but  secondarily  in  thought.  The  English  temperament
stands  for  "  comfort  "  and  stubbornly  resists  anything
that  disturbs  this  aspect  of  "  the  good."  Its  method
of  defending  "  comfort "  is  by  endowing  it  with
"  respectability  "  and  by  regarding  all  disturbing  influ-
ences as  "  shocking."  Our  standard  of  "  comfort  "  is
solidly  material,  consisting  au  fond  of  "  creature
comforts."  Though  in  its  higher  strata  it  appears  as
intellectual  or  even  spiritual,  so  that  we  speak  of  the
comforts  of  religion  or  philosophy,  it  will  be  recognised
that  anything  which  makes  us  feel  really  "  uncomfort-
able," any  sentiment  or  opinion  that  is  "  shocking,"
inflicts  on  us  a  physical  disturbance.  As  a  funda-
mentally respectable,  moral,  and  religious  people,  we  are
very  sensitive  to  all  large  disturbing  thoughts  which
thus  present  themselves  as  shocking.  Though  our
real  feeling  towards  them,  as  I  say,  is  mainly  physical,
compact  of  inertia  and  apprehension,  we  represent  it  to
ourselves  as  moral.  This  bit  of  national  psychology  is
necessary  that  we  may  understand  how  it  could  come  to
pass  that  our  thinking  men  were  successfully  prevented
for  two  generations  from  setting  their  minds  to  the
large  task  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  reconstruction
which  the  destructive  criticism  of  nineteenth-century
science  involved.  Feeling  "  in  our  bones,"  as  nurses
say,  that  the  inflowing  realism  of  modern  science  and


268 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

of  a  literature  and  art  which  was  drinking  eagerly  the
realistic  spirit,  would  wash  us  away  from  all  our  old
conventional  moorings,  we  set  ourselves,  doggedly,  to
stem  the  tide,  and  by  diverting  its  force  into  the
thousand  little  practically  serviceable  channels  which  I
have  described,  to  render  it  innocuous.  We  really
succeeded  for  nearly  half  a  century  in  keeping  the
"  educated  "  public  of  England  from  facing  the  deep
searching  questions  lying  at  the  foundations  of  our
institutions,  our  religion,  morals,  art,  and  literature,
which  the  new  evolutionary  conception  of  the  cosmos
involved.  Intellectual  men  and  women  were  some-
times half  conscious  of  the  process;  they  felt  that  some-
how they  were  not  so  "  free  "  as  they  professed  to  be,
that  subtle  influences,  in  which  they  came  to  acquiesce,
prevented  them  from  thinking  out  root  questions.  The
few  bolder  ones  who  were  not  deterred  from  thinking
out,  found  that  impenetrable  barriers  stopped  publica-
tion. It  was  not,  as  is  sometimes  thought,  mere
mischance  that  kept  the  revolutionary  discoveries  of
Mendel  buried  for  a  generation.  It  was  the  tacit
conspiracy  against  disturbing  thoughts.  Every  broad-
minded  scientist  can  point  to  similar  repression  in  his
own  province.  It  was  not  so  much  a  rigid  orthodoxy,
still  less  an  active  hunting  down  of  heresy,  as  a  persistent
avoidance  of  certain  lines  of  thought,  where  what  may
be  called  the  modern  spirit  was  likely  to  be  encountered.
Just  in  proportion  as  a  subject  was  likely  to  contain  this
spirit  was  it  "  doctored  "  for  witchcraft.  Not  science
alone,  but  every  branch  of  learning  has  suffered  this
sterilising  process.  The  true  story  of  the  modernising
movement  in  our  seats  of  higher  education  would  be
most  instructive  if  it  could  be  given  in  adequate  detail.
We  should  see  how  the  newer  branches  of  natural
science  were  stoutly  refused  entrance,  until  their  claim
to  culture  was  endorsed  by  proved  utility  and  their
fiery  spirit  tamed  by  slowly  acquired  orthodoxy.
Religion  and  philosophy  were  secured  against  the  new


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 269

ferment,  partly  by  authority,  partly  by  a  slow  inocula-
tion. But  the  most  instructive  cases  are  naturally  to
be  found  in  what  were  termed  the  moral  sciences.  For
here  the  erosive  power  of  the  new  ideas  could  not  be
excluded.  The  efforts  of  the  older  ethics  to  apply
evolution  to  its  utilitarian  or  its  idealistic  standards
proved  singularly  futile,  while  the  accepted  politics
quickly  crumbled  into  ruin  with  no  serious  attempt  at
ordered  substitution.  Political  economy,  as  the  study
naturally  most  exposed  to  explosive  thought,  sought
protection  by  dropping  all  organic  unity  and  breaking
into  a  variety  of  detailed  historical  and  statistical
researches.  It  has  often  been  made  a  matter  of  amazing
comment  that  our  universities  have  ig-nored  the  o-reat
literature  which  their  own  language  offers  for  the
nourishment  of  English  youth,  or  still  worse  have
murdered  it  in  order  to  dissect.  For  this  systematic
"  doping  "  of  all  studies  to  which  the  new  disturbing
thought  might  obtain  access,  there  is  no  other  explana-
tion than  that  this  is  the  instinctive  self-defence  of  vested
interests  and  established  causes.  This  formal  resistance
of  the  educational  and  intellectual  world  was  supported
by  the  equally  instinctive  cunning  of  "  society "  in
refusing  to  discuss  or  even  to  recognise  the  graver
questions  of  the  age.  The  effrontery  of  this  attitude
was  only  equalled  by  its  consistency.

Let  me  state  the  issue  in  its  most  general  form.
Our  life  and  all  it  signifies  for  good  and  evil,  happiness
or  misery,  to  ourselves  and  others,  rests  upon  a  number
of  feelings,  thoughts,  and  actions  which,  hardened  into
customs  and  institutions,  constitute  "  the  foundations
of  society."  Such  are  the  family,  property,  the  State,
the  industrial  system,  the  Church.  Now  the  old  fixed
faiths  on  which  these  foundations  were  laid  were
undermined  by  the  new  thought.  The  enp-ines  of
criticism  were  battering  each  of  them.  Not  only  the
theories  but  the  practice  was  assailed.  The  old  clear-
cut  convictions  of  the  permanency  of  a  single  type  of


270 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

monogamous  family,  of  the  sanctity  of  individual
property,  of  the  limits  of  government,  of  the  private
control  of  industry,  of  the  conception  of  a  God  and  of
personal  immortality,  to  name  some  crucial  instances,
have  all  been  seriously  and  even  fiercely  assailed  by  free
thought.  Yet  until  quite  recently  the  ostrich  attitude
has  everywhere  prevailed.  The  modern  intellectual
forces  could  be  kept  under  but  could  not  be  kept  out,
everywhere  they  were  seen  at  work,  corroding  the  old
cast-iron  dogmas,  eating  away  the  old  theology,  the  old
politics,  the  old  social  conventions.  In  vain  did  we
shun  as  "  uncomfortable  "  and  "  shocking  "  the  early
inroads  of  realism  into  fiction,  poetry,  and  the  drama.
Tolstoy,  Zola,  Ibsen,  Shaw,  Brieux,  we  held  back  for  a
generation.  But  they  are  now  visibly  upon  us.  Mean-
while in  the  churches  and  the  orthodox  political  parties,
the  work  of  erosion  had  been  steadily  advancing.  The
great  blasting  processes  of  interrogation  have  proceeded
far.  The  seeds  of  scepticism,  sown  in  the  last  genera-
tion, are  bearing  timely  fruit  and  a  new  vigorous
generation  is  beginning  to  demand  that  the  constructive
work  shirked  by  their  fathers  shall  be  taken  in  hand.
There  are  signs  of  a  great  intellectual  and  spiritual
revival.  At  the  very  moment  when  blind  critics  are
deploring  the  decline  of  genius  and  the  barrenness  of
the  age,  an  abundance  of  fresh  inspiration  is  beginning
to  breathe  through  new  forms  of  realism  in  poetry,  the
drama,  prose,  fiction,  and  art.  The  censorship,  not  Mr.
Redford's  but  Mr.  Podsnap's,  is  being  brushed  aside.
The  very  problems  which,  springing  directly  from
scientific  history,  biology,  and  economics,  had  hitherto
been  most  successfully  evaded,  have  forced  their  way
into  a  drama  and  a  fiction  which  are  actually  becoming
popular.  Heredity,  alike  in  its  physical  and  moral
bearings,  the  origins  of  poverty  and  luxury,  the
struggles  of  sex,  of  capital  and  labour,  the  corruptions  of
politics  and  religion,  not  merely  furnish  the  material  of
art  and  the  drama,  but  they  are  treated  in  modes  of


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 271

demonstration  which,  challenging  the  fundamental
assumptions  of  the  older  art,  give  it  a  novel  intellectual
and  emotional  authority.  Not  less  significant  is  the
demand,  issuing  from  the  more  liberal  sections  of  the
Christian  Churches  and  from  their  outcast  sects,  for  a
new  spiritual  synthesis  in  which  the  constructive
as  well  as  the  destructive  criticism  shall  find  expression.
Twenty  years  ago  it  would  have  been  impossible  for
such  a  publication  as  the  Hibbert  Journal  to  have
obtained  the  influence  it  wields  to-day.  The  whole
modernist  movement  in  Catholic  and  Protestant  coun-
tries is  a  striking  confession  of  the  failure  of  the  silent
protest  to  keep  the  new  wine  out  of  the  old  bottles.
In  every  church  the  new  bottling  industry  is  going  on
with  more  or  less  success.

It  is  unnecessary  here  to  illustrate  from  the  field  of
practical  politics  a  similar  decay  of  faith  and  a  similar
demand  for  new  principles  and  a  new  policy.  It  is  the
same  penetrating  force  of  realism,  exposing  the  false-
hood of  the  ancient  party  watchwords  and  cleavages,
and  craving  intelligible  and  mentally  satisfactory  prin-
ciples. Here  Socialism  has  been  the  great  educator,
breaking  down  at  last  in  this  country  the  boycott  of
disreputability,  and  forcing  politicians  to  fight  it  with
some  champion  more  substantial  than  the  ghosts  of
Whiggism  and  Toryism.  In  a  word,  just  as  the
theologians  are  beginning  to  seek  a  re-statement  of
religion  that  is  "  real,"  comprehensive,  vital,  so  it  is
with  the  more  enlightened  politicians.  The  age  of
shirking,  vapouring,  and  opportunism  is  passing.  A
larger  and  larger  number  of  modern  men  and  women
are  possessed  by  the  duty  and  the  desire  to  put  the  very
questions  which  their  parents  thought  shocking,  and  to
insist  upon  plain  intelligible  answers.  What  is  more,
they  want  all  these  questions  answered  at  once.  In
other  words,  there  is  an  instinct  to  reverse  the  dissocia-
tive current,  which  everywhere  made  for  separatism,  and
to lay the main intellectual and spiritual stress on


272 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

harmony  and  unity.  It  is  significant  that  this  unifying
process  has  been  so  counter  to  our  national  habits  in  the
past  that,  when  we  seek  to  express  it,  we  are  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  some  foreign  term  such  as  Welt-
anschauung^  the  barbaric  look  of  which  seems  to  give
artificiality  to  the  process.  Yet  it  is  some  such  orderly
assemblage  of  ideas  that  thousands  of  men  and  women
are  beginning  consciously  to  seek  after.  For  lack  of
intellectual  guidance  or  effective  co-operation,  many  of
them  became  the  dupes  of  some  narrow  doctrine  which
appealing  powerfully  to  some  single  craving  of  their
nature,  sets  up  as  a  religion  and  a  philosophy.
So  Spiritualism,  Christian  science.  Socialism,  Quietism,
even  Anarchism  and  Agnosticism,  in  spite  of  their
negative  character,  furnish  to  many  a  binding  principle
and  a  central  enthusiasm  which  otherwise  are  lacking.
They  are  the  spiritual  makeshifts  of  an  age  of  disillusion-
ment. Those  who  adopt  them  testify  to  their  pro-
visional character  by  their  inconstancy.  It  is  a  time
of  short  intellectual  leases,  not  of  permanent  abodes.
This  restlessness  is  due  not  so  much  as  is  often  held,  to
a  nomad  state  of  soul,  as  to  an  experimental  discovery
of  defects  in  these  improvised  syntheses.

We  have  had,  it  is  true,  even  in  the  age  of  scepticism,
little  schools  of  intellectuals  who  have  soared  into  some
loftiness  of  thought  where  they  have  claimed  to  find  the
one  and  absolute.  But  the  logical  athletics  of  their
ascent  preclude  most,  and  leave  the  climbers  in  an
atmosphere  so  high  and  dim  that  unity  seems  only  got
by  blotting  out  diversity,  not  by  harmonising  it.  What-
ever may  be  said  about  the  logic  of  the  pragmatists,
their  protest  against  the  "  unreality  "  of  the  idealistic
synthesis  remains  valid.  What  is  needed  is  not  so  much
a  system  of  thought,  whether  monism  or  pluralism,  not
so  much  a  single  faith,  religious,  ethical,  intellectual,
aesthetic,  practical,  as  a  single  spirit  in  the  conduct  of
life.  Now  it  is  the  supreme  claim  of  science  that  she
has given form to the spirit of truth-seeking,


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 273

embodying  it  in  that  realism  which  to-day  is  struggling
for  positive  expression  in  every  art  of  man.  At  first
sight  realism  may  appear  an  extremely  inadequate  word
to  express  that  striving  of  head  and  heart  which  is
replacing  the  dissipation  and  distraction  of  the  earlier
rationalism.  And  indeed  there  is  no  term  that  is
adequate  :  if  there  were,  instead  of  the  striving  we
should  have  the  thing.  But  if  we  are  to  gather  together
the  various  efforts  of  enlightenment,  reconcilement,  and
reconstruction,  presented  in  religion,  politics,  art,  science,
literature,  we  shall  admit  that  there  are  two  dominant
features.  The  first  is  the  persistent  strenuous  desire  to
reach,  present  and  represent  facts,  not  excluding  fictions,
illusions,  superstitions,  but  disentangling  this  sort  of
facts  from  the  others.  The  second  is  a  firm  conviction
that  every  sort  of  salvation  or  success  lies  in  a  clear-eyed
followinor  of  fact.

We  shall  be  told  that  the  realism  which  consists  in  a
mere  following  of  fact  will  not  give  us  any  ordered
scheme  of  life.  Realism,  like  other  isms,  has  suff^ered
much  from  its  friends.  Neither  naive  realism  nor
sophisticated  naturalism  will  do  what  is  wanted,  for
their  "  Nature  "  and  "  reality  "  are  doubly  defective  :
they  lean  too  heavily  on  the  material  side  of  things,
and  they  give  Nature  too  much  independence.  Modern
thought,  correcting  this  cruder  realism,  sees  the  whole
of  Nature  as  a  psycho-physical  process,  interprets  human
history  as  a  spiritual-animalism,  and  recognises  clearly
that  so  far  as  the  selection,  valuation,  and  utilisation  of
"  realities  "  go,  Man  is  the  maker  of  the  Universe.
Philosophers  may  busy  themselves  with  the  design  of  the
pattern  according  to  which  man  makes  his  universe,  or
with  some  ultimate  hypothesis  which  shall  regard
the  whole  of  human  history  as  an  episode  in  the  self-
realisation  of  the  Absolute.  It  is  unlikely  that  this  sort
of  metaphysical  unity  will  ever  occupy  the  minds  of  men,
will  furnish  them  with  any  substitute  for  religion,  will
animate  their  art  and  literature,  or  will  incite  them  to


274 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

daring  deeds  for  their  own  good  and  that  of  others.  What
men  are  seeking  for  is  a  wholeness  without  strained
unity,  a  freedom  of  thought,  of  feeling,  of  conduct,  which
shall  enable  each  man  to  confront  an  object  of  nature,
an  idea,  an  event,  a  situation,  not  as  appealing  for
acceptance  or  reprobation  to  some  specifically  moral,
intellectual,  or  aesthetic  faculty  of  him,  but  as  a  reality  to
be  seen  clear-eyed  and  to  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth.
This  "  worth  "  or  "  value  "  must  be  given  on  a  human
consideration  which  transcends  the  distinctively  moral,
intellectual,  aesthetic.  In  fact  the  virtue  of  the  realist
outlook  upon  life  will  consist  primarily  in  closing  up
this  false  division  of  the  human  standard,  which
especially  in  England,  has  done  more  than  anything  to
keep  us  uncivilised.  The  time  of  the  Renaissance  did
not  find  us  ripe  for  humanism,  nor  was  a  humanism  so
deeply  impregnated  with  obsolete  or  obsolescent  culture,
truly  realistic.  So  we  have  lived  in  separate  strata  of
barbarism  and  philistinism  with  a  growing  but  un-
assimilated  tincture  of  cold  intellectualism.  But  unless  I
read  wrongly  the  signs  of  our  time,  there  is  a  genuine
awakening  not  in  one  but  in  many  quarters.  In  the
religious  world  the  new  term  "  comparative  "  religion
is  indicative  of  much,  and  the  anxious  rapprochement
to  science  is  in  efi^ect,  though  not  in  intention,  a  capitu-
lation to  the  spirit  of  realism.  In  politics  the  same
spirit  is  seen  in  the  weakening  hold  of  the  "romantic"
view  of  aristocracy  and  democracy,  the  critical  re-
statement of  the  revolutionary  formulae,  the  bolder
expression  of  "  real  politics  "  in  the  organised  craft  and
force  of  Bismarckism  and  political  machines,  but  more
particularly  in  the  clear  emergence  of  industrial  and
financial  interests  as  the  directing  and  dominating
factors  of  national  and  international  relations.  In
literature  and  art  eager,  even  furious,  endeavours  are
afoot  to  break  down  the  barriers  which  have  forbidden
the  keen  presentation  of  the  most  disturbing  thoughts
and topics of  our  age. Wagner, Millet, Whistler,


THE  TASK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 275

Nietzsche,  Tolstoy,  Whitman,  Ibsen,  have  not  laboured
in  vain.  It  is  true  that  in  our  compromising  English
way  we  have  at  first  received  them,  reluctantly,  as  freaks.
We  did  not  even  recognise  there  was  a  new  and  common
spirit  in  their  work.  Now,  too  late,  our  guardians  of
public  order  struggle  to  shut  the  conservatory  windows.
The  invigorating  air  has  already  quickened  a  new  per-
ception of  the  purposes  of  literature  and  art;  we  are  no
longer  content  to  grow  exotics  under  glass,  we  want  the
free  growth  of  the  natural  flora  of  our  country.  Not
less  potent,  though  difi^erent  in  its  working,  is  the  new
spirit  in  science.  There  it  acts  chiefly  as  a  correction
of  the  narrower  realism  of  detailed  research,  by  the
healing  process  of  ever  wider  and  more  fruitful  specu-
lation. For  the  sort  of  facts  which  speculative  science
sees,  its  creative  or  interpretative  hypotheses,  fall  under
the  fuller  realism  and  indeed  serve  admirably  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  the  cruder  realism  whose  only  facts
were  hard  and  dead.

What  is  most  needed  now  is  a  fuller  consciousness
amonp^  those  who  in  different  fields  of  thought  and  work
are  moved  by  this  spirit,  a  recognition  of  their  unity  of
purpose  and  a  fruitful  co-operation.  This  is  more
possible  and  more  desirable,  because  it  is  not  sought  to
secure  adhesion  to  any  common  formulae  or  any  creed,
but  only  to  a  common  temper  and  a  common  outlook.
But  we  have  so  much  faith  in  facts  as  to  believe  that
this  temper  and  this  outlook  will  work  towards  a  com-
munity of  thought  and  feeling,  not  indeed  fusing  or
subjugating  personality  but  representing  fairly  and
truthfully  in  a  "  practical  philosophy  "  of  life  what  is
common  to  mankind,  while  leaving  liberty  for  the
uniqueness  and  waywardness  of  the  individual.  There
will  doubtless  be  some  to  whom  this  realism  will  seem
either  a  false  o^eneralisation  or  a  movement  which  beino^
inevitable  in  its  direction  and  its  pace  cannot  profit  by
seeking  self-consciousness.  But  those  who  accept  the
view  that  experiments  in  collective  self-consciousness,  as


276 THE  CRISIS  OF  LIBERALISM

a  means  of  accelerating  and  directing  the  "  urge  of  the
world  "  towards  human  enlightenment  and  well-being,
are  likely  to  yield  great  results,  will  recognise  that  a
rendering  of  realism  in  many  fields  of  thought  and  art
is  the  most  profitable  task  of  our  age.


INDEX


Adult  Suffrage  a  necessary
Expedient  of  Representative
Government,  12

Advisory  Second  Chamber,
Scheme  for,  29

Agricultural  Loans,  105

Agriculture,  Scientific  Know-
ledge not  applied  to, 163

Anti-Destitution.  5<?(?  Poverty

"  Armed  Conscience  of  the
Community,"  75

Art  in  relation  to  Collectivism,
123

"  Aspects  of  the  Social  Prob-
lem,"  194  note


Bagehot,  W.,  20

Balfour,  A.  J.,  21,  34

Beit,  A.,  229  note

Belgian  Integrity,  Interna-
tional Guarantee,  251

Bemis,  Professor,  225

Booth,  Charles,  161,  199

Bosanquet,  Bernard,  76,
194  note,  T99,  200  note,  201,
203,  206,  207,  250

Budget  1909,  X,  34,  96

Banking — Loan  Credit  Re-
strictions, 104

Bradley, Professor,  75

Bureaucracy,  Uses  and  Dan-
gers of,  14,  85,  147

Cabinet  Control  : —
Dangers  of, no
Encroachment on House
of  Commons  Privileges,
8


Cabinet  Control — continued.
Enlargement  of,  Reasons,  9
Issues  requiring  Check  of,

14
Present  Condition,  28,  47
Representative System
weakened  by,  26
Capital  : —

Equality  of  Access  to,  103,

167,  171
Trade Union Organisa-
tion as  opposed  to,  179
Waste  of,  162
Carlyle,  Thomas,  262
Carnarvon,  Lord, 236
Carnegie, Andrew, 201
Carpenter,  Edward,  215
"  Cave-men,"  10, 12
Cecil,  Lord  Hugh,  96
Chamberlain, Joseph, 236,

239,  240
Character, Effect  of  Physical

Environment  on,  208
Charter,  People's,  171
Charity  — Palliative  for

Poverty,  not  remedy, 173
Charity Organisation, Social

Philosophy  of,  192
Charity  Organisation  Society,
Theories and Methods of,
193  et  seq.
Christian  Socialism,  135
Churchill,  Winston  S.,  x,  xi
Civilisation, Mission of, 256,

257
Class  Government,  78

Democracy as a Substi-
tute, 172


^77


278


INDEX


Class  Government— Confd.

Economic Power of

Possessing  Classes, 177

"  Stake  in  the  Country  "

Argument,  78

Clement  of  Alexandria,  Saint,

201
Cobden,  Richard,  3
Coleridge,  S.  T.,  261
Collectivism  in  Industry,  114
College Endowments  by Mil-
lionaires, III,  218
Commons. See House of

Conimons
Comte,  Auguste,  264,  265
"  Consciousness  of  Kind,"  249
*' Consent of  the Governed,"

Conservative  Party  : —

Budget 1909— position of

Party,  x
Class  Government. See

that  Title
House  of  Lords,  relations

with, 18, 19
Liberalism, Conservative

view  of,  viii,  ix
Tactics of Conservatism,
176  et  seq.
Constitutional  Issues  raised  by

Crisis,  6,  11,  23
Constitutional  Reforms,

necessity  of,  6
Co-operation in Interna-
tionalism,  260
Co-operative  Movement,  Effect

of, 169
Credit,  Equality  of  Access  to,

103,  167,  171
Crowley,  202

Darwin,  Charles,  261,  265
Delegacy  of  Members  of  Par-
liament, II
Democracy  : —

Applications  of, 159


Democracy — Continued.

British, committed  to  re-
presentation principle,  25
Referendum  as  an  Instru-
ment of,  36,  39,  41,  45
Reconstruction  of  Society,

261
Representative Govern-
ment no  proof  of,  6
Re-statement  of, 71
"  Socialisation  of  Govern-
ment," 172
Will  of  the  People. See
that  Title
Dendy,  Miss,  194,  208
Development  Bill  1909,  96
Dicey, Professor,  21
Diminishing  Returns,  Law  of,
in  relation  to  Monopolies,  131
"  Doles  "  Doctrine,  195  et  seq.
"  Duty  " and "  Rights  " of
Individuals,  80

Education  : —

Class  Interests  and  Preju-
dices in. III

Equality  of  Access  to,  109,
171

Meagre Conceptions of,

94
Millionaire Endowments,

III,  218
Public  Control  of,  iii
Education Bill 1906, 21, 34,

91

Egypt,  British  Non-Evacua-
tion, 253

Electoral  Reforms  in  a  Demo-
cratic House  of  Commons,
12  et  seq.

Electricity,  Equal  Access  to
Supply, 10 1

Enfranchisement.  See  Suf-
frage

Engel's  "  Condition  of  the
Working  Class,"  159


INDEX


279


Environment,  physical  effect
on  Character,  208

Equality  of  Opportunity,  93,
96, 109, 164, 167, 171

Executive  of  House  of  Com-
mons. See  Cabinet  Con-
trol

Experts,  Officials,  Uses  and
Dangers  of,  14,  83,  147,  148

Facultative  Referendum,  53
Finance  : —

House of Lords, powers
regarding Money Bills,
20
Industry, Financial Con-
trol of, 104
Referendum,  Finance

Bills  Exemption,  38
Resolution of House of
Commons  1678,  20
Finance  Bill  1909,  x,  34,  96
Foreign  Affairs,  Autocracy  in,

9.  ^54
Fortnightly  Review,  30
Franchise. See  Suffr.\ge
Free Competition advocated

b}-  New  Liberalism,  4
Free Education, 109 et  seq.,

Freedom,  Mobility  Essential
to,  99

French  Procedure  on  Differ-
ences between  two  Cham-
bers, 30

George,  D.  Llojd,  x

George,  Henry,  135

Giddings,  Professor,  249,  250

Gladstone,  W.  E.,  3,  16,  251

"  Gospel  of  Wealth,"  201,  219

Graft-System,  149

Halsbury,  Lord,  22

Hegel,  76

Hertzog,  General,  233


Hibbert  Journal,  271
High-Road  Equality  of  Oppor-
tunity, 99
Hobbes,  249
Home  Rule  Bill, 19
House  of  Commons  : —

Cabinet Control. See

that  Title
Caucus  System  curtailing

Liberty  of,  11
House  of  Lords  Crisis.  See

that  Title
Reforms  needed  in,  12
Single Chamber Govern-
ment. See  that  Title
House  of  Lords  Crisis  : —

Conservative Majorities,

19,  181
Constitutional  Issues

raised  by,  6,  11,  23
"  Ending or Mending  "

Proposals,  23
Historical  Survey,  17
Motives  of,  ix
Property — Bills rejected,

5.  18
Veto. See  that  Title

Ideas,  Revolt  against,  114
Imperial  Defence,  241
Imperialism  : —
Defects  of,  259
Ethical Justification for,

258
Militarism, Social Re-
forms diverted  by,  viii
Parasitic,  260
South Africa — A Lesson
in  Empire,  253  et  seq.
Incomes, Equalisation of, as

Cure  for  Poverty, 164
Increasing Returns, Law  of,
in  relation  to  Monopoly,  129
Industry  :■ —

Collectivism  in, 114
Financial  Control  of, 104


2«0


INDEX


Industry — Continued.

Individual Demand and

Supply,  122
"  Routine  "  Demand  and
Supply,  I20
See  also  Labour
Inefficiency, Personal, as a

Cause  of  Poverty, 164
Insurance,  xi,  106,  117
Internationalism. See  Mor-
ality OF  Nations

Joint  Stock  Enterprise  :—

Limitations  —  [Adam

Smith],  116
Public Enterprise com-
pared with,  139  et  seq.
Justice  : —

Access to Legal Protec-
tion,  107,  172
Kindness and Humanity
as  a  Substitute  for,  250

"  Kickers,"  11
Kingsley,  Charles,  262
Kropotkin,  P.,  163

Labour  : —

Capital  in  relation  to,  179
Selling  Power  of,  167
Trade  Unionism.  See  that

Title
Waste  of,  162

See  also  Industry
Labour  Exchanges,  xii
Laissez-faire  Doctrines,  4,  99,

136
Land  : —

Equality  of  Access  to,  97,
166,  171

House  of  Lords,  Land  Re-
form Bills  destroyed
by,  5,  18

New  Liberalism  and  the
Land  Question,  97  et
seq.


Land — Continued.

Small Holdings.  See

that  Title
Land  Values,  Taxation  of,  98
Lansdowne,  Lord,  21,  22,  34,

37
Law, Equality of Access to

Legal  Protection,  107,  172
Leaders  of  the  People,  Train-
ing of, 112
Liberal  Parliamentarians,  91
Liberalism  : —

British  and  Foreign,  Com-
pared, xii
Character  of,  92,  95
Constructive,  issues  of,  3,

94
New  Liberalism.
See  that  Title
Licensing Bills, Effect of
Referendum  on  framing  of,

45

Licensing  Bill,  1908,  Conser-
vative Character  of,  91

Lincoln,  Abraham,  242

Lloyd  George,  D.,  x

Loch,  C.  S.,  194  note,  203,
210

Lords. See  House  of  Lords

Loria's  "  Economic  Founda-
tions of  Society," 176  note

Lowell,  Professor,  8


McCallum,  Mrs., 194  note
Machiavelli,  249
Machinery,  Limitation  of,  119
Maeterlinck's "  Life of the

Bee,"  73
Mandate  Doctrine  : — ■

Ineffective and Illusory

Mandates,  35
Referendum supporting,

34
Marshall,  Professor,  128
Marx,  Karl,  137


INDEX


Mazzini,  115

Mechanical  Energy,  Equality
of  Access  to,  10 1

Meredith,  "  Beauchamp's
Career,"  178  note

Mill,  John  Stuart,  27,  29,  134

Millionaire  Endowments,  iii,
218

Milner,  Lord,  235

Mineral  Sources  of  Energy,
Safeguards  against  Mono-
poly of, 102

Mob  Electorates,  16

Mob-mind,  Psychology  of,  74,

75
Mobility as a Condition of

F"reedom,  99
Money  Bills  :  —

Powers  of  House  of  Lords,

20
Referendum inoperative
upon, 38
Money-lending, Restrictions,

103
Monopolies  :  —

Dangers  of, loi
Definition and Kinds  of,

128,  129
"  Natural,"  131
Public  and  Private, 130
Morality of Nations, 248 et

seq.
M  or  ley,  Lord,  3
Municipalisation  of  the  Public
Services,  116,  ri8,  1^0  et  seq.

Nations, Morality of, 248 et

scq.
New  Liberalism  :—

Failure  of  old  Policy — first

symptoms,  vii
Future  of,  xiii
Obstacles  to,  4,  5
Public Control and Free
Competition advocated
by,  4


New  Liberalism — Cotitd.

Socialism in relation to,
xii,  19,  133

Obligatory  Referendum,  53
Officialism,  Defects  of,  14,  85,

M7
Old  Age  Pensions,  xii,  96
Opportunity, Equality  of,  93,

96,  109,  164,  171
Organism — Society  considered

as,  71,  77
Owen,  Robert,  209

Palmerston,  Lord,  251

Paper Duties Repeal Act,

i860,  19,  20
Payment  of  Members— a  demo-

cratic  Reform, 13
People's  Charter,  171
People's  Will. See  Will  of

THE  People
Permanent  Legislative  Service,

86
Personal Inefficiency as a

Cause  of  Poverty,  164
Pledges from Parliamentary

Members and Candidates,

effects  of,  II,  13,  35,  36
Plural Voting Destruction — a

democratic  Reform,  13
Plural  Voting Bill, 1909, 21,

34
Poor  Law  Commission, 1834,

159
Poverty  : —

Charity  Organisation,

Social Philosophy of,
192
Causes  and  cures, 159  et

seq.
Defects of present Poor
Law,  173
Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood,
262


INDEX


Progress, popular, and  Class

Interests,  i8i  et  seq.
Property  : —

"  Doles  " and Private

Property,  195  et  seq.
Land. See  that  Title
Possessing  Classes'  Con-
trol of,  177
"  Stake  in  the  Country  "
Rights,  78
Proportional Representation,

13
Prostitution, Conditions

favouring,  209
Public  Enterprise,  Psychology

of,  139
Public  Services,  Municipalisa-

tion  of,  116,  118,  140  et  seq.

Quantitative and Qualitative
Demand,  126

Railways  Nationalisation, 100
Rationalism and Destructive

Criticism,  261  et  seq.
Reconstruction  of  Society,  261
Referendum  : — •

Abuses  of,  37,  38,  44
Advantages  of,  32,  39,  42,

68
Changes probably pro-
duced by,  48
Democracy  —  Referendum
as  an  Instrument  of,  36,

39.  4I;  45

Exemptions  from  opera-
tion, 38,  39

Expense  of  Administra-
tion, an  advantage,  39

General Considerations,

15.  48
Laws  tested  by,  64  et  seq.
Lord's  Veto,  Referendum

Safest  Check  to,  42,  43
Mandate Doctrine, an

argument  for,  34


Referendum — Continued.

Objections  to,  35,  36,  43,  47
Political Schemes tested
by,  67

Representative Govern-
ment not  abandoned  by
use  of,  37,  38,  46,  47,  48
Revolutionary Action

checked  by,  67
Swiss Referendum. See

that  Title
Training in Self-Govern-
ment afforded  by,  69
Reform  Bill, 183 1,  19
Reform  Bill,  1832,  17,  20
Representative  Government :
British Democracy com-
mitted to,  25
Democracy not a neces-
sary corollary  of,  6
Equality of representa-
tion, 84
Referendum. See that

Title
Suffrage  Exclusions  nulli-
fying  character  of, 12,
13,  244  et  seq.
Rhodes,  Cecil,  243
"  Rights  " and "  Duty  " of

Individuals,  80
Rights  of  the  Political  Organ-
ism, 81
Rights  of  Nations,  256  et  seq.
Ritchie,  Prof.  D.  G.,  250
Rockefeller,  J.  D.,  225,  226
Ross,  Prof.,  225
Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  76
Rowntree,  Seebohm,  161
Ruskin,  John,

Russian  Struggle  for  Self-
Government,  British  Attitude
towards,  251

"  Sanctity  of  Contract,"  92
Self-Government. See  Demo-


INDEX


283


Second  Chamber  : —

Advisory,  Schemes  for,  29
True  Functions  of,  31
See  House  of  Lords
Shelley,  P.  B.,  261
Single  Chamber  Government  :
Abuses  of,  25,  27,  42
Cabinet  Control. See  that

Title
Conservative  Uni-cameral

Government,  18
General Considerations,

II,  24

Switzerland,  examples,  55

Small  Holdings  Bills,  framing,

effect  of  Referendum  on,  45

Small Holdings Acts, Loans

provided  by,  105
Small  Holdings  Policy,  xii
Smith,  Adam,  116,  117,  119
Smuts,  General,  233
Social Reform Party, Future

of,  134  et  seq.
Socialism  : —

Abuse  of  Power  by  Public
Employees, Objection,
152  et  seq.
Art  in  relation  to,  123
Collectivism in Industry,

114
Corrupt  Practices  in  Public

Enterprise,  Objection
Educating  Force  of,  211
Liberalism  and  Socialism,

distinction  between,  93
Meaning  of,  96
Municipalisation  of  Public

Services,  116,  118,  140
Political  Structure  of,  139

et  seq.
Practicable  and  Theoretic,

172
Socialistic Liberal Measures,

xJ.  96,  133
Society  as  an  Organism,  71,  77
Society  of  Nations,  248,  252


Sociology  of  the  Vested  Inter-
ests, 184
South Africa — A Lesson in

Empire,  233  et  seq.
Spencer,  Herbert,  264
"  Spirit  of  the  Hive,"  74
Spoils System in the United

States,  151
Standard  Oil  Company,  129
Stanford,  Mrs.,  225
State  Socialism. See  Socialism
Suffrage  : —
Adult,  12

Disenfranchisement of

public  employees  under

Socialism  discussed,  154

Equality  of  Franchise,  84

"  One  Man  one  Vote,"  13,

78
Plural  Voting,  13,  21,  34
South Africa, Coloured
Races  Exclusion,  244  et
seq.
Women's  Suffrage,  13,  84
Suspensory  Veto,  31,  32
Swiss Federal Agreement,

1815.  55
Swiss  Referendum  :—

"  Conservatism  "  of  the
People  as  shown  by,  61

Constitution  and  Working
of,  38,  42,  44,  46,  47,  50
et  seq.

Difficulties  and  Discrepan-
cies of,  61

Origin  of,  54

Voting  Papers,  59,  60


Taxation — "No  Taxation  with-
out Representation  "  dis-
cussed, 77

Tennyson,  Lord,  261

Town  Planning  Policy,  xii

Trade  L^nionism  : —

Capital,  Effect  upon,  179


284


INDEX


Trade  Unionism — Contd.

Selling  Power  of  Labour

strengthened  by,  i68
Trade  Union  Act,  Conser-
vative Character  of,  91
Trades Disputes Bill,
igo6,  21
Transit  : —

Freedom  of,  99
Joint  Stock  Enterprise  in,
118
Treaty  Obligations,  Considera-
tion of,  252
Trusts,  129
"  Tyranny  of  Socialism,"  155


Uni-Cameral  Government.  See

Single  ChaxMber
United  States  : —

Millionaire Endowments,

219  et  seq.
Party  Machines,  50
Spoils  System,  151
Utilitarian  Specialisation,  264


Vested  Interests  : —

Attacks upon. Effect on

House  of  Lords,  19
Bureaucratic  Support, 14,

IS

College Endowments in
Defence  of,  231

Obstacles to Social Re-
form, 5

Oligarchy  of,  177  et  seq.

Sociology  of,  184
Veto  of  the  House  of  Lords  : —

Democracy,  Veto  not  the
only  barrier  to,  7

Destruction, Effects and
after-treatment,  16,  42


Veto — Continued.

"  Ending or Mending  "
Proposals,  23

Limitations  of,  20

Popular Mandate Claim,
22

Record  of,  18
Veto,  Suspensory,  31,  32
Virchow,  72
Votes. See  Suffrage


Wallace,  A.  R.,  30
Wallas,  Graham,  145
Ward, Prof.  Lester,  72
Wealth  :—

Collectivism  in  relation  to,

127
Gospel  of  Wealth,  201,  219
Webb,  Mrs.  Sidney,  124
Webb,  Sidney,  145
Wellington,  Duke  of,  20
Will — Doctrine  of  the  General

Will,  76
Will  of  the  People  :—

Commons  and  Lords,  Atti-
tude towards,  21
Delegacy  and  Pledges, 11
Failure  in  realisation,  6
Lords'  Veto  Destructions,

Effect  upon,  8,  11
Officialism conflicting

with,  14
Referendum. See that

Title
Representative Govern-
ment. See  that  Title
Training of Popular

Leaders, 112
Trust in the People — a
political  necessity,  40
Women's  Suffrage,  13,  84
Wordsworth,  William,  261


GARDKN CITY PRESS LTD.,  PRINTERS,  LETCHWORTH.


ip


■  ailMiHBBWaH—


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY

Los  Angeles

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below.


KECDIW:<S


miM


^^


"t


REC'D  Lb-U


URL

Form  L9— Series


MAR  1^


t


%»


\^^


•I  ;.L.'-u  •, I.:


\A


"137S


IIUL. 51976

ftC-ULU.u«.


4S


19


tfAR9 1973


BECO  LO-URl
* AUG  18 19^


Vv


«


.  ^^s^


(T


3  1158  00013  7413


iilii'"

'»'* 001281001


JN
237
1909
H65


^


^»«


!' iliii^ir/fi'CllWil
