The Evolution of Modern Capitalism
John A. Hobson (1894)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): John A. Hobson's 'The Evolution of Modern Capitalism: A Study of Machine Production' (first published London, 1894). Sourced from a later Allen & Unwin impression scan via Internet Archive (Digital Library of India), reproducing the 1894 text. Publisher's catalogue matter trimmed from beginning and end. The 1894 work is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE EVOLUTION OF

MODERN CAPITALISM

A Study of Machine Production


JOHN A. HOBSON


FIRST PUBLISHED 1 894
SECOND IMPRESSION 1901
SECOND EDITION, THIRD IMPRESSION I906
THIRD EDITION, FOURTH IMPRESSION 1916
FIFTH IMPRESSION I919
SIXTH IMPRESSION 1 92 1
FOURTH EDITION, SEVENTH IMPRESSION 1926
EIGHTH IMPRESSION 1 927
NINTH IMPRESSION I928
TENTH IMPRESSION I93O
ELEVENTH IMPRESSION 1 949
TWELFTH IMPRESSION 1 9 54


This book is copyright under the Berne Convention.
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of
private study, research , criticism or review, as
permitted under the Copyright Act 19 1 1 , no portion
may he reproduced by any process without written
permission. Enquiry should be made to the publisher.


40785


PRINTED IN GRSAT BRITAIN BY
UNWIN BROTHERS LTD
WOEING AND LONDON


PREFACE TO NEW AND REVISED EDITION.


In the long Supplementary Chapter added to this new
edition of The Evolution of Modern Capitalism I have
endeavoured to trace and illustrate the chief movements
of trade and industry which are distinctive of the open-
ing quarter of the twentieth century. In the first part
of the chapter I have dealt chiefly with the movements
prior to the Great War, though in some cases I have
brought the statistical record of events up to the
present time. It is, however, evident that the War
period (1914-1918) makes a definite cleavage in economic
as in general history, and that the mode, the direction,
and the pace of capitalist development have undergone
great changes in consequence of the War and its politi-
cal and economic sequelae. The period has been one of
disturbance, recovery, and readjustments.

The redistribution of political boundaries and controls,
not only in Europe, but in Africa, Asia, and the Pacific,
have affected industrial development and trade routes.

State policies during the War and after have had im-
portant reactions upon the relative growth of industries
and upon the structure of businesses, stimulating in no
ordinary degree the combinations and associations which
always modify and often displace the competitive system.

The new development of electric power, for transport,


PREFACE TO NEW AND REVISED EDITION.

industry, and domestic purposes, is already producing
changes not only of industrial structure but of the re-
lative importance of the industrial areas of the world.
Water power and oil are seen to be determinants of
economic strength. Assessments of current economic
strength, in terms of coal, iron, foreign trade, etc., give
some valuable indications of the changing wealth of the
advanced industrial nations — in particular, the new place
taken by the United States as a financial and economic
power. Post-war difficulties and disturbances have
ripened old problems and disclosed new ones in the field
of international finance, the control of backward countries
with rich natural resources, and the relations between
capital and labour within the several countries and in
the international sphere. I offer some brief settling of
these problems, in terms of fact and figure, as a contri-
bution towards a speculative forecast of the capitalism
of the near future.

J. A. HOBSON.


May, 1926.


PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION.

This new and enlarged edition of The Evolution of M odern
Capitalism contains additions and alterations so great as
to constitute it in effect a new book.

The chapters dealing with the concentrative forces in
modem industry, the growth of industrial Combinations,
Trusts, Cartels, etc., are entirely rewritten. Large use
has been made of recent English and American material,
and much attention is given to new developments of
capitalism in the transport and manufacturing industries
of the United States.

In Chapter X. an analysis of the position occupied by
the financier in modem industry is prejented, with illus-
trations from recent developments in South Africa and
America.

While most of the matter of the earlier historical
chapters in the first edition is retained, numerous emen-
dations and additions have been made, and an intro-
ductory chapter on the Origin of Modem Capitalism,
based largely upon the researches in Professor Somb art's
great work, Der Moderne Kapitalismus , has been
inserted.

For material relating to capitalistic combinations in
Great Britain I desire to express my deep indebtedness to
the writings of Air. W. H. Macrosty, whose collection


vi


PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION.


and analysis of instances form the best single fund of
information. For recent American material relating to
Trusts I have made large use of the reports of the
Industrial Commission and the writings of Professor
Richard Ely and Professor Jeremiah Jenks.

J. A. HOBSON.

August, 1906,


CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

2PAGK

THE ORIGIN OF MODERN CAPITALISM ... I
Section.

1. The first conditions of Capitalism.

2. Mediaeval repositories of Wealth.

3. Rents the origin of early Capital.

4. “ Treasure ” as the monetary basis.

5. Nobles, burghers, and officials the first “Business

Men.”

6. The beginnings of Colonial Exploitation and “ Forced

Labour.”

7. The rise of a British proletariat of dispossessed culti-

vators.

8. Similar movement in Continental Europe.

$. Slow growth of use of Machinery.

to. The Spirit of Economic Rationalism.*

11. Causes of England’s priority in Capitalisms


CHAPTER II.

THE INSTRUMENTS OF CAPITALISM .... 25


1. Scientific inventions and Economic direction.

2. The meaning of the term Capital.

3. Place of Machinery in Capitalism

4. The financial aspect of Capitalism


Vi PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION.

and analysis of instances form the best single fund of
information. For recent American material relating to
Trusts I have made large use of the reports of the
Industrial Commission and the writings of Professor
Richard Ely and Professor Jeremiah Jenks.


J. A. HOBSON.


CONTENTS.


ix


CHAPTER V.

PACE

SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF THE MODERN BUSINESS. 113

Section.

1. General measure of growth of Business-structure.

2. Evidence of the relative Economy of large and small

Businesses in United States.

3. Testimony from Great Britain, Germany, and France.

4. Concentration in Transport Industry.

5. Concentration in Banking and Insurance.

6. Concentration in Distributive' Processes.

7. Concentration in Agriculture.

8. Survival of small Farms.

9. Summary of mechanical tendencies.

10. Economies of Productive Power in large Businesses.

11. Economies of Competitive Power.

12. Survival of small Businesses.

13. The morbid survival of small Sweating Businesses.

14. General Summary of the opposed tendencies.

15. The typical magnitude of a Business.


CHAPTER VI.

THE STRUCTURE OF TRADES AND MARKETS . . 141

1. Differentiation of the Business Structure.

2. Integration of Processes.

3. Horizontal and Lateral Integration.

4. Structure and Size of different Markets.

5. Machinery a direct Agent in expanding Market Areas.

6. Expanded Time-area of the Market.

7. Interdependency of Markets.

8. Sympathetic and Antagonistic Relations between Trades.

9. National and Local Specialisation in Industry.

10. Influences determining Localisation of Indies try.

11. Impossibility of Final Settlement of Industry.

12. Specialisation in Districts and Towns.

13. Specialisation within the Town.


vi


PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION.


and analysis of instances form the best single fund of
information. For recent American material relating to
Trusts I have made large use of the reports of the
Industrial Commission and the writings of Professor
Richard Ely and Professor Jeremiah Jenks.

J. A. HOBSON.

August, 1906,


CONTENTS.


xi


CHAPTER IX.

PAGE

ECONOMIC POWERS OF THE TRUST . . 2l6

Section.

1. Power of Trusts over earlier or later processes.

2. Power of Trusts over direct competitors. Control of

markets.

3. Control over wages and volume of employment.

4. Control over prices.

5. The theory of monopoly prices.

6. Control of prices in relation to classes of commodity.

7. General summary of price control.


CHAPTER X.


THE FINANCIER 235

1. The origin and economic nature of modem finance.

2. Relations between investor and financier.

3. Need of the financial middleman.

4. Earning capacity the true basis of Capitalisation

5. The art of promotion.

6. Manipulating the share-markets.

7. The control of sound profitable businesses.

8. Bank-loans as a factor in business finance.

9. The triangle of financial forces in America.

10. Financial pressure for external markets.

11. The financial system as illustrated from South Africa


CHAPTER XL

MACHINERY AND INDUSTRIAL DEPRESSION „


%, The external phenomena of Tfcade Depression.

2. Correctly described as Und^paxjductkm and Over-

production.

3. Testimony to a general excess of Productive Power over

iut leoniremeni for Cft&mirotion.


273


xii


CONTENTS,


PAGE


Section.

4. The connection, of modem Machine-production, and

Depression shown by statistics of price.

5. Changing forms in which Over-supply of Capital is

embodied.

6. Summary of economic relation of Machinery to De-

pression.

7. Under-consumption as the root-evil.

8. Economic analysis of “ Saving.”

9. Saving requires increased Consumption in the future.

10. Quantitative relation of parts in the organism of

Industry.

11. Quantitative relation of Capital and Consumption.

12. Economic limits of Saving for a Community.

13. No limits to the possibility of individual Saving — Clash

of individual and social interests in Saving.

14. Objection that excess in forms of Capital would drive

interest to zero not valid.

15. Excess is in embodiments of Capital, not in real

Capital.

16. Uncontrolled Machinery a source of fluctuation.


CHAPTER XII.

MACHINERY AND DEMAND FOR LABOUR . . . 317

1. The Influence of Machinery upon the number of Em-

ployed, dependent cm “ elasticity of demand.**

2. Measurement of direct effects on Employment in Staple

Manufacturers.

3. -Fallacy of the Separatist Measure of Employment.

4. Influence of Introduction of Machinery uponRegularity

of Employment.

5. Effects of ** Unorganised ** Machine-industry upon

Regularity.

6. Different Ways In which modem Industry causes Un-

employment.

7. Summary of General Conclusions.


CONTENTS*


sdii


CHAPTER XIII.

FAGS

MACHINERY AND THE QUALITY OF LABOUR • . 335

Section.

z. Kinds of Labour which Machinery supersedes.

2. Influence of Machine-evolution upon intensity of

physical work.

3. Machinery and the length of the working day.

4. The Education of Working with Machinery.

5. The levelling tendency of Machinery — The subordina-

tion of individual capacity in work.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE ECONOMY OF HIGH WAGES .... 352

x. The Economy of Low Wages.

2. Modifications of the Early Doctrine— Lord Brassey’s

Evidence from Heavy Manual Work.

3. Wages, Hours, and Product in Machine-industry.

4. A General Application of the Economy of High Wages

and Short Honrs inadmissible.

5. Mutual Determination of Conditions of Employment

and Productivity.

6. Compressibility of Labour and Intensification of Effort.

7. Effective Consumption, dependent upon Spare Energy

of the Worker.

8. Growth of Machinery in relation to Standard of 1 * 3

Comfort

9. Economy of High Wages dependent upon Consump-

tion.

CHAPTER XV.

SOKE EFFECTS OS MODERN INDUSTRY UPON PEE

WORKERS AS CONSUMERS , , - 37 ^

i. How far the gate from tee

Pa 2 ofPiiaes.

a. liae«a©Tw>dKtooe«pe«-'

sated ty tee gating Weak fli Dbtritatipa.

3. Slim fcasttea lfaddab-

pamdiaeiiote.


XIV


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XVI.

PAGK

OCCUPATIONS OF THE PEOPLE 383

Section.

1. Shifts of English employment as attested by the

Censuses.

2. Advancing and declining Manufactures.

3. Similar shifts of employment in the United States,

France, Germany, Austria, Sweden.

4. General laws of the shift of occupations.

5. Explanation of general movements of employment.

6. The normal law of evolution of employment.

7. Relation of employment to international trade.


CHAPTER XVII.

CIVILISATION AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT . 401

1. Imperfect Adjustment of Industrial Structure to its

Environment.

2. Reform upon the Basis of Private Enterprise and Free

Trade.

3. Freedom and Transparency erf Industry powerless to

core the deeper Industrial Maladies.

4. Beginnings of Public Control of Machine-production.

5. Passage erf Industries into a public N on-competitive

Condition.

6 . The raison cFHre of Progressive Collectivism.

7. Collectivism follows the line of Monopoly.

8. Cases of M Arrested Development the Sweating

Trades.

9. Genuine Survivals of Small Industry.

10. The Natural Limits of Collectivism.

zr. Improved Quality of Consumption the Condition of
Social Progress.

X2« The Highest Division of Labour between Machinery
and Art


CONTENTS.


XV


Section. bags

13. Qualitative Consumption defeats the Law of Decreas-
ing- Returns.

24. Freedom of Art from Limitations of Hatter.

15. Machinery and Art in Production of Intellectual

Wealth.

16. Reformed Consumption abolishes Anti-Social Com-

petition.

17. Economies of Intellectual Production.

18. Life itself must become Qualitative.

19. The basis. Individuation.

20. Organic Relations between Production and Con-

sumption.

21. Summary of Progress towards Coherent Industrial

Organism.


SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER.

INDUSTRY IN TEE TWENTIETH CENTURY * . 440


PART I.

2. Growth of large Joint-Stock enterprises.

2. The “ Representative Business” : its size and structure.

3. The effect of limits of maximum efficiency in maintain-

ing Competition.

4. New Developments in Combinations, Cartels, and

Trusts.

5. Combinations in Post-War Britain.

6. The Distribution of Occupations in Britain and the

United States.

7. Women’s new place in Industry, Commerce, and Pro-

fessions.

8. Comparative Advance of Basic Industries of Capitalism

in different countries.

9. The Growth of International Trade.

10, 'Export of Capital.

zx. Advance of America as a Creditor Nation. .

22. Effects of the War on Bfipnomfo strength of Nations,
13. The New Electric Age.


XVI


CONTENTS.


PART II.

Section.

i. The Revelation of Reserve Productivity in War Time,
s. Waste in Productive and Distributive Processes.

3. The Problem of Business Reconstruction.

4. Relations of Capital and Labour.

5. Socialisation of Fundamental Industries.

6. State Provisions regarding Wages and Unemployment.

7. National Economy and Key Industries.

8. Constructive Economic Internationalism and its

Problems.


FAG*


REPLETE INDEX


495-510


THE EVOLUTION
OF MODERN CAPITALISM.


CHAPTER L

THE ORIGIN OF MODERN CAPITALISM.

| x. The first conditions of Capitalism,

§ a. Medtaval repositories of Wealth,

§ 3 Rents the origin of early Capital
j 4. “ Treasure ” as the monetary basis .

§ 5. Nobles , burghers , and officials the first u Business
Menl*

§ 6. The beginnings of Colonial Exploitation and “ Forced
Labour , ”

§ 7. The rise of a British proletariat of dispossessed cul-
tivators.

§ 8, Similar movement in Continental Europe,

| 9. Slow_ growth of use of Machinery.

§ xo. The Spirit of Economic Rationalism.

§ 1 1. Causes of England s priority in Capitalism.

§ 1. Capitalism may provisionally be defined as the
organisation of business upon a large scale byan employer
or company of employers possessing an accumulated stock
of wealth wherewith to acquire raw materials and tools, and
hire labour, so as to produce an' increased quantity of wealth
which shall constitute profit Wherever in the course of
history a conjunction of certain essential economic and
moral* forces has appeared, capitalist industry in soxx^ip^m


2


THE EVOLUTION OF


and size has existed. These essential conditions may be
thus enumerated: —

First, a production of wealth not required to satisfy the
current wants of its owners, and therefore saved.

Second, the existence of a proletariat or labouring class
deprived of the means of earning an independent
livelihood by putting their productive labour-power
into materials which they can freely appropriate,
purchase, or hire, consuming or selling the product
for their own advantage.

Third, such a development of the industrial arts as enables
indirect methods of production to afford profitable
employment to organised group-labour using tools
or machinery.

Fourth, the existence of large, accessible markets with
populations willing and economically able to con-
sume the products of capitalist industry.

Fifth, the capitalist spirit, or the desire and the capacity
to apply accumulated wealth to profit-making by the
organisation of industrial enterprise.

These are, of course, no series of wholly independent
conditions. On the contrary, they are closely inter-related.
The causes which favour an accumulation of wealth in one
class of a nation, or Other social aggregate, will commonly
assist the formation of a proletariat labour class. The
existence of a population capable of generating new wants
will help not only to stimulate accumulation, by offering the
possibility of large profitable sales, but will also arouse the
development of industrial arts, which in their turn will re-act
upon die consuming public by provoking new wants. Such
an atmosphere of technical" progress, alike in the arts of
production and of consumption, will educate the desire and
the capacity of capitalist organisation.

§ 2. The forms which capitalist enterprise takes differ
widely according to the relative development of these con-
stituent forces Or conditions.

Unless we regard as capitalist enterprises the military and
naval expeditions for pillage, to which so large a share of
die accumulations in the ancient world and throughout the
Middle Ages was applied, the area of older capitalism was


MODERN CAPITALISM.


s


virtually confined to certain public or semi-public works,
such as palaces, temples, tombs, castles, and other edifices
for ostentation or defence; the making of roads, water-
courses, and other permanent improvement of transport;
mining, chiefly for precious metals; and certain expensive
and hazardous branches of commerce with distant parts.
Slave or serf labour applied to the cultivation of the soil
may also be accounted a species erf capitalism in ancient
times. Of the most characteristic branch of modem capital-
ism, large-scale manufacture, the ancient world contains few
traces.

Until the close.of what we call the Middle Ages none of
the conditions we have named as essential to a wide general
development of capitalism was present, and two at least did
not assume considerable dimensions until the eighteenth
century.

As we briefly trace the emergence of these forces in die
modem world, we shall bring into prominence the distinctive
features of modem as distinguished from ancient capitalism,
as well as furnish an explanation of the rapid growth of the
capitalist economy. .

In his elaborate research into the sources of accumulation
in the Middle Ages, Sombart finds five principal repositories
of accumulated wealth ; —

i. The papal treasury at Rome, fed by the contributions
of the faithful, and enormously enhanced during the
period of the Crusades.

a. Hie knightly orders, foremost among them the
Templars, whose establishments extended over the
entire known world, from Greece to Portugal, from
Sicily to Scotland.

3. The royal treasuries of France and England.

4. The higher grades of the feudal nobility.

5. The city funds of the important commercial centres,

Venice, Milan, Naples, ranking first, followed by
Bologna and Florence in Italy, Paris, London,
Barcelona, Seville, Lisbon, Bruges, Ghent (later
Antwerp), Numberg, and Kdln. 1

1 Per ftttdefft, § Zm^s f friff*- Zriw tet


4


THE EVOLUTION OJT


If we seek the actual origins of these early accumulations
we run them “ to earth ” in rents of agricultural and city
lands, in the working of mines, and the discovery or pillage of
ancient treasures of the East. In the Middle Ages the home
trade and th<s industrial crafts were never anything else
than means of “ livelihood,” their scale and the conditions
under which they were conducted furnishing no scope for
considerable accumulations. Though in the later periods
of the Middle Ages large profits were made out of Colonial
trade and money-lending, these processes implied the pre-
existence of large accumulations which were essential to their
operations; moreover, further analysis of Colonial trade
and money-lending drive down to labour on the land as
the prime source of their profits.

§ 3. The historical foundation of capitalism is rent, the
product of labour upon land over and above what is requisite
to maintain the labourers; this surplus accrues by political
or economic force to the king, feudal superior, or landowner,
and can be consumed or stored by him.

By taxes and tolls, fines, rents, or even by voluntary contri-
butions, the king, the Church, the landlord, was able to
draw from the cultivation of the land the surplus product of
the more fertile soil, and most of the increment of the
productivity of agriculture due to improved methods of
cultivation. Systems of taxation and of land tenure were
evolved in order to extract as much as possible of these
natural surpluses for the benefit of the political or economic
superior. This power, however, to draw from the cultivators
a large amount of the produce, though conferring on the
landowner or feudal superior a large command over surplus
wealth for his personal consumption and that of a body of
idle retainers, would not in itself enable him to accumulate,
for the wealth he thus received would consist almost wholly
of perishable goods; even the forced labour he sometimes
extorted in lieu of produce was of necessity applied chiefly
to the production of buildings, roads, bridges, etc., which,
though of more permanent utility, could contribute little to
such accumulation as is required for capitalism.

To the surplus product of agriculture must be added the
rents of town lands. Though the small town trader 01
craftsman under primitive conditions was seldom able to
make sufficient savings out of his profits to become even a


MODERN CAPITALISM.


5


local usurer, the growth of the smallest sort of town yielded
to the owner of the ground on which it stood a number of
little rents whose growth became a considerable source of
wealth. As from his country estates the feudal noble was
able to squeeze from the peasants the fruits of improved
agriculture and more settled government, so from his town
lands he could take the value of improvements of the in-
iustrial arts. The beginnings of the wealth of cities are
accumulated ground rents. 1

Investigations into the records of the early history of
rising cities show that in nearly all cases the early capitalists
are representatives of the families originally in possession of
the ground on which the town is built The landowners
necessarily controlled the laying out of streets; the mill, the
smithy, the markets were made or controlled by them;
houses, booths, and workshops were often built by them.
The increments of city values came to them in hereditary or
life leases, or in time leases; while sales of these town lands
and redemptions put large sums into the hands of the
territorial aristocracy, who as early as the thirteenth century
in Italy and Flanders jre found in the position of large
“capitalists.*

“ It was a slow, gradual, and for the working population
an unobserved draining of small particles of labour which in
course of time was destined to serve as the foundation of
the capitalist economy.”* The important point to recognise
is that whether the industry whose surplus profits (the excess
over the subsistence of the worker) is agriculture, or town
handicrafts and trading, the first instrument of appropriation
is the ownership of land.

§ 4. But we .must look to another sort of labour on the
land to furnish the technical condition of effective ac-
cumulation. Payment of rents for country or town lands in
kind could not found capitalism. The discovery and ap-
propriation of the precious metals are essential to this
achievement It is necessary that the original power of
drawing rents should be monetised before the possession of
capital can become itself a basis of profit Until “treasure”
could be obtained and retained in Western Europe modem
capitalism could make no really Considerable start The

1 CL Sombftrt* *oL i. P* 19X. * IHd^ toL i. p. *68-


6


THE EVOLUTION OF


earlier treasure-houses were in the East, and during the
early Middle Ages Western intercourse with these older
civilisations meant a constant suckage of the precious
metals eastwards to pay for the goods which came into
Europe through the Levant trade. Though Germany and
Austro-Hungary turned out considerable quantities of gold
and silver, these passed through the hands of the Italian
merchants into the East. Not until the collapse of the
Byzantine empire opened the ALge&n and the Asiatic coast
to the plunder and exploitation of Italian rulers and
merchants did the tide begin to turn and Western Europe
obtain the supply of money required as a basis of
capitalism.

Economic historians often misrepresent the part played
by money. The development of mines and a large output
of the precious metals assist the rise of capitalism in that
they give to the possessors of these precious metals a power
to divert into channels of indirect production the surplus in-
dustrial energy drawn from the producers in taxes, tolls, rents,
etc. A sufficient development of agriculture and of other
industrial arts to furnish such a surplus is a pre-requisite.
The existence of the precious metals in a community en-
ables the type known as u the business man ” to arise and
function by directing the flow of “superfluous industrial
energy” from the production of immediate to that of mediate
goods; or in other words, from the direct production of con-
sumers’ wealth to the production of industrial and com-
mercial capital-goods. This does not necessarily occur as
a result of the discovery of gold and silver even in a. fairly
civilised state. The owners of wealth got from mines
may, often do, use it chiefly for ostentation and for decora-
tive consumption. But blended with this use is the re-
cognition of another use of precious metals and jewels as
a store of value which on occasion may give the owner a
command over other forms of wealth and over the energy of
men.

This storage of treasure in the hands of kings, nobles, and
of cities is first conceived with the design of providing for
defensive or offensive warfare. For defence or attack it is
necessary to maintain and equip quickly large bodies of
men, to furnish weapons, ships, and other expensive, ap-
paratus of war, and the earliest forms of large enterprise


MODERN CAPITALISM.


?


which resemble capitalist industry are the equipment of land
and sea expeditions for conquest and plunder. The early
funds not only of monarchs but of the Italian cities in the
Middle Ages were chiefly designed and used for war.

So long as the surplus-product of labour passed* in forms
of tax, toll, and rent, into the hands of kings and nobles,
the Church, the orders* and city funds, whether to be con-
sumed in luxury or to be accumulated as treasure, it could
not give rise to capitalism,

§ 5. It was essential that masses of this surplus wealth
should pass into the hands of “ business men,” who should
seek to make it a basis of “profitable ” use. Now, records
seem to point to two chief origins of such a class.

The rise of the great mercantile power of the Italian cities
clearly indicates one origin — the entrance of members of the
landed aristocracy into city life and burgher occupations.
With the growth of more settled order in the country, and
of a softer, more luxurious habit of life, some of the landed
nobility came to settle in the cities, bringing with them
their rent-rolls and buying more city lands. Especially the
younger branches of the nobility, no longer wholly occupied
with war, came into town life. This merging of the landed
nobility with city life was earlier and freer in the Italian and
Flemish states than in France or Germany, and the larger
quantity of money thus brought into the cities by the
“monetisation” of the rents of their estates contributed not
a little to the earlier development of large commercial
undertakings by Italian and Flemish merchant-houses. Iu
England also from the thirteenth century the lower nobles
began to mix more easily with burgher life, and “the
younger sons of the country knight sought wife, occupation,
and estate in the towns.” 1 “A large proportion of the
London apprentices were drawn from the houses of rural
gentry ”* in the time of Elizabeth, the cleavage between the
landed and the moneyed interests not haying yet begun to
display itself. So, too, in Germany the early commercial
prosperity of such towns as Augsburg^ Nfiruberg, Basel, and
ELoln was fed from a similar source, Unfortunately, the
history of Germany in the later Middle Ages tended more

1 Stubbs, 197.

1 Caimlngham, Growth MnyUsk Industry* toL i, p. 126 {Sto,

1903}-


8


THE EVOLUTION OF


and more to estrange the landed nobility from the peaceful
life and pursuits of towns, a fact which greatly contributed
to retard the commercial and industrial development of
that country.

While many of the great business men of the Middle Ages
in Italy, Flanders, Germany thus sprang from the landed
aristocracy, possessing agricultural rents, tolls, and fines as
their commercial nest-egg, the smaller owners of city-grounds,
the original burgher-families, played an equally important
part in cases where the town-lands were not closely held by
noble or by church. These original settlers, small farmers
at the start, extending their holdings, often encroaching on
or dividing by agreement common lands, formed strong
local oligarchies, sucking the rising land values to form the
capital which they afterwards employed in commerce.

To these nobles or small land-holders who passed Into
commerce with accumulations directly derived from ground-
rents, must be added the officials who, under the feudal
system, were quartered upon the public resources in
lucrative offices of state, or were entrusted with the collec-
tion and farming of taxes and tolls. Not only were the
salaries of chancellors, marshals, and other high officers
extremely large, but all officials connected with the raising
and expenditure of public moneys had opportunities for
peculation which were freely exercised. The ruling
families in the cities could thus add to their private ground-
rents a share of the city funds. So large shares of the
original accumulations of royal and papal treasuries, and of
the rents and endowments of monasteries and cities passed
into the hands of the business men, who were agents for
these great public sources of income . 1

The management of the estates and the finances of the
private land-owners, lay and spiritual, was largely entrusted
to a dass of business officials, who, as rent collectors,
stewards, bailiffs, reeves, intendants, came to share the
riches of the landlords. But it must be remembered that
in whatever form incomes came to these public or private
officers and agents, as salaries, fees, profit, or peculation,
land-rents were the almost exclusive origin.

1 So the Spini, Spigliati, Bardi, Cerchi, Puld, Alfani, and later the
Media, became the great bankers of the Papacy. (Sombart, toL i
P- *5i-)


MODERN CAPITALISM.


9


Given * class of business-men with such sources of
accumulation in their hands, it is not difficult to perceive
the chief profitable use to which they could put this
* capital.” The most important branch of primitive
capitalism is "usury” or "money-lending,” and the patt
this played in converting feudal into burgher wealth was
noteworthy. 1 The great spiritual landlords were driven to
borrowing money in order to forward to Rome the in-
creasing monetary contributions which the "age of faith”
called forth; the temporal lords, embarrassed by the grow-
ing expenses of war and of building (the two chief uses of
money), were drawn more and more into debt to the
"banking-houses” in Italy, Flanders, and Germany. The
Crusades form a chief landmark in this growing power of
the new business class, compelling the Crusaders to borrow
for their expenses of equipment and travel, giving increased
power to their stewards and agents, and bringing back a
new influx of luxurious habits of life from the East which
led them into further extravagances. In Italy and else-
where increasing quantities of land were thus alienated from
their aristocratic owners, forfeited for debt. When the
period of the Renaissance brought the fuller influence of the
East to bear upon " barbarous ” Europe, and cities began to
assume an air of luxury and to exercise influence as "social
centres,” the country nobility and gentry wishing to enter
this new life, found themselves short of money and com-
pelled to borrow from the rich burghers. Beginning in
Italy as early as the thirteenth century, this movement
reached Germany in the fifteenth, and England in Eliza*
beth’s reign showed that the "money-lending” business
was so large and profitable as to tempt not only Continental
capital but Dutch settlers from Amsterdam and elsewhere
to compete with the Jewish and Lombard houses in
London. 1

Extravagance of dress was itself a considerable factor in
the borrowing habits which built the wealth of the city
financiers.

§ 6. But all these modes by which capital has passed
from the ownership of landlords into that of business men
furnish an inadequate explanation of the rapid increase of


1 CL Sombait, toL i p. 255.


* Conningham, toL L p, 334.


xo


THE EVOLUTION OF


wealth in Western Europe. Without far larger access to
monetary treasures as instruments of concentrated accumu-
lation, without larger opportunities of gathering the various
material resources for the development of the industrial arts,
modem capitalism would have been impossible in its exist-
ing dimensions. Western Europe supplied 'no adequate
output of precious metals from the mines: her agricultural
population afforded no increase of production in the form of
rents large enough to furnish a great stream of accumulating
wealth, nor could the productiveness of the industrial arts of
the towns yield a rapid growth of profit The economy
of mediaeval Europe did not expose a large landless pro-
letarian population to the free exploitation of profit-seeking
masters. The labour basis of modem capitalism was
lacking.

The exploitation of other portions of the world through
military plunder, unequal trade, and forced labour has been
one great indispensable condition of the growth of European
capitalism. " The riches of the Italian cities is quite incon-
ceivable apart from the exploitation of the rest of the
Mediterranean; just as the prosperity of Portugal, Spain,
Holland, France, and England is unthinkable apart from the
previous destruction of the Arab civilisation, the plundering
of Africa, the impoverishment and desolation of Southern
Asia, and its island world, the fruitful East Indies, and the
thriving states of the Incas and Astecs .” 1

The Italian republics were the first to take this work in
hand. The dose of the Crusades saw them in virtual con-
trol of numerous cities in Syria, Palestine, the -dSgean, and
the Black Sea. From the beginning of the twelfth century,
Genoa, Pisa, and Venice fastened their economic fangs into
the towns of Arsof, Caesarea, Acre, Sidon, Tyre, etc. The
break up of the Eastern empire gave Venice a vast colonial
power, not less than three-eighths of that empire falling
under her single sway; while her rival, Genoa, also acquired
large possessions among the Ionian islands and on the main-
land. Asia Minor and the Aegean islands were full of rich
natural resources, with large civilised populations inheriting
arts of skilled industry as yet unknown to the Western
world. The Italian cities did not pretend to colonise in any


1 Sombart, voL i p. 326.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


II


modem sense this vast empire, but established trading
centres in the chief towns and took rich toll of the manu-
factures. They found in Antioch, Tripolis, Tyre, a flourishing
silk industry; cotton in Armenia; glass and pottery in Syria;
and considerable mining operations in Phocis and elsewhere.
Their mode of exploitation seems to have been an adaptation
of the feudal system, by which as overlords they exacted a
large portion, usually one-third, of the total produce of the
soil, mines, and industry. This form of infeudation, which
later on the Spaniards introduced into America under the
title of Encomiendas, existed long before in these Italian
colonies of the Levant Later on the feudal form dropped
off, giving place to the sway of privileged companies
wielding a royal or state monopoly.

The real significance of this early “colonisation” for the
rise of modern capitalism was that it afforded the first
opportunity of profit on a large scale, by placing at the dis-
posal of the Italian masters a large supply of skilled serf
labour. Not only was the property of whole provinces
confiscated to the conquerors, but the condition of large
masses of the inhabitants was, from old usage, one of virtual
slavery, “all rights and possessions in men, women, and
children ” passing to the new feudal superiors. The Italian
conquerors found also a most profitable inheritance , in the
slave-trade, which Byzantines and Arabs had carried on
from ancient times. This slave-trade they greatly extended
by means of a premium system, bringing in great numbers
of captive Mussulmans, so that, for example, the increase of
population in Crete alone under their rule was from 50,000
to 192,725.

Thus early was laid the foundation of the profitable trade
which furnished to Western Europe the accumulations of
wealth required for the later development of capitalistic
methods of production at home. A huge “proletariat,”
slave or nominally free, was first placed at the disposal of
Europe in the near East The treasures of the East, its
hoarded gold and slaves, its rich textiles, its spices and other
concentrated wealth, poured into Western Europe through
the hands of the Italian traders and bankers. The lesson
taught by this early experiment was that the chief advantage
of conquest lies, not in the discovery and seizure of hidden
accumulated treasure, important as that was in the case of


THE EVOLUTION OF


1 %

early Eastern empire, but in the continuous exploitation of
large quantities of forced labour.

The Portuguese and Spanish learned this lesson well,
recognising that “ the true riches of new-discovered lands
are their inhabitants.” The Spaniards in Mexico and Peru,
the Portuguese in West and East Africa, the Dutch in
Malacca, Java, and Ceylon, bettered their early instructions,
founding their economic dominion upon an even stronger
basis of “forced” and “slave” labour with a fuller organisa-
tion of the slave supply. The black population of Africa
was, of course, the great reservoir for the new tropical
economy of the European colonial system which spread
through Central America, Brazil, and the West Indies,
taking root later on in North America. The dimensions of
this trade from the beginnings of its development at the
opening of the sixteenth century by the Portuguese were
enormous : the actual number of slaves in use at any given
time presents but a slight idea of its bulk, for the waste of
life involved in it was so large and the duration of the
economic life of the slaves so short. In 1830 the European
colonies contained only about two and a half million slaves;
but during three centuries a stream of countless millions had
been flowing in to be used up as " raw material ” in the
colonial products which built the early fortunes of Spanish,
Portuguese, Dutch, and British merchants.

The profits of the European companies embarking in
early colonial trade were very large, for slave economy is
not in itself and under all circumstances bad. Merivale
clearly points out the main condition of its profitable use.
“ When the pressure of population induces the freeman to
offer his services, as he does in all old countries, for little
more than the natural minimum of wages, those services
are very certain to be more productive and less expensive
than those of bondsmen. This being the case, it is
obvious that the limit of the profitable duration of slavery
is attained whenever the population has become so
dense that it is cheaper to employ the free labour for
hire.” 1

In other words, Western Europe until the nineteenth
century did not present the large supply of landless

1 Merivale, Lutuns on Colonisation^ vol. i pp, 297, 298.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


13


labourers required as one condition of great profitable
capitalism. It is for this reason that colonial economy
must be regarded as one of the necessary conditions
of modem capitalism. Its trade, largely compulsory,
was in large measure little other than a system of veiled
robbery, and was in no sense an equal exchange of
commodities. Trading profits were supplemented by
the industrial profits representing the ** surplus-value 99 of
slave or forced labour, and by the yield of taxation and
plunder.

“The particular significance of the colonial economy is
that it affords undertaker’s profits before the conditions of
true capitalism are ripe, before the required accumulation
of money has taken place, before there is a proletariat^ and
before free land has disappeared.* 1

§ 7. The growth of a large proletariat in Western Europe
was an essential condition for capitalist industry. That
meant an increase of rural population beyond the means of
subsistence on the soil, according to current modes of
agriculture *and land tenure, and an increase of town
population incapable of earning a livelihood as independent
artificers or craftsmen. Now this condition was long de-
layed by the slow growth of population in the European .
nations. Famine, plague, and war kept down the popula-
tion through the Middle Ages: the death-rate of children
was enormous, and the effective life for the mass of the
people was very short. Though no really reliable statistics
are available, it is pretty well established that up to the
eighteenth century the rate of increase of population for
Europe as a whole was very slow, and even during the
eighteenth century showed no great expansion. In Germany
for a long time after the Thirty Years’ War the population
actually fell off, recovering only in the eighteenth .century.
France about the middle of the eighteenth century reached
again the numbers she had attained in the first half of the
fourteenth century, and still stood below the r 8, 000,000
she had attained after the death of Louis XIV. Holland
and Belgium seem hardly to have increased for three cen-
turies. From the last half of the sixteenth century to the
beginning of the eighteenth century Italy was stagnant at


* Se^hartf ▼oj* i. p* 358.


14


THE EVOLUTION OF


about 11,000,000. In Spain the population showed an
extraordinary decline during the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries.

The English population estimated at nearly 2,000,000 at
the time pf Doomsday, seems to have grown very slightly for
three centuries, reaching not more than two and a half
millions by 1377, in the last year of Edward III, During
the following two centuries and a quarter the pace of
growth was ~more rapid, for at the end of Elizabeth’s reign
it is estimated at some 5,000,000. From this time the rate
of growth again declined, and 6,000,000 was not attained
until nearly the middle of the eighteenth century. 1

Mere growth of population, however, in lands, large parts
of which were uncultivated or poorly cultivated, does not in
itself explain the formation of a proletariat. "As we traced
the beginnings of “capital” to the accumulated ground-
rents, so we must trace the beginnings of a mobile wage-
earning class to agricultural and industrial changes which
detached large numbers of the rural population from their
earlier status as small owners or holders of land, or as
labourers with some stake in the profits of the farm they
helped to work Agricultural reforms, involving more pro-
ductive utilisation of land and better business methods,
were the chief instruments of change. In Great Britain
and upon the Continent the primitive agriculture of feudal


\ Statistical Journal \ vol. xliiL p. 462.


1 Mr. Cunningham gives the following selected estimates of the
population of England and Wales from 1688 onwards ( Growth of
English Industry , vol. iii. p. 935): —

1688 ... 5,500,52° G. King, in Davenant JVorhs, vol. ii. p. 184.

1700 ... 5,475*000

1710 5,240,000

1720 ... 5 » 5 ^ 5 »o°o

1730 — 5,796,000

1740 6,064,000

1750 ~ 6,467,000

1760 ... 6,736,000

1770 — 7.428,000

1780 ... 7,928,000

1790 ... 8,675,000

1801 ... 8,892,536'

1811 ... 10,114,226

1821 ^ 12,000,237

1831 13,896,798

1841 ... 15,914,146

1851 ... 17,927*609;


> Accounts and Papers^ 1852-53, lxxxv.-xxxiii^


MODERN CAPITALISM.


15

society required little “capital,” and afforded no play for
the "business” spirit The “landowner” was not much
concerned to exact money rents or to get considerable
profits out of the land; his tenants and the cottagers or
other workers on the farm enjoyed fixity of tenure and of
status, tilled the soil according to custom for their liveli-
hood, sharing the produce and living a nearly self-sufficing
existence.

Trade in agricultural produce, bringing an increased use
of money into the agricultural economy and stimulating
owners and tenants to a more careful and intensive cultiva-
tion, so as to earn money rents and profits, was the chief
channel of the innovating cnrrent It was the Flemish
demand for wool, which, coining upon England' in the
Tudor age when political and social conditions were
favourable, afforded a large profitable use of pasture, lead-
ing to the enclosure of great quantities of common lands
and wastes, and the formation of large pasture farms under
new proprietors who, entering into the estates of the de-
cayed baronial families and the confiscated church and guild
lands, administered them by their agents in the spirit of a
modem rent-receiver. This foreign market for wool, and
the growing market for grain afforded by the increase of
London and other centres of population and by a certain
sporadic export trade, began that process of converting the
small yeoman and cottager into the mere wage-earner
which reached its fullest pace in the enclosures at the end
of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
turies. Whereas in the earlier period of this movement it
was enclosure for pasture that was the chief propeller, in
the later period it was enclosure for tillage.

Though the earlier enclosures involved much injustice in
depriving small farmers and labourers of their legal or
customary rights in the use of the land, and set afloat
a considerable number of landless folk who lived as
“rogues and vagabonds,” or found a settlement in the
towns, the mass of the villagers and rural workers seem to
have retained until the eighteenth century some stake,
however slender, ir the soil, that differentiates them from
the pure proletariat which modem capitalism requires as
a condition. The simultaneous improvements in tillage,
cattle-breeding, and sheep-farming of the eighteenth century


THE EVOLUTION OF


r 8

the Continent, religious or political refugees, and in the
earlier era of the industrial revolution by large migrations of
unskilled labourers from Ireland.

§ 8. In Germany the same origin of an industrial prole-
tariat is plainly traceable. The same survival of the patri-
archal farm-family, in which the labourers held a small legal
or customary share in the land, cattle, and product of the
farm, receiving part of their payment in a share of the
harvest, broken up, partly by the agrarian reform of 1811-16,
partly by the Schlesian Law of 1845, the enclosure of the
common fields, the restriction and gradual disappearance of
the labourers* rights, and the subsequent conversion of a class
of little profit-sharing farmers into hired labourers. The
same compelling forces were operative here as half-a-century
earlier in England — the growth of more intensive cultivation,
use of machinery, diminished winter employment in agri-
culture or in supplementary industries. 1

In Italy, France, Belgium, Switzerland, in fact throughout
Western Europe, the same general movement has been dis-
cernible, its pace determined partly by the growth of popula-
tion, partly by the size of the estates, and partly by the
condition of agricultural arts. The rapid rise of land values
in Belgium from the middle of the nineteenth century,
together with the decay of village industries, broke up the
economy of a distinctively peasant tenure; the same holds
alike of the small peasant districts of Central Italy and the
larger estates of South Italy. The prevalence of small hold-
ings in these countries and in France, though doubtless
retarding the adoption of capitalistic agriculture and the
displacement of rural population, has not prevented the
constantly increasing Sow of a redundant labouring prole-
tariat into town industrial life. Everywhere a farm-labour-
ing class, shaken from its earlier hold upon the land, has
been accompanied in its townward trend by the children
of the small peasant proprietors who, finding the economic
conditions of the old patriarchal farm-family no longer
tolerable, seek the better livelihood and larger independence
of industrial life.

1 More work for summer, less for winter, resulted from (a) increased
arable, diminished pasture, especially reductions of sheep and flax-
growing; (£) machine-threshing in place of the hand-flails (7)
diminished work in forestry. (Cf. Sombart, iL 126. 1


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*9


g 9 . The existence of accumulated wealth, and of a large
population dependent on the sale of their labour power
could not, however, generate the system of modern in-
dustrial capitalism unless the industrial arts had attained
a high development The capitalism of the ancient, and
even of the mediaeval world, exhibiting a few rare instances
of large organisation of workers tinder a single control,
working on wages for the profit of their employers, differed
in one important respect from modern industrial capitalism.
Whether in the great serf agriculture of the early Roman
Empire, or in the mines of Thrace or Sicily, or still earlier
in the great building operations of Egypt,, Babylon, or
India, the element of “ fixed ” capital was very small, con-
sisting of simple tools or relatively slight and unimportant
"machinery”: the capital by which employment was
afforded consisted of food and raw materials, which were
“advanced” to the labourers.

Early accumulations of "capital” consisted in (a) treasure,
(/?) raw materials and a store of food; or from the standpoint
of the individual capitalist, in either a or /3.

Though the financial capitalism of the money-lender or
banker making loans or advances to farmers and artificers,
and the commercial capitalism of merchants giving out raw
materials to workers, collecting, purchasing, and marketing
their manufactured products, are, as we shall see, important
stages in the evolution of the capitalist structure, the
business organisation they imply differs essentially from the
structure of the great factory, ironworks, railroad, mine, or
shipping firm in which modem industrial capitalism finds its
typical expression.

The concrete basis of modem industrial capitalism is its
large ^ complex structure of “fixed” factors, plant and
machinery, the mass of expensive instruments to assist
labour in furthering processes of production. The
economy of expensive machinery, and the development of
indirect or “roundabout” methods of production were the
chief instruments in the industrial revolution of manu-
factures. It is strange how slow this discovery and
application of machinery was, and how little progress was
made from ancient times up to the middle of the eighteenth
century. To those who regard evolution as essentially the
product of “accidental variations,” the inventions of in-


20


THE EVOL0TION OF


dustria! machinery may appear attributable to the “chance”
which assigns to some ages and countries a large crop of
inventive geniuses, and denies it to other ages and countries,
A more scientific view of history explains the slow growth
of mechanical invention by the presence of factors un-
favourable to, and the absence of factors favourable to, the
application of human intelligence to definite points of
mechanical progress. The vested interests and conservative
methods of existing industrial castes and their guild or-
ganisations rendered the mediaeval city poor soil for the
introduction of “ labour saving ” machinery or other revolu-
tionary experiments: the small dimensions of markets,
confined partly by political, partly by natural restrictions,
presented no opportunities for the profitable disposal of
large outputs. No great “free” labour market existed in
the mediaeval town ; the ambition and the trained capacity
of the business organiser had little opportunity of dis-
covering and asserting themselves in an age when education
was almost wholly confined to classes who regarded with
disdain the useful arts and crafts. In times when the early
thirst for gold and the zest of physical inquiry absorbed
men of “science” and intellectual ingenuity in “alchemy”
and problems of perpetual motion, there was no
“conduction” of intelligence along the humbler paths of
detailed mechanical improvement in the useful arts.

The force of these unfavourable factors is made more
manifest by the fact that single examples of successful
capitalist organisation upon a tolerably large scale did
actually occur in the later Middle Ages in a few instances,
where machinery had come into play. The printing trade
showed an early tendency to concentration in large capitalist
businesses, attributable to the expensive “ fixed ” capital in
presses. At the end of the fifteenth century we find in
N urn berg a large printing business with twenty-four presses
and a hundred employees -type-setters, printers, correctors,
binders, etc. So likewise in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries we find paper-mills in Niimberg and Basel on a
capitalistic basis. In Bologna, as early as 1341, we find
accounts of large spinning-mills worked by water-power, and
even where no non-human power was available, the com-
parative expensiveness of the distaffs and looms helped to
establish mills in which large bodies of workers were


MODERN CAPITALISM.


21


employed in Genoa and other Italian cities . 1 A large
capitalist silk manufacture was formed in Ulm, in which the
loom played a distinctive part. In the early development
of capitalism in the metal industries, the importance of
plant and tools is discernible, and the introduction of the
blast-furnaces in the first half of the fifteenth century with
the use of coal and of water-power to work stamps, hammers,
etc., was a conspicuous advance towards modern con-
ditions.

Difficulties of transport and the slight irregular structure
of markets were largely responsible for the retardation of
mechanical inventions and capitalistic enterprise in the
manufactures. The early beginnings noted above are con-
fined to articles at once costly, portable, and durable; and
even for such commodities as books, silk and woollen cloth,
and hardware, the narrow limits of a distant market, in
which packmen and annual fairs were important links be-
tween producer and consumer, offered little encouragement
to enterprise.

§ io. Under such conditions the evolution of the business
man, and in particular the application of the organising
mind to manufacture, was necessarily slow. It is difficult to
realise how modem is the capitalist spirit, the disposition to
employ accumulated wealth in furthering production for the
sake of profit. The early accumulations of money were
animated by no such motive. King, nobles, knightly orders,
church, sought wealth in order to spend it on war, personal
display, and largesse or almsgiving. Neither to the getting
nor the spending of money were any steady rational motive
and method applied The quick attainment of treasure by
rapine, extortion, and adventure, its quick squandering in
the “unproductive consumption 99 which such a life involved,
marked the spirit of the powerful classes in the Middle Ages.
Even when the craving for money spread more widely by
the introduction of luxuries into city life, the idea of industry
or trade as a regular instrument for obtaining money was
slow to make its way. Freebooting, the squeezing of
peasants or townsmen by rents, aids, or taxes, or the more
romantic, though less productive adventures of treasure-
digging and alchemy, had earlier vogue. Only as the lust of

1 CL Sombftrt, voL i. p. 405.


22


THE EVOLUTION Of


accumulation spread among lower and more peaceful sorts
of men did money-lending and commerce begin to be
recognised as means to get money by the use of money.
11 Economic Rationalism” is the suggestive name which
Sombart gives to the change of spirit from the romantic, ad-
venturous money-hunting of the Middle Ages to the pursuits
of modern commercialism. In this process he assigns a very
significant part to the discovery and use of technical busi-
ness methods in account-keeping, the application of exact
calculation to Industry. Two names mark the early ad-
vances towards modem book-keeping — Leonardo Pisano,
whose Liber Abbaci, published in 1202, may be said to indi-
cate the beginning of modern industry, coinciding as it did
with the Venetian assault upon Constantinople; and Fra
Luca, whose completed system of double entry was essential
to capitalistic account-keeping. The development of book-
keeping, accompanied as it was by a wide general applica-
tion of rational and mathematical system throughout com-
merce, in the shape of exact measurement of time and place,
forms of contract, land surveying, modem methods of
weights and measures, city plans, public accounts, was at
once an indispensable tool and an aspect of modern
industry. It rationalised business, releasing it from caprice
and chance, and giving it a firm objective character from the
profit-making standpoint. This was the most definite and
direct contribution to industry of the Renaissance, with its
emphasis on individual interests, personal responsibility, and
free competition — the same spirit which wrought in art,
literature, religion, and politics.

Such were the technical conditions for the development of
the modem business spirit, the rationale of the entrepreneur
approximating to the type known as “ the economic man.”
Such a man was first found in the banking and merchant
class of the Italian and German cities of the later Middle
Ages. Of the great Jacob Fugger it was told that, when a
rich competitor, wishful to retire from business in advancing
years, approached the old banker with the suggestion — “Let
us both retire, now we have led a long career of profit-
making, and give others a chance,” his reply was that €< he
had quite a different mind. He wanted to go on making
profit as long as he could.”

This spirit, then new, and confined to a few merchant-


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*3

bankers, was destined to spread until it became the life of
modem industry, absorbing the greater part of the intelli-
gence and will-power of the directing classes in the modem
world. The warrior-noble, the sportsman, the churchman,
the landed-gentleman, who gave example and direction to
the feelings, thoughts, and activities of our ancestors in
the Middle Ages, had no feeling for “profit,” and gave no
regular accumulative impulse to the production of wealth.
The mental and moral equipment of the entrepreneur ,
required for the conduct of modem capitalist industry,
demands a special valuation and outlook upon life, possible
to very few even in the more developed industrial cities of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Not until the eighteenth
century was his character sufficiently evolved to enable him
to take full advantage of the new industrial conditions: 1 * not
until that period did there arise in all advanced industrial
countries large numbers of men who set themselves to ad-
minister commercial and manufacturing businesses on a basis
of large capital, and to employ large masses of labour for
profit

| 1 1. This brief statement of the main conditions essential
to modem capitalism enables us to understand England’s
priority in the adoption of new industrial methods, and the
retardation of the Industrial Revolution upon the Continent
of Europe and in America; for most of the conditions we
have named were better fulfilled for Great Britain than for
any other nation by the middle of the eighteenth century.

At that time Great Britain was indeed second to Holland
in the existing development of industrial and commercial
resources. Adam Smith accounted Holland, “in proportion
to the extent of the land and the number of its inhabitants,
by far the richest country in Europe,” and he ascribed to
her “the greatest share of the carrying trade of Europe.” 3

1 Hume, Essays , vol. iL p. 57, gives a clear-cut image of the new
entrepreneur:—" If the employment yon give him be lucrative,

especially if the profit be attached to every particular exertion of
industry, he has gams so often in his eye, that he acquires by
degrees a passion for it, and knows no such pleasure as that of seeing
the daily increase of his fortune. And that is the reason why trade
increases frugality, and why, among merchants, there is the same over-
plus of misers over prodigals as among the possessors of land there is the
contrary.”

* Wealth 0/ Nations, Bock II. f chap. v.


24 THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM.

Her command of capital was attested by the low rate of
interest for public and private borrowing, and her wage-
evel was said to be higher than in England . 1 But Great
Britain, larger in land and population, and already gaining
upon Holland in the possession of capital, the control of
colonies and of the carrying trade, was in other respects
best fitted for industrial development upon new lines. The
absolute amount of capital and of labour available for new
industrial enterprise in England was greater than elsewhere.
The rise of land-values alike in country and in town, the
profits from colonial trade, the beginnings of large busi-
nesses at home in banking, brewing, mining, and the woollen
trade, eta, afforded larger accumulated funds than were to
be found elsewhere. The great capacity of growth exhibited
by the working-class population of Great Britain was assisted
by freer immigration from Ireland and the Continent, while
the earlier and more complete reforms of the agricultural
system drove larger numbers into the new industrial centres.
This larger supply of capital and labour available for new
industries coincided with a great development of the in-
dustrial arts, which indeed they served to stimulate, and the
discovery of rich deposits of coal and iron in various parts
of the country furnished a solid material basis for the new
machine economy.

Finally, the minds of British business men were directed
more sharply and continuously to the cultivation of business
methods in the organisation of capital and labour and the
development of markets, and the opportunity of taking a
profitable part in this enterprise was open to a larger pro-
portion of the population than was the case elsewhere.

1 W&aitk of Nations ' Book L, chap. is.


CHAPTER II


THE INSTRUMENTS OF CAPITALISM.

§ i. Scientific inventions and economic direction.

§ a. The meaning of the term Capital.

§ 3. Place of Machinery in Capitalism.

§ 4. The financial aspect cf Capitalism.

1 1. While the conditions laid down in oar introductory
chapter offer a variety of approaches to the study of
rap iralism, the efficient causation of the evolutionary pro-
cess may be found in the application of scientific inventions
to the industrial arts, and in the new art of economic direc-
tion as expressed in the methods of the modem entrepreneur .
From these two standpoints we may most profitably study
the evolution of the structure arid functions of capitalist
business. Following the history of the application of new
scientific methods, we shall be kept in close touch with the
changes of productive processes which give increased im-
portance to “fixed” capital in the form of machinery
and power, involving radical changes in the use of
labour-power and indirectly in the structure of markets and
the life of industrial communities. Following the other
routes our study of the changing rationale of business enter-
prise will yield its primary results in a fuller understanding
of the shifting relations between the persons whose intelli-
gences and voluntary efforts contribute— as employers,
capitalists, 1 labourers to the several processes of production,
and of the capitalist business regarded as an organic co-
operation of humanly ordered activities. The latter study
would also keep us in closer contact with the financial or
account-keeping side iff business, that exact renter of

1 Including ludownen.


36


THE EVOLUTION OF


buying and selling in which all economic processes mirror
and record themselves in terms of quantity.

The close relation between what, without serious mis-
understanding, may be called the objective and the sub-
jective aspects of the industrial order is obvious. A
complete study of modern capitalism will be continually
engaged in passing from one aspect to the other, and dwell-
ing upon the constant interaction between the concrete
industrial changes and the changes of mental direction and
disposition which are involved A new invention of ma-
chinery or a new application of chemistry, displacing a
domestic system of simple too! labour by a factory system,
alters not only the mode of production but the direction
of producing power: the quantities, qualities, and the com-
position of the human efforts involved in the industry are
changed

Every simplification of the study of this complex inter-
action involves some sacrifice of accuracy, but in every
elementary treatise some such sacrifice is required It is
here proposed to pursue as our main line of inquiry the
concrete development of capitalism as expressed in the
growing part taken by the material forms of capital in
the operations of modem business, contenting ourselves
with a more general consideration of the subjective aspects
of business enterprise as affected by capitalist control.

§ 2. Writers upon Political Economy have brought much
metaphysical acumen to bear upon definitions of Capital, and
have reached very widely divergent conclusions as to what
the term ought to mean, ignoring the clear and fairly con-
sistent meaning the term actually possesses in the business
world around them. The business world has indeed two
views of Capital, but they are consistent with one another.
Abstractly, money or the control of money, sometimes called
credit, is Capital. Concretely, capital consists of all forms
of marketable matter which embody labour. Land or
nature is excluded except for improvements: human powers
are excluded as not being matter: commodities in the hand*
of consumers are excluded because they are no longer
marketable. Thus the actual concrete forms of capital are
the raw materials of production, including the finished stage
of shop goods; and the plant and implements used in the
several processes of industry, including the monetary imple-


MODERN CAPITALISM.


27


raents of exchange. Concrete business capital is composed
of these and of nothing but these. 1 In taking modern in-
dustrial phenomena as the subject of scientific inquiry it is
better to accept such terminology as is generally and con-
sistently received by business men, than either to invent
new terms or to give a private significance to some accepted
term which shall be different from that given by other
scientific students, and, if we may judge from past experience,
probably inferior in logical exactitude to the current meaning
in the business world.

§ 3. The chief material factor in the evolution of Capital-
ism is machinery. The growing quantity and complexity of
machinery applied to purposes of manufacture and convey-
ance, and to the extractive industries, is the great special
fact in the narrative of the expansion of modern industry.

It is therefore to the development and influence of
machinery upon industry that we shall chiefly direct our
attention, adopting the following method of study. It is
first essential to obtain a clear understanding of the structure
of industry or “the industrial organism” as a whole, and of
its constituent parts, before the new industrial forces had
begun to operate. We must then seek to ascertain the laws
of the development and application of the new forces to the
different departments of industry and the different parts of
the industrial world, examining in certain typical machine
industries the order and pace of the application of the new
machinery and motor to the several processes. Turning
our attention again to the industrial organism, we shall
strive to ascertain the chief changes that have been brought
about in the size and structural character of industry, in the
relations of the several parts of the industrial world, of the
several trades which constitute industry, of the processes
within these trades, of the businesses or units which com-
prise a trade or a market, and of the units of capital and
. labour comprising a business. It will then remain to under-
take closer studies of certain important special outcomes of

1 Professor Marshall regards this restricted use of capital as “ mis-
leading,” rightly urging that “ there are many other things which truly
perform the services commonly attributed to capital” ( Principles , Bk.
II., chap. iv.). But if we enlarge our definition so as to include all
these “ other things” we shall be driven to a political economy which
shall widely transcend Industry as we now understand the term, and


28


THE EVOLUTION OF


machinery and factory production. These studies will fall
into three classes, (i) The influences of machine-produc-
tion upon the size of the units of capital, the intensification
and limitation of competition, the natural formation of
Trusts and other forms of economic monopoly of capital;
trade depressions and grave industrial disorders due to dis-
crepancies between individual and social interests in the
working of modern methods of production. ( 2 ) Effects of
machinery upon labour, the quantity and regularity of
employment, the character and remuneration of work. (3)
Effects upon the industrial classes in the capacity of con-
sumers, the growth of the large industrial town and its
influences upon the physical, intellectual, moral life of the
community. Lastly, an attempt will be made to summarise
the net influences of modern capitalist production in their
relation to other social progressive forces, and to indicate
the relations between these which seem most conducive to
the welfare of a community measured by generally accepted
standards of character or happiness.

§ 4. Since every industrial act in a modem community
has its monetary counterpart, and its importance is com-
monly estimated in terms of money, it will be evident that
the growth of capitalism might be studied with great advan-
tage in its monetary aspect Corresponding to the changes
in productive methods under mechanical machinery we
should find the rapid growth of a complex monetary system
reflecting in its international and national character, in its
elaborate structure of credit, the leading characteristics
which we find in modern productive and distributive in-
dustry. The whole industrial movement might be regarded
from the financial or monetary point of view. But though
such a study would be capable of throwing a flood of light
upon the movements of concrete industrial factors at many
points, the intellectual difficulties involved in simultaneously
following the double study, in constantly passing from the


shall comprehend the whole science and art of life so flu: as it Is con-
cerned with human effort and satisfaction. If it is convenient and
justifiable to retain for certain purposes of study the restricted connota-
tion of Industry now in vogue, the confinement of Capital as above to
Trade Capital is logically justified. For a fuller treatment of the ques-
tion of the use of the term Capital in forming a terminology descriptive
of the parts of Industry the reader is referred to Chapter VII.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


29


more concrete to the more abstract contemplation of indus-
trial phenomena, would tax the mental agility of students
too severely, and would greatly diminish the chance of a
substantially accurate understanding of either aspect of
modem industry. We shall therefore in this study devote
our attention chiefly to the concrete aspect of capitalism,
describing in a single chapter the main outlines of the
recent development of the financial mechanism and the
place it occupies in the structure and working of modern
capitalism.


30


CHAPTER III.

THE STRUCTURE OF INDUSTRY BEFORE MACHINERY.

| i. Dimensions of International Commerce in early Eigh-
teenth Century .

§ 2. Natural Barriers to International Trade.

§ 3. Political \ Pseudo-economic t and Economic Barriers —
Protective Theory and Practice.

§ 4. Nature of International Trade.

§ 5. Size, Structure , Relations of the several Industries.

§ 6. Slight Extent of Local Specialisation.

§ 7. Nature and Conditions of Specialised Industry ,

§ 8. Structure of the Market
§ 9, Combined Agriculture and Manufacture.

§ 10. Relations between Processes in a Manufacture.

§ 11. Structure of the Domestic Business: Early Stages of
Transition.

§ 12. Beginnings of Concentrated Industry and the Factory .

§ 13. Limitations in Size and Application of Capital —
Merchant Capitalism.

§ 1, In order to get some clear understanding of the laws of
the operation of the new industrial forces which prevail under
machine-production it is first essential to know rightly
the structure and functional character of the “industrial
organism ” upon which they were destined to act In order to
build up a clear conception of industry it is possible to take
either of two modes of inquiry. Taking as the primary cell or
unit that combination of labour and capital under a single
control for a single industrial purpose which is termed a
Business, we may examine the structure and life of the
Business, then proceed to discover how it stands related to
other businesses so as to form a Market, and, finally, how the


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. 3 1

several Markets are related locally, nationally, internationally
so as to yield the complex structure of Industry as a whole.
Or reversely, we may take Industry as a whole, the Indus-
trial Organism as it exists at any given time, consider the
nature and extent of the cohesion existing between its
several parts, and, further, resolving these parts into their
constituent elements, gain a close understanding of the
extent to which differentiation of industrial functions has
been carried in the several divisions.

Although in any sociological inquiry these two methods
are equally valid, or, more strictly speaking, are equally
balanced in virtues and defects, the latter method is here
to be preferred, because by the order of its descent from
the whole to die constituent parts it brings out more
definitely the slight cohesiveness and integration of industry
beyond the national limits, and serves to emphasise those
qualities of nationalism and narrow localism which mark
the character of earlier eighteenth century industry. We are
thus enabled better to recognise the nature and scope of
the work wrought by the modem industrial forces which
are the central object of study.

While the Market or the Trade is less and less deter-
mined or confined by national or other political boundaries
in modem times, and nationalism is therefore a factor
of diminishing importance in the modern science of
economics, the paramount domination of politics over
large commerce in the last century, acting in cooper-
ation with other racial and national forces, obliges any
just analysis of eighteenth century industry to give
clear and early emphasis to the slight character of the
commercial interdependency among nations. The degree
of importance which statesmen and economists attached to
this foreign commerce as compared with home trade, and
the large part it played in the discussion and determination
of public conduct, have given it a prominence in written
history far beyond its real value . 1

It is true that through the Middle Ages a succession of
European nations rose to eminence by the development of
navigation and international trade, Italy, Portugal, Spain,
France, Holland, and England; but neither in size nor in


1 A. Smith, WtaUk if Nations* Bk. ir., chap, L


32


THE EVOLUTION OF


character was this trade of the first importance. Even in
the case of those nations where it was most developed it
formed a very small proportion of the total industry of the
country, and it was chiefly confined to spicery, bullion,
ornamental cloths, and other objects of art and luxury.

It is important to recognise that in the first half of
the eighteenth century international trade still largely
partook of this character. Not only did it bear a far
smaller proportion to the total industry of the several
countries than does foreign trade to-day, but it was still
engaged to a comparatively small extent with the transport
of necessaries or prime conveniences of life. Each nation,
as regards the more important constituents of its consump-
tion, its staple foods, articles of clothing, household furni-
ture, and the chief implements of industry, was almost
self-sufficing, producing little that it did not consume,
consuming little it did not produce.

In 1712 the export trade of England is officially estimated
at £6,64 4, 103, 1 or considerably less than one-sixth of the
home trade of that date as calculated by Smith in his
Memoirs of Wool Such an estimate, however, gives an ex-
aggerated impression of the relation of foreign to home trade,
because under the latter no account is taken of the large
domestic production of goods and services which figure in
no statistics. A more instructive estimate is that which
values the total consumption of the English people in
17 13 at 'forty-nine or fifty millions, out of which about
four millions covers the consumption of foreign goods.*
In 1740 imports amounted to ,£6,703,778, exports to
£8,197,788. In 1750 they had risen respectively to
£?j77 2 * * * * * >339 and £12, 699, 081, 8 and ten years later
to £9,832,802 and £14,694,970. Macpherson, whose
Annais of Commerce are a mine of wealth upon the
history of foreign commerce in the eighteenth century,
after commenting upon the impossibility of obtaining a

1 Macpherson, Annals of Commerce , voL ii. p. 728.

^ 1 Smith, Memoirs , vol. ii., chap. iiL As the approximate calcula-

tion of a very competent business man these figures are more reliable

than the official figures of imports and exports, the value of which

throughout the eighteenth century is seriously impaired by the fact that

they continued to be estimated by the standard of values of 1694.

* Whitworth's Stat* quoted, Macpherson, voL iii* p. 283.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


ti


just estimate of the value of home trade, alludes to a
calculation which places it at thirty-two times the size of
the export trade. Macpherson contents himself with con-
cluding that it is “a vast deal greater in value than the

PROGRESS OP FOREIGN TRADE IN ENGLAND.


mMtl 170 0 to 3Q so 40 so so jo sa so f80 °}&.eo so #o & 60 to so 1 890


400 m


500 Mil


mMil


ioc Mil


whole of the foreign trade.” 1 There is every reason to
believe that in the case of Holland and France, the only
two other European nations with a considerable foreign
trade, the same general conclusion will apply.

1 Annals % voL iii p. 340.


3


34


THE EVOLUTION OF


The smallness of the part which foreign trade played in
industry signifies that in the earlier part of the eighteenth
century the industrial organism as a whole must be regarded
as a number of tolerably self-sufficing and therefore homo-
geneous national forms attached to one another by bonds
which are few and feeble. As yet there was little special-
isation in national industry, and therefore little integration
of national parts of the world-industry.

§ 2. Since the breaking-down of international barriers and
the strengthening of the industrial bonds of attachment
between nations will be seen to be one of the most
important effects of the development of machine-industry,
some statement of the nature of these barriers and their
effect upon the size and character of international trade
is required.

Though considerable advances had been made by
England and Holland at the beginning of the eighteenth
century in the improvement of harbours, the establishment
of lighthouses, and the development of marine insurance , 1
navigation was still subject to considerable risks of the loss
of life and of investments, while these “ natural ” dangers
were increased by the prevalence of piracy. Voyages were
slow and expensive, commerce between distant nations being
necessarily confined to goods of a less perishable character
which would stand the voyage. Trade in fresh foods,
which forms so large a part of modem commerce, would
have been impossible except along the coasts of adjoining
nations. With these natural barriers to commerce may be
reckoned the defective knowledge of the position, resources,
and requirements of large parts of the earth which now fill
an important place in commerce. The new world was but
slightly opened up, nor could its known resources be largely
utilised before the development of more adequate machinery
of transport We can scarcely realise the inconveniences,
costs, and risks entailed by the more distant branches of
foreign trade at a time when the captain of a merchant-
ship still freighted his vessel at his own expense, and when
each voyage was a separate speculation. Even in the early
nineteenth century the manufacturer commonly shipped
his surplus produce at his own risk, employing the merchant

1 Annals , voL iii. p. 34a For estimates erf import and export
values between 1613 and 1832, see Cunningham, Growth of English
lrdustry t p. 931, Append** F.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


35


upon commission, and in the trade with the Indies, China,
or South America he had frequently to lie out of his money
or his return freight of indigo, coffee, tea, etc., for as long
as eighteen months or two years, and to bear the expense
of warehousing as well as the damage which time and tide
inflicted on his goods.

§ 3. Next come a series of barriers, partly political, partly
pseudo-economic, in which the antagonism of nations took
shape, the formation of political and industrial theories
which directed the commercial intercourse of nations into
certain narrow and definite channels.

Two economic doctrines, separate in the world of false
ideas, though their joint application in the world of practice
has led many to confuse them, exercised a dominant
influence in diminishing the quantity, and determining the
quality of international trade in the eighteenth century.
These doctrines had reference respectively to the construc-
tion and maintenance of home industries and the balance
of trade. The former doctrine, which was not so much a
consciously-evolved theory as a short-sighted, intellectual
assumption driven by the urgent impulse of vested interests
into practical effect, taught that, on the one hand, import
trade should be restricted to commodities which were not
and could not with advantage be produced at home, and to
the provision of cheap materials for existing manufactures;
while export trade, on the other hand, should be generally
encouraged by a system of bounties and drawbacks. This
doctrine was first rigidly applied by the French mi nis ter,
Colbert, but the policy of France was faithfully copied by
England and other commercial nations and ranked as an
orthodox theory of international trade.

The Balance of Trade doctrine estimated the worth of a
nation’s intercourse with another by the excess of the
export over the import trade, which brought a quantity of
bullion into the exporting country. This theory was also
widely spread, though obviously its general application
would have been destructive of all international co mm erce.
The more liberal interpretation of the doctrine was satisfied
with a favourable balance of the aggregate export over the
aggregate import trade of the country, but the stricter
interpretation, generally dominant in practice, required that
in the case of each particular nation the balance should be


34


THE EVOLUTION OF


The smallness of the part which foreign trade played in
industry signifies that in the earlier part of the eighteenth
century the industrial organism as a whole must be regarded
as a number of tolerably self-sufficing and therefore homo-
geneous national forms attached to one another by bonds
which are few and feeble. As yet there was little special-
isation in national industry, and therefore little integration
of national parts of the world-industry.

§ 2. Since the breaking-down of international barriers and
the strengthening of the industrial bonds of attachment
between nations will be seen to be one of the most
important effects of the development of machine-industry,
some statement of the nature of these barriers and their
effect upon the size and character of international trade
is required.

Though considerable advances had been made by
England and Holland at the beginning of the eighteenth
century in the improvement of harbours, the establishment
of lighthouses, and the development of marine insurance , 1
navigation was still subject to considerable risks of the loss
of life and of investments, while these 4 4 natural ” dangers
were increased by the prevalence of piracy. Voyages were
slow and expensive, commerce between distant nations being
necessarily confined to goods of a less perishable character
which would stand the voyage. Trade in fresh foods,
which forms so large a part of modem commerce, would
have been impossible except along the coasts of adjoining
nations. With these natural barriers to commerce may be
reckoned the defective knowledge of the position, resources,
and requirements of large parts of the earth which now fill
an important place in commerce. The new world was but
slightly opened up, nor could its known resources be largely
utilised before the development of more adequate machinery
of transport We can scarcely realise the inconveniences,
costs, and risks entailed by the more distant branches of
foreign trade at a time when the captain of a merchant-
ship still freighted his vessel at his own expense, and when
each voyage was a separate speculation. Even in the early
nineteenth century the manufacturer commonly shipped
his surplus produce at his own risk, employing the merchant

1 Annals , voL iii. p. 34a For estimates erf import and export
values between 1613 and 1832, see Cunningham, Growth of English
lrdustry t p. 931, Appendix F.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


37


"A tax was laid on foreign linens in order to provide a
fund for raising hemp and flax at home; while bounties
were given on these necessary articles from our colonies,
the bounty on the exportation of hemp was withdrawn.
The imposts on foreign linen yam were withdrawn.
Bounties were given on British linen cloth exported; while
the making of cambricks was promoted, partly by pro-
hibiting the foreign and partly by giving fresh incentives,
though without success, to the manufacture of cambricks
within our island. Indigo, cochineal, and logwood, the
necessaries of dyes, were allowed to be freely imported.” 1

The encouragement of English shipping (partly for com-
mercial, partly for political reasons) took elaborate shape in
the Navigation Acte, designed to secure for English vessels
a monopoly of the carrying trade between England and all
other countries which sent goods to English or to colonial
shores. This policy was supported by a network of minor
measures giving bounties to our colonies for the exportation
of shipping materials, pitch, tar, hemp, turpentine, masts,
and spars, and giving bounties at home for the construction
of defensible ships. This Navigation policy gave a strong
foundational support to the whole protective policy. Prob-
ably the actuating motives of this policy were more
political than industrial Holland, the first to apply this
method systematically, had immensely strengthened her
maritime power. France, though less successfully, had
followed in her wake. Doubtless there were many clear-
thinking Englishmen who, though aware of the damage
done to commerce by our restrictive regulations about
shipping, held that the maintenance of a powerful navy
for the defence of the kingdom and its foreign possessions
was an advantage which outweighed the damage. 1

The selfish and short-sighted policy of this protective
system found its culminating point in the treatment of
Ireland and the American plantations. The former was
forbidden all manufacture which might either directly or
indirectly compete with English industry, and was com-
pelled to deal exclusively with England ; the American
colonies were forbidden to weave doth, to make hats, or to

1 Chalmers, Estimates, p. 148.

* CC Cunningham, Growth of English Industry, voL ii. p. 292.


THE EVOLUTION OF


58

forge a bolt, and were compelled to take all the manu-
factured goods required for their consumption from England.

The freedom and expansion of international commerce
was further hampered by the policy of assigning monopolies
of colonial and foreign trade to close Chartered Companies.
This policy, however, defensible as an encouragement of
early mercantile adventure, was carried far beyond these
legitimate limits in the eighteenth century. In England
the East Indian was the most powerful and successful of
these companies, but the assignment of the trade with
Turkey, Russia, and other countries to chartered companies
was a distinct hindrance to the development of foreign
trade.

Our foreign trade at that period might indeed be classed
or graded in accordance with the degree of encouragement
or discouragement offered by the State.

Imports would fall into four classes.

i. Imports forbidden either (a) by legislative pro-
hibition, or (£>) by prohibitive taxation.

3. Imports admitted but taxed.

3. Free imports.

4. Imports encouraged by bounties.

Exports might be graded in similar fashion.

1. Prohibited exports (c.g., sheep and wool, raw
hides, tanned leather, woollen yam, textile im-
plements, 1 certain forms of skilled labour).

3. Exports upon which duties are levied (< e.g
coals 2 ).

3. Free exports.

4, Exports encouraged by bounties, or by draw-

backs.

The unnatural and injurious character of most of this
legislation is best proved by the notable inability to
effectively enforce its application. The chartered com-
panies were continually complaining of the infringement of
their monopolies by private adventurers, and more than one
of them failed through inability to crush out this illegal
competition. A striking condemnation of our policy to-

Smith, W$al tk of Nations % Bk. it., chap. viiL 9 Ibid,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


39


wards France consisted in the growth of an enormous
illicit trade which, in spite of the difficulties which beset it,
made a considerable part of our aggregate foreign trade
during the whole of the century. The lack of any clear
perception of the mutuality of advantage in foreign and
colonial trade was the root fallacy which underlay these
restrictions. Professor Cunningham rightly says of the
colonial policy of England, that it “ implied that each dis-
tinct member should strengthen the head, and not at all
that these members should mutually strengthen each
other .* 1

So, as we tried to get the better of our colonies, still more
rigorously did we apply the same methods to foreign
countries, regarding each gain which accrued to us as an
advantage which would have wholly gone to the foreigner if
we had not by firmness and enterprise secured it for our-
selves.

The slight extent of foreign intercourse was, however,
partly due to causes which are to be regarded as genuinely
economic. The life and experience of the great mass of the
population of all countries was extremely restricted; they
were a scattered and rural folk whose wants and tastes were
simple, few, home-bred, and customary. The customary
standard of consumption, slowly built up in conformity with
local production, gave little encouragement to foreign trade.
Moreover, to meet the new tastes and the more varied con-
sumption which gradually found its way over this country,
it was in conformity with the economic theory and practice
of the day to prefer the establishment of new home in-
dustries, equipped if necessary with imported foreign labour,
to the importation of the products of such labour from
abroad. So far as England, in particular, is concerned, die
attitude was favoured by the political and religious oppres-
sion of the French government which supplied England in
the earlier eighteenth centf&y with a constant flow of skilled
artisan labour. Many English manufacturers profited by
this flow. Our textile industries in silk, wool, and linen,
calico-printing, glass, paper, and pottery are specially be-
holden to the new arts thus introduced.

Among the economic barriers must be reckoned the

1 Gramtk *f English Industry^ vol iL p. 39 4


40


THE EVOLUTION OF


slight development of international credit, and ot the
machinery of exchange.

§ 4. These barriers, natural, political, social, economic,
against free international intercourse, throw important light
upon the general structure of world-industry in the eigh-
teenth century.

In this application they determined and strictly limited not
only the quantity but the nature of the international trade.
The export trade of England, for example, in 1730 was
practically confined to woollen goods and other textile
materials, a small quantity of leather, iron, lead, silver, and
gold plate, and a certain number of re-exported foreign
products, such as tobacco and Indian calicoes. The import
trade consisted of wine and spirits, foreign foods, such as
rice, sugar, coffee, oil, furs, and some quantity of foreign
wool, hemp, silk, and linen-yam, as material for our specially
favoured manufactures. Having regard to the proportion
of the several commodities, it would not be much exaggera-
tion to summarise our foreign trade by saying that we sent
out woollen goods and received foreign foods. These
formed the great bulk of our foreign trade. 1 Excepting the
woollen goods and a small trade in metals, leather is the
only manufactured article which figured to any appreciable
extent in our export of 1730. At that time it is clear that
in the main English manufacture, as well as English agri-
culture, was for the supply of English wants. The same was
true of other industrial countries. Holland and France,
who divided with England the shipping supremacy, had a
foreign trade which, though then deemed considerable, bore
no greater proportion to the total industry of these countries
than in the case of England. Germany, Italy, Russia,
Spain, and even Portugal were almost wholly self-sustained.

Regarding, then, the known and related world of that time
in the light of an industrial organism, we must consider it as
one in which the processes of integration and of differentia-
tion of parts has advanced but a little way, consisting as
yet of a number of homogeneous and incoherent national
cells.

This homogeneity is of course qualified by differences in
production and consumption due to climate, natural pro-


1 Macphersoc, Annals, voL iii. pp. 155, 156.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 4 1

ducts, national character and institutions, and the develop-
ment of industrial arts in the several nations.

§ 5. This consideration of the approximate homogeneity
of the national units of world-industry gives a higher
scientific value to the analysis of a single typical indus-
trial nation such as England than would be the case in
modem times, when the work of differentiation of industrial
functions among the several nations has advanced much
further.

Taking, therefore, the national industry of England as the
special subject of analysis, we may seek to obtain a clear
conception of the size, structure, and connections of the
several branches of industry, paying special regard to the
manufactures upon which the new industrial forces were
chiefly to operate.

It is not possible to fonu a veiy accurate estimate
of the relative importance of the different industries as
measured either by the money value of their products,
or by the amount of labour engaged in producing them.
Eighteenth century statistics, as we saw, furnished no
close estimate of the total income of the nation or of
the value of home industries. Since no direct census
of the English population was taken before 1805, the
numbers were never exactly known, and eighteenth century
economists spent much time and ingenuity in trying to
ascertain the growth of population by calculations based
upon the number of occupied houses, or by generalising
from slender and unreliable local statistics, without in the
end arriving at any close agreement. Still less reliable will
be the estimates of the relative size and importance of the
different industries.

Two such attempts, however, one slightly prior to the
special period we are investigating, and one a little later,
may be taken as general indications of the comparative im-
portance of the great divisions of industry, agriculture*
manufacture, distribution or commerce.

The first is that of Gregory King in the year 1688.
King's calculation, however, can only be regarded as roughly
approximate. The quantity of combined agriculture and
manufacture, and the amount of domestic industry for
domestic consumption, renders the manufacturing figures,
however carefully they might have been collected, very


42


THE EVOLUTION OF


deceptive. The same criticism, though to a less degree^
applies to the estimate of Arthur Young for 1769.


If to Young's estimate of the population dependent
upon agriculture we add the class of landlords and their


MODERN CAPITALISM.


43


direct dependents and a proper proportion of the non-
industrious poor, who, though not to be so classed in a
direct measurement of occupations, are supported out of
the produce of agriculture, we shall see that in 1769 we are
justified in believing that agriculture was in its productive-
ness almost equivalent to the whole of manufactures and
commerce.

In turning to. the several branches of manufacture, the
abnormal development of one of them, viz. the woollen,
for purposes of foreign trade, marks the first and only con
siderable specialisation of English industry before the advent
of steam machinery. With the single exception of woollen
goods almost the whole of English manufactures were for
home consumption. At the opening of the eighteenth
century, and even as late as 1770, no other single manu-
facture played any comparable part in the composition of
our export trade.

According to Chalmers, 1 * in the period 1699-1701, the.
annual value of woollen exports was over two and a half
million pounds, or about two-fifths of the total export trade,
while in 1769-71 it still amounted to nearly one-third of
the wholes giving entire or partial employment to no fewer
than “ a million and a half of people,” or half of the total
number assigned by Young to manufacture.

Next to the woollen, but far behind in size and import-
ance, came the iron trade. In 1720 England seems to
have developed her mining resources so imperfectly as to
be in the condition of importing from foreign countries
20,000 out of the 30,000 tons required for her hardware
manufactures. 3 Almost all this iron was destined to home
consumption with the exception of hardware forced upon
the American colonies, who were forbidden to manufac-
ture for themselves. In 1720 it is calculated that mining
and manufacture of iron and hardware employed 200,000
persons.*

Copper and brass manufactures employed some 30,000
persons in 172a 4

Silk was die only other highly developed and consider-

1 Chalmers, Estimate, p. 208. See, however, Baines, who gives a

slightly smaller estimate, History of the Cotton Manufacture, p. 112.

* Macphezson, Annals , voL xzL p. 114.

* Ibid, voL iix. p. 73. 4 Ibid., voL iii p, 73.


44


THE EVOLUTION OF


able manufacture. It had, however, to contend with
Indian competition, introduced by the East India Com-
pany, and also with imported calicoes. 1 In 1750 there
were about 13,000 looms in England, the product of which
was almost entirely used for home consumption. Cotton
and linen were very small manufactures during the first
half of the eighteenth century. At the beginning of the
century the linen trade was chiefly in the hands of Russia
and Germany, although it had taken root in Ireland as
early as the close of the seventeenth century, and was
worked to some extent in Lancashire, Leicestershire, and
round Darlington in Yorkshire, which districts supplied the
linen-warp to the cotton weavers. 2 * 4 As for cotton, even in
1760 not more than 40,000 persons were engaged in the
manufacture, and in 1764 the cotton exports were but one-
twentieth of the value of the woollen exports.* The small
value of the cotton trade and an anticipatory glance at its
portentous after-growth is conveyed in the following
figures; —

Export Trade.

^220,759 (Postletwayte)

The many other little manufactures which had sprung up,
such as glass, paper, tin-plate, produced entirely for
home consumption, and employed but a small number of
workers.

§ 6. If we turn from the consideration of the size of English
industry and the several departments to the analysis of its
structure and the relation to the several trades, we shall find
the same signs of imperfect organic development which we
found in the world-industry, though not so strongly marked.
Just as we found each country in the main self-sufficing, so we
find each district of England (with a few significant excep-
tions) engaged chiefly in producing for its own consumption.
There was far less local specialisation in industry than we

1 Smith, Memoirs on Wool, vol. iL pp. 19, 45.

* Smith, ibid., voL iL p. 270; cf. also Cunningham, Growth of
English Industry, yoL SL p. 300.

* Toynbee, Industrial Revolution, p. 5a

4 Schulze-GaeYernitz, Dor Grossbctrieb, p. 77. The estimates of the
annual importation of cotton wool during the eighteenth century, cf.
Cunningham, vol ii p. 624.


Home Market.

1766 .£379,241

1819-21 13,044,000

1829-31 13,351,000


MODERN CAPITALISM.


45


find today. The staple industries, tillage, stock-raising,
and those connected with the supply of the common
articles of clothing, furniture, fuel, and other necessaries
were widespread over the whole country.

Though far more advanced than foreign intercourse, the
internal trade between more distant parts of England was
extremely slight Defective facilities - of communication
and transport were of course in large measure responsible
for this.

The physical obstructions to such freedom of commerce
as now subsists were very considerable in the eighteenth
century. The condition of the main roads in the country at
the opening of the century was such as to make the carriage
of goods long and expensive. Agricultural produce was
almost entirely for local consumption, with the exception of
cattle and poultry, which were driven on foot from the
neighbouring counties into London and other large markets. 1 *
In the winter, even round London, bad roads were a great
obstacle to trade. The impossibility of driving cattle to
London later than October often led to a monopoly of winter
supply and high prices. 8 The growth of turnpike roads,
which proceeded apace in the first half of the century, led
to the large substitution of carts for pack horses, but even
these roads were found “ execrable ” by Arthur Young, and
off the posting routes and the neighbourhood of London
the communication was extremely difficult. “The great
roads of England remained almost in this ancient condition
even as late as 1752 and 1754, when the traveller seldom
saw a turnpike for two hundred miles after leaving the
vicinity of London.” 8

■Rivers rather than roads were the highways of commerce,
and many Acts were passed in the earlier eighteenth
century for improving the navigability of rivers, as the Trent,
Ouse, and Mersey, partly in order to facilitate internal
trade and partly to enable towns like Leeds and Derby to
engage directly in trade by sea, 4 and to connect adjoining
towns such as Liverpool and Manchester. In 1755 the
first canal was constructed, and in the latter part of the
century the part played by canals in the development of the

1 Defoe, Tour, voi. ii. p. 371. * Chalmers, pp. 124, 125.

f Ibid., vol. ii. p. 37a * Defoe, Tour, vol. iii. p. 9, etc.


THE EVOLUTION OF


46

new factory system was considerable. But in spite of these
efforts to improve methods of transport in the earlier
eighteenth century, it is evident that the bulk of industry
was engaged in providing articles for local consumption,
and that the area of the market for most products was
extremely narrow.

The facile transport of both capital and labour, which is
essential to highly specialised local industry, was retarded
not merely by lack of knowledge of the opportunities of
remunerative investment, but also by legal restrictions which
had the influence of checking the free application and
migration of labour. The Statute of Apprentices by requir-
ing a seven years’ apprenticeship 1 in many trades, and the
Law of Settlement by impairing mobility of labour, are
to be regarded as essentially protective measures calcu-
lated to prevent that concentrated application of capital and
labour required for specialisation of industry.

Within the nation we had for the most part a number of
self-sufficing communities, or, in other words, there was
little specialisation of function in the several parts, and
little integration in the national industry. With the single
exception of Holland, whose admirable natural and artificial
water communication seemed to give unity to its commerce,
the other countries of Europe, France, Germany, Italy,
Spain, Russia, were still more disintegrated in their industry.

§ 7. In regarding those districts of England in which
strong indications of growing industrial specialisation
showed themselves, it is important to observe the degree
and character of that specialisation.

We find various branches of the woollen, silk, cotton,
iron, hardware, and other manufactures allocated to certain
districts. But if we compare this specialisation with that
which obtains to-day we shall observe wide differences.

In the first place, it was far less advanced The woollen
industry of England, though conveniently divided into three
districts — one in the Eastern Counties, with Norwich, Col-
chester, Sandwich, Canterbury, Maidstone, for principal
centres ; one in the West, with Taunton, Devizes, Bradford
(in Wilts), Frome, Trowbridge, Stroud, and Exeter; and
the third, in the West Riding, is in reality distributed over


1 Smith, Wealth of Nations, voL L, chap, x., part 2.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


47


rimost the whole of England south of the Thames, and over
i large part of Yorkshire, to say nothing of the widespread

INDUSTRIAL ENGLAND IN 1730.


tAKct Ttmut nminifll t mo* comes •

TtXTtlX CUTTStlA m TtXUlX ANO HOK BtKSICTSfSt

LASCS 4X0* OlSTUe T* ff


production, either for private consumption or for the market,
in Westmoreland, Cumberland, and indeed all the North of
England Where the land was richer in pasture or with


48


THE EVOLUTION Of


easier access to large supplies of wool, the clothing manu-
factures were more flourishing and gave more employment,
but over all the southern and most of the northern counties
some form of woollen manufacture was carried on.

The only part of England which Defoe regarded as
definitely specialised in manufacture is part of the West
Riding, for though agriculture is carried on here to some
extent, the chief manufacturing district is dependent upon
surrounding districts for its main supply of food. 1

Iron, the industry of next, though of far inferior import-
ance, was of necessity less widely distributed. But in 1737
the fifty-nine furnaces in use were distributed over no fewer
than fifteen counties, Sussex, Gloucester, Shropshire, York-
shire, and Northumberland taking the lead. 2 So too the
industries engaged in manufacturing metal goods were far
less concentrated than in the present day. Though Sheffield
and Birmingham even in Defoe’s time were the great centres
of the trade, of the total consumption of the country the
greater part was made in small workshops scattered over the
land.

Nottingham and Leicester were beginning to specialise in
cotton and woollen hosiery, but a good deal was made round
London, and generally in the woollen counties of the south.
Silk was more specialised owing to the importation of
special skill and special machinery to Spitalsfield, Stockport,
Derby, and a few other towns. In Coventry it was only the
second trade in 1727. 3

The scattered crafts of the wheelwright, the smith, car-
penter, turner, carried on many of the subsidiary processes
of building, manufacture of vehicles and furniture, which
are now for the most part highly centralised industries.

When we come presently to consider the structure of the
several industries we shall see that even those trades which
are allocated to certain local areas are much less concen-
trated within these areas than is now the case.

But though stress is here laid upon the imperfect differen-
tiation of localities in industry, it is not to be supposed that
the eighteenth century shows England a simple industrial
community with no considerable specialisation.

1 Defoe, Tour, vol. iiL p. 84.

* Scrivener, History of the Iron Trade.

* Defoe, Tour, voL ii. p. 323.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


49


Three conditions of specialised industry are clearly
discernible in the early eighteenth century — conditions
which always are among the chief determinants.

1. Physical aptitudes of soil — eg.> since timber was still
used almost entirely for smelting, iron works are found
where timber is plentiful or where river communication
makes it easily procurable. So the more fertile meadows
of Gloucester and Somerset led these districts to specialise
in the finer branches of the woollen trade. A still more
striking example is that of South Lancashire. By nature it
was ill-suited for agriculture, and therefore its inhabitants
employed themselves largely in the cotton and woollen
trades. The numerous little streams which flowed from
the hills to the neighbouring sea gave plenty of water-
power, and thus made this district the home of the earlier
mills and the cradle of machine-industiy. 1 The “ grit ” of
the local grindstones secured the supremacy of Sheffield
cutlery, while the heavy clay required for the “ seggars,” or
boxes in which pottery is fired, helped to determine the
specialisation of Staffordshire in this industry. 2

2. Facility of Market — The country round London,
Bristol, and other larger towns became more specialised
than the less accessible and more evenly populated parts,
because the needs of a large town population compelled
the specialisation in agriculture of much of the surrounding
country ; cottagers could more easily dispose of their manu-
factures ; improved roads and other facilities for convey-
ance induced a specialisation impossible in the purely rural
parts.

3. T 7 te Mature of the Commodity . — When all modes of
conveyance were slow the degree of specialisation depended
largely upon the keeping quality of the goods. From this
point of view hardware and textiles are obviously more
amenable to local specialisation than the more perishable
forms of food. Where conveyance is difficult and expensive
a commodity bulky for its value is less suitable for local

1 Schulze-Gaevemitz, Der Grossbeirieb , p. 52.

* Cf Marshall, Principles , p. 328. In the case of Staffordshire,
however, there existed an early trade in wooden platters dependent
on quality of timber and traditional skill. When the arts of pottery
came in, the new trade taken np in the same locality ousted the old,
though there was no particular local advantage in


4


So


THE EVOLUTION OF


specialisation in production than one containing a high
value in small weight and bulk. So cloth is more suitable
for trade than com ; l and coal, save where navigation is
possible, could not be profitably taken any distance. 3

The common commodities consumed, as food, fuel, and
shelter, were thus excluded from any considerable amount
of specialisation in their production.

§ 8. Turning from consideration of the attributes of
goods and of the means of transport which served to limit
the character of internal trade and determine the size of
the market, let us now regard the structure of the market,
the central object in the mechanism of internal commerce.

The market, not the industry, is the true term which
expresses the group of organically related businesses.
How far did England present a national market? How
far was the typical market a district or purely local
one?

The one great national market town was London. It
alone may be said to have drawn supplies from the whole
of England, and there alone was it possible to purchase at
any season of the year every kind of produce, agricultural
or manufactured, made anywhere in England or imported
from abroad This flow to and from the great centre of
population was incessant, and extended to the furthermost
parts of the land Other large towns, such as Bristol, Leeds,
Norwich, maintained close and constant relations with the
neighbouring counties, but exchanged their produce for
the most part only indirectly with that of more distant parts
of the country.

The improving communication of the eighteenth century
enabled the clothiers and other leading manufacturers to
distribute more of their wares even in the remotest parts of .
the country, but the value paid for their wares reached the
vendors by slow and indirect channels of trade, passing for
the most part through the metropolis.

But while London was the one constant national
market-place, national trade was largely assisted by fairs
held for several weeks each year at Stourbridge, Winchester,
and other convenient centres. At the most important of

2 Smith, Wealth of Nations, Book XIL, chap. iiL
* Westmoreland coal did not compete in the Newcastle market.—
Wealth if Nations, Book I., chap. ad. p. 2.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


51


these the large merchants and manufacturers met their
customers, and business was transacted between distant
parts of the country, including all kinds of wares, English
and foreign. Thus we had one constant and two or three
intermittent avenues of free national trade. The great
bulk of markets, however, were confined within far smaller
areas.

In the more highly developed and specialised textile
trades certain regular market-places were established of
wide local importance. The largest of these specialised
district markets were at Leeds, Halifax, Norwich, and
Exeter. Here the chief local manufacturers of doth,
worsted, or crape met the merchants and factors and
disposed of their wares to these distributing middle-
men.

It was, however, in the general market-places of the
county town or smaller centres of population that the
mass of the business of exchange was transacted There
the mass of the small workers in agriculture and manu-
facture brought the product of their labour and sold it,
buying what they needed for consumption and for the
pursuance of their craft Only in considerable towns were
there to be found in the earlier eighteenth century any
number of permanent shops where all sorts of wares could
be bought at any time. The weekly market in the market-
town was the chief medium of commerce for the great mass
of the population.

Regarding the general structure of Industry we see that
not only are international bonds slight and unessential,
but that within the nation the elements of national cohesion
are feeble as compared with those which subsist now. We
have a number of small local communities whose relations,
though tolerably strong with other communities in their
immediate neighbourhood, become greatly weakened by
distance. For the most part these small co mmuniti es are
self-sufficing for work and life, producing most of their own
necessaries, and only dependent on distant and unknown
producers for their comforts and luxuries.

Trade is for the most part conducted on a small local basis
with known regular customers; markets are less fluctuating in
quantities of supply and in prices than in modem days.

Outside of agriculture the elements of speculation and
fluctuation are almost entirely confined to foreign trade,


52


THE EVOLUTION OF


Capital and labour are fixed to a particular locality and a
particular business. 1

§ 9. Turning to the structure of the several industries we
find that different employments are not sharply separated
from one another. In the first place, agriculture and manu-
facture are not only carried on in the same locality but by
the same people. This combined agriculture and manu-
facture took several forms.

The textile industries were largely combined with agri-
culture. Where spinning was carried on in agricultural
parts there was, for the most part, a division of labour
within the family. The women and children spun while
the men attended to their work in the fields. 2 Every
woman and child above the age of five found full employ-
ment in the spinning and weaving trades of Somerset and
the West Riding. 3

This method prevailed more generally in the spinning
than in the weaving trades, for before the introduction of the
spinning-jenny the weaving trade was far more centralised
than the other. For example, a large quantity of weaving
was done in the town of Norwich while the earlier process
was executed in the scattered cottages over a wide district
But even these town workers were not specialised in manu-
facture to the extent which prevails to-day. Large numbers
of them had allotments in the country to which they gave
their spare time, and many had pasture rights and kept
their cattle on the common lands. This applied not merely
to the textile but to other industries. At West Bromwich,
a chief centre of the metal trade, agriculture was still carried
on as a subsidiary pursuit by the metal workers. 4 So too
the cutlers of Sheffield living in the outskirts of the town
had their plot of land and carried on agriculture to a small
extent, a practice which has lasted almost up to the present
day. The combined agriculture and manufacture often

1 Adam Smith, writing later in the century, observes with some

exaggeration, “A merchant, it has been said very properly, is not
necessarily the citizen of a particular country. It is in a great measure
indifferent to him from what place he carries on his trade, and a very
trifling disgust will make him remove his capital, and together with it
ail the industry which it supports, from one country to another* ** — -
Book XIX., chap. iv.

* Defoe, voL ii pu 37. * vol. h< p. 17.

4 Annals pf Agriculture chap. iv. p. 137*


MODERN CAPITALISM.


S3


took the form of a division of labour according to season.
Where the weaving was not concentrated in towns it
furnished a winter occupation to many men who gave the
bulk of their summer time to agriculture. Generally speak-
ing, we may take as fairly representative of the manu-
facturing parts of England the picture which Defoe gave of
the condition of affairs in the neighbourhood of Halifax.
He found “ the land divided into small enclosures from two
acres to six or seven acres each, seldom more ; every three
or four pieces of land had a house belonging to it— one
continued village, hardly a house standing out of speaking
distance from another — at every house a tenter, and on
almost every tenter a piece of cloth or kersie or shalloon —
every clothier keeps a horse — so every one generally keeps
a cow or two for his family .” 1

Not only were agriculture and many forms of manufacture
conjoined, but the division of labour and differentiation of
processes within the several industries was not very far
advanced. The primitive tillage of the common-fields
which still prevailed in the early eighteenth century, though
the rapid enclosure of commons was effecting a considerable,
and from the wealth-producing point of view, a very
salutary change, did not favour the specialisation of land
for pasture or for some particular grain crops. Each little
hamlet was engaged in providing crops of hay, wheat, barley,
oats, beans, and had to fulfil the other purposes required by
a self-subsisting community. This arose partly from the
necessity of the system of land tenure, partly from ignorance
of how to take advantage of special qualities and positions
of soil, and partly from the self-sufficiency imposed by
difficulties of conveyance. As the century advanced, the
enclosure of commons, the increase of large farms, the
application of new science and new capital led to a rapid
differentiation in the use of land for agricultural purposes.
But in the earlier part of the century there was little
specialisation of land except in the West Riding and round
the chief centres of the woollen trade, and to a less extent
in the portions of the counties round London whose position
forced them to specialise for some particular market of the
metropolis.


1 Defoe, toL m. pp. 78, 79.


54


THE EVOLUTION OF


§ 10. As the small agriculturist on a self-sufficing farm
must perform many different processes, so the manufacturer
was not narrowed down to a single process of manufacture.
A large part of the ruder manufactures were home produc-
tions for home consumption, and the same hands tended
the sheep which furnished the wool, and spun and wove the
wool for family use. The smith was in a far fuller sense
the maker of the horse-shoe or the nail or bolt than he is
to-day; the wheelwright, the carpenter, and other handi-
craftsmen performed a far larger number of different pro-
cesses than they do now. Moreover, each household, in
addition to its principal employments of agriculture and
manufacture, carried on many minor productive occupations,
such as baking, brewing, butter-making, dressmaking, wash-
ing, which are now for the most part special and inde-
pendent branches of employment
In the more highly-developed branches of the textile
and metal trades the division of processes appears at first
sight more sharply marked than to-day. The carder,
spinner, weaver, fuller in the cloth trade worked in the
several processes of converting raw wool into finished cloth,
related to one another only by a series of middlemen who
supplied them with the material required for their work and
received it back with the impress of their labour attached,
to hand it out once more to undergo the next process . 1
But though modem machine-production will show us these
various processes drawn together into close local proximity,
sometimes performed under the same roof and often making
use of the same steam power, we shall find that a chief
object and effect of this closer local co-ordination of the
several processes is to define and narrow more precisely
the labour of each worker and to make the spinner and the
weaver confine himself to the performance of a fractional
part of the full process of spinning or weaving. Thus we
find that English industry in the early eighteenth century is
marked on the one hand by a lack of clear differentiation
as regards industries, and on the other hand by a lack of
minute differentiation of processes within the industry.

§ n. Upon the area and structure of the market depends
the size and character of the unit of Industry — the Business.

1 C£~ Burnley, Wool and Wool- combings p. 417,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


55

"Thus the handicraft or guild system is associated with the
town economy, the domestic or commission system with the
national economy , and the factory system with the world
economy.” 1

In the study of the composition of capital, labour, and
direction in a business, the following are points of dominant
importance : —

'a. The ownership of the raw material.
n . , /3. „ „ tools (and sources of non-

CapitaL ‘ human power).

y. ,, „ workplace.

8. The labour-power.

c The work of superintendence and management.

f. The work of marketing.

In other words, in the operation of an industrial Business,
an employer organises and directs the application of labour-
power working with tools upon raw materials in a workshop
or factory, and sells the product Now all these six func-
tions may be combined in a single person or family, or
they may be divided in various ways among two or many
persons. The simplest form of manufacturing business
would be one in which an industrial family, growing or
buying the materials and tools, and working with the power
of their own bodies in their own home, under the direc-
tion of the head of the household, produce commodities,
partly for their own consumption, partly for a small local
market

Omitting all consideration of the virtually self-sufficing
economy of the farmers and cottagers who, producing food,
clothing, etc., for their own consumption, cannot rank as
business-units for our purposes, we find even in eighteenth-
century England a large number of town and rural industries
in which the differentiation from the primitive type has only
just begun.

The simplest structure of “domestic” manufacture is that
in which the farmer-manufacturer is found purchasing his

1 industrial Or^emsatum in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries .

Unwin, p. ia


56


THE EVOLUTION OF


own material, the raw wool or flax if he is a spinner, the
warp and weft if he is a weaver, and, working with his
family, produces yam or cloth which he sells himself, either
in the local market or to regular master-clothiers or
merchants* The mixed cotton weaving trade was in this
condition in the earlier years of the eighteenth century.
“The workshop of the weaver was a rural cottage, from
which, when he was tired of sedentary labour, he could
sally forth into his little garden, and with the spade or the
hoe tend its culinary productions. The cotton-wool which
was to form his weft was picked clean by the fingers of his
younger children, and was carded and spun by the elder
girls, assisted by his wife, and the yam was woven by
himself, assisted by his sons.” 1

The weak point in this economy lay in the trouble and
uncertainty of marketing the product. It was here that the
merchant, who represents the earliest form of industrial
capitalism, presses in upon the self-employing artisan-
capitalist Taking from the small producer his product,
paying him for it, and undertaking the trouble, delay,
and risk of finding consumers to purchase it at a
price which will yield him a profit, the merchant relieves
him of the function which he is least competent to pe-
rform.

From the habit of selling his product to a specialist
middleman, it is a small step to receiving “orders” from
the latter. But where, as is usual, the raw material, or some
of it, has to be bought by the producer, the latter is apt to
find that this buying is almost as troublesome as selling, and
so he is easily induced to receive his warp and woof, or
other materials, from the same merchant who takes from
him his product

So the ownership of the raw material often passes from
the “ independent ” small workman into the hands of the
organising merchant or middleman, who, as early as the
seventeenth century, in the clothing trade is found usurping
the title “ manufacturer.”

This stage, where the workman receives his “ orders ” and
his “materials” from another, while retaining the disposal
of his labour-power and working with his own tools in his

1 Ure, History of tic Cotton Manufacture , vol, L p,


MODERN CAPITALISM. 57

own home or workplace, prevailed widely in the textile
industries of rural England.

The condition of the cotton-trade in Lancashire about
1750 illustrates most clearly the transition from the inde-
pendent weaver to the dependent weaver. So far as the
linen warp of his fabric was concerned he had long been in
the habit of receiving it from the larger “manufacturer” in
Bolton or in Manchester, but the cotton yam he had
hitherto supplied himself; using the yarn spun by his own
family or purchased by himself in the neighbourhood. The
difficulty of obtaining a steady, adequate supply, and the
waste of time involved in trudging about in search of this
necessary material, operated more strongly as the market
for cotton goods expanded and the pressure of work made
itself felt 1 It was this pressure which we shall see acting
as chief stimulus to the application of new inventions in
the spinning* trade. In the interim, however, the habit
grew of receiving not only linen warp but cotton weft from
the merchant or middleman. Thus the ownership of the
raw material entirely passed out of the weaver’s hands
though he continued to ply his domestic craft as for-
merly.* This had grown into the normal condition of
the trade by 1750. The stocking-trade illustrates one
further encroachment of the capitalist system upon
domestic industry. In this trade not only was the material
given out by merchants, but the “ frames” used for
weaving were likewise owned by them, and were rented
out to the workers, who continued, however, to work in
their own homes.

But this stage of business organisation, where the material
is provided and the product taken by an outsider, a mer-
chant or other customer, is by no means confined to the
country weaver. It is frequently to be traced as a stage in
the decline of a town trade-guild When, for example, the
processes of the doth manufacture became specialised, the
weaver, fuller, bureller, finisher, and dyer becoming separate
trained handicrafts, it happened sometimes that one or other
of these related crafts became strong enough to set up as

1 Baines, History of the County Palatini of Lancashire^ voL it
p. 4*3*

* Ure, History of Cotton Manufacture, vol. L p. 224, etc.

* Dr. Aikin, History of Manchester (quoted Baines, p. 406).


THE EVOLUTIOH OF


S 8

employers of the others, and gave out work for them to do.
So it seems that in the later thirteenth century a number of
the burellers in London gave out work to the weavers,
while among the weavers themselves large masters sprang
up, who gave out yarn to the poorer masters, and employed
fullers and dyers . 1

When the raw material is given out to an artisan by a
merchant or another manufacturer there is a clear loss of
independence, especially when this step is followed by the
letting out of tools or machines. In London, as early as the
thirteenth century, big master-weavers seem to have hired
out looms to small weavers . 2 Similarly in the stocking-
trade, at a much later period, “frames” as well as material
were let out by merchants to the workers, who continued to
work in their own homes.*

§ 12. Two further steps remained to be taken in the
transition from the “domestic” to the “factory” system, the
one relating to the ownership of “power,” the other to the
workplace, (a) The substitution of extra-human power
owned by the employer for the physical power of the
worker; (&) the withdrawal of the workers from their
homes, and the concentration of them in factories and
workplaces owned by the capitalists.

Although these steps were not completely taken until the
age of steam had well set in, before the middle of the
eighteenth century there were found examples of the factory,
complete in its essential character, side by side and in
actual competition with the earlier shapes of domestic
industry.

Capitalist ownership of extra-human industrial u power”
was of course narrowly restricted before the age of steam.
Water-power, horse-power, and to a much smaller extent,
wind-power, were utilised. But the most important services
water rendered to industry prior to the great inventions
were in facilitating the transport of goods, and in certain
subsidiary processes of manufacture such as dyeing.
Though a considerable number of water-mills existed early
in the century, they played no large part in manufacture.
A natural force so strictly confined in quantity and in local
application, and subject to such great waste from the back-

1 Unwifi, pp. 27, 29. * Ibid., p. 29.

* Codec Taylor, The Modem Factory System , p. 69.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


59


ward condition of mechanical arts, was not able to serve to
any great extent as a substitute for or aid to the muscular
activity of man.

But although the economy of mechanical power was not
yet operative to any appreciable extent in concentrating
labour, certain other notable economies of large-scale pro-
duction were beginning to assert themselves in all the
leading manufactures. Indeed so powerful are some of the
economies of division of labour and co-operation even in a
primitive condition of the industrial arts, that Professor
Ashley considers it not improbable that the great manu-
factory might have become an important or even a dominant
feature of the woollen trade as early as the sixteenth century,
if legislative enactments had not stood in the way. 1 As it
was, these earlier centralising forces, while they drove the
workers to work and live in closer and compacter masses,
did not at first dispose them in factories to any great extent.
They continued for the most part to work in their own
houses, though for material and sometimes for the im-
plements of their craft they were dependent upon some
merchant or large master-manufacturer. This was the con-
dition of industry in the neighbourhood of Leeds in 1725.
“The houses are not scattered and dispersed as in the
vicarage of Halifax, one by one, but in villages, and those
houses thronged with people and the whole country in-
finitely populous.”* In the more highly-developed branches
of the cloth trade, however, where the best looms were a
relatively costly form of capital, the foundation of the
factory system was clearly laid. In Norwich, Frome,
Taunton, Devizes, Stourbridge, and other clothing centres,
Defoe found the weaving industry highly concentrated, and
rich employers owning considerable numbers of looms.
Some of this work was put out by the master-manufacturers,
but other work was done in large sheds or other premises
owned by the master. This large organised “business,” half
factory, half domestic, continued to prevail in the important
West of England clothing industry up to the close of the
eighteenth century- u The master clothier of the West of
England buys his wool from the importer, if it be foreign,
or in the fleece if it be of domestic growth ; after which, in

1 Ee*n*m*c History, voL ii p. 237.

* Defoe, T*ur, toL iii. p. 89,


6o


THE EVOLUTION OF


all the different processes through which it passes, fie is
under the necessity of employing as many distinct classes of
persons; sometimes working in their own houses, some-
times in that of the master clothier, but none of them going
out of their proper line Each class of workman, however,
acquires great skill in performing its particular operation,
and hence may have arisen the acknowledged excellence,
and, till of late, the superiority of the cloths of the West of
England.” 1

So again, in the cotton industry of Lancashire, the hold
which the merchants had got over the weavers by supplying
them with warp and weft led in some cases, before the
middle of the century, to the establishment of small
factories containing a score or two of looms, in which hired
men were employed to weave. A little later, though long
before steam power, Arthur Young finds a factory at
Darlington with over fifty looms, a factory at Boynton with
150 workers, and a silk mill at Sheffield with 152 workers.
In the more developed branches of the textile industry this
transformation of business structure was tolerably complete
by the end of the eighteenth century. Improved means of
communication were beginning to expand the area of the
market, enlarged businesses enabled labour to be profitably
divided, and required a more effective control over the
workers than could be obtained over a scattered population
of agricultural manufacturers.

Thus by a series of economic changes the several func-
tions of the independent craftsman have been taken from
him, until he is left in possession of his labour-power
alone, which he must sell to an employer who furnishes
materials, tools and machinery, workplace, and superintend-
ence, and who owns and markets the production of his
labour. From a free craftsman he has passed into a “ hired
hand.”

In this growth of capitalistic structure there have, of
course, been various halting places, temporary or lasting.
The small craftsman or other producer working in his own
premises with his own tools and machinery, sometimes with
his own power, using his own labour or that of a few hired
workers, has survived in many departments of industry.

1 Report of tho Commission on tie Woollen Manufacture of England
(1S06).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


6l


From early times many sorts of craftsmen have received
their “orders” and material directly from the consumer.
In the country the weaver, miller, baker, cobbler, tailor,
smith, were mostly engaged in working at materials supplied
by customers. Even till quite recent days in many parts of
Germany and Switzerland cobblers, tailors, coopers, some-
times saddlers, carpenters, wheelwrights, were a nomad folk,
not only working on material supplied by others, but
working in the houses of their customers. In mediaeval
times it was chiefly where some sort of fixed plant or
machinery were required, such as mills, ovens, forges,
looms, that customers gave out the material to be made up
in the workplace of the artisan . 1

Even in the most advanced countries, where tools or
machines are easily capable of transport, the itinerant
craftsman still survives — t.g* tinkers and coopers, and
among women’s work that of the dressmaker and
seamstress. In the less advanced European countries
a great deal of work remains in this stage. “In Russia
and the southern Slav countries there are hundreds
of thousands of wage-workers, belonging especially to the
building and clothing trades, who lead a continuous
migratory life, and who, on account of the great distances
travelled, often remain away from home half a year or
more .” 1

While the receipt of raw materials and “orders” from
merchants or other producers has commonly been the first
stage in the breakdown of an independent business, this
is by no means universally the case. There are many
Instances where all the factors of an independent business
survive except the ownership of the raw material In the
textile trades great capitalist businesses, engaged in
dyeing, bleaching, printing, etc., survive in this stage,
while in shipping yards and in the metal and machine
manufactures large numbers of repairing trades stand on
this footing.

A further variety is furnished in the food and drink
trades. The maltster, brewer, miller was in mediaeval times
the owner of kilns, brewing-house* or mill, to which the
customer not only brought his own materials, but where he

1 Ct Bficher, Industrial Evolution, p. 6 *.

* Bttchex, p. 164.


62


THE EVOLUTION OF


personally superintended their manufacture, the owner of
the plant and premises looking to the working of his
machinery, and supplying the power and other technical
conditions of the process,

§ 13, Regarding the Business as a combination of Labour
and Capital, we perceive that one strongly distinctive charac-
teristic of the pre-machinery age is the small proportion
which capital bears to labour in the industrial unit. It is
this fact that enabled the “domestic” worker to hold his
own so long in so many industries as the owner of a sepa-
rate business. So long as the mechanical arts are slightly
developed and tools are simple, the proportion of “ fixed
capital ” to the business is small and falls within the means
of the artisan who plies his craft in his home. So long as
tools are simple, the processes of manufacture are slow,
therefore the quantity of raw material and other u circulat-
ing capital” is small and can also be owned by the worker.
The growing divorcement in the ownership of capital and
labour in the industrial unit will be found to be a direct
and most important result of those improvements in
mechanical arts which, by continually increasing the
proportion of capital to labour in a business, placed
capital more and more beyond the possession of those
who supplied the labour power required to co-operate in
production.

In the middle of last century there were very few
instances of a manufacturing business in which a large
capital was engaged, or in which the capital stood to
the labour in anything like modem proportion. It was
indeed the merchant and not the manufacturer who
represented the most advanced form of Capitalism in the
eighteenth century. Long before Dr. Johnson’s discovery
that “an English merchant is a new species of gentleman,”
Defoe had noted the rise of merchant-princes in the
Western clothing trades, observing that “ many of the great
families who now pass for gentry in these counties have
been originally raised from and built out of this truly noble
manufacture.” 1 These wealthy entrepreneurs were some-
times spoken of as “ manufacturers,” though they had no
claim either upon the old or the new signification of that


1 Tmr, toL ii p. 55.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


63


name. They neither wrought with their hands nor did
they own machinery and supervise the labour which worked
with it They were, as has been shown above, merchant-
middlemen. The clothing trade being the most highly
developed, evolved several species of middlemen, including
under that term all collectors and distributors of the raw
material or finished goods.

(a) One important class of “factors ” engaged themselves
in buying wool from farmers and selling it to clothiers,
and appear to have sometimes exercised an undue and
tyrannous control over the latter by an unscrupulous
manipulation of the credit system which was growing up
in trade. 1

(£) The "clothiers” themselves must be regarded in
large measure as middleman-collectors, analogous in func-
tion to the distributors, who still rank as one of the grades
of middlemen in the cheap clothing trade of London
to-day.*

(c) After the cloth was made three classes of middlemen
were engaged in forwarding it to the retailer — (1) travel-
ling merchants or wholesale dealers who attended the big
fairs or the markets at Leeds, Halifax, Exeter, etc., and
made large purchases, conveying the goods on pack-horses
over the country to the retail trader; (2) middlemen who
sold on commission through London factors and ware-
housemen, who in their turn disposed of the goods to
shopkeepers or to exporters; (3) merchants directly en-
gaged in the export trade.

With the exception of shipping and canal transport
(which became important after the middle of the century)
there were no considerable industries related to manu-
facture where large capitals were laid down in fixed plant
Even the capital sunk in permanent improvements of
land, which played so important a part in the development
of agriculture, belonged chiefly to the latter years of the
eighteenth centin^. Almost the only persons who wielded
large capitals within the country were those merchants
dealers, or middlemen whose capital at .any given time
consisted of a large stock of raw material or finished

1 For an interesting account of the cunning devices of “factors ” see
Smith’s Memoirs tf W&L, roL iL p. 311, etc.

* CL Booth, Labour and Lift efthe PttpL r, voL L p. 486. ate.


THE EVOLUTION OF


64

goods. Even the latter were considerably restricted in the
magnitude of their transactions by the imperfect develop-
ment of the machinery of finance and the credit system.
In 1750 there were not more than twelve bankers* shops out
of London. 1 Until 1759 the Bank of England issued no
notes of less value than £ 20 .

Joint-ownership of capital and effective combination of
the labour units in a business were only beginning to make
progress. The Funded Debt, the Bank of England, the
East India Company were the only examples of really
large and safe investments at the opening of the eighteenth
century. Joint-ownership of large capitals for business
purposes made no great progress before the middle of the
eighteenth century, except in the case of chartered com-
panies for foreign trade, such as the East India Company,
the Hudson’s Bay Company, the Turkish, Russian, East-
land, and African companies. Insurance business became a
favourite form of Joint-stock speculation in the reign of
George L The extraordinary burst of joint-stock enterprise
culminating in the downfall of the South Sea Company
shows clearly the narrow limitations for sound capitalist
co-operation. Even foreign trade on joint-stock lines could
only be maintained successfully on condition that the
competition of private adventurers was precluded.

Joint-capital had yet made no inroad into manufacture,
one of the earliest instances being a company formed in
1764 with a capital of ;£ 100,000 for manufacturing fine
cambrics.*

The limits of co-operative capitalism at the opening of
the period of Industrial Revolution are indicated by Adam
Smith in a passage of striking significance: — “The only
trades which it seems possible for a joint-stock company
to carry on successfully, without an exclusive privilege, are
those of which all the operations are capable of being
reduced to what is called a routine, or to such a uniformity
of method as admits of little or no variation. Of this kind
is, first, the banking trade; secondly, the trade of insurance
from fire and from sea risk and capture in time of war;
thirdly, the trade of making and maintaining a navigable

1 Toynbee, Industrial Revolution , p. 55.

* Cunningham, roL ih p, 35a


MODERN CAPITALISM. 6g

cut or canal; and fourthly, the similar trade of bringing
water for the supply of a great city .” 1

In other words, the businesses amenable to joint-stock
enterprise are those where skilled management can be
reduced to a minimum, and where the scale of the business
or the possession of a natural monopoly limits or prohibits
competition from outside.

1 Wealth of Nations % Bk. V., chap. L, pact 3.


66


CHAPTER IV.

THE ORDER OF DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINE INDUSTRY-

§ I. A Machine differentiated from a Tool \

| a. Machinery in Relation to the Character of Human
Labour \

| 3. Contributions of Machinery to Productive Power \

§ 4- Main Factors in Development of Machine Industry .

§ 5, Importance of Cotton-trade in Machine Development*

§ 6. History refutes the “Heroic” Theory of Invention.

§ 7 - Application of Machinery to other Textile Work.

§ &. Reverse order of Development in Iron Trades.

| 9. Leading Determinants in the General Application of
Machinery and Steam-Motor.

1 10. Order of Development of modern Industrial Methods
in the several Countries — Natural , Racial , Political \
Economic.

§ 1. It appears that in the earlier eighteenth century, while
there existed examples of various types of industrial structure,
the domestic system in its several phases may be regarded
as the representative industrial form. The object of this
chapter is to examine the nature of those changes in the
mechanical arts which brought about the substitution of
machine-industry conducted in factories or large workshops
for the handicrafts conducted within the home or in small
workshops, with the view of discovering the economic bear-
ing of these changes.

A full inductive treatment would perhaps require this
inquiry to be prefaced by a full history of the inventions
which in the several industries mark the rise of the factory
system and the adoption of capitalist methods. This, how-
ever, is beyond the scope of the present work, nor does it
strictly belong to our scientific purpose, which is not to
write the narrative of the industrial revolution, but to bring


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. 67

such analysis to bear upon the records of industrial changes
as shall enable us clearly to discern the laws of those
changes.

The central position occupied by machinery as the chief
material factor in the modem evolution of industry requires
that a distinct answer should be given to the question.
What is machinery ?

In distinguishing a machine from a mere tool or handi-
craft implement it is desirable to pay special attention to
two points, complexity of structure and the activity of man
in relation to the machine. Modem machinery in its most
developed shape consists, as Karl Marx points out, of three
parts, which, though mechanically connected, are essentially
distinct, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism,
and the tool or working machine.

“The motor mechanism is that which puts the whole in
motion. It either generates its own motive power, like
the steam-engine, the caloric engine, the electro-magnetic
machine, etc., or it receives its impulse from some already
existing natural force, like the water-wheel from a head
of water, the windmill from wind, eta The transmitting
mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed wheels,
pullids, straps, ropes, bands, pinions, and gearing of the
most varied kind, regulates the motion, changes its form
where necessary, as, for instance, from linear to circular,
and divides and distributes it among the working machines.
These two first parts of the whole mechanism are there
solely for putting the working machines in motion, by
means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon
and modified as desired ” 1

Although the development of modem machinery is
largely concerned with motor and transmitting mechanisms,
it is to the working machine we must look in order to get
a clear idea of the differences between machines and tools.
A tool may be quite simple in form and action as a knife,
a needle, a saw, a roller, a hammer, or it may embody
more complex thought in its construction, more variety
in its movement, and call for the play of higher human
skill Such tools or implements are the hand-loom, the
lathe, the potteris-wheel. To these tools man stands
In a double relation He is handicraftsman in that
he guides and directs them by his skill within the

1 Karl Marx, Capital, p. 367.


68


THE EVOLUTION OF


scope of activity to which they are designed He also
furnishes by his muscular activity the motive force with
which the tool is worked It is the former of these two
relations which differentiates the tool from the machine.
When the tool is removed from the direct and individual
guidance of the handicraftsman and placed in a mechanism
which governs its action by the prearranged motion of some
other tool or mechanical implement, it ceases to be a tool
and becomes part of a machine. The economic advantage
of the early machines consisted chiefly in the economy of
working in combined action a number of similar tools by
the agency of a single motor. In the early machine the
former tool takes its place as a central part, but its move-
ments are no longer regulated by the human touch . 1 The
more highly evolved modern machinery generally represents
an orderly sequence of processes by which mechanical
unity is given to the labour once performed by a number
of separate individuals, or groups of individuals with differ-
ent sorts of tools. But the economy of the earlier machines
was generally of a different character. For the most part
it consisted not in the harmonious relation of a number
of different processes, but rather in a multiplication of the
same process raised sometimes to a higher size and speed
by mechanical contrivances. So the chief economic value
of the earlier machinery applied to spinning consisted in
the fact that it enabled each spinner to work an increased
number of spindles, performing with each the same simple
process as that which he formerly performed with one. In
other cases, however, the element of multiplication was not
present, and the prime economy of the machine consisted
in the superior skill, regularity, pace, or economy of power
obtained by substituting mechanical direction of the tool
for close and constant human direction. In modern
machinery the sewing-machine illustrates the latter, as
the knife-cleaning machine illustrates the former.

The machine is inherently a more complex structure
than the tool, because it must contain within itself the
mechanical means for working a tool, or even for the
combined working of many tools, which formerly received
their direction from man. In using a tool man is the
direct agent, in using a working machine the transmitting

1 Mane points out how in many of the most highly evolved machines
the original tool survives, illustrating this from the original power-
loom [Capital* woL ii. p. 368.)


MODERN CAPITALIST


69


mechanism is the direct agent, so far as thfc character
of the several acts of production is not stamped upon
the form of the working machine itself The man placed
in charge of a machine determines whether it shall act,
but only within very narrow limits how it shall act The
two characteristics here brought out in the machine,
complexity of action and self-direction or automatic
character, are in reality the objective and subjective
expression of the same factor — namely, the changed rela-
tion of man towards the work in which he co-operates.

Some of the directing or mental effort, skill, art, thought^
must be taken over, that is to say, some of the processes
must be guided not directly by man but by other processes,
in order to constitute a machine. A machine thus becomes
a complex tool in which some of the processes are re-
latively fixed, and are not the direct expression of human
activity. A machinist who feeds a machine with material
may be considered to have some control over the pace and
character of the first process, but only indirectly over the
later processes, which are regulated by fixed laws of their
construction that make them absolutely dependent on the
earlier processes. A machine is in the nature of its work
largely independent of the individual control of the
“tender,” because it is in its construction the expression
of the individual control and skill of the inventor. A
machine, then, may be described as a complex tool with a
fixed relation of processes performed by its parts. Even
here we cannot profess to have reached a definition which
enables us in all cases to nicely discriminate machine from
tooL It is easy to admit that a spade is a tool and not a
machine, but if a pair of scissors, a lever, or a crane are
tools, and are considered as performing single simple
processes, and not a number of organically relative processes,
we may by a skilfully arranged gradation be led on to
include the whole of machinery under tools. This diffi-
culty is of course one which besets all work of definition.

But while it is not easy by attention to complexity of
structure always to distinguish a tool from a machine,
nothing is gained by making the differentia of a machine to
consist in the use of steam or other non-human motor.

A vast amount of modem machinery is of course directed
not to combining tools or series of productive processes
upon which the productive skill of man is closely engaged,
but to substituting other motors for the muscular power of


70


THE EVOLUTION OF


man. But though certain tools as well as certain forms of
human effort are here replaced by machines, these tools are
not commonly embodied in the machinery for generating
and transmitting the new force, so that the mere considera-
tion of the different part played by the worker in generating
productive force does not assist us to distinguish a machine
from a tooL A type-writer, a piano, which receive their
impulse from the human muscles, must evidently be included
among machines. It is indeed true that these, like others
of the same order, are exceptional machines, not merely in
that the motive power is derived more essentially from
human muscles, but in that the raison d'etre of the mechanism
has been to provide scope for human skill and not to destroy
it But though it is true that a high degree of skill may be
imparted to the first process of the working of a piano or type-
writer, it is none the less true that the “ tool,” the implement
which strikes the sound or makes the written mark, is not
under immediate control of human touch. The skill is con-
fined to an early process, and the mechanism as a whole must
be classed under machinery. Nothing would indeed be
gained in logical distinctness if we were to abandon our
earlier differentia of the machine and confine that term to
such mechanical appliances as derived their power from non-
human sources — the fact which commonly marks off modern
from earlier forms of machine production. For we should
find that this substitution of non-human for human power
was also a matter of degree, and that the most complex
steam-driven machinery of to-day cannot entirely dispense
with some directing impulse of human muscular activity,
such as the shovelling of coal into a furnace, though the
tendency is ever to reduce the human effort to a minimum
in the attainment of a given output

This consideration of the difficulties attending exact
definitions of machinery is not idle, for it leads to a clearer
recognition of the nicely graded evolution which has
changed the character of modem industry, not by a cata-
strophic substitution of radically different methods, but by
the continuous steady development of certain elements,
common to all sorts of industrial activity, and a correspond-
ing continuous degeneration of certain other elements.

§ 2. The growth of machine-industry then may be measured
by the increased number and complexity of the processes
related to one another in the mechanical unit or machine,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


71


and by a coiTesponding shrinkage of the dependence of the
product upon the skill and volition of the human being
who tends or co-operates with the machine . 1 Every product
made by tool or machine is qud industrial product or com-
modity the expression of the thought and will of man;
but as machine-production becomes more highly devel-
oped, more and more of the thought and will of the
inventor, less and less of that of the immediate human
agent or machine-tender is expressed in the product.
But it is evidently not enough to say that the labour-
saving machine has merely substituted the stored and con-
centrated effort of the inventor for that labour of the
handicraftsman which is saved This would be to ignore
the saving of muscular power due to the substitution of
forces of nature — water, steam, electricity, etc., for the
painful effort of man. It is the thought of the inventor,
plus the action of various mechanical and other physical
forces, which has saved the labour of man in the produc-
tion of a commodity. The further question — how far this
saving of labour in respect of a given commodity is com-
pensated by the increased number of commodities to which
human labour is applied — is a consideration which belongs
to a later chapter

In tracing the effect of the application of modem
machinery to English industry there appear two prominent
factors, which for certain purposes require separate treat-
ment — the growth of improved mechanical apparatus, and
the evolution of extra-human motor power.

We speak of the industry which has prevailed since the
middle of the eighteenth century as machine-production,
not because there were no machines before that time, but
firstly, because a vast acceleration in the invention of com-
plex machinery applied to almost all industrial arts dates

1 This does not imply a corresponding growth in the mechanical
complexity of the machine itself, for, as Adam Smith observed, “All
machines are generally, when first invented, extremely complex in
their principles, and there is often a particular principle of motion for
every particular movement which it is intended they should perform.
Succeeding improvers observe that the principle may be so applied as
to produce several of these movements, and thus the machine becomes
gradually more and more simple, and produces its effects with fewer
wheels and fewer principles of motion .” — Moral Sentiments, quoted
Hirst, “ Adam Smith,” p. 64.


THE EVOLUTION OF


ft

from that period, and secondly, because the application
upon an extensive scale of non-human motor powers mani-
fested itself then for the first time.

One important external effect and indication of the
momentous character of these changes is to be found in
the quickening of that operation, the beginning of which
was observable before the great inventions, the substitution
of the Factory System for the Domestic System.

The peculiar relation of Machinery to the Factory
System consists in the fact that the size, expensiveness,
and complexity of machinery on the one hand, and the
use of non-human power on the other hand, were forces
which united to drive labour from the home workshop to
the large specialised workshop — the Factory.

u The water frame, the carding engine, and the other
machines which Arkwright brought out in a finished state,
required both more space than could be found in a cottage,
and more power than could be applied by the human arm.
Their weight also rendered it necessary to place them in
strongly-built walls, and they also could not be advantage-
ously turned by any power then known but that of water.
Further, the use of machinery was accompanied by a greater
division of labour, and therefore a greater co-operation
was requisite to bring all the processes of production into
harmony and under a central superintendence.” 1 Hence
the growth of machine-production is to a large extent
synonymous with the growth of the modem Factory
System,

§ 3. Man does his work by moving matter. Hence
machinery can only aid him by increasing the motive
power at his disposal.

(1) Machinery enables forces of man or nature to be
more effectively applied by various mechanical contrivances
composed of levers, pulleys, wedges, screws, etc.

{2) Machinery enables man to obtain the use of various
motor forces outside his body — wind, water, st eam, elec-
tricity, chemical action, etc.*

Thus by the provision of new productive forces, and by
the more economical application of all productive forces,
machinery improves the industrial arts.

1 Cooke Taylor, History of the Factory System, p. 422.

* CL Babbage, p. 1$.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


73


Machinery can increase the scope of man’s productive
ability in two ways- The difficulty of concentrating a large
mass of human force upon a given point at the same
time provides certain quantitative limits to the productive
efficiency of the human body. The steam-hammer can
perform certain work which is quantitatively outside the limit
of the physical power of any number of men working with
simple tools and drawing their motor power from their own
bodies. The other limit to the productive power of man
arises from the imperfect continuity of human effort and
the imperfect command of its direction. The difficulty of
maintaining a small, even, accurate pressure, or a precise
repetition of the same movement, is rather a qualitative
than a purely quantitative limit The superior certainty and
regularity of machinery enables certain work to be done
which man alone could not do or could do less perfectly.
The work of the printing machine could not be achieved by
man. Machinery has improved the texture and quality of
certain woollen goods ; 1 recent improvements in milling
result in improved quality of flour and so on. Machinery
can also do work which is too fine or delicate for human
fingers, or which would require abnormal skill if executed
by hand. Economy of time, which Babbage 4 accounts a
separate economy, is rightly included in the economies just
named. The greater rapidity with which certain manufactur-
ing processes — e.g. } dyeing — can be achieved arises from the
superior concentration and continuity of force possible
under machinery. All advantages arising from rapid trans-
port are assignable to the same causes.

The continuity and regularity of machine work are also
reflected in certain economies of measurement The faculty
of self-registering, which belongs potentially to all machinery,
and which is more utilised every day, performs several
services which may be summed up by saying that they
enable us to know exactly what is going on. When to self-
registration is applied the faculty of self-regulation, within
certain limits a new economy of force and knowledge is
added. But machinery can also register and regulate the
expenditure of human power. Babbage well says : — “ One
of the most singular advantages we derive from machinery

1 Burnley, Wool and Wool-combings p 417.

* Economy of Machinery % p. 6.


74


THE EVOLUTION OF


is in the check which it affords against the inattention, the
idleness, or the knavery of human agents.” 1 This control of
the machine over man has certain results which belong to
another aspect of machine economy. 2

These are the sources of all the improvements of
economies imputed to machine-production. All improve-
ments in machinery, as applied to industrial arts, take
therefore one of the following forms

(1) Re-arrangement or improvement of machinery so as
to utilise more fully the productive power of nature or man.
Improvements enabling one man to tend more spindles, or
enabling the same engine at the same boiler-pressure to
turn more wheels, belong to this order of improvement.

(2) Economies in the source of power. These will fall
under four heads —

2. Substitution of cheaper for dearer kinds of human
power. Displacement of men’s labour by women’s
or children’s.

2. Substitution of mechanical power for human power.

Most great improvements in the “labour-saving”
character of machinery properly come under this
head.

3. Economies in fuel or in steam. The most momentous

illustration is the adoption of the hot blast and the
substitution of raw coal for coke in the iron trade. 3

4. The substitution of a new mechanical motor for an

old one derived from the same or from different
stores of energy — e.g. % steam for water power, natural
gas for steam.

(3) Extended application of machinery. New industrial
arts owing their origin to scientific inventions and their
practice to machinery arise for utilising waste products.
Under “waste products” we may include (a) natural materials,
the services of which were not recognised or could not be
utilised without machinery — <zg., nitrates and other “waste”
products of the soil; (£>) the refuse of manufacturing pro-
cesses which figured as “waste” until some unsuspected use
was found for it. Conspicuous examples of this economy are
found in many trades. During the interval between great

1 Economy of Machinery , p. 39.

1 Vide infra , p. 340.

* Scrivener, History of the Iron Trade % pp. 296, 297.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


75


new inventions in machinery or in the application of power
many of the principal improvements are of this order. Gas
tar, formerly thrown into rivers so as to pollute them, or
mixed with coal and burnt as fuel, is now u raw material for
producing beautiful dyes, some of our most valued medi-
cines, a saccharine substance three hundred times sweeter
than sugar, and the best disinfectants for the destruction of
germs of disease.” “ The whole of the great industries of
dyeing and calico-printing have been revolutionised by the
new colouring matters obtained from the old waste material
gas tar.” 1 These economies both in fuel and in the utilisa-
tion of waste material are largely due to the increased scale
of production which comes with the development of
machine industry. Many waste products can only be
utilised where they exist in large quantities.

§ 4. If we trace historically the growth of modem capitalist
economies in the several industries we shall find that they
fall generally into three periods —

1. The period of earlier mechanical inventions, marking

the displacement of domestic by factory industry.

2. The evolution of the new motor in manufacture. The

application of steam to the manufacturing processes.

3. The evolution of steam locomotion, with its bearing

on industry.

As these periods are not materially exclusive, so also
there are close economic relations subsisting between the
development of machinery and motor, and between the
improvements in manufacture and in the transport industry.
But in order to understand the nature of the irregularity
which is discernible in the history of the development of
machinery, it is essential to consider these factors both
separately and in the historical and economic relation they
stand to each other. For this purpose we will examine two
large staple industries, the textile and the iron industries
of England, in order that we may trace in the chief steps
of their progress the laws of the evolution of modem
machinery.

The textile industry offers special facilities to such a study.
The strongest and most widespread of English manufac-
tures, it furnishes in the early eighteenth century the

1 Sir Lyon Playfair, Norik Awuruan. RovUvo* Nov. 189*.


THE EVOLUTION OF


76

clearest examples of the several forms of industry. To the
several branches of this industry the earliest among the
great inventions were applied. This start in industrial
development has been maintained, so that the most advanced
forms of the modem factory are found in textile industry.
Moreover, the close attention which has been given to,
and the careful records which have been kept of certain
branches of this work, in particular the Lancashire cotton
industry, enable us to trace the operation of the new
industrial forces here with greater precision than is the
case with any other industry. As Schulze -Gaevemitz,
in his masterly study, says of the cotton industry —
M The English cotton industry is not only the oldest, but
is in many respects that modem industry which manifests
most clearly the characteristics of modern industrial methods,
both in their economic and their social relations.” 1

The iron industry has been selected on the ground of
its dose connection with the application of steam-driven
machinery to the several industries. It is in a sense the
most fundamental industry of modem times, inasmuch
as it furnishes the material environment of the great
modem economic forces. Moreover, we have the advan-
tage of tracing the growth of the iron manufacture ab ovo,
for, as we have seen, before the industrial revolution it
played a most insignificant part in English commerce.

Lastly, a study of the relations between the growth of the
iron and the textile industries will be of special service in
assisting us to realise the character of the interaction of the
several manufactures under the growing integration of
modem industry.*

§ 5. In observing the order of inventions applied to
textile industries, the first point of significance is that
cotton, a small industry confined to a part of Lancashire,
and up to 1768 dependent upon linen in order to furnish
a complete cloth, should take the lead.

The woollen trades, in the first half of the eighteenth

1 Der Gressbeiritb) p. 85.

* The important part which the cotton and iron industries play in
the export trade of England entitles them to special consideration as
lepresentatives of world -industry. Out of ,£283,000,000 value of
English exports in 1903, cotton comprised £72,000,000; iron and
£35»ooq, 00a


MODERN CAPITALISM.


77


century, as we saw, engaged the attention of a vastly larger
number of persons, and played a much more important
part in our commerce. The silk trade had received new
life from the flow of intelligent French workers, and the
first modem factory with elaborate machinery was that set
up for silk throwing by Lombe. Yet by far the larger
number of the important textile inventions of the eighteenth
century were either applied in the first instance to the
cotton manufacture and transferred, sometimes after a lapse
of many years, to the woollen, worsted, and other textile
trades, or being invented for woollen trades, proved unsuc-
cessful until applied to cotton . 1

Although the origin and application of inventive genius
is largely independent of known laws, and may provision-
ally be relegated to the domain of “accident,” there are
certain reasons which favoured the cotton industry in the
industrial race. Its concentration in South Lancashire and
Staffordshire, as compared with the wide diffusion of the
woollen industries, facilitated the rapid acceptance of new
methods and discoveries. Moreover, the cotton industry
being of later origin, and settling itself in unimportant
villages and towns, had escaped the influence of official
regulations and customs which prevailed in the woollen
centres and proved serious obstacles to the introduction
of new industrial methods . 8 Even in Lancashire itself
official inspectors regulated the woollen trade at Man-
chester, Rochdale, Blackburn, and Bury . 8

The cotton industry had from the beginning been free
from all these fetters. The shrewd, practical business
character which marks Lancashire to-day is probably a
cause as well as a result of the great industrial development
of the last hundred years.

Moreover, it was recognised, even before the birth of
the great inventions, that cotton goods, when brought into
free competition with woollen goods, could easily under-
sell them and supplant them in popular consumption.
This knowledge held out a prospect of untold fortune to
inventors who should, by the application of machinery,
break through the limitations imposed upon production

1 Cunningham, chap, ii p. 450.

* Scholzc-Gaevemitz, Der Grossbetrub , p. 34.

* Ure, Tht Cotton Manufacture , p, 187.


THE EVOLUTION OF


ys

by the restricted number of efficient workers in soma
of the processes through which the cotton yam must
pass.

But the stimulus which one invention afforded to another
gave an accumulative power to the application of new
methods- This is especially seen in the alternation of
inventions in the two chief processes of spinning and
weaving.

Bren before the invention of John Kay’s Fly Shuttle,
which doubled the quantity of work a weaver could do in a
day, we found that spinners had great difficulties in supply-
ing sufficient yam to the weavers. This seems to have
applied both to the Lancashire cotton and to the Yorkshire
woollen manufactures. After the fly-shuttle had come into
common use this pressure of demand upon the spinners
was obviously increased, and the most skilful organisation
of middleman-clothiers was unable to supply sufficient
quantities of yam This economic consideration directed
more^ and more attention to experiments in spinning
machinery, and so we find that, long before the invention
of the jenny and the water-frame, ingenious men like John
Kay of Bury, Wyatt, Paul, and others had tried many
patents for improved spinning. The great inventions of
Hargreaves, Arkwright, and Crompton enabled spinning
to overtake and outstrip weaving, and when, about 1790,
steam began to be applied to considerable numbers of
spinning mills, it was no longer spinning but weaving that
was the limiting process in the manufacture of woollen and
cotton cloths.

This strain upon weaving, which had been tightening
through the period of the great spinning improvements,
acted as a special incentive to Cartwright, Horrocks, and
others to perfect the power-loom in its application, first to
woollen, then to cotton industries. Not until well into
the nineteenth century, when steam power had been fully
applied by many minor improvements, were the arts of
spinning and weaving brought fully into line. The com-
plete factory, where the several processes of carding, spin-
ning, weaving (and even dyeing and finishing), are conducted
under the same roof and worked in correspondence with
one another, marks the full transition from the earlier form
of domestic industry, where the family performed with


MODERN CAPITALISM. 79

simple tools their several processes under the domestic
roof. 1

§ 6. The history of these textile inventions does a good
deal to dispel the “heroic” theory of invention — that of
an idea dashing suddenly from the brain of a single genius
and effecting a rapid revolution in a trade. No one of the
inventions which were greatest in their effect, the jenny,
the water-frame, the mule, the power-loom, was in the main
attributable to the effort or ability of a single man; each
represented in its successful shape the addition of many
successive increments of discovery; in most cases the
successful invention was the slightly superior survivor of
many similar attempts. “ The present spinning machinery
which we now use is supposed to be a compound of about
eight hundred inventions. The present carding machinery
is a compound of about arty patents.”* This is the
history of most inventions. The pressure of industrial
circumstances direct the intelligence of many minds towards
the comprehension of some single central point of difficulty,
the common knowledge of the age induces many to reach
similar solutions: that solution which is slightly better
adapted to the facts or “grasps the skirts of happy chance ”
comes out victorious, and the inventor, purveyor, or, in
some cases, the robber is crowned as a great inventive genius.
It is the neglect of these considerations which gives a
false interpretation to the annals of industrial invention by
giving an irregular and catastrophic appearance to the work-
ing of a force which is in its inner pressure much more
regular than in its outward expression. The earlier incre-
ments of a great industrial invention make no figure in

1 Modem economy now favours the specialisation of a factory and
often of a business m a single group of processes — spinning or
weaving or dyeing, both in the cotton and woollen industries. This,
however, is applicable chiefly to the main branches of textile work.
In minor branches, such as cotton thread, the tendency is still towards
an aggregation of all the different processes under a single roof, both
in England and in the United States.

* P. R. Hodge, civil engineer— evidence before House of Lords
Committee in 1857.

In Germany a spinning-wheel had been long in use for flax-spinning,
which in effect was an anticipation of the throstle (cf. Kannarch,
Technologic, voL ii j>. 844, quoted Schulze-Gaevemitz, p. 30), and
m a chine -weaving is said to have been discovered in Danzig as early
« *57»


8o


THE EVOLUTION OF


the annals of history because they do not pay, and the
final increment which reaches the paying-point gets all
the credit, though the inherent importance and the
inventive genius of the earlier attempts may have been
as great or greater.

There is nothing fortuitous or mysterious in inventive
energy. Necessity is its mother, which simply means that
it moves along the line of least resistance. Men like Kay,
Hargreaves, Arkwright, Cartwright, set their intelligence
and industry to meet the several difficulties as they arose.
Nearly all the great textile inventors were practical men,
most of them operatives immersed in the details of their
craft, brought face to face continually with some definite
difficulty to be overcome, some particular economy desirable
to make. Brooding upon these concrete facts, trying first
one thing then another, learning from the attempts and
failures made by other practical men, and improving upon
these attempts, they have at length hit upon some con-
trivance that will get over the definite difficulty and secure
the particular economy. If we take any definite invention
and closely investigate it, we shall find in nearly every case
it has thus grown by small increments towards feasibility.
Scientific men, strictly so called, have had very little to
do with these great discoveries. Among the great textile
inventors, Cartwright alone was a man leading a life of
thought 1 When the spinning machinery was crippled in
its efficiency by the crude methods of carding, Lees and
Arkwright set themselves to apply improvements suggested
by common sense and experience; when Cartwright’s power-
loom had been successfully applied to wool, Horrocks and
his friends thought out precisely those improvements which
would render it remunerative in the cotton trade.

Thus in a given trade where there are several important
processes, an improvement in one process which places it
in front of the others stimulates invention in the latter, and
each in its turn draws such inventive intelligence as is
required to bring it into line with the most highly-developed
process. Since the later inventions, with new knowledge
and new power behind them, often overshoot the earlier
ones, we have a certain law of oscillation in the several

1 C£ Brcntano, Ubcr du UrsacJun d*r Juutigcn sociaim Nrt;
Dmr Gresstetrui, p, 3a


MODERN CAPITALISM.


81


processes which maintains progress by means of the stimulus
constantly applied by the most advanced process which
“makes the pace.” There is nothing mysterious in this.
If one process remains behind in development each incre-
ment of inventive effort successfully applied there brings a
higher remuneration than if applied to any of the more
forward processes. So the movement is amenable to the
ordinary law of “Supply and Demand” enforced by the
usual economic motives. As the invention of the fly-shuttle
gave weaving the advantage, more and more attention was
concentrated upon the spinning processes and the jenny
was evolved ; the deficiency of the jenny in spinning warp
evolved the water-feme, which for the first time liberated
the cotton industry from dependence upon linen warp:
the demand for finer and more uniform yams stimulated
the invention of the mule. These notable improvements
in spinning machinery, with their minor appendages, placed
spinning ahead of weaving, and stimulated the series of
inventions embodied in the power-loom. The power-loom
was found to be of comparatively little service until the
earlier processes of dressing and sizing had been placed oa
a level of machine development by the efforts of Horrocks
and others. Not until after 1841 was an equilibrium reached
in the development of the leading processes. So likewise
each notable advance in the machinery for the main pro-
cesses has had the effect of bringing an increase of inventive
energy to bear upon the minor and the subsidiary processes
— bleaching, dyeing, printing, etc. Even now the early
process of “ginning ” has not been brought fully into line in
spite of the prodigious efforts, made especially in the United
States, to overcome the difficulties involved in this prepara-
tory stage of the cotton industry.

The following schedule will serve to show the relation of
the growth of the cotton industry as measured by consump-
tion of raw cotton to the leading improvements of machinery.

Cotton Imported. XBTenUona Ac.

Iba.

1730 1,545,472 1730 Wyatt's roller-spinning (patented

1738 ).

1738 Kay's fly-shuttle.

1741 1,645,031 1748 Paul's car ding-machine (useless until

improved by Lees, Arkwright
Wood* 177*74). 6


82


THE EVOLUTION OF


Codoa Import#*. Invention*, Ac.

Ib*.

1764 3,870,392 1764 Hargrcave’s spinning-jenny (patented

1770), for weft only.

1764 Calico-printing introduced into Lanca-
shire.

1768 Arkwright perfects Wyatt's spinning-
frame (patented 1769), liberating
cotton from dependence on linen


*77i]

to }■ 4,764,589
1775J


1781 5,198,775

1785 18,400,384


179* 34,907,497
iSlJ 51,000,000
iSjO 261^200,000


iSjS 287,800,000

1841 489,900,000


warp.

1771 Arkwright's mill built at Cromford.

1775 Arkwright takes patents for carding,
drawing, roving, spinning.

1779 Crompton's mule completed (combin-
ing jenny and water-frame, pro-
ducing finer and more even
yam).

1785 Cartwright's power-loom.

Watt and Boulton's first engine for
cotton-mills.

1792 Whitney's saw-gin,

18x3 Horrocks' dressing-machine,

1830 The “Throstle" (almost exclusively
used in England for spinning
warp).

1832 Roberts’ self-acting mule perfected,

1841 Bullough’s improved power-loom.

Ring spinning (largely used in U.S.A.,
recently introduced into Lanca-
shire).


From this schedule it is evident that the history of this
trade may be divided with tolerable accuracy into four
periods.

(1) The preparatory period of experimental inventions of
Wyatt, Paul, etc., to the year 1770.

(2) 1770 to 1792 (circa), the age of the great mechanical
inventions,

(3) 1 79 2 to 1830, the application of steam power
to manufacture and improvements of the great inven-
tions.

(4) 1830 onward, the effect of steam locomotion upon
the industry (1830, the opening of the Liverpool and
M a nc he s ter railway).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


83

If we measure the operation of these several industrial
forces within these several periods, as they are reflected
on the growing size of the cotton industry, we shall
realise the accumulative character of the great indus-
trial movement, and form some approximately accurate
conception of the relative importance of the develop-
ment of mechanical inventions and of the new motor-
power.

§ 7. The history of the cotton industry is in its main out-
lines also the history of other textile industries. We do not
possess the same means of measuring statistically the
growth of the woollen industries in the period of revolution ;
but since, on the one hand, many of the spinning and weav-
ing inventions were speedily adapted into the woollen from
the cotton industry, .while the application of steam to
manufacture and die effects of steam locomotion were
shared by the older manufacture, the growth of the trade
in the main conforms to the same divisions of time. The
figures of imported wool are not so valuable a register as in
the case of cotton, because no account is taken of home-
produce, but the following statistics of foreign and colonial
wool imported into England serve to throw light upon the
growth of our woollen manufactures.


STATISTICS or WOOL IMPORTED INTO ENGLAND.


IbflL

1766 1,926,000

1771 1,829,000

1780 323,000

1790 2,582,000

1 800 8,609,000

l8lO 10,914,000

1820 9,775,000


1830 32,305,000

1840 49,436,000

1850 74,326,000

i860 151,218,000
1870 263,250,000
1880 463,309,000
1890 635,340,110
1902 647,204,376


In die silk industry the influence of machinery is compli-
cated by several considerations especially affecting this
manufacture. Although the ingenuity and enterprise of
the Lombes had introduced complex machinery into silk
throwing many years before it was successfully applied to
any other branch of textile industry, the trade did not grow
as might have been expected, and the successive increments
of great mechanical invention were slowly and slirhdv


THE EVOLUTION OF


84

applied to the silk industry. There are special reasons for
this, some of them connected with the intrinsic value of
the commodity, others with the social regulation of the
trade.

The inherent delicacy of many of the processes, the
capricious character of the market for the commodities, the
expensive production of which renders them a luxury and
especially amenable to the shifts of taste and fashion, have
preserved for artistic handicraft the production of many of
the finer silk fabrics, or have permitted the application of
machinery in a tar less degree than in the cotton and
woollen industries.

Moreover, the heavy duties imposed upon raw and
thrown silk, which accompanied the strict prohibition of
the importation of manufactured silk goods in 1765, by
aggravating the expenses of production and limiting the
market at the very epoch of the great mechanical inven-
tions, prevented any notable expansion of consumption of
silk goods, and rendered them quite unable to resist the
competition of the younger and more enteiprising cotton
industry, which, after the introduction of colour-printing
early in the nineteenth century, was enabled to out-compete
silk in many markets.

Even in the coarser silk fabrics where weaving machinery
was successfully applied at an early date, the slow progress
in “ throwing ” greatly retarded the expansion of the trade,
and after the repeal of the duty on imported silk in 1826
the number of throwing mills was still quite inadequate to
keep pace with the demands of the weavers. 1 Subsequent
improvements in throwing mills, and the application of the
ingenious weaving machinery of Jacquard and later im-
provers, have given a great expansion to many branches of
the trade in the last fifty years.

But the following statistics of the consumption of raw
and thrown silk from 1765 to 1844 indicate how slight and
irregular was the expansion of the trade in England during
the era of the great inventions and the application of
the steam-motor, and how disastrously the duties upon
raw and thrown silks weighed upon this branch of
manufacture.


1 Farter, Pregrtst of the Nation^ p, 219.


MODERN CAPITALISM-


*5


Average Importation. 1


1765)
1766}
1767 J

1786 \

1787 J

1801 s
to [

1812 J

1814

1815
1826

1817

1818
2829
2820
1822
1822


ifa*.

715.000

881.000


r, 110,000

2,U9,974
389
334
1,686,659
1,922,987

1,848,553

2,027,635

2,329,808

2^41,563


1823

1824

1825

1826

1827

1828

1829

1830

1831

1832

1833

1834
183s

1836

1837

1838

1839

1840


Rnl

2,468,121

4,011,048*

3,604,058

2,253,513

4,213,153

4,547,812

2,892,201

4,693,517

4,312,330

4,373,247

4,761,543

4,522,451

5,788458

6,058,423

4,598,859

4,790,256

4,665,944

4,819,262


In the linen industry the artificial encouragement given to
the Irish trade, which, bounty-fed and endowed with a mon-
opoly of the British markets, was naturally slow to adopt
new methods of production, and the uncertain condition
of die English trade, owing to the strong rivalry of cotton,
prevented the early adoption of the new machine methods.
Although Adam Smith regarded linen as a promising in-
dustry, it was still in a primitive condition Not until the
very end of the eighteenth century were flax spinning mills
established in England and Scotland, and not until after
1830 was power-loom weaving introduced, while the intro-
duction of spinning machinery into Ireland upon a scale
adequate to supply the looms of that country took place a
good deal later.

We see that the early experimental period in the cotton
industry produced no very palpable effect upon the volume
of the trade. Between 1700 and 1750 the manufacture was

1 Selected from Porter, p. 218.

1 In 1824 Mr. HusHsson introduced the principle of free trade,
securing a reduction of the duties on raw and thrown silks, and in 1825,
1826, considerable further reductions were maae. (C£ Ure, Philosophy
of Manufacture, p» 454, etc.) But protection of English silk manu-
factured goods was maintained until the French Treaty of 186a


86


THE EVOLUTION OF


stagnant 1 The woollen manufacture, owing largely to
the stimulus of the fly-shuttle, showed considerable expan-
sion. The great increase of cotton production in 1770-90
measures the force of the mechanical inventio.ns without the
aid of the new motor. The full effects of the introduction
of steam power were retarded by the strain of the French
war. Though 1800 marks the beginning of a large con-
tinuous expansion in both cotton and woollen manufactures,
it was not until about 1817, when the new motor had estab-
lished itself generally in the large centres of industry and
the energy of the nation was called back to the arts of
peace, that the new forces began to fully manifest their
power. The period 1840 onwards marks the effect of the
revolution in commerce due to the application of the new
motor to transport purposes, the consequent cheapening of
raw material, especially of cotton, the opening up of new
markets for the purchase of raw material and for the sale of
manufactured goods. The effect of this diminished cost of
production and increased demand for manufactured goods
upon the textile trades is measured by the rapid pace of the
expansion which followed the opening of the early English
railways and the first establishment of steam-ship traffic.

§8. The development of the textile trades, and that of
cotton in particular, arose from the invention of new
machinery. This machinery was quickened and rendered
effective by the new motor. The iron trade in its develop-
ment presents the reverse order. The discovery of a new
motor was the force which first gave it importance. The
mechanical inventions applied to producing iron were
stimulated by the requirements of the new motor.

In 1740 the difficulty of obtaining adequate supplies of
timber, and the failure of attempts to utilise pit-coal, had
brought the iron trade to a very low condition. According
to Scrivener, at this time * ** the iron trade seemed dwindling
into insignificance and contempt” 2

The earlier steps in its rise from this degradation are
measured by the increased application of pit-coal and the
diminished use of charcoal.

The progress may be marked as follows : —


* Ct Ure, History of the Cotton Manufacture, to L L p. ni,

* Scrivener, History of the Iren Trade , p. 56.


MODERF CAPITALISM.


*7


(1) The application of Watt’s earlier improvements upon
Newcomen’s engines, patented 1769, was followed by a rise
in the average output for furnaces worked with charcoal.
The average output of 294 tons in 1750 was increased to
545 tons in 1788.

(2) The substitution of coke for charcoal proceeding
pari passu with improved methods of smelting yielded an
average output for coke-fed furnaces of 903 tons in 1788.
To tins epoch belong also Coifs inventions for puddling
and rolling (patented 1783-84), which revolutionised the
production of bar-iron.

(3) The introduction of Watfs double-power engine
in 1788-90. In 1796 the production of pig-iron was double
that of 1788s and the average output per furnace raised to
1048 tons.

{4) The substitution of hot for cold blast in 1S29,
effecting an economy of coal to the extent of a tons 18
cwt per ton of cast-iron.

{5) The adoption of raw coal instead of coke in 1833,
effecting a further reduction of expenditure of coal from
5 tons 3j£ cwt to 2 tons 5}^ cwt in producing a ton of
cast-iron.

These were the leading events in the establishment of
die iron industry of this country. The following table
indicates the growth of the production of Eng li sh iron from
1740 to 1840 : —


Year.


N<x of Vnrnoees.


ToW Product.
Tons.


1740

59

1788

77

1796

121

1806

133

1825

.364

(261 m blast)

1828

, 365

(277 in blast)

1839

378


294 x * 7 , 35 °

909 coke 1 , T

545 charcoal/ 6l » 3 °°

1048 125,079

1546 258,206

2228 703,184

2530

3592 i» 347 , 79 <>


Here we see that economy of power rather than improved
machinery is the efficient cause of the development of
industry, or pore properly, that economy of power pre-
cedes and stimulates the several steps in improvement of
machinery.


88


THE EVOLUTIOH OF


The substitution of coke for charcoal and the application
of steam power not merely increased enormously the
volume of the trade, but materially affected its localisation*
Sussex and Gloucester, two of the chief iron-producing
counties when timber was the source of power, had shrunk
into insignificance by 1 796, when facilities of obtaining coal
were a chief determinant By 1796, it is noteworthy that
the four districts of Stafford, Yorkshire, South Wales, and
Salop were to the front

The discovery of the hot blast and substitution of raw
coal for coke occurring contemporaneously with the opening
of railway enterprise mark the new interdependence of
industries in the age of machinery.

Iron has become a foundation upon which every machine-
industry alike is built The metal manufactures, so small
in the eighteenth century, attained an unprecedented growth
and a paramount importance in the nineteenth.

The application of machinery to the metal industries has
led to an output of inventive genius not less remarkable in
this century than the textile inventions of the eighteenth
century.

“In textile manufacture it was improved machinery that
first called for a new motor ; in metal manufacture it was
the new motor which rendered necessary improved
machinery. . . . For all modem purposes the old handi-
craft implements were clearly obsolete. The immediate
result of this requirement was the bringing to the front a
number of remarkable men, Brindley, Smeaton, Maudsley,
Clements* Bra mah, Nasmyth, eta, to supply mechanism of
a proportionate capacity and nicety for the new motive-
power to act upon and with, and the ultimate result was
the adoption of the modem factory system in the larger
tool-making and engineering workshops, as well as in metal
manufactories proper. Thus there gradually grew up,”
says Jevons, “ & system of machine-tool labour, the substi-
tution of iron hands for human hands, without which the
execution of engines and machines in their present perfec-
tion would be impossible.” 1

In the later era of machine development an accumulative

1 Cooke Taylor, Madom Factory System, p. 1645 ct also Karl Marx,
Capitol, p. 381.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


89

importance is attached to the improvements in the machine-
making industries. The great inventions associated with
the names of Maudsiey and Nasmyth, the cheapening of
steel by the Bessemer process, and the various steps by
which machines are substituted for hands in the making
of machinery, have indirect but rapid and important effects
upon each and every machine-industry engaged in produc-
ing commodities directly adapted to human use. The
economy of effort for industrial purposes requires that a
larger and larger proportion of inventive genius and enter-
prise shall be directed to an interminable displacement of
handicraft by machinery in the construction of machinery,
and a smaller proportion to the relatively unimportant work
of perfecting manufacturing machinery in the detailed pro-
cesses of each manufacture engaged in the direct satisfaction
of some human want

A general survey of the growth of new industrial methods
in the textile and iron industries marks out three periods of
abnormal activity in the evolution of modem industry. The
first is 1780 to 1795, when the fruits of early inventions are
ripened by the effective application of steam to the machine-
industries. The second is 1830 to 1845, when industry,
reviving after the European strife, utilised more widely the
new inventions, and expanded under the new stimulus of
steam locomotion. The third is 1856 to 1866 (circa), when
the construction of machinery by machinery became the
settled rule of industry.

§ 9. Bearing in mind how the invention of new specific
forms of machinery in the several processes of manufacture
proceeds simultaneously with the application of the new
motor-power, we find ourselves quite unable to measure the
amount of industrial progress due to each respectively. But
seeing that the whole of modem industry has thus been
set upon a new foundation of coal and iron, it is obvious
that the bonds connecting such industries as the textile and
the iron must be continually growing closer and stronger.
In earlier times the interdependency of trades was slight and
indirect, and the progress in any given trade was almost
wholly derived from improvements in specific skill or in
the application of specific mechanical invention. The
earlier eighteenth century did indeed display an abnormal
activity in these specific forms of invention. For examples


9 ©


THE EVOLUTION OF


of these it is only necessary to allude to Lombe’s silk
mill at Derby, the pin factory made famous by Adam
Smith, Boulton's hardware factory at Soho, and the
renowned discoveries of Wedgwood. But all increased
productivity due to these specific improvements was but
slight compared with that which followed the discovery of
steam as a motor and the mechanical inventions rendering
it generally applicable, which marked the period 1790 to
1840. By this means the several specific industries were
drawn into closer unity, and found a common basis or
foundation in the arts of mining, iron-working, and engin-
eering which they lacked before.

From these considerations it will follow that the order in
which the several industries has fallen under the sway of
modem industrial methods will largely depend upon the
facility they afford to the application of steam-driven
machinery. The following are some of the principal charac-
teristics of an industry which determine the order, extent,
and pace of its progress as a machine industry: —

(a) Size and complexity of Structure* — The importance of
the several leading textile manufactures, the fact that some
of them were highly centralised and already falling under
a factory system, the control of wealthy and intelligent
employers, were among the chief causes which enabled the
new machinery and the new motor to be more quickly and
successfully applied than in smaller, more scattered, and
less developed industries.

(£) Fixity in quantity and character of demand. — Perfec-
tion of routine-work is the special faculty of machine-
production. Where there is a steady demand for the same
class of goods, machinery can be profitably applied. Where
fashion fluctuates, or the individual taste of the consumer is
a potent factor, machinery cannot so readily undertake the
work In the textile industries there are many departments
which machinery has not successfully invaded Much lace-
making, embroidery, certain finer weaving is still done
by human power, with or without the aid of complex
machinery. In the more skilled branches of tailoring,
shoe-making, and other clothing trades, the individual
character of the demand — /.<?., the element of irregularity —
has limited the use of machinery. A similar cause retains
human motor-power in certain cases to co-operate with


MODERN CAPITALISM. 91

ind control complex machinery, as in the use of the sewing-
machine.

Uniformity of demand is a first essential of that
“ standardisation n which enables a process to be performed
by machinery. In many industries where mechanical
methods have made great advance, complete standardisa-
tion remains impracticable. <s There is some doubt as to
the possibility of standardising ships, at least to such an
extent as we have already attained in building bridges,
railway engines, and stationary engines. A modern
steamship is a much more complex agency than a bridge
or a locomotive engine, and while standardising may apply
much more largely than is at present the case in the pro-
duction of certain features, it is certain that a present
practice of standardising does not generally prevail in the
manufacture of hull and ship-machinery, except as ships
are built to a standard for record and to come under low
rates of insurance . 1

(c) Uniformity of material and of the processes of produc-
tion , — Inherent irregularity in the material of labour is
adverse to machinery. For this reason the agricultural
processes have been slow to pass under steam-power,
especially those directly concerned with work on the soil,
and even where steam-driven machines are applied their
economy, as compared with hand labour, is less marked
than in manufacturing processes. To the getting of coal
and other minerals steam and other extra-human power has
been more slowly and less effectively applied than in dealing
with the matter when it is detached from the earth The
displacement of a less uniform material, wood, by the more
uniform steel for building-structures, railroad cars, barges,
ships, furniture, etc., marks a great advance for machine-
production,

(d) Durability of valuable properties , — The production
of quickly perishable articles being of necessity local and
immediate demands a large amount of human service
which cannot economically be replaced or largely aided by
machinery. The work of the butcher and the baker have
been slow to pass under machinery. - Where butchering has
become a machine-industry to some extent, the direct cause


* CMpia, Ftragm Cmpetiti*** p. xofi.


THE EVOLUTION OF


9 *

has. been the discovery of preservative processes which
have diminished the perishability of meat. So with other
food industries, the facility of modern means of transport
has alone enabled them gradually to pass under the con-
trol of machinery. ’ Until quite recently cakes and the
finer forms of bakery were a purely local and handicraft
product

(e) East or simplicity of labour involved * — Where abund-
ance of cheap labour adequate to the work can be obtained,
and particularly in trades where women and children are
largely engaged, the development of machinery has been
generally slower. This condition often unites with (b) or
(4 to retain an industry in the w domestic ” class. A large
mass of essentially “irregular” work requiring a certain
delicacy of manipulation, which by reason of its narrowness
of scope is yet easily attained, and which makes but slight
demands upon muscular force or intelligence, has remained
outside machine-production. Important industries contain-
ing several processes of this nature have been slower to fall
into the complete form of the factory system. The slow
progress of the power-loom in cotton and wool until after
1S30 is explained by these considerations. The stocking-
frame held out against machinery still longer, and hand
work still plays an important part in several processes of
silk manufacture. Even now, in the very centre of the
factory system, Bolton, the old hand-weaving if represented
by a few belated survivors. 1

(/) Skilled Workmanship . — High skill in manipulation
or treatment of material, the element of art infused into
handicraft, gives the latter an advantage over the most
skilful machinery, or over such machinery as can economic-
ally be brought into competition with it In some of
the metal trades, in pottery and glass-making there are
many processes which have not been able to dispense
with human skill In these manufactures, moreover,
more progress is attributable to specific inventions t han
to the adoption of the common machinery and motor-
power which are not largely available in the most important
processes.

§ 10. The new industrial forces first applied to the cotton

1 Schalze-G&everxuix, p. 140.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


93


spinning of South Lancashire, and rapidly forcing their
way into other branches of the textile manufactures, then
more gradually transforming the industrial methods of
the machinery, hardware, and other staple English manu-
factures, passed into the Western Continent of Europe
and America, 1 * destroying the old domestic industry and
establishing in every civilised country the reign of steam-
driven machinery. The factors determining the order and
pace of the new movement in the several countries are
numerous and complex. In considering the order of
machine-development, it must be remembered that the
different nations did not start from an equal footing at
the opening of the age of great inventions. By the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century England had established
a certain supremacy in commerce. The growth of her
colonial possessions since the Revolution and the drastic
and successful character of her maritime policy had enabled
her to outstrip Holland. Although, as we have seen, the
actual amount of foreign trade done in the eighteenth
century by the most advanced commercial nations bore a
very small proportion to their domestic trade, the expansion
of England’s export trade in textiles was so rapid as to play
an important part in stimulating not only the new machine
processes in these trades, but indirectly the development
of iron and shipbuilding. In 1729 by far the greater part
of the Swedish iron exported from Gothenburg went to
England for shipbuilding purposes.* At the close of the
seventeenth century Gregory King placed England, Hol-
land, and France at the head of the industrial nations with
regard to the productivity of their labour. 3 Italy and

1 “It was not until about 1840 that the factory method of manu-
facture extended itself widely to miscellaneous industries, and began
rapidly to force from the markets the hand-made products with
which every community had hitherto chiefly supplied itself. It
seems probable that until about the year 1850, the bulk of general
manufacturing done in the United States was carried on in the
shop and the household, by the labour of the family or individual
proprietors, with apprentice assistance.” {Twelfth Census, vpL viL
P- 53 -)

1 Yeats, The Growth and Vicissitudes of Commerce , p. 284.

* The average income for England in 1688 he puts at £*] 18s.;
for Holland, £& Is. 4<L; France, £6 — p. 47. Such an estimate,
however, has little value*


94


THE EVOLUTION OF


Germany were little behind in the exercise of manufacturing
arts, though the naval superiority and foreign possessions
#f the above-named nations gave them the commercial
superiority. By 1760 England had strengthened her posi-
tion as regards foreign commerce* and her woollen industry
was the largest and most highly-developed industry in the
world. But so far as the arts of manufacture themselves
were concerned there was no such superiority in England
as to justify the expectation of the position she held at the
opening of the nineteenth century. In many branches of
the textile arts, especially in silk spinning and in dyeing, in
pottery, printing, and other manufactures, more inventive
genius and more skill were shown on the Continent, and
there seemed a priori no reason why England should out-
strip so signally her competitors.

The chief factors in determining the order of the develop-
ment of modem industrial methods in the several countries
may be classified as natural, political, economic.

{at Natural. (i ) The structure and position of the several
countries . — The insular character of Great Britain, her
natural facilities for procuring raw materials of manufacture
and supplies of foreign food to enable her population to
specialise in manufacture, the number and variety of easily
accessible markets for her manufactures, gave her an immense
advantage. Add to this a temperate climate, excellent in-
ternal communication by river (or canal), and an absence
of mountain barriers between the several districts. These
advantages were of greater relative importance before steam
transport, but they played a large part in facilitating the
establishment of effective steam transport in England.
Extent of sea-board and good harbourage have in no small
measure directed the course of modern industry, giving to
England, Holland, France, Italy an advantage which the
levelling tendency of modem machinery has not yet been
able to counteract The slow progress of Germany until
recent years, and the still slow progress of Russia, is
attributable more to these physical barriers of free communi-
cation, internal and external, than to "any other single cause
that can be adduced. Inherent resources of the soil,
quality of land for agriculture, the proximity of large sup-
plies of coal and iron and other requisites of the production
of machinery and power rank as important determinants


MODERN CAPITALISM.


95


of progress. The machine development of France in
particular has been retarded by the slow discovery of her
natural areas of manufacture, the districts where coal and
iron lie near to one another in easily accessible supply.
The same remark applies to Germany and to the United
States. At the close of last century, when the iron trade of
England was rapidly advancing, the iron trade of France
was quite insignificant, and during the earlier years of the
nineteenth century the progress was extremely slight . 1

(a) Race and National Character „ — Closely related to
dimate and soil, these qualities of race are a powerful
directing influence in industry. Muscular strength and
endurance, yielding in a temperate climate an even con-
tinuity of vigorous effort $ keen zest of material comfort
stimulating invention and enterprise; acquisitiveness, and
the love of external display; the moral capacities of industry,
truth, orderly co-operation ; all these are leading factors de-
termining the ability and inclination of the several nations
to adopt new industrial methods. Moral qualities in
English workmanship have indisputably played a large*
part in securing her supremacy. “A British trade-mark
was accepted as a guarantee of excellence, while the pro-
ducts of other countries were viewed with a suspicion
justified by experience of their comparative inferiority.” *
The more highly civilised nations have thus gained by this
civilisation, and have widened the distance which separates
them from the less civilised England, France, Germany,
Holland, and the United States are in wealth and in
industrial methods far more widely removed from Spain and
Russia than was the case a hundred years ago.

(#) Political. — Statecraft has played an important part
in determining the order and pace of industrial progress.
The possession of numerous colonies and other political
attachments in different parts of the world, comprising a large
variety of material resources, gave to England, and in a less
measure to France, Holland, Spain, a great advantage.
The tyrannical use these nations made of their colonies for

1 la 1810 the total produce was 140,000 tons.

» 1818 „ „ „ 114,000 „

„ 1834 » » » 164,000 „

(Scrivener, History of tJu Iren Trmd* , p. 153.)

* Yeats, Crmtimd Viemitndes Cemmsru, p. 983,


THE EVOLUTION OF


96

the purpose of building up home manufactures enabled
them to specialise more widely and safely in those indus-
tries to which the new methods of production were first
applied. Even after the. North American colonies broke
loose, the policy of repression England had applied to
their budding manufactures enabled her to retain to a
large extent the markets thus created for her manufactured
goods.

The large annexations England made during the eigh-
teenth and early nineteenth centuries gave her a monopoly of
many of the finest markets for the purchase of raw materials
and for the sale of manufactured goods. The large demand
thus established for her textile and metal wares served not
only to stimulate fresh inventions, but enabled her to
utilise many improvements which could only be profitably
applied in the case of large industries with secure and
expanding markets.

But the most important factor determining the priority of
England was the political condition of continental Europe
at the very period when the new machinery and motor-
power were beginning to establish confidence in the new
industrial order. When Crompton’s mule, Cartwright’s
power-loom, Watt’s engines were transforming the industry
of England, her continental rivals had all their energies
absorbed in wars and political revolutions. The United
States and Sweden were the only commercial nations of any
significance who, being neutral, obtained a large direct
gain from the European strife. Yet England, in spite of
the immense drain of blood and money she sustained, under
the momentum of the new motor-power far outstripped the
rivalry of such states. Though she had to pay a heavy
price for her immunity from invasion, she thereby secured
an immense start in the race of modem machine-produc-
tion. Until 1S20 she had the game in her own hands. In
European trade she had a practical monopoly of the rapidly
advancing cotton industry. It was this monopoly which,
ruthlessly applied to maintain prices at a highly remunera-
tive rate, and to keep down wages to starvation point, built
up, in an age of supreme and almost universal misery for
the masses, the rapid and colossal fortunes of the cotton kings.
Not until peace was established did the textile and other
factories begin to take shape upon the Continent, and many


MODERN CAPITALISM.


97


years elapsed before they were able to compete effectively
with England Switzerland was the first continental country
to actively adopt the new methods. The large supply of
water-power stood her in good stead, and the people took
more willingly to the factory system than in other countries. 1
France was slower in her development, in spite of the strong
protective system by which she strove, though not very
successfully, to exclude English cotton goods. The fall of
English prices and profits in the cotton trade between 1820
and 1830 marks clearly the breakdown of the English
monopoly before the cheap labour of Alsace and the cheap
raw material of the United States, now organised in the
factory system with the new machinery.* In this, the most
advanced trade, the world-competition which now is operative
in a thousand different industries, measuring and levelling
economic advantages, first clearly shows itself, and in 1836
Ure finds the continental nations and America competing
successfully with England in markets which had hitherto
been entirely her own.

( c ) Economic Conditions. — The transformation of Eng-
lish agriculture, the growth of large farms, drove great
numbers of English peasants into the towns, and furnished
a large supply of cheap labour for the new machinery.

This movement was accelerated by the vices of our land
tenure. In France and Germany, where the agricultural
workers had a stronger interest and property in their land,
they were less easily detached for factory purposes. But
in England, where the labourer had no property in the land,
reformed methods of agriculture and the operation of the
Poor Law combined to incite the large proprietors and
farmers to rid themselves of all superfluous population in
the rural parts and accelerated the migration into the towns.


1 Schulze-Gaevemitz, Der Crossbetrieb^ p. 48.

9 Ellison, History of the Cotton Trade , presents the following Interest-
tog table (yam, 40 hanks to the lb.):—


1TT9.

1784.

1799.

1812.

1830.

1882.


8 . d.

a <L

a d.

a d.

a d.

a <L

Selling price
Cost of Cotton

16 O

10 11

7 «

2 6

I *\

0 10 *

(zSob.)

2 O

2 0

1 u

*

1 6

0 7f

O 74

Labour & Capital 14 0

8 zi

a a

z 0

0 6 £

0 3i


7


THE EVOLUTION OF


98

Here the population bred with a rapidity hitherto unknown.
The increase of population in England and Wales during
the thirty years from 1770 to 1S00 is placed at 1,959,590,
or 27^ per cent, while during the next thirty years, 1800
to 1830, it amounted to 5,024,207, or 56f per cent 1 This
large supply of cheap labour in the towns enabled the
Lancashire and Yorkshire factories to grow with startling
rapidity. The exhaustion left by the Napoleonic wars, the
political disorder and insecurity which prevailed on the
Continent, retarded until much later the effective competi-
tion of other European nations who were behind England
in skill, knowledge, and the possession of markets. The
American manufactures which had sprung up after the
revolution had made considerable strides, but the conquest
and settlement of vast new areas of land, and the immense
facilities afforded for the production of raw material, retarded
their rate of growth until long after the opening of this
century. It was, indeed, not until about 1845 that the
cotton manufacture made rapid strides in the United States.
During the twenty years previous the progress had been
very slight, hut between 1845 and 1859 a very substantial
and, making allowance for fluctuations in the cotton crops,
a very steady growth took place. 2

Another great economic advantage which assisted Eng-
land was the fact that she, more than any other European
nation, had broken down the old industrial order, with its
guilds, its elaborate restrictions, and conservative methods.
Personal freedom, security of property, liberty to work and
live where and how one liked, existed in England to an
extent unknown on the Continent before the French Revo-
lution. The following account of the condition of the
cotton manufacture in Germany in the eighteenth century
will serve to indicate the obstacles to the reformed methods
of industry : — “ Everything was done by rule. Spinning
came under public inspection, and the yarn was collected
by officials. The privilege of weaving was confined to the
confraternity of the guild. Methods of production were
strictly prescribed; public inspectors exercised control
Defects in weaving were visited with punishment. Moreover,

1 Porter, Progress of the Nation , p. 13. Eighteenth century figures
are, however, not trustworthy. The first census was in 1801.

1 Ure, Philosophy if Manufactures, p. 531.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


99


the right of dealing in cotton goods was confined to the
confraternity of the merchant guild: to be a master-weaver
had almost the significance of a public office. Besides
other qualifications, there was the condition of a formal
examination. The sale also was undqr strict super-
vision; for a long time a fixed price prevailed, and a
maximum sale was officially prescribed for each dealer.
The dealer had to dispose of his wares to the weaver,
because the latter had guaranteed to him a monopoly of
the export trade.” 1

Under such conditions the new machine-industry could
make little advance: Excepting in the ca$e of the woollen
industries, England had for the most part already shaken
off the old regulations before 1770. In particular, the
cotton trade, which was in the vanguard of the movement,
being of recent growth and settling outside the guild towns,
had never known such restrictions, and therefore lent itself
to the new order with a far greater facility than the older
trades. Moreover, England was free from the innumerable
and vexatious local taxes and restrictions prevalent in
France and in the petty governments of Germany.
Although the major part of these foolish and pernicious
regulations has been long swept away from Germany and
other continental nations, the retarding influence they
exercised, in common with the wider national system of
protection which still survives, kept back the cotton
industry, so that in Germany it still stands far behind its
place in England 5

The following figures show how substantial was the lead
held by England in the cotton manufacture a little before
the middle of the century.

1 Schuke-Gaevermtx, Dor GrossbetrUb % p. 34.

* In 1882 42 per cent, of the German textile industry was still con-
ducted in the home or domestic workshop, while only 38 per cent, was
carried on in factories employing more than 50 persons. More weavers
were still engaged with hand-looms than with power-looms, and the
latter was so little developed that the hand-loom coaid still hold its own
in many articles. Knitting, lace-making, and other minor textile indus-
tries are still in the main home industries. — {Social JPeace f p. 113.)
“ While in En gl a nd in 1885 each spinning or weaving )i»f? an
average of 191 operatives, each spinning mill in Germany in z88a
employed an avenge of IQ persons only/— {Brataao, Mmn, Wmgu,
amd P r odu ct i on * p. 64.)


100


THE EVOLUTION OF


NUMBER OF SPINDLES WORKING IN COTTON MILLS IN 1846. 1


Spindles.

England and Wales

• 15.554,619

Scotland ....

. 1,727,871

Ireland

215,503

Austria and Italy .

. 1,500,000

France .....

. 3*500,000

Belgium ....

. 420,000

Switzerland ....

650,000

Russia

. 7,585,000

United States

• 3,500,000

States of the Zollverein

. 815,000

35,467,993


Making due allowance for the necessary inexactitude of
such a table, it remains reasonable to suppose that Great
Britain in the middle of the century was doing half the
cotton spinning for the civilised world.

Lastly, the national trade policy of England was of
signal advantage in her machine development Her early
protective system had, by the enlargement of her carrying
trade and the increase of her colonial possessions, laid the
foundation of a large complex trade with the more distant
parts of the world, though for a time it crippled our
European commerce. While we doubtless sacrificed other
interests by this course of policy, it must be generally
admitted that u English industries would not have advanced
so rapidly without Protection.” 1 2 But as we built up our
manufacturing industries by Protection, so we undoubtedly
conserved and strengthened them by Free Trade — first, by
the remission of tariffs upon the raw materials of manufacture
and machine-making, and later on by the free admission
of food stuffs, which were a prime essential to a nation
destined to specialise in manufacture. France, our chief
national competitor, weakened her position by a double
protective policy, not merely refusing admittance to foreign
manufactures in her markets, but re tainin g heavy duties
upon the importation of foreign coal and iron, the founda-
tional constituents of machine-production. This protective
policy, adopted by nations whose skill, industry, and natural
resources would have rendered them formidable competitors

1 Ure, Philosophy of Manufacture ^ p. 515,

* Toynbee, Industrial Revolution, p. 79.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


IOI


to English manufacturers, has hindered considerably the
operation of those economic forces which impel old and
thickly-peopled countries to specialise in manufacture and
trade, and so has retarded the general development of
modem machine-production. But while protective tariffs
indisputably operate in this way, it is not possible to
determine the extent of their influence. In a large
country of rich resources a high degree of specialisation
in manufacture is possible in spite of a protective policy.
The pressure of high wages is an economic force more
powerfully operative than any other in stimulating the
adoption of elaborate machinery . 1 Both in the textile and
the iron industries the United States present examples of
factory development more advanced even than those of
England. Certain processes of warping and winding axe
done by machinery in America which are still done by hand
labour in England 1 The chain and nail-making trades,
which employ large numbers of women in South Stafford-
shire and Worcestershire, are conducted more cheaply
by machinery in America.* Moreover, the high standard
of living and the greater skill of the American operatives
enables them to tend more machines. In German
factories a weaver tends two, or rarely three looms; in
Lancashire women weavers undertake four, and in Massa-
chusetts often six looms, and sometimes eight 4

Thus we see how the new industrial forces were deter-
mined in the order of their operation by the character and
conditions of the several countries, their geographical posi-
tion and physical resources, the elements of racial character,
political and industrial institutions, deliberate economic
policies, and, above all, by the absorbing nature of the
military and political events contemporary with the outburst
of inventive ingenuity. The composition of these forces
determined the several lines of less resistance along which
the new industry moved.

The exact measurement of so multiform a force is

z The highly elaborate American machine industry of watch-making
is a striking example of this influence of high wages. Cl Schulze*
Gaevemitz, Social Peau^ p. 125.

* Schoenhof, Economy of Sigh Wagts, p. 279.

* I&d., pp. 225, 226.

4 Schulze-Gaevernitx, p. 66 \note>. This six and eight-loom weaving
is, however, at a lower speed.


THB EVOLUTION OF


ioa

impossible. It seems desirable, however, to make some com-
parative statement of the level of modern industrial develop-
ment attained by the chief civilised nations of the world.
With this object certain criteria of material progress have
been selected, the principal branches of the mining industry,
the iron and steel trade, and the most important of the
textile trades; transport is best represented by the statistics
of railroads and shipping. In regard to the true industrial
development of a country, consumption is, however, in
reality more instructive than production ; we have therefore
added certain figures measuring the comparative consump-
tion of certain staple commodities by the chief industrial
nations. Finally, a selection has been made of comparative
statistics of occupations made from recent official publications
of the Board of Trade. The appended tables and dia-
grams, however, will serve to indicate (i) the comparative
development of the chief industrial nations in certain
leading branches of industry and of consumption; (a) the
absolute size of certain national industries : —


Comparative Table, Production and Consumption. 1
{Per caput of the respective populations .)


,.*i

Si'S

if.3

Hi

a

s.L

41

“i

I*

— S 3
2-2

m

|E

Wheat

(consumption lbs.
per caput).

Pig Iron

(consumption tons
per caput).

a

iS
<3 §

i

h

i 1

United Kingdom •


5.38

0,12

350

0.18

3*89

39

Russia .

0.6

—

0.OZ4

145

0.02

0.15

3

U.S.A.

3*9

25-52

0.17

274

0.20

3-3®

26

Austria-Hungary .

i-7

! 4.66

0.03

223

O.O3

0.40

6

France

4-1

I 7.46

O.O4

473

0.06

1.15

10

Italy . ,

1.7

i 6.4

—

283

—

0.15

9

Germany .

3*9

O.XZ

200

0.14

2.70

13

Belgian •

10.5

6.03

O.XO

418

0.13

2.79

ir


Selected from Table la Cd. 1761, xxviii


COMPARATIVE TABLE, PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION
PER CAPUT OF THE RESPECTIVE POPULATIONS.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


103


Belgium, 10‘S


THE EVOLUTION OF


STEEL PRODUCTIONS, TONS PER CAPUT.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


105


WHEAT CONSUMPTION, LBS. PER CAPUT.


THE EVOLUTION Of


GenrumyBOO
Belgium +18


PIG IRON CONSUMPTION, TONS PER CAPUT,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


107


COAL, TONS PER CAPUT.


THE EVOLUTION OF


Belgium. 2 19


RAW COTTON (LBS.).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


IC9


Table or Occupations . 1 (ooo omitted.)


THE EVOLUTION OF


Compiled from Memorandum XVII. in Cd. 2337. 3 Coal only.


MODERN CAPITALISM*


Eli


Growth of World's Production of Coal . 1


Ww ‘r 4 m

Actual
Total
Quantity
m 1900.

Percentage Rate of
Increase.

1870

to

xSSe

18S0

to

1890

*890

to

1900

1870

to

1880

x8Se

to

2890

x8go

to

X900

U.S.A.

3.468

8,623

11,191

269,683

94

Z2I

7 *

Great Britain

4,092

3.880

4,879

252,203

33

24

24

Germany 3 ...

9,767

3 > 3 «

6,641

164,805

74


67

France

682

741

806

36,812

47


28

Austria

711

1,401

1,269

43,011

77

86

42

Belgium ...

352

3 84

340

25,856

2 3

21

15

Russia ...

283

306

i.x *7

17,799

385

85

168

j*p*“

—

292

526

8,187


l8o

Spain

—

*.336

134

2,947

—

—

120

Italy ...

9 .

26

11

530

*37


India

1,000*

144 .

244

6,853


Canada

1.425*

143

312

5,322

—


New S. Wales

67.

179 i

274

6, 168

69


N. Zealand ...

336*

33


1,225


Queensland...

1 4

3 i

18

557

160


Other ^ \

Countries /

176

389

422

4,082

:

121

8


Coal. — Q uantity of tons produced in 1900: —


Great Britain ...
U.S.A.

Germany
France ...

Austria ...

Belgium
Japan


... 252,000,000

... 270,000,000

... 165,000,000

... 37,000,000

... 43,000,000

... 26,000,000
... 8,000,000


Steel. — Quantity of tons produced in 1901 : —

Great Britain ... ... 4,904,000

U.S.A. ... ... *3»474»ooo

. Germany ... ... 6,394,000

France ... ... 1,425,000

Austria — . ... 1,500,000

Belgium ... ... 653,000

1 British Industries under Free Trade (edited Harold Cox), p. 351*
Fisher Unwin. 1 Including lignite.

* Total production is ($40; not increase over the decade.


112 THE EVOLUTION 0 T MODERN CAPITALISM.


Shipbuilding. — Tonnage of vessels of ioo tons and over,
built 1900 , as recorded in Lloyd’s Register Book: —


U.K.

1,459.407

U.S.A.

*97,93!

Germany

211,850

France

101,318

Austria

14,945

Belgium and Holland ...

39,793

Japan

*3,335


Merchant Navies of the Chief Maritime Nations.
In millions of tons ( steam and sailing tons together).


Ytcr.

U.K.

Biit

PoSs'lLS.

Go-

many.

U.S^

France.

Norway.

Italy.

Japan,

1850

3-4

0.7

.

1.6

0*7

o *3

_ _


i860

4*$

1.0

—

2*5

1.0

0.5

—

—

1870

5*7

14

O.9

i*5

1. 1

1.0

1.0

—

1880

1 6.6

1*9

1.2

i *3

O.9

i*5

1.0

ai

1890

8, 0

i*7

14

0.9

0.9

i*7

0.8

0.1

1900

9*3

14

1*9

0.8

1.0

i*5

0.9

0.8

1901

9.6

i*5

2.1

0.9

Z.I

i*5

1.0

0.9

1902

| 10,0

»

i*5


0.9


Merchant Steamships of Chief Nations in 1901.


U.K.


Tons.

... 7,617,793

British Possessions

... 571,836

Germany

... ...

... 1,506,659

U.S.A.

*•»

... 429,722

France


... 546,541

Norway

»«*

... 531,142

Italy

•»«

... 424,711

Japan


... 583,067


Oiioiza-MocqF, Elements of the Pistol Question, pp. 166, 167.]


CHAPTER V.


SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF THE MODERN BUSINESS.

§ i. General measure of growth of Business-structure,

§ 2. Evidence of the relative Economy of large and small

Businesses in United Slates.

§ 3. Testimony from Great Britain t Germany , and France.
§ 4. Concentration in Transport Industry \

§ 5. Concentration in Banking and Insurance*

§ 6. Concentration in Distributive Processes.

§ 7. Concentration in Agriculture.

§ 8. Survival of small Farms .

§ 9. Summary of mechanical tendencies .

§ 10. Economies of Productive Power in large Businesses ;

§ 11. Economies of Competitive Power.

§ 12. Survival of small Businesses .

§13. The morbid survival of small Sweating Businesses.

§ 14- General Summary of the opposed tendencies.

§ 15. The typical magnitude of a Business.


§ 1. How far can we irace in modem industry a general
tendency to the formation of larger business-units in which
capital plays a relatively more important part than labour,
and which tend to displace competition by various forms of
trade agreement or by amalgamation ?

Of the growth in the size of businesses, the increasing
importance of capital, and the diminishing number of
businesses in a trade, we have statistical evidence relating
to certain fields of industry.

The largest mass of evidence is presented in the Com-
parative Summary taken of the Twelfth Census of the
United States relating to manufactures. We have there a
comparison of the general conditions of manufacturing
development during recent decades and of the several
d ep artmental and local divisions of manufacture. Although


1 14


THE EVOLUTION OF


certain changes in modes of enumeration on the one hand,
and difficulties of accurate ascertainment on the other hand,
impair the exactitude of the figures , 1 these errors are not
large enough to invalidate the general results of the investi-


gation.


Year.

Number of

Capital.

Number of

Value of

Establishments.

Wage-earners.

Products.

1900

512,191

$ 9 >S 1 3,834,3 10

5*306,143

$ 13 , 000 , 149,159

189 O

355v*G5

6,525,050,759

4 , 251,535

9,372,378,843

1 SS 0

2 53,$5 2

2,790,272,606

2,732,595

5,369,579,191


From this table it appears that in the United States the
average size of a business alike in capital and labour is
growing, that the factor of capital is growing faster than
that of labour, while the value of the product though larger
per business unit* barely keeps pace with the growth of
labour and falls far short of the growth of capital

It is quite evident that these figures do not support any
general judgment of the rapid concentration of capital
throughout the manufacturing industries of America.
Bearing in mind the growth of industrial combination
which has given a few huge businesses command of a
large proportion of the market in many manufactures, we
must recognise in this growth of the number of separate
establishments, a growth twice as fast as that of the
American population , 8 a striking proof of the increase of
small manufacturing establishments.

§ 2 . If in the group analysis of manufactures 4 we turn to
the groups where capitalist methods have made most
advance, the textile, food, iron, steel and metal industries,

1 Comparisons between the Censuses of 1890 and 1900 are more
valid than those between 18S0 and 1890, especially as regards capital
A new method of computing the number of employees in 1900 results
in some variation of the average numbers as between the two censuses.
Moreover, classes of “ overseers and foremen ” included in 1890 are
excluded from “ wage-earners ” in 190a
3 The total number of manufacturing establishments increased by
1 01. 8 per cent, between 1SS0 and 1900, while the total value of the
product increased 142.2 per cent.

* PERCENTAGE OF INCREASE.

Population. Manufacturing

1 Businesses.

*89010 1900 ... 20.7 ... 44,1

xSSo to 1890 24.9 ... 40.0

Abstract of the Twelfth Census. Table 156.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


«5


leather, paper and printing, chemicals and vehicles, we
still find that, while the amount of capital per business is
considerably greater, and the amount of labour somewhat
greater, the aggregate increase of establishments grows at
least as fast as the population (except in the leather trades),
while the growth of the value of the product though some-
what greater than the growth in the number of businesses^
fails in every such group to keep pace with the growth of
capital

In these pre-eminently capitalistic industries there is
overwhelming testimony to a strong survival and growth
of small plants as a counter-tendency to concentrative
capitalism. The textile industries, to which machine-
industry and capitalist methods were earliest applied,
exhibit in a marked degree these cross-tendencies, as the
following statistics indicate : —


rtanxDcx of
Establishment*.

1900 30,048 $1,366,604,058

1890 16,847 1,008,050,268

1880 14,137 594,922,734


No. of Value of

Worker*. Product.

1,029,910 $2,273,880,877
824,138 1,636,197,191

710,493 1,171,165,325


If instead of taking the entire area of the United States
we confine ourselves to the North Atlantic division, which
contains the largest proportion of developed manufactures,
there is no marked difference in the tendencies.


jNuxn&er ot ,

Establishment*. tapttaL

1900 204,265 $5,299,725,076

1890 162,796 3,548,288,553

1880 112,680 1,719,212,222


Karf

Worker*.


Value of
Product.


2,772,117 $6,498,058,774

2 , 317,736 4 , 896 , 743,650

1,692,016 3,106,053,580


Narrowing our inquiry yet further to the most manu-
facturing of all the States, Massachusetts, we still find that,
in spite of the laige growth of capital per business, the
number of establishments grows apace, increasing in fact
faster than the number of employees, and exhibiting a
smaller average value of product per business-unit


Number of


Capital


No. of


Value of
Product.


1900 29,180 *823,264,287 499.448 *1,035,198,989

1890 26,923 630,032,341 447.270 888,160,403

1880 14,352 303,806,185 35*^55 631,135,284


Finally, if we accept Mr. Edward Atkinson’s analysis of


II 6


THE EVOLUTION OF


the Census results relating to the typical manufactures of
textiles, boots and shoes, in Massachusetts, we have a
measure of the relative status of large and small establish-
ments, which is certainly unfavourable to the economy of
the former, indicating as it does the superior economy both
of capital and labour in the smaller plants.


TEXTILES, BOOTS AND SHOES.

Collective.

No. of establishments 1,078

Machinery and tools (per estab-
lishment) $76,400

Average number of workers ... 186

Average earnings ... ... $393

Average product per person ... $1,528


Individual.

28,102

$4,200

io-37

*503

$2,500


Taking the manufacturing industries of the United States
as a whole, there seems overwhelming proof that no general
tendency exists favourable to the substitution of great
factories for small workshops and home industry.

In many particular industries, or branches of industries,
the law of the economy of large establishments is doubtless
plainly operative. But in the textile and shoe trades, as in
many others where the factory system has been fully de-
veloped, this system only absorbs a certain section of the
trade, leaving to smaller workshops or individual workers
much of the best and the worst work, the former consisting
in special orders or finishing processes where individual
skill and care are required, the latter in low-grade routine
work where "sweated" labour can undersell factory
products.

If from such industries we turn to those which are en-
tirely confined to factories we find strong testimony to the
superior economy of large-scale production* Agricultural
implements, a typical American machine-industry, will serve
as an example. Here with an increasing capital and labour
and a corresponding increase in value of product we find a
diminishing number of establishments.


1900

1890

1SS0


AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS.
Establishment*. Capital Workers.

715 $I57»707,95 1 46,582

910 145 , 313,997 38,827

1,943 62,109,66$ 39,580


Value of
Product.

$101,207,428

81,271,651

65,640,486


MODERN CAPITALISM,


117


In almost all the industries connected with iron and steel,
the metal and machine-making manufactures, the same
tendencies are visible; the number of establishments does
not show any considerable increase, sometimes declines,
while both capital and product are much larger than
before.

The single great instance of iron and steel must suffice to
illustrate this truth.


IRON AND STEEL,


Establishments. CapitaL

1900 668 5573,391,663

1890 645 372,678,018

1880 1,005 230,971,884


Nad

Workers.

222490

148.71s

140,978


Value 0#
Product.

5803 , 965,273

430 , 954,348

296,557,685


Almost all departments of brass work, cutlery, foundry
supplies, hardware, the special iron and steel trades, jewellery,
musical instruments* sewing machines, fire-arms, shipbuild-
ing, come under this economy of large production j other
trades conforming in a very marked degree to the same law
are boots and shoes (factory products), bricks and tiles,
carriages and cars, chemicals, clocks, cooperage, leather,
saddlery, malt liquors, paper and wood pulp, pottery, soap
and candles, smoking tobacco, umbrellas.

§ 3. In Great Britain, though no such large volume of
ordered testimony is available, a large variety of evidence
attests the operation of the same forces in the staple manu-
factures. In the fundamental textile and metal industries,
in milling, brewing, chemicals, the leather, glass, pottery,
paper and other machine industries, the size of a single
plant and still more the size of a business has been growing,
while the growth of the capital factor in the business
exceeds that of the labour factor. Under domestic textile
manufacture the value of the tools was, as a rule, equivalent
only to a few months’ wages. In 1845 McCulloch estimated
that the fixed capital in well-appointed English cotton milk
amounted to about two years’ wages of an operative. 1 In
2890 Professor Marshall assigns a capital in plant amount-
ing to about £ 200 , or five years’ wages, for every man,
woman, or child engaged in a fully-equipped spinning mOL*

The actual growth in the capital-size of a mill in the


1 Porter, Prwgrm wftt$ Wait*** p. 216.

1 M m ei/fa if Bttmwin (second edition), p. 28a.


THE EVOLUTION OF


1x8

typical modern industry, the cotton trade, is illustrated by
the following estimate of the increase of the average number
of spindles and looms to a single factory between 1850 and
1885, though these figures take no account of the increased
speed and efficiency of the machines : —

Spindles. Looms.

1850 ... 10,858 ... 155

1885 ... 15,227 ... 213

Even these statistics do not fully represent the facts, for
they include a considerable number of mills of the older
sort, where spinning and weaving are carried on together.
Taking the more highly specialised spinning mills in the
Oldham district, Dr. Schulze-Gaevernitz found (1892) an
average of 65,000 spindles per mill, while the largest con-
tained as many as 185,000. So also the average number of
power looms per mill in North Lancashire is placed at 600,
the largest number in a single min being 4,500.

The growth of joint-stock enterprise here as elsewhere
has caused the size of the business to grow at a far faster
pace than that of the single plant

The brewing trade, which within the last two generations
has passed almost entirely into the “company” business,
exhibits the concentrative tendency in a remarkable degree.

The following figures show the number of common
brewers, or “brewers for sale,” as they are called, since
1850: —

1850 ... ... 44,300

i860 39,948

1870 32,682

18S0 ... ... ... ... 21,346

1890 ... ... ... ... 11,364

19 00 ... 6,447

1903 ••• **• 5,692

In Germany die brewing industry exhibits a similar
tendency to concentration, the number of breweries de-
creasing from 1,400 in 1872 to 1,050 in 1885, though a
large increase in production took place during this period. 1

The comparative statistics of the Industrial Censuses of
Germany in iSSa and 1895 throw light upon the broad

Ct Efy, MonoftlUs and Trusts, p. i£&


MODERN CAPITALISM.


Itg


tendencies in manufacture, showing that while the larger
businesses grow at a faster pace the small businesses by no
means tend to disappear, but on the contrary occupy an in-
creasing proportion of the population.

While the growth of the population in this period
amounted to 13.5 per cent the comparative increase of
small, moderate, and large establishments was as follows: —


Small establishments (1 to

iS6>.

,895-

Increase

percent

Moderate - sized establish-

2,457,95°

3,056,3x8

24.3

ments (6 to 10 persons)...
Large establishments (10

500,079

833r4°9

66.6

to 50 persons)

896,230

1,620,848

8x.8


While no figures measuring recent tendencies in France
axe available;, the Industrial Census of 1896 shows that u la
grande Industrie” has not made any great advance in
general manufacture. Out of a total of 575,531 establish-
ments, 461,354, or four-fifths of the whole number, com-
prised not more than three employees, while the number
of great establishments with more than 500 employees
amounted to no more than 446.

The distribution over the three main branches of em-
ployment runs as follows: —


Agriculture

Percentage.

Industry

Percentage.

Commerce

Percentage.

I to 4 wage-earners

... 9209 >M

85.03 ...

90.00

5 to 50

»

*.* 7-89 ...

13.68 ...

9.82

50 to 500
Over 500


... 0.02 ...

1. 21 ...

0.18

*

... — — ...

ZOO

0.08 ...

ZOO

100


§ 4. It is, however, not to manufacture but to transport
industry that we must look for the most conspicuous results
of the concentrative influence of machinery. The substitute
of the railroad for the pack-wagon and the stage-coach, of the
steamship for the sailing-vessel, exhibits the largest advance
of modern capitalism. “ The cost of a steamship is perhaps
equivalent to the labour of ten years or more of those who
work her, while a capital of about ^900,000,000 invested
in railways in England and Wales is equivalent to the work


120


THE EVOLUTION OE


of about twenty year* of the 400,000 people employed on
them.” 1 The fact that all privately-managed railroads,
steam or electric, are joint stock enterprises, and that all
sea-transport, with the exception of a diminishing proportion
of the coast and river trade, has adopted the same typically
capitalist form, testifies to the concentrative tendency in
this department of industry.

§ 5, Next to transport the department of business where
the concentrative forces are in strongest and most general
operation is finance, using that term to cover banking and
insurance, stockbroking, bill-broking, and money-lending
of every kind.

These monetary businesses formed the cradle of
modern capitalism: they were the earliest to adopt the
form of joint stock enterprise, and to assume an inter-
national area of operation, capital expands in them out of
all relation to labour, and the advantage of a large capital
over a small capital is normally greater than in any other
business operation.

The spread of an elaborate credit-system throughout the
business world is in such close connection with improved
machinery of communication that the whole of modern
finance may be considered to rest upon a mechanical basis.
In the creation and mobilisation of credit, by which the
great mass of modem business transactions is conducted,
the large financial business enjoys an obvious superiority.
Large financial operations for governments and for in-
dustrial corporations can only be undertaken by great
financial houses, and though detailed local or trade know-
ledge may form the basis for the survival of the small
money-lender and the small broking-firm, the amount of
financial independence enjoyed by smaller firms is always
diminishing, so that they pass into the form of agencies or
branches of some great finance company.

Bagehot, writing a generation ago, emphasised this
tendency: “A large bank always tends to become larger,
and a small bank to become smaller.” Since he wrote, the
private bank has largely disappeared in Great Britain before
the great joint stock banks, whose branches spread all over
the country. The deposits in British banks are estimated to


1 Marshall (2nd ed.), p. 2S3.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


xax

have Increased from ^350,000,000 in 1875 to ^859,000,000
in 1903, an increase of 147 per cent in 27 years. 1 Be-
tween 1858 and 1903 the number of bank offices has grown
from 2,008 to 6,592, entirely due to the extension of branch
banking. Scotland, the earliest country to develop a general
use of banking facilities, exhibits the closest concentration
of banking industry. In 1SS3 she had ten banks with 9x2
branches, in 1896 ten banks with 1,015 branches. In
England amalgamation is rapidly exterminating private and
proprietory banks. Barclay's Bank has taken over 24 other
businesses, Parr's as many, while Lloyd's has absorbed 38
other banking-houses.

A similar concentration of insurance business is every-
where discernible. Nowhere is the economic advantage of
a large over a small capital so obvious as in the insurance
business. The number of American life insurance offices
has been steadily diminishing during the last quarter of a
century, the smaller number doing an immensely larger
business. In 1873 the number was 56, with an income of
$118,396,502; and in 1897 the number was 35, with an
income of $301,268,179.

§ 6. The concentrative forces in commerce are less easily
ascertained; but, as regards wholesale operations, there can
be no doubt that an increasing proportion of the distributive
business is passing into the hands of large and growing
firms. Over a considerable area of wholesale trade the
separate mercantile stage has been eliminated, especially
where the goods in question are raw materials or unfinished
manufactures. Either the manufacturer purchases his
materials direct from the producers by regular process of
contract, or sets up producing plants of his own, as where
jam manufacturers own fruit plantations or ironworks
acquire collieries. In many other cases the producer
supplies the retailer direct, as in the case of most patent
or packet goods and over a large part of the clothing
businesses ; or undertakes the entire wholesale and retail
distribution, as do certain shoe factories, collieries, etc.
Most ordinary articles of manufacture are supplied to-day
directly from the factories to the retailers. Where the
wholesale merchant still remains as a distinct distributive


1 Bniisk Industrie* p. 91.


laa


THE EVOLUTION OF


stage, he is usually either an importer of foreign produce or
a collector of foods and other perishable home produce.
Such businesses partake more and more of a speculative
character, involving more largely the element of credit and
becoming in most instances an appanage of finance. For
successful business upon these lines, large capital is essential,
and while the enormous growth of the commercial classes
in all countries attests the mass of business done, this in-
crease is in clerks, agents, commercial travellers, etc., not in
the number of employers.

The application of joint stock enterprise to retail trading
goes on apace. Gigantic stores, tending to become “ uni-
versal providers,” like Whitele/s and Barker's, or covering
a wide area of wants, like Maple’s or Spiers & Pond,
spring up in the large cities, taking an increasing proportion
of retail business. Other companies, more specialised,
extend their business through numerous branches, as in the
grocery and provision trades, milk, restaurants, fish, and
game trades. In some of these cases the retail companies
strengthen themselves by entering the productive processes
of farming and manufacture; more frequently the manu-
facturers themselves acquire retail stores or operate through
“tied ” shops, as in the shoe, jewellery, and tobacco trades*

§ 7. All general measurements of the concentrative forces
of capitalism as applied to agriculture are extremely difficult
to compass.

In such countries, however, as the United States, where
agricultural machinery has been very folly applied, it is
clearly established that the size and value of farms increase
in those departments of agriculture where machinery can
be most largely utilised, and that the capital value of these
forms as well as the value of the product increases more
rapidly than the increase of labour employed upon them.

A careful monograph upon American agriculture recently
published 1 shows that in the North Central States, which
are most largely devoted to field crops, in the cultivation of
which machinery is most developed, a considerable increase
in the size of forms (including improved land only) has
resulted, amounting to 26.4 per cent for the decennium

1 Tie Influence f Farm Machinery an Production and Labour % by
H. W. Qoiinuace, Nov. 1904.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


m


1880-90, and 4 z.8 per cent for the two decennia 1880-1900.
In other divisions of the United States, where either a large
multiplication of negro farming, ensuant on the breaking of
plantation^ has taken place, as in the South Atlantic and
Sooth Central States, or where market-gardening and orchard
products form important and growing features, as in parts
of the North Atlantic and Western divisions, the tendency
of machinery to increase the area of the farm is either
entirely or partially counterbalanced by these forces making
for small culture.

But while these tendencies have kept the improved area
of an average farm for the United States as a whole from
increasing, 1 the capital value of an American farm and the
value per acre of its product are increasing tolerably fast
The following table indicates this growth, and makes it
quite evident that American agriculture as a whole is being
brought by machinery into a form where capital performs a
more important and labour a relatively less important
part: — *


Buc

Average value of all farm
property . *3,515

Average value of farms (land
and improvements) . . $2,835

Average value of implements

and machines . . . $136

Farmers, planters, and over-
seers .... 828,800
Agricultural labourers. . 352,765


xSSo.

189a

<900.

IOO

138.3

I85.8

IOO

138.6

189.O

IOO

inn

152.9

IOO

—

K 7.4

IOO

—

173-6


The fact that the employed or dependent class has in-
creased 73.6 per cent during the period 1880-1900, while
the employing or independent class has increased only 27.4
per cent, is a strong corroborative testimony to the growth
of the coaeentxative process.

1 The actual rise of farms (including unimproved land*) shorn a
marked increase since xSSo as compared with a decline in the several
preceding decades.

* This decline in the importance of labour is made clearer by the
following figares from the Census:^

X g ftB . 1890. 1880.

Africultonl labowen , 612,418 3591894 352,565

FarmcB, photos, udoveiKss. 1,056,237 1,091,867 828,800


1,668,655


1,451,761 1,181,365


134


THE EVOLUTION OF


Though much of the improvements in agriculture is due
to better methods of cultivation, the use of fertilisers, irriga-
tion, improved rotation, better seeds, etc., most of these are
closely related to the use of modem machinery, which must
be regarded as the representative agency of capitalism . 1

The following table contains an estimate of the economy
achieved in producing the crops where machinery is most
largely used, expressed in units of time of man-labour: —


Unit

No.

Name and quantity of j
crop jarodceed, and de* j
scnptiooof work done.

1 Year of Production. !

1

Time Worked.


1 i


*


Hand, j

; Machine.

Hrs.

Min.

Hrs.

Min.

3

Bailey: 30 bushels
(1 acre) barley .

1S29-30

f

1895-96

63

35 *o

2

42.8

9

Com : 40 bushels (1
acre) yellow corn,
basked; stalks left
infield . • . .

1855

1894

38

45.0

!5

7 -s

m

Cotton : By hand,
750 pounds; by
machine, 1000
pounds (1 acre)
seed cotton . *

1841

1S95

167

48.0

78

42.0

12

Hay: Harvesting 1
ton (1 acre) timo-
thy hay . . *

!

1850

1895

21

5 *o

3

56.5

*3

Oats: 40 bushels (l
acre) oats . . .

1830

1893

66

15.0

7

5.8

1 6

Potatoes: 220 bush-
els { z acre) potatoes

1866

189s

10S

55 .o

38

—

*7

Rice: 2,640 pounds
(1 acre) rough rice

1870

1895

62

5 *o

17

2*5

zS

Rye: 25 bushels (z
acre) rye . . .

1847-48

*894-95

62

5S.9

25

10.0

2 6

Wheat: 20 bushels
(1 acre) wheat .

1829-30

1895-96

61

5*0

3

19.2


1 Qsamtaacc* p. 20.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


»5


The increased effectiveness of labour thus indicated
varies from 1 50 per cent, in the case of rye to 3,244 per
cent in the case of barley, yielding an average increased
productivity of about 500 per cent 1
$ 8. But while this concentrative force of machinery has
been so strong in certain kinds of agriculture as to raise the
average size of the farm as a unit of value and of produc-
tivity, it by no means follows that small farming everywhere
tends to disappear. The reduced area of improved land
per farm in every division except the North Central shows
at any rate that capitalism in American agriculture does not
generally imply large farms. In fact intensive and scientific
as distinguished &om merely mechanical cultivation every*
where makes for small farms, though involving in many
cases an increased use of capital per acre. Uniform shape
and character of land, a soil not so rich or so well-situated
with regard to markets as to repay garden-culture, and yet
sufficiently good and accessible to be worth cultivation by
machinery, such are the conditions most favourable to large
farming. In proportion as markets for the finer fruits,
flowers, poultry, and other farm products which involve
minute individual care and skill become relatively more im-
portant than the markets for staple crops and ordinary
cattle, the forces making for large farms, or even for large
capitalism in forming, will probably be diminished. Indeed,
though in almost every branch of agricultural work machinery
and other labour-saving contrivances are used to an increas-
ing extent, this does not involve the elimination of the small,
independent former. Though the great grain farm or
rancne, worked with machinery and hired labour, is growing
at such a pace as to weight the 44 average * for agriculture as
a whole in this direction, this is quite consistent with a large
growth of small formers.

Recent evidence from Belgium throws an interesting light
upon the conflicting tendencies in agriculture. While large
estates have increased in number and in the proportion of
the whole area of the country which they embrace, the
number and the proportion of very small estates have grown
still foster: the diminution has occurred in the intermediate
sizes of property. 1 These small plots, however, it is main-

1 Quainta&ce, p. 33, Vaadevdde, Mtckm SeciaHsm, p. 204.


THE SV0L0TIOH OF


126

tained, are not farms of small peasants, bat strips of land
cultivated by industrial proletarians, who work them as
supplementary means of livelihood, either varying summer
work in agriculture with town wage- work in winter, or using
the land for allotments to be cultivated after a day’s work
in the town.

While machinery favours the large as compared with the
middling farms, taken along with modem means of trans-
port in a small, thickly-populated country like Belgium, it
drives the small peasant more and more into town industries.
The movement is thus summarised by M. Vandevelde: —
“What cannot be disputed is the progressive intensification
of agriculture, the development of the use of machinery — in
a word, the increase of fixed capital in comparison with
circulating {/>., in comparison with capital for paying manual
labour); agriculture is becoming industrialised; arable land
is turned into pasture; we see the multiplication of agricul-
tural industries — distilling, sugar-making, the manufacture
of chicory, of syrups, etc.; and in consequence of this trans-
formation, more and more of the population of the rural
districts is splitting into two quite distinct classes. You see
there a growing proletariat, made up of agricultural labourers,
who are the minority; industrial labourers, who go off daily
to work elsewhere; and what may be called half-and-half
labourers, half agricultural, half industrial, working in the
sugar factories at certain periods, harvesting at others, going
to the collieries in winter, to resume work in the fields in
the spring. 1,1

§9. It is thus quite evident that economies of machinery
and power are operating in many fields of industry —

(1) To increase the size of the individual “plant” and
“establishment,” employing a larger co-operative
unit of capital and labour to produce a larger
“output”

(a) To increase the size and importance of capital in
comparison with labour.

(3) To produce greater differentiation and specialisation
of capital and labour, so as to give increased com-
plexity to the business-unit

Hus economy of machinery is furthest advanced in the


1 Mtdn S* cisk'jm a p. * 23 .


MODERN CAPITALISM.


127


staple manufactures where a large, regular demand for the
same products exists, and where materials and methods are
most capable of standardisation. A large and increasing
share of the transport trades, where steam and electric
power are utilised, comes under this same economy. Hie
same tendency, less advanced, is operative over large parts
of the mining industries, and over certain portions of
agriculture. Wholesale trade is less amenable to the con-
centrative force of machine-economy, except so far as it
involves the physical handling of large quantities of goods,
while retail trade makes the smallest use of mechanical
methods.

But this merely mechanical economy does not cany
us very far in interpreting the concentrative tendency
of capitalism. The increased size and complexity and
“ capitalist n nature of a single “plant” is represented by
the growing cost and productivity of a modern textile or
flour mill, as compared with the more primitive mill it
displaces, or the superior carrying capacity of a modem
railway train or steamship as compared with primitive
vehicles. Now the true economic unit of capitalism is not
the technical unit of a “ plant,” but the industrial and
financial unit of the “ business.”

Except in a few instances, merely mechanical economy
does not go very far towards explaining the larger develop-
ment of the “business.” Upon this mechanical economy
is superimposed a series of other industrial, commercial,
and financial economies favourable to the big business.
Where and in proportion as these are operative we find a
number of technically complete plants or establishments
bound by a common control and ownership, and worked
as a single business.

The great and growing size of many commer cial, financial,
and even retail distributive businesses makes it quite evident
that machine-economy is not essential to the concentrative
tendency of capitalism. Not only do vast businesses spring
destitute of this foundation, but; as we have seen, in
some manufactures a tolerably complex machine-plant
forms the basis of small businesses.

While therefore it is important to enter upon an analysis
of die economy of the large business by way of a study of
me ch a nical efficiency, we must treat this as one element in


1 28


THE EVOLUTION OF


a complex of economies favouring the large business* It is
now neces sar y to make a formal statement of these elements,
and to set against them other elements favouring the main-
tenance or increase of small businesses.

§ 10. The forces which are operating to drive capital to
group itself in larger and larger masses, and the consequent
growth of the business-unit, require special study in relation
to changes effected in the character of competition in the
market and the establishment of monopolies. The econ-
omies which give to the large business an advantage over
the small business may be divided into two classes —
economies of productive power, and economies of com-
petitive power.

In the first class will be placed those economies which
arise from increased subdivision of labour and increased
efficiency of productive energy, and which represent a net
saving in the output of human energy in the production of
m given quantity of commodities, from the standpoint of the
whole productive community. These include —

(а) The effort saved in the purchase and transport of
raw materials in large quantities as compared with small
quantities, and a corresponding saving in the sale and
transport of the goods, manufactured or other. Under this
head would come the discovery and opening up of new
markets for purchase of raw materials and sale of finished
goods, and everything which increases the area of effective
competition and cooperation in industry.

( б ) The adoption of the best modem machinery. Much
expensive machinery will only “save labour” when it is
used to assist in producing a large output which can find a
tolerably steady market. The number of known or dis-
coverable inventions for saving labour which are waiting
either for an increase in the scale of production or for a rise
in the wages of the labour they might supersede, in order to
become economically available, may be considered infinite.
With every rise in the scale of production some of these
pass from the M nonpaying " into the “paying^ class and
represent a net productive gain in saved labour of the
community.

(c) The performance of minor or subsidiary processes
upon the same premisses or in dose organic connection
with the main process, the establishment of a special work-


1 13


CHAPTER V.

SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF THE MODERN BUSINESS.

§ 1. General measure of growth of Business-s tructure.

j 2. Evidence of the relative Economy of large and small
Businesses in United States.

§ 3. Testimony from Great Britain , Germany , and France.

§ 4. Concentration in Transport Industry \

§ 5. Concentration in Banking and Insurance.

§ 6. Concentration in Distributive Processes ;

§ 7. Concentration in Agriculture.

§ 8. Survival of small Farms.

§ 9. Summary of mechanical tendencies.

§ 10. Economies of Productive Power in large Businesses.

§ xi. Economies of Competitive Power.

§12. Survival of small Businesses.

§13. The morbid survival of small Sweating Businesses.

§ 14. General Summary of the opposed tendencies.

§15. The typical magnitude of a Business.

§ 1. How far can we trace in modem industry a general
tendency to the formation of larger business-units in which
capital plays a relatively more important part than labour,
and which tend to displace competition by various forms of
trade agreement or by amalgamation ?

Of the growth in the size of businesses, the increasing
importance of capital, and the diminishing number of
businesses in a trade, we have statistical evidence relating
to certain fields of industry.

The hugest mass of evidence is presented in the Com-
parative Summary taken of the Twelfth Census of the
United States relating to manufactures. We have there a
comparison of the general conditions of manufacturing
development during recent decades and of the several
departmental and local divisions of manufacture. Although


U4


THE EVOLUTION OF


certain changes in modes of enumeration on the one band,
and difficulties of accurate ascertainment on the other hand,
impair the exactitude of the figures , 1 * these errors are not
large enough to invalidate the general results of the investi-
gation.

v«__ Number of r Number of Value of

Year * Esublishments. Wage-earners. Products.

1900 512,191 19,813,834,310 5,306,143 $13,000,149,159

JS 90 355,405 6,525,050,759 4,251,535 9,372,378,843

188O 253,352 2,790,272,606 2,732,595 5,369,579,191

From this table it appears that in the United States the
average size of a business alike in capital and labour is
growing, that the factor of capital is growing faster than
that of labour, while the value of the product though larger
per business unit* barely keeps pace with the growth of
labour and falls far short of the growth of capital.

It is quite evident that these figures do not support any
general judgment of the rapid concentration of capital
throughout the manufacturing industries of America.
Bearing in mind the growth of industrial combination
which has given a few huge businesses command of a
large proportion of the market in many manufactures, we
must recognise in this growth of the number of separate
establishments, a growth twice as fast as that of the
American population , 3 a striking proof of the increase of
small manufacturing establishments.

§ 2, If in the group analysis of manufactures 4 we turn to
the groups where capitalist methods have made most
advance, the textile, food, iron, steel and metal industries,

1 Comparisons between the Censuses of 1890 and 1900 are more
valid than those between 1SS0 and 1S90, especially as regards capital
A new method of computing the number of employees in 1900 results
in some variation of the average numbers as between the two censuses.
Moreover, classes of “overseers and foremen” included in 1890 are
excluded from “wage-earners” in 190a

* The total number of manufacturing establishments increased by
101.S per cent, between iS$o and 1900, while the total value of the
product increased 142.2 per cent

* PERCENTAGE OF INCREASE.

Pop***

1890101900 20.7 44*1

i8$o to 1890 34.9 40.9

Abstract of the Twelfth Censas. Table 156.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


«5


!eather f paper and printing} chemicals and vehicles, we
still find that, while the amount of capital per business is
considerably greater, and the amount of labour somewhat
greater, the aggregate increase of establishments grows at
least as fast as the population (except in the leather trades),
while the growth of the value of the product though some-
what greater than the growth in the number of businesses^
fails in every such group to keep pace with the growth of
capitaL

In these pre-eminently capitalistic industries there is
overwhelming testimony to a strong survival and growth
of small plants as a counter-tendency to concentrative
capitalism. The textile industries, to which machine-
industry and capitalist methods were earliest applied,
exhibit in a marked degree these cross-tendencies, as the
following statistics indicate: —


Hum ocr ot r . *

Establishments. L ' iplt * L

1900 30,048 $1,366,604,058

1890 16,847 1,008,050,268

1880 *4,137 594,922,734


No. of Value of

Workers. Product.

1,029,9 IO $2,273,S8o,877

824,138 1,636,197,191

710,493 1,171*165,325


If instead of taking the entire area of the United States
we confine ourselves to the North Atlantic division, which
contains the largest proportion of developed manufactures,
there is no marked difference in the tendencies.


Number of


No. of
Workers.


Value of
Product.


1900 204,265 $5,299,725,076 2,772,117 $5,498,058,774

1890 162,796 3,548,288,553 2,317,736 4,896,743,650

1880 112,680 1,719,2X2,222 1,692,0x6 3,106,053,580

Narrowing our inquiry yet further to 'the most manu-
facturing of all the States, Massachusetts, we still find that,
in spite of the large growth of capital per business, the
number of establishments grows apace, increasing in fact
faster than the number of employees, and exhibiting a
smaller average value of product per business-unit


No. at
Wockcx*.


Value of
Product.


*900 29,180 $823,264,287 499,448 *1.035,198,989

1890 26,923 630,032,341 447,270 888,160403

isso 14,35a 303,806,185 352,255 631,135.284

Finally, if we accept Mr. Edward Atkinson’* analysis of


U4


THE EVOLUTION OF


certain changes in modes of enumeration on the one band,
and difficulties of accurate ascertainment on the other hand,
impair the exactitude of the figures , 1 * these errors are not
large enough to invalidate the general results of the investi-
gation.

v«__ Number of r Number of Value of

Year * Esublishments. Wage-earners. Products.

1900 512,191 19,813,834,310 5,306,143 $13,000,149,159

JS 90 355,405 6,525,050,759 4,251,535 9,372,378,843

188O 253,352 2,790,272,606 2,732,595 5,369,579,191

From this table it appears that in the United States the
average size of a business alike in capital and labour is
growing, that the factor of capital is growing faster than
that of labour, while the value of the product though larger
per business unit* barely keeps pace with the growth of
labour and falls far short of the growth of capital.

It is quite evident that these figures do not support any
general judgment of the rapid concentration of capital
throughout the manufacturing industries of America.
Bearing in mind the growth of industrial combination
which has given a few huge businesses command of a
large proportion of the market in many manufactures, we
must recognise in this growth of the number of separate
establishments, a growth twice as fast as that of the
American population , 3 a striking proof of the increase of
small manufacturing establishments.

§ 2, If in the group analysis of manufactures 4 we turn to
the groups where capitalist methods have made most
advance, the textile, food, iron, steel and metal industries,

1 Comparisons between the Censuses of 1890 and 1900 are more
valid than those between 1SS0 and 1S90, especially as regards capital
A new method of computing the number of employees in 1900 results
in some variation of the average numbers as between the two censuses.
Moreover, classes of “overseers and foremen” included in 1890 are
excluded from “wage-earners” in 190a

* The total number of manufacturing establishments increased by
101.S per cent, between iS$o and 1900, while the total value of the
product increased 142.2 per cent

* PERCENTAGE OF INCREASE.

Pop***

1890101900 20.7 44*1

i8$o to 1890 34.9 40.9

Abstract of the Twelfth Censas. Table 156.


MODERN CAPITALISM,


it?

In almost ail the industries connected with iron and steel,
the metal and machine-making manufactures, the same
tendencies are visible; the number of establishments does
not show any considerable increase, sometimes declines,
while both capita! and product are much larger than
before.

The single great instance of iron and steel must suffice to
illustrate this truth.

IXON ST&1.L.

Ma No* Value of

Embiishsients* ^ Workers. Product.

1900 668 $ 573 i 39 i »663 222,490 $803,965,273

1890 645 372,678,018 148,715 43<>,954,34S

1880 1,005 230,971,884 140,978 2 96,557*685

Almost all departments of brass work, cutlery, foundry
supplies, hardware, the special iron and steel trades, jewellery,
musical instruments, sewing machines, fire-arms, shipbuild-
ing, come under this economy of large production; other
trades conforming in a very marked degree to the same law
are boots and shoes (factory products), bricks and tiles,
carriages and cars, chemicals, clocks, cooperage, leather,
saddlery, malt liquors, paper and wood pulp, pottery, soap
and candles, smoking tobacco, umbrellas.

§ 3, In Great Britain, though no such large volume of
ordered testimony is available, a large variety of evidence
attests the operation of the same forces in the staple manu-
factures. In the fundamental textile and metal industries,
in milling, brewing, chemicals, the leather, glass, pottery,
paper and other machine industries, the size of a single
plant and still more the size of a business has been growing,
while the growth of the capital factor in the business
exceeds that of the labour factor. Under domestic textile
manufacture the value of the tools was, as a rule, equivalent
only to a few months’ wages. In 1845 McCulloch estimated
that the fixed capital in well-appointed English cotton mills
amounted to about two years’ wages of an operative. 1 In
1890 Professor Marshall assigns a capital in plant amount-
ing to about j£aoo, or five years’ wages, for every man,
woman, or child engaged in a fully-equipped spinning mill. 1

The actual growth in the capital-size of a mill in the

* Porter, En g r tst *ftk* Ufoti**, p, aid.

1 IHmtiftit if (teem* edition), p. 28a.


THE EVOLUTION OF


118

typical modem industry, the cotton trade, is illustrated by
the following estimate of the increase of the average number
of spindies and looms to a single factory between 1850 and
2885, though these figures take no account of the increased
speed and efficiency of the machines: —

Spindles. Looms.

1850 ... 10,858 ... I55

1885 ... 15,227 ... 213

Even these statistics do not fully represent the facts, for
they include a considerable number of mills of the older
sort, where spinning and weaving are carried on together.
Taking the more highly specialised spinning mills in the
Oldham district, Dr. Schulze-Gaevernitz found (1892) an
average of 65,000 spindles per mill, while the largest con-
tained as many as 185,000. So also the average number of
power looms per mill in North Lancashire is placed at 600,
the largest number in a single mill being 4,5pp.

The growth of joint-stock enterprise here as elsewhere
has caused the size of the business to grow at a far faster
pace than that of the single plant

The brewing trade, which within the last two generations
has passed almost entirely into the “company” business,
exhibits the concentrative tendency in a remarkable degree.

The following figures show the number of common
brewers, or “brewers for sale,” as they are called, since
2850: —


1850 ... »t,

44,300

i860 ... ...

39,948

I87O ... ...

32,68s

1SS0

21,346

2S90 ... ...

*1,364

1900 ... ...

6,447

1903 ... *«•

5,692


In Germany the brewing industry exhibits a similar
tendency to concentration, the number of breweries de-
creasing from 1,400 in 2872 to 1,050 in 1885, though a
large increase in production took place during this period. 1

The comparative statistics of the Industrial Censuses of
Germany in 1882 and 2895 throw light upon the broad

1 CL Ely, Mmcfclus m*d Trusts, p. xSS.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


119


tendencies in manufacture, showing that while the larger
businesses grow at a faster pace the small businesses by no
means tend to disappear, but on the contrary occupy an in-
creasing proportion of the population.

While the growth of the population in this period
amounted to 13.5 per cent the comparative increase of
small, moderate, and large establishments was as follows: —


Small establishments (1 to

■88.

■895.

Increase

percent

5 persons)

Moderate -sired establish-

2.457.95°

3,056,318

24.3

ments (6 to 10 persons)...
Large establishments (10

500,079

833^09

66.6

to 50 persons)

896,230

1,620,848

81.8


While no figures measuring recent tendencies in France
are available^ the Industrial Census of 1896 shows that “la
grande industrie” has not made any great advance in
general manufacture. Out of a total of 575,531 establish-
ments, 46 i»3S4» 01 four-fifths of the whole number, com-
prised not more than three employees, while the number
of great establishments with more than 500 employees
amounted to no more than 446.

The distribution over the three main branches of em-
ployment runs as follows: —


Agriculture

Industry

Commerce


Percentage.

Percentage.

Percentage.

z to 4 wage-earners

... 92.09 ...

85.03 ...

90.00

5 to 50

a

*.« 7.S9 ...

I3-68 ...

9-32

50 to 500

n

... 0.02 ...

Z.21 ...

o.x8

Over 500

9

««a ” 999

0.08 ...

—


ZOO

100

100


§ 4. It is, however, not to manufacture but to transport
industry that we must look for the most conspicuous results
of the concentrative influence of machinery. The substitute
of the railroad for the pack-wagon and the stage-coach, of the
steamship for the sailing-vessel, exhibits the largest advance
of modem capitalism. “ The cost of a steamship is perhaps
equivalent to the labour of ten years or more of those who
work her, while a capital of about ^900,000,000 invested
in railways in England and Wales is equivalent to the work


120


THE EVOLUTION OT


of about twenty years of the 400,000 people employed on
The fact that all privately-managed railroads,
steam or electric, are joint stock enterprises, and that all
sea-transport, with the exception of a diminishing proportion
of the coast and river trade, has adopted the same typically
capitalist form, testifies to the concentrarive tendency in
this department of industry.

§ 5. Next to transport the department of business where
the concentrarive forces are in strongest and most general
operation is finance, using that term to cover banking and
insurance, stockbroking, bill-broking, and money-lending
of every kind.

These monetary businesses formed the cradle of
modern capitalism: they were the earliest to adopt the
form of joint stock enterprise, and to assume an inter-
national area of operation, capital expands in them out of
all relation to labour, and the advantage of a large capital
over a small capital is normally greater than in any other
business operation.

The spread of an elaborate credit-system throughout the
business world is in such close connection with improved
machinery of communication that the whole of modem
finance may be considered to rest upon a mechanical basis.
In the creation and mobilisation of credit, by which the
great mass of modem business transactions is conducted,
the large financial business enjoys an obvious superiority.
Large financial operations for governments and for in-
dustrial corporations can only be undertaken by great
financial houses, and though detailed local or trade know-
ledge may form the basis for the survival of the small
money-lender and the small broking-firm, the amount of
financial independence enjoyed by smaller firms is always
diminishing, so that they pass into the form of agencies or
branches of some great finance company.

Bagehot, writing a generation ago, emphasised this-
tendency: 41 A large bank always tends to become larger,
and a small bank to become smaller.” Since he wrote, the
private bank has largely disappeared in Great Britain before
the great joint stock tanks, whose branches spread all over
the country. The deposits in British banks are estimated to


4 Marshall (and ed.}, p. 283,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


121

have increased from ^350,000,000 in 1875 to ^859,000,000
in 1903, an increase of 247 per cent in 27 years. 1 Be-
tween 1858 and 1903 the number of bank offices has grown
from 2,008 to 6,592, entirely due to the extension of branch
banking. Scotland, the earliest country to develop a general
use of banking facilities, exhibits the closest concentration
of banking industry. In 1883 she had ten banks with 912
branches, in 1896 ten banks with 1,015 branches. In
England amalgamation is rapidly exterminating private and
proprietory banks. Barclay’s Bank has taken over 24 other
businesses, Parr’s as many, while Lloyd’s has absorbed 38
other banking-houses.

A similar concentration of insurance business is every-
where discernible. Nowhere is the economic advantage of
a large over a small capital $0 obvious as in the insurance
business. The number of American life insurance offices
has been steadily diminishing during the last quarter of a
century, the smaller number doing an immensely larger
business. In 1873 the number was 56, with an income of
$1x8,396,502; and in 1897 the number was 35, with an
income of $30 1 , 268, 1 79.

§ 6. The concentrative forces in commerce are less easily
ascertained; but, as regards wholesale operations, there can
be no doubt that an increasing proportion of the distributive
business is passing into the hands of large and growing
firms. Over a considerable area of wholesale trade the
separate mercantile stage has been eliminated, especially
where the goods in question are raw materials or unfinished
manufactures. Either the manufacturer purchases his
materials direct from the producers by regular process of
contract, or sets up producing plants of his own, as where
jam manufacturers own fruit plantations or ironworks
acquire collieries. In many other cases the producer
supplies the retailer direct, as in the case of most patent
or packet goods and over a huge part of the clothing |
businesses; or undertakes the entire wholesale and retail*
distribution, as do certain shoe factories, collieries, etc.
Most ordinary articles of manufacture are supplied to-day
directly from the factories to the retailers. Where the
wholesale merchant still remains as a distinct distributive


1 British Indmtries t p. 91.


r*a


THE EVOLUTION OF


stage* he is usually either an importer of foreign produce or
a collector of foods and other perishable home produce.
Such businesses partake more and more of a speculative
character, involving more largely the element of credit and
becoming in most instances an appanage of finance. For
successful business upon these lines, large capital is essential,
and while the enormous growth of the commercial classes
in all countries attests the mass of business done, this in-
crease is in clerks, agents, commercial travellers, etc., not in
the number of employers.

The application of joint stock enterprise to retail trading
goes on apace. Gigantic stores, tending to become “uni-
versal providers,* 5 ' like Whiteley*s and Barker's, or covering
a wide area of wants, like Maple's or Spiers & Pond,
spring up in the large cities, taking an increasing proportion
of retail business. Other companies, more specialised,
extend their business through numerous branches, as in the
grocery and provision trades, milk, restaurants, fish, and
game trades* In some of these cases the retail companies
strengthen themselves by entering the productive processes
of fanning and manufacture; more frequently the manu-
facturers themselves acquire retail stores or operate through
u tied 15 shops, as in the shoe, jewellery, and tobacco trades*

§ 7. All general measurements of the concentradve forces
of capitalism as applied to agriculture are extremely difficult
to compass.

In such countries, however, as the United States, where
agricultural machinery has been very fully applied, it is
clearly established that the size and value of farms increase
in those departments of agriculture where machinery can
be most largely utilised, and that the capital value of these
farms as well as the value of the product increases more
rapidly than the increase of labour employed upon them.

A careful monograph upon American agriculture recently
published 1 shows that in the North Central States, which
are most largely devoted to field crops, in the cultivation of
which machinery is most developed, p, considerable increase
in the size of farms (including improved land only) has
resulted, amounting to 26.4 per cent, for the decennium

1 Tie Injhuvtft if Farm Machinery an Production and Labour, by
H, W. Quakitmnce. Nov. 1904.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


1*3


188090, and 41.8 per cent for the two decennia 1880x900.
In other divisions of the United States, where either a large
multiplication of negro fanning ensuant on the breaking of
plantations, has taken place, as in the South Atlantic and
South Central States, or where market-gardening and orchard
products form important and growing features, as in parts
of the North Atlantic and Western divisions, the tendency
of machinery to increase the area of the farm is either
entirely or partially counterbalanced by these forces making
for small culture.

But while these tendencies have kept the improved area
of an average farm for the United States as a whole from
increasing 1 the capital value of an American farm and the
value per acre Of its product are increasing tolerably fast.
The following table indicates this growth, and makes it
quite evident that American agriculture as a whole is being
brought by machinery into a form where capital performs a
more important and labour a relatively less important
part: — *


3 «ac. x88o»

Average value of all farm
property * - • - *3,515 - ico

Average value of bums (land
and improvements) . . $2,835 “ 100

Average value of implements
and machines . . . 8136 = zoo

Farmers, planters, and over-
seers .... 828,800 — 100
Agricultural labourers. . 352,765 = 100


1890. 190a

138.2 185**

138*6 189.0

111.0 152.9


127.4

173-6


The fact that the employed or dependent class has in-
creased 73.6 per cent during the period 1880-2900, while
the employing or independent class has increased only 27.4
per cent, is a strong corroborative testimony to the growth
of the concentrative process.

1 The actual see of farms (mdndiog anjgaproved lands) shows a
marked in cre a se since 1880 as compared with a decline a the several
preceding d ecad es .

* This decline in the importance of labour is made dearer by the
following figures from the Censas;—

,900 . i|gtk iSSOk

Agricultural labourers. . . 6x2,418 359,894 3 52,565

Fanners, planters, and overseers . 1,056,237 1,091,867 828,800


1 , 668,655 1*451.761 1.281,365


**4


THE EVOLUTION OF


Though much of the improvements in agriculture is due
to better methods of cultivation, the use of fertilisers, irriga-
tion, improved rotation, better seeds, etc., most of these are
closely related to the use of modern machinery, which must
be regarded as the representative agency of capitalism . 1

The following table contains an estimate of the economy
achieve! in producing the crops where machinery is most
largely used, expressed in units of time of man-labour: —


Unit

Name and quantity of
crop produced , aod de«
script: on cf work done.


t.


,uu * w '

Hand.

’> Machine.

Hrs.

Mia.

Hrs,

Min.

3

Barley: 30 bushels
(i acre) barley .

; 1829-30

2S95-96 |

63

35-0

2

42. s

9

Corn : 40 bushels fi
acre) yellow com,
hnsked ; stalks left
in field . . , .

iSss 1

i

1894 !

3S

j

45.O

15

7.8

to

Cotton: By hand,
750 pounds; by
machine, 2000
pounds (1 acre)
seed cotton . .

! 1S41

| 1895

167

O

OQ

W

78

42.0

12

Hay: Harvesting 1
ton (1 acre) timo-
thy hay . . ,

O

OQ

1

1895

21

S.o

3 |

56- 5

n

Oats: 40 bushels (i
acre) oats . . . j

1830 |

1S93

66

15.0

7

5-8

16

Potatoes: 220 bush-
els {2 acre) potatoes

1866 !

1S95

10S

55-o

1

! 38


17

Rice: 2,640 pounds
(1 acre) rough rice

1

1870

1S95

62

5.0

17

2-5

IS

Rye: 25 bushels (l
acre) rye . . .

I847-48

1894-95

62

5S.9

25

10.0

36

Wheat: 20 bushels
(1 acre) wheat .

1

!

1829-30

1895-96

61

.

5-0

3

1

19.2


1 Qaaintaace* p. ao-


MODERN CAPITALISM*


wj

The increased effectiveness of labour thus indicated
varies from 150 per cent, in the case of rye to 2,244 per
cent in the case of barley, yielding an average increased
productivity of about 500 per cent 1

§ S. But while this concentrative force of machinery has
been so strong in certain kinds of agriculture as to raise the
average size of the farm as a unit of value and of produc-
tivity, it by no means follows that small farming everywhere
tends to disappear. The reduced area of improved land
per farm in every division except the North Central shows
at any rate that capitalism in American agriculture does not
generally imply large farms. In fact intensive and scientific
as distinguished from merely mechanical cultivation every-
where makes for small farms, though involving in many
cases an increased use of capital per acre. Uniform shape
and character of land, a soil not so rich or so well-situated
with regard to markets as to repay garden-culture, and yet
sufficiently good and accessible to lie worth cultivation by
machinery, such are the conditions most favourable to large
farming. In proportion as markets for the finer fruits,
flowers, poultry, and other farm products which involve
minute individual care and skill become relatively more im-
portant than the markets for staple crops and ordinary
cattle, the forces making for large farms, or even for large
capitalism in fanning, will probably be diminished. Indeed,
though in almost every branch of agricultural work machinery
and other labour-saving contrivances are used to an increas-
ing extent, this does not involve the elimination of the small,
independent farmer. Though the great grain farm or
rancue, worked with machinery and hired labour, is growing
at such a pace as to weight the ** average ” for agriculture as
a whole in this direction, this is quite consistent with a large
growth of small farmers.

Recent evidence from Belgium throws an interesting light
upon the conflicting tendencies in agriculture. While large
estates have increased in number and in the proportion of
the whole area of the country which they embrace, the
number and the proportion of very small estates have grown
still fester: the diminution has occurred in the intermediate
sizes of property, 1 These small plots, however, it is main-


* QuainUnce, p. 2%. *8. Vandcrdde, JMtfw StcUHsm, p. * 04 .


YHB EVOLUTION OF


IS 6

fcaifted, are not farms of small peasants, but strips of land
cultivated by industrial proletarians, who work them as
supplementary means of livelihood, either varying summer
work in agriculture with town wage-work in winter, or using
the land for allotments to be cultivated after a day’s work
in the town.

While machinery favours the large as compared with the
middling farms, taken along with modem means of trans-
port in a small, thickly-populated country like Belgium, it
drives the small peasant more and more into town industries.
The movement is thus summarised by M. Vandevelde : —
“What cannot be disputed is the progressive intensification
Of agriculture, the development of the use of machinery — in
a word, the increase of fixed capital in comparison with
circulating (/.<?., in comparison with capital for paying manual
labour); agriculture is becoming industrialised; arable land
is turned into pasture; we see the multiplication of agricul-
tural industries — distilling, sugar-making, the manufacture
of chicory, of syrups, etc.; and in consequence of this trans-
formation, more and more of the population of the rural
districts is splitting into two quite distinct classes. You see
there a growing proletariat, made up of agricultural labourers,
who are the minority; industrial labourers, who go off daily
to work elsewhere; and what may be called half-and-half
labourers, half agricultural, half industrial, working in the
sugar factories at certain periods, harvesting at others, going
to the collieries in winter, to resume work in the fields in
the spring.” 1

§9. It is thus quite evident that economies of machinery
and power are operating in many fields of industry —

(1) To increase the sine of the individual “plant” and
“establishment," employing a larger co-operative
unit of capital and labour to produce a larger
“output”

(a) To increase the size and importance of capital in
comparison with labour.

(3) To produce greater differentiation and specialisation
of capital and labour, so as to give increased com-
plexity to the business-unit

This economy of machinery is furthest advanced in the


MODERN CAPITALISM.


127


staple manufactures where a large, regular demand for the
same products exists, and where materials and methods are
most capable of standardisation. A large and increasing
share of the transport trades, where steam and electric
power are utilised, comes under this same economy. The
same tendency, less advanced, is operative over large parts
of the mining industries, and over certain portions of
agriculture. Wholesale trade is less amenable to the con-
centiative force of machine-economy, except so far as it
involves the physical handling of large quantities of goods,
while retail trade makes the smallest use of mechanical
methods.

But this merely mechanical economy does not cany
us very far in interpreting the concentrative tendency
of capitalism. The increased size and complexity and
“capitalist” nature of a single “plant” is represented by
the growing cost and productivity of a modern textile or
flour mill, as compared with the more primitive mill it
displaces, or the superior carrying capacity of a modem
railway train or steamship as compared with primitive
vehicles. Now the true economic unit of capitalism is not
the technical unit of a “ plant,” but the industrial and
financial unit of the “business.”

Except in a few instances, merely mechanical economy
does not go very far towards explaining the larger develop-
ment of the “business.” Upon this mechanical economy
is superimposed a series of other industrial, commercial,
and financial economies favourable to the big business.
Where and in proportion as these are operative we find a
number of technically complete plants or establishments
bound by a common control and ownership, and worked
as a single business.

The great and growing size of many commercial financial,
and even retail distributive businesses makes it quite evident
that machine-economy is not essential to the concentrative
tendency of capitalism. Not only do vast businesses spring
up, destitute of this foundation, but, as we have seen, in
some manufactures a tolerably complex machine-plant
forms the basis of small businesses.

While therefore it is important to enter upon an analysis
of the economy of the large business by way of a study of
mechanical efficiency, we must treat this as one dement in


128


THE EVOLUTION OF


a complex of economies favouring the large business. It is
now necessary to make a formal statement of these elements,
and to set against them other elements favouring the main-
tenance or increase of small businesses.

§ 10. The forces which are operating to drive capital to
group itself in larger and larger masses, and the consequent
growth of the business-unit, require special study in relation
to changes effected in the character of competition in the
market and the establishment of monopolies. The econ-
omics which give to the large business an advantage over
the small business may be divided into two classes —
economies of productive power, and economies of com-
petitive power.

In the first class will be placed those economies which
arise from increased subdivision of labour and increased
efficiency of productive energy, and which represent a net
saving in the output of human energy in the production of
a given quantity of commodities, from the standpoint of the
whole productive community. These include —

(a) The effort saved in the purchase and transport of
raw materials in large quantities as compared with small
quantities, and a corresponding saving in the sale and
transport of the goods, manufactured or other. Under this
head would come the discovery and opening up of new
markets for purchase of raw materials and sale of finished
goods, and everything which increases the area of effective
competition and co-operation in industry.

(b) The adoption of the best modern machinery. Much
expensive machinery will only 14 save labour” when it is
used to assist in producing a large output which can find a
tolerably steady market. The number of known or dis-
coverable inventions for saving labour which are waiting
either for an increase in the scale of production or for a rise
in the wages of the labour they might supersede, in order to
become economically available, may be considered infinite.
With every rise in the scale of production some of these
pass from the “nonpaying” into the “paying" class and
represent a net productive gain in saved labour of the
community.

(r) The performance of minor or subsidiary processes
upon the same premisses or in close organic connection
with the main process* the establishment of a special work-


MODERN CAPITALISM. 129

shop for repairs, various economies in storage, which attend
large-scale production.

(d) Economies consisting in saved labour from increased
efficiency of management, superintendence, clerical and
other non-manual work, which follow each increase of size
in a normally constructed business. These are often closely
related to (£), as where clerical work is economised by the
introduction of type-writers or telephonic communication,
and to (r), as by the establishment of more numerous and
convenient centres of distribution.

(e) Economy of place and space. The ability of a large
business to utilise a given ground-area advantageously for
productive work and for storage is often a great practical
economy, measured financially by the smaller part rent
occupies in establishment expenses. In retail trade where
superficial “display” of goods, storage^ and elbow-room are
of prime importance, this is one of the chief factors favouring
the large “store.”

(/) The utilisation of waste-products, one of the most
important practical economies in large-stale production.

{g) The capacity to make trial of new experiments in
machinery and in industrial organisation.

§ ii. To the class Economies in Competitive Power
belong those advantages which a large business enjoys in
competing with smaller businesses, enabling it either to
take trade away from the latter, or to obtain a higher rate
of profits without in any way increasing the net productive-
ness of the community. This includes —

(1) A large portion of the economy in advertising, travel-
ling, local agentSi and the superiority of display and touting
which a large business is able to afford. In most cases by
far the greater part of this publicity and self-recommenda-
tion is no economy from the standpoint of the trade or the
community, but simply represents a gain to one firm com-
pensated by a loss to others. In not a few cases the
“trade” may be advantaged to the damage of other trades
or of the consumer, as when a class of useless or deleterious
drugs is forced into consumption by persistent methods of
self-appraisal which deceive the public.

(2) The power of a large business to secure and maintain
the sole use of some patent or trade secret in machinery or
method of manufacture which would otherwise have gone

9


130 THE EVOLUTION OF

to another firm, or would have become public property in
the trade, represents no public economy, and sometimes a
public loss. Where, however, such improvement is due
solely to the skill and enterprise of a business man, and
would not have passed into use unless the sole right were
secured to his business, this economy belongs to the pro-
ductive class.

{3) The superior ability of a large business to depress
wages by the possession of a total or partial monopoly of
local employment, the corresponding power to obtain raw
material at low prices, or to extort higher prices from con-
sumers than would obtain under the pressure of free
competition, represent individual business economies which
may enable a large business to obtain higher profits.

The better facilities of credit enjoyed as a rule by large
firms must be accounted a separate economy. This
economy is partly a productive advantage, implying a
greater facility of expansion in business operations, partly a
competitive advantage imparting greater freedom in pro-
cesses of buying and selling and greater power in tiding
over difficulties.

This particular economy is, of course, most important in
financial businesses, next in large commercial businesses,
playing however a considerable part in mining and manu-
facturing businesses, in proportion as the “speculative n
factor is inherent in their conduct

§ 12. When, as we perceive to be the case over large areas
of industry, commerce, and other employments, the small
business survives, this survival may be traced partly to the
absence of some of these leading tendencies towards con-
centration, partly to the action of countervailing tendencies,
positively favourable to the small form of business.

In considering the physical and economic limitations to
the effective application of machinery we have already indi-
cated certain economies of the small business. (1) Where
the nature of the raw material or of the process of hand-
ling it is incalculably and greatly irregular this irregularity
renders the full application of machinery and routine labour
impossible; The kind or degree of this irregularity may be
such as to make success in the business dependent so
largely upon the skill, genius, character of the operator, or
upon chance, as to preclude the use of machinery or of any


MODERN CAPITALISM


131

sort of tt routine * economy. The irregularity of material, if
it relates to cheap products, may not suffice to defeat the
net economy of the large business, though precluding the
full use of machine methods. The irregularity in the shape,
texture, etc, of hides does not prevent tanning from becoming
an industry of big-businesses ; nor does the irregular shape
and quality of fruit keep the “canning” and “jam” trades
in small businesses. But jewel cutting and setting, the
most artistic grades of the clothing or dressmaking trades,
of watchmaking and many other luxury trades where the
choice and careful manipulation of fine qualities of expen-
sive materials are concerned, tend to remain in small
businesses. The most striking instance is in gold-mining,
where individual digging remains for alluvial deposits while
“banket” gold is mined by great companies.

The largest application of this principle is of course in
agriculture. Small farms tend to survive in proportion to
(a) the irregularity of soil, seed, climate, etc., and the con-
sequent amount of detailed care and skill involved in the
agricultural processes; (fi) the absolute market value of the
products, vegetable or animal, raised under such conditions.

Bonanza farms for growing great quantities of some single
crop and applying machine methods may afford to disregard
minor irregulanties of soil, etc. ; large cattle ranches, or even
fruit farms, may for similar reasons be made to pay. But in
raising the more delicate and costly plants or fruits, or in
breeding the finest types of birds and animals, the factor of
individual skill and interest is so important as commonly to
outweigh all economies of large production.

(2) When the individuality of the consumer impresses
himself upon an industry through demand for the satisfac-
tion of particular needs, an “art” economy is substituted
for a “ routine * or “machine” economy. It is this force
which, in large measure, gives importance to differences of
materials, and evokes skill in dealing with them. But even
where complete standardisation or regularity of materials
exists, the demand of consumers for goods exactly accom-
modated to their individual fit or fancy involves skilled
workmanship, and prohibits the use of machinery or routine
method. Ibis does not necessarily imply the execution of
such orders by small businesses. A large pottery company
often employs a number of designers and skilled craftsmen


132 THE EVOLUTION OF

in order to stimulate and supply the more refined demands
of high-grade customers, just as a large firm of tailors or
drapers may keep a special order department and a “ fancy
goods " department But where the skill of some final
process of production forms the chief element of use and of
cost in a commodity, and especially when this output of
skill approaches the nature of close personal service, the
small unit of business is apt to survive. Though the
ordinary work of photography may be passing to large
companies, the more artistic work remains in the hands of
independent artists. In London the best part of the clock-
making, the saddlery and cabinetmaking trades remains in
small businesses. Even when it is the “particular” demands
not of consumers but of producers that are in question, the
small business often holds its own, as in many of the minor
metal trades of Birmingham.

Though the standardisation of machinery releases much
work of repair from dependence on skilled engineers and
smiths, while many large businesses keep repairing shops of
their own, this essentially irregular work forms the basis of
many small independent workshops in large manufacturing
centres. Though the building and the printing trades are
in the main large capitalist undertakings, jobbing builders,
carpenters, plumbers, and printers exist in considerable
numbers for special and emergency work

In retail trade, as we have seen, the survival of the
personal relation with u customers,” the adhesion of some
final productive process to the art of retail distribution,
sometimes the importance of mere proximity, enable the
small storekeeper to hold his own.

It is natural that the productive energy which functions
for the production and distribution of material and im-
material wealth in the professions, the finer arts, and in the
recreative and personal services, should be least amenable
to the concentraiive forces of capitalism Though there is
a sense in which the schools of law, medicine, theology, and
pedagogy in our universities may be regarded as large
capitalist enterprises — factory-plants for turning out and
distributing legal, medical, religious, and other services —
while the trade-organisations of the bar, the churches, the
medical councils, etc., limit the liberty of professional men
in their “ practices.” these considerations do not materially


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*33


impair the 4 business ” independence of the ordinary clergy-
man or physician. The tendency towards the large
capitalist structure, though discernible in the teaching, the
legal, the medical, and especially the dental professions, does
not cover any large proportion of these professions and
reaches within a moderate compass a maximum economy.
In the recreative arts large capitalism has obtained a
stronger hold over some departments which involve a large
outlay of capital and a high order of business management.
Perhaps the intellectual art or profession in which the
centralising force is most powerful is journalism, though
even there the large capitalistic machinery of the press is
fed by an increasing number of small jobbers not closely
attached to any particular press.

All these small businesses in agriculture, the mechanical
trades, mining, retail trade, the arts and professions survive
because of certain features in the materials or processes
involved which give importance to those personal qualities
of skill, care, judgment, and character incapable of being
evoked, controlled, and applied effectively under the routine
economy of the large business. To these inherent advan-
tages of the small business in the production and distribution
of certain high qualities of material and immaterial wealth,
must be added the independent spirit of the genuine artist
or craftsman, which, even in such largely routine work as
carpentry, shoemaking, or retail shopkeeping, is often
strong enough to induce a man to remain a small inde-
pendent producer with a precarious unlucrative business
rather than become a mere cog in the capitalist machine.

| 13. From these genuine economic survivals of the small
business-unit must be distinguished the numerous forms of
small sweat-shop and sweating home industry which are
found everywhere in the industrial lowlands. The charac-
teristic of such small sweating businesses is the production
of low-grade routine goods by subdivided labour under
conditions of low wages, low rent, and evasion of sanitary
and other industrial restrictions which make this mode
of production cheaper than production in a factory by
machinery or by properly accommodated and protected
hand labour. Much of the production of the sweat-shop
consists of ill-made or shoddy goods which would not be
made at all except for the “demands” of the poorest class,


134


THE EVOLUTION O T


kept in poverty by the same economic maladies which furnish
to these sweating trades their supply of cheap, inefficient
labour; much of it would otherwise be done by machinery
in factories, where the pay is higher, the hours shorter, and
all the terms of employment better. This is the case, for
instance, with most of the clothing and shoe manufactures
of the sweat-shops. The rest, which though simple and not
high skilled elude the full application of the machine by
certain irregularities of detail — e.g.> flower-making, fur-pul ling,
packing, eta — would become subsidiary departments of the
major trades to which they belong. Though these sweating
trades are rightly spoken of as “ morbid ” survivals of small
businesses, as “parasitic” growths, they are natural products
of the present stage of capitalism ; for all the economic
supports of these “low organisms” — the existence of a large
margin of low-skilled “unemployed,” the high rents which
form a leading element of economy and the market for the
debased products of the sweat-shop — can be traced to the
unregulated operation of capitalist forces.

With the gradual development of a sounder social policy,
expressed through public opinion and legislative action,
these morbid growths may be excised from the industrial
body. In this work of extirpation economic considerations
are even more potent than philanthropic or sanitary ones,
and it is probable that in England and America the pro-
portion of these morbid to the healthy survivals of small
businesses is diminishing, especially in the clothing trades,
where machinery has made such large recent advances. At
the same time, so long as cheap labour in considerable
quantities is available, these parasitic trades will continue
to appear anew, particularly in those industries to which
season and fashion impart irregularity and where one
economy of the sweat-shop consists in saving the waste
incurred in factories by keeping machinery idle or half-
used over considerable periods,

§ 14. But assuming that the sweating trades be left out
of consideration, what general conclusion are we justified in
forming as to the relative strength of the centripetal and
centrifugal forces making respectively large and small
businesses ?

The industrial department in which the large capitalist
business is most prevalent and where a growing tendency


MODERN CAPITALISM*


*35


to concentration is most general is Transport In all
advanced industrial nations the carriage of persons, goods,
news by railroads, steamships, pipe lines, telegraphic and
telephonic services, has passed into the control of large
companies; as the horse is more and more displaced by
electric or oil traction for the subsidiary Transport services
in town and country, this further mechanisation of transport
favours the displacement of the small carrier and the private
tradesman by the large company* Moreover, the relative
importance of the transport trades, as indicated both by the
quantity of capital and the quantity of labour employed, is
growing rapidly and generally.

Among the extractive industries mining has become
almost entirely a great capitalist business, and the increased
use of machinery upon the one hand, the development of
corporation finance upon the other, favour the absorption
of this branch of industry by large company enterprise.
The survival of small businesses in agriculture is wide-
spread and persistent wherever small ownership or security
of tenure prevails. The permanence of the small holding
must, however, depend more and more upon the abandon-
ment of certain elements of self-sufficiency, or otherwise
upon the grafting of processes of large co-operative or
corporate business upon the small farming economy. In
Denmark, Switzerland, Belgium, Ireland, co-operation for
dairying and other collecting and manufacturing processes,
for the use of machinery, marketing, mutual credit, and
education, are seen to be essential to the maintenance of
small holdings. Without this cooperation the economic
strength of the small holder or the tenant farmer is under-
mined by the carrying companies, the merchant-middlemen,
and the money-lender, and in time he either is displaced by
some large-farm system or becomes the mere dependent of
one or other of the capitalist classes just named.

The fishing industry still continues to some considerable
extent in small shapes, though the steam trawler and the
large fish-merchant are bringing it more and more under
large capitalism.

Most of the manufactures engaged upon the processes of
making the foods, clothes, houses, and other prime neces-
saries and conveniences of life have passed or are passing
into big capitalist businesses. While these staple manu-


THE EVOLUTION OF


136

factures employ an increasing proportion of capital, they do
not, save in the less advanced nations, engage an increasing
proportion of labour. Attached to each of them is a large
quantity of manufacturing industries which remain in small
businesses, and though the application of mechanical and
other sciences continually displaces old handicrafts by large
machine industries, while new industries arise capitalistic
from their start, a large quantity of new irregular and highly
skilled trades come into being, employing a large quantity
of labour. It is by no means proved that an increasing
proportion of manufacturing labour is employed in large
businesses, or that the “labour-saving” economy of
machinery is attended by so large a general expansion of
manufacturing industry as to provide employment for all
the labour that is “saved” 1

While the concentrative forces are strong in wholesale
commerce, the small dealer survives and even multiplies in
most countries, though his economic independence is sapped
in many trades by dependence on some large manufacturing
or “furnishing” firm. Bearing in mind the growth of
retail trading companies with many branches and the
various forms of “ tied ” houses, it seems probable that a
larger share both of the capital and the labour engaged is
passing under large capitalism.

Banking, insurance, and other financial business is seen
to be peculiarly adapted to the play of concentrative forces.
In the civil arts, professions, and services which are growing
so rapidly in the proportion of employment they afford, the
small business very generally holds its own. The increase
of labour and of capital employed in public services must,
however, be accredited to the side of the large business.

It may then be concluded : —

(1) That an increasing proportion of the aggregate wealth
(goods and services) in modern communities is pro-
duced in large and expanding businesses.

(a) That this concentrative tendency is particularly
operative in the making and carrying of the goods
which constitute the necessaries and prime con-
veniences of life of the people.

(3) That in the aggregate production of wealth capital

1 On this point see Chapter XI.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 137

plays a part of increasing importance as compared
with labour.

(4) That the increasing importance of capital is greatest

in the production of the most fundamental and
essential forms of material wealth.

(5) That it is probable that an increasing proportion of

the number of persons employed is employed in
large or expanding business-forms, though the con-
centrative forces are less powerful in the case of
labour than in the case of capital.

S 15. But while a larger number of processes and indus-
tries are constantly brought under the operation of the con-
centrative forces which make for Large business-units, there is
no reason to regard the economy of large-scale production,
as unlimited in any branch of production or transport

Reverting to the recognised economic formula, there is
no industry where the law of increasing returns perma-
nently and absolutely overrides the law of diminishing
returns. In any country in any given condition of industrial
development there is for each industry a size of business
where the maximum net economy is reached, and beyond
which, unless supported by a legal or a natural basis of
monopoly, it cannot grow.

In many manufacturing processes which have attained a
high degree of mechanical development the maximum
economy is soon reached, the unit of cheapest production
representing a comparatively small annual output in tons,
gallons, or other standard : the mere advantages of ma-
chinery and division of labour are soon exhausted. This
limitation of the size of an individual plant is generally
recognised. Of course where other economies besides
those of the manufacturing process are taken into account,
economies of purchase and of sale, of rent, establishment
expenses, administration, advertising, eta, the profitable
size of such a business may be considerably raised. But
even the aggregate of these economies does not evade the
law of diminishing returns. Not only for mechanical pro-
duction but for administration of a business there is a
point of maximum growth. 1

1 An experienced accountant in a large English midland manufactur-
ing town writes to me as follows:—

“ So far as I am able to judge from businesses I have been connected


138 THE EVOLUTION OF

Throughout industry businesses may be regarded as
gravitating towards “a typical magnitude,” which yields for
the time being the maximum economy.

The final limits of this growth are described by a recent
economist 1 as functions of:

(1) The internal complexity of arrangements.

(2) The importance of quality in the output.

(3) The expensiveness of the machinery used.

(4) External relations depending on the nature of the

markets touched.

(5) Stability in the demand for the output

(6) The stationary character of the industry in relation to

methods or otherwise.

(7) The extent of the economies to be secured by pro-

ducing on a large scale. 2

If, however, we examine more closely the limits upon the
economy of the large business, thus indicated, we shall
perceive that they ultimately rest upon a law of diminishing
returns, applied not to the mechanics but to the administra-
tion of business. Although there must be conceived to
be an ultimate limit to the economy of large production
dependent on the necessity of having recourse to inferior
or more expensive sources of raw materials or power, this,
save in rare instances, is not an actual limit. So, likewise,
though the practical limits set upon the elaboration of
machinery and the division of labour may fix the maximum
size of an individual plant, it does not limit the size of a

with fox years, and which are systematically increasing their output,
far from its being possible to formulate a general rule that standing
expenses diminish proportionately in relation to the output, I am
inclined to think that they increase. I think there is a certain size
(quickly attained in many businesses) at which everything is done most
cheaply, and that, as the product goes on increasing, there is a slight
relative increase in expense, due to the fact that mere size necessitates
the doing of everything by rule, and the formation of separate depart-
ments, and a complicated system of checking and accounting generally,
which tends to counterbalance, and which does in fact more than
counterbalance, the advantage gained by size. There is also the in-
tangible loss caused by the removal of direct responsibility, and this, I
think, must account for a good deal.”

, Professor S. J. Chapman, The Lancashire Cotton Industry , p. 169.

* This last economy is not separate from the rest, but appears to
summarise them*


MODERN CAPITALISM.


139


business, which may contain a number of such plants, and
will tend to increase this number so long as the net
economy of business administration is subserved thereby.
This being so, the only substantial limit to the growth of a
business, from the standpoint of economy of supply, has
reference to the application of administrative power; in
other words, of the factors that constitute the business-unit
ability of control and management must be regarded as a
constant factor. The chief cause of the survival of small
forms of business in many highly-skilled trades was found to
be the necessity of direct detailed attention on the part
of a responsible interested workman or employer. Any
expansion of the business, implying delegation of this
control and the adoption of routine methods, would react
injuriously upon the quality of the work. When the
industry is highly susceptible of routine methods this
economy of M the masters eye ” is relatively unimportant;
the managing ability is best occupied in the more general
acts of organisation and control, a discretionary power of
detailed management being delegated to departmental
managers, overseers, and inspectors. But there must
always be some limit to the economy of the managing or
directing mind : every expansion brings larger intricacy, and
the machinery of administration becomes more cumber-
some, involving larger waste from imperfect co-ordination,
dislocation, friction, and other disturbances.

When the financial economy of modern business intro-
duces more division of labour into the administration,
dividing the interest, responsibility, and control among a
number of directors, a managing director and a number of
salaried officers, difficulties of policy and of close co-ordina-
tion are apt so to increase as to outweigh the advantages of
substituting many administrative minds for one. The well-
recognised failure of joint-stock companies to compete suc-
cessfully with private firms in some classes of business is a
clear testimony to the limits of this economy. While,
therefore, differences of personal ability, especially evinced
in the larger policy of organisation and in the selection of
subordinates, impart great elasticity to the maximum size of
a business, it is none the less true that there is always "a
typical magnitude” to which each class of business tends
to conform, and which yields the cheapest unit of supply.


140 THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM.


This tendency for every business to grow to the limit
of cheapest production is however qualified by another
tendency from the demand side. When the number of
growing businesses in a competitive trade is such that the
aggregate output is continually increasing, the fall of the
selling price may be such as to preclude any of these
businesses from attaining the “typical magnitude” which
yields the greater cheapness of supply. In other words,
the direct determinant of the size of a business will be the
net maximum of profit, and this will depend upon the
relation of growing cheapness of supply to elasticity of
demand

The real limits to concentration of capital and labour in
single businesses, as distinct from single plants, are not to
any large extent considerations of technical production,
but of administration and of market. For this reason a
larger proportion of the highest intellect engaged in business
life is being directed to experiment and invention of ad-
ministrative methods, including business organisation and
finance, with the double object of effecting large economies
of supply-cost and of so monopolising or controlling
markets as to prevent these gains passing to the consumer
by competition of producers.


* 4 *


CHAPTER VL

THE STRUCTURE OF TRADES AND MARKETS.

§ i. Differentiation of tke Business Structure.

§ 2. Integration of Processes.

§ 3. Horizontal and Lateral Integration .

§ 4. Structure and Size of different Markets .

§ 5. Machinery a direct Agent in expanding Market Areas.

§ 6. Expanded Time-area of the Market.

§ 7. Interdependency of Markets.

§ 8. Sympathetic and Antagonistic Relations between Trades.

§ 9. JVationai and Local Specialisation in Industry .

§ 10. Influences determining Localisation of Industry.

§ 11. Impossibility of Final Settlement of Industry.

§ 12. Specialisation in Districts and Towns .

§ 13. Specialisation within the Town.

§ 1. In those industries where the business-unit grows in
size it generally grows also in complexity of structure. This
increased complexity is due partly to a process of differen-
tiation within the business-unit, partly to a process of
integration by which productive activities which formerly
constituted separate businesses become departments of a
single business.

The increasing differentiation or division of capital and
labour due to the greater size and technical improvements
of modem businesses is easily recognised. In a modern
shoe factory there are about sixty distinct processes.
Grain, in the elaborate machinery of the modern flour-
mill, passes through a score of different stages, cleaning,
winnowing, grinding, etc. The American machine-made
watch is said to be the product of 370 separate actions.
In an up-to-date textile factory a dozen different processes
contribute to the spinning or weaving of cotton or silk, and
new improvements or refinements of cleaning or finishing
are always being added


l^Z THE EVOLUTION OF

This process of differentiation is continually fed by the
.ncreased variety of demand due to an expanding market,
involving larger variety in size, quality, and character of
goods. Special classes of goods must be manufactured for
Australia, Egypt, or Burma. New customers in China or
Persia insist upon their cloth or hardware goods being
made-up or packed in some familiar form long after the use
or convenience of this form has passed away. The exi-
gencies of keen competition requires constant experimenta-
tion in new lines of goods to touch the fancy of a newly
opened market or to get away the trade of a competitor.

This differentiation of a business from within is often
accompanied by a double course of integration, involving
the absorption of various minor or subsidiary processes by
some business performing a major process of production;
or the expansion of some manufacturing or mercantile
business taking on the production or sale of new kinds of
goods which lay previously outside the limits of its business
activity.

§ 2 . Every industry is connected with a number of other
industries engaged upon processes anterior to, subsequent
to, or subsidiary to, the operation with which it is itself
concerned : this creates a stable bond of common interest
which forms a basis of integration. The most strongly
organised and best developed of a series of business
processes thus related tends frequently to absorb the
others. So a modem steel-mill will often own its own
smelting works and its own supply of iron-ore and coal,
together with its own railway or line of boats for carrying
the raw material. A cocoa or jam manufactory will own its
own fruit plantations. In other cases the wholesale or the
retail merchant takes the initiative, as when the English
Co-operative Wholesale Society sets up cloth and shoe
factories and imports its groceries on its own ships; or
when a retail store like Whiteley’s supplies fruits and dairy
produce from its own farms. A railroad, as for instance
the London and North Western, sometimes expands so as
to be almost entirely self-sufficing, manufacturing its rails,
rolling stock, etc, from its own stocks of materials,
and making almost all the articles required for its ser-
vice down to the wooden legs for the use of its crippled
employees.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*43


In the textile industries this integration is widely visible*
In the woollen manufactures the preliminary processes of
sorting and cleansing, carding or combing, as well as the
main processes of spinning and weaving, fulling, dyeing, and
finishing, each of which was at one time committed to a
separate and independent group of workers, are frequently
found going on simultaneously in a single factory . 1 This
integration is, however, often qualified or crossed by a
tendency to differentiation so strong as to detach a par-
ticular process and to set it up in business for itself. So in
the Yorkshire woollen trader whereas spinning and weaving
are usually under the same roof, combing and fulling
are often distinct, and “ finishing * is usually done
separately. The same conflicting tendencies are seen in
the Lancashire cotton industry: all processes up to spinning
are always united; twining is sometimes separate; spinning
and weaving are sometimes united, sometimes not; dyeing
is sometimes under the same management as spinning and
manufacturing, sometimes committed to a dyer. Calico
printing forms a separate business . 1

In fact throughout the textile and metal manufactures we
see clear signs of a double process of business differentiation
opposing the process of integration in one direction, while
assisting its advance in another. In the woollen trader
where strong differences of quality occur, there arises much
specialisation, many businesses confining themselves to a
particular class of goods, and absorbing all the processes
involved in this special trade. Opposed to this specialisa-
tion of quality is the specialisation of processes exhibited in
the “fulling” or “finishing” businesses which take work for
a large number of the specialised mills. The cotton trader
as we shall see, develops in similar fashion by local differen-
tiation of firms and coarser “counts” and various grades and
types of manufacture.

The modem bicycle trade exhibits the conflict of the two
tendencies most clearly in the struggle between the techni-


1 A good deal of the cleansing and combing in the cloth and worsted
trades is, however, done separately on commission by large firms such
as lister's {cL Burnley, p. 417). In Germany “ finishing” still
remains a separate business process (cf. Chapman, Foreign Competition
P- 197 ).

1 Chapman, The Lancashire Cotton Industry^ p. 165*


*44


THE EVOLUTION OF


caliy complete factory turning out a whole machine of a
particular type, and the factory confined to the production
of a single part, suited for the structure of many types of
machine.

So far as minor subsidiary processes are concerned, much
integration is visible in all large manufactures. Wherever
the demand is large and regular there is a tendency for
packing, printing, box-making, etc., to be done on the
premises ; while engineering shops, carpenters’ shops,
chemical laboratories, are frequent appendages to a large
modern factory.

Thus a number of small, relatively simple business-units,
representing the various stages in the production and dis-
tribution of a commodity, come to group themselves into a
large, complex business-unit

| 3. Though, as we see, there is in many trades a tendency
to specialisation in quality of manufacture, a business confin-
ing itself to the many processes contributory to a single sort
of commodity, in others the integration proceeds horizontally
as well as laterally, a manufacturer or merchant extending
the number of commodities in which he deals. This often
happens where some community of raw material or of
method of manufacture connects two different commodities.
Hence a biscuit manufactory, like Messrs. Huntley &
Palmer, expands its activity until it has absorbed a great
variety of other food products, while a watchmaking busi-
ness takes up electrical or surgical apparatus.

In retail trade this integrative tendency is widely opera-
tive. The modem grocer sells tinned meats, cakes, wine,
teapots, and Christmas cards; the draper sells all sorts of
ornamental wares; the stationer, oil-man, and china store set
out an increasing miscellaneous lot of wares, advancing
towards the position of “general dealer.” The “Stores”
and the Universal Provider represent the culmination of
this movement in the retail business, returning to a more
enlarged and complex form of the primitive “general shop” of
the village. 1 Here, however, as elsewhere, the differentiating

1 A similar reversion to a general primitive type is observed in some
manufacturing businesses, e.g, cotton. “The weaver’s cottage with
its rude apparatus of jug-warping, hand-cards, hand-wheels, and im-
perfect looms, was the steam-loom factory in miniature.” (Guest,
Bisimy §ftk* Gotten Manufacture^ p. 47,)


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*45


tendency is sometimes dominant: fashionable shops devote
themselves to special grades of gloves, hats, cigars or furs,
while manufacturing or mercantile companies set up
numerous branch shops for selling some single com-
modity, such as watches, bicycles, shirts, ready-made
clothing, coffee, etc.

Wherever we turn in the industrial world we find the
business-unit changing its form under the pressure of the
integrating and the differentiating forces, sometimes taking
on a wider range of activities, sometimes a narrower. As
in manufacture and commerce, so in banking and finance.
A modem bank has added various processes of money-
lending and discounting which were alien to its early
functions, while the modem bill-broker tends continually to
become more highly specialised in the kind of bills which
he discounts.

Whiles then, over a large field of business enterprise there
exists a strong tendency towards increasing complexity of
business structure, it is clear that this tendency is not of
universal application even in distinctively capitalistic fields.
Increasing size generally implies further division of labour
and other increased differentiation even where no new lines
of work are taken on. If a growing business, on the one
hand, expands the variety of its products, and, on the other,
takes on various antecedent or subsidiary processes hitherto
independent, it may easily reach a stage of complexity
which introduces larger risks of dislocation and waste from
defective central control We must therefore conclude
that as for every class of business there exists at any given
time a normal size of maximum efficiency, so there exists a
normal degree of complexity.

Increased complexity generally proceeds with increasing
size: where the capitalist forces are making for the produc-
tion of routine goods and services upon a large-scale there
we find the business-unit more heterogeneous and more
highly integrated, partly as the result of differentiation from
within, partly through taking on new lines of business
activity from outside.

§ 4. Ascending from the business-unit to the larger
unit in the structure of industry, the Market, or groups of
directly competing businesses, we find similar changes have
takas place; In considering these changes the relation

ID


THE EVOLUTION OF


I46

between Market and Trade should be clearly grasped. The
mere fact that two persons or groups of persons in different
places are engaged in similar processes of production, that
is to say, belong to the same trade, has no significance
for us. The trade or aggregate of productive units of a
particular sort receives industrial unity only in so far as
there is competition of the units in buying the raw materials,
tools, and labour for carrying on their trade, and in selling
the results of their activity. Weavers of cotton goods in
Central China belong to the same trade as weavers in
Lancashire, and conduct their craft with similar imple-
ments to those which still prevail in the cottage industries
of France and Germany, but such competition as may exist
between them is so indirect and slight that it may be
neglected in considering industrial structure. It is in the
competition of a market that businesses meet and are
vitally related In a trade there may be several markets
whose connection is distant and indirect Market is the
name given to a number of directly competing businesses.

Economists understand by the term market not any
particular market-place in which things are bought and
sold, but the whole of any region in which buyers and
sellers are in such free intercourse with one another that
the prices of the same goods tend to equalise easily and
quickly.** 1

A single competitive price is then the essential feature
and the test of a market Businesses in such close relation
with one another that the prices at which they buy and sell
are the same, or differ only by reason of and in correspond-
ence with certain local advantages or disadvantages, are
members of a single market The money market is a
single market throughout the world The price of money
in London, Rome, Rio de Janeiro, may differ, but this
difference will correspond to certain differences of risk.
There will be a tendency towards a single price, or, putting
the case in other words, wherever in the world £100 of
money represents the same commodity the same price will
be paid for its use, while any difference in its value as a
commodity will be accurately reflected in the difference of
price.

1 Cournot, Reckerckes mr Us Principe* Mathimatiques de la Tkeorie
4 u Mieiesm (quoted M a rsh a ll, Principles qf £cemmics, pw 384).


147


MODERN CAPITALISM,

Absolute freedom of intercourse is not essential to the
establishment of a common market. Market tariffs and
other advantages and disadvantages may place the competi-
tors on an unequal footing. Moreover, in order to form part
of a market as helping to determine the price, a business
need not actively enter the field of competition. Feat of
the potential competition of outsiders often keeps down
prices to a Jevel above which they would rise were it not
for the belief that such a rise would bring into active, effective
competition the outsider. England had until recently a
monopoly of the market for cotton goods in certain Eastern
countries, but the price at which she sold was determined
by the possibility of rival French or German merchants, as
well as by the direct competition of the several English
firms. In certain commodities the market is conterminous
with the trade, that is, we have a world-market This is
the case with many of the forms of money, the most
abstract form of wealth, and the most highly competitive.

Dealers in Stock Exchange securities and in the precious
metals, are in active, constant competition at all the great
commercial centres of the world Other staple commodities,
whose value is great, durable, and portable, such as jewels,
wheat, cotton, wool, have to all intents and purposes a
single market

This world-market represents the fullest expansion due
to modem machinery of transport and exchange, the rail-
way, steamship, newspaper, telegraph, and the system of
credit built up and maintained by the assistance of these
material agents.

The market-area for various commodities varies with the
character of these commodities, from the world-market for
stock exchange securities down to the minimum market
consisting of a few neighbouring farmers competing to
sell their over-ripe plums 01 their skim-milk. The chief
qualifies which determine the market-area are —

(a) Extent of demand. — Things in universal or very
wide demand, which are at the same time durable, such as
money, wool, wheat, compete over very wide areas. Things
specially accommodated to the taste or use of a particular
locality or a small class of individuals will have a narrow
market. This is the case with clothes of a particular cut,
and with many kinds of fabrics out of which clothes are


THE EVOLUTION OF


I48

made The market for certain classes of topographical
books will be confined to the limits of a county, though the
book market for some books is a world-market

id) Portability. — Even where the demand is far from
a general one, the market-area may be very wide where
high value is stored in small bulk. Smoking tobacco and
more highly valued wines and liqueurs are examples of
this order. The market for common bricks is local, though
Portland marble finds a national market

(c) Durability . — Durable objects and objects which can
easily be brought within reach of modem means of rapid
transport have a wide market Perishable goods, as, for
example, many fruits and vegetables, have for these reasons
a narrow market.

§ 5. Modem machinery has in almost all cases raised
the size of the market The space-area of competition has
been immensely widened, especially for the more durable
classes of goods. It is machinery of transport — the
transport of goods and news — that is chiefly responsible for
this expansion. Cheaper, quicker, safer, and more calcul-
able journeys have shrunk space for competing purposes.
Improved means of rapid and reliable information about
methods of production, markets, changes in price and
trade have practically annihilated the element of dis-
tance.

Machinery of manufacture as well as of transport has a
levelling tendency which makes directly for expansion of
the area of competition. As the spread of knowledge places
each part of the industrial world more closely tn rapport
with the rest, the newest and best methods of manufacture
are more rapidly and effectively adopted. Thus in all
production where less and less depends on the skill of the
workers, and more and more upon the character of the
machinery, every change which gives more prominence to
the latter tends to equalise the cost of production in
different countries, and thus to facilitate effective competi-
tion.

§ 6. Modem methods of production have also brought
about a great expansion in the time-area of the market
Competition covers a wider range of time as well as of space.
Production is no longer directed by the quantity and quality
of present needs alone, but is more and more dependent


MODERN CAPITALISM.


149


upon calculation ef future consumption. A larger propor-
tion of the brain power of the business man is devoted to
forecasting future conditions of the market, and a larger
proportion of the mechanical and human labour to pro-
viding future goods to meet calculated demands. This
expansion of the time-market, or growth of speculative
production, is partly cause, partly effect of the improved
mechanical appliances in manufacture and in transport
The multiplication of productive power under the new
machinery has in many branches of industry far outstripped
the requirements of present known consumption at remuner-
ative prices, while increased knowledge of the widening
market has given a basis of calculation which leads manu-
facturers to utilise their spare productive power in providing
against future wants. So long as industry was limited by
the labour of the human body, assisted but slightly by
natural forces and working with simple tools, the output of
productive energy could seldom outstrip the present demand
for consumable goods.

But machinery has changed all this. Modem industrial
nations are able to produce consumables far faster than
those who have the power to consume them are willing to
exercise it Hence there is an ever-increasing margin of
productive power redundant so far as the production of
present consumptive goods is concerned. This excess of
productive power is saved It can only be saved by being
stored up in some material forms which are required not for
direct consumption but for assisting to increase the rate at
which consumables may be produced in the future. In
order to make a place for these new forms #f saving it is
necessary to interpose a constantly increasing number of
mechanical processes between the earliest extractive process
which removes the raw material from the earth and the final
or retailing process which places it in the consumer's hands.
New machinery, more elaborate and costly, is applied;
special workshops, with machines to make this machinery —
other machinery to make these machines; there is an
expansion of the mechanism of credit, the system of agents
and representatives is expanded, new modes of advertising
are adopted Thus an ever-widening field of investment is
provided for the spare energy of machine-production. The
change is commonly described by saying that production is


THE EVOLUTION OF


ISO

more “ roundabout” 1 A larger number of steps are inserted
in the ladder of production. This increased complexity in
the mechanism of production is not, however, the central
point., iff importance. We must realise that the change is
one which is essentially an increase in the H speculative n
character of commerce. The “ roundabout” method of
production signifies a continual increase in the proportion
of productive forces devoted to making “future goods” as
compared with those devoted to making “ present goods.”
Now future goods, plant, machinery, raw material of com-
modities, are essentially “contingent goods”: their worth
or waste depends largely upon conditions yet unborn : their
social utility and the value based upon it depend entirely
upon the future powers and desires of those unknown
persons who are expected to purchase and consume the
commodities which shall come into existence as results of
the existence and activity of these future goods.

The actual time which elapses between the extractive
stage and the final retail stage of a commodity may not be
greater and is in many cases far less under the new methods
of industry. The raw cotton of South Carolina gets on the
wearers back more quickly than it did a century and a half
ago. But when we add in the time-elements involved in
the provision of the various forms of intricate plant and
machinery whose utility entirely consists in forwarding
these cotton goods, and whose existence in the industrial
mechanism depends upon them, we shall perceive that the
“roundabout* method signifies a great extension of the
speculative or time-element in the market 8

| 7. The growing interdependency of trades and markets,
the ever closer sympathy which exists between them, the
increased rapidity with which a movement affecting one
communicates itself to others, are other striking character-
istics of modem trade. This interdependency is in large
measure one of growing structural attachment between trades

m 1 ^ however, to be kept in mind that the application of the

. rc«ndabont method 1 $ only economically justified by a continual
mctease m consumption. So far as a given quantity of consumption is
concerned the result of the “roundabout” method is to diminish the
i quantity of capital which assists to produce it

Professor Bohm Bawerk shows this increased time of production
T 1 fii characterise c a pit a li s t production. C£ Paitiv


MODERN CAPITALISM.


1ST

and markets formerly in feint and distant sympathetic rela-
tionship. Formerly, agriculture was the one important
foundational industry, and from the feebleness of the
transport system the vital connections and the unity it
supplied was local rather than national or international.
Now the agricultural industries no longer occupy this
position of prominence. The coal and iron industries
engaged in furnishing the raw material of machinery and
steam-motor, the machine manufacture, and the transport
services, are the common feeders and regulators of all
industries, including that of agriculture. They form a
system corresponding to the alimentary system of the
human body, any quickening or slackening of whose func-
tional activities is directly and speedily communicated
to the several parts. Any disturbance of price, of efficiency,
or regularity of production in these foundational, industries
is reflected at once and automatically in the several
industries which are engaged in the production and dis-
tribution of the several commodities. The mining and
metal industries, shipbuilding, and the railway services are
recognised more and more as furnishing the true measure
and test of modem trade; their labour enters in fever
larger proportion into die production of all the consumptive
goods.

Besides the general integration or unification of industry
implied by the common dependency of the specific
trades upon these great industries, there are other forces
engaged in integrating groups of trades. Foremost is the
u roundabout” method of production, to which our atten-
tion has been already directed. Not merely does this
capitalist system bring a number of trades and processes
under the control of a single capital, as a single complex
business, but it establishes dose identity of trade-life find
interests among businesses, trades, and markets which
remain distinct so far as ownership and management are
concerned.

•§ 8. If we take the mass of capital and labour composing
one of our staple productive industries, we shall find that it
is related in four different ways to a number of other
industries.

(i) It has a number of trades which are directly co-
ordinate — engaged in the earlier o* later processes of


THE EVOLUTION OF


I$2

producing the same consumptive goods. Thus the manu-
facture of shoes is related co-ordinately to the import
trades of hides and bark, to tanning, to the export trade
in shoes, and to the retail shoe trade. A common stream
of produce is flowing through these several processes, and
though from the point of view of ownership and manage-
ment there may be no connection, there is a close identity
of trade interest and a quick sympathy of commercial life
at these several points.

(2) Each important manufacturing industry has a number
of industries which in their relation to it are secondary,
although in some cases, having similar relations to a number
of other trades, they may in themselves be large and import-
ant In the large textile centres are found a number of
minor industries, planers, sawyers, turners, fitters, smiths,
engaged in irregular work of alteration and repairs upon the
plant and machinery of the textile factories. The same
holds of all important manufactures, especially those which
are closely localised.

A somewhat similar relation appertains between those
manufactures engaged in producing the main body of any
product and the minor industries, which supply some slighter
and essentially subsidiary part In relation to the main
textile and clothing industries, the manufacture of buttons,
of tape, feathers, and other elements of ornament Or
trimmings may be regarded as subsidiary. In the same
way rite manufacture of wall-papers or house paint may be
considered subsidiary to the building trades, that of black-
ing to the shoe manufacture. These subsidiary trades are
related to the primary one more or less closely, and are
affected by the condition of the latter more or less power-
fully in proportion as the subsidiary elements they famish are
more or less indispensable in character. The far and feather
trades are far more dependent upon direct forces of fashion
than upon any changes of price or character in the main
branches of the clothing trade. On the other band, any
cause which affected considerably the price of sugar would
have a great and direct influence on the jam manufacture,
while the rise in price of tin due to the M'Kinley tariff
caused serious apprehension to the Chicago manufacturers
and exporters of preserved meats.

{3) The relations between one , of the great arterial


MODERN CAPITALISM,


*53


industries! such as coal-mining, railway transport, or machine-
making, and a specific manufacture may be regarded as
auxiliary. The extent to which the price of coal, railway
rates, etc., enters into the price of the goods and affects the
condition of profits in the trade measures the closeness of
this auxiliary connection. In the case of the smelting
industries or in the steam transport trades, even in the
pottery trades, the part played by coal is so important that
the relation is rather that of a primary than an auxiliary
connection — coal-mining must be ranked as co-ordinate
to smelting. But where heat is not the direct agent of
manufacture, but is required to famish steam-motor alone,
as in the textile factories, dm connection may be termed
auxiliary.

(4) The relationship between some industries is “ sympa-
thetic” in the sense that the commodities they produce
appeal to closely related tastes, or are members of a group
whose consumption is related harmoniously. In foods we
have the relations between bread, butter, and cheese ; the
relation in which sugar and salt stand to a large number of
consumables. Some of these axe natural relations in the
sense that one supplies a corrective to some defect of the
other, or that the combination enhances the satisfaction or
advantage which would accrue from the consumption of
each severally. In other cases the connection is more
conventional, as that between alcohol and tobacco. The
sporting tastes of man supply a strong sympathetic bond
between many trades. ^ The same is true of literary, artistic,
or other tastes, whiclTby the simultaneous demand which
they make upon several industries, in some proportion
determined by the harmoniotfs satisfaction of their desires,
throw these industries into sympathetic groups. 1 These four
bonds mark an identity of interest between different
industries.

The relationship is sometimes one of,divergency or c r
petition of trades. Where the same service may be sup
by two or more different commodities the trades are re
by direct Competition. Oil, gas, electricity, as illuminant
a famiHar example of this relationship. Many trades wu

1 For a fall and valuable treatment of these harmonious relations,
from the point of view of oonsamptkm and production, see~ Patten's
Economics cfn Dynamic Society*


*54


THE EVOLUTION OF


produce commodities that are similar, but far from iden-
tical in character, feel this relationship very closely. The
competition between various kinds of food, which with
diffei^nt kinds and degrees of satisfaction may produce
the same substantial effects, between fish and meat,
between various kinds of vegetables and drinks, enables
us to realise something of the intricacy of the relations
of this kind In clothing we have antagonism of interests
between the various fabrics which has led to great industrial
changes. The most signal example is the rise of cotton,
its triumph over woollen clothes by the earlier application
of the new machinery, and over silk by the early superiority
of its dyeing and printing processes. 1 So in recent years
in the conflict among beverages, tea, and in a less measure
cocoa, have materially damaged the growth of the coffee
industry so far as English consumption is concerned.
Where such rivalry exists, an industry may be as power-
fully and immediately affected by a force which raises or
depresses its competitor as by a force which directly affects
itself.

§ 9. The growth of numerous and strongly-built structural
attachments between different trades and markets related to
different localities implies the existence of a large system
of channels of communication throughout our industrial
society. By the increased number and complexity of these
channels connecting different markets and businesses, and
relating the most distant classes of consumers, we can
measure the evolution of the industrial organism. Through
these channels flow the currents of modem industrial life,
whose pace, length, and regularity contrast with the feeble,
short, and spasmodic flow of commerce in earlier times.
This advance in functional activity of distribution is thus
expressed by Mr. Spencer: — “In early English times the
great fairs, annual and other, formed the chief means of dis-
tribution, and remained important down to the seventeenth
century, when not only villages, but even small towns, devoid
of shops, were irregularly supplied by hawkers who had
obtained their stocks at these gatherings. Along with
increased population, larger industrial centres, and improved
channels of communication, local supply became easier;


1 Cf. Porter, Progrtss oftkt Nation, pp. 177-206.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


155


and so frequent markets more and more fulfilled the purpose
of infrequent fairs. Afterwards, in chief places and for chief
commodities, markets themselves multiplied, becoming in
some cases daily. Finally came a constant distribution,
such that of some foods there is to each town an influx
every morning; and of milk even more than once in the
day. The transition from times when the movements of
people and goods between places were private, slow, and
infrequent, to times when there began to run at intervals
of several days public vehicles % moving at four miles an
hour, and then to times when these shortened their intervals
and increased their speed, while their lines of movement
multiplied, ending in our own times, when along each line
of rails there go at full speed a dozen waves daily that are
relatively vast, sufficiently show us how the social circula-
tion progresses from feeble, slow, irregular movements to a
rapid, regular, and powerful pulse .” 1

The differentiation of function in the several parts of the
industrial organism finds a partial expression in the localisa-
tion of certain industries. As there is growing division of
labour among individuals and groups of individuals, so the
expansion of the area of competition has brought about a
larger and larger amount of local specialisation.

Roughly speaking, the West of Europe and of America
has specialised in manufacture, drawing an ever larger
proportion of their food supplies from the North-West States
of America, from Russia, the Baltic Provinces, Australia,
Egypt, India, etc., and their raw materials of manufacture
from the southern United States, South America, India, etc.,
while these latter countries are subjected to a correspondent
specialisation in agriculture and other extractive arts. If we
take Europe alone, we find certain large characteristics
which mark out the Baltic trade, the BlacSg. Sea trade, the
Danube trade, the Norwegian and White Sea trade. So the
Asiatic trade fklls into certain tolerably defined divisions of
area, as the Levant trade, the Red Sea trade, the Indian, the
Straits, and East Indian, the China trade, etc. The whole
trade of the world is thus divided for commercial purposes . 1
Though these trade divisions are primarily suggested by

x Principles of Sociology > coL L p. 500 (3rd edit).

* For a detailed account of the national trade divisions, cf. Dr. Yeats,
The Golden Gates of Trade,


I $6 THE EVOLUTION OF

considerations of transport rather than of the character of
production, the geographical, climatic, and other natural
factors which determine convenient lines of transport are
found to have an important bearing on the character of the
production, and convenience of transport itself assists largely
to determine the kind of work which each part of the world
sets itself to do.

The establishment of a world-market for a larger and
larger number of commodities is transforming with mar-
vellous rapidity the industrial face of the globe. This does
not now appear so plainly in the more highly-developed
countries of Europe, which, under the influence of half a
century's moderately free competition for a European
market, have already established themselves in tolerably
settled conditions of specialised industry. But in the new
world, and in those older countries which are now fast
yielding to the incursions of manufacturing and transport
machinery, the specialising process is making rapid strides.

Improved knowledge of the world, facile communication,
an immense increase in the fluidity of capital, and a con-
siderable increase in that of labour, are busily engaged in
distributing the production of the world in accordance
with certain dominant natural conditions. Those in-
dustrial forces which have during the last century and a
half been operative in England, draining the population
and industry from the Southern and Eastern counties, and
concentrating it in larger proportions in Lancashire, the
West Biding, Staffordshire, and round the Northumbrian
and South Wales coal-fields, specialising each town or
locality upon some single branch of the textile, metal, or
other industries for which its soil, position, or other natural
advantages made it suitable, are now beginning to extend
the area of their control over the whole surface of the known
and inhabited globe.

As huge areas of Asia, South and Central Africa,
Australia, and South America fall under the control of
European commercial nations, are opened up by steamships,
railways, telegraphs, and are made free receptacles for the
increased quantity of capital which is unable to find a safe
remunerative investment nearer home, we are brought
nearer to a condition in which the whole surface of the
world will be disposed for industrial purposes by these same


MODERN CAPITALISM.


IS 7


forces which have long been confined in their direct and
potent influence to a small portion of Western Europe and
America. This vast expansion of the area of effective com-
petition is beginning to specialise industry on the basis of a
world-market, which was formerly specialised on the more
confined basis of a national or provincial market So in
England, where the early specialisation of machine-industry
was but slightly affected by outside competition, great
changes are taking place. Portions of our textile and metal
industries, which naturally settled in districts of Lancashire^
Yorkshire, and Staffordshire, while the area of competition
was a national one , 1 seem likely to pass to India, to Germany,
or elsewhere, now that a tolerably free competition on the
bass of world-industry has set in. It is inevitable that with
every expansion of the area of competition under which
a locality falls the character of its specialisation will change.
A piece of English ground which was devoted to corn-
growing when the market was a district one centred in the
county town, becomes the little factory town when com-
petition is established on a national basis; it may become
the pleasure-ground of a retired millionaire speculator
if under the pressure of world-competition it has been
found that the manufacture which now thrives there can be
carried on more economically in Bombay or Nankin, where
each unit of labour power can be bought at the cheapest
rate, or where some slight saving in the transport of raw
material may be effected.

§ io. The question how industry would be located,
assuming the whole surface of the globe was brought into
a single market or area of competition, with an equal
development of transport facilities in all its parts; or in
other words, “What is the ideal disposition of industry in
a world-society making its chief end the attainment c f
industrial wealth estimated at present values?” is one ti
which of course no very exact answer can be given. Bu
since this ideal represents the goal of modem industrial pro-

1 Foreign competition with English textiles, though comparatively
modern so far as the more highly developed machine-made fabrics are
concerned, was keenly felt early in the century in hand-made goods.
Schulze- Gaevemitz points out that the depression in work and wages
of the hand-loom workers in 1820 was due more to foreign competition
than to the new machinery. Grossbetrteb, p. 41,)


THE EVOLUTION OF


IS8

gress, it is worth while to call attention to the chief - deter-
minants of the localisation of industries under free world-
competitioa The influences may be placed in three
groups, which are, however, interrelated at many points.

(1) The first group may be called Climatic, the chief
influences of which are astronomical position, surface con-
tour, prevalent winds, ocean currents, etc. Climatic zones
have their own flora and fauna, and so far as these enter
into industry as agricultural and pastoral produce, as raw
materials of manufacture, as sustenance of labour, they are
natural determinants of the localisation of industry. In
vegetable products the climatic zones are very clearly
marked. “The boreal zone has its special vegetation of
mosses, lichens, saxifrages, berries, oats, barley, and rye;
the temperate zone its peas, beans, roots, hops, oats, barley,
rye, and wheat ; this zone, characterised by its extent of
pastures, hop gardens, and barley fields, has also a dis-
tinctive title in the * beer and butter region.’ The warm
temperate zone, or region of * wine and oil,’ is characterised
by the growth of the vine, olive, orange, lemon, citron,
pomegranate, tea, wheat, maize, and rice ; the sub-tropical
zone, by dates, figs, the vine, sugar-cane, wheat, and maize ;
the tropical zone is characterised by~coffee, cocoa-nut,
cocoa, sago, palm, figs, arrowroot, and spices; and the
equatorial by bananas, plantains, cocoa-nut, etc.” 1

( 2 ) The second-group is geographical and geological.
The shape and position of a country, its relation in space
to other countries, the character of the soil and sub-soil, its
water-supply, though closely related to climatic influences,
have independent bearings. The character of the soil, which
provides for crops their mineral food, has an important bear-
ing upon the raw materials of industry. The shape and
position of the land, especially the configuration of its coast,
have a social as well as climatic significance, directing the
intercourse with other lands and the migrations of people and
civilisations which play so large a part in industrial history.

{3) Largely determined by the two groups of influences
named above are the forces which represent the national
character at any given time, the outcome of primitive race
characteristics, food supply, speed and direction of industrial


1 Vests, TJu Gtldtn Gates ofTrade % p. 12. (Philip & Son.)


MODERN CAPITALISM.


159


development, density of population, and the various other
causes which enter in to determine efficiency of labour.
The play of these natural and human forces in world-com-
petition leads to such a settlement of different industries in
different localities as yields the greatest net productiveness
of labour in each part

§ 11. But this world-competition, however free it may
become, can lead to no finality, no settled appointment of
industrial activity to the several parts of the earth. Setting
aside all political and other non-economic motives, there are
three reasons which render such local stability of industry
impossible.

There is first the disturbance and actual loss sustained by
nature in working up the mineral wealth of the soil, and the
flora and fauna sustained by it, into commodities which are
consumed, and an exact equivalent of which cannot be
replaced. The working out of a coal-field, the destruction
of forests which reacts upon the elementary climatic
influences, are examples of this disturbance.

Secondly, there is the progress of industrial cits, new
scientific discoveries applicable to industry. There is no
reason to believe that human knowledge can reach any final
goal : there is infinity alike in the resources of nature and
in the capacity of the development of human skill

Lastly, as human life continues, the art of living must
continually change, and each change alters the value
attached to the several forms of consumption, and so to the
industrial processes engaged in the supply of different
utilities.^ New wants stimulate new arts, new arts alter the
disposition of productive industry, giving value to new
portions of the earth. Ignoring those new material wants
which require new kinds of raw material to be worked up
for their satisfaction, the growing appreciation of certain
kinds of sport, the love of fine scenery, a rising value set
upon healthy atmosphere, are beginning to exercise a more
and more perceptible influence upon the localisation of
certain classes of population and industry in the more
progressive nations of the world.

§ 12. The same laws and the same limitations which are
operative in determining the character and degree of special-
isation of countries or large areas are also seen to apply
to smaller districts, towns, and streets. Industries engaged


THE EVOLUTION OF


1 6b

in producing valuable, durable material objects in wide
demand are locally specialised ; those engaged in providing
bulky perishable non-material goods, or goods in narrow
demand, are unspecialised. England, where internal inter-
course has been most highly developed, and where internal
competition has been freest and keenest, shows the most
advanced specialisation in several of its staple industries.
The concentration of cotton spinning in South Lancashire
is an example, the full significance of which often escapes
notice. From the beginning South Lancashire was the
chief seat of the industry, but it is now far more concen-
trated than was the case a century ago. Several of the
most valuable inventions in spinning were first applied in
Derbyshire, in Nottingham, at Birmingham, and in Scotland.
Scotland then competed closely in weaving with Lancashire.
Now the Scotch industry is confined to certain specialities.
In spite of the enormous growth of the manufacture, the
local area it covers is even narrower than in last century.
Within Lancashire itself the actual area of production has
shrunk to some 25 square miles in the extreme south, while
the two great cities are further specialised — Liverpool as the
market for cotton, Manchester for yam and cotton cloths.

Moreover, the localisation of various departments of the
trade within Lancashire is still more remarkable. Not only
have the old mills in which spinning and weaving were
carried on together given way before division of labour, but
the two processes are mostly conducted in different districts,
the former In the towns immediately around Manchester,
the latter in the more distant northern circuit Nor is the
specialisation confined to this. Spinning is again ‘ divided
according to the coarser and finer qualities of yam. The
Oldham district, with Ashton, Middleton, and other towns
south of Manchester, is chiefly confined to the medium
numbers. Bolton, Chorley, Preston, and other northern
towns undertake the finer numbers. In weaving there
is even more intricate division of labour, each town or
district specialising upon some particular line of goods. 1
Moreover, it must be borne in mind that the substitu-
tion of the factory for the domestic system and the

* Cf. Schulze-Gaevernitz’s minute investigation of this whole subject,
Der Grossbetricb, pp. 98, 99, etc. Also cf. Holm in British Industries,
edited by Professor W. J- Ashley.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


161

continual enlargement of the average factory indicates
an important progressive concentration. So the cotton
industry does not in fact cover nearly so large a local
area as when it was one-hundredth the size. The same
is true of the other chief branches of the textile and
metal industries. Nor is it only in the manufactures that
towns and districts are closely specialised. The enormous
increase of commerce due to machinery of manufacture and
of transport .requires the specialisation of certain towns for
purely commercial purposes. London, Liverpool, Glasgow,
and Hull are more and more devoted to the functions
of storage and conveyance. Manchester itself is rapidly
losing its manufacturing character and devoting itself almost
exclusively to import and export trade. The railway service
has made for itself large towns, such as Crewe, Derby,
Normanton, and Swindon. Cardiff is a portentous example
of a new mining centre created when the machine develop-
ment of England was already ripe.

The specialisation of function in a large town is, however,
qualified in two ways. The strong local organisation of a
staple trade requires the grouping round it of a number of
secondary or auxiliary trades. In large textile towns the
manufactures of textile machinery, and of subsidiary
materials, are found. The machine-making of Manchester
is one of its most important industries, furnishing the
neighbouring textile towns. Leeds is similarly equipped
for the woollen trade. This is one of the respects in which
the superior development of the English cotton industry
over the continental ones is indicated. In Alsace alone of
the continental centres has the concentration of industry
advanced so far as to furnish a local machine industry
specially devoted to cotton machinery. Germany is still
largely dependent upon England for her machines . 1 So
likewise with regard to co-ordinate trades, there is an
advantage in the leading processes being grouped in local
proximity, though they are not united in the same business.
Thus we find dye-works and the various branches of the
dothing trade largely settled in the large textile towns,
such as Leeds, Bradford, Manchester, Bolton. The unit
of local specialisation is thus seen to be not a single


1 Sdnte-Gaevcmits, p. xrn


ll


l6a THE EVOLUTION OF

trade, but a group of closely allied trades, co-ordinate,
dependent, and derivative.

Round some large industries in which men find employ-
ment minor parasitic industries spring up stimulated by the
supply of cheap abundant labour of women and children.
In metal and machine towns such as Birmingham, Dudley,
Walsall, in Newcastle-on-Tyne, and other shipbuilding
towns, where the staple industries are a masculine mono-
poly, textile factories have been planted. The same holds
of various mining villages and of agricultural villages in the
neighbourhood of large textile centres. There is in the
midland counties a growing disposition to place textile
factories in rural villages where cheap female labour can be
got, and where the independence of workers is qualified by
stronger local attachments and inferior capacity of effective
trade union organisation. As textile work passes more and
more into the hands of women, 1 this tendency to make it
a parasitic trade thriving upon the low wages for which
women's labour can be got where strong and well-paid
male work is established, win probably be more strongly
operative.

§ 13. The specialisation of certain districts within the town,
though far less rigid than in the mediaeval town, is very
noticeable in the larger centres of industry. Natural causes
often determine this division of localities, as in the case of
the riverside industries, brick-making and market-gardening
in the outer suburbs. Round the central station in every


1 The following table* shows the proportions of females in 1000
occupied persons in the chief textile industries of England and Wales.


1861.

1871.


Cotton ....

567

598

620

609

628

Wool and Worsted •

461

513

561

557

582

Silk ...

64a

676

691

667

702

Hemp, Jute, etc.

365

304

374

393

49*

Hosiery . . .

46 8

468

533

629

713

Lace ....

829

826 i

743

625

653

Carpets, etc. •

! *83

1

31 * ,

362

440

517


G&uraJ Rsfort tf Census? p. 86.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


I63


large town, for convenience of work and life, settle a
number of industries related to the carrying trade. Every
trade, market, or exchange is a centre of attraction. So
the broking, banking, and the general financing businesses
are grouped closely round the Royal Exchange. Mark Lane
and Mincing Lane are centres of the corn and tea trades.
In all town industries not directly engaged in retail distribu-
. tion there are certain obvious economies and conveniences
in this gregariousness. Agents, travellers, collectors, and
others who have relations of sale or purchase with a number
of businesses in a trade find a variety of disadvantages in
dealing with a firm locally detached from the main body, so
that when a district is once recognised as a trade centre* it
becomes increasingly important to each new competitor to
settle there. The larger the city the stronger this force of
trade centralisation. Hence in London, untrammelled by
guild or city regulations, we find a strong localisation of
most wholesale and some retail businesses. In retail trade,
however, the economic gain is less universal. Since retail
commodities are chiefly for use in the home, and homes
are widely distributed, the convenience of being near one’s
customers and away from trade competitors is often a pre-
dominating motive. Shops which sell bread, meat, fish,
fruit, groceries, articles which are bought frequently and
mostly in small quantities, shops selling cheaper articles of
ordinary consumption, such as tobacco, millinery, stationery,
and generally shops selling articles for domestic use, the
purchase of which falls to women, are widely dispersed. On
the other hand, where the articles are of a rarer and more
expensive order, when it is likely that the purchaser will
seek to compare price and character of wares, and will pre-
sumably be willing to make a special journey for the purpose,
the centralising tendency prevails in- retail trade. So we
find the vendors of carriages, pianos, bicycles, the heavier
articles of furniture, jewellery, second-hand books, furs, and
the more expensive tailors and milliners clustering togethe
in a special street or neighbourhood.

Effective competition in retail trade sometimes required
concentration, sometimes dispersion of business. But the
most characteristic modem movement in retail trade is a
combination of the centralising and dispersive tendencies,
and is related to the enlargement of the business-unit


i6+ THE EVOLUTION OF

which we found proceeding everywhere in industry. The
large distributing company, with a number of local branch
agents who call regularly at the house of the con-
sumer for orders, is the most highly organised form of
retail trade In all the departments of regular and general
consumption the movement is towards this constant house-
to-house supply. The wealthier classes in towns have
already learned to purchase all the more perishable forms of
food and many other articles of house consumption in this
way, while the growing facilities of postage and conveyance
of goods enable them to purchase from a large central store
by means of a price-list all other consumables into which
the element of individual taste or caprice does not largely
enter. This habit is spreading in the smaller towns among
the middle classes, so that the small dispersed retail
businesses are becoming more and more dependent upon
the supply of the needs of the working classes, and of such
articles of comfort and luxury as may appeal to the less
regular and calculable tastes of the moneyed classes. Just
as in towns we have a constant automatic supply of water
and gas instead of an intermittent supply dependent on a
number of individual acts of purchase^ so it seems likely
that all the routine wants of the consumer will be
supplied

How far mechanical inventions may be applied to increase
tbe facility and cheapen the cost of this distribution it is
difficult to say. The automatic machine for distributing
matches and sweetmeats is adaptable to many forms of
routine consumption. In the larger stores many kinds of
labour-saving machinery are already applied. As steam or
dectric power is adopted more widely in the local transport
services the retail distribution of goods from a large single
centre is likely to proceed apace, and a displacement of
human labour by machinery similar to that which is taking
place in manufacture will take place in distribution. So far
as the wants of large classes of the public become regular
and their consumption measurable in quantity, machinery
will unquestionably take over the labour of distribution,
especially in the large towns which are absorbing in a way
convenient for mechanical distribution a larger proportion
of the consuming public. With each new encroachment of
machinery into the domain of the distributing trades the


MODERN CAPITALISM.


16s

characteristic* of machine-industry, enlarged mass of the
business, increased area of the market, increased complexity
of relations to other trades, increased specialisation of local
activity will be clearly discernible.


We thus see m the several departments of industry, under
the pressure of the same economic forces, an expansion of
size, a growing complexity! of structure and functional
activity, and an increased cohesion of highly differentiated
parts in the business, the market^ and in that aggregation of


1 66 THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM,

related trades and markets which forms the world-industry.
The physical instrument by which these economic forces,
making for increased size, heterogeneity, and cohesive-
ness , 1 have been able to operate is machinery applied to
manufacture and transport. Moreover, each new encroach-
ment of machinery upon the extractive and the distributing
industries brings into prominence within these processes
the same structural and functional characteristics.

1 In a free application of Spencer’s formula of evolution to modern
industry I have not included the quality of u definiteness,” which close
reflection shows to possess no property which is not included un der
heterogeneity and cohesiveness.


CHAPTER VII.


COMBINATIONS OF CAPITAL

§ i. Competition intensifies with Modem Capitalism .

§ 2. Experiments in Combination , . TA? Birmingham Al-
liance .

§ 3. “Pools” in American Metal Trades .

§ 4. Conferences in Railroads and Shipping ; Insurance

Pools , .

§ 5. “ Comers ” in Markets , ,

§ 1. The increased size and complexity of the business,*
unit in those industries where the concentrative force of
capitalism has operated cause changes in the relations
between businesses contributing to the same market
When the growth in the normal size of the business is
attended by a corresponding expansion of the market, the
total number of competitors may remain as large as before,
and the terms of their competition may remain unchanged.
But in most branches of capitalist industry the market does
not continue to expand as fast as the size of an effective
business, so that the number of effective competitors in a
market tends to be smaller. So long as the competition
among the smaller number of large competitors remains as
“free” as formerly among a larger number of small com-
petitors, no radical alteration in the structure of the market
takes place. Ail the productive economies tend as before
to pass into the hands of the consumer in reduced prices of
commodities. Nay, more than this, a competing firm cannot
even keep to itself the advantages of some private individual
economy if its competitor possesses some other private
economy of equal importance. If A and B are two closely
competing firms, A owing a special machine capable of
earning for him 2 per cent above the normal, trade profit,


i68


THE EVOLUTION OF


and B possessing an equal advantage in a supply of cheaper
labour, these private advantages are cancelled by com-
petition, and pass into the pocket of the consuming public
through reduced prices.

There is every reason to believe that with a diminution
in the number of competitors and an increase of their size,
competition grows keener and keener. Under old business
conditions custom held considerable sway; the personal
element played a larger part alike in determining quality of
goods and good faith; purchasers did not so closely com-
pare prices; they were not guided exclusively by figures,
they did not systematically beat down prices, nor did they
devote so large a proportion of their time, thought, and
money to devices for taking away one another’s customers . 1
From the new business this personal element and these
customary scruples have almost entirely vanished, and as
the net advantages of large-scale production grow, more
and more attention is devoted to the direct work of com-
petition. Hence we find that it is precisely in those trades
which are most highly organised, provided with the most
advanced machinery, and composed of the largest units of
capital, that the fiercest and most unscrupulous competition
has shown itself. The exact part which machinery, with
its incalculable tendency to over-production, has played in
this competition remains for later consideration. Here it
is enough to place in evidence the acknowledged fact that
the growing scale of the business has intensified and not
diminished competition. In the great machine industries
trade fluctuations are most severely felt; the smaller
businesses are unable to stand before the tide of depression
and collapse, or are driven in self-defence to coalesce. The
borrowing of capital, the formation of joint-stock enterprise
and every form of co-operation in capital have proceeded most
rapidly in the textile, metal, transport, shipping, and machine-
making industries, and in those minor manufactures, such as
brewing and chemicals, which require large quantities of ex-
pensive plant This joining together of small capitals to
make a single large capital, this swallowing up of small by

1 There still survive in certain old-fashioned trades firms which do
business without formal written contracts, and which would be ashamed
to take a lower price than they had at first asked, or to seek to beat
down another’s price.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


169


large businesses, mean first and foremost an endeavour to
escape the risks and dangers attending small-scale production
in the tide of modem industrial changes. But since all are
moving in the same direction, no one gains upon the other.
Certain common economies are shared by the monster com-
petitors, but more and more energy must be given to the
work of competition, and the productive economies are
partly squandered in the friction of fierce competition, and
partly pass over to the body of consumers in lowered prices.
Thus die endeavour to secure safety and high profits by the
economies of large-scale production is rendered futile by
the growing severity of the competitive process. Each
big firm finds itself competent to undertake more busi-
ness than it already possesses, and underbids its neigh-
bour until the cutting, of prices has sunk the weaker and
driven profits to a bare subsistence point for the stronger
competitors.

§ 2. The intensity of competition thus generated under
developed capitalism, when a few large businesses find an
increasing difficulty in disposing of their full output regu-
larly and at a profitable price, drives the competitors to
seek some arrangement with one another which shall
-mitigate the severity of the struggle.

These arrangements are primarily directed to restrain
underselling by fixing price-lists, and when necessary and
feasible^ by regulating output: firms do not cease to com-
pete, but endeavour to limit the terms of their competition.
There is of course nothing new in this: in local industries,
especially where goods are sold directly to consumers, prices
never have been fixed by “free” competition; the regula-
tions of Guilds and of Assizes have always been succeeded
by conspiracies among local vendors to hold up prices. In
the case of large capitalist industries the necessary
mechanism of the market for buying raw material and for
selling their product, the Com or Cotton Exchange, the
Clearing House for Railroads or Banks, the necessary
organisation of the trade for obtaining quick and sure
intelligence on matters of common trade interest, the
growth of Wage Boards and other machinery for dealing
with labour,— all these form a basis of association which
can be utilised for regulating competition.

The earliest stage is one of informal agreement, starting


170


THE EVOLUTION OF


first among competing firms of a particular locality, and
gradually extending so as to cover the entire trade, or a
sufficient proportion to give the required control of price.
This has been the typical movement in the British iron,
steel* and engineering trades during recent years.

The statement of a representative trade journal in 1898
accurately conveys the state of those trades. “We have
now in operation agreements or understandings as to prices
In the rail, ship-plate, boiler-plate, bar iron, and other
branches of the iron and steel trades of this country by
means of which prices are fairly well maintained and
cutting is largely prevented.” 1

Amid other schemes of combination or amalgamation
which are in progress in the metal, textile, and other staple
manufacturing and commercial industries in Britain these
experiments for regulating prices by informal agreements
are everywhere rife. Their success or failure depends in
the main upon two conditions — first, the proportion of the
total trade commanded by a few great competing firms;
second, the state of the market as regards supply. When,
as in most departments of the British metal and engineering
trades, a few gigantic businesses dominate the market, the
existence of a large number of small firms doing for the
most part a purely local business, need not prevent the
maintenance of a successful price list On the other hand,
an overstocking of the market, due to a large improvement
of productive plant or a collapse in demand, may easily
knock the bottom out of such an “agreement” and lead to
secret or even open underselling.

The rapid changes, alike in capacity of production and
in volume of demand, which are characteristic of modern
markets, afford little security to “ agreements ” of competing
firms unless accompanied by some effective guarantees or
penalties for infringement of the conditions of the agree-
ment In order that agreements to maintain profitable
prices may have any chance of enduring success it is per-
ceived that they must be accompanied by provisions for the
regulation of output, or for the proportionate distribution of
“orders” In mining and manufacturing businesses limita-
tion of M output * is in some countries the basis of an effective


* Iron and Coal Trades Review (quoted Macrosty, p. 184).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


171

agreement In England, however, little recourse has yet been
had to this method of maintaining prices. When, as recently
in the Lancashire cotton industry, competing firms have
agreed to work short time, the policy has been adopted not
in order to hold up prices, but to deal with a passing
emergency due to a short supply of material Although
more than once in the South Wales coal trade the proposal
has been made to limit the output and to distribute the
orders among the various collieries, no experiment upon
these lines has been tried.

But while most of the important British manufacturing
industries are experimenting upon “informal agreements,"
a number of smaller trades, especially in metal industries,
have been seeking a firmer basis of association. “The
Birmingham Alliance "is the name given to a species of
combination, which, starting in the iron bedstead trade in
1890, was adopted by various minor branches of metal
manufacture in the Midlands, and later by the dyeing trade
of the West Riding and a few other industries of the second
rank. Its prime basis was a formal agreement among the
members of the Employers' Association to adopt a scientific
system of “cost-taking," to add an agreed portion of profit
to the true cost, and thus to reach a price-list to which
every member should bind himself to adhere. The novel
portion of the scheme lay in the extension of the combina-
tion so as to include labour. The Employers’ Association
entered into an alliance with the Trade Unions, signing a
formal agreement whereby each employer bound himself to
employ union members only, while the Trade Union bound
itself only to supply men to employers who were members
of the Association. On the basis of a certain permanent
addition to existing wages a sliding scale was fixed, whereby
future wages rose and fell in direct proportion to profits.
The whole scheme was clinched by a Conciliation Board
upon which employers and workers were equally repre
sented, with provision, when necessary, for impartis
arbitration. If an employer broke away from the AiHanr
or violated his pledges, the Board “called out" his work-
men. The outside competitor was to be met “by well-
arranged, careful, judicious, and systematic underselling,
until he is compelled either to retire or to come to terms."
A. fighting fund was raised to deal with such cases, and a


172 THE EVOLUTION OF

system of “rebates” was added in order to detach customers
from foreign makers.

For several years the plan was successful in the bedstead
and several other trades: prices were raised, profits were
high, and large bonuses were added to wages. But the
high profits were found in time to overstrain the economic
itrength of the Alliance, disloyal members of the Associa-
tion began to practise under-selling by false invoices or
secret commissions, while outside competition began to
assume too formidable dimensions. As a result of this
demoralisation, in 1900 the Bedstead Alliance broke down,
followed or preceded in its fall by most of its imitators.

§ 3. This experiment serves to show that not even a
formal agreement among firms as to selling prices is capable
of being maintained unless the Association possesses some
direct control over the output of the several firms, and can
easily detect and adequately punish infractions of the agree-
ment A number of interesting experiments in Industrial
Pooling in the United States are expressly directed to
discover and test the best methods of maintaining such
agreements.

“Manufacturers desiring to form a pool usually create
an unincorporated organisation, such as the Bessemer
Steel Association, the Merchants’ Ore Association, or the
Steel Rail Association. All agree to maintain a schedule
of prices fixed by the Association and to limit their pro-
duction accordingly. Each manufacturer is allowed to
produce (or sell) only a certain percentage of the whole
output^ depending upon the capacity and advantages of his
plant To prevent violation of the agreement, a money
deposit is often required from each, forfeitable to the
Association.” 1

Expert accountants are employed: fines are imposed
spon firms producing more than the allowed percentage,
a corresponding bonus being paid to those producing less.
Prices and allotments of output are arranged each November
or December for the following year. A territorial division
of the market is frequently practised. As a rule, local
prices are arranged, by first fixing a uniform factory price*

1 W. E. Belcher in an article on *• Industrial Pooling ” {Quarterly
Journal ef Economics $ Nov. 1904), from which the following particulars
are also taken.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 173

and then adding a freightage from factory to the place of
sale.

Several variations from this general type are extant.
“Several pools have omitted the feature of percentage allot-
ments, and have placed a tax upon all manufacturing.”
Another device is the joint sales agent. The combining
firms agree to use a single party for their sole sales agent,
he contracting with each of them separately, but fixing a
uniform selling price. “Another form of pool is based on
patents essential to the manufacture of the article. The
patentee sells the rights of use, for a uniform royalty, to all
who apply. He also limits the quota to be produced by
each firm, above which amount the royalty increases
rapidly. 1

The steel and iron trades in the United States are honey-
combed by such pools. The ore when dug is handled by
an Association, claiming to fix prices and regulate output.
In the manufacture of pig-iron an Association arranges prices
among furnace men. Steel billets were pooled in 1896, and
again since 1900; so also with heavy materials such as steel
rails, beams, angles, bars, etc., and light materials such as
chains, bolts, pipes, and tubing.

Few, if any, of these pools can be regarded as stable
organisations. Their frequent collapse is regarded by Mr.
Belcher as the natural result of early attempts at overgrasp-
ing by rises of prices. The chief interest which attaches to
them is due to the fact that, like the English * Alliances,”
they represent endeavours of manufacturers engaged in
capitalist industry to secure an element of monopoly profits
without abandoning the independent ownership and control
of their several businesses.

§ 4. The largely developed capitalism of the transport
trades by rail and water has led to the adoption of methods
of agreement in regulation or restraint of competition more
enduring and successful than those agreements of manufac-
turers just described. In Great Britain and the United
States, the two chief nations where railroads have been left
to “ private enterprise,” railroad companies exposed to keen
competition have organised common systems of rates for

1 The Consolidated Seedless Raisin Co. and the National Ham
Co. are named as of this order of " pooh”


174


THE EVOLUTION OF


freight and also for passenger traffic. In Great Britain
these agreements to regulate "competition” are openly
recognised; in America they are illicit, but operative all the
same. The English method is by Conferences, of which
there are two principal ones — “The English and Scotch
Traffic Rates Conference n and “ The Normanton Confer-
ence.” a The English and Scotch Conference is composed
of representatives (who are usually the chief goods managers)
of all the companies, both English and Scotch, who are in-
terested in the carriage of goods between places in England
and places in Scotland by the various routes. These repre-
sentatives meet once a month, and deal with all questions
arising in connection with the making of new rates or the
alteration of existing rates for competitive places between
which more than one company can carry. The Normanton
Conference, which was originally established to control the
rate for a certain district of which Normanton, where its
meetings were formerly held, was a convenient centre, has
gradually so much extended its scope that it is now com-
posed of representatives of nearly every company of any
importance in England, and governs almost the whole of
the competitive rates which are not dealt with by the
English and Scotch Conference/’ 1
The fixing of rates is sometimes supplemented by a further
plan, which brings the agreement into closer resemblance
to the industrial pool above described. This is known as
the “Percentage Division of Traffic.” “Supposing that
there is a certain traffic to be conveyed between two towns
or districts, and that there are two or more railway com-
panies, each having a route of its own by which it is enabled
to compete for the traffic. An agreement is come to that
the receipts derived from the whole of the traffic carried by
all routes shall be thrown into a common fund, and that
each company shall be entitled to a certain percentage of
the whole. . . . The percentages are usually adjusted on
the basis of past actual earnings, but in settling the terms of
the agreement due weight is accorded to any prospective
advantage which may entitle one company to claim a larger
[proportion than it has carried in the past.” 3

Sir G* Findlay, Tkt Working and Managtment of an English
Railway* p. 365.

* Fhdlsy, p. 269.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


m


la America, where all positive rate-agreements between
competing railroad corporations are illegal, the machinery
for such regulation is more informal and hidden from the
public eye, but there can be no doubt that recourse is
continually had to rate-fixing, and even to the pooling of
business among competing roads.

“It is idle to say that where such a condition exists,
where, for example, every one of the numerous lines trans-
porting grain from Chicago, St. Louis, and kindred points
to the Atlantic seaboard advance their rates upon the same
day and by precisely the same amount, there has been no
understanding between those companies. Nor do the
carriers, as a rule, deny such concert of action, but they
insist that it does not proceed to the point of an unlawful
agreement” 1

The term Conference is also used to describe the organi-
sation by which competing shipping companies maintain
fixed rates, and preclude outsiders from entering their trade.
A Conference is an arrangement among the leading lines of
steamships, plying on a particular sea route, to charge a
fixed “fair” rate for freight and passenger traffic. Such an
arrangement can only be effective on condition that all or
nearly all the regular lines come into the Conference. For
the power of a Conference is exercised directly on the
shippers by means of a “rebate” system, which operates
partly as a bribe, partly as a menace, inducing shippers to
do business exclusively with members of the Conference.
The system appears to have begun in the China trade, and
the following circulars illustrate its working as early as
1884: —

“To those exporters who confine their shipments of tea
and general cargo from China to Europe (not including the
Mediterranean and Black Sea ports) to the Peninsular and
Oriental Steam Navigation Company’s, Messageries Mari-
time Company’s, Ocean Steamship Company’s, Glen, Castle,
Shire, and Ben lines, and to the Steamships Oopack and
Ningchow, we shall be happy to allow a rebate of 5 per cent
on the freight charged.” Another circular issued by the same
Conference in 1885 states that “shipments for London by
non-Conference steamers, at any of the ports in China or

1 Cammsnu Cammtuum far 1903, p. 15.


THE EVOLUTION OF


176

Hong-Kong, will exclude the firm making such shipment
from participation in the return during the whole six-
monthly period within which they have been made, even
although the firm elsewhere may have given exclusive
support to the Conference lines .” 1 * The object and effect of
this method is to coniine traffic to Conference lines with
agreed rates, and to preclude “ tramp ” steamers or sailing
vessels from calling in and taking business either at the
Conference rates or at reduced rates.

The usual method has been for the steamship lines to
charge^ in addition to the freight rate, a “primage” of 10
per cent, with the understanding that after a stated time
(say six months) they would refund the “primage” to
shippers who had not shipped by “ outside ” steamers.

Since ocean routes are international highroads, such Con-
ferences have naturally expanded beyond the limits of a
single nation, and English, French, German, Dutch, and
American companies have been drawn into the system,
which has been extended from the Far East trade to the
Cape, West Indian, Australian, North American, and South
American trades. In the case of the stronger Conferences
the “monopolies” thus established rest, not merely upon
the system of rebates, but upon Post Office and other
public subsidies, and upon port facilities which give them
an advantage over outside companies.

The substantial identity of this method of limiting com-
petition with that employed by railroads is admitted by the
Chairman of the P. and O. Company in the following
terms: — “It was not possible profitably to carry on ship-
ping business unless there was uniformity of tariffs settled
by a 4 conference ’ of the shipping companies. These
conferences might be compared to the agreements which
existed between the various railway companies of the
United Kingdom. Railways charged identical rates when
running between the same points, although they competed
in speed, train accommodation, and general facilities. This
was exactly what the steamship companies did.” *

The form of combination in which competition is most
rigorously limited, and business independence reduced to

1 Quoted Macrosty, p. 157.

1 Annual meeting (quoted Macrosty, p. 158).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


177


its lowest terms, is found in certain branches of the insur-
ance business, notably in British Fire Insurance. The
entire trade is in the hands of a very small number of
companies, who organise a strict set of rates with heavy
penalties for proved infractions, and agree to share the
business which comes into each company, distributing it in
a fixed proportion among the various companies. This
system of re-investment, designed primarily to equalise
risks, serves likewise to equalise business, leaving to the
several companies a competition virtually confined to
economies of collection and office administration. There
is only one price offered to the insurer, though slight varia-
tions in the form of policy and mode of payment are
doubtless utilised by the agents of the several companies to
secure for their firm the initial handling of business.

§ 5. All the forms of combination in restraint of competi-
tion hitherto examined fall short in some measure or respect
of an entire amalgamation or identification of interest
among the combining businesses.

We must now proceed to consider cases where restraint
of competition is pushed to an amalgamation which either
merges the hitherto independent businesses or identifies
their profitable interests. Such amalgamation or identifica-
tion may be temporary, for the purposes of a single business
amp or a series of amps, in which case no merger of
economic or legal structure takes places ; or it may be per-
manent, involving a disappearance of the economic and
sometimes of the legal entity of the several businesses.

A temporary “ combine ” of normally competing busi-
nesses in order to “rig the market,” “comer” the supply,
hold up prices and take monopoly profits, though a frequent
phenomenon* in modern business enterprise, need not detain
us long. Such “comers” are commonly contrived by
securing in the transport or mercantile stages through which
some commodity passes from the farm, mine, or mill, to the
wholesale or retail market, a control of the whole supply,
or a sufficiently large proportion of the supply, to give a
mastery over selling prices.

The typical corner is a financial movement on one of the
produce markets by which the wheat or cotton crops, o _
some other important supply of food or raw material, i
held up for a time by speculators who hope by monopolis-

xa


<7 8


THE EVOLUTION OF


ing the supply to compel merchants or other speculators,
who have bound themselves to deliver quantities of this
commodity at a given date, to buy it from them at a greatly
enhanced price.

The following description of a comer in wheat will serve
for an example : —

“The man who forms a corner in wheat, first purchases
or secures the control of the whole available supply of
wheat, or as near the whole supply as he can. In addition
to this he purchases more than is really within reach of the
market by buying * futures,’ or making contracts with
others who agree to deliver him wheat at some future time.
Of course he aims to secure the greater part of his wheat
quietly, at low figures; but after he deems that the whole
supply is nearly in his control, he spreads the news that
there is a * comer 1 in the market, and buys openly all the
wheat he can, offering higher and higher prices, until he
raises the price sufficiently high to suit him. Now the men
who have contracted to deliver wheat to him at this date
are at his mercy. They must buy their wheat of him at
whatever price he chooses to ask, and deliver it as soon as
purchased, in order to fulfil their contracts. Meanwhile
mills must be kept in operation, and the millers have to pay
an increased price for wheat; they charge the bakers higher
prices for flour, and the bakers raise the price of bread.
Thus is told by the hungry mouths in the poor man’s home
the last act in the tragedy of the corner .” 1

While most of these corners organised by financiers are
short-lived deals, it sometimes happens that a more durable
“combine” is attempted, more nearly resembling the “in-
dustrial pools ” already described. A single illustration of
this method will suffice from the “Copper Syndicate,” which
for some time traded as “ La Society Industrielle Commer-
ciale de Metaux.” Its history in brief was this: A body of
French capitalists, for the most part not owners of mines
or metals, but speculators pure and simple, placed in a
common fund a sum of money with the intention of corner-
ing the supply of tin. Before completing this design they
were diverted into a larger speculation in the copper

1 There need, of course, be no actual diversion of goods into the
possession of the Ring: the essence of the monopoly consists in the
control, not in the possession of goods.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


179


market. In 1887 they entered into contracts with the
largest copper-producing companies in various countries,
agreeing to buy all the copper produced for the next three
years at an agreed price, with an added bonus equivalent to
half the profit from the sale of the same. In 1888 the
Syndicate sought to extend its contracts with the chief
mining companies to cover a period of twelve years,
arranging with them also to limit the output of copper.
For some time they held the market in their grip, and
prices advanced considerably. But, partly owing to a
failure to complete their contracts securing a reduction in
output, and partly from inability to meet current liabilities,
the corner was broken down in 1889, and the artificially
inflated prices felL

Other more durable “comers” or "combines” formed
not by outside speculators but by merchants and manu-
facturers, resemble more nearly the Industrial Pools already
described. Such, for example, was the famous "Big Four
Cattle Combine” in Chicago, by which Messrs. Armour,
Swift, Morris, and Hammond controlled the cattle and meat
trade over a large part of the United States, fixing alike the
prices paid to farmers for cattle and the retail prices for
beef paid by consumers.

These early experiments in temporary or partial com-
bination among firms independent in ownership and profit-
able interests, though they are disturbing elements of
considerable magnitude at the present time, have no great
or enduring importance as forms of capitalist association.


CHAPTER VIII.


CARTELS AND TRUSTS.

§ i. Growth of stabler forms of Combination
§ 2. Structure of the German Cartel
§ 3. The economic nature of a Trust
§ 4. Classification and spread of Trusts.

§ 5. Monopoly power of Trusts .

§ 6. Economy of large capital no sufficient basis fot
monopoly .

§ 7. The chief economic origins and supports of monopolies.

§ 8. Tariff as the foster-mother of Trusts.

§ 9, The railroads as supports of Trusts .

§ 10. Transport conjoined with sources of natural supply.

§ 1 1. Business genius as a basis of Trusts.

§ 12. Horizontal and lateral expansion of the Trust.

§ 13. Circumstances favouring Trusts in US. A.

§ 14. Origin of Combines in Great Britain.

§15. Trusts in Great Britain.

§ 16. Monopolies in the Arts and Professions.

§ 17. International Trusts.

§ 18. General summary of the extent of the Trust power.

§ 1. The economic object of all the “agreements,”
“alliances,” “combines,” “pools,” and “corners” de-
scribed in the last chapter, is to establish some form or
degree of “ monopoly,” the owners of the supply agreeing
upon a selling price, and refusing to compete by under-
selling one another. In most cases, where a lasting control
of the market is sought, the agreement between the busi-
nesses seeks to impose some regulations upon output,
implying a certain amount of control over the conduct of
the several businesses by the “ combine.”

From the standpoint of economic structure and function
the difference between these “combines” and the com-
plete amalgamation of a Trust is only one of degree, alike


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. l8l


as regards (a) control of selling price, and (ft) loss of inde-
pendence in business control. Legally the difference no
doubt is large, for whereas the Trust generally assumes the
form of a publicly authorised corporate body (though the
legality of particular forms may be contested), the partial or
temporal combinations are in almost every instance extra-
legal or actually illegal

A half-way house between the informal combinations we
have been considering and the “ Trust,” or other complete
amalgamation, is the “Cartel,” as found in Germany,
Austria, Belgium, and other Continental European coun-
tries. Though their progeners may be traced far back in
Dutch and German industrial history, their present shape
and importance are quite modem. Extending the idea of
the Industrial Pool, the businesses adopting the Cartel have
formed themselves into public corporations for the purpose
of fixing uniform selling prices and regulating output, but
without assuming a direct control management over the
syndicated businesses or a uniform rate of profit

§ 2. The best organised of these Cartels are in the coal
and coke industries, and in the pig-iron, steel, and manu-
factured metal trades of Germany and Austria. The
structure of the Cartel and its mode of operation is best
illustrated in the important Coal Cartel of the Ruhr in
Rhenish Westphalia.

The mineowners of the district form a selling company
(with a nominal capital, the shares of which they hold),
designed to act as their sole agent for the sale of their coal.
This company, or syndicate, is organised in statutory form,
as a corporation ( Acticngesdkchaft ). Its duly appointed
executive committee ( Vorstand) is empowered to make
contracts with the mineowners severally, binding itself to
take from them and sell the output of the mines under
certain arrangements as to price and payment, they in their
turn undertaking to sell all their coal, coke, etc., to the
syndicate, with the exception of certain portions allotted to
their own use in their mining works, to their private use,
and for certain purposes of purely local supply.

The mineowners also agree with the Syndicate an<
with one another to form an organisation or Associatioi
( Vcrsammlung) in order to appoint a representative Council
to fix the general price norms assessments towards the


1 83


THE EVOLUTION OF


upkeep of the Selling Syndicate, penalties for breaches of
agreement, etc., and to make other arrangements for
enforcing the common policy. The most important func-
tion of the association, however, is the appointment of a
commission to determine the <c participation ” — i,e. the
proportion of output to be allowed to each mine.

The committee of the Selling Syndicate, thus receiving
from the Association its general regulations as to (a) pro-
portionate output of the several mines, (fi) general price
norms, proceeds to apply and enforce the common policy
— (i) buying and selling the coal, coke, and brickets pro-
duced by the syndicate mines; (a) fixing the actual selling
price or prices in the competitive and non-competitive
markets; (3) proposing to the association the assessments
for the expenses of the syndicate; (4) examining the books
of the individual mines; (5) proposing fines for breaches of
agreement

The effect of this somewhat complicated machinery is to
establish a common selling agent and a single minimum
price, and to regulate the general and the several outputs.
The minimum selling price is that at which the syndicate
takes the coal from the mineowners. Where the syndicate
sells in competitive districts, it may sell as low as at this
minimum. In non-competitive regions it often sells at a
premium, in which case the surplus price is commonly,
though not always, paid over to the mine which supplies it.

The syndicate itself is not worked as a profit-making
company, all its expenses are covered by assessments on the
mineowners; it is merely the selling instrument of a number
of profit-seeking mineowners who seek to maintain high
prices and to regulate output. There is no pooling of
capital interests, no guarantee of a uniform rate of profit, or
even of a uniform price paid to the several mineowners. 1

The weak points of the Cartel appear to be two. First,
the refusal of certain producers to enter the syndicate,
preferring to keep their liberty and to pursue an alternative
policy of selling at the higher prices secured by the
syndicate where it is strong, or underselling it where it is
weak. Second, the complaints of smaller and weaker mine-

1 This description of the Ruhr Cartel is condensed from the valuable
monograph on “Monopolistic” Combinations in the German Coal
Industry, by Francis Walker (American Economic Association, 1904).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


183


owners or manufacturers that the rate of participation
(output) is fixed to their disadvantage as compared with
the larger and stronger producers.

The fundamental defect appears, however, to lie in the
fact that continuous employment cannot be guaranteed to
the members of the Cartel. In order to meet or abate this
defect a careful export policy forms a part of the working of
the Cartel. ^

“We find that the Iron Kartell agreement fixes the
quantity of manufactured iron which each establishment is
sdlowed to produce, but ‘in the contract are not reckoned
products which are exported, either by being sent directly
into the foreign country, or through being sold to manu-
facturing establishments (for example manufacturers of
wagons or of locomotives), and by them used for export'
The result of arrangements of this nature would seem to be
that a certain impulse is given to the export trade, more or
less irrespective of the prices at which the goods can be
sold in foreign countries. But ‘the Kartell endeavours to
avoid a volume of production exceeding the requirements of
the home market; and its practice accordingly is not to
encourage the export trade — a trade carried on at a lower
rate of profit than the home trade, or even at a loss.'” 1
Most Cartels, however reluctant to encourage export trade
at unprofitable rates, appear from time to time to be driven
to this method of keeping their mines and works running.
Not merely do they sanction and organise export trade at
lower prices, but in many cases they encourage it by means
of bounties. Indeed the development of the export trade
was one of the earliest reasons for association among the
mining interests, 1 and the modem development of export
trade in German manufactured and semi-manufactured
goods is largely the direct result of a Cartel policy. While
the Cartels would like to regulate output and prices without
encouraging a less profitable export trade, the tendency to
over-production in modem manufactures is so strong that
an absolute limitation of output to the needs of a regulated
home market is often found impracticable, and some foreign
outlet is allowed or encouraged as a concession to th<
urgency of the case.

1 Grilnzel, Utbcr Kartellc^ p. 217, quoted Cd. 1761, p. 328.

■ Walker, p. 209.


I $4


THE EVOLUTION OF


The Coal and Iron Syndicates have during recent years
adopted a general system of bounties or premiums paid,
not to exporters of these raw materials, but to exporters of
metal goods into which coal enters as a chief cost of pro-
duction. As early as 1882 the iron interests of Westphalia
and Siegenland appear to have given price-rebates to certain
groups of rolling-mills, 1 but the regular system of bounties
in the miniijg and metallurgical industries seems to have
begun about 1891.* As time went on this export policy of
Cartels assumed a more highly organised shape, and in 1902
the coal, coke, pig-iron and “half-finished” iron, and steel
industries of Rhenish Westphalia established at Diisseldorf
a “Clearing-house for Export” in order to deal with
premiums on export trade.* This clearing-house was
empowered to fix bounties on the various goods, and the
following were the figures fixed for the last quarter of
1902: —

1.50 m. per ton for coaL

2.50 m. „ „ raw iron (excL coal bounty).

10.00 m. „ ,, Halbzeug (in cl. coal and iron

bounty).

While this Cartel system appears most prominent in the
coal, iron, and metal industries, German and Austrian Cartels
have handled sugar, petroleum, twine, cotton, worsted and
woollen yarn, a large variety of chemicals, besides a number
of miscellaneous articles such as pencils, paper, cement,
porcelain, glassy leather, rubber goods, electrical apparatus. 4

The spread of Cartels in Germany has indeed advanced
with great rapidity since the beginning of her modern era
of industry- Whereas in 1870 there existed only five
syndicates, the number in 1897 was placed at 345, covering
virtually the entire field of manufacture and commerce.
During the last few years combination among syndicates
has reduced their number and increased their effective
power.

§ 3. Though Cartels are often classed with Trusts, there is
a tolerably wide difference between them in economic struc-
ture and in function. The American term u Trust ” is here
adopted as the most convenient term to describe a con-

1 Walker, p. 22a * Cd, 1761, p. 313.

* Riffidovich, p. 23. 4 Cd. 1761, p. 358.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


185


solidation of capital within a trade that is large enough and
strong enough to control to an appreciable extent the supply
and the selling price of the articles with which it deals.

The Cartel and the Industrial Pool, in which a number
of separately-owned businesses participate, fall short, alike
in control of production and of price, of the organic con-
solidation of interests comprised in a Trust. Unity in the
organisation of an industry commanding a market is the
essential feature of the Trust, which is thus identified with
a Monopoly in that the real ownership of the whole or the
bulk of a supply is vested in it

This definition is at once narrower and wider than cer-
tain common uses of “Trust” For instance, in the United
States the word is often applied to any large corporation,
especially if it is formed by the amalgamation of a number
of formerly independent businesses. Now in almost every
field of capitalist enterprise, especially in banking, railroads
and other transport, mining and metal-working industries,
amalgamation and the absorption of weaker by stronger
businesses has been rapidly proceeding in every advanced
industrial community. But there is no reason to distin-
guish these amalgamations or combines from other large
companies or private businesses for present purposes unless
their construction has the object and the result of giving
them a substantial power of monopoly.

If a business possesses this power, it matters not whether
it has come into being by amalgamation of a number of
competing equals, by the forcible absorption of weaker
firms by a stronger, or by the creation of a single new
corporation or private business in a new department of
industry.

Still less are we concerned with the special legal origin
and meaning of the term “ Trust ” in our economic treat-
ment of monopolies, except in so far as it bears important
testimony to the instability and weakness of the “industrial
pool ” or other formal or informal agreement among com-
peting businesses. The inability of competitors in the oil,
sugar, whisky, and other industries to secure faithful and
effective co-operation, as regards output and prices, by any
method short of a surrender of their separate stock to r
body of Trustees empowered to exercise an absolute contr
over the conduct of their businesses, may possibly


THE EVOL0TIOH OF


ISO

dicate that Cartels, Pools, and other “agreements” are
merely transitory phases in the development of capitalist
enterprise towards a higher and more perfect structure. 1
F § 4. The Trusts with which we are concerned comprise
all combinations of capital which are operated as business
units and which exercise a substantial control of a market.
The forms of combination may be classed as follows: —

a. “ Trusts proper,” where the whole or the majority of
the stock of the different combining businesses is trans-
ferred to trustees who exercise full control, and issue
certificates to the several owners, the latter retaining in
some cases mortgages to the extent of the valuation of their
factories.

The Standard Oil Trust in its original form was the
leading case of absolute surrender to trustees, the Whisky
Trust of conditional surrender.

ft. Consolidations other than u Trusts proper,” where
practical unity of operation is secured with the retention of
formal independence.

This may be a temporary arrangement, as when a rail-
road leases or rents another road, a policy sometimes
adopted in other lines of business.

Or it may be a permanent arrangement, as when a rail-
road or other corporation purchases a controlling share of
other corporations, operating them as parts of its single
system.

When a separate corporation is formed for the purpose of
securing a controlling share of a corporation or a number of
competing companies in order to operate them as a single
system, we have the so-called “holding Trust” or a “voting
Trust” whose economic form nearly resembles the “Trust
proper,” though its legal or illegal status is somewhat
different

The holders of a majority of the stock in a company or a
number of companies put the voting power of their stock

1 The Whisky Trust best exemplifies the development from a weaker
form of pool. _ For many years agreements had been made among the
competing distillers, sometimes fixing an output, sometimes levying an
assessment upon the quantity of com mashed, in order to subsidise the
^export trade, so as, by relieving the pressure on the home market,
|o keep up remunerative prices.^ These pools were continually being
broken, and the failure to maintain such agreements led to the forma-
tion of the Trust Cl Jenks, TJu Trust ProbUm % p. 108.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


187


into the hands of a body of trustees or a Trust company,
empowering the latter to carry on the affairs of the company
or companies in accordance with some general line of policy
previously determined.

u The individual shareholders may then pledge or sell or
dispose of their stock in whatever way seems to them best,
but the voting power remains in the hands of the trustees.
The purpose of such a voting Trust is, of course, to pre-
serve continuity of the policy which, for whatever reason,
the shareholders prefer. In some cases it may be that the
majority of the stockholders of the original corporation
think it desirable to devote all the earnings for a specific
period to the improvement of the property instead of to the
payment of dividends. It might be impossible to continue
such a policy with a shifting body of shareholders, many of
whom might wish to receive annual dividends. If, how-
ever, the stock can be transferred, but the voting power
remains in a few hands, the policy can be carried out
consistently for a fixed period of years.” 1

The most notorious example of a holding trust was that
known as the Northern Securities Company, formed for the
purpose of placing in common hands a controlling share
of the stock of four great railroads in order to restrain
competition and to operate them as a single system. The
legality of this form of trust in railroads has been success-
fully called in question, but modem financial develop-
ment gives increasing prominence to this method of
uniting multiform ownership of stock with concentrated
controL

7. Amalgamation, in which a complete ‘‘merger” of
competing businesses is effected, as in the fusion of the
New York Central and Hudson Railroad, or the fusion of
the Union and the Castle Steamship lines in England.

This process of complete amalgamation, either by agree-
ment of equals or by coercion and forcible absorption on
the part of a stronger competitor, is of course the most
general process of concentration of capital in every large
fine of big industry. Where such amalgamation yields a
basis of monopoly, it is entitled to rank as a “ Trus"
within the meaning of the word here taken, and probat

1 Jfc&kx. The T*nst Problem* pp. 115* IT*


1 88


THE EVOLUTION OF


the majority of effective “monopolies” in manufacture,
transport, and finance are built up in this way.

S, Absorption of a number of competing businesses by a
new company established for this purpose. The United
States Steel Corporation and the Atlantic Shipping Combine
are two conspicuous examples of this mode of establishing
a Trust. 1

§ 5. Many of these methods of combination have been
followed for the purpose of securing economies of operation
or of restraining a cut-throat competition, and not with a view
to exercising any substantial powers of monopoly. Although
such combinations are frequently classed as Trusts, they do
not differ essentially as economic entities from other large
companies which are not the products of combination, and
they do not concern us in our study of Trusts as here
identified with monopolies.

The monopoly power of Trusts is of course entirely a
question of degree. No Trust is the sole source of supply
throughout the whole of its market; no Trust is without
actual or potential competition which limits its control of
prices.

The lists of trusts and combinations which purport to
show how large a proportion of the aggregate industry of
the United States or other nations has definitely passed
oat of the competition stage into a stage of private mono-
poly are not reliable as sources of accurate measurement,
though they are serviceable as indicating the extent of
progress in concentrated capitalism in the several industrial
departments. From this standpoint it is significant to find
that in 1899 the New York Journal of Commerce published
a list of 350 trusts and combinations in existence that
year.

Large American corporations (mostly formed by com-
bination) practically control the entire industry of land and
water transport by steam and electricity, banking, insurance,
and finance in general, the local services of water, gas, etc*
besides the local and national telegraph and telephone
systems, the industries of mining and of irrigation, the
publication of books and newspapers, the great bulk of the
wholesale and retail distribution in the cities, a large, prob-

1 This classification follows closely the analysis of Von Halle in his
Trusts, chap. Hi


MODERN CAPITALISM. 189

ably increasing, ownership of lands and agriculture, a
complete control over theatres and many other recreative
industries, besides the control of almost all the large
manufactures engaged in supplying the prime necessaries
and conveniences of the people.

The summary of Industrial Combinations presented by
the Census Report of the United States for 1900 gives an
interesting indication of the classes of manufacture which
have been most exposed to the growth of combination.


Industry Group.

No. of
Combina-
tions.

No. of
Plants.

Capital.

Wage*

earners.

I. Iron, steel, and pro-


?


ducts

40

447

341,779.954

145,609

2. Food and kindred


products

3. Chemicals and allied

22

282

247,944,675

33,165

products

!S

250

176,512,835

28,401

4. Metals other than


iron and steel

II

89

118,519,401

20,522

5. Liquors

6. Vehicles . M

28

219

118,459,158

7,624

6

65

85,965,683

34,422

7. Tobacco

4

4i

16,191,818

I7,66l

8. Textiles

8

72

92,468,606

37,723

9. Leather, etc
io. Paper and printing

5

100

62,737,011

9,898

7

116

59,271,691

16,706

II. Clay, .glass, etc

15

180

46,878,928

20,294

12. Lumber, etc

8

61

24,470,281

10,778

13. Miscellaneous

16

118

45,408,869

17,243

Total


2,040 $1,436,625,910

400,046


The following 1 is a list of the articles manufactured or
sold in 1900 by large corporations — ie. with a nominal
capital of over 10,000,000 dols: — Fertilisers, alkali, beet
sugar, brick, brass, bicycles, railroad cars, cotton oil, electric-
heating apparatus, fish (packed), window-glass, gas and
electric-lighting fixtures, hides and leather, ice, linseed oil,
lithograph productions, sewing machines, malt, school
furniture, ships, silk thread, whisky, wire, steel-hoops,
sugar (cane sugar), thread, tinplate, tobacco, woollen
goods, writing paper, copper, snuff, bolts and nuts, borax,
steel, lumber, pharmaceutical products, beer and ale (there

1 Cl W. M. Collier, Tie Trusts , p. 15.


190 THE EVOLUTION OF

being combinations of breweries in the following cities;
Chicago, San Francisco, Pittsburg, Boston, Cleveland and
Sandusky, Baltimore ; also Milwaukee and Chicago) ; coal
and iron (industries of Colorado, also of Tennessee),
electric-car lighting apparatus, steel cars, cement, plug
tobacco, cotton yarn, matches, electric boats, electric
storage batteries, sewer pipe, chemicals, general electrical
apparatus, glucose sugar, granite ware, Cuban tobacco,
paper (news and printing), silver-plate, smokeless powder
and dynamite, steam pumps, “Bourbon” whisky (Ken-
tucky distilleries), iron (Lake Superior mines), cellulose,
biscuits, crackers and bread-stuffs, carbon, carpets, enamel-
ling and stamping, white lead, salt, screws, starch, tubes,
wall-paper, pine timber, passenger elevators, plate-glass,
print cloth, iron and steel, baking powder, rubber goods,
coal, window-sashes and doors, flour, petroleum and its by-
products, whisky, rope and twine, steel beams, steel rails,
beef, coal and iron, paper bags, typewriters, fruit, shoe
machinery, cast-iron pipe, dye-wood, flour, glue, leather,
rubber boots and shoes, varnish, writing paper, etc.

In what degree, over what market-area, and for how long,
these various corporations have been able to exercise a
power of “monopoly” is incapable of approximate
determination. Most of them have probably held some
measure of monopoly, but few have attained the large and
durable control of a market possessed for long periods of
time by the Standard Oil Trust or the Sugar Trust. If in
all these markets a single corporation controlled (say) 80
per cent of the output, the security which competition
affords to the consuming public would have virtually dis-
appeared. The percentage required to give a large limit of
effective control over prices will of course vary with the
class of commodity handled and with various conditions of
the market, but it may be safely asserted that the degree
and extent of monopoly-power exercised by most of the
above-named corporations falls far short of that exercised
by the classical examples just named.

Regarding the single large corporation as the instrument
of monopoly, there is no evidence to show that these
industrial corporations have yet developed sufficient strength
even in America to limit output or to hold up prices for any
considerable time except in the case of a small number of


MODERN CAPITALISM.


191

commodities . 1 If we add to these Trusts the industrial
pools and other combines, the durable monopoly exercised
through industrial combination does not affect any large
number of commodities. Regarded as a solid instrument
of capitalist control the industrial trust is as yet feebly
developed. Local combinations in retail trade in all
probability exercise a larger and a more widespread
influence upon the prices paid by consumers.

With a few exceptions the proved power of capitalist
** monopoly 9 in America is vested, not in the industrial
trusts, but, as we shall see, in transport and financial cor-
porations and in corporations handling local services under
charters or other privileges. The aggregate influence of the
disturbances of price exercised by industrial trusts is doubt-
less considerable, but their power to hold up prices has
hitherto been weak, irregular, and short-lived, so far as the
great majority of the commodities they handle are con-
cerned. It is very doubtful where a combination of mere
manufacturers can maintain an effective monopoly even in
a national market for which they obtain tariff protection.
The real strength of a manufacturing or industrial trust
is commonly, if not universally, derived from non-manu-
facturing processes with which it is connected

While, therefore, there is ample evidence to show that
industrial corporations, largely the result of combination
of formerly competing firms, are everywhere engaged in
trying to regulate output and to raise prices so as to earn

1 “ In many of the most important lines of industry combinations
have secured control of a large percentage of the country’s production.
In other industries, although the percentage of the entire output con-
trolled by combinations is not so large, still there are organisations
with very large capital. In the raising or distributing “of agricultural
products, such combinations, though not unknown — e.g. the United
Fruits Company — are still rare. While a beginning has been made
towards the combination of mercantile industries, not merely in
department stores, but also in the union of several large establishments
along several lines, such as the combination organised by H. JB.
OapHn, yet by far the largest proportion of our mercantile business
is owned and managed by relatively small concerns. Many manu-
facturing industries, such as clothing, dressmaking, millinery, small
tools, electrical specialities, house-furnishing materials, the textiles, and
numerous other articles are substantially free from combinations. The
manufacture of cotton is perhaps the most important in which no com-
bination of great size exists . tf tko Industrial Commission,
fd six. p. 604.


193


THE EVOLUTION OF


high profits, only a small minority have been able to main-
tain a successful career upon these lines.

The present stage, even in America where the movement
has gone fastest, is rather one of multiform experiment than
of achievement A certain amount of regulation of prices
is doubtless operative in most large staple industries, but it
is mainly the result of temporary agreements among com-
peting firms rather than the dictation of any single corpora-
tion that can be called a trust

The fields of economic energy in America, where “ cor-
porations/’ “combinations,” or trusts are strongly operative,
lie outside the manufacturing processes, and where a manu-
facturing trust is powerful its power is usually derived from
these non-manufacturing sources.

§ 6. Investigation of the origins and supports of success-
ful "trusts” in America and elsewhere fails to show any
cases where the economy of the concentration of capital
establishes a monopoly in manufacture, at any rate over a
national or international market.

The point is one of great theoretical and practical im-
portance. The economy of large-scale production is, as we
have seen, operative in most fields of machine production,
and experience seems to attest the fact that this economy
proceeds in different industries up to a different point,
establishing in each industry a maximum type of business:
if this maximum were exceeded certain wastes of business
management and other disadvantages would outweigh the
technical economies of larger-scale production. Now, if in
any industry the net economy of large-scale production con-
tinues up to or beyond the point in which the large business
can supply the entire market, a monopoly can clearly be.
established upon this economy alone. A simple and widely
prevalent doctrine of economic evolution of" industrial
society is based upon the assumption of the wide or general
operation of this tendency. This general operation is, in-
deed, rendered highly improbable by the wide expansion
of markets which comes with improved transport and
mechanism of selling. But there is no a priori reason why
a monopoly of a local, national, or even a world-market
should not be reached before the progressive economy of
large-scale production in a particular manufacturing in-
dustry has run out In local markets it is indeed often the


MODERN CAPITALISM.


193


_ case ttiat a big man, possessing no other superiority than
size, can crush a smaller competitor and establish a
monopoly absolute within its limits, though* even in such
cases it is always open to argue that personal ability or
energy is a factor in success.

When, however, we consider national or world-markets, it
is more likely to be the case that the economy of large-scale
production will be exhausted before a size of business
adequate to monopoly is reached. While it is impossible
to prove that a strong national Trust could not be formed
out of the mere economy of large-scale production as
operated by a man of normal business ability, there is no
instance of any large industrial Trust seen to stand on this
economy alone.

If any instances of effective Trusts standing upon the
economy of concentrated capital alone exist, they must be
sought in the region of finance rather than of ordinary
industry, for it is in banking, insurance, and general finance
that the essential force of modern capitalism is found; in
finance mere size of credit appears to assign a progressive
advantage without limit to the competitor for profitable
business, or the manipulator of profitable coups.

§ 7. If we examine the actual rise and structure of trusts
we shall always find the economy of large-scale production
supported by some more certain basis of monopoly.

These supports may be provisionally classified 1 as
follows : —

1. Superior access to raw materials.

2. Superior control of means of transport and distribution.

3. Differential advantages in production or marketing

due to patents, trade marks, special processes.

4. Public franchises, licences, or other privileges bestow-

ing monopoly or restricting competition.

5. Tariff legislation.

Reflection will show that these supports are not in every
case mutually exclusive. - Superiority of access to raw
materials and to railroad transport, for example, are in
part attributable to public franchises, while tariff legislation
confers a differential advantage in markets.

1 A fuller and more scientific classification of Monopolies Is to be
found in Ely’s Mtncpclics and Trusts , chap, ii


x 3


194


THE EVOLUTION OF


But for our purpose this classification will suffice. No
American trust, industrial or other, seems destitute of one
or more of these supports. So intricately interwoven are
the conditions of industrial life that it is difficult to assign
the relative importance which attaches to these various
supports.

Many monopolies evidently draw their strength from ad-
vantages comprised in classes 3 and 4. Special inventions,
secured by patents or secrecy, may be a single and sufficient
basis of monopoly for a manufacturing firm of type-setters
or electrical machinery or chemicals.

In the growth of the Sugar Trust, the Havemeyer and
SpreckeFs refineries gained their early predominance largely
by the possession of patents securing to them economies of
production. The same has been true of the Carnegie Steel
Company and of other businesses which have acquired in
their trade a position of sufficient eminence to enable them
to force a combine upon businesses of inferior equipment.

Copyrights may furnish a similar power of monopoly to a
newspaper or other publishing business. Largely based on
these differential advantages of production are the uses of
trade marks attesting reputation. In certain lines of manu-
facture — €.g. engineering, chemicals, scientific instruments,
agricultural machines — all the most prominent firms have
embedded in the capital value of the business some patents
or other private methods of production, and not a few of
the most successful trusts enjoy advantages of this class.

Other corporations possess powers of monopoly derived
from legal grants of franchises or charters, conferring on
them exclusive rights over profitable markets. The local
service franchises, assigned to water, lighting, street railways,
and other companies belong to this order. The amalgama-
tion of these companies, formed upon purely local mono-
polies, into national or even international corporations,
handling electric traction or telephone services, is an im-
portant development of recent capitalism. In the United
States the railroads and telegraph companies, in Great
Britain the railroads, derive a large part of the power of
monopoly which they exercise over large areas of non-
competitive traffic from public charters, the rest being due
to natural advantages of route, which drive down to private
ownership of land In the United States the growing


MODERN CAPITALISM. 195

amalgamation of competing railroads into a few large
systems pooling rates is by far the most formidable aspect
of the Trust question. The enormous grants of land con-
ferred upon railroad corporations by charters emphasises
the public character of the monopoly-power they wield.

Among monopolies affected or supported by public policy
must be included restraints upon effective competition due
to a public limitation upon licences to sell certain com-
modities. The brewing industry in England, and to a less
extent in other countries, presents the most conspicuous
instance of a growth of strong corporations enjoying mono-
poly profits derived from the limitation or practical extinc-
tion of local competition, based upon restrictions in the
number of liquor-sellers imposed by public authority.

The banking system in many countries contains elements
of publicly-bestowed monopoly in the sense of special rights
to issue notes, or the enjoyment of special governmental
aids, conferred upon a restricted number of banks.

§ 8. The most general support offered to Trusts by public
policy is derived from the protective system of the Tariff.
To what extent the Tariff is in reality “the mother of
Trusts ” is difficult to determine. There have been cases of
trusts arising directly behind tariff walls erected in order to
support them. The organ of the New York Reform Club
a few years ago named a hundred instances of manufactur-
ing trusts which it imputed to protection. 1 The list, how-
ever, contained many articles, such as electric supply, steel
rails, anthracite coal, school books, cotton-seed oil, which
enjoy other economic or public aids besides the tariff.

It must, however, be borne in mind that the concentration
of industry must have gone already very far in a trade before
the Tariff can be operative in creating a trust. The United
States is itself a huge free-trade area, and unless, owing to
the operation of other forces, the number of effective com-
petitors in that market is already very small, the idea of
amalgamation in a single corporation, so as to raise prices
within the limits of the protective area, would not be feasible.
The existence of a protective duty, or the probability of
procuring one, is certainly a strong inducement for a busi-
ness or a group of businesses already commanding a large


1 See You Halle, p. 5 a


196


THE EVOLUTION OF


share of the home market to complete its combination with,
or absorption of, its rivals. 1

But a protective tariff can only create or facilitate a trust
in cases where the conditions for an effective combination
on a national scale have already been ripened by other
forces making for monopoly. Upon the whole it would be
safer to describe the Tariff as the foster-mother than the
mother of Trusts. By feeding them at the expense of the
body of consumers, and protecting them against invasion of
the home market by foreign competition, it enables them to
maintain their monopoly and to render it more profitable.*
The same sort of assistance is also rendered the industrial
pools and other combinations which in structure fall short
of the completed Trust It is probable that the net
economy of large-scale production, apart from the supports
of patents, railroad aid, and superior access to materials,
may suffice in certain cases to raise the size and restrict the
number of effective businesses so as to make tariff support
the final determinant of a trust

§ 9. But the actual history of the great representative
American trusts seems to indicate that superior access to
transport accommodation, and to supplies of raw materials,
are the most important supports for an enduring trust.
Among the “monopolies” or trusts of the first rank in size
and in control of markets, the Standard Oil Trust, the
Anthracite Coal Trust, and the United States Steel Cor-

1 An illustration of this is given by Von Halle in the extension of the
great Cordage Combination prepared in 1890 in anticipation of the
McKinley AnL { Trusts, p. 51.)

* Professor J. W. Jenks [7 he Trust Preblem, 40-41) does not thfny
that in many instances the removal of the tariff would restore competi-
tion.

"The removal of the tariff, whether the industry were dependent
upon it or not, would certainly destroy the rivals of the Trust before
the Trust itself would go out of existence. In either case, however,
the consumers would, beyond question, for the time being enjoy lower
prices.

" It is also true that the removal of the tariff in many Instances, by
strengthening the competition from foreigners, would simply bring
about an international combination.”

The formation and maintenance of an international trust are, how-
ever," not “simple” processes, as even the history of the Standard Oil
STrust testifies: the successful experiments are extremely few, and are
confined to small trades or trades where the best sources of raw
loaterials are so few a* to be capable of being cornered.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


197


poration stand out as the most representative In each case
the origin of the combination is traceable to special facilities
of transport, and to a command over the best sources of
supply of raw materials.

The early formation of the Standard Oil Company upon
a basis of illicit rebates obtained by arrangement with the
railroads passing through the oil district is a matter of
ordinary knowledge. The rise of the Carnegie Steel Com-
pany (the nucleus of the present Steel Trust) upon a similar
arrangement of preferential rates with the Pennsylvania
Railroad is equally significant, though less notorious. The
absolute control of the anthracite coal industry by a pooling
of the interests of the seven railroads which traverse the coal
district belongs to the same order of industrial facts. In
each of these cases the control exercised through railway
transport was flanked by a superior access to supplies of
material If the early oil wells had been scattered over
various parts of the country instead of being concentrated
in a limited region of Ohio, effective monopoly through
transport could not have been organised. The narrow
limitation of anthracite supply is essential to the compact
organisation which operates these mines. The fundamental
strength of the Steel Trust, the condition of its permanence,
resides in its control of the Lake Superior ores and the
facilities of handling and carrying them.

It is not, of course, necessary for a powerful manufactur-
ing trust always to own and work the best supplies of raw
materials, though, as we shall see, it is commonly a sound
trust policy to acquire a direct control of these sources. A
strong enough control over the means of transport by rail,
steamship, or pipe line commonly yields sufficient command
over the domestic or imported supplies to control the market.
The Standard Oil Trust did not begin to acquire any
amount of direct ownership of oil wells until well advanced
in its career: it was able to buy the crude oil from producers
upon its own terms, and still in large measure maintains
this policy. So, too, the Steel Trust was already in exist-
ence before it acquired direct possession of the richest
sources of iron ore.

In America the central factor in the organised control of
industry by Trusts is the power of the railroads, dominating
the rich natural sources of supply in mining and agriculture,


THE EVOLUTION OF


196

share of the home market to complete its combination with,
or absorption of, its rivals. 1

But a protective tariff can only create or facilitate a trust
in cases where the conditions for an effective combination
on a national scale have already been ripened by other
forces making for monopoly. Upon the whole it would be
safer to describe the Tariff as the foster-mother than the
mother of Trusts. By feeding them at the expense of the
body of consumers, and protecting them against invasion of
the home market by foreign competition, it enables them to
maintain their monopoly and to render it more profitable.*
The same sort of assistance is also rendered the industrial
pools and other combinations which in structure fall short
of the completed Trust It is probable that the net
economy of large-scale production, apart from the supports
of patents, railroad aid, and superior access to materials,
may suffice in certain cases to raise the size and restrict the
number of effective businesses so as to make tariff support
the final determinant of a trust

§ 9. But the actual history of the great representative
American trusts seems to indicate that superior access to
transport accommodation, and to supplies of raw materials,
are the most important supports for an enduring trust.
Among the “monopolies” or trusts of the first rank in size
and in control of markets, the Standard Oil Trust, the
Anthracite Coal Trust, and the United States Steel Cor-

1 An illustration of tbis is given by Von Halle in the extension of the
great Cordage Combination prepared in 1890 in anticipation of the
McKinley Act. {Trusts, p. 51.)

* Professor J. W. Jenks {The Trust Problem, 40-41) does not thfnV
that in many instances the removal of tbe tariff would restore competi-
tion.

"The removal of the tariff, whether the industry were dependent
upon it or not, would certainly destroy the rivals of the Trust before
the Trust itself would go out of existence. In either case, however,
the consumers would, beyond question, for the time being enjoy lower
prices.

“ It is also true that the removal of the tariff in many instances, by
strengthening tbe competition from foreigners, would simply bring
about an international combination.”

The formation and maintenance of an international trust are, how-
ever^not "simple” processes, as even the history of the Standard Oil
Trust testifies: the successful experiments are extremely few, and are
aonfined to small trades or trades where the best sources of raw
paterials are so few as to be capable of being cornered.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


199


which they are often prohibited by the terms of their
charters. But still more important are the indirect and
often secret arrangements by which they bind themselves to
favour trusts and combinations with which they are not
organically connected. Special facilities of transport are the
chief instrument of favour, and these facilities are classed
as follows, by Professor Ely :

“ (a) General facilities, as supplying cars to one com-
petitor more promptly than to another; (fi) rushing through
the freight of the favoured shipper, while that of another is
side tracked; (y) furnishing better terminal facilities to one
person than to another; (5) maintenance of such relations
between various modes of shipment — as, for example, be-
tween tank-cars- and barrels, and between rail, water, and
pipe line transportation — that advantages come to some
which others do not enjoy; (e). classifications of freight
made and changed to the advantage of favoured classes;
(f) making discriminations in favour of geographical sec-
tions in the interest of classes of shippers.” 1

A common business interest embodied in an agreement,
or a mutually profitable understanding, between a trust and
a railroad enables the trust to safeguard and utilise any
other advantages it may possess from size, superior com-
mand of materials or of market, by inducing the railroad to
afford assistance by all these various forms of differential
treatment

§ 10 . The importance which railroad transport assumes
in the working of industrial monopolies, especially in the
United States, is easily intelligible. If we follow the flow
of raw materials of industry from the primary extractive
industries through the various manufacturing and mercan-
tile processes which shape and place them at the disposal of
consumers, we shall find that in most instances this stream
of production is narrowest in the transport stage : the pro-
ducers of the raw material are numerous and widespread,
their product, left to competition, would tend to pass into
the hands of a number of competing manufacturers who,
in their turn, would pass on the finished goods to many
wholesale merchants and retailers. But the collection and
conveyance of raw materials, coal, grain, cotton, cattle,


1 Ely, Evolution sf Industrial Secuty l p. 210.


200


THE EVOLUTION OF


from the prime producers to the manufacturers or to the
wholesale market forces the current into a narrow channel
of transport, where competition, normally and necessarily
checked, can easily be eliminated: hence it arises that
a group of manufacturers or merchants, or of produce
gamblers, can most effectively organise a monopoly or
control of output and of market through the instrumentality
of the railroad system. Where the railroads do not choose,
or are unable, themselves to organise the monopoly, as they
have done in the case of anthracite coal, they are open to
enter a profitable compact with an independent corporation
or pool, placing at the disposal of the latter the monopolistic
power attaching to the transport stage.

Armed with such powers, the cattle trust organised by
Armour, Swift, Morris, and Hammond, was able to fix the
price which they would pay for cattle to the farmers who
could find no other buyer than the trust, and to fix the
price which consumers should pay for meat. Discrimina-
tion of freight rates, and other transport and terminal
facilities, procured by the favour of railroads, were the
actual economic force they exercised.

In other countries where the railroad factor is less domi-
nant, as in Germany or England, special rates or facilities,
procured either by political influence (where state railroads
are involved) or by private arrangements, form a leading
economy of trusts or other large organisations of capital.
Where lower rates are accorded by railroads for long
haulage in bulk, such discrimination, though sometimes
illegal, cannot be regarded as unreasonable, for the lower
rates correspond to the lower costs of carriage: there is no
more reason why short haulage of small quantities should
command the same rates as long haulage of bulk, than that
any other retail prices should be as low as wholesale
prices.

But where, as is common, rebates or other special
facilities are accorded to shippers, irrespective, of or in
excess of these considerations of economy of haulage, the
railroads are definitely makers of monopoly.

The transport factor in monopoly cannot, however, be
worked with full effect unless in connection with some
natural limitation of the supply of some raw material, or of
the market for commodities.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


201


If the raw material is procurable in many quarters, and of
equal quality, its manufacture is less likely to be concen-
trated, and its flow will be less narrowed in the .transport
stage. A lasting corner of wheat, or even of cotton, is far
more difficult than a comer of anthracite coal or even oil On
the other hand, where the best or most accessible supply
of material is narrowly confined in locality, an effective
monopoly may be established without railroad support

For example^ the paper trust which for a time controlled
prices in the United States lived upon the monopoly which
it possessed of the water power and lumber tracts so situated
as to be available for the cheap production of paper.

The actual supports of the American trusts may be thus
summarised: Control of railroad rates, control of limited
sources of coal, iron, and other natural supplies, control of
patents, protection against world competition by the tariff,
and finally, the escape from such a ratio of taxation to the
market value of their property as is borne by the smaller
business man . 1

§n- One other possible origin and support of a Trust
requires recognition. We have seen that the economy of
capitalist production makes for the establishment in every
industry of a business whose size represents a maximum
economy. Now in determining the normal limit of this
business we recognised that economy of administration was
a factor of prime importance. After a certain size and
complexity is reached waste ensues from lack of central
business control But here and there a business man of
abnormal energy and capacity may emerge, whose mind
may carry the economy of large-scale administration far
beyond the ordinary, introducing qualities of insight or of
organisation that postpone the application of the law of
diminishing returns, which otherwise prohibits an increase
of the business beyond the normal limit

Where the normal economies of large-scale production
are exhausted before the business has grown to the size
required to establish a national trust or monopoly, this rare
business ability may suffice to lift it to the required level
Where comparatively few men get the opportunity to dis-
cover, train, and exercise a natural genius for business

1 E. W. Semis, American Bern . . Association Report* 1904, p. iax.


202


THE EVOLUTION OF


organisation in a sufficiently large field of activity, it seems
possible that here and there a business mind may be found
so superior to his competitors that he crushes them and
builds a monopoly upon their ruins.

Professor H. C. Adams thus propounds this view that a
trust may arise from a monopoly of natural ability, as well
as from a monopoly of raw materials, or of some other
requisite: —

u A survey of the past hundred years of industrial change
makes evident the fact that industry on its mechanical side
has developed more rapidly than on the side of manage-
ment and administration, and in any final explanation of
congested competition, a phrase which appears to me to
suggest a fairly accurate diagnosis of the industrial ills of our
time, the scarcity of business talent holds an important
place. ... In as far as the centralisation of industrial
power is traceable to failure in the supply of business
ability, no permanent relief from the evils of Trusts may be
expected until the highest grade of business intelligence
becomes the common possession of the business world.
The Trust may be regarded as a corner in business insight,
business talent, and business courage .” 1

That rare business ability imparts great elasticity to the
conception of a normal maximum size of business, and that
in point of fact a successful Trust owes its success largely
to the administrative and strategic genius of its chief
organiser, must assuredly be admitted. There is, how-
ever, no evidence of the formation of a Trust resting upon
business capacity alone: one or more of the other supports
is present in every case . 2

§ 12. Turning now to the structure of the Trust, we shall
be prepared by the foregoing analysis to expect an ex-
tension of functions. In our general examination of
the large modem business we saw that it extended both

1 American Econ . Ass. y 1904, p. 104.

* So far as business genius is at factor in a successful Trust, it imparts
an element of instability. For though “hereditary control” is far
less usual in the United States than in England, the capacity to select
and train a competent successor cannot be considered a normal part of
the equipment of a great Trust-maker.

t On this personal factor in business success see some interesting
Remarks by Professor S. J. Chapman, Lancashire Ccttin Industry .
| I7«.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


203


Longitudinally, to take in earlier and later processes, and
latitudinally, adding new classes of products and by-
products to its original line of production.

& Trust seeking to secure and strengthen its monopoly
is impelled by considerations of more than ordinary force
to a similar enlargement of its structure. Beginning by
organising a particular process of manufacture, it is naturally
driven to seek control or possession of the market of its
chief raw materials, on the one hand, and of the markets
for disposal of its manufactured goods upon the other. To
secure not merely superior facilities of transport, but actual
possession of the best sources of supply; to supply its
goods directly to retail stores under its control and bound
by agreement to sell only its goods and at prescribed prices,
belong to the ordinary methods of Trust economy. Or-
ganising transport of raw materials and of finished goods in
its own cars, tanks, or pipe lines, ships or barges, it proceeds
to own and control the entire chain of productive and
distributive processes. To this is commonly added the
control of manufacturing and other processes subsidiary to
the main operations, the possession of coal or electric
supplies, the manufacture of machinery and other plant
required to give self-sufficiency to a Trust The latitudinal
expansion takes the shape partly of new products and by-
products, partly of the acquisition of interests in other
kinds of products which, otherwise, competing with the
product of the Trust, would limit its monopoly. This last
extension is illustrated by the acquisition of gas companies
by the Standard Oil Trust and of canals by the various
Railroads.

The typical form taken by a Trust whose nucleus is a
single manufacturing process is one which makes it co-
terminous with a complete section of industry comprising
all the processes which directly or indirectly contribute to
the supply of a consumer's need for a given class of
commodities.

This is best illustrated by the objects named in a clause
of the charter of The United States Steel Corporation,
which read as follows: — “To construct bridges, ships,
boats, engines, cars and other equipment, railroads, docks,
slips, elevators, waterworks, gasworks, and electric works,
viaducts, canals and other waterways, and any other means


204


THE EVOLUTION OF


of transportation, and to sell the same and otherwise to
dispose of, or to maintain and operate the same.”

Most of the industries above named are subsidiary or
instrumental to the final objects of the Corporation, viz.,
the production and sale of various commodities of which
steel is the chief material.

The double process of this Trust expansion may be thus
illustrated : —


United States Steel Corporation.


Iron Ore,
Coal Mines,
Coke,

Natural Gas.


Railroads,'

p

_ Ships,

, Blast

’ Docks, 1

Furnaces/

. etc J

h


Rolling

Mills,

Fur-

naces,

etc


' fHoops,

Hw&

iTube,
Tin Plate,
Bridges,

" Cars,
Elevators,
Engines,
Electric
Works,

. etc.


The properties owned are described officially in a
general way as follows: — “78 blast furnaces, with a capacity
of upwards of 6,500,000 tons of pig iron yearly, or half
that of the United States in 1900; 149 steel works and
six finishing plants, including bar mills, standard steel and
plate mills, with an annual capacity of about 9,000,000
tons of finished material; 18,300 coke ovens; about 70 per
cent of the ore mines of the Lake Superior region, pro-
ducing in 1900 12,724,900 tons; 70,830 acres of coal lands,
about 30,000 acres of surface lands in the coke region, and
125 lake vessels, etc.”

§ 13. There are four principal reasons why the Trust or
dose combination, with monopoly, assumes greater promi-
nence in the United States than in England and elsewhere.
First: the railroad as an economic factor is more important
than elsewhere, and is able to render more assistance
to mining, manufacturing, or commercial combinations.
Secondly: the tariff, by securing to American producers
the home market, renders profitable combinations more
feasible than in a country of free imports. Moreover, in


MODERN CAPITALISM. 205

none of the protective countries of Europe have the great
manufacturing interests obtained so exclusive a control over
the tariff policy as in the United States. Thirdly: the
corrupt domination of politics by business interests, stronger
in the United States than in any great industrial nation of
Europe, enables the great railroad and business corporations
to procure municipal and state charters and other profitable
privileges, to override many laws with impunity, and to
avoid their fair share of contribution to the public purse.
Fourthly: the greater absorption of the national energy
in business operations, the greater field of selection for
ability, the greater equality of opportunity to rise, the
sanguine and audacious temperament of the American busi-
ness man, coupled with freedom from many of the legal or
customary restraints which hamper the “logical” evolution
of capitalistic enterprise in Europe, have evolved a type of
industrial and financial “hustler” with bigger ideas and
more rapid and unscrupulous modes of realising them than
is found in Europe.

§ 14. But while in this favouring atmosphere Trusts have
grown bigger and more numerous, none of the conditions
thus peculiar to America is essential to the formation of a
Trust.

Without any assistance from a Tariff or from rail-
roads we saw that in many branches of the metal and
other manufacturing industries of Great Britain combina-
tions, of a less rigorous order than a Trust, existed and
were able to exercise a certain considerable control of
prices.

There exist, indeed, in Britain many instances of mam-
moth businesses, formed by amalgamation, occupying so
large and firm a place in domestic and foreign markets for
particular classes or grades of goods, that in America they
would assuredly rank as Trusts. The “monopoly” or
superior competing power enjoyed is due in most cases
largely to “good-will” or reputation, based partly upon
patents and secret processes, upon long skill of manage-
ment and workmanship, or in other words upon the
K character of the work.” In many of these cases the scale
of the operations required for a successful undertaking im-
plies enormous capital, inducing amalgamation and pre-
cluding any easy setting up of new competition. Recent


20 6


THE EVOLUTION OF


amalgamations in the iron, steel, and engineering industries
furnish a number of instances of firms which, though by no
means outside competition, enjoy a degree of practical
monopoly over certain market-areas and for certain sorts of
governmental or private contracts.

To such an order would belong Platts of Oldham in
cotton machinery, the Elswick Works (including Armstrong’s
and Whitworth’s, etc.) in engineering and shipbuilding,
Nettlefolds (amalgamating with Guest, Keen & Co. and
other amalgamations) in the screw trade, Vickers and Co.
(absorbing Maxim, Nordenfeldt, the Naval Construction
and Armament Co., etc.) in the armour-plate trade.

As in the case of the American trust there is a growing
tendency for these English companies to fortify themselves
by securing the best available sources of raw material, and
by extending their operations from the manufacture of
saleable goods to the preparatory processes.

So, for example, we find Nettlefolds’ absorbing the Patent
Nut and Bolt Company which had previously absorbed the
Dowlais Iron Company, comprising collieries, iron mines in
Spain, blastfurnaces, steelworks, rolling mills, etc . 1 So like-
wise the great firm of John Brown & Co., manufacturers
of armour plates and other shipping equipment, acquire
collieries and iron-mines . 1

In certain cases, where patents or command of raw
materials are determinant factors in control of “ cost ” or of
market, consolidation approaches so strong a form of
monopoly as to rank as a real Trust. This is the case with
Brunner, Mond & Co. in the chemical trade, where special
inventions and scientific skill furnish the chief element of
success; and with Borax Consolidated, which rests primarily
upon the possession of all the important mines and sources
of raw material.

In most British instances where a company possesses so

1 Macrosty, p. 186.

* “ Present appearances would lead us to expect that the steel industry
will soon be confined to a comparatively small group of large units —
Armstrong, Cammell, John Brown & Co., Vickers, Guest, Keen, the
Weardale Co., the South Durham Co. (which alone aggregate some
£“21,000,000 capital), and some others. Under such an organisa-
tion competition may be as completely eliminated as under a trust
if the most regular description.’’ — Macrosty, Econ. Journal , Sept.
905 .


MODERN CAPITALISM.


207


strong a position in the market as to earn abnormally high
profits, not by cheapness of production alone but also by
control of prices, this position rests upon patents, trade-
marks, superior access to raw material, upon means of
carriage, or upon special contracts with government, or
with some other monopoly. Unusual business capacity is
commonly a requisite for the full utilisation of these bases
of monopoly. Amalgamation of competing businesses and
great size of capital may be conditions of success, but are
not in all cases essential: the characteristic of such
monopolies is rather the creation of a special market resting
upon a unique sort of commodity, unique in form or in
quality.

The Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Company, Huntley &
Palmer's Biscuit Company, Macmillan's Publishing Com-
pany (recently absorbing Bentley’s), Cadbury's Cocoa, the
Timts , are instances of companies which enjoy such special
markets, the commodities they sell competing rather with
different classes or grades of commodities than with the
same commodities produced by competing firms. The high
differentiation of markets is the chief cause of the differential
profits of these monopolies. The “ monopoly M of Messrs.
W. H. Smith & Sons in railway bookstalls, of the Union-
Castle Line in South African trade, or of Messrs. Kynoch in
small-arms contracts, rests upon special business arrange-
ments which render outside competition inoperative.

In all such cases tolerably rigid limits exist for the
monopoly. Other sorts of tyre continually compete with
Dunlops, books and papers may be purchased outside the
railway stations instead of at Smith's stalls, no government
could give preference to Kynoch's if the tenders of this firm
were exorbitantly high, and so forth.

§ 15, Though many of these businesses are virtually
“trusts," the term in Great Britain has been usually re-
served for certain amalgamations which have been formed
with the avowed object of putting an end to competition
and of controlling a market.

The earliest instances were the Salt Union, formed in
1888 with' a capital of three millions in shares and one
million in debentures, and the United Alkali Company in
1891 with six millions of shares and two and a half millions
of debentures. Both sought to establish a monopoly by


20 $


THE EVOLUTION OF


controlling sources of supply and by superior modes of
production. Foreign competition broke these down. 1

Textile manufactures have been a favourite field for
British experiments, but history thus far attests, more failures
than successes. The strongest and most continuously suc-
cessful of these trusts is that of Messrs. Coats in the thread
trade.

Messrs. J. & P. Coats, after entering into a pool or selling
union with their chief competitors, Clarke & Co., Chadwick
& Co., and James Brook & Co., amalgamated with these
firms in 1890. Shortly afterwards they made large invest-
ments in the English Sewing Cotton Co. and the American
Thread Co., and in 1899 bought a Belgian firm. This
series of amalgamations made them masters of the thread
trade not only in Great Britain and America, but through-
out the world.

The Bradford Dyers* Association, formed in 1898, united
about 90 per cent, of the Bradford piece-dyeing trade, and
has been fairly successful

The Yorkshire Woolcombers’ Association (formed in
1899), the Fine Cotton Spinners* and Doublers* Association
(1898), the Calico Printers* Association (1899), the British
Cotton and Wool Dyers* Association (1900), the United
Velvet Cutters* Association (1900) appear to have been
entirely unsuccessful, while several other textile experiments
have not yet been sufficiently tested.

The careful analysis of British trusts presented by Mr.
Macrosty (Econ. four ., Sept. 1902) 2 indicates that only a
small number of experiments in this form of combination
have been successful. Among the few successful ones we
observe that almost all are in articles not exposed to the
brunt of effective foreign competition: Messrs. Coats &
Clarke are international, and control the world market;
three are in the coal trade, where foreign competition is not
practicable; one or two others, like the Wall Paper Manu-
facturers, cater for national tastes and requirements.

To this list of British industrial trusts a large number of
brewing companies ought to be added. In fact, brewing is
the most “ trusted ” British trade: an overwhelming pro

1 Ci Hubbard, Econ. Journal Ap. *902.

1 See opposite page


MODERN CAPITALISM.


209


210


THE EVOLUTION OF


portion of the trade is controlled by great companies, largely
formed by combination and absorption of competitors,
enjoying virtual monopolies over local areas. These drink
“trusts” stand on a different footing from other industrial
combinations, deriving their strength from local monopolies
of licences vested in public-houses which they own, and to
which they furnish liquor.

The transport trade, especially the application of electric
and other new means of carriage and communication,
exhibits some of the strongest forms of monopoly. Partly
a “pool” based upon mutual arrangements of rates, etc.,
our railroad system exhibits in England and Scotland
several instances of amalgamation in order to repress com-
petition, while over large tracts of country certain roads
possess a control of rates which is liable to gross abuses.
In other departments the National Telephone Company
and the Electric Traction Company are instances of powerful
businesses wielding for some years many of the distinctive
powers of a full-fledged Trust.

§ 1 6. In different branches of transport, manufacture,
mining, distribution, and finance we have traced the growth
of organised restraints on competition, issuing in corners,
pools, trusts, or other forms of monopoly. In the supply
of wants which lie outside the ordinary region of industrial
and commercial activity, belonging rather to the world of
intellect and art, the same tendency is sometimes operative.
The theatre in the United States, and to an increasing
extent in England, presents the most striking example of
the dominion of a trust. The ordinary “consumer” of
the drama is in most American and many English cities
compelled to buy whatever theatrical performances Mr.
Frohman chooses to sell, at prices and on other conditions
imposed by a monopolist: the actor can only place his
services before the public through the instrumentality of
Mr. Frohman.

The newspaper press, in many instances a local monopoly
by the nature of the case, now exhibits distinct tendencies
towards the formation of “Trusts” which shall control over
wide areas the sale of news and the manipulation of public
opinion. In Great Britain the two firms of Messrs. Harms-
worth and Messrs. Pearson have already acquired news-
papers in a considerable number of large cities, and are


MODERN CAPITALISM.


an


extending the number of tbeir properties with a view to
economy of production and monopoly of market, through
the publication of a “ simultaneous newspaper ” appearing
in all the great centres of population, comprised in part of
common news and “ editorial policy ” provided from a single
centre, in part of local news and policy superimposed upon
the former. 1

In another department of literature — the supply of school
books, the American Book Company deserves to rank as
an example of a powerful trust whose main strength is
derived from controlling the State school system through
methods familiar to American politics.

How far a Church organising the sole supply of a special
sort of religious service, supported by the monetary pay-
ments of its adherents, can be regarded as a business
corporation is doubtless open to dispute. But in the highly
centralised system and careful business arrangements of the
Christian Science Church, furnishing literature and other
services at distinctly “monopoly” prices, we have a modern
example of a spiritual “ trust,” operating by methods which,
though doubtless analogous to those always employed by
the Roman Catholic and other powerful churches, are more
crudely “ monopolistic ” in their form.

§ 17. One other point of great significance in the “trust”
movement deserves attention here. Though tariffs and
other national laws and customs tend to keep the structure
of capitalism within national limits, powerful forces make
for business internationalism, and the international trust is
already in the field.

This internationalism takes various shapes. Sometimes
it implies the control of a foreign market by a trust whose
productive operations are conducted in the single country
of its origin; though subordinate companies may be registered
in the foreign country, as in the case of the Standard Oil
Company with its Anglo-American attachment, or Burroughs
& Wellcome in the drugs trade. In other cases there is an
amalgamation of firms in different countries for the formation
of an international trust, though here also the forms of
national companies are frequently preserved. The Coats &

1 An interesting article by Mr. Alfred Harmsworth in the North
American Review for January 1901, describes the economy of this form
of “ Trust”


212


THE EVOLUTION OF


Clarke Thread Trust, already named, the Nobel Dynamite
Trust (with its subsidiary companies in Scotland, Germany,
and elsewhere), and the Atlantic Shipping Trust are among
the largest examples of this class. The absorption of the
American firm of Brooke & Co. (“Monkey Brand”) by Lever
Brothers (“Sunlight” Soap), the new company establishing
factories also in Germany and Switzerland; the absorption
of Bryant & May’s Match Company by the American Star
Company, are instances of more limited monopolies standing
on an international basis.

The Atlantic Shipping Trust and the combination of
financial interests in the electric traction business of
America and Great Britain are the largest examples of the
trend towards internationalism in the Trust movement

The largest proposal for an extension of the trust
principle to international competition was that projected
by the steel trade in 1904, when a provisional agreement
was reached between the American Steel Trust and the
leading groups of British, German, Belgian, and French
producers for a regulation of the output of steel rails. 1 The
basis of the agreement as between the chief European
countries was the allotment to each nation of a fixed per-
centage of output; British works producing 53.50%, German
28.83%, Belgian 17.67%. France was to come in on a
somewhat different basis, adding to the British-German-
Belgian total of 100 units 4.8 for the first year, 5.8 for the
second, and 6.4 for the third year of the agreement. Each
country was then to apportion its share of the output to its
constituent companies. All the large British firms were
involved in the arrangement which, if successfully executed,
seemed likely to control well-nigh the entire world output.

§ 18. The wide prevalence of concentration of capital in
pools, trusts, and various local, national, or international
combinations, discovered to exist in the various fields of
industry, may seem inconsistent with the large volume of
evidence as to the survival of small businesses. The in-
consistency is, however, only apparent. Over the whole
field of industry, if every form of occupation be included,
neither the aggregate number of small businesses nor the
proportion of the workers employed in them is declining;


1 Carried into effect in the summer of 1905.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 91 $

but the economic independence of many sorts of small
businesses is encroached upon by organised capitalism,
which in almost every current of production plants itself at
the narrowing of the stream, to impose tolls upon the traffic
as it passes to the consumer.

The small producer still survives in large numbers in
agriculture; but as successful modem agriculture requires
use of considerable capital and large opportunities of market,
the small farmer becomes more and more dependent on the
moneylending company and the railroads. In manu-
facture, the small artisan, the jobbing plumber or other
“ builder,” the Sheffield grinder or the Sttle brassfounder in
Birmingham, the home-working tailor or cabinetmaker,
though surviving in great numbers, are more closely attached
to big firms of manufacturers or contractors who take their
work, and often stand behind them with “credit.” The
independence of the small “sweating” business in so
many of the clothing and other trades is of course merely
nominal. Much the same holds of the commercial busi-
nesses: most of it is “agency” business which, alike in
wholesale trade and in retail, binds the merchant or shop-
keeper to some big manufacturing, shipping, mining, or
commercial company for which he does business. The
immense growth of “packet” goods in retail trade and
the general extension of the “tied” store system illustrate
this growth of dependency.

The same influences penetrate the world of art and
literature, and even the professions: multitudes of jobbing
journalists attached to one or two newspaper offices, of
authors working for publishers or syndicates, artists whose
only chance of selling is the art-shop: actors, musicians,
doctors, teachers, even clergymen, earning their hazardous
livelihood through the mstrrmentality of a company of
middlemen.

The measure of the power of concentrated capitalism
is therefore by no means confined to the immediate area of
capitalistic operations. In the long series of productive
and distributive processes by which raw materials of material
or immaterial wealth are created and passed on for sale to
the consumer there will commonly be some process whic v
involves a high capitalist organisation. In this case, thoug
every other process lay in the region of small competitive


2X4


THE EVOLUTION OF


business, the monopolist control may lay a heavy hand upon
all the other processes and impose on the ultimate consumer
a tax as great as if the whole chain of processes were con-
ducted in the sphere of monopoly. Such a power may be
and often is exercised over small farmers or fishermen, and
over the consuming public, by the carrying companies, or
by the ring that controls the wholesale market: it may
emerge in a manufacturing process where a few great
businesses are able to combine, a corner in the produce
market may from time to time usurp this power, or, after
free competition in all earlier stages of production and of
trade, rings of retail dealers may hold up local prices so as
to take the profits of monopoly. Everywhere the “com-
petitive system * is honeycombed by combinations exer-
cising some form or degree of “ monopoly ” — t.e, presenting
in some market the attitude of a single seller able within
limits to impose his price. It matters comparatively little
to the consumer whether “ free competition ” is “ held up ”
by monopoly in several of the processes of production and
of commerce or in only one: one strong “combine,”
fastening on a single necessary process, can exercise the
same amount of control over the output and the selling
price of a commodity as half-a-dozen different combines
handling earlier and later processes in the same productive
series.

In point of fact the existence of one strong pool or trust
arising in a single stage of production, as for instance in the
carrying of oil or the refining of sugar, prevents the inde-
pendent combination of producers or distributors at any
other process in the trade, absorbing the entire profits of
monopoly by suckage at the narrowest point. Though, as
we have seen, the “organisation” of a trade at a particular
point tends to spread to the organisation of the earlier and
later processes and to the control of subsidiary and competing
| processes, this effective stoppage of competition cannot yet
■h be said to have spread over any large proportion of the
B; general field of industry. The survival of keen competition
- ' in so many markets attests, in part, the rudimentary con-
dition of the new arts of capitalistic “ organisation.” But
in part it is attributable to the control exercised by a
“ring,” “pool,” or other combine which, instead of directly
controlling the earlier processes, forces them to cut-throat


MODERN CAPITALISM.


215

competition, in order that it may buy cheap and sell dear.
While therefore the greater part of our industrial system
still continues to be competitive, the area of the power
of capitalist combination is growing and the effective pro-
tection furnished by competition to the consumer is
diminishing.


214


THE EVOLUTION OP


business, the monopolist control may lay a heavy hand upon
all the other processes and impose on the ultimate consumer
a tax as great as if the whole chain of processes were con-
ducted in the sphere of monopoly. Such a power may be
and often is exercised over small farmers or fishermen, and
over the consuming public, by the carrying companies, or
by the ring that controls the wholesale market: it may
emerge in a manufacturing process where a few great
businesses are able to combine, a corner in the produce
market may from time to time usurp this power, or, after
free competition in all earlier stages of production and of
trade, rings of retail dealers may hold up local prices so as
to take the profits of monopoly. Everywhere the “com-
petitive system ” is honeycombed by combinations exer-
cising some form or degree of “ monopoly ” — t.e. presenting
in some market the attitude of a single seller able within
limits to impose his price. It matters comparatively little
to the consumer whether “free competition” is “held up”
by monopoly in several of the processes of production and
of commerce or in only one: one strong “combine,”
fastening on a single necessary process, can exercise the
same amount of control over the output and the selling
price of a commodity as half-a-dozen different combines
handling earlier and later processes in the same productive
series.

In point of fact the existence of one strong pool or trust
arising in a single stage of production, as for instance in the
carrying of oil or the refining of sugar, prevents the inde-
pendent combination of producers or distributors at any
other process in the trade, absorbing the entire profits of
monopoly by suckage at the narrowest point. Though, as
we have seen, the “organisation” of a trade at a particular
point tends to spread to the organisation of the earlier and
later processes and to the control of subsidiary and competing
processes, this effective stoppage of competition cannot yet
be said to have spread over any large proportion of the
general field of industry. The survival of keen competition
in so many markets attests, in part, the rudimentary con-
dition of the new arts of capitalistic “ organisation.” But
in part it is attributable to the control exercised by a
“ ring,” “ pool,” or other combine which, instead of directly
controlling the earlier processes, forces them to cut-throat


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. 217

attached individuals or companies, trusting to their position
as the largest purchasers of crude oil to enable them to
dictate prices. The fall in the price paid by the company
for crude oil from 9.19 cents in 1S70 to 2.30 in 1881, when
the Trust was formed, and the maintenance of an almost
uniform lower level from 1881 to 1890, testifies to the close-
ness of the grip in which the company helt the oil pro-
ducers; for although improvements in the machinery for
sinking wells and for extracting oil took place during the
period, these economies in production do not at all suffice
to explain the fall. Indeed, the method of the company’s
transactions with the oil producers, as described by their own
solicitor in his defence of the Trust, is convincing testimony
of their control of the situation: — “When the producer of
oil puts down a well, he notifies the pipe line company (a
branch of the Trust), and immediately a pipe line is laid to
connect with his well. The oil is taken from the tank at the
well, whenever requested, into the large storage tanks of the
company, and is held for the owner as long as he desires it.
A certificate is given for it, which can be turned into cash at
any time; and when sold it is delivered to the purchaser at
any station on the delivery lines.” 1 In similar fashion the
Sugar Trust controlled the market for raw sugar. Nor was
this power exercised alone over the producers of raw sugar.
It extended to dictating the price at which the wholesale
grocers who took from them the refined sugar should sell to
their customers.*

The Wall Paper Manufacturers’ Trust made an arrange-
ment with the dealers binding them to abstain from buying
foreign papers for ten years.

In the petroleum business the Standard Oil Company
adopted the most rigorous means of enforcing its monopoly
on retailers. An oil-dealer who attempted to trade with its
competitors was approached by an agent of the Trust, who
informed him that, unless he ceased his “free” buying, a
local store would be opened to undersell him. 3 In other cases
a rebate system, not dissimilar from that prevailing in the
Shipping Conferences is practised. For instance, in America,

1 S. C. T. Dodd, The Forum , May 1892.

9 “Trusts in the United States,” Economic Journal, p. 86.

9 CL Lloyd, Wealth against Commonwealth , p. 250; and Tarbell,
History of the Standard Oil Trust.


2l8


THE EVOLUTION OF


in the cigarette and alcohol trades, the trust gives a rebate
of 5 per cent or 7 per cent, to customers who can prove
that within a given time they have bought their supplies
exclusively from the Trust. 1

This power of a monopoly is not merely extended to the
control of prices in the earlier and later processes of pro-
duction and distribution of the commodity. One of the
most potent forms it assumes in manufactures where
machinery is much used is a control over the patentees
and even the manufacturers of machinery. Where a strong
Trust exists, the patentee of a new invention can only sell
to the Trust and at the Trust’s price. Charges are even
made against the Standard Oil Trust and other powerful
monopolies to the effect that they are in the habit of
appropriating any new invention, whether patented or not,
without paying for it, trusting to their influence to avoid the
legal consequences of such conduct There is indeed
strong reason to believe that the irresponsible position in
which some of these corporations are placed induces them
to an unscrupulous use of their great wealth for such
purposes.

§ 2. {$) Since the prime object of a Trust is to effect
sales at profitable prices, and prices are directly determined
by the quantitative relation between supply and demand, it
is clearly advantageous for a Trust to obtain as full a power
in the regulation of the quantity of supply as is possible.
To control a predominant share of the output is indeed an
essential to the real existence of a Trust. In England it is
a common maxim of business that a minimum of 70 per
cent, of the trade is indispensable to the success of con-
solidation, and in almost every instance of a strong trust the
proportion is considerably larger than this, the Wall Paper
Manufacturers, for example, claiming to control 98 per cent,
of the trade. Though the Standard Oil Company on re-
construction in 1899 claimed only to produce about 65 per
cent, of the country’s total output of refined oil, its pro-
portionate control over the eastern and middle western
market was far larger than this figure, while Mr. Havemeyer

C tided in 1897 that the American Sugar Refining Com-
ay was supplying 90 per cent, of the total national


1 Von Halle, p. 77.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


219


consumption. In many articles of steel a single combina-
tion controls 75 to 80 per cent of the output, and in some
lines even more. 1

In order to effect this control the Trust will pursue a double
policy. It will buy up such rival businesses as it deems can
be worked advantageously for the purposes of the Trust.
The price at which it will compel the owners of such
businesses to sell will have no precise relation to the value
of the business, but will depend upon the amount of trouble
which such a business can cause by refusing to come into
the Trust. If the outstanding firm is in a strong position
the Trust can only compel it to sell by a prolonged process
of cutting prices, which involves considerable loss. For
such a business a high price will be paid By this
means a strongly-established Trust or Syndicate will bring
under its control the whole of the larger and better-
equipped businesses which would otherwise by their compe-
tition weaken the Trust's control of the market A smaller
business, or an important rival who persistently stands out
of the Trust, is assailed by the various weapons in the hands
of the Trust, and is crushed by the brute force of its stronger
rival. The most common method of crushing a smaller
business is by driving down prices below the margin of
profit, and by the use of the superior staying power which
belongs to a larger capital starving out a competitor. This
mode of exterminating warfare is used not merely against
actually existing rivals, as where a railway company is known
to bring down rates for traffic below cost price in order to
take the traffic of a rival line, but is equally effective against
the potential competition of outside capital After two or
three attempts to compete with Jay Gould's telegraph line
from New York to Philadelphia had been frustrated by a
lowering of rates to a merely nominal price, the notoriety of
this terrible weapon sufficed to check further attempts at
competition. In this way each strongly-formed Trust is
able to fence off securely a certain field of investment, thus
narrowing the scope of use for any outside capital. This
employment of brute force is sometimes spoken of as
" unfair * competition, and treated as something distinct
from ordinary trade competition. But the difference drawn


1 Report of Industrial Commission t vol six. p. 604-


220


THE EVOLUTION OF


is a purely fallacious one. In thus breaking down a com-
petitor the Trust simply makes use of those economies
which we have found to attach to large-scale businesses as
compared with small. Its action, however oppressive it may
seem from the point of view of a weaker rival, is merely an
application of those same forces which are always operating
in the evolution of modern capital. In a competitive in-
dustrial society there is nothing to distinguish this conduct
of a Trust in the use of its size and staying power from the
conduct of any ordinary manufacturer or shopkeeper who
tries to do a bigger and more paying business than his
rivals. Each uses to the full, and without scruple, all the
economic advantages of size, skill in production, knowledge
of markets, attractive price-lists, and methods of advertise-
ment which he possesses. It is quite true that so long
as there is competition among a number of fairly equal
businesses the consuming public may gain to some extent
by this competition, whereas the normal result of the
successful establishment of a Trust is simply to enable its
owners to take higher profits by raising prices to the
consumer. But this does not constitute a difference in the
mode of competition, so that in this case it deserves to be
called “fair,” in the other “unfair.”

It is even doubtful whether such bargains as that above
described between the Standard Oil Company and the
Railways, whereby a discriminative rate was maintained in
favour of the Company, is “unfair,” though it was under-
hand and illegal. In the ordinary sense of the term it was
a free ” contract between the Railways and the Oil Com-
pany, and in spite of its discriminative character might have
been publicly maintained had the law not interfered on a
technical point. The same is even true of the flagrant act
of discrimination described by Mr. Baker : — “A combination
among manufacturers of railway car-springs, which wished
to ruin an independent competitor, not only agreed with
the American Steel Association that the independent com-
pany should be charged $10 oer ton more for steel than
the members of the combine, but raised a fund to be used
as follows : when the independent company made a bid on
a contract for springs, one of the members of the Trust was
authorised to under-bid at a price which would incur a loss,
which was to be paid out of the fund. In this way the


MODERN CAPITALISM.


221


competing company was to be driven out of business .” 1
These cases differ only in their complexity from the simpler
modes of underselling a business rival. Mean, underhand,
and perhaps illegal many of these tactics are, but after all
they differ rather in degree than in kind from the tactics
commonly practised by most businesses engaged in close
commercial warfare. If they are “ unfair,” it is only in the
sense that all coercion of the weak by the strong is
“unfair,** a verdict which doubtless condemns from any
moral standpoint the whole of trade competition, so far as it
is not confined to competing excellence of production.

The only exercise of power by a Trust or Monopoly in
its dealings with competing capital which deserves to be
placed in a separate category of infamy, is the use of money
to debauch the Legislature into the granting of protective
tariffs, special charters or concessions, or other privileges
which enable a monopoly company to get the better of their
rivals, to secure contracts, to check outside competition,
and to tax the consuming public for the benefit of the trust-
maker’s pocket Under this head we may also reckon
the tampering with the administration of justice which is
attributed, apparently not without good reason, to certain
of the Trusts, the use of the Trust’s money to purchase
immunity from legal interference, or, in the last resort, to
buy a judgment in the Courts.

How far the more or less definite allegations upon this
subject are capable of substantiation it is beyond our scope
to inquire, but certain disclosures in connection with the
Tweed Ring, the Standard Oil Company, the Anthracite
Coal Trust, and other syndicates induce the belief that
the more unscrupulous capitalists seek to influence the
Courts of Justice as well as the Legislature in pursuance of
their business interests. Contributions to party funds for
the purpose and with the result of influencing tariff and
other legislation in their interest are methods of Trusts
which, though matter of common belief, are difficult of
proof We have, however, the admission of Mr. Havemeyer
before a Committee of Congress that the Sugar Trust con-
tributed in Republican States to the fund of the Republican
party, in Democratic States to that of the Democratic party,


1 Baker, Mmopolia and tJu People t p. 85,


222


THE EVOLUTION OF


in order to stand well with the dominant political power in
each State . 1

§ 3. (c) The more or less complete control of the capital
engaged in an industry, and of the market, involves an
enormous power over the labour engaged in that industry.
So long as competition survives, the employee or group of
employees are able to obtain wages and other terms of
employment determined in some measure by the conflicting
interests of different employers. But when there is only
one employer, the Trust, the workman who seeks employ-
ment has no option but to accept the terms offered by his
employer. His only alternative is to abandon the use of
the special skill of his trade and to enter the ever-swollen
unskilled labour market This applies with special force to
factory employees who have acquired great skill by in-
cessant practice in some narrow routine of machine-tending.
The average employee in a highly elaborated modern
factory is on the whole less competent than any other
worker to transfer his labour-power without loss to another
kind of work 2 Now, as we have seen, it is precisely in
these manufactures that many of the strongest Trusts spring
up. The Standard Oil Company or the Steel Trust are the
owners of their employees almost to the same extent as they
are owners of their mills and machinery, so subservient has
modern labour become to the fixed capital under which it
works. It has been claimed as one of the advantages of a
Trust that the economies attending its working enable it to
pay wages higher than the market rate. There can be no
question as to the ability of the stronger Trusts to pay high
wages. But there is no power to compel them to do so,
and it would be pure hypocrisy to pretend that the interests
of the labourers formed any part of the motive which led a
body of keen business men to acquire a monopoly. One
of the special economies which a large capital possesses
over a small, and which a Trust possesses par excellence , ,
is the power of making advantageous bargains with its
jemployees.

A few of the stronger Trusts have recognised the ad-
Brntage of detaching their employees from the general
^labour movement,” by introducing a small element of


1 G£ Jenks, The Trust Problem § p. 192. * Cl Chapter XVfc


MODERN CAPITALISM.


223


“ profit-sharing,” or by offering an inducement to them to
invest their small savings in shares of the corporation. A
small fraction of monopoly profits, thus laid out, purchases
industrial peace, and helps to induce in the general public a
belief that the profits of a Trust enrich many instead of a
few. It is claimed with some reason that the Standard
Oil, Steel, and a few other Trusts are administered with
sufficient intelligence to recognise “the economy of high
wages” for responsible and high-skilled employees. But
the wages and other conditions of labour prevalent among
the less skilled workers in the Anthracite Coal Mines 1 and
in other strongly “trusted” industries prove that the
working classes in general have nothing to gain from the
economy of industrial monopoly.

But the practical ownership of its employees involved in
the position of a monopoly is by no means the full measure
of the oppressive power exercised by the Trust over labour.
.Since the means by which Trust prices are maintained is
the regulation of production, the interests of the Trust often
require that a large part of the fixed capital of the com-
panies entering the Trust shall stand idle. “When com-
petition has become so fierce that there is frequently in the
market a supply of goods so great that all cannot be sold
at remunerative prices, it is necessary that the competing
establishments, in order to continue business at all (of
course, under perfectly free competition many will fail),
check their production. Now an ordinary pool makes
provision for each establishment to run in one of the two
ways suggested. Manifestly a stronger organisation like
the Trust, by selecting the best establishments, and running
them continuously at their full capacity, while closing the
others, or selling them, and making other use of the capital
thus set free, will make a great saving.”* The Whisky
Trust presents a notable instance of this economy. When
the whisky trade was worked under the looser organisation
of an industrial pool, each of the constituent distilleries
worked below its full capacity, one year at 40 per cent,
another even at 28 per cent of former output. But
when the 80 distilleries had entered the closer form of a

1 Roberts, Anthracite Coal Indust

* J. W. Jenks, “Trusts in the United States,” Economic Journal
voL it p. So.


22 4


THE EVOLUTION OP


Trust, in the following year all were closed with the excep-
tion of the 12 best situated and best equipped: these ran at
full capacity, and their aggregate output was as large as that
of the So which had been running before. 1 When at the
beginning of 1S94, Mr. Carnegie combined with six other
steel manufacturers, so as to bring 65 per cent, of the out-
put under his control, outsiders were paid large sums to
dose their establishments. 1 The same policy has been
adopted among others by the Cotton Oil Trust, the Sugar
Trust, and the Rubber Trust* All the greater Trusts, in
fact, have followed this plan of closing entirely the weaker
establishments and running only the stronger, thereby effect-
ing a saving in capital and labour. 4

Here we see a Trust exercising its economic power of
regulating production. That power, as we shall see below,
is not merely confined to closing the inferior mills in order
that the same aggregate output may be obtained by a full
working of the more efficient plant. Where over-production
has occurred it is to the interest of the Trust to lessen
production. With this end in view it will suddenly close
half the mills, or works, or elevators in a district. The
owners of these closed plants get their interest from the
Trust just as if they were working. But the labour of these
works suddenly, and without any compensation for disturb-
ance,^ “saved” — that is to say, the employees are deprived
of the services of the only kind of plant and material to
which their skilled efforts are applicable. It is probable
that one result of the formation of each of these larger trusts
has been to throw out of employment several thousands of
workers, and to place them either in the ranks of the
unemployed or in some other branch of industry where
their previously acquired skill is of little service, and where
their wages are correspondingly depressed. This saving of
labour is not confined to the productive processes. When
the American Steel and Wire Company (now a branch of
the great Steel Trust) was formed, the services of 200
salesmen were dispensed with: one of the early econo-
mies of the Whisky combine was the dismissal of 300
u travellers.” From the account given above of the

1 Jcnks, The Trust Problem^ p. 34.

* Von Hallo, p. 62. * Von Halle, pp. 66, 108.

4 J* W. Jenks, The Trust Problem^ p. 33*


MODERN CAPITALISM. 225

changes in organisation of production under the Trust it
might appear that the effect upon labour was not to reduce
the net employment, but to give* full, regular employment to
a smaller number instead of partial and irregular employment
to many, and that thus labour, considered as a whole, might
be the gainer. An industrial movement which substitutes
the regular employment of a few for the irregular employ-
ment of many is so far a progressive movement But it
must be borne in mind first that there is usually a net
reduction of employment, a substitution not of 50 workers
at full-time for 100 at half-time, but of 30 only. For not
only will there be a net saving of labour in relation to
the same output, the result of using exclusively the best
equipped and best situated factories, but since the Trust
came into existence in order to restrict production and so
raise prices, the aggregate output of the business will be
either reduced or its rate of increase will be less than under
open competition. The chief economy of the Trust will
in fact arise from the net diminution of employment of
labour. As the Trust grows stronger and absorbs a larger
and larger proportion of the total supply for the market,
the reduction of employment will as a rule continue. Of
course* if the scale of prices which the Trust finds most
profitable happens to be such as induce a large increase of
consumption, and therefore to permit an expansion of the
machinery ( f production, the aggregate of employment may
be maintained or even increased. Bat, as we shall see
below, there is nothing in the nature of a Trust to guarantee
such a result The normal result of placing the ordering of
an industry in the hands of a monopoly company is to give
them a power which it is their interest to exercise, to
narrow the scope of industry, to change its locale , to
abandon certain branches and take up others, to substitute
machinery for hand labour, without any regard to the wel-
fare of the employees who have been associated with the
fixed capital formerly in use. When to this we add the
reflection that the ability to choose its workmen out of an
artificially made over-supply of labour, rid of the competi-
tion of other employers, gives the Trust a well-nigh absolute
power to fix wages, hours of work, to pay in truck, and
generally to dictate terms of employment and conditions of
life, we understand the feeling of distrust and* antagonism

*5


226


THE EVOLUTION OF


with which the working classes regard the growth of these
great monopolies on both sides of the Atlantic.

§ 4. Those who admit tjiat a Trust is in its essence a
monopoly, and that it is able, by virtue of its position, to
sell commodities at high prices, sometimes affirm that it is
not to the interest of a Trust to maintain high prices, and
that in fact Trusts have generally lowered prices.

Since the direct test of the strength of a monopoly con-
sists in its control over prices, great interest attaches to these
questions. Difficulties, however, present themselves directly
we seek to ascertain the facts. It is true that we can easily
learn the fluctuations in prices alike of the " trusted ” com-
modities and of their chief raw materials before and after
the formation of the trust. Thus we can ascertain whether
as a matter of fact trusts have reduced prices, or to what
extent they have raised them. By comparing the curves
for raw materials and for finished commodities we can
ascertain, though with less exactitude, whether the margin
has increased or diminished: if it has increased we may
generally conclude that the Trust is earning monopoly
profits by holding up prices to consumers, not necessarily
above the earlier level, but above the level to which they
would have sunk if the trust were forced to be content
with a normal rate of profit A most careful investigation
of the subject from this point of view was made by
Professor Jenks for the “ Industrial Commission.” Dealing
with the Sugar Trust he reaches the conclusion that “ The
sugar combination has, beyond question, had the power of
determining for itself, within considerable limits, what the
price of sugar should be, low or high, with or without com-
petitors, although, when there has been competition, it has
chosen to cut prices to drive out its rivals rather than to
run the risk of letting them gradually take its market on
account of its high prices. During about nine of the
twelve years which have passed since the organisation of
the Trust, the margin between raw and refined sugars has
been considerably higher 1 than it was for three years before

1 We cannot however conclude from this that the margin of profit
rises corrtipendingtyt for “ in order that the profits may be the same
the margin between the price of the raw material and that of the
finished product should generally increase slightly with the increase in
price of the raw material ” (p. 133).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


227

the Trust was organised and than it has been during the
three years when there has been vigorous competition.” 1
The Whisky Trust has been less successful in manipulating
prices, for “ whisky combinations have been able to hold
prices and profits high only for short periods, inasmuch as
they have almost invariably attempted to overreach and
secure too high profits.” 2

The effort of the Standard Oil Trust is thus summarised :
“The Standard Oil Trust was formed in 1882. From that
time on, for a period of eight or nine years, it is noticeable
that there is only a slight decrease in the margin. From
1891 until 1898 the margin seems to have been steadily
nearly or just a cent, lower than for the period preceding.
But the period of the smallest margin seems to have been
in the years 1893 and 1894. During the last two years 3
there has been a decided increase, not merely in the price
of refined petroleum, but also in the margin between crude
and refined.” 4 This larger margin does not imply a
corresponding rise of profit, since there is an added cost of
refining to be taken into consideration.

The chart of prices in the Tin Plate trade showed that
the immediate effect of the combination was to raise the
margin, and the rise of profit thus obtained was afterwards
increased by a reduction in the cost of manufacture. 5 The
same general results followed the formation of the Steel
and Wire Company (now absorbed in the Steel Trust).
u Margins as well as prices of production increased rapidly
from the date of combination.”

§ 5. But while such investigations may serve to illustrate
the control over prices which it is the main object of a
Trust to secure, they do not enable us to measure the
“ monopoly ” element in consumers’ prices, or the net profit
beyond the normal business rate, which accrues to a Trust

It may pay a Trust not only to lower prices to consumers,
but even to reduce the margin between the price of its
materials and of its finished articles ; nay, it may pay a
Trust in absolute control of its market to reduce the
margin between cost of production and selling prices per
unit of its aggregate output This reduced margin of profit
may still contain a monopoly element which, when the

3 Jeaks, p. 139. 1 IeUm y p. 149. 3 /.*. 1S98-1900.

4 jeak*, pp. 153-4* * Jeaki, p. 163.


228


THE EVOLUTION OF


whole output is taken into consideration, represents the
largest aggregate profit which the monopoly is capable of
yielding.

It is only from a deductive treatment of the subject that
it is possible clearly to prove that Trusts possess a power
over prices antagonistic to the interests of the consuming
public.

A trust or any other business with a complete monopoly
of any class of goods for which there is a market will
strive to fix that price which will yield the largest net
return from the business. The prime question will be,
u How many articles shall I produce and offer for sale?”
The answer to this question will depend upon the relations
between two sets of calculations, the one set having
reference to expenses of production, the other to elasticity
of demand on the part of consumers.

On the side of expenses of production, the tendency to
restrict or enlarge his output depends of course upon how
far his business conforms to the laws respectively of
diminishing, of constant, or of increasing returns — in other
words, upon the limit of maximum efficiency in the size of
his business. So long as a further enlargement of output
can be made with a reduction of expense per unit of the
whole output, our monopolist will tend to enlarge his out-
put But he will check this tendency by regard to the
demand side of the problem. If he produces a small
amount he can sell it at a high price, to dispose of a larger
supply involves a lowering of price. If the article supplies
a keen, widely-felt need, or strongly stimulates a craving for
increased consumption among those who take off the earlier
increments of supply, a large increase of supply may be
attended by a comparatively small fall in prices. On the
other hand, if the article has a weak hold upon the con-
suming public, satisfying the shallow taste of a small
special group, dependent upon M rarity n for its appreciation,
or easily displaced in the public favour by some other
commodity, a larger output can only be disposed of
at a great reduction of price. It is the relation between
these two technically unconnected considerations that
determines the practical power of a monopolist over prices.
As expenses of production fall, urging the monopolist
to increase his output, so the selling prices for his


MODERN CAPITALISM*


229


output likewise falls, urging him to restrict his output
The actual maximum output, the production and sale of
which will yield him the largest aggregate profit, must
obviously depend upon the relative pace of those two price
movements.


at.


The above diagram 1 furnishes a geometrical expres
sion of this play of forces, and indicates the difference
between the determination of a competitive and a mono*
poly price for a business conforming in^the main to a law
of increasing returns.

u In the diagram the curved line ao is taken to represent
the varying cost of production, and is hence called the
supply curve : the line eo, representing the state of demand \
is similarly called the demand curve. The line ox would
represent the price under competitive conditions. The
perpendiculars jh and il represent the prices that would be
fixed by the demand if the monopolist were to limit the

1 Adapted with a slight alteration from Ely and Wicker’s Elementary
Principles ef Economics, p, 1S4.


230


THB EVOLUTION OF


supply to eh or el respectively. The lines gh and hi would
represent the total cost per unit of producing these various
quantities. The parallelograms ghqe and klne represent the
total costs of the different quantities, and the parallelograms
fhpe and time represent the total returns from sales. Conse-
quently the smaller parallelograms fgpq and ihmn t which
equal the parallelograms representing total income, minus
the parallelograms representing total costs, represent the
net return. If the character of the two curves be known,
it is possible to determine by mathematical formulae where
the parallelogram of greatest net return will fall, and conse
quently what will be the monopoly price.”

From this diagram it appears that the monopoly price,
wherever it is fixed, at fh or elsewhere, must always be
higher than the competitor's price ox. Reflection, however,
shows that it is possible that by a coincidence in the two
curves, expressing respectively expenses of supply and
elasticity of demand, the monopoly price and the com-
petitive might coincide. In other words, the economy of
enlarged production might be so great, and the economy of
reduced consumption so small, that it would pay a mono-
polist to sell a very large quantity of articles at a price
which was no higher, nay, a price which might be lower,
than the competitive price. For if by this term “competitive
price ” we signify the market price which would prevail if*
instead of being a monopoly, the market were occupied by
several large competing businesses, it is quite possible that
a trust might find it pay to fix selling prices below this
point For the expenses of competition, which a monopoly
ex hypothcsi saves, must be taken into consideration in
determining a competitive price: a trust might find it
profitable to fix a price which would represent some
positive gain to the consuming public from the establish-
ment of its monopoly. It is probable that under the
pressure of those forces actual cases have arisen where the
public has enjoyed under a monopoly lower prices than
would have prevailed under competition or some looser
form of combination.

§ 6. The real danger of Trusts in their control of prices
appears when we consider this control in relation to the
various classes of commodities which form the subjects of
monopoly.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


* 3 *


(a) The urgency of the need which a commodity satisfies
enables the monopolist to charge high prices. Where a
community Is dependent for life upon some single com-
modity, as the Chinese on rice, the monopolist is able to
obtain a high price for the whole of a supply which does
not exceed what is necessary to keep alive the whole popula-
tion. Thus a monopolist of corn or rice in a famine can
get an exorbitant price for a considerable supply. But after
the supply is large enough to enable every one to satisfy the
most urgent need for sustenance, the urgency of the need
satisfied by any further supply falls rapidly, for there is no
comparison between the demand of famine and the demand
induced by the pleasures of eating.

A monopoly of a necessity of life is therefore more
dangerous than any other monopoly, because it not merely
places the lives of the people at the mercy of private traders,
but because it will often be the interest of such monopolists
to limit supply to the satisfaction of the barest necessaries
of life.

Next to a necessary in this respect will come what is
termed a "conventional necessary,” something which by
custom has been firmly implanted as an integral portion of
the standard of comfort. This differs, of course, in different
classes of a community. Boots may now be regarded as
a “ conventional necessary ” of almost all grades of English
society, and a monopolist could probably raise the price of
boots considerably without greatly diminishing the consump-
tion. Half a century ago, however, when boots were not
firmly established as part of the standard of comfort of the
great mass of the working classes, the power of a monopolist
to raise prices would have been far smaller.

As we descend in the urgency of wants supplied we find
that the comforts and luxuries form a part of the standard
of life of a smaller and smaller number of persons* and
satisfying intrinsically weaker needs, are more liable to be
affected by a rise of price.

(b) Closely related to this consideration, and working in
with it at every point, is the question of the possibility of
substituting another commodity for the one monopolised.
This everywhere tempers the urgency of the need attaching
to a commodity. There are few, if any, even among the
commodities on which we habitually rely for food, shelter,


233 THE EVOLUTION OF

clothing, that we could not and would not dispense with
if prices rose very high. The incessant competition that
is going on between different commodities which claim to
satisfy some particular class of need cannot be got rid of by
the monopoly of one of them. This is probably the chief
explanation of the low prices of the Standard Oil As an illu-
minant, oil is competing with gas, candles, and electricity, and
unless the monopoly were extended laterally so as to include
these and any other possible illuminants, the Trust’s prices
cannot be determined merely by the pressure of the need for
artificial light Though to a modem society artificial light is
probably even more important than cane sugar, a Sugar Trust
may have a stronger monopoly and be able to raise prices
higher than an Oil Trust, because the substitutes for cane
sugar, such as molasses and beetroot, are less effective com-
petitors than gas, candles, and electricity with oil

The power of railway monopolies largely depends upon
the degree in which their services are indispensable, and
no alternative mode of transport is open. Sometimes,
however, they miscalculate the extent of their power. The
high railway rates in England have recently led in several
quarters to a substitution of road and canal traffic in the case
of goods where rapidity of - conveyance was not essential
So also in other cases sea-transport has been substituted.

The stronger monopoly of American railways consists
partly in the fact that distances are so great, and the sea-
board or other water conveyance so remote, that over a large
part of the Continent the monopoly is untempered by
alternative possibilities of transport

The reverse consideration, the possibility of substituting
the article of monopoly for other articles of consumption,
and so securing a wider market, has quite as important
an influence on prices. The possibility of substituting
oil for coal in cooking and certain other operations has
probably a good deal to do with the low price of oil. A
Trust will often keep prices low for a season in order to
enable their article to undersell and drive out a rival article,
a competition closely akin to the competition with a rival
producer of the same article. When natural gas was dis-
covered in the neighbourhood of Pittsburg, the price was
lowered sufficiently to induce a large number of factories
and private houses to give up coal and to bum gas. After


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*33


expensive fittings had been pm in, and the habit of using
gas established, the Gas Company, without any warning,
proceeded to raise the rates to the tune of 100 per cent
When we ascend to the higher luxuries, the competition
between different commodities to satisfy the same generic
taste, or even to divert taste or fashion from one class of
consumption to another class, is highly complicated, and
tempers considerably the control of a Trust over prices.

The power of a company which holds the patent for a
particular kind of corkscrew is qualified very largely not
only by competition of other corkscrews, but by screw-
stopper s and various other devices for securing the contents
of bottles. The ability to dispense with the object of a
monopoly, though it does not prevent the monopolist from
charging prices so much higher than competition prices as
to extract all the “ consumer’s rent,” of the marginal con-
sumer, forms a practical limit to monopoly prices.

(c) Lastly, there is the influence of existing or potential
competition of other producers upon monopoly prices.
Where prices and profits are very high a Trust is liable
to more effective competition on the part of any surviving
independent firms, and likewise to the establishment of
new competitors. This ability of outside capital to enter
into competition will of course differ in different trades.
Where the monopoly is protected by a tariff the possibility
of new competition from outside is lessened. When the
monopoly is connected with some natural advantage or
the exclusive possession of some special convenience, as
in mining or railways, direct competition of outsiders on
equal terms is prohibited. Where the combination of large
capital and capable administration is indispensable to the
possibility of success in a rival producer, the power of a
monopoly is stronger than where a small capital can produce
upon fairly equal terms and compete. If the monopoly is
linked closely with personal qualities and with special oppor-
tunities. of knowledge, as in banking, it is most difficult for
outside capital to compete effectively.

§ 7. These considerations show that the power of a Trust
or other monopoly over prices is determined by a number
of intricate forces which react upon one another with vary-
ing degrees of pressure, according as the quantity of supply
is increased or diminished. But a Trust is always able to


234 THK evolution of modern capitalism.

charge prices in excess of competitive prices, and it
generally its interest to do so. It will commonly be
the interest of a Trust or other monopoly to maintain a
lower scale of prices in those commodities which are
luxuries or satisfy some less urgent and more capricious
taste, and to maintain high prices where the article of
monopoly is a common comfort or a prime necessary of
life for which there is no easily available substitute.


S' K-


CHAPTER X,


THE FINANCIER.

5 z. The origin and economic nature of modem finance.

§ 2. Relations between investor and financier.

g 3. Need of the financial middleman .
g 4. Earning capacity the true basis of Capitalisation.

| 5. The art of promotion.

§ 6. Manipulating the share-markets.

§ 7. The control of sound profitable businesses.

§ S. Bank-loans as a factor in business finance.

§ 9. The triangle of financial forces in America.

§ 10. Financial pressure for external markets.

| 1 1. The financial system as illustrated from South Africa.

§ 1. The structure of modem Capitalism tends to throw
an ever-increasing power into the hands of the men who
operate the monetary machinery of industrial communities,
the financial class. For large enterprises the financier has
always been a necessary man: in the ancient and the
mediaeval world he found large sums of money to meet the
emergencies of kings and great nobles, ecclesiastical or civil,
to furnish military or naval expeditions, and to facilitate the
larger forms of commercial enterprises which needed capital.
Small financiers, as usurers or money-lenders, have at all
times lived upon the irregularities and misfortunes of the
farming, artisan, and small trading classes. But not until
the development of modern industrial methods required
a large, free, various flow of capital into many channels of
productive employment did the financier show signs of
assuming the seat of authority he now occupies in our
economic system. Every important step which we have
traced in the growth of industrial structure has favoured
the segregation of a financial from a more general capital is?


* 3 *


THE EVOLUTION OF


class, and has given it a larger and a more profitable control
over the course of industry.

The elaborate differentiation of industrial processes into
separate businesses, the concatenation of a long series of
different businesses contributing directly to the production
of each class of commodities, the relation of each member
of this series to dependent or subsidiary businesses, each of
which is itself a member of another series of separately
ordered processes, the interdependence of the most widely
divergent manufacturing or commercial processes through
the use of some common source of mechanical power, or
some instrument of transport, the expansion of local into
national and world-markets which bring what were formerly
separate self-sufficing industrial systems into unity — the
working of such an industrial organisation implies a deli-
cate and intricate mechanism of adjustments. In order
that such a system may work properly and economically
there must be an automatic apparatus for the application of
economic stimuli and the generation of productive power at
points of industrial deficiency, and a corresponding applica-
tion of repressive checks at points of industrial excess:
industrial power must be distributed in some general form
throughout the entire organism to be transmuted into special
kinds of productive energy where there is need.

This growing necessity of modem industry has reacted in
two important ways upon the economic structure — first by
producing a radical change in the structure of the business-
unit, and secondly in giving rise to “a class of pecuniary
experts whose business is the strategic management of the
interstitial relations of the system .” 1

The quick rise of new manufacturing and commercial
business demanded a freer movement of capital than the
older business structure could easily procure : old-established,
private businesses sought to expand: men with keen wits
apable of seizing opportunities rose “from the ranks” and
seeded the use of capital; vast new forms of enterprise in
railroads, mining# etc, demanded larger capital than private
finance could furnish. Hence the need of a reformation of
business structure upon a basis of co-operative capital, drawn
from innumerable private sources, welded into large masses


1 VeUen, Tk* Thstry cf Business Enterprise p. 29.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


«37


and utilised for profitable industry by able directors of large
business enterprises. The wider spread increase of wealth
from new industrial methods enabled far more people than
before to effect private savings : the economy of large-scale
production precluded them from setting up in business for
themselves upon the small capital they thus commanded,
while improved methods of commercial intelligence greatly
widened the area of secure investment, tending more and
more to separate capital from the presence and direct
control of its owners, and to place it at the disposal
of big business men who paid interest to its owners for
its use.

Thus it has come to pass that in every field of capitalist
industry joint-stock enterprise has been rapidly displacing
privately-owned businesses. So long as the new class of
small investors had only the alternative of effecting loans or
mortgages at small fixed rates of interest, or of incurring
“unlimited liability” by investments which they could
neither watch effectively nor easily withdraw, the growth of
co-operative capital was comparatively slow. But after
“limited liability” was set on a solid legal footing 1 the
movement became very rapid and widespread. The appli-
cation of this new capitalist structure, first to public loans,
then to railroad, shipping, mining, and banking enterprises,
the enormous expansion of public or “ company ” develop-
ment in the supply of municipal services, and finally the
extension to industrial companies of every sort and size,
have revolutionised the character of modern economics and
politics. Countless thousands of citizens in America or
Great Britain are part-owners of lands, railroads, minerals,
factories, municipal plants, and public revenues in all parts
of the civilised or semi-civilised world. Primarily this
signifies a divorcement of political from economic interests
for large sections of these nations: politically they are
members of a single nation with an area of influence and
interest thus circumscribed, economically they are to an
ever-growing extent cosmopolitans. In what important
ways this economic internationalism is moulding world-
politics is obvious, the cross-ownership among nations is by
far the most substantial guarantee of the development of a

1 la Great Britain by Acts i$ and 19 Viet., c. 133 (1855), consoli-
dated by 25 and 26 Viet, c. Sfl {1862).


*3$ THE EVOLUTION OF

general policy of peace. Economic internationalism is
the precursor and the moulder of political international-
ism, the beginnings of which are laid in a common postal
system, a public or semi-public organisation of railroads,
shipping routes, banking and telegraphs, and the increasing
exercise of public protection for foreign investments. The
early beginnings of this cross-ownership among different
nations are, indeed, often sources of national quarrels and
even of wars, where the owners of foreign investments which
are in peril of repudiation, or are otherwise injured by “ bad
government,** are possessed of sufficient political influence
in their own nation to utilise the public purse and the public
force in order to safeguard or improve their stakes in foreign
parts. But the wider normal tendency is towards a political
solidarity which shall reflect the growing economic solidarity
of nations.

§ 2 This obvious result of the community of economic in-
terests is, however, gravely impeded by certain group-interests
of financiers within the several nations which do not coin-
cide with, and are often antagonistic to, the more stable
interests of international investors.

A dear understanding of the place occupied by the
financier in modem capitalism and of the harmony and
divergence of interests between him and the investor is
essential to the study of the industrial system of to-day.

The modern financier may be regarded as the product of
the joint-stock company , 1 and can best be understood by
studying the u natural history** of this form of modem busi-
ness structure. The theory of a “ company** is that a
number of persons owning some capital which they cannot

1 There is another tap-root of finance — namely, the development of
national borrowing, which plays perhaps an even more important part
than joint-stock enterprise in the business of some of the greatest
European financial houses. The great family group of Rothschilds,
and to a less extent such firms as Baring’s, Hambro’s, Stem’s, and
Goschen’s, have devoted themselves to floating, dealing in, and mani-
pulating those public debts which are the financial expression of
modern political movements. This oldest field of' profitable finance
has expanded enormously with the development of public expenditure
upon war, armaments, and productive enterprise in Europe, the Far
East, and in South America. Immensely important as is this field, it
lies, however, so far outside the area of our investigation that we can
only bestow upon it a few passing glances indicative of its reactions
upon private capitalism.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 2$g

otherwise profitably employ agree to “ pool ” their capitals,
so as to form a capital large enough for profitable use in
some business which they select: they choose directors to
represent their interests and to exercise a general control
over the business, subject to their over-ruling in a general
meeting of shareholders; the directors appoint managers,
who are in command over the actual industrial processes; the
supreme and ultimate control always rests with the body of
shareholders, and the motive of the undertaking is to fur-
nish them with the largest profit upon their capital.

The formal structure of a company as a legal entity reflects
this theory. The actual origin and working of most com-
panies, however, is very different. A practical business man
gets hold of what may be called “ a profitable notion.” This
“notion” may have a solid concrete basis in some actual
business which he has been running on his own account,
and which he thinks can be' “put upon the market” in a
form to attract investors and enable him either to escape
from active business life with a large independent income or
to remain in command with so .much more capital at his
disposal that he can greatly increase the net value of his
property. Or the “profitable notion” may reside in some
patent of a new process of manufacture, the utilisation of
some new source of supply, the opening of some new
market, or, finally, in some new business organisation
which, by “ pooling” or amalgamation, shall effect economies
of cost or control of market.

Whatever be the basis of the “ notion ” the business man
is concerned with its vendibility in the investment market.
In order to make it into a marketable commodity he must
have recourse to the assistance of general financiers who are
dealers in “ vendible notions,” and are able to put them on
the market in such a manner as to tempt the investing
public into buying. Such a * promoter” will sometimes be
himself a great capitalist, or will have intimate business
associations with some great banking or finance company
which is prepared to “ back ” the project by “underwriting”
shares. If the project be “ sound”— *>., either immediately
vendible or industrially profitable as an interest yielding
investment^ the “ promoters ” will dispose of certain blocks
of shares to other capitalists, and will participate themselves
before putting it upon the open market


THE EVOLUTION Of


240

The initial arrangements will be dominated by the desire
of the “vendor” of the project and the “promoter” to pro-
cure for themselves the largest possible proportion of the
profits which may accrue, either from the sale of shares to
the investing public, or from the development of a steadily
remunerative business in case the project is well fitted for a
prolonged industrial career. If it is designed to work the
Company as a profit-making concern, the vendors and their
financial backers will commonly retain a sufficient propor-
tion of the share-capital to enable them to keep control
over business operations. In America it is common in the
construction or reconstruction of Corporations formed for
profitable working, for the promoting group to retain in
their hands all or nearly all the ordinary shares, letting in
the general public only as mortgagors. In England the
usual policy has been to offer to the public a large holding
of ordinary shares, as well as the bulk of preference shares
and debentures, and to trust to the prestige of the directorate,
backed by a sufficient support of personal holdings, to en-
force the policy of the board Such is the case in most
British Railways, Banking or Brewing Companies — a wide-
spread ownership of the stock accompanied by a sufficient
control of voting power by the directorate to give them
command.

In form, therefore, an economic democracy with an elec-
tive responsible government, the joint-stock company is in
most instances a close oligarchy: the monetary support of
the public is wanted but not their direction. Diffused
ownership with concentrated control is the distinctive
feature of the Company ; so far from the investors choosing
their board of directors, the board their chairman, and the
directors executing the will of the investors, the actual pro-
cess is the reverse. The chairman, probably the nominee
of some big promoting capitalist, is given the post and one
or two financial or ornamental supporters are put in as
fellow-directors: this tiny group nominate the rest of the
directorate and force their selection in the meeting of share-
holders; having the initiation of the business in their hands
they dictate the policy, retain despotic power in all vital
matters, communicate to the shareholders what is convenient,
conceal what is inconvenient, and resist — almost in every
case successfully— -attempts of a refractory minority, or even


MODERN CAPITALISM. *41

majority, to question their conduct, or alter the composition
of file board

High considerations of industrial expediency, if not of
necessity, seem to require the maintenance of an effective
oligarchy in the control of business, though at the same
time requiring a wider distribution in the ownership of the
capital engaged: this expediency of concentrated control
forms the rational basis of a financial power which, as we
shall see, is liable to great and dangerous abuses.

g 3. This ** Company* structure of modern business which
is now virtually in possession of the entire field of capitalism
in the mining, transport, banking, and large manufacturing
industries has given rise to financial methods and interests
requiring further study.

The first salient point in this study of the relation between
modem finance and modem concrete industry is the figure
of the ordinary investor. Now an investor is animated by
one of two motives — either the desire to hold stocks or
shares in order to get income from the profitable conduct
of the business which they represent, or the desire to sell at
a rise and so secure by a coup an addition to his capital.
The two motives are frequently combined in the same person
and in relation to the same class of shares: some buy to
hold, others to sell, and a large number of men engaged in
some special business or other avocation are continually
engaged in shifting their investments, partly in order to earn
higher interest, partly to make profitable coups. There are
also classes of men who, quitting some special calling,
virtually occupy themselves in these more or less specula-
tive aspects of investment, never organising any financial
operation but operating through brokers on the stock
markets.

A very large proportion of the well-to-do classes who
possess some property or have made some savings are
occupied in investing them in businesses the nature of
which they cannot really know, and the conduct of which
they cannot a 9 shareholders appreciably influence. The
suekage of new capital demanded for the expansion of old
industries and the establishment of new comes mainly from
these classes of small and middling investors, who know
little of the actual working of the financial system and can-
not by their industrial action control it What we have

16


242 THE EVOLUTION OF

here is in fact a great capitalist proletariat, who bear to the
operators of finance a relation closely analogous to that
which the labouring proletariat bear to the employing class.
The ordinary investor, the small capitalist, must sell the use
of his capital, as the labourer must sell the use of bis
labours, to some organiser of a business enterprise if he is
to get any advantage from possessing it Now, since his
capital is evidently wanted to co-operate with labour-power
in actual operations of industry, it might seem natural that
he should sell his use of capital direct to the same man who
buys labour-power, the entrepreneurs or managers of a busi-
ness concern. In a simpler state of business this is what
happened — the owner-employer privately borrowed money or
obtained advances for the conduct of his business. But in
the more developed business-form the “ financing " becomes
a function separate from that of business management and
passes to a separate class of promoters, bankers, brokers,
and other financiers. These classes are “ middlemen ”
between the investor and the entrepreneur or organiser of
concrete industry, gathering up from countless sources the
idle capital of the community, and directing it through the
various channels of investment. Such men are the whole-
sale dealers in “ money ” or fluid capital, and the private
owner of capital must place it in their hands if he wishes to
employ it The “terms” he can get for its use, and the
economic nature of the use to which it is actually put, are
largely imposed upon him by the regulations of the financial
system, similarly as the terms of the employment of various
sorts of labour are directly imposed by the rules or customs
of employers and the technical exigencies of the trade. A
large fraction of this garnered “ capital ” lies at any given
time in the possession and at the disposition of bankers,
stock and bill brokers, in a fluid form, supporting the
general volume of credit by which the operations of buying
and selling are conducted in business. The rest of it is in-
vested in stocks and shares and mortgages, the owners
receiving (or being entitled to receive) scrip representing a
claim upon the capital value of certain concrete business
forms and on a share of their earnings.

Even in the simplest form of conducting a small business
on the safest basis the element of speculation exists. Op-
portunities of extending the business, or of adopting some


MODERN CAPITALISM,


*43


new plant or machine, induce the business-man to borrow
from neighbours their savings; or some unforeseen mis-
fortune drives him to seek a temporary loan in order to
tide him over the emergency: he borrows in order to make
an additional profit or to spread over a longer period a loss
which falling at a single blow might break him. In both
cases there is a risk, in both cases he gives security to the
lender by giving him a mortgage or other lien upon his
property, in both cases he trades on “ credit,” buying and
selling goods which in part belong not to himself but to his
creditors.

The distinctive characteristic of modern large business
is that this abnormal and occasional practice has become
universal and perpetual, and that a large intricate financial
machinery exists for operating it Credit enters into the
financial structure of the company business at its inception
in the form of capitalisation : it enters into the functional
activity of the business in the way of discounting bills, bank
advances, and other temporary loans.

The whole system is one of betting: not indeed blind
gambling, but speculation in which foresight and chance
play parts of varying magnitude. In the borrowing of the
simpler business man the latter backs his skill and luck to
produce and sell within a given time a sufficient quantity ot
goods at a sufficient price to enable him to pay back his
loan with interest, at the same time earning for himself a
profit Both borrower and lender here evidently look in
this “speculation” to the probability of profitable sales.

What is true here, remains true of the more elaborated
speculative system of modem “credit” The financial basis
of the whole “credit” system is the estimate of “earning
capacity,” the ability of the actual business apparatus to
market goods at such a rate and such a margin over cast as
will enable a profit to be paid: the diseases or errors of the
credit system are all attributable either to miscalculations or
misrepresentations of this “ earning capacity.”

§ 4. In honest company business, although thejprm of the
capitalisation is to attribute a separate value to the tangible
assets — land, buildings, machinery, stock, etc., and the
intangible assets such as patents and goodwill, the real
valuation of the assets is upon earning capacity. If, as
often happens, the tangible assets are valued at cost of


242 THE EVOLUTION OF

here is in fact a great capitalist proletariat, who bear to the
operators of finance a relation closely analogous to that
which the labouring proletariat bear to the employing class.
The ordinary investor, the small capitalist, must sell the use
of his capital, as the labourer must sell the use of bis
labours, to some organiser of a business enterprise if he is
to get any advantage from possessing it Now, since his
capital is evidently wanted to co-operate with labour-power
in actual operations of industry, it might seem natural that
he should sell his use of capital direct to the same man who
buys labour-power, the entrepreneurs or managers of a busi-
ness concern. In a simpler state of business this is what
happened — the owner-employer privately borrowed money or
obtained advances for the conduct of his business. But in
the more developed business-form the “ financing ” becomes
a function separate from that of business management and
passes to a separate class of promoters, bankers, brokers,
and other financiers. These classes are “ middlemen ”
between the investor and the entrepreneur or organiser of
concrete industry, gathering up from countless sources the
idle capital of the community, and directing it through the
various channels of investment Such men are the whole-
sale dealers in u money ” or fluid capital, and the private
owner of capital must place it in their hands if he wishes to
employ it The “terms” he can get for its use, and the
economic nature of the use to which it is actually put, are
largely imposed upon him by the regulations of the financial
system, similarly as the terms of the employment of various
sorts of labour are directly imposed by the rules or customs
of employers and the technical exigencies of the trade. A
large fraction of this garnered “ capital ” lies at any given
time in the possession and at the disposition of bankers,
stock and bill brokers, in a fluid form, supporting the
general volume of credit by which the operations of buying
and selling are conducted in business. The rest of it is in-
vested in stocks and shares and mortgages, the owners
receiving (or being entitled to receive) scrip representing a
claim upon the capital value of certain concrete business
forms and on a share of their earnings.

Even in the simplest form of conducting a small business
o® the safest basis the element of speculation exists. Op-
portunities of extending the business, or of adopting some


MODERN CAPITALISM.


HS

its assets, tangible and intangible, quite valueless. A
famine in India may knock out the margin of his profit by
raising the price and restricting the supply of his cotton or
other raw material, a coal strike may stop his source of
power, a war in China or a revolution in Argentina may
destroy his market; with every expansion in number and
variety of markets in which he buys and sells comes an
increasing number of incalculable risks. C Though some of
these may be cancelled on the theory of putting one’s eggs
in several baskets, the net result is to render future earning-
capacity less calculable. Indeed, the growing variety and
magnitude of these risks has largely given rise to that great
department of modern finance known as Insurance, which,
by discounting and distributing certain specific risks, such
as loss by fire, loss at sea, dishonesty of employees, etc.,
counteracts to some extent this growing inealculability of
future earnings.

§ 5. The limits of the sound and useful service of the
promoters and financiers in constructing and in floating a
Company are now quite evident They consist in a just
calculation on actuarial and other bases of the future
earning-capacity of the business, its capitalisation upon
these bases, and the distribution of the stocks and shares
and their marketing in forms most convenient to the
investing public, who are informed of the true nature of the
business into which they put their money. An agreed and
recognised rate of commission for such work of financial
construction and promotion, with a further commission for
underwriting, paid either by the vendors or by the Company
or both, would be the gain of the promoter and financier
most conformable to reasonable business methods. Placing
a business upon a basis where it can command more
working capital and more bank credit increases its com-
petitive, and in some instances even its industrial, efficiency,
and is entitled to payment for this service.

But the actual operation of the promoter and financier in
construction of Companies and the nature of the gains
which accrue to them are not normally confined within
these limits. The vendors, promoters, and underwriters of
a Company are not unnaturally given to calculating in the
first place how much they individually and collectively can
get out of the business enterprise, or in other words how


THE EVOLUTION OF


246

little they can leave to the ordinary investing public whose
capital they want to attract It is their profit and not the
interest upon the shares of investors that is the originating
motive of most Companies, as we have seem

Now, they may take these profits in three different ways.
By over-valuation of the earning capacities of the various
plants of amalgamating businesses, of the patents and
especially of the goodwill 1 and other invisible assets,, they
may bloat out the capital value of the Company to the
utmost, distributing among themselves in vendors* and
promoters* shares and in other payments as much of the
more vendible stocks as they can conceal, substituting in
this capitalisation the consideration of immediate ven-
dibility for future earning-capacity. So far as they can
succeed in raising the immediate market value of the
stocks they have allotted to themselves for services or
obtained by the ordinary method of subscription, it will be
to their interest to unload these stocks upon the market
before the inflated capitalisation of the market is effectively
exposed.

A great deal of 11 bogus** company promotion and even
of more substantial promotion of family businesses and of
combinations is primarily motived by the desire of the
financial promoters to scoop out the whole value of the
Company by this method of extraction, which shall leave
the swollen carcase to shrivel to its meagre unprofitable
dimensions in the hands of deluded investors. The arts of

1 “Tim goodwill k chiefly a capitalisation of the differential ad-
vantages possessed by the several concerns as competitors in business,
and is for the most part of no use for other than competitive business
cuds. It has for the most part no aggregate industrial effect. The
differential advantages possessed by business concerns as competitors
disappear when the competitors are merged in the degree in which
they cease to compete with rival bidders for the same range of business.
To this aggregate defanct goodwill of the consolidated concerns (which
in the nature of things can make only an imaginary aggregate) is added
something in the way of an increment of goodwill belonging to the
new corporation as such.”— Vebien, Theory of Businas Enterprise,
PP* I2s6 - 7 -

(So far, however, as goodwill is expressed in terms of “credit,” this
conaoisdatiou may create a value of goodwill larger than the cancelled
goodwill of the amalgamating units: the credit of the new corporation
may be greater than the added credits of the old ones. This Vebien
•diai is, p. 168 note.— J. A. H.)


MODERN CAPITALISM.


247


drawing a prospectus and of “making a market n are
devoted to the single end of producing a temporary boom.
Improper accountancy misrepresents the value and the
past profits of the business that is incorporated, expert
engineers, chemists, eta, are paid to over-estimate the
productive and profit-earning capacity of the mines,
machinery, and other plant acquired by the Company; well-
known business names, and in Great Britain politicians and
titled personages, are procured for the directorate; the
bright and solid prospects of the business are set out with
consummate literary skill, every present defect or future
risk carefully concealed; the whole glamour of the pro-
position is suddenly flashed before the face of the confiding
public by a parade of full-page advertisements. Any
sluggishness or suspicion of the investing public is over-
come by making a market, the promoters manipulating
prices by collusive dealing on the market, until the outside
investor is lured on^to buy.

The motive and effect of these financial arts are to create
a false confidence on the part of the ordinary capitalist or
investing public which expresses itself in a temporary boom
of watered stocks.

This of course does not exhaust the functions of the
promoter, especially where an amalgamation or the forma-
tion of a “trust ” is the object of the Company. Here there
is much scope for strategic work of a preparatory nature:
rival interests must be fused upon terms advantageous to
the trust-makers, with much use of bluff, intrigue, threats,
bribes, and actual processes of “freezing out” When
strong businesses “stand out” they can often obtain an
exorbitant price for consenting to come in, and this exor-
bitance is a large factor in the over-capitalisation of the
Company . 1

This formal over-capitalisation or statement of the earn-
ing capacity of the Company in an excess of shares, would,
however, be comparatively harmless (and useless to pro-
moters) unless the processes of over-valuation were con-
cealed. When this over-capitalisation, attended by a sale
of inflated stock by the promoters, takes place, the business
is of course one of organised deception, that of a profes-


1 The Atlantic Skipping Combine well illustrates this point.


24 % THE EVOLUTION OF

sional dealer palming off a shoddy or adulterated article on
to an ignorant amateur public. 1

While this fraudulent method of flotation is only too
common a practice of professional promoters, profits of
company formation are not confined to this origin. Even
where the vendors dispose of the great majority of their
shares it does not follow that the profit they extract involves
a deception of* or a loss to, the investing public Where
the new form of the Company represents a real economy in
production, marketing, and credit, as compared with the
older business or businesses, the promotion creates an
actual fund of gain which the vendors or promoters are
able to take while selling to the public shares which are
genuinely interest-bearing securities. Where for private
reasons of convenience a family business is converted into
a public company, the promotion has often been conducted
without deception, the vendors realising in shares held or
sold a substantial profit from the superiority of the new
over the old business form. But where it is possible in
modem business life to make a large additional gain within
the limits of legality, it is generally made and a profession
is founded in order to make this sort of gain. Hence a
larger proportion of modem Company promotion is initiated
by professional promoters who are not primarily concerned
with the, gains which represent technical improvements of
the Company structure, but with the gains got from an
artificially produced vendibility of shares.

§ 6. Most financiers or money-dealers, however, are not
chiefly engaged in promoting Companies, but in getting
profits from handling the stocks and shares upon the
mark©* As in Company construction so toe the
business rests on a read foundation of utility or pro-
ductivity. This utility consists in using skilled fore-
sight, so as to direct the Sow of industrial capital into

1 For simplicity we have assumed that the “ promoters * dear oat
of the Company after a first unloading of their shares upon an artificially
inhaled market Often it Is quite otherwise; they retain a sufficient
control over the ordinary shares to enable them, after the Company has
Med and gone into liquidation, to assume the task of reconstruction,
during which they can freeze out the surviving interests of outsiders
and either secure the real asset s of the reconstructed company for
profitable holding, or play anew the former game of raining inflated
shares upon a newly-made market


KQDERH CAPITALISM. 2*9

the most serviceable industrial channels. For the rises
and fells of stocks and shares, so far as they are
naturally induced, and rest upon sound business informa-
tion, are the financial machinery directing the creation of
the various quantities of concrete capital required to co-
operate with labour in the most efficient working of the
various industries. The really useful skill of stockbrokers,
billbrokers, bankers, and other financiers who handle stocks
and shares, buying or selling them, discounting them or
advancing money on their security, consists in intimate
knowledge of the industrial and commercial facts that give
value to the pieces of paper which they handle — in other
words, a knowledge of the relative strength and weakness of
the various trades and of the particular businesses which
operate in them. It is their function to stimulate and
direct the flow of credit, and through credit of actual indus-
trial power, from failing to thriving trades, and from ill-
ordered and unprofitable to well-ordered and profitable
businesses. To assist in putting capital where it is most
wanted is thus the social function of these orders of
financiers. The performance of this work requires not
only large and accurate knowledge of facts, but high
qualities of combination and of constructive imagination
in interpreting the probable course of future movements.
Dealing in the most mobile, changeful, and divisible forms
of vendible goods, the money-market is of all markets the
most complex and at the same time the most unified in its
structure, and it admits of a high order of specialisation.
Groups of brokers or financiers attach themselves to par-
ticular classes of stocks, the classification being partly
local — €.g. y South African mines or American railroads.

The “legitimate” business of this finance is to operate
the machinery for the distribution of capital by accurate
registration and calculation of price-movements. Since the
limits of calculation are often very narrow, the element
of chance or speculation must enter in as a necessary
ingredient of the business so far as any individual operation
is concerned. But while the ignorance of most amateur
investors converts their investments into mere acts of
gambling, the professional financier is not properly a
gambler. When he departs from “legitimate” finance it
is not primarily to gamble but to manipulate prices, so as


250


THE BVOL0TIOH OF


to assist his calculations. Instead of merely predicting
price-changes he endeavours to produce them. If he is
able in any way to cause and to regulate fluctuations of
prices in any class of securities, he can buy at the bottom
and sell at the top, an obviously advantageous method: if
he can sit for some time upon a class of stocks, rocking the
values up and down at will, he may be able to extract from
the ordinary investing public a larger quantity of money
than could be got by any single coup of Company pro-
motion. Any group of financiers furnished with large
enough resources may fasten upon a stock, using it either
to milk the innocent investing public by preconcerted price
movements which deceive them into buying and selling at
a loss, or to corner the stock and squeeze other financiers
not “in the know* by forcing them to buy stock at
monopoly prices in order to fulfil their engagements. But
the financiers, who are themselves promoters or directors
of a Company and have retained large blocks of shares, can
play this profitable game at a great advantage. Instead of
over-capitalising a Company at construction and clearing
out by a single act of “ unloading,* they may retain their
shares and use them for what is euphemistically termed
“speculating” on the bourse, but what is in reality an
alternate “rigging and depressing of prices.” Superior or
early access to information affecting the movement of
prices gives them their first advantage ; this they may
supplement by manipulating public opinion through the
press; finally, their financial position and control of move-
ments enables them more effectively than outsiders to bull
and bear the market An intrinsically unsound business,
with incalculable or fluctuating assets, best lends itself to
such operations. A classical example in modern finance is
the South African Chartered Company, a wildly speculative
venture of such magnitude and superficial possibilities, so
well adapted to political and sentimental appeals, as to
enable its crafty organisers to plan and execute price move-
nents of enormous range. The advantages enjoyed by
inanciers (t in the know ” are well illustrated by the record
>f the holding of Chartered Shares before and after the
Jameson Raid by Messrs. Rhodes, Beit, Rudd, and their
intimates in South African finance.

These operations of financiers in managing the play or


MODERN CAPITALISM.


251


mobile stocks resembles the keeping of gaming tables: from
their standpoint it is business, from that of their clients it is
gambling; under normal circumstances and in the long run
there is little risk for them — they must win, the amateurs
who play with them must lose.

§ 7. The skilled financier, who makes large gains by
“ speculative ” business in floating companies and planning
c&ups upon the Stock Exchange, desires, if he retains any
“conservative instinct,” to possess some substantial, profitable
stake in the world of finance, some considerable investment
in real estate or in regularly remunerative businesses : such
holding substantiates his credit, gives him social position
and respectability, and so assists Ms speculative operations,
besides furnishing a soft bed on which to fall in the event
of some knock-down blow. The master of modem finance
does not therefore use all his resources in speculative busi-
ness, nor does he find it to his interest to impart mobility
to every form of investment In his career he enjoys ex-
ceptional opportunities of making or discovering genuinely
profitable investments based upon the control of rich natura
resources or other protective support The directors of the
Standard Oil Trust or of the East Rand Mines or De Beers
do not “gamble” with such stocks, nor do they let out of
their hands at any time the control of these profitable busi-
nesses: they only speculate with the surplus gains which
spring from such “monopolies,” and with the cumulative
profits of their well-directed speculations.

The financial class, then, as distinguished from the main
body of capitalists or amateur investors, grafts upon its
legitimate and useful function of determining and directing
the most productive flow of capital, three methods of private
gain, each of which is a corruption and abuse of its true
function.

Planning and promoting Companies based, not upon
economy of industrial or financial working, but upon an
artfully enhanced vendibility of shares, they cause a waste
of general capital by obtaining an excessive subscription to
the Company and diverting the excess Into their own
pockets, thus imparting insecurity to otherwise sound
businesses, damaging their credit and impeding their pro-
ductive operations. To this waste must, of course, be added
the injury wrought by floating “bogus” Companies which


THE EVOLUTION OF


253

have no actual foundation in the business world; the wide
prevalence of these criminal adventures not only wastes
capital, but, disturbing public confidence, further impedes
the easy, natural flow of capital throughout the industrial
organism.

Creating or stimulating fluctuations of prices in order to
contrive comers or to practise concerted coups is an even
more injurious dislocation of the social machinery of finance:
it is a falsification of the automatic register of values ex-
pressly designed to determine the most productive applica-
tion of capital

finally, the creation, absorption, and supreme control of
the most profitable forms of natural monopoly and other
abnormally prosperous businesses impart a strength and
solidity to the new financial oligarchy which enable it to
fasten its hold still more firmly on the necks of the prole*
tariat of capital, who thus, cut off more and more from
secure investments, are driven into the “gambling hells" of
speculative stocks and shares kept by these masters of
finance.

The multitude and magnitude of these interferences with
the delicate adjustments of the financial machinery directing
the flow of capital involve other indirect consequences of
importance. They impart debility and irregularity to the
actual processes of production and of commerce under the
new order of capitalism. The business of a Company whose
stock, over appreciated upon construction, is allowed after-
wards to slide, or is made the sport of gamblers who toss it
up and down for private financial purposes, is rendered
insecure: the actual flow of capital into it, plundered at the
source, is insufficient for its full expansion, attempts to
“support the market” by earning good profits through
economy of “costs” or other unsound business finance,
drive the Company into difficulties, force it to call up more
of its capital, weakening its general credit, while special
emergencies impel it to seek advances from bankers and
other accommodations.

$ 8. From the financial standpoint the whole of the economy
*f large-scale production, and in particular of joint-stock
mterprise, maybe summed up in the single phrase, enlarged
redit This credit, however, is not merely drawn from the
investing public in the form of subscription to its stocks


MODERN CAPITALISM*


253


and bonds: the “capital” thus created is also a basis for a
more elastic sort of credit required in the actual running of
a modem business. In order that a business may make its
maximum earnings it must secure the quickest turnover and
the largest volume of business. This expansion of the rate
and volume of actual business involves the us© at certain
times of a far larger amount of “money” than is actually
owned by the Company: the Company must buy more than
it can pay for in cash, and must obtain from elsewhere the
purchasing power. It is driven constantly to increase its
liabilities and to discount its bills. In other words, it must
have recourse to bank credit, using its actual capital, visible
and invisible, as collateral security upon which to obtain the
use of a far larger amount of credit. Although interest or
discount must be paid for this bank credit, it is obviously
profitable to use it so far as the increased volume of busi-
ness thus made possible yields a margin of profit in excess
of the rate paid to the bank for “credit” Since any firm
which employs this command of credit to the full has an
advantage over another firm which does not so utilise it, the
impulsion to its full employment in competitive trade
becomes evident “ Under modem conditions,” writes
Professor Veblen, 1 “ business cannot profitably be done by
any one of the competitors without the customaiy recourse
to credit Without the customary recourse to credit a
1 reasonable ’ return could not be obtained in the invest-
ment.”

But where businesses are normally worked upon a basis
in which credit is strained to its utmost, it is clear that any
abnormal occurrence causes trouble. Where in addition to
the risks to which all industries are more or less exposed,
from natural accidents, political changes, labour conflicts,
etc., operations of financiers upon the stock and produce
markets are taken into account, we perceive that businesses
using their maximum credit must come more and more to
lean on “banks” and “finance companies.” Even where
businesses are not developed in the fullest form of capital-
ism, the frequent recourse to bank-credit plays an important
part, and it is clearly seen that in all “capitalist” trades
the private business, or the “unlisted” company whose


F. 99*


254


THE EVOLUTION OF


stocks are not freely negotiable, stands at a great disadvan-
tage for all purposes of expansive trade, through its inability
to get bank-credit upon easy terms.

Looking at the matter from the other side we perceive
that bill discounting and temporary advance to business
firms form an ever-growing part of the banking business.
Where, as in London, bill-brokers form a distinct class
dealing with the better sorts of paper, they are chiefly
financed by banks. The large profitable business of modern
banking consists ever more largely in selling short pieces of
“credit” to business firms. It is necessary to any com-
petitive firm to buy this “ credit,” and the price it has to
pay may not seem unreasonable.

The bank loan system is rightly regarded as a natural
adjunct to the financial structure of the joint-stock com-
pany, part of a financial system for applying capital at places
and at times where it may be most productively used. A
sound working of bank loans extends the actual business
operations of firms which can obtain such loans, and since
ceteris paribus a competently conducted firm will more
readily obtain such credit than an incompetently conducted
one, the net result is to enhance the general efficiency of
the industrial system . 1

When full account is taken of the double part played by
banks in financing companies, first as promoters and under-
writers, often as large holders of blocks of shares undigested
by the investing public, secondly as money-merchants dis-
counting bills and advancing money, it becomes evident
that the business of the modern banker is largely that of
the general financier and that the financial dominance in
capitalist industry is exercised in great measure by bankers.

1 Professor Veblen appears to hold that no considerable net increase
of industrial^ productivity accrues from this use of credits. “They are
business capital only; they swell the volume of business as counted in
once, etc., but they do not directly swell the volume of industry, since
hey do not add to the aggregate material apparatus of industry, or alter
he character of the processes employed, or enhance the degree of effici-
ency with which industry is managed ” (p. 99). But this is only true
on the opposition which Professor Veblen appears to make (p. 98}
that an incompetent manager has an equal access to such “ credit ” with
a competent one. Surely this is not the case. Bank credit tends to
pat more actual Industrial power in the hands of the more competent
and thus to “ enhance the degree of efficiency with which industry is
managed.*


MODERN CAPITALISM.


2 5S


The general spread of the use of banks in all business
communities makes bankers the holders of all the margins
of uninvested savings and other moneys not in immediate
use. It is this fund of deposits that furnishes the “ credit ”
which the banks supply in floating and financing com-
panies. Not only do they participate in the legitimate and
illegitimate profits of company promoting, but the intricate
relations which subsist between industrial companies and
particular banks enable the latter in many instances to
squeeze the former in the price paid for credit, though there
are other cases where a bank, having become deeply in-
volved with a company by pawnings of the company’s
share or debenture capital,- or through excessive advances, is
itself squeezed by the company. Weaker companies, how-
ever, which, by over-capitalisation, incompetent management,
or misfortune, are often in need of temporary assistance,
become bond-slaves to a bank, which is not only able to
extort exorbitant prices for its services, but can at any time
by forcing the company into liquidation gain possession of
what really valuable assets it contains. Reckless or dis-
honest construction of companies, weakening the financial
structure at the outset of its career, obliges a large amount
of modern business to pay heavy toll to bankers for “credit”
which costs dearer in proportion to its urgency.

This brief study of the finance of capitalism makes it
clear, first, that a complex financial machinery is essential to
the delicate adjustment of modern industry; secondly, that
this machinery operated for private profit can often earn the
highest profits by causing industrial dislocation and mal-
adjustments.

§ 9. As “ credit ” becomes more and more the vital force
of modern business, the class that controls credit becomes
more powerful and takes for itself as “ earnings ” a larger
proportion of the product of industry. If, however, “credit”
were left to the free competition of a large number of bankers
and financiers, this control would not imply mastery. In
order to comprehend the power of finance we must look a
little closer at its structure. In no other business operation
is the advantage of a large over a small capital so obvious:
nowhere else is the force making for concentration of busi-
ness so evident If any limit exists to the “law of in-
creasing returns” in banking, insurance, and finance, it is


2$6


THE EVOLUTION OF


aot easily discernible. Great operations of public or
private finance, the floating of public' loans or great
industrial combinations, the contrivance and execution of
great movements in the stock and share markets, can only
be conducted with the suddenness and secrecy which are
requisite to safety and success by financial businesses of
the first order of magnitude. Great businesses alone can
stand their ground against the larger shocks to the general
credit of a nation, or can rely upon their political influence
to secure governmental aid in cases of real emergency.
Thus it arises that a large proportion of the most profitable
business of financiers is never exposed to effective com-
petition, and the prices they receive for their services are
“monopoly” prices: either it is business which they
initiate and organise and for which they charge “ what the
business will bear,” or it is business whose size and delicacy
forbid close bargaining, or finally it is money-lending in
which advantage can be taken of the urgent needs of the
applicant for loans.

Although no statistics are procurable, it is certain that
the profits of “ finance ” form a constantly increasing toll
on industry. It is also probable that this toll and the
control it represents are concentrated in a few hands.
Though the diffused ownership of capital makes a large
number of persons small participants in the profits of
finance, these gains of the small investor are kept at a
minimum by the application to banks and finance companies
of the methods of company construction above described
The share of the proletariat of capitalists in the net gains of
financial business is very small as compared with that of the
magnates of finance.

In parts of the world where economic conditions are
most favourable to the rapid ripening of finance, we perceive
the actual wielding of great masses of concentrated “credit”
by little groups of financiers in ways which enable us to
appreciate the significance of this most important product
of modem capitalism. That the concerted action of a
mall number of banks and financial companies in New
fork could produce the panic and the depression which
/wept over the United States in 1893 was an early mani-
festation of a power which is now stronger and more closely
organised


MODERN CAPITALISM.


257


A study of the origins and careers of the great American
financiers discloses three chief sources of financial power;
railroads, industrial trusts and banking, and the union in
the same hands of the control of these three economic
functions is an instructive testimony to the nature of the
new power. The railroad kings and the great industrial
trust makers are drawn by economic necessities into general
finance. The control exercised by American railroads over
agriculture, irrigation, mining, city development, has led
railroad men into the promotion of all sorts of business
enterprises more or less dependent upon railroads; while
the tortuous financial history of most roads has necessitated
a constant recourse to the general machinery of finance.
Though the same is not equally true of the man who makes
his pile by the successful operation of an industrial trust,
another economic necessity drives him into general finance.
The profitable management of a trust depends primarily
upon regulation of output, which involves a limitation of the
employment of capital. It is thus impossible ex hypotTusi
for a trust-maker to find full continuous employment for the
high profits he makes by extending the plant and working
capital of his own business : such a policy would be evidently
suicidal. He must look outside his own business for fields of
profitable investments for his profits. If he occupies himself,
as sometimes he does, in organising other industrial trusts in
businesses related to his own, his success yields new profits
which must seek employment further afield. Thus the
profits arising from specific monopolies in the transport or
the manufacturing world are logically forced into the more
general regions of finance. They form a large and a grow-
ing fund of free capital which naturally associates itself with
the free funds held by bankers, and operates by the ways
we have described in fastening a general control of finance
upon business that enables the financial class to extract a
larger share of the general wealth. So trust-makers such as
Messrs. Rockefeller, Rogers, Havemeyer, and railway men
such as Harriman, Gould, Depew, or Vanderbilt, be-
come bankers or directors of insurance companies; while
bankers like J. P. Morgan organise steel and shipping
combines and sit on a number of railroad and industrial
directorates.

The following table illustrating these transverse business

*7


25S


THE EVOLUTION OF


affiliations was drawn up by Professor Meyer . 1 u The
names,” he adds, “have been selected at random and the
table could be extended through hundreds of names.” It


•TTiOX

00 wvotr>t>.a\t«sfO'<e-N r>jf^O O^vo 00 00

N fOMH N VO «H rON rotO« CS PO in


-- 1 | ««-« | | | „ | ! | | «.| „

*saJtuovj;iiTR]^

j j CSISH j N j | | WmNwcoNN'Ow j


1'°’"“ 1 1 ! 1 " II 1 M ” 1 ! ~ 1 1

•diqsui* 3 js

1 - 1 1 " 1 1 1 " " "» 1 " 1 1 1 - 1 1 1 I


1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ~ 1 ~ 1 1 1 11 1 1 r

*»tTO

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 “ 1 1 1 - 1 1 ~ 1 1 II

•*ooqd?px

l“lllllll* , IIIMI* , MM


iVm i 1 -- 1*-- 1 « ri >o 1 m 1 1

-iC?Ai[Te^

J rooo 0 f'-vo to rovo ro m'O ~ n O^n h idnoo 0

I fi «u-> m « n M row MMin

'WtreiBixQ

PUB

Jisodsg ajBg

"!«««*• WH J « W Tf | | | PI H | N J |

•aDu^nsai

« WWnn |HNjHw»flHNMw| JVOWJ

istux

N j i-r | WN^« | w | | MVO N I


| Oww


itib $

8 „-«G 5 _^SW gyt-;

! 1 j I s 0 w ^-| jf £■ t S * -§1 1 ■§

§ s N*rl Its §mj| &|I |i

< # ffl 0 0- A £ O 0 E W fS c/S w Co h £


represents the number and kind of companies in which
certain men aGt as directors or officials.

Or we may take the case of a single great trust, the

1 American Econ. Assn. Report* 1904, p, iji.


(From the Directory of Directors for New York t 1902.)


MODERN CAPITALISM.


259


Standard Oil Company, and watch the necessary affiliations
that it forms. For five years past the Oil Trust has
yielded dividends averaging forty-five million dollars a
year, or nearly 50 per cent, on its capitalisation. Probably
one-third of this goes into the hands of Mr. John D.
Rockefeller and 90 per cent, into the little controlling
group. “Consider,” writes Miss Tarbell, “what must be
done with the greater part of this $45,000,000. It must
be invested. The oil business does not demand it.
There is plenty of reserve for all of its ventures. It must
go into other industries. Naturally, the interests sought
will be allied to oil They will be gas, and we have the
Standard Oil crowd steadily acquiring the gas interests of
the country. They will be railroads, for on transportation
all industries depend, and besides, railroads are one of the
great consumers of oil products and must be kept in line
as buyers. And we have the directors of the Standard Oil
Company acting as directors on nearly all of the great
railways of the country — the New York Central, New York,
New Haven, and Hartford, Chicago, Milwaukee & St.
Paul, Union Pacific, Northern Pacific, Delaware, Lacka-
wanna & Western, Missouri Pacific, Missouri, Kansas &
Texas, Boston & Maine, and other lesser roads. They
will go into copper, and we have the amalgamated scheme.
They will go into steel, and we have Mr. Rockefeller’s
enormous holdings in the steel trust They will go into
banking, and we have the National City Bank and its
allied institutions in New York City and Boston as well as
a long chain running over the country.” 1

The central ganglion of the great financial system of
which the Standard Oil Co., the United States Steel
Corporation, and the “Big Four ” Railroad Combine are the
main industrial arteries, is the National City Bank and its
connections. The National City Bank is the creation and
the direct financial organ of the Standard Oil Company.
Four National City Bank directors sat (1905) as presi-
dent, vice-president and trustees on the board of the great
insurance company the “New York Life”; its vice-presi-
dent was a trustee of the “Mutual Life” of New York
while another directed the Equitable Trust Co. and tl

1 “ History of the Standard QU Trust,” Madurt, Oct 1904.


z6o


THE EVOLUTION OF


Mercantile Trust, which are in large part owned by the
Equitable Life.

On the directorate of the United States Mortgage and
Trust Co. were eight trustees of the Mutual Life and two of
the Equitable Life, while on the Guaranty Trust directorate
sat the President of the Mutual Life, Mr. Rogers of the
Standard Oil and the Mutual Life, and Mr, E. H. Harriman
of the Mercantile Trust and Equitable Trust This cluster
of life insurance companies, owning probably more than half
the combined assets of insurance in America, and affiliated
through their directorate and their investments with a
number of trading banks and trust companies, represented
a huge solidarity of “credit” controlled from a common
centre by a tiny group, and directed now to the formation
of a Steel or Shipping Combine, now to the enlargement
of a railroad system, now to some huge deal in Amalgamated
Copper. The triangle of forces in American capitalism,
represented by railroad amalgamations, industrial trusts, and
banking corporations, tends more and more to assume the
shape of a purely financial power ; a mass of credit directed
to any point of the economic system where it is required to
force an industrial combination, to finance a mining or
railroad coup y or to crush some threatened invasion upon
one of its “ spheres of influence.” The main stress of its
recent application is towards a strengthening of its hold
over the railroad system of the country, which it rightly
regards as the best means of securing a permanent control
over the natural resources and the industries of the
country.

The solidarity of financial interests which has been
described is of course far from complete : 1 at many points
it represents an alliance, informal and temporary, not a
fusion. Moreover, this credit-mass wielded for many com-
mon purposes by Messrs. Rockefeller & J. P. Morgan is
often confronted by other alliances of credit which it must
fight, in Wall Street in the Legislature and the Courts. In
the railroad, the banking, and the industrial world; the
spirit of combination bubbles up in many places into

1 The American correspondent of the Economist (quoted Raffalovich,
p. 143) in 1901 named five financiers— John D. Rockefeller, E. Harri-
man, J.*P. Morgan, W. K. Vanderbilt, and George Gould as possessing
amongst them a fortune of 800 million dollars, and representing with


MODERN CAPITALISM.


26l


financial shapes seeking expansion in alien enterprises where
they meet opposition. Though the financial combination
described above is all powerful over certain areas of in-
dustry, transport, and finance, in others it encounters stout
resistance; even in its component companies there are
many cross-currents of interest, and strong temporary unions
of other credit forces can sometimes be formed for some
concrete purpose of attack.

A supreme control over the financial machinery of a great
industrial community is not practicable save by securing a
firm control over one of the main arteries of the industrial
body. Even the close monopoly of so important a com-
modity as oil is a quite inadequate basis: nor does steel
admit of a sufficiently absolute dominion. Control of the
main highroads, the railroad system, is the only practicable
means of attaining full financial supremacy, and to that end
the most powerful group of American financiers is evidently
looking. The fight for the railroads is the most urgent
issue in the economic evolution of America. But the main
and ultimate object is not the power to levy tolls upon the
transport industry, but to obtain a fulcrum sufficiently
solid to enable them to work the lever of financial
supremacy.

§ 10. One other aspect of the finance of capitalist concen-
tration demands attention. A trust or other combine cannot,

their allies a control of 8000 million dollars invested in railroads, banks,
and industrial businesses out of a total of 17,000 employed in these
branches. He grouped them as follows : —


MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.


Radis.

Banks.

Industrial

Trusts.

Total.

Standard Oil, Gould, Harri-


2,828

man ... .« .« 1,997

8 S ~

746

Morgan 1,691

Vanderbilt ... — 753

122 ...

1,677 -

3,490

... 12

IO .«

775

Pennsylvania Railroad _ 870

... ^ — ~

30 ...

900

5*3H

219

2a463

7*9 93


The chief interest attaching to this rough calculation consists in the
relative importance of the several classes of undertaking in the Trust
economy. Since 1901 these groups have drawn much closer, though
not yet working in full harmony.

The Summary of the Census , 1900 , p. 329, gives a considerably
smaller figure for the capital of Industrial Trusts, the Steel Trust not
then being formed.


2 62


THE EVOLUTION OF


it is pointed out, find room to invest its profits within the
u trusted "industry: it must go outside. These profits pass,
as we see, into general finance, and are thence directed into
forming and financing other trusts and large businesses. Thus
the process of concentration and consolidation proceeds
apace over all those industrial fields where capitalist methods
of production prevail But if a single trust cannot usefully
absorb its profits, neither can a group of trusts. The
movement, therefore, seems to be attended by a growing
restriction of the field of investment. Thus there is a grow-
ing natural pressure towards the acquisition of markets out-
side the present area of monopoly, in America, the national
tariff-protected market. The fruits of this pressure are
already visible in the economic "policy of the American
trusts, in the shape of a demand for larger external outlets
for their goods and their investments. Without such outlets
the " trust” movement is ultimately suicidal, larger and
larger masses of “profits” will be annually earned which
cannot be put into the trust-machine and cannot find any
other profitable use. This “ free ” capital will either tend
to pass into the hands of businesses which would attack the
trusts, or it must find outside employment The pressure
is already felt in the large manufacturing corporations : some
relief is found in a policy of subsidising export trade, and in
seeking foreign investments in electric and other fields of
enterprise where they can push most successfully without
tariff aid. The ill-contrived and extravagantly financed
Atlantic Shipping Combine was an early and crude attempt
to reach after a new policy which is required by the logic of
the evolution of trusts.

Another expression of the same economic need, fraught
with even graver importance, is the new public policy of
American political expansion. The economic tap-root,
the chief directing motive of all the modern imperialistic
expansion, is the pressure of capitalist industries for
markets, primarily markets for investment, secondarily
markets for surplus products of home industry. Where
the concentration of capital has gone furthest, and
where a rigorous protective system prevails, this pres-
sure is necessarily strongest. Not merely do the trusts
and other manufacturing trades that restrict their out-
put for the home market more urgently require foreign


MODERN CAPITALISM.


263


markets, but they are also more anxious to secure protected
markets, and this can only be achieved by extending the
area of political rule. This is the essential significance of
the recent change in American foreign policy as illustrated
by the Spanish War, the Philippine annexation, the Panama
policy, and the new application of the Munroe doctrine to
the South American States, South America is needed as a
preferential market for investment of trust “ profits ” and
surplus trust products: if in time these states can be
brought within a Zollverein under the suzerainty of the
United States, the financial area of operations receives a
notable accession. China as a field of railway enterprise
and general industrial development already begins to loom
large in the eyes of foresighted American business men;
the growing trade in American cotton and other goods in
that country will be a subordinate consideration to the ex-
pansion of the area for American investments. Diplomatic
pressure, armed force, and where desirable, seizure of terri-
tory for political control, will be engineered by the financial
magnates who control the political destiny of America.
The strong and expensive American navy now beginning to
be built incidentally serves the purpose of affording profit-
able contracts to the shipbuilding and metal industries : its
real meaning and use is to forward the aggressive political
policy imposed upon the nation by the economic needs of
the financial capitalists.

It should be clearly understood that this constant pres-
sure to extend the area of markets is not a necessary impli-
cation of all forms of organised industry. If competition
was displaced by combinations of a genuinely co-operative
character in which the whole gain of improved economies
passed, either to the workers in wages, or to large bodies of
investors in dividends, the expansion of demand in the
home markets would be so great as to give full employment
to the productive powers of concentrated capital, and there
would be no self-accumulating masses of profit expressing
themselves in new credit and demanding external employ-
ment It is the “ monopoly ” profits of trusts and combines,
taken either in construction, financial operation, or industrial
working, that form a gathering fund of self-accumulating
credit whose possession by the financial class implies a
contracted demand for commodities and a correspondingly


264


THE EVOLUTION OF


restricted employment for capital in American industries.
Within certain limits relief can be found by stimulation of
the export trade under cover of a high protective tariff
which forbids all interference with monopoly of the home
markets. But it is extremely difficult for trusts adapted to
the requirements of a profitable tied market at home to
adjust their methods of free competition in the world
markets upon a profitable basis of steady trading. More-
over, such a mode of expansion is only appropriate to cer-
tain manufacturing trusts : the owners of railroad, financial,
and other trusts must look always more to foreign in-
vestments for their surplus profits. This ever-growing
need for fresh fields of investment for their profits is the
great crux of the financial system and threatens to
dominate the future economics and the politics of the
great Republic.

The financial economy of American capitalism exhibits in
more dramatic shape a tendency common to the finance of
all developed industrial nations. The large, easy flow of
capital from Great Britain, Germany, Austria, France, etc.,
into South African or Australian mines, into Egyptian
bonds, or the precarious securities of South American re-
publics, attests the same general pressure which increases
with every development of financial machinery and the more
profitable control of that machinery by the class of profes-
sional financiers. To a limited extent this cosmopolitanisa-
tion of finance is a natural and normal result of improved
material and moral communication between the various
nations of the earth. But in large measure it arises from a
restriction of home markets which must be called artificial
in the sense that industrial and financial trusts, pools, and
other combinations, taking out of the aggregate product a
larger quantity of “profit" than they can employ for further
profit in these or other home investments, are impelled ever
to look further afield and to use all their financial and
political influence to develop foreign markets by such pacific
or forcible means as will best serve their purpose. In every
case the financier is the instrument or vehicle of this pres-
sure: a swelling stream of investors* savings is constantly
passing into the banking and financial system which he
controls; in order to keep it flowing with greatest gain to
himself he must find or fashion fresh investments.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


2$5


§ xi. The most compact exposition of capitalist finance is
contained in the recent history of South Africa. A poor and
sparsely peopled country, it disclosed within a few years two
highly concentrated forms of natural treasure, the diamond
mines of Kimberley and the Rand gold-reef. The most
economical working of the diamond mines involved ex-
pensive plant and favoured large capitalists, while profitable
sales involved limitation of output so as to realise high prices
for a luxury whose value depended largely upon regulation
of supply. By 1887 consolidation of interests had pro-
ceeded so far that Mr. Rhodes, financed by Messrs. Roths-
child, was able to propose to Mr. Barmto an amalgamation
which gave the De Beers* Company a complete ownership
and control of the productive mines. This diamond mining
trust, controlling by far the most important contribution to
the world’s supply, fortified itself by a complete organisa-
tion of the marketing process, so that the directors of
De Beers virtually regulate the entire supply, limit out-
put and fix prices on a calculation of maximum net
profits 1 which in 1904 amounted to three million pounds
sterling.

The profitable working of De Beers formed the financial
nucleus of the early speculative gold-mining companies in
the Potchefstroom and Witwater Rand districts, and when,
early in the nineties, the full richness of the banket reef of
the Rand was disclosed, the De Beers financiers were
found in control of the greater part of the most valuable
mines in the two associated groups of Wemher, Beit & Co.,
and the Consolidated Goldfields of South Africa (Messrs.
Rhodes, Rudd & Rothschild). The conditions of the
gold-mining, while favourable to large capitalist methods,
did not render feasible a close amalgamation of interests on
the De Beers pattern. In the first place there was no
necessity to limit output, the interests of the financiers lay
in encouraging every expansion of mining which could pay
or form a basis of company promotion ; secondly, the size
of the new goldfield and the cropping up of the reef at so
many points assisted the entrance of many groups of cosmo-

1 Although the recently discovered Premier Mine in the Transvaal
is independently organised for production and disavows all. connection
with De Beers, there can be no doubt that in the merchandising of the
diamonds a thoroughly effective agreement is maintained.


2 66


THE EVOLUTION OF


politan financiers, who set up more or less conflicting
interests. From these groups a few men, mostly Jews,
forced their way into the inner circle of Transvaal finance ;
but upon the whole the De Beers group have throughout
kept the lead : most of the profitable surface and deep level
mines fell under their control, and the manipulation of the
most tempting new propositions in the share-markets was
in their hands. Moreover, the vast speculative exploit of
the South African Chartered Company was the financial
offspring of De Beers, and entered the investment market
backed by all the financial prestige of the diamond and
gold kings.

The most distinctive feature of South African finance,
however, has been the skilled use which the financiers made
of political machinery to assist them in improving and
marketing investments. The actual lands which form the
material basis of industrial and speculative exploitation,
Kimberley, the Rand, Rhodesia, have m each case involved
in their acquisition the application of a medley of non-
economic forces, legal treachery in the case of Kimberley,
the dupery of “concessions,” riveted by armed force in
Rhodesia, bribery and diplomatic coercion followed by war
in the Transvaal. The financiers worked €l * politics” and
the coercive machinery of the State at every turn in their
career: to obtain special legislation for the diamond
industry, to promote railroad facilities, and to secure im-
munity from taxation they required influence in the Cape
Government : the flotation of the Chartered Company and
the “ protection ” of its properties against native risings in-
volved imperial influence; the management of Mr. Kruger’s
government in the Transvaal kept them incessantly dab-
bling in the internal politics of that country, seeking
concessions and other privileges, planning raids and
ultimately organising a catastrophe which was worked
on their behalf and by their express machination at the
prodigious expense of the British Government. In new,
unsettled -countries the financier is in Constant need of
political assistance ; he needs political control in order to
mature his financial operations, and he is able to obtain it.
The power of the little group of men who wield the finance
of De Beers and the Rand is virtually absolute in the
politics of South Africa : their control over the finances of


MODERN CAPITALISM.


267

the country, public and private, enables them to wreck any
political schemes antagonistic to their interests; all that
money can do in a poor country to elect representatives,
influence officials, and secure legislation, they can command.
To realise the fulness of this power to paralyse effective
opposition we must remember that not only' are the mining
industries under their control, the only solid sources of
riches the whole country possesses, but that upon them
depend the success or failure of the trading interests
at the ports and in Kimberley and Johannesburg, of
the public and private railroad and telegraphic companies,
the banking and insurance businesses, the collieries and
iron-mines, irrigation, and all other manufacturing and
agricultural works demanding capital. Not merely are
all these industries economically dependent on the mines,
but the mineowners supply their capital and appoint
their officers. Nowhere in the world has there ever
existed so concentrated a form of capitalism as that
represented by the financial power of the mining houses
in South Africa, and nowhere else does that power
so completely realise and enforce the need of controlling
politics. The newness of the country and the absence of
any earlier growth of strong vested interests have enabled
these financiers, drawn from all the European countries, to
develop the latent powers of pure finance more logically
than elsewhere ; the immensely rapid possibilities of
financial exploitation has attracted thither not a few
financial intellects of the highest order, men who have
known how to adapt finance to the particular environment
and to operate at once upon the racial and economic
antagonisms within their area of industrial operations, and
upon the patriotic sentiments in Great Britain needed to
secure for their investments the political and military
assistance necessary to mature them. Their strategy has
been large and masterful, Recognising that the success of
their financial operations and of their political adjuncts was
dependent upon the movement of public opinion and
public sentiment in South Africa and Great Britain, they
bought the leading organs of the South African press,
subsidised political parties in Africa and Great Britain, and
organised a moral propaganda among the churches and the
philanthropic bodies. By thus creating a volume of public


2 68


THE EVOLUTION OF


interest and confidence in South African “development”
they secured an atmosphere favourable to investment;
by playing upon fears, suspicions, and sentimental aspira-
tions they produced an agitation of the public mind
reflected in the share-market; by a concentrated exer-
tion of all their moral and intellectual influence they
engineered a catastrophe, from the ruin of which they
have emerged with a firmer grip than ever upon the
substantial resources of the country and its government,
which implies a more profitable handling of the share-
market

The exigencies of South African finance in relation to
local concrete circumstances involve a financial control in
which several elements or strains are distinguishable. In
the acquisition of the material bases of finance the services
of a class of adventurous explorers and concession-mongers
were essential; to this class men like Rudd, Jameson,
Maguire, and even Rhodes himself must be relegated,
though the political and financial ability of the last-named
gives him other claims. The main work of building the
structure of South African finance is, however, attributable
to the presence of a group of “ pure financiers,” many of
whom, in early origin diamond dealers at Kimberley, found
an illimitable opportunity in the construction and handling
of mining properties in the diamond and gold fields, and
later in Rhodesia. Of this class the Beits, Bamatos, AJbus,
Neumanns, Ecksteins, may be taken as leading examples :
most of the abler and more successful members of this class
are Jews, originally from the European continent, though
assimilating with ease and fervour to the environment of
British sentiment, which is helpful to their financial designs.
The admission even to the inner financial circle of a few
members of the British aristocracy, attracted by the sheer
spirit of adventure, was valuable, not only for the vulgar
purpose of prospectuses, but for the slower and more
delicate work of constructing political and “social”
supports for the Rhodesian bubble. So we find men like
the Duke of Abercorn, Earl Grey, Lord Harris, taking an
active part in South African finance. These factors of
British influence are needed for the profitable working of
big “confidence tricks,” and the great masters of the
financial machine can well afford to “let in” a certain


MODERN CAPITALISM. 269

number of decorative personalities, few of whom, however,
are allowed to touch the levers.

The co-operation of these three separate strains was for a
time concealed by the dominating public part played by
Mr. Rhodes, who, essentially a combination of the first two
strains, adventurer and financier, was able, by his political
genius, to give a temporary cloak of political significance to
adventures which were au fond operations on the stock-
markets. His disappearance has exposed to plainer view
the actual mechanism of South African finance and its
direction by the small group of u mineowners ” and
“ merchants in Johannesburg, Kimberley, and London.
The profitable working of their “ system 19 follows the lines
which are more fully set forth in our main analysis. The
masters of the system retain for themselves the ownership
and dividends of the most solid and remunerative properties
in the diamond and gold fields. The everyday investor
cannot buy the ordinary shares of De Beers or of the best
Deep Level Mines upon the Rand. Here is the first
source of profit, the fruit of careful selection among the
many propositions which pass through their hands. Other
shares or debentures relating to poorer or more precarious
propositions, the values of which being more sensitive are
more amenable to skilled manipulation, are used to tempt
the investing or the gambling public, the professional
u croupiers ” raking in the profits of the table. Last, not
least, comes the periodic harvest of company flotation,
where more highly-organised displays of financing enable
the promoters to make a number of large u scoops ” out of
the public credulity, craftily stirred and stimulated at times
when a period of industrial prosperity has furnished a
swollen supply of savings. If it were possible to set forth
the ownership of the shares in the chief companies, this
concentration of financial power would be most convincing;
all the great financial interests would be seen closely linked
by transverse ownership. The following tables 1 dealing with
the directorships held (1905) by a number of leading
financiers illustrates, though less perfectly, the solidarity of
financial control : —


1 Constructed from the Directory of Directors and the Stock
Exchange Year Book, 1905.


270


THE EVOLUTION OF


South African Company Directors*


u

TJ

c

I

s

2

O

Chartered Co.

Lands and
Exploration.

Hanks and
Finance.

Railways.

Telegraphs.

1

O

Miscellaneous.

Albu, S. ...

-

14


I

.

__


_

Albu, L.

—

10

—

—

—


—

I

—

*Beit, A ...

i (de B.)

2

I

—

2

2

—

—

—

•Eckstein, F.

—

2

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

English, R.

3 (de B.)

—

—

. —

—

—

—

—

—

English, F. A. ...

I (P.)

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

Farrar, Sir G.

—

8

—

I

I

—

—

I

—

Farrar, S. H.

—

n

—

2

I

—

—

I

—

Goldie, H. ...

—

20

—

3

I

— •

—

—

—

Harris, Lord

—

I

—


I

—

—

—

—

Hamilton, J. J. ...

—

4

—

—

4

—

—

—

—

Jameson, L. S. ...

— '

i

I

—

—

—

* —

—

—

Joel, S. B.

I (deB.)

1

—

I

I

—

—

I

2

Maguire, J. R. ...

—

I

I

2

2

3

I

—

—

Meyer, C.

i (deB.)

I

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

Michell, Sir L. L.

i (de B.)

— '

I

—

—

—

—

j — .

—

Mosenthal, H.

2 (de B.)

I-

—

I

—

—

' —

| —

—

•Neumann, S.

I (PO

13

—

I

I

—

I

—

. —

•Phillips, L.

—

9

—

I

—

—

—

—

—

Reyersbach, L. ...

I (P.)

3

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

Robinson, J. B.

I

15

—

I

—

—

—

—

—

•Rube, C. ...

—

37

—

I

I

—

—

—

I

Rudd, C. D. "...

—

3

—

—

I

—

—

—

—

•Weraher, J. C. ...

(i de B.)

2

—

—

—

—

I

—

—


* Directors of Weraher Beit (merchants) or of Rand Mines,
f De B. =s de Beers Consolidated; P. = Premier.

The following facts assist us to understand the nature
of the consolidation which the table suggests. Messrs.
Weraher, Beit, Eckstein, Phillips, and Rube are members of
a “mercantile” firm in London and Johannesburg. Two
of these, Messrs, Weraher and Beit, are life governors of
De Beers: they are also directors of the Rand Mines,
forming with Mr. S, Neumann the London Committee of
that Company. Now, Mr. S. Neumann is also on the
London Committee of the Premier (Transvaal) Diamond
Company, sitting there with three other directors, one of
whom is Mr. F. A. English. Mr. F. A. English is not


MODERN CAPITALISM. tfl

a director of De Beers, but Mr. R. English is. . Thus the
relations between the two (independent ?) diamond groups
are ^tolerably clear. None of the Wernher Beit directors
sits on the Consolidated Goldfields directorate, but Mr.
Maguire, a director of this latter Company, sits on the
directorate of the Chartered Company with Messrs. Beit
and Sir L. L. Michell, both of De Beers. The connection
with the Farrar group is equally plain: Sir G. Farrar sitting
on the directorate of the important H. F. Company, while
Mr. S. H. Farrar sits on the London Committee of that
Company with Mr. Beit and Mr. S. Neumann. On the

E. Rand Proprietary Mines Sir G. Farrar and Mr. S. H.
Farrar sit with Mr. L. Phillips of Wernher Beit and Mr.

F. Drake of the Rand Mines. On the directorate of the
Albu _group (W. Rand Consolidated Mines) Messrs. C. S.
Goldmann and A. Reyersbach sit with the Albus; the
former sitting with Mr. Phillips, S. Goldmann, and the
Farrars on the E. Rand Proprietary Mines; the latter a
director of the Premier Diamond Company. C. Meyer of
De Beers is a director of Goltz & Co., while S. B. Joel
of De Beers is a member of the firm of Barnato Brothers
(merchants).

Following these illustrative lines of connection we can
perceive the close union of management between all the
chief gold groups, and between gold and diamonds and the
speculative finance of the Chartered Company, while the
railroads, banks, collieries, telegraphs, exploration com-
panies, and newspapers are seen to be appendages of this
central cluster.

The small inner ring of South African finance may be
thus indicated from the directorate of the five most repre-
sentative companies : —


De Beers. ]

premier.

Rand

Mines.

Goldfields.

Chartered

Company.

Beit, A. ... ^

I

mm

1


I

Jameson, L. S. ...

I


—

—

I

Maguire, R.

—

■

—

I

I

Michell, Sir L. L.

I

wgm

—

—

X

Neumann, S. i

—

9B j H

I


—

Wernher w

I

mm

X

—

—


272 THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM.


To these we may add the names of Mr. F. Eckstein, Lord
Harris, and perhaps Sir G. Farrar, chairmen respectively of
several of the most important companies.

It would be safe to say that this tiny group of men hold
in their control the financial, the industrial, and the political
destinies of South Africa. Every important interest is
directly managed by these men and their close business
associates. All, with the exception of Lord Harris and
Mr. Maguire (of the Goldfields), and Sir G. Farrar, are
De Beers and Wernher Beit men. It will be seen by
reference to the earlier table that this same small group
directly control banks, railways, telegraphs, coal mines,’ and
through the finance or trust companies which they direct
are able to control many other companies. Most of the
strongest Press is also in their hands. The following rough
diagram correctly delineates the situation : —


*73


CHAPTER XI.

MACHINERY AND INDUSTRIAL DEPRESSION.

§ i. The external phenomena of Trade Depression.

§ 2. Correctly described as Underproduction and Over-
production .

§ 3. Testimony to a general excess of Productive Power over
the requirement for Consumption.

§ 4. The connection of modem Machineproduction and
Depression shown by statistics of price.

§ 5. Changing forms in which Over-supply of Capital is
embodied

§ 6. Summary of economic relation of Machinery to De-
pression.

§ 7. Under-consumption as the root-evil.

§ 8. Economic analysis of “ Saving P
§ 9. Saving requires increased Consumption in the future.

§ 10. Quantitative relation of parts in the organism of
Industry.

§ 1 1. Quantitative relation of Capital and Consumption.

§ 12. Economic limits of Saving for a Community.

§ 13. No limits to the possibility of individual Saving — Clash
of individual and social interests in Saving.

§14. Objection that excess in forms of Capital would drive
interest to zero not valid.

§ 15. Excess is in embodiments of Capital \ notin real Capital*
§16. Uncontrolled Machinery a source of fluctuation.

§ 1. The leading symptom of the disease called Depression
of Trade is a general fall of wholesale prices, accompanied
by a less than corresponding fall of retail prices. Whatever
may be the ultimate causes of a trade depression, the direct
and immediate cause of every fall of price must be a failure

18


274 the evolution of

of demand to keep pace with supply at the earlier price.
So long as those who have goods to sell can sell all these
goods at the price they have been getting, they will not
lower the price. The direct efficient cause then of any fall of
price is an actual condition of over-supply at earlier prices.
A very small quantity of over-supply will bring down prices
in a business, or in a whole market, provided the competi-
tion between the businesses is keen. Where such a fall
of prices quickly stimulates demand so that the over-supply
is carried off and the rate of demand is equated to the rate
of supply at the lower price level, the condition is com-
monly described as a “tendency to over-supply.” But
it is important to bear in mind that in strictness it was
not a “ tendency ” but an actually existing quantity of over-
supply which brought down the price.

Where any fall of price thus brought about quickly
•stimulates a corresponding increase of demand, stability
of prices follows, and there will be a full, healthy production
at the lower prices.

The mere fact then that prices are generally lower than
they were five or ten years ago is no evidence of depressed
trade. Depressed trade signifies not merely low prices but
relaxed production : more has been produced than can be
sold at the lowest profitable prices, and markets are congested
with stock, but less is being produced than could be produced
with existing means of production. The fact which faces
us in a period of depression is an apparent excess of
productive power. If this excess were of labour alone
it might be explained with some plausibility as due to
the displacement of labour by machinery. For it has
been admitted that the first and immediate effect of
introducing labour-saving or labour-aiding machines may
be a diminution in the demand for labour, even when
the labour of making and repairing the machines andof
distributing the increased product which finds a sale is
taken into consideration. The simultaneous application
of a number of new forms of machinery attended by
other general economies in the organisation of industry
might seem to explain why for a time there should be a
general redundancy of labour in all or most of the chief
industries of a country. Such an over-supply of labour
would result from the accumulated -action of “ first effects.”


MODERN CAPITALISM.


275


When the cheapening influences of machinery had time
to exercise their full natural influence in stimulating con-
sumption the labour temporarily displaced would be again
fully utilised ; for the moment, past labour saved and stored
in forms of fixed capital would do a great deal of the work
which would otherwise be done by present living labour.
But such an explanation is wholly negatived by the fact
that in a depressed condition of trade there is an excess
of forms of capital as well as of labour. There exists
simultaneously a redundancy of both factors in production.
Labourers are out of work or are in irregular employment,
mills and factories are closed or working short time, the
output of coal and metals is reduced, and yet with this
relaxed production the markets are glutted with unsold
goods unable to find purchasers at a price which will yield
a minimum profit to their owners. To this must be added,
in the case of the extractive industries, agriculture, mining,
etc., the exclusion from productive use of land which had
formerly found a profitable employment

§ 2. To this condition of industry the antithetical terms,
over-production and under-production, may be both correctly
applied, according as one regards production as a state or
as a process. The state of trade in a depression is one
of over-production — the industrial body is congested with
goods which are not drawn out for consumption fast enough.
This plethora debilitates the industrial body, its functional
activities are weakened. The slackness of trade thus
induced is rightly described as under-production.

It is commonly said by English writers upon economics
that the state of over-production, the redundancy of capital
and labour, though found in one or two or several trades at
the same time, cannot be of general application. If too
much capital and labour is engaged in one industry there is,
they argue, too little in another, there cannot be at the same
time a general state of over-production. Now if by general
over-production is meant not that every single industry is
supplied with an excess of capital, but that there exists a
net over-supply, taking into account the plethora in some
trades and the deficiency in others, this assertion of English
economists is not in accordance with ascertained facts 01
with the authority of economists outside of England.

§ 3. If a depression of trade signified a misapplication of


2 j 6 the evolution of

capital and labour, so that too much was applied in some
industries, too little in others, there would be a rise of
prices in as many cases as there was a fall of prices, and the
admitted symptom of depression, the simultaneous fall of
price in all or nearly all the staple industries, would not
occur. The most careful students of the phenomena of
depressed trade agree in describing the condition as one of
general or net excess of the forms of capital They are
also agreed in regarding the enormous growth of modern
machinery as the embodiment of a general excess of pro-
ducing power over that required to maintain current con-
sumption.

Lord Playfair, writing on this subject in 1888, says, “ It
matters not whether the countries were devastated by war
or remained in the enjoyment of peace ; whether they were
isolated by barriers of Protection or conducted these
industries under Free Trade; whether they abounded in
the raw materials of industry or had to import them from
other lands j under all these varying conditions the machine-
using countries of the world have felt the fifteen years of
depression in the same way, though with varying degrees of
intensity.” His conclusion is “that the improvements of
machinery used in production have increased the supply of
commodities beyond the immediate demands of the world.” 1
In support of this position he adduces the authority of con-
tinental writers such as Dr. A. von Studnitz, Piermez, Jules
Duckerts, Laveleye, Trasenster, Annecke, and EngeL In
the United States, Carroll Wright, David Wells, and Atkinson
are foremost in upholding this to be the explanation of
depression of trade. Mr. Carroll D. Wright, Commissioner
of Labour at Washington, is emphatic in his assertion of
the fact “ So far as the factories and the operatives of the
countries concerned are to be taken into consideration
(England, the United States, France, Belgium, Germany),
there does exist a positive and emphatic over-production,
and this over-production could not exist without the intro-
duction of power-machinery at a rate greater than the
consuming power of the nations involved, and of those
dependent upon them, demand ; in other words, the over-
production of power-machinery logically results in the over-


1 Contemporary Revieu> % March 18S8.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


2 77


production of goods made with the aid of such machinery,
and this represents the condition of those countries depend-
ing largely upon mechanical industries for their prosperity.” 1 * *
The Reports of the English “ Commission on the Depres-
sion of Trade and Industry” make si milar admissions of an
excess of producing power as distinct from a mere miscal-
culation in the application of capital and labour. The
Majority Report, defining “over-production” as “the pro-
duction of commodities, or even the existence of a capacity
for production at a time when the demand is not sufficiently
brisk to maintain a remunerative price to the producer,”
affirms “ that such an over-production has been one of the
prominent features of the course of trade during recent
years, and that the depression under which we are now
suffering may be partially explained by this feet. . .

The Minority Report lays still stronger stress upon
“systematic over-production,” alleging “that the demand
for commodities does not increase at the same rate as
formerly, and that our capacity for production is conse-
quently in excess of our home and export demand, and
could, moreover, be considerably increased at short notice
by the fuller employment of labour and appliances now
partially idle.” 1 Brentano speaks of German Kartels as
“providing a parachute to enable the victims of over-
production to get safely down to a solid basis.”

The most abundant information regarding the excess of
the machinery of production in the several branches of
industry has been given by Mr. D. A. Wells, who regards
machinery as the direct cause of depressed trade, operating
in three ways — (i) increased capacity of production, (2)
improved methods of distribution, (3) the opening up of
new abundant supplies of raw material. Thus production
grows faster than consumption. “In this way only is it
possible to account for the circumstances that the supply of
the great articles and instrumentalities of the world's use
and commerce have increased during the last twelve or
fifteen years in a far greater ratio than the contemporaneous
increase of the world's population or of its immediate con-
suming capacity.” 4

The earlier inventions in the textile industries, and the
general application of steam to manufacture and to the trans-

1 Report on Industrial Depressions , Washington, 1886.

* Report, pars. 61 -66. * Report, pax. xo6.

* Contemporary Review, July 1887.


27 $


THE EVOLUTION OF


port services, have played the most dramatic part in the in-
dustrial revolution of the last hundred years. But it should
be borne in mind that it is far from being true that the great
forces of invention have spent themselves, and that we have
come to an era of small increments in the growth of pro-
ductive power. On the contrary, within this last generation
a number of discoveries have taken place in almost all the
chief industrial arts, in the opening up of new supplies of
raw material, and in the improvement of industrial organisa-
tion, which have registered enormous advances of pro-
ductive power. In the United States, where the advance
has been most marked, it is estimated that in the fifteen or
twenty years preceding 1886 the gain of machinery, as
measured by “displacement of the muscular labour,”
amounts to more than one-third, taking the aggregate of
manufactures into account. In many manufactures the
introduction of steam-driven machinery and the factory
system belongs to this generation. The substitution of
machinery for hand labour in boot-making signifies a gain
of 80 per cent, for some classes of goods, 50 per cent, for
others. In the silk manufacture there has been a gain of
50 per cent., in furniture some 30 per cent, while in many
minor processes, such as wood-planing, tin cans, wall-
papers, soap, patent leather, etc., the improvement of
mechanical productiveness per labourer is measured as a
rise of from 50 to 300 per cent or more. The gain is,
however, by no means confined to an extension of “power”
into processes formerly performed by human muscle and
skill. Still more significant is the increased mechanical
efficiency in the foundational industries. In the manu-
facture of agricultural implements the increase is put
down at from 50 to 70 per cent, in the manufacture of
machines and machinery from 25 to 40 per cent., while “in
the production of metals and metallic goods long-estab-
lished firms testify that machinery has decreased manual
labour 33# per cent.” The increase in the productive ,
power of cotton mills is far greater than this. From 1870
to 1884 the make of pig-iron rose 131 per cent in Great
Britain and 237 per cent in the rest of the world. 1 “ In
building vessels an approximate idea of the relative labour


1 Cmtftmfrrary Rroirv* March i8£S.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


279

displacement is given as 4 or 5 to 1 — that is, four or five
times the amount of labour can be performed to-day by
the use of machinery in a given time that could be done
under old hand methods.” 1

In England the rise in productiveness of machinery is
roughly estimated at 40 per cent in the period 1850 to
1885, and there is no reason to suppose this is an excessive
estimate. In the shipping industry, where more exact
statistics are available, the advance is even greater. The
diminution of manual labour required to do a given quantity
of work in 1884 as compared with 1870 is put down at no
less than 70 per cent., owing in large measure to the
introduction and increased application of steam-hoisting
machines and grain elevators, and the employment of
steam power in steering, raising the sails and anchors,
pumping, and discharging cargoes.* In the construction of
ships enormous economies have taken place. A ship which
in JS83 cost £ 24,000 can now be built for ^14,000. In
the working of vessels the economy of fuel, due to the
introduction of compound-engines, has been very large.
A ton of wheat can now be hauled by sea at less than a
farthing per mile. Similarly with land haulage the economy
of fuel has made immense reductions in cost. “In an
experiment lately made on the London and North Western
Railway, a compound locomotive dragged a ton of goods
for one mile by the combustion of two ounces of coaL”*
The quickening of voyages by steam motor, and by the
abandonment of the old Cape route in favour of the Suez
Canal, enormously facilitated commerce. The last arrange-
ment is calculated to have practically destroyed a tonnage
of two millions. The still greater facilitation of intelligence
by electricity did away with the vast system of ware-
housing required by the conditions of former commerce.
These economies of the foundational transport industries
have deeply affected the whole commerce and manufacture
of the country, and have played no inconsiderable part in

1 Report of the Commissioner of Labour , Washington, 1886, pp. 80
to 88.

a D. A Wells, Contemporary Review, August 1887.

* Lord Playfair, in the Contemporary Review , March 1888, gives a
number of interesting illustrations of recent economies in transport and
manufacture.


THE EVOLUTION OF


sSo

bringing about the general fall of prices by lowering the
expenses of production and stimulating an increased output.

Excessive production of transport-machinery, especially of
railways, has played an important part as an immediate
cause of modem trade depression. The depression begin-
ning in 1875 aQ d culminating in 1878 is described as having
its origin “in the excessive lock-up of capital in the con-
struction of railways, especially in America and Germany,
many of which, when built, had neither population to use
them nor traffic to carry; in the wild speculation that
followed the German assertion of supremacy on the Con-
tinent ; in the exaggerated armaments, which withdrew an
inordinate amount of labour from productive industry, and
over-weighed the taxpayers of the great European nations;
and in over-production in the principal trades in all
European countries.” 1

Mr, Bowley points out that “after each of the great
railway booms of the century, for instance in England
about 1847, in America before 1857 and 1873, in India
in 1878, and on the Continent in 1873, the collapse has
been very violent; for the materials are bought at exag-
gerated prices; the weekly wage during construction is
enormous; no return is obtained till the whole scheme,
whose carrying out probably lasts many years, is complete.”

A great deal of this railway enterprise meant over-
production of forms of transport-capital and a correspond-
ing withholding of current consumption. In other words,
a large part of the “savings” of England, Germany,
America, eta, invested in these new railways, were steril-
ised; they were not economically needed to assist in the
work of transport, and many of them remain almost use-
less, as the quoted value of the shares testifies. It is not
true, as is sometimes suggested, that after a great effort
in setting on foot such gigantic enterprises, a collapse is
economically necessary. If the large incomes and high
wages earned in the period prior to 1873, when capital
and labour found full employment in these great enterprises,
had been fully applied in increased demand for commodities
and an elevated standard of consumption, much of the new

r

x Statist, 1879, quoted Bowley, England' t Foreign Trade in the
Nineteenth Century, p. 80.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


281


machinery of transport, which long stood useless, would
have been required to assist in forwarding goods to maintain
the raised standard of consumption. This argument, of
course, assumes that ignorance or fraud have not caused
a misdirection of investment There is no evidence to
indicate that the vast sums invested in 1869-72 in railway
enterprise could have found any safer or more remunerative
investment It is the overflow of “savings,” after all capital
economically needed to carry on the work of production
to supply steady current wants has been secured, that flows
into the hands of speculative company-promoters. Such
savings are not diverted from safe and useful forms of
investment, they are “ savings ” which ought never to have
been attempted, for they have no economic justification in
the needs of commerce, as is proved by results.

§ 4. The direct causal connection between the increased
productive power of modern machinery and trade depres-
sion clearly emerges from a comparison of the fluctuations
in the several departments of industry in different industrial
countries. As modem machinery and modem methods of
commerce are more highly developed and are applied more
generally, trade fluctuations are deeper and more lasting. A
comparison between more backward countries largely en-
gaged in raising food and raw materials of manufacture for
the great manufacturing countries is sometimes adduced in
support of the contention that highly-evolved industry is
steadier. But though Mr. Giffen is undoubtedly correct in
holding that depressions are often worse in countries pro-
ducing raw materials than in manufacturing countries, 1 this
is only true of raw-material producing countries which
produce for export, and which are therefore dependent for
their trade upon fluctuations in demand for commodities in
distant markets whose movements they are least able to
calculate or control Irregularity of climate, disease* and
other natural causes must be a constant source of fluctua-
tion in the productivity of agriculture. But those non-
manufacturing countries which are little dependent upon
commerce with manufacturing nations, and winch are chiefly
self-supporting, will of necessity retain a larger variety of
agriculture and of other primitive industries, and will there-


1 Essays in Finance toL i p. 137, etc.


THE EVOLUTION OF


280

bringing about the general fall of prices by lowering the
expenses of production and stimulating an increased output.

Excessive production of transport-machinery, especially of
railways, has played an important part as an immediate
cause of modem trade depression. The depression begin-
ning in 1875 aQ d culminating in 1878 is described as having
its origin “ in the excessive lock-up of capital in the con-
struction of railways, especially in America and Germany,
many of which, when built, had neither population to use
them nor traffic to carry; in the wild speculation that
followed the German assertion of supremacy on the Con-
tinent; in the exaggerated armaments, which withdrew an
inordinate amount of labour from productive industry, and
over-weighed the taxpayers of the great European nations ;
and in over-production in the principal trades in all
European countries.” 1

Mr. Bowley points out that “ after each ot the great
railway booms of the century, for instance in England
about 1847, in America before 1857 and 1873, in India
in 1878, and on the Continent in 1873, the collapse has
been very violent; for the materials are bought at exag-
gerated prices; the weekly wage during construction is
enormous; no return is obtained till the whole scheme,
whose carrying out probably lasts many years, is complete.”

A great deal of this railway enterprise meant over-
production of forms of transport-capital and a correspond-
ing withholding of current consumption. In other words,
a large part of the “savings” of England, Germany,
America, etc., invested in these new railways, were steril-
ised; they were not economically needed to assist in the
work of transport, and many of them remain almost use-
less, as the quoted value of the shares testifies. It is not
true, as is sometimes suggested, that after a great effort
in setting on foot such gigantic enterprises, a collapse is
economically necessary. If the large incomes and high
wages earned in the period prior to 1873, when capital
and labour found full employment in these great enterprises,
had been fully applied in increased demand for commodities
and an elevated standard of consumption, much of the new

1 Statist, 1879, quoted Bowley, England' * Foreign Trad* in tkt
Nineteenth Century , p. 8a


COURSE OF AVERAGE PRICES OF GENERAL COMMODITIES.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


283


284


THE EVOLUTION OF


which the raw material passes on its way to the consumes
soon become congested with an over-supply. This, how-
ever, need not be very large, nor does it long continue to
grow. So long as the production of these excessive wares
continues, though we have a growing glut of them, the
worst features of industrial disease do not appear ; promts
a re low, perhaps business is carried on at a loss, but
factories, workshops, mines, railways, etc., are in active


WHEAT PRICES,


operation; wages may be reduced, but there is plenty of
employment. It is when this congestion of goods has
clogged the wheels of the industrial machine, retarded the
rate of production, when the weaker manufacturers can no
longer get credit at the bank, can no longer meet their
engagements, and collapse, when the stronger firms are
forced to close some of their mills, to shut down the less
productive mines, to work short hours, to economise in
every form of labour, that depression of trade assumes its


MODERN CAPITALISM.


285

more enduring and injurious shape. The condition now is
not that of an increasing glut of goods; the existing glut
continues to block the avenues of commerce and to check
further production, but it does not represent the real
burden of over-supply. The true excess now shows itself
in the shape of idle machinery, closed factories, unworked
mines, unused ships and railway trucks. It is the auxiliary
capital that represents the bulk of over-supply, and whose
idleness signifies the enforced unemployment of large
masses of labour. It is machinery, made and designed to
increase the flow of productive goods, that has multiplied
too fast for the growth of consumption. This machinery
does not continue in full use, a large proportion of it is not


GENERAL FOOD PRICES.


required to assist in producing the quantity of consumptive
goods which can find a market, and must of necessity stand
idle; it represents a quantity of useless forms of capital,
over-supply, and its unused productive power represents
an incomparably larger amount of potential over-supply of
goods. Economic forces are at work preventing the con-
tinuation of the use of this excessive machinery ; if it were
used in defiance of these forces, if its owners could afford to
keep it working, there would be no market for the goods
it would turn out, and these too would swell the mass of
over-supply.

§ 6. The general relation of modem Machinery to Com-
mercial Depression is found to be as follows: — Improved


286


THE EVOLUTION OF


machinery of manufacture and transport enables larger and
larger quantities of raw material to pass more quickly and
more cheaply through the several processes of production.
Consumers do not, in fact, increase their consumption as
quickly and to an equal extent. Hence the onward flow of
productive goods is checked in one or more of the manu-


MINERAL PRICES.


i860 1870 IS

_ f 2 4 6 8 i 2 4-68


1890 1900

246812.468 i


HimiUlllllllllIlKIIIIIIRIMIIIIIIIIIIIII
iflHBBBraMBHHBHBBBiBfliBBBBBiMBBiaBBmmi
BBBBflBBBflBBBBBBBflBBBBBBBBBBBflBflBBBBflBBflBBHB
lflBUIBHBBHflHHIIfllHHiaHIMflaBBBB««B
iMimiinivHMHVRinHiflURiiHniiun
feiiiiiiiuiitiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiimii
■■■■■■■■■■IllfilMlllllllMIHIIIIHimill
IIRHIRaaillH!lllIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIBII|lllllR
»BBBflBBBIBfiBrillBBBBBBlBBBBBBBBBIBflflBBBBBBBBBj


Mil


Rill


■III


■flBflBBfllBBIBIlBBBBBBIBBflflBBBBBRBflBBBBBBBflflB

IIIIRIRailRRIlilllllRIIIIUIRIRlIRRIlRiaill

■MliMlllBllilllBIIBRliililBBBBIBBBBBIBBBB

■BBIBIBIBBfllBBIBBBBIIHBBBBIBBBIIflBBaBBBBBflB

flBBBBBBflBBBIilBIBBMIlllBfllBHBBIBBBBBBBBBBBB

aaaiRaillRIfllRIIRHaillRHRinilRIIRRRRIRRRIR

IIRIRIBaHIIIIRIBaiaillRBRRiaailiaRRIHIRiaiR

BlIRHBIBflRIIIfllllflRHRflllHBBBIHBIIBflBIIIHIIflll

■■■IllllIlKIIHHHHIIlHIlHHRHMMMflriflB


III!


Ill


l!l


Bill


BiBaaBBBaaBBiBaBiBBBaaiBBaBBBBBRaaaaBBaariiiBB

ilHIUHIBBlUBllBBBIlIBBflBIBBBIIHIflBMFlIlH

UBBFi.VBBBBBBBBIBlIBBBRRRBIlIBBBBIBBBBIfllBBIIBI

tlEflUlBIliyilBIlBlllIBBIIIIIIBIBBBIBBIIBIfll

IHIlSlIHfillMlHIIIIHIHBIBRIIBBIMIfllH

BBBIBBUBB=flBBBBB.lBBBIRBBBBBBBBRBBBBBBBflBBBB

■■■■■■l!lftHIIIIIMBMIIIHIIHBIIIMIHIi«M

BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB'BBBBBBBBBBBBBRBBBBBBBBIBBIIB

BIBICIIIBaBRRIIBBIBRIRBBIBBBIBIIIBIIIBlfBBaB


BIBIfllllBIBIIBIIBIBrillBlBIflViBBIlBBIBBBIflBBB

iaifflmiiiaaasaiasiiria a iB aiim s

SSBBSBBSBBBSBBBBBBBBBH

BlinilBBlIBBIflBIRBIIBIBflBflBIRIBflRfliriBlIRBI

BBIIIBIlBHIIBBBflBIBIIIflBBBBBflBIBBBL^fllBIBII

SmiiiiiBiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiniiimun


facturing stages, or in the hands of the merchant, or even in
the retail shop. This congestion of the channels of produc-
tion automatically checks production, depriving of all use
a large quantity of the machinery, and a large quantity of
labour, The general fall of money income which has
necessarily followed from a fall of prices, uncompensated by


MODERN CAPITALISM. 287

a corresponding expansion of sales, induces i shrinkage of
consumption. Under depressed trade, while the markets


TEXTILE PRICES.


288


THE EVOLUTION OF


shrunk consumption of the depressed community. Before
the turn in the commercial tide, current production even
falls below the level of current consumption, thus allowing
for the gradual passage into consumption of the glut of
goods which had congested the machine. After the con-
gestion which had kept prices low is removed, prices begin
to rise, demand is more active at each point of industry,
and we see the usual symptoms of reviving trade.

This is an accurate account of the larger phenomena
visible in the commercial world in a period of disturbance.
When the disease is at its worst, the activity of producer and
consumer at its lowest, we have the functional condition of
under-production due to the pressure of a quantity of over-
supply, and we have a corresponding state of under-consump-
tion.

§ 7 , Machinery thus figures as the efficient cause of
industrial disease, but the real responsibility does not rest
on the shoulders of the inventor of new machinery, or of
the manufacturer, but of the consumer.

The root-evil of depressed trade is under-consumption.
If a quantity of capital and labour is standing idle at the
same time, in all or in the generality of trades, the only
possible reason why they remain unemployed is that there
is no present demand for the goods which by co-operation
they are able to produce.

English economists, most of whom, ever since the time
of J. B. Say, have denied the possibility of the condition of
general over-supply which is seen to exist in depressed trade,'
are contented to assume that there can be no general over-
supply because every one who produces creates a correspond-
ing power to consume. There cannot, it is maintained, be
too much machinery or too much of any form of capital
provided there exists labour to act with it ; if this machinery,
described as excessive, is set working, some one will have
the power to consume whatever is produced, and since we
know that human wants are insatiable, too much cannot be
produced. This crude and superficial treatment, which
found wide currency from the pages of Adam Smith and
McCulloch, has been swallowed by later English economists,
unfortunately without inquiring whether it was consistent


MODERN CAPITALISM.


289

with industrial facts. Since all commerce is ultimately
resolvable into exchange of commodities for commodities,
it is obvious that every increase of production signifies a
corresponding increase of power to consume. Since there
exists in every society a host of unsatisfied wants, it is equally
certain that there exists a desire to consume everything that
can be produced. But the fallacy involved in the supposi-
tion that over-supply is impossible consists in assuming that
the power to consume and the desire to consume necessarily
co-exist in the same persons.

In the case of a glut of cotton goods due to an in-
creased application of machinery, the spinners and manu-
facturers have the power to consume what is produced, while
a mass of starving, ill-clad beings in Russia, East London
— even in Manchester — may have the desire to consume
these goods. But since these latter are not owners of any-
thing which the spinners and manufacturers wish to consume
or to possess, the exchange of commodities for commodities
cannot take place. But, it will be said, if the Lancashire
producers desire to consume anything at all, those who pro-
duce such articles of desire will have the power, and
possibly the desire, to consume more cotton goods, or at any
rate the desire to consume something produced by other
people who will have both power and desire to consume
cotton goods. Thus, it will be said, the roundabout exchange
of commodities for commodities must be brought about
And this answer is valid, on the assumption that the
Lancashire producers desire to consume an equivalent of
the goods they produce. But let us suppose they do not
desire to do so. The reply that since human wants are
insatiable every one with power to consume must have
desire to consume, is inadequate. In order to be operative
in the steady maintenance of industry the desire to consume
must be a desire to, consume now, to consume continuously,
and to consume, to an extent corresponding with the power
to consume.

Let us take the Lancashire trade as a test case. Evidently,
there could be no superfluous capital and labour in Lanca-
shire trade if the cotton-spinners, manufacturers and their
operatives, increased their own consumption of cotton
goods to correspond with every increase of output

But if they do not do this, they can only make good

*9


290


THE EVOLUTION OF


and maintain their capital and labour in employment by
persuading others to increase their consumption of cotton
goods. How can they do this? If, instead of desiring
to consume more cotton goods, the Lancashire employers
and operatives desire to consume, and do actually consume,
more hardware, houses, wine, etc., then the increased
consumption of these things, raising their prices and so
stimulating their production, and distributing a larger
purchasing-power among the capitalists and operatives
engaged in producing the said hardware, houses, wine, eta,
will enable the latter to consume more cotton goods, and
if these desire to do so, their effective demand will maintain
the new capital and labour employed Jn Lancashire trade.

But if, instead of taking this course, the Lancashire
capitalists and operatives want not to consume either cotton
or anything else, but simply to save and put up more mills
and prepare more yarn and cloth, they will soon find they
are attempting the impossible. Their new capital, and the
fresh labour conjoined with it, can only be employed on
condition that they or others shall increase their con-
sumption of cotton goods. They themselves ex hypothesi
will not do so, and if the capitalists and operatives engaged
in setting up the new cotton-mills, etc., will consent to "do
so, this only postpones the difficulty, unless we suppose a con-
tinuous erection of new mills, and a continuous application
on the part of those who construct these mills of the whole of
their profits and wages in demanding more cotton goods —
a reductio ad absurdum . In short, cotton capitalists- and
operatives can only ^effect this saving and provide this
increased employment of capital and labour on condition
that either those engaged in erecting and working the new
mills shall spend all their income in demanding cotton
goods, or that other persons shall diminish the proportion
of their incomes which hitherto s they have saved, and shall
apply this income in increased demand for cotton goods.

Now if the same motives which induce Lancashire
capitalists and workers to jrefuse to increase their present
consumption pari passu with the rate of production are
generally operative, it will appear that capital and labour
lie idle because those who are able to consume what they
could produce are not willing to consume, but desire to
postpone consumption — to save.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


191


g 8 . The process of “Saving” has received but scant
attention from economic writers, Jevons appears to have
held that superfluous food and other necessary consumptive
goods, in whosoever hands they were, constituted the only
true fund of capital in a community at any given time.
Sidgwick also holds that all “ Savings ” are in the first in-
stance “ food” That this is not the case will appear from
the- following example: — A self-sufficing mat produces
daily for his daily consumption a quantity of food, etc.,
denoted by the figure 10. 5 of this is necessary and 5

superfluous consumption. This man, working with primi-
tive tools, discovers an implement which will greatly
facilitate his production, but will cost 4 days’ labour to
make. Three alternatives are open to him. He may
spend half his working day in producing the strictly
necessary part of his previous consumption, 5, and devote
the other half to making the new implement, which will be
finished in 8 days. Or he may increase the duration of his
working day by one quarter, giving the extra time to the
making of his new implement, which will be finished in 16
days. Or lastly, he may continue to produce consumptive
goods as before, but only consume half of them, preserving
the other half for 8 days, until he has a fund which will suffice
to keep him for 4 continuous days, which he will devote to
making the new implement If he adopts the first alter-
native, he simply changes the character of his production,
producing in part of his working day future goods instead
of present consumptive goods. In the second he creates
future goods by extra labour. In the third case only does
the “saving” or new “capital” take as its first shape food
In the same way a community seeking to introduce a more
“roundabout” method of production requiring new plant,
or seeking to place in the field of industry a new series of
productive processes to satisfy some new want, may achieve
their object by “saving” food, etc., or by changing for
awhile the character of their production, or by extra
labour. Thus new capital, whether from the individual or
the community point of view, may take either “ food ” or
any other material form as its first shape.

Since “savings” need not take the shape of food or
any article capable of immediate consumptions Adam
Smith and J. S, Mill are clearly wrong when they urge


292


THE EVOLUTION OF


in terms almost identical 1 that what is saved is necessarily
consumed, and consumed as quickly as that which is spent
The antithesis of saving and spending shows these writers,
and the bulk of English economists who follow them, are
misled, because they regard “ saving ” as doing something
with money, and do not sufficiently go behind the financial
aspect of putting money into a bank.

A closer analysis of saving yields the result that, except
in one of the simple cases taken in our example above,
where “saving” implied withholding consumable goods
from present consumption, every act of saving in a complex
industrial society signifies making, or causing to be made,
forms of capital which are essentially incapable of present
consumption — i.e., future or productive goods.

Each member of an industrial community receives his
money income as the market equivalent of value created
in goods or services by the requisites of production, land,
capital, labour which he owns. For every £ 1 paid as
income an equivalent quantity of material or non-material
wealth has been already created.

Let A be the owner of a requisite of production, receiving
^500 a year as income in weekly payments of ^10. Before
receiving each £zo he has caused to come into existence
an amount of wealth which, if material goods, may or may
not be still in existence ; if services, has already been con-
sumed. It is evident that A may each week consume £10
worth of goods and services without affecting the general
condition of public wealth. A, however, determines to
consume only £$ worth of goods and services each week,
and puts the other £$ into the bank. Now what becomes
of the £5 worth of goods and services which A might have
consumed, but refused to consume? Do they necessarily
continue to exist so long as A is credited with the money
which represents their “ saving ” ; if so, in what form ? In
other words, what actually takes place in the world of com-
merce when money income is said to be saved, what other

“ What is annually saved is as regularly consumed as what is annu-
ally spent, and nearly in the same time too ; but it is consumed by a
different set of people.” ( Wealth of Nations , p. 1493, McCulloch.)
** Everything which is produced is consumed ; both what is saved and
what is said to be spent, and the former quite as quickly as the latter.”
{Principles of Political Economy > Book I., chap, v., sec. 6 .)


MODERN CAPITALISM. 293

industrial facts stand behind the financial fact of A deposit
ing part of his income in the bank as “ savings ” ?

To this question several answers are possible.

(1) B, a spendthrift owner of land or capital, wishing
to live beyond his income, may borrow from the bank
each £5 which A puts in, mortgaging his property. In
this case B spends what A might have spent; B’s property
(former savings perhaps?) falls into A’s hands. A has
individually effected a “saving” represented by tangible
property, but as regards the community there is no saving
at all, real or apparent

(2) C, a fraudulent promoter of companies, may by
misrepresentation get hold of A’s saved money, and may
spend it for his own enjoyment, consuming the goods and
services which A might have consumed, and giving to A
“paper” stock which figures as As “savings.” Here A
has individually effected no saving..

From the point of view of the community there is no
real saving (C has consumed instead of A), but so long
as the “stock” has a market value there is an apparent
saving. To this category belongs the “ savings ” effected if
A lends his money to a government to be spent on war.
From the standpoint of the community there is no saving
(unless the war be supposed to yield an asset of wealth or
security), but A’s paper stock represents his individual
saving. A’s “ saving ” is exactly balanced by the spending
of the community in its corporate capacity, A receiving a
mortgage upon the property of the community. 1

(3) D and E, manufacturers or traders, engaged in pro-
ducing luxuries which A used to buy with his before
he took to saving, finding their weekly “ takings ” diminished
and being reduced to financial straits, borrow A’s “ savings ”
in order to continue their business operations, mortgag-
ing their plant and stock to A. So long as, with the
assistance of A’s money, they are enabled to continue pro-
ducing, what they produce is over-supply, not needed to
supply current consumption, assuming the relation between
spending and saving in the other members of the com-
munity remains pnaltered. This over-supply is the material

1 An able analysis of the nature of “ paper savings” is found in
Mr. J. M. Robertson's Fallacy of Saving* (Sonnenschein.)


THE EVOLUTION OF


* 9 $

representative of A’s “savings.” So far as real capital is
concerned there is no increase by A’s act of saving, rather
a decrease, for along with the net reduction in the consump-
tion of luxuries on the part of the community due to A ’s
action, there must be a fall in the “ value ” of the capital
engaged in the various processes of producing luxuries,
uncompensated by any other growth of values. But by
A’s “ saving ” new forms of capital exist' which bear the
appearance of capital, though in reality they are “ over-
supply.” These empty forms represent A’s saving. Of
course A, with full knowledge of the facts, would only
lend to D and E up to the real value of their mortgaged
capital. When this point was reached D and E could get
no further advances, and their stock and plant would pass
into A’s hands. From the point of view of the community
A’s action has resulted in the creation of a number of
material forms of capital which, so long as the existing
relations between the community’s production and con-
sumption continue, stand as over-supply.

(4) A may hand over his weekly ^5 to F on security.
F by purchase obtains the goods which A refused to con-
sume, and may use them (or their equivalent in other
material forms) as capital for further production. If F can
with this capital help to produce articles for which there is
an increasing consumption, or articles which evoke and
satisfy some new want, then A’s action will have resulted in
“saving” from the point of view of the community — /.£,
there will be an increase of real capital ; forms of capital
which would otherwise have figured as over-supply have the
breath of economic life put into them by an increase in
general consumption. No real difficulty arises from a doubt
whether the goods and services which A renounced were
capable of becoming effective' capital. The things he
renounced were luxurious consumptive goods and services.
But he could change them into effective capital in the
following way: — Designing henceforth to consume only half
his income, he would deliberately employ half the requisites
of production which furnished his income in putting extra
plant, machinery* etc., into some trade. Whether he does
this himself or incites F to do it, makes no difference ; it
will be done. In this way, by establishing new forms of
useful capita^ A can make good his saving, assuming an


MODERN CAPITALISM.


*95


increase of general consumption. These axe the four
possible effects of A’s saving from the point of view of the
community —

( 1 ) NiL

(2) Bogus or “ paper ” saving.

(3) Over-supply of forms of capital

(4) Increase of real capital.

It appears then that every act which in a modem
industrial society is “ saving,” from the standpoint of the
community, and not a mere transfer of “spending” from
one person to another, consists in the production of a form
of goods in its nature or position incapable of present
consumption.

This analysis of “ saving " convicts J. S. Mill of a double
error in saymg, " Everything which is produced is consumed;
both what is saved and what is said to be spent; and the
former quite as rapidly as the latter.” In the first place, by
showing that “ saving,” from the point of view of the com-
munity, generally means producing something incapable of
present consumption, it proves that even if what is “saved”
is consumed, it is not consumed as quickly as what is spent
Mill seemed to think that what was “ saved ” was necessarily
food, clothing, and so-called finished goods, because “saving”
to him was not a process, but a single negative act of
refusing to buy. Because a man who has “saved” has
command of an extra stock of food, etc., which he may
hand over to labourers as real wages, he seems to think that
a community which saves will have its savings in this form.
We see this is not the case. Even where in a primitive
society extra food is the first form savings may take, it
belongs to the act of saving that this food shall not be
consumed so soon as it was available for consumption.
In short, Mill’s notion was that savings must necessarily
mean a storing up of more food, clothing, etc., which,
after all, is not stored, but is handed over to others
to consume. He fails to perceive that a person who
saves from the social as opposed to the individual
point of view necessarily produces something which
neither he nor any one else consumes at once —
steam engines, pieces of leather, shop goods. A “ saving "
which is merely a transfer of spending from A to B is
obviously no saving from the point of view of the com-


296 THE EVOLUTION OF

munity to which both A and B belong. If A* who is said
to save, pays wages to B, who makes a machine which
would otherwise not have been made, when this machine is
made something is saved, not before.

Though Mill does not seem, in Bk. L chap, v., to regard
increased plant, machinery, etc., as “ savings,” but rather as
something for which “savings” may be exchanged, 1 the
more usual economic view of “ savings ” embodies part of
them in plant and raw material, etc., and considers the
working up of these into finished goods as a “ consumption.”
But though industrial usage speaks of cotton yam, etc.,
being consumed when it is worked up, the same language is
not held regarding machinery, nor would any business man
admit that his “ capital ” was consumed by the wear and
tear of machinery, and was periodically replaced by
“ saving.” The wearing away of particular material embodi-
ments of capital is automatically repaired by a process
which is not saving in the industrial or the economic
sense. No manufacturer regards the expenditure on main-
tenance of existing plant as “ saving what he puts into
additional plant alone does he reckon “ savings.” It would
be well for economists to clearly recognise that this busi-
ness aspect of capital and saving is also the consistent
scientific aspect. “Saving” will then be seen to apply
exclusively to such increased production of plant and
productive goods as will afterwards yield an increased crop
of consumptive goods, provided the community is willing to
consume them. “ Saving ” is postponed consumption —
the production of “future goods,” plant, machinery, raw
materials in their several stages, instead of commodities
suitable for immediate consumption.

§ 9. There are, in fact, two distinct motives which
induce individuals to continue to produce, one is the
desire to consume, the other the desire to save — to
postpone consumption. It is true that the latter may be
said also to involve a desire to consume the results of the
savings at some indefinitely future time, but the motive of
their production at present is a desire to reduce the quantity
of the present consumption of the community, and to
increase the quantity of postponed consumption.


1 Chap. ▼. § 5.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


297


It is this consideration which gives the answer to the
single sentence of J. S. Mill, which has been sometimes
held to offer a complete refutation of the notion of an
existing state of over-supply. “The error is in not per-
ceiving that, though all who have an equivalent to give
might be fully provided with every conceivable article which
they desire, the fact that they go on adding to the produc-
tion proves that this is not actually the case .” 1 Here the
present desire to consume either what is produced or its
equivalent is assumed to be the only motive which can lead
an individual to produce. The fact that people go on pro-
ducing is regarded as proof that they are not “fully provided
with every conceivable article they desire.” If this were
true it 'would be a final and conclusive refutation of the
idea of over-supply. But if saving means postponed con-
sumption, and the desire to save, as well as the desire to
consume, is a vera causa in production, then the fact of
continued production affords no proof that such production
must be required to supply articles which are desired for
consumption. Ultimately a belief that some one will
consent to consume what is produced underlies the con-
tinued production of “a saving person,” but, as we shall
see presently, the belief of a competing producer that he
can get a market for his goods, even when justified by
events, is no guarantee against excessive production in the
whole trade.

If, then, those who have the power to consume in the
present desire to postpone their consumption they will
refuse to demand consumptive goods, and will instead
bring into existence an excess of productive goods.

§ 10. The diagram on next page may serve more clearly
to indicate the quantitative maladjustment of Consuming
and Saving which constitutes under-consumption, and
exhibits itself in a plethora of machinery and productive
goods.

A, B, C, D, E represent the several stages through which
the raw material obtained from Nature passes on its way to
the position of a consumer’s utility. The five stages re-
present the five leading processes in production — the
extractive process, transport, manufacture, wholesale and


1 Bk. III., chap. dv. $ 3*


THB EVOLUTION OF


298

retail trade. The raw materials extracted at A, the wheat,
skins, iron, timber, cotton, etc., obtained from various
quarters of the globe, are gathered together in large quan-
tities into places where they undergo various transformations
of shape and character; they are then distributed by
wholesale and retail merchants, who hand them over to
persons who consume them as bread, boots, kettles,
chairs, shirts. The extractive, transport, manufacturings
and merchant stages may of course be subdivided into many


MECHANISM OF PRODUCTION.


complex processes, as applied to the history of the more
elaborately-produced commodities. But at each point in
the process of production there must stand a quantity of
plant and machinery designed to assist in moving the
productive goods a single step further on the road towards
consumption. This fixed capital is denoted by the black
circles placed at the points k, B, C,'D, E. But each
machine, or factory building, or warehouse is itself the
ultimate, product of a series of steps which constitute a
process similar to that denoted by the main chann el of


MODERN CAPITALISM.


299


production. Consisting in raw material extracted from
nature, the machinery and plant are built up by a number of
productive stages, which correspond to A, B, C, D, E, into
the completed shapes of fixed capital, adjusted to the
positions where they can give the proper impulse to the
main tide of production. Each productive stage in the
production of plant or machinery requires the presence of
other plant and machinery to assist its progress. Each of
these secondary forms of fixed capital situate at a , b t c, d f *,
has of course a similar history of its own. To represent the
full complexity of the mechanism of industry thus suggested
would be confusing and would serve no purpose here. It is
sufficient that we recognise that at each point A, B, C, 3>, E,
and at each of the points a , r, d, e, upon the perpen-
dicular lines, stands a quantity of forms of fixed capital
which are gradually worn out in the work of forwarding
quantities of A to B, and quantities of B to C, and so on.
Now if we turn to the point F, where goods pass out of the
productive machine into the hands of consumers, who
destroy them by extracting their “utility or convenience/’
we shall find in this flow of goods out of the industrial
machine the motive-force and regulator of the activity of the
whole machine.

Let us take an illustration from a single trade, the
shoe trade. The number of boots and shoes purchased
by consumers at retail shops and drawn out from the
mechanism at the point F, determines the rate at which
retailers demand and withdraw shoes from wholesale
merchants, assuming for the sake of simplicity that all shop-
keepers deal with manufacturers through . the medium of
merchant middlemen. If the number of sales effected in a
given time by retailers increases, they increase their demand
from the merchants,, if it falls off they lower their demand
The quantity of goods which retailers will in normal con-
ditions keep in stock will be regulated by the demand of
consumers. 1 Thus the flow of shoes from D to E, and the

1 The stock of a small retailer will not, however, in all eases vary
proportionately with the aggregate sales of all classes of goods. A
small shopkeeper, to retain his custom and credit, is often required to
keep a small stock of a large variety of goods not often in request. If
he sells them rather more quickly, he does not necessaal? :inVMMJti»lug
stock in hand at any particular time.


300 , the evolution oe

quantity of shoes which at any given time are at the point
E, are determined by the demand of consumers — that is to
say, by the quantity or pace of consumption. If, owing to
miscalculation, a larger number of shoes stands in the retail
shops than is required to satisfy current consumption, or if
the flow from D to E is faster than the outflow from E,
this excess ranks as an over-supply of these forms of capital
Now just as the demand of consumers determines the
number of shoes which stand at E and flow from D to E, so
the demand of the retailer determines the number of shoes
which at any time constitutes the stock of the merchants at
D, and the size and number of the orders they give to the
manufacturers at C. Similarly with the earlier processes of
production; the flow of leather from the “tanners” and
the quantity of leather kept in stock are likewise de-
termined by the demand of the manufacturers; and the
transport of hides and bark, and the demand for these
materials of tanning, will be regulated by the demands of the
tanners. So the quantity of stock at each of the points
A, B, C, D, E, and the rate of their progress from one point
to the next, are dependent in each case upon the quantity
demanded at the next stage. Hence it follows that the
quantity of productive goods at any time in stock at each of
the points in the production of shoes, and the quantity
of productive work done and employment given/ at each
point, are determined by the amount of consumption of
shoes. If we knew the number of purchases of shoes
made in any community by consumers in a given time,
and also knew the condition of the industrial arts ,at
the different points of production, we should be able to
ascertain exactly how much stock and how much auxiliary
capital was required at each point in the production
of shoe*. At any given time the flow of consumption
indicated by F determines the quantity of stock and
plant of every kind economically required at each point
A, B, Q D, E. What applies to the shoe trade applies
to trade hi general. Given the rate or quantity of consump-
tion in the community, it is possible to determine exactly
the quantity of stock and plant required under existing in-
dustrial conditions to maintain this outflow of consumptive
goods, and any stock or plant in excess of this amount
figures as waste forms of capital or over-supply. F then is


MODERN CAPITALISM,


301

the quantitative regulator of A, B, C, D, E. 1 Nor is the
accuracy of this statement impaired by the speculative
character of modem trade. Speculative merchants or
manufacturers may set up business at D or C and provide
themselves with stock and machinery to start with, but
unless they meet or create a growing demand of consumers
their capital is waste, or else if they succeed in getting
trade it is at the expense of other members of the trade,
and their capital is made productive by negativing the
capital of other traders.

§ 11. The truth here insisted on, that an exact quantitative
relation exists between the amount of stock and plants
severally and collectively, required at the different points
A, B, C, D, E, and that the amount economically serviceable
at each point is determined by the quantity of current con-
sumption, would seem self-evident. But though this has
never been explicitly denied, the important results follow-
ing from its recognition have been obscured and be-
fogged by several conceptions and phrases relating to
capital which have found acceptance among English
economists.

Chief and foremost among these errors is the framing
of a definition of capital so as to exclude the clear separation
of productive goods and machinery, the economic means,
from consumptive goods, the economic end. So long as a
definition of capital is taken which includes any con-
sumptive goods whatsoever, two results follow. One is a
hopeless confusion in the commercial mind, for in commerce
everything is capital which forms the stock or plant of a
commercial firm, and nothing is capital which does not
form part of such stock or plant. Secondly, to include
under capital the food in the possession of productive

1 It likewise determines the quantity of plant and stock at a, c t d down
each of the perpendicular lines, for the demand at each of these points
in the production of plant and machinery is derived from the require-
ments at the points A, B, C, D, E. The flow of goods therefore up these
channels, though slower in its movement (since in the main channel
only goods flow, while fixed capital is subject to the slower “wear
and tear”), is equally determined by and derived from the consump-
tion at F. The whole motive-power of the mechanism is generated
at F, and the flow of money paid over the retail counter as it passes
in a reverse current from F towards A, supplies the necessary stimulus
at each point, driving the goods another stage in their journey.


302


THE EVOLUTION O*


labourers or any other consumptive goods is an abandon-
ment of the idea of consumption as the economic end and a
substitution of production.

If we follow Bohm-Bawerk and the Austrian economists
in definitely refusing to include the consumptive goods of
labourers as capital , 1 we get a conception of capital which
is at once in accordance with the universal conception of
commercial men, and which enables us to realise the vital
relation between capital and consumption. We now see
Capital in the form of stock and plant at each point in the
industrial machine deriving its use and value from its con-
tribution to the end, Consumption, and dependent for its
quantity upon the quantity of Consumption. We have
seen that a demand for commodities is the true and exact
determinant of the quantity of capital at each industrial
stage: It is therefore the determinant of the aggregate of
wealth which can function as useful forms of capital in
the industrial community at any given time. The aggregate
of plant and stock which constitute the material forms of
capital at the points A, B, C, D, E must in a properly adjusted
state of industry have an exact quantitative relation to the
consumption indicated by F. If F increases, the quantity of
forms of capital at A, B, C, D, E may severally and collectively
increase ; if F declines, the useful forms of capital at each
point are diminished. Since we have seen that the sole
object of saving from the social point of view is to place
new forms of capital at one of the points A, B, C, D, E, it is
evident that the amount of useful saving is limited by the
rate of consumption, or financially, by the amount of “ spend-
ing.” Where there is an improvement in the general pro-
ductive power of a community, only a certain proportion
of that increased power can be economically applied to
“saving” — /.<?., to the increase of forms of capital; a due
proportion must go to increased spending and a general
rise in consumption.

§ i a. This will hardly be disputed, except by those who
still follow Mill in maintaining that the whole of the current
production could be “saved,” with the exception of what
was required to support the efficiency of labour, a doctrine

1 B8hm-Bawerk, Positive Thtoty of Capital, p. See Appendix
I. for conflict of opinion among English economists. Cossa stigmatises
the inclusion of labourers' consumptive-goods under capital as one of

those well-known tangles of misconception which have proverbially
-fHicted English economists.” (Intro, to Political Economy, p. 360.)


MODERN CAPITALISM.


303


to which even he could only give passing plausibility by
admitting that the increased savings which resulted from an
attempt to do this would take the shape of luxuries con-
sumed by the said labourers — that is to say, would not be
“savings” at all, but a transfer of “spending” from one
class to another . 1 If capital be confined to commercial
capital, and “ saving ” to the establishment of the forms of
such capital, no one will deny that the quantity of “ saving”
which can be effectually done by a community at any time
depends upon the current rate of consumption, or that any
temporary increase of such saving must be justified by a
corresponding future increase in the proportion of spending . 2

This will be generally admitted. But there are those
who will still object that production just as much limits
and determines consumption as consumption does produc-
tion, and who appear to hold that any increase in present
saving, and the consequent increase of amount of plant and
stock, have an economic power to force a corresponding rise
of future consumption which shall justify the saving. This
they urge in the teeth of the fact that in a normal state
of industry in machine-using countries there exists more
machinery and more labour than can find employment, and
that only for a brief time in each decennial period can the
whole productive power of modern machinery be fully used,
notwithstanding the increasing blood-letting to which super-
fluous saving is exposed by the machinations of bogus
companies, in which the “saving” done by the dupes is
balanced by the “ spending ” of the sharps. Ignoring the
fact that the alleged power of increased saving to stimulate
increased consumption is not operative, they still maintain
that there cannot be too much “saving,” because the
tendency of modern industry is to make production more
and more “ roundabout ” in its methods, and thus to pro-
vide scope for an ever-increasing quantity of forms of
capital.

Under modem machinery we see a constant increase in

1 Principles of Political Economy , Bk. I., chap v. § 3; sec also
Bk. III., chap. xiv. f 3.

* It should be noted that an increased amount of consumption in the
future does not necessarily compensate for a disturbance of the current
balance of saving and spending, for an increased proportion of future
income will have to be spent in order to compensate.


THE EVOLUTION OF


304

the number of direct and subordinate processes connected
with the forwarding of any class of commodities to its com-
pletion. A larger proportion of the productive labour and
capital is employed, not upon the direct horizontal line, but
upon the perpendicular lines which represent the making of
subsidiary machinery. More and more saving may be
stored up in the shape of machines to make machines, and
machines to make these machines, and thus the period at
which the “ saving ” shall fructify in consumption may be
indefinitely extended.

Some of the labour stored and the capital established in
the construction of harbours, the drainage of land, the
construction of scientific instruments, and other works of
durable nature and indirect service, may not be represented
in consumptive goods for centuries. Admitting this, it may
be urged, can any limits be set to present “saving” and
its storage in forms of capital, provided those forms be
selected with a due regard to a sufficiently distant future ?
The answer is that only under two conditions could an
indefinitely large amount of present “.saving ” be justified.
The first condition is that an unlimited proportion of this
“saving” can be stored in forms which are practically
imperishable; the second condition is that our present
foresight shall enable us to forecast the methods of produc-
tion and consumption which shall prevail in the distant
future. In fact neither of these conditions exists. How-
ever much present “ saving ” we stored in the most enduring
forms of capital with which we are acquainted — e.g, in the
permanent way of railroads, in docks, in drainage and
improvement of land, a large proportion of this “saving”
would be wasted if the consumption it was destined to
subserve was postponed for long . 1 Neither can we predict
with any assurance that the whole value of such “ savings ”

1 It mast be borne in mind that many articles of utility and enjoy-
ment mast in their final processes be produced for immediate consump-
tion. The “ saying ” of perishable goods is confined to a saving of
the. more enduring forms of machinery engaged in their production,
or in some few cases to a storing up of the raw material.- So like-
wise that large portion of productive work termed “ personal ser-
vices” cannot be antedated. These limits to the possibility of
“saving” are important. No amount of present sacrifice in the
interest of the next generation could enable them to live a life of
luxurious idleness.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 305

will not have disappeared before a generation has elapsed
by reason of changes in industrial methods.

The amount of present “ saving ” which is justified from
the point of view of the community is strictly limited We
cannot forecast the demand of our twentieth generation of
descendants, ot the industrial methods which will then
prevail; we do not even know whether there will be a
twentieth generation; there are certain large inevitable
wastes in postponed consumption by reason of the perish-
ability of all material forms of wealth, or the abstraction
of them by others than those for whose use they were
intended Moreover, we do not believe it would be good
for our descendants to have the enjoyment of excessive
wealth without a corresponding personal effort of producing,
nor would it be good for us to exert effort without some
proximate and corresponding enjoyment. The limits of
individual life rightly demand that a large proportion of
individual effort shall fructify in the individual life.

Thus there are practical limits set upon the quantity of
“ saving ” which can be usefully effected by extending the
interval between effort and enjoyment. If the right period
be exceeded the risk and waste is too great The analogy of
gardening adduced by Ruskin is a sound one . 1 By due care
and the sacrifice of bud after bud the gardener may increase
the length of the stem and the size of the flower that may be
produced He may be said to be able to do this inde-
finitely, but if he is wise he knows that the increased risks of
such extension, not to mention the sacrifice of earlier units of
satisfaction, impose a reasonable limit upon the procrastina-
tion. The proportion of “saving” which may be and is
applied to establish late-fructifying forms of wealth, differs
not only with the different developments of the industrial
arts, but with the foresight and moral character of the race
and generation. As our species of civilisation advances,
and the demand for complex luxuries and the arts of
supplying them advance, a laiger amount of “round-
about” production becomes possible, and as regard for
the future generations advances, more capital will be put
into forms which fructify for them. But at the present in
any given community there is a rational and a necessary


1 Raskin, Unto tku last, p. 145.


THE EVOLUTION OF


306

limit to the quantity of “ saving ” which can be applied to
such purposes.

Secondly, we find that in fact the surplus “ saving ” over
and 'above what is needed to provide the necessary forms of
capital, to assist in satisfying current consumption is not
absorbed -in making provision for distant future consump-
tion by more “ roundabout methods.” Much of it goes
into a mere increase of the number of existing forms of
capital whose raison d'etre lies in the satisfaction of present
or immediately future wants. The multiplication of cotton-
spinning-mills, of paper-mills, of breweries, ironworks, has
gone on far faster than the growth of current consumption.
This increase of productive machinery has not in fact been
able to force such an increase of consumption as gives
adequate employment to these new forms of machinery and
to the labour which is at hand to work them.

§ 13. It is not therefore correct to say that the rate of
production determines the rate of consumption just as much
as the rate of consumption determines the rate of produc-
tion. The current productive power of capital and labour
places a maximum limit upon current consumption, but an
increase of productive power exercises no sufficient force
to bring about a corresponding rise in consumption. Just
as in a particular trade — e.g., the Lancashire cotton trade,
an excess of “ saving ” may be applied to the establishment
of mills and machinery which cannot be kept working
because there is no market for their output, so it is with
trade in general. It is not true that the inflation of capital
in the Lancashire trade is due to a misdirection which implies
a lack “of capital in some other branch of industry. In a
period of depression every other important branch of
industry displays the same symptoms of excessive plant,
over-supply of stock, irregular and deficient employment of
labour, though not to the . same extent. Nor is there any
a priori reason why there should not be from time to time
such general maladjustment.

It is universally admitted that from ignorance or mis-
calculation too much new capital often flows into certain
industries or groups of industry, and too little into others;
some are congested, others starved All economists allow
that temporary over-production in certain fields of industry
is thus caused, other fields being insufficiently fertilised with
capital. This maldistribution of capital among the several
occupations, they will likewise admit, involves a net waste


MODERN CAPITALISM.


307


of. productive power: it is bad economy of production.
But if this waste from misdirection in the application of
capital at a given time is admitted as a natural occurrence,
why is it unreasonable to expect that a general misdirection
of capital, not as between one set of industries and another,
but as between one period of time and another, may occur?
In other words, is it unreasonable to expect that the saving
and investing classes as a whole may be deceived as to the
amount of new capital that can be economically absorbed
by the industrial organism during a given period ? Thus
deceived, may they not be led from time to time to en-
deavour to put a larger amount of new capital into effective
operation than is needed, in the actual condition of industry,
to provide for the increased rate of consumption which will
take place in the future ? The same imperfect knowledge,
the same short-sight which cause a local misdirection will
also cause a temporary misdirection of capital: errors will
arise as to the total quantity of saving that is economically
desirable at a particular time.

The quantitative relations actually subsisting between the
aggregate of “spending” and of “saving” do not rest upon
any such basis of direct and accurately measured self-interest
as will serve to keep a constant just balance, calling forth
at each time exactly that amount of saving economically
required to forward die progress of industry and provide for
the actual needs of further consumption.

On the contrary, while it is the interest of every “saver”
to put his savings into the most remunerative investment
he can find, and he normally exerts some conscious effort
in finding it, the question how large a proportion of his
income he shall -save does not in many cases form a subject
of serious consideration. If every one saved with a keen
eye to the rate of interest he was to get, increasing his
saving when interest rose, decreasing it when Interest feH,
there would be a fairly effective economic check upon such
over-saving and consequent over-production as we perceive
takes place. But in fact a great deal of the “saving” is an
automatic process by which surplus elements of income,
over what is needed to maintain a customary class standard
of consumption, save themselves. Much of the saving of
the wealthy classes is of this nature. Even with regard to
the saving of the less wealthy, much of it is done without
regard to the rate of interest, and some sorts of saving.


THE EVOLUTION OF


308

where the object is to secure a future income of a given size,
are actually stimulated by a fall of interest.

Thus there exists no automatic check upon the propor-
tion of saving to spending, so far as the general income is
concerned. In certain conditions of distribution, where
the automatic self-accumulation of the surplus incomes
of the rich play a large part in the aggregate of saving,
it is reasonable to expect the frequent recurrence of
a tendency to congest industry with excessive capital
For consideration of the industrial organism shows that
maladjustment in the relation of “saving” to “ spending "
can only lean one way. There cannot be too little saving
to furnish current consumption, taking the industrial com-
munity as a whole, for it is impossible to increase the rate
of consumption, F, faster than the increase of the rate of
current production : any increase of the purchase of shop-
goods by raising prices and circulating more money down
the paths of production stimulates and strains the sinews
of production, and if the existing machinery of produc-
tion is inadequate it supplies a motive-power to increase
“saving.” In no case can a community consume faster
than it produces. An individual can do so by living on
his capital, a nation may do so for a time by living upon
its capital, giving to other nations by means of an increased
debt a lien upon its future wealth. But a whole industrial
community can never live upon its capital, can never in the
literal sense of the term “ spend too much.” This state-
ment requires a single qualification. While a community
can never by " spending ” deplete its capital, while it can-
not increase its “spending” without at the same time
increasing its real capital , 1 it will doubtless be profitable
to a progressive community to reduce its consumption for
a while below the normal proportion in order to fully utilise
new discoveries in the industrial arts which shall justify in
the future increased consumption.

With this necessary qualification it is true that a com-
munity cannot exceed in the direction of spending. But
the balance may lean the other way. A community may
“save too much,” that is to say, it ma> establish a larger

1 This does' not necessarily imply a stimulation of new saving. A
fuller vitality given to existing forms of capital will raise the quantity of
real capital as measured in money. Mills and machinery which have
no present or future use, though they embody saving, have no value
md 4o not increase real coital


MODERN CAPITALISM.


309


quantity of productive machinery and goods than is
required to maintain current or prospective consumption.
What is to prevent a community -consisting of a vast
number of individuals with no close knowledge of one
another's actions, desires, and intentions, making such a
miscalculation as will lead them to place at each of the
points A, B, C, D, E, and in all or most branches of
industry, a larger quantity of forms of capital than are
required ?

It is said that the harmony which subsists between the
social interest and the self-interest of individuals will
prevent this, or, in other words, that individuals would find
that if they attempted unduly to increase the aggregate of
capital beyond what was socially advantageous in view of
the community's consumption, it would not pay them to do
so. Is this true?

An individual working entirely for himself whose capital
lay in his tools and his raw or unfinished commodities,
would never increase the latter unduly. A socialist com-
munity properly managed would never add to its stock
of machinery or increase the quantity of its raw materials
or unfinished goods, so as to leave any machines unused
or half used, or any goods unnecessarily occupying ware-
house room and deteriorating in quality. But when com-
petition of individual interests comes in there is no such
security.

It may pay individuals to build new factories and put in
new machinery where it would not pay the community to
do so, were it the sole owner of the means of production.

The knowledge that enough capital is already invested in
an industry to fully supply all current demands at profitable
prices has no power to deter the investment of fresh capital,
provided the new investors have reason to believe their
capital can be made to displace some existing capital owned
by others. If the new-comer can, by superior business
address, by successful advertising, by “sweating” his em-
ployees or otherwise, get hold of a portion of the business
hitherto in the hands of other firms, it will pay him to
build new factories and stock them with the requisite
machinery, and to begin the process of manufacture. There
may be in existence already more bicycle works than are
sufficient to supply the consumption of the community.


THE EVOLUTION OF


310

But if a would-be manufacturer thinks he can withdraw from
other makers a sufficient number of customers, he will set
up works, and make new machines, though his methods of
production and the goods he turns out may be no better
than those of other makers. The same holds at every stage
of production. \n wholesale or retail distribution the fact
that there are sufficient warehouses and shops in existence
adequately to supply the current demand does not prevent
any one from embarking new savings in more warehouses or
shops, provided he believes he is able to divert into his own
firm a sufficient amount of the business formerly held by
others. In a district two grocers’ shops may be quite
sufficient to supply the needs of the neighbourhood, and to
secure adequate competition. But if a third man, by an
attractive shop-front or superior skill in the labelling or
adulteration of his wares, can procure for himself an ade-
quate share of the custom, it will pay him to put the requisite
plant and stock into a shop, though the trade on the one
hand and the community on the other are no gamers by
his action.

There is indeed much evidence to show that it may be
to the advantage of individuals to increase the machinery of
production, even though there is no reasonable prospect of
this machinery being worked at a profit It is the unanimous
testimony of business men that the Lancashire trade has
been congested with mills and machinery in this way. As
a result of an excessive desire to postpone consumption
there are considerable sums of money which cannot find a
safe remunerative investment Here is the material for the
company promoter. By means of the specious falsehoods
of prospectuses he draws this money together; with him
work a builder and an architect who desire the contract of
putting up the factory; the various firms interested in manu-
facturing and supplying the machinery, the boilermaker and
fitters of various kinds, the firm of solicitors whose services
are requisite to place the concern upon a sound legal foot-
ing, or to establish confidence, take up shares. It is to the
interest of all these and many other classes of persons to
bring into the field of production new forms of capital,
quite independently of the question whether the condition
of a trade or the consumption of the community has any
need for them.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


311

Sr 14 * These operations, which imply a conflict between
the interests of individuals and those of the community,
pervade all modem commerce, but are more prevalent in
businesses where complex machinery plays a prominent
part, or where specious advertising gives the outsider a
larger chance of successful entry.

In each and all of these cases it is to the interest of the
individual to place new “ savings ” in new forms of capital
in branches of industry where sufficient capital already exists
to assist in supplying the current demand for consumptive
goods. So far is it from being true that the self-interest of
individuate provides an economic check upon over-supply,
that it is possible that at each of the points of production,
A, B, C, D, E, and in all or the majority of industries at the
same time, there should be an excess of forms of capital as
compared with that which would suffice for the output, F.
The automatic growth of bubble companies and every
species of rash or fraudulent investment at times of depressed
trade is proof that every legitimate occupation for capital
is closed, and that the current rate of saving is beyond that
which is industrially sound and requisite. These bubble
companies are simply tumours upon the industrial body
attesting the sluggish and unwholesome circulation; they
are the morbid endeavours of “saving” which is socially
unnecessary, and ought never to have taken place, to
find investments. When one of these “ bubble” companies
collapses it is tacitly assumed by unthinking people that
those who invested their money in it were foolish persons
who might have sought and found some better investment
Yet a little investigation would have shown that at the
time this company arose no opportunity of safe remunera-
tive investment open to the outside public existed, every
sound form of business being already fully supplied with
capital

At first sight it might appear that Consols and first-class
railway and other stocks were open, and that the folly of
the investors in bogus companies consisted in not preferring
a safe 2)4 per cent to a risky 5 or 10 per cent But this
argument is once more a return to the unsound individual-
istic view. It was doubtless open to any individual investor
of new savings to purchase sound securities at 2)4 per cent.,
but, since the aggregate of such soundly-placed capital


THE EVOLUTION OF


312

would not be increased, this would simply mean the dis-
placement of an equal quantity of some one else’s capital
A could not buy Consols unless B sold, therefore the com-
munity to which A and B belong could not invest any fresh
savings in Consols. Any widespread attempt on the part of
those who plunged into bogus companies to try first-class
investments would obviously have only had the effect of
further reducing the real interest of these investments far
below 2# per cent The same effect would obviously,
follow any effective legal interference with company-pro-
moting of this order. The fact that Consols and other
first-class investments do not rise greatly at such times is,
however, evidence that the promoters of unsound enter-
prises succeed in persuading individual investors that their
chance of success is not less than 2^ per cent. In many
instances the investor may be acting wisely in preferring a
smaller chance of much higher profits, because a secure 2
per cent may be quite inadequate to his needs. For it
must be borne in mind that a knowledge that the new bank
or new building society is unnecessary, because enough
banks and building societies already exist, does not make it
impossible or necessarily improbable that the new venture
will succeed.

The objection, then, which takes the form that over-
saving cannot exist, because the worst investments made
with open eyes must be productive of more than that which
could be obtained by investing in Consols, is not a valid one.
It would only be valid on the supposition that capital were
absolutely fluid, that the quantity of soundly-placed invest-
ments were indefinitely expansible, and that new forms of
capital had in no case the power to oust or negative the use
of old forms of capital But this we have seen is not the
case. If there existed absolute fluidity of competition in all
forms of capital, the fact that interest for new investments
stood above zero would be a proof that thereVas not excess
of forms of capital. Capital appears to "have this fluidity
when it is regarded from the abstract financial point of
view. A man who has u saved ” appears to hold his
“savings” in the form of bank credit, or other money which
he is able to invest in any way he chooses. But, as we have
seen, the real “savings,” which represent his productive
effort plus his abstinence, are of necessity embodied in


MODERN CAPITALISM.


3X3


some material forms, and are therefore devoid of that
fluidity which appears to attach to them when reflected in
bank money.

§ 15. The evils of trade depression, or excessive growth
of the forms of capital beyond the limits imposed by con-
sumption, are traced in large measure directly, but also
indirectly, to the free play of individual interests in the
development of machine-production. The essential irregu-
larities of invention, the fluctuations of public taste, the
artificial restrictions of markets, all enable individual capi-
talists to gain at the public expense. The added interests
of its individual members do not make the interest of the
community. All these modes of conflict between the indi-
vidual and the public interest derive force from the com-
plexity of modem capitalist production.

In fastening upon the uncontrolled growth of machinery
the chief responsibility for that depression of trade which is
derived from an attempt to devote too large a proportion of
the productive power of the community to forms of “saving,”
two points should be clearly understood

In the first place, it is the forms of capital and not real
capital which are produced in excess. If there are 500
spinning-mills in Lancashire where 300 would suffice, the
destruction of 200 mills would no whit diminish the amount
of real capital. If 200 mills were burnt down, though the
individual owners would sustain a loss, that loss, estimated
in money, would be compensated by a money rise in the
value of the other mills. The quantity of real capital in
cotton-spinning is dependent upon the demand for the use
of such fprms of capital — that is to say, upon the consump-
tion of cotton goods. If 300 mills are sufficient to do the
work of supplying yam to meet the demand of all manufac-
turers, the value of 500 mills is no greater than of 300;
assuming that the 500 mills equally distributed the trade,
it would simply mean that the real capital was thinly spread
over 500 mills, which could only work a little over half-time
without producing a glut of goods, instead of being con-
centrated upon 300 mills fully occupied.

Turning once more to the diagram,


b c d e


< /(consumption),


3*4


THE EVOLUTION OF


/(the current rate of consumption) determines the quantity
of real productive power of capital that can be effectively
employed at each point, a, b 9 c> d, e. The condition of the
arts of industry, including the rates of wages and other
conditions of the labour market, determines how many
forms of capital (mills, warehouses, ironworks, raw material,
etc.) at any given time are socially requisite to embody
this capital But though f has an economic power to force
into existence the requisite minimum of these forms of
capital, it has no power to prevent the pressure of indi-
vidual interests from exceeding that minimum and planting
at a, c, d f t more forms of capital than are required.

Secondly, over-production or a general glut is only an
external phase or symptom of the real malady. The disease
is under-consumption or over-saving. These two imply one
another. The real income of a community in any given
year is divisible into two parts, that which is produced and
consumed, that which is produced and not consumed — Lc*,
is saved. Any disturbance in the due economic proportion
of these two parts means an excess of the one and a defect
of the other. All under-consumption therefore implies a
correspondent over-saving. This over-saving is embodied
in an excess of machinery and goods over the quantity
economically required to assist in maintaining current
consumption It must, however, be remembered that this
over-saving is not measured by the quantity of new mills,
machinery, etc, put into industry. When the mechanism
of industry is once thoroughly congested, over-saving may
still continue, but will be represented by a progressive
under-use of existing forms of capital, that unemployment
of forms of capital and labour which makes trade depression.

An increased quantity of saving is requisite to pro*
vide for an expected increase of consumption arising
from a growth of population or from any other cause. Such
increased saving is of course not over-saving. The propor-
tion, a s well as the absolute amount of the community^
income which is saved, may at any time be legitimately
increased, provided that at some not distant time an
increased proportion of the then current income be con-
sumed. If in a progressive community the proportion of
‘saving” to consumption, in order to maintain the current
itandard of living with the economic minimum of “forms ”


MODERN CAPITALISM.


315

of capital, be as 2 to 10, the proportion of saving in any
given year may be raised to 3 to 9, in order to provide for a
future condition in which saving shall fall to 1 to x 1. Such
increased “saving” will not be over-saving; the forms of
capital in which it is embodied will not compete with
previously existing forms so as to bring down market prices.
The efforts which take the form of permanent improvements
of the soil, the erection of fine buildings, docks, railways,
etc., for future use, may provide the opportunity to a com-
munity of increasing the proportion of its savings for a
number of years. But such savings must be followed by
an increased future consumption without a correspondent
saving attached to it The notion that we can indefinitely
continue to increase the proportion of our savings to our
consumption, bounded only by the limit of actual neces-
saries of life, is an illusion which places production in the
position of the human goal instead of consumption.

§ 16. Machinery has intensified the malady of under-con-
sumption or over-saving, because it has increased the oppor-
tunities of conflict between the interests of individuals and
those of the community. With the quickening of competi-
tion in machine industries the opportunities to individuals
of making good their new “ savings ” by cancelling the old
“ savings 99 of others continually grow in number, and as an
ever larger proportion of the total industry falls under the
dominion of machinery, more and more of this dislocation
is likely to arise; the struggles of weaker firms with old
machinery to hold their own, the efforts of improved
machinery to find a market for its expanded product,
will continue to produce gluts more frequently, and the
subsequent checks to productive activity, the collapse of
businesses, the sudden displacement of large masses of
labour, in a word, all the symptoms of the malady of
“ depression ” will appear with increased virulence.

It must be clearly recognised that the trouble is due to
a genuine clash of individual interests in a competitive
industrial society, where the frequent, large, and quite incal-
culable effects of improved machinery and methods of
production give now to this, now to that group of com-
petitors a temporary advantage in the struggle. It was
formerly believed that this bracing competition, this free
dash of individual interests, was able to strike out harmony,


316 the evolution or modern capitalism.

that the steady and intelligent pursuit by each of his own
separate interest formed a sure basis of industrial order and
induced the most effective and serviceable disposition of.
the productive powers of a community.

It now appears that this is not the case, and that the
failure cannot in the main be attributed to an imperfect
understanding by individuals of the means by which their
several interests may be best subserved, but is due to the
power vested in individuals or groups of individuals to
secure for themselves advantages arising from improved
methods of production without regard for the vested in-
terests of other individuals or of society as a whole.


3X7


CHAPTER XII.

MACHINERY AND DEMAND TOE LABOUR.

§ i. The Influence of Machinery upon the number of
Employed^ dependent on “elasticity of demand.”

§ 2. Measurement of direct effects on Employment in Staple
Manufacturers .

§ 3. Fallacy of the Separatist Measure of Employment
§ 4. Influence of Introduction of Machinery upon Regularity
of Employment

§ 5. Effects of u Unorganised” Machine-industry upon Regu-
larity.

§ 6. Different Ways in which modem Industry causes Un-
employment

§ 7. Summary of General Conclusions .

^ 1. In discussing the direct influences of machinery upon
the economic position of the labourer we must distinguish its
effects upon (1) the number of workers employed; (2) the
regularity of employment; (3) the skill, duration, intensity,
and other qualities of labour; (4) the renumeration of
labour. Though these influences are closely related in
complex interaction, it is convenient to give a separate
consideration to each.

(1) Effects of Machinery upon the number of Employed . —
The motive which induces capitalist employers to introduce
into an industry machinery which shall either save labour
by doing work which labour did before, or assist labour by
making it more efficient, is a desire to reduce the expenses
of production. A new machine either displaces an old
machine, or it undertake* a process of industry formerly
done by hand labour without machinery.

In the former case it has been calculated that the
expenses incurred in making, maintaining, and working the
new machines so as to produce a given output will be less


THE EVOLUTION OF


3x8

than the corresponding expenses involved in the use of the
old machines. Assuming that the labour of making and
working the new machines is paid at no lower rate than the
labour it displaces, and that the same proportion of the
price of each machine went as wages and as profits, it must
follow that the reduction of expenses achieved signifies a
net displacement of labour for a given quantity of pro-
duction. Since the skilled labour of making new machines
is likely to be paid higher than that of . making more old
machines, and the proportion of the price which goes as
profit upon a new invention will be higher than in the case
of an old one , 1 the actual displacement of labour will
commonly be larger than is represented by the difference in
money price of the two machines. Moreover, since in the
case of an old manufacturing firm the cost of discarding a
certain amount of existing machinery must be reckoned in
the substitution of new machinery for old will generally
mean a considerable displacement of labour.

Similarly, when a new process is first taken over by
machinery the expenses of making and working the machines,
as compared with the expenses of turning out a given pro-
duct by hand labour, will, other things being equal, involve
a net diminution of employment. The fact that the new
machinery is introduced is a proof that there is a net
diminution of employment as regards a given output ; for
otherwise no economy would be effected.

What then is meant by the statement so generally made,
that machinery gives more employment than it takes away
—that its wider and ultimate effect is not to diminish the
demand for labour?

The usual answer is that the economy effected by labour,
saving machinery in the expenses of production will,
through competition of producers, be reflected in a lower
scale of prices, and this fall of prices will stimulate con-

1 Against this we may set the possibility of a fall in the rate of
terest at which manufacturers may be able to borrow capital in order
' set up improved machinery. Where an economy can be effected in
is direction, the displacement of labour due to the introduction of
machinery may not be so large — it will pay a manufacturer to
introduce a new machine which only ** saves” a small amount of
money, if he can effect the change at a cheap rate of borrowing. (C£
Marshall, Principles of Economics, and edit, pp. 569, 570.)


MODERH CAPITALISM.


319


sumption. Thus, it is urged, the output must be greatly
increased. When we add together the labour spent in
producing the machinery to assist the enlarged production,
the labour spent in maintaining and working the same, and
the labour of conveying and distributing the enlarged pro-
duction, it will be found that at least as much labour is
required under the new as under the old conditions of
industry. So runs the familiar argument.

The following is a fair example of the argument which
has passed current, drawn from the pages of a competent
economic writer: —

“The first introduction of machinery may indeed dis-
place and diminish for a while the employment of labour,
may perchance take labour out of the hands of persons
otherwise not able to take another employment, and create
the need for another class of labourers altogether; but if it
has taken labour from ten persons, it has provided labour
for a thousand. How does it work? A yard of calico
made by hand costs two shillings, made by machinery it
may cost fourpence. At two shillings a yard few buy it ;
at fourpence a yard multitudes are glad to avail themselves
of it Cheapness promotes consumption ; the article which
hitherto was used by the higher classes only is now to be
seen in the hand of the labouring classes as well. As the
demand increases, so production increases, and to such an
extent that, although the number of labourers now employed
in the production of calico may be immensely less in
proportion to a given quantity of calico, the total number
required for the millions of yards now used greatly exceeds
the number engaged when the whole work was performed
without any aid of machinery .” 1

Now, turning from the consideration of the particular
instance, which we shall find reason to believe is peculiarly
unfortunate when we deal with the statistics of the cotton
Industry, it must be observed that economic theory makes
dead against this £ priori optimism. Ignoring for the
sake of convenience, the not improbable result that an
economy of production may, at any rate for a time,
swell profits instead of reducing prices, it will be evi-
dent that the whole value of the argument turns upon


1 Leone Leri* Work and Pay, p. *&


320


THE EVOLUTION OF


the effect of a fall of price in stimulating increased
consumption. Now the problem, how far a given fall in
price will force increased consumption, we have found in our
discussion of monopoly prices to involve extremely intricate
knowledge of the special circumstances of each case,
and refined calculations of human motives. Everything
depends upon “elasticity of demand,” and we are certainly
not justified in assuming that in a particular industry a
given fall of prices due to machine-production will stimu-
late so large an increase of consumption that employment
will be given to as many, or more persons than were
formerly employed. On the contrary, if we apply a
similarly graduated fall of prices to two different classes of
goods, we shall observe a widely different effect in the
stimulation of consumption. A reduction of fifty per cent,
in the price of one class of manufactured goods may treble
or quadruple the consumption, while the same reduction in
another class may increase the consumption by only twenty
per cent In the former case it is probable that the
ultimate effect of the .machinery which has produced the
fall in expenses of production and in prices will be a
considerable increase in the aggregate demand for labour,
while in the latter case there will be a net displacement. It is
therefore impossible to argue a priori that the ultimate effect
of a particular introduction of machinery must be an increased
demand for labour, and that the labour displaced by the
machinery will be directly or indirectly absorbed in forwarding
the increased production caused by machinery. It is alleged
that the use of steam-hammers has displaced nine of the
ten men formerly required, that with modern machinery one
man can make as many bottles as six men made formerly,
that in the boot and shoe trade one man can do the work
five used to do, that “in the manufacture of agricultural
implements 600 men now do the work which fifteen or
twenty years ago required 2145, thus displacing 1515,”
and so forth. 1 Now in some of these cases we shall find
that the fall of prices following such displacements has led
to so large an increase of demand that more persons are

1 Statement by Mr. Shaftoe, President of the Trades Union Con-
gress, 1888; cf. Carroll D. Wright, Report en Industrial Depressions,
Washington, 1886, pp. 80-90.


MODERN CAPITALISM 321

directly engaged in these industries than before; in other
cases this is not the case.

The following quotation from a speech made at the In-
dustrial Remuneration Conference in 1885 will present the
most effective criticism upon Professor Leone Levi’s position :

“In carpet weaving fifty years ago the workman drove
the shuttle with the hand, and produced from forty-five to
fifty yards per week, for which he was paid from gd. to is.
per yard, while at the present day a girl attending a steam
loom can produce sixty yards a day, and does not cost her
employer 1 j£d. per yard for her labour. That girl with her
loom is now doing the work of eight men. The question
is. How are these men employed now? In a clothier’s
establishment, seeing a girl at work at a sewing machine, he
asked the employer how many men’s labour that machine
saved him. He said it saved him twelve men’s labour.
Then he asked, ‘What would those twelve men be doing
now?’ ‘Oh,’ he said, ‘they will be much better employed
than if they had been with me, perhaps at some new
industry.’ He asked, ‘What new industry?’ But the
employer could not point out any except photography; at
last he said they would probably have found employment in
making sewing machines. Shortly afterwards he was asked
to visit the American Singer Sewing Machine Factory, near
Glasgow. He got this clothier to accompany him, and
when going over the works they came upon the very same
kind of machines as the clothier had in his establishment
Then he put the question to the manager, ‘ How long would
it take a man to make one of these machines ? ’ He said
he could not tell, as no man made a machine; they had a
more expeditious way of doing it than that — there would be
upwards of thirty men employed in the making of one
machine ; but he said ‘if they were to make this particular
kind of machine, they would turn out one for every four
and a half days’ work of each man in their employment.’
Now,- there was a machine that with a girl had done the
work of twelve men for nearly ten years, and the owner of
that machine was under the impression that these twelve
men would be employed in making another machine, while
four and a half days of each of these men was sufficient to
make another machine that was capable of displacing other
twelve men.”


ex


322 THE EVOLUTION OF

In cases like the above we must, of course, bear in mind
that a diminution of employment in the several manu-
facturing processes directly and indirectly engaged in for-
warding an industry, is not of itself conclusive evidence
that the machinery has brought about a net displacement of
labour. If the output is increased the employment in the
extractive, the transport, and the various distributing pro-
cesses may compensate the reduction in making goods and
machinery.

§ 2. The industrial history of a country like England can
furnish no sufficient data for a conclusive general judgment
of the case. The enormous expansion of production in-
duced by the application of machinery in certain branches
of textile industry during the first half of this century indis-
putably led to an increased demand for English labour in
trades directly or indirectly connected with textile produc-
tion. But, in the first place, this cannot be regarded as a
normal result of a fall of prices due to textile machinery,
but is largely attributable to an expansion in the area of
consumption — the acquisition of vast new markets — in
which greater efficiency and cheapness of transport played
the most considerable part. Secondly, assuming that the
more pressing needs of the vast body of consumers are
already satisfied by machine-made textile goods, we are not
at liberty to conjecture that any further cheapening of
goods, owing to improved machinery, will have a corre-
spondent effect on consumption and the demand for labour.
If England had been a self-contained country, manufactur-
ing only for her own market, the result of machinery applied
to textile industries would without doubt have been a con-
siderable net displacement of textile labour, making every
allowance for growth of population and increased home
consumption. The expansion of English production under
the rapid development of machinery in the nineteenth cen-
tury cannot therefore be taken as a right measure of the
normal effects of the application of machinery.

Neither in economic theory nor in industrial practice is
there any justification for the belief that the net result of
improved machinery is a maintenance or an increase of
employment within the particular trade, or even within the
group of the interdependent trades engaged in producing or
supplying a class of commodities. Still less support is there


MODERN CAPITALISM.


323


for this belief as applied to the trade of a particular locality
or national area. While the Introduction of new labour-
saving machinery in type-setting and printing has been
followed by so large an expansion of business as to employ
increased numbers of workers, recent improvements in most
British textile mills, cotton, woollen, hemp, etc., have been
followed by an absolute reduction of employment.

The following figures 1 exhibiting the relative growth in
the consumption of raw cotton in Great Britain and the
number of persons employed in cotton manufacture from
1854 to 1891 affords a general indication of the influence
of improved machinery and methods of production upon
quantity of employment: —


Consumption of Raw Cotton.
Million Cwts.


Persons employed in
Cotton and Lace Trades
(Including Dealers).


1854 ...

... ... 6.9 ...

... 627,819

1861 ...

... ... 9 *® ...

... 660,231

1871 ...

... ... 10.8 ...

... 647,633

1881 ...

... ... 12.9 ...

... 664,279

1891 ...

... ... 14*9 ...

... 682,075


The same economy of labour, though less marked, is
evidenced in the statistics of the relative growth of the con-
sumption of iron in the United Kingdom and the number
of persons employed in iron and steel trades.


Estimated Consumption of Pig Iron. Persons employed in Iron

Million Tons. and Steel Trades.


1854 ...

2.8

... 110,408 (Census 1850)

1861

3-3

149,366

1871

56 ...

223,448

1881

6.7

241,346

1891

6.6

245,847


Even if we take account of the industries subsidiary to
such particular manufactures and the transport and dis-
tributive employment of handling the larger quantities of
cheapened goods, we cannot conclude that the net effect of
certain improved machinery will not be a reduction in the
quantity of employment.

The statistics of employment given in Chapter XVI. point
to the conclusion that the further a nation advances in the

* Cd. 1761, p. 367*


3*4


THE EVOLUTION OF


application of labour-saving machinery to the production of
those goods which satisfy the primary needs of the popula-
tion, the smaller the proportion of the total employed class
engaged in these productive processes. The best available
statistics in various countries indicate that the proportion of
employment afforded by the staple manufactures as a whole
diminishes after modern machine methods are well estab-
lished, and that the tendency is strongest in those manu-
factures engaged in supplying ordinary classes of textile,
metal, and other goods in the home markets.

§ 3. In order to judge the net effect of labour-saving
machinery upon the volume of employment a wider view is
necessary. If the first effect is to cheapen goods, we need
not look to the expansion of demand for this class of goods
to absorb the labour which it is the object of the introduction
of the machine to displace. We must look to the expansion
of demand for other sorts of goods due to the application
of the elements of income saved by the fall of prides in this
first class of goods. If cotton goods are cheaper owing to
improved methods of production, the chief result may be
the increased demand for foods, other clothing, furniture,
etc., due to the expenditure of a smaller proportion of the
general income upon cotton goods.

A clear grasp of the interdependency of markets, through
the law by which incomes are spent in securing the greatest
aggregate utility of consumption-goods, exposes the fal-
laciousness of seeking to test the general effects of
machinery upon employment by the separatist method.

This wider outlook enables us to conclude that though
the effect of machinery may sometimes be a reduction of
employment in a special trade or group of trades, the
general result must be to maintain the same aggregate
volume of employment as before, provided that the income
liberated from a particular demand is applied to other
Remands for commodities. If a class of British consumers
has been spending 10 per cent of its income upon articles
of food, or of clothing, and improved methods of produc-
tion or of transport reduces the price of these goods by half,
the saved 5 per cent, of this class income, expended upon
other sorts of commodities, will afford as much employ-
ment for labour as has been saved in the food or clothing
trades.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


325


If, as may be objected, there is a simultaneous tendency
to reduce the prices of most articles of ordinary consump-
tion by applying machine methods of production and
transport, the normal result would be to stimulate new
wants, and so to create new channels of production yielding
employment to displaced labour. That this is in fact the
normal operation of economic forces in the world of
industry, where this normal operation is not impeded by
over-saving, no one can seriously doubt.

If the improvements of machine-methods were regular,
gradual, and continuous in the several industries, no con-
siderable effect in reducing the volume of employment
would occur: the young labour ripening for the labour
market would flow into the industries which were increasing
their employment, and the decline of employment in other
industries would be met by the normal mortality of the
workers engaged in them, or by the slow transfer to other
related trades.

But where industrial improvements are sudden, irregular,
and incalculable, this natural adjustment is not possible.
It is this irregular action of machine-development which
has proved so injurious to large bodies of labourers whose
employment is subjected to a sudden and large shrinkage.
From time to time great numbers of- skilled workers find
the value of their personal skill cancelled, and are driven
either to acquire a new skill or to compete in the unskilled
labour market for a lower livelihood.

Where by a rigorous system of protection a trade is
virtually restricted to the home tnarket, these dislocations
are larger, more frequent, and more injurious than where
freedom of commerce affords more elasticity of foreign
trade. This is a chief reason why, during recent waves of
general industrial depression moving over the industrial
world, the amount of unemployment has been greater in
high-tariff nations, such as France, Germany, and the United
States, than in Great Britain . 1

This irregularity in machine-development, involving large
temporary displacements of labour at certain times, is of
course no inconsiderable factor in the problem of un-


1 Gf. Memorandum on British and Foreign Trade, Cd. 2337
(Second Series, Board of Trade).


3^6


THE EVOLUTION OF


employment, though subsidiary to the main cause as
defined in Chapter XI.

In an industrial society where the state of distribution of
income was such that every saving in the general ex-
penditure upon a particular commodity, due to improved
machinery or other economy, automatically stimulated an
increased expenditure upon other commodities, the brisk
condition of general trade thus generated would quickly
and easily absorb the labour displaced in the individual
trade in question. If British trade remained normally in
the condition of the year 1900 (as it might if the artificial
stimulus then temporarily operative were replaced by a
normal natural stimulus) no complaint of the influence
of machinery in diminishing employment would be
heard.

§ 4. Under actual conditions of industry, however, the
disturbing influence of machine-economy upon regularity, as
distinct from volume, of employment is very considerable.
We have so little means of measuring the irregularity of
employment before the industrial revolution that it is not
possible to judge whether former leakages were as large as
those in recent times: the waste due to sudden new
methods of production was certainly less, but the limita-
tions of and interferences with markets may have caused a
net amount of waste quite as injurious to trade.

When agriculture was relatively so much more important
a branch of industry- than now, and manufactures were
more dependent upon local supplies of raw materials,
climatic and other natural disturbances must have occa-.
sioned great irregularity of employment.

Two points, however, are raised by Professor Nicholson
which deserve consideration. He finds two laws or
tendencies which operate to reduce the disturbing in-
fluence of machinery. He holds (1) that a radical change
made in the methods of production will be gradually and
continuously adopted ; (2) that these radical changes —
these discontinuous leaps — tend to give place to advances
by small increments of invention. 1

History certainly shows that the fuller application of
great inventions has been slow, though Professor Nicholson

1 J. S. Nicholson, Efftcts §f Machinery m Wagu % p. 33.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


3*7


somewhat over-estimates the mobility of labour and its
ability to provide against impending changes. The story of
the introduction of the power-loom discloses terrible suffer-
ings among the hand-weavers of certain districts, in spite of
the gradual manner in which the change was effected. The
fact that along with the growth of the power-loom the
number of hand-looms was long maintained, is evidence of
the immobility of the hand-weavers, who kept up an irregular
and ill-paid work through ignorance and incapacity to adapt
themselves to changed circumstances . 1 • In most of the
cases where great distress has been caused, the directly
operative influence has not been introduction of machinery,
but sudden change of fashion. This was the case with the
crinoline-hoop makers of Yorkshire, the straw-plaiters of
Bedfordshire, Bucks, Herts, and Essex . 2 The suddenly-
executed freaks of protective tariffs seem likely to be a
fruitful source of disturbance. So far as the displacement
has been due to new applications of machinery, it is no
doubt generally correct to say that sufficient warning is
given to enable workers to check the further flow of labour
into such industries, and to divert it into other industries
which are growing in accordance with the new methods
of production, though much suffering is inflicted upon the
labour which is already-specialised in the older method of
industry.

Moreover, the changes which are taking place in certain
machine industries favour the increasing adaptability of
labour. Marly machine processes are either common to
many industries, or are so narrowly distinguished that a
fairly intelligent workman accustomed to one can soon
learn another. If it is true that “the general ability, which
is easily transferable from one trade to another, is every year
rising in importance relatively to that manual skill and
technical knowledge which are specialised in one branch of
industry ,” 2 we have a progressive force which tends to
minimise the amount of unemployment due to new applica-
tions of specific machinery.

Professor Nicholson’s second law is, however, more specu-

1 Babbage, Economy of Manufactures* p. 230.

1 Cf. Thorold Rogers, Political Economy (1869), pp. 78* 79*

* Marshall, Principles of Economics * p. 607 ; cf. Cunningham, Uses
and Abuses of Money* p. £9. See. however, infra Chap. ix.


THE EVOLUTION OF


328

lative and less reliable in its action. It seems to imply some
absolute limit to the number of great inventions, Radical
changes are no doubt generally followed by smaller incre-
ments of invention; but we can have no guarantee that
new radical changes quite as important as the earlier ones
may not occur in the future. There are no assignable limits
to the progress of mechanical invention, or to the rate at
which that progress may be effected. If certain preliminary
difficulties in the general application of electricity as a
motor can be overcome, there is every reason to believe
that, with the improved means of rapidly communicating
knowledge we possess, our factory system may be reorganised
and labour displaced far more rapidly than in the case of
steam, and at a rate which might greatly exceed the capacity
of labour to adjust itself to the new industrial conditions.
At any rate we are not at liberty to take for granted that
the mobility of labour must always keep pace with the
application of new and labour-disturbing inventions. Since
we are not able to assume that the market will be extended
pari passu with the betterment in methods of production, it
is evident that improvements in machinery must be reckoned
as a normal cause of insecurity of employment. The loss of
employment may be only “ temporary,” but as the life of a
working man is also temporary, such loss may as a disturb-
ing factor in the working life have a considerable importance.

§ 5. {&) Whether machinery, apart from the changes due to
its introduction, favours regularity or irregularity of employ-
ment, is a question to which a tolerably definite answer can
be given. The structure of the individual factory, with its
ever-growing quantity of expensive machinery, would seem
at first sight to furnish a direct guarantee of regular employ-
ment, based upon the self-interest of the capitalist. Some
of the tc sweating ” trades of London are said to be main-
tained by the economy which can be effected by employers
who use no expensive plant or machinery, and who are
able readily to increase or diminish the number of their
employees so as to keep pace with the demands of some
“season” trade, such as fur-pulling or artificial flowers.
When the employer has charge of enormous quantities of
fixed capital, his individual interest is strongly in favour of
full and regular employment of labour. On this account,
then, machinery would seem to favour regularity of employ-


MODERN CAPITALISM.


329

ment. On the other hand. Professor Nicholson has ample
evidence in support of his statement that “ great fluctua-
tions in price occur in those commodities which require for
their production a large proportion of fixed capital ' These
fluctuations in prices are accompanied by corresponding
fluctuations in wages and irregularity of employment ” 1 In
a word, while it is the interest of each producer of
machine-made goods to give regular employment, some
wider industrial force compels him to irregularity. What
is this force? It is uncontrolled machinery. In the
several units of machine-production, the individual fac-
tories or mills, we have admirable order and accurate
adjustment of parts ; in the aggregate of machine-production
we have no organisation, but a chaos of haphazard specula-
tion. " Industry has not yet adapted itself to the changes
in the environment produced by machinery.” That is alL

Under a monetary system of commerce, though commo-
dities still exchange for commodities, it is an essential con-
dition of that exchange that those who possess purchasing
power shall be willing to use a sufficient proportion of it to
demand consumptive goods. Otherwise the production of
productive goods is stimulated unduly while the demand
for consumptive goods is checked, — the condition which
the business man rightly regards as over-supply of the
material forms of capital. When production was slower,
markets 2 narrower, credit less developed, there was less
danger of this big miscalculation, and the corrective forces
of industry were more speedily effective. But modem
machinery has enormously expanded the size of markets,
the scale of competition, the complexity of demand, and
production is no longer for a small, local, present demand,
but for a large, world, future demand. Hence machinery is
the direct material cause of these great fluctuations which
bring, as their most evil consequence, irregularity of wages
and employment.

1 Effects of Machinery on Wages t p. 66.

3 An increase in the space-area of a market may, however, in some
cases make a trade more steady, especially in the case of an article
of luxury subject to local fluctuations of fashion, etc. A narrow silk
market for England meant fluctuating employment and low skill. An
open market gave improved skill and stability, for though silk is still
the most unsteady of the textile industries, it is far less fluctuating than
was the case in the eighteenth century. IQL Porter, p. 225.)


330


THE EVOLUTION OF


How far does this tend to right itself? Professor
Nicholson believes that time will compel a better adjust-
ment between machinery and its environment

“ The enormous development of steam communication
and the spread of the telegraph over the whole globe have
caused modem industry to develop from a gigantic star-fish,
any of whose members might be destroyed without affecting
the rest, into a fieya £5 ov which is convulsed in agony by a
slight injury in one part A depression of trade is now
felt as keenly in America and even in our colonies as it is
here. Still, in the process of time, with the increase of
organisation and decrease of unsound speculation, this
extension of the market must lead to greater stability of
prices ; but at present the disturbing forces often outweigh
altogether the supposed principal elements.” 1

The organisation of capital under the pressure of these
forces is doubtless proceeding, and such organisation, when
it has proceeded far enough, will indisputably lead to a
decrease of unsound speculation. But these steps in
organisation have been taken precisely in those industries
which employ large quantities of fixed capital, and the
admitted fact that severe fluctuations still take place in
these industries is proof that the steadying influences of
such organisation have not yet had time to assert them-
selves to much purpose. The competition of larger and
larger masses of organised capital seems to induce heavier
speculation and larger fluctuations. Not until a whole
species of capital is organised into some form or degree of
“combination” is the steadying influence of organisation
able to predominate.

§ 6. But there is also another force which, in England at
any rate, under the increased application of machinery, makes
for an increase rather than a diminution of speculative
production. It has been seen that the proportion of
workers engaged in producing comforts and luxuries is
growing, while the proportion of those producing the prime
necessaries of life is declining. How far the operation of
the law of diminishing returns will allow this tendency to
proceed we cannot here discuss. But statistics show that
this is the present tendency both in England and in the
United States. Now the demand for comforts and luxuries

1 tit. % p. U9.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


331


is essentially more irregular and less amenable to com-
mercial calculation than the demand for necessaries. The
greatest economies of machine-production are found in
industries where the demand is largest, steadiest, and most
calculable. -Hence the effect of machinery is to drive ever
and ever larger numbers of workers from the less to the
more unsteady employments. Moreover, there is a marked
tendency for the demand for luxuries to become more
irregular and less amenable to calculation, and a corre-
sponding irregularity is imposed upon the trades engaged
in producing them. Twenty years ago it "was possible for
Coventry ribbon-weavers to “make to stock” during the
winter months, for though silk ribbons may always be
classed as a luxury, certain patterns commanded a toler-
ably steady sale year after year. Now the fluctuations of
fashion are much sharper and more frequent, and a far
larger proportion of the consumers of ribbons are affected
by fashion-changes. Hence it has become more and more
difficult to forecast the market, less and less is made to
stock, more and more to order, and orders are given at
shorter and shorter notice.„ So looms and weavers kept
idle during a large part of the year are driven into fevered
activity of manufacture for short irregular periods. The
same applies to many other season and fashion trades.
The irregularity of demand prevents these trades from
reaping the full advantages of the economies of machinery,
though the partial application of machinery and power
facilitates the execution of orders at short notice. Hence
the increased proportion of the community's income spent
on luxuries requires an increased proportion of the labour
of the community to be expended in their production.
This signifies a drifting of labour from the more steady
forms of employment to those which are less steady and
whose unsteadiness is constantly increasing. A larger pro-
portion of town workers is constantly passing into trades
connected with preparing and preserving animal and vege-
table substances, to such industries as the hat and bonnet,
confectionery, bookbinding, trades affected by weather, holi-
day and season trades, or those in which changes in taste
and fashion are largely operative.

Thus it appears there are three modes in which modem
capitalist methods of production cause temporary unemploy-


33*


THE EVOLUTION OF


meat (i) Continual increments of labour-saving machinery
displace a number of workers, compelling them to remain
wholly or partially unemployed, until they have “ adjusted ”
themselves to the new economic conditions. ( 2 ) Mis-
calculation and temporary over - production, to which
machine industries with a wide unstable market are parti-
cularly prone, bring about periodic deep depressions of
"trade,” temporarily throwing out of work large bodies of
skilled and unskilled labour. ( 3 ) Economies of machine-
production in the staple industries drive an increasing
proportion of labour with trades which are engaged in
supplying commodities, the demand for which is more
irregular, and in which therefore the fluctuations in demand
for labour must be greater. N

Most economists, still deeply imbued with a belief in the
admirable order and economy of "the play of economic
forces,” appear to regard all unemployment not assignable
to individual vice or incapacity as the natural and necessary
effect of the process of adjustment by which industrial pro-
gress is achieved, ignoring altogether the two latter classes of
consideration. There is, however, reason to believe that in
an average year a far larger number of the "unemployed”
at any given time owe their unemployment to a temporary
depression of the trade in which they are engaged, than to
the fluctuations brought about by organic changes in the
economic structure of the trade.

The size and importance of the “unemployment” due
primarily to trade depressions is very imperfectly appreci-
ated. The following statistics 1 set forth the fluctuations of
the last twenty years: a. in the general body of skilled
trades; 3. in a relatively unstable group of trades: —


Year.

Percentage
for all

Percentage for
Engineering, Ship-
building, & Metals.

Year.

Percentage
for all

Percentage for
Engineering, Ship-
building, & Metals.

Trade Unions.


Trade Unions.

1884

• 7.15 •


10.8

1894

. 7.70 .

. 1 1.2

1885

. 8.55 .


12. 9

18 95

.6.05 .

. 8.2

1886

• 9-55 •


13-5

I896

• 3*50 .

. 4.2

1887

. 7.15 •


10.4

1897

• 3-65 •

• 4.8

1888

• 4 * I S •


6.0

I898

• 3-15 •

• 4*0

1889

• 2 »n 5 •


2-3

1899

. 2.40 .

« 2.4

1890

. 2.10 .


2.2

1900

. 2.85 .

• 2.6

1891

. 3.4O .


4-1

1901

, 3.80 .

. 3*8

1892

. 6.20 .


7.7

1902

. 4.60 .

• 5*5

1893

• 7-70 .


II.4

1903

. 5 * 3 ° •

. 6.6


1 Statistical Tables, Cd. 3,337 (1904).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


333

When it is remembered that these figures apply only
to the well-organised trades unions, which, as a rule, com-
prise .the best and most highly - skilled workers in the
several trades, who are less likely than others to be thrown
out in a “ slack time,” that the building and season trades
are not included in the estimate, and that women’s industries,
notoriously more irregular than men’s, are altogether ignored,
it will be evident that these statistics very inadequately re-
present the proportion of unemployment for the aggregate
of the working classes at the several periods. The Report
on Principal and Minor Textile Trades deducts io per cent
from the normal wages to represent unemployment, though
the year 1885, to which the figures refer, is spoken of as
“fairly representative of a normal year.” 1

The injury inflicted upon the wages, working efficiency,
and character of the working classes by irregular employ-
ment is, however, very inadequately represented by figures
indicating the average of “unemployment” during along
period. In the first place, in such an estimate no allow-
ance is made for the “short time,” often worked for
months together by large bodies of operatives. Secondly,
in measuring the evil of “unemployment,” we must look
rather to the maximum than to the mean condition. If a
man is liable to have his food supply cut off for a month at
a time, no estimate showing that on the average he has
more than enough to eat and drink will fairly represent the
danger to which he is exposed. If once in every ten years
we find that some 10 per cent, of the skilled workers, and
a far larger percentage of unskilled workers, are out of
employment for months together, these figures measure
the economic malady of “unemployment,” which is in
no sense compensated by the full or excessive labour of
periods of better trade.

§ 7. Our reasoning from the ascertained tendencies of
machine-production points to the conclusion that, having
regard to the two prime constituents in demand for labour,
the number of those employed, and the regularity of employ-
ment, machinery does not, under present conditions, gener-
ally favour an increased steady demand for labour. It tends
to drive an increased proportion of labour in three directions.

(1) To the invention, construction, and maintenance of
1 Page xii.


334 THE evolution of modern capitalism.


machinery to make machines, the labour of machine-
making being continually displaced by machines, and being
thus driven to the production of machines more remote
from the machines directly engaged in producing con-
sumptive goods. The labour thus engaged must be in an
ever-diminishing proportion to a given quantity of consump-
tion. Nothing but a great increase in the quantity of con-
sumption, or the opening of new varieties of consumption,
can maintain or increase the demand for labour in these
machine-making industries.

(2} To continual specialisation, subdivision, and refine-
ment in the arts of distribution. The multiplication of
merchants, agents, retailers, which, in spite of forces mak-
ing for centralisation in distributive work, is so marked a
feature in the English industry of the last forty years, is
a natural result of the influence of machinery, in setting
free from “making” processes an increased proportion of
labour.

{3) To the supply of new forms of wealth, which are either
(a) wholly non-material — /.<?., intellectual, artistic, or other
personal services; (b) partly non-material — e.g., works of
art or skill, whose value consists chiefly in the embodiment
of individual taste or spontaneous energy, or (c) too
irregular or not sufficiently extended in demand to admit
the application of machinery. The learned professions, art,
science, and literature, and those branches of labour engaged
in producing luxuries and luxurious services furnish a con-
stantly increasing employment, though the supply of labour
is so notoriously in excess of the demand in all such
employments that a large percentage of unemployment is
chronic.

So long then as a community grows in numbers, so long
as individuals desire to satisfy more fully their present wants
and continue to develop new wants, forming a higher or
more intricate standard of consumption, there is no evi-
dence to justify the conclusion that machinery has the
effect of causing a net diminution in demand for labour,
though it tends to diminish the proportion of employment
in the “manufacturing” industries; but there is strong reason
to believe that it tends to make employment more unstable,
more precarious of tenure, and more fluctuating in maritei

VlkSG.


33 $


CHAPTER XIII.

MACHINERY AND THE QUALITY OF LABOUR.

§ i. Kinds of Labour which Machinery supersedes.

§ 2. Influence of Machine-evolution upon intensity of physical
work.

§ 3. Machinery and the length of the working day .

3 4* The Education of Working with Machinery.

§ 5. The levelling tendency of Machinery — The subordination
of individual capacity in work.

§ 1. In considering the influence of Machinery upon the
quality of labour — i.e., skill, duration, intensity, intel-
lectuality, eta, we have first to face two questions — What
are the qualities in which machinery surpasses human
labour? What are the kinds of work in which machinery
displaces man ? Now, since the whole of industrial work
consists in moving matter, the advantage of machinery
must consist in the production and disposition of motive
power. The general economies of machinery were found
to be two 1 — (1) The increased quantity of motive force
it can apply to industry; (2) greater exactitude in the
regular application of motive force (a) in time — the exact
repetition of the same acts at regulated intervals, or greater
evenness in continuity, (b) in place —exact repetition
of the same movements in space. 2 All the advantages

1 Cf. supra y chap. iii. § 2.

8 Karl Marx ranks the chief economies of machinery under two
heads — (1) Machinery supersedes the skill of men working with tools.
“ The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial revolution,
supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, by a mechanism
operating with a number of similar tools, and set in motion by a
single motive power, whatever the form of that power may be.” (2)


33 ®


THE EVOLUTION OF


imputed to machinery in the economy of humari time, the
utilisation of waste material, the display of concentrated
force or the delicacy of manipulation, are derivable from
these two general economies. Hence it follows that wher-
ever the efficiency of labour power depends chiefly upon the
output of muscular force in motive power, or precision in
the regulation of muscular force, machinery will tend to
displace h uman labour. Assuming, therefore, that displaced
labour finds other employment, it will be transferred to work
where machinery has not the same advantage over human
labour — that is to say, to work where the muscular strain or
the need for regularity of movement is less. At first sight
it will thus seem to follow that every displacement of labour
by machinery will bring an elevation in the quality of labour,
that is, will increase the proportion of labour in employ-
ments which tax the muscles less and are less monotonous.
This is in the main the conclusion towards which Professor
Marshall inclines . 1

So far as each several industry is concerned, it has been
shown that the introduction of machinery signifies a net
reduction of employment, unless the development of trade
is largely extended by the fall of price due to the diminu-
tion in expenses of production. It cannot be assumed as a
matter of course that the labour displaced by the introduc-
tion of automatic folders in printing will be employed in less
automatic work connected with printing. It may be diverted
from muscular monotony in printing to the less muscular
monotony of providing some new species of luxury, the
demand for which is not yet sufficiently large or regular to
justify the application of labour-saving machinery. But
even assuming that the whole or a large part of the dis-
placed labour is engaged in work which is proved to have
been less muscular or less automatic by the fact that it is
not yet undertaken by machinery, it does not necessarily
follow that there is a diminution in the aggregate of physical
energy given out, or in the total “ monotony 99 of labour.

Machinery supersedes the strength of man. “ Increase in the size of
a m a chine , and. in the number of its working tools, calls for a more
massive mechanism to drive it ; and this mechanism requires, in order
to overcome its resistance, a mightier moving power than that of man. ”
{Cental* voL ii pp. 370, 371.)

1 Principles of Economics* and edit, pp, 314, 322.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


337

One direct result of the application of an increased pro-
portion of labour power to the kinds of work which are less
“muscular” and less “automatic” in character will be a
tendency towards greater division of labour and more
specialisation in these employments. Now the economic
advantages of increased specialisation can only be obtained
by increased automatic action. Thus the routine or auto-
matic character, which constituted the monotony of the
work in which machinery displaced these workers, will now
be imparted to the higher grades of labour in which they
are employed, and these in their turn will be advanced
towards a condition which will render them open to a new
invasion of machinery.

Since the number of productive processes falling under
machinery is thus continually increased, it will be seen that
we are not entitled to assume that every displacement of
labour by machinery will increase the proportion of labour
engaged in lighter and more interesting forms of non-
mechanical labour.

§ 2. Nor is it shown that the growth of machine-produc-
tion tends to diminish the total physical strain upon the
worker, though it greatly lessens the output of purely mus-
cular activity. As regards those workers who pass from
ordinary manual work to the tending of machinery, there
is a good deal of evidence to show that, in the typical
machine industries, their new work taxes their physical
vigour quite as severely as the old work Professor Shield
Nicholson quotes the following striking statement from the
Cotton Factory Times : — “ It is quite a common occurrence
to hear young men who are on the best side of thirty years
of age declare they are so worked up with the long mules,
coarse counts, quick speeds, and inferior material, that they
are fit for nothing at night, only going to bed and taking as
much rest as circumstances will allow. There are few
people who will credit such statements; nevertheless they
are true, and can be verified any day in the great majority
of the mills in the spinning districts.”

Schulze-Gaevemitz shows that the tendency in modem
cotton-spinning and weaving, especially in England, has
been both to increase the number of spindles and looms
which an operative is called upon to tend, and to increase
the speed of spinning. “ A worker tends to-day more than

22


THE EVOLUTION OF


33 *

twice or nearly three times as much machinery as his father
did; the number of machines in use has increased more
than five-fold since that time, while the workers have not
quite doubled their numbers.” 1 With regard to speed,
“since the beginning of the seventies the speed of the
spinning machines alone has increased about 15 per cent”*

We are not, however, at liberty to infer from Schulze-
Gaevernitz’s statement regarding the increased number of
spindles and looms an operative tends, that an intensifica-
tion of labour correspondent with this increase of machinery
has taken place, nor can the increased output per operative
be imputed chiefly to improved skill or energy of the
operative. Much of the labour-saving character of recent
improvements, especially in the carding, spinning, and inter-
mediate processes, has reduced to an automatic state work
which formerly taxed the energy of the operative, who has
thereby been enabled to tend more machinery and to quicken
the speed without a net increase of working energy.

In the carding, slubbing, intermediate, roving, and spin-
ning machinery there is in every case an increase in the
amount of machinery tended But carding machinery has
been revolutionised within the last few years ; the drawing
frame has been made to stop automatically when there is a
fault, thus relieving the tender of a certain amount of super-
vision; in the slubbing, intermediate, and roving frames
certain detailed improvements have been effected, as is also
the case in the spinning mules and sizing machines.

To some extent the increased quantity of spindles, etc.,
and increased speed may be regarded as set off by relief
due to these improvements. Moreover, though there has
no doubt been some general speeding up, any exact measure-
ment is hardly possible, for the speed of machinery is very
often regulated by the amount of work each process is made
to do; for example, if a roving frame makes a coarse
hank, the speed of the spindles does not require to be so
great as when the hank is finer; in that case the mule draws
out the sliver to a greater extent than when the roving is
finer, or, in other words, the mule in one case does the work
of the roving frame to a certain extent

The general opinion seems to be that in the spinning


1 Zkr Gmtbtfritbt p. 12a


1 IbUU % p. xi}*


MODERH CAPITALISM.


359


mills, roughly speaking, 75 per cent, of the increased out-
put per operative may be imputed to improved machinery,
35 per cent, to increased intensity of labour in regard to
quantity of spindles or “ speeding up.”

In the weaving processes more specific measurement is
possible, though even there much depends upon the quality
of yam that is used. Here a reduction in the working day
is followed by an increase in speed without any labour-
saving improvements. Previous to the Factory legislation
of 1878, the speed of looms was generally from 170 to 190
picks per minute during the ten hours’ day. In the course
of about two years after the reduction of hours (6 per cent.)
the general speed had become 190 to 200 picks, without
change in machinery or raw material, a growth which must
have proportionately increased the intensity of the work of
weaving. A deterioration in the quality of the raw material
used for producing cotton cloth is also commonly assigned
as a fact involving more care on the part of the weaver,
and increased danger and disagreeability of work owing
to the heavy sizing and steaming it has brought into
vogue. It is not easy to argue much respecting increased
intensity of labour from the increased average of looms
attended, for, as was recently admitted in evidence before
the Labour Commission, everything depends upon the class
of looms and of goods they are manufacturing. “ It is quite
as easy to drive five looms of some classes as two of others.” 1
But the prevalence of the “driving” system, by which the
overlookers are paid a bonus on the product of the looms
under their charge, has admittedly induced, as it was
obviously designed to do, an increased intensity of labour.

Summing up the evidence, we are able to conclude that
the shortening of working hours and the improvements in
machinery has been attended by an increased effort per
unit of labour time. In the words of an expert, “ the
change to those actually engaged in practical work is to
lessen the amount of hard manual work of one class, but
to increase their responsibility, owing to being placed in
charge of more machinery, and that of a more expensive
kind; while the work of the more lowly skilled will be
intensified, owing to increased production, and that from

1 Evidence given by Mr. T. Birtwietf*


340


THE EVOLUTION OF


an inferior raw Laaterial. I mean that to the operative the
improvements in machinery have been neutralised by the
inferior quality of raw material used, and I think it is fair
to assume that their work has been intensified at least in
proportion to the increase of spindles, etc.”

The direct evidence drawn from this most highly-evolved
machine industry seems to justify the. general opinion
expressed by Professor Nicholson, “It is clear that the
use of machines, though apparently labour-saving, often
leads to an increase in the quantity of labour , negatively,
by not developing the mind, positively by doing harm to
the body.” 1

§ 3. When any muscular or other physical effort is required
it is pretty evident that an increased duration or a greater
continuity in the slighter effort may tax the body quite as
severely as the less frequent or constant application of a
much greater bodily force. There can be no question but
that in a competitive industrial society there exists a tend-
ency to compensate for any saving of hard muscular, or
other physical effort afforded by the intervention of
machinery in two ways: first, by “forcing the pace” —
compelling the worker to attend more machines or to
work more rapidly, thus increasing the strain, if not upon
the muscles, then upon the nerves ; secondly, by extending
the hours of labour. A lighter form ©f labour spread over
an increased period of time, or an increased number of
minor muscular exertions substituted for a smaller number
of heavier exertions within the same period of time, may
of course amount to an increased tax upon the vital energy.
It is not disputed that a general result of the factory system
has been to increase the average length of the working day,
if we take under our survey the whole area of machine-
production in modem industrial communities. This is only
in part attributable to the fact that workers can be induced to
sell the same daily output of physical energy as before, while
in many cases a longer time is required for its expenditure.

1 Op. cit.y p, 82. Babbage, in laying stress on one of the “advantages”
of machinery, makes an ingenuous admission of this “ forcing ” power.
“ One of the most singular advantages we derive from machinery is the
check it affords against the inattention, the idleness, or the knavery of
human agents.” {Economy of Machinery , p. 39; cf. also Ure, Philo-
sophy of Manufacture p. 3a )


MODERN CAPITALISM,


341


Another influence of equal potency is the economy of
machinery effected by working longer hours. It is the
combined operation of these two forces that has lengthened
the average working day.^ Certain subsidiary influences,
however, also deserve notice, especially the introduction of
cheap illuminants. Before the cheap provision of gas, the
working time was generally limited by daylight Not until
the first decade of this century was gas introduced into
cotton-mills, and another generation elapsed before it
passed in general use in manufactories and retail shops . 1
Now a portion of nature’s rest has been annexed to the
working day. There are, of course, powerful social forces
making for a curtailment of the working day, and these
forces are in many industries powerfully though indirectly
aided by machinery. Perhaps it would be right to say that
machinery develops two antagonistic tendencies as regards
the length of the working day. Its most direct economic
influence favours an extension of the working hours, for
machinery untired, wasting power by idleness, favours con-
tinuous work. But when the growing pace and complexity
of highly-organised machinery taxes human energy with
increasing severity, and compresses an increased human
effort within a given time, a certain net advantage in limit-
ing the working day for an individual begins to emerge,
and it becomes increasingly advantageous to work the
machinery for shorter hours, or, where possible, to apply
“ shifts ” of workers . 2

But in the present stage of machine-development the
economy of the shorter working day is only obtainable in
a few trades and in a few countries; the general tendency is
still in the direction of an extended working day . 1 The
full significance of this is not confined to the fact that
a larger proportion of the worker’s time is consumed in
the growing monotony of production. The curtailment of
his time for consumption, and a consequent lessening of
the subjective value of his consumables, must be set off
against such increase in real wages or purchasing power as
may have come to him from the increased productive
power of machinery. The value of a shorter working day

1 Porter, Progrsss of tie Nation^ p. 590.

* CL Schulze-Gaevemitr, p. 115.

* For a fuller treatment of this subject, see the next chapter.


34 *


THE EVOLUTION OF


consists not merely in the diminution of the burden of toil
it brings, but also in the fact that increased consumption
time enables the worker to get a fuller use of his purchased
consumables, and to enjoy various kinds of ‘‘free wealth”
from which he was precluded under a longer working day. 1
So far as machinery has converted handicraftsmen in the
manufacturing arts into machine-tenders, it is extremely
doubtful whether it has lessened the strain upon their
energies, though we .should hesitate to give an explicit en-
dorsement to Mill’s somewhat rhetorical verdict “ It is
questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have
lessened the day’s toil of any human being.” But when
rude forms of unskilled or low skilled muscular labour are
taken over by machinery the benefit to labourers is indis-
putable: Steam-diggers, coal-cutting machines, grain and
coal elevators, and the use of most agricultural machines
assuredly “ lighten the day’s toil.” “As to the influence of
machinery on farm labour,” writes an American expert, 2
“all intelligent expert observation declares it beneficial.
It has relieved the labourer of much drudgery ; made his
work easier and his hours of service shorter ; stimulated his
mental faculties ; and made the labourer a more efficient
worker, a broader man, and a better citizen.”

But while this holds true where machinery is made a
servant of labour, this condition is not yet applicable to
most factory trades. At any rate we have as yet no security
that machinery, owned by individuals who do not them-
selves tend it, shall not be used in such a way as to increase
the physical strain of those who do tend it. “ There is a
temptation,” as Mr. Cunningham says, “to treat the^ machine
as the main element in production, and to make it the
measure of what a man ought to do, instead of regarding
the man as the first consideration, and the machine as the
instrument which helps him; the machine may be made
the primary consideration, and the man may be treated as a
mere slave who tends it”*

§ 4. Now to come to the question of “monotony.” Is the
net tendency of machinery to make labour more monoton-
ous or less* to educate the worker or to brutalise him?

1 Cf. Patten, The Theory of Dynamic Economics , chap. xi.

* J. R. Dodge, “American Farm Labour,” in Rept, of IncL Com
{1901), vbL x. 7, p. hi (quoted Quintance, p. 74).

* Use and Abuse §f Money, p. xxx*


MODERN CAPITALISM.


343


Does labour become more intellectual under the machine ?
Professor Marshall, who has thoughtfully discussed this
question, inclines in favour of machinery. It takes away
manual skill, but it substitutes higher or more intellectual
forms of skill . 1 “ The more delicate the machine’s power
the greater is the judgment and carefulness which is called
for from those who see after it ” 5 Since machinery is daily
becoming more and more delicate, it would follow that the
tending of machinery would become more and more
intellectual. The judgment of Mr. Cooke Taylor, in the
conclusion of his admirable work, The Modem Factory
System , is the same. “ If man were merely an intellectual
animal, even only a moral and intellectual one, it could
scarcely be denied, it seems to us, that the results of the
factory system have been thus far elevating.”* Mr. Taylor
indeed admits of the operative population that u they have
deteriorated artistically; but art is a matter of faculty, of
perception, of aptitude, rather than of intellect.” This
strange severance of Art from Intellect and Morals,
especially when we bear in mind that Life itself is the finest
and most valuable of Arts, will scarcely commend itself to
deeper students of economic movements. The fuller signifi-
cance of this admission will appear when the widest aspect
of the subject is discussed in our final chapter.

The question of the net intellectual effects of machinery
is not one which admits of positive answer. It would be
open to one to admit with Mr. Taylor that the operatives
were growing more intellectual, and that their contact with
machinery exercises certain educative influences, but to
deny that the direct results of machinery upon the workers
were favourable to a wide cultivation of intellectual powers,
as compared with various forms of freer and less specialised
manual labour. The intellectualisation of the town opera-
tives (assuming the process to be taking place) may be
attributable to the thousand and one other influences of
town life rather than to machinery, save indirectly so far
as the modern industrial centre is itself the creation of
machinery . 4 It is not, I think, possible at present to offer

1 Principles , p. 315. * IHd. % p. 316. * Page 435.

* A similar difficulty in distinguishing town influences from specific
trade influences confronted Dr. Arlidge in his investigation into
diseases of employments. “ It is a most difficult problem to solve,
especially in the case of an industrial town population, how far the
diseases met with are town-made and how far trade- made j the former
almost always predominates.” {Diseases ef Occupation , , p. 33.)


344


THE EVOLUTION OF


any clear or definite judgment. But the following dis«
tinctions seem to have some weight in forming our opinion.

The growth of machinery has acted as an enormous
stimulus to the study of natural laws. A larger and larger
proportion of human effort is absorbed in processes of in-
vention, in the manipulation of commerce on an increasing
scale of magnitude and complexity, and in such manage-
ment of machinery and men as requires and educates high
intellectual faculties of observation, judgment, and specula-
tive imagination. Of that portion of workers who may be
said, within limits, to control machinery, there could be no
question that the total effect of machinery has been highly
educative.

The growing size, power, speed, complexity of machinery,
undoubtedly makes the work of this class of workers “ more
intellectual.” Some measure of these educative influences
even extends to the “hand” who tends some minute
portion of the machinery, so far as the proper performance
of his task requires him to understand other processes than
those to which his labour is directly and exclusively applied.

So likewise consideration must be taken of the skilled
work of making and repairing machinery. The engineers 1
shop and other workshops are becoming every year a more
and more important factor in the equipment of a factory or
mill. But though “ breakdowns " are essentially erratic and
must always afford scope for ingenuity in their repair, even
in the engineers , shop there is the same tendency for
machinery to undertake all work of repair which can be
brought under routine. So the skilled work in making
and repairing machinery is continually being reduced to a
minimum, and cannot be regarded, as Professor Nicholson
is disposed to regard it, as a factor of growing import-
ance in connection with machine-production. The more
machinery is used, the more skilled work of making and
repairing will be required, it might seem. But the rapidity
rith which machinery is invading these very functions turns
tie scale in the opposite direction, at any rate so far as the
laking of machinery is concerned. Statistics relating to the
number of those engaged in making machinery and tools
show that the proportion they bear to the whole working
population is an increasing one ; but the rate of this increase
is by no means proportionate to the rate of increase in the
use of machinery. Moreover, an increased proportion of
machinery production is for export trade, so that a large


MODERN CAPITALISM.


345


quantity of the labour employed in those industries is not
required to sustain the supply of machinery used in English
work. In repairs of machinery, the economy effected by
the system of interchangeable parts is one of growing
magnitude, and tends likewise to minimis e the skilled
labour of repair , 1

Finally, it should be borne in mind that in several large
industries where machine^ fills a prominent place, the bulk
of the labour is not directly governed by the machine.
This fact has already received attention in relation to railway
workers. The character of the machine certainly impresses
itself upon these in different degrees, but in most cases
there is a large amount of detailed freedom of action and
scope for individual skill and activity.

Though the quality of intelligence and skill applied to
the invention, application, and management of machinery
is constantly increasing, practical authorities are almost
unanimous in admitting that the proportion which this
skilled work bears to the aggregate of labour in machine
industry is constantly diminishing. Now, setting on one
side this small proportion of intelligent labour, what axe
we to say of the labour of him who, under the minute
subdivision enforced by machinery, is obliged to spend
his working life in tending some small portion of a single
machine, the whole result of which is continually to push
some single commodity a single step along the journey
from raw material to consumptive goods ?

The factory is organised with military precision, the
individual’s work is definitely fixed for him ; he has nothing
to say as to the plan of his work or its final completion
or its ultimate use. “The constant employment on one
' sixty-fourth part of a shoe not only offers no encouragement
to mental activity, but dulls by its monotony the brains of
the employee to such an extent that the power to think and
reason is almost lost”*

The work of a machine-tender, it is urged, calls for
“judgment and carefulness.” So did his manual labour
before the machine took it over. His “judgment and
carefulness” are now confined within narrower limits

1 Cf. Marshall, Principles of Economics , voL L p. 315.

* D. A. Wells, Contemporary Review > 1889, p. 392.


THE EVOLUTION OF


346

than before. The responsibility of the worker is greater,
precisely because his work is narrowed down so as to be
related to and dependent on a number of other operatives
in other parts of the same machine with whom he has
no direct personal concern. Such realised responsibility
is an element in education, moral and intellectual. But
this gain is the direct result of the minute subdivision,
and must therefore be regarded as purchased by a narrow-
ing of interest and a growing monotony of work. It is
questionable whether the vast majority of machine workers
get any considerable education, from the fact that the
machine in conjunction with which they work represents
a huge embodiment of the delicate skill and invention of
many thousands of active minds, though some value may
be attached to the contention that “the mere exhibition
of the skill displayed and the magnitude of the operations
performed in factories can scarcely fail of some educa-
tional effect.” 1 * * * The absence of any true apprenticeship in
modern factories prevents the detailed worker from under-
standing the method and true bearing even of those pro-
cesses which are closely linked to that in which he is
engaged. The ordinary machine-tender, save in a very few
instances, ^.^watchmaking, has no general understanding
of the work of a whole department. Present conditions
do not enable the “ tender ” to get out of machinery the
educational influence he might get. Professor Nicholson
expresses himself dubiously upon the educational value of the
machine. “Machinery of itself does not tend to develop
the mind as the sea and mountains do, but still it does not
necessarily involve deterioration of general mental ability.” 1
Dr. Arlidge expresses a more decided opinion. “ Generally
speaking, it may be asserted of machinery that it calls
for little or no brain exertion on the part of those con-
nected with its operations; it arouses no interest, and
has nothing in it to quicken or brighten the intelligence,
though it may sharpen the sight and stimulate muscular
ictivity in some one limited direction,” 8

The work of machine-tending is never of course abso-

1 Taylor, Modem Factory System , p. 435.

* Cf. the comparison of conditions of town and country labour in

Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations , Bk. L, chap, x., part 2.

* Diseases of Occupations, pp. 25, 26.


MODERN CAPITALISM,


347


lately automatic or without spontaneity and skill. To a
certain limited extent the “tender” of machinery rules
as well as serves the machine ; in seeing that his portion
of the machine works in accurate adjustment to the rest,
the qualities of care, judgment, and responsibility are
evolved. For a customary skill of wrist and eye which
speedily hardens into an instinct, is often substituted a series
of adjustments requiring accurate quantitative measurement
and conscious reference to exact standards. In such in-
dustries as those of watchmaking the factory worker, though
upon the average his work requires less manual dexterity
than the handworker in the older method, may get more
intellectual exercise in the course of his work But though
economists have paid much attention to this industry, in
considering the character of machine-tending it is not an
average example for a comparison of machine labour and
hand labour; for the extreme delicacy of many of the
operations even under machinery, the responsibility at-
taching to the manipulation of expensive material, and the
minute adjustment of the numerous small parts, enable the
worker in a watch factory to get more interest and more
mental training out of his work than falls to the ordinary
worker in a textile or metal factory. Wherever the material
is of a very delicate nature and the processes involve some
close study of the individual qualities of each piece of
material, as is the case with the more valuable metals, with
some forms of pottery, with silk or lace, elements of thought
and skill survive and may be even fostered under machine
industry. A great part of modern inventiveness, however,
is engaged in devising automatic checks and indicators for
the sake of dispensing with detailed human skill and reduc-
ing the spontaneous or thoughtful elements of tending
machinery to a minimum. When this minimum is reached
the highly-paid skilled workman gives place to the low-skilled
woman or child, and eventually the process passes over
entirely into the hands of machinery. So long, however,
as human labour continues to co-operate with machinery,
certain elements of thought and spontaneity adhere to it
These must be taken into account in any estimate of the
net educative influence of machinery. But though these
mental qualities must not be overlooked, exaggerated
importance should not be attached to them. The. lay


THE EVOLUTION Of


348

man is often apt to esteem too highly the nature of
skilled specialist work. A locomotive superintendent of
a railway was recently questioned as to the quality of
engine-driving. “ After twenty years' experience he declared
emphatically that the very best engine-drivers were those
who were most mechanical and unintelligent in their work,
who cared least about the internal mechanism of the
engine.” 1 Yet engine-driving is far less mechanical and
monotonous than ordinary tending of machinery.

So far as the man follows the machine and has his work
determined for him by mechanical necessity, the educative
pressure of the latter force must be predominant. Machinery,
like everything else, can only teach what it practises. Order,
exactitude, persistence, conformity to unbending law, — these
are the lessons which must emanate from the machine.
They have an important place as elements in the formation
of intellectual and moral character. But of themselves
they contribute a one-sided and very imperfect education.
Machinery can exactly reproduce; it can, therefore, teach
the lesson of exact reproduction, an education of quanti-
tative measurements. 2 The defect of machinery, from the
educative point of view, is its absolute conservatism. The
law of machinery is a law of statical order, that everything
conforms to a pattern, that present actions precisely resemble
past and future actions. Now the law of human life is
dynamic, requiring order not as valuable in itself, but as the
condition of progress. The law of human life is that no
experience, no thought or feeling is an exact copy of any
other. Therefore, if you confine a man to expending his
energy in trying to conform exactly to the movements of a
machine, you teach him to abrogate the very principle of
life. Variety is of the essence of life, and machinery is the
enemy of variety. This is no argument against the educa-
tive uses of machinery, but only against the exaggeration of
hese uses. If a workman expend a reasonable portion of

.s energy in following the movements of a machine, he may

tin a considerable educational value; but he must also
-ive both time and energy left to cultivate the spontaneous
and progressive arts of life.

§ 5. It is often urged that the tendency of machinery is not

1 The Social Horizon, p, 22.

* Cf. Veblen, The Theory of Business Enterprise , pp. 308-309.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


349


merely to render monotonous the activity of the individual
worker, but to reduce the individual differences in workers.
This criticism finds expression in the saying : “ All men are
equal before the machine." So far as machinery actually
shifts upon natural forces work which otherwise would tax
the muscular energy, it undoubtedly tends to put upon a
level workers of different muscular capacity. Moreover, by
taking over work which requires great precision of move-
ment, there is a sense in which it is true that machinery
tends to reduce the workers to a common level of skill, or
even of un-skill.

“Whenever a process requires peculiar dexterity and
steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn as soon as possible
from the cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities
of many kinds, and it is placed in charge of a peculiar
mechanism, so self-regulating that a child can superin-
tend it ." 1

That this is not true of the most highly-skilled or quali-
tative work must be conceded, but it applies with great force
to the bulk of lower-skilled labour. By the aid of machinery
— of the condensed embodiment of the inventor’s skill,
the clumsy or weak worker is rendered capable of assisting
the nicest movements on a closer equality with the more
skilled worker. Of course piece-work, as practised in textile
and hardware industries, shows that the most complete
machinery has not nearly abolished the individual differ-
ences between one worker and another. But assuming that
the difference in recorded piece wages accurately represents
difference in skill or capacity of work — which is not quite
the case — it seems evident that there is less variation in
capacity among machine-workers than among workers
engaged in employments where the work is more muscular,
or is conducted by human skill with simpler implements.
The difference in productive capacity between an English
and a Hindoo navvy is considerably greater than the differ-
ence between a Lancashire mill operative and an operative
in an equally well-equipped and organised Bombay mill.

But this is by no means all that is signified by the
“equality of workers before the machine.” It is the
adaptability of the machine to the weaker muscles and


1 Ure, Philosophy of Manufactures % chap. i. p. 19.


THE EVOLUTION OF


350

intelligence of women and children that is perhaps the
most important factor. The machine in its development
tends to give less and less prominence to muscle and high
individual skill in the mass of workers, more and more to
certain qualities of body and mind which not only differ less
widely in different men, but in which women and children
are more nearly on a level with men. It is of course
true that considerable differences of individual skill and
effort survive in the typical machine industry. “ Machine-
weaving, for instance, simple as it seems, is divided into
higher and lower grades, and most of those who work in
the lower grades have not the stuff in them that is required
for weaving with several colours.’ 71 But the general effect
of machinery is to lessen rather than to increase individual
differences of efficiency. The tendency of machine industry
to displace male by female labour is placed beyond all
question by the statistics of occupations in England, which
show since 1861 a regular and considerable rise in the
proportion of women to men workers in most branches of
manufacture where machinery is most fully applied. 2 Legal
restrictions, and in the more civilised communities, the
growth of a healthy public opinion, prevent the economic
force from being operative to the same degree so far as
children are concerned.

Those very qualities of narrowly restricted care and
judgment, detailed attention, regularity and patience,
which we see to be characteristic of machine work, are
common human qualities in the sense that they are
within the capacity of all, and that even in the degree of
their development and. practice there is less difference
between the highly-trained adult mechanic and the raw
" half-timer 77 than in the development and practice of
uch powers as machinery has superseded. It must be
jcognised that machinery does exercise a certain equal-
ing influence by assigning a larger and larger relative
importance to those faculties which are specific as com-
pared with those which are individual. 8 “General ability”
is coming to play a more important part in industry than
specialised ability, 1 * * 4 and though considerable differences

1 Marshall, Principles of Economics , p. 265.

* Cf. General Report of Census for igoi, p. 86.

* Marshall, Principles of Economics^ chap. x.

4 Cf. Marshall, p. 265.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 35 1

may exist in the “general ability" of individuals, the
differences will be smaller than in specialised abilities . 1

' The net influence of machinery upon the quality of
labour, then, is found to differ widely according to the
relation which subsists between the worker and the
machine. Its educative influence, intellectual and moral,
upon those concerned with the invention, management, and
direction of machine industry, and upon all whose work is
about machinery, but who, are not detailed machine-tenders,
is of a distinctly elevating character. Its effect, however,
upon machine-tenders in cases where, by the duration of
the working day or the intensity of the physical effort, it
exhausts the productive energy of the worker, is to depress
vitality and lower him in the scale of humanity 'by an
excessive habit of conformity to the automatic movements
of a non-human motor. This human injury is not ade-
quately compensated by the education in routine and regu-
larity which it confers, or by the slight understanding of
the large co-operative purposes and methods of machine
industry which his position enables him to acquire.

1 Cf. Marshall, Principles of Economics % p. 36


35 *


CHAPTER XIV

THE ECONOMY OF HIGH WAGES.

§ i» The Economy of Low Wages.

§ 2. Modifications of the Early Doctrine — Lord Brassefs
Evidence from Heavy Manual Work.

§ 3. Wages, Hours, and Product in Machine-industry.

§4 .A General Application of the Economy of High Wages
and m Short Hours inadmissible.

§ 5. Mutual Determination of Conditions of Employment
and Productivity.

§ 6. Compressibility of Labour and Intensification of Effort.

§ 7. Effective Consumption dependent upon Spare Energy of
the Worker.

§ 8. Growth of Machinery in relation to Standard of Comfort.
§ 9. Economy of High Wages dependent upon Consumption.

§ 1. The theory of a “ natural ” rate of wages fixed at the
bare subsistence-point which was first clearly formulated in
the writings of Quesnay and the so-called “ physiocratic ”
school was little more than a rough generalisation of the
facts of labour in France. But these facts, summed up in
the phrase, “ II ne gagne que sa vie,” and elevated to the
position of a natural law, implied the general belief that a
higher rate of wage would not result in a correspondent
increase of the product of labour, that it would not pay
an employer to give wages above the point of bare susten-
ance and reproduction. This dogma of the economy of
cheap labour, taught in a slightly modified form by many
of the leading English economists of the first half of the
nineteenth century, has dominated the thought and in-
directly influenced the practice of the business world. It
u true that Adam Smith in a well-known passage had given


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. 353

powerful utterance to a different view of the relation
between work and wages : — “ The liberal reward of labour
as it encourages the propagation so it encourages the
industry of the common people. The wages of labour are
the encouragement of industry, which, like every other
human quality, improves in proportion to the encourage-
ment it receives.” 1 But the teaching of Ricardo, and the
writers who most closely followed him in his conception of
the industrial system, leaned heavily in favour of low wages
as the sound basis of industrial progress.

The doctrine of the economy of low wages in England
scarcely needed the formal support of the scientific econo-
mist. It was already strongly implanted in the mind of the
eighteenth century “business man,” who moralised upon
the excesses resulting from high wages much in the tone of
the business man of to-day. It would be scarcely possible
to parody the following line of reflection : —

“The poor in the manufacturing counties will never work any
more time in general than is necessary just to live and support
their weekly debauches. Upon the whole we may fairly aver
that a reduction of wages in the woollen manufactures would be
a national blessing and advantage and no real injury to the
poor. By this means we might keep our trade, uphold our
rents, and reform the people into the bargain.” (Smith’s Memoirs
on Wool y voL ii. p. 308.)

Compare with this Arthur Young’s frequent suggestion that
rents should be raised in order to improve farming. 2 So
Dr. Ure, half a century later, notwithstanding that his main
argument is for the “ economy of high wages,” both on the
ground that it evokes the best quality of work and because
it keeps the workman contented, is unable to avoid flatly
contradicting himself as follows : —

“ High wages, instead of leading to thankfulness of temper
and improvement of mind, have, in too many cases, cherished
pride and supplied funds for supporting refractory spirits in
strikes wantonly inflicted upon one set of mill-owners after
another throughout the several districts of Lancashire for the
purpose of degrading them into a state of servitude.” ( Philosophy
of Manufacture, p. 366.)

1 Wealth of Nations ^ vol. i. p. 86.

* QL Northern Tour, voL ii p. 86.

23


354


THE EVOLUTION OF


So again (p. 298): — “In fact, it was their high wages
which enabled them to maintain a stipendary committee in
affluence, and to pamper themselves into nervous ailments
by a diet too rich and exciting for their indoor occupation.”

The experiments of Robert Owen in raising wages and
shortening hours in his New Lanark mills failed utterly
to convince his fellow-manufacturers that a high standard of
comfort among the workers would bring a correspondent
rise in working efficiency.

The history of the early factory system, under which
rapid fortunes were built out of the excessive toil of
children and low-skilled adult workers paid at rates which
were, in many instances, far below true “ subsistence wages,”
furnished to the commercial mind a convincing argument
in favour of “cheap labour,” and set political economy for
half a century at war with the rising sentiments of humanity 1
Even now, the fear frequently expressed in the New World
regarding the “competition of cheap labour” attests a
strong survival of this theory, which held it to be the
first principle of “good business” to pay as low wages
as possible.

§ 2. The trend of more recent thought has been in the

1 It is true that out-and-out defenders of the factories against early
legislation sometimes had the audacity to assert the “ economy of high
wages,” and to maintain that it governed the practice of early mill-
owners. . So Ure, ** The main reason why they {i.e. wages) are so high
is, that they form a small part of the value of the manufactured article,
so that if reduced too low by a sordid master, they would render his
operatives less careful, and thereby injure the quality of their work
more than could be compensated by his saving in wages. The less
proportion wages bear to the value of the goods, the higher, generally
speaking, is the recompense of labour. The prudent master of a fine
spinning-mill is most reluctant to tamper with the earnings of his
spinners, and never consents to reduce them till absolutely forced to it
by a want of remuneration for the capital and skill embarked in his
business” {Philosophy of Manufacture, p. 330). This does not, however,

- prevent Dr. Ure from pointing out a little later the grave danger into
which trade-union endeavours to raise wages drive a trade subject to
the competition of “ the more frugal and docile labour of the Continent
and United States” (p. 363). Nor do Dr. Ure’s statements regarding
the high wages paid in cotton-mills, which he places at three times the
agricultural wages, tally with the statistics given in the appendix of his
own book (cf. p. 515). Male spinners alone received the “ high wages *
he names, and out of them had to pay for the labour of the assistants
whom they hired to help them.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


355

direction of a progressive modification of the doctrine of
the “ economy of low wages.” The common maxim that
“ if you want a thing well done you must expect to pay for
it ” implies some general belief in a certain correspondence
of work and wages. The clearer formulation of this idea
has been in large measure the work of economic thinkers
who have set themselves to the close study of comparative
statistics. The work in which Mr. Brassey, the great rail-
way . contractor, was engaged gave him an opportunity of
making accurate comparison of the work and wages of
workmen of various nationalities, and his son, Lord
Brassey, collected and published a number of facts bearing
upon the subject which, as regards certain kinds of work,
established a new relation between work and wages. He
found that English navvies employed upon the Grand
Trunk Railway in Canada, and receiving from 5s. to 6s. a
day, did a greater amount of work for the money than
French-Canadians paid at 3s. 6d. a day; that it was more
profitable to employ Englishmen at 3s. to 3s. 6d. upon
making Irish railways than Irishmen at is. 6d. to is. 8d. ;
that “in India, although the cost of dark labour ranges
from 4^& to 6d. a day, mile for mile the cost of railway
work is about the same as in England ; ” that in quarry
work, “in which Frenchmen, Irishmen, and Englishmen
were employed side by side, the Frenchman received three,
the Irishman four, and the Englishman six francs a day.
At those different rates the Englishman was found to be the
most advantageous workman of the three.” Extending his
inquiries to the building trades, to mining, and to various
departments of manufactures, he found a general consensus
of opinion among employers and other men of practical
experience making for a similar conclusion. In France,
Germany, and Belgium, where wages and the standard of
living were considerably lower than in England, the cost of
turning out a given product was not less, but greater. In
the United States and in a few trades of Holland, where the
standard of comfort was as high or higher than in the
corresponding English industries, more or better work was
done. In short, the efficiency of labour was found to vary
with tolerable accuracy in accordance with the standard of
comfort or real wages.

In bis introduction to his work on Foreign Work and


35<5


THE EVOLUTION OF


English Wages , Lord Brassey gives countenance to a
theory of wages which has frequently been attributed to
him, and has sometimes been accepted as a final statement
of the relation of work and wages — viz., that “ the cost of
work, as distinguished from the daily wage of the labourer,
was approximately the same in all countries.” In other
words, it is held that, for a given class of work, there is a
fixed and uniform relation between wages and efficiency of
labour for different lands and different races.

Now, to the acceptance of this judgment, considered as
a foundation of a theory of comparative wages, there are
certain obvious objections. In the first place, in the state-
ment of most of the cases which are adduced to support the
theory reference is made exclusively to money wages, no
account being taken of differences of purchasing power
in different countries. In order to establish any rational
basis, the relation must be between real wages or standard
of living and efficiency. Now, though it must be admitted
as inherently probable that some definite relation should
subsist between wages and work, or, in other words, between
the standard of consumption and the standard of produc-
tion, it is not a priori reasonable to expect this relation
should be uniform as between two such countries as
England and India, so that it should be a matter of
economic indifference whether a piece of work is done by
cheap and relatively inefficient Indian labour or by ex-
pensive and efficient English labour. Such a supposition
could only stand upon one of two assumptions.

The first assumption would be that of a direct arithme-
tical progression in the relation of wage and work such as
would require every difference in quantity of food, eta,
consumed by labourers to be reflected in an exactly corre-
spondent difference of output of productive energy — an
assumption which needs no refutation, for no one would
maintain that the standard of comfort furnished by wages
is the sole determinant of efficiency, and that race, climate,
and social environment play no part in economic production.
The alternative assumption would be that of an absolute
fluidity of capital and labour, which should reduce to a
uniform level throughout the world the net industrial ad-
vantages, so that everywhere there was an exact quantita-
tive relation between work and wage, production, and


MODERN CAPITALISM.


357

consumption. Though what is called a “ tendency” to
such uniformity may be admitted, no one acquainted with
facts will be so rash as to maintain that this uniformity is
even approximately reached

§ 3. There is, then, no reason to suppose that wages, either
nom i n a l or real, bear any exact, or even a closely approxi-
mate, relation to the output of efficient work, quantity and
quality being both taken into consideration. But, in truth,
the evidence afforded by Lord Brassey does not justify a
serious investigation of this theory of indifference or equiva-
lence of work and wages. -For, in the great majority of
instances which he adduces, the advantage is clearly shown
to rest with the labour which is most highly remunerated.
The theory suggested by his evidence is, in fact, a general
theory of “ the economy of high wages.”

This theory, which has been advancing by rapid strides in
recent years, and is now supported by a great quantity of
carefully-collected evidence, requires more serious consider-
ation. The evidence of Lord Brassey was chiefly, though
by no means wholly, derived from branches of industry
where muscular strength was an important element, as in
road-making, railway-making, and mining; or from the
building trades where machinery does not play a chief part
in directing the pace and character of productive effort It
would not be unreasonable to expect that the quantitative
relation between work and wages might be closer in indus-
tries where freely expended muscular labour played a more
prominent part than in industries where machinery was a
dominating factor, and where most of the work consisted in
tending machinery. It might well be the case that it would
pay to provide a high standard of physical consumption to
navvies, but that it would not pay to the same extent to
give high wages to factory operatives, or even to other
classes of workers less subject to the strain of heavy
muscular work.

In so far as the tendency of modem production is to
relieve man more and more of this rough muscular work, it
might happen that the true economy favoured high wages
only in those kinds of work which were tending to occupy
a subordinate place in the industry of the future. The
earlier facts, which associated high wages with high pro-
ductivity, low wages with low productivity, in textile


THE EVOLUTION OF


358

factories and ironworks, were of a fragmentai/ character,
and, considered as evidence of a causal connection between
high wages and high productivity, were vitiated by the wide
differences in the development of machinery and industrial
method in the cases compared. In recent years the
labours of many trained economists, some of them with
close practical knowledge of the industrial arts, have
collected and tabulated a vast amount of evidence upon
the subject. A large number of American economists,
among them General F. A. Walker, Mr, Gunton, Mr.
Schoenhof, Mr. Gould, Mr. E. Atkinson, have made close
researches into the relation between work and wages in
America and in the chief industrial countries of Europe.
A too patent advocacy of tariff reform or a shorter
working day has in some eases prevented the statistics
collected from receiving adequate attention, but there
is no reason to doubt the substantial accuracy of the
research.

The most carefully-conducted investigation has been
that of Professor Schulze-Gaevemitz, who, basing his argu-
ments upon a close study of the cotton industry, has
related his conclusion most clearly to the evolution of
modem machine-production. The earlier evidence merely
established the fact of a co-existence between high wages
and good work, low wages and bad work, without attempt-
ing scientifically to explain the connection. Dr. Schulze-
Gaevemitz, by his analysis of cotton spinning and weaving,
successfully formulates the observed relations between
wages and product. He compares not only the present
condition of the cotton industry in England and in
Germany and other continental countries, but the condi-
tions of work and wages in the English cotton industry at
various times during the last seventy years, thus correcting
any personal equation of national life which might to some
extent vitiate conclusions based only upon international
comparison. This double method of comparison yields
certain definite results, which Dr. Schulze-Gaevemitz sums
up in the following words: — “Where the cost of labour
(i.e. piece wages) is lowest the conditions of labour are
most favourable, the working day is shortest, and the
weekly wages of the operatives are highest ” (p. 133). The
evolution of improved spinning and weaving machinery in


MODERN CAPITALISM.


359

England is found to be attended by a continuous increase in
the product for each worker, a fall in piece wages reflected
in prices of foods, a shortening of the hours of labour, and
a rise in weekly wages. The following tables, compiled by
Dr. Schulze-Gaevernitz, give an accurate statement of the
relations of the different movements, taking the spinning
and weaving industries as wholes in England : —


SPINNING,


Product of
yarn

In 1000 lbs.

Number of
workers
in spinning

mills.

Product per
worker
in lbs.

Cost of
labour
per lb.

Average

yearly

wages.

1819-21

106,500

111,000

968

s.

6

d.

4

£ a. d.

26 13 0

1829-31

216,500

140,000

1546

4

2

27 ' 6 O

1844-46

523,300

190,000

2754

2

3

28 12 O

1859-61

910,000

248,000

3671

2

1

32 IO O

1880-82

1,324,000

240,000

5520

1

9

44 4 o 1 * * * * * *


WEAVING.


Products in
1000 lbs.

Number of
workers.

Product per
worker
in lbs.

Cost of
labour
per lb.

Average

yearly

income.

1819-21,

80,620

250,000

322

s. d.

15 5

£ s. d.
20 18 O

1829-31

143,200

275,000

S2 l

9 0

19 18 O 8

1844-46

348,110

210,000

1658

3 5

24 IO O

1859-61

650,870

203,000

3206

2 9

30 15 O

1880-82

993,540

246,000

4039

2 3

39 0 0


1 Der Grossbetrieby p. 132. In regarding the advance of recent

average wages it should be borne in mind that the later years contain a

larger proportion of adults. In considering the net yearly wages a

deduction for unemployment should be made from the sums named in

the table.

8 Account must be taken of the depressed condition of hand-loom

weavers, who had not yet disappeared.


THE EVOLUTION OF


360

The same holds good of the growth of the cotton-weaving
industry in America, as the following table shows : —


Yearly
product
per worker.

Cost of
labour
per yard.

Yearly
earnings
per worker.


Tarda.

Cents.

Dollars.

1830

4,321

1-9

164

1850

12,164

1.55

190

1870

19,293

I.24

240

1884

28,032

1.07

290


Of Germany and Switzerland the same holds. Every im-
provement of machinery increasing the number of spindles
or looms a worker can tend, or increasing the pace of the
machinery and thus enlarging the output per worker, is
attended by a higher weekly wage, and in general by a
shortening of the hours of labour.

A detailed comparison of England, the United States, and
the Continent, as regards the present condition of the
cotton industry, yields the same general results. A com-
parison between England and the United States shows that
in weaving, where wages are much higher in America, the
labour is so much more efficient as to make the cost of
production considerably lower than in England; in spin-
ning, where English wages are about as highly paid, the
cost of production is lower than in America (p. 156). A
comparison between Switzerland and Germany, England,
and America, as regards weaving, yields the following
results (p, 151) : —


Weekly
product
per worker.

Coat

per yard.

Honrs of
labour.

Weekly

wage.

Switzerland and Germany

Yards.

466

0-303


a d.

II 8

England ....

706

0-275


16 3

America .

1200

0,2


20 3


MODERN CAPITALISM,


3<5i

The low-paid, long-houred labourers of the Italian
factories are easily undersold by the higher paid and more
effective labour of England or America. So also a com-
parison between Mulhausen and the factories of the Vosges
valleys shows that the more highly-paid labour of the
former is the more productive.

In Russia the better-paid labour in the factories near
Petersburg and in Esthland can outcompete the lower paid
labour of the central governments of Vladimir and Moscow.

Schulze-Gaevemitz goes so far as to maintain that under
existing conditions of low wages and long hours, the Indian
factories cannot undersell their Lancashire competitors, and
maintains that the stringent factory laws which are demanded
for India are likely to injure Lancashire , 1 instead of giving
her an advantage. The most vital points of the subject are
thus summarised, after an elaborate comparison of the
cotton-spinning of England and of those parts of Germany
which use English machinery : —

"In England the worker tends nearly twice as much machinery
as in Germany ; the machines work more quickly ; the loss as
compared with the theoretic output (/.£., waste of time and
material) is smaller. Finally, there comes the consideration
that in England the taking-off and putting-on from the spindles
occupies a shorter time ; there is less breaking of threads, and
the piecing of broken threads requires less time. _ The result is
that the cost of labour per pound of yam— -especially when the
work of supervision is taken into account — is decidedly smaller
in England than in Germany. So the wages of the English
spinners are nearly twice as high as in Germany, while the
working day occupies a little over 9 hours as compared with 1 1
to nj in Germany.” (P. 136.)

More recent investigations directed to a comparison
between the efficiency of British and Continental labour
confirm the conclusions of Schulze-Gaevernitz. German
workers are still inferior to English in the cotton trade,
though they have gained in efficiency during the last ten

1 Here Schulze-Gaevemitz appears to strain his argument. Though
official reports lay stress upon the silver question as an important
factor in the rise of Bombay mills, there seems no doubt of the ability
of Bombay cheap labour, independently of this, to undersell English
labour for low counts of cotton in Asiatic markets. Brentano in his
work, Hours and Wages in Relation to Production , supports Schulze-
GaeveroiU.


3 62


THE EVOLUTION OF


years, a gain directly associated with higher wages and a
better standard of living. The same is generally true of
France, Switzerland, and Holland.

As regards the labour cost in India, we are told “ The
number of operatives required to manage a given quantity
of machinery was five to eight times greater in India than
in England, and now it is at least three times greater.
It is the advantage of position alone which has enabled
this native industry to oust foreign yarns, except a few the
bulk of which are coloured.” 1 *

Later comparisons of the relative efficiency of American
and English weavers are invalidated by the growing extent
to which automatic looms and other improvements in
machinery have been adopted in America. No quantitative
measurement is possible between the efficiency of the best
eight-loom weavers of Massachusetts, earning their 45s. or
50s. per week, and the best Lancashire weavers, with their
smaller number of looms and lower wages. Alike in spin-
ning and in weaving, the difference in the quality of the
cotton goods further complicates the comparison. The
higher average wages paid to cotton operatives in the
Northern States is not, however, in the judgment of a recent
professional observer, 8 compensated by a corresponding
superiority of efficiency. As regards the efficiency of
labour in Southern mills, there appears to have been
a temporary economy in low wages ; though to-day
it is held that “in many instances the labour cost is
actually higher in the South though the wages are so
much lower.” 8

Some interesting testimony from Germany directly sup-
ports the economy of high wages in hard manual occupations,
A Foreign Office report of 1898 on the coal industry of
"*henish Westphalia states: “Although wages are doubtless
r er than in England, even in this district, where they
id higher than in any other part of Germany, I think it
. still be found on the average that the working effect per
.^ 1 -hewer and shift is only about half what it is in England,
ior the following reasons: because the English pitman lives
better, works with more judgment and skill, and once he

1 Brassey and Chapman, p. 152.

8 Mr. Young. * Brassey and Chapman, p. 181.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


363


has made his conditions, gives his greater labour-power
more freely; and last, not least, he is a trained hewer,
timber-setter, or putter, as the case may be3

This is confirmed by the evidence of a German miner
who worked for some time in Northumberland. “There
is good reason why the English miner should be the
stronger man of the two. He has time to rest properly,
and he enjoys more meat than potatoes. Generally speak-
ing, overstrain and under-feeding disable the German from
competing with him.” 1

There exists a large amount of testimony, both of busi-
ness men and of economists, in support of the favourable
effect of the higher standard of comfort enjoyed by
American workmen upon the output of labour. European
workmen who have gone to work in the United States
commonly admit that they give out a much larger amount
of working energy. How far this is susceptible of physio-
logical explanation, the better food converted into more
work, may perhaps be questioned. Trobably psychical
factors play at least as important a part. The recognition
of a career open to every talent, or at least a fair oppor-
tunity of distinct and appreciable improvement in the
standard of comfort, has been a stimulus operative among
all sections of American workmen, though recent con-
ditions of the low-skilled labour market have diminished
its effectiveness. The increase of the population of
negroes and foreign immigrants, forming an unskilled
class of labour kept in its place by a reduced demand
for skilled labour relative to the supply, seems likely to
reduce the energy of the American “stroke” to the level
of the European. If, in addition to this, the real wage
of unskilled labour falls, as it has in fact done since 1897,
one great source of American industrial progress is per-
ceptibly weakened

§ 4. From the evidence adduced by Schulze- Gaevernitz,
modern industrial progress is expressed, so far as its effects
on labour are concerned, in seven results : (a) Shorter hours
of labour. {£>) Higher weekly wage {c) Lower piece-wage.
(d) Cheaper product (e) Increased product per worker.

1 How the English Workman Lives, Ernst Duchershoff (1899),
quoted Brassey and Chapman, p. 48.


THE EVOLUTION OF


3«4

(/) Increased speed of machinery, (g) Increased number
and size of machines to the worker.

All these factors must be taken into consideration before
a full "judgment of the net results of machinery upon the
worker can be formed. The evidence above recorded,
conclusive as it is regarding the existence of some causal
connection between a high standard of living and high
productivity of labour, does not necessarily justify the con-
clusion that a business, or a federation of employers, may
go ahead increasing wages and shortening hours of labour
ad libitum in sure and certain expectation of a corresponding
increase in the net productivity of labour.

Before such a conclusion is warranted, we must grasp
more clearly the nature of the causal relation between high
standard of living and efficiency. How far are we entitled
to regard high wages and other good conditions of employ-
ment as the cause, how far as the effect of efficiency of
labour? The evidence adduced simply proves that a b c,
certain phenomena relating to efficiency — as size of pro-
duct, speed of workmanship, quantity of machines tended
— vary directly with dtf y certain other phenomena relating
to wages, hours of labour, and other conditions of employ-
ment. So far as such evidence goes, we are only able to
assert that the two sets of phenomena are causally related,
and cannot surely determine whether variations in a b c are
causes, or effects of concomitant variations in d e f or
whether both sets of phenomena are or are not governed by
some third set, the variations of which affect simultaneously
and proportionately the other two.

The moral which writers like Mr. Gunton and Mr.
Schoenhof have sought to extract, and which has been
accepted by hot a few leaders in the “labour movement,”
is that every rise of wages and every shortening of hours
will necessarily be followed by an equivalent or a more than
equivalent rise in the efficiency of labour. In seeking to
establish this position, special stress is laid upon the evi-
dence of the comparative statistics of textile industries.
But, in the first place, it must be pointed out that the
evidence adduced does not support any such sweeping
generalisation. The statistics of Mr. Gould and Mr.
Schoenhof, for instance, show many cases where higher
money and real wages of American operatives are not


MODERN CAPITALISM.


3*55

accompanied by a correspondingly larger productivity. In
such cases the “ cheap ” labour of England is really cheap.

Again, in other cases where the higher wages of American
workers are accompanied by an equivalent, or more than
equivalent, increase of product, that increased product is
not due entirely or chiefly to greater intensity or efficiency
of labour, but to the use of more highly elaborated labour-
saving machinery. The difference between the labour-cost
of making and maintaining this improved machinery, and
that of making and maintaining the inferior machinery it
has displaced, ought clearly to be added in, where a com-
parison is made between the relation of net labour-cost to
product in different countries, or in different stages of
industrial development in the same country. The omission
of this invalidates much of the reasoning of Schulze-
Gaevemitz, Brentano, Rae, and other prophets of “the
economy of high wages.” The direct labour-cost of each
commodity may be as little, or even less, than in England,
but the total cost of production 1 and the selling price may
be higher. Lastly, in that comparison between England
and America, which is in many respects the most service-
able, because the two countries are nearest in their develop-
ment of industrial methods as well as in the character of
their labourers, the difference of money and of real wage
is not commonly accompanied by a difference in hours of
labour.

The evidence we possess does not warrant any universal
or even general application of the theory of the economy
of high wages. If it was generally true that by increasing
wages and by shortening working hours the daily product
of each labourer could be increased or even maintained,
the social problem, so far as it relates to the alleviation of
the poverty and misery of the lower grades of workers,

1 Mr. Gould’s general conclusion, from his comparison of American
and European production, is “ that higher daily wages in America do
not mean a correspondingly enhanced labour-cost to the manufacturers ”
{Contemporary Review, Jan. 1893). This he holds to be partly due to
superior mechanical agencies, which owe their existence to high wages,
partly to superior physical force in the workers. But Mr, Gould’s
evidence and his conclusion here stated, taken as testimony to the
“economy of high wages,” are insufficient, for they only show that
high wages are attended by increased output of labour, not by an
increase correspondent to this higher wage.


THE EVOLUTION OF


3 «

would admit of an easy solution. But though it will be
generally admitted that a rise of wages or of the general
standard of comfort of most classes of workers will, be
. followed by increased efficiency of labour, and that a short-
ening of hours will not be followed by a corresponding
diminution in output, it by no means follows that it will be
profitable to increase wages and shorten hours indefinitely.
Just as it is admitted that the result of an equal shortening
of hours will be different in every trade, so will the result of
a given rise in standard of comfort be different In some
cases highly-paid labour and short hours will pay, in other
cases cheaper labour and longer hours. It is not possible
by dwelling upon the concomitance of high wages and good
work, low wages and bad work, in many of the most highly-
developed industries to appeal to the enlightened self-interest
of employers for the adoption of a general rise in wages and
a general shortening of hours. Because the most profitable
business may often be conducted on a system which involves
high wages for short intense work with highly evolved
machinery, it by no means follows that other businesses
may not be more profitably conducted by employing low-
paid workers for long hours with simpler machinery. We
are not at liberty to conclude that the early Lancashire
mill-owners adopted a short-sighted policy in employing
children and feeble adult labour at starvation wages.

The evidence, in particular, of Schulze-Gaevemitz certainly
shows that the economy of high wages and short hours is
closely linked with the development of machinery, and that
when machinery is complex and capable of being worked
at high pressure a net economy of high wages and short
hours emerges. In this light modern machinery is seen as
the direct cause of high wages and short hours. For though
the object of introducing machinery is to substitute machine-
tenders at low wages for skilled handicraftsmen, and though
\e tireless machine could be profitably worked continuously,
len due regard is had to human nature it is found more
ofitable to work at high pressure for shorter hours and to
urchase such intense work at a higher price. It must, of
course, be kept in mind that high wages are often the direct
cause of the introduction of improved machinery, and are
an ever-present incentive to fresh mechanical inventions.
This was dearly recognised half a century ago by Dr. Ure,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


367

who names the lengthened mules, the invention of the self-
acting mule, and some of the early improvements in calico-
printing as directly attributable to this cause. 1

But, admitting these tendencies in certain machine indus-
tries, we are not justified in relying confidently upon the
ability of a rise of wages, obtained by organisation of labour
or otherwise, to bring about such improvements of industrial
methods as will enable the higher wages to be paid without
injuring the trade, or reducing the profits below the minimum
socially required for the maintenance of a privately con-
ducted industry.

Our evidence leads to the conclusion that, while a rise
of wages is nearly always attended by a rise of efficiency of
labour and of the product, the proportion which the in-
creased productivity will bear to the rise of wage .will differ
in every employment Hence it is not possible to make a
general declaration in favour of a policy of high wages or of
low wages.

§ 5. The economically profitable wages and hours will vary
in accordance with many conditions, among the most
important being the development of machinery, the strain
upon muscles and nerves imposed by the work, the indoor
and sedentary character of the work, the various hygienic
conditions which attend it, the age, sex, race, and class of
the workers.

In cotton-weaving in America it pays better to employ
women at high wages to tend six, seven, or eyen eight
looms for short hours, than to pay lower wages to inferior
workers such as are found in Germany, Switzerland, or even
in Lancashire. But in coal-mining it appears that the
American wages are economically too high — that is to say,
the difference between American and English wages is not
compensated by an equivalent difference of output The
gross number of tons mined by United States miners
working at wages of $326 per annum is 377, yielding a cost
of 86J cents per ton, as compared with 79 cents per ton,

1 Ure’s Philosophy of Manufacture^ pp. 367-369. Dr. Ure regarded
mechanical inventions as the means whereby capital should keep labour
in subjection. In describing how the “self-acting mule” came into
use he adds triumphantly : “ This invention comprises the great doctrine
already propounded, that when capital enlists science in her service the
refractory hand of labour will always be taught docility ” (p. 368).


THE EVOLUTION OF


368

the cost of North Staffordshire coal produced by miners
earning $253, and turning out 322 tons per head. 1 So also
a ton of Bessemer pig iron costs in labour about 5° cents
more in America than in England, the American wages
being about 40 per cent, higher. 2

It is, indeed, evident from the aggregate of evidence that
no determinable relation exists between cost in labour and
wages for any single group of commodities.

Just as little can a general acceptance be given to the
opposite contention that it is the increased efficiency of
labour which causes the high wages. This is commonly
the view of those business men and those economists who
start from the assumption that there is some law of compe-
tition in accordance with whose operation every worker
necessarily receives as much as he is worth, the full value
of the product of his labour. Only by the increased
efficiency of labour can wages rise, argue these people;
where wages are high the efficiency of labour is found to be
high, and vice versd; therefore efficiency determines wages.
Just as the advocates of the economy of high-wages theory
seek by means of trade-unionism, legislation, and public
opinion to raise wages and shorten hours, trusting that the
increased efficiency which ensues will justify such conduct,
so the others insist that technical education and an elevation
of the moral and industrial character of the workers must
precede and justify any rise of wages or shortening of
hours, by increasing the efficiency of labour. Setting aside
the assumption here involved that the share of the workers
m the joint product of capital and labour is a fixed and
immovable proportion, this view rests upon a mere denial
of the effect which it is alleged that high wages and a rise
in standard of comfort have in increasing efficiency.

The relation between wages and other conditions of
;mployment, on the one hand, and efficiency of labour or
size of product on the other, is clearly one of mutual
determination. Every rise in wages, leisure, and in general
standard of comfort will increase the efficiency of labour;
every increased efficiency, whether due directly to these or
to other causes, will enable higher wages to be paid and
shorter hours to be worked

1 “No. 64 Consular Report” (quoted Schoenhof, pu aoo).

* Schoenhof, p. 2x6,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


3«9

§ 6. One further point emerges from the evidence relating
to efficiency and high wages. According to Schulze-Gaever-
nitz’s formula, every fall in piece wages is attended by a rise
in weekly wages. But it should be kept in mind that a rise
in time wages does not necessarily mean that the price
of labour measured in terms of effort has been raised.
Intenser labour undergone for a shorter time may obtain a
higher money wage per unit of time, but the price per unit
of effort may be lower. It has been recognised that a
general tendency of the later evolution of machinery has
been to compress and intensify labour. In certain classes
of textile labour the amount of muscular or manual labour
given out in a day is larger than formerly. _ This is the case
with the work of children employed as piecers. In Ure’s
day (1830) he was able to claim that during three-fourths of
the time spent by children in the factory they had nothing to
do. The increased quantity of spindles and the increased
speed have made their labour more continuous. The same
is true of the mule spinners, whose labour, even within the
last few years, has been intensified by increased size of the
mule. Though as a rule machinery tends to take over the
heavier forms of muscular work, it also tends to multiply
the minor calls upon the muscles, until the total strain is
not much less than before. What relief is obtained from
muscular effort is compensated by a growing strain upon
the nerves and upon the attention. Moreover, as the
machinery grows more complex, numerous, and costly, the
responsibility of the machine-tender is increased. To some
considerable extent the new effort imposed upon the worker
is of a more refined order than the heavy muscular work it
has replaced. But its tax upon the physique is an ever-
growing one. “A hand-loom weaver can work thirteen
hours a day, but to get a six-loom weaver to work thirteen
hours is a physical impossibility.” 1 The complexity of
modem machinery and the superhuman celerity of which it
is capable suggest continually an increased compression of
human labour, an increased output of effort per unit of
time. This has been rendered possible by acquired skill
and improved physique ensuing on a higher standard of
living. But it is evident that, where it appears that each


* Der Gros&iriebt p. 167.


24


37°


THE EVOLUTION 0?


rise in the standard of living and each shortening of the
working-day has been accompanied by a severer strain
either upon muscles, nerves, or mental energy during the
shorter working day, we are not entitled to regard the
higher wages and shorter hours' as clear gain for the worker.
Some limits are necessarily imposed upon this com-
pressibility of working effort. It would clearly be im-
possible by a number of rapid reductions of the working
day and increases of time wages to force the effectiveness
of an hour's labour beyond a certain limit for the workers.
Human nature must place limits upon the compression.
Though it may be better for a weaver to tend four looms
during the English factory day for the moderate wage of
1 6s. a week than to earn iis. 8d. by tending two looms in
Germany for twelve hours a day, it does not follow that it is
better to earn 20s. 3d. in America by tending six, seven, or
even eight looms for a ten-hours day, 1 or that the American’s
condition would be improved if the eight-hours day was
purchased at the expense of adding another loom for each
worker.

The gain which accrues from high wages and a larger
amount of leisure, over which the higher consumption
shall be spread, may be more than counteracted by an
undue strain upon the nerves or muscles during the shorter
day. This difficulty, as we have seen, is not adequately met
by assigning the heavier muscular work more and more to
machinery, if the possible activity of this same machinery
is made a pretext for forcing the pace of such work as
devolves upon machine-tenders.

In many kinds of work, though by no means in all,
an increase of the amount of work packed into an hour
could be obtained by a reduction of the working-day;
but two considerations should act in determining the pro-
gressive movement in this direction : first, the objective
conomic question of the quantitative relation between the
uccessive decrements of the working-day and the incre-
ments of labour put into each hour ; second, the subjective
economic question of the effect of the more compressed
labour upon the worker considered both as worker and
as consumer.

1 Vidt mpra^ p. 360. These wages, however, are the average of all
tbe labour employed id the weaving-sheds, not of (t weavers ” alone.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 37 1

There is not wanting evidence to show that increased
leisure and higher wages can be bought too dear.

In drawing attention to this consideration it must not,
however, be assumed that the increase of real wages and
shortening of hours traced in progressive industries are
necessarily accompanied by a corresponding increase in the
compression of labour. In the textile and iron industries,
for example, it is evident (pace Karl Marx) that the oper-
atives has obtained some portion of the increased produc-
tivity of improved machinery in a rise of wages. Even
where more machinery is tended we are not entitled to
assume a correspondent increase in felt effort or strain
upon the worker." A real growth of skill or efficiency will
enable an increased amount of machinery to be tended with
no greater subjective effort than a smaller amount formerly
required.- But while allowance should be made for this,
the history of the factory system, both in England and
in other countries, clearly indicates that factory labour is
more intense than formerly, not, perhaps, in its tax upon
the muscles, but in the growing strain it imposes upon
the nervous system of the operatives.

The importance of this point is frequently ignored alike
by advocates of a shorter working-day and by those who
insist that the chief aim of workers should be to make
their labour more productive. So far as the higher
efficiency simply means more skill and involves no in-
creased effort it is pure gain, but where increased effort
is required the question is one requiring close and detailed
consideration.

§■7. Another effect of over-compressed labour deserves
a word.

The close relation between higher wages and shorter
hours is generally acknowledged. A rise of money wages
which affects the standard of living by introducing such
changes in consumption as require for their full yield of
benefit or satisfaction an increase of consuming-time can
only be made effective by a diminution in the producing
time or hours of labour. When, for example, the new
wants, whose satisfaction would be naturally sought from
a rise of the standard living, are of an intellectual order,
involving not merely the purchase of books, etc., but the
time to read such books, this benefit requires that the


17 *


THE EVOLUTION OF


higher wages should be supplemented by a diminution
in the hours of labour in cases where the latter are unduly
long. But it is not so clearly recognised that such questions
cannot be determined without reference to the question of
intensity of labour. Yet it is evident that an eight-hours
day of more compressed labour might be of a more
exhausting character than a ten-hours day of less intense
labour and disqualify a worker from receiving the benefits
of the opportunities of education open to him more than
the longer hours of less intense labour. The advantage of
the addition of two hours of leisure might be outweighed
by the diminished value attached to each leisure hour. In
other words, the excess of intense work might be worse in
its effects than the excess of more extended work. This
possibility is often overlooked in the arguments of those
who support the movement towards a shorter working-day
by maintaining that each unit of labour-time will be more
productive. When the argument concerns itself merely
with alleging the influence of higher wages, without shorter
hours, upon the efficiency of labour, this neglect of the
consideration of intense labour has a more urgent import-
ance. It may be gravely doubted whether the benefit of
the higher wages of the Massachusetts weavers is not over-
balanced by the increased effort of tending so large a
number of looms for hours which are longer than the
English factory day. The exhausting character of such
labour is likely to leave its mark in diminishing the real
utility or satisfaction of the nominally higher standard of
living which the high wages render possible. Where the
increased productivity of labour is largely due to the
improved machinery or methods of production which are
stimulated by high wages without a corresponding intensi-
fication of the labour itself, the gain to labour is clear.
But the possibility that short hours and high wages may
stimulate an injurious compression of the output of pro-
ductive effort is one which must not be overlooked in
considering the influence of new industrial methods upon
bour.

§ 8. Duration of labour, intensity of labour, and wages, in
sir mutual relations, must be studied together in any
:empt to estimate the tendencies of capitalist production,
inor can we expect their relations to be the same in any two


MODERN CAPITALISM.


373

industries. Where labour is thinly extended over an in-
ordinately long working-day, as in the Indian mills, it is
probable that such improvements of organisation as might
shorten the hours to those of an ordinary English factory
day, and intensify the labour, would be a benefit, and the
rise of wages which might follow would bring a double gain
to the workers. But any endeavour to further shorten and_
intensify the working-day might injure the workers, even,
though their output were increased. Such an instance,
however, may serve well to bring home the relativity which
is involved in all such questions. The net benefit derived
from a particular quantitative relation between hours of
labour, intensity, and earnings would probably be widely
different for English and for Indian textile workers. It
would, d frioriy be unreasonable to expect that the working-
day which would bring the greatest net advantage to both
should be of the same duration. So also it may well be
possible that the more energetic nervous temperament of
the American operative may qualify him or her for a shorter
and intenser working-day than would suit the Lancashire
operative. It is the inseparable relation of the three factors
— duration, intensity, and earnings — which is the important
point. But in considering earnings, not merely the money
wage, nor even the purchasing power of the money, but the
net advantage which can be obtained by consuming what is
purchased must be understood, if we are to take a scientific
view of the question.

It should be clearly recognised that in the consideration
of all practical reforms affecting the conditions of labour,
the “wages” question cannot be dissociated from the
“ hour* ” question, nor both from the “ intensity of labour ”
question ; and that any endeavour to simplify discussion, or
to facilitate “labour movements,” by seeking a separate
solution for each is futile, because it is unscientific. When
any industrial change is contemplated, it should be regarded,
from the “labour” point of view, in its influence upon the
net welfare of the workers, due regard being given, not
merely to its effect upon wage, hours, and intensity, but
to the complex and changing relations which subsist in
each trade, in each country, and in each stage of industrial
development between the three.

But although, when we bear in nrind the effects of


374


THE EVOLUTION OF


machinery iu imparting intensity and monotony to labour,
in increasing the number of workers engaged in sedentary
indoor occupations, and in compelling an ever larger pro-
portion of the working population to live in crowded and
unhealthy towns, the net benefit of machinery to the work-
ing classes may be questioned, the growth of machinery has
been clearly attended by an improved standard of material
comfort among the machine-workers, taking the objective
measurement of comfort.

Whatever allowance may be made for the effects of
increased intensity of labour, and the indirect influences of
machinery, the bulk of evidence clearly indicates that
machine-tenders are better fed, clothed, and housed than
the hand-workers whose place they take, and that every
increase in the efficiency and complexity of machinery is
attended by a rise in real wages. The best machinery
requires for its economical use a fair standard of living
among the workers who co-operate with it, and with the
further development of machinery in each industry we may
anticipate a further rise of this standard, though we are not
entitled to assume that this natural and necessary progress
of comfort among machine-workers has no fixed limit,
and that it is equally applicable to all industries and all
countries.

It might, therefore, appear that as one industry after
another fell under machine-production, the tendency of
machine-development must necessarily make for a general
elevation of the standard of comfort among the working
classes. It may very well be the case that the net influence
of machinery is in this direction. But it must not be for-
gotten that the increased spread of machine-production does
not appear to engage a larger proportion of the working
population in machine-tending. Indeed, if we may judge
by the recent history of the most highly-evolved textile
industries, we are entitled to expect that, when machinery
is got firm hold of all those industries which lend them-
Ives easily to routine production, the proportion of the
lole working population engaged directly in machine-
ending will continually decrease, a larger and larger pro-
portion being occupied in those parts of the transport and
distributing industries which do not lend themselves con-
veniently to machinery, and in personal services. If this is


MODERN CAPITALISM


375

so, we cannot look upon the evolution of machinery, with
its demand for intenser and more efficient labour, as an
adequate guarantee of a necessary improvement irv the
standard of comfort of the working classes as a whole. To
put the matter shortly, we have no evidence to show that a
rise in the standard of material comfort of shopmen, writing
clerks, school-teachers, ’busmen, agents, warehousemen,
dockers, policemen, sandwich-men, and other classes of
labour whose proportion is increasing in our industrial
society, will be attended by so considerable a rise in the
efficiency of their labour as to stimulate a series of such
rises. The automatic movement which Schulze-Gaevemitz
and others trace in the typical machine-industries is not
shown to apply to industry as a whole, and if the tendency
of machine-development is to absorb a larger proportion of
the work but a smaller proportion of the workers, it is not
possible to found large hopes for the future of the working
classes upon this movement of the earning of high wages in
nachine-industry.

§ 9. But though the individual self-interest of the producer
cannot he relied upon to favour progressive wages, except in
certain industries and up to a certain point, the collective
interest of consumers lends stronger support to “the
economy of high wages.” We have seen that the possession
of an excessive proportion of “power to consume” by
classes who, because their normal healthy wants are already
fully satisfied, refuse to exert this power, and insist upon
storing it in unneeded forms of capital, is directly responsible
for the slack employment of capital and labour. If the
operation of industrial forces throw an increased proportion
of the “ power to consume ” into the hands of the working
classes, who will use it not to postpone consumption but to
raise their standard of material and intellectual comfort, a
fuller and more regular employment of labour and capital
must follow,. If the stronger organisation of labour is able .
to raise wages, and the higher wages are used to demand _
more and better articles of consumption, a direct stimulus
to the efficiency of capital and labour is thus applied. The
true issue, howevet,* must not be shirked If the power of
purchase now " saved ” by the wealthier classes passed into
the hands of the wooers in higher money wages, and was
not spent by them in raising their standard of comfort, but


THE EVOLUTION OF


376

was “invested ” in various forms of capital, no stimulus to
industry would be afforded; the “ savings” of one class
would have fallen into the hands of another class, and their
excess would operate to restrict industry precisely as it now
operates. Though we would gladly see in the possession of
the working classes an increased proportion of those forms
of capital which are socially useful, this simple act of
transfer, however brought about, would furnish no stimulus
to the aggregate industry. From the standpoint of the
community nothing else than a rise in the average standard
of current consumption can stimulate industry. When it is
clearly grasped that a demand for commodities is the only
demand for the use of labour and of capital, and not merely
determines in what particular direction these requisites of
production shall be applied, the hope of the future of our
industry is seen to rest largely upon the confident belief
that the working classes will use their higher wages not to
draw interest from investments (a self-destructive policy) but
to raise their standard of life by the current satisfaction of
all those wholesome desires of body and mind which lie
latent under an “ economy of low wages.” The satisfaction
of new good human desires, by endowing life with more hope
and interest, will render all intelligent exertion more effec-
tive, by distributing demand over a larger variety of com-
modities will give a fuller utilisation both of natural and
human resources, and by redressing the dislocated balance
of production and consumption due to inequality of pur-
chasing power, will justify high wages by increased fulness
and regularity of work. But it must be clearly recognised
that however desirable “ saving ” may seem to be as a moral
virtue of the working classes, any large practice of saving
undertaken before and in preference to an elevation of
current consumption, will necessarily cancel the economic
^ vantages just dwelt upoa Just as the wise individual will
he cannot afford to “save” until he has made full
•vision for the maintenance of his family in full physical
ciency, so the wise working class will insist upon utilising
aiier accesses of wages in promoting the physical and
intellectual efficiency of themselves and their families before
they endeavour to “invest” any considerable portion of
their increased wages. Mr. Gould puts this point very
plainly and convincingly: “Where economic gains are small.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


37 ?

savings mean a relatively low plane of social existence. A
parsimonious people are never progressive, neither are they,
as a rule, industrially efficient It is the man with many
wants — not luxurious fancies, but real legitimate wants —
who works hard to satisfy his aspirations, and he it is whe
is worth hiring. Let economists still teach th6 utility and
the necessity of saving, but let the sociologist as firmly insist
that to so far practise economy as to prevent in the nine-
teenth century a corresponding advance in civilisation of the
working with the other classes is morally inequitable and
industrially bad policy. I am not sorry that the American
does not save more. Neither am I sure but that if many
working-class communities I have visited on the Continent
were socially more ambitious, there would not be less
danger from Radical theories. One of the most intelligent
manufacturers I ever met told me a few years ago he would
be only too glad to pay higher wages to his working people,
provided they would spend the excess legitimately and not
hoard it He knew that in the end he should gain thereby,
since the ministering to new wants only begets others.” 1
If there are theoretic economists who still hold that “a
demand for commodities is not a demand for labour,” they
may be reminded that a paradox is not necessarily true.
In fact, this particular paradox is seen to be sustained
by a combination of slipshod reasoning and moral pre-
judice. The growing opinion of economic students is
veering round to register in theory the firm empirical judg-
ment from which the business world has never swerved, that
a high rate of consumption is the surest guarantee of
progressive trade. The surest support of the “ economy of
high wages” is the conviction that it will operate as a
stimulus to industry through increased consumption. The
working classes, especially in the United States and in
England, show a growing tendency to employ their higher
wages in progressive consumption. Upon the steady
operation of this tendency the economic future of the
working classes, and of industry in general, largely depends.


E. R. L. Gould, Contemporary Review, January 1893.


378


CHAPTER XV

SOME EFFECTS OF MODERN INDUSTRY UPON THE WORKERS
AS CONSUMERS.

§ i. How jar the different Working Classes gain from the
Fall of Prices.

§2. Part of the Economy of Machine-production compensated
by the growing Work of Distribution.

§ 3. The Lowest Class of Workers gains least from Machine-
production.

§ 1. In considering the effect of machine-production upon
a body of workers engaged in some particular industry we
are not confined to tracing the effects of improvements in
the arts and methods of that single branch of production.
As consumers they share in the improvements introduced
into other industries reflected in a fall of retail prices.
Insomuch as all English workers consume bread they are
benefited by the establishment of a new American railway
or the invention of new milling machinery which lowers the
price of' bread ; as all consume boots the advantage which
the introduction of boot-making machinery confers upon
the workers is not confined to the higher wages which may
Se paid to some operatives in the boot factory, but is
xtended to all the workers who can buy cheaper boots.

How far do methods of modem capitalist production
end to benefit the labourer in his capacity as consumer ?

Economic theory is in tolerably close accord with experi-
ence in the answer it gives to this question. Each portion
of the working classes gains in its capacity of consumer
from improved methods of production in proportion to the
amount by which its income exceeds the bare subsistence
wage of unskilled workers. The highly-paid mechanic gains


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM 379

most, the sweated worker least. The worker earning forty
shillings per week gains much more than twice as much as
the worker earning twenty shillings from each general
cheapening in the cost of production. There are several
reasons why this is so.

1. Where there exists a constant over-supply of labour
competing for what must be regarded at any particular time
as a fixed quantity of employment, wages are determined
with tolerably close reference to the lowest standard of
living among that class of workers, and not by any fixed or
customary money wage. This is particularly the case in
the “ sweating ” trades of large towns. Here such improve-
ments in machinery and methods of industry as lower the
price of articles which fall within the “standard of living”
of this class are liable to be speedily reflected in a fall of
money wages paid for such low-skilled work. In other
words, a “ bare subsistence wage ” does not gain by a fall
in the price of the articles which belong to its standard
of comfort

Even in the lowest kinds of work there is no doubt some
tendency to stick to the former money wage and thus to
raise somewhat the standard of real wages, but where the
competition is keenest this vis inertia is liable to be over-
borne, and money wages fall with prices. As we rise to the
more highly skilled, paid, and organised grades of labour,
we come to workers who are less exposed to the direct
constant strain of competition, where there is not a chronic
over-supply of labour. Here a fall of retail prices is not
necessarily or speedily followed by any corresponding fall of
money wages, and the results of the higher real wages
enjoyed for a time impress themselves in a higher habitual
standard of comfort and strengthen the resistance which is
offered to any attempt to lower money wages, even though
the attempt may be made at a time when an over-supply
of labour does exist. ^

In proportion as a class of workers is highly paid,
educated, and organised, it is able to gain the benefit
which improved machinery brings to the consumer, because
it is better able to resist the economic tendency to deter-
mine wages by reference to a standard of comfort inde-
pendent of monetary considerations. So far as the lowest
waged and most closely competing labourers have gained


THE EVOLUTION OF


380

by the fall of prices, it has been due to the pressure of
sentiment on the part of the better class of employers and
of the public against the lowering of money wages, even
where the smaller sum of money will purchase as much as
a larger sum previously.

2. The smaller the income the larger the proportion of
it that is spent upon commodities whose expense of pro-
duction and whose price is less affected by machinery.
Machine-production, by the- fall of prices it brings, has
benefited people in direct proportion to their income. The
articles which have fallen most rapidly in price are those
comforts and luxuries into which machine-production enters
most largely. The aristocracy of the working classes, whose
standard of comfort includes watches, pianos, books, and
bicycles, has gained much more by the fall of prices
than those who are obliged to spend all their wages on
the purchase of bare necessaries of life. The gain of the
former is manifold and great, the benefit of the latter is
confined to the cheapening of bread and groceries — a great
benefit when measured in terms of improved livelihood
no doubt, but small when compared with the increase
of purchasing power conferred by modem production upon
the Lancashire factory family, with its £3 or £ 4 . a week,
and in large measure counterbalanced by the increased
proportion of the income, which, in the case of town
operatives, goes as rent and price of vegetables, dairy
produce, and other commodities which have risen in
price.

3. The highly-paid operatives generally work the shortest
hours, the low-paid the longest So far as this is not
compensated by an increased intensity of labour on the
part of those working short hours, it implies an increased
opacity of making the most out of their wages. Longer
dsure enables a worker to make the most of his con-
lmption, he can lay out his wages more carefully, is

.ess tempted to squander his money in excesses directly
engendered by the reaction from excessive labour, and
can get a fuller enjoyment and benefit from the use of
the consumables which he purchases. A large and increas-
ing number of the cheapest and the most intrinsically valu-
able commodities, of an intellectual, artistic, and spiritual
character, are only open to the beneficial consumption of


MODERN CAPITALISM. 381

those who have more leisure at their command than is
yet the lot of the low-skilled workers in our towns.

§ 2. If we compare the statistics of wages we shall find
that the largest proportionate rise of money wages has been
in the highly-organised machine industries, and that the
benefit which machinery confers upon the workers in the
capacity of consumers falls chiefly to the same workers.

It must not, however, be assumed that improved methods
of production yield their full benefit through competition
to the consuming public. On the contrary, much of the
economy of machine-production fails to exercise its foil
influence upon retail prices. There are two chief reasons
for this failure. To one of these adequate attention has
been already drawn, the growth of definite forms of capital-
ist monopoly, which secure at some point or other in the
production of a commodity, as higher profits, that which
under free competition would pass to the consumer through
lower shop prices. The second consists in the abnormal
growth of the distributive classes, whose multiplication is
caused by the limitation which the economy of machinery
imposes upon the amount of capital and labour which can
find profitable employment in the extractive and manu-
facturing processes. A larger and larger number of indus-
trial workers obtain a living by a subdivision of the work of
distribution carried to a point far beyond the bounds of
social utility. For, on the one hand, when competition of
manufacturers and transporters is more and more confined
to a small number of large businesses which, because their
united power of production largely transcends the con-
sumption at profitable prices, are driven into closer com-
petition, a larger amount of labour is continually engaged
in the attempt of each firm to secure for itself the largest
share of business at the expense of another firm. On the
other hand, shut out from effective^ or profitable com-
petition in the manufacturing industries, a larger amount
of capital and labour seeks to engage in those departments
of the distributive trade where new-comers have a better
chance, and where by local settlement or otherwise they
have an opportunity of sharing the amount of distribution
that is to be done. Hence a fall of wholesale prices is
usually not reflected in a corresponding fall of retail prices,
for competition in retail trade, as J. S. Mill clearly recog-


382 THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM.

nised, “ often, instead of lowering prices, merely divides the
gains of the high price among a greater number of dealers.” 1

§ 3. The wide difference between the economic position
of the skilled mechanic and the common labourer shows
how fallacious is that treatment of the influence of machinery
upon the condition of the working classes which is com-
monly found in treatises of political economy. To present
a comparative picture of the progress of the working classes
during the last half century, which assigns to them an
increase of money wages, obtained by averaging a number
of rises in different employments, and reduces this increase
to real wages without any reference to the different use of
wages by different classes, is an unscientific and mischievous
method of dealing with one of the most important economic
questions. The influence of machine-production appears
to be widely different upon the skilled mechanic and the
common labourer considered both as producers and con-
sumers, and tends to a wide difference in standard of
comfort between the two classes. This difference is further
enhanced by the indirect assistance which machinery and
large-scale industry give to the skilled workers to combine
and thus- frequently to obtain wages higher than are
economically requisite to secure their efficient work. On
the other hand, growing feelings of humanity and a vague
but genuine feeling of social justice in an ever larger
portion of the public often enable the low-skilled worker
to secure a higher standard of comfort than the operation
of economic competition alone would enable him to reach.
But after due allowance is made for this, the conclusion is
forced upon us that the gain of machine-production, so far
as an increase in real wages is concerned, has been chiefly
taken by the highly-skilled and highly-waged workers, and
that as the character of work and wages descends, the
proportionate gain accruing from the vast increase of pro-
ductive power rapidly diminishes, the lowest classes of
workers obtaining but an insignificant share.

1 Principles of Political Economy > Bk. ii., chap, iv, § 3.


383


CHAPTER XVI.

OCCUPATIONS OF THE PEOPLE,

§ I. Shifts of English employment as attested by the
Censuses.

§ 2. Advancing and declining Manufactures.

§ 3. Similar shifts of employment in the United States,
France , , Germany , Austria, Sweden.

§ 4. General laws of the shift of occupations.

§ 5, Explanation of general movements of employment.

§ 6, The normal law of evolution of employment.

§ 7. Relation of employment to international trade .


§ 1. The most valuable source of information regarding
the effects of modern industrialism is the study of the com-
parative statistics of occupations. Like every statistical
inquiry, this is full of pitfalls, and much of the apparent
precision which columns of figures and percentages suggest
disappears when modes of collection and classification are
subjected to detailed analysis. But while such errors in-
validate many particular conclusions as to the nature and
size of fluctuations, they do not affect to anything like the
same degree the broader judgments based upon a large mass
of cumulative statistical evidence.

Now there is a striking consensus of evidence which
attests certain important tendencies towards the expansion
or contraction of occupations under the pressure of modern
industrial forces.

The summary tables of occupations in the last five
censuses for England ■ and Wales give the following
enumeration of the employed population under general
beads: —


384 the evolution of


The main tendencies which appear in these summaries —
viz., the relative and absolute decline of agricultural em-
ployment, the relative decline of domestic employment, the
.moderate increase of industrial and the very great increase
of commercial and professional employment — are more
profitably studied in the fuller analysis of the census of


MODERN CAPITALISM.


3»5

1 90 1, 1 stating the proportions per million employed in the
principal sub-heads in the last three censuses, and dis-
tinguishing those which show an increase from those which
show a decline.

The relative decline of agriculture, so far as employment
is concerned, was not the sequel of the repeal of the Corn
Laws. The census report of 1851 for England and Wales
presents the following comparative table of percentages: —

Agricultural.

1S11 ... ... ... ... ... ... 35

1821 33

1831 28

1841 22

To which we may add the later estimates derived from sub-
sequent censuses, which, though computed on a somewhat
different basis, exhibit the same general tendency: —


1851 ...


... 23.5

1861 ...


... 21.2

1871 ...


... l6.8

188 1 ...


... 13.8

1891 ...


... i 1.6

1901 ...


... 95


Turning to the professional class, we have first to note
the~ growth of persons engaged in Governmental work,
general or local, a growth of 37.3 per cent, during the last
decennium, or more than three times greater than the
growth of population. In the private “ professions,” the
clerical and legal callings (except in their humbler brandies)
fail to keep pace with the occupied population; medicine
grows faster, though its largest growth is in nurses and other
medical attendants. The teaching profession and engineer-
ing show a moderate increase, somewhat faster than the
aggregate of the occupied classes. By far the largest- pro-
portional advance is found under the heads of u Art, Music,
and Drama,” and “ Exhibitions and Games,” while the
smaller group entitled “ Literary and Scientific” also grows
apace. In other words, the classes subsidiary to the liberal
professions and the classes engaged in catering to luxuries
and recreations grow fastest among the “ professions.”

* See Cd. 2174, p. 132.


*5


386


THE EVOLUTION OF


Domestic service is declining in its proportionate em-
ployment, chiefly through the opportunities open to women
to undertake industrial employment, partly also through the
raising of the “school age.” In the twenty years from 1881
to 1901 female domestic servants increased by only 8.2 per
cent., while the entire population' advanced 25.2 per cent

One of the plainest and most considerable tendencies is
the rapid growth of commercial occupations of almost every
class. The “commercial” group in the English census
consists almost entirely of clerks, accountants, brokers,
agents, travellers, auctioneers, and persons engaged in
banking and insurance. The main body of merchants,
salesmen and buyers, and most retailers are relegated to the
branches of “ industry ” which are concerned with the goods
they handle. This prevents the census from affording exact
or full measurement of the increase of commercial occupa-
tions. But in recent decades the rate of growth of this
class has far exceeded that of the “industrial” class, giving
a rate of increase of 42.8 per cent for 1881-91, and 44.6
per cent for 1891-1901. In ordinary commerce the growth
of commercial clerks and travellers is respectively 47. 1 per
cent and 46 per cent, during the last decade, or about four
times as fast as the growth of the occupied population.
Banking, broking, and finance agencies have increased
during the same period 43. 1 per cent., while insurance has
grown no less than 79.4 per cent.

Although it is found impossible so far to separate dealers
from makers as to present a faithful account of employment
in retail trade, enough figures are available to make it certain
that the retail trading occupations are growing faster than
the M making ” parts of the industries.

In his analyses of the censuses from 1841 to 1881 Mr.
Charles Booth shows a very considerable advance in the
proportionate importance of dealing: —


1841

... 5.3 per cent

1851

... 6.5 „

1861 ...

... 7.1 ,,

1871

... 7.8 - „

1881

»*• 7*8 mi


The recent census, making a cautious estimate of retail


MODERN CAPITALISM. 387

trade, reaches the figure 9.5, giving the aggregate of
1,358,500 as covering the shopkeeping classes.

The census for 1891, comparing a number of retail trades
where the dealers are separated from makers, showed an
increase of 27.9, as compared with an increase of 15.1 for
the whole occupied population.

Extracting from the comparative table of occupations for
the last three censuses 1 such figures of retail dealers as are
clearly distinguished under the several industrial sub-orders,
we reach the following result, which may be taken as fairly
representative, from the varieties of retail business it
includes : —


1881 1891 1901

Persons occupied ... 609,100 ... 794,300 ... 922,750

Regarding the commercial and the industrial classes from
the standpoint of the census, we perceive that the rate of
growth of the former is considerably and persistently higher
than that of the latter. If the retailers were taken out of
the industrial class and put into the commercial, the more
rapid growth of “dealers” or “distributors,” as compared
with “makers” or “producers,” would be still more
striking.

Turning now to the industrial group, which includes
manufactures, mines, and the building trades, we find that
though the whole class shows a considerable and continuous
increase in proportion of employment, that increase is chiefly
attributable to mining and building. Taking manufactures
in the usual signification of that term, we do not find them
gaining in the proportion of employment they afford during
recent decades. Mr. Booth’s recent investigations 2 show
that, while the proportion grew up to 1861, it declined from
that date to 1881.

His percentages for persons employed in manufactures
are as follows: —


1841 ...


27.1 percent

1851 ...

M*

••• 32-7

n

1861 ... ... _


... 33-0

n

1871 ...

•o

... 31.6

n

1881 ...


... 3°-7

n

1 Cd. 2174, Table 34.


Occupations of the People ,


388 THE EVOLUTION OF

Though recent census reports do not present the returns in
a form which enables us to continue Mr. Booth's tabulation,
a table comparing the censuses of 1881, 1891, and 1901
enables us, b 7 extracting the distinctively manufacturing
groups, to perceive that manufactures (whether building be
excluded or included) do not engage any appreciable in-
crease of the proportion of employed persons.

The percentages relative to the total population over ten
years of age are as follows : —

1881 1891 1901

Manufactures (excluding building) 21.54 21.89 21.73
Manufactures (including building) 25.50 25.49 26.18

If the dealing classes, included here, were left out, it seems
probable that the decline shown by Mr. Booth to have
taken place between 1861 and 1881 would be proved to
have continued.

§ 2. A closer examination of the changes of employment
in the several groups of manufactures shows that while
manufactures as an aggregate are nearly stationary in the
proportion of employment they afford, some sorts are ad-
vancing, others declining.

The orders which show the greatest decline are textiles
and dress. While metal, ships, pottery, wood, food, etc.,
show a moderate advance, precious metals and instruments,
vehicles, chemicals, printing, show a great increase. A still
closer examination into the sub-orders of the census returns
shows that the foundational and the staple processes of
manufacture are stagnant or declining in importance, while
those concerned with the finishing processes of manu-
factures, especially those concerned with the manufacture
of more highly specialised articles, are increasing. In the
metal trades, while the more fundamental and general
branches, classed as “iron and steel,” show an advance
of only 10.3 per cent, in the employment they" afford in the
period 1891-1901, the sub-order engineering and machine-
making shows an advance of 67.4 per cent!, 1 while the
trades connected with the manufacture of brass, wire, and
electro-plate goods, show large gains. Electrical apparatus
and various species of scientific, surgical, *and musical

1 Some of this increase, however, must be imputed to greater pre-
cision in the census return.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


389

instruments, together with the trades generally classed with
jewellery, illustrate the same tendency in the metal in-
dustries for the finer and later processes to absorb a larger
share of the occupation.

The order “ paper, prints, books ” shows the same tend-
ency. The most rapid growth is in the processes of printing,
lithography, bookbinding, etc.; the least rapid in the paper-
making industry.

In the textile industry, amid a general decline of the
staple branches of the spinning and weaving trades, the
only group which holds its own is that employed on minor
manufactures, “hemp, jute, cocoa fibre, rope, mat, canvas,
sailcloth.” The order “dress” would have shown a positive
decline in the numbers employed between 1891 and 1901
had it not been sustained by the inclusion of various
“dealing” and small miscellaneous manufacturing trades.
All the staple trades here also show a marked decline in
the rate of growth. In the “ food ” order, again, the most
conspicuous gains are in confectionery, jams, pickles,
spices, mineral waters, and in other trades where
“making” is weighted by the inclusion of dealers. In
“spirituous liquors, board, and lodging,” the manufacturing
processes fail to keep pace with the population in the
employment they afford ; the only real advances are in the
mercantile and retail processes of distribution. Jewellery,
printing, jam and pickles, motor cars, electrical apparatus,
oilcloths, ginger-beer, india-rubber, drugs, explosives, house-
fittings and decorations are instances of rapidly-advancing
manufactures from the standpoint of employment.

Two important groups of “ making ” trades which exhibit
a most marked advance require separate notice.

First, the group of trades connected with houses, their
building and furnishing. The greater mobility of the
population, the increase of great towns, the demand for
larger and better housing, the development of public build-
ings for educational and other public purposes have bred a
great demand for building labour, while the comparatively
meagre use of machinery and substitution of machine-
formed for hand-formed materials has obliged this demand
to be met by a great increase in the supply of labour.
Though the figures of the last two censuses are vitiated for
exact comparison by the exclusion in the former of large


390


THE EVOLUTION OF


numbers of “ general labourers ” included in the latter, the
fact that the number of houses, built or building, had in-
creased by 15.5 per cent, between 1891 and 1901 is a
sufficient testimony to the progress of this industry. Under
the general head of building are also included “works of
construction and roads,” industries in large measure sub-
sidiary to the transport trade.

The second of these great progressive groups of industry
is that concerned with the manufacture of vehicles for land
or water carriage. The growth of land vehicles, including,
of course, the new cycle and motor car trades, greatly sur-
passes even the growth of the shipbuilding trades. The
following figures show the increase of occupation per
million of the population (over ten years of age) during the
last t#o decades : —

1881 1891 1901

Vehicles ... 3,280 3,694 4,679

Ships and boats ... 2,801 3,162 3,421

This great advance of the ship and vehicle industries
serves to introduce one of the most significant movements
of occupation, the enormous rise of the transport order. If
we add to the conveyance heading of tbo census certain
groups of workers engaged in or contributing to the railway
service, we find that the percentage for the last three decades
stands thus: —

1881 1891 1901

4-4 — 4-9 «. 5 - 5 ;

1851 ... ... ... ... 4. r per! cent.

1861 ... im ... ... 4*6 1,,

1871 ... 4*9

1881 ... .« ... ... 5.6 5 „

Each sub-order of the conveyance industries ghows a signal
advance in the amount of employment, except the sub-
order “on seas, rivers, and canals,” where thete is a slight
decline in absolute numbers during the twenty years. This
decline of British employment, however, is - attended by
a considerable growth of foreigners employed in British
ships, the total increase from 1887 to 1902 being consider-
ably faster than the increase of tonnage. 2

1 Mr. Booth’s different classification of transport in his analyses,
1831-81, includes elements omitted here.

* Statistical Abstract, Cd. 1727, p. 193.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


391


§ 3. Statistics of occupations in the United States exhibit
many of the same broad tendencies as those of Great
Britain, a decline in the proportion of agricultural employ-
ment, a large advance in the professional classes, in
commerce and the professions, a great development of
mining, and during the last decade a stoppage of the
earlier rise in the proportion of manufacturing and
mechanical classes.

The following table marks the broadest lines of change: —


Percentages of Total Employed Population.


1880

1890

1900

Agriculture ...

...

44-3

37.7

35-7

Professions


3*5

4.1

4-3

Domestic and personal service


19.7

18.6

19.2

Trade and transportation ...

...

10.7

14.6

16.4

Manufactures and mechanical pursuits

21.8

25.0

24.4


Many of the more detailed changes resemble those which
are occurring in England.

In the professions there is the same abnormal advance
of the teaching, medical, and legal classes. The increase
of the commercial classes is marked especially in employ-
ments connected with banking and insurance, and by an
enormous rise in the number of clerks, bookkeepers, ac-
countants, and commercial travellers. Most of the groups
engaged in the conveyance of persons, goods, and news
show an abnormal increase, especially those connected with
street traffic, telegraphic and telephonic services. Traders,
wholesale and retail, do not, however, advance so rapidly
as in England.

In the manufacturing and other productive industries the
most rapid recent advance is in the iron, steel, and
machinery trades, in cotton, hosiery, and silk, in paper and
printing, glass, oil, chemicals, and a few minor manufac-
tures. Among the manufactures which decline in the
proportion of employment they afford are many of the
building and food trades, brewing and distilling, watch and
clock-making, and precious metals, and various textile
trades. An absolute decline in employment between 1891
and 1901 is recorded in boot and shoemaking and the
general leather trade, in woollen and carpet manufacture,
and in most of the lumber manufactures, bricks, tiles, and


39 *


THE EVOLUTION OF


milling. Mining shows an immense increase, rising in ten
years from 387,000 to 564,000.

The only available comparison of the movements of
occupations in France, as afforded in the censuses of 1866
and 1896, exhibits the same general trend : —


Occupations . 1

Numbers.

Percentages.


1866

I 896

l 866

1896

Agriculture

6 , 195 . 329 s
( 7 , 200 , 000 )

8 , 421 , 3 x 9

52

1

47

Industry

4 . 715,805

6,373,239

34

35

Commerce

Professions (various) and

572,816

916,532

4

5

transport

488,630

971,433

3

5

Liberal professions

914,034

1 , 405,382

7

8


The rapid advance made by the “professional” classes,
liberal or industrial, the commercial and transport classes,
and in manufactures by the metal and food industries, is
exhibited by a closer analysis of these general figures.

The change of occupations in Germany is exhibited in a
comparison of the results of the two great industrial
censuses of 1882 and 1895: — 3


Occupations.

Numbers.

Percentages.


1882

1895

1882

1895

Agriculture and fishing

8,236,496

8,292,692

46.7

39*9

Industry and mining ...

6,396,465

8,281,220

36.2

399

Trade and transport ...

1,570,318

2,338,511

8.9 :

11.2

Domestic callings

397,582

432,491

2.2

2.07

Professions, military and


CIVll ... ... a*.

i j °3 i j i 47

1,425,961

5.8

6.8


17,632,008

20,770,875


1

Unoccupied

1,354,486

2,142,683


.


1 Table compiled from the Rhultais Siatistiqius de Recensement f
Tome iv., 1901.

* In order to compare 1866 with 1896 about one million domestic
employees must be accredited to the earlier year.

3 Statistichc Jahrbuchcr % 1885 and 1904.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


393


The detailed figures exhibit a striking parallel to the
larger changes of occupations exhibited by our analysis of
the English censuses, the same great advance in the mining,
metal, building industries, in transport and dealing, in
chemicals, printing and art trades, and in insurance ; while
textiles and clothing show a relative decline, and agricul-
ture is virtually t stationary in the absolute, and rapidly
retrogressive in the proportionate, employment it affords.

By way of comparing the four largest and most advanced
industrial countries with less developed countries, we may
take the following official tables exhibiting the tendencies
of occupations in Austria and Sweden : —

Austria. Percentages.


Agriculture


1890.

.. 62.5

1900.

58.2

Manufactures

...

.. 21.2

22.3

Trade and Commerce ...

...

.. 6.2 ...

7.3

Official and Professional Service

.. I O.I

12.2


-

100.0

100.0

SWEDEN.

Percentages.


1880.

1890.

1900.

Agriculture and Fishing ...

71.87

... 60.92 ...

55-32

Industry

1471

... 22.72 ...

27.08

Trade and Transport

5.06

... 8.92 ...

10.47

Public Service, etc. (in-
cluding professions)

8.36

... 7*44 —

7-13


— -

—

—


100.0

100.0

100.0


§ 4. In all these countries the statistics of occupations
point to certain common tendencies : —

1. A relative decline in the importance of agriculture, a
rapid positive decline in free-trade England with its earlier
development of capitalistic industry and its dense popula-
tion, a considerable relative decline in each of the other
countries, irrespective of tariff policy, density of population,
land tenure or manufacturing development. Agricultural
protection, combined with a large retention of small land-
owners as in France and Germany, the possession of a large
export trade in agricultural produce, as in the United
States, retard, but do not cancel, the operation of the
tendency.


394


THE EVOLUTION OF


2 . An abnormally rapid growth of the transport and
distributive trades (wholesale and retail) with the building,
car-making, electric, and other manufacturing industries
subsidiary to transport and distribution.

3. Wherever large deposits of coal and iron exist a great
development of employment in mines.

4. A relative decline of the staple or fundamental manu-
facturing industries, especially the textile and dressmaking,
as compared with the manufactures of final commodities
for consumption. Luxury trades, or trades subsidiary to
the arts and professions, present an increasing proportion
of occupation.

5. In almost every instance a large, rapid increase in the
proportion of the occupied population engaged in public
services, professions, and other branches of non-material
production.

6. An increase in the proportion of the retired or un-
occupied classes.

Now it is evident that these movements are in part the
expression of the evolution of capitalism through improved
economies of machinery and the attendant organisation of
labour. Where machinery is most perfected and most
generally applied, as in the leading branches of the textile
and other staple manufactures, such as milling, we find
everywhere a relative, in several instances a positive, decline
in the quantity of occupation, notwithstanding the existence
of a large export trade in these articles. The minor in-
dustries, especially those concerned with the supply of
luxuries, and other articles, the demand for which fluctuates
with fashion, season, or taste, or where rapid changes in the
methods of production preclude the large use of expensive
machinery, absorb a larger and larger proportion of the
manufacturing classes. But manufacture, as a whole, does
not advance at all, or at any rate not so fast as commerce
and transport. This is evidently due in part to the fact
that machinery and the routine economies of modern
capitalism are less applicable to these latter industries.
Commerce, wholesale or retail, employs a much smaller
amount of fixed capital than manufactures, and although
the proportion of fixed capitals in the shape of machinery is
very large in the main branches of the transport trades, only
a comparatively small proportion of the employees in these


MODERN CAPITALISM.


395


trades are directly engaged in operating machinery, the
great majority being occupied in subsidiary operations to
which machine economy is but slightly applicable. The
great proportionate increase of mining and building em-
ployment in most countries is also attributable in part to
the comparatively small use of machinery in these opera-
tions, though it is possible that the use of coal-cutting and
other machinery of digging and haulage for mining, and the
use of prepared steel, wood, and other machine-made
materials in the building trades, may reduce the growth of
direct employment in these industries.

The rapid growth of the professions, and of most of the
other classes engaged in producing 4 ‘services” or non-
material forms of wealth, is evidently due in large measure,
to the inherently individual economy of these modes of
production.

The decline in the proportion of domestic service to the
total of the occupied classes, exhibited in England and
America, seems at first sight inconsistent with the attribu-
tion of so much importance to the capitalist economy. But
reflection will show that while something may here be
attributed to the reduction in supply for domestic services
arising from the increased use of women in industrial and
commercial occupations, a more direct source of the decline
is the removal from the home, and the performance by
machine-industry, of many of those processes of washing,
cooking, cleaning, dressmaking, etc., which were formerly
done at home. This is one of the most obvious economies
of that city life which is lived by an ever larger proportion
of our population.

§ 5. The positive or relative decline of agricultural occupa-
tions cannot, however, be adequately explained by the growth
of machinery and scientific methods. Nor is it in the main
attributable to dependence upon foreign countries for food
supplies, for the United States, a great food exporter, and
France, Germany, and Sweden, all of which are almost self-
supporting in agricultural products, show rapid reduction in
the proportionate employment in agriculture. Against the
economies of machinery and of more scientific farming must
be set the necessity of having recourse to less fertile lands
to meet the growing demands of consumers.

In order to explain the decline of agricultural employ-


396


THE EVOLUTION OF


ment we must look not so much to changes in production
as to changes in consumption. Every rise of the standard
of consumption for a class or a nation is attended by a fall
in the proportion which food and other products of the soil
bear to the total of consumption. Whereas in the early
decades of the nineteenth century food swallowed up almost
the entire income of the poorer sections of the working
classes, and was by far the largest factor in the expenditure
of the upper working and lower middle classes, its present
place in the standard of comfort of these classes, though
important, is much smaller. If any accurate comparative
statistics of consumption for the entire English nation were
available, it is certain that the proportion of the general
income of the nation expended upon food and other
raw materials obtained by agriculture would show a rapid
diminution during the last eighty years. What is true of
food is also true of many sorts of manufactured goods, as
the standard of comfort of large classes of a nation advances
further. Though for the working classes the earlier
advances of real wages from a bare subsistence economy
may be taken almost entirely in demand for better and
more various foods, and for larger quantities of furniture,
clothing, and other manufactured goods, further advances
exhibit a larger expenditure upon recreation, travel, educa-
tion, professional services; and the middle and well-to-do
classes spend a still larger share of their growing incotnes
upon non-material consumption and upon those more
highly-finished or artistic forms of material wealth which
derive a smaller proportion of their value from the extractive
and mechanical processes. The paper and printing trades,
as a half-way house between material and intellectual com-
modities, advancing in every country far faster than the
occupied population, in spite of their great use of machine
economies, may be cited as a convincing instance of the
change in consumption. If improved education ever brings
a better economy of reading, substituting a qualitative for a
quantitative consumption, a diminution of the paper and
print occupations may follow, accompanied by an increase
of occupation in the higher non-material arts of literary and
scientific interpretation, or even by a substitution of the
non-economic art of thinking.

The rapid growth of the professional and commercial


MODERN CAPITALISM.


397


classes is partly attributable to the fact that a larger number
of people have more money to spend upon the services
rendered by these less mechanical occupations. But partly
the growth of these classes may be regarded as an artificial
inflation, due to a combination of economic and social
circumstances. The superior social consideration attaching
to a professional career, or conversely the dislike of a life of
manual or mental routine in manufacture or commerce
among an increasing middle class, together with a great
expansion of the means of professional education, leads to a
congestion of many of the professions and to a growth of
what is sometimes called an u intellectual proletariat,” a
struggling, ill-paid, and irregularly employed mass of quali-
fied teachers, doctors, engineers, journalists, and other
writers.

While a large increase of wholesale and retail dealers,
agents, travellers, and other commercial classes is required
for the improved distribution of the growing quantities of
cheapened material products, the actual increase of many
of these classes seems greatly in excess of this requirement.
The increasing difficulty experienced in setting up for one-
self with any prospect of success in a manufacturing busi-
ness, as a farmer or other independent producer, drives
larger and larger numbers of men into commercial pursuits,
where with smaller and less specialised training they can
struggle to earn a living by cutting into one or other of
the distributive processes, as merchant, broker, retailer, or
agent for some mercantile or insurance business. It is
easier to enter the distributive competition with a chance of
getting away some business from another firm than to enter
a productive business. While therefore it is doubtless true
that an excessive amount of productive power exists in
many of our manufacturing industries, the waste is far less
than is caused in the mercantile and retail processes by the
reckless multiplication of distributors.

§ 6. The normal development of occupations for a nation
passing through the era of modern capitalism would seem
to be as follows: — Beginning at a point where the large
majority of the population were occupied in or about agri-
culture, and a small minority occupied exclusively in manu-
facture or in commerce, it would proceed to provide more
and more occupation in the mining and staple manufao


39 *


THE EVOLUTION OF


turing industries, especially in the main textile and metal
trades. Proceeding further it would effect great economies
in the fundamental manufactures, or would become a large
importer of the cruder manufactures, and would employ
itself more largely in the final stages of manufacturing
commodities for consumers, in novel industries concerned
with special tastes and luxuries. Transport and commercial
operations will then come to play a greater part, and the
finance aspect of business life to engage an increased
amount of energy. While “dealing” becomes relatively
more important than “ making ” in regard to the occupation
it affords, the production and distribution of non-material
as compared with material goods grows apace — that is to
say, the arts and professions (including the art of Govern-
ment) engage a larger share of the population. When the
general standard of consumption for the great mass of the
-people has reached a point where the more urgent needs of
food, clothing, housing are satisfied, all further rises in
the standard represent a larger proportion of demand for
recreation, education, professional services and other im-
material forms of wealth. How rapidly a national economy
will follow this line of progress depends largely upon special
circumstances. Among these the most important are the
relative power of the working classes to secure a share of
the increased material wealth which capitalist methods tend
to produce, and the freedom and expansibility of foreign
markets. Where a large expansion of home markets for
agricultural and manufacturing products is furnished by a
rising effective demand on the part of the main body of the
nation, and where at the same time a larger command of
foreign markets is obtained, the proportion of employment
in the productive arts may remain large for a considerable
period. The rapidly expanding markets for British manu-
factures during the first two-thirds of the nineteenth century
served to maintain a very large proportion of the people in
productive occupations in spite of the great economies of
labour effected by machinery. Where a rigorous protective
policy prevails, as in the United States, Germany, and
France, the rate of displacement of agricultural and manu-
facturing occupations by commercial and professional is
considerably slower. These nations, not entering the era
of machine economy for manufactures until half-a-centuiy


MODERN CAPITALISM.


399


later than Great Britain, have been enabled to furnish
occupation to a growing proportion of their populations in
the manufacturing arts, in part displacing by home products
the former imports from Great Britain, in part providing for
the early increments of a material standard of comfort for
their growing populations.

Where a nation enters the modern capitalist economy
with a low standard of material comfort for the masses, a
growing population and a protective system, it may post-
pone for a long time the diminution of agricultural and
manufacturing occupation which is an inevitable tendency
of an advanced economy,

§ 7. The bearing of this upon international trade is ob-
vious. Although the number of wants common to members
of different nations constantly increases, and an international
standard of comfort thus established furnishes an ever-
growing basis of international division of labour and
exchange, very definite limits exist at any time to the
kinds of national wealth really available for international
trade. While improved and cheapened methods of storage
and transport continually increase the quantity of foods,
raw materials, and manufactured goods available for wide
international distribution, an ever-increasing proportion of
national energy is put into those final processes of preparing
these material forms of wealth for consumers, and into the
processes of distribution, which are of necessity confined to
national industry. Again, every increase of the transport
trades, and every growth in the proportionate importance of
the arts, professions, and other branches of non-material
production, further restricts the proportion of the national
wealth adapted to international exchange. Where a nation
is throwing an increasing proportion of its energies into
these occupations, the proportion of its aggregate demands
which is of a nature to be supplied from extra-national
sources will diminish. It by no means follows that the
volume and value of its imports is diminished either abso-
lutely or in proportion to its total expenditure. Such a
nation may, for a time at any rate, rely to an increasing
extent upon foreigners for its supplies of food, raw material,
and cruder manufactures. So long as it has large access to
the markets of less advanced nations, it may displace its
own agriculture and even its manufactures by imported


400 THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM.


goods consumed in rises of the material standard of comfort
of the people, and paid for to an increasing extent by higher
types of manufacture and by various sorts of services, com-
mercial and financial.

While there is no theoretic limit thus assigned to the
growth of an import trade which may more and more dis-
place the more primitive home industries, it is to be ex-
pected that, as a diminishing proportion of the national
consumption takes shape in cruder commodities, so in time
the growth of the aggregate import trade will be checked,
a diminishing proportion of the national income being
expended upon buying foreign goods. This decline in the
relative importance of foreign trade, so far from implying a
fall of national prosperity, would imply an advance, signify-
ing, as it would, that such a nation has become rich enough
to spend a larger share of its income upon higher forms of
wealth.

Great Britain is the nation which has gone furthest in this
evolution. The history of her foreign trade during the
nineteenth century shows her during the first half increasing
the value of her import and export trade at a pace enor-
mously more rapid than the growth of her aggregate income,
foreign trade assuming an ever greater importance. About
i860 the pace of growth of foreign trade began to slacken,
advancing at a pace which but slightly exceeded the growth
of the aggregate income of the nation. After 1885 a slow
decline in the rate of growth as compared with national
income is discernible. It seems likely that Great Britain
has already passed the turning-point in the development of
foreign trade, and that in the future, while the volume
and even the value of her imports (and therefore of her
exports) will show a continual advance, those imports will
constitute a slowly diminishing proportion of the annual
aggregate of commodities and services consumed by the
nation.

The statistics of occupations among other advanced in-
dustrial nations indicate that, though their later develop-
ment may keep them for some time further in the era of
rapidly expanding foreign trade, the time will come when
they also will be subject to the same law, the aggregate of
their national industry growing faster than their foreign
trade.


401


CHAPTER XVII.

CIVILISATION AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.

| K. Imperfect Adjustment of Industrial Structure to its
Environment

§ 2, Reform upon the Basis of Private Enterprise and Free
Trade.

§ 3. Freedom and Transparency of Industry powerless to
cure the deeper Industrial Maladies.

§ 4. Beginnings of Public Control of Machine-production.

§ 5. Passage of Industries into a public Non-competitive
Condition.

§ 6. The “ raison litre” of Progressive Collectivism.

§ 7. Collectivism follows the line of Monopoly.

§ 8. Cases of " Arrested Development the Sweating
Trades.

§ 9. Genuine Survivals of Small Industry \

§ 10. The Natural Limits of Collectivism.

S 11. Improved Quality of Consumption the Condition of
Social Progress.

§12. The Highest Division of Labour between Machinery
and Art.

§ 13. Qualitative Consumption defeats the Law of Decreasing
Returns.

§ 14. Freedom of Art from Limitations of Matter.

§15. Machinery and Art in production of Intellectual
Wealth.

§16. Reformed Consumption abolishes Anti-Social Com-
petition.

§17. Economies of Intellectual Production.

§ 1 8. Life itself must become Qualitative .

§19, The basis , Individuation.

§ 20. Organic Relations between Production and Consumption.

§ 21. Summary of Progress towards a Coherent Industrial
Organism*


402


THE EVOLUTION OF


§ i. Modem industrial societies have hitherto secured to a
very inadequate extent the services which modern machinery
and methods of production are capable of rendering. The
actual growth of material wealth, however great, has been
by no means commensurate with the enormously increased
powers of producing material commodities afforded by the
discoveries of modern science, and the partial utilisation
of these discoveries has been attended by a very unequal
distribution of the advantages of this increase in the stock
of common knowledge and control of nature. Moreover,
as an offset against the growth of material wealth, machinery
has been a direct agent in producing certain material and
moral maladies which impair the health of modem in-
dustrial communities.

The unprecedented rapidity and irregularity of the
discovery and adoption of the new methods made it im-
possible for the structure of industrial society to adjust
itself at once to the conditions of the new environment
The maladies and defects which we detect in modern in-
dustry are but the measure of a present maladjustment

The progressive? adjustment of structure to environment
in the unconscious or low-conscious world is necessarily
slow. But where the conscious will of man, either as an
individual or as a society, can be utilised for an adjusting
force, the pace of progress may be indefinitely quickened.
A strongly-rooted custom in a man yields very slowly to
the pressure of changed circumstances which make it useless
or harmful, unless the man consciously recognises the
inutility of the custom and sets himself to root it out and
plant another custom in its place. So the slowness of this
work of industrial adjustment has been in no small measure
due to the lack of definite realisation by the members of
modern communities of the need and importance of this
adjustment. A society which should bring its conscious
will to bear upon the work of constructing new social and
industrial forms to fit the new economic conditions, may
make a progress which, while rapid, may yet be safe,
because it is not a speculative progress, but one which is
guided in its line of movement, by precedent changes of
environment

Regarding, then, this conscious organised endeavour,
enlightened and stimulated by a fuller understanding of


MODERN CAPITALISM.


403


industrial forces in their relation to human life, as a deter-
minant of growing value in the industrial evolution of the
future, it may properly belong to a scientific study of
modern industry to seek to discover how the forces of
conscious reform can reasonably work in relation to the
economic fences whose operations have been already in-
vestigated.

In other words, what are the chief lines of economic
change required to bring about a readjustment between
modem methods of production and social welfare? The
answer to this question requires us to amplify our interpre-
tation of the industrial evolution of the past century, by
producing into the future the same lines of development,
that they may be justified by the appearance of consistency
with some rational social end. The most convenient, and
perhaps the safest way to meet this demand is to indicate,
with that modesty which rightly belongs to prophecy, some
of the main reforms which seem to lie upon the road of
industrial progress, rendered subordinate to larger human
social ends.

§ 2. So far as the waste of economic maladjustment
consists in the excessive or defective application of various
kinds of productive force at different points of industry,
upon the existing basis of individual initiative and control,
the reforms which are desirable must be considered as
contributing to the more complete establishment of “ free ”
competition in industry.

The complete breakdown of all barriers which impede
the free flow of commerce and the migration of capital and
labour, the fullest and widest dissemination of industrial
information, are necessary to the attainment of the indi-
vidualistic ideal of free trade. Perfect transparency of
industrial operations, perfect fluidity of labour and of wealth
would effect incalculably great economies in the production
of commercial wealth. The free-trader, in his concentration
upon the achievement of the latter economy, has generally
failed to do full justice to the importance of the former.
He has indeed to some limited extent recognised the value
of accurate and extended industrial information^ as the
intellectual basis of free trade. But, in common with most
economists, he has failed to carry this consideration far
enough. It is generally admitted that the increased pub-


404


THE EVOLUTION OF


lication of accounts and quotations of stock, springing out
of the extension of joint-stock enterprise, the growth of
numerous trade journals, the collection and dissemination
of industrial facts by government bureaux and private
statisticians, are serviceable in many ways. But the extreme
repugnance which is shown towards all endeavours to
extend the compulsory powers of acquiring information by
the state, the extreme jealousy with which the rights of private
information are maintained, show how inadequately the true
character of modem industry is grasped. In the complexity
of modern commerce it should be recognised that there is
no such thing as a “ self-regarding ” or a private action. No
fact bearing on prices, wages, profits, methods of produc-
tion, etc., merely concerns a single firm or a single body
of workers. Every industrial action, however detailed in
character, however secretly conducted, has a public import,
and necessarily affects the actions and interests of innumer-
able persons. Indeed it is often precisely in the knowledge
of those matters regarded as most private, and most carefully
secreted, that the public interest chiefly lies. Yet so firmly
rooted in the business mind is the individualistic conception
of industry, that any idea of a public development of those
important private facts upon which the credit of a particular
firm is based, would appear to destroy the very foundation
of the commercial fabric. But, although in the game of
commerce a single firm which played its hand openly while
others kept theirs well concealed might suffer failure, it is
quite evident that the whole community interested in the
game would gain immensely if all the hands were on the
table. Many, if not most, of the great disasters of modern
commercial societies are attributable precisely to the fact that
the credit of great business firms, which is pre-eminently an
affair of public interest, is regarded as purely private before
the crash. As industry grows more and more complex, so
the interest of the public and of an ever-wider public in
every industrial action grows apace, and a correspondingly
growing recognition of this public interest, with provision
for its security, will be found necessary. So far as the
natural changes of industrial structure in the private busi-
ness fail to provide the requisite publicity, the exercise of
direct public scrutiny must come to be enforced. The
reluctance shown alike by ^bodies of employers and of


MODERN CAPITALISM.


405


workers to divulge material facts is in large measure due to
the false ideas they have conceived as to the nature of
industrial activity, which education can do something to
remove, but which, if not removed, must be over-ruled in
the public interest

§ 3. It must not, however, be supposed that the most
thorough transparency of industry, any more than the
removal of the political barriers which prevent Free Trade,
would tend to bring about the desirable adjustment between
the healthy social organism and the environment of machine-
production. Full free trade would supply, quicken, and
facilitate the operation of those large economic forces which
we have seen at work : the tendency of capital to gravitate
into larger and fewer masses, localised where labour can
be maintained upon the most economical terms : a corre-
spondent but slower and less complete organisation of labour
in large masses : the flow of labouring population into towns,
together with a larger utilisation of women and (where per-
mitted) children for industrial work : a growing keenness
of antagonism as the mass of the business-unit is larger,
and an increased expenditure of productive power upon
aggressive commercial warfare: the growth of monopolies
springing from natural, social, or economic sources, con-
ferring upon individuals or classes the power to consume
without producing, and by their consumption to direct the
quantity and character of large masses of labour.

The complete realisation of full free trade in all directions
has no power whatever to abate the activity of these forces,
and would only serve to bring their operation into more
signal and startling prominence.

For the waste of periodic over-production visible in trade
depression, for the sufferings caused by ever larger oscilla-
tions in prices and great irregularity of employment of
capital and labour, for the specific evils of long hours or
excessive intensity of labour, dangerous and unwholesome
conditions of employment, increased employment of women
and children, and growth of large-city life, freedom of trade
conjoined with publicity of business operations can furnish
no remedies.

It has been seen that these injuries to individuals and
groups of individuals, and through them to society, arise
naturally and necessarily from the unfettered operation of


THE EVOLUTION OF


406

the enlightened self-interest of individuals and groups of
individuals engaged in obtaining for themselves, by the
freest use of industrial means available, the largest quantity
of money.

So far as these evils are in form or in magnitude the
peculiar products of the last two centuries, they are in large
measure traceable to methods of production controlled by
machinery, and to the social estimate of machine-products
which gives machinery this controlling power.

If this is so, such progress as shall abate these evils and
secure for humanity the uses of machinery without the
abuses will lie in two directions, each of which deserves
consideration : (1) an adequate social control over machine-
production; (2) an education in the arts of consumption
such as may assign proper limits to the sphere of machine-
production.

§ 4. That machinery subject to the unrestricted guidance
of the commercial interests of an individual or a class
cannot be safely trusted to work for the general welfare, is
already conceded by all who admit the desirability or neces-
sity of the restrictive legislation of Factory Acts, Mines
Regulation Acts, and the large growth of public provisions
for guarding against economic, hygienic, and other injuries
arising from the conditions of modem industrial life.

These provisions, whether designed directly to secure the
interests of a class of employees, as in the case of Factory
Acts, or to protect the consuming public, as in the case of
Adulteration Acts, must be regarded as involving an admis-
sion of a genuine antagonism between the apparent interests
of individuals and of the whole community, which it is the
business of society to guard against.

All this legislation is rightly interpreted as a restriction of
the freedom of individual industry under modem methods
of production, required in the public interest. Uncontrolled
machine-production would in some cases force children of
six or eight years to work ten hours a day in an unhealthy
factory, would introduce suddenly a host of Chinese or
other “cheap” workers to oust native labour accustomed to
a higher standard of comfort, would permit an ingenious
manufacturer to injure the consumer by noxious adulteration
of his goods, would force wages to be paid by orders upon
shops owned or controlled by employers, would oblige


MODERN CAPITALISM,


407

workers to herd together in dens of infection, and to breed
physical and moral diseases which would injure the body
politic. The need of a growing social control over modern
machine-production, in cases where that production is left
in the main to the direction of individual enterprise, is
admitted on every side, though the development of that
control has been uneven and determined by the pressure of
concrete grievances rather than by the acceptance of any
distinct theory of public responsibility.

Other limitations upon individual freedom of industry
imply a clearer recognition of the falsehood of the laissez
fairt position. The undertaking by the State or the Muni-
cipality, or other units of social life, of various departments
of industry, such as the railways, telegraphs, post-offices, is
a definite assertion that, in the supply of the common
services rendered by these industries, the competition of
private interests cannot be relied upon to work for the
public good

§ 5. The industries which the State either limits or
controls in the interest either of a body of workers or of
the consuming public may be regarded as passing from a
private competitive condition to a ''public non-competitive
condition. If therefore we wish to ascertain how far and
in what directions social control of modern production
will proceed, we shall examine those industries which
already exhibit the collective character. We shall find that
they are of two kinds — (1) industries where the size and
structure of the “business” is such that the protection
afforded by competition to the consuming public and to
the workers has disappeared, or is in frequent abeyance;
(2) industries where the waste and damage of excessive
competition outweighs the loss of enterprise caused by a
removal or restriction of the incentive of individual gain.
As we have seen in the analysis' of “trusts,” these two
characteristics, wasteful competition and monopoly, are
often closely related, the former signifying the process of
intense struggle, the object and ultimate issue of which is
to reach the quiet haven of monopoly. Generally speaking,
social control in the case of over-competing industries is
limited to legislative enactments regarding conditions of
employment and quality of goods. Only those industries
tend to pass under public administration where the mon-


408


THE EVOLUTION OF


opoly is of an article of general and necessary consumption,
and where, therefore, a raising of prices considerably above
the competition rate would not succeed in evoking effective
competition. Since the general tendency of industry, so far
as it falls under modem economies of machinery and method,
is either towards wasteful competition or towards monopoly,
it is to be expected that there will be a continual expansion
of State interference and State undertakings. This growing
socialisation of industry must be regarded as the. natural
adjustment of society to the new conditions of machine*
production. As under the economies of machine-produc-
tion the business-unit, the mass of capital and labour
forming a single “ firm ” or “business,’' grows larger in size
and more potent in its operations, the social disturbances
which it can occasion by its private activity, the far-reaching
and momentous results of its strain of competition, the
probability of an anti-social exercise of “ monopolic ” power
over the whole or part of its market-area, will of necessity
increase. The railway and shipping industries, for example,
in countries like England ana the United States, have
already reached a stage of industrial development when the
social danger arising from" an arbitrary fixing of rates by a
line or a “pool” of lines, from a strike or lock-out of
dockers or railway men, is gaining keener recognition
every year. The rapidly growing organisation of both
capital and labour, especially in the fundamental industries
of coal, iron, and machine-making, in the machine-transport
industries, and the most highly evolved manufactories, gives
to a body of employers or employed, or to a combination
of both, the power at any moment to paralyse the whole or
a large portion of the entire trade of a country in pursuit of
some purely private interest or resentment, or in the acquis-
ition of some strategical position, which shall enable them
to strengthen their competing power or gain a monopoly.
Although the organisation of masses of capital and of labour
may, as is often urged, make industrial strife less frequent,
the effects of such strife upon the wider public, who have no
opportunity of casting a vote for war or peace, are more
momentous. Moreover, as these private movements of
capital and labour proceed, the probability of combined
action between employers and employed in a particular
industry, to secure for themselves some advantages at the


MODERN CAPITALISM.


409

public expense, will be a factor of increasing importance in
industrial evolution.

The Trade Union movement and the various growths of
Industrial Partnership, valuable as they are from many
points of view*, furnish no remedies against the chief forms
of economic monopoly and economic waste ; they can only
change the personality and expand the number of monopo-
lists, and alter the character, not the quantity, of economic
waste. Society has an ever-deepening and more vital in-
terest in the economical management of the machinery of
transport, and this interest is no whit more secure if the
practical control of railways and docks were in the hands of
the Dockers’ Union or the Amalgamated Society of Rail-
way Servants, or of a combined board of directors and trade
union officials, than it is under present circumstances. On
the contrary, an effective organisation of capital and labour
in an industry would be more likely to pursue a policy
opposed to the interests of the wider public than now,
because such a policy would be far more likely to succeed.

§ 6. When it is said that modem industry is becoming
essentially more collective in character and therefore de-
mands collective control, what is meant is that under
modern industrial development the interest of the industrial
society as a whole, and of the consuming public in each
piece of so-called private enterprise, is greater than it was
ever before, and requires some guarantee that this interest
shall not be ignored. Where the industry is of such a kind,
and in such a stage of development, that keen competition
without undue waste survives, this public interest can com-
monly be secured by the enactment of restrictive legislation.
Where such partial control is insufficient to secure the
social interest against monopoly or waste, State manage-
ment, upon a national, municipal, or such other scale as is
economically advisable, must take the place of a private
enterprise which is dangerous to society. This necessity
becomes obvious as soon as the notion of a business as
being purely “ private ” or “ self-regarding ” in its character
is seen to be directly negatived by an understanding of the
complex social nature of every commercial act So soon as
the idea of a social industrial organism is grasped, the
question of State interference in, or State assumption of,
an industry becomes a question of social expediency — that


4io


THE EVOLUTION OF


is, of the just interpretation of the facts relating to the
particular case. In large measure this social control is to
be regarded, not as a necessary protection against the
monopolic power of individuals, but as necessary for the
security of individual property within the limits prescribed
by social welfare. Modern machine-evolution, as is seen,
permits and encourages the wanton invasion and destruction
of forms of capital by the competition of new savings em-
ployed in an anti-social way. It likewise tends to the
frequent destruction of the value of that labour power which
is the sole property of the mass of workers. “ The property
which every man has in his own labour, as it is the original
foundation, so it is the most sacred and inviolable. 1,1

There are certain wastes of economic power involved
in all competition ; there are certain dangers of monopoly
attaching to all private conduct of industry. Collective con-
trol deals with these wastes and dangers, adjusting itself to
their extent and character.

§ 7. To the question how far and how rapidly may this ex-
tension of collective control proceed, no more definite answer
is possible than this, that as a larger and larger amount of
industry passes into the condition of the most highly evolved
machine-industries of to-day, and develops along with the
corresponding economies, corresponding dangers and wastes,
larger portions will pass under restrictive legislation or State
management

The evolution in the structure of capitalist enterprise, while
it breeds and aggravates the diseases of trade depression,
sweating, etc., likewise prepares the way and facilitates the
work of social control. It is easier to inspect a few large
factories than many small ones, easier to arbitrate where
capital and labour stands organised in large masses, easier
to municipalise big joint-stock businesses in gas, water, or
conveyance. Every legislative interference, in the way of
inspection or minor control, quickens the evolution of an
industry, and hastens the time when it acquires the position
of monopoly which demands a fuller measure of control,
and finally passes into the ranks of public industry.

Thus it would follow that, unless proceeding part passu
with this evolution there was a springing up or an expansion


1 WiaUh of Nations I p, no.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


411

of other industries not so amenable to large machine pro-
duction, and therefore not prone to the dangers and wastes
which appertain to it, collectivism would absorb an ever-
increasing proportion of industrial effort.

§ 8. At present it appears that there are several classes
of productive work which are not amenable to machine-
economy. There is much work which, though it could be
performed by machinery so far as technical character is
concerned, cannot economically be undertaken in factories
so long as large quantities of very cheap hand : labour are
procurable. This class comprises the bulk of what are
commonly called the “ sweating ” trades, conducted for the
most part in the homes of the workers, or in small work-
shops. Most of these trades are rightly regarded as cases
of “ arrested development,” in the sense that they are kept
out of the main course of industrial evolution by certain
special circumstances relating chiefly to the supply of cheap
labour. The wasteful working of the industrial system even
in its best-ordered parts, the irregular and incalculable
changes by which quantities of skilled labour are supplanted
by new machinery, ill-directed migration of labour from
country to town and from foreign lands, the diminution of
domestic work for women in the home, these and other
movements feed the large industrial centres with quantities
of unskilled and untrained labour which can be bought so
cheaply that in the lowest grades of many industries it does
not pay the capitalist entrepreneur to incur the initial cost
of setting up expensive machinery and the risk of working it.

Not only in the manufactures but in other occupations
this existence of a permanent pool of low-skilled, inefficient
labour presents a grave obstacle to the social and moral
order of industrial nations. Large masses of “general” or
casual labourers, dockers, cheap commercial clerks, shop-
assistants, etc., offer by their presence in the labour market
an unsurmountable obstacle to the better organisation of
the occupations to which they adhere. The low economic
calibre of these grades of workers, their lack of skill, educa-
tion, their low standard of consumption, keep alive a
number of small, irregular, loosely-managed businesses,
retarding the legitimate evolution of organised capitalism,
and sustaining the most wasteful and degrading sorts of
competition.


412


THE EVOLUTION OF


Economic and social progress demands the destruction
of these arrested developments: sanitary and other
humanitarian legislation should harry the sweating den;
technical and general education should implant more
skill and evoke more wants; trade-organisation, where
practicable, should make for higher wages and other im-
proved conditions of employment; labour colonies and a
more enlightened poor-law administration should assist to
drain these malarial marshes. The retarded or discarded
growths of “sweating” trades involve social surgery for their
removal, and the governmental “interference” it involves
should rightly be distinguished from the “socialism” which
consists in the conversion of private normally grown
monopolies into public undertakings.

§ 9. But apart from these degraded survivals of pre-
capitalist business, there are other kinds of work which remain
outside of capitalist production, because they are from theii
nature or the necessary conditions of their performance not
amenable to machine industry. In branches subsidiary to
the great routine industries we have seen that much work
of final production and of repair remains in small busi-
nesses, that a genuine and healthy survival of hand-labour
may exist in trades too dependent upon fluctuating demands
to enable them to pass under factory rule, and that where
the irregularity of the material or of the conditions of
work preclude full use of routine methods, as over a large
part of agriculture, an economy of small-scale production
survives.

Certain recent tendencies of mechanical development
favour, and may even extend, these types of small industry.
The extension of small-power machine^ and the cheaper
distribution of electric power, under public ownership or
control, might give a new independence to small masters
in some of our manufactures; while greater facilities and
cheapness of transport might substitute co-operation of
small farmers for the centralising process even in cases
where the latter is at present predominant

These genuine survivals of small businesses in agriculture
and the manufactures, as also in certain departments of
commerce, are, as we have seen, attributable to elements
of personal care, skill, and interest, which, forming im-
portant conditions of success, are found to outweigh the


MODERN CAPITALISM.


413


economies of large-scale production. They are, in fact,
elements which distinguish the business where they are
found from mechanical industry, and stamp upon it the
character of an art.

Wherever these individual mental activities of workers
play a considerable part the art-economy displaces the
machine-economy. Such arts or crafts may often be far
removed in their end or purpose from the fine arts that are
concerned with producing objects of which the utility con-
sists in their “beauty”; sometimes they may be exercised
merely in getting common forms of “ standardised” goods
out of irregular or otherwise intractable materials, or in the
skilled use of climate, soil, and other natural conditions ; at
other times the individuality of the worker is directed to
meet some special need or taste of the consumer that be-
longs to a narrowly utilitarian order. But wherever these
characteristics of an industry attain importance, the direct
stream of tendency towards large capitalism and machine-
economy is checked or reversed.

Although, as has been pointed out, the indirect control of
the capitalist system over the surviving forms of small handi-
crafts, farming, retail distribution, and even over the profes-
sions and the fine arts, is sometimes very considerable, the
survival of these large and even growing departments of
industry in small business forms vitalised by individual
qualities of workmanship is a phenomenon of supreme
significance.

If, therefore, we provisionally accept the view which
regards the large routine-businesses, where mechanical
methods are dominant, as tending towards a condition
where competition disappears and public control, ultimately
public administration, become necessary, we must clearly
recognise the existence of even larger domains of industrial
activity which, not conforming to this economy, remain in a
state of competition and of private enterprise.

Accepting this method of interpretation, we shall be dis-
posed to regard those large routine-industries, where public
control is growing tighter, and which are striving ever more
successfully to eliminate competition, and to establish forms
of trade agreement or combination, as destined to pass into
the form of public industries.

§ 10. Our examination of tendencies in the more advanced


414


THE EVOLUTION OF


industrial countries enables us to designate pretty dearly
the general outline of this “socialistic” movement. A more
definite re-assertion of public ownership of the land as the
chief source of the material and the power of industry, as
well as the basis of the home, is making its way in various
forms into the work of modern government. While the
present movement as regards agricultural and urban lands
is chiefly directed to securing for the public by taxation an
increased share of land-values, the growing recognition of
the needs of city life imposes everywhere more restrictions
upon the private use of lands and an increased public
ownership of land for special public purposes. In modern
democratic countries an increased availability of land for
small settlers, embodying the principle of equal access
to the natural resources of the- soil, is rapidly advancing
as a public policy. Legal restrictions upon large estates
or upon other wasteful or extortionate uses of land are a
chief line of governmental action. But the growth of city
life in populous countries is pressing the demands for a
more rigorous control over urban areas which makes for
public ownership of city land as the final security for public
hygiene, convenience, aesthetics, and finance. How far the
interference with private contract, through the establish-
ment of land-courts and the utilisation of public credit
for converting tenants into owners, may turn out to be
the preparatory stage of a process of public ownership
of agricultural lands, occupied by tenants whose pay-
ment for their land may be regarded indifferently as a
tax or a rent, remains a question for answer in the near
future.

In regard to the primary uses of land, practicable socialism
may confine itself to securing for the State as large a share
of the annual value of the land as it can safely take, and to
imposing more stringent conditions upon " its uses, while
abstaining from any large exercise of public ownership and
administration. The greater interest imparted to the public
by modem industry in the limited mineral resources of land,
taken in conjunction with the appearance of cartels, trusts,
and other combinations for the capitalist control of mining
industries, places the latter in the category of those in-
dustries which appear destined to pass into public enter-
prise, and the fact that in certain countries they are so


MODERN CAPITALISM. 41 $

owned and administered favours this interpretation of the
tendency.

If we follow the general line of development indicated by
our earlier analysis, we shall ascribe to collectivism also the
administration of the chief modes of transport by land,
and probably by water, the main systems of national
and international highways. The greater part of the rail-
ways of the world are already public industries, and
it is extremely unlikely that Great Britain and America,
the two important exceptions, will long resist the demand
for nationalisation.

That local transport, especially in city areas, is passing
from private into public enterprise, pari passu with other
local routine services, is already sufficiently evident.
Although the energy of private capitalist companies has
at present secured this field for private profitable enter-
prise in most cities of the United States and many of
Great Britain, they cannot long hold a position which a
wider survey of the civilised world shows to be a gross
anomaly.

How far the nationalisation of manufacturing industry is
likely to go, we have at present insufficient data for
prophecy. If the prevalence of tariffs encourages the
growth of strong industrial trusts within national areas, the
instinct or necessity of public protection against these
monopolies may compel civilised states to substitute public
for private monopoly, arrd to embark upon those funda-
mental metal, and other manufactures which are vital
factors in national industry and consumption. Such a step
would, however, be prefaced by a series of experiments in
taxation and control, through restrictive legislation affecting
prices and conditions of employment But while there is
no early probability of modern industrial states engaging
in manufactures (except for special purposes of revenue or
public security) there is more likelihood of a powerful, new,
direct public control over manufacturing industries being
exercised through public ownership of manufacturing power.
As electricity becomes more and more the source of
industrial power for manufacturing as well as for transport
services, the ownership and distribution of this power
will more and more be recognised as a function which
municipalities, or other larger public areas of govern-


41 6 THE EVOLUTION OF

ment, must undertake. Whether this new industrial power
continue to be generated from coal, or in some other
way, its safe and economical production and distribution
over local areas cannot be long entrusted to private
companies. This socialisation of manufacturing power is
likely long to ante-date any considerable socialisation
of concrete manufacturing processes, and may possibly
become so potent an instrument of public control as
to render unnecessary public ownership and working of
specific manufactures.

How far municipal or other public enterprise is likely to
invade the distributing trades depends, in part, upon the
rate at which the carrying trades generally pass into public
trade, partly upon the success or failure of the numerous
experiments in inspection which are at present regarded
as sufficient safeguards of the public interest in many
trades. Where, however, strong control over prices by
local rings exists, or where inspection is proved inadequate
to secure the public health against diseased or adulterated
wares, new invasions upon the domain of private trade will
occur.

The public abattoirs which already exist in many
European cities may turn out to be the first stage in a
public meat supply; municipal dairies and bakeries may
displace private trade in bread and milk; while the present
extortionate practices of rings of coal merchants would
hardly be likely to survive public ownership and manage-
ment of railroads. Though the general machinery of credit
and insurance still remains for the most part in private
businesses, considerable encroachments in the shape of
State insurance and public savings banks have been made.
Here, as in many other departments, the forward movement
in many countries takes shape in municipalism rather than
in nationalism, and municipal insurance schemes, banks,
and pawnshops are occupying places of increased import-
ance in the development of public city life.

It is very germane to our present outlook to recognise
the supersession of private by public enterprise which is
taking place in that department of production which we
term the professions. The assumption of education as a
chief function of the State is of course the most conspicuous
instance of this tendency. In most European countries,


MODERN CAPITALISM.


417


however, the socialisation of medical services and of general
hygiene is advancing at a considerable pace* Even in Great
Britain the majority of our hospitals and infirmaries are
publicly supported and managed, and public dispensaries
play an increasing part in the hygienic machinery of the
country. Though the socialisation of law, in the sense of
free access to public advice and administration of justice,
is very far from completion, certain notable advances have
been made in most countries within recent times. In
Great Britain the extension of law to cover new areas of
controversy, reforms of procedure, as in bankruptcy and in
the administration of Public Companies Acts, gratuitous
legal advice of magistrates, criminal defences paid out of
the public purse, and various other movements illustrate
this slow, uneven, but continuous advance towards the fuller
nationalisation of justice.

The routine trades or professions engaged in supplying
common forms of recreation are also becoming socialised,
partly as appendages of public education or of public
hygiene. Art galleries, free libraries, public parks and
gardens are but a few of the embellishments of civic life
which form important bases of public professions and
industries.

§ n. We now stand face to face with the main objection
so often raised against all endeavours to remedy industrial
and social diseases by the expansion of public control.
Competition and the zest of individual gain, it is urged,
furnish the most effective incentive to enterprise and
discovery. Assuming that society were structurally com-
petent to administer industry officially, the establishment
of industrial order would be the death-blow to industrial
progress. The strife, danger, and waste of industrial com-
petition are necessary conditions to industrial vitality.

How much force do these objections contain in the light
of the information provided by our study of industrial
evolution ? It should be recognised at the outset that the
economic individualist is not a conservative, defending an
established order and pointing out the dangers attending
proposed innovations. Our analysis of the structure of
modern industry shows the progressive socialisation of
certain classes of industry as a step in the order of events,
equally natural and necessary with the earlier steps by which

a 7


THE EVOLUTION OP


418

machine-industry superseded handicraft and crystallised in
ever larger masses with changing relations to one another.
The indictment against social control over industry is an
indictment against a natural order of events, on the ground
that nature has taken a wrong road of advancement. It
is only possible to regard the legislative action by which
public control over industry is established as '* unnatural”
or “artificial” by excluding from “ Nature ” those social
forces which find expression in Acts of Parliament, an
eminently unscientific mode of reasoning.

But though this growing exercise of social control can-
not be regarded as “fighting against the constitution of
things, 31 1 it may be considered by those who hold we have
no guarantee of the future development of the human race, as
one of the lines of action in which the advancing enfeeble-
ment of man may express itself: the abandonment of
individual strife in commerce may be regarded as a mark of
diminishing vitality, which seeks immunity from effort and
an equable . condition of material comfort, in preference to
the risks and excitement of a more eventful and arduous
career. Order will be purchased at the price of progress :
the abandonment of individual enterprise in industry is part
of the decadence of humanity. This is the interpretation
which Dr. Pearson, in his National Life and Character , ,
places upon the socialistic tendencies of the age : the sup-
pression of competitive industry in order to cure poverty,
physical misery, and social injustice, will produce a society
which is “ sensuous, genial, fibreless.” The validity of such
a judgment rests upon two assumptions : first, that social
control of industry necessarily crushes the spirit of indi-
vidual enterprise and checks industrial progress; second,
that extension of State control over capitalist industry
necessarily implies a diminished scope of individual control
in the production of wealth.

The first assumption is open to a number of criticisms
which must be held to greatly modify its force, and which
may be summarised as follows : —

(i) Much individual enterprise in industry does not make
for industrial progress. A larger and larger proportion of
the energy given out in trade competition is consumed in

1 Spencer. Cmtem^ermry Review t March x8&t*


MODERN CAPITALISM.


419


violent warfare between trade rivals, and is not represented
either in advancement of industrial arts or in increase of
material wealth.

(2) History does not show greed of gain as the motive of>
the great steps in industrial progress. The love of science,
the pure delight of mechanical invention, the attainment of
some slight personal convenience in labour, and mere
chance, play the largest part in the history of industrial
improvements. These motives would be as equally oper-
ative under state-control as under private enterprise.

(3) Such personal inducements as may supply a useful
stimulus to the inventive faculty could be offered in socially-
controlled industry, not merely publicity and honour, but
such direct material rewards as were useful.

Industrial history shows that in modem competitive
industry the motive of personal gain is most wastefully
applied. On the one hand, the great mass of intelligent
workers have no opportunity of securing an adequate reward
for any special application of intelligence in mechanical
invention or other improvement of industrial arts. Few
great modem inventors have made money out of their
inventions. On the other hand, the entrepreneur , with just
enough business cunning to recognise the market value of
an improvement, reaps a material reward which is often enor-
mously in excess of what is economically required to induce
him to apply his “ business ” qualities to the undertaking.

(4) The same charges of weakened individual interest,
want of plasticity and enterprise, routine torpidity, are in a
measure applicable to every large business as compared with
a smaller. Adam Smith considered them fatal barriers to
the growth of joint-stock enterprise outside a certain
narrowly-defined range. But the economies of the large
business were found to outweigh these considerations. - So
a well-ordered state-industry may be the most economical
in spite of diminished elasticity and enterprise.

But while these considerations qualify the force of the
contention that state - control would give no scope for
industrial progress, they do not refute it The justification
of the assumption by the State of various functions, military,
judicial, industrial, is that a safe orderly routine in the
conduct of these affairs is rightly purchased by a loss of
elasticity and a diminished pace of progress. The arts of


4*o


THE EVOLUTION OF


war and of justice would probably make more advance
under private enterprise than under public administration,
and there is no reason to deny that postal and railway
services are slower to adopt improvements when they pass
under government controL

It may be generally admitted that, as the large modem
industries pass from the condition of huge private mon-
opolies to public departments, the routine character will
grow in them, and they will become less experimental and
more mechanical. It is the nature of machines to be
mechanical, and the perfection of machine-industries, as
of single machines, will be the perfection of routine. Just
in proportion as the machine has established its dominancy
over the various industries, so will they increase in size,
diminish in flexibility, and grow ripe for admission, as
routine businesses, into the ranks of state-industry. If the
chief object of society was to secure continual progress in
military arts and to educate to the utmost the military
qualities, it would be well to leave fighting to private
enterprise instead of establishing state monopolies in the
trade of war. It sacrifices this competition, with the progress
it induces and the personal fitness it evolves, in order that
the individual enterprise of its members may be exercised
in the competition of industrial arts, inducing industrial
progress and evolving industrial fitness. The substitution
of industrialism for warfare is not, however, understood to
imply a diminution of individual enterprise, but an altera-
tion in its application.

If, starting from this point of view, we regard human life
as comprising an infinite number of activities of different
sorts, operating upon different planes of competition and
educating different human “ fitnesses,” we shall understand
how the particular phase of industrial evolution we are
considering is related to the wider philosophic view of life.
All progress, from primitive savagedom to modern civilisa-
tion, will then appear as consisting in the progressive
socialisation of the lower functions, the stoppage of lower
forms of competition and of the education of the more
brutal qualities, in order that a larger and larger proportion
of individual activity may be engaged in the exercise of
higher functions, the practice of competition upon higher
planes, and the education of higher forms of fitness.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


421

If the history of past civilisation shows us this, there is an
h priori presumption that each further step in the repression
ot individual enterprise and in the extension of state-control
does not mean a net diminution in individual activity or
any relaxation of effort in self-assertion, but merely an eleva-
tion of the plane of competition and of the kind of human
qualities engaged This is, in fact, the philosophical defence
of progressive socialism, that human progress requires that
one after another the lower material animal functions shall
be reduced to routine, in order that a larger amount oP
individual effort may be devoted to the exercise of higher
functions and the cultivation by strife of higher qualities.

To suppose that the reduction of all machine-industry to
public routine services, when it becomes possible, will imply
a net diminution in the scope of individual self-expression,
rests upon the patent fallacy of assigning certain fixed
and finite limits to human interest and activity, so that
any encroachment from the side of routine lessens the
absolute scope of human spontaneity and interest. If, as
there is reason to believe, human desires and the activities
which are engaged in satisfying them are boundless, the
assumption that an increase in the absolute amount of
state-control or routine-work implies a diminution of the
field for individual enterprise is groundless. The under-
lying motive, which alone can explain and justify each
step in progressive socialism, is the attainment of a net
economy of individual effort, which, when it is released
from exercise upon a lower plane of competition, may
be devoted to exercise upon a higher. If the result of
extending social control over industry were merely to bring
about a common level of material comfort, attended by
spiritual and intellectual torpor and contentment, the move-
ment might be natural and necessary, but could hardly be
termed progress.

But such a view is based upon a denial of the axiom that
the satisfaction of one want breeds another want Experi-
ence does not teach the decay but the metamorphosis of
individuality. Under socialised industry progress in the
industrial arts would be slower and would absorb a smaller
proportion of individual interest, in order that progress in the
finer intellectual and moral arts might be fastei, and might
engage a larger share of life. To future generations of more


THE EVOLUTION OF


422

highly evolved humanity the peculiar barbarism of our age
will consist in the fact that the major part of its intelligence,
enterprise, genius, has been devoted to the perfection of
the arts of material production through mechanical means.
If it is desirable that more of this individual energy should
be engaged in the production of higher forms of wealth by
competition upon higher planes, this can only be achieved
by the process of reducing to routine the lower functions.
Higher progress can only be purchased by an economy of
the work of lower progress, the free, conscious expression
of higher individuality by the routine subordination of
lower individuality. Industrial progress would undoubtedly
be slower under state-control, because the very object of
such control is to divert a larger proportion of human
genius and effort from these occupations in order to apply
them in producing higher forms of wealth. It is not,
however, right to assume that progress in the industrial
arts would cease under state-industry ; such progress would
be slower, and would itself partake of a routine character —
a slow, continuous adjustment of the mechanism of produc-
tion and distribution to the slowly-changing needs of the
community.

§ 1 2. A most important misunderstanding of the line of
industrial development arises from a conviction that all
production of wealth embodied in matter tends to pass
under the dominion of machinery, that an increasing
number of workers in the future will become machine-
tenders, and that the state-control of machine-industry would
bring the vast majority of individuals into the condition of
official machine-workers. This, however, is by no means
a reasonable forecast. In competitive machine-industry,
although it is to the interest of the individual business to
u save ” as much labour as possible, the play of competition
causes to be made and worked a much larger quantity of
machinery than is enough to maintain the current rate of
consumption, and thus keeps in the ranks of manufacture a
much larger quantity of labour than is socially necessary.
Yet in a typical manufacturing country like England statis-
tics show that the proportion ®f the working population
engaged in machine manufactures is not increasing. If,
then, by the gradual elimination of competition in the
machine-industries, the quantity of machine-work were kept


MODERN CAPITALISM.


433


down to the social requirements of the community's con-
sumption, the proportion of machine- workers would be less
than it is, assuming the demand for machine-made goods
continued the same.

But what, it may be said, will become of the increasing
proportion of the workers not required by machinery? will
they go to swell indefinitely the ranks of distributors?
Will the number of merchants, jobbers, speculators, shop-
keepers, agents, middlemen of various sorts, grow without
limit ? Assuming that the work of distribution were left to
competitive enterprise, and that the quantity and quality of
consumption remained the same as now, this result would
seem necessarily to follow. The labour saved in manu-
facture would pass, as it does now, to intensify the com-
petition of the distributive trades and to subdivide into
needlessly small fragments the necessary but limited
amount of distributive work. But these assumptions are
not necessarily correct. If, as seems likely, the increased
intensity of competition forced the growth of strong mon-
opolies in certain departments of distribution, the anti-social
power thus bestowed upon individuals would necessitate
the extension of state-control to them also. The work
of distribution would thus pass into routine-industry ad-
ministered by the public for the public interest. Thus the
area of socialised industry would extend until it absorbed
one after another all industries possessing the machine-
character and capable of administration by routine. It
might thus appear that, after all, the forebodings of the
individualist would be verified, the work of life would be
reduced to a dull monotonous mechanism grinding out
under bureaucratic sway an ever growing quantity of material
comforts for a community absorbed in the satisfaction of its
orderly behaviour.

This goal seems inevitable if we assume that no change
takes place in the quantity and quality of the consumption
of the community, that individual consumers save or try
to save the same proportion of their incomes as now,
and apply the portion that they spend to the purchase
of increased quantities of ever-cheapening machine-made
goods.

But are we justified in considering it necessary, or even
probable, that consumption will in amount and character


424


THE EVOLUTION OF


remain unchanged ? In proportion as the large industries
pass into the condition of monopolies, whether under
private or public control } the area of safe and profitable
investment for the average “saving” man will be more
restricted Thus some of the useless “saving” which
takes the shape of excessive plant, machinery, and other
forms of capital will be prevented In other words, the
quantity of consumption will increase, and this increase will
give fuller employment to the machinery of production and
to the labour engaged in working it and in distributing the
increased product. If, however, increased consumption
merely took the form of consuming increased quantities of
the same material goods as before, the gain would be limited
to the rise of material comfort of the poorer classes, and this
gain might be set off by the congested and torpor-breeding
luxury of the better-to-do. A mere increase in quantity of
consumption would do nothing to avert the drifting of
industry into a bureaucratic mechanism.

§ 13 . It is to improved quality and character of consump-
tion that we can alone look for a guarantee of social progress.
Allusion has been already made to the class of artistic and
intellectual work which cannot be undertaken by machinery.
It must never be forgotten that art is the true antithesis of
machinery. The essence of art in this wide sense is the
application of individual spontaneous human effort. Each
art-product is the repository of individual thought, feeling,
effort, each machine-product is not. The “ art ” in machine-
work has been exhausted in the single supreme effort of
planning the machine ; the more perfect the machine the
smaller the proportion of individual skill or art embodied
in the machine-product The spirit of machinery, its vast
rapid power of multiplying quantities of material goods
of the same pattern, has so over -awed th t industrial
world that the craze for quantitative consumption has
seized possession of many whose taste and education
might have enabled them to offer resistance. Thus, not
only our bread and our boots are made by machinery,
but many of the very things we misname “art-products.”
Now a just indictment of this excessive encroachment of
machinery is not based upon the belief, right or wrong,
that machinery cannot produce things in themselves as
fit or beautiful as art The true inadequacy of machine-


MODERN CAPITALISM.


4^5


products for human purposes arises from the fact that
machine-products are exactly similar to one another, whereas
consumers are not. So long as consumers consent to sink
their individuality, to consume articles of precisely the same
shape, size, colour, material, to assimilate their consumption
to one another, machinery will supply them. But since no
two individuals are precisely similar in physical, intellectual,
or moral nature, so the real needs of no two will be the
same, even in the satisfaction of ordinary material wants.
As the dominance of machinery over the workers tends to
the destruction of individuality in work, obliging different
workers to do the same work in the same way with a
premium upon the mere capacity of rapid repetition, in the
same way it tends to crush the individuality of consumers
by imposing a common character upon their consumption.
The progressive utilisation of machinery depends upon the
continuance of this indiscriminate consumption, and the
willingness of consumers to employ every increase of income
in demanding larger and larger quantities of goods of the
same pattern and character. Once suppose that consumers
refuse to conform to a common standard, and insist more
and more upon a consumption adjusted to their individual
needs and tastes, and likewise strive to follow and to satisfy
the changing phases of their individual taste, such individ-
uality in consumption must impose a corresponcling in-
dividuality in production, and machinery will be dethroned
from industry. Let us take the example of the cloth-
ing trade. Provided the wearing public will consent to
wear clothes conforming to certain common patterns and
shapes which are only approximate “ fits,” machinery can be
used to make these clothes 5 but if every person required
his own taste to be consulted, and insisted upon an exacti-
tude of fit and a conformity to his own special ideas of
comfort, the work could no longer be done by machinery,
and would require the skill of an u artist” It is precisely
upon this issue that the conflict of machine versus hand-
labour is still fought out. The most highly-finished articles
in the clothing and boot trades are still hand-made; the
best golf-clubs, fishing-rods, cricket bats, embody a large
amount of high manual skill, though articles of fair average
make are turned out chiefly by machinery in large quantities.
These hand-made goods are produced for a small portion of


THE EVOLUTION OF


426

the consuming public, whose education and refinement of
taste induces them to prefer spending their money upon a
smaller quantity of commodities adjusted in character to
their individual needs, than upon a larger quantity of
common commodities.

Assuming that industrial evolution places an increasing
proportion of the consuming public in secure possession of
the prime physical necessaries of life, it is surely possible
that they too may come to value less highly a quantitative
increase in consumption, and may develop individuality of
tastes which require individual production for their satis-
faction. In proportion as this happens, hand-work or art
must play a more important part in these industries, and
may be able to repel the further encroachments of machinery,
or even to drive it out of some of the industrial territory it
has annexed. But although the illustration of the present
condition of the clothing trades serves to indicate the nature
of the contest between machinery and art in the region of
ordinary material consumption, it is not suggested that social
progress will, or ought to, expel machinery from most of the
industries it controls, or to prevent its application to indus-
tries which it has not yet reached. The luxury and foppish
refinement of a small section of “ fashionable ” society,
unnaturally relieved of the wholesome necessity of work,
cannot be taken as an indication of the ways in which indi-
viduality or quality of consumption may or will assert itself,
in a society where social progress is based upon equality of
opportunity, and the power to consume has some just rela-
tion to ability and merit. It seems reasonable to expect
that on the whole machinery will retain, and even strengthen
and extend, its hold of those industries engaged in supply-
ing the primitive needs of man — his food, clothing, shelter,
and other animal comforts. In a genuinely progressive
society the object will be so to order life as to secure, not
merely the largest amount of individual freedom or self-
expression, but the highest quality. If an undue amount of
individuality be devoted to the production and consumption
of food, clothing, etc., and the conscious, refined cultivation
of these tastes, higher forms of individual expression in
work and life will be neglected. The just economy of indi-
viduality will therefore relegate certain branches of produc-
tion to machinery, in order that the energy saved by such


MODERN CAPITALISM.


427

routine-work may be set free for higher individual endeavour.
The satisfaction of the primary animal wants — hunger, thirst,
cold, etc. — are common to all ; in these purely physical
demands there is less qualitative difference in different men;
as the needs are the same the consumption will be the same
The absence of wide individual differences of taste marks
out the commodities for routine or machine-production. As
individuals are nearest alike in their prime physical needs,
so, as they gradually develop higher material wants, and,
after these are satisfied, aesthetic, intellectual, moral wants,
their individualism becomes more and more marked. It is
therefore in the most highly developed, or, as they are some-
times called, the more “ artificial ” wants of man, that the
diversity of individual nature shows itself most strongly, and
demands a satisfaction peculiar to itself which only art can
give. In a highly evolved society it is likely that many
physical needs, and even some intellectual needs, will be
common to all, and will engage little individual attention.
These may be graded as routine wants, and may be satisfied
by machine-made goods. As a society, safely ordered in
the supply of ordinary physical comforts, continued to
develop, a less and less diversity would show itself in the
ordinary aspect of its material civilisation, because the
individuality which once found expression there is raised
to a higher plane of activity. The enrichment and enlarge-
ment of human life in such a society would undoubtedly
manifest itself in a greater likeness between the individual
members in the lower modes of life, but the extent of indi-
vidual difference in the higher modes would be ever widen-
ing. The object of the levelling in the lower processes of
life would be that higher individual differences might have
opportunity to assert themselves. In a progressive society
thus conceived, where socialisation and individuation grow
inseparably related and reacting on one another, there is
evidently no fixed limit to the progress of machinery. As
each higher want is educated, some lower want will drop
into the position of a routine-want, and will pass into the
rightful province of machinery. But though a large propor-
tion of material commodities would doubtless be made by
machinery, it is not signified that art will be banished from
what are commonly called the industrial arts. On the con-
trary, art may be in many ways the friend and co-operator


THE EVOLUTION OF


423

of machinery, the latter furnishing a routine foundation for
the display of individual taste and of individual satisfaction
in the consumer. One of the most hopeful signs of the
last few years is the growing intrusion of art into the
machine-industries, — the employment of skilled designers
and executants who shall tempt and educate the public eye
with grace of form and harmony of colour. In pottery,
textile wares, hardware, furniture, and many other indus-
tries, the beginnings of public taste are operating in demand
for variety and ornament May not this be the beginning
of a cultivation of individual taste which shall graft a fine-
art upon each machine-industry, apportioning to machinery
that work which is hard, dull, dangerous, monotonous, and
uneducative, while that which is pleasant, worthy, interest-
ing, and educative is reserved for the human agent?

§ 14. Machinery is thus naturally adapted to the satisfaction
of the routine wants of life under social controL The charac-
ter of machine-production, as has been shown, is essentially
collective. The maladies of present machine-industries are
due to the fact that this collective character is inadequately
recognised, and machinery, left to individual enterprise and
competition, oppresses mankind and causes waste and com-
mercial instability. In a word, the highest division of
labour has not been yet attained, that which will apportion
machinery to the collective supply of the routine needs of
life, and art to the individual supply of the individual needs.
In this way alone can society obtain the full use of the
“labour-saving” character of machinery, minimising the
amount of human exertion engaged in tending machinery
and maximising the amount engaged in the free and
interesting occupations. Engaged in satisfying the steady,
constant needs of society under social regulation, machinery
would no longer be subject to those fearful oscillations of
demand which are liable unforeseen to plunge whole
masses of workers into unemployment and poverty, and to
waste an infinite amount of “ saving.” Where the fluctu-
ations in consumption were confined to the region of
individual taste, the changes of taste and growing variety
of consumption would furnish the education of the artist,
who will acquire skill and flexibility by freely following
and directing the changing tastes of consumers.

In such a forecast it is of course useless to endeavour to


MODERN CAPITALISM.


429


predict how far art will continue to occupy itself with

industry, or how far, set free by machinery, it will be

absorbed in the creation of finer intellectual or spiritual

products* or in what are now termed the fine arts. This

must depend upon the nature of the harmonious develop-
ment of human capacities of effort and enjoyment under
conditions of individual freedom, and the interaction of the
free development of individuals in a society founded upon an
equality of the material means of life. The study of the
qualitative development of consumption in modem society
is only just beginning to be recognised as the true starting-
point of economic science, for although many of the older
economists did verbal homage to the importance of this
branch of study, it has been reserved for recent thinkers
to set about the work. 1

§ 15. It is hardly too much to say that the whole of social
progress depends upon the substitution of qualitative for
quantitative methods of consumption. In so far as indi-
viduals apply their growing ability to consume in order
to demand increased quantities of the same articles they
consumed before, or flash variety of fashionable goods in
no wise adjusted to individual need or taste, they extend
the dominion of machinery. In so far as they develop
individual taste, delicacy rather than quantity of satisfaction,
they give wider scope to work which embodies conscious
human skill and deserves the name of art.

But there is another bearing of this point of equal signifi-
cance. Political economists have a dismal formula called
the Law of Diminishing Returns, which casts a dark shadow
upon industrial progress as it is commonly conceived The
more food and clothing, fuel, and other material goods we
require, the further we have to go for the material, and the
harder it is to get : we must plough inferior lands yielding
smaller crops, we must sink deeper shafts for our coal and
iron. As our population grows ever larger, and this larger
number wants more and more pieces of the earth to feed

1 Professor Jevons’ work upon this branch of Economics was marred
by an attempt to treat it purely mathematically, that is to reduce qual-
itative to quantitative differences— an impossibility. Among recent
writers, Professor Patten, of Pennsylvania University, has made by far
the most important contributions towards a systematic treatment of
the economics of consumption.


43 <>


THE EVOLUTION OF


its machines and to turn out the increased quantity of
goods, the drain upon natural resources is constantly
increasing. The material world is limited ; in time Nature
will become exhausted, and, long before this happens, the
quantity of human labour required to raise the increased
supply of raw material in the teeth of the Law of Diminish-
ing Returns will far exceed the economies attending large-
scale machine-production.

This danger will also be found to result entirely from the
quantitative estimate of human wealth and human life. '

Confining our view for the moment to that branch of
production which is engaged in providing food, to which
the Law of Diminishing Returns is held to apply with
special rigour, we can see without difficulty how, by a
progressive differentiation of consumption, we can mitigate
or even utterly defeat the operation of this law. If the
inhabitants of a country persist in maintaining a single
narrow standard of diet, and use the whole of their land
for growing wheat and raising sheep, not merely do they
waste all other fine productive qualities belonging to
certain portions of the cultivated or uncultivated soil, but
every increase in their narrow consumption drives them to
worse soil, obliges them to put more labour into a quarter
of wheat or a sheep, and increases the proportion of their
aggregate product which goes as rent . 1 If, on the other
hand, a community cultivates a varied consumption and
seeks to utilise each portion of its soil for whatever form
of food it can grow best, instead of grading its land ex-
clusively according to its wheat or sheep-raising capacity,
it is able to defeat the 14 niggardliness of nature” which
asserts itself when the community insists upon a continual
extension of the same demands. For land which may
be very bad for wheat-growing or grazing, which may
even be “ below the margin of cultivation ” for these
mrposes, may be well adapted for producing other com-
nodities. A large variety of alternative uses will enable
is to get the largest net amount of utilities out of Nature,
and a community which, in lieu of an extension of demand
for the same commodities, asserts its civilisation in the
education of new demands and a greater complexity in


1 Patten’s Premists of Political Economy, chap. hr.


MODERN CAP!TALISM b


431


the standard of its comfort, may draw from the land an
indefinite increase of wealth without putting forth more
labour or paying higher rent. It is simply one more
example of the economy attainable by division of labour
and specialisation of function,

§ 16. What applies to food will equally apply to the use
of the earth for providing the raw material of all other forms
of material wealth, A people with growing variety of con-
sumption is ever finding new and more profitable uses for
slighted or neglected capacities of nature. The social
progress of nations must be chiefly determined by the
amount of their intelligent flexibility of consumption. Mere
variety of consumption in itself is not sufficient to secure
progress. There must be a progressive recognition of the
true relations, between the products which can be most
economically raised upon each portion of the soil, and the
wholesome needs of mankind seeking the full harmonious
development of their faculties in their given physical en-
vironment. A progressive cultivation of taste for a variety
of strong drinks, though it might provide an increased
number of alternative uses for the soil, and might enhance
the aggregate market-values of the wealth produced, would
not, it is generally held, make for social progress. That
nation which, in its intelligent attainment of a higher
standard of life, is able to thoroughly assimilate and har-
monise the largest variety of those products for which their
soil and climate are best adapted, will be foremost in
industrial progress and in the other arts of civilisation which
spring out of it.

The case is a simple one. A mere increase in the variety
of our material consumption relieves the strain imposed
upon man by the limits of the material universe, for such
variety enables him to utilise a larger proportion of the
aggregate of matter. But in proportion as we add to mere
variety a higher appreciation of those adaptations of matter
which are due to human skill, and which we call Art, we pass
outside the limits of matter and are no longer the slaves of
roods and acres and a law of diminishing returns. So long
as we continue to raise more men who demand more food
and clothes and fuel, we are subject to the limitations of
the material universe, and what we get ever costs us more and
benefits us less. But when we cease to demand more, and


432 THE EVOLUTION OF

begin to demand better, commodities, more delicate, highly
finished and harmonious, we can increase the enjoyment
without adding to the cost or exhausting the store. What
artist would not laugh at the suggestion that the materials
of his art, his colours, clay, marble, or what else he wrought
in, might fail and his art come to an end ? When we are
dealing with qualitative, i.c. artistic, goods, we see at once
how an infinite expenditure of labour may be given, an
infinite satisfaction taken, from the meagrest quantity of
matter and space. In proportion as a community comes to
substitute a qualitative for a quantitative standard of living,
it escapes the limitations imposed by matter upon man.
Art knows no restrictions of space or size, and in proportion
as we attain the art of living we shall be likewise free.

§ 17. So far the consideration of reformed qualitative
consumption has been confined to material goods. But a
people moving along the line of progress, seeking ever a
more highly qualitative life, will demand that a larger pro-
portion of their energy shall be given to the production and
consumption of intellectual goods.

This world likewise is at present largely under the
dominion of Machinery and a Law of Diminishing Returns
By making of our intellectual life a mere accumulation of
knowledge, piling fact upon fact, reading book upon book,
adding science to science, striving to cover as much intel-
lectual ground as possible, we become mere worshippers
of quantity. It is not unnatural that our commercial life
should breed such an intellectual consumption, and that
the English and American nations in particular, who have
beyond others developed machine -production and the
quantitative genius for commerce, should exhibit the same
taste in their pursuit after knowledge. Pace, size, number,
cost, are ever on their lips. To visit every European capital
in a fortnight, see acres of pictures, cathedrals, ruined castles,
collect out of books or travel the largest mass of unassorted
and undigested information, is the object of such portion of
the commercial life as can be spared from the more serious
occupations of life, piling up bale after bale of cotton goods
and eating dinner after dinner of the same inharmoniously
ordered victuals.

Our schools and colleges are engaged in turning out year
by year immense quantities of common intellectual goods.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


433

Our magazines, books, and lectures are chiefly machine-
products adjusted to the average reader or hearer, and are
reckoned successful if they can drive a large number of
individuals to profess the same feelings and opinions and
adopt the same party or creed, with the view of enabling
them to consume a large number of copies of the same
intellectual commodities which can be turned out by intel-
lectual machinery, instead of undergoing the effort of think-
ing and feeling for themselves. This danger, connected
with the rapid spread of printed matter, is a grave one.
Happily there are visible here also counteracting influences,
forces that tend to individualise intellectual consumption
and thus to stimulate the higher arts of intellectual pro-
duction. In a progressive community it will be more folly
recognised that it is not sufficient to induce people to give
more time and attention to intellectual consumption ; they
must demand intellectual goods vitally adjusted to their
individual needs.

§ 1 8. To the increased regard for quality of life we must
likewise look to escape the moral maladies which arise from
competition. For what is the cause of anti-social com-
petition? It is the limitation of quantity. Two dogs are
after one bone. Two persons wish to consume one com-
modity at the same time. Now, even in material goods, the
more qualitative consumption becomes, and the more insist-
ent each individual is upon the satisfaction of his peculiar
tastes, the smaller will be the probability that two persons
will collide in their desires, and struggle for the possession
of the self-same commodity. Even in art-objects which are
still bounded by matter, among genuine lovers of art the
individuality of each stands out in mitigation of the
antagonism of competition, for no two will have precisely
the same tastes or estimates, or will seek with equal avidity
the same embodiments of art. As we rise to purely intel-
lectual or moral enjoyments, competition gives way to
generous rivalry in co-operation. In the pursuit of know-
ledge or goodness the rivalry is no longer antagonism—
what one gains another does not lose. One man's success
is not another's failure. On the contrary, the enrichment
of one is the enrichment of all. Both in the production
and the consumption of the highest goods of Science, Art,
and Virtue, social, not anti-social, motives are the chief

aS


434


THE EVOLUTION OF


stimulus. In the highest forms of consumption, the practice
of the noblest arts of life, the enjoyment of the finest
intellectual and spiritual goods, there is no purely selfish
consumption. For though the highest individuality is then
attained, the enjoyment ©f one individual requires the en-
joyment of others. The attainment of the highest reaches
of knowledge is impossible for the individual without the
constant and increasing aid of other minds and the inspiring
“spirit of the age”; the enjoyment of such knowledge is in
an even wider communication. The practice and enjoy-
ment of the arts of goodness are necessarily social, because
the good life can only be lived in a good society. Spinoza
has summed up the truth in saying — “ The highest good is
common to all, and all may equally enjoy it” So it appears
that the highest goods are essentially at once individual
and social, pointing once more the attainment of the higher
synthesis in which the antagonism of the “ one ” and the
u all,” which shows itself in the lower planes of competing
effort and enjoyment, disappears,

§ 19. One necessary condition of this progressive life
cannot be ignored. Human life itself must become more
qualitative, not only in its functional activities, but in its
physical basis. The greatness and worth of a community
must be seen more clearly to consist not in the numbers,
but in the character of its members. If the number of
individuals in a society continually increases, no reform in
methods of consumption can prevent the constant increase
in the proportion of human energy which must be put into
the production of the prime material necessaries of physical
life which are, and in spite of all improved methods of
treating nature will remain, ultimately subject to a law of
diminishing returns : so, less and less energy can be spared
for the life of varied and delicate consumption, high indi-
viduality and intellectual and moral growth. Professor
Geddes has well expressed the importance of this truth:
“The remedy lies in highef and higher individuation —
if we would repress excessive multiplication, we must
develop the average individual standard throughout society.
Population not merely tends to out-run the means of sub-
sistence, but to degenerate below the level of subsistence,
so that without steadily directing more and more of our
industry from the production of those forms of wealth


MODERN CAPITALISM,


435


which merely support life to those which evoke it, from the
increase of the fundamental necessities of animal life to
that of the highest appliances of human culture, degenera-
tion must go on .” 1

§ 20. One final consideration remains. Modern large-
scale industry has enlarged and made more distinct an
unnatural and injurious separation of the arts of production
and the arts of consumption. Work has become more and
more differentiated from enjoyment, and in a twofold way.
Modem machine-industry has in the first place sharpened
the distinction between the “ working classes,” whose name
indicates that their primary function is to labour and not to
live, and the comfortable classes, whose primary function
is to live and not to labour, which private enterprise in
machine-industry has greatly enlarged. The extremes of
these large classes present the divorcement of labour and
life in startling prominence. But since work and enjoy-
ment are both human functions, they must be organically
related in the life of every individual in a healthy com-
munity, It must be recognised to be as essential to the
consumer to produce as for the producer to consume. The
attempt on the part of an individual or a class to escape
the physical and moral law which requires the output of
personal exertion as the condition of wholesome consump-
tion can never be successful On the plane of physical
health. Dr. Arlidge, in his book upon The Diseases of
Occupations , points the inevitable lesson in the high rate of
disease and mortality of the “unoccupied class” in that
period of their life when they have slaked their zest for
volunteer exertion and assume the idle life which their
economic power renders possible. The man of “inde-
pendent means ” cannot on the average keep his life in his
body nearly so long as the half-starved, ill-housed agri-
cultural labourer, from whose labour he draws the rents
which keep him in idleness. The same law applies in the
intellectual world. The dilettante person who tries to
extract unceasing increments of intellectual or sesthetic
enjoyment from books or pictures or travel, without the
contribution of steady, painful intellectual effort, fails to

1 Professor Patrick Geddes, Claims of Labour . Cf. The Evolution
of Sex, chap. xx. (Contemporary Science Series: Walter Scott
Publishing Co.).


43 $


THE EVOLUTION OF


win an intellectual life, for the mere automatic process of
collecting the knowledge of others for personal consumption
without striving to enlarge the general stock, congests and
debilitates the min£ and prevents the wholesome digestion
and assimilation.

The same necessary evil arises from the sharp separation
of the processes of production and consumption in the
individual life of the worker: Industry which is purely
monotonous, burdensome, uninteresting, uneducative, which
contains within itself no elements of enjoyment, cannot be
fully compensated by alternate periods of consumption or
relaxation. The painful effort involved in all labour or
exertion should have linked with it certain sustaining
elements of related interest and pleasure. It is the
absence of this which condemns machine-tending from the
human standpoint, it is the presence of this which dis-
tinguishes every art. Hence in a progressive society we
must look to see not the abolition of machinery, but the
diminution of machine-tending which attends the growing
perfection of machinery, in order that the arts may be able
to absorb a larger share of human exertion.

The arts of production and consumption will, in the
evolution of a wholesome industrial society, be found in-
separable : not merely will they be seen to be organically
related, but rather will appear as two aspects of the same
fact, the concave and the convex of life. For the justly
ordered life brings the identification of life, a continuous
orderly intake and output of wholesome energy. This
judgment, not of “sentimentalism” but of science, finds
powerful but literally accurate expression in the saying
of a great modern thinker, “Life without industry is guilt,
industry without art is brutality.” Just in proportion as
the truth of the latter phrase finds recognition the con-
ditions which make “ life without work ” possible will
disappear. Everything in human progress will be found to
iepend upon a progressive realisation of the nature of good
‘ consumption.” Just in proportion as our tastes become
jo qualitative that we require to put our own spontaneity,
our sen.se of beauty and fitness, our vital force, into what-
ever work we do, and likewise require the same elements of
spontaneity and individuality in all we enjoy, the economic
ooaditions of a perfect society will be attained.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


437

§21. This forecast of the social and industrial goal seems
justified by a thoughtful interpretation of the tendencies
visible in the development of modern industry. How
fast may be the progress towards such an ideal, or how far
such progress may be frustrated or impaired by the appear-
ance of new or the strengthening of old antagonistic forces,
lies beyond the powers of legitimate speculation. The
endeavour to test industrial evolution by reference to the
wider movements of human life brings into prominence two
great tendencies whose operations, attested not dimly by
modem history, are in close accord with the general trend
of the development of social and individual life and the
relations subsisting between the two.

As modern industrial societies develop they disclose
certain material wants which are common to all or most
members, and are less subject to fluctuations in quantity
or quality of demand than others. These routine wants,
representing that part of consumption which is common,
can be supplied most economically by highly organised
machinery and highly concentrated methods of production.
But so long as the machinery for the satisfaction of the
common wants remains outside the common control, and is
worked for the benefit of sections of the community whose
interests conflict, both with one another and with the
general interest, an immense amount of waste and danger
arises from the working of the machinery, and grave social
maladies are engendered. These maladies evoke in the
best ordered and most intelligent communities an increas-
ing pressure of public control. This public control is
strengthened and extended in proportion as the highly
evolved structure of the industry enables its administrators
to exercise powers of monopoly either in relation to the
treatment of its employees, or in relation to the price or
quality of the commodities it supplies to the public. Such
industries as develop these economic powers of monopoly
in the highest degree, and in relation to the supply of
prime necessaries or comforts of common life, pass gradually
into the condition of public industries organised for the
public good. It seems likely that all the important machine
industries engaged in satisfying common routine wants will
gradually develop the monopolic characteristics which accrue
to large production, and will pass by degrees through the


438


THE EVOLUTION OF


different phases of public control until they become merged
in public industry.

This so-called socialistic movement in industry represents
the growing cohesiveness of modem societies. At all times
there is a strong natural tendency to supply common wants
by common efforts. So long as the common wants in their
wider significance only extend to protection of the person
and of certain forms of personal property, state-work is
confined within these protective limits, and the work of
producing common wealth, so far as it exists, is left
to village communities or other small units of social
organisation. As the elements of steady common con-
sumption grow in number, the common organisation
of activity to supply them will grow, and where the
supply has at first 'been left to private enterprise, the abuse
of power and growing inconvenience of competition will
drive them into public industry. But since the very raison
<T2trc of this increased social cohesiveness is to economise
and enrich the individual life, and to enable the play of
individual energy to assume higher forms out of which more
individual satisfaction may accrue, more and more human
effort will take shape in industries which will be left to
individual initiative and control, the arts in which the
freedom of personal spontaneity will find scope in the ex-
pression of physical or moral beauty and fitness and the
attainment of intellectual truth. The infinite variety which
these forms of artistic expression may assume, fraught with
the individuality of the artist, will prevent them from ever
passing into “routine” or “common” industries, though
even in the fine arts there will be certain elements which, as
they become part of the common possession, will become
relatively void of individual interest, and will thus pass into
a condition of routine activity. The idea of continuity in
human progress demands this admission. But since each
tncroachment of routine upon the “ finer arts ” is motived by
l prior shifting of the interest of the consumer into forms
jf higher refinement, there will be a net gain and not a loss
in the capacity of individual exercise in artistic work. In
every form of human activity the progress of routine
industry will be the necessary condition of the expansion of
individual freedom of expression. But while the choice and
eontrol of each higher form of “industry” will remain


MODERN CAPITALISM.


439

individualistic, in proportion as the moral bonds of society
obtain fuller conscious recognition, the work of the “ artist ”
likewise will be dedicated more and more to the service of
his . fellow-men. Thus will the balance of the social and
individual work in the satisfaction of human wants be
preserved, while the number of those wants increase and
assume different values with the progress of the social and
individual life.


440


SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER.

INDUSTRY OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.

PART I.

§ i. Growth of large Joint-Stock enterprises .

§ 2. The “ Representative Business ” : its size and
structure.

§ 3. The effect of limits of maximum efficiency in
maintaining C omp etition .

§ 4. New Developments in Combinations , Cartels , and
Trusts.

§ 5. Combinations in Post-War Britain .

§ 6. The Distribution of Occupations in Britain and
the United States.

§ 7. Women's new place in Industry , Commerce ,
Professions.

§ 8. Comparative Advance of Basic Industries of

Capitalism in different countries .

§ 9. The Growth of International Trade.

§ 10. Export of Capital.

§ 11. Advance of America as a Creditor Nation.

§ 12. Effects of the War on Economic Strength of
Nations.

§ 13. The New Electric Age.

PART II.

§ 1. The Revelation of Reserve Productivity in War
Time.

§ 2. Waste in Productive and Distributive Processes.

§ 3. The Problem of Business Reconstruction.

§ 4. Relations of Capital and Labour.

§ 5. Socialisation of Fundamental Industries.

§ 6. State Provisions regarding Wages and Unem-
ployment.

' § 7. National Economy and Key Industries.

§ 8. Constructive Economic Internationalism and its
Problems .


THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. 44I

Part I.

§ 1. The increasing attention recently given by
governments and private economists to statistics of
production and of occupations enables us to trace with
more certainty and exactitude the changes of business
structure taking place in the industrially developed
countries. The advance of capitalistic methods in the
industry, commerce, and finance of such countries as
the United States, Germany, and Japan enables us both
to verify and to correct generalisations based too
exclusively upon the example of Great Britain, and
the experience of these later followers of capitalism
has disclosed some new developments in economic
structure.

The statistics of all these countries testify to the
truth of the central law of the evolution of capital-
ism — viz., the movement of businesses engaged in the
routine processes of manufacture, trade, transport,
mining, and finance into large joint-stock films, employ-
ing larger numbers of workers, turning out increasing'
outputs, and limiting free competition by various
modes of regulation, co-operation and combination.

The continued growth of joint-stock enterprise in Great
Britain is attested by the increase in the number of
Registered Companies and the increasing aggregate of
the capital invested in this form of business structure.


Registered Companies in Great Britain.


Year.

Number.

Total.

Capital.

Average.

1900 -

29,730

Millions. £ 000

1.623 56-3

1905 -

39,616

1.954

49- 1

1910 -

50,137

2,133

42*6

193:3 -

58,882

2,377

40-4

1920 -

77,021

3,438

42*6

1923 -

87.930

4,265

48-5

(Figures for

Ireland omitted after 1903.)


If we accept the rough estimate made by the Final
Report of the Census of Production (p. 36) of the total
capital employed in the manufacturing, mining, trans-
port, and distributing trades as amounting in 1907 to


THE EVOLUTION OF


442


a figure between £4,200 million and £5,000 million,
we shall come to the conclusion that a little less than
half of the total business of the country had by that
time passed into the joint-stock form. When due
allowance is made for the depreciated value of sterling
since 1913, we shall recognise that the number of
Comp ani es has grown considerably faster than the total
paid-up capital, indicating that a growing number of
family businesses of moderate size have taken on the
Company form.

Perhaps the most striking testimony to the advance
of joint-stock enterprise, and the consequent displace-
ment of individual businesses and private firms, is given
by the comparison of the results of recent Census
investigation into the manufactures of the United
States. 1 During the period 1914-1919, the proportion
of the total number of manufacturing establishments
under the control of Corporations increased from
23-6% to 3i*5%. The proportion of wage-earners
employed by Corporations increased from 70-6% to
86*6%. The proportion of the value of the manufac-
turing product turned out by Corporations grew from
73*7% 87*7%. The value added by the process of

manufacture (i.e. } the net product) increased from 70-1%
to 87*0%.

Another interesting table in the same report bears
even closer testimony to the concentration of capital
in manufactures by showing the increasing proportion
of (1) number of workers; (2) quantity of gross product;
(3) quantity of net product, in the hands of large busi-
nesses with a “ value of product ” exceeding one million
dollars.


Per cent, of
Workers.
1904 - 25 '6

1921 - 48*4


Per cent, of Per cent, of

Product. Net Product.
38*0 - - 29-9

59’o • 62*3


. § 2. We have seen that the concentration of capital
in the sense of the tendency of businesses to take
larger shapes and to limit competition is not a law of
universal application in the world of business. In
agriculture, in mining, in manufacture, in trade, in

1 Statistical Abstract of the U.S.A.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


443

transport, and even in finance, there are some busi-
ness processes favourable to the maintenance of smgJl
businesses. Nor is this economy of the small or
moderate-sized business confined to processes where
expensive machinery and other capitalistic methods are
inapplicable. Even in the great staple manufactures
it is found that some limit exists at any given tim e
to the net earning of the big business, at any rate as
regards manufacturing establishments. In the textile,
metal, and other staple manufactures in different coun-
tries, capital and labour tend to flow in to productive
units of a more or less uniform size and composition,
forming a representative or dominant type.

Among spin n i n g and weaving businesses in Lanca-
shire it has been shown that there is a representative
type, in respect to number of spindles and looms, to
which the industry tends to conform. That number is
larger in 1925 than prevailed in 1889, but definitely,
not indefinitely, larger. There is now in Lancashire a
size or type for each branch of work beyond which it
is evidently not profitable to lay out a business, unless
some unusual circumstance favours a larger type. An
extremely valuable statistical enquiry, by Sir S. J.
Chapman and Mr. T. S. Ashton, into "The Size of
Businesses mainly in the Textile Industries/ 1 1 places
before readers a large amount of well-sifted evidence
regarding textile business in various countries.

Related to the question of the size of the represen-
tative business is that of the structure, and it is seen
that not only are limits set upon the growth but also
upon the specialisation of business types. There may,
indeed, be more than one type of maximum efficiency
in an industry. But there will always be some limit,
however large, to the size, just as there will always be
some law of the proportion of fixed to circulating
capital, or of capital as a whole to labour employed.
To those who grasp the conception of a business as an
organic structure these conclusions will appear a priori
reasonable. But the accumulation of evidence gives
them a sound inductive foundation. It may here suffice to
state in general terms the results of recent enquiries
1 Journal of Royal Statistical Soc., April, 1914.


THE EVOLUTION OF


444

in the summary which Sir S. J. Chapman and Mr.
T. S. Ashton append to their study: — -

“ Generally speaking, there ■would seem to exist in industries
or branches of industries, of adequate size, under given sets of con-
ditions, typical or representative magnitudes to which businesses tend
to grow, typical proportions between their parts, and typical consti-
tutions. The number of spindles possessed by an exclusively spinning
firm, the proportion of spindles to looms in a combined firm, and
even their absolute numbers, the form of government originally, whether
autocracy, oligarchy, or elected directorate, all would seem to be
subject more or less to law, analogous to natural law. Indeed, the
growth of a business, and the volume and form which it ultimately
assumes, are apparently determined in somewhat the same fashion as
the development of an organism in the animal or vegetable world.
As there is a normal size and form for a man, so, but less markedly,
are there normal sizes and forms for businesses. Many variations about
the h uman type are to be found, according to variations in anteced-
ents and enviro nm ents and in those unknown causes which for the
sake of convenience are termed chance. But a type will emerge in
any given tim e or place which results from the fundamental facts of
our nature. Roughly, a similar transformation may be expected in the
industrial world, according to the showing of our analyses of facts,
though more and greater variations are to be found in the case of
individuals. ,, 1

The determinant factors of sizes are partly objective.
Conditions relating to the provision of mechanical power,
available local supplies, the maximum workable size of
engines, the economy and waste of transmission, are
of leading importance. These objective conditions
determine the mechanical limit of maximum efficiency,
and limit the size of the single productive establish-
ment. But modem organisation may place several or
many establishments under the same control and
management. The limit to the size of the business as
a financial and managerial unit is far more elastic, for,
though it is true that <f A straitened supply of initia-
ting, organising, and directing ability, for instance,
is bound at some point to evoke decreasing returns
in a business/' it is not easy to find these limits experi-
mentally. Modem business finance is continually
engaged in discovering new forms of co-operation or
federal union between formerly “ independent " busi-
nesses which can raise the magnitude of " the subjective
units of maximum efficiency ” towards a level which
gives it an effective control of the selling market.

1 Journal of Statistical Soc. t p. 513.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


445

§ 3. How far this admitted limitation of the pro-
ductive efficiency of concentrated capital furnishes a
natural check upon economic monopolies still remains
a matter of acute controversy. In some lines of busi-
ness the limit of maximum efficiency may not be
reached until a substantial monopoly has been attained.
The limit of productive efficiency may compel the
survival of a considerable number of businesses in the
textile and metal trades with the world for their
potential market, but in railroading the maximum
economy of working may not be reached until a single
national 'railway system is adopted, and in banking or
other branches of finance the business unit of maxi-
mum efficiency may be so large as to render effective
competition impossible over many fields of enterprise.
In Great Britain, as in the United States and where-
ever railroading has remained a private enterprise, the
absorption of small and weak by large and strong
companies has been continuous, and working and rate
arrangements between formally competing lines have
been more frequent and better maintained. In Great
Britain, even before the war, railway companies fixing
rates between competitive points had led to arrange-
ments between single companies with a view to more
economical working, and the merging of competing
roads into four great systems, each with its unitary
management and finance, is a marked achievement
of concentrated capitalism.

In banking, where mere size secures a monopoly of
certain large and profitable operations, the concentra-
tive process has recently proceeded with great rapidity.

In 1890 the number of Joint Stock Banks in Eng-
land and Wales was 104: in 1900 it had sunk to 77,
and in 1914 stood at 38. The processes of absorption
and amalgamation continued during and after the war,
the number in 1924 being 18. During this same period,
— i.e., from 1890 to 1924 — the number of branches
increased from 2,203 to 8,264, a continually increasing
proportion of these branches belonging to the Big Five
which have been absorbing a continually growing pro-
portion of the increasing banking business of the
country. In 1924 the five great Banks held 84 per


THE EVOLUTION OF


446

cent, of the aggregate deposit and current accounts.
The economies of this concentrative movement are
illustrated by the statement that “ The paid-up capital
of the English Joint-Stock Banks has only risen from
£61 millions in 1900 to £73*3 millions in 1924, while
reserve funds have increased from £35^ millions to
nearly £58} millions. During the same period deposits
have risen from £587 millions to £1,813 millions." 1

§ 4. But amalgamation, in the strict sense of the
word, is not the only mode of limiting competition,
securing economy of administration, and controlling
markets. Too much attention has been accorded to
a few dramatic instances of amalgamation along hori-
zontal and vertical lines of movement, too little to the
numerous experiments in associations, federal or other,
short of amalgamation, which constitute the main trend
of modem capitalistic combination. According to
Mr. Macrosty's serviceable analysis, 3 the lowest or
weakest class of business associations are “ combina-
tions for the settlement of terms upon which business
shall be done," dealing with discount, terms of credit,
payment for transport, etc., but not with selling prices.
Price Associations form the next grade. They are
largely unions of local manufacturers, or traders, meet-
ing to arrange selling prices and price changes. They
generally leave restriction of output alone. But the
industrial combination is usually directed, not merely
to price lists, but to that regulation of output which
is essential to a control of prices. The essential
feature of the Cartels or Syndicates which were con-
spicuous in the pre-war capitalism of Germany is the
agreement as to quantities and proportions of supplies
to be put upon the market. The general character of
these Cartels has already been described .3 But an inter-
esting development of recent German experience has
been the establishment of Sales Associations, whereby the
members of the Syndicate form a Joint-Stock Company,
which takes from the members their agreed product
or output at an arranged price and sells it at a price

1 The Economist Banking Supplement, May 9th, 1925.

* The Trust Movement in British Industry (Longmans & Co.J.

* Chapter ix.


MODERN CAPITALISM. 447

determined by the executive in accordance with the
state of trade and of outside competition.

The general effect of the war has been to accelerate
and strengthen in every belligerent country the move-
ment towards consolidations, combines, and trusts,
alike in their industrial, commercial, and financial
structures. In Britain, Advisory Committees and Trade
Associations were formed in all important industries,
to control prices and regulate the conditions of industry.
Many of these groups (virtually comprising all firms
in a trade) retained the form and many functions of
the Association after the war. Again, the restriction
of new capital issues by Government, and the limita-
tions upon export of capital, kept out new potential
competitors, while large war profits enabled extensions
of plant and the acquisition of weaker by stronger
firms to proceed apace. When decontrol took place,
an era of mergers and fusions followed, especially in
the engineering, shipping, mining, and other war
industries. The very processes of standardisation in
technique and accountancy required by war economy
facilitated combination afterwards.

§ 5. The war brought home more clearly than before to
British business men and financiers the lesson, that if
the nation was to hold its own in the new conditions
of world manufacture and commerce, it must develop
to the utmost the economies of co-ordination and
amalgamation. It also brought home to the intelli-
gent consumer the necessity of devising or extending
public regulations to secure the purchaser against the
possible or probable abuses of the monopoly powers
thus brought into fuller play. The Report of the
Committee on Trusts 1 records the existence in Britain
of price-fixing Associations or other modes of combina-
tion in many branches of the metal and machine-
making trades, in chemicals, textiles, and the build-
ing trades, and expresses the following judgment : —
" We are satisfied that Trade Associations and
Combines are rapidly increasing in this country, and
may within no distant period exercise a paramount
control over all important branches of the British

1 Published 1919.


THE EVOLUTION OF


448

trade.” 1 Mr. Hilton's study, prepared for the Com-
mittee, thus summarises the extent of the movement: —
“ It may be taken that there are considerably more
than five hundred Associations, all exerting a substan-
tial infl uence on the course of industry and price, in
being at the present time in the United Kingdom,"
In regard to the building trades, he adds: — ■" The most
painstaking enquiry yet undertaken into combination
in any section of British industry is that made in respect
of building materials, and the conclusion there reached
was that 25 per cent, of the materials that go to the
building of an average house are subject to full control,
and 33 per cent, are partially controlled." 2
The intensification of economic nationalism, with its
more numerous and higher protective tariffs (especi-
ally in the Continent of Europe), its restriction of
foreign investments, its subsidisation of home indus-
tries, evidently stimulates international combinations.
There is also ripening everywhere a conscious policy of
State control over prices, in order to safeguard the
consumer against the danger of a trade with price-fixing
powers.

The new protective policy in Great Britain is definitely
altering the situation as it appeared to a pre-war
observer, Mr. Herman Levy, who wrote that " The
development of controls and trusts in English industries
is restricted by three facts — the absence of a protective
tariff, the comparative insignificance of freights, and
the rarity of slowly reproduced mineral products likely
to form national or international monopolies." 3 •

But neither free trade nor protection is a solid or
sufficient barrier to the development of international
combines, which was taking place before the war and
is already beginning to resume activities.

Writing before the war, Mr. Macrosty stated: —
"In one way or another the world's trade in rails,
tubes, nails, screws, sewing-thread, bleaching-powder,
borax, nitrates, and tobacco is, to a greater or less
degree, brought under international control, while, at

1 Report, p. 11.

* Report, p. 26.

3 Monopolies and Competition , p. 304 (Macmillan).


MODERN CAPITALISM.


449

least till lately, dynamite was so controlled, and repeated
attempts have been made similarly to syndicate the
whole steel trade.” Some of the combinations are
temporarily broken or weakened, but the combinatory
economics are nearly all in force, and in certain trades
(especially metals and engineering) the advantages of
regulation of output and divisions of market are
greater than before. In the meat trade and certain
other food trades, foreign combinations, such as the
American Meat Trust, are more powerful than before.

The growth of international combinations with price-
fixing powers must in time evoke protective measures
by agreement between Governments. The beginning
of an economic international policy, already recognised
in the work of the League of Nations and its related
instrument the International Labour Bureau, must
address itself with ever clearer intentions to this task
of regulating the prices and distribution, upon equit-
able terms, of articles and services controlled by inter-
national capitalism.

Meanwhile, the perilous condition of finance and of
trade, to which all great industrial nations have been
recently subjected, is intensifying the process of com-
bination. In Germany especially, and to a less extent
in Britain and America, the looser associations of
business in Cartels, confined to the marketing processes,
are giving place to actual mergers.

§ 6. We have seen that modern capitalism brings
in all developed countries certain definite changes in the
proportionate importance of occupations. Agriculture,
because its productivity gains less directly from capital-
istic economies than other processes, generally dwindles,
an increasing proportion of foods and materials coming
in from outside commerce. The staple manufactures,
except those engaged in supplying growing foreign
markets. ' "increase to a maximum, and then show a
positive or relative decline, as measured by the employ-
ment they afford. On the other hand, the transport
and other distributive trades engaged in moving and
selling goods show a marked advance. So do the
occupations providing professional, financial, official,
and other services.


29


THE EVOLUTION OF


450

The British census of 1911 1 shows these processes
to be continuous. Agriculture shows a growth much
below that of the population as a whole, the numbers
being 1,128,604 in 1901, and 1,235,237 in 1911. Mining,
on the other hand, shows an advance nearly three
times as fast as the growth of the population — viz.,
35 • 2 per cent, in the decennium. The conveyance trades
increase by 13*1 per cent., the percentage for railway
employees being at the higher figure of 16-7, albeit a
much less rapid growth than in any of the preced-
ing census returns. Of the manufacturing trade groups
metals and machinery show a considerable rise, 20*5
per cent, in the case of men. This class, however,
contains the shipbuilding and vehicle trades, inclusive
of motors. “ Precious metals/' etc., shows an even
larger increase, 23-7 per cent., largely accounted for
by “ scientific instruments, musical instruments, and
apparatus for sports and games." '* Wood, furniture,
and fittings" increase by 22-7, chiefly accounted for
by house and shop fittings _and by dealers in art and
furniture. This is in curious contrast to the building
trade, which shows a decline of 9*3 per cent, in the
decade, carrying with them a smaller shrinkage in the
“ brush, cement, pottery, glass group."

The other large proportionate advances of manu-
facture are in “ chemicals, oil," etc., where the
enormous rise of 38-2 is registered, and in “paper,
prints, books, stationery," etc., where the increase is
24*8 per cent.

Textiles, after showing a relative decline of occu-
pation during the preceding decade, again advanced
slightly faster than the population, owing mainly to a
recovery of male employment in the cotton trade.
The woollen and dress trades lose ground, the latter
groups registering a decrease of 1*5 for men, and an
increase of only 3*8 for women among the “ makers."

Wholesale trade, and retail, wherever the latter is
distinguished from processes of manufacture, continue
to absorb a largely increasing proportion of employees.

1 Unfortunately the results of the 1921 Census axe not comparable
with earlier figures, owing to the adoption of entirely new modes of
classification.


MODERN' CAPITALISM.


451

This is seen in the increase of the whole group “ com-
mercial,” with a figure' 34*3 per cent. Commercial
travellers yield 31 per cent.; banking, 33*3 per cent.;
insurance agents, 56*9 per cent. The group called
" dealers ” gives 23-8 per cent, for men, 54-2 per cent,
for women. The boot and shoe trade presents an in-
structive contrast. For, whereas the makers show a
decline of 7*9 per cent., the dealers show a rise of
52-9 per cent. Domestic and allied services continue
to show a proportionate decline, especially indoor
domestics, whose increase is only 1*3 per cent. Pro-
fessions show a large continuous advance, though the
rise of new subsidiary branches makes exact measure-
ment difficult. The same qualification applies to the
figures for general and local government, which include
many persons “ taken over ” from private employment
during the period. The actual and proportionate
advance in public employment remains, however, a note-
worthy fact. The increase is from 171,687 to 244,379,
or 42*3 per cent, for males; from 26,500 to 44,882,
or 69*4 for females.

The accompanying table indicates the rise or decline
in the relative importance of the general classes of
occupations of males during the decennium 1901-1911.

Male Occupations.


Males per 10,000 over 10 years, England and Wales.


1901

I. General or Local

1911

VII. Agriculture —

0

a\

M

1911

Government - 14 1

179

Farmers

- 167

153

II. Defence - - 139

151

Farm-workers

- 594

558

III. Professions - - 257

269

Others

VIII. Mining —

- 121

124

IV. Domestic —


Coal -

- 528

647

Outdoor - - 148

Domestic —

166

Others

IX. Metals —

- 110

92

Indoor, etc. - 102

1x8

Machines -

- 814

846

V. Commercial —


Ships

- 71

76

{a) Merchants,


Vehicles

- 95

128

Agents, Banking,


X. Building

■ 839

693

etc. - 184

222

XI. Wood -

- 169

158

(b) Clerks - - 254

264

XII. Paper, Print

- 123-

131

VI. Conveyance —


XIII. Textiles

- 33 i

343

(a) Rail - - 290

291

XIV. Dress -

- 305

275

(b) Road - - 355

345

XV. Food, etc. •

- 638

669


452


THE EVOLUTION OF


§ 7. In the recent evolution of economic forms and
methods women have been taking a continually larger
part. Not only have they followed into organised and
specialised industry the various processes of spinning,
weaving, and dressmaking, the preparation of food and
drink, laundry, and other once domestic occupations,
but they have entered in increasing numbers into a
larger number of general occupations, many of which
until lately were exclusively male in personnel. The
most rapid and largest advances have been in certain
branches of commerce, public service, and the pro-
fessions. During the last half century the census
figures show that in the class commercial clerks, women
have advanced from 5 to 245 per 1,000 “ persons so
employed,” the last decade alone being responsible for
a rise from 153 to 245. The telegraph and telephone
departments have now fallen predominantly into female
operation, the rise being from 406 to 522 per 1,000
in the decennium. In the drapery, shoe, and certain
other branches of distributive trade, women are dis-
placing men rapidly.

On the other hand, in the manufacturing branches
of the chief textile trades, which until recently had
been passing predominantly into female hands, a certain
definite reversal is discernible. The statistics for the
cotton trades make this manifest.


Persons Occupied
Males
Females -


The woollen trade figures run on the same line,
showing that the total increase of employment, amount-
ing to 6*2 per cent., is made up out of 9*0 per cent,
for males and only 4*2 per cent, for females. In the
dress manufactures women continue to gain on men,
but these industries themselves show a rate of growth
much below that of the occupied population as a whole.


529J3I

196,898

332,233


605,177

233,380

371,789


Increase
per cent.

14-4

18*5

II-Q


MODERN CAPITALISM. 453

Proportion of Females in Certain Occupations out

OF EVERY 1,000 PERSONS SO EMPLOYED.


1861.

1871.

1881.

1891.

1901.

191Z.

Teachers -


725

741

727

740

745

727

Photographers -


66

147

197

234

257

297

Laundry Service


990

987

981

964

957

93 i

Commercial Clerks


5

16

33

72

153

245

Telegraph and Telephone


82

76

236

291

406

522

Earthenware, etc.


311

354

384

385

392

421

India-rubber Workers


206

200

275

39 i

398

370

Brush, etc.

Paper Manufacturing -


321

346

382

389

431

440


417

395

444

401

366

312

Stationery, etc. -


345

380

531

600

643

653

Cotton -


567

598

620

609

628

614

Wool


461

513

561

557

582

571

Silk - - -


642

676

691

667

702

693

Hemp and other Textiles


265

304

374

393

492

530

Hosiery -


468

468

533

629

713

735

Lace -


829

826

743

625

653

630

Carpet, Rug


183

312

362

440

5 i 7

544

Drapers, Mercers


208

257

349

433

504

560

Straw Manufacturers -


921

926

903 !

814

737

666

Glover Makers -

Boot and Shoe Makers

and

864

882

854

769

761

731

Dealers

-


154

115

160

185

210

226

Tobacco -

“


221

296

435

548

601

596


The foregoing table, dealing with the occupations,
other than domestic service, in which women take a
prominent place, sheds important light upon the
advance of women into a larger number of trades and
manufactures. Earthenware, stationery, photography,
hosiery, carpets, shoes, brushes, chemicals, are pro-
minent in this class. Not merely does domestic service
show a large relative shrinkage before the demand
of industry and commerce, but the predominant part
taken by women as teachers appears to have reached
its zenith and to be declining. This doubtless is due
to the larger number of occupations open to educated
women.

As the following table serves to indicate, the economic
system of the United States exhibits many of the same
tendencies with regard to the changes in the relative


THE EVOLUTION OF


454

importance of occupations — i.e., the decline of agricul-
ture and of domestic service, the large increase of
clerical occupations, the increase in trade, transport,
professions, and public service.


Distribution of Population by Occupations
in U.S.A. (Percentages).


Agriculture, Forests, Animals


1930.

26*3

X910.

33*i

Extract, Minerals


2*6

27*5

Manuf. Mechanical . .


30*8

6-8

Transportation


7*4

9*9

Trade


10*2

1*5

Public Service


i*9

4*2

Professions


5*2

9*4

Domestic and Personal Service


8*2

2 * 9

Clercial Occupations


7*5

4*6


The proportions of aggregate employment in gainful
occupations according to sex run as follows : —


1880


Male
per cent.
578


Female
per cent.

14*7

1890


60 -2


17*4

1900


6l 2


18 -8

1910


8 l *3


23*4

1920


78*2


21*7


In America the changes in occupations of women
and girls also follow the same general course as in
Britain. The largest proportionate advance is in clerical
occupations. Next come the professions, trade,
public service. Manufactures and transportation show
a considerable increase. Agriculture and domestic
service show a tolerably large decline.

§ 8. The check which the Great War put upon the
growth of industry in the world at large, and in the
European belligerent countries in particular, is best
attested in terms of reduced production of iron and
steel and in shrinkage of foreign trade. The follow-
ing tables of world production in pig iron and steel


MODERN CAPITALISM.


455 '


show that the world output for 1923, in both, lay con-
siderably below the pre-war level of 1913. They also
afford conspicuous proof of the supremacy of the United
States in these basic industries, and of the collapse
and slow recovery of Germany.


World Production of Pig Iron

(In thousands of tons.)


Countries.

1913

1919

1920

1921

1922

1923

World Total ..

77,182

50,843

58,854

34,700

51 , 938 .

64,580

United States

30,655

30,579

36,401

16,506

26,851

39 , 5 oo

Britain

10,260

7,398

8,035

2,616

4,902

7,860

France . .

5,126

2,374

3,380

3,308

5 ,i 47

5,000

Belgium

2,428

247

1,099

862

1,578

2,118

Germany

19,000

6,192

5,568

6,096

8,000

4,000

Italy . .

420

251

107

75

9i

200

(Statistical Abstract of U.S.A.,

1923, p.

270.)


World Production of Steel


(In thousands of tons.)


Countries.

1913

1919

1920

1921

1922

1923

World Total

.. 75 ,oi 9

57 ,m

67,145

42,487

63,098

72,573

United States

.. 31,301

34,671

42,133

19,744

35,603

44,400

Britain

.. 7,664

7,894

9,067

3,703

5,881

8,480

France

.. 4,614

2,151"

3,002

3,010

4,464

4,750

Belgium

.. 2,428

329

1,233

780

i ,539

2,185

Germany

.. 18,631

7,648

6,624

8,700

9,000

5,000

Italy . .

.. 918

763

762

672

600

800

(Statistical Abstract of U.S.A.,

1923, p.

279.)


§ 9. The growth of economic internationalism
strengthens the bonds of commercial intercourse
between the different countries of the world, promotes
a closer and more effective co-operation between the
members of different nations in the exploitation of the
resources of the world for the general good, and stand-
ardises the arts of production and consumption in all
countries brought into this economic intercourse. This
movement made notable advances in various districts,
both extensively and intensively, during the opening
years of the present century.


THE EMOTION OF


456

The absolute and the proportionate increase of im-
port and export trade of the chief European countries
before the war is contained in the following table.

It will be observed that every country showed an
exceedingly marked advance, both in import and in
export values. In every country except Russia a
large, and for the most part a growing, surplus of
import over export values was recorded. In Germany,
for example, the surplus of imports rose from a little
under 50 millions in 1901 to nearly 92 millions in 1912;
in France, from 16 millions to 59 millions. In Austro-
Hungaiy an export balance of 10 millions in 1901 passed
into an import balance of 34 millions in 1912.

This condition of foreign trade attested, of course,
a large growth of unseen exports in the way of ship-
ping, financial, and other services, together with an
increase of the aggregate of interest on foreign invest-
ments in the case of such countries as Germany, France,
and Belgium. The balance, in the case of Italy and
Austro-Hungary, was partly maintained by remittances
from America sent by recent immigrants into those
countries.


Value of Imports and Exports Into and From. Value £.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


457


co o
to co
vo w


Tf- CO
^ OV
tN


vo rr
Cr\

oo" vo"


§ 8
q

rPvo"

m

IN O'.


8 8 8 8


. IN VO
<- 4 ? «0 »+•
CN W


Oi C\
vo vo
-*■ Cv


VO vo
vo CO
O IN
Cl" IN

VO Ct
N <N


-Vj-
VO CN
CO CO


vo co
vo VO
oo »n

tN In

coco


W tN

vo

Ol H


in In
-<t- H
VO to


o o

O O

o o


(D o

o" CO


8 8 8


O
_ o

q. q

cT vo"
in -s}-
ovvo

•tp tN

^ o

N C 4


o o
o o
o o


Oi' o»

-<P o


co n
^ n n

o o


C\ o\
m m

tN Ct


o o

q q

-«P cf

-v)- W

o" CO
CO IN
CO w


oo ov oo «n


o o

q q

d\oo"

N M
CO <D
in In

oo oo


88


Cv Ov
co oo
VO co


O O
8 8
VO oo

CS tN

vo m


o o
8 8
00 oo

-If OO
O tN

-if co"


6 O

o o

oo" IN
m ov

tN ov


3 "3 § 13 3

o 2 2 i o o

■ • & ■ 8 S S & &

c/2_ oo

4242 42 42 ( 42 42 42 42 42 42 42 42 g 42 42
m m y y J y y y y i y y yy^yy
oo i oo^oo^oo oo oopqoo

ft&j; aaS aft! p,ft |

s t 3 ;SSMsS [ g 3 s £ g 88 t gj 0 [ «§ 0 ,«

i-hW 55 hh W g h W Fn hh W £ t — i ffl >- h-i P4 HhW

w « r-l -4 d to

P W W « i P

G$ O CQ 1 h £ <


THE EVOLUTION OF


458

The significant fact, however, was the rapid growth
of international trade. After making due allowance for
the general rise of prices in recent years, that growth
was considerably faster than accepted estimates of
the growth of industry as a whole in the respective
countries. Foreign trade had everywhere been growing
faster than internal trade. Closer ' investigation will
also show that the trade was more varied, as regards
kinds of goods, and as regards the countries w r ith
which it was carried on. In civilised countries every-
body had become increasingly dependent upon the
production of a greater number of foreigners for the
supply of an increased number of their daily needs.

The damages done by the war and the post-war
situation in Europe to this international trade were
grave and numerous. Disordered monetary systems
operated to retard recovery of industry and to disturb
security and confidence in trade. The setting up of
new tariffs, shifts in trade routes, deficiency of purchas-
ing power, embargoes and boycotts, war animosities,
the dropping out of Russia from the comity of nations,
disturbances in China and elsewhere, have all been
obstacles to easy commercial intercourse between
nations. Though some considerable recovery from the
severance of trade relations during the war had been
made by 1923, the following general comparison of
world trade in 1913 and 1923 shows a very large
actual shrinkage in volume, as distinguished from in-
flated values. It also sheds interesting light upon the
growing share of world trade passing to the United
States and the British Empire (in particular the other
British countries).


Table from p. 667 of the Survey of Oversea Markets , published (1925) by the Committee on Industry and Trade

(Stationery Office). 6s. net.

World Trade 1913 and 1923. British, American, and French Share.
Imports (Special) of Merchandise. Exports (Special) of Merchandise.


modern capitalism. 459


Per cent,
of Total.

CO 0

n

On O

H O

H

CO H

O M

TT VO

H M

•+

0

CO

00 00 0

co NO

VO tv Nf)

W ^

CO ?

H 0

H °

W H

C* VO

? N

CO N

W H

CO

NO

w

tv VO ON

JN yt-

ct vo *o

H NO

9

£

„ s?

§ is
sx

uo \p

CO CO

'*■ m

tv co

•

ON

NO

H

CO op On

H NO

ON O O

00 Tj-

N

CO fl®

H _0 ^

S' 1=3 ro

S 3 -

CO *v

vn Tt-

« On

10 rj-

9

0

N

2

H OO ON

co « 00

O tv co

NO W N

Ot


World Total

(157 Countries)

British Empire —
United Kingdom . .

Other British

Countries . .

Total British Empire

United States. .

France . . • • • .

All Other Countries . .

P* O

co ?

Sn §

H h

H NO

00 00

VO CO

H M

VO

VO

0

CO

Tt- NO »0 .

u-i Np N

t K N

H •+

m ?

s §

M H

O tv

H 00

NO H

W H

tv

On

VO

N

tV NO H

W VO H

00 tv tv

NO

Total Value.

s?

<0 fi ?

St .2 0

H g!

s «

7 *"

00 co

10 CO

ON tv

op

VO

tv

H

O NO ts

ON 0 CO

PC CO ON

0O VO

N

S?
co C

J 2 -2

S' =3 VO

M B co
£ *

N O

On CO

NO W

VO NO

N

tv

tv

H

H

O ON C*

H CO CO

VO CO ON

CO CO ^

ct


World Total . .

(157 Countries)

British Empire —

United Kingdom

Other British

Countries

Total British Empire

United States . .

France.. ..

All Other Countries . .


THE EVOLUTION OF


460

Note i. — In the tables of Imports and Exports (Special) of Mer-
chandise given on the preceding page, conversions of foreign currencies
to sterling have been made at the averages of the quoted rates. The
figures for 1923 are available for about 91 per cent, of the imports and
89 per cent, of the exports, and the balance has been estimated from
the 1922 records. For better comparison with 1913, the figures of
trade of the United Kingdom in 1923 have been adjusted (reduced) to
apply to the British Isles as a whole, and not to Great Britain and
Northern Ireland only.

Note 2. — For an explanation of the meaning of “ special ” imports
and exports, see p. 27.


§ 10. The most distinctive feature of modern economic
internationalism, however, is not the growth of ordin-
ary commerce across political boundaries, but the
increasing investment of capital in foreign countries.
This growth of export of capital (involving great compli-
cations in the general trade balances of the countries
engaged in it) has been common to all the advanced
industrial countries of Europe. The United Kingdom
has gone furthest in this direction, both as to the
amount of money invested abroad and the proportion
of that sum to home investments. The investments
from the United Kingdom are also more widely dis-
tributed over non-European countries than is the case
with the foreign investments of other capital-exporting
countries. Though no closely reliable measures of the
flows of exported capital or of the flow of home in-
vestments are available, such indices as are to hand
point to a large absolute and relative growth of foreign
as compared with home investments on the part of the
United Kingdom from 1905 to 1914. The earlier year
first registers a large predominance in the total of capital
absorbed in London for investment abroad, as com-
pared with that subscribed for investment at home,
and the figures for subsequent years up to 1914 empha-
sise this predominance. ^When allowance is also made
for capital " subscribed partly on the Continent/' but
wholly subscribed through London, the comparative
figures, compiled from the beginning of the century,
run as follows: —


MODERN CAPITALISM.


461


In Thousands of £.


Year.

For Investment in
United Kingdom.


For Investment
Abroad.

1900

.. 100,121


26,069

1901

.. 106,585


26,978

1902

•• 75,124


62,214

1903

. . 44,868


60,013

1904

.. 50,083


64,616

1905

. . 48,426


110,617

1906

39,314


72,995

1907

.. 32,988


79,334

1908

. . 50,052


117,871

1909

18,681


150,468

igio

.. 60,296


179,832

1911

.. 26,146


142,740

1912

45,335


144,560

1913

•• 35,951

. .

149,735


Though the actual proportions of subscribed capital
for the several fields do not closely correspond with
the figures of issues, while large volumes of savings
pass into home issues by private processes of invest-
ment, the general tendency disclosed by such statistics
is unmistakable.

This flow is into an expanding number of employ-
ments in an increasing number of countries. While
the largest flow has been into Canada, the United States
and Argentina, other South American countries have
been large recipients; smaller though considerable sums
have been found for South Africa, our other African
colonies, and Egypt, while India and Australia have
also taken a share. Russia within recent years had
come to count as a borrower of British savings.

“ The main purpose for which these gigantic sums
are required is still railway construction in almost every
part of the world. Docks, water and gas works,
electric lighting, telegraphs, and tramways, form
another important group of enterprises which are
constantly demanding fresh capital. All of these activi-
ties are conducted both by Governmental Authorities
— central or local — and by Joint-Stock Companies. In
addition, there are mining concerns and plantations,
land mortgage companies, banks, trust insurance and
trading companies, all of .which figured prominently
during earlier periods of foreign investment. There is.


THE EVOLUTION OF


462

however, a new characteristic visible in the course of
foreign investment during the past few years — namely,
a tendency to invest in manufacturing and industrial
concerns.” 1

Statistics of issues on the French Bourses showed
the same tendency to a larger, volume and a wider
distribution of foreign investments, and, though the
proportion of foreign issues in the case of Germany
was much smaller, the absolute amounts, inclusive of
Government loans, were very considerable. Whereas,
during the pre-war period. Great Britain' had invested
yearly sums varying from 100 to 200 millions in the
colonies and foreign countries, the yearly flow of French
money into foreign lands had been from 80 to 100
millions, that of German from 40 to 60 millions.
Holland and Belgium were also contributors towards
a stream of money furnished from Western Europe to
the borrowing countries of the world, amounting to
some 300 millions annually.

The actual amount of British capital invested
abroad was estimated in 1914 to be approximately
£4,000,000,000, while French capital was put at
£1,800,000,000, and German capital at £1,200,000,000.

The financing of the Great War materially affected
the flow of export of capital and its ownership.
Germany disposed of the greater part of her foreign
securities; Great Britain reduced her foreign holdings
by £1,000,000,000 or thereabouts. A large proportion
of French foreign investments in Europe disappeared.
Since the war none of these nations has had large
surplus funds available for outside investment, though
Britain has made some recovery of her war sacrifices.

§ 11. One of the most significant effects of the war
in its bearing on the relative position of nations in
finance and commerce has been the rapid transforma-
tion of the United States from the position of a debtor
into that of a creditor nation. Up to the opening of
the twentieth century America was still drawing capital
from Western Europe, chiefly through London, though
the tide was beginning to turn before the war. The

1 The Export of Capital , by C. K. Hobson, p. 159 (Constable), the
fullest historical and statistical treatment of the subject up to 1914.


MODERN CAPITALISM.


463

heavy advances to Europe during the war, chiefly
through credit sales of supplies, is estimated to have
left a balance of indebtedness in America's favour to
the extent of some £600,000,000, omitting the loans
to foreign Governments. Since the war, new capital
loans, public and private, of large dimensions, have
been made.

The situation as regards the amount and territorial
distribution of foreign investments at the beginning
of 1924 was thus presented by the Department of
Commerce.


Region.

Government

Obligations.

$1,000.

Industrial

Obligations.

Si,ooo. !

Total.

$1,000.

Canada . . . .

750,000

1,750,000

2,500,000

Cuba

110,000

1,250,000

1,360,000

Mexico

22,000

1,000,000

1,022,000

Central America and

W. Indies .. . .

48,000

100,000

148,000

S. America

430,000

800,000

1,230,000

Europe

950,000

350,000

1,300,000

Asia

190,000

250,000

440,000


2,500,000

5,500,000

8,000,000


This sum, $8,000,000,000, does not take into account
obligations of foreign Governments, owed since the
World War, amounting to some $18,500,000,000.
Against the $8,000,000,000, representing American
investments abroad, may be set foreign residents' invest-
ments in America, estimated at some $3,000,000,000
at the beginning of 1924.

Consideration of the trade balance in recent years
makes it evident that, apart from the continued in-
vestment of new subscribed capital, an automatic


THE EVOLUTION OF


464

increase of American holdings in foreign countries must
result from the pursuance of a tariff policy that dis-
ables America from receiving the annual interest
payments due to her from her foreign creditors. The
average recent annual surplus of America available
for foreign advances is conservatively estimated by
Mr. Dawes at £130,000,000, inclusive of " what might
in the most favourable circumstances be paid to us
under the full settlement of international indebtedness/'
If this sum were left (as under the present tariff
restriction upon imports) to roll up at compound inter-
est, it would amount in twenty years' time approxi-
mately to £325,000,000 per annum, without any
extension of American foreign trade. But the large
surplus of exports over imports, the medium of this new
expansion of foreign investments, is unlikely to cease,
unless the Government reverses its tariff policy; and
with the constantly expanding productivity of mass
production in the iron and steel and other standard
manufactures, it is likely to increase. A very rapid
expansion of American investments, at present chiefly
in Europe and on the American Continent, but later to
an increasing extent for the development of oil, rubber,
and other raw materials in backward countries of Asia
and Africa, may be expected.

This advance of America coincides with a decline
in the position of Britain as a foreign investor.
For, though Britain has made good since the war
a large part of her war sacrifices of American and
other foreign investments, her average annual surplus
is considerably reduced, and even a fair recovery of
world trade will not enable her to resume her pre-
war supremacy in the world market for investments.
The same must apply with every greater stringency
to the other large investing countries, France and
Germany. Assuming that these countries pay off any
considerable portion of their foreign indebtedness for
loans and reparations, their surplus available for foreign
investment is likely for some time to be little or nil.
Indeed, it seems quite probable that any foreign in-
vestments they may make will be offset by fresh
borrowing from America, and, to a less extent, from


MODERN CAPITALISM


465

Britain, these countries being paid their interest on
past loans and instalments of reparations out of fresh
credits which they themselves supply.

§ 12. The increased dependence upon large amounts
of capital for the successful conduct of so many branches
of industry and commerce, and the large part played
by distant and intricate processes of commerce in-
volving long periods of time for their accomplishment,
have given immense importance to the machinery of
banking and finance. The modern investment system,
through joint-stock enterprise, has not only extended
and depersonalised the modern business ; it has given a
dominant and determinant place in the business world to
little groups of men in the great monetary centres who
control and regulate the flows of capital and the credit
system by which an increasing proportion of modern
business is conducted. The work of floating new enter-^
prises by collecting from diverse sources the required
capital, of converting private into public joint-stock
businesses, of assisting to finance the concrete oper-
ations of industry and commerce by loans, discounts,
and other financial aids, of undertaking risks and
providing guarantees, of furnishing to stockbrokers
and other dealers in “ paper ” the means to carry on
their operations, has given a pivotal position in modern
capitalism to the men and houses wielding this money
power. The great joint stock banks in most countries
are the centres of this power. Most of these oper-
ations are conducted, or at least financed, by them.

The direct relations between the bank and industry
have differed in different countries. In Germany and
in the United States the direct financial dependence
of great manufacturing and other business firms upon
the banks has been much closer than ih Great Britain.
But in every advanced country the development of
banking and insurance, both extensive and intensive,
has been a marked feature of our time. Every town,
every considerable village, has its branches and its
agents of some large company. The savings of all
classes are tempted into broader channels of invest-
ment, and cheques are everywhere playing a larger
r 61 e as methods of payment.


30


THE EVOLUTION OF


466

What applies to internal trade applies also to foreign
trade. Great capitalistic countries like Great Britain,
Germany, Holland, extended their banking systems over
the whole world, assisting to finance trade and to
develop the resources of new or backward countries.
Great Britain, with her great predominance in shipping
and in foreign trade, took the lead. In the early twentieth
century, however, the more adventurous German banks
forced numerous openings. The United States banks,
hitherto absorbed for the most part in financing their
own great developing industries, also began to enter
on the international field, the National City Bank being
the pioneer in the establishment of foreign branches
in Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Cuba. A paper
read by Professor Emery R. Johnson at the meeting
of the American Economic Association (December, 1915)
stated, on the authority of a. well-known New York
banker, that more than a hundred European banks
had established branches in foreign countries, exceed-
ing two thousand, in number. “ There are more than
one hundred in South America, about three hundred
in Asia, four hundred in Africa, and more than seven
hundred in Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific
Isles.”

The growth of foreign trade and investments has been
closely related to this movement of international finance.
It is the most fluid form of economic internationalism.

§ 13. The Great War will probably serve in history
as a convenient landmark indicating certain important
changes in the relative economic strength and progress
of the several industrial nations, and of the classes or
occupations within these nations. In other words
(partly as a consequence of the war itself, but more
largely as a resultant of many forces which were
operating prior to the war, but which acquired greater
momentum owing to war and post-war conditions), im-
portant changes have been taking place in the distribu-
tion of wealth as between different nations of the
world and different sections of the nations.

The following table was compiled in 1919 by
Sir Josiah Stamp: —


MODERN CAPITALISM


467


ts 3
5 r( a 6
oSo.2 S3 o


S 3 O « O 00 m m •
n >


S.S3^


0000000

LO IO VO O 0 0 f*> I

N « H UDX) M N


11 , . 00 0 U"t ,

*0 0 n

1 1 1 1 w ro tn 1


II I l M 1


| s w^-g = I I ! I I I

G £ fr.rt jj fl «

"13 ’S uc-- 3

«i c ? cp - 7 ; ^ ^

Wo O ”£* J2 3 rt

° CQQffitL. PQ

♦j tj 1

II |J ^ - «?0« N ?££*#
If (2 5


00 O VO v-OCO O i-O
vO OVNO h
*-« M C4 ro fO rn


S.ESM

I S


ooooooooog
OOlflOOO 5 'tOv^O
vno^voo rf m Oi n o o
'<£ NVO ci" rf vo n m m cT


OOOQO 1000
tN o O ro 0000

ON N VO 00 vn N


-K ^

2 § 8 «

g-’B 313

a, rt o 1 -

< S


:>>>- m>i.


5 c ^

*0

rja : : : : :j* a «j

tL. u 5 JQ


Cu.2^ a

0 cj qG C -f; cj m 2-3 0 . M .»« -O “ g M

§«S « si u rt £ E «i h .S.S.S'5 g*< 5 §

^OtdwOWPQOco^W OQO^a #cq


: r s * • • • •

* ‘K

j A f§ «
> *c c-2 «.§,§

3 >vj: 'j bos I /5 u
5 "cS 3 ®* p ^

4M <J <w ao £ w


sias’s §s

v; C-H w c 3 hj

lol <6 &


THE EVOLUTION OF


468

Though material is not available for estimating
wealth and annual income ten years later, certain gen-
eral statements may be made, indicative of the relative
gains and losses in economic position. Though the
United States may not have greatly increased her lead
in the amount of capital per head, owing to the large
proportion of her wealth vested in as yet undeveloped
natural resources, her income must have increased
faster than that of any other country, both in terms
of money and of commodities. Indeed, of the belli-
gerent nations she is the only one whose current
productivity (1925) is not below the pre-war level.
Possessing the greatest variety of natural resources in
the largest, wealthiest, and best connected market, her
production and distribution of wealth have been far
less disturbed than in any European country. During
the war she reaped immense gains from an artificially
stimulated world trade, conducted on a high price level,
and after the war the forces of mass standardised pro-
duction have (as the statistics of iron and steel and
power indicate) made great further advances. Britain
and France are still operating a little below their pre-
war level of productivity, though British productive
power in capital and labour is fully capable of the
pre-war output were markets available. France is
hindered by bad public finance and lack of business
initiative from assuming the position which her en-
larged natural resources of coal and iron would render
possible. Germany, well furnished with plant, labour,
and business capacity, is crippled by lack of working
capital and adequate markets. Of the broken Austro-
Hungarian Empire, Czecho-Slovakia is the only section
that has made a good recovery, Austria, even with
her restored monetary system, conducts a struggle for
bare subsistence, owing to the tariff walls set up by
sections of her former free markets. Though financial
difficulties and political uncertainty damage the full
recovery of Italy, it is probable that industrial Italy,
with Switzerland and Scandinavia, by reason of their
newly available resources of industrial power, will take
a larger place in capitalistic industry. Belgium and
Holland are evidently advancing in wealth production.


MODERN CAPITALISM


469

Spain and Russia are economically enfeebled, though
the large varied natural resources of the latter, coupled
with her improved land tenure, might lead to a rapid
economic progress, were world confidence in her finance
restored, and an adequate system of economic incen-
tives applied to evoke industrial efficiency.

The relative strength and growth in capitalist
production of the various countries must, of course,
be profoundly affected by their relative possession and
availability of coal, oil, and water power, together with
improvements in the technique of the generation and
distribution of electric power. The dominating part
played by electric energy, distributed from great
generating stations over wide areas, may not only
alter the relative position of the industrial nations in
wealth, production, and commerce, but may have
equally important reactions upon the conditions of
work and life within the industrial countries.

The development of electric power will have four chief
distinguishable uses : for industry, transport, agricul-
ture, and domestic services. In each department it can
be utilised so as greatly to reduce costs and increase
productivity. If it is fully utilised, it is capable, with
a reasonable rate of progress in technique, of increas-
ing so largely the output of wealth as to raise the
existing populations of industrial countries to a far
higher level of material comfort and leisure than has
hitherto been attainable. It, as seems probable, the
established checks upon birth-rate still hold good,
poverty in the old use of the term might be abolished,
and the economic struggle might cease to dominate
politics. Decent arrangements between capital and
labour, employer and worker, might bring about an
ease and security of life and work which would trans-
form the social and moral fabric of civilisation.

How far these immense gains may be attained will
largely depend upon how far the new power is made
easily and equally available for all sorts and conditions
of men and work. It is self-evident that unrestricted
private capitalism affords no adequate security for the
nation as a whole attaining the full benefits of the new
economies of power. If areas for the marketing of


THE EVOLUTION OF


470

electric power were handed over to competing- com-
panies, with their separate services, the waste, insecurity,
and disturbance occasioned by such private enterprise
would be immense. On the other hand, to establish
private monopolies of power, in- sole possession of large
markets and at liberty to rackrent consumers, would
be still more intolerable. If this be admitted, we are
thrown upon the alternatives of public administration
or public control. If, as is likely at any rate in Britain
and America, the latter policy prevails, at any rate in
the earlier period of development, much will turn upon
the principles as well as the efficiency of State control.
Should the operation of the industry be that of ordinary
business and finance (the capital and conduct of the
industry being left to the incentives of private enterprise,
checked only by price restrictions for the protection
of consumers, with, perhaps, an excess profit tax
to divert some of the monopoly value to the public
revenue), the social economic effects might be quite
other than those attendant on a public enterprise.
For, in the case of a public service, the supply of electric
energy would, take a time and space economy widely
divergent from that of a purely profit making company.
It might, for example, adopt a policy of equal supply
prices, at any rate for certain important uses, over the
whole area of supply, following the analogy of postal
services ; while it might take a longer time range for
the development of certain services than would be
remunerative to private enterprise. It is easy, for
instance, to see that the State might regard the cheap
availability of electric power to stimulate agriculture
and strengthen rural industries with a more liberal eye
than would a private company looking to quick profits
as its criterion. For the State could not disregard
certain considerations of human welfare that lie not
only outside the profit making scheme, but outside
the economic field.

A power policy that might enable and encourage a
wider spacing out of population for work and living
is one of the obvious possibilities of the new electric
age. The State might go further in this human
economy than private enterprise could afford to do,


MODERN CAPITALISM 47 1

by making favourable rates for works more distant
from the generating centres, or, at any rate, for such
cheap transport as would encourage workers to live
at some distance from their workplace. Even if strict
business motives should at first prevail, the possibility
of transmission of power at moderate rates will reduce
the close concentration of the steam age, though the
main industries of the country would still lie in the
neighbourhood of the great coal-fields in countries where
coal remained the source of power.

An era in which electric power was available cheaply
and easily for most industrial, agricultural, and even
domestic routine services, might not only raise the
standard of comfort for the .whole population and
enable them to live in a less crowded environment,
but it might transform the methods of work and the
character of whole classes of workers. When the.
farm-worker, the navvy, the shoemaker, the house-
wife, shift more and more of their routine manual
labour on to electric machines, they assume more and
more the attitude of skilled operators. With the
change in the nature of their work, their mental attitude
towards the work is changed. The command and skilled
direction of mechanical power gives a new interest and
dignity to work, where it is not unduly narrowed in
its application. Rural life is already visibly changing
with the new power, and, taken in conjunction with
the other services of communication, education, and
amusement, which are breaking up the isolation of
country life, electricity may effect a liberation of the
rural mind fraught with noticeable reactions in political
and other fields of conduct.


Part II.

§ 1. This speculation into the coming electric age
may serve as a convenient introduction to two chief
economic lessons of the Great War.

The most imposing revelation from the experience
of British industry during the war was its quantitative


THE EVOLUTION OF


472

and qualitative adaptability to sudden new demands.
After nearly three years, during which more than four
million men (or nearly one-third of the adult able-
bodied male population) had been drafted into the
fighting services, while something like a million more
had been added for the special requirements of the
munitions trades, the ordinary trades of the country
were still able to be carried on so as to supply the
material requisites of life for the remaining civil popu-
lation upon a level not appreciably lower than before
the war.

It is true that larger supplies than usual were im-
ported to supplement our internal production. But, when
freights and other special costs are taken into account*
it is probable that the actual quantity of imported
foods and materials available for civilian use and
consumption was not much above the normal. It is
clear that the nation was able to draw upon internal
reserves of productive power much greater than would
hitherto have been believed to exist. The production
of material wealth as a whole (inclusive of munitions
and other material war requisites) did not appear to
have been perceptibly diminished by the withdrawal of
four million men.

How has this been possible ? Well, in the first place,
not more than half this supply of men was taken out
of labour employed in the direct production of material
goods. Probably nearly half of the four millions was
drawn from the leisured, the student, and the em-
ploying classes, the professional, distributive, and
transport occupations, domestic and other personal
services. Some half-a-million represent the emigration
suspended during the war. Some of the luxury trades
and recreations, especially those catering for the needs
of the well-to-do male, fell into abeyance. But the
fundamental material industries were reinforced from
various sources, so that their aggregate output did
not much diminish. The unemployed margin was
absorbed, retired workers came back to work, children
and young persons were taken from education into
industry, great numbers of women were drawn into
manufacture, commerce, and agriculture, a fuller week


MODERN CAPITALISM


473


was worked, with much overtime and even Sunday
labour, more labour-saving machines were introduced,
and all machinery speeded up, “dilution” produced a
more effective division of labour, and a suspension of
trade union rules gave more elasticity and produc-
tivity to labour. While, therefore, the distributive and
other services were much let down, the “productive ”
were well maintained. Mr. Hoover draws the same lesson
from the shorter war experience of America. *■ “ Certain
proof of our deficient normal production is shown
when, with 20 per cent, of man-power withdrawn into
the army, we yet produced 20 per cent more com-
modities than we are doing to-day.” 1

Post-war experience in Europe, and not least in
Britain, has sharpened the conscious need for an in-
creased national output. Demands for higher wages
and shorter hours on the part of labour, the higher
rate of interest required by new capital, and the conse-
quent difficulty in keeping costs of production low
enough to maintain the pre-war share of the shrunken
world market, press home in each industrial country
the needs for improved technique, business organis-
ation, and finance, in order to maintain full regular
production.

§ 2. Waste signifies the failure to utilise the best
available methods, not only by the several businesses
but by industries taken separately and as integral parts
of a national economy. Some of the largest wastes are
found in the wrong disposition of economic resources.
A leading example is the excess of energy absorbed
in the distributive processes. This perhaps attains its
maximum in the handling of food stuffs. Sir Charles
Fielding, analysing the retail prices of wheat, milk,
and meat in England in the year 1923, showed that
between 50 and 60 per cent, of the prices of these
home-grown products was absorbed in the processes
of distribution and conversion into food. In the veget-
able, flower, and fish trades the percentage is probably
higher. The constant increase in the proportion of
the population employed in the distributive trades


1 Industrial Waste , New York, 1921,


THE EVOLUTION OF


474

attests the wastes of selling costs, partly attributable
to excessive competition, partly to needless duplica-
tion of wholesale and retail handling.

But in the technique of manufacture Britain is hardly
less wasteful. i 4 It seems probable that if all the iron
and steel works in this country adopted the most
efficient methods, they could, on an average, improve
their output by something between 50 and 100 per
cent.” 1 The huge waste of coal in almost all its uses
is too well known to need specific evidence.. This
waste, so far as it consists in failure to apply the best
machinery and methods, may be attributed partly to
mental indolence, partly to a lack of risk-taking enter-
prise, partly to lack of capital needed for scrapping
out-of-date plant and putting in new expensive plant.
Already, before the war, British business men were
waking up to the fact that they were outclassed in
certain branches of manufacture by the superior
“science” of Germany and the mass production of
America. The greater use of machinery and mechan-
ical power in many American plants, and the greater
readiness of German businesses to avail themselves of
chemical and physical laboratories, were beginning to
act as stimulants to British business enterprise. But,
though there is plenty of evidence to show that in
many branches of the textile, metal, and other trades
Britain leads in efficiency and quality of output, the
statistical comparisons in output per employee in
many staple processes in England and America indi-
cate large economies either in methods or in human
energy favourable to America. 2

1 Industrial Fatigue Research Board Report 5, p. 95.

2 See, for some striking examples, an article by Professor Taussig in
the Quarterly Journal of Economics , Oct., 1924.

Economic students in Britain, however, are so accustomed to hear
references to the high productivity of American labour and machine
production that it will surprise them to learn the grave testimony borne
by American business men and economists to the wasteful working of
American businesses. Mr. Stuart Chase ( The Tragedy of Waste , ch. iii)
has classified this waste under four categories :

(1) Waste in the technique of Production and Distribution ;

(2) Waste of natural resources ;

(3) Idle man power, or lost labour time ;

(4) Waste in consumption, or what may be tr*-**~* detrimental produc-


MODERN CAPITALISM


475

This leads to the recognition of a defect in the
general working of our economic system largely
accountable for the restrictions of output to which
both employers and workers in many of our productive
industries are prone. The amount of recorded un-
employment during periods of trade depression is a
very inadequate measure of the waste due to a know-
ledge on the part of employers and workers that
their productive capacity is normally in excess of their
market. This is no place to open a discussion of the
root causes of cyclical depressions, and of the exist-
ence in ordinary times of a capacity of supply in
excess of effective demand. The point is, that this
limitation of the market, operative in most indus-
tries at most times, keeps the productive power of
the economic system functioning far below its full
capacity. The fear of unemployment is constantly
before the workers, and exercises a depressing influ-
ence upon their output. It is largely responsible for
the “ ca* canny,” organised or customary in many trade
unions, and for the similar tactics of employers in
trade combines or associations. The industrial system
works normally at low gear, lest high productivity
should precipitate a crisis, display over-production,
and herald in a period of trade depression. The
prolonged depression, beginning in 1920-21 and felt
throughout the world of industry in different degrees
of intensity, focussed more attention upon this central
defect of our system than ever before. Prevailing
poverty in Europe led economists and politicians to
fasten upon insufficiency of purchasing power as the
source of this trouble, though this was only another


tion. Certain of these wastes are greater in America than in most Euro-
pean countries, and go far to offset the superiority o that country in
standardisation and machine economy. The waste of natural resources
is probably the heaviest loss. Oil, timber, coal, water power, the soil,
and animal life- have been operated in a recklessly extravagant way.
The advertising industry, accredited with a turnover of $1,200,000,000,
speculation and gambling in their various forms, quackery in medicine
and hygiene, are also large contributors. Mr. Chase’s general estimate
of the economic waste in the current working of America’s economic
system is given as approximately 50 per cent, of the total available
labour power (p. 270).


THE EVOLUTION OF


476

way of saying that markets were limited. But it
has led to innumerable discussions of the monetary
machinery of the economic system, and to many specu-
lative policies for pumping in more purchasing power
by open or masked processes of inflation. This
concentration upon the monetary aspect of the trouble
served to divert attention from the kernel of the problem
— viz., the question why there normally exists more
capital and labour than is wanted. The constant tend-
ency of production to outrun consumption, due, to a
distribution of income that tends to more creation
of capital than can find adequate employment in
helping to produce saleable goods, is the inevitable price
of the prevailing inequality of economic opportunities,
which disables large sections of the community from
expressing their needs and desires through effective
demand for commodities, while it enables and induces
small wealthy sections to disorganise the economic
system by the irregular and wasteful methods of their
spending, at the same time leaving too large a surplus
to pour automatically into new investments for creating
more plant and other capital than can be fully employed.

§ 3. There is no remedy for this low gear operation
of the economic system except better distribution of
wealth and better opportunities. It is, of course, true
that even in a country relatively so prosperous as
America the productive power of great industry is
continually held in leash by * ‘the price system.*’ It
would be unprofitable for industry to let itself u all out.”
Therefore, it is idle to point to the need for higher
productivity without perceiving that it can only be
justified by radical changes in the distributive system.

These issues were ripening before the war. The
detailed evidence of our Census of Production, together
with the later statistical analysis of Professor Bowley
and Sir Josiah Stamp, made it manifest that the British
output of wealth was not adequate to provide a satis-
factory standard of living for our whole population
even were it parcelled out equally among them. But it
was bad logic that led so many to draw the lesson
that insufficient production, not inequitable distribution,
was the sole source of trouble. For larger produc-


MODERN CAPITALISM


477

tion is unattainable without improved distribution,
partly because of the 4 4 limited ” market, whose limit-
ations would not be thus removed, partly because
the incentives to employers and employees to produce
more' will remain inadequate. Slowly the mind of
social economic reformers is moving towards a clearer
recognition of the intimate correlation of the problems
of increased production, more equal distribution, and
improved consumption of wealth. They are not three
sets of problems, but one. The inter-relation may be
presented in the following terms. A more equal (and
more equitable) distribution of income, by which a larger
share passes to the workers, while the share of the
owners and employers is reduced (by cutting down
the surplus elements in the shape of rents, high profits,
and other emoluments which do little or nothing to
stimulate production), will have important reactions
both upon the quantity and quality of the wealth
produced and consumed. As it is admitted that
inequality of incomes is favourable to saving, inasmuch
as a larger proportion of high incomes is saved than of
lower incomes, the first effect of equalisation would
be to reduce the proportion of the aggregate income
that is saved, and to increase the proportion that is
spent. But this need not and should not involve any
absolute reduction in the quantity of saving and
provision of new capital. For the enlarged propor-
tion of spending will have its first effect in a fuller
and more regular employment of the existing supplies
of capital and labour. This, larger demand for capital
will in all probability require the existing supply of
capital to be reinforced by a rate of saving even
higher than that which formerly took place, in other
words, both the rate of spending and the rate of
saving will simultaneously be raised by means of the
higher productivity rendered possible by the stimu-
lation applied to consumption through the better
distribution of income. The rate of spending, however,
will be raised more than the rate of saving. As the
increased spending will operate in raising the standards
of living for the main body of the workers, and in
cutting down the expenditure of large unearned incomes


THE EVOLUTION OF


478

upon luxuries, greater regularity and security will be
imparted to the general working of the industrial system
— i.e.y a transference of employment of capital and labour
from essentially useless, fluctuating, and degrading
trades and services to more useful, regular, and whole-
some ones. This implies a general rise in the human
utility of consumption. A double gain would thus
result from a better distribution. It would stimu-
late a higher productivity, and would impart a larger
consuming value to each- item of the product

If this be the true inter-relation of production, distri-
bution, and consumption, it appears that the desired
increase of production and the desired improvement
of consumption are dependent on better distribution.
Many business men, who may not accept or under-
stand this interaction, will readily admit that the
increased productivity which they would like to see
attained without any alterations in the existing business
arrangements appears unattainable, because the workers
refuse to give out in time, energy, and skill the increased
productive power required to enlarge the output and
to keep down labour costs.

§ 4. There has arisen, therefore, in many quarters a
new willingness to consider and to try bolder experi-
ments, both in private and public enterprise, than have
hitherto been possible. To realise the needed condition
of higher productivity, more pacific relations between
capital and labour, employer and employed, are essen-
tial. The peril of a situation in which falling wages
and unemployment on an unprecedented scale are leading
features drives the more active-minded employers to
make considerable concessions from the old capitalist
autocracy. From the employers’ standpoint the pro-
blem is one of devising adequate and reliable stimuli
to draw from the workers a larger and more regular
output of productive energy, a greater willingness
to adopt and apply new mechanical and business
methods, and, in general, to co-operate more effectively
with the other factors of production. " But,* in order
thus to get labour to realise its community of interest
with capital, that community itself must be established
on a firmer footing. Labour must be given * more


MODERN CAPITALISM


479

definite “ interest ” in the business and in its conduct,
so far as matters directly affecting labour are involved.
Hitherto, the business has “ belonged to ” the persons
who owned the capital ; it has been exclusively their
property. The “ interest” of any worker in it has
been terminable by a week’s notice, or less. Except
so far as grudging concessions have been made to
trade union pressure, the worker has had no voice
in regulating the “ conditions of labour ” in the factory,
mine, mill, or farm. Some more solid property in,
and control of, the business must be secured for the
workers in it. How to make that property and control
consistent with the maintenance of the supremacy of
the employer in the general conduct of the business,
its organisation, as a technical instrument, the deter-
mination of the lines and methods of production, and the
buying and selling processes, will be the great problem
of business reconstruction. But closely related to it is
the problem of securing to the workers a definite
pecuniary interest in the success of the business as a
whole. The wage system need not be displaced. The
workers cannot be called upon to share fully in the
risks and possible losses which the owners of the capital
undertake. For no chances of participation in profits,
however high, could secure the workers against the risks
of periods of “ working at a loss.” But the wage
system could be supplemented and strengthened by
participation in the gains, applied so as to stimulate
the greater efficiency of labour which should create
gains. The evident defects which have caused the
failure of most profit sharing schemes are being studied
and remedies sought for them. For if capital and
labour are to be brought into conscious harmony within
the business, they must be got to realise that they stand
to gain by effective co-operation. If the labourers,
through their credited representatives, had some better
understanding of the nature and methods of the busi-
ness and of the factors contributing to success or failure,
had some control over the conditions of working, and
some definite interest in putting out the largest and
best product compatible with reasonable consideration
of their health and safety, the output of industry would


THE EVOLUTION OF


480

undoubtedly be greatly increased, and its distribution
would be more socially beneficial.

But in all reform of business structure there is a third
factor, the interests of which must be brought into
harmony with those of capital and labour — namely, the
market, the consumer. In freely competitive industry,
the competition of rival businesses is considered to
furnish a sufficient guarantee for the consumer’s interest.
But over a very large part of the fields of industry and
commerce, combination has displaced competition, so
far as the relations of producer with consumer are
concerned. From top to bottom, from bank, insurance,
and shipping rates to retail prices of milk and bread,
the consumer’s interests are jeopardised by more or less
tight, widespread, and continuous arrangements between
the members of a trade. The experience of the war
disclosed many conspicuous instances of this organised
oppression of the consumer.

Considerations of market open up a wide divergence
of interests and of policy between those trades which
are sheltered, by reason of the virtual monopoly of the
home market which their goods or services command,
and those working largely for export trade, or exposed to
the competition of foreign goods entering these shores.
The weakness of the latter section, containing many of
the most highly developed capitalist industries, especially
in metals and textiles, stands in the way of that general
enforcement of a national minimum of wages and hours
which is a more or less accepted principle of enlightened
social thinkers. The economy of high wages and short
hours has its limits, and international trade unionism
has not gone far towards standardising labour con-
ditions in the competing nations. The result has been
that in almost every European country certain of the
sheltered trades have been able to keep a larger share
of the artificially inflated rates of pay due to the war
and post-war emergencies than the other trades, em-
phasising the weakness of the latter by the high prices
which their sheltered condition enables them to main-
tain. The discontent and unrest among these great
bodies of organised labour can find no obvious relief.
Neither protective tariffs nor bublic subsidies can


MODERN CAPITALISM 481

furnish any remedy for trades unable to hold their own
:n external markets.

Under these conditions many business firms are
inclined towards radical changes in business organis-
ation, with a view to harmonising the interests of capital
and labour and establishing better relations. This
signifies an abatement of the two distinctive features of
ordinary capitalism — viz., the absolutism of the manage-
ment and the exclusive sway of the profit making
motive. Labour is to be taken into consultation, is to
have a “ voice ” in all matters in which its interests are
concerned and in which its experience and judgment are
useful, not merely for arranging wage rates and other
“conditions” of labour and for settling “ disputes/’ but
for improvements in organisation and methods of work.
The beginnings of industrial representative government
are here to be found. Following the famous Whitley
Committee’s report, a number of industrial councils
were established in English trades, with a network of
district councils and workshop committees. In other
staple trades where some machinery of consultation and
conciliation has long existed, as in the leading textile
and engineering trades, many firms have endeavoured
to interest their employees in efficient co-operation
with the management by schemes of bonus wages,
profit sharing, or participation in ownership. There are
those, especially in Britain and America, who claim that
in co-partnership and the general spread of ownership
and investment the real remedy for industrial unrest and
“ ca’ canny” is to be found. If the main body of the
workers in any firm or industry were shareholders, even
on a small scale, they would, so runs the argument, be
led to identify in their own persons the interests of
capital and labour. Their position as shareholders
would carry a measure of control over the conduct of
the business, and would give them some insight into the
difficulties and delicacies of managerial work. An actual
share in profits would make^Xhem less insistent in
attempts to raise wages at the expense of dividends.
The considerable savings which well-paid skilled labour
can secure in some branches of industry, especially in
America and Britain, must tend to affect working-class

3 1


THE EVOLUTION OF


482

psychology In the ways above described, making la
some measure for harmony in the working of industry.
But the evidence adduced in America 1 to show that
considerable numbers of workers are small shareholders
in some large corporation does not go far towards estab-
lishing the new economic harmony. The number of
businesses in which the employees possess a consider-
able, not to say controlling, share of the capital is
negligible. Workers for the most part do not invest
such savings as they make in the shares of the business
where they work, except where some profit sharing ex-
periment or other special inducement is brought into
play. A very large proportion of their savings is not
for permanent investment, but for deferred expenditure.
No doubt, while it is invested and is earning interest,
it has some slight educative influence in abating “pro-
letarian” feeling. Where, as in America, rich trade unions
and their members experiment in Labour Banks, there
opens up the possibility of a small labour capitalism,
perhaps controlling mines, farms, factories, and distri-
butive agencies of its own. But at present this has
gone a very little way towards any general improve-
ment of relations between capital and labour. Workers
who may draw some small percentage of their income
from Investments, through some Provident Society or
Trust Company, in some unknown business operations,
are not likely to alter appreciably their labour attitude.
The proportion of the total capital owned by working-
class persons in Britain is very small. Even in America
during the prosperity of 1918-19, data gathered by the
Department of Labour in 92 industrial centres showed
that the annual savings of the two-thirds of the family
budgets which disclosed a surplus was only $155 per
family, while against that must be set a deficit of $127
per family in the case of nearly one-quarter of the
budgets. The average city worker’s family income,
amounting to $1:513, as indicated by the same enquiry,
could not in any case yield a rate of saving sufficient to
effect materially the distribution of property in America.
In Britain, where in 1919 “ we get two-thirds of the

1 See Robert S. Brookings Industrial Ownership (Macmillan & Co.)


MODERN CAPITALISM


4^3


wealth held by just 400,000 people and the top one-
third by 36,000 people/’ 1 no recent British computation
of total or average wages has appeared, but Dr. Bowley
in 1913 estimated ^770 millions as the earnings of 15}
million wage-earners, a trifle over ^52 per annum for
the average worker. Assuming, .as is not unlikely*
this -£52 be raised to ^80, to allow for the new
monetary situation, the margin for saving must remain
very small. There is no reason to hold that by large
changes in ownership of capital any appreciable im-
provement in the relations of capital and labour can be
effected. We must look for other remedies for unrest
and low productivity. There are those who, maintain-
ing the necessity of private ownership and administration
of industry, look for peace and efficiency to various
steps which admit the workers to a larger share of the
product, and to a clearer understanding of, and interest
in, the efficient working of the business. To this school
standard wages, publicity of accounts, the substitution
of debenture for share capital (or the limitation of
dividend upon share capital), are “the way out,” ac-
companied in some cases by a division of any u surplus ”
income, after standard wages and profits are met, in a
manner favourable to labour. There are many variants
of the schemes for reconciling the interests of the two
parties. The most radical is that which envisages the
workers in a business engaging to pay the owners of
the capital a fixed interest and undertaking to run
the business themselves, with or without the assistance
of the former managers ; in other words, the workers
to take over the business, paying the owners an annual
interest and perhaps a sinking fund for their rights.
But there has been no marked disposition for groups of
workers to embark upon business on their own account,
hiring the necessary capital, and conducting the concern
for their own profit. Where attempts have been made,
as recently in England by Building Guilds, little success
has accrued. The history of Productive Co-operation,
in the strict sense of the term, does not encourage hopes
of wide success.


1 Sir J. Stamp, Wealth and Taxable Capacity, p. 102,


THE EVOLUTION OF


484

In Britain at any rate, during* the last generation,
the growth of orderly collective bargaining appeared to
many the best available means of improving the con-
ditions of labour and of avoiding disastrous conflicts.
But v though there is no decline in the use of machinery
for collective bargaining, its limitations and drawbacks
from the social standpoint have become more evident.
It has not shown itself generally effective during this
century for raising the real wages of labour, nor for
preventing strikes and lock-outs which", from the very
strength of the organisations engaged, have been
increasingly damaging to other trades and to the
community. Where collective bargaining is not
accompanied by any compulsory arbitration or other
judicial settlement, and when bargaining fails to win
agreement, there is no security for industrial peace.
Thus it has come about that the worker has been
disposed to use his organised political power to supple-
ment trade unionism, while the public, in its capacity
of consumer, looks to the State to safeguard its
interests against failures of necessary supplies and
services when quarrels of employers and employed
bring stoppages, or against extortionate prices when
competition fails, and industrial peace inside sheltered
trades is purchased at the cost of high profits and high
wages,

§ 5. This being the situation not only in Britain and
her Dominions, but in most industrial countries, the State
is everywhere driven to take a more active and varied
part in economic affairs. The hastily improvised State
Socialism of the war, for the most part scrapped when
peace ensued, has left a curiously mixed attitude of
mind in most countries. Professed contempt for the
inefficiency of Governmental machinery, as illustrated
by war controls, is accompanied by an increased expect-
ation of, and acquiescence in, State intervention for
emergency situations and for protective measures in
general. Business men, bitterly hostile to State inter-
ferences and trade union privileges, are engaged in
seeking tariff protection, or subsidies, or diplomatic and
financial aids in the development of trade, while
workers look more and more to Government to help in


MODERN CAPITALISM


485

securing standard conditions of wages and hours, with
adequate provisions against unemployment, the competi-
tion of foreign sweated goods, etc. The public subsidies
which, under various pressure, have been found in
recent times for the railways and mines, for agriculture
and for export trade, are less significant on their own
account than as indications of a widespread new attitude
towards government regarded as an instrument of eco-
nomic defence and progress. This attitude, no doubt,
is largely due to disorders and perils that are war
sequelae. Britain, so vitally dependent upon foreign
trade, seeks from government and public policy aids to
recovery which she envisages as purely temporary ex-
pedients. But, in point of fact, what is taking place is
a growing conscious realisation of national, and to a less
degree imperial, economy as an organised system, con-
servation, and development of national and imperial
resources, in view of the dangers, political and economic,
of the outside world. This is seen in the attention
given by all political parties to the revival of agriculture
and reduced dependence upon overseas supplies, dis-
couragement of overseas investments, proposals for
expenditure of public credit on development of electric
power, improved transport, and insurance in all its
branches. Many of the schemes are unsound and even
fantastic, but their wide prevalence attests a new spirit
of dependence on and confidence in the State. Though
in Britain, as in every advanced industrial country
except America, a powerful political party is formally
committed to Socialism, the attitude here indicated can
not admit so compact an interpretation. It is very far
from seeking the overthrow of private capitalism and
the substitution of a general Socialism, State or Guild,
or other. It is much more opportunist, tentative, ex-
perimental, and compromising. But it brings State
action into the business world in a great variety of
ways Dislike of centralised autocracy and certain
deep-seated defects of that system make it unlikely that
any Western nation will resort to public ownership and
operation of industry upon a general scale. There will,
however, be a steady, though perhaps not rapid, move-
ment towards the displacement of private by public


THE EVOLUTION OF


486

ownership in certain vital industries and services. The
public ownership of the land, or at any rate of city sites
and mineral areas, formally existent as a right of
eminent domain, will become a reality in all well
populated countries. The instruments for production
and distribution of u power ” for industry, transport,
agriculture, and domestic uses, will tend to become
public services, after costly and necessary experiments
in private enterprise have disclosed their best economies
of technique. The nationalisation of mines and of
railways, already partially effected in many countries
of the old and new world, will become general No
less clear is the trend towards common ownership in
the departments of banking and insurance. Recent
experiences in the operations of finance have convinced
ail men of the paramount importance of the money
power. It will be urged, no doubt, that the gravest
sinners in the economic department have been govern-
ments. And it is true that the acts of inflation, whose
consequences have been so disastrous, are mainly
governmental. But the chief impelling forces that
made governments inflate were the preference of the
great business classes for this dishonest way of raising
public revenues over the honest way of direct taxation,
and the opportunties which would credit operations
afforded to the gamblers in the money markets. There
is an increase of the census of opinion among economists
and informing publicists that the issue and control of
money need unitary management, and cannot safely be
left to individuals of corporations whose private profit-
able interests do not coincide with the public needs.

Insurance in many branches, especially as a provision
against working-class emergencies, has in many countries
passed under public operation or regulation. Outside
the area of industrialism, education, hygiene, and
medicine and law are passing more and more from
the status of private crafts or mysteries into that of
public services.

Summing up, it may be said that, apart from all
theories of socialism and individualism, a general tend-
ency is seen in civilised countries towards the assertion
of public ownership, operation, or control of land,


MODERN CAPITALISM


48?

power, transport, money, insurance, education, hygiene
and justice, regarded as necessary prerequisites of
liberty and equality of opportunity. A stoppage or
shortage in any of these services, due either to the fix-
ing of excessive rates or prices, in order to earn high
profits for a trade or profession, or to conflicts between
employers and employed, inflicts such intolerable in-
juries upon the community, that the State is bound to
intervene. But casual intervention in an emergency is
no adequate method of safeguarding the public interests.
It is a medley of these different considerations that
directs the practical and partial socialism to which all
modern States at various paces are committing them-
selves.

§ 6. But it may be said that, in order to safeguard
the public interest, public ownership and operation may
be unnecessary ; public control may suffice. Even where
strong trusts or other combinations command the supply
of prime necessaries, or administer essential public
services, such as railroads, telephones, electric supplies,
or banking, several alternatives to complete socialis-
ation are proposed and practised. Public ownership
may be combined with private business operation, the
State leasing out the enterprise to profit making cor-
porations, and the public interest being safeguarded by
regulation of prices and other conditions of supply,
public participation in profits, and standard conditions
for employees. If it were always, and in all cases,
unreasonable to expect that the best public operation
can approach the efficiency of good private enterprise, a
strong case would exist for this line of advance, assum-
ing that the State could exercise effectively the powers
of control entrusted to it. Another much discussed pro-
posal is that of combining public ownership with a
scheme of representative government of the trade by
its members with some governmental guarantees for
public order and consumers’ interests. This approaches
Guild Socialism, the central idea being that those who
perform the productive functions, manual and mental,
should regulate the business of industry, subject to
consumers’ safeguards. Where public ownership of
the existing and prospective capital of the industry


THE EVOLUTION OF


488

was established, it is evident that the rights of self-
government, accorded to the workers of hand and
brain, must be limited by some final power vested
in the Government, or, better perhaps, in some per-
manent expert Commission. But, within such limits,
a great field for free self-government might be
assigned to the active elements in the industry. It is
not unlikely that in Britain experiments along these
lines may take place in the coal-mining and railway
industries, though perhaps with widely different repre-
sentation of the managerial, technical, and manual
workers, in the two cases. Other trades, affected by
strong public interests, might, even though formed
in trusts or price fixing combines, be left free from
public regulation, other than the ordinary Factory and
Workshops Acts and some standard regulation of pay
and hours, the State taking toll of any surplus gains
by an excess profits tax. Any such arrangement would
involve an adequately ordered publicity of accounts.
Standardised accountancy is, however, essential to any
effective form of public control, whether by govern-
mental action or the force of public opinion.

State control, adequate to secure the interests of
the workers on the one hand and the consumers
on the other, and with due regard to the needs of
the public revenue, inevitably involves much regula-
tion and inspection by officials. Those who prefer
public control to public ownership and administration
must be prepared to show that such control can be
exercised with sufficient skill and honesty to achieve
the public ends, and without any interference with
private business administration that is vexatious and
injurious. Many of the objections made against State
Socialism are also valid against strong State control,
and it is notorious that most champions of private
enterprise are hostile to any control that is rigorous
and inquisitive enough to be effective. But the present
prevailing disposition in Britain is to favour various
experiments in public control, carrying the early policy
of factory legislation in new directions involving what
would appear to the older school of economists inter-
ferences with u economic laws.” Such is the policy of


MODERN CAPITALISM


489

legal minimum wages, and of Unemployed Insurance
Funds, founded upon compulsory contributions from
employers, workers, and the national exchequers. Per-
haps the most radical of recent experiments along these
lines is the Trade Boards, originally designed in 1909
to deal with wages and other conditions in a few defin-
itely “ sweated ** trades, and now (1925) extended so
as to apply to forty-five distinct trades with about a
million and a-half employees. While most of these
trades are concerned with minor textile or clothes
making processes, some large industries have within
the last few years been brought under the Act — e.g . ,
sugar and confectionery trades, laundries, tobacco
manufacture, grocery and provision shops. The theory
is that the structure and condition of these trades are
such that it is unsafe to leave them to the ordinary
processes of the labour contract. Hence the estab-
lishment of Boards, with equal representation of
employers and employed, and a smaller number of
members appointed by Government, wielding a stat-
utory power to fix wages, where agreement cannot be
got by mutual consent of the parties.

The processes by which wages are regulated in two
such important industries as coal-mining and agri-
culture, though not precisely on all fours with the
Trade Board procedure, indicates how far public opinion
and public practice have departed from the old laisses
faire attitude.

§ 7. The economic consequences of the war have
involved many temporary or lasting excursions into
closer forms of national economy. The most general
forms have been the extension of protective tariffs,
regulation or prohibition of exports (including gold),
and a policy of subsidies for the development of
natural resources or new industries, all with the view
to cultivating more economic self-sufficiency. The war
emergency familiarised us with the vague concept
“Key Industries,” which we must preserve and en-
courage at all costs for purposes of national defence.
Foreign luxuries, taxed in war-time, for reasons, partly
of national finance, partly of transport economy,
together with a few manufactured articles (mostly of


THE EVOLUTION OF


490

German origin) were continued in the same restric-
tions after the emergency had passed. Partly by this
fragmentary protectionism, partly by subsidies, partly
by imperial, preferences applicable both to imports and
to exports, Britain has been attempting to diminish
her dependence upon foreign trade. Though there is
an obvious conflict between the national self-contained-
ness of Key Industries and agricultural subsidies and
the wider imperial economy, such contradictions are
so frequent in “ high politics ” as to occasion little
disturbance of the public mind.

It is impossible to gauge the distance or the pace
of this movement towards conservation and develop-
ment of national and imperial resources with a view
to self-sufficedness. But, so far as it goes, it involves
a reversal of the free internationalism of trade and
finance which for the best part of a century has been
the prevalent feature of our economic life. The con-
traction of our free trade and investments throughout
the world would not only reduce our commercial profits,
but would be attended by a shrinkage of our world
control of shipping and finance and of the large direct
and indirect gains accruing to our nation therefrom.
The national or imperial economy which would impose
these sacrifices will not be arguable on any other
ground than that laid down by Adam Smith in his
famous declaration that “ defence is much more im-
portant than opulence.” The restrictions of a national
or imperial economy would undoubtedly be represented
in a diminished volume of national and imperial wealth.
But of that diminished volume a larger quantity than
formerly would be required and taken for defensive
services. For in the dangerous world which is con-
templated we should have to add to the supremacy
of the navy (which might then be called upon to take
into account the new rising naval power of America),
an army, and an air force maintained upon a Continental
scale. Such a sacrifice of opulence would not, how-
ever, afford security ; it would only mitigate the
immediate insecurity, and help to preserve the balance
of power which ensures a future war.

This situation would be, of course, eminently


MODERN CAPITALISM


49 i

unfavourable to economic progress. Industry and
commerce would be consciously subjected everywhere
to political and military motives, and such scientific
and technical developments as took place would contin-
ually be directed more by military than by economic
utility. The trend of thought and valuation in such
a world would be hostile to free processes of human
co-operation. Nor is that all. The autocratic and
protective functions exercised by v he State would in-
evitably be exploited by organised business interests to
build up monopolies and to secure profitable dips into
the public purse. The cry for economic self-sufficiency
always means rising rents and high profits for protected
trades, with a consequent depression in real wages.

§ 8. The only escape from the costs and perils of
economic nationalism is by a fuller measure of economic
internationalism, secured by improved political arrange-
ments between the Powers. Underneath the racial,
national, and sentimental grievances which have figured
in the forefront of the stage of history as causes of
war, the struggles of trading, manufacturing, and
financial groups, using the “foreign policy ” of there
respective governments to push their private profit-
able interests, are easily discernible. Look behind the
diplomacy in all the recent danger zones — Egypt,
Persia, Transvaal, Tripoli, Morocco, Mexico, China,
and the Balkans — the real grievances that rankle, the
real aspirations and demands that formulate policy,
are of a mainly economic character: the desire for
access to trade routes and harbours, the push for
markets, and, above all, the establishment of capital-
istic control over the undeveloped resources of great
backward countries with supplies of cheap labour, and
weak or corrupt governments. If a durable peace is to
be obtained, it can only be obtained by international
arrangements directed primarily towards stopping
the conflicts of business interests and the conse-
quent political disputes which arise between advanced
industrial and commercial nations for markets and
lucrative investments. To expect that all the
advanced countries will easily or quietly abandon their
national protective tariffs and admit one another’s


THE EVOLUTION OF


492

goods freely, is unreasonable. But is it impossible
that they should assent to an agreement to maintain
or to establish equality of access to all markets in
their colonies, protectorates, and spheres of influence,
and equal opportunities to the members of every
nation to take part in the profitable development of
the resources of these dependencies ? Such an arrange-
ment, could it be got, would remove most of the
feelings of suspicion, jealousy, and resentment which
underlie the policy of imperialistic competition. Free
access to trade routes by land and water, equal rights
for traders to enter, buy, and sell, together with inter-
national agreements for sharing upon equal terms the
commercial and developmental opportunities afforded
by backward dependent countries — these are the basic
conditions of such an international arrangement.

It is in part the fuller application to foreign trade
of the doctrine of laisses faire , laisses aller. But it
is a positive, not a merely negative, application that
would be required. The State could not simply leave
its traders and investors to go where they liked and
put their goods where they liked at their own risk.
The Governments of the several States should agree
to give equal protection to the rights of the members
of all nations in their respective areas of political
control. Not merely should they agree not to take
separate political action to secure markets, conces-
sions, or other economic privileges for their respective
nationals. They should agree to take concerted action
for the fair apportionment of economic opportunities in
dealing with the governments and peoples of countries
which, like China, were ripening for development, by
the use of foreign capital and enterprise.

A purely laisses faire internationalism, which left
individuals or groups of business men within each
nation free to engage in any foreign trade they chose
or to invest their capital in any foreign enterprise at
their own risk, has never been practised, and is not
practicable. The actual practice has been t for business
men to- secure the assistance of their governments in
pushing for markets, investments, and concessions
outside their own country, in competing with busi-


MODERN CAPITALISM


493

ness men of other nations similarly supported by their
governments, and in bringing diplomatic or public
pressure to bear upon the government or people of
any weak country where their trading or other
economic interests are threatened. It is this illicit
and underhand use of foreign policy by private business
interests which has converted economic internationalism
into the peril it has shown itself to be. Since it is
impossible for governments to take a disinterested
attitude towards the business operations of their
nationals in foreign lands, a more definitely responsible
control of these operations is the only alternative.
And, if this control is to avoid the dangers of the
past, it must be exercised by the concerted action of
the Powers. In other words, international economics
must be supported and sustained by international
politics. This forward movement in political and
economic internationalism is the only escape from a
reversion towards a reactionary nationalism which
will at once diminish the “ opulence ” of each country
without securing its “ defence.”

The system of Mandates established under the
Covenant of the League of Nations, though un-
satisfactory in its origin and in its partial application,
is a beginning of that internationalisation of oppor-
tunity in backward countries which is a basic condition
for a world economy. By its extension to colonies
and protectorates in Africa and parts of Asia, a large
step would be taken towards regulating that competi-
tion for tropical and other resources that has hitherto
been the chief obstacle to peace between nations and
to the development of the wealth of the world for
the good of mankind.


REPLETE INDEX.


Abercorn, 268
Aberdeen Comb, 209
“ Accounts and Papers,” 14
Acre, IO
Adams, 202
Adam Smith, 71
Adaptability of Labour, 327
Adulteration Acts, 406
Advisory Committees, 447
Algean, 6, 10

Africa, IO, 12, 156, 249, 250, 264,
265, 2 66, 267, 268, 269, 461,
466, 493

African Company, 64
Agricultural Implements, 116
Agricultural Labour, 123
Agriculture, transformation of En-
glish, 97; concentration in, 122;
small farming, 13 1 ; Decline of
workers in, 385, 395-396
Aikin, 57
Albu, 268, 270
Alexander, 258
Alfani, 8
Alsace, 97, 161
Amalgamated Copper, 260
Amalgamated Society of Railway
Servants, 409

America, 11, 17, 23, 37, 43, 93,
97, 98, 101, 1 14, 121, 122, 123,
125, 155. *5<5, 157, I75» 190,

191, 192, 196, 197, 198, 20 r,
208, 212, 217, 232, 237, 238,
240, 249, 260, 261, 262, 263,
264, 280, 360, 361, 362, 363,
364, 365, 367» 368, 370, 373*
377, 378, 395, 415, 449, 455,
456, 462, 463, 464, 470, 473,
474, 475, 48i| 482, 490. (See


also United States; also Central
America, Southern America, and
North America)

American Book Co., 21 1
American Economic Association,
182, 202, 466

“ American Economic Association
Report,” 198, 201, 258
American Star Company, 212
American Steel Association, 220
American Steel and Wire Co. , 224
American Sugar Refining Co., 218
American Thread Co., 208
Amsterdam, 9
Annals of Agriculture, 52
Annals of Commerce , 32, 33, 34,
40, 43

Annecke, 276

Anthracite Coal Industry, 223
Anthracite Coal Trust, 196, 221,
223

Antioch, 11
Antwerp, 3

Apprentices, Statute of, 46
Arab Civilisation, 10, 11
Argentina, 245, 461, 4 66, 467
Arkwright, 72, 78, 80, 81, 82
Arlidge, 343, 346, 435
Armenia, 11
Armour, 179, 200
Armstrong, 206
Arsof, 10

Art in Relation to Machinery, 424-
429

Ashley, 59, 160
Ashton, 160
Ashton, 443, 444
Asia, 156, 361, 463, 466, 493
Asia Minor, 10
Atkinson, 115, 2 76,358


495


INDEX


496

Atlantic Ocean, 123
Atlantic Shipping Combine, 188,
212, 247, 262
Augsburg, 7

Australia, 142, 155, 156, 264, 461,
4 66, 467

Austria, 100, 510 , III, 112, 181,
264, 393

Austria-Hungary, 6, 102- 109, 450,
457, 467, 468
Aztecs, 10

Baibage, 72, 73 , 3 * 7 , 340

Babcock, 258

Babylon, 19

Bagehot, 120

Baines, 43, 57

Baker, 220, 221, 258

Balance of Trade, 35-38

Baldwin (see J. and J. Baldwin)

Balkans, 491

Baltic Provinces, 155

Baltimore, 190

Bankers’ Clearing House, 169
Banking, 9, 64

Banking Amalgamations, 445, 446
Bank of England, 64
Banks and Industry, Relation be-
tween, 465
Barcelona, 3
Barclay’s Bank, 12 1
Bardi, 8
Baring, 238
Barker, 122
Barnato, 265, 268
Barnato Brothers, 271
Barry, Ostlere, and Shepherd, 209
Barthe, 467
Basel, 7, 20
Basle (see Basel)

Bawerk (see Bohm-Bawerk)
Bedfordshire, 327
Bedstead Alliance, 172
Beit, 250, 268, 270, 271. (See also
Wernher)

Belcher, 172, 173
Belgium, 13, 18, 100, 102-112,
125, 126, 135, 181, 276, 355,
455» 456, 457, 462, 467, 468
Brlmont, 258
Brmis, 201
Ben line, 175


Bentley, 2 07
Bessemer, 89, 368
Bessemer Steel Association, 172
Big Four Cattle Combine, 179
Big Four Railroad Combine, 259
Big Five (Banks), 445
Bill-Brokers, 254
Birmingham, 48, 132, 160, 162,
213

Birmingham Alliance, 171
Birtwhistle, 339
Blackburn, 77
Black Sea, 10, 155, 175
Bleachers’ Association, 209
Board of Trade, 102
Bohm-Bawerk, 103, 150
Bologna, 3, 20
Bolton, 57, 92, 160, 161
Bombay, 157, 349, 361
Bonanza Farms, 131
Book-keeping, Origin of, 22
Booth, 63, 386, 387, 3 88, 390
Borrowing, 9
Boston, 190, 259
Boston and Maine Railway, 259
Boulton, 82, 90
Bowley, 280, 467, 476, 483
Boynton, 60
Bradford (Wilts), 46
Bradford (Yorks), 161, 208
Bradford Coal Association, 209
Bradford Dyers’ Association, 208,
209

Bramah, 88

Brassey, 355, 356, 357, 362, 363
Brazil, 12, 466

Brent an o, 80, 99, 277, 361, 365

Brindley, 88

Bristol, 49, 50

Britain (see Great Britain)

British Cotton and Wool Dyers’
Association, 208, 209
British Dyewoods and Chemicals,
209

British Empire, 458, 459
British Industries , 1 21, 160
British Industries under Free
Trade> III

British Oil and Cake Mills, 209
British Possessions, 112
Bromwich (see West Bromwich)
Brook (see James Brook and Co.)


INDEX


497


Brooke’s Soap, 212
Brookings, 482

Brown, (see John Brown and Co.)
Bruges, 3

Brunner, Mond, and Co., 206
Bryant and May’s Match Com-
pany, 212
BGchkr, 61
Buckinghamshire, 327
Building Guilds, 483
Building Trade, 389-390
Bullough, 82
Bunge, 467
Bureaucracy, 423
Burma, 142
Burnley, 54, 73, 143
Burroughs and Wellcome, 21 1
Bury, 77, 78

Business and the “Speculative”
Factor, 130

Business Men : their origin as a
class, 6, 7, 24

Business Structure : its Differentia-
tion, 141-142

Business : the Scale of its Oper-
ations, 138-140
Byzantine Empire, 6, n

“ Ca’ Canny,” 475, 481
Cadbury’s Cocoa, 207
Caesarea, IO

Calico Printers’ Association, 208,
209

Cammell, 206

Canada, in, 461, 463, 467

Canadian Bankers’ Association,

467

Canals, 45
Cannan, 258
Canterbury, 46
Cape, 266, 279
Capital , 67, 68, 88, 336
Capitalism : defined, I, 26 ; first
conditions of, 1-2 ; money basis
of, 5 j early accumulations of,
19 ; British priority in develop-
ment of, 23 ; instruments of, 25-
29 ; periods of, 75 ; order of
national progress in, 94-112 j
concentration of, 1 13-140, 251,
262; trustified, 180-234; finan-
cial, 235-272


Cardiff, 161
Carnegie, 194, 224
Carnegie Steel Company, 194, 197
Carolina, 150

Cartels and Trusts, 180-215, 446.

(See also Trusts)

Cartwright, 78, 80, 82, 96
Castle Line, 175. (See also Union
Castle Line)

Catholic. (See Roman)

Cattle Trust, 179, 200, 216
Cattle Trust of the U.S., 216
Census of Production, 476
Central America, 12, 463
Cerchi, 8
Ceylon, 12

Chadwick and Co., 20S
Chalmers, 37, 43, 45
Chapman, 91, 138, 143, 202, 362,
363. 443 > 444
Chartered Companies, 38
Chase, 474, 475
Chemistry, 26

Chicago, 152, 175, 190, 198 .
Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Paul
Railway, 259
Children’s Labour, 350
China, 35, 142, 146, 155, 175, 231,
245. 263, 458, 491, 492
Chiozza-Money, 112
Chorley, 160

Christian Science Church, an
Claims of Labour, 435
Claplin, 19 1

Clarke and Co., 208. (See also
Coats and Clarke Thread Trust)
Clearing House for Export, 184
Clements, 88
Cleveland, 190
Climate, 158
Clothiers, 62-63
Coal, 108, hi
Coats (see J. and P. Coats)

Coats and Clarke Thread Trust,
208, 21 1, 212. (See also J. and P.
Coats)

Cockerell (see Rickctt)

Colbert, 35
Colchester, 46
Collier, 189
Cologne (see Koln)

Colorado, 190


32


INDEX


498

Combinations of Capital, 167-234
Commission on the Depression of
Trade and Industry, 277
Committee on Industry and Trade,
459

Commons, enclosure of, 15, 17, 53
Companies Act, 417
“ Company ” Structure of Modern
Business, 241

Competition: Economies in, 129-
130; Intensification of, 168-169;
as Incentive, 417
Conciliation Board, 17 1
Consolidated Goldfields of South
Africa, 265, 27 1

Consolidated Seedless Raisin Co.,
173

Constantinople, 22
Consumers’ Rent, 233
“ Contemporary Review,” 276,
277, 278, 279, 345, 365, 377, 418
Cooke-Taylor (see Taylor)
Co-operation, Productive, 483
Co-operative Farming, 135
Co-operative Wholesale Society,
142

Copper Syndicate, 178
Cordage Combination, 196
Corn Laws, 385
Corners, 1 77- 179
CORT, 87

Cory (see W. Cory and Son)
Cossa, 302

** Cotton Factory Times,” 337
Cotton (Raw), Relative Growth in
Consumption of, 323
Cotton Oil Trust, 224
Cotton Trade, early, 44, 48, 57;
Improvements in Spinning and
Weaving, 77-79, 81-82; expan-
sion of, 81-83 » comparative na-
tional consumption, 109
Cournot, 146

Covenant of the League of Nations,
493

Coventry, 48

Cox, C. F., 258

Cox, Harold, iii

Craftsmen, Itinerant, 61

Credit in modern Business, 252-255

Crete, II

Crewe, 161


Cromford, 82
Crompton, 78, 82, 96
Crusades, 3, 9, IO
Cuba, 463, 466
Cumberland, 47

Cunningham, 7> 9 * i4» 34* 37*
39, 44, 64, 77 , 327, 342
Czecho- Slovakia, 468


Danube, 155
Danzig, 79
Darlington, 44, 60
Davenant Works , 14
Dawes, 464

Dealer : survival of small, 136 ;
general, 144; growth of, 386,

398

De Beers Company, 251, 265, 266,
269, 270, 271, 272
Defence versus Opulence, 490
Defoe. 45, 48, 52, 53, 59, 62
Delaware, Lackawanna, and West-
ern Railroad, 259
Demand (see Supply and Demand)
Denmark, 135, 467
Department of Labour (U.S.), 482
Depew, 257, 258
Depression, Commission on, 277 ;

Causes of, 281 ; of Trade, 330,
Derby, 45, 48, 90, 161
Derbyshire, 160
Devizes, 46, 59

Diminishing Returns, 137 , 4 2 9 -


430 , 432

Diplomacy, Economic Influences
in, 491

Directory of Directors , 269
Directory of Directors for New
York, 258

Diseases of Occupations, 343, 346,


Dockers’ Union, 409
Dodd, 217
Dodge, 342
Domesday Book, 14
Domestic Service, 395
Domestic System, 55, 72
Domestic Survivals, 92
Dowlais Iron Company, 206
Drake, 271
Duchershoff, 363
Duckerts, 276


INDEX


499


Dudley, 162

Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Com-
pany, 207
Diisseldorf, 184
Dutch, 12
Dyeing, 75

Earning Capacity, 244
East India Company, 3s, 44, 64
East Indies, 10, 35, 44, 155. (See
also India)

East London, 289
East Rand Mines, 251, 271
Eastland Company, 64
Eckstein, 268, 270, 272
Economic Doctrine, 35
Economic History , 59
“ Economic Journal,” 206, 208,
217, 223

Economic Rationalism, 22
“ Economist,” 259, 446
Economy of High Wages, 101
Economy of Machines and Manu-
facturts, 72, 73, 74, 327, 340
Edward III., 14
Effects of Machinery on Wages ,
3 26 > 329

Egypt, 19. 142, 155 . 264, 461, 491
Elasticity of Demand, 320
Electric Power, Development of,
469-471

Electric Traction Company, 210
Elementary Principles of Econom-
ics , 229

Elements of a Dynamic Society,
I S3

Elements of the Ft seal Question ,
112

Elevator Companies, 216
Elizabeth, 7, 9, 14
Ellison, 97
Elswick Works, 206
Ely, 1 18, 193, 199, 229
Employers’ Association, 17 1
Employment, Effects of Machine
Development on, 322-324
Enclosure of Commons, 15, 17, 53
Encomiendas, 11
Engine-Driving, 348
England, 3, 9, 10, 14, 16. >3, 23,
®S. 3i. 3J, 34. 36, 37. 39. 40,
41. 44. 45. 46, 47. 48. 50. S3.


54. 5S, 59. 60. 79. *2, 83. 84.
85. 93. 94. 95. 9<5. 97. 98, 99.
100, IOI, 122, 160, 162, 171,
195, 200, 204, 210, 232. 24O,
275, 276, 279, 280, 322, 337,
355» 356, 360, 361, 362, 365,
368, 370, 371, 372, 373. 377.
378, 383. 384, 385, 390, 39 3,
395, 408, 422, 44s, 451, 473,
474. 481, 483* (See also United
Kingdom ; also Great Britain)
England's Foreign Trade in the
Nineteenth Century , 280
English, 270, 271
English and Scotch Traffic Rates
Conference, 174

English Sewing Cotton Company,
208, 209

Entrepreneurs, 22, 23, 62, 242,

411,419

Essays , 23

Essays in Finance , 281
Esthland, 361
Estimates, 37, 43, 45
Equitable Life Insurance Company,
260

Equitable Trust Company, 259,
260

Essex, 327

Europe, II, 12, 13, 18, 23, 46, 93,
98, 155, 156, 157, 165, 175, 205,
238, 448, 456, 458, 461, 462,
463, 464, 468, 473, 475, 480
Evolution of Industrial Society ,
199

Evolution of Sex, 435

Exeter, 46, 51, 63

Expenses of Production, 228

Export of Capital \ 462

Export Trade, Eighteenth Century,

32, 38

Extract Wool and Merino, 209

Factors, 63

Factory Acts, 406

Factory and Workshops Act, 488

Factory Development, 101

Factory Legislation of 1878, 339

Factory System, 58 et seq*

Fairs, English, 154
Fallacy of Saving, 293
Family Industry, 55


5oo


INDEX


Far East, 238
Farm Labour, 18
Farrar, 270, 271, 272
Fashion, Fluctuations of, 331
Frllner, 467
Fielding, 473

Final Report of the Census of Pro-
duction , 441
Financier, 235, 272
Findlay, 174

Fine Cotton Spinners’ and Doub-
lers* Association, 208, 209
Fish, 258
Fishing, 135
Flanders, 5, 7, 8, 9
Flemish Wool, 15
Flodstrom, 467
Florence, 3
Fly Shuttle, 78, 81
Fochlbkck, 467
Forced Labour, 12
Foreign Competition, 91, 1 43
Foreign Office, 362
Foreign Trade in England (Table),

33

Foreign Work and English Wages ,

355- 356
*' Forum,” 217

France, 3, 7, 10, 18, 3». 33, 3S»
36. 37. 39. 4°. 46 , 93. 94. 95.

97, 99, 100, 102-112, 1 18, 146,

147, 264, 277. 325. 355. 362,
393. 395. 398, 455. 456. 457.
459. 462, 464, 467. 468 _

Freedom (Personal) in Business,

98, 167-168

Free Trade, ioo, 276, 405
French Revolution, 98
Frohman, 210
Frome, 46, 59
Fugger, 22
Funded Debt, 64

Furnaces in Eighteenth Century,

48

Gi«v*RNiTZ (see Schulze- G^ v-
ernitz)

Gary, 253
Geddes, 434, 435
General Labour, 411
General Report of Census for igo /,
162, 350


Genoa, 10, 21
George I., 64

Germany, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 22, 36,
40, 44, 46, 61, 79, 94, 95, 97,
98, 99, 101, 102-112, 118, 143,
146, 147* 157* 161, 181, 183,
184, 200, 212, 264, 276, 2 77,
280, 325, 355, 360, 361, 362,
363. 367. 370, 392, 393, 395,
398, 44L 449, 455, 456, 457,
462, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468,
474. (See also Zollverein)

Ghent, 3

Giffen, 281, 467
Gini, 467,

Glasgow, 161, 321

Glen Line, 175

Gloucester, 48, 49, 88

Golden Gates of Trade , 155, 158

Goldie, 270

Goldmann, 271

Goltz and Co., 27 1

Goodwill as an Asset, 246

Goschen, 238

Gothenburg, 93

Gould, E. R. L., 35S, 364, 365,

376, 377

Gould, Jay, 219, 257, 25S, 260,

26l

Grand Trunk Railway of Canada,
355

Great Britain, 14, 23, 25, 94, 100,
no, in, 117, 121, 173, 194,
205, 207, 212, 237, 264, 266,
278, 279, 323, 325, 399, 400,
415, 417, 441, 445, 447, 448,
449, 450, 454, 455, 457, 462,
464, 465, 466, 468, 470, 471,
473, 474, 481, 482, 484. (See
also England ; also United King-
dom)

Great War, 454, 462, 463, 4 66,
467, 471, 489
Greece, 3
Grey, 268

Grossbetrieb , 44, 49, 76, 77, 79,
92, 97, 157, 160, 161, 338, 341,
359, 369

Ground-Rents, 8, 24
Growth and Vicissitudes of Com-
m*rce> 93, 95


INDEX


501


Growth of English Industry , 7, 9,
14, 34, 37 , 39 , 44 , 64, 77

GRttNZEL, 183
Guaranty Trust Co. , 260
Guest, 144

Guest, Keen, and Co., 206
Guilds, 17, 55, 169
Guild Socialism, 485, 487
Gunton, 358, 364

Half-Timers, 350
Halifax, 51, 53, 59, 63
Halle, 188, 195, 196, 218
Hambro, 238
Hamilton, 270
Hammond, 179, 200
Hargreaves, 78, 80, 82
Harmsworth, 210, 21 1
Harriman, 257, 258, 260, 261
Harris, 268, 270, 272
Havemeyer, 194, 218, 221, 257
Helfferich, 467
Heroic Theory of Invention, 79
Hertfordshire, 327
Hilton, 448
Hirst, 71

History of Cotton Manufacture , 56,
57 , 77

History of Manchester , 57
History of the Cotton Manufacture ,
43, 86, 144

History of the Cotton Trade, 97
History of the County Palatine of
Lancashire , 57

Hist 01 y of the Factory System , 72
History of the Iron Trade, 48, 74,

86 , 95

History of the Standard Oil Trust,
217, 259
.Hobson, 462
Hodge, 79

Holland, 9, 13, 23, 24, 31, 33, 34,
36, 37, 40, 46, 93 , 94, 95 , no,
355 * 362, 462, 466, 467, 468. (See
also Dutch)

Holm, 160
Hong- Kong, 176
Hoover, 473
Horrocks, 78, 80, 81, 82
Hours and Wages in relation to
Production , 99, 361


How the English Workman Lives ,

363

Hubbard, 208
Hudson’s Bay Company, 64
Hull, 161
Hume, 23

Hungary (see Austria; also Austria-
Hungary)

Huntley and Palmer, 144, 207
Huskisson, 85
Hyde, 258

Imperialism, Financial Cause of,
262-263

Imports : Classes, 38
Incas, 10

India, 19, no, III, 155, 157, 245,
280, 356, 362, 373, 461. (Sec
also East Indies)

Indies (see East Indies and West
Indies)

Individualism, 434 ; Tendencies of,
405-406 ; Case for, 418
Industrial Combinations, 189
Industrial Commission, 226
Industrial England in 1730 (map),
47

Industrial Evolution , 61
Industrial Fatigue Research Board
Report , 474

Industrial Organisation in the Six-
teenth and Seventeenth Centuries ,

17, 55. 58

Industrial Ownerships 482
Industrial Partnership, 409
Industrial Pooling, 172, 173, 179,
185

Industrial Remuneration Confer-
ence, 321

Industrial Revolution, 23, 64
Industrial Revolution , 44, 64, 100
Industrial Waste, 4 73
Industries, Differentiation and In-
tegration of, 143

Industry, General Structure of, 51
Influence of Farm Machinery on
Production and Labour , 122, 124.
125

Insurance, 44, 177
Intellect an Industrial Factor, 201-
202

Interest, Low Rate of, 24


502


INDEX


Internationalism in Trusts, 21 1, 212
Internationalism, Modern Econ-
omic, 4S5-465

International Labour Bureau, 449
International Trade, 31, 32, 51,
399

Invention, Heroic Theory of, 79
Investment, Foreign, 460 et seq .
Investment, Misdirection of, 281
Investors, 237
Ionian Islands, 10
Ireland, 18, 24, 44, 85, 100, 135,
441. (See also United Kingdom)
“ Iron and Coal Trades Review, 5 ’
170

Iron Cartel, 183

Iron, Comparative Consumption
(diagram), 107

Iron the Foundation of Machine
Industry, 88
Iron Trade, 87, 95
Italy, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, g, io, n, 13,
18, 21, 22, 31, 36, 40, 46, 93,
94, 100, 102, 103, 106, 108-112,
361, 4SS, 456, 457, 467, 468

Jacquard, 84
James Brook and Co., 208
Jameson, 268, 270, 271
Jameson Raid, 250
J. and J. Baldwin, 209
J. and P. Coats, 208, 209. (See also
Coats and Clarke Thread Trust)
Japan, IIO, III, 112, 441, 467
Java, 12

Jay Gould, 219. (See also Gould)
Jenks, 186, 187, 196, 222, 223,
224, 226, 227
Jevons, 88, 291, 429
oel, 270, 271

ohannesburg, 266, 269, 270
John Brown and Co., 206
Johnson, Emery R., 466
Johnson, Samuel, 62
Joint-Stock Banks, 445, 446
Joint-Stock Enterprise, 64-65, 118,
122, 237-252

“Journal of Royal Statistical Soc-
iety, 55 443, 444

Karmarch, 79
Kay, 78, 80, 81


Keen (see Guest)

Kentucky, 190

Key Industries, 489, 490

Kimberley, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269

King, 14, 41, 43, 93, 467

Knibbs, 467

Koln, 3, 7

Kruger, 2 66

Kynoch, 207

Labour and Life of the People , 63
Labour Banks, 482
Labour Bureau, International, 449
Labour Commission, 339
Labour, Division of, 52
Labour: Relations with Capital,
479

Laissez faire, 407, 492
Lake Superior, 190, 197, 204
Lamont, 258
Lanark, 354

Lancashire, 44, 49, 57, 60, 77, 78,
82, 93, 98, 101, 118, 143, 146,
156, i57> 160, 171, 289, 290,
306, 310, 313, 349, 353 . 36i,
362, 367, 373. 443
Lancashire Cotton Industry , 138,
143. 202

Land-Tenure, English, 97
Laveleye, 276

Law of Diminishing Returns, 429-
430 . 432 ,

Law of Settlement, 17, 46
League of Nations, 449, 493
Lectures on Co?n bination t 12
Leeds, 45. 5°. 5*. 59. 63, 161
Leeds Worsted Dyers, 209
Lees, 80, 81
Leicester, 48
Leicestershire, 44
Leone Levi, 319, 321
Levant, 6, 11, 155
Lever Brothers, 212
Levi, 319, 321
Levy, 448
Liber Abbaci t 22
Lisbon, 3
Lister, 143

Liverpool, 45, 160, 161
Liverpool and Manchester Rail-
way, 82

Living, continual change in, 159


INDEX


503


Lloyd, 217
Lloyd’s Bank, 121
Lombe, 77, 83, 90
London, 3, 7, 9, 45, 48, 49, 50,
' 5 8 > 6 3> 146, 161, 163, 254, 269,
270, 328, 460. (See also East
London)

London and North Western Rail-
way, 142, 279
Louis XIV., 13
Luca, 22

McCulloch, 117, 288, 292
Machine Production, 30; Textile
Towns, 161

Machinery : Tardy Growth of, 19 ;
for Factory Production, 28 ; De-
fined, 67 ; Economy of, 68, 69,
7 2 ; Tenders of, 69 ; Periods of
Development, 89 ; Causes of
Progress, 90, 93 ; and Trade De-
pression, chap. xi. ; in Agricul-
ture, 123-124, 126; Reduction of
Employment, 278 ; Economy of,
279 ; Influence on Labourers,
chap. xii. ; Influence on Number
Employed, 317, etc. ; and Irre-
gularity of Work, 329-334 ; and
Quality of Labour, chap. xiii. ;
Relief of Toil, 336 ; Division of
Labour under, 337 ; Speeding-up
of, 337-338 ; Hours of Labour
under, 341; Monotony of Labour,
343 ; Inteilectualisation under,
343 ; Control of, 344 ; Labour
Subsidiary to, 345 ; Responsi-
bility of Workers for, 346 : How
far automatic? 347 ; Needs Soc-
ial control, 406 ; Province of,
428; Driving “ System,” 339,
340 ; Net Influence on Workers,
348, 351, 364 ; Equality before,
349 ; Benefits Skilled Workers,
38i

McKinley, 152, 196
“Maclure’s Magazine,” 259
Macpherson, 32, 33, 40, 43
Macmillan Publishing Co., 207
Macrosty, 170, 1 76, 206, 208,
446, 448

Maguire, 268, 270, 271, 272
Maidstone, 46


Malacca, 12

Management between Groups, 217
Manchester, 45, 57, 77, 82, 160,
161, 289
Mandates, 493

Manufactures : Early, 57, 62 ;

Limit to size of, 137
Maple, 122

Market : Area of, 31 ; Facilities of,
49; Structure of, 50, 145; World,
147 ; Time-area of, 148; Expan-
sion of, 155
Market Places, 51
Mark Lane, 163

Marshall, 27, 49, 117, 121, 146,
318, 327, 343, 345, 350, 351
Marx, 67, 68, 88, 335, 371
Massachusetts, ioi, 115, 116, 362,
372

Maudsley, 88, 89
Maxim Nordcnfeldt Co., 206
May (see Bryant)

Meat Trust, 449

Mediaeval Prepositions of Wealth,
2-4

Medici, 8

Mediterranean, 10, 175
Memoirs of Wool , 32, 36, 44, 63,
353

Memorandum on British and For-
eign Trade , 325
Mercantile Trust Co., 259
Merchants’ Ore Association, 1 73
Merivale, 12
Mersey, 45

Messageries Maritime Co., 175
Metal Trade in the Eighteenth
Century, 40, 43
Mexico, 12, 463, 491
Meyer, 198, 258, 270
Michell, 270, 271
Middle Ages, 2-4, 6, 7, 8, 13, 2D,
21, 22, 23, 31

Middlemen, 51, 56 ; in Finance,
242

Middleton, 160
Milan, 3

Mill, 291, 295, 296, 297, 302,
342, 3Sr
Milwaukee, 190
Mincing Lane, 163
Mines : Early Development of, 6


5®4


INDEX


Mineowners, 269, 270
Mines Regulation Acts, 406
Mining, 135 ; Employment in, 387
Mississippi, 198

Missouri, Kansas, and Texas Rail-
way, 259

Missouri Pacific Railroad, 259
Moderns. Kapitalismus , 3, 5, 8, 9,
10, 13, 18, 21

Modern Factory System , 58, 88,
343* 346

Modem Socialism , 125, 126
Money Market, 146
Money (see Chiozza-Money)
Monkey Brand, 182
Monopolies and Competition , 448
Monopolies and the People , 221
Monopolies and Trusts , 118, 193
“Monopolistic” Combinations in
the German Coal Industry, 182
Monopoly, 185; in America, 19 1,
196

Morgan, 257, 258, 260, 261
Morocco, 491
Morris, 179, 200
Moscow, 361
Mosenthal, 270
Mulhausen, 361
Munroe Doctrine, 263
Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New
York, 259, 260

Nankin, 157
Naples, 3

Napoleonic Wars, 17, 86, 98
Nasmyth, 88, 89
National City Bank, 259, 466
National Harrow Co. , 173
National Life and Character , 418
National Telephone Co., 210
Nations, Antagonism of, 35
Naval Construction and Armament
Co., 206

Navies, Merchant, 112
Navigation Acts, 37
Nettlefold, 226
Neumann, 268, 270, 271
Newcastle-on-Tyne, 50, 162
Newcomen, 87
New Lanark, 354
New South Wales, in
Newspaper Trusts, 210


New York, 219, 256, 259, 466
New York Central and Hudson
Railroad, 187, 259
“ New York Journal of Com-
merce,” 188

New York Life Insurance Co., 259
New York, New Haven, and Hart-
ford Railroad, 259
New York Reform Club, 195
New Zealand, in, 466
Neymarck, 467

Nicholson, 326, 327, 329* 337.

340* 344* 346
Ningchow, s.s., 175
Nitrates, 54

Nobel Dynamite Trust, 212
Normanton, 161, 174
Normanton Conference, 174
North America, 12, 96. (See also
America, South America, Cen-
tral America, and United States)
“North American Review,” 75,
211

Northern Pacific Railway, 259
Northern Securities Co., 187, 19S
Northern Tour> 353
Northumberland, 48, 156, 363
Norway, 112, 155, 467
Norwich, 46, 50, 51, 52, 59
Nottingham, 48, 160
Nuremberg (see Niirnberg)
Niirnberg, 3, 7, 20

Occupations : Shifts of, chap,
xvi. ; Size of, 42, no ; English,
384-390; American, 391; French,
392 ; German, 393 ; Austrian,
393 ; Swedish, 393 ; General
tendencies in, 393-394 ; Changes
of, 449-4S4

Occupations (Female) Classified,
453

Occupations (Male) Classified, 451
Occupations of the People , 387
Ocean Steamship Co., 175
Ohio, 197

Oil Trust (see Standard Oil)
Oldham, 118, 160, 206
Oopack, s.s., 1 75
Organism, Industrial, 2 7, 31, 34
Ostlere (see Barry)

Ouse, 45


INDEX 505


Output, Need for Increased Na-
tional, 473

Output, Regulation of, 170
Over- Capitalisation, 247
Over-Production, 275, 277
Over-Supply, 274 ; Nature of, 282
OWKN, 354


Pacific Isles, 466
Palestine, 10

Palmer (see Huntley and Palmer)
Panama Policy, 263
Papal Treasury at Rome, 3
Parasitic Industry, 162
Paris, 3

Parr’s Bank, 122

Party Funds, Contributions to, 221
Patent Nut and Bolt Co., 206
Patten, 153, 342, 429, 430
Paul, 78, 81, 82
Pearson, 210, 418
Peninsular and Oriental Co., 175,
176

Pennsylvania Railroad, 261
Pennsylvania University, 429
Percentage Division of Traffic, 174
Persia, 142, 491
Peru, 12
Petersburg, 361
Philadelphia, 219
Philippine Annexation, 263
Phillips, 270, 271
Philosophy of Manufactures , 85,
98, IOO, 340, 349, 353, 354, 367
Phocis, 11
Physiocrats, 352
Piermez, 276
Pita, 10
Pisano, 22

Pit- Coal, Early Supplies of, 87
Pittsburg, 190, 232
Platt, 206

Playfair, 75, 2 76, 279
Political Economy , 302
Pond (see Spiers and Pond)
Pooling (see Industrial Pooling)
Poor Law, 16, 17, 97
Population, Growth of, 19, 98 ;
Checks to, 469

Porter, 84, 85, 98, 117, 154, 329,

34i


Portland Cement Manufacturers,

209

Portugal, 3, 9, 12, 31, 36, 40
Positive Theory of Capital , 303
Potchefstroom, 265
Power Loom, 78 ; Introduction of,
327

Power : Use of, 58 ; Economies of,

74

Premier Diamond Co., 270, 271

Premier Mine, 265

Premises of Political Economy, 430

Preston, 160

Price Associations, 446

Price Lists, 169

Prices, Fluctuations of, 283-287
Principles of Economics , 27, 49,
117, 121, 146, 318, 327, 33 6 *
345, 350, 35i

Principles of Political Economy ,

292, 303, 343, 382

Principles op Sociology , 155
Production and Consumption,
Tables of, 102-103
Production in War Time, 471-473
Productive Co-operation, 483
Productivity of Labour, 372
Professions, Growth of, 132, 133,

383

Profit, Conception of, 23
Profit-sharing by Trusts, 223
Progress of the Nation , 84, 85, 98,
117, 154, 329, 34i
Proletariat, Origin of, 11, 13, 17,
18

Promoters, 239
Protection, 100, 276
Public Companies Acts, 417
Pulci, 8
PUPIN, 467

QUAINTANCE, 122, 124, 125
“Quarterly Journal of Economics,”

172, 474

Queensland, m
Quesnay, 352


Rae, 365

Raffalovich, 184, 260
Railway Clearing House, 169
Railways : Mileage, 104 ; Amnl-


INDEX


506


gamation, 195-198 ; Discrimina-
tion by, 199

Rand, 265, 2 66, 269, 270, 271 , 272
Rationalism, Economic, 22
Rebates, Illicit, 172, 197
Recherches sttr les Principes Mathl-
matiques de la Thiorie des
Richessts, 146
Red Sea, 155

Registered Companies in Great
Britain, 441
Renaissance, 9, 22
Rents the Origin of Early Capital,
4> St ^

Report of a Commission on ike
Woollen Manufacture of Eng-
land ', 60


Refort of Inter-State Commerce
Commission for sgog, 175
Report of the Commissioner of
Labour , 279

Report of the Committee of Trusts ,
447

Report of the Industrial Commis-
sion, 191, 219, 342
Report on Industrial Depression ,
2 77, 320

Report on Principal and Minor
Textile Trades, 333
Repositories of Mediaeval Wealth,


2-4

Risultats Statistiques de Recense-
mentj 392
Retail Prices, 382
Retail Trade, 122 ; Structure of,
144, 163-164

Returns, Diminishing, 429-430,
432

Revolution (British) of 1688, 93 ;
French, 98

Revolution, Industrial (see Indus-
trial)

Reyersbach, 270, 271
Rhodes, 250, 265, 268, 269
Rhodesia, 266, 268
Ricardo, 353

Rickett, Cockerell and Co., 209
Riding (see West Riding)

Rio de Janeiro, 146
Rivers, Navigable, 45
Rivet, Bolt, and Nut Co., 269
Roads, Early Condition of, 45


Roberts, 82, 223
Robertson, 293
Robinson, 270
Rochdale, 77

Rockefeller, 256, 258, 259, 260
Rogers (of Standard Oil Trust),
257, 260

Rogers, Thorold, 327
Roman Catholic Church, 211
Roman Empire, 19
Rome, 3, 9, 146
Rossiter, 258
Rothschild, 238, 265
Roundabout Production, 150, 151
Royal Exchange, 163
Rubber Trust, 224
Rube, 270

Rudd, 250, 265, 268, 270
Ruhr, 181, 182
Ruskin, 305

Russia, 38, 40, 44, 46, 61, 94, 95,
100, 102, 103, 104-111, 155, 289,
456, 457, 458, 461, 467, 469

Sage, 258
St. Louis, 175
Sales Association, 446
Salop (see Shropshire)

Salt Union, 207, 209
Sandusky, 190
Sandwich, 46
San Francisco, 190
Saving : Theory of, 291-297 ;
Motives of, 296 ; Limits upon,
301, 304, 375-376 5 Relation to
Spending, 303 ; Checks on, 308
Say, 288
Scandinavia, 468
Schlesian Law, 18
SCHOENHOF, IOI, 358, 364, 368
Schulze-G^evernitz, 44, 49, 76,
77. 79, 92, 97, IOI, 118, 157,
160, 161, 337, 338, 341, 358,
359, 361, 3 6 3> 3 6 5> 366, 369,
375

Schwab, 258

Scotland, 3, 85, 100, 160, 210, 212.
(See also Great Britain ; also
United Kingdom)

Scrivener, 48, 74, 86, 95
Secondary Trades, 150
Seggars, 49


INDEX


507


Self-regarding Activities, 404
Selling Syndicate, 1S2
Settlement, Law of, 17, 46
Seville, 3
Shaftoe, 320
Sheffield, 48, 49, 52, 213
Shepherd (see Barry)

Shipbuilding, Comparative, 112
Shipping Combine, 21 1
Shipping Conferences, 217
Shire Line, 175
Shropshire, 48, 88
Sicily, 3, 19
Sidon, 10

Silk, 44, 48, 77, 84
Singer Sewing Machine Factory,
213

Size of Business, mainly in the Tex-
tile Industries, 443
Slav Countries (Southern), 61
Slave Trade, Ancient, 11
Slavery, Colonial, 12
Smeaton, 88

Smith, Adam, 23, 32. 36, 38,

44> 50. 52, 63, 64, 71, 85, 90,
288, 291, 346, 352, 353* 4i9, 490
Smith, W. H. (see W. H. Smith
and Sons)

Social Horizon , 348
Social Peace, 99, 101
Socialism, 414 ; in Land, 414 ; in
Power, 415 ; in Transport, 415 ;
in Municipal Enterprise, 416 ; in
Professions, 417 ; Progressive,
421 ; not opposed to Individual-
ism, 421; not all-absorbing, 422
Societe Industrielle Commerciale
de M&aux, 178

Society : Conscious Evolution of,
402 ; its Interest in Economy,
409 ; Law of Social Progress, 427
Soho, 90

SOMBART, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 13, 18,

21 , 22

Somerset, 49, 52
South Africa (see Africa)

South African Chartered Co., 250,
266

South America, 35, 155, 156, 263,
461, 463, 4 66
South Carolina, 150
South Durham Co., 206


South Sea Company, 64
South Wales (see Wales)

Spain, 10, 11, 12, 14, 31, 40, 46,
95, hi, 467, 469
Spanish War, 263
Specialisation, 46, 48 ; Eighteenth
Century, conditions of, 49
Speculations, Nature of, 243
Spencer, 154, 166, 418
Spending, relative “to Saving, 303
Spiers and Pond, 122
Spigliati, 8
Spini, 8
Spinning, 160
Spinoza, 434
Spitalfields, 48
Spreckel, 194

Staffordshire, 49, 77, 88, 101, 156,
157

Stamp, 466, 467, 476, 483
Standardisation, 91
Standard of Comfort, 396
Standard of Living, 371, 375, 379;

Leisure, relative to, 372
Standard Oil Trust, 186, 190, 196,
197, 203, 211, 216, 217, 218,
220, 221, 222, 223, 227, 232,
251, 259, 260, 261
Star Company, 212
State Control, 409, 486, 487
State Socialism, War-time and
Post-war, 484 et seq.

“ Statist,” 280

Statistical Abstract of tko U.S.A.,
442

“ Statistical Journal,” 14
Statistical Tables, 332
“ Statistiche Jahrbucher,” 392
Steam Locomotion, 75
Steel, Comparative Production, 105
Steel and Wire Co., 227
Steel Rail Association, 172
Steel Trust, 197, 212, 222, 223,
224^227, 261. (See also Ameri-
can Steel Association ; also
United States Steel Corporation)
Stern, 238
Stillman, 258

“ Stock Exchange Year Book,” 269
Stocking Trade, 57
Stockport, 48
Stourbridge, 50, 59


5o8


INDEX


Straits Settlements, 155
Stroud, 46
Stuart, 467
Stubbs, 7
Studnitz, 276
Subsidiary Trades, 152
Suez Canal, 279

Sugar Trust, 190, 194, 217, 221,
224, 226, 232

Summary of the Census , 1900, 261
Sunlight (see Lever Brothers)
Supply and Demand, 81
Surplus Value, 13
Survey of Ocean Markets , 459
Sussex, 4S, 88

Sweating : Economy of, 133, 134,
328 ; Wages, 37 9 ; Trades, 411,
412

Sweden, 96, no, 393, 395, 467
Swift, 179, 200
Swindon, 161

Switzerland, 18, 61, 97, 100, no,
135, 212, 360, 362, 367, 467,
468

Sympathetic Trades, 153
Syria, 10, n

Tarbell, 217, 259
Tariffs in Eighteenth Century, 36
Tariffs in the U.S., 195-196. (See
also Protection)

Taunton, 46, 59
Taussig, 474

Taylor, 58, 72, 88, 343, 346
Technologies 79
Templars, 3
Tennessee, 190

Textile Machinery Association,
209

Textile Trade : Early Laws of, 37 ;
Markets, 51 ; Combined with
Agriculture, 52 ; Division of
Labour in, 54 5 Importance of
Study, 76-77 ; Concentration
in, 116 ; Differentiation in, 143
Thames, 47

Theory of Business Enterprises
236, 246, 253, 254, 348
Theory of Dynamic Economics ,
342

Thery, 467
Thirty Years* War, 13


Thorold Rogers (see Rogers)

Thrace, 19

Throstle, 82

Tied Houses, 136, 213

“Times,” 207

Tin Plate, 227

Tools, 68-70

Tour through the whole Island of
Great Britain, 45, 48, 52, 53,

59 , 62

Town Life, 343
Toynbee, 44, 64, 100
Trade Associations, 447
Trade Boards, 489
Trade Marks, 95
Trade Unions, 150, 171, 409
Trades Union Congress, 320
Tragedy of Waste , 474
Transport, 155 ; Occupation in,
390 , 39 i

Transvaal, 265, 266, 491
Trasenstkr, 276
Treasure, 5 ; Use of, 6, II
Trent, 45
Tripoli, 11, 491
Trowbridge, 46

Trust Movement in British In-
dustry , 446

Trust Problem , 186, 187, 196, 222,
224, 227

“Trusts in the United States,”
217, 223

Trusts : Meaning of, 184-185 ;
Classification of, 186 ; Growth
ofinU.S.A., 188; Origins of,
193, etc. ; Structure of, 202 ;
Horizontal and Vertical Growth,
203 ; English, 205, etc. ; An-
alysis by Macrosty, 208-209 ;
Steel Trust, 203 ; Economic
Powers of, Chap. ix. ; Oil
Prices under, 217 ; Control of
Prices, 218 ; Control of Outputs
219 ; Crushing Competition, 219
-220 ; Influencing Legislation,

221 ; Control of Employees,

222 ; Shutting-down of Plants,
223-224 ; Labour-saving Policy,
224 ; Regularisation of Employ-
ment, 225 ; Price (Policy of),
226, etc. ; Power in relation to
Classes of Commodity, 230-234


INDEX


Trusts , i88, 189, 195, 196, 224
Tudor Age, 15
Turkey, 38
Turkish Company, 64
Tweed Ring, 221
Twelfth Census of the United
States of America, 93
Twombly, 258
Tyre, 10, 11


Uber die Ursachen der heutigen
sozialen Not , 80
Ulm, 21

Under-Consumption, 275
Underwriting, 239
Unemployed Insurance Funds, 489
Unemployment, 332*333
Union Castle Line, 187, 207
Union Pacific Railway, 259
United Alkali Co., 207, 209
United Fruits Co., 191
United Indigo and Chemicals, 209
United Kingdom, 102-109, 112,

323> 448, 460, 461, 467- (See

also separate Countries)

United States, 79, 81, 82, 93> 95>
96, 97, 98, 100, 101, 102-112,
114, 115, 116, 122, 123, 155,

172, 173, 188, 194, 195. 198,

199, 201, 204, 205, 210, 211,

216, 256, 257, 263, 276, 278,

325» 355. 360, 367, 377, 393,

395> 398, 408, 415. 44i, 442,

445> 453. 454, 455, 458, 459,

462, 465, 466, 467, 468. (See

also America ; also North Amer-
ica)

United States Mortage and Trust
Co., 260

United States Steel Corporation,
196, 203, 204, 259
United Velvet Cutters’ Association,
208, 209

Universal Providers, 122, 144
Unoccupied Classes, 394
Unto this Last , 305
Unwin, 17, 55, 58
Uric, 56, 57, 77, 85, 86, 97, 98,
100, 340, 349, 353> 354» 366,

367. 369

Uruguay, 466


5<>9

Uses and Abuses of Money , 327,
342

Usury, Primitive, 9

Vanderbilt, 257, 258, 260, 261
Vandevrlde, 125, 126
Veblen, 236, 246, 253, 254, 348
Vendors, 240
Venice, 3, 10, 22
Vickers, 206
Vladimir, 361
Vosges, 361

Wage Boards, 169
Wages : “Natural,” 352 ; Econ-
omy of Low, 353, 355 ; Econ-
omy of High, 353, 357, 365,
374 ; Subsistence, 354 ; in Cot-
ton Trade, 358-359 ; Relative
Efficiency among Nations, 359,
362; “Cheap” Labour, 365;
American, 367 ; Relation to Effi-
ciency, 368 ; Piece and Time,
369 ; Weavers’, 370 ; Relative
to Hours, 373

Wales, 88, 98, 100, 156, 162, 171,
383, 384, 385. 445 > 45i- (See
also Great Britain ; also United
Kingdom)

WALKER, 182, 183, 184, 358
Wall Paper Manufacturers, 208,
209, 217, 218
Wall Street, 260
Walsall, 162
Wants, Growth of, 159
War (see Great War)

Waste Products, 74
Water-Mills, 58; Power in Swit-
zerland, 97
Watt, 82, 87, 96
W. Cory and Son, 209
Wealth against Commonwealth ,
217

Wealth and Taxable Capacity , 483
Wealth, Mediaeval Repositories of,

2-4

Wealth of Nations, 23, 24, 31, 38,
50, 52, 65, 292, 346, 353, 410
Weardale Co., 206
Weaving, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59;

Comparative Figures of, 101
Wedgwood, 90


5io


INDEX


Wellcome (see Burroughs and
Wellcome)

Wells, 276, 277, 279, 345
Wernhrr, 2 70, 271,

Wernher, Beit, and Co., 265, 270,
271, 272

West Bromwich, 5 2
West Indies, 12, 463
Westmoreland, 47, 50
Westphalia, 181, 184, 362
West Rand Consolidated Mines,

271

West Riding, 46, 48, 52, 53, 156,

171

Wheat, Comparative Consump-
tion, 102

Whisky Trust, 186, 223, 227
Whiteley, 122
White Sea, 155

Whitley Committee’s Report, 481

Whitney, 82

Whitworth, 32, 226

W. H. Smith and Sons, 207

Wicker-, 229

Winchester, 50

Witwater, 265

Women, Occupations of, 453
Women Workers, 162
Women’s Labour displacing Men,
350

Wood, 81


Wool and Wool Combing 54, 73,

143

Woollen, Early Trade in, 51
Woollen Trade in Eighteenth Cen-
tury, 40, 43, 83
Worcestershire, 101
Wot k and Ray, 319
Workers as Consumers, Chap, xv,
Working and Management oj an
English Railway , 174
World Markets, 147, 156
World Trade 1913 and 1923 (Brit-
ish, American, and French
Share), 459

World War (see Great War)
Wright, 276, 320
Wyatt, 78, 81, 82

Yeats, 93, 95, 155, 158
Yeomen, 16

Yorkshire, 44, 47, 48, 78, 88, 98,
143 , 157

Yorkshire Dyeware, Co., 209
Yorkshire Indigo Dyers, 209
Yorkshire Woolcombers’ Associa-
tion, 208, 209

Young, 42, 43 * 45 > 60, 353, 362

Zollverein (American), 263
Zollverein (German), 100
Zones, 158


GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD

London: 40 Museum Street , W.C.i

Auckland: Haddon Hall , City Road
Sydney, N.S.W.: Bradbury House , 55 York Street
Cape Town: 58-60 Long Street
Bombay: 15 Graham Road , Ballard Estate , Bombay 1
Calcutta: 17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13
New Delhi: Munshi Niketan , Kamla Market , Ajmeri Gate, New Delhi l
Karachi: Haroon Chambers, South Napier Road, Karachi 2
Toronto: 91 Wellington Street West
Sao Paulo: Avenida 9 de Julho 1138-Ap. 51


by John A. Hobson


CONFESSIONS OF AN ECONOMIC
HERETIC

Cr. 8vo 7$. 6d. net

“He remains above everything a rational humanist. Intel-
lectual integrity, disarming modesty, independence of
judgment and a warm humanity distinguish this book as
they have distinguished his other writings. In all these ways
he resembles that great intellectual saint of the last century —
John Stuart Mill.”

hugh gaits kell in New Statesman and Nation


IMPERIALISM: a study

Cr. 8vo 3rd Revised Edition 10s. 6d. net

“This book, now long out of print, made a profound im-
pression upon contemporary liberal thought. Over thirty
years later it is reissued with its statistics brought up to date
and after thorough textual revision. Not only did Mr.
Hobson’s book exercise a formative influence upon the mind
of Lenin, but in Europe and the United States it has been a
seminal book.” The Listener

