BY  J.  A.  HOBSON

THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED  :  An  Enquiry  and
an  Economic  Policy. Sixth  Edition. Crown  8vo. 2s.  6d.

This  book  shows  that  unemployment  is  a  natural  and  necessary
result  of  a  mal-distribution  of  consuming  power,  and  endeavours  to  dis-
cover the  true  principle  of  remedial  treatment.

INTERNATIONAL  TRADE  :  An Application of  Economic
Theory. Crown  8vo. 2s.  6d.  net.

This  book  shows  the  application  of  Economic  Principles  to  the  ques-
tions of  Free  Trade  and  Preferential  and  Protective  Tariffs.  It  deals
with  the  importance  of  external  trade,  nations  as  trading  groups,  non-
protective  and  protective  duties,  the  balance  of  imports  and  exports,  the
mystery  of  dumping,  protection  as  a  remedy  for  unemployment,  and  pro-
tection and  socialism.

PROBLEMS  OF  POVERTY :  An  Inquiry  into  the  Industrial
Condition  of  the  Poor. Eighth  Edition. Crown  8vo. as.  6d.

The  object  of  this  volume  is  to  collect,  arrange,  and  examine  the
leading  facts  and  forces  in  modern  industrial  life  which  have  a  direct
bearing  upon  poverty.


THE PROBLEM

OF

THE UNEMPLOYED

AN  ENQUIRY  AND  AN  ECONOMIC  POLICY


BV

JOHN A. HOBSON

AUTHOR  OF "PROBLEMS  OF POVERTY"


SIXTH EDITION


METHUEN  &  CO.  LTD.

36 ESSEX STREET W.C.

LONDON


First  Published  .
Second  Edition,  Revised  .
Third  Edition .
Fourth  Edition  .
Fifth  Edition ,


August  ;8q6
August  iqo4
November  igo6
December  igo8
December  /g//


--<


r\BRAjf=


^


PREFACE


The  Unemployed  Question  has  greatly  suffered  from  the
modern  tendency  of  economic  investigation  in  England
to  devote  an  almost  exclusive  attention  to  the  study  of
detailed  facts,  ignoring  the  larger  facts  or  principles  in
which  these  smaller  facts  find  their  unity.  It  may  be
readily  conceded  that  the  treatment  of  no  industrial  subject
has  suffered  more  than  this  from  vague  and  unfounded
generalities,  and  that  the  close  labour  of  historical  research
in  collecting  and  grouping  facts  is  a  most  urgent  need.
Such  work  to  be  effective  requires  a  separate  investigation
and  discussion  of  the  several  forms  and  aspects  of  Un-
employment and  of  the  forces  which  are  engaged  in  causing
it.  So  the  Unemployed  Question  easily  bifurcates  into
the  treatment  of  skilled  and  unskilled,  able-bodied  and
inefficient,  temporarily  unemployed  and  surplus  labour,
country  and  town  labour,  while  each  trade  is  found  to
have  its  special  characters  and  causes  of  seasonal  irregularity
or  wider  fluctuations.

But  the  need  of  this  segmentary  search  for  facts  does
not  justify  the  common  suggestion  that  there  is  not  one
Unemployed Problem but  fifty, and  that each  must  be


Fju  PREFACE

treated  entirely  by  itself  upon  the  basis  of  its  special  facts,
without  reference  to  wider  or  more  general  principles.

The  tendency  thus  to  fritter  away  the  unity  of  a  great
subject  into  an  ever- widening  number  of  component  parts
is  a  grave  intellectual  danger  which  induces  a  paralysis
of  all  work  of  practical  reform.  My  object  in  this  book  is
to  show  that  the  Unemployed  Question  has  a  true  unity
which  is  clearly  discernible  amid  the  facts  which  are  already
ascertained,  and  which  is  inevitably  hidden  by  the  sectional
treatment.  After  making  due  allowance  for  minor  contribu-
tor)' causes,  I  claim  to  establish  the  identity  of  Unemploy-
ment as  an  aspect  of  Trade  Depression  and  by  further
analysis  of  facts  to  establish  Under-consumption  as  the
direct  economic  cause  of  the  industrial  malady.  The
refusal  to  recognise  that  Industry  both  in  volume  and
character,  is  directly  determined  by  the  effective  demand
of  Consumers,  with  due  allowance  for  the  prophetic  or
stimulative  influence  of  Producers,  is  still  the  deepest
source  of  error  in  the  English  theory  of  the  structure  of
Industry.

The  identification  of  Unemployment  with  Under-consump-
tion demands  an  explanation  of  that  failure  of  Consumption
to  keep  pace  with  Producing-power  which  is  recognised
as  a  general  feature  of  industry  in  highly  developed
countries.  This  explanation  is  found  in  causes  which
affect  the  distribution  of  power  to  consume  and  induce
individuals  to  endeavour  to  capitalise  "  unearned"  elements
of  income  at  a  greater  pace  than  is  economically  needed
to  satisfy  the  demands  of  current  consumption.

This  economic  analysis  of  the  phenomena  of  Trade
Depressions  does  not  claim  to  be  new  in  substance.
Several early economists, in particular Lauderdale and


PREFACE  ix

Malthus,  gave  a  brilliant  and  a  sound  analysis  of  these
phenomena,  which  was  never  refuted.  Their  valid  arguments
were  rejected  not  because  they  were  disproved,  but  because
they  were  associated  with  views  and  practical  proposals
often  rightly  regarded  as  misleading  or  mischievous.  The
general  acceptance  of  illogical  and  inconsistent  definitions
of  the  terms  Capital  and  Demand,  and  a  neglect  to  study
the  actual  mechanism  of  Saving,  have  caused  the  main
body  of  English  professional  economists  to  evade  all
scientific  recognition  of  the  phenomenon  of  an  excess  of
general  producing-power  which  is  visible  in  periods  of
trade  depression.  No  sufficient  consideration  has  been
accorded  to  several  recent  statements  of  the  case,  both
in  England  and  in  the  United  States.  In  the  latter  country
Mr.  Uriel.  Crocker  of  Boston  was  the  first  to  apply  clearly
and  effectively  this  analysis  to  the  modern  phenomena  of  "de-
pressed trade"  in  advanced  industrial  communities,  and  his
latest  statement  entitled  "  The  Cause  of  Hard  Times"  is  by  far
the  most  convincing  short  popular  rendering  of  the  argument.
Mr.  J.  M.  Robertson  in  his  "Fallacy  of  Saving"  gave  a  powerful
reading  of  one  important  aspect  of  the  case,  the  false  or
"  bogus"  saving  which  a  futile  endeavour  to  establish  exces-
sive capital  engenders.  Some  years  ago  in  conjunction
with  the  late  Mr.  A.  F.  Mummery  I  endeavoured,  in
The  Physiology  of  Industry,  to  call  attention  to  the  large
issues  involved  in  this  line  of  thought.  Several  other
writers  *  during  recent  years  have  effectively  exposed  the
fallacies  of  Adam  Smith's  doctrine  of  Parsimony  and
J.  S.  Mill's  Fundamental  Propositions  concerning  Capital,

*  E.g.,  R.  S.  Moffat  in  "The  Economy  of  Consumption."  Frank
Fairman,  in  various  pamphlets.  Dr.  Hertzka  in  "Freeland."  See  also
"The  Evolution  of  Modern  Capitalism",  by  the  present  writer.


x  PREFACE

though  the  force  of  their  criticism  in  some  instances  is
weakened  by  a  disparagement  of  the  habit  of  individual
thrift,  which  is  not  rightly  involved  in  the  line  of  their
attack  and  which  indicates  a  failure  to  grasp  the  true
relations  between  individual  and  social  "saving."  Their
arguments  have  received  little  attention,  in  this  country
or  in  America,  from  the  main  body  of  economists,  who
still  lean  with  childlike  confidence  upon  a  theory  of  Cap-
ital formulated  by  J.  S.  Mill,  and  afterwards  abandoned
in  its  most  essential  feature  by  its  author.  In  spite  of  the
general  acceptance  accorded  to  the  new  position  by  several
important  continental  economists,  they  stubbornly  refuse
to  re-open  what  they  have  chosen  to  regard  as  a  dead
controversy.

It  is  hoped  that  this  restatement  of  the  position,  by  its
specific  application  to  the  concrete  problem  of  the  "  unem-
ployed" and  by  the  central  importance  assigned  to  the
idea  of  Under-consumption,  may  avoid  some  of  the  mis-
understanding to  which  earlier  statements  were  liable.
By  its  explanation  of  Unemployment  as  a  natural  and
necessary  result  of  a  mal-distribution  of  consuming-power,
contained  in  economic  rent  and  superfluous  elements  of
profit,  the  argument  claims  a  distinct  place  in  the  theory  of
social  progress.

The  latter  half  of  the  book  is  an  endeavour  to  discover
and  apply  true  principles  of  remedial  treatment,  by  marking
the  outlines  of  the  larger  economic  policy  which  shall
embody  the  principle  of  progressive  consumption,  and  by
the  application  of  a  scientific  test  to  the  several  popular
remedies  or  palliatives  which  occupy  the  public  attention.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  I

THE MEANING OF "  UNEMPLOYMENT  *

Unemployment  as  Waste  of  Labour-power I

Leakage  in "  Season  "  Trades 2

Is  Winter  Slackness  Unemployment  ? Official  View ...  3

The  Social  Estimate  of  Waste  Labour 5

The  "  Unemployed  "  by  Trade  Depression 6

Summary  of  Official  View  of  "Unemployment" 8

A  wider  Meaning  of  "  Unemployed  "  is  Legitimate ...  9

CHAPTER  II

THE MEASURE OF UNEMPLOYMENT

1.  Defective  General  Statistics 11

2.  A  Trade-Union  Average 12

3.  Trades  which  Contribute  to  the  Board  of  Trade  Returns. .  13

4.  No  full  Measure  of  Unemployed  Unionists 14

5.  Prime  Object  of  Unions  to  Avoid  Unemployment ....  16

6.  A  Larger  Figure  for  Non-Unionists 17

7.  Unemployed  in  Unorganised  Trades 18


xii  CONTENTS

§  PAOB

8.  "Skilled"  versus  "Unskilled"  Trades 20

9.  Are  there  Two  Questions  of  the  Unemployed? ....  20

10.  Evidence  of  the  Labour  Bureaux 22

11.  Summary  of  "Waste"  in  "Making"  Industries  ....  23

12.  Proportion of  Manufacturing to Distributive "Work in

England 24

13.  Unemployment in Distributive, Transport, and Public

Services 26

14.  General  Measure  of  the  Problem 29

15.  The  Upper  Class  of  Unemployed 30

16.  Waste  of  "Pauper"  Labour 30

Appendix  A. Unemployment in Registers of  Labour

Bureaux 31

chapter  rn

DOES UNEMPLOYMENT GROW?

1.  Do  Modern  Forces  Make  for  Irregular  Employment?  . .  35

2.  Expansion  of  Market  Areas 35

3.  The  Speculative  Nature  of  Modern  Industry 36

4.  Influence  of  Taste  and  Fashion 37

5.  Transferability  of  Labour. — General  versus  Special  Ability.  .  38

6.  Does Division of  Labour Give  Security  of  Employment

in  Manufacture? 40

7.  Transferability  of  Labour  in  other  Industries 42

8.  Can  the  Displaced  Worker  Take  up  Another  Trade?. .  43

CHAPTER  IV

MINOR CAUSES OF UNEMPLOYMENT

1.  The  Individual  Moral  View  of  the  Problem 45

2.  Nature  of  the  Individualist  Fallacy 46

3.  Connection  of  Machinery  with  Unemployment 49


CONTENTS  xin

§  I'Ai.H

4.  Estimate of  Minor  Causes — Trade  Depression  Shown  as

Major  Cause 50

5.  Short  Period  and  Long  Period  Fluctuations 51

6.  Strikes  as  Causes  of  Unemployment 52

7.  Unemployed  Capital  and  Land  as  well  as  Labour ...  54

CHAPTER  V

THE  ROOT  CAUSE  OF  UNEMPLOYMENT

1.  Fallacy of  the Piecemeal  Treatment  of  the  Unemployed

Question 56

2.  Need  of  a  Unified  Organic  Treatment 57

3.  Central  Fact — General  Excess  of  Producing-power ...  59

4.  A  Priori  Assumptions  of  Economists 60

5.  True  Meaning  of  "Over-production" 60

6.  Authorities Admit a General Excess. Evidence of

Commission 61

7.  The  Testimony  of  Recent  Industrial  History 63

8.  Failure of  Consumption to keep Pace with  Growth  of

Productive  Power 65

Wasteful  Multiplication  of  Distributors 66

The  Abnormal  Growth  of  Retail-Traders 68

The  Causes  of  "Waste  of  Distributive  power 69

"Why "Waste Takes a Different Form in Distribution

and  in  Manufacture 70

False Assumption that  all Power to  Consume  must  be

Exercised 72

Is Desire to Consume  the only Motive  to  Production?  73

Does  all  Saving  Give  Increased  Employment? 74

Excessive  forms  of  Capital do  Exist 76

The  Theoretic  Limit  of  Socially  Useful  Forms  of  Capital  78

How  Excessive  Forms  of  Capital  Stop  Production  ...  79


xiv  CONTENTS

§  PAG8

19.  The Fallacy that Saving implies no Reduced Consump-

tion 80

20.  The Limit  to  Social "Saving" — No Limit  to  Individual

"Saving" Si

St. How Self-interest of Individuals Causes Social Waste

of  Capital 83

22.  The  Difference  between  Individual  and  Social  Economy .  85

23.  A  Nation  is  not  a  Community 86

24.  The  Motives  of  Under- Consumption 88

25.  Excess  of  Capital  a  Result  of  "  Unearned "  Incomes . .  91

26.  No  Repudiation  of  Uses  of  Individual  Thrift 92

Appendix  B. Effect  of  Under-Consumption  on Employ-
ment . 93

CHAPTER  VI

THE ECONOMIC REMEDY

1.  The Remedy lies in a Reformed Distribution of Con-

suming-Power 98

2.  Lines  of  Social  Policy. Taxation  of  "  Unearned  "  Income .  99

3.  Various  Forms  of  Social  Property  Amenable  to  Taxation . .  100

4.  Working- CI  ass  Movement  for  Higher  Wages 103

5.  Increased  Consumption  gives  Validity  to  Increased  Saving .  104

6.  Effect of a Shorter Working-Day upon Consumption —

Cases  where  Output  is  Maintained 105

7.  Where  a  Shorter  Working-Day  Means  a  Smaller  Output . .  106

8.  Where  the  Cost  of  a  Shorter  Day  comes  out  of  Profits . .  106

9.  Where  the  Cost  comes  out  of  Higher  Prices 107

10.  Where  International  Competition Keeps  down Prices and

Profits 108

11.  Increased  Leisure  a  Condition  of  Rising  Consumption . .  109

12.  A  Summary  of  the  "High  Consumption"  Policy . . . .  no

13.  This  Policy  Involves  no  Social  Danger no


CONTENTS  xv
CHAPTER  VII

BIMETALLISM AND TRADE DEPRESSION

§  PAGF

1.  The  Industrial  and  Financial  Sides  of  Business 112

2.  What  takes  Place  when  Prices  Fall? 113

3.  Illicit  Jumps  in  Monetary  Explanations  of  Depression . . .  115

4.  Bimetallism can only Raise Prices by Raising Consump-

tion 116

5.  Does a Fall of  Prices come from Increased Supply or

Diminished  Demand? 118

6.  The  Test  of  Sauerbeck's  Index  Numbers 119

7.  Want of u  Confidence  " not a Vera Causa — Itself a

Symptom 120

8.  The  Notion  that  Reduced  Cost  of  Production  cannot  Reduce

all  Prices  Disproved 122

9.  The Right Place of Money as an Agent in Falls of

Prices 124

CHAPTER  VIII

PALLIATIVES OF UNEMPLOYMENT

1.  A  Test  for  Palliatives. Do  they  Raise  Consumption  ?  . . .  126

2.  Labour  Bureaux  as  Clearing-Houses 126

3.  The  Elimination  of  Minor  Forms  of  Waste 129

4.  Schemes  for  Increasing  Employment 130

5.  Labour  Colonies — Penal  Conditions 131

6.  Farm  Colonies  for  Paupers 132

7.  Mr. Charles Booth's Suggested Labour Colonies for

Class  B 133

8.  Practical  Difficulties  of  "  Social  Drainage  " 136

9.  German  and  Dutch  Free  Labour  Colonies 137

10. The  Starnthwaite  Experiment 138


xvi  CONTENTS

§  PAGB

ii.  Educative  Colonies  at  Hadleigh  and  Elsewhere ....  139

12.  Mr. Mather's Scheme of Training and Agricultural

Colonies 141

13.  Economic  Precautions  Required  in  Labour  Colonies . .  143

14.  Difficulties  of  disposing  of  Surplus  Produce 145

15.  Scheme  of  Afforestation 147

16.  Establishment  of  Small  Holders  as  a  Means  of  Increased

Agricultural  Employment 148

17.  An  Illustration  of  a  Small  Holdings  Scheme 149

18.  Corporate  Tenancy  and  Other  Co-operative  Elements  . .  150

19.  Economic  Criticism. National  versus  International  Policy. .  151

20.  The Gain of Agricultural Revival should go Chiefly

to  Labour 153

21.  Proposal  of  Secondary  or  Alternative  Trades 154

22.  Sound  Distribution  of  Public  and  Private  Work  ....  155

23.  Theory  of  Pub  He  Relief  Works 156

24.  Right  Economic  Conditions  of  Relief  Works 157

25.  True  and  False  Ideas  of  Public  Industry  and  Employment .  158

26.  Danger  of  Resting  upon  Palliatives 1 59


THE  PROBLEM
OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

AN  ENQUIRY  AND  AN  ECONOMIC  POLICY

CHAPTER  I
THE  MEANING OF "UNEMPLOYMENT*

§  j. Unemployment  as Waste  of  Labour-Power

*  Unemployment"  is  perhaps  the  most  illusive  term  which
confronts  the  student  of  modern  industrial  society.  This
illusiveness  exposes  the  subject  to  grave  abuses.  Well-
meaning  but  somewhat  hasty  social  reformers  stretch  the
term  and  bloat  it  out  to  gigantic  proportions;  professional
economists  and  statisticians,  provoked  by  this  unwarranted
exaggeration,  are  tempted  to  a  corresponding  excess  of
extenuation,  and  are  almost  driven  to  deny  the  realitv
of  any  "unemployed"  question,  over  and  above  that  of
the  mere  temporary  leakages  and  displacements  due  to
the  character  of  certain  trades,  and  to  the  changes  of
industrial  methods.

In  order  to  get  some  clear  understanding  of  the  nature
and  size  of  the  industrial  malady  of  unemployment,  we
must,  I  think,  set  aside  for  the  present  the  personal
aspects  of  the  subject  which  appeal  most  powerfully  to
human interest, and try to relate "unemployment"  to

1  I


2  THE  PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

waste  of  labour-power  regarded  from  the  social  point  of
view.  This  method  has  the  advantage  of  strict  accord
with  the  position  held  by  Mr.  Charles  Booth,  who  urges
that  "the  total  number  of  the  superfluous  is  the  true
measure  of  the  unemployed."

Let  us  first  try  to  ascertain  how  far  the  various  classes
of  those  who  at  any  given  time  would  be  found  to  be
"  off  work"  can  be  reckoned  as  "  superfluous"  or  as  waste
of  labour-power.

Many  workers,  especially  in  employments  which  severely
tax  the  muscular  energy,  prefer  at  times  to  earn  their
weekly  wages  by  hard  labour  during  four  or  five  days
in  the  week  rather  than  spread  their  energy  more
evenly  over  the  six  days.  This  voluntary  "  play"  of  the
miner  or  the  gas-stoker  clearly  cannot  rank  as  "  unem-
ployment", nor  does  it,  if  confined  within  reasonable
limits,  involve  any  waste  of  labour-power.  On  the  other
hand,  when  "  short  time"  is  either  forced  upon  employees,
or  accepted  by  them  as  an  alternative  to  a  reduction  in
the  number  of  employed,  such  off-time  will  rightly  rank
as "  unemployment", and implies  waste  of  labour-power.

§  2. Leakage  in  u  Season " Trades,

Season  trades  with  short  engagements  usually  involve
a  certain  "leakage,"  as  in  the  intervals  between  "jobs"
in  the  building  trades.  A  census  of  "unemployed,"  taken
on  a  given  day,  would  be  apt  to  include  a  certain  number
of  masons,  bricklayers,  etc.,  who  were  at  leisure  for  this
reason.  Yet,  so  far  as  this  leakage  belongs  to  an  irregu-
larity inherent  in  the  trade,  it  cannot  rank  as  "waste",
nor  could  the  labour  thus  temporarily  displaced  be  regarded
as "superfluous." But  a  strict  limit  must  be  assigned  to


IS WINTER SLACKNESS UNEMPLOYMENT?  3

this  "  necessary  "  leakage.  If  the  building  trade  is  slack,
not  only  will  a  smaller  number  of  workers  be  employed,
but  the  intervals  between  jobs  will  be  longer.  Here  there
exists  a  genuine  waste  of  labour-power,  which  would
rightly  rank  as  unemployment.  A  period  of  brisk  trade
in  which  intervals  are  smallest  must  be  taken  as  the  right
measure  of  necessary  leakage,  and  even  then,  if  the
leakage  is  due  to  inadequate  organisation  in  the  trade,  it
implies  some  waste.  In  various  trades  improved  intelli-
gence, cheaper  travelling,  travelling  benefits  of  trade  unions,
have  reduced  what  would  formerly  have  been  considered
"necessary"  leakage  due  to  natural  conditions  of  the
trade.

§  j. Is Winter  Slackness Unemployment?
Official  View.

How  far  can  this  view  of  necessary  leakage  be
extended  to  the  longer  intervals  of  leisure  in  the  building
trades  and  other  trades  whose  irregularity  is  due  to
natural  causes?  The  recent  Report  of  the  Labour  Depart-
ment upon  the  Unemployed  is  disposed  to  rule  out  all
"  unemployment "  in  the  building  trades  in  the  winter
months.

"A  certain  amount  of  time  will  be  lost  almost  every
year  during  frost.  Are  the  men  thus  thrown  out  of  work
really  '  unemployed '  ?  The  loss  of  time  may  be  considered
as  one  of  the  ordinary  trade  risks;  it  recurs  more  or  less
every  year;  it  may  be  supposed  to  be  discounted  in  the
rates  of  pay  earned  by  members  of  these  trades  when
fully  at  wrork.  The  bricklayers  idle  during  frost  are  in  no
sense  'superfluous,'  if  the  whole  year  be  taken  as  a
unit; were they emigrated or  planted in  farm  colonies,


4 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

or  otherwise  lifted  permanently  off  the  labour-market,  the
building  trades  would  presently  suffer  from  a  deficiency
of  men.  Nor  are  they  necessarily  insufficiently  employed.
There  may  be  work  enough  for  all,  but  the  trade  is  such
that  the  work  it  offers  has  to  be  concentrated  in  certain
parts  of  the  year."

This  view  of  compensation  forcibly  recalls  the  "  eco-
nomic man  "  of  the  old  economists,  with  his  infinite  capacity
for  calculating  chances,  an  absolute  freedom  to  select  his
employment,  and  a  full  power  to  extort  from  his  employer
a  higher  wage  to  balance  any  specific  disadvantage
attending  his  work.  Such  a  man,  being  in  our  present
case  a  bricklayer,  might  be  supposed  to  obtain  such
earnings,  and  so  to  regulate  his  expenditure  as  to  hiber-
nate comfortably  during  the  annual  period  of  slackness.
The  actual  bricklayer,  though  he  doubtless  can  make
some  provision  against  the  idle  season,  is  not  economi-
cally strong  enough  to  fully  discount  in  his  earnings  the
irregularity  incident  to  his  trade,  still  less  is  the  brick-
layer's labourer  able  to  do  so.

If  the  a  priori  reasoning  in  the  Board  of  Trade
view  be  accepted,  it  may  be  pushed  so  far  as  to
show  that  all  workers  are  able  to  discount  all  "ordinary
trade  risks,"  and  to  obtain  wages  adequate  to  support
them  during  such  portion  of  the  year  as  trade  sta-
tistics show  to  represent  the  average  "  unemployment "  in
that  trade.

The  casual  docker,  the  fur-puller,  and  all  the  workers
in  "season"  trades,  whose  irregularity  can  be  foreseen,
ought,  according  to  this  theory,  to  be  able  to  make
adequate  provision  against  the  "off"  period,  however
long it  may  be; and since the work of  all  of  them  is


THE SOCIAL ESTIMATE  OF "WASTE" LABOUR 5

necessary  for  the  season,  their  idleness  in  the  off  period
must  not  rank  as  ■  unemployment ",  or  be  regarded  as  a
waste  of  labour-power.

§  4. The  Social  Estimate  of  u  Waste "  Labour.

We  are  not  here,  however,  concerned  to  discuss  how
far  workers  in  season  trades  might  or  ought  to  make
provision  against  the  times  when  they  are  unable  to  earn
wages,  but  whether  the  labour-power  in  such  periods  is  to
be  reckoned  "superfluous"  or  "waste".  Of  the  literal
"  superfluity "  there  can  be  no  question,  but  is  there
"waste"  from  the  social  point  of  view?  Surely  there  is.
The  case  is  not  on  all  fours  with  the  irregular  distribution
of  work  within  the  week.  No  true  economy  of  human
forces  is  able  to  compensate  for  a  winter's  idleness  by
excessive  work  in  the  spring  and  summer  months.  This
"  waste "  may  be  due  to  inherent  irregularities  of  trade,
but  it  is  not  the  less  waste.  The  "unemployment"  of
the  painter  during  the  winter  months  is  not  rightly  classed
with  the  "  leakage "  between  jobs.  In  the  first  place,  a
good  deal  of  the  seasonal  unemployment  in  the  building,
dock,  and  many  other  trades  is  not  necessary  or  inherent
in  the  nature  of  the  trade,  but  is  attributable  to  the  very
existence  of  a  chronic  over-supply  of  labour.  If  there
were  not  so  large  a  "  margin  "  of  labour  to  make  sudden
calls  upon,  the  irregularity  of  many  trades  would  be
largely  modified.  Climatic  and  other  natural  causes  will
doubtless  impose  a  certain  amount  of  irregularity,  but  a
far  more  regular  distribution  of  employment,  even  in  the
building  trades,  would  be  possible,  if  it  became  necessary ;
and  such  readjustment  would  not  imply  a  waste  but
ultimately an economy  of  labour-power, since  it  would


6 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

prevent  the  degradation  of  morale  and  industrial  efficiency
which  every  irregularity  of  trade  produces.  Just  as  in
the  case  of  the  docks,  the  recent  readjustment  of  methods
of  employment  has  squeezed  out  and  exhibited  as  "  super-
fluous" a  large  mass  of  casual  labour  which  formerly
would  have  ranked  as  a  necessary  margin  for  occasional
absorption,  so  in  the  building  and  other  trades  a  similar
pressure,  modifying  methods  of  work,  would  expose  a
like  superfluity  or  "  waste  M  of  labour-power.  But  even  if
it  be  held  that  the  distribution  of  employment  throughout
the  year  in  these  trades  cannot  be  materially  altered,  it
should  be  admitted  that  the  necessary  working  of  these
trades  involves  a  great  waste  of  labour-power  by  reason
of  its  irregularity.  The  bricklayers  idle  during  frost
clearly  represent  a  superfluity  of  labour,  though  not
necessarily  of  bricklaying  labour.  The  earnest  desire
expressed  by  some  to  provide  these  season  workers  with
an  alternative  craft  is  a  virtual  admission  of  the  present
waste  of  labour-power.

§  5. The  u  Unemployed" by  Trade  Depression,

A  very  large  majority  of  the  skilled  workers  who
are  "out  of  work"  at  a  time  like  the  present  owe  their
unemployment,  not  to  short  leakages  or  seasonal  fluctua-
tions, but  to  great  depressions  in  the  manufacturing  trade
of  the  country.  This,  one  might  imagine,  would  be  at
once  admitted  to  imply  a  superfluity  and  a  waste  of
labour-power.  But  the  Report  on  the  Unemployed  is
disposed  to  think  quite  otherwise :

"  In  a  period  of  contraction  like  the  present  there  are
many  men  who  are  out  of  work.  They  are  industrially
*  superfluous,' if  so  short  a  period  as  a  year  be  taken  as


THE "UNEMPLOYED" BY TRADE DEPRESSION 7

the  unit,  but  over  a  period  of  seven  years — which  for
shipbuilding  appears  to  be  about  the  period  of  the
cycle — they  are  necessary,  and  were  they  lifted  off  the
labour-market  in  slack  years  there  would  not  be  enough
men  to  execute  the  work  when  trade  revived."

That  is  to  say,  when  trade  is  good  a  large  body  of  men
are  wanted  to  work,  when  trade  is  bad  they  are  wanted
to  wait  in  case  it  may  get  better.  While  they  wait  their
labour-power  is  not  to  be  considered  "  waste",  because,  in
the  words  of  Mr.  Booth,  "our  modern  system  of  industry
will  not  work  without  some  unemployed  margin,  some
reserve  of  labour."  "  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and
wait,"  Milton  has  told  us,  but  this  specific  application  of
the  truth  has  seldom  been  made  clear.  My  chief  criti-
cism of  the  judgment  made  in  the  Report  is  that  it
begs  the  entire  question  with  an  almost  humorous  effron-
tery. As  an  alternative  to  the  suggestion  that  without
this  unhappy  margin  of  "waiters"  "there  would  not  be
enough  men  to  execute  the  work  when  trade  revived,"
I  would  put  the  following  question :  "  May  not  the
existence  under  normal  conditions  of  an  average  margin
of  5  per  cent,  'unemployed'  in  the  skilled  trades,  and
possibly  a  larger  margin  in  the  'unskilled'  trades,  be  a
cause,  as  it  is  certainly  a  condition,  of  the  fluctuations
which  make  this  year  'good'  and  that  year  'bad'?"  If
there  did  not  exist  this  "margin,"  it  is  evident  trade
would  not  "revive"  to  the  extent  it  does  in  such  a  year
as  1899;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  not  conceivable,
that  it  might  not  decline  so  deeply  as  in  1908  ?  In
other  words,  is  it  not  possible  that  the  fluctuations  would
be  less  violent  if  there  did  not  under  normal  conditions
exist an average "reserve" force of labour to "play


8  THE  PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

with"  ?  The  subject  is,  of  course,  far  too  large  for  paren-
thetic treatment  here,  but  I  cannot  forbear  to  raise  this
question  in  protest  against  the  placid  assumption  in  the
Unemployed  Report  that  there  is  no  "  superfluity"  of
labour,  because  the  "superfluity,"  is  sometimes  for  a  brief
period  mopped  up.

But  whatever  may  be  the  explanation  of  trade  depres-
sion to  which  we  may  incline,  there  can  be  no  question
but  that  "  depression "  is  directly  responsible  for  a  vast
amount  of  unemployment.  Even  the  Unemployed  Report
admits  that  it  would  be  a  "  strain  of  ordinary  language
to  refuse  to  these  men  during  slack  years  the  title  of
'unemployed'."  I  further  claim  that  this  "unemploy-
ment" represents  "superfluous,"  or  waste  labour-power,
whether  the  trade  depression  from  which  they  suffer  be
accounted  the  cause  or  the  effect  of  the  "superfluity."

§  6. Summary  of  the  Official  View  of
"  Unemployment."

If  I  correctly  understand  the  Unemployed  Report,
the  only  "superfluity"  or  waste  of  labour-power  which  it
admits  consists  of  the  following  two  classes  :

"Those  members  of  various  trades  who  are  economic-
ally superfluous,  because  there  is  not  enough  work  in
those  trades  to  furnish  a  fair  amount  to  all  who  try  to
earn  a  livelihood  at  them.

"Those  who  cannot  get  work  because  they  are  below
the  standard  of  efficiency  usual  in  their  trades,  or
because  their  personal  defects  are  such  that  no  one  will
employ  them."

These  classes  are  represented  by  a  small  fringe  of
the "skilled" trades who even in  fairly  good  trade  fail


A  WIDER  MEANING  OF  UNEMPLOYED  IS  LEGITIMATE  9

to  get  sufficient  employment,  and  who  represent  a  genuine
over-supply  of  labour-power,  and  by  a  large  mass  of  low-
skilled  inefficient  labour  of  the  towns,  that  superfluous
mass  which  Mr.  Booth  reckoned  in  East  London  to
amount  to  100,000.

Although  the  Report  confines  "superfluity"  of  labour-
power  to  these  narrow  limits,  the  question  of  "  the  un-
employed" admittedly  includes  others — viz.,  all  that  labour
whose  temporary  displacement  is  due  to  changes  in  methods
of  industry,  changes  of  fashion,  changes  in  the  field  of
employment,  or  other  causes,  which  are  unforeseen  and
cannot  be  reasonably  discounted  or  provided  against  by
the  workers.

The  Unemployment  Report  thus  narrows  down  "  un-
employment" by  refusing  to  include  not  only  "  leakages"
in  employment  but  seasonal  idleness,  and  it  still  further
limits  superfluity  or  waste  of  labour-power  by  excluding
the  large  body  of  "unemployed"  whose  condition  is  due
to  trade  depressions.

§  J. A Wider  Meaning  of  Unemployed  is
Legitimate.

I  claim  to  have  shown  prima  facie  reasons  for  a  wider
application  of  the  term  "  unemployment"  than  commends
itself  to  the  official  mind,  by  the  inclusion  of  all  forms
of  involuntary  leisure  suffered  by  the  working  classes.
This  connotation  has  the  advantage  of  being  in  closest
accord  with  the  general  usage  of  "unemployed,"  and  in
this  sense  I  shall  continue  to  apply  the  term.  The
more  scientific  definition  would,  however,  identify  un-
employment with  the  total  quantity  of  human  labour-
power not employed in  the  production  of  social  wealth,


10 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

which  would  rank,  under  present  conditions,  as  super-
fluity or  waste.  This  latter,  it  can  be  clearly  shown,  is
not  narrower  but  far  wider  than  the  official  unem-
ployment


CHAPTER  II
THE  MEASURE  OF UNEMPLOYMENT

§  i. Defective  General  Statistics.

Exact  statistical  measurement  of  "the  unemployed",  or
even  a  close  estimate  of  the  total  number  of  those  "  out
of  work  "  at  any  given  time  is  impossible  at  present.  The
miserably  defective  character  of  our  statistical  machinery
forms  an  adequate  basis  of  ignorance  upon  which  to  form
discreet  official  answers  to  awkward  questions.  But  though
we  cannot  directly  measure  the  magnitude  of  the  evil,
we  are  able  to  show  that  it  is  very  great.

The  only  official  figure  relating  to  the  general  quantity
of  "  unemployment "  is  that  percentage  calculated  by  the
Board  of  Trade  from  the  returns  furnished  to  it  by  trade
union  officials.  The  official  figure  represents  the  average
percentage  of  members  of  certain  unions  who  are  reported  at
a  given  date  to  be  in  receipt  of  unemployed  benefit  from  the
union  funds.  In  the  December  number  1894  of  the  Labour
Gazette  the  figure  obtained  by  averaging  the  results  of
sixty-two  trade  union  returns  was  7  per  cent  But  this
figure  cannot  be  taken  as  a  general  measure  of  "unem-
ployment." It  is not  designed  as  such  by  the  Labour


12 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

Department,  but  is  merely  quoted  as  a  serviceable  index
to  the  general  condition  of  trade  and  employment  in
some  of  our  staple  manufactures.  The  Board  of  Trade
exercises  no  power  to  compel  all  trade  societies  to  make
returns  of  ■  unemployed " ;  many  unions  have  no  record
of  "  unemployed",  many  that  have  a  record  make  no
return,  and  many  of  the  returns  are  too  indefinite  for  use.

§2. A Trade  Union  Average.

But  though  we  cannot  take  the  7  per  cent,  average
of  sixty-two  trade  unions  and  apply  it  generally  to  the
working  classes  in  order  to  estimate  the  total  of  unem-
ployed, we  may  use  it  as  a  serviceable  starting-point  for
legitimate  conjecture.  In  particular,  I  propose  to  bring
evidence  to  show  how  far  it  is  likely  that  the  average  of
those  who  are  involuntarily  "  unemployed "  is  greater  or
smaller  than  7  per  cent.

This  task  requires  an  answer  to  three  questions:

1.  How  far  can  the  figure  7  per  cent,  be  taken
as  a  true  estimate  of  "unemployment"  among  trade
unionists  ?

2.  How  far  would  the  average  "unemployment"
among  trade  unionists  be  reliable  as  a  measure  of
unemployment  in  the  whole  manufacturing  and  ex-
tractive industry  of  the  country?

3.  How  will  these  industries  compare  with  other
branches  of  labour  in  respect  of  "  unemployment "  ?

In  order  to  deal  effectively  with  the  points  involved
in  the  first  two  questions,  it  is  well  to  understand  how
far  the  sixty-two  trade  unions  which  yield  the  basic  7
per  cent,  are  representative  of  the  general  trade  of  the
country. The courtesy of the Labour Commissioner


TRADES WHICH CONTRIBUTE TO THE BOARD 1 3


enables  me  to  present  the  following  distribution  of  the
sixty-two  unions  in  relation  to  the  numbers  of  their
members.  To  these  figures  I  append  a  third  column
compiled  from  the  returns  of  occupations  in  the  1 891
Census  Report  in  order  to  furnish  a  general  indication  as
to  how  far  the  trade  unions  in  the  general  groups  of
industry  are  fairly  representative  of  the  whole  body  of
workers.


Trades.

Number

of
Unions.

Number  of

Members  of

Unions.

Total
Occupied  in
the  Trade.  *

Engineering  and  Metal  Trades

Shipbuilding

Building  and  furnishing  . . .

Mining

n
4

13

2

2
20
10

111,889

53,895
76,043
10,629
68,030
34,632
4,973

342,231

70,517
820,582

1,128,589
561,637
H5,307

unknown

Printing  and  Kindred  Trades
Clothing,  Leather,  Glass,  etc.

§  3. Trades  which  Contribute  to  the  Board  of
Trade  Returns.

Now  the  first  thing  evident  is  that  the  trade  union
figure  of  unemployment  is  based  on  returns  which  are  in
many  cases  too  small  to  adequately  represent  the  mass
of  industry  to  which  they  refer. Only  in  the  case  of  the

*  Employers  as  well  as  employed  are  included  here,  and,  in
some  cases,  a  large  number  of  dealers  as  well  as  makers.  Other
difficulties  of  classification  prevent  these  figures  from  being  any-
thing but  a  general  indication  of  the  relative  importance  of  the
several  groups  of  industry


14 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

engineering  and  metal  trades,  shipbuilding  and  printing,
can  the  number  of  trade  unionists,  upon  whose  condition
the  return  is  based,  be  considered  large  enough  to  reflect
with  some  degree  of  accuracy  the  whole  trade  to  which
they  belong.  In  the  other  cases  the  condition  of  certain
small  sections  of  a  trade  or  of  certain  districts  can  alone
be  accurately  reflected  in  the  returns.  These  figures  are
checked  and  rendered  more  serviceable  in  the  Labour
Gazette  by  the  general  reports  of  trades  from  the  several
districts.  We  are  thus  enabled  to  see  that  the  large
percentage  of  unemployed  is  in  shipbuilding,  engineering
and  kindred  trades.  Other  information  leads  us  directly
or  inferentially  to  the  conclusion  that  the  average  for  the
other  groups  of  trade  was  at  the  close  of  1894  comparatively
small,  not  greatly  in  excess  of  what  is  due  to  normal  trade
displacement  and  personal  causes.  Indeed,  if  we  take  out
the  shipbuilding  and  engineering  trades,  the  average  of
"  unemployment "  would  seem  to  be  so  small  as  to  furnish
a  contradiction  to  the  general  idea  of  slackness  and  de-
pression which  prevailed  and  which  was  even  reflected  in
the  descriptive  reports  of  the  several  trades.

§  4. No  Full  Measure  of  Unemployed  Unionists.

Now  it  seems  to  me  there  is  much  reason  to  believe
that,  so  far  as  the  "making"  industries  are  concerned,
the  figures  of  "  unemployment"  furnished  to  the  Board
of  Trade  do  not  adequately  indicate  the  full  measure  of
"  unemployment."

In  the  first  place,  it  is  certain  that  the  number  of
members  returned  by  the  trade  union  officials  as  in
receipt  of  unemployed  benefit  does  not  fully  represent
the number  of  trade  unionists  out  of  work. A  period  of


NO FULL MEASURE  OF  UNEMPLOYED  UNIONISTS 15

twelve  months'  membership  is  commonly  required  as  a
qualification  for  the  receipt  of  unemployed  benefit;  otlici
conditions  are  often  essential  to  full  membership.  Thus
a  considerable  proportion  of  those  included  in  the  aggre-
gate of  members  are  not  entitled  to  receive  out-of-work
pay,  and  their  unemployment  does  not  appear.  For  example,
only  88  per  cent,  of  iron-founders  and  only  50  per  cent,
of  shipwrights  were  eligible  for  out-of-work  pay  in  1893
according  to  the  Report  on  the  Unemployed.  In  all
unions  "unemployed  pay"  is  confined  to  a  limited  number  of
weeks,  and  in  some  cases  no  return  is  made  of  those
who  have  passed  this  limit ;  "  unemployment "  does  not
generally  count  as  such  until  a  member  has  been  out
of  work  for  about  a  week;  many  are  disqualified  by
falling  into  arrears  in  their  subscription,  a  misfortune  to
which  they  will  be  most  liable  in  times  of  bad  trade ;
some  better-to-do  workers  make  it  a  point  of  personal
pride  not  to  come  on  their  union  fund  until  they  are
obliged.  Owing  to  these  causes,  particularly  the  first,
the  returns  made  by  the  trade  unions  which  only  take
account  of  the  members  who  are  in  actual  receipt  of
"unemployed  benefit,"  gravely  under- represent  the  "un-
employment" of  trade  union  members.

Again,  the  strain  of  modern  competition  and  the
pressure  of  our  great  "  driving"  system  bear  more  and
more  heavily  upon  working  men  who  are  past  their  prime
of  vigour ;  the  age  when  men  are  superannuated  as  no
longer  able  to  earn  the  standard  wage  is  very  early  in  the
harder  manual  trades ;  and  members  who  are  still  pos-
sessed of  a  fair  measure  of  efficient  labour-power  no
longer  receive  "  unemployed"  benefit,  but  are  placed  upon
the superannuated or the sick list, receiving  aid  for  a


1 6 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

certain  period,  after  which  they  are  left  to  shift  for
themselves.  Not  only  among  trade  union  members  of
skilled  trades,  but  throughout  the  entire  field  of  industry,
the  shortness  of  employment  is  most  largely  represented
in  the  progressive  under-employment  of  the  middle-aged.
In  many  departments  of  labour,  for  example,  among
miners,  sailors,  mule-spinners,  in  metal  and  machine  making,
it  is  practically  impossible  for  a  man  to  have  any  security
of  work  over  the  age  of  forty-five  or  fifty.  Notwith-
standing all  efforts  to  retain  the  appearance  of  youth,  he
finds  employment  slipping  from  his  grasp ;  his  skill  and
experience  avail  him  little  in  competition  with  the  younger
generation  who  can  outstrip  him  in  pace  and  muscular
activity.  In  ideal  schemes  of  industrial  society  it  is  often
held  that  the  twenty  or  twenty-five  years  which  form  the
prime  of  manhood  or  womanhood  afford  an  ample  period
for  the  expenditure  of  labour-power  in  the  social  service
Under  present  conditions  the  early  compulsory  retirement,
not  into  honourable  and  comfortable  leisure,  but  into  a
miserable  and  degrading  struggle  for  the  casual  means  of
a  bare  subsistence,  which  becomes  more  precarious  as
old  age  advances,  must  be  accounted  one  of  the  most
terrible  forms  of  the  problem  of  unemployment.

§  5. Prime  Object  of  Unions  to  Avoid
Unemployment.

In  estimating  the  returns  of  "  unemployed"  by  the
textile,  the  mining,  and  other  industries,  it  must  be  borne
in  mind  that  many  of  the  strongly  organised  trades
distribute  the  loss  of  employment  among  all  their  members,
instead  of  allowing  some  to  become  wholly  unemployed,
working  short  time  instead  of  allowing  a  reduction  of  the


A LARGER FIGURE FOR NON-UNIONISTS 1 7

number  employed.  One  of  the  chief  objects  in  the
practical  programme  of  many  trade  unions  is  the  arrange-
ment with  employers  to  work  short  time  so  as  to  avoid
unemployment.  This,  of  course,  introduces  an  element
of  genuine  "  unemployment"  as  measured  in  superfluity
or  waste  of  labour-power,  which  is  not  returned  in  the  statistics
of  "unemployed."  If  all  the  members  of  a  trade  work
half  time  for  a  period,  in  any  scientific  measurement
this  must  reckon  at  50  per  cent,  unemployed.  The  pro-
portion of  economic  "  unemployment "  due  to  this  cause
is  growing  all  the  time  as  trade  organisations  become
stronger  and  are  able  to  bring  pressure  on  the  employers
to  distribute  a  spell  of  bad  trade  so  as  to  inflict  least
injury  to  the  body  of  workers.

It  is  then  certain  that,  among  the  trade  unions  whose
figures  form  our  basis  of  calculation,  the  actual  amount  of
unemployment  is  greater  than  is  reported.

§  6. A  Larger  Figure  for  Non-unionists.

If  we  turn  to  the  further  question,  how  far  the  condition
of  the  trade  union  is  a  just  indication  of  the  condition  of
the  whole  trade,  we  shall,  I  think,  be  disposed  to  hold
that  unemployment  is  greater  among  non-unionists  than
among  unionists.

In  most  cases,  the  members  of  trade  unions  must  be
regarded  as  the  pick  of  their  trade  in  skill,  strength,
character  and  intelligence ;  and  one  chief  economic  object
of  trade  unionism  is  to  secure  as  far  as  possible  a  mo-
nopoly of  regular  well-paid  employment  for  its  members,
limiting  membership  by  the  test  of  capacity  to  earn  a
standard  wage.  In  a  period  of  slack  or  depressed
trade the trade unionist, both by virtue of  personal

2


1 8  THE  PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

efficiency  and  by  the  strength  of  his  union,  is  more
likely  to  retain  employment  than  the  outsider.  The  less
efficient  members  of  a  union,  whose  employment  is  less
secure,  fail,  in  slack  times,  to  keep  up  their  weekly
subscriptions,  and  drop  out  of  the  union,  whose  official
report  takes  no  account  of  them  as  "  unemployed."  It
is  true  that  against  this  we  must  set  the  ability  of  the
non-unionist  to  hold  his  work  by  a  readier  acceptance
of  lower  wages.  Moreover,  as  he  has  no  "unemployed
benefit"  to  fall  back  upon,  he  will  often  be  driven  to
take  what  casual  labour  of  any  sort  he  can  get.  In
measuring  the  chances  of  "  unemployment,"  these  proba-
bilities must  be  set  against  the  superior  position  of  the
union  man ;  but  taking  the  term  "  unemployed "  as
commonly  applied  to  members  of  a  skilled  trade,  we
must  reasonably  expect  to  find  a  larger  percentage  of
"unemployed"  among  non-unionists  than  among  union
members.

§  ?. Unemployed  in Unorganised  Trades.

Since  the  unions  which  effectively  maintain  out-of-work
funds  and  keep  books  with  sufficient  care  to  be  utilised
in  Board  of  Trade  Reports,  are  generally  the  strongest
unions,  competent  to  secure  for  their  members  the  largest
share  of  whatever  work  is  going,  the  advantage  of  union-
ists compared  with  non-union  members  as  regards
employment  will  be  greatest  in  those  trades.  This  fact
impairs  still  further  the  validity  of  the  Board  of  Trade
returns,  as  indicative  of  the  state  of  employment  in
whole  trades.

Again,  in  regarding  the  trade  unions  which  make  returns
as a  general index  of  the  condition  of  trade,  we  cannot


UNEMPLOYED IN UNORGANISED IK  AD  19

fail  to  observe  that  the  trades  which  they  represent  are

in  most  eases  the  highly  skilled  and  well-organised  trades.
It  is  true  that  some  skilled  trades  are  among  the  most
fluctuating,  and  this  is  particularly  true  of  shipbuilding,
which  furnishes  so  high  a  percentage  of  unemployment
in  the  quoted  returns.  It  is  sometimes  stated  that  the
great  fundamental  and  staple  industries  which  are  here
represented  are  more  fluctuating  in  their  employment  than
the  minor  trades.  We  have  here  no  means  of  accurate
comparison,  but  it  does  not  seem  reasonable  to  suppose
that  this  is  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems  more
than  likely  that  the  minor  manufactures,  which  are  con-
cerned largely  in  the  supply  of  luxuries,  or  at  any  rate
of  u  unnecessaries ",  and  are  subject  to  innumerable
freaks  of  fashion,  or  genuine  change  of  natural  taste,
and  which  are,  moreover,  the  first  to  suffer  from
any  depression  which  affects  the  spending  powers  of
the  community,  should  on  the  whole  present  an  amount
of  displacement  of  labour  in  excess  of  that  which
occurs  in  the  more  necessary  trades.  The  reasonability
of  this  view  is,  I  think,  clearly  illustrated  from  the
textile  trades.  The  trade  union  returns  refer  only  to  the
Lancashire  cotton  trade.  If  the  minor  textile  industries
in  the  woollen  trade,  and  particularly  in  the  silk,  lace,
and  linen  trades,  had  been  faithfully  recorded,  a  very
large  quantity  of  ■  unemployment "  would  have  been
registered.

Between  1881  and  1901  the  employment  in  the  lace
trade  as  indicated  by  the  table  of  occupations  in  the
Census  fell  off  to  the  extent  of  17  per  cent.,  the  English
linens  trade  fell  off  41.5  per  cent.,  while  the  number
engaged  in  silk  and  kindred  manufactures  was  diminished


2Q  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

by  39.8  per  cent.  These  figures  in  declining  trades  do
not,  it  is  true,  represent  the  number  of  those  who  are  at
any  time  unemployed,  but  they  do  indicate  a  large  actual
displacement  of  labour.

§  8. ''Skilled"  versus  *  Unskilled" Trades.

Finally,  the  important  question  confronts  us  as  to  how
far  "unemployment"  is  greater  in  the  "unskilled"  or
"  low-skilled  "  than  in  the  "  high-skilled "  trades.  The
official  percentage  is  derived  exclusively  from  the  picked
members  of  skilled  trades.  Is  there  not  a  strong  pre-
sumption that  in  the  low-skilled  trades  the  proportion  of
economc  "unemployment "  or  waste  is  greater?

One  result  of  the  organisation  of  the  skilled  trades  has
been  to  render  it  more  difficult  for  outsiders  to  equip
themselves  for  effective  competition  in  a  skilled  trade.
To  some  extent,  at  any  rate,  the  skilled  unions  have
limited  the  labour-market  in  their  trade.  The  inevitable
result  of  this  has  been  to  maintain  a  continual  glut  in
the  low-skilled  labour  market.  This  permanent  pool  of
over-supply  of  low-skilled  casual  labour  is  fed  by  the
periodic  trade  depressions  which  thrust  the  weaker  members
of  the  skilled  trades  into  the  seething  mass  of  low-skilled
town  workers  to  struggle  for  a  bare  subsistence  by  irreg-
ular labour.

§  p. Are  there  Two  Questions  of  u  the
Unemployed  "  ?

It  is  sometimes  sought  to  separate  entirely  the  problem
of  the  low-skilled  superfluous  labour  of  our  towns  from
the  problem  of  "  unemployment "  to  which  skilled  workers
are  subject. But,  while  the  severance  may  be  sound  and


ARK  niKKKTWo  QUESTIONS  OF  UNEMPLOYMENT  ?  21

serviceable  in  considering  modes  of  relief  or  remedies,
any  deeper  diagnosis  of  industrial  disorder  shows  a  close
organic  connection  constantly  maintained  between  the  two
classes  of  "unemployed".  It  is  true  that,  in  times  of
good  trade,  nearly  all  the  members  of  skilled  trades  find
full  employment,  while  a  close  investigation  among  the
poorest  quarters  of  our  towns  would  show  that  even  at
these  times  there  was  a  large  superabundance  of  low-
skilled,  inefficient  casual  labour.  But  more  minute  exami-
nation would  show  that  this  "  sediment "  of  labour  was
the  gradual  accumulation  of  deposits  from  the  various
regular  grades  of  workers,  dislodged  from  their  former
place  in  the  course  of  agricultural  or  manufacturing  dis-
turbances, weakened  by  irregular  town  life,  and  breeding
weaklings  and incapables.

That  there  does  exist,  even  in  periods  of  normally
good  trade,  a  large  permanent  over-supply  of  low-skilled
and  casual  labour  in  all  our  large  towns,  there  can  be  no
possible  doubt.  In  East  London  alone  Mr.  Charles  Booth
estimated  the  "waste"  or  "superfluity"  at  100,000  (1 1^
per  cent,  of  the  whole),  not  counting  therein  the  lowest
dregs  of  the  population :

"  It  may  not  be  too  much  to  say  that  if  the  whole  of
Class  B  (100,000)  were  swept  out  of  existence,  all  the
work  they  do  could  be  done,  together  with  their  own
work,  by  the  men,  women  and  children  of  classes  C  and
D ;  that  all  they  earn  and  spend  might  be  earned,  and
could  very  easily  be  spent,  by  the  classes  above  them;
that  these  classes,  and  especially  class  C,  would  be  im-
mensely better  off,  while  no  class  nor  any  industry  would
suffer  in  the  least."

This same class  B numbers  no less than  317,000  in


22  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

the  whole  of  London.  The  metropolis  may  be  somewhat
worse  than  other  cities,  but  we  are  brought  face  to  face
here  with  a  huge  mass  of  "  waste "  labour-power  which
finds  no  reflection  in  the  reports  of  the  Labour  Gazette.

Much,  if  not  most,  of  this  low-graded  town  labour,
taken  as  it  is,  differs  widely  in  respect  of  "  unemployment"
from  the  case  of  skilled  workers  in  times  of  depression.
Unemployment  here,  even  more  than  in  the  case  of  skilled
workers,  becomes  a  question  of  "degree."  Living  by
casual  and  essentially  irregular  work,  few  of  them  could
be  definitely  said  to  be  "  out  of  work  "  at  one  time  more
than  another:  some  scraps  of  work  they  must  be  getting
constantly,  or  they  sink  into  pauperdom.  The  true  meas-
ure of  unemployment  here  would  clearly  be  the  waste
of  such  labour-power  as  they  possess.  This,  I  take  it,  is
what  Mr.  Booth  meant  by  his  estimate  of  superfluous
labour  in  East  London.  Now,  if  we  bear  in  mind  the
large  mass  of  our  growing  town  population  which  is
subjected  either  to  the  essential  irregularities  of  the  low-
skilled  trades  or  ekes  out  a  living  by  casual  labour,  we
shall  recognise  that  even  in  periods  of  good  trade  such  a
figure  as  the  7  per  cent,  which  is  applicable  to  skilled
trade  unionists,  would  be  far  below  the  measure  of  eco-
nomic "  unemployment "  in  these  classes.

§  10. Evidence  of  the  Labour  Bureaux.

This  view  of  the  higher  rate  of  "  unemployment"  among
low-skilled  and  casual  workers  seems  to  be  borne  out  by
such  direct  evidence  as  is  available  from  the  reports  of
the  Labour  Bureaux  in  London,  Liverpool,  Salford,  and
other  places.  Among  male  applicants  for  work,  general
labourers form by  far  the  largest  class,  while  clerks  and


u  WASTE  " IN M  MAKING  " INDUSTRIES  23

warehousemen,  porters  and  messengers,  contribute  a  very
large  proportion  of  the  whole,  and  far  outweigh  the
members  of  skilled  trades,  which  are  chiefly  represented
by  the  building,  engineering,  and  metal  trades.  Similarly,
among  female  applicants  for  work,  charwomen  and  other
general  workers  have  a  large  predominance.  Although
no  close  statistical  conclusions  as  to  distribution  of  unem-
ployment can  be  drawn  from  such  sources,  because  the
greater  helplessness  of  low-paid  labour  would  more  readily
drive  it  to  have  recourse  to  these  Labour  Bureaux,  the
evidence  does  warrant  us  in  concluding  that  "  unemploy-
ment" is  greater  among  the  low-skilled  and  casual  than
among  the  high-skilled  labourers.

§  11. Summary  of  ■  Waste1*  in  a  Making*
Industries.

Following  this  line  of  argument,  we  shall  conclude  that
the  7  per  cent,  which  was  taken  as  our  starting-point,
is  not  a  full  measure  of  the  "unemployment"  in  trade
unions  of  skilled  trades,  still  less  is  it  a  measure  of  the
"  unemployment"  or  the  waste  labour  in  the  whole  body
of  these  trades,  and  that  when  we  turn  from  the  skilled
trades  to  the  less  skilled,  and  from  them  to  the  casual
labour  of  our  towns,  we  shall  expect  to  find  a  far  higher
average  rate  of  economic  waste  or  "unemployment."  If
to  this  we  add  the  inevitable  tendency  of  modern  industrial
forces,  attested  plainly  by  statistics  of  occupations,  to
assign  an  ever-diminishing  proportion  of  national  employ-
ment to  the  great  staple  manufactures  engaged  in  supplying
common  "routine"  wants,  and  an  ever-increasing  propor-
tion to  subsidiary  and  luxury  trades,  which  are  in  their
nature prone to irregularity we shall  find  good  reason


24 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

to  believe  that  the  "waste"  of  labour-power  and  the
economic  "unemployment"  in  the  extractive  and  manu-
facturing trades  taken  as  a  whole  is  considerably  under-
represented  by  the  evidence  which  is  drawn  exclusively
from  the  higher  grades  of  the  best  organised  trades.

But  it  must  be  remembered  that  our  enquiry  has  so
far  confined  itself  almost  entirely  to  the  wage-earners  in
the  manufacturing  trades  and  in  mining.  How  far  can  the
conclusions  which  apply  there  be  extended  to  employ-
ment in  general  ?

§  12. Proportion  of  Manufacturing  to  Distributive
Work  in  England.

We  are  so  accustomed  to  regard  ourselves  as  a  manu-
facturing nation  as  to  forget  that  less  than  one-third  of
the  occupied  classes  of  the  English  nation  are  engaged
in  manufacture.  Unfortunately,  the  method  of  our  Census
Returns  does  not  enable  us  to  say  with  any  precision
how  many  persons  are  engaged  in  manufactures  as  wage-
earners  ;  but  the  careful  investigations  of  Mr.  Booth  into
the  Census  Returns  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
proportion  of  English  people  engaged,  not  merely  in  the
staple  manufactures  but  in  manufactures  as  a  whole,  has
been  gradually  declining  since  1861.  The  percentages
up  to  1 88 1  run  as  follows:

1841 ........  27.1  per  cent.

1851 ........  32.7 „

1861 . .  33-o

1871  . . . . . . . .  31.6

1881 30.7

If  we  could  separate  the  "  makers  "  from  the  "dealers"
in  our  latest  Census  Reports,  I  feel  sure  we  should  find


PROPORTION OP WORK IN ENGLAND  2$

that  the  proportion  of  our  people  engaged  in  manufactures
could  not  be  placed  higher  than  30  per  cent.  Taking
into  account  the  two  great  branches  of  "  extractive"
industry,  agriculture  and  mining,  the  recent  increase  in
the  latter  as  regards  employment  is  approximately  balanced
by  the  decline  of  the  former.  A  considerable  majority
of  the  "employed"  classes,  alike  in  England  and  in  the
United  Kingdom,  are  engaged  in  occupations  which  we
have  not  yet  placed  under  survey  for  the  purpose  of
estimating  "unemployment"  or  "waste."  An  ever  larger
proportion  of  our  workers  and  employers  are  continually
engaged  in  commercial  and  transport  trades  and  in  the
various  sorts  of  professional,  civil,  and  domestic  service.
Now  it  must  be  at  once  admitted  that  in  many  large
departments  of  these  occupations  the  quantity  of  direct
"  unemployment"  and  of  other  labour- waste  will  be  much
less  than  in  the  manufacturing  trades.  If,  as  a  rough
estimate,  we  take  13,000,000  as  the  number  of  wage-
earners  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  is  not  likely  that  more
than  4,000,000  *  are  engaged  in  manufactures.  The  large
class  engaged  in  retail-dealing,  which,  from  official  evi-
dence, seems  to  be  growing  more  than  twice  as  fast  as
the  population,  and  which  affords  an  ever-growing  propor-
tion of  employment,  and  the  "  commercial"  classes,  which
in  most  departments  are  growing  still  more  rapidly,  cannot,
I  think,  be  charged  with  so  large  a  proportion  of  "  un-
employment" as  belongs  to  the  manufactures.

*  The  general  summary  of  groups  of  occupations  from  the
Census  of  course  includes  large  bodies  of  employers  as  well  as
the  whole  class  of  dealers.


2  0 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§  ij. Unemployment  in  Distributive, Transport,
and  Public  Services,

The  chief  waste  of  labour  in  distribution  takes  the
form,  not  of  "unemployment,"  but  of  employment  which
is  excessive  and  useless  from  the  social  standpoint,  the
multiplication  of  clerks,  warehousemen,  shop-assistants,
etc.,  which  proceeds  far  faster  than  the  growth  of  wares
to  be  distributed.  It  is  true  that  the  evidence  of  Labour
Bureaux  shows  that  large  numbers  of  clerks,  shop  assistants,
and  warehousemen  are  "  unemployed",  and  the  heightened
competition  in  these  departments  of  work  leads  doubtless
to  an  increased  precariousness  of  employment.  But  in
taking  a  present  estimate  we  should  be  obliged  to  assign
a  lower  figure  of  "unemployment"  to  commercial  than
to  manufacturing  industry.  Again,  the  "  transport"  industries
constantly  afford  more  employment,  occupying  more  than
12  per  cent,  of  the  employed  males  in  1901.  Some  large
departments  of  work  connected  with  road-transport  show  a
great  "  superfluity  "  of  labour,  and  carmen,  stablemen,  and
others  connected  with  street-traffic  figure  largely  in  the  lists  of
the  Labour  Bureaux :  while,  apart  from  absolute  "  unem-
ployment", there  must  be  an  enormous  waste  of  labour-
power  in  cab-driving,  etc.

The  evidence  provided  by  the  registers  of  Labour
Bureaux,  though  it  has  a  value  of  its  own,  must  not,  I
think,  be  taken  as  even  an  approximate  test  of  the
proportion  of  unemployed  in  the  several  trades  of  the
localities.  The  preponderance  of  general  labourers  and
of  those  belonging  to  the  building  trades  amongst  men,
and  dressmakers  and  seamstresses  and  charwomen  amongst
women do, I think, rightly indicate  a  very  large  excess


UNEMPLOYMENT IN PUBLIC SERVICES  2"]

of  labour-power  as  well  as  a  great  irregularity  in  its
demand  in  these  trades,  but  the  very  large  register  of
clerks  and  messengers,  warehousemen  and  porters,  I  am
disposed  rather  to  impute  partly  to  the  fact  that  such
workers  often  cannot  take  the  ordinary  means  of  seeking
work  by  personal  application  which  is  open  to  those
engaged  in  manufactures  and  large-scale  industries,  and
partly  to  the  absence  of  trade  union  organisation  upon
which  most  skilled  and  some  unskilled  workers  rely  to
assist  them  to  a  place.  But  though  the  classes  of  road-
transport  are  evidently  subject  to  great  irregularity,  against
this  must  be  set  the  steady  and  large  employment  on
railways  and  in  large  departments  of  navigation.

On  the  contrary  dockers  and  all  branches  of  riverside
labour  will  yield  a  very  large  quantity  of  "waste."  If  we
accept  Mr.  Geoffrey  Drage's  estimate  of  the  number  of
London  dock  labourers  at  22,000  (exclusive  of  those
who  drift  in  occasionally  from  other  trades),  and  compare
it  with  the  average  of  those  actually  employed  on  any
given  day,  which  for  the  year  1894  amounted  to  7,006,
we  shall  perceive  that  after  allowance  is  made  for  the
fairly  full  work  of  "  permanent "  hands,  the  quantity  of
unemployment  for  the  mass  must  be  enormous.  Much
of  this  irregularity  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  a  trade
so  largely  dependent  on  season  and  on  weather,  which
yields  a  difference  of  about  25  per  cent,  for  the  numbers
employed  in  March  and  in  November,  while  the  daily
fluctuations  are  much  wider.  But  even  if  we  take  the
maximum  employed  on  the  busiest  day  of  the  year  we
shall  find  it  falls  short  by  some  thousands  of  the  number
of  "  dockers ",  indicating  a  large  net  surplus  of  "  unem-
ployed" not  wanted  even  for  short  emergencies. In  other


2  8  THE  PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

ports  than  London  work  is  not  quite  so  irregular  and
the  permanent  surplus  of  "  dockers "  is  probably  much
less,  but  in  spite  of  all  efforts  to  organise  and  regulate
dock  employment,  the  total  "  waste "  of  labour  in  this
branch  of  transport  trade  must  be  very  large.

On  the  whole,  the  workers  engaged  in  "  the  conveyance
of  men,  goods,  and  messages "  would  yield  a  far  lower
rate  of  unemployment  than  the  manufactures.  We  must
next  add  in  the  rapidly  growing  department  of  public
services,  State,  county  and  municipal,  together  with  the
semi-public  services  of  gas,  water,  electricity,  etc.  These
routine  services  are  essentially  regular  and  would  yield
no  appreciable  quantity  of  "unemployment"  either  in
their  civil  or  military  departments,  unless  we  include
under  the  latter  the  lamentable  and  criminal  waste  of
"labour"  represented  by  the  constant  flow  of  soldiers
from  regular  military  service  into  the  Army  Reserve,
which  helps  to  swell  the  standing  host  of  untrained  and
low-skilled  labour.  One  other  large  class  of  wage-earners
requires  mention,  those  engaged  in  domestic  service.
The  conditions  of  this  work  impose  a  high  degree  of
regularity  in  employment,  and  though  the  multiplication  of
registry-offices  indicates  a  large  constant  flow  from  "place"
to  "place",  which  doubtless  involves  a  certain  "leakage"
of  employment,  there  cannot,  if  we  take  the  country  as
a  whole,  be  a  large  percentage  of  "unemployment"  or
direct  "  waste "  in  domestic  service.  I  think  that  the
"unemployment"  of  servants  which  figures  considerably
in  the  accounts  of  Labour  Bureaux,  belongs  rather  to
the  large-town  problem  of  general  low-skilled  labour  than
to  the  specific  conditions  of  domestic  service.  Some  over-
supply,  however,  in  the  lower  grades,  must  be  admitted.


GENERAL  MEASURE  OF  THE  PROBLEM 29

§  14. General  Measure  of  the  Problem.

The conditions of  this estimate  of  "unemployment"

among  wage-earners  forbid  us  from  venturing  even  upon
an  approximate  figure  for  the  total  of  unemployment.  I
am  on  the  whole  disposed  to  think  that  if  it  were  pos-
sible to  take  an  accurate  census  upon  the  subject,  we
should  find  that  the  average  for  our  manufactures  as  a
whole  was  considerably  higher  than  the  figures  of  the
Board  of  Trade  Return  (applying  the  term  "  unemployed  "
as  usually  interpreted  by  trade  unions),  but  that  the  bulk
of  other  wage-earning  occupations  would  tend  to  lower
the  average  of  "  absolute "  unemployment.  Interpreted
more  liberally  and  more  logically  as  "  waste  of  social
labour-time,"  I  think  that  a  figure  like  7  per  cent,  for  a
period  of  depression  such  as  1894  must  be  considered  far
below  the  true  measure  of  this  waste.  In  other  words,  great
as  is  the  evil  of  complete  "  unemployment,"  the  evil  of
irregular  and  insufficient  employment  is  far  greater.

Taking  a  wider  survey  of  this  "  unemployed  "  problem
from  the  social  standpoint,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that  it
by  no  means  exclusively  applies  to  the  wage-earners.
That  all  the  professions  and  the  higher  arts  are  "over-
stocked "  has  long  been  a  commonplace.  Turn  where
you  will — to  the  law,  to  medicine,  engineering,  architecture,
teaching,  to  literature  and  journalism — you  find  large
numbers  of  men  who  are  only  "  nominal "  members  of
their  calling,  still  larger  numbers  who  are  always  under-
employed. Neither  here  nor  in  the  case  of  manual
workers  is  it  a  question  of  competency  or  qualifications:
set  what  standard  of  efficiency  you  will,  the  number  of
well-qualified  applicants  for  any  fixed  employment,  how-


30 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

ever  moderate the salary, indicates  that every  grade  oi
the  arts  and  professions  is  over-supplied.

§  75*. The  Upper  Class  of  Unemployed.

In  viewing  the  subject,  not  from  the  exclusive  stand-
point of  poverty,  but  from  that  of  the  social  economy
of  labour-power,  two  other  classes  must  be  taken  count
of  before  we  realise  the  full  waste  of  labour-power.  The
first  is  the  class  of  upper  "  unemployed",  euphemistically
described  in  the  Census  Reports  as  "  unoccupied."  In
1 90 1  there  were  in  England  and  Wales  no  fewer  than
328,111  males  between  the  age  of  twenty  and  sixty-five
who  were  not  even  nominal  members  of  any  trade  or
profession.  This  represents  a  large  mass  of  adult  labour-
power  utterly  wasted  for  purposes  of  social  work,  subsisted
out  of  the  labour  of  others  and  contributing  nothing  in
return.  A  large  proportion  of  this  class  are  well-nourished,
capable  men,  whose  idleness  injures  both  themselves  and
the  society  upon  which  they  live.  The  casual  voluntary
work  which  some  of  these  may  undertake  cannot  be
regarded  as  a  serious  contribution  to  the  aggregate  of
social  work,  being  amateur  in  character  and  commonly
misdirected,  since  from  the  economic  nature  of  the  case
it  is  not  amenable  to  social  direction  and  control.

§  16. Waste  of  "Pauper"  Labour,

The  sum  of  labour-waste  is  not  complete  without  an
allusion  to  the  lowest  class  of  "unemployed" — the  able-
bodied  pauper  class.  There  were  on  January  1  of  1903,
in  England  and  Wales  alone,  106,412  able-bodied  adult
paupers.  It  is  true  that  most  of  these,  regarded  from
the working point of  view, would  be found  hopelessly


REGISTERS  OF  LABOUR  BUREAUX  31

inefficient.  But  a  full  consideration  of  their  case  would
show  that  this  physical,  moral,  industrial  incapacity  is
inseparable  from  the  disorder  of  a  society  which  has
failed  to  furnish  opportunities  of  educating  and  utilising
in  the  social  service  the  labour-power  which  in  some  kind
and  degree  attaches  to  every  human  being.  This  able-
bodied  pauper  class  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  wholly  separate
problem,  out  of  organic  relation  to  general  problems  of
industrial  and  social  order.  The  forces  which  are  respon-
sible for  other  forms  of  ■  unemployment"  are  engaged  in
depositing  and  maintaining  at  the  bottom  of  society  the
sediment  of  pauperism.  The  able-bodied  pauper  represents
so  much  potential  labour-power  which  is  wasted  now.

Appendix  A.
Unemployment  in  Registers  of  Labour  Bureaux.

The  following  statistics,  furnished  by  the  Labour  Bureaux
established  by  private  philanthropy  in  nine  places,  yield
some  information  as  to  the  occupations  of  the  unem-
ployed during  1894.  It  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind
that  five  of  the  nine  registers  are  in.  cities  (London,
Liverpool,  Salford,  Plymouth,  Ipswich)  and  that  four  of
them  are  in  the  Metropolis  (Chelsea,  St.  Pancras,  Batter-
sea,  Islington),  so  that  the  results  bear  only  upon  the
unemployed  problem  in  large  centres  of  population.  More-
over, the  absolute  numbers  on  the  registers  are  too  small
to  furnish  any  close  indication  of  the  proportion  of  un-
employment  in the  several  trades, while  the  number  of


32


THE  PROBLEM  OF  1HE  UNEMPLOYED


ioco r^N m n -^-  r~»  r-«  vr

3 oc

f^

M M ■<*• T*- N

M

r>.

N * I«5 H CO O O t"^ C

3 t>

ON

M N Cv

VO

»o

CO M N M N f-» C>

c

M

M

c*J

Q

CS

N

ts ffl N >0 rJ-t^MCOh-

c

Oi

M M lO  lO M

VO

Tj"

>

1/)1/)10N 1 VO H MvO<

CO

M f~v CO M

VO

O

o

CO M 1 M — N 00 C

c

3 M

M

M

r>.

fc

0

M

oo moo  oo vo  vo  co  m vovc

M

o

M CO M  \0

VO

oo

O

-u

On  ■*)-  vo  m m tj-ovD On  r-

» M

vo

M Tj- ^}- M

M

OS

O

MM M M N r->  H

M

M

M

M

«*

M

M

N O WOOlOOO H O^^O "

3 O

f^

N  oo -^i-oo

CO

lO

M

Cm

1-1 t^. VO M M f f) to <J\ C

c

\ «*■

M N v£

M

M

VO

o

MM N M M Tj- ^

f

M

M

M

M

c/)

M

N

M NO\IOMOO "OO M

00

C^

M M * tT  •*

vO

O

bo

00 vO VO M MOO Tj- O V/3 l-

c

» M

N COOC

M

VO

C^

3

MM M M M VO 1-

M

M

M

M

<!

M

M

00 M M CONN* "OO O

■« <N

r^

C^  O m  vO

M

VO

-3-

>>

m  vO  vO N vO m ON  m r-

» cr

3 M

M lO C^ M

VO

O

MM M M M VO M

f-

N

M

M

M

►— >

M

Tf0\l/->OO O NHCO M O

c*

3 VO

lO  lO  covO

ON

00

r^

vO ■«+■  N m m O OnvO ^"  c>

C

\ o

M lO CO M

N

N

3
I—)

MM M M VO M

VO

N

M

M

M

M

M

U1N0O ^00 O O "^"  vO M

t»

ON

t^  t^vO

o

O

vO

(4

VQMMM T^- M M CO ■"!

r-

■<*•

I M M »*■  M

CO

MM M M N vO «v

C

M

1 M

M

£

M

N

OO m t^  N  vO OnOO tJ-  co  c

3 H

VO

M t~^  -<*-C0

r^

00

■*

O vo  M N coOO^M

M

VO

M Tl- M

oo

vO

MM M H N r>N M

O

M

N M

M

M

CO
M^ _

VO N -3-0O O M M CO ON M

1/

3 N

■^j-  on\o  C

N

M

OO

vOOOvOMMOvOOOmt

vO

t^

■cJ-VO

■<a-

vO

ON

MM CO  M M  00 ev

n

3 N

M

M

OO

ci

N

rj-  CO  ON M M CO00 O CO f>

c

•<*•

lO  vO  m C

M

vO

O

-O

O  O t^  tj-  m co  moo m e>

i/

3 CO

M M  OC

VO

r-»

VO

<u

CO N CO M N M c

oc

M

M

CO

|X4

M

P

CO

tj-00 **-  vooo  vo vo  o r^  o

N VO

r^

■«*■  cOvO co  co

ON

M

MvO M **•  M vo N M to  h

OC

M

cooo t-

M

VO

r^

d

VO M M N M CO VO I-

c

M

M M

CO

00

*— >

M

M

. . . • O •

• •

BB . • . *A m

• in '

. 0)

t> . • . « .

. <r O

>  <u  w>  :  s  g

U3 K>

W

in

•  -*-» •«

in

ngineering  and  Metal
/oodwork  and  Furnitu
rinting  and  Bookbindi

armen,Stablemen,Hors
lerks  and  Warehousen
orters  and  Messengers
eneral  Labourers  ....

e

O

u,

ressmakers  and  Seams
harwomen,  daily  work
^rvants

a)

a

o

a,

3
o
u

o

a

a
1-

E-

b
•E

"5

R

c

c

X

a
P
s
E
C

C

h
1

i

a.

-4-

c

pq
5

1-5

o
s

d

09

6

c

i

i

o

d
d

B
o

O

"c3
O

H

a

a

u

o

pq

Ht>MUOUfc

c

c

v-lQOc/:

o

H

REGISTERS OF  LABOUR  BUREAUX  33

centres  from  which  the  figures  are  drawn  are  not  enough
to  prevent  the  effects  of  one  or  two  special  local  disturb-
ances of  industry  from  exercising  an  undue  influence
upon  the  results,  considered  as  indicative  of  general
conditions  of  trade.

The  totals  seem  to  conform  very  closely  to  the  general
law  that  employment  is  better  in  the  summer  than  in
the  winter  months  in  the  case  of  men.  The  statistics  of
women  are  so  slight  and  irregular  as  to  have  little  value.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  building  trades  and
general  labourers  furnish  nearly  half  the  total  of  unem-
ployed men,  but  that  they  are  closely  followed  by  the
town  "transport"  trades:  carmen,  stablemen,  horsemen
porters  and  messengers  forming  a  significant  feature  in
the  list.  The  figures,  however,  considered  as  representative
of  the  "unemployed,"  in  the  several  trades,  are  vitiated
by  various  considerations.  Members  of  skilled  trades
would  seldom  place  themselves  upon  the  Bureaux  registers,
preferring  to  seek  work  through  their  business  or  by
personal  application  at  known  quarters.  Many  skilled
workmen,  clerks  and  others,  would  not  care  to  publicly
register  themselves  as  unemployed.  Charwomen  and
other  day  workers  will  often  use  the  Labour  Bureaux  as
a  means  of  enlarging  their  connection,  misrepresenting
the  extent  of  their  "  unemployment "  for  this  purpose.
The  workers  in  irregular  trades  of  the  home  or  small
workshop  will  rarely  know  the  existence  of  Labour
Bureaux.  This  will  possibly  account  for  the  small  number
of  men  and  women  belonging  to  the  clothing  trades  who
appear  on  the  registers.  Knowledge  or  ignorance  of  the
existence,  purpose,  or  value  of  the  Labour  Bureaux,  will-
ingness  or unwillingness to publicly acknowledge  them-


34 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

selves  as  unemployed,  existence  of  other  facilities  for
obtaining  work,  probability  of  effectual  aid  from  the
Bureaux — these  are  only  a  few  of  the  "factors"  which
determine  the  register  and  which  render  it  of  small
account  in  its  present  condition  as  an  index  of  the  distri-
bution of  w  unemployment "  among  different  classes  of
industry.


CHAPTER  III
DOES UNEMPLOYMENT GROW?

§  i. Do  Modern  Forces  Make  for  Irregular
Employment?

Is  this  waste  of  labour-power  arising  from  chronic  in-
sufficiency or  from  irregularity  of  employment  tending  to
increase?  The  question  is  often  put  and  answered  in  the
affirmative  or  negative  with  equal  confidence.  As  we
possess  no  just  measure  of  present  "unemployment,"  and
no  measure  at  all  of  past  "unemployment,"  no  direct
evidence  can  decide  the  point.  There  are,  however,  some
considerations  derived  from  knowledge  of  the  changes  in
the  character  of  different  industries  and  the  proportion
of  those  employed  in  these  several  industries,  which  will
Jead  us  to  believe  that  the  general  condition  of  employ-
ment in  England  is  one  of  greater  irregularity,  and  that
the  waste  of  time  and  energy  is  larger  than  it  was  half  a
century  ago  or  during  the  18th  century.

§  2. Expansion  of  Market  Areas.

Three conditions are specially calculated to impress
irregularity of employment upon a business. First  the

35


36 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

wideness  of  area  of  the  market  to  the  supply  of  which  it
contributes.  When  a  manufacturer  or  a  trader  supplied
a  small  local  market  of  known  customers  whose  habits
of  consumption  were  pretty  fixed,  and  who  were
practically  unable  to  go  for  their  supply  outside  this
small  market,  a  regularity  of  local  demand  prevailed
which  also  implied  a  regularity  of  production.  The
resources  and  methods  of  production  of  one's  trade
competitors  were  known  and  were  not  subject  to  such
rapid  changes  as  would  enable  them  to  draw  away  quickly
a  "  custom "  once  established.  The  expansion  of  market
area,  directly  attributable  to  improved  methods  of  com-
munication and  transport,  renders  every  business  man
liable  to  the  keen  competition  of  rivals  in  distant  parts
of  the  country  or  in  foreign  lands  with  whose  existence,
economic  resources,  and  methods  of  production  he  is  not
familiar.  Although  he  does  his  best  to  keep  himself  au
courant  with  the  movements  of  the  wider  market,  that
market  is  constantly  growing  larger  and  more  complex,
and  he  finds  it  quite  impossible  to  obtain  a  knowledge
of  the  corn  or  wool  or  iron  market  of  the  world  so
reliable  as  that  which  he  once  possessed  of  the  narrower
area.  To  take  a  familiar  example,  the  education  of  the
English  farmer  is  utterly  inadequate  to  enable  him  to
follow  the  world-market  for  wheat  or  pigs,  which  is  con-
stantly expanding  or  contracting  by  the  influence  of
economic  and  political  factors  which  are  utterly  outside
his  ken.  This  applies  more  or  less  to  an  ever-increasing
number  of  trades.

§  j. The  Speculative  Nature  of  Modern  Industry.
Not only are the individual businesses  compelled  to


INFLUENCE OF TASTE  AND FASHION  37

compete  with  a  larger  number  of  unknown  competitors
in  a  market  with  a  wider  space-area,  but  a  corresponding
expansion  is  taking  place  in  the  time-area.  Manufacture
is  less  and  less  to  supply  present  known  wants,  more  and
more  to  provide  against  future  expected  wants,  and  to
assist  in  those  auxiliary  branches  of  the  machinery  of
capitalist  production  which  are  always  becoming  more
and  more  complex.  A  less  and  less  proportion  of  work
is  done  to  supply  definite  orders,  more  and  more  is  done
for  the  chance  of  an  unknown  sale.  In  other  words  a
larger  proportion  of  trade  is  taking  on  the  character  of
"speculation."  Miscalculation  and  misdirection  of  industrial
energy  belong  essentially  to  speculative  trade  and  impress
irregularity  on  employment.

In  dealing  directly  with  causes  of  unemployment  we
shall  see  how  closely  this  irregularity  is  connected  with
the  application  of  modern  machinery  and  power.  Although
the  co-operation  of  large  fixed  capital  in  plant  and
machinery  in  itself  tends  to  enforce  continuity  of  work
upon  each  business,  since  the  loss  incurred  by  stoppage
or  contraction  is  greater  the  individual  finds  that  the
matter  is  less  and  less  dependent  upon  his  own  will
and  energy,  and  more  and  more  upon  the  wider  trade
forces  beyond  his  control,  which,  operating  by  upward
and  downward  pressure  of  prices,  oblige  him  to  an
oscillating  policy  of  expansion  and  contraction  which
involves  a  waste  in  the  use  of  capital  and  labour.

§  4. Influence  of  Taste  and  Fashion.

The  increased  influence  of  taste  and  fashion  makes
in  the  same  direction.  A  larger  proportion  of  labour  is
constantly engaged  in  the  production  and  distribution  of


38 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

comforts  and  luxuries  which  are  more  amenable  to  the
caprices  of  the  consumer  or  of  the  dealers  who  are
responsible  for  changes  in  fashion.  The  silk  trade  has
always  been  more  irregular  in  its  prices  and  its  employ-
ment than  the  cotton  or  the  woollen  trades,  and  that
irregularity  is  increasing  as  the  refinement  and  rapidity
of  fashion- changes  obtain  a  hold  over  a  larger  proportion
of  the  consuming  public.  Formerly  there  was  a  constant
and  fairly  steady  demand  for  certain  kinds  of  silk  ribbon
which  it  was  safe  to  make  "to  stock,"  now  changes  of
fashion  spread  so  rapidly  and  reach  so  quickly  the  mass
of  the  consumers  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  make
to  stock.  The  same  holds  generally  of  articles  of  conve-
nience or  luxury.  These  rapid  changes  of  taste  can  of
course  only  find  satisfaction  on  the  assumption  that  there
either  exists  a  great  surplusage  of  productive  power  which
only  obtains  full  use  at  certain  periods  and  is  kept  in
abeyance  at  other  times,  or  that  the  transferability  of
capital  and  labour  is  so  great  as  to  enable  production  to
follow  the  changes  of  consumption  without  any  consider-
able waste.  No  one  acquainted  with  trade  will  assert
the  validity  of  this  latter  supposition.  It  follows  thus
that  with  the  increased  control  of  taste  and  fashion  over
industry  and  the  increased  adaptability  of  industry  to  this
control  which  arises  from  the  great  expansion  of  productive
power,  irregularity  of  employment  tends  to  grow.

§  5. Transferability  of  Labour. —  General  versus
Special  Ability.

It  is  sometimes  held  that  any  increased  irregularity  of
employment  thus  caused  is  more  than  compensated  by
the  greater  facilities  which  labour  possesses  for  transferring


TRANSFERABILITY OF LABOUR  yj

itself  from  one  place  to  another  place,  and  from  one
trade  to  another  trade.

So  far  as  the  transferability  from  one  locality  to  another
is  concerned,  the  same  causes  which  have  expanded  the
area  of  the  market  for  most  commodities  have  certainly
expanded  the  labour-market.  A  man  who  is  thrown  out
of  work  by  some  local  decline  of  trade  is  more  easily
and  more  quickly  able  to  find  an  opening  in  the  same
trade  in  another  place  than  was  once  the  case,  but  I  do
not  believe  that  this  increased  fluidity  of  labour  has  kept
pace  with  the  increased  fluidity  of  general  trade.  Adam
Smith's  dictum  still  holds  good  that  "a  man  is  of  all
sorts  of  luggage  the  most  difficult  to  be  transported."

The  increased  ability  of  the  modern  worker  who  is
displaced  from  one  trade  to  find  employment  in  another
trade  is  frequently  asserted  by  economists.  The  tendency
is,  it  is  maintained,  to  substitute  "general"  ability  for
special  manual  skill.  Formerly  a  handicrafts-man  spent
many  years  in  getting  a  particular  form  of  manual  dexterity,
and,  if  he  were  obliged  to  find  some  other  occupation,
he  would  have  to  acquire  a  new  skill  in  the  same  slow
fashion,  besides  being  limited  in  his  new  choice  by  the
specialisation  of  powers  which  had  warped  his  general
development.  Nowadays,  it  is  said,  a  man,  engaged  in
some  particular  process,  who  is  displaced  can  learn  in  a
few  weeks  or  months  another  process  in  another  trade,
or  can  find  in  another  trade  a  species  of  work  analogous
to  that  upon  which  he  was  formerly  engaged.  The  broad
question  whether  there  exists  for  the  average  workman
to-day  an  increased  transferability  of  his  labour-power
depends  for  its  answer  upon  two  sets  of  considerations.
The  first  has  reference  to  the  structure  of  trades.


40 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§  6. Does  Division  of  Labour  give  Security  of
Employment  in  Manufacture?

In  modern  manufacturing  industry  the  labour  of  employees
must  be  roughly  divided  into  three  classes,  (i)  general
labour  in  the  care  of  machinery  and  superintendence  of
labour,  including  the  work  of  overseers,  of  foremen,  and
of  engineers  and  smiths  who  are  responsible  for  the  right
working  of  machinery  and  for  repairs;  (2)  machine-tending
specialised  to  work  with  some  particular  machine  employed
in  a  single  process;  (3)  highly-skilled  work  in  a  special
process  by  handicraftsmen  or  by  those  who  direct  and
control  a  special  machine.

When  the  increased  transferability  of  labour  is  asserted
the  first  class  and  a  portion  of  the  third  class  are  taken
into  account.  It  is  evident  that  the  work  of  superintend-
ing labour  is  mostly  of  a  "general"  character  and  can
be  transferred  without  much  loss  from  one  trade  to
another.  So,  too,  the  engines  and  general  machinery  for
producing  power,  and  some  of  the  machinery  for  trans-
mitting it  to  specific  machines  are  similar  in  many  in-
dustries; so  that  a  good  deal  of  labour  in  the  engineering
and  in  the  machine  and  tool  making  trades  will  be
transferable.  A  man  who  looks  after  engines  in  a  cotton-
spinning  mill  can  find  employment  in  any  other  kind  of
mill  which  uses  similar  engines.  A  smith,  or  a  carpenter,
or  a  fitter  can  adapt  himself  to  a  good  many  different
trades.  It  is  obvious  that  many  trades  have  some  "  com-
mon "  foundational  character,  and  that  workers  engaged
upon  such  work  have  great  transferability.  Again  in  the
metal  or  the  textile  trades  there  will  be  certain  special
skilled processes, which, since they deal with similar


DOES DIVISION OF LABOUR GIVE SECURITY? 41

properties  of  similar  material,  will  be  analogous.  The
passage  of  weavers  from  the  woollen  mills  of  Yorkshire
to  the  cotton  mills  of  Lancashire  has  been  not  uncommon;
watchmakers  in  Coventry  have  adapted  themselves  to  the
less  refined  processes  of  the  bicycle  trade,  while  this
last  has  also  drawn  indiscriminately  from  the  Birmingham
metal  trades  those  who  could  easily  adapt  themselves  to
the  new  work.  But  when  writers  dwell  with  enthusiasm
upon  these  signs  of  "  despecialisation "  of  labour,  as
proving  the  increasing  importance  of  general  over  special
attainments  and  of  bringing  an  increased  freedom  and
choice  of  occupation  to  the  workers,  they  fail  to  take
account of two counter-acting forces. Along with this

■  despecialisation "  and  more  general  in  its  operation  is
the  constant  and  finer  sub-division  of  labour,  among  the
great  mass  of  subordinate  workers.  The  machine-tender,
the  typical  modern  worker,  is  constantly  being  narrowed
in  his  work;  the  "general"  mechanic  in  the  building
trades  has  disappeared,  the  elaborate  and  many-sided
work  of  the  "plumber"  has  been  so  specialised  and
taken  over  by  machinery  that  he  is  now  nothing  but  a
"fitter."  This  subdivision,  this  "specialisation"  is  surely
the  main  stream  of  tendency  of  which  the  other  is  only
a  counter-acting  current  of  inferior  power.  Those  who
speak  of  the  increased  importance  of  "  general "  as  opposed
to  special  capacities  in  the  modern  worker  deceive  them-
selves, if  they  think,  as  they  appear  to  do,  that  the  fact
implies  greater  economic  freedom.  The  modern  workman
is  not  "  despecialised  " ;  on  the  average  he  is  more  highly

■  specialised "  but  he  is  less  deeply  set  in  his  special
groove  and  therefore  loses  less  if  he  is  taken  out  of  it.
It is not so much that  his  work nowadays  calls  for  a


42 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

larger  absolute  amount  of  general  ability  but  that  it  calls
for  a  smaller  quantity  of  special  skill.  General  ability  is
only  relatively  more  important  in  the  modern  mechanic
and  machine-worker.

§  J. Transferability  of  Labour  in  Other  Industries.

If  we  turn  from  manufacture  to  the  extractive  industries
concerned  directly  with  getting  the  raw  materials  of  food
or  manufacture,  we  shall  not  find  any  net  increase  of
ability  to  transfer  labour-power,  except  from  one  locality
to  another.  The  Scotch  or  the  Durham  coalminer  may
try  his  luck  in  Pennsylvania,  or  the  Cornish  tin  miner
may  migrate  to  South  Africa,  but  the  saying  "  once  a
miner  always  a  miner"  still  holds  good,  and  there  is
every  reason  to  believe  that  a  miner  is  more  narrowly
specialised  and  that  in  the  modern  strain  of  competition
a  thin-seam  "hewer"  has  less  chance  than  formerly  of
working  advantageously  in  a  thick-seam  mine.

The  young  agricultural  labourer  no  doubt  has  more
freedom  of  choice  and  can  take  up  town  work  or  work
on  the  line,  but  when  he  is  once  inured  to  agricultural
work  he  can  no  more  quit  it  for  factory  or  other  town
work  than  can  the  sailor,  the  soldier,  or  the  fisherman.
The  various  departments  of  the  transport  and  the  dis-
tributive trades  do  unquestionably  contain  a  large  amount
of  labour  which  is  more  transferable.  Though  much
railway  labour  and  some  dock  labour,  as  for  example  the
work  of  many  of  the  stevedores,  is  highly  skilled,  the
bulk  of  it,  together  with  the  work  of  draymen,  messengers,
and  the  like,  rests  for  its  value  upon  certain  common
qualities  of  muscular  vigour  and  intelligence  which  can
be diverted without  much  loss  to  another  branch  of  the


THE  DISPLACED  WORKER  AND  ANOTHER  TRADE 43

transport  services.  A  railway-porter,  a  warehouseman,
a  man  accustomed  to  drive  and  to  care  for  horses,  has  a
large  and  I  think  an  ever  larger  range  of  employments
open  for  him.

In  mercantile  and  retail  industry  the  writing  clerk  and
the  shop  assistant  are  serviceable  by  reason  of  certain  ca-
pacities of  quick  perception,  accuracy,  and  address  which
belong  to  trade  in  general  rather  than  to  any  specific
trade.  The  increased  proportion  of  the  labour  of  the
community  which  is  engaged  in  distribution  and  in  trans-
port tends  here  to  assign  more  importance  to  the  common  as
distinguished  from  the  special  elements  of  labour  power.
But  there  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  as  machinery
obtains  larger  control  over  those  branches  of  industry,  the
subdivision  of  labour  which  prevails  in  manufacture  will
find  its  way  there  also,  reducing  the  extent  of  the  present
transferability  of  labour.

The  labour  of  the  railway  worker  and  of  the  "sailor"
on  a  steamship  is  more  specialised  than  the  work  of  the
coachman  and  the  sailor  on  a  sailing-vessel  which  they
have  displaced.  We  therefore  cannot  look  with  confi-
dence to  the  operation  of  new  economic  forces  to  secure
greater  regularity  of  work  by  means  of  improved  trans-
ferability of  labour.

§  8. Can  the  Displaced  Worker  Take  tip
Another  Trade?

Even  if  it  be  admitted  that  a  special  process  in  modem
industry  (especially  in  manufacture)  does  not  generally
require  so  much  time  and  energy  to  acquire  as  formerly,
and  that  a  man  can  thus  more  easily  give  up  one  special
work and  fit  himself  for  another,  it  by  no  means  follows


44 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

that  he  can  get  that  other  work.  It  is  here  that  we  strike
that  second  false  assumption  of  those  who  maintain  a
general  increase  of  transferability  of  labour.  Suppose  the
structure  of  modern  industry  did  favour  transferability
from  one  trade  to  another,  the  transfer  can  only  be
effective  provided  the  demand  for  labour  in  these  other
trades  gives  openings  to  outsiders.  Individuals  endowed
with  special  energy  and  enterprise  are  no  doubt  often
able  to  turn  their  hand  to  another  trade,  but  the  average
man,  though  he  could  take  up  some  other  skilled  trade,
if  he  had  the  chance,  finds  that  he  does  not  get  the  chance.
Trade  Unions  from  the  practical  standpoint  see,  what
the  theoretic  economist  often  refuses  to  see,  that  generally
throughout  the  field  of  industry  the  supply  of  labour,
skilled  as  well  as  unskilled,  is  normally  in  excess  of  the
demand,  and,  acting  in  their  own  interests,  rightly
direct  their  energies  to  making  it  difficult  for  an  outsider
to  compete  for  their  kind  of  work.  As  the  organisation
of  labour  grows  stronger  this  policy  will  be  enforced  more
rigidly,  and  that  transfer  of  labour  from  one  trade  or
process  to  another  which  the  structure  of  industry  might
permit,  will  be  prevented  by  the  operation  of  other  social
forces.

Taking  a  general  view  of  the  situation  we  are  driven
to  the  conclusion  that  the  alleged  greater  transferability
of  labour  is  not  adequate  to  counteract  the  forces  which
make  for  irregularity  of  employment  and  displacement  of
labour.  Since  a  larger  proportion  of  the  total  number  of
employed  are  coming  under  the  new  conditions  of  in-
dustrial life,  the  absolute  quantity  of  "  unemployment "  at
any  given  time  due  to  these  causes  must  be  increasing.


CHAPTER  IV
MINOR CAUSES OF  UNEMPLOYMENT

§  i. The  Individual  Moral  View  of  the  Problem.

In  order  to  realise  the  relative  importance  of  the  economic
causes  which  are  directly  responsible  for  "  unemployment,"
some  deductions  from  our  earlier  analysis  may  be  of
service.  The  common  notion  of  the  "philanthropist"  and
the  moralist  who,  wholly  untrained  in  economic  thought,
thinks  the  only  thorough  treatment  of  this  and  other
problems  of  poverty  consists  in  the  treatment  of  indivi-
dual character,  need  not  detain  us  long.  The  fallacy  is
one  necessary  to  all  individualist  views  of  society.  A
depression  of  the  staple  trade  in  a  town  throws  out  of
employment  10  per  cent,  of  those  who  are  normally
employed.  The  charity  organiser  with  his  individual
scrutiny  sets  to  work,  and  a  close  investigation  of  each
"case"  discloses  in  most  of  this  10  per  cent,  some  moral
or  economic  defect:  there  is  drink,  laziness,  inefficiency,
or  some  other  personal  fault  discernible  in,  or  imputed
to,  most  of  these  "unemployed."  Our  "thorough"  in-
vestigator, having,  as  he  thinks,  found  a  sufficient  reason
why each man  should  be  unemployed,  reaches  the  con-

45


46 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

elusion,  that  "  unemployment"  is  due  to  individual  causes.
Such  conclusion  is,  of  course,  wholly  fallacious.  Personal
causes,  no  doubt,  explain  in  a  large  measure  who  are  the
individuals  that  shall  represent  the  10  per  cent,  "unem-
ployed", but  they  are  in  no  true  sense  even  contributory
causes  of  the  "unemployment."  When  economic  causes
lower  the  demand  for  labo&r,  competition  will  tend  to
squeeze  out  of  employment  those  individuals  who,  for
reasons,  sometimes  moral,  sometimes  industrial,  are  less
valuable  workers  than  their  fellows.  If  these  individuals
had  not  been  morally  or  industrially  defective  they  would
have  kept  their  work,  but  necessarily  by  pushing  out
other  10  per  cent.  Personal  causes  do  not  to  any  appreci-
able extent  cause  unemployment,  but  largely  determine  who
shall  be  unemployed.  The  individualist-moralist  is  keen  to
detect  the  fallacy  involved  in  supposing  that  poverty  can
be  stopped  by  regarding  it  as  a  number  of  holes  to  be  filled  up
by  pouring  in  promiscuous  charity.  But  he  does  not  perceive
that  this  analysis  and  treatment  of  "  unemployment"  involves
a  fallacy  closely  analogous  to  that  which  he  has  condemned.

§  2 . Nature  of  the  Individualist  Fallacy. — Character
Determining Who  Shall  be Unemployed.

The  moral  and  industrial  elevation  of  defective  indivi-
duals is,  for  their  individual  sakes  and  on  general  moral
grounds,  highly  desirable,  but  it  will  have  no  direct  effect
in  diminishing  unemployment.

This  may  appear  to  some  a  hard  saying.  But  it  is
strictly  true.  The  effect  of  the  McKinley  tariff  in  causing
depression  of  trade  and  unemployment  in  Bradford  is
not  really  dependent  upon  the  moral  or  industrial  qualities
of  those  workers  who  are  displaced. If  these  latter,  who


NATURE  OF  THE INDIVIDUALIST FALLACY 47

will  be  found  less  efficient  or  less  reliable  on  the  average
than  those  whose  services  were  retained  during  the  depres-
sion, could  be  morally  and  technically  educated  above
the  level  of  their  fellows,  this  fact  would  not  prevent  the
same  external  forces  from  operating  upon  Bradford  with
the  same  effect  as  before.  Different  individuals  might  be
displaced  from  employment,  that  is  all.  A  sudden  fall
of  the  fashion  for  wearing  silk  ribbons  will  reduce  the
employment  of  Coventry  weavers,  and  no  moral  or  industrial
elevation  of  the  workers  will  affect  the  quantity  of  unemploy-
ment which  is  caused.  Even  if  it  be  allowed  that  a  rise
of  the  average  efficiency  of  the  Bradford  or  Coventry  workers
would  enable  them  to  keep  some  of  their  trade  by  underselling
the  competitors  in  other  towns  or  other  countries  in  a  time
of  depressed  trade,  they  would  only  escape  unemployment
by  throwing  out  of  work  their  weaker  competitors  in  other
places :  the  trade  as  a  whole  would  suffer  just  as  much  from
unemployment  as  before.  The  notion  that  an  increase  of
productive  power  will  be  a  safeguard  against  unemployment
will  not  stand  for  one  moment  when  confronted  with  the  fact
that  during  each  period  of  unemployment  a  large  existing
excess  of  productive  power  is  the  most  striking  phenomenon.

Indirectly  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  forces  which
contribute  to  the  intellectual  and  moral  education  ot  the
workers  help  to  maintain  employment  in  so  far  as  they  stimu-
late a  demand  for  a  higher  standard  of  life,  which  will  find
expression  in  an  increased  effective  demand  for  commodities.

But  this  does  not  justify  us  in  stating  that  moral  or  technical
inefficiency  are  considerable  causes  of  unemployment  in  face
of  the  fact  that  during  periods  of  ordinarily  good  trade
most  of  those  very  individuals  whose  "  unemployment"  is
imputed  to  "  personal  defects"  are  found  to  be  in  regular


48 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

work,  or  in  supposing  that  moral  and  technical  education
will  help  directly  either  to  prevent  or  cure  unemployment.

It  is  perhaps  almost  inevitable  that  those  who  are
absorbed  in  work  amongst  the  poor  should  often  be  dupes
of  this  individualist  fallacy.  Personal  defects  commonly
appear  as  direct  and  sufficient  reasons  why  A  or  B  or
C  fail  to  get  regular  work,  and  if  Society  at  large  is
regarded  merely  as  a  conglomerate  of  particular  instances
of  A  and  B  and  C,  these  personal  defects  appear  to
furnish  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  total  amount  of
poverty  or  of  unemployment  in  the  whole  society.  But
this  conclusion,  very  natural  to  those  immersed  in  detailed
cases,  and  unable  to  see  the  forest  for  the  trees,  ignores
utterly  the  interrelations  of  the  various  individuals  and
the  organic  unity  which  they  express.  Regarded  as  furnish-
ing an  explanation  of  "unemployment,"  it  rests  upon  a
total  denial  of  the  operation  of  wider  economic  forces
determining  the  quantity  of  employment  available  at  a
given  time  for  a  working  community.  If  it  is  true,  as
all  students  of  economics  assert,  that  there  are  forces
operating  from  without  which  are  liable  to  cause  a  shrink-
age of  employment  in  the  woollen  or  the  iron  trade,
Amounting  to  (say)  30  per  cent,  of  the  former  volume  of
employment,  it  is  idle  for  those  who,  working  as  philan-
thropists, shut  their  eyes  to  these  economic  forces,  to
adduce  as  causes  of  "  the  unemployment"  those  personal
causes  which  merely  decide  whether  A  or  B  or  C  among
the  workers  shall  be  among  the  30  per  cent,  unemployed.

It  has  been  necessary  to  emphasise  this  point  because
the  grasp  of  an  organic  conception  of  industrial  life  and  its
necessary  implications  is  still  very  weak,  and  the  notion
that  investigation  which  confines  itself  to  particular  instances


MACHINERY AND  UNEMPLOYMKN  1  49

alone  contributes  a  thorough  and  a  scientific  treatment  is
very  prevalent  among  many  of  those  who  claim  to  speak  with
authority  on  the  questions  of  poverty  and  unemployment.

§  3. Connection  of  Machinery  with  Unemployment.

It  can,  I  think,  be  clearly  shown  that  the  great  mass
of  "  unemployment"  and  "  under-employment"  is  not  due
to  those  "  minor"  leakages  which  belong  to  the  character
of  certain  trades  or  even  to  the  detailed  changes  ot
machinery,  industrial  method,  and  locale  of  markets,  which
we  saw  were  verce  causce  in  the  problem.  At  certain  periods,
large  sudden  displacements  have,  of  course,  been  attributable
to  the  substitution  of  machinery  for  handlabour  or  to  some
greatpolitical  event  affecting  markets.  If,  however,  we  confine
ourselves  to  British  trade  in  recent  years  we  cannot  explain
by  these  means  the  great  fluctuations  of  employment.

It  is  a  mistake  to  regard  as  one  of  the  necessary
effects  of  improvements  in  machinery  and  their  substitution
for  hand -labour  a  great  mass  of  unemployment.  The
introduction  of  new  machinery  into  a  trade  must  under
existing  circumstances  inflict  a  twofold  injury  upon  those
whose  labour  it  affects.  It  reduces  or  destroys  the  market-
value  of  the  special  skill  they  have  acquired,  and  it
imposes  upon  some  or  all  of  them  the  necessity  of  finding
other  work,  where  their  special  skill  is  not  available.  But
if  the  general  condition  of  the  labour-market  were  such
that  the  demand  for  labour  pressed  upon  the  supply,
such  displaced  labour  would  be  rapidly  re-absorbed  and
the  total  waste  by  "  unemployment"  would  be  very  small.
In  the  prosperous  period  187 1-4  machinery  made  con-
siderable strides  in  many  English  industries,  and  many
"savings"  of  labour  were  effected,  especially  in  the  metal

4


5°


THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED


trades ;  but  the  expanding  demand "  for  labour  was  so
great  that  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  working  popula-
tion was  at  any  time  out  of  employment.  Where  im-
provements of  machinery  occur  during  periods  of  "  booming"
trade  they  do  not  occasion  any  large  quantity  of  unem-
ployment or  distress.  It  cannot  therefore  be  held  that
the  application  of  improved  machinery,  is  itself  a  chief
and  necessary  cause  of  unemployment.

§ 4. Estimate of  Minor  Causes. Trade  Depres-
sion shown  as  Major  Cause.

These  machinery  changes  and  specific  trade  movements
are,  of  course,  extremely  numerous  and  of  continual  oc-
currence. For  this  very  reason,  in  taking  a  term  of  years
their  influence  may  be  discounted.  The  amount  of
"  unemployment "  due  to  these  causes  must  be  taken  as
a  pretty  constant  quantity.  A  glance  at  the  statistics  of
unemployment  recorded  by  the  Board  of  Trade  during  the
last  ten  years  will  indicate  the  importance  of  this  conclusion.

All  Trade  Unions  Making  Returns.


At  end  of

189318941895189618971898

1 1 1 i

1899

1900

1 901

1902
Per

Per

Per

Per Per

Per Per

Per

Per

Per

cent.

cent.

cent.  cent.

cent.  cent.

cent.

cent.

cent.

cent.

January ....

IO.O

7.0

8.2 4.5

3-3

5.0

3-0

2.7

4.0

44

February . . .

9-5

6.3

7-9

3-«

3-0

4.4

2.6

2.9

3-9

4-3

March ....

«•  7

6.5

6.5

3-5

2-5

3-i

2.5

23

3-6

3-7

April ....

6.9

6.1

6.5

3-2

2-5

2.9

2.2

2-5

3-»

3-9

May

6.2

6.3

6.0

3-3

2-3

2-7

2-5

2.4

3-o

4.0

June

5.8

6.3

5.6

3-2

2.7

2.6

2-3

2.6

3-5

4-2

July

6.2

7-4

5-3

3-'

2.7

2.6

2-3

2.7

3-4

4.0

August  ....

7.1

77

5-2

3-4

3.5

2.8

2-3

3.o

3-9

4-5

September . . .

7-3

7-6

49

36

4.4

2.6

2.4

3-0

3-7

5.0

October

7-3

74

4-9

3-3

4-7

2-5

2.3

3-3

3-7

5.0

November  . . .

7.2

7.0

4-3

2.9

4.8

2-3

2.2

32

3-8

4.8

December  .
Yearly  Mean . .

7-9

7-7

4.8

3-2

34

5.3

2.9

2-5

4.0

4.6

5-5
4.4

75

6.9

5-8

35

3-0

2-4

2.9

3-8

FLUCTUATIONS  5 1

§  j. Short  Period  and  Long  Period  Fluctuations.

Now,  if  in  the  skilled  trades  here  represented  we  are
justified  in  counting  the  minor  "  leakages "  and  special
displacement  due  to  introduction  of  new  machinery,  etc.,
as  a  fairly  constant  quantity,  taking  one  year  with  an-
other, we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  that  some  greater  forces
are  at  work  which  account  for  the  large  bulk  of  the
unemployment  here  displayed.  In  January,  1900,  the
necessary  minor  M  leakages "  and  specific  displacements
were  going  on,  and  yet  these  only  caused  2.7  unemploy-
ment. If,  then,  we  are  called  upon  to  explain  why  in
January,  1903,  10  per  cent,  are  "unemployed,"  we  must
seek  another  cause  or  causes.  A  further  comparison  of
one  year  as  a  whole  with  another  will  disclose  the  fact
that  the  force  to  which  we  must  attribute  the  mass  of
unemployment  is  one  which  operates  over  wider  periods
than  a  year.  We  are  driven  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion
that  the  great  tidal  movements  of  trade,  and  not  the
minor  detailed  movements  of  special  trades,  are  the  root-
causes  of  the  evil  we  are  investigating.  No  accumulation
of  minor  short-period  causes  will  explain  why,  on  the
average,  throughout  1899  tne  rate  of  "  unemployment"  was
only  2.4,  while  in  1893  it  was  7.5,  and  in  1894 6.9.

So  far  as  these  statistics  of  skilled  trades  can  be  taken
as  an  index  of  general  trade  movements,  we  must  con-
clude that  the  great  trade  depressions  are  the  vital  factor
with  which  we  have  to  deal,  and  that  no  palliatives  or
cures  will  be  of  much  service  unless  they  serve  to  miti-
gate the  force  of  these  vast  world-movements  in  trade.


52 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§  6. Strikes  as  Causes  of  Unemployment.

It  is  not  infrequent  for  business  men  and  others  who
have  not  followed  sufficiently  closely  the  periodic  fluc-
tuations in  prices  and  volume  of  trade  during  the  last
half  century  to  assign  Strikes  as  the  chief  cause  or  as  an
important  contributory  cause  of  bad  trade  and  of  unem-
ployment. So  it  is  urged  by  a  writer  in  the  National
Review  *  that  the  high  percentage  of  "  unemployment "  at
the  opening  of  1 893  must  be  attributed  to  the  "  cotton
strike ",  the  suggestion  being  that  all  "  unemployment "
which  is  not  explained  by  necessary  leakage  and  specific
trade  displacements  is  a  voluntary  suspension  of  work
arising  from  excessive  claims  of  the  workers.  "  These
people  rebel  against  their  masters,  make  extortionate  and
impossible  demands,  and  after  striking  work  or  being
locked  out  assume  the  role  of  men  unable  to  get  work
and  wages"— is  the  frequent  comment  made  by  the
unthinking  members  of  all  classes.  Now  in  the  first  place
there  is  no  close  correspondence  between  the  great  strikes
and  a  high  rate  of  unemployment :  comparatively  few
strikes  of  any  importance  have  occurred  in  the  trades
whose  unions  are  well-ordered  enough  to  furnish  proper
statistics  to  the  Board  of  Trade,  or  in  trades  which  closely
affect  them.  The  coincidence  of  the  cotton  strike  with
the  high  general  percentage  of  "unemployment"  was
exceptional.  But  even  were  it  true  that  all  periods  of
great  unemployment  were  marked  by  strikes  or  by  lock-
outs resulting  from  action  of  the  workers,  we  should  be
quite unjustified in  stopping our enquiry  at  this  point.

*  Miss.  H.  Dendy, "Socialistic  Propaganda,"  September  1895.


STRIKES AS CAUSES OF UNEMPLOYMENT 53

There  is  an  overwhelming  weight  of  evidence  to  show
that  most  great  strikes  are  symptoms  and  results  of  trade-
depressions,  not  causes.  The  three  large  strikes  of  recent
years,  those  connected  with  Dock  Labour,  the  Cotton
Trade,  and  Coal  Mining,  were  all  of  this  character.
Schulze-Gaevernitz  in  his  careful  and  impartial  investi-
gation of  English  industry  finds  the  real  cause  of  the
great  Dock  Strike  in  1889  in  the  financial  weakness  of  the
Dock  Companies,  attributable  to  the  fact  that  "  Too  many
docks  had  been  built  and  there  was  the  fiercest  compe-
tition between  the  Companies. "  *  The  persistent  fall  of
prices  due  to  "  over-production  "  is  assigned  as  the  explan-
ation of  the  cotton-strike  of  1893.  f  The  cutting  down
of  contract  prices  under  the  pressure  of  the  same  forces
brought  about  the  great  lock-out  in  the  Coal-mining
industry.  Other  ostensible  causes  are  sometimes  to  the
front,  but  most  modern  strikes  are  conditioned  by  an  ex-
cess of  producing  power  in  the  several  trades,  which
drives  employers  to  lower  prices  which  they  can  only
render  profitable  by  reducing  wages  or  by  introducing
new  labour-saving  machinery  or  by  other  economies  which
directly  diminish  the  demand  for  labour.  The  only
strikes  which  we  are  entitled  to  count  as  voluntary  unem-
ployment and  for  which  allowance  should  be  made  in
our  analysis  of  economic  causes,  are  those  made  for  a
rise  in  the  standard  wage  or  some  other  definite  improve-
ment in  the  economic  condition  of  a  class  of  workers,  or
the  rare  case  of  a  sympathetic  strike.  Speaking  generally
a  strike is not a  cause  but  an  effect  of  depressed  trade

*  "Social  Peace,"  p.  262.

t  Cf. De Rousiers, "  La Question Ouvriere en Anglettrre"
FP  455-458.


54 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

and  is  preceded  by  a  fall  of  prices  in  the  goods  with  the
production  of  which  the  trade  is  concerned.

§  J. Unemployed  Capital  and  Land  as  well
as  Labour.

One  final  statement  belongs  to  an  understanding  of
the  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  disease.  "  Unemployment "
of  labour,  waste  of  labour-power,  does  not  stand  alone.
At  the  great  periods  of  depression,  we  have  not  only
"  unemployed  "  labour,  but  "  unemployed  "  capital.  Nor
can  it  be  accounted  a  mal-adjustment  of  capital  and
labour  as  between  trade  and  trade.  The  special  charac-
teristic of  industry  during  a  period  of  trade  depression  is
that,  not  in  this  or  that  trade,  but  over  the  general  field
of  industry,  there  is  labour-power  and  capital  lying
"unemployed."  The  actual  phenomenon  is  a  general
excess  of  productive  power.  The  waste  of  labour-power
in  our  modern  communities  is  evidently  but  one  import-
ant aspect  of  an  even  larger  economic  problem.  This
question  is  one  we  may  well  allow  to  germinate  in  our
minds.  "  Why  is  it  that,  with  a  wheat-growing  area  so
huge  and  so  productive  that  in  good  years  whole  crops
are  left  to  rot  in  the  ground,  thousands  of  English
labourers,  millions  of  Russian  peasants,  cannot  get  enough
bread  to  eat?  Why  is  it  that  with  so  many  cotton-mills
in  Lancashire  that  they  cannot  all  be  kept  working  for
any  length  of  time  together,  thousands  of  people  in
Manchester  cannot  get  a  decent  shirt  to  their  backs?
Why  is  it  that,  with  a  growing  glut  of  mines  and  miners,
myriads  of  people  are  shivering  for  lack  of  coal?"  These
questions  are  not  conceived  in  a  spirit  of  sensationalism,
but  merely  to  bring  home  the  nature  of  the  vital  problem


UNEMPLOYED CAPITAL  AND LAND  55

which  is  forced  more  and  more  upon  thinking  men  and
women:  "Has  our  general  standard  of  consumption  risen
to  a  degree  commensurate  with  the  prodigious  incr<  e
of  productive  power  brought  about  by  modern  improve-
ments in  machinery  and  methods  of  industry,  and  vested
in  modern  forms  of  labour  and  capital  ?  "


CHAPTER  V
THE  ROOT-CAUSE OF  UNEMPLOYMENT

§  i. Fallacy  of  the  Piecemeal  Treatment  of  the
Unemployed  Question.

A  misapplied  respect  for  thoroughness  often  leads  students
of  society  to  a  piecemeal  treatment  of  industry  which
blinds  them  to  a  perception  of  large  organic  operations.
It  is  natural  that  men  of  business,  whose  interests  and
sympathies  are  absorbed  in  some  special  trade  and  some
special  locality,  should  mistake  their  knowledge  of  local
symptoms  for  a  thorough  diagnosis  of  industrial  disease.
But  it  is  not  so  creditable  that  statesmen  and  economists
should  do  their  best  to  make  it  appear  that  the  "  unem-
ployed "  is  not  one,  but  a  hundred  different  questions  to
be  studied  only  in  detail  and  to  be  solved  by  a  hundred
different  little  local  remedies.  This  detailed  research  is
highly  necessary,  but  it  can  lead  us  only  to  a  knowledge
of  secondary  and  contributory  causes;  no  clear  under-
standing of  the  problem  is  attained  until  this  fragmentary
knowledge  is  gathered  into  the  unity  of  a  higher  synthesis.
The  piecemeal  method  which  commends  itself  so
signally  to  Royal  Commissions  upon  Labour  or  Committees

56


NEED OF A UNIFIED ORGANIC TREATMENT 57

Upon  "The  Unemployed"  does  not  really  deserve  the
character  it  claims  of  being  "thorough."  Refusing  to
investigate  the  wider  operation  of  economic  forces  and
discarding  all  "  theoretic "  considerations,  these  practical
persons  confine  themselves  to  collecting  elaborate  memor-
anda of  minor  facts,  while  ignoring  the  major  facts  by
which  alone  they  can  order  and  interpret  their  details.
When  the  British  mind  is  driven  to  take  in  hand  a
question  like  that  of  "  the  unemployed "  its  first  instinct
is  to  chop  it  up  into  a  number  of  little  questions,  and
again  to  subdivide  these  into  an  infinite  number  of
smaller  portions.  It  then  proceeds  to  collect  "  evidence  "
— huge  quantities  of  little  local  facts  and  figures  which  it
serves  up  in  crude  masses  through  Blue  Books.  An
attempt  is  sometimes  made  to  reach  minor  generalisations
bearing  upon  some  detailed  aspects  of  the  general  ques-
tion, but  no  endeavour  is  made  to  focus  the  evidence  in
any  bearing  upon  the  unity  of  the  subject.

§  2. Need  of  a Unified  Organic  Treatment.

All  this  work  of  laborious  detail  is  useful,  it  ought
to  be  done,  but  not  the  other  left  undone.  The  method
is  really  not  scientific  but  the  reverse.  It  attempts  to
treat  a  unified  organic  subject  by  a  piecemeal  inorganic
method.  Its  collections  of  facts  never  attempt  to  go  be-
hind concrete  phenomena  into  the  wider  movements  of
industrial  life,  so  as  to  find  out  what  mal-adjustment  of
the  larger  economic  forces  is  really  represented  in  unem-
ployment. The  notion  that  scientific  thoroughness  consists
in  breaking  up  an  organic  whole  into  a  number  of  inor-
ganic pieces  would  be  simply  humorous  if  it  were  not
fraught  with  the  most  injurious  effects  upon  the  reputation


58 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

of  sociological  studies.  It  is  not  really  scientific  to  speci-
alise without  any  "  fundamentum  divisionis  ",  and  without
any  attempt  or  intention  to  apply  the  results  of  speci-
alised enquiry  to  a  philosophic  interpretation  of  the  sub-
ject as  a  single  whole.  "  There  is  no  Social  Problem,
there  are  only  social  problems,"  Gambetta  is  reported  to
have  said.  This  is  the  attitude  of  most  of  our  statesmen
and  many  of  our  economists :  it  is  the  typical  position  of
the  politician  and  the  academic  person.  Being  a  practical
denial  of  the  possibility  of  Social  Science,  the  very  exist-
ence of  which  depends  on  the  admission  of  unity  in  the
subject  matter,  the  prevalence  of  this  falsehood  explains
why  progress  in  social  study  is  so  slow.  It  also  explains
the  vague  and  chaotic  character  of  the  general  judgments
to  which  our  public  bodies  of  enquiry  commit  themselves
when  they  occasionally  break  loose  from  the  tabulation
of  raw  facts.  A  delightful  example  of  this  judgment  is
contained  in  the  Final  Report  of  the  Labour  Commission,
when  that  body,  confronted  with  the  necessity  of  saying
something  on  the  wider  aspects  of  Irregularity  of  Employ-
ment, gives  vent  to  the  following:

"  Fluctuations  of  trade  in  this  country  are  due  to  a
variety  of  causes,  the  chief  of  which  may  be  briefly
indicated  here.  The  majority  of  these  periodical  changes
are  connected  in  some  way  with  the  state  of  commercial
credit,  and  the  willingness  or  unwillingness  of  business
men  to  embark  on  new  ventures.  The  state  of  credit  in
every  country  depends  each  year  more  and  more  upon
the  general  conditions  of  business  throughout  the  world."

Omitting  the  middle  terms  of  this  syllogistic  argument,  we
attain  the  valuable  conclusion  that  irregularity  of  employment
is  attributable  to  "  the  general  conditions  of  business " !


GENERAL  EXCESS  OF  PRODUCING  POWER 59

§  j. Central  Fact —  General  Excess  of  Producing

Power.

Neither  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Labour  Commission
nor  in  the  analysis  of  causes  of  unemployment  contained
in  the  Report  of  the  Board  of  Trade  do  we  find  the
faintest  recognition  of  the  central  fact  of  the  "unemployed"
problem — viz.,  the  simultaneous  general  unemployment
of  labour,  capital,  and  land  in  periods  of  depressed  trade.
Our  analysis  of  the  available  statistics  forced  us  to  the
conclusion  that  the  "unemployed"  question  was  in  the
main  a  leading  aspect  of  the  problem  of  trade  depression.
From  the  financial  point  of  view  bad  trade  appears  as  a
general  lowness  of  prices  and  of  profits,  but,  regarded  as
a  disease  of  the  industrial  structure,  it  takes  the  shape  of
a  general  slackness  or  under-use  of  the  various  factors
of  production.  Now,  no  serious  attempt  has  been  made,
by  what  may  provisionally  be  called  the  orthodox  school
of  English  economists,  to  explain  why  it  is  that  at  one
and  the  same  time  there  can  be  in  existence  more  labour,
more  capital,  and  more  land,  than  are  wanted.  There  might
exist,  according  to  their  theory,  more  labour  than  could
be  employed,  owing  to  an  insufficiency  of  capital  with
which  to  assist  labour  to  produce ;  but,  since  capital  and
labour  are  the  only  requisites  for  the  production  of
wealth,  they  could  not  both  be  in  excess.  The  common
mode  of  meeting  the  difficulty  was  to  deny  the  fact  of
a  general  excess  of  producing-power.  There  might,  it
was  alleged,  be  an  excessive  application  of  capital  and
labour  to  certain  trades,  but  this  was  a  malady  of  mis-
direction, general  excess  of  producing-power  was  impossible.


60 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§4. A  Priori  Assumptions  of  Economists.

This  view  has  always  been  based  upon  an  a  priori  assump-
tion that  whatever  is  produced  can  be  sold  and  must  be
sold  because  it  was  produced  for  no  other  motive,  the
validity  of  which  assumption  I  shall  discuss  later  on.
Here  it  is  enough  to  say  that  the  theory  that  over-
production in  some  trades  implies  under-production  in
others,  and  that  the  malady  is  only  the  necessary  mis-
direction of  productive  energy  arising  from  imperfect
acquaintance  with  markets,  is  inconsistent  with  the  facts
at  a  time  of  depressed  trade.  Where  are  then  to  be
found  the  under-producing  trades,  those  which  are  insuffi-
ciently fed  with  capital  and  labour,  and  where,  in  conse-
quence of  the  growing  inability  to  satisfy  demand,  prices
are  rising  ?  There  are  no  such  trades.  The  fall  of  prices,
the  depression  of  trade,  the  slack  employment  are  general
not  special  in  application.  The  glut  of  loanable  capital
is  sufficient  proof.  If  there  were  trades  which  were
under-producing  this  free  capital  would  flow  into  them.
A  continued  glut  of  loanable  capital  seeking  investment
is  only  consistent  with  the  admission  that  all  avenues  of
sound  investment  are  already  occupied.

§  5. True  Meaning  of  "  Over-production"

But  when  the  state  is  described  as  one  of  over-
production, a  certain  misconception  often  arises.  If  by
over-production  is  meant  a  continued  process  of  glutting
the  markets  with  goods  which  cannot  find  purchasers
and  are  accumulated  in  ever-increasing  quantities,  such
an  operation  is  not  possible.  A  comparatively  small
quantity of goods which are "  over-produced" in the


EVIDENCE OF  COMMISSION  6 1

sense  that  their  addition  to  supply  drives  prices  below
the  margin  of  profitable  production  will  suffice  to  "congest"
a  trade.  If  fixed  expenses  are  very  heavy,  production
may  be  carried  on  for  some  time  at  a  loss,  but  always
at  a  slackened  pace,  while  it  is  only  a  question  of  time
when  the  weaker  businesses  are  driven  to  suspend  opera-
tions and  the  stronger  to  a  close  restriction  of  their
output,  sometimes  accompanied  by  a  trade  dispute  which
checks  for  a  time  the  whole  volume  of  production.  In
no  trade  can  actual  over-production  of  goods  continue
for  any  long  period,  though  the  liability  to  over-
produce may  manifest  itself  in  actual  gluts  from  time  to
time  over  a  long  period  of  years.  The  true  signification
of  over-production  as  used  to  designate  the  immediate
cause  of  depression  is  the  continued  existence  of  a  general
excess  of  producing-power  in  the  forms  of  capital  and
labour  beyond  what  is  economically  required  to  supply
the  current  or  prospective  rate  of  consumption  of  the
community.

§  6. Authorities  Admit  a  General  Excess. —
Evidence  of  Co??imission.

But  if  what  is  signified  is  a  long  continued  existence
of  a  general  excess  of  producing-power  beyond  what  is
economically  required  to  supply  the  current  rate  of  con-
sumption, such  excess  is  plainly  attested  by  modern
industry.  Moreover,  it  was  admitted  in  unmistakable
language  by  the  same  Majority  Report  of  the  Commission
on  the  Depression  of  Trade  in  1885,  which  rejected  with
scorn  the  notion  of  "a  general  over-production."  In  its
general  summary  this  Report  says,  ■  That  owing  to  the
nature  of  the  times  the  demand  for  our  commodities  does


62 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

not  increase  at  the  same  rate  as  formerly ;  that  our
capacity  for  production  is  cojiseqaently  in  excess  of  our
requirements,  and  could  be  considerably  increased  at  short
notice ;  that  this  is  due  partly  to  the  competition  of  the
large  amount  of  capital  which  is  being  steadily  accumulated
in  the  country."  The  Minority  Report  finds  the  gist  of
trade  depressions  in  "a  long-continued  fall  of  prices — in
many  cases  the  result  either  of  actual  over-production  or
of  a  capacity  of  production  in  excess  of  the  demand."
This  Commission  entirely  throws  over  the  notion,  which
every  man  of  wide  business  experience  has  long  repudiated,
that  an  excess  of  producing-power  in  some  trades  must
be  balanced  by  a  deficiency  in  others,  and  that  there  can  be
no  general  excess.  The  idea  that  depressed  trade  means
a  mis-application  of  capital  and  labour  as  between  trade
and  trade  is  entirely  rejected  by  both  bodies  of  Commis-
sioners, who  find  the  malady  they  are  investigating  common
to  all  "productive  industries."  The  Minority  expressly
asserts  over-production,  in  the  sense  above  taken,  as  the
chief  agent  in  depression :

"  Over-production,  by  which  we  understand  the  produc-
tion of  commodities  (or  existence  of  the  agencies  of
production)  in  excess,  not  of  the  capacity  of  consumption,
if  their  distribution  were  gratuitous,  but  of  the  demand
for  export  at  remunerative  prices,  and  of  the  amount  of
income  or  earnings  available  for  their  purchase  in  the
home  market — that  is,  of  profitable  employment  for  the
people.  The  depression  under  which  we  have  so  long
been  suffering  is  undoubtedly  of  this  nature."

The  Majority,  though  rejecting  the  general  term  "  over-
production," admit,  as  we  saw,  the  phenomena.


RECENT  INDUSTRIAL HISTORY  63

§  J. The Testimony  of  Recent  Industrial  History.

The  one  fact  which  emerges  with  striking  clearness
from  the  whole  investigation  of  the  period  1875- 1885  is
that  the  producing-power  of  capital  and  labour,  to  which
full  employment  was  given  in  the  years  immediately
following  the  Franco-German  war,  was  found  excessive
in  quantity  during  the  ten  years  which  ensued.  The
same  trade-malady — general  under-employment  of  capital
and  labour— has  been  plainly  visible  since  1890.  In
trade  after  trade  it  has  been  made  manifest  that  the
capacity  of  production  is  far  in  advance  of  the  current
or  expected  demand  at  a  profitable  price,  and  in  all  of
them  brief  bursts  of  activity  have  alternated  with  long
periods  of  torpor,  during  which  weaker  mills,  mines  and
works  are  closed,  while  others  are  working  short  time,
and  large  bodies  of  workers  are  kept  half-employed.  In
three  staple  industries,  docks,  cotton,  coal-mining,  the
attempts  to  fully  utilise  existing  powers  of  production
were  directly  responsible  for  prolonged  stoppages,  during
which  the  congestion  was  relieved  at  a  terrible  cost  of
suffering  to  the  workers.  A  strike  or  a  lock-out,  attributable  to
a  fall  of  prices,  would,  as  we  have  seen,  rightly  rank  as  so  much
■  unemployment"  in  any  true  economic  analysis,  though
the  immediate  cause  might  be  a  disagreement  between
capital  and  labour  in  reference  to  wages  or  other  terms
of  employment.  All  business  men  are  compelled  to  admit
that  at  the  present  time  there  exists,  not  in  this  industry
or  that,  but  in  all  the  important  industries  of  the  country,
a  considerably  larger  quantity  of  plant  and  labour  than
can  be  profitably  employed.  A  general  consensus  of
practical opinion would sustain the  judgment recently


64 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

affirmed  by  an  experienced  business  man,  "  So  rapid  has
been  the  advance  in  production,  whether  agricultural  or
mechanical,  so  greatly  have  the  means  of  transportation
and  communication  improved  and  cheapened  that  supply
always  now  outruns  demand."*  Indirect  testimony  of  the
most  valuable  kind  is  afforded  by  Von  Halle  in  his
treatment  of  the  American  Trust.  "  Before  the  establish-
ment of  the  combinations,  hardly  any  industry  had  been
able  to  utilise  its  full  capacity.  For  instance,  even  before
the  days  of  the  Cotton  Oil  Trust,  numerous  presses  and
refineries  had  for  a  long  time  been  inactive.  The  Trust
closed  at  once  more  than  a  dozen  of  the  small  old-
fashioned  mills.  The  same  thing  happened  with  the
Sugar  Trust,  which  can  supply  the  whole  market  with  the
product  of  one  fourth  of  the  plant  it  owns.  The  Whiskey
Trust  immediately  closed  68  of  its  80  distilleries,  and
with  the  remaining  12  was  enabled  to  furnish  the  same
output  as  before  and  soon  to  largely  increase  it."  f

In  other  words,  with  the  means  of  production  which
now  exist  a  far  larger  quantity  of  commodities  could  be
produced  than  are  actually  produced.  It  is  probable  that
the  percentage  of  unemployed  or  under-employed  capital
in  the  shape  of  mills,  ironworks,  dockyards,  mines,  and
plant  and  machinery  of  various  kinds  is  far  larger  than
the  8  or  10  per  cent,  which  may  represent  the  waste  of
labour-power.  From  the  financial  point  of  view  the
excess  is  attested  by  the  universal  glut  of  loanable  capital
to  which  Mr.  A.  J.  Wilson  has  recently  directed  public
attention. § Another financial authority, Mr.  Van  Oss

*  J.  H.  Trotson, "  The  Assault  on  the  Standard. "

f  Von  Halle, "Trusts."  p.  66.

§ "Investor's  Review,"  January  1895.


CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTIVE  POWER 65

rightly  associates  the  glut  of  money  with  a  glut  of  capital,
affirming  that  ■  the  amazing  production  of  wealth  under
the  new  industrial  conditions  is  rapidly  altering  the  pro-
portion between  the  supply  of  capital  and  the  demand
for  it."  *

§  8. Failure  of  Co7isumption  to  Keep  Pace  with
Growth  of  Productive  Power.

The  opening  up  of  vast  new  tracts  of  land  for  the
growth  of  our  food  and  raw  material  of  manufacture,  the
huge  accumulation  of  capital  in  the  shape  of  fixed  plant
and  power-driven  machinery  of  manufacture  and  transport,
the  rapid  growth  of  an  intelligent  and  closely  co-operative
population  have,  during  the  last  few  generations,  multiplied
twentyfold  or  more  the  general  productive  power  of  the
community.  The  actual  standard  of  consumption  for
nearly  every  class  of  the  community  has  likewise  been
raised.  The  landowning  classes  live  far  more  expensively
than  they  did  at  the  opening  of  the  present  century;
the  owners  of  manufacturing  and  trading  capital  form  a
numerous  new  class  of  consumers  whose  expenditure  has
grown  continuously;  statistics  of  working-class  life  show
that,  except  among  the  very  poor,  the  general  standard
of  comfort  is  considerably  higher  than  it  was,  though
the  stability  of  the  standard  is  grievously  impaired  by
growing  irregularity  of  work.  But,  great  as  this  general
rise  in  the  consumption  of  the  people  may  appear,  it
has  been  far  less  rapid  than  the  growth  of  productive
power.  The  industrial  revolution  has  not  been  attended
by  a  commensurate  revolution  in  the  consuming  habits  of

*  "Nineteenth  Century,"  April 1896.


66 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

the  people.  If  modern  machinery  and  methods  of  pro-
duction have  raised  twentyfold  the  producing-power,  the
consumption  of  the  community  has  increased  at  a  lower
ratio.  We  therefore  find  that  the  several  agents  of  pro-
duction exist  in  excess;  full  and  continuous  use  cannot
be  found  for  them.  This  is  no  theory,  but  a  just  sum-
mary of  the  phenomena  of  modern  industry.  Why  such
excess  of  wealth-producing  power  is  possible  may  remain
an  open  question,  but  of  the  fact  there  can  be  no  dis-
pute. It  is  not  a  case  of  improper  application  of  product-
ive power,  an  excess  in  certain  trades,  or  at  certain  times,
balanced  by  a  deficiency  in  other  trades  or  other  times.
It  is  a  normal  and  general  condition  of  excess.  The
rate  of  production  of  commodities  actually  maintained  in
the  years  187 1-4  could  have  been  continued  during  the
ten  years  which  followed,  if  the  demand  had  not  slack-
ened ;  and  the  fact  that  it  was  not  so  continued  is  a  clear
admission  of  a  grave  excess  of  productive  power  under
normal  conditions  of  national  life.

§  9. Wasteful  Multiplication  of  Distributors.

This  excess  of  general  producing-power  is  far  from
being  adequately  represented  by  the  average  unemploy-
ment or  under-employment  of  capital  and  labour  in  the
extractive  and  manufacturing  industries.  "  Unemployment "
is  only  one  form  of  the  waste.  Another  is  the  socially
useless  multiplication  of  middle-men  and  other  distributors,
and  of  the  capital  engaged  in  distributive  businesses.
Unable  to  find  remunerative  employment  in  "  productive "
industries,  an  increasing  proportion  of  capital  and  labour
is  engaged  in  the  work  of  distribution.  This  movement
is unmistakably attested by the  Statistics  of  Occupations


WASTEFUL MULTIPLICATION  OF  DISTRIBUTORS  67

in  the  Census  Reports.  The  common  notion  that  we  are
becoming  more  and  more  a  manufacturing  nation  is
incorrect  so far as employment of  labour  is  concerned.

Taking  the  aggregate  of  the  manufactures  from  the  Census
returns,  as  interpreted  by  Mr.  Charles  Booth,*  it  appears
that  whereas  up  to  1861  manufactures  engaged  an  increas-
ing proportion  of  our  population,  since  that  date,  although
there  continues  to  be  an  absolute  increase  in  the  numbers
so  employed,  that  increase  is  slower  than  the  growth  of
the  population.  The  percentage  engaged  in  manufactures
from  1 84 1  to  1 88 1  is  as  follows:

1841 27.1  per  cent.

1851 32-7

J  861 33.0

1871 31.6

1881 30.7

Though  we  cannot  place  in  exact  line  with  the  preceding
returns  the  results  for  1891  and  1901,  there  is  every  reason
to  believe  that  the  proportionate  decline  of  employment  has
continued,  and  that  not  more  than  30  per  cent,  of  the
occupied  classes  are  engaged  in  manufactures.  Set  off  the
increase  of  coal-miners  against  the  decline  of  agricultural
workers,  and  a  small  increase  of  the  numbers  engaged  in
extractive  industries  is  obtained.  What,  then,  has  become
of  the  two  millions  and  a  half  added  to  our  working  popula-
tion between  1 88 1  and  1901  ?  Outside  the  manufacturing
and  extractive  industries  there  is  only  one  other  large  depart-
ment of  "  making  "  industry,  the  building  trades.  The  only
branch  of  "  making "  industry  besides  mining  which  has
shown  a  marked  advance  in  the  amount  of  occupation  it
affords  from  1881  to  1901  is  building,  which  absorbs  rather

*  "  Occupations  of  the  People,  1841 — 1881."


68  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

more  than  a  quarter  of  a  million  of  the  two  and  a  half
millions.  What  has  become  of  the  rest  of  the  increase?
The  answer  is  that  the  trades  engaged  in  distribution  and
transport  are  growing  quite  out  of  proportion  to  the  growth
of  the  population.  While  the  agricultural  class  has  largely
declined,  the  domestic  class  increased  but  slowly,  the  indus-
trial class  barely  kept  pace  with  the  growth  of  the  occupied
population  as  a  whole,  the  transport  class  has  increased  62
per  cent,  between  1881  and  1901,  and  the  commercial  class
no  less  than  85  per  cent.  When  we  look  more  closely  into
this  enormous  increase  of  the  classes  engaged  in  distributing
wealth,  we  find  that  "  commercial  clerks "  have  grown  in
twenty  years  from  181,487  to  307,889,  an  increase  about
twice  as  great  as  that  of  the  occupied  population  as  a  whole.
Bank  clerks  and  officials  have  increased  from  14,998  to
30,284,  and  insurance  agents  from  15,068  to  55,013.

§ 10. The  Abnormal  Growth  of  Retail  Traders.

Owing  to  the  fact  that  many  "  dealers  "  are  classed  with
11  makers  "  in  the  Census  returns,  it  is  not  possible  to  make
a  full  and  accurate  computation  of  the  growth  of  those
engaged  in  retail  trade.  But  the  following  comparison  of
those  engaged  in  retail  trades  in  1881  and  1891*  where  the
dealers  are  separated  from  the  makers  is  most  instructive  :

*  The  figures  for  1901  are  not  yet  available.


CAUSES OF WASTE


bg


Trades.

1881

1891

Increase or
decrease  per  cent.

Chemists

Booksellers

Stationers

Drapers

Haberdashers

Grocers

Poulterers  and  Fishmongers
Greengrocers, Fruiterers. .
Cheesemongers,  Buttermen.

Butchers

Coal  dealers

Ironmongers

General  Shopkeepers  . . .

19,000
9,910

15,241
82,362

9,565
129,818

21,497
29,614
4,397
81,702
20,401
16,122
54,860

21,930
•3,596
21,798

107,018
12,481

181,856

29,711

40,963

5,108

98,921

23,799
21,444
53,6o8

+ '5-4
+  37-2
+  43-o

4-  29.9

+  30.5

4-  40-1
+  38.2
+  38.3

4-  16.6
4-  21. 1
4-  10.7
4-  33.0
— 2.3

Total

494,471

632,233

+  27.9

§  11. The  Causes  of  Waste  of  Distributive  Power.

It  thus  appears  that,  in  spite  of  all  economies  of  con-
centration resulting  from  the  increased  amount  of  distribution
which  has  fallen  to  large  stores  and  universal  providers,
the  increase  in  the  number  of  retail  distributors  is  nearly
twice  that  of  the  occupied  classes  as  a  whole.  To  put  the
matter  succinctly,  a  smaller  proportion  of  the  population  is
engaged  in  ■  making "  the  increased  quantity  of  material
goods  which  are  consumed,  a  larger  proportion  in  distributing
them.  Nor  is  this  movement  adequately  explained  by  the
fact  that  distribution  has  not  shared  equally  with  manufacture
the  economies  of  modern  machinery  and  method.  For
the  large  growth  of  our  population  and  its  concentration
in  larger  towns  must  have  greatly  reduced  the  labour-cost
of  distributing  a  given  quantity  of  goods.  This  consideration,
taken  along  with  the  improvements  in  every  mode  of
transport,  would  enable  the  increased  quantity  of  modern


70 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

wealth  to  be  effectively  distributed  without  any  considerable
increase  of  the  labour  or  capital  engaged  in  distributive
industries.  Even  if  some  increase  of  distributors  be
economically  necessary,  it  will  not  be  denied  that  the
actual  increase  of  all  classes  of  middle-men  and  retailers
has  passed  far  beyond  this  wholesome  necessary  limit.
A  diminishing  proportion  of  commercial  effort  is  expended
in  the  actual  work  of  distribution,  an  increasing  proportion
in  the  work  of  getting  business.  A  proof  of  this  is  the
phenomenal  growth  of  commercial  travellers,  local  agents,
jobbers,  touts,  and  the  enormous  expenditure  in  every
form  of  advertisement.  The  actual  energy  given  out  in
trades,  directly  or  indirectly  concerned  in  distribution,  is
thus  swollen  far  beyond  the  demands  of  such  wholesome
and  effective  competition  as  will  ensure  for  the  consuming
public  a  cheap  and  rapid  service  of  supply.  The  keenness
of  competition  among  rival  distributors  is  admittedly  re-
sponsible for  much  of  the  adulteration  and  other  deceitful
practices  which  tend  to  the  deterioration  of  commodities.
Unfortunately,  we  possess  no  official  or  reliable  records
of  the  general  movements  in  retail  trade,  which  we  can
compare  with  the  statistics  of  wholesale  prices  prepared  by
Mr.  Sauerbeck.  It  is,  however,  generally  believed,  and  such
fragmentary  evidence  as  we  possess  accords  with  the  belief,
that  the  great  fall  of  wholesale  prices  since  1873  has  not
been  attended  by  a  commensurate  fall  of  retail  prices.

§  12. Why Waste  takes  a  Different  Form  in
DistribiUion  and  in  Manufactures.

Nor  is  it  unreasonable  that  this  should  be  the  case.
The  effects  of  competition  are  somewhat  different  in
manufacturing  and  in  distributing  industries. In  the  former


WASTE  IN  DISTRIBUTION  AND  IN  MANUFACTURES 7  I

an  excess  of  producing-power,  after  exhibiting  itself  in  a
comparatively  trifling  glut  of  actual  manufactured  goods,
shows  its  "  waste  "  in  the  form  <  >f  "  unemployed "  labour
and  capital,  which  operate  in  some  measure  as  a  check
upon  further  application  of  labour  and  capital.  In  the
latter,  no  such  natural  check  is  provided.  Small  quan-
tities of  capital,  unable  to  enter  manufacture  with  any
reasonable  prospect  of  success,  may  embark  in  distribution,
especially  in  retail  trade,  with  some  hope  of  attracting  to
their  businesses  a  fair  proportion  of  the  trade  of  others.
It  is  not  easy  for  a  new  business  to  succeed  even  in
retail  trade,  but  it  is  less  difficult  than  in  manufacture.
The  same  amount  of  business  may  thus  come  to  be
divided  among  a  larger  number  of  persons.  It  may  even
supply  a  livelihood  to  all,  on  the  single  condition  that  the
margin  of  profit  in  each  sale  is  larger;  which  means,  in  a
period  of  falling  wholesale  prices,  that  retail  prices  fall  more
slowly  and  more  slightly.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  this
is  a  true  description  of  the  actual  phenomena  exhibited
in  distributive  trade.  The  assumption  commonly  made
by  statesmen,  and  even  by  economists,  that  the  consumer
gains  the  advantage  of  the  full  decline  of  wholesale
prices,  and  that  such  decline  is  therefore  a  matter  of
comparative  indifference,  is  unwarranted.  The  cautious
opinion  expressed  by  J.  S.  Mill  has  been  closely  borne
out  by  the  experience  of  the  last  twenty  years.  "  Retail
price,  the  price  paid  by  the  actual  consumer,  seems  to
feel  very  slowly  and  imperfectly  the  effects  of  competition :
and  where  competition  does  exist,  it  often,  instead  of
lowering  prices,  merely  divides  the  higher  prices  among
a  larger  number  of  dealers."  *

*  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  vol.  ii.,  ch.  iv.  §  3.


72 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

In  other  words,  an  increased  proportion  of  the  prices
paid  by  consumers  goes  to  support  agents,  middle-men,
shopkeepers,  and  their  dependents,  who  thus  receive  a
growing  share  of  the  national  income  paid  for  services  of
distribution.  Without  seeking  to  disparage  the  value  of
genuine  services  of  necessary  distribution,  I  may  point
out  that  this  diseased  swelling  of  labour  and  capital  in
distributive  trade  represents  from  the  social  standpoint  a
waste  of  power  strictly  analogous  to  the  "  unemployment "
in  manufacture,  though  different  in  the  concrete  aspect  it
assumes.  In  distribution,  the  waste  does  not  for  the
most  part  show  itself  as  "  unemployed "  and  "  unpaid "
capital  and  labour,  but  as  unnecessary  reduplication  of
distributive  machinery.  In  any  scientific  treatment  of  the
"  unemployed "  question,  this  form  of  waste  must  rank
as  an  important  aspect  of  the  social  malady.

§  ij. False  Assumption  that  all  Power  to
Consume  Must  be  Exercised.

The  business  man  readily  admits  the  existence  of  an
excess  of  general  producing-power  in  forms  of  capital  and
labour  which  are  either  unemployed  or  wastefully  employed.
But  many  economic  theorists,  misled  by  loose  deductive
reasoning,  still  persist  in  their  denial  of  a  phenomenon
which  stares  the  practical  man  in  the  face.  It  is  not
possible,  they  urge,  that  a  general  excess  of  capital  and
labour  could  exist,  for  these  are  the  sole  requisites  of
production,  and  since  everything  that  is  produced  can  find
a  market  at  a  price,  whatever  can  be  produced  will  be
produced,  and  whatever  is  produced  will  be  consumed.
Now,  this  line  of  reasoning  is  thoroughly  fallacious.  Since
all  business  is  the  exchange  of  commodities  for  commodities,


MOTIVE  OF  PRODUCTION  73

it  is  evident  that  some  one  possesses  the  power  to  consume
whatever  can  be  produced.  It  may  also  be  asserted  that,
since  the  desires  of  man  are  unlimited,  and  many  keenly
felt  wants  remain  unsatisfied,  there  exists  a  desire  to  con-
sume whatever  can  be  produced.  But  in  order  to  an
"  effective  demand  "  the  power  to  consume  and  the  desire
to  consume  must  be  vested  in  the  same  persons.  The
denial  by  economists  of  the  possibility  of  general  excess
of  producing-power  involves  the  assumption  of  this  coinci-
dence. This  assumption  is,  however,  false.  Those  who
draw  profit,  interest,  and  rents  from  modern  manufactures
are  thereby  vested  with  the  power  to  consume  huge  quan-
tities of  cotton  and  other  textile  wares,  of  coals,  hardware,
pottery,  etc.,  but  they  have  the  desire  to  consume  a  com-
paratively small  quantity  of  these  commodities.  "But,"
it  may  be  urged,  "  they  will  have  the  desire  to  consume
other  commodities,  and  in  order  to  obtain  these  they  will
exchange  their  superfluous  cotton  and  iron  goods  with
others  who  want  to  consume  these  articles."  This,  however,
is  not  the  case.  After  a  certain  tolerably  high  accustomed
standard  of  consumption  has  been  attained  in  cotton  and
iron  wares,  and  in  other  articles  for  which  these  are
exchanged,  there  still  remains  a  large  surplus  power  to
consume  which  has  no  desire  behind  it  to  convert  it  into
effectual  demand.

§  14. Is  Desire  to  Consume  the  only  Motive
to  Production?

It  has  generally  seemed  to  economists  of  the  last  two
generations  a  sufficient  refutation  of  the  theory  of  over-
production to  assert  that  it  is  impossible,  and  to  assume
that this impossibility is  proved by asking  what  motive


74 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

prompts  a  person  to  produce  except  the  desire  to  consume
what  is  produced  or  its  equivalent.  "  Each  may  not  want
more  of  what  he  himself  produces,  but  each  wants  more
of  what  some  other  produces,  and  by  producing  what
the  other  wants,  hopes  to  obtain  what  the  other  produces.
There  will  always  be  consumption  for  everything  which
can  be  produced,  until  the  wants  of  all  who  possess  the
means  of  producing  are  completely  satisfied  and  the
production  will  not  increase  any  further."  *  Now  though
it  must  be  allowed  that  a  desire  to  consume  is  in  general
the  motive  force  behind  production,  it  does  not  operate
so  closely  and  so  generally  as  to  preclude  the  waste  of
over-production.  A  great  many  persons  in  whose  hands
rests  the  control  of  industry  are  not  regulated  in  the
quantity  of  production  which  they  set  on  foot  by  the
quantity  of  consumption  which  they  desire,  nor  indeed
does  the  desire  to  consume  form  the  whole  or  the  chief
part  of  their  conscious  motive  in  their  work  of  production.

§  75. Does  all  "  Saving " Give  Increased
Em  ft  loym  ent  ?

Mill  assumes  that  all  who  own  the  power  to  consume  want
to  consume  all  they  can  and  to  do  so  without  delay.

Now,  a  large  part  of  the  power  to  consume  is  in  the
hands  of  those  who  have  not  the  desire  to  consume.  What,
then,  do  these  men  desire  to  do?  They  desire  to  save.
But  saving,  if  we  look  behind  the  operation  of  putting
money  in  a  bank,  means  paying  labour  to  set  up  plant,
machinery,  and  other  material  forms  of  capital.  But  does
not  this  give  as  much  employment  to  capital  and  labour
as  the  same  power  used  to  demand  consumables?  Quite
*  J.  S.  Mill,  "Unsettled  Questions,"  p.  49.


SAVING AND INCREASED EMPLOYMENT  75

true,  the  "saving  "  which  employs  labour  to  build  a  factory
and  stock  it  with  machinery  will  cause  as  much  employ-
ment as  the  same  amount  of  spending,  though  not  more
employment,  as  J.  S.  Mill  sought  to  maintain.  Moreover,
in  the  one  case,  when  the  money  is  "  spent "  there  is
nothing  to  show  for  it,  in  the  other  case  there  is  a  factory
and  machinery.  But  when  our  theoretic  friend  goes  on
to  assume  that  this  factory  can  be  profitably  worked,  and
that  the  work  it  affords  signifies  a  net  increase  of  em-
ployment both  of  labour  and  capital,  he  jumps  to  a  con-
clusion which  is  quite  unwarranted.  It  can  only  be
profitably  worked  on  one  of  two  suppositions.  It  may  by
successful  competition  obtain  the  orders  which  would  have
gone  to  another  factory,  ousting  from  employment  the
capital  and  labour  there  engaged.  In  this  case  it  is  clear
that  no  general  increase  of  employment  has  taken  place.
An  individual  has  made  good  his  "saving,"  but  has  done
so  by  negativing  the  previous  "  saving  "  of  some  one  else ;
the  productive  power  of  the  community  is  increased,  but
no more  actual  production  than  before  is  brought  about.

The  other  supposition  is  that  the  demand  for  the  class
of  commodities  which  the  factory  makes  will  be  greater
in  the  future,  and  that  more  capital  and  labour  can
therefore  be  employed  in  the  trade.  So  far  as  this
supposition  is  valid,  the  "  saving "  is  socially  useful,  and,
indeed,  necessary;  but  it  should  be  plainly  recognised  that
the  dependence  of  capital  and  labour  for  employment
upon  a  rising  standard  of  consumption  places  an  absolute
limit  at  any  given  time  upon  socially  useful  saving.

It  is  therefore  not  true  that  the  existence  of  a  general
desire  for  increased  consumption  is  any  sufficient  guarantee
that too much  saving  will  not  take  place. Even  if  it  be


7  6 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

allowed  that  the  ultimate  object  of  persons  who  save  is
always  the  desire  to  consume  an  increased  quantity  in
the  future,  this  individual  policy  may  and  does  result
in  a  congestion  of  forms  of  capital  which  is  suicidal  from
the  collective  point  of  view.  In  a  society  composed  of
A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  any  three,  say  ABC,  might  save
as  much  as  they  liked,  or  each  and  all  might  save  a
definite  proportion  of  their  income,  but  any  policy  of  the
individual  members  which  collectively  exceeded  this  aggre-
gate would  be  wasteful.  Yet  it  might  be  quite  possible
that  all  individuals  in  this  over-saving  community  were
actuated  by  a  genuine  desire  to  consume  largely  in  some
distant  future.

An  individual  may  save  any  proportion  of  his  income,
provided  he  can  induce  others  to  spend  their  income
and  give  him  liens  upon  their  present  property  or  future
production.  But  the  proportion  of  a  community's  income
which  it  can  save  and  usefully  store  up  in  plant,  machinery
and  other  forms  of  capital  is  strictly  limited  by  the  rate
of  current  or  prospective  consumption.  Only  a  very  small
proportion  of  "  saving"  can  profitably  be  invested  in  forms
of  capital  that  fructify  in  the  distant  future;  the  current
or  immediately  prospective  rate  of  consumption  determines
pretty  closely  the  proportion  of  current  income  which  can
be  usefully  saved.

§  16. Excessive  Forms  of  Capital  do  Exist.

To  the  suggestion  that  an  excess  of  saving  is  possible
it  is  often  deemed  a  sufficient  answer  to  point  to  the
infinitude  of  human  wants  and  the  new  industrial  enter-
prises which  they  can  vitalise.  Why,  it  is  urged,  should
you assume that any trade will be over-stocked with


EXCESSIVE  FORMS  OF  CAPITAL DO  EXIST 77

new-saved  capital,  when  the  self-interest  of  savers  will
naturally  lead  them  to  prefer  new  uses.  With  the  pure
theory  of  this  answer  I  have  no  quarrel.  If  all  the  ■  saved"
incomes  do  in  fact  take  shape  in  fixed  forms  of  capital  which
supply  increased  consumption-goods  in  the  shape  of  new
public  or  private  comforts  and  conveniences  to  the  present  or
even  to  the  next  generation,  we  can  thoroughly  approve
this  saving :  it  is  no  cause  of  diminished  employment.

Well,  it  may  be  said,  does  that  not  settle  the  matter?
Are  there  not  ample  opportunities  for  the  supply  of  new
or  improved  public  and  private  needs?  Are  our  towns
as  well-built,  commodious  and  beautiful  as  they  might
be  ?  Are  they  perfectly  supplied  with  water,  lighting,  trans-
port, and  other  services  ?  Could  not  public  education
provide  a  good  field  of  investment  for  capital  and  labour
both  on  the  material  and  intellectual  planes?  Is  it  not
self-evident  that  without  passing  the  barrier  of  wholesome
personal  conveniences  a  vast  and  ever-growing  number
of  good  and  reasonable  wants  remain  unsatisfied  because
there  is  no  capital  and  labour  directed  to  their  satisfaction  ?
How  in  the  face  of  this  can  over-saving  be  possible  ?
Still  more  how  can  it  be  asserted  to  actually  exist  ?

The  answer  is  that  a  sufficient  portion  of  new  savings
does  not  in  fact  seek  these  new  avenues  of  socially  useful
investment,  that  a  large  proportion  of  it  does  flow  into
channels  which  are  admittedly  full,  and  that  when  this
congestion  is  made  manifest,  much  fresh  "saving"  instead
of  seeking  new  fields  of  investment  accumulates  in  the
hands  of  bankers  and  other  persons.  That  portion  of
new  savings  which  embodies  itself  in  forms  of  capital  that
satisfy  new  wants  is  both  morally  and  economically  justi-
fied : that portion which embodies  itself  in  the  socially


78 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

useless  multiplication  of  existing  forms  of  capital  is  harmless
as  regards  employment  so  long  as  it  continues  to  embody  itself
thus,  but  when  by  clogging  the  wheels  of  industry  it  stops
the  machinery  and  checks  the  investment  of  new  "savings",
it  contributes  to  that  state  of  under- employment  and
under-production  which  we  call  "  tradedepression."

§  ij. The Theoretic  Limit  of  Socially Useful
Forms  of  Capital.

The  theory  that  all  new  savings  should  and  must  find
socially  useful  employment  is  contradicted  by  the  facts.
It  is  also  unsound  as  a  theory.  Those  who  urge  it  show
no  motive  force  sufficient  to  compel  new  savings  to  invest
themselves  in  socially  useful  ways.  The  individual  saver
does  not  want  to  raise  the  general  level  of  consumption,
he  simply  wants  to  find  a  remunerative  investment  for
his  capital.  This  he  can  often  find,  and  still  oftener
thinks  he  can  find,  in  setting  up  new  forms  of  capital  in
trades  which  are  already  sufficiently  provided  for  the  supply
of  current  consumption.  No  guarantee  can  be  offered  to
him  that  that  heterogeneous  body  of  consumers  called  the
public  will  pay  him  a  higher  rate  of  interest  for  putting
his  savings  into  untried  ventures  which  shall  stimulate
and  satisfy  a  new  want.

Public  improvements  of  an  enduring  order  do  indeed
absorb  a  large  and  a  growing  quantity  of  new  saving.
But  even  here  the  quantity  of  capital  which  the  most
enlightened  public  body  could  safely  apply,  with  reason-
able regard  to  social,  industrial,  and  other  changes  in  the
future,  is  strictly  limited  at  any  given  time.  A  lavish  ex-
penditure with  a  view  to  a  far  distant  consumption  would
often  be  a  wasteful  and  an  antisocial  policy.


EXCESSIVE FORMS STOP PRODUCTION  79

Indeed,  as  matters  actually  stand,  such  capital  expen-
diture by  public  bodies  is  very  limited,  and  there  are  no
sufficient  economic  powers  to  drive  the  requisite  propor-
tion of  new  savings  into  the  ideally  correct  channels.
Hence  the  frequent  congestion  of  all  ordinary  channels
of  investment,  and  the  excess  of  loanable  capital.
It  is  quite  possible  that  as  large  a  proportion  of  our
present  general  income  as  is  now  "  saved  "  might  under
different  economic  conditions  be  advantageously  applied
in  forms  of  new  capital.  But  as  matters  actually  stand
some  of  it  represents  "  oversaving "  and  brings  about
the  state  of  congestion  and  stoppage  of  industry  which
has  for  one  of  its  leading  aspects  the  malady  of  ■  unem-
ployment."

§  18. How  Excessive  Forms  of  Capital  Stop
Production.

Our  saving  class  is  therefore  not  necessarily  causing
an  increase  of  "  employment "  by  paying  workers  to  put
up  more  factories  instead  of  using  their  moneys  to
demand  consumables.  So  long  as  the  "  saving "  is  ac-
tually in  progress— i.e.,  so  long  as  the  factory  and  machin-
ery are  being  made — the  net  employment  of  the  community
is  just  as  large  as  if  the  money  were  spent  to  demand
commodities;  more  labour  is  engaged  in  making  factories,
less  in  working  them.  But  after  the  new  factories  are
made,  they  can  only  be  worked  on  condition  that  there
is  an  increase  of  consumption  correspondent  to  the  in-
crease of  producing-power — i.e.,  on  condition  that  a
sufficient  number  of  persons  are  actuated  by  motives
different  from  those  which  animated  the  "  saving  "  class,  and
will  consent  to  give  validity  to  the  saving  of  the  former  by


80 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

"  spending "  on  commodities  an  increased  proportion  oi
their  incomes.  Where  no  such  expectation  is  realised,
an  attempt  to  "  operate "  the  new  factories  does  not  give
any  net  increase  of  employment,  it  only  gluts  the  markets,
drives  down  prices,  closes  the  weaker  factories,  imparts
irregularity  to  work,  and  generally  disorganises  trade.
The  frequent  recurrence  of  these  phenomena  in  most
departments  of  trade  is  the  strongest  presumptive  evidence
of  an  attempt  of  the  capitalist  classes  to  place  and  to
operate  more  capital  than  is  required  to  maintain  the
current  flow  of  consumption.  An  individual  may  be  a
rich  miser,  a  community  cannot.  To  the  average  reason-
able man  it  is  a  self-evident  fact  that  a  community  cannot
advantageously  save  more  than  a  certain  proportion  of
its  annual  income,  unless  for  the  express  purpose  of  con-
suming a  larger  proportion  at  some  not  distant  date.

§  ip. The  Fallacy  that  Saving  Implies  no
Reduced  Consumption.

The  economist  is,  however,  too  often  blinded  by  the
acceptance  of  a  strange  sophism  to  the  affect  that  "  saving
implies  no  reduction  in  current  consumption,"  a  wild
notion  which  is  due  to  a  failure  to  analyse  the  process
of  saving.  The  following  simple  refutation  of  this  theory
will  suffice.  Suppose  the  case  of  two  economic  commun-
ities, each  with  a  net  annual  income  of  £1,500,000,000.
One  nation  spends  the  whole,  saving  nothing;  this  means
that,  after  providing  against  wear  and  tear  of  existing
plant,  all  the  productive  energy  is  devoted  to  producing
"consumables"  which  are  consumed.  The  other  nation
"  saves "  £200,000,000  annually :  this  means  that,  after
the same provision  for wear and tear,  two-fifteenths  of


THE LIMIT TO SOCIAL SAVING  Si

the  productive  energy  is  devoted,  Dot  to  producing  "  con-
sumables," but  to  setting  up  new  plant,  machinery,  and
unfinished  goods,  which  are,  in  their  form  or  their
economic  position,  not  consumable,  and  which  are,  in
fact,  not  consumed.  It  would  seem  unnecessary  to  thus
demonstrate  that  the  consumption  of  the  latter  nation
amounted  to  £1,300,000,000  (i.e.,  that  15 — 2  =  13),  were
it  not  for  the  general  prevalence  of  the  notion  that  saving
implies  no  reduction  in  consumption.  Adam  Smith  is
perhaps  chiefly  responsible  for  the  misconception,  by
urging  that  "What  is  annually  saved  is  as  regularly  con-
sumed as  what  is  annually  spent,  and  nearly  in  the  same
time  too,  but  it  is  consumed  by  a  different  set  of  people."  *
The  heart  of  the  fallacy,  which  has  been  effectively
exposed  by  various  writers,  consists  in  failing  to  perceive
that  the  difference  between  "  spending "  and  "  saving "
is  that  the  former,  as  an  economic  cause,  causes  "  consum-
ables "  to  be  made,  while  the  latter,  so  far  as  it  finds
an  embodiment  in  actual  forms  of  capital,  causes  ■  non-
consumables  "  to  be  made.  The  forms  of  capital  which
represent  "  saving "  correspond  to  the  extra  consumption
which  would  have  taken  place  if  the  persons  saving  had
not  saved,  but  had  applied  the  money  in  demand  for
consumables.

§  20. The  Limit  to  Social  Saving. — No  Limit
to  Individual  Saving.

This  simple  truth  that  real  saving  implies  diminished  con-
sumption for  the  time  being  is  the  kernel  of  a  true  understand-
ing of  the"  unemployed  "  question. If  we  find  labour  and

*  "Wealth  of  Nations,"  p.  1496,  McCulloch  ;  cf.  Mill's  "Polit-
ical Economy," vol.  i.  ch.  v.  §  6.

6


8  5 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

capital  unemployed  in  our  manufactures,  if  we  find  them
wastefully  employed  in  our  distributing  industry,  it  can  only
mean  an  undue  diminution  of  consumption,  or,  in  other
words,  an  attempt  to  establish  as  "  savings "  a  larger
number  of  forms  of  capital  than  are  economically  required
to  assist  in  maintaining  current  or  prospective  consumption.

These  results  of  over-saving  are  not,  of  course,  made
manifest  at  once.  So  long  as  the  over-saving  is  being
stored  in  new  plant  or  machinery  and  so  long  as  this
new  plant  is  engaged  in  turning  out  increased  supply  of
goods,  there  is  no  reduction  of  employment  and  no  fall
of  general  prices.  It  is  when  the  admitted  glut  of  goods
checks  further  investment  and  over-saving  can  find  no
vent  that  prices  fall,  production  is  slackened  and  unem-
ployment shows  itself.

The  failure  to  give  proper  recognition  to  the  obvious  fact
that  the  quantity  of  serviceable  forms  of  capital  at  the  several
stages  of  production  is  absolutely  limited  by  the  rates  at
which  consumable  goods  are  drawn  out  of  the  industrial
machine,  arises  from  the  refusal  to  consider  industry  from
the  social  organic  standpoint.  Because  an  individual  or
a  class  of  individuals  can  "  save"  without  any  other  limit
than  that  imposed  by  the  necessity  of  living,  it  has  been
wrongly  supposed  that  the  same  rule  holds  good  of  a
whole  community.  This  blind  individualistic  conception
of  industry  was  aided  by  the  recognition  of  the  moral
and  material  value  which  attaches  to  the  exercise  of
effectual  thrift  by  individual  members  of  a  society,  and
which  within  the  limits  imposed  by  the  aggregate  consump-
tion must  be  recognised  as  necessary  and  beneficial  to
society.  Although  the  famous  dictum  of  Adam  Smith
that  "  the  study  of  his  own  advantage  naturally,  or  rather


SELF-INTEREST  CAUSES WASTE  OF  CAPITAL 83

necessarily,  Leads  him  to  prefer  that  employment  which
is  most  advantageous  to  the  society,"  *  has  been  largely
replaced  in  modern  minds  by  a  perception  that  "  the
mere  conflicts  of  private  interests  will  never  produce  a
well-ordered  commonwealth  of  labour,"!  the  implications
of  this  new  doctrine  have  not  been  properly  digested.
Many  of  those  who  most  fully  recognise  the  necessity  of
imposing  restraints  upon  "conflicts  of  private  interests"
in  the  competition  of  the  labour-market  and  in  the  sale
of  goods,  still  hold  that  the  selfishness  of  individual
■  savers"  can  be  relied  upon  to  secure  the  most  economical
disposition  of  capital  at  the  several  points  of  the  industrial
machine.  We  have  seen  that  this  is  not  true  in  fact,
that  the  operation  of  saving  individuals  under  the  existing
industrial  dispensation  leads  to  a  wasteful  accumulation
of  forms  of  capital.  It  remains  to  ask,  Why  should  this
be  so ;  why  should  the  free  selfish  action  of  saving  in-
dividuals disturb  the  right  adjustment  between  "  saving"
and  "  spending"  from  the  standpoint  of  the  community  ?
Why  should  it  be  possible  for  us  to  endeavour  to  establish
new  capital  to  the  extent  of  £200,000,000  a  year,  when
£150,000,000  might,  perhaps,  suffice  to  supply  the  current
rate  of  consumption,  increased  by  £50,000,000?

§  21. How  Self-interest  of  Individuals  Causes
Social  Waste  of  Capital.

We  have  already  seen  that  in  retail  trade  the  self-
interest  of  individual  traders  may  and  does  lead  them  to
establish  a  far  larger  number  of  shops  than  are  required
for the effective  distribution  of  commodities  in  a  district.

* "Wealth  of  Nations,"  book  iv.,  chap.  ii.

f  Article  on  Political  Economy  in  "Encyclopaedia  Britannica."


84  THE PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

Similarly  in  manufacture  it  is  often  to  the  interest  of  a
capitalist  to  set  up  and  to  work  new  spinning-mills  01
iron-works,  although  there  may  already  exist  enough  mills
and  works  to  supply  every  possible  demand,  provided  he
sees  a  fair  prospect  of  getting  away  from  his  competitors
a  sufficient  proportion  of  the  trade.  Nor  is  it  an  ade-
quate reply  to  say  that  the  new-comer  can  only  get  the
trade  by  producing  a  better  or  a  cheaper  article,  and  that
in  this  way  the  community,  as  a  body  of  consumers,  is
advantaged  by  his  action.  In  the  first  place,  this  state-
ment is  not  true ;  it  is  commonly  by  superiority  in  the
arts  of  competition,  which  do  not  necessarily  involve
superiority  of  production,  that  the  modern  business  firm
is  able  to  get  business.  Secondly,  even  supposing  that
the  new  capital  is  made  effective  by  some  trifling  economy
in  methods  of  production,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the
consuming  public  gains  by  the  lowering  of  prices,  or  gains
to  a  corresponding  extent.  For  we  have  already  seen
that  the  constant  cutting  of  prices  in  manufacturing  trades
has  been  a  chief  operative  cause  of  the  multiplication  of
middle-men  and  retailers,  whose  maintenance  prevents  a
fall  of  retail  prices  equivalent  to  the  fall  of  wholesale
prices.  Lastly,  the  fall  of  retail  prices  to  the  consuming
public  must  not  be  taken  as  the  just  and  final  test  and
measure  of  a  net  industrial  gain  to  the  community.  The
gain  may  be  bought  too  dearly  if  it  involves,  as  it  often
does,  a  large  and  unforeseen  displacement  of  capital  and
labour  in  earlier  use,  the  vested  interests  of  which  receive
neither  compensation  nor  consideration  under  the  stern  rule
of  competitive  trade.  This  is  no  plea  for  conservatism  in
industry,  or  for  the  rejection  of  new  and  improved  forms
of machinery and method. It is only designed as a


INDIVIDUAL AND  SOCIAL  ECONOMY  85

protest  against  the  waste  of  the  wrecking  policy  in  modem
commerce,  by  which  old  businesses  are  ruined  by  the
speculative  operation  of  new  competitors  who  bring  with
them  no  intrinsic  superiority  of  production  sufficient  to
compensate  the  destruction  of  capital  value  and  the
disturbance  of  employment  which  they  cause.

§22. The  Difference  between  Individual  and
Social  Economy.

It  is  important  to  recognise  that  an  economy  of  pro-
duction which  is  sufficient  to  enable  a  new  firm  to  cut
prices  and  to  get  business  is  not  necessarily  an  economy
at  all  from  the  standpoint  of  the  whole  commercial  com-
munity. If  a  new  firm  can  set  up  plant  to  produce
one-tenth  per  cent,  more  cheaply  the  goods  which  are
now  supplied  by  other  firms,  it  will  clearly  be  to  its
interest  to  do  so.  But  if  an  established  firm  discovered
this  new  cheaper  method  of  production,  it  would  only
set  up  the  new  plant  on  condition  that  the  cheapening
of  production  was  sufficiently  great  to  compensate  for  the
cancelling  of  the  old  plant  with  which  it  had  operated
hitherto.  The  new  firm  would  not  take  into  consideration
the  cancelling  of  old  capital,  the  established  firm  would
set  this  against  the  advantages  of  the  new  method,  and
would  only  adopt  the  new  method,  if  there  was  a
net  economy.  Now  the  industrial  community,  which  in-
cludes all  its  members  and  their  property,  may,  for  the
purpose  of  this  argument,  be  regarded  as  the  owners  of
all  the  forms  of  capital;  their  net  interest  then  is  measured
not  by  the  advantage  of  the  new  competing  firm,  but
by  that  of  the  firm  which  owns  the  older  forms  of  capital


86  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

which  it  is  proposed  to  displace.  It  follows  then  that  in
a  competitive  society,  it  may  be  the  distinct  interest  of
individuals  to  set  up  "  savings "  in  new  forms  of  capital,
which,  having  no  regard  to  the  destruction  of  the  value
of  older  forms  of  capital,  confer  no  net  economic  advantage
on  the  community.

This  free  play  of  individual  self-interest  in  saving  leads
to  a  purchase  of  each  step  of  industrial  progress  by  a
most  expensive  cancelment  of  old  "  savings."  Since  obsolete
forms  do  not  at  once  perish,  but  struggle  to  keep  the
breath  of  industrial  life  and  to  play  their  accustomed  part,
we  find  in  existence  at  any  given  time  a  large  excess  of
plant  of  various  kinds  beyond  what  is  fully  utilised  for
actual  work  of  production.

§  2j. A  Nation  is  not  a  Community.

In  ascribing  necessary  limits  to  the  "savings"  of  a
community,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  modern
industry  a  "  nation"  is  by  no  means  coterminous  with  a
"community."  Every  year  more  and  more  the  whole  body
of  nations,  which  are  related  by  close  ties  in  common
world-markets,  or  are  otherwise  in  direct  or  indirect  commer-
cial relations  with  one  another,  must  be  regarded  as  a
single  commercial  community.  This  being  so,  it  is  clear
that  no  absolute  limit  is  set  at  any  given  time  to  the
"  savings "  of  a  single  nation,  other  than  the  total  field
of  investment  of  the  industrial  world.  It  would  therefore
follow  that  not  only  is  there  no  theoretic  limit  to  the
proportion  of  his  income  which  any  individual  Englishman
might  legitimately  save,  but  that  no  limit  could  be  placed
upon  the  proportion  of  the  national  income  which  can  be
saved,  provided  that  the  surplus  savings  beyond  what  can


A NATION IS  NOT  A COMMUNITY  87

find  useful  occupation  in  home  trade  dispose  themselves  in
foreign  countries.  Since  our  enquiry  into  the  facts  of
Unemployment  was  chiefly  confined  to  England,  it  may
seem  that  the  wider  causal  treatment  is  not  strictly
relevant.  It  is  indeed  quite  true  that  here  as  elsewhere,
in  all  industrial  problems,  the  international  factor  is  of  so
great  importance  that  a  full  scientific  investigation  should
stand  upon  a  basis  of  international  statistics.  These  we
cannot  yet  obtain  with  any  degree  of  accuracy.  There
is,  however,  we  have  seen,  a  general  agreement  both  among
business  men  and  scientific  experts  that  those  phenomena
of  depressed  trade  which  we  study  chiefly  in  England  an<?
America  are  simultaneously  visible  in  different  shapes  ank
degrees  throughout  those  other  countries  which  make  up
the  industrial  world.  Since  the  money-market  is  the  most
perfect  of  world-markets,  the  unimpeachable  testimony
to  a  large  and  general  glut  of  loanable  capital  affords
conclusive  evidence  that  the  "  unemployed "  question  on
the  side  of  capital  is  of  general  application.  On  the  side
of  labour  the  gigantic  armaments  maintained  by  certain
continental  countries  absorb  large  masses  of  labour  which
would  otherwise  swell  the  ranks  of  "  unemployed "  or
displace  those  at  present  in  work.  Many  structural  differ-
ences of  industrial  society  in  less  developed  countries
conceal  the  waste,  which  there  is  every  reason  to  believe
exists.

Lastly  it  does  not  devolve  on  me  to  prove  that  all  the
phenomena  which  we  have  found  in  England  exist  elsewhere,
in  order  to  show  that  there  exists  "  over-saving "  and  an
excess  of  forms  of  capital  in  the  whole  international
community.  If  there  were  no  "  unemployment "  of  capital
and labour  in  England,  that  would  not  prove  there  were


88 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

no  unemployment  in  the  whole  community,  but  might  be
attributable  to  the  superior  ability  of  English  capital  and
labour  to  find  employment.  But  if  in  any  considerable
part  of  the  industrial  community  of  nations  such  general
"  unemployment  "  or  excess  of  producing-power  does  exist,
it  is  proof  of  the  over-saving  of  the  community,  whether
it  is  also  found  in  other  nations  of  the  community  or  not.

§24. The  Motives  of  Under- Consumption.
A  Natural  Law  of  Consumption.

But  thus  far  I  have  only  explained  the  mechanism  of
over-capitalisation,  the  central  fact  of  the  unemployed
question.  What  are  the  motive  forces  which  act  upon
individuals  impelling  them  to  a  line  of  action  which,  from
the  wider  standpoint  of  the  community,  is  uneconomical?
Why  does  the  free  play  of  individual  interests  fail  to
secure  the  interest  of  the  whole  community?

The  answer  to  this  vital  question  is  found  in  the  region
of  Distribution.  The  reason  why  attempts  are  made  by
individuals  to  establish  more  forms  of  capital  than  are
socially  required,  is  that  they  possess  certain  elements  of
income  which  are  not  earned  by  effort,  and  which  are  therefore
not  required  to  satisfy  any  present  legitimate  wants.  In  spite
of  all  attempts  to  make  an  artificial  severance  between  a
"  producing  "  and  a  "  consuming  "  class,  the  natural  relation
between  production  and  consumption,  between  effort  and
satisfaction,  exercises  a  strong  influence  in  the  social  economy.
It  is  possible  for  individuals  and  for  classes  who  draw  large
incomes  ahem  vultus  sndore,  or  without  any  considerable  con-
tribution of  effort,  to  be  large  and  profuse  consumers.  But,  after
all,  the  law  which  relates  effort  to  satisfaction  is  a  "  natural "
law,  which,  finding  its  simplest  expression  in  the  physical


MOTIVES  OF  UNDER-CONSUMFTION  89

fact  that  a  man  cannot  eat  and  digest  a  good  dinner
unless  he  has  made  some  output  of  physical  energy  in
exercise,  penetrates  in  some  unseen  way  the  whole  region
of  consumption,  denying  satisfaction  that  is  not  compensated
by  some  corresponding  personal  effort.  This  "  natural "
law  finds  an  economical  expression  in  the  fact  that  an
attempt  to  be  a  very  large  consumer  and  a  very  small
producer  in  the  long  run  defeats  itself,  and,  when  it
cannot  by  force  of  social  circumstances  stimulate  production,
it  limits  consumption.

This,  interpreted  into  simple  language,  means  that  a  man
who  draws  a  large  income  without  working  for  it  cannot
and  does  not  spend  it.  This  will  seem  to  some  a  strange
assertion,  at  variance  with  the  lavish  luxury  imputed  to
and  practised  by  many  members  of  the  upper  unemployed
class,  but  it  is  literally  true.  Though  the  bulk  of  the  painful
abstinence  and  thrift  in  our  modern  communities  is  practised
by  the  working  and  poorer  trading  and  professional  classes,
the  bulk  of  the  "  saving "  is  effected  by  the  wealthy.
The  accumulated  savings  of  the  manual  workers  of  the
country,  even  if  we  place  to  their  account  the  whole  of
the  £200,000,000,  which  in  round  figures  represents  the
total  capital  of  savings  banks,  trade  unions,  benefit,  building,
co-operative  and  mutual  societies  of  every  kind,  does  not
amount  to  more  than  two  per  cent,  of  the  total  accumulated
wealth  of  the  country.  Although  we  have  no  means  of
exactly  apportioning  the  ownership  of  capital  value  among
the  various  classes  of  the  community,  we  know  that  a  large
proportion  represents  the  accumulation  of  the  surplus
income  of  the  wealthy  classes  after  their  wholesome  and
even  their  luxurious  wants  are  satisfied.  The  portentous
growth  of  the  capital  wielded  by  a  few  successful  business


go THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

men  in  America  affords  an  extreme  case  ot  the  self-
accumulative  power  of  capital.  There  are  on  both  sides
of  the  Atlantic  a  small  number  of  families  whose  most
profuse  expenditure  yet  leaves  an  enormous  surplus  income
to  accumulate.  "  I  can  do  nothing  with  my  income,"
said  Mr.  J.  J.  Astor,  "  but  buy  more  land,  build  more
houses,  and  lend  money  on  mortgage.  In  short,  I  am
found  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  more  than  that
I  cannot  get  out  of  my  money."  The  absorption  of
interest  and  the  specialisation  of  activities  required  for  the
successful  practice  of  money-making  are  commonly  such
as  to  leave  undeveloped  or  to  disable  the  capacities  for
spending  even  upon  the  lower  planes  of  material  enjoyment.
Hence  "  we  see  as  a  rule  that  men  who  have  made  money
in  business  are  not  great  spenders  of  it  in  the  present,
and  have  often  no  other  notion  of  spending  it  than  to
make  new  businesses  to  bring  them  in  future  returns."*

Turning  from  these  leviathans  to  the  merely  wealthy
classes,  we  find  most  of  them  living  well  within  their
incomes  and  furnishing  large  sums  for  investment.  It
would,  I  think,  be  pretty  safe  to  conclude  that  a  very
large  percentage  of  incomes  received  as  rents  and  interest
are  not  used  for  current  expenditure,  but  are  left  to  grow
by  compound  interest.  Since  these  elements  of  income
are  not  earned  by  present  efforts,  they  are  not,  as  a  rule,
required  to  satisfy  present  desires.

In  thus  stating  my  position,  I  do  not  wish  to  be  under-
stood as  denying  the  utility  or  even  the  "  productive
power"  of  that  abstinence  which  may  rightly  rank  as
"  present  effort "  in  the  case  of  the  savings  of  less  wealthy

*  Dr.  Bonar, "Philosophy  and  Political  Economy,"  p.  222.


EXCESS  OF  CAPITAL  AND  M  UNEARNED"  INCOMES 9 1

members  of  the  community.  My  point  is  simply  this,
that  a  large  proportion  of  "  new  capital  "  does  not  represent
"  saving "  due  to  painful  abstinence,  careful  postponement
of  present  to  future  use,  but  represents  the  merely
automatic  accumulation  of  an  idle  surplus  of  income  after
all  genuine  and  wholesome  needs  are  fully  satisfied.
Where  incomes  flow  in,  yielding  a  power  of  consumption
wholly  disproportionate  to  the  output  of  personal  effort,
a  natural  tendency  to  "  save "  is  manifested,  which  is
sharply  distinguishable  from  the  reasonable  "  saving "
made  out  of  legitimate  earnings.  It  is  this  automatic
"  saving "  which  upsets  the  balance  between  consumption
and  producing-power,  and  which  from  the  social  standpoint
may  be  classed  as  "over-saving."  No  class  of  men  whose
"  savings "  are  made  out  of  their  hard-won  earnings  is
likely  to  oversave,  for  each  unit  of  "  capital "  will  represent
a  real  want,  a  piece  of  legitimate  consumption  deferred.
But  where  "savings"  represent  the  top  portion  of  large
incomes,  drawn  from  economic  rents  of  land,  profits  of
speculation,  high  interest  of  capital  derived  from  monopolies,
no  natural  limit  is  set  upon  the  amount  which  is  saved.

§  25. Excess  of  Capital  a  Result  of
u  Unearned"  Incomes.

If  this  reasoning  is  correct,  the  over-capitalisation  which
is  found  to  exist  is  identified  with  those  elements  of
individual  incomes  which  are  unearned  in  the  sense  that
their  "incoming"  is  not  attended  by  any  corresponding
"  outgoing "  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  recipient.  This
is  no  doubt  largely  an  a  priori  argument,  but  it  contains
the  only  hypothesis  which  serves  to  explain  the  facts.
This hypothesis may be formally summarised in the


0  2 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

following  terms.  Modern  machinery  and  methods  of
production  have  brought  about  a  vast  and  continuous
increase  in  the  power  of  producing  wealth :  the  rate  of
consumption  has  likewise  risen,  but  less  rapidly.  This
decrepancy  in  the  pace  of  progress  is  manifested  in  the
existence  of  a  permanent  surplus  of  producing-power — *'.*.,
though  every  producing-power  implies  the  existence  of  a
corresponding  consuming-power  the  latter  is  not  fully
utilised.  This  failure  to  fully  utilise  consuming-power
is  due  to  the  fact  that  much  of  it  is  owned  by  those
who,  having  already  satisfied  all  their  strong  present
desires,  have  no  adequate  motive  for  utilising  it  in  the
present,  and  therefore  allow  it  to  accumulate.

§  26.  No  Repudiation  of  Uses  of  Individual

Thrift.

To  all  who  have  followed  carefully  the  line  of  reasoning
adopted  here  it  ought  to  be  manifest  that  no  depreciation
of  the  merit  and  uses  of  individual  "thrift"  is  intended
or  conveyed.  But  so  firmly  implanted  in  the  mind  of
most  men  is  the  individualist  conception  of  the  commercial
community,  that  they  are  exceedingly  apt  to  transfer  the
limit  set  upon  the  "  saving "  of  a  community  to  the  case
of  an  individual.  The  temptation  to  defend  an  orthodox
position  in  "  economics  "  by  representing  its  assailants  as
engaged  in  an  insidious  attack  upon  the  character  and
moral  habits  of  the  members  of  the  working  classes  has
proved  too  powerful  for  many  critics.  It  may  therefore
be  well  to  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  distinct  pronounce-
ment to  the  effect  that  an  acceptance  of  the  doctrine,
that  the  quantity  of  socially  useful  "saving"  for  a
community at a given time is limited,  does  not  in  any


EFFECT  OF UNDER-CONSUMPTION  93

shape  or  degree  impair  the  obligation  of  individuals  to
make  provision  out  of  their  current  incomes  for  future
contingencies  of  sickness,  unemployment,  old  age,  etc.,
nor  does  it  lend  the  least  suggestion  of  disparagement  to
any  policy  of  "saving,"  either  on  the  part  of  an  individual
or  a  community,  which  takes  the  shape  of  deferred
consumption.  Such  right  distribution  of  spending-power
over  periods  of  time  belongs  to  the  conduct  of  every
rational  man  or  society  of  men.  The  only  limit  is  that
imposed  upon  the  total  fund  of  sound  investment  at  any
given  time  by  the  quantity  of  current  consumption  in  the
community,  and  the  impossibility  of  forecasting  and  pro-
viding for  any  save  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  con-
sumption of  the  future.

Appendix  B.
Effect  of  Under- Consumption  on  Employment.

It  seems  best  to  reserve  one  important  point  in  the
Economics  of  Saving  for  separate  statement  here.  The
admission  made  in  the  text  of  this  chapter  that  over-
saving or  the  establishment  of  socially  unnecessary  forms
of  capital  gives  as  much  employment  while  it  is  going  on
as  spending  does,  and  that  the  attempt  to  work  an
excessive  number  of  factories,  etc.,  may  for  a  time  yield
full  employment,  is  liable  to  be  misunderstood.  It
may  appear  that,  after  all,  no  net  increase  of  employment
would  be  caused  by  a  well-adjusted  balance  between
saving  and  spending,  and  that  the  malady  is  only  one
affecting  the  distribution  of  employment,  and  not  the
total volume; that the only  effect of  over-saving  is  to


94 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

balance  periods  of  under-employment  and  over-employment
against  one  another.

Now  I  think  this  conclusion  is  not  well  founded.  The
following  line  of  illustration  will,  I  think,  make  it  apparent
that  a  net  loss  of  employment  over  a  long  period  is
caused  by  under  consumption  and  not  merely  a  mal-
distribution of  employment.

In  order  to  test  the  case,  take  a  community  with  stable
population  where  there  has  existed  a  right  economic  rela-
tion between  forms  of  capital  and  rate  of  consumption.
Suppose  an  attempt  is  initiated  to  increase  saving  by
abstention  from  consumption  of  some  class  of  goods,  say,
Cotton.  Increased  saving  has  no  legitimate  economic
channel,  if  we  suppose  this  parsimonious  policy  is  to
continue  and  not  to  be  balanced  by  an  early  period  of
abnormal  spending.  Since  no  trade  requires  increase  of
capital,  the  new  savings  may  as  well  be  invested  in  the
form  of  new  cotton  mills  as  in  any  other  way.  Let  us
suppose  that  the  over-saving  of  the  first  year  is  capitalised
in  this  form.  What  has  occurred  during  this  first  year
is  that  an  increased  employment  of  capital  and  labour
in  making  cotton  mills  has  balanced  a  diminished  employ-
ment in  making  cotton  goods.  Assuming  an  absolute
fluidity  of  capital  and  labour,  the  net  employment  for  the
comn  unity  is  not  affected  by  the  change.  People  have
simply  been  paid  to  make  cotton  mills  instead  of  to  make
cotton  goods.  At  the  end  of  the  year  there  exists  an
excess  of  cotton  mills  over  what  would  have  been  required
if  consumption  of  cotton  goods  had  stood  firm,  a  double
excess  over  what  is  needed  to  supply  the  now  reduced
demand  for  cotton  goods.  If  it  seems  unfair  to  anyone
that  we  should apply the over-saving  to  the  only  trade


EFFECT  OF  UNDER-CONSUMPTION  95

where  the  demand  is  absolutely  reduced,  I  can  only  reply
that  it  simplifies  the  argument  and  makes  no  real  difference
in  its  validity.  If  we  assumed  the  "saving"  to  be  equally
distributed  among  all  trades,  then  at  the  end  of  the  year
all  trades  would  be  to  a  minor  degree  in  the  same  con-
dition as  the  cotton  trade  is  according  to  my  illustration.

If  savers  were  mad  enough  to  continue  this  policy,
preferring  the  growing  ownership  of  useless  cotton-mills
to  the  satisfaction  of  consuming  commodities,  the  process
might  continue  indefinitely,  without  reducing  or  affecting
in  any  way  the  aggregate  employment  of  labour  and
capital.  It  would  simply  mean  that  a  number  of  persons
take  their  satisfaction  in  seeing  new  cotton-mills  rising  and
going  to  decay.

But  it  is  conceivable  that  in  the  second  year  of  over-
saving, the  savers  instead  of  continuing  to  pay  people
to  put  up  more  mills  might  employ  people  to  operate  the
excess  of  cotton-mills,  lending  their  money  to  buy  raw
material  and  to  pay  wages.  Cotton  goods  which  ex
hypothesi  can  find  no  markets  are  thus  accumulated.  If
the  savers  chose  to  take  their  pleasure  in  such  a  way,
they  might  go  on  indefinitely  without  the  aggregate  of
employment  of  capital  or  labour  being  affected.  If  they
continued  this  impolicy  for  a  twelvemonth,  we  should  say
that  whereas  in  the  first  year  they  saved  useless  mills,
in  the  second  year  they  saved  useless  cotton  goods.  In
neither  the  first  nor  the  second  year  is  there  any  net
increase  or  decrease  of  employment  due  to  the  new  policy
of  saving.  In  fact,  assuming  sanity  of  individual  conduct,
affairs  would  work  out  differently.  Admitting  an  attempt
to  work  the  surplus  mills,  the  actual  overproduction  of
goods could not proceed far. Let us assume  savers  to


9 6  THE  PROBLEM OF THE  UNEMPLOYED

use,  throughout,  the  agency  of  Banks,  which  are  to  find
investment  for  their  savings.  Suppose  the  Banks,  not
realising  the  mode  of  this  new  saving,  have  invested  the
first  year's  savings  in  superfluous  cotton  mills.  These
cotton  mills  or  others  in  the  next  year  cannot  continue
to  work  without  advances  from  Banks,  since  they  are
unable  to  effect  profitable  sales.  Soon  after  the  beginning
of  the  second  year  the  Banks  will  refuse  to  make  further
advances  for  over-production :  markets  being  congested  and
prices  falling,  the  demand  for  bank  accommodation  will  grow,
but  banks  will  not  be  justified  in  making  advances.  Now
the  weaker  mills  must  stop  work,  general  short  time  fol-
lows, and  the  result  is  an  unemployment  of  labour  and  forms
of  capital.  This  is  the  first  effect  of  the  attempt  to  over-save
upon  employment.  We  have  now  for  the  first  time  a  reduc-
tion of  the  aggregate  of  production.  The  result  of  reduced
employment  (under-production)  will  be  a  reduction  of  real
incomes.  This  will  tend  to  proceed  until  the  reduced  reward
of  saving  (real  interest)*  gradually  restores  the  right  propor-
tion of  saving  to  spending — a  very  slow  and  wasteful  cure.

It  thus  appears  that  so  long  as  "  saving  "  can  be  vested  in
new  forms  of  capital,  whether  these  are  socially  useful  or  not,
no  net  reduction  of  employment  is  caused,  the  portion  of
income  which  is  "saved"  employs  as  much  labour  as,  though
not  more  than,  that  which  is  " spent,"  but  when  the  machinery
of  production  is  so  glutted  that  attempted  saving  takes  shape
in  the  massing  of  "loanable  capital"  unable  to  find  an  invest-
ment, the  net  production  and  the  net  employment  of  labour  in
the  community  is  smaller  than  it  would  have  been  had  saving

*  Observe  that  an  over-supply  of  capital  does  not  bring  down  the  "rate
of  interest,"  though  it  reduces  the  real  reward  of  saving.  The  effect  of
putting  up  unnecessary  mills  is  to  lower  the  capital  value  of  each  mill.
The  rate  of  interest  on  this  reduced  valuation  may  be  the  same  as  before
(Cf.  Ifadley,  p.  278).


EFFECT OF UNDEK-CONSUMPTION  97

been  confined  to  the  minimum  required  by  the  needs  of  society.
From  the  standpoint  of  "employment"  the  injury  dune
by  over-saving  is  thus  seen  to  consist  not  in  the  over-
production of  plant  or  goods  but  in  the  condition  of  under-
production which  follows  the  financial  recognition  of  this
glut.  The  real  waste  of  power  of  capital  and  labour  is
measured  by  the  period  and  the  intensity  of  the  under-
production in  which  forms  of  capital  and  labour  stand  idle.

Briefly,  the  order  of  causation  is  this :

Under-consumption  or  over-saving  causes  over-capitali-
sation, first  in  forms  of  fixed  capital,  then  in  a  glut  of
goods;  the  glut  checks  the  investment  of  loanable  capital ;
this  check  restricts  production  and  a  period  of  under-
production with  low  prices  ensues.

Thus  it  appears  that  the  immediate  cause  of  the  under-
production and  unemployment  is  the  inability  of  would-be
savers  and  investors  to  find  any  forms  of  capital  capable
of  embodying  their  savings.  It  makes  no  immediate
difference  as  regards  aggregate  employment  in  the  com-
munity, whether  incomes  are  spent  in  demand  for
consumption-goods  or  for  plant  or  for  production-goods :
so  long  as  savers  who  hold  money-tokens  are  able  to
apply  them  anywhere  in  the  actual  field  of  industry  they
equally  stimulate  production  and  employment,  but  when
misdirection  compels  them  to  withhold  their  application,
production  falls  off  and  unemployment  ensues.

It  is  the  identification  of  this  refusal  to  apply  the
money-tokens  of  saving  with  lack  of  confidence  that
induces  economists  like  Bagehot  to  explain  bad  trade  bv
lack  of  confidence.  This  lack  of  confidence  is  shown  *  to
be  merely  the  subjective  side  of  lack  of  openings  for
investment,  an  objective  fact  due  to  over-saving.

*  See  Chapter  VII  y


CHAPTER  VI
THE  ECONOMIC  REMEDY

§  /. The  Remedy  lies  in  a  Reformed  Distribution
of  Consuming  Power.

This  is  the  only  rationale  of  the  simultaneous  unemploy-
ment of  labour,  land,  and  capital  which  forms  the  problem
of  the  "  unemployed."  Under-consumption  is  the  economic
cause  of  unemployment.  The  only  remedy,  therefore,
which  goes  to  the  root  of  the  evil  is  a  raising  of  the
standard  of  consumption  to  the  point  which  shall  fully
utilise  the  producing-power,  after  making  due  allowance
for  such  present  "saving"  as  is  economically  needed  tc
provide  for  further  increase  of  consumption  in  the  future.
If  the  analysis  of  causes  in  the  last  chapter  is  correct,
this  remedy  can  only  be  made  operative  by  a  line  of
policy  which  shall  affect  the  ownership  of  increased
consuming-power.

Unfortunately  this  last  conclusion  was  not  admitted  by
economic  writers  whose  diagnosis  of  trade-disease  was  in
close  accord  with  that  taken  here.  The  brilliant  analysis
of  Malthus  in  particular  was  never  rebutted,  but  it  could
be disregarded safely by the economists of his day,

98


LINES OF  SOCIAL  POLICY  99

because  he  used  it  in  defence  of  the  luxury  of  the  classes.
Malthus  saw  that  the  over-saving  of  the  wealthy  was  the
direct  economic  force  which  kept  trade  back.  His  remedy
was  an  increase  of  luxurious  expenditure.  But  this,  even
were  it  otherwise  desirable,  is  wholly  impracticable.  We
have  seen  that  the  motives  which  induce  the  wealthy  to
withhold  the  present  use  of  consuming-power  are  natural
and  necessary.  A  piece  of  academic  advice,  unbacked
by  any  economic  force,  is  absolutely  futile.  The  owners
of  "  unearned"  elements  of  income,  as  we  see,  must
accumulate  capital  which  from  the  social  standpoint  is
excess.  A  more  natural  distribution  of  consuming-power,
under  which  the  power  to  consume  shall  be  accompanied
by  the  desire  to  consume — not,  as  now,  severed  from  it —
is  the  only  possible  remedial  policy.

§  2. Lines  of  Social  Policy. Taxation  of
"  Unearned"  Income.

Towards  this  policy,  parties  of  social  progress  are
slowly  gravitating.  Unfortunately  their  path  is  lighted
by  no  clear  intellectual  conceptions,  and  they  move  with
hesitant,  uneven,  staggering  steps,  often  by  circuitous
routes,  along  a  road  which  should  be  recognised  as  clear,
straight,  and  fairly  smooth.  The  policy  of  progressive
consumption  has  two  direct  lines  of  advance  which  may
here  be  briefly  indicated.

The  surplus  of  consuming-power  in  the  hands  of  the
rich  may  be  "  unearned  "  by  its  owners,  but  it  is  not,  for
all  that,  "  unearned."  Part  of  it — for  example,  the  grow-
ing value  of  town  lands — is  earned  by  public  effort,  and
forms  a  property  designed  for  public  consumption  in  xne
support  of  wholesome  public  life


TOO THE  PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

§  j. Various  forms  of  ■  Social  Property  *
Amenable  to  Taxation.

"It  certainly  is  true  that  any  increase  in  the  rental
value  or  selling  value  of  land  is  due,  not  to  the  exertions
and  sacrifices  of  the  owners  of  the  land,  but  to  the  exer-
tions and  sacrifices  of  the  community.  It  is  certainly
true  that  economic  rent  tends  to  increase  with  the  growth
of  wealth  and  population,  and  that  thus  a  larger  and
larger  share  of  the  product  of  industry  tends  to  pass
into  the  hands  of  the  owners  of  land,  not  because  they
have  done  more  for  society,  but  because  society  has
greater  need  of  that  which  they  control."  *  Here  then  is
indicated  a  large  property  "earned"  by  the  work  of  the
community  which  might  be  usefully  consumed  by  the
community.  But  these  land  values  by  no  means  exhaust
and  probably  do  not  form  the  largest  portion  of  that
annual  property  directly  created  by  public  effort  or  the
pressure  of  public  needs.  Part  of  the  profits  of  all
monopolies  or  protected  businesses  and  of  many  businesses
not  formally  protected  but  assisted  by  some  dependence
upon  land,  some  advantage  of  position  or  vicinity  to
markets,  is  clearly  due  to  the  same  social  causes  as  are
operative  in  the  direct  growth  of  land  values.  Profits
obtained  from  various  branches  of  local  services,  many
departments  of  the  transport  trades  and  of  retail  dis-
tribution are  often  enhanced  by  this  extraneous  support.
In  some  cases  the  profits  which  thus  arise  go  to  swell
rent,  as  is  largely  the  case  with  the  profits  of  shops  in
advantageous  positions,  in  other  cases  sufficient  competition,
direct or indirect, may survive  to  enable  the  consuming

*  Professor  Francis  Walker  ("  First  Lessons  in  Political  Economy").


■  SOCIAL  PROPERTY  »  AMENABLE  TO  TAXATION IOI

public  to  reap  the  advantage  in  lower  prices.  But  any
one  who  goes  over  the  most  remunerative  kinds  of
industry  will  find  that  many  of  these  derive  their  character
from  dependence  upon  natural  or  legal  monopoly.  The
strong  position  of  such  a  trade  as  brewing  is  explained
by  a  combination  of  natural  and  legal  monopoly.  In  all
such  trades  elements  of  profits  are  apt  to  emerge  which
are  not  the  necessary  interest  upon  capital,  nor  results  of
skill  in  production  or  enterprise  in  management,  but  are
simply  due  to  a  power  of  monopoly  or  in  other  words
to  the  pressure  of  public  needs.  Even  where  no  direct
assistance  is  derived  from  natural  or  legal  monopoly,  a
combination  of  capital  strong  enough  to  crush  out  or
keep  down  effective  competition  may  obtain  so  strong  a
control  of  the  market  through  a  "ring,"  a  " syndicate, "
"  trust, "  or  other  business  structure,  as  to  exercise  a  similar
power  of  taxing  the  public  for  its  private  profit.  All  this
body  of  rents  and  profits  represents  a  property  made  by
public  efforts  and  needs  which  might,  wherever  it  can  be
discovered,  legitimately  pass  into  the  public  possession.

In  many  cases  it  may  be  difficult,  in  some  perhaps
impossible,  to  discriminate  economic  rents  and  monopoly
profits  from  those  growths  of  value  which  are  needed  for
the  maintenance  of  the  private  effort  and  enterprise
which  co-operated  to  produce  them.  But  economic
analysis  discloses  the  fact  that  there  does  exist  a  large
fund  of  "  unearned "  incomes,  the  private  ownership  of
which  is  justified  neither  by  natural  "  right "  nor  by
expediency,  which  could  economically  be  taken  by  the
public  and  used  for  public  purposes.  These  unearned
elements  of  income  are  not  needed  to  induce  the  appli-
cation of individual effort  in  those  who  at  present  own


102  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

them;  they  are  needed  for  the  improvement  and  enlarge-
ment of  public  life.

Our  civic  and,  in  general,  our  public  life,  is  narrow,
meagre,  inefficient,  and  undignified  in  comparison  with
what  it  ought  to  be,  if  the  wealth  due  to  public  effort
was  wisely  and  economically  laid  out  in  the  public  service.
Taxation,  or  State  assumption  on  equitable  terms,  of
properties  whose  increasing  values  are  due  to  public
activity  and  public  need,  to  be  administered  in  the  supply
of  common  wants  and  the  enrichment  of  the  common
life,  is  likely  to  be  of  material  assistance  in  raising  the
general  standard  of  consumption.  The  adoption  of  pro-
gressive taxation  of  accumulated  wealth  through  the  Death
Duties  is  based  on  an  instinctive  recognition  that  this
assertion  of  a  public  claim  is  both  just  and  expedient.
The  same  is  true  of  the  progressive  income-tax,  so  adjusted
as  to  secure  for  purposes  of  public  use  that  portion  of
the  income  of  the  well-to-do  which  otherwise  would
materially  assist  to  swell  the  excess  of  accumulated  forms
of  capital.

The  direct  and  progressive  taxation  of  ground  rents
and  values,  so  far  as  they  can  be  ascertained,  would
accord  with  this  policy.  The  economist,  while  insisting
upon  the  necessity  of  securing  to  all  private  investors
whose  "  saving"  is  needed  to  furnish  capital,  the  market
price  of  such  saving,  i.e.y  the  minimum  interest  required
to  draw  sufficient  capital  into  the  several  channels  of
production,  would  sanction  the  taxation  of  dividends
which  exceeded  that  necessary  limit.  The  application  of
this  purely  economic  principle  would  of  course  be  liable
to  be  overruled  by  considerations  of  practical  politics
At present  many  elements  of  "unearned"  income  accrue


MOVEMENT FOR HIGHER  WAGES  103

in  the  course  of  private  business  which  cannot  be  assessed,
and  even  in  the  case  of  public  companies,  the  possibility
of  evading  heavy  taxation  by  watering  stock,  distributing
oonuses  and  by  other  means  of  concealing  profits,  would
have  to  be  considered  by  statesmen  guided  by  an  economic
policy.  Economists  will  declare  that  these  elements  of
income  are  a  legitimate  object  of  taxation  wherever  they
can  be  reached,  in  that  they  are  the  result  of  public
activities  and  public  needs.  How  far  and  in  what  ways
they  can  best  be  reached  are  questions  for  politics  as
distinguished  from  economics.

These  practical  qualifications  do  not,  however,  impair
the  value  of  the  light  which  economic  analysis  throws
upon  the  paths  of  the  progressive  policy.

If  the  public  mind  once  firmly  fastens  on  the  economic
principle  that  taxation,  in  whatever  way  imposed,  tends  *
to  settle  on  the  economic  rent  of  land,  high  profits  of
monopolies  and  other  "  unearned"  elements  of  individual
income,  it  is  likely  that  the  assumption  of  public  property
by  means  of  progressive  taxation  will  be  more  rapid  and
more  systematic  than  hitherto.

§4. Working-Class  Movement  for  Higher  Wages,

The  other  line  of  advance  is  the  organised  pressure  of
the working classes for  an  increasing  proportion of  the

*  This  tendency  is  of  course  in  many  instances  thwarted  or
retarded  by  the  effect  of  leases  and  other  contracts  and  by  various
forms  of  friction  which  impede  the  strictly  "economic"  settlement
of  taxation  here  indicated,  imposing  for  a  time  new  burdens  upon
those  who  are  ill  able  to  bear  them.  The  tendency,  however,  of
practical  politicians  is  to  over-estimate  the  length  of  time  taken
by  a  tax  to  settle  on  rents.


I04 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

national  income,  which  they  will  use  in  raising  their
standard  of  consumption.  By  effective  trade  organisation
they  may  raise  wages,  by  co-operation  of  consumers  they
may  expend  their  wages  more  economically,  by  organised
use  of  the  franchise  they  may  secure  such  equality  of
educational  and  economic  opportunities  as  will  remove
or  abate  the  dangers  of  ignorance  and  destitution,  which
at  present  bar  the  progress  of  the  rear-guard  of  labour.
The  low  rate  of  interest  and  profits  in  many  trades  is  no
sufficient  barrier  to  the  wisely  regulated  pressure  of  trade-
organisations  for  higher  wages.  Setting  aside  all  consider-
ation of  the  greater  efficiency  of  higher  paid  labour,  we
cannot  fail  to  see  that  the  effective  demand  for  higher
wages  tends  like  a  tax  to  settle  on  unearned  elements  of
income.  A  rise  of  wages,  in  a  trade  where  profits  lie  at
a  minimum,  tends  to  lower  rents,  or,  in  default  of  rent,
by  raising  prices,  falls  upon  those  consumers  whose  money
incomes  will  not  be  affected  by  a  rise  of  prices.

^5. Increased  Consumption  gives Validity  to
Increased  Saving.

Let  it  be  clearly  understood  that  this  policy  of  in-
creased consumption  by  the  public  and  by  the  working
classes  of  the  country  contains  no  repudiation  either  of
the  principle  or  the  practice  of  saving.  On  the  contrary,
each  rise  of  general  consumption  signifies,  not  merely  an
increased  employment  of  labour,  but  of  capital  as  well.
A  rise  in  the  general  standard  of  consumption  is  a
demand  for  more  saving  and  it  alone  can  give  economic
validity  to  more  saving,  by  enabling  it  to  assist  in  the
satisfaction  of  increased  needs.  The  very  gist  of  our
analysis  lay  in  the  disclosure  that  every  increase  of  effective


EFFECT  OF  SHORTER WORKING-DAY  1 05

saving  was  dependent  upon  an  increase  of  consumption.
It  is  in  a  country  where  new-felt  needs  are  constantly
clamouring  for  satisfaction,  where  men  spend  freely,  as
in  the  United  States,  that  the  growth  of  valid  forms  of
capital  is  largest.

§  6. Effect  of  a  Shorter Working-day  upon

Consumption. Cases  where Output  is

Maintained.

The  pressure  towards  a  shorter  working-day  must  like-
wise be  held  to  conduce,  both  in  its  direct  and  in  its
indirect  influence,  to  the  same  end,  the  elevation  of  the
general  standard  of  consumption.  It  is  true  this  may
not  hold  of  all  trades  and  all  circumstances.  The  plea
for  an  Eight  Hours  Day  on  the  ground  that  it  will
absorb  the  unemployed  does  not  admit  of  general  accept-
ance. In  many  occupations,  as  Mr.  Rae  and  others
have  shown,  the  shorter  working-day  will  simply  mean
an  increased  compression  of  labour,  the  same  output
being  produced  in  an  eight  hours  day  as  previously  in
a  nine  or  ten  hours  day.  In  all  cases  where,  either  by
this  intensification  of  labour  or  by  improved  machinery
and  method,  the  shorter  day  is  as  productive  as  the
longer  day  was  formerly,  there  will  be  no  absorption  of
"  the  unemployed "  and  no  direct  effect  upon  the  aggre-
gate volume  of  employment.  This  would  probably  be
the  result  of  shortening  the  hours  of  labour  in  some  of
the  mining  and  metal  industries,  in  those  branches  of
textile  and  other  manufactures  where  machinery  is  not
yet  perfected  or  speeded  to  full  pitch,  and  in  the  bulk
of  the  distributive  trades.  In  these  it  is  likely  that  a
shorter  day  would  be  made  as  productive  as  a  longer  day.


106 THE  PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§  7. Where  a  Shorter  Day  Means  a  Smaller  Output.

But  in  many  other  departments  of  work  there  would
be  a  loss  of  productivity  by  shortening  the  working  day.
In  this  case  one  of  three  things  might  happen.  First :
the  former  output  might  be  maintained  by  reduction  of
the  daily  wage  and  an  increase  in  the  number  of  those
employed  at  the  lower  wage.  On  this  supposition  there
would  be  no  increase  in  the  total  consumption  of  the
working  classes,  no  increase  in  the  volume  of  employment,
but  only  a  distribution  of  the  former  volume  of  employ-
ment among  a  larger  number  of  persons.  It  is  quite
conceivable  that  this  might  happen  in  the  engineering  and
other  trades,  were  trade  unions  able  and  willing  to
enforce  their  resolutions  against  the  use  of  over- time.
Since  the  absorption  of  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the
unemployed  would  strengthen  trade- organisation  and  im-
prove the  position  of  workers  in  bargaining  with  masters,
it  is  considered  unlikely  that  the  shorter  working-day,
even  in  trades  where  the  output  was  diminished,  would
be  attended  by  an  actual  reduction  in  daily  wages.
Supposing  the  same  wage  was  paid  for  the  reduced  product,
one  of  two  results  would  follow.

§  8. Where  the  Cost  of  a  Shorter  Day  co?nes
out  of  Profits.

In  cases  where  profits  were  above  the  minimum  required
to  maintain  the  continued  application  of  capital,  the  for-
mer aggregate  production  would  be  maintained,  the
increased  wages-bill  being  defrayed  at  the  expense  of
profits.  In  this  way  monopoly  profits,  and  other  "un-
earned " elements of  income,  which  we  have  seen  to  be


"COST"  comes  out  of  higher  prices 107

amenable  to  taxation,  might  pass  to  the  workers  in  the
shape  of  increased  wages.  Although  the  common  belief
of  working  men  that  the  "  eight-hours'  day  "  or  any  other
increased  cost  of  production  could  be  paid  for  out  of
profit  does  not  admit  the  sweeping  application  it  often
receives,  there  are  unquestionably  many  trades  which  in
normal  conditions  could  and  actually  would  bear  the
"cost."  In  these  cases  the  transfer  of  would-be  profits
and  rents  to  wages  in  attainment  of  a  shorter  working-
day  for  a  larger  number  of  workers  would  be  directly
instrumental  in  raising  the  consumption  of  the  community,
for  if  our  former  analysis  be  correct  a  far  larger  pro-
portion of  the  wages  than  of  the  profits  and  rents  will  be
spent  upon  consumables.

§9. Where  the  "  Cost" Comes  out  of
Higher  Prices.

Again,  there  will  be  other  cases  where,  trade  competition
being  keen,  profits  are  too  low  to  bear  the  increased  cost,
but  where  prices  might  be  raised  and  consumers  made
to  bear  the  cost.  This  would  be  the  case  where  inter-
national competition  is  excluded  and  where,  as  in  the
case  of  necessaries  or  prime  comforts,  the  necessary  rise
of  price  would  not  appreciably  affect  consumption.  The
objection  which  is  sometimes  raised  to  the  effect  that
such  a  rise  of  prices  though  it  might  benefit  the  workers
in  some  trades  would  not  benefit  the  whole  body  of
workers  since  in  their  capacity  of  consumers  they  would
suffer,  does  not  seem  convincing.

The  rise  of  price  will  really  operate  in  the  same  way
as  a  new  tax  which  it  is  sought  to  place  upon  wages,  the
real  incidence  of  which  may  be  tested  by  taking  the  posi-


108 THE  PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

tion  of  the  lowest-paid  class  of  labour  in  the  community.
It  can,  I  think,  easily  be  seen  that  the  "  real  wages "
of  this  class  cannot  be  reduced  by  a  tax  upon  the  money
wage,  even  in  the  form  of  a  rise  of  prices:  if  the  prices
of  articles  consumed  by  the  "marginal"  labourer  are
raised,  his  wages  must  rise  to  meet  them.  Similarly  an
attempt  to  tax  other  classes  of  labour  with  a  strongly
fixed  standard  of  comfort  will  be  resisted.  In  other
words  the  higher  prices  will  not  ultimately  injure  the
standard  of  comfort  of  the  lower  strata  of  workers  but
will  tend  to  fall,  like  a  tax,  upon  the  unearned  incomes
which  can  afford  to  pay  the  higher  prices.  Skilled  workmen
with  high  wages  or  whose  standards  of  comfort  were  not
strongly  fixed  might  suffer  somewhat  from  the  rise  of
prices,  but  most  of  the  increased  cost  would  ultimately
settle  upon  "  surplus  "  income.

§  10. Where  International  Competition  Keeps
down  Profits  and  Prices.

The  third  possibility  lies  in  the  trades  where  inter-
national competition  presses  keenly  and  where  reduced
hours  would  not  be  compensated  by  increased  productivity
of  labour  per  hour.  Here  the  normal  result  of  pressing
a  shorter  working-day  on  any  other  than  an  international
basis  would  be  to  disable  all  weaker  competitors  from
continuing  in  business,  with  the  effect  of  reducing  the
total  output  of  the  trade  and  the  total  volume  of  employ-
ment. Some  trades  are  certainly  in  such  a  case  that
reduced  hours  would  imply  an  increased  wages-bill  which
could  neither  be  paid  out  of  profits  nor  by  raising  prices :
here  the  compulsory  application  of  shorter  hours  (unless
in pursuance of  international policy)  would  reduce  botb


INCREASED LEISURE  109

the volume of  consumption and of  production,  spoiling
the  trade.

All  reasonable  advocates  of  a  general  policy  of  short-
ening the  working-day  must  make  just  allowance  for
trades  in  this  last  condition.  With  these  important  ex-
ceptions and  modifications  it  is  true  that  the  shorter
working-day  will  contribute  to  strengthen  the  economic
position  of  the  workers  and  to  increase  the  proportion  of
consuming-power  which  falls  into  their  hands.  It  will
directly  absorb  a  certain  proportion  of  "unemployment."
It  will  do  away  with  certain  irregularities  of  employment
which  are  not  truly  inherent  in  the  nature  and  conditions
of  the  trade,  but  are  due  to  the  disturbing  existence  of
a  large  margin  of  spare  labour.  By  relieving  to  some
degree  the  glut  of  the  labour-market  it  will  assist  labour
to  organise  more  effectively  and  to  raise  the  general
standard  of  working-class  consumption.

§  11. Increased  Leisure  a  Condition  of
Rising  Consumption.

The  indirect  effects  of  a  shorter  working-day  are  not
less  important.  Provided  the  increased  leisure  is  not  pur-
chased by  an  injurious  over-strain  in  the  shorter  working-
day,  the  increased  opportunities  it  will  afford  for  the  cul-
tivation of  unused  faculties  and  the  satisfaction  of  new
tastes,  will  furnish  an  ever-growing  stimulus  towards  an
elevation  of  the  standard  of  life.  By  yielding  a  continuous
demand  for  the  satisfaction  of  new,  strong  desires  it  will
supply  the  moral  force  which,  allied  with  improved  intelli-
gence and  the  more  effective  means  of  organisation  which
modern  conditions  of  industry  and  of  life  afford,  makes
powerfully  and  persistently  for  enforcing  the  claims  of  the


IIO  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

working classes to a larger share of  the  aggregate  con-
suming-power of  the  community.

§12. A  Summary  of  the  "High  Consumption"

Policy.

Thus  the  recognition  of  "  unemployment "  as  the  labour
aspect  of  a  wider  economic  problem — viz.,  the  excess  of
productive  power  over  the  requirements  of  current  consump-
tion, supplies  us  for  the  first  time  with  a  sound  practical
standard  by  which  to  test  the  worth  of  proposed  remedies
and  palliatives.

It  furnishes  a  strong  economic  justification  for  the  chief
lines  of  action  which  modern  progressive  parties  have
instinctively  taken.  The  transfer  of  economic  rents  and
monopoly  profits  from  private  owners  to  the  public,  whether
by  taxation  of  incomes  or  by  direct  public  assumption  of
the  functions  of  monopolist  industries,  is  seen  to  contribute
to  the  enhancement  of  the  aggregate  consumption  of  the
community.  Similar  results  attend  the  well-considered
endeavours  of  working  classes,  either  by  direct  increase
of  wages  or  by  increased  leisure,  to  increase  the  proportion
of  the  total  wealth  of  the  community,  which  falling  to  them
as  wages  shall  be  spent  in  raising  the  general  standard
of  working-class  consumption.

§  i j. This  Policy  involves  no  Social  Danger.

But  those  who  are  not  willing  to  admit  the  existence  of
any  large  "  unearned "  elements  of  income,  or  who  fear
lest  this  progressive  taxation  might  encroach  too  far,  are
needlessly  alarmed.  Assuming  there  existed  no  large
unearned  elements  of  income,  so  long  as  there  exists  any
quantity of  unutilised  producing-power,  labour,  land,  and


THIS POLICY INVOLVES NO SOCIAL  DANGER I  I  I

capital,  which  is  under-employed,  it  does  not  seem  rea-
sonable to  suppose  that  such  taxation  imposed  upon  owners
of  land  and  capital  will  reduce  the  aggregate  income
derived  from  such  ownership.  For  since  the  direct  result
of  this  taxation  is  to  increase  the  general  consumption,
such  increase  must  in  the  nature  of  the  case  give  increased
employment  to  all  the  requisites  of  production.  Hence
it  would  appear  that  the  quantity  of  land  and  capital  for
which  rent,  interest,  and  profit  is  paid  will  be  larger  than
before,  though  the  rate  of  the  remuneration  for  the  use
of  each  piece  of  land  or  capital  may  be  kept  within
moderate  limits  by  taxation  or  by  the  pressure  of  labour-
organisation.  If  there  were  no  unearned  elements  of  income
they  could  not  be  taken  by  taxation  and  any  attempt  to
tax  socially  necessary  interest  would  defeat  itself.  The
complexity  of  our  industrial  organism  is  such  as  to  pre-
clude me  from  here  tracing  out  the  exact  modus  operandi
by  which  a  new  tax  or  an  effective  demand  for  higher
wages  must  work.  But  if  the  principle  be  once  firmly
grasped  that  a  demand  for  commodities  is  the  only  ultimate
demand  for  the  use  of  land,  labour,  and  capital,  then  the
existence  of  "  unemployed  "  producing-power,  is  proof  that
increased  consumption  is  possible  without  a  reduction  in
the  present  income  of  any  class  of  the  community.  The
legitimacy  of  a  "  progressive "  consumptive  policy  is  not,
therefore,  dependent  upon  a  theory  of  "economic  mono-
polies," but  has  a  separate  justification.


CHAPTER  VII
BIMETALLISM  AND TRADE  DEPRESSION

§  i. The  Industrial  and  Financial  Sides  of

Business.

The  monetary  or  financial  explanations  of  commercial
crises  and  consequent  depressions  do  not  in  the  least
invalidate  this  analysis,  nor  can  they  be  accepted  as
substitutes  for  it.  Every  fact  in  the  production,  distribu-
tion, and  exchange  of  commercial  wealth  has  its  book-
keeping or  financial  side.  For  every  change  that  takes
place  in  the  economic  nature  or  the  ownership  of  com-
mercial goods  there  is  some  change  in  the  ownership
of  money  or  of  credit.  There  is  some  correspondence
between  the  two  classes  of  movements,  but  not  an  accurate
one.  Oscillations  in  the  total  quantity  of  money  and
of  credit,  changes  in  the  distribution  of  its  ownership
may  take  place  without  any  facts  of  corresponding  size
or  character  in  industry.  The  operations  of  the  money
market  furnish  familiar  examples.  A  company  is  floated,
credit  is  manufactured  by  bankers  and  other  persons,  is
imputed  to  certain  persons  and  will  for  certain  times
and purposes perform the functions of  money, without


WHAT TAKES PLACE WHEN PRICES FALL? 113

any  corresponding  reality  in  the  production  of  service-
able forms  of  value.  This,  however,  though  of  extremely
great  importance  in  the  world  of  business,  must  be  held
exceptional.  In  most  cares,  in  all  sound  business,  a
creation  of  forms  of  commercial  value  has  taken  place
corresponding  to  the  money  or  the  credit,  and  there  is
a parallelism  in  the  distribution  of  ownership  of  the  two.

The  object  of  these  remarks  is  to  establish  clearly  the
idea  that  business  has  two  aspects,  the  industrial  and  the
financial,  and  that  (except  in  banking  and  the  business
of  finance)  the  two  present  alternative  views  of  each  fact.
In  studying  a  particular  business,  that  of  a  spinning-mill
or  a  foundry,  you  might  study  it  from  its  books  in  terms
of  sales  and  purchases,  contracts  and  prices,  or  you
might  study  it  in  the  operations  of  labour  and  machinery
upon  the  raw  material  in  the  various  processes  and  the
changes  in  nature  or  position  of  forms  of  wealth.

Either  study  would  yield  a  clear  and  complete  know-
ledge of  the  structure  and  working  of  the  business,  but
from  a  different  standpoint.  The  great  mass  of  those
who  are  employed  in  the  works  or  in  the  counting-office
are  acquainted  with  only  one  of  the  aspects,  and  do  not
require  to  know  the  other.

§  2. What  Takes  Place  when  Prices  Fall?

The  manager  alone  is  fully  cognisant  of  both  aspects
of  the  business  and  is  concerned  with  their  inter-relations.
Looking  at  the  business  as  a  going  concern,  the  book-
keeping side  seems  simply  to  follow  and  to  register  in
figures  and  names  the  facts  of  purchase,  work,  and  sale,
and  to  constitute  the  industrial  side.  '  The  relations  between
the two sides are focussed in the  will  of  the  manager.

8


114 THE PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

It  is  the  business  manager  who  directly  determines  to
reduce  the  employment  of  capital  and  labour  in  a  period
of  depression,  and  the  conjoined  action  of  business
managers  thus  causes  "unemployment."  But  what  drives
managers  to  this  resolve?  Does  the  real  impulse  come
from  the  financial  or  from  the  industrial  side  ?  The
immediate  force  which  operates  on  managers  dictating
this  policy  is  "falling  prices."  When  "general  prices"
fall  below  a  certain  point,  they  make  it  "  not  worth  while
to  go  on  producing"  and  production  is  checked  with  the
result  of  "unemployment."

It  is  then  to  the  phenomenon  of  "  falling  prices "  we
must  turn.  Prices  are  the  real  link  of  connection  between
the  industrial  and  the  financial  side  of  a  business.  At  first
sight  this  will  seem  an  admission  of  the  dominance  of
finance,  for  we  associate  prices  more  closely  with  the
money-medium  than  with  the  articles  which  are  the
objects  of  exchange.  But  when  we  definitely  face  the
crucial  question,  How  is  a  price-change  brought  about?
we  shall  find  that  the  directly  operative  force  belongs  to
the  industrial,  not  to  the  financial  side.  It  proceeds  from
an  alteration  in  the  relation  between  the  quantity  of
production  and  the  quantity  of  sales  effected  in  a  given
time.  If  production  increases  while  there  is  no  increase
on  the  side  of  sales,  the  congestion  of  goods  weighs  down
price  as  surely  as  if  the  operation  were  of  the  nature  of
a  mechanical  balance.  On  the  other  hand  if  production
remains  the  same  or  is  reduced,  while  the  number  of  sales
effected  in  a  given  time  is  larger  than  before,  a  rise
of  prices  is  effected.  No  seller  and  no  trade  reduces
prices  so  long  as  it  is  possible  to  sell  all  that  can  be
supplied at former prices. The only possible im-


ILLICIT  JUMPS  I  1 5

mediate  cause  of  a  fall  of  prices  is  an  actual  increase
of  supply  in  its  relation  to  quantity  demanded.  It  is  of
real  importance  to  recognise  that  an  actual  over-stock  is
necessary  to  bring  about  a  fall  of  prices,  and  that  nothing
else  can  bring  it  about.

This  changed  relation  ot  Supply  and  Demand  exhibited
in  an  over-stock  may  not  be  considerable  and  may  in-
volve no  great  or  lasting  waste,  but  it  must  exist  or  be
believed  to  exist.  When  therefore  we  are  told  that  such
and  such  political,  industrial,  financial  facts,  a  rumour  of
war,  a  protective  tariff,  an  influx  of  gold  have  brought
about  a  "fall  of  prices,"  we  know  that  these  forces  lie
outside  the  direct  line  of  action  and  can  only  affect
prices  by  either  increasing  supply  or  by  reducing  demand.
So  when  monetary  authorities  tell  us  that  the  great  fall  of
wholesale  prices  since  1873  is  due  to  matters  affecting
the  supply  of  gold  and  silver  money,  we  do  right  to
insist  on  being  shown  precisely  how  the  alleged  deficiency
in  quantity  of  money  has  affected  the  quantitative  relation
between  supply  and  demand  for  goods  so  as  to  reduce
the  proportion  which  the  latter  holds  to  the  former.

§3. Illicit  Jumps  in  Monetary  Explanations
of  "  Depression?

The  connection  between  money  and  price  in  discussions
of  commercial  crises  and  depressions  is  generally  made
by  a  process  of  illicit  jumps.  Somehow  or  other,  we  are
told,  an  increased  quantity  of  "  money "  will  form  a  basis
of  improved  credit  and  with  the  improved  credit  commer-
cial confidence  will  revive,  confidence  will  establish  enter-
prise and  general  activity  affording  increased  employment
of  capital  and  labour,  and  higher  prices  will  ensue.


Il6  THE  PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

The  exact  point  of  connection  between  the  mental  01
subjective  phenomena  called  confidence  and  enterprise
and  the  objective  commercial  facts  of  an  increase  of
sales  is  always  concealed.  Bimetallists  commonly  assume
that  an  increased  quantity  of  money  must  cause  a  corre-
sponding rise  of  prices,  without  taking  the  least  trouble  to
show  how  this  increase  of  money  will  necessarily  induce
purchasers  of  goods  to  increase  the  quantity  of  their
purchases.  I  am  not  here  concerned  to  deny  that  it  will
have  this  result,  but  it  is  clearly  their  business  to  prove  it.

An  increase  of  money  which  was  privately  hoarded  by
its  possessors  could  manifestly  have  no  effect  on  prices.
If  it  was  hoarded  in  banks,  it  could  only  operate  by
reducing  the  rate  of  discount,  thus  stimulating  the
purchases  of  those  who  borrow  to  buy.

The  supposition  that  increased  volume  of  money  would
of  necessity  either  directly  or  by  enlarged  credit  imply
an  increase  of  purchases  corresponding  to  its  size  is  un-
warranted.

§  4. Bimetallism  can  only  Raise  Prices  by
Raising  Consumption.

It  is,  however,  quite  needless  to  open  the  whole  cur-
rency question  or  to  propound  a  theory  of  the  extent  of
the  influence  of  quantity  of  money  upon  prices.  It  suf-
fices to  affirm  the  principle  that  whatever  influence  an
increase  of  money  would  exercise  on  prices  must  come
by  raising  the  quantity  of  purchases  relative  to  the  supply
of  articles  offered  for  sale.  It  is  essential  to  recognise
that  if  bimetallism  or  any  other  monetary  "  ism "  operates
so  as  to  stimulate  increased  production  equally  with  con-
sumption it  can  have  no  possible  effect  in  raising  general


BIMETALLISM  117

prices.  For,  if  the  result  of  a  free  flow  of  money  is  to
bring  about  an  increase  of  supply  and  a  merely  equivalent
increase  of  quantity  demanded  (effective  demand)  prices
must  remain  as  before.  If  it  be  alleged  that  in  commerce
buyers  only  buy  to  sell,  and  that  producers  who  obtained
use  of  a  freer  and  cheaper  supply  of  money  would  only
use  it  to  increase  their  rate  of  production  and  swell  the
total  of  supply,  the  answer  is  that  such  use  of  the  enhanced
supply  of  money  could  have  no  possible  influence  in  raising
prices.  Only  that  portion  of  the  increased  supply  of  money
used  by  consumers  of  commodities  in  enhanced  consump-
tion would  operate  by  changing  the  quantitative  relation
between  the  aggregate  Supply  and  the  aggregate  Demand,
and  thus  raise  prices.  Therefore,  in  order  to  make  good
their  claim  that  a  bimetallic  coinage  would  raise  prices,
the  advocates  of  this  system  must  show  that  it  would
induce  consumers  to  spend  an  increased  proportion  of
their  incomes  in  a  demand  for  commodities.  This  I  need
hardly  say  they  make  no  pretence  to  do.  If  they  did
show  this  result,  it  would  be  tantamount  to  admitting  the
previous  existence  of  an  excessive  quantity  of  producing-
power,  i.e.,  a.  condition  of  under-consumption.  In  other
words,  the  view  which  finds  in  the  state  of  currency  the
cause  and  the  cure  of  depressed  trade  and  prices  can
establish  its  position  in  no  other  wise  than  by  admitting
the  accuracy  of  the  analysis  which  refers  the  depression
to  under-consumption.  If  bimetallists  actually  claimed
that  their  system  of  currency  would  maintain  the  full  and
economic  adjustment  between  producing-power  and  con-
sumption by  stimulating  the  latter,  it  might  be  necessary
to  consider  more  closely  the  nature  of  their  cure.  But
since  they  make  no  such  claim  no  such  necessity  emerges.


Il8 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§  5. Does  a  Fall  of  Prices  Come  from  Increased
Supply  or  Restricted  Dema7id?

Since  a  continuous  fall  of  prices  means  nothing  else
than  an  actual  excess  of  supply  over  quantity  demanded
at  former  prices,  it  may  be  explained  either  by  the  oper-
ation of  forces  which  feed  Supply  without  stimulating
Demand  to  a  corresponding  extent,  or  by  the  operation
of  forces  which  act  primarily  as  a  restriction  of  demand.
Since  bimetallists  repudiate  the  explanation  that  the  fall
of  prices  since  1873  is  due  to  a  cheapening  of  "cost"  of
production  which  has  enlarged  supply,  they  are  driven  to
the  alternative  admission  that  the  result  of  an  insufficient
supply  of  money  is  to  restrict  demand  for  goods.  This
admission  is  seldom  made  in  so  many  words  because
currency  men  often  seem  to  lose  sight  of  the  principle
that  price-change  always  means  in  the  first  instance  a
change  in  the  quantitative  relation  of  supply  and  quantity
demanded  at  a  former  price.  But  the  bimetallist  position
clearly  rests  upon  the  assumption  that  an  insufficient
supply  of  money  disables  purchasers  from  buying  as  much
as  they  would  otherwise  have  done.  The  two  explanations
of  falling  prices,  an  enlargement  of  supply  and  a  restriction  of
demand,  form,  it  is  true,  no  logical  antinomy ;  both  forces  may
be  operative  in  different  degrees ;  but  for  testing  the  truth  or
falsehood  of  the  financial  explanation  of  depressed  trade,
we  may  treat  them  as  alternatives.  Our  position  is  that
the  forces  which  depress  prices  have  in  fact  operated  by
enabling  larger  quantities  of  goods  to  be  added  to  supply
at  less  labour-cost,  and  that  in  order  to  effect  sales  the
owners  of  these  goods  have  been  constantly  obliged  to
lower  prices.


THE  TEST  OF  SAUERBECK'S  INDEX  NUMBERS 119


§ 6. The Test  of  Sauerbecks  Index  Numbers,

Of  the  accuracy  of  this  explanation  Sauerbeck's  tables
seem  to  furnish  a  tolerably  simple  test.  If  diminished  cost
of  production  is  the  principal  cause  of  falling  prices  we  shall
expect  the  prices  of  different  goods  to  fall  in  different  propor-
tions, since  the  diminution  of  cost  will  differ  in  each  case.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  volume  of  money  is  the  principal
cause  of  falling  prices  we  shall  expect  a  corresponding  fall  in
all  prices. What  do  we  actually  find  ?

SAUERBECK'S  INDEX  NUMBERS.


■

V

>

'c  °

Sugar,
Coffee,  Tea.

P

«5

1

■

c

V)

K
V

H

C  V

3  *

0  «

OH

1873

106

109

106

107

141

103

106

ii4

III

1874

105

103

I05

104

n6

92

96

IOO

102

1875

93

108

IOO

IOO

IOI

88

92

93

96

1876

92

zo8

98

99

90

85

95

91

95

1877

100

IOI

103

IOI

84

85

94

89

94

1878

95

IOZ

90

96

74

78

88

81

87

1879

87

94

87

90

73

74

85

78

83

1880

89

IOI

88

94

79

81

89

84

88

l88l

84

IOI

84

9i

77

77

86

80

85

1882

84

104

76

89

79

73

85

80

84

1883

82

103

77

89

76

70

84

77

82

1884

7i

97

63

79

68

68

81

73

76

1885

68

88

63

74

66

65

76

70

72

1886

65

87

60

72

67

63

69

67

69

1887

64

79

67

70

69

65

67

67

68

1888

67

82

65

72

78

64

67

69

70

1889

65

86

75

75

75

70

68

70

72

1890

65

82

70

73

80

66

69

7i

72

1891

75

81

71

76

76

59

69

68

72

1892

65

84

69

7i

7i

57

67

65

68

1893

59

85

75

68

68

59

68

65

68

1894

55

80

65

64

64

58

64

60

63

1895

54

78

62

64

62

52

65

60

62

1896  j

53

73

59

62

63

54

63

60

61

1897

60

79

52

65

66

5i

62

59

62

1898

67

77

5i

68

70

5i

63

61

64

1899

60

79

53

65

92

58

65

70

68

1900

62

85

54

69

108

66

7i

80

75

190I  j

62

85

46

67

89

60

7i

72

70

1902  I

63  j

87

41

67

82

61

7i

71

69

I903  1

62  1

84

44  j

66

82

66

69

72

69

120 THE PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

Not  only  do  we  find  each  group  of  commodities  widely
and  variously  differing  from  the  others  in  the  proportionate
fall  of  price  between  1873  and  1894,  but  there  is  no  such
general  regularity  in  these  fluctuations  throughout  the
period  as  would  seem  necessary,  were  these  changes  all
dominated  by  the  single  factor  volume  of  currency.
Moreover,  if  we  analyse  the  several  groups  we  see  every
possible  variety  of  price-change  in  the  different  component
articles  consistent  with  a  general  downward  tendency.
The  more  we  split  up  the  groups  into  their  component
parts  the  larger  and  the  more  various  the  fluctuations  in
price.  While  this  is  inconsistent  with  an  explanation  of
(all  of  prices  by  volume  of  currency  it  is  not  merely
consistent  with  but  would  inevitably  follow  from  the
attribution  of  price-change  to  increase  of  supply  stimulated
by  improvements  of  machinery  of  manufacture  and  trans-
port and  other  reductions  in  the  "cost"  of  production
of  a  number  of  different  commodities.

§  7. Want  of  ■  Confidence  " not  a Vera  Causa —
Itself  a  Symptom.

The  refusal  of  bimetallists  and  other  monetary  spe-
cialists to  admit  these  tests  arises  from  their  refusal  to
realise  the  necessity  of  explaining  price-change  by  facts
relating  to  quantity  of  supply  and  demand  of  commodities
other  than  money.

Rejecting  on  a  priori  grounds  the  idea  of  a  general
excess  of  production,  they  are  driven  to  explain  bad
trade  and  the  apparent  surplus  of  forms  of  capital  by
causes  affecting  the  quantity  of  money  which  operates
upon  public  confidence.  This  attitude  of  mind  is  best
illustrated in one who was in no sense a monetary


WANT OF "CONFIDENCE ITSELF A  SYMPTOM 12  1

specialist.  The  words  in  which  J.  S.  Mill  suras  up  his
explanation  of  the  periods  when  "commodities  in  general
became  unsaleable,"  producing  a  temporary  condition  of
"  general  over-supply "  form  a  most  succinct  expression
of  the  fallacy.  "  The  essentials  of  the  doctrine  are
preserved  when  it  is  admitted  that  there  cannot  be  per-
manent excess  of  production  or  of  accumulation,  though
it  be  at  the  same  time  admitted  that  as  there  may  be  a
temporary  excess  of  any  one  article  considered  separately,
so  may  there  of  commodities  generally,  not  in  conse-
quence of  over-production,  but  of  a  want  of  commercial
confidence."*

Here  we  have  the  explicit  explanation  of  a  purely  objective
phenomenon,  an  excess  of  unsaleable  articles,  by  reference
to  what  is  properly  and  primarily  a  purely  subjective
phenomenon,  want  of  confidence.  Want  of  commercial
confidence  can  no  more  be  a  cause  of  an  accumulation
of  unsaleable  goods  than  a  rise  in  the  thermometer  can
be  a  cause  of  sunshine.  Want  of  commercial  confidence
arises  from  the  collapse  of  some  businesses  through  inability
to  effect  sales  at  profitable  prices,  the  general  decline  of
business  profits  arising  from  low  prices,  and  a  general
lack  of  safe  and  profitable  fields  of  investment.  This
prevalence  of  low  prices  simply  registers  the  existence  of
an  excess  of  supply  over  quantity  demanded.  Want  of
confidence  then  is  nothing  but  a  subjective  interpretation
of  the  already  existing  fact  of  a  general  excess  of  forms
of  capital,  or  productive  power.  It  may  be  a  convenient
term  to  describe  the  attitude  of  mind  of  those  who  have
money to invest and  who  refuse  to  place  it,  but  it  can

*  "Unsettled  Questions  of  Political  Economy,"  p.  74.


122  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

furnish no  explanation  of  the  congested  state  of  industry
implied  by  the  fact  of  general  over-supply.

§  8. The  Notion  that  Reduced  Cost  of  Production
ca?mot  Reduce  all  Prices,  Disproved.

One  other  deep-rooted  fallacy  underlies  the  currency
explanation  of  the  fall  of  prices,  the  a  priori  denial  that
a  lowering  of  "cost  of  production"  of  all  commodities
can  be  a  true  cause  of  a  fall  of  prices.  Mill  gave  distinct
utterance  to  this  doctrine  by  arguing  that,  since  all  trade
is  exchange  of  commodities  for  commodities,  any  increase
of  supply  must  involve  a  corresponding  increase  of  demand,
so  that  each  unit  of  the  increased  supply  must  exchange
on  the  same  terms  as  before,  even  if  the  increased  supply
was  due  to  reduced  labour-cost  of  producing  a  unit  of
supply.  But  this  argument  rests  on  the  assumption  that
everything  which  can  be  "  demanded"  will  be  "demanded,"
i.e.,  that  all  producing-power  is  necessarily  utilised  in
demand.

This  doctrine  has  been  lately  reaffirmed  by  Dr.  Smart
in  terms  which  seem  to  clearly  expose  the  error  which  it
contains.  A  general  fall  in  cost  of  production  would  not,
he  maintains,  in  itself  tend  to  a  general  fall  of  prices,  for  "  if  a
particular  trade  were  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  reduc-
tion of  machinery  by  laying  down  proportionally  more  plant
and  extending  production,  the  total  cost  would  not  diminish
although  the  cost  per  item  would.  In  such  circumstances,
however,  this  trade  could  maintain  the  exchange  value  of
its  commodities  per  item  only  if  demand  increased  pari
passu  with  the  increase  of  supply.  And  demand  would
increase — assuming  equal  elasticity — if  the  production  of  all
the  other  goods  increased  in  the  same  ratio."  * Now  the

*  "Studies  in  Economics",  p. 175.


REDUCED COST CANNOT REDUCE  ALL  PRICES 123

assumption  that  demand  would  increase  is  without  warrant.
Dr.  Smart  is  only  justified  in  assuming  that  demand  might
increase.  All  increase  of  supply  might  be  demanded  and
consumed  as  fast  as  it  grew.  If  that  actually  occurred
there  would  be  no  alteration  in  the  quantitative  relation
of  supply  and  demand  (quantity  demanded)  at  the  different
stages  of  industry.  Moreover,  there  could  then  be  no  fall  of
prices.  Dr.  Smart  thinks  that  scarcity  of  money  causes  the
general  fall  of  prices  which  others  have  attributed  to  reduced
cost  of  production.  But  if  every  increase  of  supply  was
taken  off  in  increased  demand,  no  scarcity  of  money
(assuming  there  were  such  a  thing)  could  affect  prices.
This  may  be  tested  by  a  closer  attention  to  any  class  of
prices.  Suppose  a  general  increase  of  supply  in  all  retail
shops  and  a  corresponding  increase  of  demand  as  a  neces-
sary counterpart,  retailers  would  not  lower  prices  but  would
sell  the  increased  quantity  of  goods  at  the  same  prices  as
before.  If  scarcity  of  money  is  to  be  operative  in  reducing
prices,  it  can  only  be  by  preventing  demand  from  keeping
pace  with  increased  supply,  i.e.,  by  defeating  the  operation
of  what  has  just  been  assumed  as  a  necessary  law,  the
effective  demand  of  the  whole  of  supply.

It  is  of  course  true  that  with  every  increase  of  supply
an  increase  of  ■  purchasing  power  "  or  possible  demand  is
created.  If  this  power  is  exercised,  nothing  that  happens
to  the  supply  of  money  can  prevent  prices  from  standing
firm.  If  scarcity  of  money  does  operate  on  prices  it  can
only  be  by  preventing  some  of  the  possible  demand  from
becoming  effective.  If  prices  do  fall  it  means  that  those
who  have  the  power  to  demand  all  the  increased  supply,
do  not  exercise  it,  but  withhold  it.


124 THE  PROBLEM  OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

§9. The  Right  Place  of  "Money1"  as  an  Agent
in  Falls  of  Prices.

It  may  be  important  to  ascertain  how  far  scarcity  of
money  may  be  the  cause  which  induces  some  owners  of
demand -power  to  withhold  that  power.  This,  I  think,
is  the  point  where  monetary  influences  act.  If  all  exchange
were  of  commodities  with  commodities  direct,  it  is  clear
there  could  be  no  over-supply  and  that  the  alleged  power
of  supply  to  create  a  corresponding  effective  demand  would
be  always  valid.  The  possibility  of  withholding  Demand
only  arrives  with  the  use  of  some  forms  of  money,  by
the  ownership  of  which  power  to  demand  may  be  held
in  solution  as  a  lien  upon  the  future.  In  other  words
the  use  of  money  is  a  necessary  condition  to  that  failure
of  demand  to  keep  full  pace  with  the  growth  of  supply
which  is  expressed  in  a  fall  of  prices.  But  no  proof  is
forthcoming  that  there  is  in  fact  anything  which  can  be
rightly  called  "  scarcity  "  of  money,  or  how  such  "  scarcity  "
increases  the  tendency  of  owners  of  demand-power  to
withhold  that  power.

Money  is  indeed  the  social  instrument  by  which  over-
saving or  under-consumption  becomes  possible.  By  means
of  money  the  refusal  to  consume  may  be  practised  to  an
excess  for  certain  long  periods  of  time.  But  this  excess
is  not  shown  to  vary  with  quantity  of  money  in  a  com-
munity.

Over-saving  from  the  social  standpoint  is  seen  to  arise
from  the  effort  of  a  number  of  individuals  to  postpone  a
larger  quantity  of  their  power  to  demand  commodities
than  is  socially  useful  in  maintaining  forms  of  capital.
This  refusal is quite consistent with  the  amplest  supply


MONEY AS AN  AGENT IN FALLS OF PRICES 125

of  money,  and  wherever  it  occurs  prices  must  fall.  Close
analysis  shows  over-saving  or  under-consumption  as  the
only  immediate  cause  of  a  general  fall  of  prices:  scarcity
of  money  is  not  proved  to  be  either  directly  or  indirectly
a  vera  causa.


CHAPTER  VIII
PALLIATIVES OF UNEMPLOYMENT

§  i. A Test  for  Palliatives. Do  they  Raise
Consumption  ?

If  under-consumption,  chiefly  due  to  excessive  attempts
to  capitalise  unearned  elements  of  individual  income,  is
the  direct  cause  of  the  mass  of  unemployment,  no  remedy
will  be  effective  which  does  not  help  to  raise  the  general
standard  of  consumption.  The  radical  and  permanent
remedies  will  lie  in  the  lines  of  that  progressive  movement
outlined  in  the  last  chapter.  But  our  analysis  must  also
furnish  a  test  which  is  applicable  to  the  numerous  proposals
which  seek  by  special  measures  to  cure  or  to  alleviate
the  malady  of  unemployment.

It  is  quite  beyond  the  scope  of  this  enquiry  to  examine
or  even  to  describe  most  of  these  proposals.  But  some
short  summary  under  several  heads  may  be  of  service  in
order  that  we  may  ascertain  how  far  they  satisfy  the
essential  economic  test.

§2. Labour  Bureaux  as  Clearing-Houses.
At  the  threshold  lies  the  proposal  for  the  establishment

ia6


LABOUR BUREAUS as  CLEARING-HOUSES 127

o(  a  system  of  Labour  Bureaux  as  a  department  of  the
public  service,  which  shall  register  the  names  and  require-
ments of  workers  who  seek  employment,  and  of  employers
offering  employment,  and  shall  assist  to  place  the  two
bodies  in  communication  with  one  another.  An  effective
organisation  of  this  sort  would  reduce  to  a  minimum  those
elements  of  "  waste "  arising  from  leakage  between  jobs
to  which  lowly  organised  trades  are  specially  prone,  and
would  impart  some  increased  elasticity  to  industry  by
enabling  employers  to  execute  their  new  designs  with  less
trouble  and  less  loss  of  time  than  is  imposed  by  the
present  need  of  seeking  for  suitable  labour.  Workers  out
of  employment  who  possessed  some  labour-power  for
which  there  was  a  growing  demand  would  be  able  to
utilise  it  more  speedily  and  more  advantageously  than  at
present.  Labour  Bureaux  would  thus  impart  increased
fluidity  to  labour  and  would  for  the  lower-organised
trades  undertake  some  of  the  important  functions  of  the
Trade  Union  in  the  skilled  and  well-organised  trades.
If  Labour  Bureaux  under  local  management  and  ordered
on  the  same  general  principles  were  kept  in  close  and
constant  relation  with  each  other,  a  Clearing  House
system  for  Labour  might  be  established  which  would
reduce  to  a  minimum  the  waste  arising  from  leakages
and  minor  trade  displacements.  At  the  same  time,  though
such  work  would  be  conducive  to  industrial  order  and
might  help  to  throw  light  upon  the  extent  and  nature  of
fluctuations  in  employment,  no  system  of  Labour  Bureaux
would  materially  assist  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  un-
employed. The  ability  to  fill  gaps  in  employment  some-
what more  easily  will  not  considerably  increase  the  net
quantity of employment. Even when Labour Bureaux


128  THE PROBLEM OF THE  UNEMPLOYED

have  found  temporary  employment  for  a  considerable
proportion  of  their  applicants,  we  are  not  entitled  to
assume  that  the  net  amount  of  employment  in  the  com-
munity has  been  increased:  for  it  may  be  the  case  that
the  selection  of  employees  recommended  by  the  Labour
Bureaux  has  involved  the  rejection  or  the  >*on-selection
of  others  who  remain  unemployed.  In  trades  where  there
exists  normally  an  over-supply  of  labour  it  is  difficult  to
admit  that  the  establishment  of  increased  facilities  for
hiring  labour  will  increase  the  number  of  those  employed,
though  it  might  allow  a  more  discriminative  process  of
selection.

Even  if  we  assume  that  a  certain  quantity  of  productive
work  remained  undone  at  present  because  of  the  lack  of
a  system  placing  employers  in  close  communication  with
employees,  this  admission  only  implies  that  Labour
Bureaux  might  somewhat  increase  the  available  power  of
production.  But  in  periods  of  depressed  trade,  and  in
many  trades  normally,  there  exists  an  excessive  power  of
production,  and  the  addition  made  to  production  by
Labour  Bureaux  would  not  be  economically  valid  unless
it  could  be  shown  that  a  corresponding  rise  in  consump-
tion was  involved.  In  a  town  where  more  houses  are
being  built  than  can  find  occupants,  no  net  continuous
increase  of  employment  would  be  caused  by  a  Labour
Bureau  which  enabled  builders  to  secure  an  easier  sup-
ply of  all  necessary  labour  and  so  to  put  up  houses  faster
than  before,  and  if  this  same  condition  held  in  all  or
most  towns  no  system  of  mere  labour-exchange,  however
well-conducted,  would  increase  the  total  quantity  of  em-
ployment over  a  long  area  of  time.  Even  the  stoppage
of  waste  from  "  leakages  "  and  misplacements  would  only


ELIMINATION OF  MINOR FORMS OF WASTE 1 29

be of  real assistance  in  a  community  where  there  exists
no  general  over-supply  of  productive  power.

§  j. The Elimination  of  Minor  Forms  of  Waste.

In  order  that  Labour  Bureaux  may  successfully  operate
as  Clearing  Houses  it  is  of  course  essential  that  they
should  possess  the  confidence  alike  of  genuine  working-
men  and  of  employers.  Arising  in  many  cases  in  con-
nection with  Relief  Work  they  have  remained  on  a  semi-
philanthropic  or  charitable  footing,  failing  to  draw  or  to
deserve  the  application  of  employers  in  search  of  the  best
available  labour,  and  also  failing  to  induce  skilled  and
capable  workers  to  have  regular  recourse  to  them  as  a  means
of  getting  good  and  remunerative  employment.  Whether
the  Labour  Bureau  should  itself  undertake  to  ascertain
the  industrial  character  and  qualifications  of  applicants,
confining  itself  to  the  register  of  sound  cases,  or  whether
it  should  pursue  the  general  policy  of  registering  all
comers,  is  a  disputed  point.  The  difficulties  attending
character-enquiry  and  the  distrust  it  not  unnaturally  en-
genders seem  to  favour  the  perfectly  free  register,  though
every  facility  might  be  afforded  for  the  collection  and
communication  of  such  information  as  would  enable  both
parties  to  a  bargain  to  understand  the  nature  of  the
contract  upon  which  they  entered.  If  the  Labour  Bureau
were  in  every  centre  of  population  recognised  as  an  im-
portant public  institution  conducted  on  sound  business
principles,  it  would  probably  gain  the  confidence  of  all
classes  of  employers  and  workers  who  were  in  need  of
each  other  and  found  the  ordinary  private  modes  of
meeting  inadequate.

The  Labour  Bureau  might  of  course  with  great  advan

9


130 THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

tage  combine  with  such  work  other  important  functions,
especially  the  ascertainment  and  publication  of  reliable
statistics  relating  to  all  forms  of  local  industries.  But  the
relief  work  of  a  charitable  or  semi-charitable  kind  which
is  often  done  by  Labour  Bureaux  must  be  left  to  other
public  or  private  agencies,  if  the  Bureaux  are  to  perform
effectively  the  work  of  Labour  Exchanges.

In  relation  to  the  "  Unemployed "  the  Labour  Bureaux
would  rank  as  one  of  the  many  means  of  increasing  the
productive  efficiency  of  the  community  by  eliminating
certain  forms  of  waste.  Where  the  progress  of  Consump-
tion is  such  as  to  fully  utilise  every  increase  of  productive
power  the  full  advantage  of  this  labour-saving  system  is
obtained :  in  a  condition  of  industry  where  the  labour-
market  is  in  general  over-stocked  the  net  gain  of  this
and similar  forms  of  economy  is  reduced  to  a  minimum.

§4. Schemes  for  Increasing  Employment.

The  different  schemes  the  object  of  which  is  to  give
increased  quantity  of  employment  might  be  classified  in
various  ways,  according  to  the  kind  of  work  which  they
seek  to  provide,  skilled  or  unskilled,  agricultural  or  manu-
facturing; according  to  the  kind  of  unemployment  they
seek  to  alleviate,  casual,  season,  or  permanent;  according
as  they  adopt  voluntary  or  compulsory  methods,  State  or
private  enterprise ;  according  as  they  seek  to  enlarge
present  modes  of  employment  or  to  create  new  ones ;
according  as  they  are  generally  educative  or  purely
industrial  in  their  motives.

The  most  convenient  classification  for  our  purpose  is
that  which  distinguishes  the  various  proposals  according
as  they  are  intended  to  relieve :


LABOUR COLONIES— PENAL  CONDITIONS 13  1

(a)  The  chronic  glut  of  low-skilled  labour  in  towns  or
flowing  into  towns.

(p)  Temporary  unemployment  due  to  season  or  trade
fluctuations.

§  5. Labour  Colonies — Penal  Conditions.

Under  the  first  head  we  may  properly  treat  the
proposals  for  the  establishment  of  farm  colonies  and  other
labour  colonies.  Various  colonies  of  different  types  where
the  labour  is  chiefly  employed  in  cultivation  of  the  land
exist  already  in  England  or  on  the  continent,  and  a  wider
application  of  the  various  systems  is  often  advocated.
These  colonies  may  be  divided  into  several  classes.*

Several  penal  colonies  for  convicted  beggars  and  loafers
exist  in  Belgium  and  Holland,  where  some  thousands  of
men  are  employed  in  agricultural  work  under  a  kind  of
military  discipline.  These  institutions  stand  in  organisation
somewhere  between  the  laxer  workhouse  and  the  prison,
but  differ  essentially  from  both  in  that  the  educating  and
reforming  influences  are  more  dominant.  An  attempt  is
made  to  give  a  sound  moral  and  industrial  basis  to  broken-
down  characters.  The  minority  of  the  Labour  Commis-
sion in  their  Report  urge  the  establishment  of  this  order
of  labour  colonies  in  England.

■  For  the  invalids  of  labour,  those  unfortunates  who  have
already  become  unfit  for  regular  work,  we  should  welcome
the  establishment  of  experimental  labour  colonies,  under
strict  government,  to  which  any  man  might  be  committed
for a fixed term, to undergo  the  course  of  mental  and

*  For  this  division  and  much  information  bearing  on  these  colonies
I  am  indebted  to  a  valuable  paper  by  Mr.  Herbert  Samuel,  entitled
"A  Survey  of  the  Unemployed  Problem."


132  THE  PROBLEM  OF THE  UNEMPLOYED

technical  educational  discipline  most  calculated  to  restore
him  to  the  ranks  of  the  workers."  For  dealing  with  the
"  sturdy  beggar  "  and  the  professional  tramps  such  methods
mark  a  distinct  advance  upon  the  present  system  of
mendicancy  tempered  by  the  casual  ward,  and  careful
experiments  upon  these  lines  merit  serious  attention.  In
so  far  as  the  tramp  and  able-bodied  pauper  classes  are
constantly  fed  by  the  off-scourings  of  the  lower-skilled
labour  market  all  attempts  to  deal  with  them  touch  the
subject  of  "the  unemployed,"  but  since  these  people  can
hardly  be  ranked  among  the  occupied  classes,  their  treat-
ment must  be  regarded  more  as  a  palliative  of  a  special
symptom  of  the  disease  than  as  a  direct  and  effective
treatment  of  the  disease  itself.  Though  it  is  plainly
desirable  that  society  should  be  relieved  as  far  as  possible
from  the  contamination  of  a  parasitic  tramp  population,
public  work  given  upon  penal  terms  to  such  people  cannot
be  looked  upon  as  a  direct  or  important  contribution  to
the  solution  of  the  unemployed  problem,  so  long  as
nothing  is  done  to  obviate  those  defects  of  low-skilled
employment  which  help  to  produce  the  tramp  and  the
sturdy  rogue.

§  6. Farm  Colonies  for  Paupers.

If  such  colonies  are  regarded  as  a  possible  develop-
ment of  a  more  humanised  and  rational  penal  code,  ad-
ministered by  the  Home  Office  as  part  of  our  Reformatory
System,  other  colonies  not  dissimilar  in  administration
and  in  methods  might  grow  from  a  specialisation  of  the
Poor  Law  work.  Some  agricultural  labour,  though  not
of  a  very  remunerative  sort,  is  carried  on  by  Boards  of
Guardians in gardens  and  small  farms  for  the  supply  of


MR.  C.  BOOTH'S  LABOUR  COLONIES  FOR  CLASS  B 133

vegetables  and  other  food  to  the  workhouse,  and  a
separate  establishment  to  which  select  pauper  labour  might
be  drafted,  and  where  removed  from  the  benumbing  in-
fluence of  the  ordinary  workhouse  it  might  be  more
productively  utilised  and  trained  towards  efficiency  and
independence,  is  no  unreasonable  development  of  an
enlightened  Poor  Law.  It  may  be  remembered  that
for  such  a  step  no  revolutionary  legislation  is  required.
The  Guardians  have  power  already  under  Statutes  of
George  III.  and  William  IV.  to  obtain  and  occupy  fifty
acres  of  land  in  each  parish  of  their  union  for  the
purpose  of  providing  work.  They  are  able  to  take  action
as  soon  as  the  Local  Government  Board  issues  rules  for
their  guidance,  and  several  Unions  have  the  projected
experiment  under  consideration.

Moreover  it  is  open  for  philanthropic  enterprise  to
undertake  this  work  where  Boards  of  Guardians  are  un-
willing to  incur  the  expense  of  an  experiment  on  their
own  account.  Boards  are  already  empowered  by  the
Local  Government  Board  to  send  able-bodied  men  to
privately  organised  Farm  Colonies  where  they  will  receive
training  in  work,  and  to  pay  5/-  a  week  out  of  the  rates
for  the  maintenance  of  each  man  so  sent.  Both  the
Hadleigh  Colony  and  Mr.  Hazell  have  received  paupers
upon  these  terms  for  work  and  training  on  their  farms.

§7. Mr. Charles  Booth's  Suggested  Labour
Colonies  for  Class  B.

These  schemes  though  well  deserving  of  attention  upon
grounds  of  humanity  do  little  more  than  touch  the  fringe
of  the  "  unemployed "  question.  They  belong  rather  to
the  important  subject  of  the  humanisation  of  our  criminal


134 THE  PROBLEM OF THE  UNEMPLOYED

and  poor  law  systems.  By  removing  a  certain  number  of
industrial  weaklings  from  the  free  industrial  society  which
they  burden  and  contaminate,  and  by  ordering  their  lives
for  them  with  some  regard  to  comfort,  education,  and
self-respect,  a  grievous  stain  upon  our  civilisation  might
be  obliterated.  It  is,  however,  improbable  that  any  con-
siderable number  of  these  weaklings  can  be  converted
into  self-dependent  members  of  society,  and  it  must  be
remembered  that  if  turned  again  upon  the  low-skilled
labour-market  with  whatever  fair  equipment  of  efficiency,
they  go  to  swell  a  glut  and  can  only  get  work  by  keeping
others  out.

The  unemployed  question  cannot  be  solved  or  its  pres-
sure materially  abated  by  taking  the  most  inefficient
members  of  the  lowest  classes  (Mr.  Booth's  Classes  A
and  B)  and  converting  them  into  members  of  Classes
C  or  even  D.  The  permanent  plethora  of  inefficient
and  even  of  fairly  efficient  low-skilled  labour  must
not  be  shirked.  It  forms  a  terrible  centre-piece  of  the
unemployed  problem  and  challenges  "  heroic "  remedies.
Mr.  Charles  Booth  perceiving  how  these  classes  are  over-
stocked, suggests  the  possibility  of  a  wider  system  of
labour  colonies  than  any  yet  in  operation.  His  guarded
and  tentative  proposal  is  for  a  large  social  drainage
scheme  which  might  remove  the  whole  or  the  greater  part
of  the  irregular,  inefficient,  low-paid  labour  included  under
his  Class  B  with  the  families  dependent  upon  them.

"  Put  practically,  but  shortly,  my  idea  is  that  these
people  should  be  allowed  to  live  as  families  in  industrial
groups,  planted  wherever  land  and  building  materials
were  cheap;  being  well  housed,  well  fed,  and  well  warmed;
and taught, trained, and employed from morning to


MR. C.  BOOTH'S  LABOUR  COLONIES  FOR  CLASS  B 135

night  on  work,  indoors  or  out,  for  themselves  or  on
Government  account;  in  the  building  of  their  own  dwell-
ings, or  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  in  the  making  of
clothes,  or  in  the  making  of  furniture.  That  in  exchange
for  the  work  done  the  Government  should  supply  materials
and  whatever  else  was  needed.  On  this  footing  it  is
probable  that  the  State  would  find  the  work  done  very
dear  and  by  so  much  would  lose.  How  much  the  loss
would  be  could  only  be  told  by  trying  the  system  experi-
mentally. There  would  be  no  competition  with  the  out-
cide  world.  It  would  be  merely  that  the  State,  having
these  people  on  its  hands,  obtained  whatever  value  it
sould  out  of  their  work.  They  would  become  servants
of  the  State.  Accounts  would  have  to  be  kept,  however,
and  for  this  purpose  the  work  done  would  have  to  be
priced  at  the  market  rate.  It  would  even  be  well  that
wages  should  be  charged  and  credited,  each  person  at  the
fair  proportionate  rate,  so  that  the  working  of  one  com-
munity might  be  compared  with  another,  and  the  earnings
of  one  man  or  one  family  with  others  in  the  same  com-
munity. The  deficiency  could  then  be  allotted  in  the
accounts  proportionately  to  each,  or  if  the  State  made
no  claim  for  interest  or  management,  there  might  be  a
surplus  to  allot,  opening  out  a  road  back  to  the  outside
world.  It  would,  moreover,  be  necessary  to  set  a  limit
to  the  current  deficiency  submitted  to  by  the  State,  and
when  the  account  of  any  family  reached  this  point,  to
move  them  on  to  the  poor-house  where  they  would  live
as  a  family  no  longer."  *

*  "Life  and  Labour  of  the  People,"  vol.  I,  p.  167.


136 THE  PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

§  8. Practical  Difficulties  of  ■ Social  Drainage?

Such  a  proposal  differs  radically  from  the  penal  or
pauper  colonies  in  two  ways,  first  because  it  assumes  the
voluntary  presence  of  the  members  of  a  colony  and
therefore  dispenses  with  the  severe  disciplinary  methods
needed  where  the  draft  to  the  colony  is  compulsory,
secondly  because  it  preserves  the  family  as  the  social
unit  and  endeavours  to  secure  the  continuance  of  the
motives  which  operate  in  a  free  community  so  far  as  is
consistent  with  the  conditions  of  the  experiment.

The  difficulties  which  the  large  effective  application  of
such  a  scheme  would  involve  are  very  great,  perhaps  in-
superable in  such  a  country  as  England.  The  chief  of
these  difficulties  would  be:

1.  The  unwillingness  of  city  families  of  the  "very
poor"  to  leave  the  customary  slum  environment  and  to
undertake  a  more  orderly  life  necessitating  any  degree  of
regularity  of  work.

2.  The  inability  of  the  members  of  such  a  community
to  submit  to  the  most  humane  and  thoughtful  discipline
required  to  keep  the  "  colonies "  from  contact  with  the
outside  world.  The  population  of  such  volunteer  colonies
would  be  constantly  shifting.

3.  The  expense  to  the  public  purse  which  would  of
course  be  much  greater  where  whole  families  are  main-
tained than  upon  colonies  for  single  men,  and  which
would  be  enhanced  by  the  "  shifting "  character  of  the
population  and  the  consequent  ineffectiveness  of  the
labour  that  was  done.

The  voluntary  basis  of  such  colonies  would  in  effect  be
a  far  more fatal obstacle  than  the  public  expense  when


GERMAN  AND  DUTCH  FREE  LABOUR  COLONIES  1 3  7

we  take  into  due  consideration  the  enormous  cost,  direct
and  indirect,  which  society  incurs  in  keeping  this  class
under  present  circumstances".  But  apart  from  these  practical
suggestions  the  scheme  is  economically  sound,  that  is  to
say,  if  such  communities  could  be  maintained  upon  the
basis  described  we  should  at  one  and  the  same  time
derive  two  great  benefits,  the  humane  care  and  a  decent
standard  of  material  comfort  for  the  class  which  is  unable
to  look  after  itself,  and  a  distinct  relief  from  the  glut  of
low-skilled  inefficient  labour  which  would  considerably
strengthen  the  industrial  and  social  position  of  those  working
classes  which  stand  just  above  the  class  that  was  removed.

§  p. German  and  Dutch  Free  Labour  Colonies.

I  am  not  aware  that  any  adequate  experiment  upon  Mr.
Booth's  basis  has  been  tried.  The  labour  colonies  open  to
all  comers  are  in  most  cases  confined  to  single  men,  and  for
the  most  part  are  destined  as  temporary  shelters  and
training  schools,  not  as  permanent  institutions  for  relieving
the  pressure  of  the  labour-market.  Of  such  a  character  are
the  twenty-six  German  Labour  Colonies,  which  though
nominally  open  to  all  comers  are  practically  shunned  by  the
great  mass  of  bond  fide  working  men  and  are  chiefly
utilised  by  ex-criminals  who  number  no  less  than  76  per
cent,  of  the  population  of  these  colonies.  About  one  half
of  the  colonists  seek  temporary  relief,  the  rest  loaf  round
from  colony  to  colony.  The  general  economic  effect  of
these  colonies  is  almost  nil.  The  colonies  do  not  interfere
with  the  labour-market,  because  they  do  not  deal  with
the  problem  of  the  want  of  employment  of  the  respectable
workman."  *

*  "Report  on  the  Unemployed  (1893)",  p.  287.


138  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

The  Dutch  Free  Labour  Colonies  at  Frederiksoord,
Wilhelmsoord,  and  Wilhelminaasoord  conform  more  closely
to  the  proposal  of  Mr.  Booth  in  that  they  recognise  the
family  and  provide  a  permanent  house  for  the  colonists,
educating  the  children.  Though  agriculture  is  the  chief
occupation  a  number  of  subsidiary  industries  are  attached,
such  as  Matmaking,  Blacksmithy,  Tailoring,  Carpentry,
Brickmaking,  Basketmaking  and  Furniture  making.  The
success  of  the  Dutch  colonies  is  not,  however,  such  as  to
afford  great  encouragement  to  the  advocates  of  labour
colonies.  The  population  is  somewhat  smaller  than  in
1873,  though  the  tendency  towards  large  families  of  children,
many  of  whom  return  to  the  colony  after  they  are  launched
in  the  outside  world,  seems  to  point  to  the  danger  of
breeding  a  permanent  race  of  paupers,  as  one  which  would
deserve  the  most  serious  consideration  in  the  wider  appli-
cation of  such  a  system.  The  average  annual  cost  of  a
family  to  the  Dutch  charitable  public  appears  to  amount
to  about  £23  per  annum,  inclusive  of  interest  on  the
capital  invested  in  land  and  plant.

§  10. The  Starnthwaite  Experiment.

So  far  as  effective  labour  and  any  definite  improvement
in  industrial  character  and  position  are  concerned  we  can
scarcely  look  with  any  degree  of  hope  to  colonies  which
are  open  to  all  comers,  exercising  no  selection.  In  England
at  any  rate  the  most  hopeful  experiments  would  seem  tc
be  those  which  selected  their  material  from  the  low-skilled
labour  which  is  displaced  from  agricultural  work  or  which
is  already  deposited  in  town  life.  Among  those  which
are  now  on  foot  the  experiment  of  the  Home  Colonisation
Society  at  Starnthwaite  in  Westmoreland  is,  in  its  economic


EDUCATIVE COLONIES AT HADLEIGH  1 39

structure  and  object,  of  the  highest  interest.  While  admit-
ting women  and  recognising  the  family  life,  it  exercises  a
certain  selection  of  colonists  and  is  animated  by  the  idea
of  so  organising  groups  of  labourers  who  would  otherwise
be  competing  for  employment  in  an  overcrowded  market,
that  they  may  be  able,  with  some  outside  assistance  of
capital,  to  apply  their  labour  so  as  to  make  a  self-supporting
community.  The  colony,  however,  is  at  present  in  a
tentative  condition,  having  been  considerably  crippled  in
its  earlier  development  by  difficulties  of  management,  and
its  numbers  hitherto  have  been  too  small  to  test  how  far
its  design  of  being  self-supporting  is  feasible.  The  idea
which  it  embodies,  that  of  a  permanent  settlement  of
selected  working-class  families  grouped  in  a  self-sufficing
and  co-operative  community,  relieves  the  Starnthwaite
colony  from  many  of  the  objections  which  apply  to  the
free  temporary  relief  colonies,  and  if  the  permanence  and
co-operative  spirit  can  be  maintained  upon  a  larger  basis
of  population  it  should  afford  a  very  valuable  lesson.

§  11. Educative  Colonies  at  Hadleigh  and  Elsewhere.

The  largest  example  of  a  Labour  Colony,  or  more
strictly  a  group  of  labour  colonies,  directly  designed  for
dealing  with  the  unemployed,  is  that  undertaken  by  the
Salvation  Army.  The  work  both  in  the  Elevator  Work-
shops and  in  the  Farm  Colony  at  Hadleigh,  is  upon  the
individual  as  distinct  from  the  family  basis  and  is  confined
to  single  male  applicants.  In  the  employment  at  the
Workshops  there  is  no  real  selection  upon  entry,  all  may
be  admitted  who  have  registered  themselves  at  the  Labour
Bureau  and  are  unable  to  get  outside  places,  though  men
once admitted are  required to satisfy a certain test  of


140 THE  PROBLEM OF THE  UNEMPLOYED

work  as  a  condition  of  remaining.  Apart  from  bridging
over  a  certain  period  of  distress,  the  chief  use  of  the
Workshop  is  in  enabling  a  selection  to  be  made  of  men
who  are  suitable  for  drafting  on  to  the  Farm  Colony,  with
a  view  to  a  sounder  and  fuller  industrial  training,  chiefly
in  connection  with  agriculture.  The  workshops  thus  act
for  the  main  as  a  relief  agency,  the  greater  part  of  those
resident  at  any  given  time  being  reabsorbed  into  the  class
of  casual  workers.  Out  of  those  who  volunteer  for  the
Hadleigh  Farm  a  certain  number  are  selected  and  the
farm  authorities  make  a  final  choice  out  of  these.  A  cer-
tain number  also  enter  without  passing  through  the  Elevator
Workshop.  It  is  very  difficult  to  estimate  the  success  of
this  experiment.  In  the  earlier  years  (1891  to  1893)  the
bulk  of  the  colonists  were  engaged  in  non-agricultural  work,
in  brickfields,  in  making  a  wharf  and  embankments,  or  in
manufacturing  work.  Since  1893  more  attention  has  been
paid  to  the  agricultural  side  with  a  considerable  reduction
in  the  net  cost  of  the  colony.

Valuable  educative  and  restorative  work  has  doubtless
been  done,  though  the  full  work  of  the  colony  cannot  be
ascertained  until  the  Over  Sea  Colony  which  it  was
designed  to  feed  with  labour  has  been  put  into  operation.
At  present  only  a  minority  of  the  colonists  remain  for
any  considerable  time,  so  that  the  colony  cannot  be
regarded  as  an  important  part  of  the  social  drainage
system.

The  smaller  but  more  carefully  ordered  training  farm
established  by  Mr.  Hazell  in  connection  with  the  Self-Help
Emigration  Society  proves  pretty  conclusively  that  unskilled
men,  even  when  carefully  selected,  cannot  be  trained  for
farm work except at a  very  considerable  cost,  though  a


MR. MATHER'S SCHEME  141

satisfactory number of those emigrated  appear  to  have
made  a  successful  start  in  the  New  World.

The  reports  of  two  continental  colonies  designed  to
tram  and  utilise  the  labour  of  selected  able-bodied  men,
one  at  Wortel  in  Belgium,  the  other  at  La  Chalmelle
near  Paris,  seem  to  point  to  the  same  conclusion,  that
such  colonies  cannot  be  maintained  except  at  consider-
able expense.

§  12. Mr.  Mather's  Scheme  of  Training  and
Agricultural  Colonies.

If  it  is  once  clearly  recognised  that  all  present  evidence
tends  to  the  conclusion  that  neither  open  colonies  nor
selected  colonies  for  training  or  for  productive  work  can
be  made  self-supporting,  or  nearly  so,  the  public  will  be
in  a  position  to  judge  of  the  utility  of  this  mode  of
dealing  with  ■  the  unemployed."  Unfortunately  even
social  reformers  so  competent  as  Mr.  Mather,  whose
scheme  is  distinctly  the  most  statesmanlike  of  those  yet
conceived,  linger  under  the  impression  that  "  it  is  necessary
to  recognise  the  fact  that  the  labour  of  any  able-bodied
man  upon  land,  can,  under  proper  directions  and  condi-
tions, be  of  at  least  an  equal  value  to  the  cost  of  his
maintenance."  Mr.  Mather's  scheme  of  Farm  Training
Colonies  is  briefly  this:  County  Councils  with  money
advanced  by  the  State  are  to  acquire  land  in  each  county
suitable  for  Training  Colonies,  and  to  erect  buildings  to
accommodate  as  many  men  as  can  be  supported  on  the
land,  single  men  or  married  couples.  The  staple  work
is  to  be  agricultural,  partly  in  reclaiming  land  capable
of  cultivation  when  reclaimed,  partly  in  the  utilisation  of
good land by manual labour for arable-dairying, and


142  THE  PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

other  cropping,  for  which  manual  labour  is  largely  avail-
able. Auxiliary  industries  which  require  small  capital  and
can  be  carried  on  by  intermittent  labour  are  to  be
attached  as  a  means  of  utilising  that  part  of  the  working
time  which  cannot  be  occupied  upon  the  land.  To  such
a  colony  the  Poor  Law  Authorities  should  send  men  of
the  "  unemployed "  class  who  seek  relief  through  employ-
ment only  and  who  have  not  hitherto  been  in  receipt  of
Poor  Law  relief.  While  the  colony  is  to  be  managed
by  the  County  Council,  the  deficit,  if  any,  is  to  be  borne
by  the  Poor  Law  Authorities.

"  The  advantages  of  this  system  of  dealing  with  the
well-conducted  members  of  the  unemployed  working  classes
would  be  threefold.  In  the  first  place  the  money  earned
would  come  largely  out  of  the  land  which  the  labour  of
the  men  had  rendered  more  productive,  thus  adding  to
the  material  wealth  without  detracting  from  the  productive
labour  of  any  other  individual  in  the  nation.  Secondly,
the  man  and  his  family  would  be  wholly  or  almost
entirely  sustained  by  the  work  of  his  own  hand.  Thirdly,
no  taint  of  pauperism  could  attach  to  this  system  and  no
disfranchisement  be  connected  therewith."*

For  a  comprehensive  scheme  upon  these  lines  there  is
much  to  be  said:  the  difficulties  of  administration  by  the
County  Council  and  of  the  relations  which  would  subsist
between  the  Local  Government  Board,  the  County  Council,
and  the  Poor  Law  Authorities,  might  quite  conceivably
be  settled  on  a  satisfactory  basis  of  adjustment.  But  the
financial  results  which  Mr.  Mather  claims  to  be  reasonably
expected cannot  for  one  moment  be  admitted. He  pro-

*  "  Draft  Scheme  to  provide  Work  for  the  Unemployed  Working
Classes,"  p.  5.


ECONOMIC PRECAUTIONS  1 43

poses  that  the  money  advanced  by  the  State  should  be
an  investment  upon  which  ordinary  interest  could  be  paid,
and  he  thinks  that  good  management  would  enable  the
County  Council  to  dispense  with  aid  from  the  Poor  Law
Authorities  in  payment  of  deficits.  Neither  of  these  ex-
pectations could  be  fulfilled.  The  very  name  Training
Colony  is  sufficient  to  indicate  that  it  cannot  be  self-
supporting.  No  educational  work  can  be  self-supporting.
The  State  would  have  to  provide  money  for  which  it
would  receive  no  direct  financial  return,  each  year  the
Poor  Law  Authorities  would  have  to  pay  a  certain  sum
for  each  man  sent  to  the  colony.  Once  recognise  that
this  investment  of  public  money  must  look  for  its  return
not  in  pecuniary  interest  but  in  certain  unmeasurable
forms  of  public  good,  the  improvement  of  the  industrial
character  of  certain  workers,  the  public  guarantee  of  a
decent  livelihood  without  degradation,  a  certain  direct
relief  of  the  low-skilled  labour-market,  and  the  proposal
takes  a  reasonable  shape.

Some  such  scheme  of  Training  Colonies  (divorced,  if
possible,  from  direct  association  with  our  Poor  Law  system)
involving  a  recognition  of  the  public  utility  of  guaran-
teeing work  to  all  willing  workers,  and  practical  training
for  work  to  all  willing  to  be  trained,  is  perhaps  the
largest  and  the  most  serviceable  of  the  palliatives  for  "  the
unemployed."

§  1  j. Economic  Precautions  required  in
Labour  Colonies.

If  such  a  scheme  could  in  fact  be  worked  on  a  self-
supporting  basis  no  distinctively  economic  difficulty  would
arise. But  when  it  is  recognised  that  these  and  all  other


144 THE  PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

Labour  Colonies  will  draw  subsidies  from  public  or  private
sources,  one  grave  economic  danger  must  be  plainly  con-
fronted and  met.

No  produce  of  a  Labour  Colony  should  be  placed  on
the  open  market  in  such  a  way  as  to  compete  with  the
produce  of  outside  English  labour.  Such  produce  being
subsidised  will  in  the  open  market  be  able  to  undersell
and  to  displace  goods  produced  under  ordinary  commercial
conditions.  The  result  of  such  underselling  will  be  to
drive  certain  weaker  outside  businesses  below  the  margin
of  subsistence  and  to  deprive  the  workers  formerly  engaged
in  them  of  their  employment.  Thus  the  "employment"
given  at  the  public  expense  or  by  charity  in  a  labour
colony  would  cause  an  amount  of  unseen  unemployment
as  large  as  that  which  it  cured.  This  condition  though
commonly  admitted  in  theory,  is  often  ignored  in  practice.
Since  it  is  not  possible  for  labour  colonies  to  be  fully
self-supporting  in  the  sense  that  they  produce  all  they
consume,  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  purchase  in  the
open  market  what  they  are  unable  to  produce.  To  meet
this  expense  they  are  often  disposed  to  confine  a  large
proportion  of  their  capital  and  labour  to  producing  those
goods  which  they  can  make  with  the  greatest  advantage
and  to  sell  them  in  neighbouring  markets.  The  result
is  they  inevitably  help  to  congest  outside  markets,  lower
prices,  and  drive  the  weakest  outside  producers  from  the
field.  Prison  labour,  workhouse  labour,  farm  colony
labour,  must  have  this  result.  If  Salvation  Army  matches
and  furniture,  if  Starnthwaite  vegetables  and  fruit  are
placed  upon  the  open  markets  of  the  neighbourhood,
they  cannot  fail  to  exercise  a  force  which  makes  for  the
"  unemployment "  of  the  least  efficient  outside  competitors.


DISPOSING OF SURPLUS PRODUCE  1 45

This  argument  is  not  really  met  by  showing  that  a
colony  does  not  directly  and  consciously  underbid:  it
helps  to  increase  Supply,  and  any  increase  of  Supply
without  a  corresponding  growth  of  Demand  necessarily
brings  down  prices.  It  may  indeed  be  urged  with  some
force  that  the  effect  produced  upon  prices  and  employ-
ment in  these  trades  will  be  more  than  compensated  for
by  the  effect  of  the  increased  demand  represented  by
the  consumption  of  other  outside  goods  purchased  by  the
Colony.  Set  these  two  tendencies  against  one  another,
and  the  result  will  be  a  net  increase  of  consumption,  repre-
sented by  the  improved  standard  of  consumption  of  the
colonists,  which  will  be  reflected  in  a  rise  of  aggregate
employment  for  the  whole  community.  This  argument
is  sound,  but  it  does  not  justify  the  retention  of  a  prac-
tice which  inflicts  upon  certain  special  English  industries
the  injury  of  an  illegitimate  competition.  Most  advocates
of  Colonies  and  other  schemes  of  public  employment
endeavour  to  provide  against  this  danger  by  confining
the  labour  of  colonists  to  the  production  of  commodities
which  are  either  consumed  on  the  colony,  or  which  if
placed  upon  the  outside  markets  only  compete  with  goods
imported  from  foreign  countries.

§  14. Difficulties  of  Disposing  of  Surplus  Produce.

A  single  colony,  if  it  is  to  make  an  effective  use  of
its  land,  its  labour,  and  its  location,  must  necessarily
specialise  its  productive  work  so  far  as  to  produce  larger
quantities  of  certain  agricultural  and  manufactured  goods
than  its  inhabitants  require  for  their  consumption.  The
difficulty  of  disposing  of  this  surplus  produce  without  in-
flicting injury  upon  outside  producers  might  be  minimised,

10


146 THE PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

if  it  were  possible  to  establish  a  system  of  labour  colonies,
some  engaged  in  rural  occupations,  others  on  co-operative
town  work.  Even  two  well-ordered  colonies,  one  in  the
town,  another  in  the  country,  might  effect  an  exchange
of  surplus  produce  upon  such  terms  that  everything  which
was  produced  could  be  consumed  by  the  colonists.  Al-
though it  is  highly  improbable  that  two  or  more  such
colonies  of  "  unemployed "  could  form  a  wholly  self-
sufficient  group,  it  seems  quite  possible  that  they  might
dispense  with  the  necessity  of  an  outside  market  for
their  goods,  while  the  need  under  which  they  would  lie
of  purchasing  in  the  outside  market  certain  articles  for
their  own  use,  would  of  course  be  perfectly  innocuous.
The  small  experiments  in  Labour  Colonies  have  never
fairly  tested  the  possibilities  of  effective  co-operation,  for
the  considerable  deficit  involved  in  their  working  is  due
chiefly  to  the  necessity  of  purchasing  in  the  outside
market  the  bulk  of  the  articles  which  they  consume  and
the  materials  and  tools  for  their  work,  an  expense  which
might  be  largely  reduced  by  the  co-operation  of  a  chain
of  labour  colonies  organised  with  the  express  design  of
mutual  support  for  industrial  life.

The  dependence  of  England  upon  foreign  countries  for
a  large  proportion  of  the  agricultural  produce  she  consumes,
affords  ample  opportunities  for  the  disposal  of  English
farm  produce  by  a  displacement  of  imports.  Our  imports
of  agricultural  produce  for  consumption  amounted  in  1902
to  more  than  ;£i  68,000,000,  of  which  grain  and  flour
exceeded  ^£7 1,000,000,  while  the  direct  and  indirect
products  of  the  dairy,  butter,  cheese,  bacon,  ham,  lard,
and  milk,  cost  ^48,000,000,  foreign  eggs  ^6,284,000,
meat  and  vegetables  over  ^29,000,000. It  seems  possible


SCHEME OF  AFFORESTATION  I  47

that  labour  farm  colonies  which  could  devote  themselves
to  the  production  of  these  goods  might  place  their  sub-
sidised produce  on  the  English  markets  without  the  same
direct  injury  which  would  result  from  placing  manufactured
goods  on  town  markets.  But  even  here  it  must  not  be
forgotten  that  foreign  agricultural  produce  would  only  be
displaced  by  an  underselling  which  would  be  likely  to
injure  English  producers  of  the  same  classes  of  articles.
If  subsidised  labour  colonies  should  displace  Danish
butter  they  would  do  so  to  the  detriment  of  those  English
farmers  who  under  present  circumstances  produce  a  large
part  of  our  butter  supply.  There  are  very  few  classes  of
produce,  agricultural  or  other,  which  could  be  produced
by  a  labour  colony  and  which  are  at  present  exclusively
in  the  hands  of  foreigners.

§  75. Scheme  of  Afforestation.

These  economic  dangers  and  difficulties  do  not  ot
course  apply  to  schemes  of  agricultural  improvement  with
or  without  State  assistance  which  are  conducted  on  purely
bond  fide  business  lines.  Of  such  schemes  the  simplest
and  most  entirely  unobjectionable  is  that  of  Afforestation.

If  the  estimates  of  Dr.  Schlich  and  other  authorities  are
correct,  that  England  contains  8,000,000  acres  well  suited
for  the  growth  of  timber,  and  that  6,000,000  of  these
would  grow  a  quantity  equal  to  our  present  imports,  that
the  industry  could  be  run  upon  an  ordinary  business
basis  and  would  provide  employment  for  large  quantities
of  unskilled  labour  during  nearly  the  whole  of  the  year,
we  have  here  a  scheme  which  would  satisfy  every  econo-
mic test.  There  is  no  economic  reason  why  capital
should  not  be  advanced  by  the  State  for  the  establishment

10*


148 THE  PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

of  such  an  industry,  supposing  it  can  be  worked,  as
Dr.  Schlich  affirms,  to  yield  a  profit  of  2f  per  cent,  after
allowing  for  compound  interest  on  the  necessary  outlay
during  the  long  period  that  must  elapse  before  returns
come  in.  Indeed  it  might  be  possible  to  go  further  and
allow  the  legitimacy  of  a  public  outlay  of  capital  without
interest,  assuming  that  the  timber  grown  displaced  a  trade
which  was  entirely  of  an  import  character.  The  large
employment  of  low-skilled  labour  in  such  a  rural  industry
might  prove  to  be  the  best  occupation  for  subsidised
labour  colonies,  if  it  were  deemed  necessary  to  establish
them  as  a  means  of  dealing  with  "  the  unemployed."

§  16. Establishment  of  Small  Holders  as  a  Means
of  Increased  Agricultural  Employment

Other  proposals  for  a  revival  of  English  agriculture,  by
the  establishment  of  small  holders  with  such  a  property
in  the  land  they  cultivate  and  such  command  of  capital
as  shall  enable  them  to  place  dairy  produce,  fruit,  vegetables,
pork  and  bacon,  fowls  and  eggs  upon  the  market  at
profitable  prices,  are  interesting  contributions  to  the  solution
of  the  unemployed  problem,  provided  one  point  is  kept
clearly  in  mind.  Such  schemes,  if  they  are  to  contain
the  elements  of  success,  must  not  be  primarily  devoted
to  the  provision  of  work  for  those  who  are  already
unemployed.  Because  there  is  unemployed  labour  and
vacant  land  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the  planting  of
this  labour  upon  this  land  will  be  a  serviceable  mode  of
dealing  with  unemployment.  If  bodies  of  trained,  able-
bodied  agriculturists  with  sufficient  capital  of  their  own,
or  furnished  by  the  public,  can  be  put  upon  good  land,
acquired without great expense or leased upon terms


ILLUSTRATION OF SMALL HOLDING SCHEME 1.49

which  will  evoke  the  application  of  the  best  energj
the  occupiers,  with  ability  to  co-operate  so  far  as  to
keep  down  certain  expenses  of  production,  of  transport,
and  of  sale,  it  seems  quite  possible  that  a  greatly  increased
employment  upon  the  land  might  be  profitably  found.
It  does  not  seem  likely  that  those  who  are  displaced
from  employment  in  the  towns,  or  other  town-bred  persons,
army  pensioners,  or  the  rank  and  file  of  the  unemployed
can  be  thus  entrusted  with  the  use  of  land  and  capital
upon  this  business  footing  with  any  chance  of  success.
But  small  farmers,  picked  agricultural  labourers,  country
mechanics  and  others  might  succeed,  provided  they  had
security  of  their  holdings  upon  reasonable  terms  and  were
possessed  of  sufficient  capital,  intelligence,  and  willingness
to  combine  for  certain  common  ends.

§  17. An  Illustration  of  Small  Holding  Scheme,

The  following  scheme  of  small  farm  settlements  upon
corporate  tenancy,  drafted  by  Mr.  Mather,  may  be  taken
as  illustrative  of  this  line  of  progress  :

"  Every  County  Council  should  receive  applications  from
those  who  seek  to  obtain  a  permanent  living  from  the
land.  Landowners  should  be  asked  to  send  to  the  County
Council  particulars  of  any  available  farms  which  may  be
suitable  for  the  purpose.  On  the  general  suitability  of
any  farm  being  approved,  the  Council  should  convene  a
meeting  of  the  applicants ;  and  if  the  farm  be  accepted
at  such  a  meeting  by  a  sufficient  number  to  take  up  the
entire  area,  the  Council  should  appoint  provisional  Trustees
or  managers  to  act  for  the  applicants.  These  Trustees
should  then  arrange  terms  with  the  owner  of  the  land,
and  settle  its  allotment  and  the  buildings  suitable  for  the


150  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

applicants.  They  should  next  submit  to  the  County
Council  full  particulars  of  the  terms  which  can  be  settled
with  the  owner  of  the  land,  the  areas  desired  to  be
taken  by  each  of  the  intending  occupiers,  and  the  cost
of  the  buildings  necessary.  If  the  County  Council  approve
of  the  proposed  terms,  they  should  then  recommend  a
loan  to  be  made  by  the  State  to  the  Trustees  of  the
sum  necessary  for  the  erection  of  the  buildings  and  laying
out  the  property.

"  On  such  a  loan  being  sanctioned,  the  Trustees  would
acquire  the  property  and  erect  the  buildings,  and  the
holdings  would  be  allotted  to  the  respective  applicants.
Before  possession  was  given,  every  applicant  would  have
to  undertake  to  do,  within  six  months  of  entry,  the  fencing
and  certain  other  specified  work,  mainly  in  relation  to
the  out-buildings,  which  could  reasonably  be  required  to
be  done  by  the  occupier.  He  might  then  take  possession
on  any  one  of  three  different  systems.  He  might  (a)
sign  an  ordinary  agreement  of  tenancy  on  terms  agreed
upon  with  the  Trustees ;  or  (b)  pay  at  least  one-tenth
the  cost  of  the  buildings  upon  his  holding,  executing  at
the  same  time  a  deed  stating  the  amount  remaining  due
from  him  for  the  same,  and  the  annual  charge  upon  it,
calculated  at  4  per  cent,  interest;  or  (c)  agree  to  pay
annually  6  per  cent,  interest  on  the  total  cost  for  a  term
of  25  years,  which  at  the  end  of  that  term  would  dis-
charge his  liability  in  respect  of  the  buildings.

§  18. Corporate  Tenancy  and  other  Co-operative

Elements.


Such schemes
business  aim


tnes having for their primary object the
of  placing  larger  quantities  of  English  agricul-


ECONOMIC CRITICISM  151

tural  produce  upon  the  market  at  the  profitable  rates,
would  exercise  a  certain  curative  influence  upon  the
malady  of  unemployment  By  affording  increased  em-
ployment on  the  land  they  would  check  the  constant
flow  of  rural  labour  to  the  towns,  and  would  render  far
more  effective  than  before  the  other  remedies  which  might
be  applied  to  the  direct  relief  of  unemployment  in  the
towns.  But  if  these  schemes  of  agricultural  business  are
to  succeed  it  is  most  important  that  they  should  be  planned
with  a  single  view  to  the  improvement  of  agriculture,
and  not  directly  with  the  object  of  "making  employment
on  the  land."  This  latter  effect  should  be  left  to  flow
naturally  from  the  attainment  of  the  former.  The  best
available  labour  should  be  put  upon  the  best  available
land,  with  freedom  of  cultivation  and  a  sufficiency  of
capital.  A  scheme  like  that  of  Corporate  Tenancy  in-
volving as  its  foundation  some  mutual  aid  and  confidence,
would  form  a  basis  of  co-operation  in  the  use  of  machinery,
dairy  appliances,  storehouses,  which  would  develop  natur-
ally certain  economies  of  transport  and  marketing,  securing
for  the  producers  a  large  proportion  of  the  profits  which
at  present  pass  to  collectors,  carriers,  salesmen,  and  other
grades  of  middlemen.  Last  but  not  least  such  groups
of  small  holders  could  by  the  development  of  Agricultural
Credit  Banks,  secure  for  themselves  that  command  of
capital  and  flexibility  of  business  outlay  which  is  so
essential  to  successful  competition  under  the  terms  of
modern  industry.

§  19. Economic  Criticism. National  versus
International  Policy.

In forming any general  estimate  of  these  proposals  as


152  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

contributions  to  the  solution  of  the  Unemployed  problem,
we  must  keep  in  mind  two  economic  points.

In  the  first  place  so  far  as  these  schemes  of  agricultural
revival  are  directed  to  the  increase  of  English  industry
by  the  displacement  of  foreign  agricultural  and  other
goods,  they  are  purely  national  remedies.  If  by  improved
methods  of  dairy  farming  we  can  enable  English  butter
to  beat  out  of  the  market  Danish  and  Brittany  butter,  we
are  simply  increasing  employment  in  England  by  diminish-
ing employment  in  Denmark  and  Brittany,  and  the  problem
of  unemployment  merely  shifts  its  locale,  unless  the  pro-
ducers in  Denmark  and  Brittany  can  force  a  new  market
either  at  home  or  elsewhere  for  their  butter  at  a  reduced
price.  The  objection  which  is  sometimes  urged  to  the
effect  that  the  displacement  of  any  class  of  imports  will
throw  out  of  employment  the  capital  and  labour  engaged
in  those  English  manufactures  which  produce  export  goods
to  pay  for  the  imports,  has  no  validity.  If  English  agri-
culturists increase  their  production  by  the  amount  which
was  formerly  imported,  they  will  be  able  to  get  in  exchange
and  consume  those  manufactured  goods  which  formerly
went  out  in  export  trade,  or  their  equivalents.  But  when
due  regard  is  paid  to  the  rapidly  growing  importance  of
the  international  aspect  of  all  industrial  questions,  it  is
not  possible  to  contemplate  as  a  final  and  satisfactory
solution  of  "  unemployment "  an  improvement  of  English
agricultural  production  which  merely  enables  England  to
oust  a  foreign  competitor,  and  to  secure  for  herself  a
larger  share  of  the  same  aggregate  of  agricultural  employ-
ment. If  this  argument  seems  to  any  a  begging  of  the
question,  I  would  refer  them  to  the  general  analysis  of
unemployment for a recognition of the fact that an


THE GAIN OF AGRICULTURAL REVIVAL 153

increased  production  has  no  necessary  force  which  can
stimulate  a  corresponding  increase  of  consumption.  It
might  therefore  not  improbably  happen  that  an  improve-
ment of  English  agriculture  would  give  increased  employ-
ment upon  English  soil,  and  might  be  attended  by  a
reduced  employment  in  Denmark  or  elsewhere.  There
will  be  no  rise  of  aggregate  employment  in  the  larger
industrial  community  to  which  both  England  and  Den-
mark belong,  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  the  result  of
English  improvements  has  been  to  raise  the  aggregate
of  consumption  in  this  larger  community,  and  this  is  not
shown  by  proving  that  more  is  consumed  in  England
unless  it  can  also  be  proved  that  less  is  not  consumed
in  Denmark.

While  such  a  consideration  need  not  deter  us  from  any
measures  of  agricultural  improvement  in  England,  we  should
recognise  that  the  ever  closening  international  relations
will  prevent  us  from  holding  the  full  advantages  from  such
improvements,  unless  the  supreme  test  of  a  rise  in  the
level  of  consumption  over  the  whole  competing  area  is
satisfied.

§  20. The  Gain  of  Agricultural  Revival  should
go  Chiefly  to  Labour.

The  second  point  is  this.  In  regarding  the  influence  of
schemes  of  agricultural  revival  upon  the  volume  of  employ-
ment, it  is  essential  that  the  chief  gain  of  such  revival  should
pass  to  wages  of  labour  and  not  to  profits  and  rents  of
the  landowning  and  large  capitalist  classes.  For  we  have
observed  that  whereas  increased  wages  will  for  the  most
part  be  "  consumed "  in  raising  the  standard  of  comfort
for  agricultural  workers,  increased  rents  and  profits  will  to


154 THE  PROBLEM OF THE  UNEMPLOYED

a  large  extent  be  "  saved "  and  invested  or  banked,  so
as  to  increase  the  excess  of  producing-power  in  forms  of
capital,  and  to  maintain  and  aggravate  the  general  in-
stability of  trade.  Schemes  for  increased  production,  even
while  they  seem  to  employ  more  labour  and  capital,  will
in  large  measure  defeat  their  end  unless  an  increased
proportion  of  the  enlarged  consuming-power  which  they
generate  passes  to  those  who  will  use  it  in  steady  demand
for  commodities.

§  21. Proposal  of  Secondary  or  A  Iternative  Trades.

It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  work  to  attempt  a
description  of  the  various  proposals  to  deal  with  temporary
unemployment  of  skilled  and  unskilled  workers  due  to
"seasonal"  or  "trade  fluctuations."  A  brief  application
of  one  economic  test  to  the  more  general  palliatives  musf'
suffice.

It  is  often  suggested  that  if  season  workers,  such  as
house  painters  and  other  members  of  the  building  trades,
were  possessed  of  a  second  or  alternative  trade  which  they
could  ply  during  the  winter,  their  economic  position  would
be  greatly  strengthened.  It  is  natural  that  those  who
look  at  the  single  trade  should  take  this  view.  Many  go
so  far  as  to  regard  it  as  a  chief  function  of  a  Technical
Education  System  to  furnish  workers  in  seasonal  or  other
capricious  or  fluctuating  trades  with  an  alternative  craft.
But  though  the  individual  is  greatly  benefited  by  increasing
his  versatility,  it  cannot  be  admitted  that  the  aggregate
of  employment  is  increased  directly  by  any  such  measures.
If  a  painter  provided  with  another  craft  sought  employment
during  the  winter  months,  what  craft  should  he  possess
and  where  wouLl  he  find  employment  except  by  displacing


DISTRIBUTION  OF  PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  WORK 1 55

another  workman  in  that  craft?  Unless  there  are  trades
which  are  insufficiently  furnished  with  effective  labour,
engaged  in  making  goods  for  which  the  increasing  demand
is  inadequately  met,  how  can  the  new  supply  of  labour
find  employment?  It  is  of  no  use  planning  new  kinds  of
production  unless  there  is  a  sufficient  growing  demand  to
take  off  at  a  remunerative  price  the  new  products.  Those
who  propose  alternative  employments  for  "season"  workers
are  not  prepared  to  point  out  any  trades  insufficiently
supplied  with  labour,  to  which  the  season  workers  might
have  recourse.

§  22. Sound  Distribution  of  Public  and
Private Work.

In  the  analysis  of  causes  of  unemployment  it  was  pointed
out  that  in  many  trades  there  was  a  needless  amount  of
irregularity  of  employment.  In  many  cases  orders  would
be  distributed  over  a  longer  period  of  time  and  work
would  be  more  regular,  if  legislative  enactments  or  private
agreement  in  the  trade  imposed  restrictions  upon  the  hours
of  labour  and  overtime  worked  by  all  competitors.
Though  the  intelligence  and  goodwill  of  single  employers
may  do  something  to  distribute  employment  more  evenly
over  the  year  and  to  throw  extra  work  of  repairs,  etc.,  on
the  times  when  general  work  is  slack,  it  is  clear  that  not
much  can  be  effected  by  this  means.  Neither  can  public
bodies,  so  far  as  they  act  on  ordinary  business  principles,
throw  any  great  increase  of  employment  on  the  periods
when  many  men  are  out  of  work.  It  is  natural  enough
that  either  public  or  private  employers  in  executing  work
which  can  be  done  equally  well  at  any  time,  should
choose  those  times  when  larger  numbers  of  men  competent


156  THE PROBLEM OF  THE UNEMPLOYED

to  do  such  work  are  available.  So  if  drains  have  to  be
cleared  or  repaired,  if  roads  have  to  be  made  or  indoor
repairs  executed,  it  is  reasonable  and  businesslike  to  have
this  work  done  when  plenty  of  suitable  labour  can  be  got,
and  a  public  body  keenly  acting  in  the  public  interest
would  select  such  times.  Since  public  bodies  are  not
always  businesslike,  it  is  legitimate  for  the  Local  Govern-
ment Board  to  remind  them  of  the  duty  of  executing
their  business  on  truly  economical  principles.  The  small
attention  paid  by  municipal  authorities  to  the  advice  of
the  central  government  may  be  attributed  to  a  conscious-
ness that  they  are  already  doing  all  that  could  be
reasonably  done  to  supply  employment  at  slack  times.

§  2 j. Theory  of  Public  Relief  Works.

Such  a  businesslike  disposition  of  public  work  must  be
carefully  distinguished  from  all  that  partakes  of  relief
works.  Whenever  it  is  claimed  that  public  bodies  should
"  make "  work,  or  should  give  necessary  work  at  times
other  than  the  most  convenient,  or  should  give  it  to
workers  who  are  not  chosen  for  their  competency,  it  is
evident  that  what  is  done  must  be  regarded  as  relief
works  and  not  classed  with  ordinary  public  work.  The
inability  of  large  numbers  of  workers  to  provide  adequately
against  trade  depressions  which  they  cannot  foresee  and
against  seasonal  employment  in  many  low-paid  trades,  is
now  widely  recognised,  and  it  is  urged  by  many  that
considerations  of  public  utility  demand  that  public  relief
works  should  be  organised  which  may  abate  the  misery
and  the  degradation  of  industrial  character  which  is
inseparable  from  long  periods  of  unemployment.


fUGHI EX  ONOMIC  CONDITIONS  OF  RK1.1  hi WORKS 157

§24. Right  Economic  Conditions  of  Relief  Works,

Three  tolerably  obvious  economic  rules  should  guide
the  organisation  of  such  relief  works,  where  they  are
deemed  necessary.

First,  the  product  of  the  labour  employed  on  public
relief  works  should  not  be  brought  into  competition  with
the  products  of  outside  labour.

Secondly,  the  wages  paid  should  be  somewhat  lower
than  those  paid  for  similar  work  in  the  outside  market.

Thirdly,  the  work  should,  so  far  as  possible,  be  adapted
to  the  circumstances  and  the  capacity  of  the  individuals
relieved,  e.g.,  a  stenographer  or  a  working  jeweller  should
not  be  set  to  do  the  work  of  a  navvy.

The  validity  of  the  first  two  rules  will  only  be  con-
tested by  those  who  seek  by  relief  work  to  provide  for
the  growth  of  a  surreptitious  and  an  uneconomical  form
of  state-socialism.  All  relief  works  are  of  course  socialistic
in  the  sense  that  they  form  a  part  of  that  definite  social
support  which  the  State  deems  it  expedient  to  give  to
certain  of  its  members  who  are  unable  without  it  to  live
in  a  condition  consistent  with  public  safety  and  with
public  self-respect.  But  it  is  of  urgent  importance  to
recognise  the  folly  of  endeavouring  to  build  a  system  of
public  industry  upon  the  foundation  of  such  relief  works.
If  in  contravention  to  the  first  of  the  above-mentioned
rules,  municipal  bakeries  were  started,  not  for  the  sake  of
providing  cheaper  and  better  food  to  consumers,  but  of
giving  employment  to  bakers  who  were  out  of  work,  one
of  two  results  would  reasonably  follow.  If  the  municipal
bakery  paid  the  same  or  higher  wages  than  outside
bakeries, it  would  gradually  induce  the  employees  in  the


158  THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED

latter  to  throw  up  their  posts  in  order  to  qualify  by
"  unemployment "  for  work  in  the  municipal  bakery.  If
the  municipal  bakery  stood  by  its  theory  and  admitted
all  qualified  applicants,  it  would  be  compelled  to  enlarge
its  operations  until  it  had  absorbed  the  whole  local  trade.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  municipal  wages  were  much
lower  than  the  wages  outside,  and  no  profits  were  required
for  the  public  capital  and  management,  it  is  conceivable
that  the  municipal  loaf  might  undersell  the  outside  loaf.
In  any  case  the  increase  of  the  supply  of  bread  by  the
addition  of  the  municipal  loaves  would  bring  down  the
price  of  bread,  and  increasing  the  congestion  of  supply
would  make  trade  impossible  for  the  weaker  bakers.  Thus
it  appears  that  the  establishment  of  a  municipal  bakery
could  not  reduce  and  might  easily  increase  the  unem-
ployment of  bakers :  it  could  only  absorb  the  unemployed
by  absorbing  the  whole  trade.  Some  socialists  acknowledge
this  and  base  their  advocacy  of  municipal  workshops
chiefly  on  the  supposition  that  they  would  lead  to  the
organisation  of  the  several  industries  by  the  municipality.
More  thoughtful  reformers,  however,  repudiate  this  line  of
movement,  because  they  perceive  that  to  try  socialistic
experiments  with  workers  who  are  selected  for  incapacity
in  trades  which  are  lowly  organised,  will  ensure  prompt
and  signal  failure.  This  lesson  has  been  taught  in  history
over  and  over  again,  one  of  the  most  dramatic  illustrations
being  afforded  by  the  attempt  to  establish  public  works
in  Paris  under  the  Commune  of  1848.

§  25. True  and  False  Ideas  of  Public  Industry
and  Employment.

If  it is desirable to extend the  area  of  State  or  mu-


TRUE AND FALSI IDEAS  1 59

nicipal  control  over  industry,  the  highly  organised  routine
trades,  already  in  the  hands  of  large  capitalist  companies,
and  often  partaking  of  the  character  of  monopolies,  furnish
the  more  favourable  field  for  such  social  experiments.  To
begin  by  "  socialising "  the  irregular  and  backward  in-
dustries simply  means  a  futile  attempt  to  force  progress
by  shoving  in  the  thick  end  of  the  wedge.  Moreover  it
is  a  sound  principle  to  recognise  that  since  industry
exists  ultimately  for  the  benefit  of  the  consumer,  it  is  his
interest  and  not  that  of  the  worker  which  should  be  kept
directly  in  view  when  it  is  proposed  to  assume  an  industry
under  public  management.  This  principle  is  not  antago-
nistic to  the  adoption  of  "relief  works"  for  the  unem-
ployed. But  when  a  municipality  decides  that  it  is  to  the
public  interest  to  meet  some  unforeseen  depression  ot
employment  by  offering  public  wage-work  upon  conditions
less  obnoxious  and  degrading  than  Poor  Law  relief,  it
should  do  so  with  a  clear  understanding  that  it  is  depart-
ing from  the  ordinary  rules  of  public  business,  and  should
confine  its  experiments  within  the  narrowest  limits  consis-
tent with  the  provision  of  effective  relief.  To  concede
any  general  demand  to  the  effect  that  all  unemployed
workers  should  be  provided  with  public  work  at  their
special  trade,  paid  at  standard  wages,  would  mean  an
attempt  to  reverse  the  national  historic  order  of  social
reconstruction,  and  to  move  towards  the  new  industrial
order  along  a  line  of  greatest  possible  resistance.  So  long  as
periods  of  unemployment  recur,  which  cannot  be  foreseen
or  provided  against  by  large  numbers  of  workers,  it  is
desirable  that  the  organised  community  shall  take  measures
by  means  of  public  work  and  wages  to  secure  the  suffer-
ers against the damage to life and industrial  character


160 THE PROBLEM OF  THE  UNEMPLOYED

which  such  periods  of  enforced  idleness  involve.  But  the
utmost  care  must  be  taken  to  absolutely  sever  such  public
employment  and  its  product  from  the  general  current  of
outside  industry,  and  to  ensure  that  all  employment
afforded  by  public  bodies  in  these  times  of  distress  shall
be  regarded  as  a  temporary  expedient  justified  by  special
social  needs  and  not  as  a  part  of  an  organised  attempt
to  reconstruct  the  industrial  system.

§  26. Danger  of  Resting  upon  Palliatives.

Two  chief  dangers  beset  the  consideration  of  the  speci-
fics for  unemployment  here  described.  The  first  is,  lest
the  practical  reformer,  impressed  by  the  scale  and  import-
ance of  one  or  more  of  these  schemes,  should  allow  his
mind  to  rest  contented  on  a  plane  of  palliatives,  ignoring
the  need  of  more  fundamental  economic  remedies.
Linked  closely  with  this  is  the  tendency  to  impute  validity
to  all  reforms  which  make  in  the  first  instance  for  an
apparent  increase  of  employment  without  considering
whether  they  are  attended  by  an  increase  of  the  aggregate
consumption.  The  attempt  to  cure  unemployment  by
making  new  employments  will  of  necessity  prove  futile,
unless  the  conditions  of  the  new  employments  are  such
as  to  throw  an  increased  power  of  consumption  into  the
hands  of  those  who  will  use  it  to  raise  the  general  level
of  consumption  in  the  community.  This  policy  alone  can
furnish  a  guarantee  for  the  steady  continuance  of  an  enlarged
volume of  industry  and  of  employment.


INDEX.


Abstinence,  90,  91.
Afforestation,  Scheme  of, 147.
Agriculture,  Decline  of  workers  in,

67. Imports  of,  147. Revival  of,

153.

B.

Bagehot,  97.

Bimetallism,  112,  etc.  Bimetallist
Assumption, 116.

Bonar,  Dr.,  Philosophy  and  Political
Economy,  90.

Booth,  Charles,  Measure  of  Unem-
ployed, 2.  Unemployed  Margin,
7.  Superfluous  labour,  9,  21.
Emploj-ment  in  Manufactures,  67.
Suggested  Labour  Colonies,  133-5.

Building  Trades,  5,33.  Employment
in,  67.

c.

Capital,  Misuse  of  term,  ix.  Unem-
ployed, 54,  59.  Glut  of,  64,  65,
76. How  a  glut  operates,  79.

Census,  Occupations  by,  13.  Mana-
facturing  population  in,  24,  25,
67. '  Unoccupied '  classes,  30.

Charity  Organisation,  42.

Commune,  Paris.  158.


Consumption,  increased,  98.  Policy
of  High  Consumption,  no.

Corporate  tenancy, 151.

Credit,  State  of,  58.  Manufacture  oi
112. Agricultural  credit,  151.

Crocker,  Mr.  Uriel,  ix.

D.

Dendy,  Miss  H.,  52.

De  Rousiers,  La  Question  Ouvrihc
en  Angleterre,  53.

Depression  of  Trade,  Unemployed
by,  6.  Cause  of  Unemployment,
50. Report of Commission,  61.

Distribution,  Waste  in,  66.  Employ-
ment in,  68.  Mal-distribution  as
root-cause  of  Malady,  88.

Dock  labourers,  27,  53.

Domestic  Service,  28.

Drage,  Mr.  Geoffrey,  27.

E.

Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  82.

F.

Farm  Colonies,  132.
'Fairman,  Frank',  ix.
Fashion,  38.


l62


INDEX


G.

Gambetta,  58.
General  labourers,  33.

H.

Hadleigh  Colony, 133, 139.
Hazell's  Colony,  133,  140.
Hertzka,  Dr.  'Freeland',  ix.
Holdings,  Small,  148. Mr.  Mather's
scheme  of, 149, 150.


I,


Internationalism,  87, 107,  152.
Investor's  Review,  64.

L.

Labour-Department,  Report  of,  3.
Labour  Gazette,  11,  14.  Statistics
of  Unemployment,  50.

Labour-Bureaux,  Unemployed  ac-
cording to,  22,  28.  Appendix
upon  Unemployment  in,  31.  As
Clearing-houses, 126  etc.

Labour- Commission,  Final  Report,
58, 131.

Labour-Colonies,  131,  133.  General
Conditions  for,  136,  143-5.  In
Germany  and  Holland,  137,  138.

Lauderdale,  Earl  of,  viii.

Leakage,  in  Season  trades,  2.  In
general  trade,  51.  Stoppage  of,
128.

M.

Machine -tender,  41.  Machinery
as  cause  of  Unemployment,  49.
Machinery  and  increased  pro-
duction,92.  Machinery  and  shorter
working-day, 105.

Malthus,  Analysis  of  Trade-depres-
sion, ix. On  Over-saving,  98.

Market,  Expansion  of,  36.  Money-
market,  87.


Mather,  Training  and  Agricultural
Colonies,  141.  Small  Holding's
Scheme, 149.

Mill,  J.  S.  Theory  of  Capital,  ix.
Increase  of  retailers,  71.  Theory
of  Saving,  81.  Want  of  commer-
cial confidence,  121,  122.

Moffat,  R.  S.  'The  Economy  of
Consumption',  ix.

Money,  Supply  of,  115.  Scarcity  of,
124.

Monopoly, natural  and  legal, 101.

Mummery,  A.  F.  'The  Physiology
of  Industry',  ix.

N.

Nation  as  distinguished  from  Com-
munity, 86.


o.


Over-production,  53.  True  meaning
of,  60.  Admitted  by  Commission,
62.

Over-saving,  76,  82,  91.

Over-supply,  64,  66.

P.

Palliatives,  126,  etc.  Dangers  of,  160.
Parsimony,  A.  Smith's  doctrine  of,  ix.
Poor  Law  Colonies, 132,  142.
Prices, how they fall, 1 13- 1 1 5.

Causes of falling prices, 118.

122, 123.
Producing-power,  Excess  of,  59.
Property,  Social, 100.
Public  Services,  28, 155.
Public  relief-works,  155-158.

R.

Rae,  103.

Relief-  works,  155-158.
Rent  of  land, 100.
Retail-trade, 25. Growth of  em-
ployment in,  68,  69.


INDI  X


1O3


E) «  rtsou,  J.  M.  Fallacy  of  Sav-

ix.

s.

uel,  11.  131.

Sauerbeck,  L  belt,  70,  119.

Sav'  1  et  of  stuely,  ix. Ex

of,  76.  Limit  of  socially  useful,
78.  Difference  between  individual
and  social,  85.  Saving  of  workers,
89.  Automatic  S.  of  rich,  90.
Increase  of  legitimate,  104.

Schulze-Gaevcrnitz, Social  Peace,

53-

Season-trades,  4, 154-

Schlich,  Dr.,  147.

Smart,  Dr.,  Studies,  in  Economics,
122.

Smith,  Adam,  Doctrine  of  Parsi-
monv,  ix.  Transport  of  labour,  39.
'Saving  is  Consuming',  81.  Lais-
sez-faire policy,  83.

Speculation, 36.

Strikes  as  causes  of  unemployment,
52. Causes of Strikes, 52, 63.

Starnthwaite, Colony, 138-9, 144.

Superannuation,  Trade  Union,  15, 16.


Taxation, as an economic  policy,

102, 103.
Technical  Education,  154.
Thrift,  Who  practice,  89. Uses  of,

92,  93.

Trade  Union,  Returns  of  Unem-
ployed, 12,  13.  Conditions  of
Unemployed  Benefit,  15.  Policy
of  labour-monopoly,  44.

Transferability of labour, 42-44.

Transport,  Unemployment  in,  26.

Trotson,  J.  H.,  64.

Trusts,  American,  64, 101.


u.


Underconsumption,  viii,  65.  Motives
of, 88. Effects  on  Employment,

93-7-
Underproduction,  60,  97.

Unearned  Incomes,  91,  99-101.
Taxation  of,  99.

Unemployed,  Report  on,  3,  6,  8,  9.

Unemployment,  Illusivencss  of,  t.
Official  signification  of,  3.  Legit-
imate use  of,  9.  Defective  sta-
tistics of,  11.  In  unorganised
trades,  1 8, etc.  Skilled  and  unskilk  d ,
20.  In  'making'  industries,  23.
In  Distribution,  Transport,  etc.,  26.
Does  Unemployment  grow,  35.
Individualist  view  of,  45,  etc.
Moral  factors  in,  46,  etc.  Machi-
nery as  cause,  48.  Of  Capital
and  Land,  54.  How  overpro-
duction produces,  78,  80.  Absorp-
tion of,  106,  109,  Different  kinds
of,  130.  Report  on,  137.  Mr.
Mather's  Draft  Scheme,  142.


Van  Oss,  64.
Von  Halle,  64.


V.


w.


Wages,  rise  of  103,  104.
Walker,  Professor  Francis,  100.
Wilson,  A.  J.  64.
Working-day, shortening  of, I05<
no.

y.

Yorkshire,  Woollen  trade,  41.


GUILDFORD

BILLING  AND SONS, LTD,

PRINTERS


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
