THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION


^•n^y^ o


THE CITIZEN'S LIBRARY


The
Economics of Distribution


BY


JOHN Al^ioBSON

AUTHOR OF " THE EVOLUTION*OF MODERN CAPITALISM "
"JOHN RUSKIN/' "SOCIAL REFORMERS," ETC.


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

LONDON : MACMILLAN & CO., Ltd.

1900

All rights rt4»rvid


/


Ck>PTBie]iT« 1900,
Br THE BfAGMILLAN GOMPANT.


J. S. Clithlng ft Go. — Berwlek ft SmWi
Norwood Mui. nJ9.A.


PREFACE.

This work endeavours to construct an intel-
ligible, self-consistent theory of Distribution by
means of an analysis of those processes of bar-
gaining through which economic distribution is
actually conducted, the results of industrial co-
operation being apportioned to the owners of the
factors of jiroduction in the several stages of
production.

The chief difficulty lies in coordinating the
different factors of production, so as to bring the
payments made respectively for the use of land,
labour, and capital under a common law of price,
and in showing that the same economic forces
which determine the market and normal prices
of commodities are applicable to the sale of all
these uses of the factors of production.

The extension to all these cases of the termi-
nology and modes of measurement hitherto con-
fined to land, or extended tentatively and by
analogy to certain other factors, involves a com-
plete restatement of some of the problems of
wages and interest. But this unification of the
different processes of economic payment has long


vi PREFACE.

been felt to be necessary to the construction of
a satisfactory theory of distribution, and various
approaches in this direction have been made.
This work claims to go farther and to reach a
common law of price applicable to every sort of
sale.

Some of the reasoning is difficult because it
involves a necessary abandonment of commonly
accepted terminology and the establishment of a
new system of economic notation. If, however,
the reasoning is valid, it establishes certain im-
portant theoretic conclusions, some of which are
fraught with large . implications in the direction
of progressive politics.

In particular, it claims to prove that all pro-
cesses of bargaining and competition, by which
prices are attained and the distribution of wealth
achieved, are affected by certain elements of force
which assign "forced gains" and other elements
of " economic rent " to the buyers or the sellers.
There is thus established the existence of a large
fund, partaking of the nature of those monopoly
and differential rents, long ago recognised in the
case of land, which furnish no stimulus to volun-
tary industrial energy, and which can be taken
for public service by taxation without injury to
industry.

Much of the material of this work was given
in the form of lectures to students of the London
School of Economics and Political Science in 1897,


PBEFACE. Yii

and parts of several chapters have appeared in the
Sarvard Quarterly Journal of JEconomics. Since
receiving the first proofs of this book, a little
volume has come into my hands, entitled ^^The
Theory of Wages," by Mr. H, M. Thompson,
which works out independently some of the main
points of my criticism of current theories, in par-
ticular of the fundamentally erroneous doctrine
that ^^ Rent does not enter into the Expenses of
Production."

JOHN A. HOBSON.


CONTENTS.

OHAPm pAoa

I. The Determination of a Mairket-prioe • . 1

II. Producer's and Consumer's Kents ... 41

in. The Determination of Long-period Prices and

of Value e . 55

IV. The Law of Kent as the Basis of Coordination ^

of the Factors of Production . • , • 113

Y. The Grading of Labour and Capital. Marginal

and Differential Payments .... 160

VL The Codrdination of the Factors of Production.
Effects on the Theory of Price and Distri-
bution 193

Vll. Bargains for the Sale of Labour-power . . 218

Vm. Bargains for the Use of Capital . . . 227

IX. Bohm-Bawerk's Positive Theory of Caj ital . 266

X. The Theory of Surplus Value — Its Influence

upon Distribution . , r . . 295

ix


THE ECONOMICS OF DISTEIBUTION.

CHAPTER I.

THB DBTEBMINATION OF A MABE:BT-PBI0B.

§ 1. "I am unaware of any rule of justice appli-
cable to the problem of distributing the produce of
industry," wrote Professor J. E. Cairnes, and it is
common to find in modern economic treatises gen-
eral expressions of dissatisfaction with existing
methods of apportioning wealth among those who
have contributed to its production. But there is
little agreement as to the nature of the defects in
present modes of distribution, nor does the analysis
of economic processes commonly adopted by those
who indulge in these expressions of dissatisfaction
fully justify any such general condemnation. The
economic power of landowners, the establishment
of trade monopolies or combinations, the weakness
of poorer classes of labourers in bargaining with
employers, are commonly regarded as defects of
the existing industrial order. But the recognition
of these defects is quite consistent with a convic-
tion that the general and normal tendency of com-
petitive industry makes for a fair and satisfactory

1


1


2 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

•

distribution of the fruits of industry. For the
specific defects named above are seen to be closely
associated with restraints of competition, and may
plausibly be regarded as exceptions which by no
means justify a general condemnation of the justice
or utility of a system' of distribution based upon
freedom of competition.

§ 2. In order to test the character of distri-
bution fairly, we must study it under normal
not under exceptional circumstances, and in its
constituent acts. Distribution is composed of, or
achieved by, transactions which, for lack of any
better term, we caU bargains. Much investiga-
tion has taken place of certain classes of bargains,
particularly in reference to sales of the use of the
factors of production, and special laws of rent,
wages, interest, have been founded upon these
studies. The general effect of these studies
among earlier economists was to break up the
unity of industry: first, by suggesting that bar-
gains for the use of land, of capital, and of labour-
power were subject to radically different laws ;
secondly, by failure to relate these laws of the
value or the price of the factors of production to
the laws which were found to determine the price
of the commodities which they contributed to
produce. More recent economic writers have
made considerable advances toward the integra-
tion or unification of a theory of Distribution, by
relating the theories of determining the price of


DETERMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 3

the several factors through an extension of the
law of differential rents, and by a scientific formu-
lation of a theory of value which is applicable to
the determination of all prices, alike of uses of
factors and of commodities.

But the completion of this work of unifying
the theory of Distribution has been delayed by a
refusal of economists to investigate sufficiently the
nature of the bargain per «e, so as to find what is
common to its different species. So far as Eng-
land is concerned, this refusal is due to a visible
reluctance among students to engage upon purely
deductive or speculative problems, except within
a certain narrow field of mathematical analysis.
The dominance of the historical spirit on the one
hand, and the rapid advance of specialisation in
economic study on the other, have unduly drawn
attention from the root-problems of deductive
economics, which are too often assumed to have
been solved, or not to be worth the trouble of solu-
tion. To these influences I chiefly attribute the
small amount of intellectual energy devoted to the
investigation of the process of bargaining which
lies at the base of the theory of Distribution.

Such study requires the moderate use of a method
which is peculiarly disfavoured by English econo-
mists of the present day, and is stigmatised as
"Crusoe economics." This recent revolt against
speculations, which were barren or ^lusive because
they commonly proceeded from false premises, has


r


4 TUB ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

gone too far. Such speculatiye analysis, with all
its dangers, is indispensable to the social sciences.
The conditions of inductive reasoning from experi-
ments, which exist in many branches of physical
science, are here notoriously lacking, and to sup-
ply this defect a process of fictitious experiment
is substituted, supposititious cases being framed
where unessential circumstances are eliminated, so
as to enable us to see more clearly the working of
certain simple forces.

To study problems of price or value, by plung-
ing into the full intricacy of actual business, is not
really a practical but a most unpractical method.
To go back to a thoroughly uneconomic condition
is usually unprofitable; but to take, first, cases
true to the essential facts of life, though contained
in a simpler setting of circumstances than that in
which they are actually found, and afterward to
introduce the excluded circumstances gradually,
in order to see what difference is wrought, — such
substitute for the experimental method of the
physical sciences is both defensible and highly
profitable as a mode of gradual approach toward
a real issue. This method I propose to adopt in
opening up the nature of a bargain.

§ 3. Bargains are found commonly in clusters at
a market-price, being acts of sale or exchange at
this common rate. It is therefore first essential
to understand how this common price-point is
determined.


DETERMINATION OF A MARKET-PBICE. 6

If A wishes to sell a horse and B is the only
buyer, it is evident that, if the highest price B
is willing to give does not reach the lowest point
A is willing to take, there can be no price and no
sale.

A asks <£20 and fixes reserve at <£15.

B offers £8 and fixes reserve at £12.

A's offers, 20 19 18 17 16 15


B's offers, 12 11 10 9 8

Next suppose A willing to take £15, while B
is willing to give <£18. If a sale takes place, the
price will obviously lie in the common ground be-
tween £18 and £15. But at what point and how
is the point reached ? Professor Hadley assumes
that a point will be reached and thinks it is deter-
mined by "relative skill in bargaining." ^

A, 20 19 18 17 16 15


B, 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8

But this attainment of a price by "skill of bar-
gaining" implies ignorance of each other's mind
in the case of A and B, or either. If A knows
or thinks that B will go to £18 and B does not
know that A will sell at £15, A will stand firm
at £18 and get that price ; if, per contra, B knows
that A will sell at £15 and A does not know that

1 Hadley's Economics, p. 73.


n


6 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

B will go to <£18, B gets his horse at <£15. If
neither knows but each suspects the other will go
further, "bluff" is the determinant; the bidding
proceeds until either A or B believes that any
further demand will outstep the limit set by the
other in his mind and will lose him the bargain.
The determinant here is superior cunning, or, a«
Hadley says, "skill in bargaining." Or it may
be that while A is willing to sell at <£15, he may
know or suspect that it is more important for B
to obtain the horse than for him to sell, in which
case he is in the position to extort <£18.

So far we have no element of competition : the
process by which a price is reached, if it is reached,
is one of bargaining from beginning to end.

Now introduce the competitive element upon
one side of the transaction. A, the happy owner
of the horse, whioh he will sell for £lb or as much
more as he can get, is faced by B and C, who both
want the horse and are furnished with eflEective
demand in the shape of cash. Now B and C
either set the same limit-price upon A's horse, or
they set a different limit-price. If it is equally
important to both to get the horse, and they are
possessed of equal pecuniary resources, they may
conceivably be both willing to bid up to ^18 for
the horse. In such a case it is a matter of absolute
indifference to A whether, after making B and C
bid against each other up to <£18, he sells to B or
to C. Indeed, the casuist would rightly argue


BETBBMINATION OF A MABKET-PBICE. 7

that, since he could not sell to both, and there
was no more reason why he should sell to one
rather than to the other, he could not sell at all ;
but would stand like the Ass of the Fable, who
starved to death as he stood at an equal distance
from two equally attractive bundles of hay. But
elbowing aside our casuist and allowing A to eflEect
a sale at £18 to either B or C, guided by some
personal preference or the prospects of future
business with the respective parties, it is plain
that the competition between B and C has simply
placed A in the same position of bargaining supe-
riority as he would occupy in dealing with B alone,
on the assumption that he knew the limit-price B
had set himself, while B did not know his limit-
price. The actual price reached would assign to
A the whole gain of the bargain, less the mini-
mum required to compensate B or C for the
trouble of bargaining.

But the chance of B and C fixing the same price-
limit and adhering to it with equal persistency is
infinitely small. In the actual business world we
may take it that the two competitors fix a different
price-limit,—

A, 20 19 18 17 16 15

B, 19 18 17 16 15 M

C, 18 17 16 15 14

B*s limit is <£19, and C will not go beyond cfil8.
Here it will be evident that competition does not


8 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTJ0N.

fix the price-point, but only a lower limit of price.
The price actually reached cannot be less than £18,
because B and C will bid against each other up to
that point. It may be anywhere between j£18 and
£19 ; and the actual point will be determined, not
by competition, but by those same forces of skill
and force in bargaining which operated in the
earlier case.

§ 4. Now arises the question : Is the method of
determining a price essentially different when we
place upon both sides of the transaction a number
of genuine competitors, in other words, when we
institute a free market ?

What is the determination of a market-price?
It is curious to observe how the text-books of
English economists have, almost without excep-
tion, shirked or slighted this practical question,
hurrying the reader to the more abstract con-
sideration of a normal price, and contented, as
was Mill, to explain any particular divergence of
market-price from normal price by vague refer-
ence to temporary fluctuations in supply and
demand, which kept market-prices oscillating
round a normal price, giving the advantage now
to sellers, now to buyers.^

It has generally been considered a satisfactory
account to say that the competition between own-
era of supply on the one hand and exercisers

ij. S. Mill, Principles of Folttieal Economy , Bk. m,
Ch. II, § 4.


DETEBMINATION OF A MABKET-PBICE. 9

of demand on the other hand will equalise sup-
ply and demand at some point of price. This is
Mill's contribution toward the theory of a market-
price,^ and it may be said to be generally received
in English economic text-books as a sufficient
description of a market-price. Professor Mar-
shall, in discussing the price of the corn market,
finds it to be such as would " exactly equate sup-
ply and demand. "2 Professor Hadley, in his
recent book, is content to say that " the market-
price of an article under the modern commercial
system is the price at which the demand is equal
to the supply."

Now such a statement is doubly unsatisfactory.
It neither defines a market-price nor explains how
a market-price is actually reached. It furnishes
no real answer to the question of the celebrated
Oxford Professor who was reported to stop his
friends in the street in order to ask them why a
silk hat cost 20«. The text-book, answer to this
question consists in showing that the price of a
BUk hat cannot be 2l8., because in that case sup-
ply would be in exoess of demand, there would be
too many hats and too few people to buy them,
and the competition of sellers would reduce prices;
conversely, the price could not be 19«., therefore
20«. is presented as a point of convergence be-
tween two opposing prices which reach at that

1 Cf. Dissertations and Discussions, Vol. IV (** Thornton ").
^JMnc^les (2d ed., p. 392).


10 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

point a temporary equilibrium. The supply of
hats was equal to the demand at 20«.

This statement that a market-prir^ is one that
equalises supply and demand explains nothing.
jWhat we want to know is why this equilibrium
occurs at 208. English economists have com-
monly shirked the direct significance of this ques-
tion, which requires an inyestigation of the actual
process of equilibration in a market, and have
either betaken themselves to an examination of
the costs or utilities which lie behind demand
and supply, or to the logomachy regarding the
meaning of these terms themselves. It is indeed
too true that some economists have so used the
terms "demand " and " supply " as to beg the ques-
tion of an equilibration. "We desire," says
Caimes, " to know the circumstances which deter-
mine price; and we are told that the selling price
is always such that the quantity of a commodity
purchased in a given market is equal to the quan-
tity sold in that market."^

1 Leading Principles^ p. 113. Caimes, however, is wrong in
imputing this fault of reasoning to J. S. Mill, though the latter,
in the passages in which he expressly defines demand, is iU-
advised in his language. In the formal definition (Bk. IH,
Ch. II, par. 8) he identifies demand with ** quantity demanded.**
Unfortunately the expression might mean ** quantity bought,*'
or it might mean ^* quantity which buyers would be willing and
able to buy at a given price.*' In a second passage (Bk. m,
Ch. XVIII, par. 2) demand is held to mean **the quantity of
it (commodities) which can find a purchaser," an expression
involved in the same ambiguity, for it might be held that only


DETEUMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 11

Where demand is equivalent to quantity de-
manded in the sense of quantity bought, and sup-
ply to quantity supplied or sold, it is evident that
the boasted Law of Supply and Demand becomes
nothing else than an identical proposition.

But while Cairnes was right in insisting upon
the need of an exact explanation of the process by
-which supply and demand are equilibrated in a
price, he was himself unable to throw any further
light upon the process than to suggest that the
final result depended upon "higgling of the
market."

§ 5. The closest formal inquiry into the opera-
tion of two-sided competition in a market is that
of Bohm-Bawerk. I propose here to take his
illustration of the market and to present his rea-
soning in what I think is a simpler form than that
found in his book.

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, are sellers of horses.
All the horses are supposed to be of the same
worth, and all the sellers to have an equal know-
ledge of the market. They have, however, mini-
mum or reserve prices, which vary from j£10 in
the case of A, to <£26 in the case of H.

the quantity actually sold ''can find a purchaser,'* or it might
include whatever quantity could be sold at a price, assuming it
to be offered at that price. Mill's' context and general treat-
ment of a market-price, however, makes it pretty clear that he
did not mean by '' quantity demanded'' quantity actually sold,
but quantity which buyers were willing to buy if they can find
sellers willing and able to sell at a price.


12


THE ECONOMICa OF BiaXEIBUTION.


I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, are buyers in the
market, with maximum prices which vary from
^15 in the case of I to ^30 in the case of R.


Sbllbrs. Pbiob-limits.

HGFEDCB A


26


25


211


20


IT


15


11


80


28


26


24


.21


22


17


18


15


10


I J K L M N O ,P Q" K

BuTBBS. Pbigb-limits.

Let bidding open at <£10. At this point only 1
will sell ; 10 would buy, and since none will let
the other have a bargain, they will overbid. At
£11 there are 2 sellers, but the competition of 10
buyers will not allow a sale at that point, and bids
still rise ; at £\b there are 3 sellers, but the other
7 will not allow 3 of their nimiber to buy horses
at <£15, that sum being less than they would
consent to give.\ At £16 10«. one of the buyers
has dropped out, his limit-price having been ex-


DETSBMINATION OF A MARKST-PBICE. 13

ceeded, but there are still 9 buyers against 3 sell-
ers ; these 3 sellers could not fix a bargain with. 3
of the buyers because, as they were settling it, the
other 6 buyers, finding that they would be left
in the cold, would offer better terms and upset
the proposed bargains. At ^17 10«. another
seller enters in, and another buyer has dropped
out, but there are still 8 buyers against 4 sellers,
and no bargain can be struck. After ^20 is
passed, another seller will hare entered, and an-
other buyer have fallen out, leaving 5 sellers faced
by 6 buyers. This state continues up to ^21. A
sale cannot take place, because the would-be ex-
cluded buyer, the odd man, will fasten on to any
of the 5 possible sales and force up the price. If
i£21 is passed, however, this inconvenient odd man
drops out, leaving 5 sellers and 5 buyers. Each
man can make his bargain at <£21 1«., for 5 are
willing to sell, 6 to buy, at that price. But
though 6 would sell at j£21 1«., they would rather
get more if they can ; they can get more, for all
6 buyers would sooner pay up to .£22 than fail to
buy a horse. But if the sellers put up the price
above .£21 10»., a 6th seller would enter the field,
and there would be 6 willing sellers against 6 will-
ing buyers — a state of things which would force
the price down below <£21 10».

So whereas at any point just over £21 10«.
there would be 6 sellers and 5 buyers, at any point
just under £21 there would be 6 buyers and 5


14 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

sellers. In neither of these conditions is a price
possible. On the other hand, at any point between
^21 10«. and £21 there are 5 sellers and 5 buy-
ers, and 5 sales can be made satisfactory to each
party. In other words, supply and demand are
equalised between <£21 lOs, and <£21.

Competition of buyers on the one hand and
sellers on the other hand has thus fixed rigid
limits for a market-price.

But to fix limits for a price is not to fix a price,
and curiously enough Bohm-Bawerk leaves his
analysis at this interesting point. The bargain is
made possible at any point between the valuation
of the most capable of the excluded buyers, M,
as lower margin, and the most capable of the
excluded sellers, F, as upper margin ; but there is
nothing in this analysis to show where it wiU lie
between these margins. Indeed, we may say that
if this w^re the whole process, no price could be
fixed at all and no sale would be possible, at any
rate by economic settlement. The unerring logic
of competing self-interest which has found the
price-limits will not find the price-point between
those limits. The competition which was so effec-
tive when 6 sellers faced 6 buyers, or 5 buyers
6 sellers, seems to collapse when 5 buyers face
5 sellers, and there is no odd man to throw his
weight on to an impending bargain. As far as
Bohm-Bawerk's analysis is carried, there is no
more reason for the market-price being fixed at


DETERMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 15

one point between the limits rather than at any
other point. Indeed, we appear to be landed in
the same serious logical dijB&culty which encoun-
tered us before. The 5 sellers would like to get
a price as near as possible to <£21 10«., the 5
buyers a price as near as possible to <£21 : here
we have a real discrepancy of interest between
the parties and no machinery of competition to
settle it.

We must plainly recognise that if the sellers
and the buyers in this case were really acquainted,
not merely with the outward condition of* the
market but with the subjective valuations which
each of them puts upon the act of sale, no sale
could be possible by economic means. If the
sellers can fix the price near the upper margin,
the advantage of one of the buyers is reduced to
a minimum, and the whole body of sellers get the
best of the bargain ; if the buyers can force the
price to near the lower margin, one seller has his
advantage reduced to a minimum, and the buyers
get the best of the bargain. Why should either
party give way? There is no economic method
of reaching a price-point here ; it would be neces-
sary either to agree to split the difference or to
"toss-up," neither of which can be reckoned an
economic settlement. This, we may take it, is
not what would really happen, for the subjective
valuations of the various buyers and sellers will
not be known to one another. Although, in his


16 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

elaborate analysis of two-sided competition, Bohm-
Bawerk does not even indicate how the price-
point is reached, he has hinted in an earlier
treatment of " one-sided competition " which ex-
hibits the same difficulty that the price-point will
depend upon "skilful bargaining."^ In other
words, the work of competition is not to find a
price, and there is no such thing as a " competi-
tion price ": competition stakes oflE a ring, within
which bargainers fight it out by force and craft.
Taking our present instance, it seems essential to
the fixing of a price that one of the bargainers
should deceive the other as to the real facts of
the case (i.e. as to his subjective valuation), lead-
ing the other to suppose that he will not give way
any further. For instance, one of the sellers will
conceal the fact that he would be willing to sell at
jS21, and will hold out for j£21 98.; one of the
buyers believing him, and fearing to be left out
in the cold, wiB show his willingfness to accept ;
thus the bargaining at any price below <£21 9«.
will once more partake of competition, since only
4 sellers face 5 buyers, and the equation of buyers
and sellers is thus falsely placed at ^21 9«. By
such fraud or force of superior bargaining the
price-limits are drawn together so closely as to
approximate toward a money-point, and the "stand-
ing out" of one of the 5 sellers may fix the
price for all 5 sales at J621 9«. Some such

1 Positive Theory of Capital, p. 200.


DETERMINATION OF A MABKET-PBICE. 17

practice of fraud or force seems necessary to
achieve a price-point.

Now, turning to those who have taken part in
the process of determining a market-price, we
can assign a different part to several groups.

(a) First come the ineffectual buyers and
sellers whose limits have been too high and too
low for them to take part in an actual sale. In
this group fall G and H among sellers, I, J, K, and
L among buyers. The desires and actions of these
persons have had no influence whatever on the
market or the price ; their absence would not
have caused any difference.

(6) Next come the effectual buyers and sellers,
whose subjective limits lie above and below the
limits within which a price-point is fixed, and
who, though they take part in the bidding of the
market, have no direct influence upon the price.
These are A, B, 0, D, among sellers, O, P, Q, R,
among buyers.

(<?) Thirdly come those members of the market
whose subjective valuation fixes the possible limits
within which 5 sellers would be willing to sell and
5 buyers to buy. Bohm-Bawerk holds that this
group should comprise E and F among sellers, M
and N among buyers, for he holds that the action
pf these two pairs fixes the upper and lower limits.
"The upper limit is constituted by the valuation
of the last buyer who actually exchanges (the
last buyer) and that of the most capable seller


18 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

excluded (the first excluded seller), and the
lower limit by the valuation of the least capable
seller who actually effects a sale (the last seller)
and that of the most capable buyer excluded (the
first excluded buyer)." So we get, he says, the
very simple formula, " The market-price is limited
and determined by the subjective valuation of the
two marginal pairs."!

According to this, the upper limit is fiied by
the valuation of F, the first excluded seller, and
N, the last actual buyer : the lower limit by the
valuations of M, the first excluded buyer, and E,
the last actual seller. But N's exact valuation,
<£22, neither fixes nor helps to fix the upper limit,
for if his valuation, instead of X22, had been
^21 11»., it would have made no difference.
Similarly, E's valuation at £20 does not help to
fix the lower limit, for if, instead of being <£20,
it had been j£20 198., it would have made no
difference.

It seems therefore that the valuation of N and
E had no direct influence upon the limits which
are determined directly and exclusively by the
valttations of M and F.

(rf) Lastly, within the price-limits we have the
action of one of the effective competitors in assum-
ing the attitude which draws the price to a point.
There is, of course, nothing to inform us which one
adopts this attitude. We will assume that it is

1 X.c, p. 209.


DETSBMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 19

E, the last actual seller, whose limit-price is <£20,
and who perhaps may be considered the stiffest
bargainer and the most likely to hold out for a
price just below ,£21 10«., which after all will
give him a less subjective gain than will fall to
any of the other sellers whose limit valuation is
lower. Or else we may suppose that N, whose
subjective gain is smallest among the buyers,
makes the successful stand, and, cajoling the sell-
ers into thinking he will not buy at a price much
over ^21, fixes the price just above that point.

§ 6. Our analysis, if correct, yields information
upon two important matters : first, as to the
method of determining a price or exchange-rate
in a market ; second, as to the distribution of
gain arising from a series of bargains at a market-
price.

As to the method of determining a price, it
proves (a) that competition does not fix a price,
but only the approaches to a price ; (6) that
within the limits a price-point is fixed by the
superior bargaining power of a single buyer or
seller.

As to the distribution of advantage arising from
the series of sales at a market-price^ that is seen
to depend, first, on the superior force or cunning
(bargaining power) of one of the buyers or
sellers ; second, on the differential valuation of
the several buyers and sellers as measured from
this price-point.


20 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

According to the conditions of this market, a
far larger aggregate gain is obtained by the sellers,
because the market-price, whether fixed near ^21
or near <£21 10»., widely exceeds the supposed
limits of several sellers. At ^21 price, the
aggregate gain of the buyers stands at <£25,
whereas the gain of sellers stands at <£32. If
£21 10«. is the price, the buyers' gain falls to
£22 10«., and the sellers' rises to £84 10«.

No provision evidently exists, in the process of
determining a price, for an equal or " fair " divi-
sion of the advantage of exchange. In no case
where a sale takes place at the market-price will
the advantage to the two parties effecting the sale
be equal. In every sale there must be some ad-
vantage to both parties, but it will not be equal.
If the price stands at just under £21 10«., N, the
last effective buyer, will gain just over 10«. ; while
E, the last effective seller, will gain a little less
than £1 10», Whatever be the actual arrange-
ment which couples the respective buyers and
sellers making the 5 sales, no one of these 5 sales
will give an equal gain to the two parties, though
to both parties in each case there must be some
gain.

§ 7. The net result of the investigation is to show
that the gain which accrues to buyers and sellers
in a market consists of two elements. First
there is the difference between the higher and the
lower limit of price, representing, in the case taken


DETERMINATION OF A MARKET-PBICE, 21

above, nearly ,£1 in each transaction. This is
distributed according to the force or skill of the
strongest among the buyers or sellers. It is not
easy to decide how this gain may be most conven-
iently described. Regarded from the standpoint
of origin it ranks as a " forced gain " ; in so far
as it denotes an advantage common to the whole
body of buyers or seUers in the market, as distinct
from the particular gains which accrue from dif-
ferences of individual valuation, it may be spoken
of as a "specific gain." It will be necessary to
use both these terms in describing it.

The sellers and buyers, whose valuations lie
beyond the limits within which the price is fixed,
take in addition to the portion of this specific
gain which may or may not fall to them, a differ-
ential gain which represents the difference between
their individual valuation and the upper or the
lower limit, according as they are buyer and seller.

For instance, on the assumption that the market-
price was fixed at £21 9«., A would obtain a gain
of 9«., representing the "forced" or "specific"
element as measured from the lower limit of j£21,
and a gain of <£11, representing the difference
between £10, the least sum at which he would
have sold, and £21, the lowest price which ordi-
nary competition rendered possible.

Economic literature has, of course, made us very
familiar with the idea of differential gains, classed
commonly as producers' and consumers' rents, but


22 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

the existence and nature of the other element,
viz. forced gain, which clearly emerges from the
analysis of market-price, has not received the
attention it deserves.

It may be said, to represent the failure of com-
petition, alike in theory and in practice, to fix a
price. If the competition between buyers and
seUers were able to determine a price-point, the
weakest buyer and seller would alike gain a
minimum advantage from the sale, and there
might be said to be a tendency toward an equal
distribution of the differential gains of the barg^ain
for the other parties. But the fair field of com-
petition is seen to be incapable of reaching a
market-price, and gives way in the last resort to
that same arbiter of fraud or force that is seen to
fix a price when a single buyer is bargaming with
a single seUer.

§ 8. In other words, if the example taken above
is a sound one, force is the ultimate determinant
of a market-price.

But is the example sound ?

Proceeding along our sliding-sc9le of instances
from a primitive bargain, have we yet reached the
true conditions of a modern market, and is the
market-price really determined' in the manner
above described ?

It is evident that the example does not corre-
spond to any actual or possible horse-market.
It assumes that 8 horse-dealers are each offering


BETEBMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 23

t

for sale a horse which they all believe, and which
all of the prospective buyers believe, to be of ex-
actly equal quality, and that, this being so, the
dealers yet differ so widely in their limit-price
that while one is only willing to sell at ,£26, an-
other will sell a horse he knows to be of equal
worth at so low a sum as <£10. An actual horse-
market will offer a supply of horses, no two of
which are estimated at the same worth by buyers
or by sellers, and there will not be any close agree-
ment as to that worth by any two of those taking
part in the market ; neither will the actual condi-
tions of bargaining be such that each knows what
offers the others are making, unless the sale is of
the nature of an auction, which really removes the
case from a two-sided competition and places it
among the one-sided competitions.

An actual horse-market, in which the several
buyers and sellers bargained with one another,
would not in fact result in the attainment of an
exact market-price for a given quality of horse ;
the prices actually paid not merely would fail to
distribute equally the subjective gains of the bar-
gains, but there would not be the objective equal-
ity afforded by our theoretic instance of equal
money prices for equal "value." The individual
craft of bargaining, the acts of concealment and
of bluff, would, in fact, play a larger part than in
our case. Taking the aggregate gains of a series
of bargains in such a market, the differential ele-


24 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTIOK.

ment would be much smaller than in the theoretic
case, and the ^^ forced gain " much larger.

Bohm-Bawerk makes his differential gains de-
pendent upon subjective valuations. In the case
of horse-markets this is specious, at any rate, so
far as buyers are concerned. But in ordinary
trade markets, where the buyers buy to sell again,
an objective basis of differential gains must exist.
A can only value the same goods at 20% more
than B, because he enjoys some trading or manu-
facturing advantage (objective) which enables
him to put what he has bought to a larger prO'
duetive use.

But these practical considerations do not appear
to me to invalidate the general correctness or to
destroy the serviceable results of the analysis.
Our example has legitimately excluded minor con-
flicting circumstances ; all the material facts have
been set in a clearer atmosphere, which enables us
rightly to detect the real nature of the bargaining
process.

§ 9. But there is one circumstance in the se-
lected example which it is important to discuss.
A horse-dealer must sell a whole horse at a time,
and the buyer cannot buy less than a whole horse.
In other words, the separate units of supply are
dumped down into the market within distinct and
fairly wide intervals of valuation between the sev-
eral units. The last horse that is sold differs from
the first horse that is not sold by a definite consid-


DETERMINATION OF A MABKET-PBICE. 26

erable sum, no less than 80«. Now if, instead of 8
horses valued at different intervals between jGlO
and <£26, we had an infinite number of horses, it
will be admitted that the competition (which I
fear, however, would take an eternal time to com-
pass) would bring the upper and the lower limit
to a meeting-point (i.e. the interval between them
would be infinitely small). ^ In that case the mar-
ginal pair would make their bargain upon equal
terms without any element of " forced gain " enter-
ing the market-price.

Now this supposition that in a finite market
there may be, not 8 or 80, but practically an infi-
nite number of units of supply, valued at extremely
minute intervals of diflPerence, is not a pure work of
the imagination, but is approximated to in certain
markets. There is no possible interval between 1
horse and 2 horses in a supply of horses, but there is
an indefinite number of possible intervals between
1 pound and 2 pounds of gold in a supply of gold.
In the case of goods which are infinitely divisible,
we might regard the supply in a market at any
given time as consisting of an infinite number of

iJevons, in his Theory of Political Economy (Ch, rV),
plainly enforces the tmth that the theory of competition, as
determinant of price-point, rests upon the supposition of in-
finite diyisibility of supply (cf. p. 108). In fact, the whole
mathematical treatment rests upon the same supposition, and
the fact that supply is not, in any case, infinitely divisible,
impairs the practical service of the whole mathematical treat-
ment.


26 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

units whose valuation in the minds of the sellers
grades down by imperceptible intervals from the
highest to the lowest limit-price. Such goods are
gold or com or cotton.

The importance of this is that, by taking our
example of a market from such classes of goods,
we seem to reach a market-price by pure competi-
tion of buyers and sellers. Look, for instance, at
the local corn-market which Marshall uses to illus-
trate the determination of a market-price. Here
we have a number of farmers, each (say) with 100
quarters of wheat to sell, and a number of corn-
factors, who are buyers in this market. At a
price of 36«. all the farmers would be willing to
sell all their stock, but few, if any, buyers could
be found at such a price : if 35«. was a possible
price, most farmers would sell all they had ; but a
few would hold back part of their wheat, thinking
to sell at a future market for 368. Each lower
price would, of course, reduce the effective supply
and increase the effective demand ; the price actu-
ally reached, say 27«., secures the so-called equilib-
rium of supply and demand, i.e. sellers are willing
to sell (say) two-thirds of their wheat at 27«., and
buyers will buy that same amount at 27«.

Now such a market differs in two respects from
our horse-market. First, as to the units of supply
and demand. In a horse-market less than 1
horse cannot be bought or sold ; 1 horse is thus
a minimum unit of supply ; a dealer with 10


DETERMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 27

horses cannot offer to supply more than 10 alter-
native quantities. But a farmer with 100 quarters
of wheat is owner of a much more elastic and divis-
ible supply; though for purposes of rough reckon-
ing he may divide his stock by tens of quarters and
reckon it worth his while to sell 100 at 36«., 90
at 34»., and so on, there is nothing to prevent him
calculating more minutely ; in theory, at any rate,
he would be willing to sell 79 quarters at a slightly
lower rate than he would take for 80, in a rising
market. At any rate, it is easy to see that there
is a far greater elasticity in supply and in demand
in a corn-market than in a horse-market, a far
greater variety of possible prices with a far nar-
rower interval between them. This signifies a far
closer and more effective competition between
buyers on the one hand and sellers on the other,
the result being that the limits between which
ordinary competition breaks down are much nar-
rower.

The second point of difference is even more
important. It consists in the fact that a local corn-
market is in far closer touch with a wide world-
market than is the local horse-market. Where
commodities are in wide and general demand,
valuable in proportion to their bulk and weight,
so durable that they can be carried far without
risk or waste, they are the subjects of a world-
market. This means that wherever they are sold
the price attained at any day in any local market


28 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBtTTION.

is not determined wholly 'or chiefly by the present
local supply and demand, but by the general sup*
ply and demand the world over. Not merely the
1000 quarters owned by the sellers, or the £1600
or so of purchasing power owned by the buyers,
compete and find an equilibrium : both sellers
and buyers are also influenced, in the quantity
they offer or buy at the several prices, by the
quotations from, the wider market upon which the
total, not merely of existing but of prospective,
supply and demand of wheat is operating.

So in a local corn-market the possible limits of
competition are circumscribed by conditions im-
posed from the national market, or those great
centres where national economic forces are most
fully operative ; while the national market is in
its turn kept within tolerably small limits of
fluctuation by the international market which
takes close account both of the present and the
probable future stock of wheat and the demands
for the same.

§ 10. Every local market, even for highly perish-
able and cheap bulky commodities, is of course to
some extent aflPected by wider market-areas, and to
some extent by the general supply and demand
of similar commodities. But, in respect of many
commodities, this outside contact is so slight and
slow that prices are chiefly the resultant of local
forces of supply and demand. Common bricks
or plums, for instance, will have a large number


DETERMINATION OF A MARKET-PRICE. 29

of little market-areas, the prices of which may
yary widely. In the small local markets sellers
of pricks or plums have little power of withhold-
ing their supply or disposing of their goods else-
where, while buyers are similarly restricted in
their demand : hence the pressure of local or
temporary circumstances, favouring either buyers
or sellers, wUl play a larger part in determining
a market-price, genuine competition will tend to
break down at any earlier point, and force or
superiority in bargaining-power will be a more
important factor. On the other hand, in the
market for gold, or even for cotton, wool, or
wheat, under normal conditions, buyers and sell-
ers in a local market are less under pressure to sell
here and now, to buy here and now : the whole
world-supply, present and prospective, is taking
part in the competition as it affects each local
market, and the local market-price reflects the
greater delicacy and complexity of the world-
market. What this signifies is that in commodi-
ties belonging to a world-market, free competition
may be said to determine the price, because the
number of actually or potentially competing units
is so numerous that little scope remains for that
force or craft of special bargaining which plays
a considerable part in the small local market.

In fact, where the local market is in such close
and constant organic relation to the world-market,
the price attained in any part tends to be not


80 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

merely a market-price, but a normal price, that is
to say, a price which will average the economic
conditions of sapply and demand over the w>^le
present market, and, by discounting probable
changes in future supply and demand, will simi-
larly average the series of temporal prices.

For instance, in the market for gold or for lead-
ing securities of any kind, if the competition of
buyers and sellers worked freely and were not
constantly checked and falsified by the manipula-
tion of rings of speculators, market-prices would
tend to become average or short normal prices.
The same is true of all goods for which there is a
world-market. The competition here is between a
vast nimiber of competing buyers and sellers, whose
units oi supply and demand represent an indefinitely
large variety of different equilibriums : under such
circumstances competition would do its work so
well that any local group of buyers and sellers
would find there remained very little for the
higgUng of the market to achieve,

§ 11. When we have one of these wide highly
organised markets, maintaining a genuine compe-
tition between very large numbers of buyers and
sellers dealing with large quantities of divisible
goods, the competition of buyers and sellers brings
the price-limits so near together as to appear to
establish a price-point. In theory, the case of the
horse-market still applies, and a bargain under
conditions of duress fixes the price-point here as


DETERMINATION OF A MABKET-PBICE. 31

elsewhere; but the influence is so slight that it
may be practically ignored.

IV^ofi^yer, in the cotton or the wheat market
not onljTis this element virtually eliminated, but
the differential gains of various buyers and
sellers are reduced to much smaller dimensions
than in the local horse-market. The markets
which are in this highly organised state are gen-
erally those in which buyers and sellers are among
themselves fairly on a level : sellers are producing
under such equality of conditions that the supply
sold at a given price yields a fairly equal profit to
the different sellers ; while buyers, as in the cotton
or corn market, are buying not for use, but to sell
again in some form or other under conditions
which tend to equalise the subjective gains made
on their bargains. The different buyers and
sellers of raw cotton at Liverpool, at a given price,
may be held to have made a subjective gain which
will not differ widely in different cases, unless
where the seller acts under some special pressure
of financial circumstances.

§ 12. Whenever a market contains a consider-
able number of buyers and sellers, fairly equal
in economic resources and in knowledge of com-
modities ; where sellers obtain their supply under
fairly equal conditions of trade or manufacture ,
where buyers are buying to sell again, not to con-
sume ; where the articles bought and sold belong
to a wide market, are minutely divisible in quan-


82 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

tity and durable in nature, — these conditions
may be held practically to eliminate force from
a market-price and to make it the result >3^om-
petition alone. v

But these conditions are notoriously absent in
the great majority of cases. Take a rapid sur-
vey of the whole range of bargaining, examining
the various classes of goods as they exchange
hands in the different processes of production ; in
how many cases are * the above-named conditions
present?

Take, first, the great extractive industries; con-
sider the bargains made by farmers, miners, fish-
ermen, etc., with the merchants who buy their
produce or the railway^f that carry it; the con-
stant attempts of shippers, importers, and produce-
exchange speculators to comer supply and to
operate in prices ; the advantages which supe-
rior sources of supply, patents or secret methods
of production, combinations to restrict output or
regulate prices have in most organised manufac-
tures; the oscillation of local comers and cut-
throat competition in most branches of retail
trade, — these and similar causes render the con-
ditions of free and fluid competition inoperative
over the vast majority of the processes in the sale
of goods. Again, if we turn to the bargains for
the sale or hire of land, the conditions are notori-
ously absent. When we investigate the condi-
tions under which bargains for the use of capital


BSTEBMINATION OF A MABKET-PBICE. 88

take place, we shall perceive how narrow are the
limits of the free field of investment where bor-
rowers and lenders meet on equal terms. As to
that huge class of bai^gains which take place at
every spot in the industrial field for the sale of
labour-power, in hardly any cases can we find the
conditions of equal bargaining present, even where
professional skill or other highly placed labour-
power is the object of sale. Outside the ordinary
range of industry, in cases where bargaining is
between author and publisher, between mistress
and domestic servant, between teacher and parent,
hotel-keeper and gi:|est, the competition is so slight
and indirect, the knowledge of the two parties so
imperfect, that an equal bargain is never struck
except by chance.

It appears then that but a very small propor-
tion of bargains can be referred to an open-faced,
two-sided competition in a market where outside
prices are so directly operative as to equalise the
-gain for the individuals who take part as buyers
or sellers in the market.

§ 13. This brief investigation of the economic
conditions of a market-price warrants the follow-
ing conclusions : —

(1) Every economic buyer and seller in a mar-
ket (i.e. every one guided by self-interest who
knows what he is doing) makes some gain from
his bargam. The notion supported by thinkers of
such diverse character as Bacon and Ruskin, that


34 THE ECONOMIC a OF DiaTRIBUTION.

in a trading bargain ^'what one man gains another
loses," receives no warrant from our analysis. It
must, however, be admitted that in every series of
bargains at a market-price, one of the buyers or
sellers will make his bargain on such terms as will
secure to him a bare minimum gain«

(2) There is nothing in the economic nature of
a Market to secure equality of gain for any two
bargainers.

(3) The amount of gain which comes to each
will depend on three conditions : (i) the superior
strength or skill of one final bargainer ; . (ii) the
ability of competition between buyers and sellers
to fix the limits within which this strength or skill
may operate ; (iii) the difference between the re-
serve-price of each buyer and seller and the actual
price attained.

(4) Where the market-area is of wide space
and time, differential estimates and power of bar-
gaining wiU be of relatively small importance;
where the market-area is narrow, they will be of
relatively large importance.

APPENDIX TO CHAPTEE I.

The BelcUive Strength of Buyer and Seller.

The analysis of the process of bargaining shows that
sometimes the buyers, sometimes the sellers, are in
the stronger position and are able to " get the better "


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I. 36

of the bargam. No law of direct and general applicar
tion assigning this superiority of bargaining power is
discernible^ but certain conditions are found to attach
to specific markets^ which evidently make in favour
of one or other of the two parties. Setting aside for
separate and fuller treatment the markets for the sale
of the use of land^ capital, and labour, and confining
ourselves here to markets of commodities, we find the
relative strength of buyers or sellers often associated
directly with (a) the greater or less urgency of the
need to buy or sell, (b) the greater or less strength or
skill in the art of bargaining.

Where the buyer does not buy for personal consump-
tion, he is generally held to have an advantage in the
process of bargain or exchange, partly because he is
the holder of money — the least specialised com-
modity — pitted against the holder of some specialised
commodity, partly because the urgency of a trade-
use is less than the urgency of a personal need. But
where the buyer is a direct consumer, this advantage
is often more than offset by the present pressure of
personal needs which obliges him to buy now from some
one who is not obliged to sell now. So, for exan^ple,
the venders of refreshments or books in a railway
station enjoy a distinct advantage in bargaining.
iThe generi rule, however, assigns superiority to the
(ownership of money, which for many commercial
purposes is more desirable than a nominally equiva-
lent value in specialised wares. It seems strange
that the advantage of the extra stability of value and
exchangeability attached to money should not be
fully discounted in actual prices; but it is found in


36 THE ECONOMICS OF BISTBIBUTION.

practice that any owner of goods for sale who names
their " value " " would rather have the money/' If,
however, the consumer who cannot delay consumption
is liable to the disadvantage attending a forced pur-
chase, the producer under modern commercial condi-
tions is often subject to the inconvenience of a " forced
sale," either because his expenses of production are
incurred on credit (t.e. he needs money to pay for
raw material bought with bills, to pay interest on
borrowed capital or mortgage, or to pay wages or
other current business expenses), or else because the
goods he has to sell spoil or lose value by being kept.
A striking example of a class of producers subject
to the conjoined force of these disadvantages is the
agriculturist, but all sellers of quickly perishable
goods are liable to this handicap.

If the owners of money be held to have an advan-
tage as compared with owners of goods for sale, the
sellers of raw materials which are needed for many
different industrial uses, and of other less specialised
commodities, will seem to have an advantage in sell-
ing to various groups of buyers who, because they
belong to different trades, will not act closely together.
The seller of timber, wool, or iron (other things equal)
seems to hold a stronger position than the buyer. It
is, however, possibly incorrect to attribute the greater ^
desirability of holding money over holding goods to
the general command over commodities attaching to
the latter. For if there were a ready and perfectly
reliable demand for goods, their possessors, though
one step further removed from the ownership of any
other class of commodities than the possessors of


. APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I. 87

money, would have a compensation for this remote-
ness by owning something of more direct service in
consumption. If the owner of com or wool or leather
could rely upon the speedy sale of his goods at a
calculable price, his command over commodities in
general would not really be weaker than that of the
owner of money, but only a little slower in its opera-
tion. In that case the buyer who offered money
could not be deemed to be to any appreciable extent
the stronger bargainer. It is therefore the uncertainty
of finding a purchaser at a calculable price which
must be accounted the weakness of the seller as com-
pared with the buyer. This weakness is plainly
enhanced by certain tendencies of machine-produc-
tion and machine-transport, which seem to keep many
markets in a constant or a frequently recurring condi-
tion of congestion : the eagerness of sellers to find pur-
chasers is attested both by the extraordinary energy
in pushing and advertising goods and by the cutting
of the marginal profits upon each sale to a minimum.
The wide prevalence of these conditions is irrefutable
proof of an admitted weakness in bargaimng on the
part of owners of goods as compared with owners
of money.^ This superiority, perhaps normal over a

1 It is cariotiB that Mr. and ySi^, Webb, who, in the chapter
on **The Higgling of the Market*' of their Industrial Democ*
racif^ emphasise and illustrate so powerfully the superior posi-
tion of the buyer *^at each link in the chain of bargaining,'*
fail to perceive that no other *' economic " explanation of this fact
is possible than that a general excess of producing power exists
beyond what is required to supply the current demands of con-
sumers. If it is a fact that ** at each link in the chain of bar-
gamings the superiority in ^ freedom ' is so overwhelmingly on


88 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

large field of industry, may be modified by the nature
of the money-offer of buyers. Where credit is freely
given, the buyer loses part of his advantage as owner
of money — a fact which may be otherwise expressed
by saying that a buyer will bid higher when he need
not pay ready money.

The mode of bargaining or the conditions under
which bargains are made have much to do with the
success of buying and selling. It may be broadly-
stated that makers are at a disadvantage in bargain-
ing with traders, in so far as the art of bargaining
forms a larger part of the trader^s activity, so that he
must be deemed more highly specialised in dealing.
Where the productive processes are conducted under
conditions which remove the. producers from wide com-
mercial training, and especially where, as in farming,
they are not themselves large buyers of raw material,
etc., the merchants or dealers who buy their produce
have a clear advantage. Purchasers of retail goods are
in this respect at a disadvantage in comparison with the
sellers. They are less effective bargainers in so much
as they must be regarded as amateurs bargaining
with specialists for any particular class of goods they
require for consiunption. Again, the conditions under
which the retail market is commonly conducted tend

the side of the bnyer that the seller feels only constraint ; " if
*Mt is highly significant that it is always the seller who bribes,
never the buyer " (Vol. II, p. 676), this can only signify a con-
stant tendency for the effective supply of markets to exceed the
effective demand, only another way of stating the fact of an
excess of producing power. It is significant that Mr. and Mrs.
Webb have no economic explanation to offer of the carious
phenomenon they note.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I. 89

to secure this advantage to the retaUer. As Caimes
points out: ^^In the wholesale market the sellers and
purchasers meet together in the same place, affording
thus to each other reciprocally the opportunity of
comparing directly and at once the terms on which
they are severally disposed to trade. In retail deal-
ing it is otherwise. In each place of sale there is but
one seller ; and though it is possible to compare his
terms with the prices demanded elsewhere by others,
this cannot always be done on the moment, and may
involve much inconvenience and delay.'' (" Leading
Principles," p. 112.)

One of the peculiar advantages of the large over
the small business in manufacture is that the scale
upon which the large business is conducted enables
it to employ skilled specialists in buying and in
selling.

These are differences in the economic strength or the
skill of bargaining. One further point bearing upon
the process of bargaining deserves mention, viz. the
relative disadvantage of the party who names a price.
In retail shops the habit of ticketing goods, of using
price-lists, or even of naming a price upon request,
gives to the buyer a certain advantage, the nature of
which is apparent from our analysis of the horse-
market. The bargainer who at the outset names a
price gives some indication of his subjective valua-
tion ; the buyer might be willing, if necessary, to pay
a higher price than that named, if both parties were
equally ignorant of the estimate they set respectively
upon iiie bargain. In open bargaining it is a clearly
recognised point of skill to get the other party to


40 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

name a price, even though that price has little or
no chance of being satisfactory to both parties.

Finally, it must be remembered that, where the
conditions of a perfect market exist, in the sense that
all buyers have the same valuation and all sellers
likewise, while the knowledge of the arts of bargain-
ing and other special advantages are equally divided,
the issue is determined by numbers. In such a case
one side (that with the shorter number of competitors)
will get the full gain of the bargain, the price being
determined at or close to the higher or the lower limit.
A reference to the case of the horse-market set forth
in the text will make this evident. Change the con-
ditions of this market so as to present 10 willing
sellers at a minimum price of £20 a horse and 9
willing buyers who would consent, if necessary, to pay
£21, the price will be at or just above £20, because
the tenth seller, afraid of failing to effect a sale, will,
by competition, beat down the price to that point.
This consideration means that under existing indus-
trial conditions, where there are generally more will-
ing sellers at a price than willing buyersi the latter
enjoy a normal advantage.


CHAPTER IL

PBODUCEB'S AND CONSUMER'S BENTS.

§ 1. Before proceeding further with the analy-
sis of market-price and the element of forced gain
contained in it, it is desirable to clear some mis-
apprehension which attaches to the differential
gains which play so prominent a part in the analy*
sis. Differential rents have received much atten-
tion from economists in their investigation of the
relations of producers and consumers. Now these
producer's and consumer's rents, as they are called,
have been a source of grave misapprehension, by
reason of the mode of measuring them, which has
been generally adopted. The nature of this error
will be best understood by examining concrete
examples.

Take the instance of the passengers who pur-
chase tickets for 32». 8d. to go from London to
Edinburgh by a particular train. Here we have
a number of buyers who pay the same price for
their .tickets, but who, presumably, will differ
widely, in the importance which they assign to the
purchase of a ^ticket. A is reluctantly leaving
business at an awkward time in order to visit his

41


42 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

relatives, and we may assume that if the price of
a ticket were any higher than 32«. 8rf., he would
refuse to go. He ranks as the marginal buyer,
whose differential gain or rent is nil. Turning to
the other extreme we find B, who will make a
business profit of £1000 if he can put in an ap-
pearance at Edinburgh within a certain number of
hours. B would pay for a ticket any sum short of
the whole difference between 32«. 8d. and £1000,
if he had no option. His differential gain, there-
fore, appears to stand at (say) £998. This is the
common mode of measuring producer's and con-
sumer's rents. Yet it is plainly fallacious. For
B's supposed gain of £998 upon his transaction
with the railway is derived truly, not from that
transaction, but from a certain business advantage
he obtains in a business bargain in Edinburgh.
This sum will evidently appear as a differential
or a specific gain in the market to which the lat-
ter transaction belongs, and if the purchase of a
ticket to Edinburgh stands as a separate action, the
same gain will be counted twice. This is clearly
inadmissible. The fallacy consists in a false inde-
pendence assigned to the purchase of the ticket.
This purchase is in reality one of a number of
acts complementary, or, in this case, subsidiary, to
the business transaction from which the gain
of £998 emerges. In order to reach Edinburgh
in time, he may be obliged to send a telegraph, to
take a cab, and to make sundry other small out-


PRODUCER'S AND CONSUMER'S RENTS. 48

lays; each of these may be a necessary means to
his end, in which case, according to the accepted
mode of estimating differential gains, the ^998
will be counted over again many times. Evi-
dently this method of detaching each transaction
is illicit. A number of related actions must be
taken to form an organic group, and the true dif-
ferential gain will be the net differential gain
upon the group. The business custom which
would reckon the price of the ticket and other
incidental outlays as expenses, to be deducted
from the gain of the transaction toward which
they were contributory means, is clearly the logi-
cal mode of procedure. Where expenses may be
incurred, partly on their own account, because
they contribute some direct satisfaction to the
spender, and partly as a means to secure some
ulterior gain, it may be difficult or even impossi-
ble to make a true assignment of differential gains.
A business man's expenditure during a given time
may not easily break up into separate groups cen-
tring round some distinct business "deal" ; even
where a large number of transactions are clearly
recognised as incidental, the main deals, from
which the " gains " directly proceed, may be
closely connected or mutually dependent.

But, however difficult it may be in practice to find
the true group-unity in a number of dealings, the-
ory requires that we reckon differential gains upon
the group, and not upon a falsely isolated item.


44 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

The fallaciousness of the separatist treatment
is still more glaring when we take the commou
instance of the differential gain attributed to the
purchaser of some necessary of life. Each time
a man buys his necessary supply of food or cloth-
ing, he can appear to make a differential gain
measured by the difference between the price he
pays and the price he would be willing and able
to pay if he were compelled to do so. " All that
a man hath will he give for his life," so that the
difference between the price actually paid and the
total possessions of the purchaser will rank as
differential gain on each occasion when a necessary
is bought.

§ 2. These reflections seem to require impor-
tant modifications to be made in the treatment of
producer's and consumer's rents. The common
presentation of consumer's rents assigns to the
consumer a rent upon that portion of his income
spent as necessaries, which is infinitely great
when measured in utility, and which, when meas-
ured in money, is equal to the whole of the re-
mainder of his income which he would have con-
sented to add to the price actually paid for neces-
saries, had he been compelled to do so. So, if we
suppose a case of a man spending an income of
<£400 a year, the first £100 going for necessaries,
the second for conveniences, the third for com-
forts, the fourth for luxuries (taking the conven-
ient distinction usually made), the consumer's


PEODUCEB'a AND CONSUMSB'S B1SNT8. 45

rent obtained on the outlay of the first £100
would be <£300, upon the second £200, and
upon the third £100, while the last can yield no
consumer's rent, for he had no reserve out of
which he could have paid a higher price for the
luxuries he bought. Such analysis yields a con-
sumer's rent of £600 out of a total expenditure
of £400. Taking a nicer discrimination in the
relative subjective valuations of different portions
of each group of goods, we should, of course, obtain
a more complex measurement (all luxuries, for
instance, except the least valued, yielding some
rent) ; but the rough estimate will serve to illus-
trate our point, which is this : If the man be sup-
posed, at any given time when he is making a
purchase, to have at his command his whole in-
come of £400, on each separate occasion when he
buys a weekly store of necessaries he will appear
to make a consumer's rent, measured by the dif-
ference between what he pays and £400, and the
net rent during the year will depend upon the
number of times he buys necessaries. The same
will hold of his other non-necessary purchases. -
Or again, if this man has £100 saved in the bank,
this £100 will rank as rent every time he makes
a purchase of necessaries, for he would and could
pay it in addition to the price he actually pays,
rather than go without a necessary. This also
will hold of his other purchases, of conven-
iences, etc., for he would consent to pay a por-


46 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

tion at least of his saved £100 rather than fail
to get them.

It is evident from this that the assignment of a
consumer's rent upon a particular purchase is il-
licit. A consumer's rent can be rightly reckoned
only by considering the totality of purchases over
a given period and the totality of the current in-
come during such period. When, therefore, Pro-
fessor Marshall says,^ "The excess of the price
which he would be willing to pay rather than go
without it, over that which he actually does pay,
is the economic measure of this surplus pleasure,
and may be called consumer's rent," his defini-
tion is doubly fallacious. In the first place, the
mere mlUngness to pay cannot be a source of con-
sumer's rent, nor indeed does Professor Marshall
intend that it shall be so understood. The will-
ingness to pay must be backed by the power to
pay. But this power to pay, as we have shown,
cannot be rightly reckoned upon the single pur-
chase. In order to measure it, we need to take a
related group of purchases, and if we are dealing
with rent derived from the expenditure of an in-
come supposed to cover a period of time, the
group must consist of the whole number of pur-
chases within that time.^

1 Principles, Bk. HI, Ch. VI, § 1.

2 Professor Nicholson (Principles of Political Economy^
Vol. I, p. 58) effectively discloses the illusory nature of the
attempt to measure total utility by price.


pboduceb'8 and consumer's bents. 47

§ 3. It may, indeed, be questioned whether this
mode of reckoning, thus logically forced upon us,
does not invalidate the utility of consumer's rent
altogether. For if we suppose that (a) either the
whole of the year's purchases are made at a single
time with the whole of the year's income, or that
(J) each piece of income as soon as it is received
is laid out in a purchase, it will appear that no
consumer's rent emerges, either upon the total-
ity of purchases in the one case (a), or upon any
individual purchase in the other case (V) ; for in
neither case is there any residue of money in the
hands of the purchaser which he could and would
have paid rather than fail to get what he buys.
If I spend my income literally as fast as I receive
it, no consumer's rent emerges. It is only the
spare cash m my purse after I have made a pur-
chase, all or part of which constitutes consumer's
rent : if my income were doled out to me for each
specific purchase, though my income over a period
of time were just as large, no consumer's rent
could appear.

One qualification to this conclusion seems to be
required. If I do not spend, but save, a portion
of my income, that saving rightly appears as
consumer's rent, even when the totality of pur-
chases is set against the total income ; for I would
have sacrificed the whole of this saving rather
than have dispensed with a necessary, and some of
it rather than go without a convenience.


48 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N .

I suggest, therefore, that savings may be the
only legitimate consumer's rent, when we take
an organically related group of purchases meas-
ured over a period of time and compare them
with the income received during that time.

It may, indeed, be arguable that the term " con-
sumer's rent" should continue to be applied to
the ,£800 which our man would have consented to
spend upon necessaries, had he been obliged to do
so ; but there seems little advantage in this appli-
cation of the term. Our first rude reckoning of
consumer's rent upon the supposition that the
first <£100 of an income of <£400 was spent on
necessaries, the second £100 on conveniences,
the third on comforts, and the fourth on luxuries
would, we found, yield a total rent of £600, —
<£800 on the first, £200 on the second, and £100
on the third division. But this reckoning must
also be discarded, for it is evidently just as il-
logical to make an artificial severance of expen-
diture into four groups, and to treat the whole
income as if available for each group, as it would
be to take the whole £400 into account whenever
a single purchase of a necessary or a convenience
was taking place.

If it is still held convenient to retain the cate-
gory of consumer's . rent, it must be understood
that, in the instance we have taken, the total con-
sumer's rent on purchases during the year will
only amount to the £800 spent on other things


PBODUCSB'a AND CONSUMER'S BENTS. 49

than necessaries. Thus conceived, consumer's
rent will be measured, not on the individual
transaction, but upon total expenditure over a
period of time, and wiU be equivalent to that ,
portion of the mcome which is either spent on '
other things than necessaries, or is saved.i

§ 4. Now let us turn to producer's rent. The
excess of price actually obtained over the price
which the seller would have consented to take
forms producer's rent. Differential advantages
for production may be said to be the origin of
these rents in competitive trade. Let us suppose
that among cycles competing for sale at <£18, the
most expensively produced cost j£15 to make,
while some others — made by makers enjoying
superior economies of production — may be pro-
duced at £12 ; in this case £S ranks as producer's

^This conclusion may be illustrated by a more detailed
examination of the illustration of consumer's rent Marshall
takes (Bk. in, Ch. VI). He takes the case of a man who
buys 7 tons of coal at £1 per ton. This man would have paid
£10 rather than fail to get one ton, £7 rather than fail to get
a second ton, £5 for a third ton, £3 for a fourth, £2 for a
fifth, 30«. for a sixth. Since he only pays £1 for each ton, his
consumer's rent on the 7 tons amounts to £22}. Now, though
none of this cost can rank as a ''necessary'' (for in that case
he would have been willing to pay the whole £7 + £22} for the
first ton), it ranks as a prime convenience of life. When, there-
fore, we say that this man would have willingly paid £22}
more in order to get the coal, we mean that he would have
sacrificed the other comforts or luxuries upon which he has
already spent £22} (or the £22} sayings, if he has saved it).
^ But if, instead of coal, we took bread or any necessary, it is


50 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

rent. At first sight this rent seems to be calcu-
lable upon a single act of sale, but it is not really
so. For this maker can produce at £12 not the
, particular cycle which is sold for £18, but this
cycle in conjunction with a large number of
others. It is only produceable at £12 as one
unit in a large output. Thus the consumer's
rent of <£3 is based upon an assumption involv-
ing a large number of other sales. Expenses
of production cannot be taken as any definite
amount in reference to a single sale, just as util-
ity of consumption reckoned in money cannot be
taken as a definite amount in reference to the pur-
chase of a single consumable.

The true basis of calculation for producer's
rent will be the total output of a particular busi-
ness over a period of time, as in the case of the

easy to see that this same £22^^, plus all the part of his income
spent on conveniences, comforts, and luxuries, will figure as
consumer's rent upon the purchase of bread. Let him have
an income of £1000 a year, £40 of which is spent on necessary-
food, the rest of the £960 will appear as consumer's rent upon
purchases of food, for he would have paid it all rather than fail
to get the food. This same sum, or part of it, cannot rightly
be reckoned over again as more consumer's rent upon coal
and other commodities which the consumer appears to yalue
at a higher price than he gives.

The total consumer's rent cannot exceed £960, and would,
in fact, appear to correspond to that portion of his income spent
upon non-necessaries, including any savings he might make.

Marshall's mode of reckoning would enable the same money
income to count over and over again, as often as a purchase
was made.


pboduceb'8 and consumer's rents. 61

consumer's expenditure of income. So the net
profit on a given business over a month or a
year may be legitimately taken as the basis of
measurement for a producer's rent.

The term "net profit" is proverbially ambiguous.
The producer's rent, however, may be taken to
be any excess of profit that may accrue in a busi-
ness during a given period over and above the
minimum profit required to induce the continued ^s
application of industrial power. This excessive
profit doubtless emerges in each act of sale; but
it cannot be rightly calculated on the separate
sales, since the expenses of production of one
article are organically related to those of other
articles. The true producer's rent thus repre-
sents the money value of a differential economy
of production, as compared with the economy of
the least effective producer competing in the
market, and is estimated upon the total business
over a period of time. The true consumer's rent
represents a differential economy of consumption,
expressed in the money value of that portion of
consumption and saving which takes place during
a given period, over and above the necessary mar-
gin of subsistence. Thus we place the two rents
in line with one another: the producer's rent
measured from a marginal expense of production
(uf. the smallest sum necessary to recoup the costs
of production of the portion of supply produced
under the least favourable circumstances) ; the


62 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

consumer's rent measured from a marginal ex-
pense of consumption (the smallest sum neces-
sary to maintain the consumer's life under the
least favourable circumstances).

§ 5. Consumer's rent is sometimes stated in
direct relation to reductions of price of a com-
modity. For instance, a fall in the marginal
expenses of producing cotton goods represented
in a fall of prices is described as yielding a con-
sumer's rent. This treatment, however, involves
an assumption of the stability of money income of
consumers which is not legitimate. It may be that

X a fall in price of commodities is also an economic
cause of a fall of income to a class of consumers ;
in that case the fall of price does not yield to mem-
bers of this class a true consumer's rent, for the
margin for purchases outside of necessaries is not
increased. Though it may be true that a fall of
money prices does commonly increase the purchas-
ing power of consumers and so raise their con-
sumer's rent, the fixity of money income is not
rightly assumed in a community where incomes
are ultimately paid out of the prices received for
sale of commodities.

§ 6. This consideration of producer's and con-
sumer's rents shows a tendency on the part of
differential rents of buyers and sellers in a mar-
ket to assume an exaggerated size by reason of an
assumption of independence and isolation of a

J small local or temporal group of transactions.


pboduceb's and consumer's rents. 63

The criticism of consumer's rent may at first
sight appear inapplicable to the differential gains
of buyers who buy not for "consumption" or
direct personal enjoyment, but in order to sell
again or to use as a means of production. But
when buyers are manufacturers who buy raw
materials of manufacture, or are retailers, their
differential gains may either be accounted anal-
ogous to consumer's rents, — consumers' utility
being imputed to the various production-goods
which are required in the different stages of
production, in accordance with the analysis of
Wieser and the Austrian School, — or they may
be taken as a source of future producer's rents
in the manufactory or the retaU business to which
the buyer devotes the goods he buys. The latter
is perhaps the more convenient mode of reckoning.
Where the buyers are manufacturers purchasing
their materials of manufacture, any differential
gain they make will be represented by a differen-
tial gain which the lower expense of production
in their business will enable them to obtain from
the sale of the manufactured goods into which
these materials shall pass.

Since the residual element of forced or specific
gain in a market-price is dependent on and
measured from the differential valuations of the
limiting buyer and seller, the character of quan-
titative exactitude imputed to it in the illustra-
tion of a market, borrowed from Bohm-Bawerk,


54 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

will be subject to a similar process of qualifi-
cation.

In fine, the group of transactions taken to con-
stitute a market at a given place and time has had
ascribed to it an independence which is unreal,
with the result that a false definiteness appears ia
the gains which the different parties are assumed
to make from their transaction.

But the recognition of this truth does not im-
^ pair the fundamental validity of the analysis of a
market. The two elements of differential and
specific gain which this analysis discovered in the
*fiarket are really there, though the actual condi-
tions of a market prevent them from being subject
to the precise measurement ascribed to them in
^ our falsely isolated instance.


CHAPTER III.

THB DETERMINATION OF LONG-PEBIOD PBICES

AND OF VALUE.

Part I.

§ 1. It ha« appeared that the process by which
a market-price is reached makes no provision for
the equal distribution of the advantage of a b?T-
gain in the case of any of the pairs which effect a
9ale in the market. It is equaUy clear that the
amount of gain which accrues to each party re-
spectively in a number of bargains at a market-
price will be determined by certain forces which
lie outside and beyond the machinery of compe-
tition and bargaming in the market, and which
assign to the body of buyers and the body of sell-
ers the economic power which is represented in
the actual gain each gets from the transaction.

If, putting the matter in general terms, we say
that the relation of supply to demand determines
the market-price, we are driven for further ex-
planation to examine the forces which give power
to supply and to demand.

First, a word further as to normal price. It is
sometimes suggested that though a market-price

66


66 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

may, by virtue of passing or local circumstances,
lean in favour either of buyers or seUers, there
exists something called a normal price, round
which market-prices oscillate, which averages the
fluctuations of market-prices over a period of
time, and which in the long run divides equally
the advantage among buyers and sellers. Now
this term "normal price " has its uses. But it must
be kept in mind that a normal price is nothing,
but an average of market-prices, itself varying
according to the number of diJBferent D(iarket-
prices it averages. The notion, therefore, that in
a normal price the inequality of competing or
bargaining power between buyers and sellers wiU
be eliminated, and that the normal price repre-
sents absolutely free competition, is utterly chi*
merical. The identification of the normal or aver-
age price with what theoretic economists some-
times still call a natural price, whereby exchanges
take place with absolute reference to cost of pro-
duction or some other standard of value, has no
validity. For we have no reason to assume that
a normal price, which represents market-prices of
wheat or horses over a period of a year or two
years, is a price which, if it were constant through
that period, would divide equally among buyers
and sellers the total gain of the transactions. If
the advantage which one party may possess in a
market were simply due to chance (to some sud-
den or unaccountable facts), and there were an


LONG-PEBIOD PBICES AND VALUE. 57

equal probability of this chance favouring one
side or the other, on that supposition an average
or normal price would be one which eliminated
the advantage in a market. But how, if the su-lj
periority of competition belongs to one side or the
other, not merely in a single market-price, but
over the whole series; if one side has an advan-
tage on the average ? Evidently the normal
price will not eliminate, but will reflect that ad-
vantage, and a normal price will in no sense be a
natural, or a "free competition," price. If one of
the two sets of bargainers enjoys a constant ad-
vantage in the power to manipulate a profit by
passing circumstances, or a power resting on some
superior source of supply, it follows that a nor-
mal price which merely averages actual market-
prices will include an element of inequality.
Average the dealings of small money lenders with
their clients over a term of years; you obtain a
normal price of such loans, but that price reflects
a normal advantage possessed by such money lend-
ers. For certain purposes, theorists are doubt-
less at liberty to ignore these normal advantages
and to consider industry under a condition of ab-
solutely free competition of capital and labour.
But much intellectual harm has resulted from
economists leaving the consideration of an actual
market-price, and hastening to the consideration
of a normal price, which in one breath they re-
gard as an average, in another as a "natural,"


58 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

price expressing the relation of commodities under
purely ideal conditio&s.

§ 2. The laws of distribution which underlie
the bargain are best studied as they govern the
forces operating in the market. Some of those
very factors, which it is believed a normal price
eliminates, are essential to the study.

Let us, then, return to our market-price. We
have seen how it is actually determined in the
market, given certain buyers and sellers with
their valuations ; but we want further to know
what outside economic forces determine such and
such buyers and sellers to enter the market and
bargain at such valuations.

Now these deeper economic forces, which govern
market-prices, are best examined as they are oper-
ative in a change of price.

What is the cause of a price-change? The
question sounds a simple one, and economists
generally agree in the terms of their answer. A
price-change is directly motived by a shift in the
quantitative relation between supply and demand
at the previous price. But what is here suggested
by supply and demand ? The supply which
thus operates in price-change evidently does not
mean the total stock of goods in existence^ but the
quantity which sellers are willing and able to sell
at the former price. Similarly with demand. If
w^e are to place it in true relation with this supply,
demand must mean either the quantity of goods


LONQ-PEBIOD PRICES AND VALUE. 59

which buyers are willing and able to buy at the
former price, or the quantity of money buyers are
able and willing to pay for goods at the former \
price. If, however, taking these meanings of the
terms, we turn to the mechanism of the market,
we find them defective in that they furnish
a merely statical setting to a dynamic problem.
Supply and demand thus conceived are stationary/
amounts. Now, price-change is a process, and in'
order to understand this process, what we have tOy
estimate is the rate at which the stock of goods is
increased and depleted — a flow and not a fund.
But, if we conceive supply and demand as quan-
tities of goods (or money) regarded at a particu-
lar time, we conceive them as funds. In order
to study price-change properly, we must express
supply and demand as flows, i.e, measure them
as processes taking place in time. Consistently
with this purpose, supply may mean the total stock
offered for sde at a price diing any given time,
and demand may mean quantity of purchases at
a price within a ^ven time, or quantity of money
expended at a price within a given time. But it
will be more convenient to define the terms more
narrowly, confinmg supply to the mte of increase
of stock; demand to the rate of withdrawal from
stock (or the rate of payment of money in with-
drawing from stock). Thus alone do we rightly
come to regard supply and demand as processes
or "flows," and the supply and demand with


60 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

which we concern ourselves will be equivalent
to the rate of production and of consumption.^
^ Where goods flow out of a stock at the same pace
as they flow in, the price remains firm, and de-
mand and supply will be said to be equilibrated ;
where the inflow is faster than the outflow, prices
fall, and supply will be said to exceed demand ;
where the outflow is faster, prices rise and de-
mand exceeds supply. This setting regards de-
mand primarily as a rate of outflow of goods.
But if we regard demand as a power exercised by
the purchaser, it signifies and is measured by an
inflow of money. The quantitative relation of
supply and demand may be expressed in either
measure of demand. But in dealing with the
mechanism of exchange, it is best to regard
demand as an action proceeding from the buyer
and to measure it in the terms of purchasing
power.

Any increase or decrease of money, expended
upon goods at a given price within a given time,
implies a corresponding increase or decrease in
quantity of goods bought, so that no error will
arise from substituting the money-measure for the
goods-measure of demand, and regarding it as an

^ The tenn ** consumption ** is here used in the loose business
sense, in wliich, for instance, it is said, cotton-yam or iron is
consumed when it is utilised in manufacturing processes. In
strict statements of economic theory, it is desirable to confine
consumption to the use of retail goods by so-called consumers.


LONO-PEBIOB PRICES AND VALUE. 61

inflow of money from the purchaser instead of an
outflow of goods from the seller.

Keeping clearly in mind this conception of
supply and demand as a rate of flow, it is hardly
possible to misstate the law of price-change.

So long as a body of sellers in a market, main-
taining the same stock of goods, can sell those
goods at the same pace at which they have sold
them hitherto, they will not lower and cannot
raise the price. If they lower the price, this act
means either a fall off in the pace at which buyers
ask for goods, or it means that they have increased
their stock, and in order to make sales correspond
with this increased rate of supply, they must
stimulate demand by lowering prices ; if they
raise their price, it means either a reduction of
supply in face of a constant or an increasing
demand, or it means a growth of the rate at
which purchases are made from a constant or
decreasing supply.

Thus there are two immediate causes of a rise
of price, — viz. a relative decrease of supply or
a relative increase of demand; two causes of a
fall of a price, — a relative increase of supply or
a relative decrease of demand.

§ 3. This somewhat pedantic formulation of the
law of price-change is rendered necessary by the
fact that in working out special problems, economic
thinkers not infrequently ignore the law and
adduce distant forces as causes of a change of


62 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

price, without showing how they operate in alter-
ing the quantitative relation between the flow of
supply and of demand. I might illustrate from
every page of the elaborate controversies upon
money. Generations of economists have argued
the influence of quantity of gold or of money
upon prices, without recognising that they are \>
under any obligation to show how an increase or
a decrease of money will affect the rate of supply
or the rate of demand for commodities : this fin^al
link required to connect quantity of money with
price-change is almost always either jumped or
ignored, the real issue being begged in some more
or less ingenious manner. Persons who so confi-
dently affirm that an increased quantity of gold or
other money would of necessity raise price, are
required to show that this increase of money
necessaray means an increased rate of purchase
of commodities, or a decrease in the supply of
commodities; this they seldom or never attempt
to do.

Of course there are numerous forces (and mone-
tary ones among them) which can be rightly spoken
of as causing changes of price, but they all act
through, and can be tested by, their influence upon
rate of demand or supply.

§ 4. Turning then to our issue, price-change,
we see seUers and buyers as repositories of supply
and demand.

Whatever force proceeding from either side dis-


LONG-PERIOD PRICES AND VALUE. 63

turbs the existing balance of supply and demand
affects price. It also affects value. Nearly the
whole of the trouble about value has arisen from
separating unduly the consideration of value from
that of price. Once keep clearly in mind the
fundamental truth that price is value expressed
in terms of money, it will then appear that the
most profitable way of studying the nature of
value is to study the forces which cause price-
change. The notion that value is some inherent
and abiding property of wealth, which escapes at
any rate the minor fluctuations of market-changes,
has no validity whatever.^

Once expel from the mind the idea that value

^ Still more fallacious is the signification which so hard-
headed a thinker as Professor Hadley adopts, identifying value
with '^ a proper and legitimate price as distinct from an unfair
and ille^timate one/^

"The price of an article or service," he says, "in the ordi-
nary commercial sense, is the amount of money which is paid,
asked, or offered for it. The value of an article or service is
the amount of money which may properly be paid, asked, or
offered for it" — Hadley 's Economics, p, 92.

Now this involves a double-barrelled error. First, whatever
value is, it is not "an amount of money," though it may be
measured by an amount of money. Secondly, the idea that it
is a "proper " or "legitimate " price involves, as indeed Hadley
admits, a reference to some ethical standard which he does not
attempt to establish. There is no justification whatever for
assigning to value (exchange-value) any more permanency
than attaches to price. The value of any stock of goods (the
quantity of other goods they will exchange for) will vary with
everything that affects the market-price.


64 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

is an inherent quality or enjoys any more perma^-^
nency than dbes market-price, and it becomes
evident that the study of price-change is the
surest approach to the true understanding of
value.^

§ 6. The one-sided theorists who have made
value dependent either solely upon "cost" of
production or upon "utility," commit a similar
error. Though they formally describe value as
a relation between commodities, they realise it as
a property attaching to commodities. Those who
attribute to cost of production the cause or deter-
mination of value, realise goods as possessing value
in the shape of the productive power of labour and
capital which has been used in making them, and
are thus driven to deny the direct influence on
value of causes which do not operate through
cost of production. The Utility School similarly
comes to regard and speak of value as a property
or force stored in goods, by reason either of the
direct satisfaction they can afford, or because of
their contribution toward the production of goods
which give a certain quantity of satisfaction, only
admitting causes from the cost side in so far as
they are seen to operate upon utility.

Considered in a broad, historical light, the two
opposed theories of value are of great interest.

^ Bdhm-Bawerk, who insists on distingoisliing yalue and
price as conceptions, admits that '* the laws of these two
coincide." (Positive Theory of Capital, p. 132.)


LONCh-PMBJOD PBICSa AND VALUE. 65

Economics, after it left the liberal hands of Adam
Smith, was moulded into the structure of a sci-
ence of commerce by the classical economists with
Ricardo at their head. The characteristic note of
this school was to regard the production of com-
mercial wealth as the end or final cause of industry:
to this intent they twisted the whole terminology
of political economy. Consumption itself was
justified as a means to an end — the furtherance
of production.^ Not merely was the theory of
Consumption or Human Satisfaction left wholly
undeveloped by this school, but it was equally
germane to their conception of the science to
igfnore utility and to consider cost of production
as the cause of value. This is essentially the com-
mercial point of view. The commercial man has
no direct concern with the utility of his goods —
that is the purchaser's lookout Qcaveat emptor!^ ;
his chief business is to look after the cost of pro-
duction and the sale. The treatment of labour as
a mere commodity — one " cost " of production —
belongs to the same attitude. On the other hand,
Jevons and his fellow-thinkers in England, Austria,
and America assign utility as cause or determi-
nant of value, because they have abandoned the
commercial standard and substituted a ^^ human "
standard. Economic activities are regarded as

^ The free trade theory did, indeed, formally recognise the
sapremacy of the interests of the consumer, but it never affected
the main structure or the terminology of political economy.


66 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

contributing, not to "business," but to satisfac-
tion : the end is no longer production, but con-
sumption. So, just as it was natural for the
commercial economist to look upon "costs" as
a force generated in various processes of produc-
tion, accumulating and vested in goods as making
them " valuable," so it was natural for those who
look down the line of industrial processes from the
other end, from consumption, to take the con-
sumer's test of the valuable — utility — to refer
it back as a property potentially existing in differ-
ent classes of commercial goods which are on
their way to blossom into really useful goods
when they reach the consumer.

Stand at one end of the stream of industry, you
see goods gathering cost as they pass from process
to process in production, and then cost appears
to be the value which is growing : stand at the
other end, value seems only to emerge from the
contributions which productive processes make
toward the supply of consumables, and to con-
sist of nothing else than this utility of consum-
ables reflected back upon the earlier processes — a
potentiality of satisfaction.

Now both these views of value are due to an
almost materialistic conception of value as a
property or force stored in material forms of
wealth and transmitted from one end or other
of the chain of industry. By an unwise depar-
ture from the actual operations of the market, they


LONG-PERIOD PBICE8 AND VALUE. 67

have developed an abstraction as unreal as the
"oddity and quiddity" of the mediaeval school-
men. Like the latter, too, they have developed a
dogmatism in the assumption of their theory,
which would be ridiculous if it were not so in-
jurious. Of course all holders of a " cost " theory
of value admit that valuable things must be use-
ful, but this utility is only a condition, while cost
is the efficient cause : " utility " men allow that
cost affects the value of all freely produced goods,
but they maintain cost is the condition, utility the
efficient cause. ^

§ 6. Now if, leaving abstractions, we turn to
shifts of actual prices and recognise that with

^ Admitting, as B5hm-Bawerk.does, that *' for the emergence
of valne there must be scarcity as well as utility, — not absolute
scarcity, but scarcity relative to the demand for the particular
class of goods,'' — it is hard to understand why he should refuse
to scarcity (and through scarcity to cost) an independent in-
fluenee as a direct determinant of value. He does not really
dispose of this independent influence by making economic
scarcity *' relative to the demand "; for while change of demand
may undoubtedly affect the " relative " scarcity, changes pro-
duced by natural causes or human arts, stimulated by no change
of demand, may also affect this relative scarcity. It is difficult
to comprehend why a change in the value of a stock of wheat,
due to a favourable season or a new railway, should be attrib-
uted to demand, which has either not changed, or the change
of which has been clearly consequent upon an enlargement of
supply. Yet if "scarcity" thus affected may be legitimately
regarded as a true determinant of change of value, why may
not *' scarcity'' and the cost factor behind it rank as a true
determinant of value ? {PosUive Theory ^ Bk. HI, Ch. II,
p. 136.)


€8 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

each price-change the value of a stock of goods
is changing, we perceive that value is affected,
and directly affected, by forces proceeding from
either side, and that this distinction between
causes and conditions of value has no ultimate
validity.

Only by turning to the actual play of economic
forces in a market can we perceive the or-
ganic relation between cost and utility operating
through supply and demand, which is required
to establish the truth that value is determined by
the interaction of the two. It is the most ser-
viceable achievement of Professor Marshall to
have clearly established the equality and the in-
terdependence of cost and utility as the deter-
minants of value. This he did by working out
through supply curves and demand curves the
laws of the regulation of prices. With the theory
of value as distinct from that of prices he has
dealt very briefly, but his brief treatment con-
tains a refutation of the Jevonian theory of "final
utility " as crushing as even Mr. Hyndman could
desire. With characteristic academic modesty
Professor Marshall has placed this criticism of
Jevons in a small print note, the very title of
which is but a slight indication of its matter. It
is called a "Note on Ricardo's Theory of Value " ;
but though it contains an exposure of the insuffi-
ciency of the cost theory, its chief importance
consists in its brief and absolutely conclusive ref-


LONQ-PEniOB PRICES AND VALUE. 69

utation of the syllogism into which Jevons some-
what rashly cast his doctrine of value. The fact
that many students of economics still speak of
themselves as Jevonians in their interpretation
of value, I can only explain by supposing that
Professor Marshall's note has escaped their atten-
tion. As Professor Marshall points out, Jevons,
with the ingenuousness of the professional logi-
cian, provides his own refutation. His theory
that the value of a supply of goods is determined
by the final utility, ue. the utility which attaches
to the least serviceable portion of the supply which
is already consumed, he sums up in the following
syllogism : —

"Cost of production determines supply,
Supply determines final degree of utility,
Final degree of utility determines value." *

Now, setting on one side the careless and inac-
curate statement that cost of production deter-
mines supply, whereas final cost is the immediate
determinant, this syllogism, as Marshall points out,
really gives away the most distinctive feature in
Jevons's treatment. Jevons wishes to insist that
final utility, not final cost, is the real controlling
force. But his syllogism, though alleging that
value is directly dependent on final utility, shows
that final utility is controlled by final cost, so that
the latter is made, after all, the master.

1 JPHneiplea (2 ed.), Bk. IV, Ch. XV.


70 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

The whole statement, as Marshall shows, can
be utterly upset by inverting Jevons's syUogism
and substituting the following, which is ^^ rather
less untrue " : — , ■

^Utility determines the amount that has to be supplied,
The amount that has to be supplied determines cost of

production.
Cost of production determines value."

The fallacy of attributing the determination of
value (or price) to final cost or to final utility is
one and the same. Final utility cannot be the
ultimate determinant of value, because final utility
will depend upon' hOw much is bought, and how
much is bought will depend upon the quantity
that is offered at different prices, and this in its
turn depends upon final cost. So, conversely,
final cost cannot determine value, because the
cost of producing the last portion of supply will
depend largely upon how much is produced, and
that will depend on the effective demand at dif-
ferent prices, or, ultimately, on the final utility
attending different quantities of consumption.

Professor Marshall has summed up the matter
with perfect accuracy by comparing the two in
their action to the blades of a pair of scissors.
" When one blade is held still, and the cutting is
effected by moving the other, we may say with
careless brevity that the cutting is done by the
second ; but the statement is not one to be made
formally and defended deliberately."


LONQ-PERIOB PRICEB AND VALUE. 71

The fact is, that both sides commonly imported
a particular concept into value which begged the
question. The commercial economist saw that
goods fetched a high price because they were dif-
ficult to get hold of (scarce) or "costly" to make ;
the humane-minded economist found the common
meaning of value more akin to utility. The same
transaction is often regarded in common life
by two parties with the same difference of view.
Take the case of the cab-runner, who demands a
shiUing for carrying your box into the house. He
values" his action at a shilling, looking at it from
the cost side ; he has run two miles against a horse,
with the risk of being refused the job after doing
all this work; a shilling is not an outrageous
charge for his effort and his risk. On the other
hand, you would almost as soon as not take the
exercise of carrying your own box up the steps, so
the actual good you get from the cab-runner is
very small indeed. Or, again, take the case of Mr.
Beecham, who sells us pills which he perhaps
correctly observes are " worth a guinea a box " to
UB, and yet, with a rare spirit of self-denial, con-
sents to take 1«. 10(2., regulating the price rather
by consideration of the cost to him than the utility
conferred on us.

The confusion which has thus attached to value
arises almost inevitably when a popular abstrac-
tion is taken into scientific terminology.

§ 7. Another curious instance of the inveterate


72 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

one-sidedness of the adherents of final utility in
recent times is furnished by the use which Bohna-
Bawerk and others of his school have made of the
term "subjective value " in seeking to identify it
with the old use value. " It is important," vnites
B6hm-Bawerk,i "that we give right names to
those things which tradition has handed down to
us under the inadequate designation of use value
and exchange value. The two groups of phe-
nomena, to both of which popular usage has
given the ambiguous name 'value,' we shall dis-
tinguish as value in the subjective and value
in the objective sense. Value in the subjective
sense is the, importance which a good, or a complex
of goods, possesses with regard to the well-being
of a subject.'^ And this " well-being " he proceeds
to identify with the " satisfaction of a want. " Now
by thus identifying subjective with use value he
has begged a most important issue. I may put
the matter in the form of a question and ask. Why
should not the term " subjective value " be applied
to the whole subjective or human facts which lie
behind objective or exchange value — facts which
relate not only to the utility of the good possess-
ing the exchange value, but to its cost as well?
The forces which directly operate in determining
objective value proceed both from costs and from
utility. Why, then, should the term " subjective
value " reflect only the subjective aspects of those

1 Positive Theory of Capital, Bk. Ill, Ch. L


LONG-PERIOD PB1CE8 AND VALUE. 73

which proceed from utility ? The " well-being of
a subject" is just as much concerned with mini-
mising costs as in maximising utility. Subjective
value, if it is to have any proper or intelligible cor-
respondence to objective value, should express
the relation of subjective cost to subjective utility.

It is perhaps not curious that Bohm-Bawerk
should proceed to mate this error by giving also
the same one-sided interpretation to objective
value by which he says is meant " the power or
capacity of a good to procure some one objective
result. In this sense there are as many kinds of
value as there are external results with which
man. may be connected. There is a nutritive
value of food, a heating value of wood and coal,
a fertilising value of manures, a blasting value of
explosives, and so on." ^ Now there is, perhaps,
no sufficient reason why Bohm-Bawerk should not
apply the term " objective value " to these objec-
tive utilities. But when he seeks to identify it,
as he does in the paragraph just quoted, with
exchansfe value, I can only say that he is depart-
ing from the m;aning conitentiy and univerLuy
accorded to that term by past economists.

The fact is that in his preliminary process of
defining objective and subjective value he has
identified them with objective and subjective
utility, denying the validity of all " cost " consid-
erations. This, occurring as it does in the opening

1 p. 131.


74 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

pages of a treatment of value, is sheer '^petitio
prindpiV*

§ 8. But, though in the specific problem of direct
determination of value final or marginal utility
exercises no power, the like of which is not exer-
cised by final or marginal cost, there is a sense in
which a superior control may be claimed for utility
as " cauBa cavsans,^^ Were " economics " expanded
into a broader science, which should take cogni-
zance of all forms of vital wealth, the economic
antimony of production and consumption would be
merged in the deeper unity to which biology and
ethics testify, when they insist that work, or pro-
duction, can be as genuine and vital a source of
satisfaction as consumption itself. From such a
standpoint Bohm-Bawerk's insistence, that the
causal connection ^^runs in an unbroken chain
from value and price of products to value and
price of costs," appears defective, for we perceive
"utility" or other vital satisfaction emerg-
ing directly from processes of production in the
finer arts and handicrafts.

A really philosophical analysis from the physio-
logical or the psychological standpoint would
seem to bring together into such close organic
relation the processes of productive and con-
sumptive work and enjoyment, that neither in
the purely biological nor in the conscious realms
could they be severed or priority of importance
accorded to one of them.


LONG-PERIOD PRICES AND VALUE. 75

But taking economics within the limits generally
assigned to it, the Utility Schools are entitled to
ignore these considerations, and to insist that the
theory of value is not concerned with the ultimate
rationale of function and fruition, effort and
satisfaction, but only with such pains of produc-
tion and pleasures of consumption ^a actually
figure in present human estimates of value. So,
any labour, which is itself a joy, and is recognised
as such, involves no economic "cost," and such
'* goods " as it produced would, unless the labour
were hampered by scarcity of material, possess
no "value," but would be "free" goods. The
utility theorist rightly urges that, since economic
costs are ex-hypothesi "painful," they cannot
be regarded as undergone for their own sake, but
only as means to the end of attaining some utility.
Thus the conscious motive force which directs
the volume of productive force emanates from the
demand of consumers, and utility of consump-
tive goods becomes the ultimate cause why value
attaches to any stock of productive goods.

We may even affirm that from utility, through
demand, proceed the very forces which direct and
evoke costs, drawing industrial energy into the
right channels and stimulating those very im-
provements in organisation and the industrial
arts which subsequently appear as chief causes of
changes of value from the cost side.

But though utility thus figures as the final cause


76 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

of value, it is not rightly taken as the sole efficient
cause or as the sole determinant of quantity of value
attaching to a stock of goods. The distinction
here made is not a barren one. The economic
problem of value is one in which we are rightly
concerned, not with final, but with efficient, causes,
and the mistake of the Utility School is that they
substitute the former treatment for the latter.
As a direct, independent, efficient cause of the
value of a given stock of goods, cost ranks on a
level with utility. The attribution of final cau-
sality to utility has no serviceable bearing on the
problem of determination of values and prices.
Bohm-Bawerk sometimes seems to feel this, and is
driven to claim for utility a superior power, not
only as final, but as efficient, cause, insisting, for
instance, that value '' runs from iron goods to iron,
and not conversely." Now the iron goods ap-
pear to impose value upon iron and to determine
the " how much " of the value, only so long as we
ignore the influence of costs (through scarcity of
supply) upon the iron goods; When, however,
that influence is taken into consideration, the
value of the supposed sole determinant is seen
to be itself determined partly from the cost
side. In other words, the flow of accumulating
costs drawn from the iron and coal is perceived
to be just as much an efficient cause of the value
of the iron goods as the utility of the latter is of
the value of the iron. So that even were we to


LONCh-PERIOB PRICES AND VALUE. 77

admit that the value of iron was imputed from the
value of the iron goods, cost is not banished as an
efficient cause of the value of iron. The somewhat
intricate and complex reasoning by which Bohm-
Bawerk has sought to get rid of costs as direct and
separate influences on value of productive goods,
receives more detailed consideration in an appendix
to this chapter. The breakdown of the attempt
to repudiate the separate efficient causal influ-
ences of " costs " in determining the value of con-
sumptive goods and productive goods is there
made manifest.

§ 9. A brief summary of the actual relations
which subsist between costs and utility and be-
tween the value of productive and consumptive
goods will take the following shape : —

Taking industry as "a going concern," and
bearing in mind the present condition of the in-
dustrial arts in the several processes, we shall find
that a definite quantitative relation exists between
the amount of value of the productive goods and
instruments at the several stages, and the amount
of value of the consumptive goods which issue
from them. If we consider, as we reasonably
may, consumptive goods as the conscious goal
of industry, it will appear that productive goods
receive their value as means to an end, and that
the amount of this value is dependent upon the
amount of value of the consumptive goods. If,
then, the value of these consumptive goods could


78 THE JEC0N0MIC8 OF DISTRIBUTION.

be rightly considered to be determined by their
final utility, this latter would be placed in the posi-
tion of the true determinant of all values. But
even Bohm-Bawerk, when confronted with the
question, admits that the final utility of consump-
tive goods is itself determined by the relations be-
tween "wants and provision." Now behind "pro-
vision " or " supply " stands the force of costs.
So that where the value of consumptive goods seems
to determine the value of productive goods, it is
not more because the final utility of consumptive
goods determines that of productive goods than
because the final costs of productive goods have
already determined the costs of the consumptive
goods, and so helped to determine the very value
which appears to be reflected back. If we choose
to disregard the "suction " exercised by demand
for consumptive goods and to follow the mere
"flow" of the industrial stream from the early
processes onward toward consumptive goods, it
seems equally plausible to represent the value of
productive goods as determining that of con-
sumptive goods.

In fact, the flow of the accumulative force of
utilities and costs is in opposite directions. So
far, then, as the actual determination of the value
of a stock of productive goods is concerned, we
must insist that there are two sets of efficient
causes, -T- those operating through final utility,
derived from and dependent on the final utility


LONG-PERIOD PBICE8 AND VALUE. 79

of consumptive goods, and those operating through
final costs (except where natural scarcity takes
the place of costs).

§ 10. While, therefore, in a scientific physiology
of industry, final utility is of supreme significance
as indicative of the true source of industrial life,
the motor power which flows from the effective
demand of consumers of commodities, and which by
the pressure of its "final" or "marginal " activity
directs and attracts the requisite productive pow-
ers in every channel of industry, it cannot rightly
take the place which is claimed for it in the spe-
cific problem of the determination of the value of
any stock of useful goods at any point of the
industrial stream. Our setting of the problem
of price-change and of value, concerned as it is
with "efl&cient" causes must, therefore, hold the
balance equal between final utility and final costi

To achieve such a task careful terminology is
essential, and, in order to clear our mind as much
as possible from controversial misconceptions, I pro-
pose, first, to substitute for the term " value" a gen-
erally admitted equivalent, which the discussions
of the Austrian School have brought to the front.

The value of a supply or of an article of supply
means the " economic importance " attaching to
it. There are two advantages in substituting
the term " importance " for value. ^ In the first

1 Menger is, I think, the first to identify value with "im-^
portance,'' in a distinct definition of the term.


80 THE ECONOMICS OF DIBTBIBUTION.

place, it is prima facie impartial, so far as a
theory of value is concerned, whereas the term
"value," from common association, leans toward
utility. Secondly, it gets rid of the notion of
" value " as a ^quality or property of goods, and
gives emphasis to the true notion of it as an aspect
or relation. This impartiality, indeed, is not quite
absolute, for we find Austrian economists, in
their adoption of the term, already imputing into
it a bias ^toward utility as the source of " impor-
tance."^

If, however, taking the following table of ter-
minology, we approach the central conception of
economic importance in relation to the concrete
problem of determination of price, the equilibrar
tion of prices from the cost and the utility sides
will be established beyond all controversy.

** Die Bedeatong, welche concrete Qtlter oder GtLterqnanti-
taten flir uns dadurch erlangen, dass wir in der Befriedigung
unserer Bediirf nisse von der Verf tigung liber dieselben anhSngig
zu seln uns bewusst sind." {Grundzuge^ p. 78.)

This is paraphrased by Professor Smart as follows, "Value
is the importance which a good acquires as the recognised con-
dition of something that makes for the well-being of a subject,
and would not be obtainable without the good. " (Introduction
to the Theory of Value, p. 14.)

1 B5hm-Bawerk, for example, proposes to define value ** un-
ambiguously and exactly,'' as : *^ That importance which goods
or complexes of goods acquire, as the recognised condition of a
utility which makes for the well-being of a subject, and would
not be obtained without them." (^Fo^tive Theory', Bk. Ill,
Ch. IL)


LONG-PBBIOD PBICES AND VALUJB. 81

J The importance or value attaching

% ^ to a stock of goods changes directly

^ S I with any change in the relative rate of

^o bo supply ^^^ demand. But supply and

^1 'I demand, in order to be economic forces,

|g 'g in order to affect importance, must be

tt p £ governed by certain forces behind them.

9^ A supply infinite or indefinitely large

J |.§ has no economic significance. Com-

►> §6 parative scarcity is the gov.emor of

§ 4 supply. Similarly, demand receives

g I its economic significance and power

5 from effective desire (a willingness and

g I ability to give something in order to

g |^,J get). Just as there is no economic

g 1^^ supply of free goods because there

I ^ I exists no scarcity, so there is no eco-

g Zi nomic demand for them, because there

% . & is no willingness to give something to

h ti, get them. Effective desire is in effect

„ § a "scarcity" on the demand side.

« & Scarcity of supply itself is condi-

^ y^ tioned: sometimes by a restriction,

o S which may be natural, as in the case

? ^ I of certain kinds of land; or the product

mid ^^ circumstances, as the scarcity of food

I, in a siege, or the scarcity due to an

,1 organised comer or syndicate. The

oj scarcity of "old masters" etc., may


nS


also be regarded as "natural.


9>


82 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

In most goods, however, scarcity is due to the
fact that human costs must be incurred to pro-
duce a supply. How far the fact that human
effort is required to produce goods will make
them scarce, depends very largely upon the rela-
tion of human effort to natural sources of supply.
Where there is some natural limit of good or easily
accessible material, more human effort must be
expended in each increase of supply.

Here scarcity is apt to assert itself and forces
rising importance to press from the cost side.
Where there is abundant access to natural sources
of supply, less human effort may be expended in
each increase of supply. Here the pressure of
scarcity is abated, and the forces operating on
supply make for a reduced value or importance
in each article. Here we have the familiar Laws
of Increasing and Diminishing Returns.

Turning to the demand side, we see a similar
mechanism of economic forces. Effective desire
regulates demand in the same way in which scar-
city regulates supply. Effective desire means
desire backed by purchasing power; it is the pro-
duct of two factors, a, human utility, or, more
strictly speaking, the craving for satisfaction
arising from utility, and )8, purchasing power.

Human utility has to demand the same relation
that human cost has to supply. The economic
forces which operate on cost are the arts of pro-
duction. The practice of the arts of production.


LONG-PERIOD P BICES AND VALUE. 83

otherwise efficiency of production, will depend in
part upon scientific considerations, the amount
of knowledge of the industrial arts, partly upon
the character or quality of the men who exercise
these arts, their individual and their collective
power to avail themselves of the knowledge of the
arts. Given the same absolute knowledge of
natural forces in relation to matter and of the
modes of working, differences of physique, race,
climate, social and political institutions, and a
variety of other influences will affect the actual
cost of producing a given quantity of wealth.
Again, the effectiveness of the practice of indus-
trial arts, as we have seen, is always qualified by
the limits imposed by nature upon the supply of
matter and natural energy.

Closely analogous in working are the forces
which play upon demand. As the arts of pro-
duction stand behind cost, so the arts of con-
sumption stand behind utility or satisfaction.
Any given stock of valuable goods will of course
depend, for the real satisfaction they afford, upon
the degree of development of the tastes of the
consumer and the habits of consumption he has
formed. There is a skill of consumption which
rests upon physical laws relating partly to the
constituents of consumable goods, partly to the
nature of the consumer, and which consists in a
right and delicate harmony or adjustment of power
in securing different kinds and quantities of con-


84 THM ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

sumption, just as the skill of production consists
in the delicate manipulation by human and natural
energy of variously adjusted quantities of raw
material. As human cost or effort is null and
void in its contribution to supply, except so far
as it has access to natural sources, similarly
human utility or satisfaction is void unless it
can find its means of expression in purchasing
power. This latter condition makes desire an
economically effective force, just as limitation of
natural supply makes productive effort effective.

Remove the limits of .matter and of natural
forces, and the cost of producing any stock of
goods may shrink to an indefinitely small amount.
Similarly assume an infinite amount of available
income or purchasing power, and the smallest
amount of desire will express itself in an indefi-
nitely large demand.^

§ 11. The use I claim for this table is not merely
that it suggests a settlement of disputed termi-
nology, but primarily and chiefly because it forces
a recognition of the organic relation between cost

1 This assignment of a sabjectiye basis of value does not
conflict with or impair the objective signification which identi-
fies value with the quantity of other goods for which a good
will exchange. If we prefer, we may accept the distinction
made by Wieser of objective exchange-value and subjective
exchange-value, imderstanding by the former the quantity of
other goods for which it exchanges, by the latter the importance
assigned to it by considerations of scarcity and utility. The
relation between the two is, that the subjective importance is


LONQ-PEBIOD PBICSS AND VALUE. 85

and utility, and the strictly equal or analogous
part each bears in determining value.

It convinces us that there are forces constantly
passing £rdm both sides to affect the value or im-
portance of a stock of goods.

It rejects the compromise sometimes suggested,
whereby the value of some kinds of goods is said
to be determined by cost, the value of others by
utility.

There are doubtless certain goods which may be
classified in such a way as to show an absolute
scarcity or limit of supply, with regard to which
all changes of value will appear to be the product
of forces from the side of demand. Pictures of
old masters, food in a siege, are familiar exam-
ples. Here human costs appear to exercise no
direct influence in determining value, which is
fixed by the relations between absolute scarcity
and effective desire, and, since the latter is the
only changing factor, it may be said to be the sole
direct regulator of the value of such goods at any
given time* It might perhaps be urged that even
in these cases cost, though reduced to a mini-
mum, is not absolutely excluded as an influence

measnred by the objectiye exchange-value, which is expressed
either in terms of other goods, or more conyeniently in terms
of money as price. It is, however, more accurate to say that
the quantity of goods for which a good will exchange, consti-
tutes not its value, but the measure of its value, though that
measure is itself commonly referred to an accepted standard ol
money.


/r-v^'


86 THE ECONOMIC a OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

on value. Supply-markets are not absolutely
separate one from another, for the demands which
cause them to be classified are not kept in water-
tight compartments. It might, then, be urged that
there is neither a supply nor a demand for old
masters which is entirely separate from the supply
and demand of other pictures, or of art goods in a
wide sense. To take a concrete example, " copies "
of old masters or "spurious *' old masters must cer-
tainly be held to cater to the same tastes as the
limited supply of genuine pictures, and may there-
fore rank as an increase of "supply," which will
moderate the absoluteness of the " scarcity. " Since
"costs » will operate upon this portion of supply,
as in other "freely produced" commodities, the
influence of these " costs " will presumably have
some effect upon the value of "old masters."
Similarly, the effective supply of food in a be-
sieged city is not an entirely inelastic quantity;
the amount of it which figures £ts supply on any
given day will depend upon the economy with
which individuals have used the stocks in their
possession, and the high human " cost " of keeping
food for a later period of the siege will have some
influence as a determinant of its value. It is
scarcely possible to eliminate altogether the in-
fluence of " cost " upon value save by recourse to
some impossible hypothesis.

In both these instances, it may be rightly
claimed by those who emphasise utility as the


LONO-PEBIOD PRICES AND VALUE. 87

final cause of value, that human desires, operating
through demand, are the real forces which evoke
the "costs " that are necessary to break down the
absoluteness of monopoly by enlarging the effective
supply. But this admission of an ultimate causal-
ity assignable to human desires ought not, as we
have shown, to affect the economic setting of the
cases. The influence of human costs and natural
scarcity cannot be eliminated as direct efficient
causes of price and value, even by reference to
extreme and almost extra-economic instances.

But even if it be admitted that human costs in
such cases have no influence on supply, and so on
value, the power of supply as a determinant of
value is still represented by "scarcity." Whether
we are dealing with a natural or an artificial
scarcity, it is never absolute and constant; the
material of every supply is continually perishing
or receiving accessions, so that, though the pres-
sure of demand appears to be the sole source of
changes of value and of price, there is always
some slight vital influence proceeding from the
supply side. Though one of the blades appears
to do all the cutting, to adopt Marshall's illustra-
tion, and the other to stand still, if we look closely
enough, we shall see that the latter nevertheless
moves. Scarcity is never a mere statical "condi-
tion " of value, but always exerts an active force.

Neither can we take the other side and conclude
with Mill that the value of freely produced goods


88 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

is derived from and determined by cost. For pur-
poses of commercial convenience it may be better
to compare the values of most free goods by refer-
ence to relative costs or expenses; for whatever
forces operate from the demand side will be re-
flected in normal costs, just as the forces from the
cost side will be reflected in utility. But the
selection of costs for the more convenient measure
of values and price-changes must not be under-
stood to imply that either theoretically or prac-
tically the forces operating through cost are more
important than those operating through utility.^

Professor Marshall, indeed, suggests that ^^we
may say that, as a general rule, the shorter the

^ The folly of recognising two Laws of Value — one where
Supply is limited, another where it is capable of increase — is
well exhibited in the controversy which B5hm-Bawerk has car-
ried on with Professor Dietzel, in the pages of Conrad^s Jahr-
bUcher fur National- Oekonomie^ during 1890-1892. Though
Dietzel had several times plainly formulated the true theory
which assigns the determination of value neither to cost nor to
utility, but to the relations between scarcity and utility (cost
being one source of scarcity)^ he weakly abandoned to the
Marginal Utility School the class of limited goods, admitting
their value to be determined by marginal utility alone, whereas
he ought to have stoutly maintained that though no *'cost''
entered here as cause, " scarcity," otherwise determined, played
the same part as a determining factor as in the case of freely
produced goods. The fact that, in the one case, the '* scarcity "
is rigid, in the other, flexible (by the application of new costs),
has no effect upon the universality of the Law of Value, thouglh
for practical purposes of measuring change of value and of
price, it throws the stress upon the utility side of the equation.


LONO-PEBIOD PRICES AND VALUE. 89

period which we are considering, the greater must
be the share of our attention which is given to the
influence of demand on value ; and the longer the
period, the more important will be the influence
of cost of production on value."*

But even this distinction, sound as it is for prac*
tical purposes, must be rejected if it implies that
ultimately cost is the more important regulator or
determinant of value. The operation of a change
of taste, the growth of a new habit into a standard
of comfort, will exercise as strong and as abiding
an effect on the value of a class of goods as any
change which takes place in the method of pro-
ducing these goods.

It may be the case that a larger number and
variety of more enduring forces operate upon
value from changes in the arts and conditions of
production than from the side of consumption,
but it is not easy to establish the fact. There
are of course certain classes of goods the value of
which is more frequently and more largely affected
by forces which come from one side or the other.
We may say that the value of wheat is more in-
fluenced from the supply side, but the value of
fashionable dress-goods is influenced chiefly from
the demand side; and in the practical considera-
tions of market-price and bargaining these facts
must receive due weight; the study of the relative
importance of these different forces as they operate

1 Econ, oflnd.j p. 223.


90 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

on market-price is the most delicate, the most
difficult, and the most practically important work
of the modem profit-seeker.

Taking the wider theoretic view, however, an
absolute equality in the relation of cost and
utility toward value must be posited.

§ 12. The most curious feature in the recent
history of economic theory is that Jevons, who
perversely insisted in trying to upset the cost
theory of Value by plunging into an opposite
falsehood of extremes, is also the English writer
who more than any other has laid the true sub-
jective foundation of a correct analysis of value.
In his chapter on " Theory of Labour " he works
out a theory of the relation between cost and
utility for the individual which is irrefutable.
He shows exactly how a worker, engaged in sujh
plying himself with commodities by his own efforts,
will accurately balance the pain or disutility of
production against the pleasure or utility of con-
sumption ; that the number of hours he works, the
intensity he imparts to his effort, the distribution
of working energy over different kinds of work, will
be carefully balanced against the different amounts
of satisfaction derived from consuming different
quantities of goods produced by the day's labour.

It is, indeed, conclusively shown that the eco-
nomic value of the day's product is similarly and
equally affected by the disutility or cost of pro-
duction and the utility or satisfaction of consump-


\


LONG-PERIOD PRICES AND VALUE. 91

tion ; to such a man it will be a matter of equal
consideration whether he increases his day's effort
by one unit or reduces his day's satisfaction by
one unit.

His analysis of disutility or cost is similar to
his analysis of utility or consumption. He offers
a complete setting of the individual economy; in
reality he lays down the true theory of Value,
which he misrepresents elsewhere. The objec-
tion may perhaps be raised that the theory of
Value cannot be given in terms of the individual
economy, because no act of exchange takes place.
But the individual problem contains all the essen-
tial factors ; if we like, we may treat the case as
one of exchange worked out between the two sides
or selves, —the idle self, which shirks effort, the
greedy self, which seeks satisfaction. The mode
rf balance will be similar, though more accurate,
than that established in an exchange of commodi-
ties between two bargainers. The strange thing
is that Jevons does not apply this theory of Ex-
change in the individual to society. His formal
theory of the Individual Economy establishes two
most important trutha : (1) the equal importance
and the continuous organic interaction between
final cost and final utility; (2) the essentially
subjective nature of the problem of exchange.^

1 His analysis, p. 189, of his Theory of Political Economy, lays
the foundation of the subjective treatment of cost and utility,
which Austrian and American economists have built upon.


92 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

Yet Jevons, in his "Theory of Exchange,"
ignores the influences which emanate from cost, or
counts them as indirect agents operating through
final utility. His treatment of "disutility" in
this part of his work refers, not to cost, but to
damage or pain incidental to certain classes of
consumption.

In his final chapter, one imperfect glimpse of
the true problem emerges, where Jevons afl&rms,
"The problem of economics may, as it seems to
me, be stated thus: Given, a certain population
with various needs and powers of production, in
possession of certain lands and other sources of
material; required, the mode of employing this
labour, which will maximise the utility of the
produce." If Jevons had added the words, "and
minimise the 'disutility ' of producing them," his
statement would have been complete. But in fact
his work, as the work of all those who attach
themselves to utility as the special measure a^d
determinant of value, is one-sided and defective.

The perception that cost and utility, resolved
into their subjective elements of effort and satis-
faction, are essentially, organically, related in
the individual economy, must be followed by the
plain admission of a similar relation in the social
economy which expresses itself in socia l value
and in price. And a scientific statement of value
must assign a similar relation to the forces afiEect-
ing value from both sides.


LONG-PERIOD PBICES AND VALUE. 93


Pabt II.

§ 18. This wide excursion into the theory of
Value may seem to some to have a too remote
bearing upon the more definite problem of price-
point and price-change. But this is not really
the case. Until the precise equality of final cost
and final utility as determinants of value is estab*
lished, we cannot fully appreciate the process of
competition and bargaining which results in a
price.

I began by pointing out the fact that behind
the supply, which figured in any market, there
were a number of forces relating to scarcity and
cost of production in the wider market, which
determined the quantity available at the different
prices. The same forces bring it about that some
portions of the market supply are produced more
cheaply than other parts. The owners of the more
cheaply produced goods would consent, if neces-
sary, to sell them at a lower price than the owners
of the more expensive portion of supply would
consent to take. In other words, the difference
of price-limit, which we saw the different sellers
put upon their goods, arises from differences in the
cost or expense of producing them. If the supply
is thus graded according to the cost of its different
parts, the price which is eventually reached will,
it is maintained, be such as only just to cover the


94 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

expenses of the most expensive portion. Those
who lay stress upon this side say that the price is
determined by the expense of producing this last
part, or the marginal expenses of production.
Similarly, the different valuation which was im-
puted to the buyers is attributed to the superior
" effective desire " which some exhibit as compared
with others. The attainment of the horse or the
quarter of wheat will either satisfy a stronger de-
sire in some than in others, or an equally strong
desire backed by a fuller purse. Those who lean
upon this side say that utility (effective desire)
of the last portion that is bought determines the
value of the whole supply.

§ 14. Now let us turn to our diagram of maxket-
price and ascertain how marginal cost and mar-
ginal utility actually express themselves. We
shall find that they can be identified with the
final pair before whose valuation competition of
buyers and sellers gives way, leaving the price-
point to be determined by the bargaining of the
two.

The competition and "higgling" was seen^ to
result in five acts of sale, in which A, B, C, D, E,
were the sellers and N, O, P, Q, R, the buyers,
at a price which was finally determined by the
higgling of a single pair within limits imposed
by competition. The final pair, whose action
determined the price-limits, and eventually the

1 Ch. I, pp. 11-19.


LOITO-PSBIOD PBICEB AND VALUE. 9S


price, were seen to be F, with a limit-price of sale
amouutiDg to ^21 lOs., and M, with a limit-price of
pnrchaee amounting to ^21. F is the one among
actual sellers whose limit-price is highest. He
cannot afford to sell at less than ^21 lOs. Why?
Became he reckons that price will only just cover

BB1.LESS. FRics-Luins.

B A


JEI.HItOPQB
Bdtbrs. Prick -LI mis.

his cost of production, or, more strictly speaking,
will only give him the minimum gain required
from a single sale. In other words, F represents
the most expensive portion of possible supply,
final or mai^inal cost. R is the actual buyer


96 THE ECONOMIC a OF BI8TRIBUTION.

whose limit-price is highest; he will pay more
than any other buyer, because he wants a unit of
supply most, or because he has more money at
his disposal, so as to make his ^^ effective desire"
the greatest. In other words, R is the person
who imputes the highest utility, and M is the
representative of final or marginal utility. The
differential advantages obtained by A, B, C, D, E
among the sellers, and N, O, P, Q, R among the
buyers, will thus be found to correspond to real
differences of cost (expenses) of production on
the one hand and utility on the other hand. If,
without making any other change, we transfer our
illustration from a horse-market to a market of
some manufactured wares, it will easily appear that
the larger gain which D, C, B, and A make as
compared with E upon each sale effected signifies
and rests upon the special advantages possessed
by each in economy of manufacture. Similarly,
it will be recognised that the special gains made
by O, P, Q, R, in their capacity of purchasers, as
compared with M, is based upon special amounts
of utility attributed by them to the same goods for
trade or for consumption.

On each side, among the buyers or the sellers,
the differential gain or ^^rent" is to be measured
from the position of a member of the final pair
representing marginal cost or marginal utility.
In our diagram the dotted line which connects F
with M enables us to see at a glance the relative


LONCh-PSBIOD PSICES AND VALUE. 97

size of these differential gains, which include
those portions of A, B, C, D, on the sellers' side,
which fall below the price line ; and those portions
of N, O, P, Q, on the buyers' side, which rise
above that line.

A certain awkwardness in the setting forth of
this analysis arises from the fact that F and M,
the final or determinant pair representing mar-
ginal cost and utility respectively, do not figure
in the actual sales effected, but are excluded mar-
gins. This is due to the fact that our examjple
has placed for convenience certain definite inter-
vals between two valuations of buyers and sellers
respectively. Under conditions of perfect compe-
tition the intervals will be infinitely small, and
E and N, the extremes of actual supply and
demand, would be legitimately taken to represent
marginal cost and marginal utility. But for pres-
ent purposes these margins must be understood to
lie just outside the actual supply and demand.

We may summarise the bearing of this analysis
upon the theory of Value and Price in the fol-
lowing words: Granting the assumption of the
mathematical economist that the supply and de-
mand of a market are infinitely divisible, the
marginal or final pair, whose transaction directly
determines price, earn, both of them, an infinitely
small gain. In such a case either marginal cost
or marginal utility may be taken with equal cor-
rectness to measure or determine price and value.


98 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

If the various contributor to supply and demand
are likewise supposed to enjoy precisely similar
advantages of production and to be subject to pre-
cisely equal pressure of needs, no differential gains
would emerge, and the market-price would dis-
tribute the gain, which would be, however, in-
finitely small on each transaction, with exact
equality among all who took part. The actual
circumstances of a real market are found to be
very different from this. Whether we take a
short or a long period, a " market " or a " normal "
price, we find that neither marginal cost nor
marginal utility exactly determines price or
value as an independent cause, though in any
given market one or the other will furnish a true
measure of price or value. In the transaction
of the marginal pair which determines price and
value an element of ^'forced gain "always emerges,
smaller where the market is large and free, larger
where it is small and restricted. The variation
of the economic resources of the different buyers
and sellers increases the inequality of distribution
effected by sales at a common price, by adding to
this forced gain a differential gain.^

1 The notion that cost is a more serviceable metuure of
value, even if it ranks equally with utility as a cause of value,
based upon the belief that different costs can more easily be
reduced to and expressed in some common term, such as
"labour-power" or ** labour-time," has no warrant. Labour-
time, ignoring kinds and intensities and other conditions of the
giving out of labour-power, is no more a measure of "cost" than


FlBaT APPENDIX TO CHAPTER lU. 99


FIEST APPENDIX TO CHAPTER HI.

The Subjective Basis of Valwe,

In order to mark the essentially subjective nature
of the theory of Value, it is desirable to distinguish
more definitely subjective cost and utility from ob-
jective cost and utility.

Subjective cost must be taken to consist of the act-
ual effort of workers measured in terms of disagree-
able feeling and regarded as a quantity, t.e. disutility
in work, as estimated by the individual consciousness
of the worker. Objective cost must be taken to mean
the productive energy which attaches to this effort,
referred for measurement to some objective standard,
i.e. hours, foot-tons, etc.

Subjective utility will represent the pleasurable
feeling got out of consumption by the consumer, re-
garded as a quantity, t.e. the quantity of pleasure got
from eating a loaf, or burning coals for warmth. Ob-
jective utility will measure the services of consumable
goods by some objective standard, i.e. the power of

abstract ** satisfaction '* is a measure of utility; and the fact
that the former is more usually, and, for certain purposes, con-
veniently, measured by the clock than the latter, gives it no prac-
tical advantage as a sound and accurate measure of value. It
is curious to find so keen a writer as Dietzel resorting to this
crudest fallacy of the Marxian analysis, in his criticisms of the
marginal utility theory {Jahrhucher fur National- Oekonomiej
B. XX, SS. 687-8), and concluding that, " Whether I reckon by
cost-value or use-value, the result is the same. But I reckon
more simply and more accurately by cost-value than by use-
value.''


100 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

sustaining life, or furnishing physical power contained
in a bushel of wheat, the actual heating-power in a
hundred-weight of coal.

The distinction is of supreme importance in the art
of economics. For while the subjective cost and util-
ity which attach to the production and consumption
of wealth are evidently the true measure of economic
prosperity and adversity, as interpreted by the present
conscious estimates alike of individuals, classes, or
societies, it is equally evident that the operations of
the actual industrial world, as expressed by many val-
uations, have direct reference only to objective cost
and objective utility.

Now it will easily appear that a given quantity of
objective cost may be related to indefinitely divergent
quantities of subjective cost, accordiag as it is distrib-
uted. A given quantity of labour-power will imply a
quantity of painful effort which varies (1) With the
nature and conditions of the work, e,g. according as it
is monotonous, taxing continuously the same muscles
or nerves, or varied, according as it implies danger
of disease or accident from the conditions under which
it is carried on. (2) With the mode of its apportion-
ment among the workers, e,g, according as it falls
upon strong men or upon weaker women and children,
according as it is given out in a long or short day's
work, etc.

A corresponding analysis of utility will show that
a given quantity of objective utility will vary indefi-
nitely when reduced to terms of subjective utility ac-
cording to (1) the nature and conditions of consumption
to which the objective utilities lend themselves, t.c.


FIB8T APPENDIX TO CHAPTEB IIL 101

the capacities and methods of enjoyment possessed b^
the actual consumers ; (2) according to their distribu- "
tion among the consuming public, i,e. food will vary in
subjective utility from infinity to zero, according as it
passes into the possession of a starving person or a
fully-fed one.

In this analysis, be it observed, no departure is
made from the commonly accepted economic standard.
The appeal is not to any such ethical or vital standard
of values, as Euskin seeks to substitute for market
valuations. The present estimate is based strictly
ui)on what "is," not upon what "oughf to be; the
existing conscious valuations of desirable and undesir-
able, on the part of workers and consumers, are taken
as the standard.

deferred to our theory of Value or Importance the
terms will take the following setting : —

3ub^6cHAD6 Objective O^eetive SuMeeiive

CoH. Cost. tfUUiy. miUty,

Measured Measured Measured Measured

in units of>^in hours, v Importance y in power of An units of
nndesira- ^foot-tons, ^ or ^sustaining ^desirabil-
bility of ef-^ or other ^ value ^vital en- Mty by con-
fort measures ergy, orfur- sumeis
of output nisbing me-
chanical
force, Le,
nitrogenous
units or de-
grees of
temperature

Professor Smart ^ suggests a serviceable illustration
from the production and consumption of a given quan-
tity of coal

^ VcHWy p. 6.


102 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

k

C^Cott. Cost. tfHUty, trUUly,

Parnful ef-v Hours' v Supply •TT^a4.,-„„ v Satisfaction
fort of > work in ^ of <( ^^zj^' < gained from
miners ^ raising coal ^ coal ^*^ ^ the heat

The efficacy and fruitfolness of this distinction of
subjective and objective value may be illustrated by-
showing how it clearly explains one difficulty which
besets the ordinary commercial view of value. Take
a Supply of commodities : the first portion that is sold
goes to satisfy the strongest desires of consumers^ the
next portion a somewhat weaker desire^ and so on
until the last portion that is sold satisfies the weakest
desire, or, using the ordinary language, has the small-
est utility attached to it. Yet all portions have the
same price and the same value. Those who insist on
taking utility as the essence of value find it difficult
to explain how, with a diminishing utility attached to
the successive portions sold, the value and price of the
part which serves the fullest use are as great as that
which supplies a necessary of life.

But our tabulation, which makes value = impor-
tance, shows that the importance attaching to all por-
tions of supply that are sold is equal. For as the
subjective utility furnished by consumption of the
later units of supply diminishes, the subjective cost
of producing these has increased. The first unit of
consumption which satisfies the strongest-felt need is
rightly considered as taking off that portion of supply
which would be produced if no other were produced,
because it can be produced most easily. Each later
portion taken from supply satisfies a weaker need,
but is produced at a greater cost, and since cost plays


FIRST APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III. 103

the same direct part in assigning importance or value
to an article as does utility^ there is no diminution
of value by a reduction of utility accompanied by a
corresponding rise of cost. The last portion of sup.
ply with the least subjective utility has the highest
subjective cost.

This has been illustrated by pointing out that the
last bottle of wine at the millionnaire's feast^ which
famishes the smallest satisfaction to the drinkers^ is
the bottle, the products of which represents the last
hour's labour of the hardest-worked producer^ t.e. has
the highest subjective cost attached to it.

Thus it can be simply shown how it is that each
separate unit of supply, though it has a different cost
and a different utility from any other unit, has the
same value or importance.

Professor Scott, of the University of Wisconsin, in
a letter which discusses the relative importance of the
influence of " human costs " and " human utilities '' on
value, makes the following interesting and pertinent
remarks concerning ^^the density and elasticity of the
medium through which ^ human costs ' produce their
effect on value.'' — " Under modem conditions of pro-
duction there is a long road between human sacrifices
and changes in the supply of goods. The people who
fomisli these sacrifices are, for the most part, labourers,
and not infrequently a change of supply, which may
mean greater sacrifice for them, may not mean greater
costs for the man whose acts are directly responsible
for changes in supply. Human costs may, therefore,
change without producing any change in supply or
value." This failure of human costs to register their


104 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTION.

changes accurately in expenses of production, and so
to operate through supply on value, is of practical im-
portance, and when in a later chapter I discuss the
special conditions of the labour-market, the reasons
for this failure will be evident.


SECOND APPENDIX TO CHAPTEE IH

Bohm-BawerWa General Theory of Value,

The elaborate attempt made by Bohm-£awerk in
his important work, "The Positive Theory of Capi-
tal," to derive all " value " from the utility of final or
consumptive goods, and to refute the "cost" theory of
Value by showing the ultimate dependence of costs
upon utility, deserves separate consideration. The
keen, and sometimes brilliant, analysis by which he
has traced the flow of utility from consumptive goods
through the veins of industry in all the productive
processes, and has thus impressed upon his readers the
organic unity of the entire industrial system, has in-
duced many to accept his interpretation of causality
in value as a sound and conclusive result of close
reasoning.

Let us, however, test Bohm-Bawerk's steps, starting
from his identification of "value" with economic
"importance," adopting, as far as possible, his own
statement of his case.

In the mere identification of value with "impor-
tance" there is nothing to indicate whether or how
far the "importance" of a good is derived from, and
depends upon, the costs of making it or the satisfaction


SECOND APPENDIX TO CHAPTEB lU. 105

of consuming it. But no sooner has Bohm-Bawerk
adopted "importance" as a synonym of value than he
proceeds to " bias " it toward utility. When we read
(p. 138) that, " If the value of a good is its importance
to human well-being, and if this ^ importance ' means
that some portion of our well-being is dependent on
our having the good, it is clear that the amount of the
goods value must be determined by the amount of
well-being which depends on it." These words make
it evident that "importance" is already conceived as
a quality of goods which comes to the possessor, and
that "well-being" is regarded purely as an effluence
of consumption. So when the question is once more
fairly put on the following page (139), "What is the
gain to our well-being that in any given circumstances
depends upon a good," the answer already imported
into the question is " Utility." This, indeed, he openly
avows, declaring that "the measure of the utility
which depends on a good is, actually and everywhere,
the measure of value for that good." We have then
at once and plainly identified "utility " with " impor-
tance."

He next proceeds (p. 140) to identify this "well-
being" or "utility" with "the satisfaction of a want,"
and to insist that the amount of this "well-being"
derived from a "good" is found in the answer to two
questions, — " First, which, among two or more wants,
depends on it? and, second, what is the urgency of
the dependent want or of its satisfaction ? " (p. 140).
It might be thought that his own use of the word
"urgency" (wliich, though called in to explain, only
repeats the notion originally conveyed by "impor-


106 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

tance^') might have bade Bdhm-Bawerk pause and
reflect whether the " urgency " of obtaining a particu-
lar good might not depend upon the cost of obtaining
an altematiye good as much as upon the intensity of
the desire of the consumer. But by this time the
'^importance'' of a good has exclusive reference in
B5hm-Bawerk's eyes to the satisfaction in consump-
tion ; and he proceeds to a careful and highly service-
able analysis of the kinds of wants, on the one hand,
and the degrees of wants on the other. Then upon
this basis he develops and illustrates the theory of
Marginal Utility in relation to different kinds and
quantities of consumables.

Then, strangely enough, after utility has abeady
been identified with value and '^ importance/' and mar-
ginal utility has already been taken as criterion, the
whole issue is once more thrown into the melting-pot
by starting the question, '< What determines marginal
utility?" It now appears (for a little while) that
the " importance " (or value) of goods is not, as was
just affirmed, identical with their utility in consump-
tion. On the contrary. Chapter VI opens with a sane
statement of the Law of Value which, though loosely
worded, is essentially correct.

"Usefulness and scarcity are the ultimate deter-
minants of the value of goods." Now, not only is
scarcity thus fetched up from the supply side of the
equation as a determinant of value separate from
utility, but it is made the determinant of " marginal
utility " itself, for " it is the scarcity that decides to
what point the marginal utility actually does rise in
the concrete case" (p. 160).


SECOND APPENDIX TO CHAPTEB III. 107

Now, since " concrete cases " are precisely those to
which the theory of value must apply, Bohm-Bawerk
is surely affected by a suicidal mania in placing
** marginal utility " at the mercy of " scarcity." For
'^ scarcity '^ depends, so far, at any rate, as most goods
are concerned, upon marginal costs of production, and
it therefore appears that marginal costs will in these
cases determine final utility. Here we perceive that
Bohm-Bawerk has made an abandonment of his posi-
tion very similar to that which Jevons, by the show-
ing of Marshall, had made before him. Nor is this a
momentary lapsus calami^ for the writer proceeds to
develop a theory which, though it no longer maintains
" scarcity *' in the dominant position just accorded it,
equally repudiates the dominance of marginal utility
for the time being. We are now told that " the height
of marginal utility is determined by the relations of
wants and provisions " (p. 160).^

But though Bohm-Bawerk goes so far in a footnote
as to make a perfectly straight declaration of a sound
theory of VaJue in affirming that "the relation of
wants and provisions is the ultimate universal deter-

^ " Classical economists,** as Dietzel remarks, ** have some
ground for dissatisfaction at having served up to them, at the
end of a long process of investigation, a Law of * Marginal
Utility ' which turns out after all to be the familiar *> Law of
Supply and Demand.* '* *•'' The value of a good depends upon
the amount of its ^ marginal utility * : the latter upon the re-
lation of needs and provision,** says Bdhm ; **the others, with
their formula that price depends upon the relation of demand
(want) and supply (provision), come to the same result.*'
(jJahrhUcker fUr NationaUOkonomie, Neue Folge, Bd. XX,
S. 670.)


108 THE ECONOMICa OF DIBTRIBUTION.

minaat of the value of goods '^ (p. 160), he gives no
analysis of the ideas of "scarcity" and "provision"
to which he has given such a commanding place, and
traces no connection between them and " costs." On
the contrary, in the following chapters, VII, VIII,
and IX, he returns to his application of the theory of
Determination of Value by Marginal Utility, just as if
he had never interrupted or abandoned it. It is not
until Chapter X that he confronts the real issue of
"costs." It soon becomes evident that he is destined
to adopt the same " question-begging " method as that
by which "importance" was originally identified with
utility. The "value" of productive goods is what
we have really to investigate, for the " costs " which,
according to cost-theorists, dominate value, are ex-
pressed and contained in productive goods. Now,
instead of proving that the "value" of productive
goods, like that of consumptive goods, is derived from
utility, Bohm-Bawerk simply asserts it as "self-evi-
dent." "On the lines of our conception of value it
must be self-evident that a productive good, like any
other good, can only obtain value for us through our
recognition that on its possession or non-possession
depends our gain or loss of some one utility, of some
one satisfaction of want. And it is equally self-
evident that its value will be high when the dependent
satisfaction is important, and low when it is unimpor-
tant. The only difference is, that, in the case of goods
for immediate consumption, the good and the satisfac-
tion stand beside each other in a direct causal relation,
while, in the case of productive goods, there is inter-
posed between them and the satisfaction finally


SECOND APPENDIX TO CHAPTEB III. 109

dependent on them a more or less lengthy series
of intermediate members^ their successiye products''
(p. 181).

We have^ then, elaborate illustrations of the way in
which the utility of consumptive goods is reflected
back upon the productive goods and constitutes their
value. ^^The value of each group has its immediate
measure in the value of its product, the succeeding
group '' (p. 182). So '^ from stage to stage the name of
the determining element changes, but under the differ-
ent names it is always the same thing that acts —
the marginal utility of the final product" (p. 183).
We have now a perfectly smooth and intelligible
theory in which all claims of ^^ costs'' to determine
value disappears (though later on it will be revived for
" a particular case " of value). In B6hm-Bawerk's own
words we may piece together and thus condense the
argument. " Costs are nothing else than the complex
of those productive goods which have value — the la-
bour, concrete capital, uses of wealth, and so on, which
must be expended in the making of a product " (p. 183).
" The amount of this, their (referring to ^ means of pro-
duction,' and so to costs) common value, is regulated
for all, in the last resort, by the amount of the mar-
ginal utility of their finished product " (p. 182). "To
put it generally : the value of the productive unit ad-
justs itself to the marginal utility and value of that
product which possesses the least marginal utility
among all the products for whose production the unit
might, economically, have been employed" (p. 186).

Here is a perfectly consistent statement of the doc-
trine of marginal utility as the final determinant of


110 THS ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION

value of all productive goods. But what has become
of '^scarcity'' and the dominant place once assigned
to it, and where has the interrelation of ^^ wants and
provisions '^ disappeared ?

To get rid of " costs ^' by merging them in "pro-
ductive goods," ^ and then to declare that it is " self-
evident" that the value of productive goods depends
upon the marginal utility of the consumptive goods
they are designed to make, is one of the most curiously
bold petUiones prindpii which I have met in the annals
of illogic. The judiciously minded reader will, at
any rate, insist upon recalling Bohm-Bawerk to the
"scarcity" and the "provision" which he has ad-
mitted to be determinants of that marginal utility of
consumptive goods which he now seeks to make the
be-all and end-all of economic activities.

K his argument in the chapter entitled " What De-
termines Marginal Utility " is intended to stand, we
must insist on taking up the assertion there made that
"it is the scarcity that decides to what point the
marginal utility actually does rise in the concrete
case," and the allied, though inconsistent, admission
that "the height of marginal utility is determined by
the relations of wants and provisions," and we must
press for an examination of the bearing of "costs"
upon scarcity and provision. If scarcity is a direct

1 Dietzel pertinently I'emarks that ''had the marginal-yalue
theorists given their consideration to the * power of production,'
instead of to that of the possession of ' a supply,' they could not
have so falsified the necessary relation between the value of the
product and the value of productive or ' cost' goods." {Jahr-
biicherfur National- Oekonomie, N. F. Bd. XX, S. 680.)


SECOND APPENDIX TO CHAPTER IH. Ill

determinant of marginal utility, and so of value in
consumptive goods, it must likewise be a determinant
of the value of productive goods, not merely the scar-
city of the consumptive goods reflected back, but the
particular scarcity of each supply of productive goods.
Por it can hardly be suggested that scarcity of fire-
irons affects the value of iron ore, but that scarcity of
iron ore itself does not affect its value. If the rela-
tion of wants and provisions, or in current economic
language, demand and supply, govern marginal util-
ity and value in consumptive goods, as B5hm-Bawerk
declares them to do, surely it is unreasonable to say
that the relation of these same forces does not govern
the value of productive goods. It would be an idle
inconsistency to affirm that the value of consumptive
goods is determined, not by marginal utility, but by
the relations of " wants and provisions," but that the
value of all intermediate goods is determined by the
marginal utility of consumptive goods. This position
Bohm-Bawerk does not, indeed, directly assume, but by
words from his own pen he can be driven into it

The entire trouble arises from his refusal to analyse ^.
"scarcity" when he has declared that it determines ^
"marginal utility" in "the concrete case." Had he
done so, he could hardly have failed to admit that
"costs" are the direct determinants of "scarcity" in
most classes of goods. In the first pages of Chapter
X a partial restoration of "costs" as a "regulator"
of value takes place. But even here, where the law of
costs is admitted, "costs are not the final, but only
the intermediate, cause of value. In the last resort
they do not give it to their products, but receive it


112 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

from them " (p. 189). The example adduced to ms&e
this perfectly clear is perhaps the most convincing
evidence of the petitio prindpiij with which I charge
Bohm-Bawerk in his initial dogmatic identification
of "importance" with "utility." "That Tokay is
not valuable because there are Tokay vineyards, but
that the Tokay vineyards are valuable because Tokay
has a high value, no one will be inclined to deny,
any more than that the value of a quicksilver mine
depends on the value of quicksilver, the wheat field
on the value of wheat, the brick kiln on that of bricks,
and not the reverse " (p. 189). On the contrary, this
is precisely what the major number of thoughtful
economists have always denied ; while admitting that
the utility of Tokay vineyards depends upon the
utility of Tokay, they refuse to make the assumption
that value is identical with utility, and are inclined to
insist that the "high value" of Tokay is itself, in
part, determined by the limited quantity of Tokay
vineyards. This, Bohm-Bawerk has admitted when
(p. 160) he makes marginal utility depend on " scar-
city." What natural scarcity does in the case of
Tokay vineyards, "costs" do in the case of freely
produced goods. Bohm-Bawerk is right in declaring
"costs are not the final, but only the intermediate,
cause of value." But the economic problems of value
are concerned with intermediate or efficient, and not
with final, causes. We may yield to B5hm-Bawerk
the final causality of utility all along the line, but in-
sist that the relations between cost (or scarcity) and
utility are what economists should regard as "causes"
of value.


CHAPTER IV.

THB LAW OF BENT AS THE BASIS OF COOBDINA-
TION OF THE FAOTOBS OF PBODUOTION.

Part I.

§ 1, In discovering the method by which a price
of goods is determined, we have practically learnt
how a ratio of exchange is established between
one class of goods and any other class. For the
sale of goods for money is admittedly not more
than half a transaction; when ^ the money that is
received has been expended in an act of purchase,
the transaction is complete ; goods have been ex-
changed for goods.

But in order to understand more fully the
nature of this bargain, we must regard any two
commodities which have been exchanged as com-
plexes of the various quantities of factors of pro-
duction that have entered into them in the various
productive processes.

A bargain for the sale or the exchange of finished
commodities will depend, so far as supply-forces
are concerned, upon the conditions of a number
of preceding, underlying bargains for the use of

113


114 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

different kinds and quantities of land^ capital, and
labour power. How far does our analysis of
market-price (and value) of commodities apply
also to the transactions for purchase of the use of
these factors?

The market-price of commodities contained,
over and above the measure of marginal cost or
marginal utility, a residuum of "forced gain," and
also allowed a series of differential gains to accrue
to the stronger buyers and sellers, measured from
the position of the marginal buyer and seller.

§ 2. Do the same conditions hold for the pur-
chase of the use of the factors of production? If
we regard the hiring of factors of production as
equivalent to the sale of their use, we are con*
fronted with the investigation of the market for
the sale of the use of various supplies of land,
labour, and capital.

Now these markets differ in one radical respect
from a market for commodities, in the mode of
measuring the supply. In our setting of the
horse-market, and any other market for goods, a
supply was reckoned for purposes of bargain as
consisting of a number of units of equal quantity
and quality. • Where the wheat or wool in a
market consists of different qualities or kinds, it
will, in theory and usually in practice, rank as a
number of separate supplies subject to separate
bargaining. Our differential gains in such a
market measured the different valuations set by


THE LAW OF BENT. 115

buyers or sellers upon goods which were held to
be identical in size and quality. Now in a market
for the sale of the use of labour and land no for-
mal reduction to equal sized units takes place.
Though the real object of sale is a quantity of
productive power vested in land or labourers,
what is nominally bought and sold is the use of
so many acres, or so many labourers, containing
each of them an indefinitely larger or smaller
quantity of productive power. But while the
bargainers express themselves in terms of acres
and labourers, the real object of their bargain is
the use of land-power and labour-power, and they
are continually engaged in reducing acres and
labourers to units of productive power when they
buy and sell. The maintenance of this awkward
mode of measuring land and labour, and the
necessity of finding some standard of reference in
order to ascertain the quantity of productive power
contained in an acre or a labourer, has given rise
to a grading of these factors of production which
has played a large part in economic theory. In
particular, it has given rise to the habit of taking
the least productive land and labour as a standard
of reference, and reckoning the productivity of
better land and labour by comparison with this.
Thus the better land and labour in a supply is
held to obtain a differential gain or rent which
measures the excess of its productive power over
the worst land or labour. If an acre of the worst


116 THE ECONOMICS OF BI8TBTBUTI0N.

land in use contains 4 units of land-use, then an
acre of better land containing 8 units has a differ-
ential rent of 4 units imputed to it. Now it is
important to observe that these differential rents
are in no sense equivalent to the differential gains
which arose in a market of goods. The latter
represent the different valuations put by different
buyers and sellers upon similar objective quanti-
ties, the former represent valuations of different
objective quantities. In order to place the sale
of factors of production upon the same level with
markets for the sale of goods, it will be necessary
to eliminate these objective differences which resti)-
upon customary modes of measuring the reposi-
tories of productive power.

But since economic theory has felt obliged to
adopt for many purposes the conventional modes
of measuring productive power, and has derived
thence certain laws which play an important part
in the theory of distribution, it is necessary to
accept provisionally the current custom of measur-
ing landfby its acreage per annum, labour by the
labourer per hour or week, and capital by its
money value, in ,£100, until we have discovered
a method of common measurement of the factors
which any satisfactory theory of distribution re-
quires.

The general tendency of economic science, es-
pecially in England, has been to assimilate the
theory of the sale of capital-use and labour-power


THE LAW OF RENT. 117

to that of the sale of goods, but to mark off the
sale of land-use as subject to quite other economic
laws.

I propose to bring the sale of the factors of pro-
duction under the general laws of value and of
price as disclosed by the investigation of bargain-
ing for commodities.

For this purpose it is necessary (1) to coordinate
the three factors with respect to the conditions
which regulate their price ; (2) to show that their
sales are in essence identical, as economic pro-
cesses, with the sale of commodities.

It is most convenient to approach the first of
these tasks by examining the validity of the claim
to assign a separate law to the determination of
the rent of land.

The separatist doctrine may be thus summarised.
Rix^ardo^s fundamentel assumption, upon which it
still rests, is that the use of land is the use of
certain ^^ inherent and indestructible properties of
the soil," certain fixed supplies of land of given
fertility and position ; that the efforts of man
cannot increase or diminish these supplies. So,
whereas the price of the use of capital and of
labour may be determined by processes of compe-
tition and higgling based upon the will of indi-
vidual bargainers to increase or reduce the effective
supply, the price of land-use will be determined
directly by circumstances not relating to land but
to the efficiency of capital and labour in those in-


118 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

dustries into which land-use enters. That is to
say, rent is a surplus, land taking in payment
for its use whatever residue is left after human
efforts and sacrifices are remunerated at a com-
petitive price.

§ 8. Now, since the determination of price is
our objective, it will be most profitable to test the
validity of this separate treatment of land by
examining the arguments which are adduced to
support the doctrine that rent of land forms no
element in prices, "does not enter into price,"
and does not help to determine prices.

Two lines of argument have been used to sup-
port this conclusion: the first has reference to
extensive cultivation with a margin represented
by the worst pieces of land in use ; the second to
intensive cultivation with a margin represented
by the worst productive power in use, contained
in a particular piece of land.

These two arguments are often adduced as con-
tributory to the same result and as consistent with
I one another. This, I propose to show, is not the
case.

The first argument is that with which we are
familiarised by Ricardo's presentation in Chapter
II of his "Political Economy." We are to
suppose different quantities of land taken suc-
cessively into cultivation to contribute to a single
supply; the "marginal" land in use at any time
will pay no rent ; the produce raised on this mai^


THE LAW OF BENT. 119

ginal land with the largest expenditure of labour
and capital per unit of produce will be the "regu-
lator " of the price of the whole supply. Since no
portion of the value of the produce of this marginal
land is taken for rent, "rent is not a component
part of the price of commodities." Ricardo leaves
it to be inferred that since the worst quantities of
labour and capital engaged in production pay some
wage and interest to their owners, wage and in-
terest must always be component parts of the price
of commodities.

Now this reasoning, so far as it relates to dif-
ferential rents, measuring the superiority of par-
ticular lands over the margin, is, of course,
I irrefutable. But its assumption that a margin of
1 cultivation is composed necessarily of no-rent
« land, has been exposed by Adam Smith in antici-
pation and by numerous writers since Ricardo.
It is quite unnecessary to have recourse to the
historical arguments which Carey and others have
used to show that the extension of the margin of
cultivation is not necessarily, or in point of fact,
from better land to worse. These arguments are
faulty in that they ignore the part which position
for market takes in determining the goodness or
badness of land.

The assumption that the extensive margin is
necessarily a no-rent margin arises from a falla-
cious simplicity in the abstract setting given by
Ricardo to his problem. If all land is considered


/


120 THE EC0N0MIG8 OF DISTRIBUTION.

as contributing to a single supply, e.g. wheat, and
if this supply contains more land than is required,
some of which is slightly inferior to the worst
land in use, the margin will be no-rent land.

But neither of these assumptions is absolutely
warrantable.

Suppose that an increase in the population and
the demand for wheat brings into cultivation all
the land available, the worst land in use may or
must pay an actual rent. This will not be a
differential rent, but a forced or scarcity rent ^
limited in its rise only by the pressure of the need
for land, and representing the power of the stronger 7
bargainer in the final pair that determines the -
market-price.^ Such forced rent would evidently
be reckoned as an expense incidental to all por-
tions of the wheat supply, and would enter into *
the prices. But this may be held to lie outside
of practical economics for a country in open com*
mercial relations with the world supply of land.

What really invalidates the Ricardian treatment
is the fact that most land in use has several al-
ternative uses or can contribute toward several
different supplies.

Though the worst grazing land may pay no

1 The adjectiye ^* monopoly *' has been often applied to sach
scarcity rent by economists ; but, though bearing some analogy
to a monopoly or ** one-man market" by reason of the dicta-
torial power held by the marginal owners, this marginal rent
|g best dewiribed as a scarcity rent or forced gain.


THE LAW OF BENT. 121

lent, the worst wheat land might be better for
grazing than the worst grazing land, in which
case it can only be obtained for growing wheat by
paying a little more than its differential rent for
grazing purposes; this rent for the worst wheat
land will be a positive rent, and will enter into
wheat prices ; again, the worst market-garden land
competing for a given market may be tolerably
good wheat land, and, if so, the rent which it could
get for wheat forms a marginal rent for market-
garden land. So as we ascend to the higher and
more special uses of land, we find that the differ-
ential rents must be measured, not from a no-rent
margin, but from a minimum specific rent of a
higher and higher order, until we get to city
ground, which is measured from a minimum which
must exceed the rent which that land could obtain
for the best agricultural use to which it could be
put.

The accompanying figure will serve for illus-
tration. Suppose the city A to lie in the middle
of a fertile plain surrounded by belts of land de-
voted to different uses. The outermost belt, E,
is rough pasture, improving in quality and posi-
tion as it approaches D, so that whereas the
pasturage at the outer belt of E pays no rent, a
gradually rising differential rent emerges as we
approach the circle D. Similarly, let us suppose
the belt of land between D and C to be engaged
in growing cereals, the worst cereal land being at


122 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

D, and the land as we approach C gradually im-
proving for cereal use. If the worst cereal land
at D would be of equal value for grazing to the
grazing land midway between D and E, it will be
rented for cereal use at a rent which is equivalent
to or slightly higher than the differential grazing
rent paid by the land midway between D and E.
Thus the marginal land for cereals will be found
paying a positive rent, and the differential rents


for cereals will be superimposed upon that mar-
ginal rent. Again, as we come nearer to the city,
crossing the circle C, we come to a belt of land
utilised for market gardens, improving in quality
and position as we near the circumference B. If
the worst of this market-garden land in C is capa-
ble of being cereal land of middling quality, the
marginal market-garden land will pay a rent
equivalent to the marginal cereal rent and the
differential cereal rent for middling quality of


THE LAW OF BENT. 123

cereal land. In the same way it will appear that
the worst land of the next belt, B, devoted to
suburban uses, will pay a still higher marginal
rent, based upon the fact that the worst suburban
land at B may be capable of drawing a high dif-
ferential rent for market-garden purposes. When
we finally reach A, the city itself, the worst ground
may draw a ground rent higher than that drawn
by the margin of suburban land.^

For the sake of simplicity I have assumed that
the marginal rent is directly and exactly deter-
mined by the alternative use of the worst land in
cultivation for each use. But this, of course, is
not necessarily the case. It is not necessary that
the worst land should have an alternative use ; it
may be some better land, enjoying a differential
as well as a marginal rent, which occupies that

1 This argument which makes ** marginal rents" hinge upon
*' alternative us69" of land may appear to lean unduly toward
the doctrine that ** marginal utility" determines values. But
though the marginal utility theory can neatly illustrate the
variation of values connected with different uses, natural varia-
tions in their bearing upon scarcity of supply can afford a
similar '* illustration " from the other side. The existence oi
'^alternative uses" with different values may be explained
either by the different chemical and other qualities of the soil
(the intensity of various wants being given) or by the growth
and intensity of different human wants (the differences in quali-
ties of soil being assumed) . The true explanation makes the
value of *' alternative uses" directly dependent on the relation
between natural qualities of soil and human wants. Here, as
elsewhere, '^ marginal utility" may be regarded as the final
cause of value, but not as the sole efficient cause.


124 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

position. The worst wheat land might obtain a
marginal rent of 20«. per acre ; superior qualities
of wheat land might take higher rents rising to
408. Suppose that some of the land rented at
30«. had another use which would yield a rent of
29«. ; it is evidently this land which fixes the mar-
ginal rent; it must receive 30«. in order to induce
it to contribute to the wheat supply, and the 20«.
taken by the worst land measures its inferiority
of wheat-growing power as compared with the 80«.
land. It is possible that the 208. land might con-
tinue to grow wheat, howQver little rent was paid ;
its rent is directly determined by the cost of keep-
ing in the supply of wheat land the superior land
at 808. In such a case it will be the 808. land and
not the 208. land which is the direct determinant
of price for the supply side in the market for sale
of wheat-growing power. The Ricardian analysis
has, in fact, laid undue stress upon the worst land
contributing to supply, the so-called margin of
cultivation. It is important to understand that
this margin has no particular significance except
as furnishing a convenient measure for the ready
reckoning of differential rents; it has no deter-
minant importance. It is the land with an alter-
native use, which may or may not be the marginal
land, that not only determines price from the supply-
side, but determines the whereabouts of the margin.
This can easily be shown by a closer examination
of the illustration just taken. It is admitted that


THE LAW OF njSNT. 126

what is really sold in the bargaining between land-
owners and cultivators for the use of wheat land
is units of wheat-growing power. The fact that
the nominal subject of bargain is acres of different
kinds of wheat land must not blind us to this
under-truth. Suppose now that the price per unit
of wheat-growing power, as determined in a market
set forth aftier the manner of our horse-market,
turned out to be 5«. per unit. This price, we will
farther suppose, is determined by the owner of the
80«. land, which yields 6 units per acre of this
wheat-producing power, and which, by the posses-
sion of an alternative use at a price just below 30«.,
has assumed the position of seller in the ^^ final
pair." The price 5s. has been determined on the
supply side by the fact that it is required to induce
this particular land to contribute toward the sup-
ply of wheat land. Now what about the 20«. land,
the worst wheat land, in occupation, the margin
of cultivation, which ex-hypothesi only yields 4
units of wheat-power per acre ? It is quite legiti-
mate to suppose that the owner of this land, hav-
ing no available alternative use at any price
approaching 20a., might have been willing to con-
tribute to supply even if the price per unit had
been fixed at 4*., and the rent per acre consequently
had been at 16a. instead of 20a. In such a case it
will be evident that it is the owner of the 30a. land
who, in fixing for the supply side the price per
unit at 5a., determines the amount of rent per acre


126 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

of the land at the margin of cultivation. In deal-
ing with the price of land-use, as of any other kind
of goods, it is to the strongest bargainer that we
must look for the direct and final determination
of a price, and the differential gain of the others
should rightly be measured from him. It is only
the conventional modes of selling and regarding
the sales of uses of factors of production that
obliges us to depart from this rule, and in the
case of land makes it convenient to measure dif-
ferential rents from the worst land in cultivation
which contributes to the market.

But though the differential rents thus calcu-
lated, not from the subjective valuation of the
"final pair" of bargainers, but from the margin
of cultivation, are not equivalent in. amount to
the " differential gains " reckoned according to our
market for sale of ordinary commodities, their
economic nature is not essentially different, for
they are determined in the same way. In so far
as the price of uses of factors of production is
reached by competition and bargaining (and this
is our hypothesis throughout), the mode of deter-
mining rent, interest, and wages will be essen-
tially the same as that of determining the price
of horses or wheat, and in order to understand the
theory of Distribution we must, while accepting
for convenience the different grading which charac-
terises the former, penetrate to the essential units
beneath. In land, we must recognise that rent or


THE LAW OF BENT. 127

price of land-use is determined, just like the price
of commodities, by the relative economic strength
of buyers and sellers bargaining for a given quan-
tity of land-use and not for a given sized piece of
land, though the language of these proceedings has
reference to the latter. The subjective valuations
of a single owner and a single tenant (the final
pair) fix the limits for the price of a unit of this
land-power, the stronger of the two fixing the
price-point. This done, the rent per acre is deter-
mined by the net yield of land-power in each grade
of land. If the higgling of the market fixes the
price of a unit at 20«., the best land available for
that supply may yield 2 units of power per acre,
in which case the rent per acre is 40«., the worst
land only |^ an unit with a rent of 10«. per acre.^
Thus it appears that the determining increment

^ The treatment of rent as purchase money of so much land-
power or use of land will only be fully justified when the full
theory of coordination of the factors in production is grasped.
One surface objection, however, may be removed here. In
speaking of rent as the price, of quantities of land-power, it
may appear a^ if I had committed myself to the view that all
land with some quantity of productive power could command a
price. To avert the appearance of this error I have used the
term ** net yield of land-power'* to indicate the power which
could command a price. Unless the value of the productivity
of a piece of land exceeds the expense of working it, there is
no '* net yield of land-power," and, therefore, no price for such
power. The term ** net yield of land-power " represents in the
use of land what emerges in the case of a machine or other piece
of concrete capital after expense of working is defrayed.


128 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION .

of supply is not necessarily identical with the
worst land contributing to that supply, commonly
known as the margin of cultivation. If the slack-
ness of demand for wheat land causes a fall of
rent, it is not necessarily the 208. land which passes
out of cultivation; it may be the 30«., if the latter
^ has an alternative remunerative use and the former
has not.

The actual determination of rent by this method
is, of course, complicated by the fact that as a rule
not merely one part of the land supply, but many
parts, have alternative uses to which they would
succumb, were the price for one use to fall below
a certain figure. But it is reasonable for us to
assume that the price per unit of land-use is always
determined by the common position of one part of
supply, which at that price is just induced to con-
tribute toward that supply in preference to some
others ; the fact that at a different price per unit
some other land would occupy this position need
not concern us.

Now since it is convenient to retain the term
"margin of occupation or employment " to describe
the worst or least efficient part of supply, some
other term is needed to mark that part which
occupies the determinant place in any given
market. I propose to speak of this portion as
"the determining portion of supply," and of its
owner as "the determining owner." The worst
land in cultivation for a particular supply will be


TBE LAW OF BXNT. 129

described, in aooordanoe with usage, as ^'mar-
ginal land," and its rent as ^'marginal rent."
"Differential rents" will be the rents obtained
by lands of superior productivity contributing
to this supply, and will be measured from the
margin.

It will, however, be useful sometimes to sub-
stitute the terms " specific " and " individual " for
" marginal " and " differential," or to conjoin these
adjectives in order to emphasise certain aspects of
our application of the Law of Rent.

One further distinction requires to be made.

Whether the determinant portion of supply of

land be the worst land or not makes no difference ;

the price of land-power, and so the'rent of different

qualities of land, appears to be directly determined

by the fact that some of the land has an alternative

use, and that it may refuse to contribute to the

supply unless a certain price is paid. But though

\ the alternative price that can be got for some other

i use determines a lower limit of marginal rent,

where is nothing to prevent the marginal rent

^\ rising higher than this. If the 30a. land has an

'■ alternative use, it is possible that use might yield

only 25a. ; now, though the owner of that land

would consent to take 26«. rent, he may be able to

get 30«., because there is, for the time, an absolute

scarcity of land available for this supply. In a

word, he may be able, as the final seller, to take

a forced gain of 6«., which corresponds precisely


130 THE ECONOMWa OF DISTRIBUTION.

to the " forced gain'* in the price of the horse in
our analysis of a market for commodities.

In such a case it might be best to distinguish
this 5«. from the other 25a., and to class it as a
1 third form of rent. Thus, if we took the highest
rented land at 40^., we should describe 258. as mar-
ginal rent, 6«. as forced or scarcity rent, and 16«.
as a differential rent measuring the superior pro-
ductivity of this land over the land at the margin
of employment for this use. This would signify
that 25a. was the pride necessary to make this
land abandon some alternative use and enter this
particular supply; that its economic force as a
bargainer, within the market of this use, enabled
it to exact 5a. more, and that 15a. measured its
superiority over the absolutely worst land con-
tributing to this supply.

Though the actual distribution of land-uses in
a country will never be so regular as that repre-
sented in our illustration, the latter approaches far
nearer to the actual facts than does the Ricardian
hypothesis, and compels us to perceive that foi^
many, if not most, purposes land at the margin
of cultivation will pay a positive rent.

The argument from extensive cultivation, though
quite valid for showing that differential rents do
not enter price, lets into price any rents which are
paid for the use of marginal land contributing to
any supply. Land may be graded according to its
economic uses ; the differential rents will be ex-


THE LAW OF BENT. 131

eluded; the positive marginal rents will be in-
cluded in the market (and even in normal) prices.

§ 4. Yet, though Adam Smith, in dealing with
wine lands and other cases of limited supplies of
land, J. S. Mill, in the formulation of the Laws of
Value, Jevons, and other modem economists have
explicitly affirmed that scarcity prices of land all
enter into prices. Professor Marshall and not a few
thinkers reject this view.

It is of the utmost importance to understand
the grounds upon which this rejection is based.
Jevons admits that a marginal rent enters into ^
expenses of production, ^^ If land which has been
yielding £2 per acre rent, as pasture, be ploughed
up and used for raising wheat, must not the £2
per acre be debited against the expenses of pro-
duction of wheat? "^ Marshall, in commenting
upon this passage, urges that 'Hhere is no con-
nection between the particular sum of £2 and the
expenses of production of that wheat which only
just pays its way."^ That is to say, though the

1 Preface, 2d ed., Theory of Political Economy,
* Book V, Ch. VIII, par. 6 (note). There is, however, a
curious passage in the sections immediately preceding this, in
which Marshall himself seems to admit that a marginal rent
does affect price. One of the chief conditions affecting the nor-
mal value of oats will he *^ the amount of land which is capable
of growing oats, but for which there is so great a demand for
other purposes that it affords a higher rent, when used for them,
than when used for growing oats. For the expenses of produc-
tion of those oats which only just pay their way are greater than
they would bet were it not that much of the land which would


182 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

worst land contributing to the wheat supply pays
a rent of £2 per acre, no portion of that rent enters
into price. This rejection of marginal rent from
price is achieved by turning from the extensive
to the intensive margin of cultivation.

Upon this mode of reasoning those economists
rely who assert that in no case does rent enter into
price, and who extend the principle from agricul-
tural rent to all other rents. The argument, first
plainly formulated by James Mill, briefly and
occasionally used by Ricardo, runs as follows : —

return the largest crops of oats to the smallest outlay is diverted
to growing other crops that will enable it to pay a higher rent
than oats would afford; and therefore the rent that land on
which oats could be grown can be made to pay for other pur-
poses, though it does not enter into the expenses of production
and the normal value of oats, yet does indirectly affect them,
(Bk. V, Ch. VIII, par. 6.)

Marshall does not explain how it "indirectly affects them."
The passage seems to admit that the positive marginal rent of
oat land, arising from alternative uses, will raise the price of
oats, somehow, without entering into the marginal expenses
of production, although this is inconsistent with the opening
words of the same paragraph, where it is said that "the
expenses of production of those oats which only just pay their
way are greater than they would be" if marginal oat lands
could be got at no-rent. The fact is that Marshall is quite
wrong from his standpoint in admitting that "the expenses of
production of those oats, which only just pay their way, are
greater than they would be," etc. The application of the
"dose" principle to an intensive margin of cultivation, upon
which he relies through his main argument, will oblige him to
ignore altogether the positive rent which must be paid for the
extensive margin of oat land.


THE LAW OF BJSITT. 188

Take a given piece of land, apply to it " doses '*
of capital and labour remunerated at the ordinary
rates of interest and wages. The produce raised
by the earlier applications of capital and labour
will leave a residue, after the fixed payments of
interest and wages, which will figure as rent.
The economic tillers of the soil will increase the
number of these "doses" of capital and labour
until the last dose yields just enough to pay in-
terest and wages, leaving nothing for rent. Since
no part of the produce obtained by the application
of the last " dose " can be reckoned as rent, while
the expense of raising this last part of the produce
measures the price of the whole supply, it follows
that rent does not enter into the price.

Economists have often evinced some hesitation
in applying the doctrine that rent does not enter
into prices to manufactured goods ; but Professor
Marshall has clearly shown that a fair expansion
of the older argument requites us to hold that
"ground rent does not enter into the expenses of
manufacture."^

Now the most curious feature of this illustration
is that it can be similarly applied to show that
interest and wages do not enter into price.

Instead of taking a given quantity of land and
applying additional doses of capital and labour,
let us take a given quantity of capital and apply
additional doses of labour, neglecting for the

* JPrindples of Economics, 2d ed., p. 462.


134 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

present the consideration of land. Let our piece of
capital be the premises, stock, good-will, etc., of
a shop. Apply to this capital additional doses
of labour in the shape of shop assistants. The
assistants first engaged will earn not merely their
wages but a considerable surplus, which will go
as interest and profit to the owner of the business.
Assuming there is plenty of labour available, the
shopkeeper will go on increasing the number of
his shop assistants as long as the last-engaged
produces more value than is represented in his
wages. At last he will come to a "marginal"
assistant, who only just produces the value of
his wages. Now the shop goods into which this
" marginal » assistant puts his work pay no interest
or profit; but they are sold for the same price as
the other shop goods, and being produced under
the least favourable circumstances, i.e. at the mar-
gin of labour, must be considered to measure the
price. Since no portion of the value added to
these goods in the retail process can figure as in-
terest, so interest on shop capital is no component
part of the price. Or, again, take the machinery,
stock, good-will, etc., which constitute the capital
of a given factory. Here, too, after a certain point
in the application of labour is reached, the same
law of diminishing return is found to apply; each
" hand " beyond a certain number yields a less and
less surplus of value over and above his wages,
until a "hand" is reached whom it is just worth


THE LAW OF BENT. 135

while to engage because the value of his work just
covers his wages. The "goods" made by this
last hand evidently pay no interest or profit, and
as they are precisely analogous to the grain pro-
duced by the application of the last dose of capital
and labour to a given piece of land, they govern
price, and therefore interest does not enter into
the price of manufactured goods. ^

Marshall, indeed, in one passage, applies the
" dose " illustration to show that one of the shep-
herds employed upon a large sheep farm is to be
regarded as a "marginal shepherd," whose produc-
tivity only just earns his wages.^ But curiously
enough he fails to recognise that he has proved
the expenses of raising sheep to be determined
by this man's wages, and that interest or profit
of farm capital does not enter into the price of
sheep.

Finally, we can take a fixed quantity of labour-
power and apply to it successive doses of capital
or land. First take the energy and skill of a
single business man who borrows doses of capital
for a commercial enterprise. The last dose he
borrows only yields to him a minimum or nominal

1 1 may here state that I use interest for the return made for
use of concrete forms of capital and not merely for capital val-
ued in money. When necessary, I distinguish the two as
"real" and "money" interest. Thus alone can one evade
the Protean term "profit."

« Frinciples, 2d ed., Vol. I, p. 667.


136 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION. .

return after paying its necessary interest, Le. he
cannot profitably utilise any more. It therefore
appears that the last increment of the goods he
handles in his business yields no earnings of
management. Therefore earnings of management
form no element in expenses of production or of
price.

Or take the case of an agriculturist in a country
where there is plenty of available land of a given
quality at a fixed or customary rent. The produce
raised by such a man upon the few acres he first
rents may yield him, after paying the stipulated
rent, a large surplus which he will take as wages.
Let this labourer increase the acreage he rents;
beyond a certain point he will find that the pro-
portion of the produce obtained by each successive
application of more land, which is left for wages,
becomes less and less, until he reaches an applica-
tion which, after paying rent, does not increase
the net surplus which he takes as wages. In other
words, the produce obtained by this marginal
application of land to labour "pays" no wage.
Since this marginal produce measures and indi-
cates the price of the whole supply, wages do not
enter into that price. Now in respect to the
supply-price of agricultural produce in any given
market, it is held that rent does not enter into
price because a portion of that supply is obtained
under conditions which preclude any part of it
from counting as rent. So it must be held that


TEE LAW OF BENT. 187

wages do not enter into the price because another
portion of that supply may, as we have seen, have
been obtained under conditions which forbid any
of it from contributing to wages, while interest
does not enter into price because a third portion
is raised under conditions which require that it
all go for rent and wages and none of it for
interest. We have only to suppose three pro-
ducers — the first of whom has a fixed quantity of
land, and keeps adding fresh doses of capital and
labour; the second with a fixed quantity of capital,
which he spreads over increasing quantities of
land and labour; and the third with a fixed quan-
tity of labour, to which he applies ever increasing
quantities of land and capital — to arrive at the
conclusion that neither rent, interest, nor wages
is a component part of "price."

To this reductio ad absurdum we are inevitably
brought by following out the line of argument
usually adduced to show that rent does not enter
into price.

§ 5. This line of reasoning, however, though
it compels the admission of a fundamental error
in the " dose " illustration as applied to intensive
cultivation, does not explain the nature of that
error. The truth is that a certain harmony of
combination of factors of production exists for
various productive purposes. In a given case, a
certain proportion of the three factors of produc-
tion is most productive. If, however, there is a


138 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

short supply of one of them at the former quality
and price, a more than proportionate increase of
one or both of the others may be substituted, in-
volving, of course, an increased cost per unit of
the increment of supply.

So when the final dose of capital and labour on
a given piece of wheat land achieves a product
which yields no rent, it means that with the same
quantity of land-use as sufficed for a smaller
product, a larger quantity of capital and labour-
use has been combined ; that as no more land-use
was employed, none was paid for.
' Or, if it seems mere reasonable, we may consider
a piece of land as containing various land-powers,
some high, some low — some powers so low that
they require so large a proportion of capital and
labour to utilise them that they only just pay to
work. These low natural powers yield no net
economic powers of production.

Now take the case where a portion of the final
increment of a supply of wheat is raised on the
^ extensive margin at a positive rent of 2 units, and
^ a portion upon the intensive margin where it is
held to pay no rent. It is evident that the cost
of production is the same in each case, though rent
forms 2 units of cost (out of say 10) in one case
and none in the other. Where the intensive mar-
gin is taken, 2 more units of cost of use of capital
and labour are found. The man who chooses be-
tween paying for worse land-use or for more


THE LAW OF BENT. 139

capital- and labour-use exercises a choice between
the factors of production which implies their
interchangeability. Either land-power or capital-
and labour-power may do the extra work required
to raise the last increment; if the former is pre-
ferred, rent is paid; if the latter, rent is not paid,
but more profit and wage. This interchangeability
is a fact of prime importance in understanding the
theory of distribution.

If, because land-use can be replaced by capital-
use, we choose to say that rent does not enter
money-cost of production, we are, strictly speak-
ing, justified in doing so. But by a similar argu-
ment it is possible to show that interest and wages
need not enter money-cost of production.

The last increment of cotton cloth in the supply
may be the produce of the worst loom in the worst-
equipped mill (i.e. raised on the extensive margin
of capital), or it may be the produce of a good
loom in a good mill working overtime: in the
former case it is partly produced by capital-use,
which may be paid by interest; in the latter case 7
there is no extra call on capital. (Or taking tlie '
analogy of lower un-paid powers of land, we may
say that lower power of capital entered in unpaid.)
In the former case, the final increment of cotton
cloth yields an interest; in the latter case, it only
just pays overtime wages; by taking the latter
case, we prove that interest forms no element in 7
the price of cotton cloth. But it must be observed


140 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

that the money-cost and the price of the final
increment of the cotton cloth will be the same,
whether it is said to include profit or not,

§ 6. We have shown how rent need not enter
money-cost of production and price of wheat
where the final increment is produced on the in-
tensive margin. By a similar application of the
Law of Substitution it can be shown that wage
may or may not enter into the price of this same
final increment of wheat. Suppose it is raised by
a tenant-farmer as part of the result of an extra
last hoeing and ploughing on his land, it pays
extra wages but no rent; if, however, instead of
this extra hoeing and ploughing the farmer decided
to hire one more acre of the same quality of land
and spread the same amount of labour-power over
the larger area, the product of this last acre pays
its rent but no wage.

Or, again, take the case of a 4-loom weaver ^ who
decides it is just worth his while to undertake
a 5th loom; the product of the 6th loom, after
paying a profit and a compensation for extra wear
and tear to the weaver, yields him no true increase
of wage. The real wage, or net advantage, which
he obtains by working 6 looms only exceeds by
a nominal amount the net advantage of working
4 looms.

1 The assumption here is that the weaver is on time wages.
The rarity of such an occurrence need not be taken to invali-
date the illustration.


THE LAW OF UENT. 141

The labour of working the 5th loom or the last
acre of land is certainly remunerated by wages,
and at the same rate as the other looms or other
acres. Why, then, does it appear from the " dos-
ing " illustration that the product of the last loom
or last acre pays no wage ?

Only two replies are possible. First, it is pos-
sible to suppose that the weaver's capacity was
underrated, and that he had been put to 4 looms
when his normal energy was equal to 5 looms.
Now it is evident that if a 6-loom weaver is
set to work 4 looms, there is an absolute waste
of labour-power; if the mistake is discovered, and
the waste stopped by adding a 5th loom, the
weaver, assuming he were on time wages, might
receive no additional wage. Similarly, we may
suppose that the farmer underestimates the number
of acres upon which he may most profitably spread
his labour-power; discovering his mistake, he may
add the extra acre which seems just to pay its rent
and leave nothing for his wage.

Now the sophistry of these examples is patent.
If an employer hires a worker and misapplies his
working power, he must pay as much as if he had
properly applied it; if a farmer does not under-
stand the economy of his labour-power, he may
expend upon a smaller area the same quantity of
power which he ought to have bestowed upon a
larger area. If a tenant hires a piece of land and
puts 6 doses of capital upon it when he ought to


142 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

have put 6, he pays a rent based upon the suppo-
sition that he will make a full economic use of the
land, i.e. that he will put 6 doses on it. If, dis-
covering his error, he afterward adds the sixth
dose, he only appears to pay no rent out of its
produce, because he has all the time been paying
a rent based upon the supposition that he was
working his land with 6 doses.

The conclusion is a peculiarly simple one. If
we make an uneconomical use of a factor of pro-
duction, we must pay the same price for it as if
we made an economical use of it.

Some of the "dosing" illustrations are thus
vitiated by treating the owner of a factor of pro-
duction as if he were not an "economic man,"
whereas the just application of a principle, like
the Law of Diminishing Returns, does not permit
such an assumption to be made.^

§ 7. But the " dosing " illustration is vitiated
by a more fundamental flaw. By assuming the
separate action of each dose, it ignores the organic
relation of parts in industry. It is not necessary
to suppose that the 5th loom was added to the

1 If I rent a piece of land in Piccadilly, in which all houses
are 3 or 4 stories, the rent I shall pay will take into considera-
tion the capacity of the ground for building a 3- or 4-story
house. If I choose to put a 1 -story house upon the ground, the
rent I pay will be the same as if I had more fully utilised the
site. If afterward I add stories, it will seem that I pay no rent
for this extra accommodation, but in reality I have been pa3ring
it all the time.


THE LA W OF RENT. 143

weaver because it was found out that he had been
paid as a 5-loom weaver while he had been work-
ing at 4 looms. We may suppose that he is in
full knowledge of the facts and has a full exercise
of choice ; as a consequence, he estimates that it
just pays him to work 6 looms instead of 4. Now
why will it appear that, whereas the weaver, when
working 4 looms, made a net wage on each of them,
he makes a merely nominal wage on the 6th loom ? j

The 6th loom, after it is added, is found to be ynj^
just as productive as any of the other 4 looms. • I
The answer is plain. The 6th loom only just )lr
pays because its addition has injured his work
with the other 4 looms ; he must work 6 looms at
slower speed than he worked 4, stoppages will be
more frequent, more time must be spent on tun-
ing, cleaning, etc. If he gives out the same work-
ing energy to 6 looms as formerly he gave to 4
(which supposition is involved in our hypothesis
that to a fixed quantity of labour-power is added
a fresh increment of capital), the effort of adding
the last loom can only be estimated by taking
account of its influence upon the productivity of
the other 4 looms.

So, reverting to our illustration of a fixed quan-
tity of shop-capital which for its most profitable
working requires 10 shop-assistants. The tenth
shopman, whichever he may be, appears only just
to produce enough to pay his wages, because it is
evident that it would not pay to put in an eleventh


144 THE ECONOMIOa OF DISTRIBUTION.

shopman. But the productivity of this last unit
of labour cannot be rightly separated from the pro-
ductivity of the other units, as is supposed when a
particular additional increment of product is at-
tributed to his presence. The service of this final
unit of shop-labour largely consists in enabling
the shop to be better ordered, and a better division
of labour to be adopted; in other words, it helps
to raise the general efficiency of all the labour
employed.

The same is true, though within narrower
limits, of the effect of the last dose of capital
applied to a given piece of land; its effect is not
a separate one, but partly consists in the greater
efficiency imparted to earlier units. Suppose the
last unit of capital to be represented by improved
fencing or drainage ; this has evidently an impor-
tant influence in increasing the efficiency of the
earlier units of capital.

There is a false separatism in the ^^ dosing"
illustration which ignores the organic unity in a
business. No light is thrown either upon the
theory or the practice of industry by treating one
Factor of Production as a constant quantity and
two as variables.

§ 8. Thus we perceive that the fallacy of the
"dosing" illustration consists in assigning a
particular amount of productivity, and therefore
of "product," to a particular dose. Professor
Marshall, in treating the marginal dose of labour


THE LAW OF BENT. 146

in agriculture (e.g. the last hoeing applied to a
field), admits that ^Hhe return to that last dose
cannot be separated from the others," but he adds
" we ascribe to it all that part of the produce which
we believe would not have been produced if the
farmer had decided against the extra hoeing."
(Bk. IV, Ch, III, par. 2,)

Here we probe the heart of the " dosing " fallacy.
It is claimed that the product of the last dose of
labour is to be measured by the reduction in the
aggregate product of the farm which would have
attended the refusal to apply this last dose of
labour. Now this is not justifiable. The with-
drawal or refusal to apply this last dose of labour
would have meant a diminished productivity, not
only of the 'other units of labour, but of the units
of capital and of land, and part of the result of
this diminished productivity of other units is
wrongly attributed to the last unit of labour.

For let us see how this mode of measuring the
productivity of the last increment applies. Let us
suppose that a farm business is composed of 4 doses
of labour, 6 doses of land, 3 doses of capital, this
being the combination of the factors which is eco-
nomically advantageous. Now in order to measure
the productivity of the last dose of labour, let us
remove it. The diminution of the total product
may be 8%. This 8%, according to Marshall's
method, we ascribe to the last dose of labour. If
now, restoring this dose of labour, we withdrew


146 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

the last dose of capital, the reduction of product
might be 10%. This 10% is regarded as the
product of the last dose of capital. Similarly, the
withdrawal of the last dose of land might seem to
reduce the product by 10%. What would be the
effect of a simultaneous withdrawal of the last
dose of each factor? According to Marshall's
method, clearly 28%. But is this correct? Is it
not likely that this simultaneous withdrawal might
reduce the product not by 28%, but by (say) 18% ?
According to Marshall, the whole of the 8% which
disappears on the withdrawal of the last dose of
labour is to be regarded as the product of that
dose. But part of that 8% will consist in the re-
duced productivity, not only of the other labour-
doses, but of the doses of capital and land. The
withdrawal of the last dose of labour may well be
supposed to reduce in particular the utility of the
last dose both of capital and of land, which factors
are now in excess. Similarly, the withdrawal of
the last dose of capital will affect the productivity
of the last dose of labour and of land. The with-
drawal of a dose of land will act in the same way
upon the last doses of labour and capital. We
should thus find that the simultaneous withdrawal
of the last dose of the three factors would be con-
siderably less than the 28% which Marshall's mode
of measurement requires. For the withdrawal of
the last labour-dose involves a nullification of a
part of the productivity of the last unit of capital


THE LAW OF RENT. 147

and of land, and a part of the result thus attributed
to labour is due to the diminished productivity of
the other factors. Put the same experiment upon **
its broadest footing, and the overlapping fallacy
becomes obvious. Take the labour, capital, and
land as consisting of a single dose of each; now
withdraw the dose of labour, and the whole service
of capital and land disappears. Is the destruction
of the whole product a right measure of the
separate productivity of the labour-dose alone?
Obviously not; for if the dose of capital had been
withdrawn instead, or the dose of land, the same
effect would have ensued.

§ 9. Causation may indeed be proved by what
is called in logical text-books the Method of
Difference, but the composition of causes pre-
vents quantitative effect from being proved in
this manner. The " dose " illustration is nothing
else than a slightly more intricate example of the
fallacy which confuses mechanical composition
with organic cooperation. Where it is essential
to productivity that land, capital, and labour
shall all cooperate, it is impossible to assign to
any one of them a product based on the supposi-
tion of a separate productivity. Similarly, where
there exists a necessary organic quantitative rela-
tion between the factors, no separate product can
be put down to any single dose of each.

The root-fallacy of the " dose " illustration con-
sists, then, in a false separation which ignores the


148 THE EC0N011IC8 OF DISTRIBUTION.


organic nature of production and the Law of Sub-
stitution. The real determinant of price of a
supply from the "cost" side will be found to
reside in the comparative advantage of employing
various combinations of the factors of production.
/ In considering how a new increment of wheat

supply, evoked by rising prices, will be produced,
nothing is learnt by supposing it to be raised by
(tpplying a new unit of capital and labour to wheat
land already in use. The real problem for con-
sideration will be, "What, changed proportion of
the several factors will most easily turn out the
\ increased supply?" Should more labour be ap-
plied to the same land, or should more land be
worked by the same labour, or should more capital
be added, or what should be the conjunction of
additional factors?

The net result of this argument is that the
application of the Law of Rent to the intensive
cultivation of a single factor must be rejected as
fallacious.

The chief .use of the "dose" illustration has
been to support the theory that rent of land
differs radically from all payments for uses of
other requisites, in that it is a surplus which,
^ being measured from a no-rent margin, does not
• form an element of price.. Whereas it appeared
that land at the extensive margin of cultivation
for all higher uses paid a positive rent, it was
sought to exclude this rent from price by arguing


THE LAW OF RENT. 149

that a portion of the supply might be raised upon
an intensive margin, where no rent was paid even
for supplies toward which no-rent land did not
contribute.

§ 10. The complete breakdown of this intensive
margin throws us back once more upon the exten-
sive margin for the sole legitimate application of
the Law of Rent.

We have already recognised what qualification
of this law is necessary. While the generally
accepted statement of the law holds good in the
case of the lowest or least remunerative use of
land where the margin of cultivation pays no rent,
it must be qualified in the case of land put to
higher uses by the recognition of a series of higher
margins of cultivation where a positive rent is
paid for the worst land in use. The differential
rents for each particular piece of land will be
measured from the no-rent margin only in the case
of lands competing for the lowest use; the dif-
ferential rents of lands for higher uses will be
measured from a specific margin which pays a
rent. While these differential rents will form no
element in prices, the marginal rents will enter
as an expense of production that is common to the
whole supply. If the marginal hop land in use
pays a rent of <£2 an acre, a portion of that sum
will be represented in the price of each pocket of
hops.


150 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.


Part II.

§ 1. While there has been a growing tendency
among recent economists to extend the term
"rent" and the application of the Law of Rent
to capital and to labour, as a rule this has been
done tentatively, rather by way of analogy than
as a recognition of the application of a common
law.

A true coordination of the factors of production
which shall enable us to bring them all alike, in
respect to the sale of their uses, under the general
laws of price which are operative in the markets
of commodities, requii*es that we first show how
the law of rent in its extensive application is valid
for each factor.

The diflSculties which confront us in this work
chiefly arise from the adoption in economic treat-
ment of a terminology which expresses loose popu-
lar modes of regarding land, labour, and capital,
and are mainly two.

S 2. The first difliculty arises from a radical
difference in the common mode of represent-
ing capital on the one hand, labour and land
on the other. Whereas the two latter are re-
garded' in their concrete forms, the land in its
acres, the labour-power in its daily or weekly out-
put of energy, we commonly regard capital not in


THE LAW OF BENT. 161

the concrete shapes of plant, raw material, and
goods, which are its serviceable forms for indus-
try, but in its money value of so many J&lOO's.
Whereas the payment to land and^ labour is pay-
ment for the use of the concrete forms, payment
for capital is payment for the use of so much of
this abstract force measured by JBlOO's.

Now it is evident that no common law of price
or value can be applied to the use of the three
factors, unless we place them upon a common foot-
ing. Either we must measure land and labour
by their abstract or money measurement, capital-
ising them and regarding rent and wages as
payment for the use of so many JElOO's of this
land-capital or labour-capital, or else when we
speak of capital, we must speak of the concrete
forms, of goods, plant, etc., which are used in
industry. The actuality of a science of industry
as distinguished from a science of finance requires
us to take the latter course, and to treat capital
as consisting not in money but in concrete forms
of wealth serviceable in production.

The payment for the use of this concrete capital
is interest. Since this latter term is by usage
closely confined to the price, not of concrete capi-
tal but of money capital, I should have preferred
to adopt some other term. But none other is
available excepting the still more slippery term

profit." I propose, therefore, to use the term

interest " for the payment of the use of concrete


44
4ft


162 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

capital, distinguishing it where necessary from
financial interest by appending the term ^^real"
to the former, " money " to the latter.

It is, of course, evident that no coordination of
capital with land by application of a law of rent
is possible where capital takes the fluid form of
money. For no " rents, " either specific or individ-
ual, could emerge from such uses of capital. It
is, of course, incorrect to say that J&IOO of capital
in one employment earns 2^% interest and another
JBIOO, elsewhere employed, 5%. The extra 2J% in
what seems the better investment will either not
be interest at all, but compensation for special
risks, or it will by its very existence raise the
capital from £100 to £200. For under present
circumstances £100 of capital simply means so
much capital as will bripg £2.10«. interest per
annum to its owner. A proper business valuation
of all capital is a valuation based upon the rate of
.interest, ^x hypothesis therefore, there can be
I only one true rate of interest for all this fluid
\abstract capital. Business habits often persist in
speaking of capital as £100, when the increased
annual value of the concrete forms represented has
raised it to £200, so that one £100 share may be
spoken of as paying 5%, but the market or selling
value of course would be £200 and the true interest
still 2J%.

No relation is possible between this capital and
our other factors of production. We must deal


THE LA W OF BENT, 153

with the concrete forms which are thus valued.
What is paid for their use is real interest.

§ 3. When we have placed the factors of pro-
duction upon the common concrete basis and agreed
upon a term to describe the payment of the use of
concrete capital, we are confronted with another
difficulty. In measuring the value of land, a
margin of cultivation is found to be of essential
importance, and our examination of the law of
rent has clearly indicated the need of substituting I
a joint-margin, composed of all the factors, for a I
margin of land only. But can we legitimately
extend the conception of a margin of employment
to capital and labour? The initial difficulty takes
this form. The worst land in cultivation for the
lowest use (say grazing land) pays no rent; can
we say that the worst placed capital will yield no
profit and the worst labour in employment obtain
no wage?

First, as to capital, whether it be true or not
that the prospect of obtaining interest is a neces-
sary motive to induce the creation of capital, it
may distinctly be affirmed that interest is not
necessary to secure the economic maintenance of
forms of capital which have been brought into
existence. What is needed for the continuous
existence of forms of capital is a provision against
wear and tear or depreciation; this charge upon
gross profits is not interest, but is a deduction
prior to payment of any interest. A business pay-


154 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

ing the minimum or merely nominal interest on
its invested capital must, if it is properly con-
ducted, have made provision for the maintenance
of its plant and other forms of capital. Though
some positive interest may be necessary to bring
into use new forms of capital, it is not required
to maintain old forms. This Walker has rightly
recognised by insisting that the idea of no-rent
land must be extended to no-profit businesses, and
that the profits of better businesses may be meas-
ured from this margin, as the rents of land are
measured from a no-rent margin.

Indeed, the more closely we look at the real
supply of land and capital, the more artificial and
the more unjustifiable appears the abrupt distinc-
tion made by earlier economic theories. Mere
land does not figure in supply. Land in its
natural state — "prairie land" — is not really a
factor of production. Its so-called "inherent
and indestructible properties " have no value until
the land is cleared and broken in, until some ex-
rpenditure of labour is made upon it. In this
\ sense there is a cost of producing a supply 6f land
roughly corresponding to the cost of producing
capital.^ Again, just as the continued existence
of capital is secured by a constant provision

1 Professor S. N. Patten has shown (Pi'emises of Political
Economy) how this cost of production of land impairs the
exactitude of the measurement of rent, because *^the laws
which regulate the bringing of new lands into cultivation, and


THE LAW OF BENT. 156

against depreciation, so the powers of land for
most purposes are not indestructible, but demand
a constant outlay. The abstraction of an eco-
nomic land for which economic rent is paid is on
the whole a singularly futile and confusing one.
The worst capital and the worst land in economic
use alike require a provision against wear and tear /
which is neither interest nor rent, while the in-
terest and rent paid for their use is a merely
nominal amount.

§ 4. Now the case of labour seems different,
but the difference arises merely from the adoption
of inconsistent terminology. Whereas the fund
for keeping forms of land and capital in existence
is not termed rent or profit, the fund for keeping
in economic existence repositories of labour-power
is included under "wages." Thus it comes to
pass that while the margin of land is no-rent land,
the margin of capital no-interest capital, the mar-
gin of labour is (say) 158. labour.

In order to clear the problem of price in distri-
bution, it is essential to remove this anomaly.
This 15«. wage does not in any sense correspond
to interest or to rent. It is simply a wear-and-
tear fund of labour, the expenditure necessary to
replace the labour-power given out in a day's work,

those according to which land will be withdrawn from cultiva-
tion, are very different," affording "a large margin within which
the price of produce may vary without a change in the quantity
produced."


'\ I'

;, i; 156 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

And to maintain the labouring population at their
present numbers and at their present efficiency*
The logical coordination of factors of production
requires that this wear-and-tear or depreciation
fund shall be distinguished from the additional
payment which^most labourers receive. It is
wages above 15». that correspond to positive rent
or interest. If the term " wage '* could be applied
exclusively to the fund of maintenance, and some
other term, such as ^^rent of labour," could be
used to describe the higher payments, the coor-
dination would be complete.

We should then be able to apply with a fairly
close degree of accuracy to all three the general
statements which have been often reserved for
land.

§ 5. The fact that while land may be in exist-
ence unutilised below the limit of cultivation,
no forms of capital continuously exist below the
no-profit limit, and no labour-power can be assumed
to exist below the bare subsistence limit, does not
in the least impair the setting. For just as land
below the margin has only a potential economic
existence, and can only be brought into supply by
prices which give a positive rent to marginal land
(lowering the margin of cultivation), so there
must be deemed to be a potential fund of capital
which will become actual, provided marginal capi-
tal receives a positive interest, while any rise of
payment to the marginal 15«. labour will increase


THE LAW OF BENT. 167

the supply of labour-power, either by raising the
population rate or by improving the efficiency of
labour, or by both.

The causes which raise and lower the margin in
all three cases will be similar in operation. The
investigation of these causes, however, lies beyond
our present inquiry. What payments for use
of land, capital, labour, enter as elements into
market-price of goods ? was our leading question.
The coordination of land, capital, and labour
leads us to conclude that just as rent of land /
need not form an element of cost or price in agri-
cultural produce, some of which is raised on no-,
rent land, so interest need not figure in the cost;
or price of manufactured goods, some of which are j /
produced by no-interest businesses, while similarly/ <
no cost of labour above the 158. depreciation fund'
need enter into the price of commodities partly',
produced by marginal labourers.

The same reasoning which shows that differen-
tial rents of land need not enter price shows also
that differential payments for capital and labour
need not enter price.

§ 6. Can a market-price then be composed of
these depreciation or maintenance costs, without
any element of positive rent or interest?

It might be the case. If a part of the supply
of wheat in a market was raised upon no-rent land
by farmers who obtained no interest for their capi-
tal and paid the minimum subsistence wage to


\


158 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

their labourers, such wheat raised under the great-
est economic difficulty might regulate the market-
price.^

But normally the last and most expensive por-
tion of supply which rules the supply-price will
not be produced under conditions which exclude
all rent and all profit. Where a number of farmers
working under widely different conditions, some
in old, some in new countries, are contributing to
the same wheat supply, it is more likely that the
last portion of supply will be produced, partly on
no-rent land, but paying an interest on capital and
perhaps a wage far above 16«., partly by tenant-
farmers paying rent but earning no interest on
invested capital, partly by peasants paying rent
or mortgage interest, but living on a bare sub-
sistence wage. That is to say, the Law of Sub-
stitution has always to be taken into account.
The possibility of this choice or substitution of
method shows the futility of arguments based on
the single Ricardian application of the Law of
Rent. If the history of the most expensive por-
tion of a wheat supply could be closely traced, it
might well be found that some quarters of it were
raised on no-rent land, others on no-profit capital,
others on subsistence wages ; but that an average

1 This assxuues that the marginal buyer is stronger than the
marginal seller in the wheat market, and that therefore the
price is pressed down to the lower limit so as to include no
element of ** forced gain.*'


THE LAW OF BENT. 159

quarter of this most expensive portion contained
some element of rent or interest or higher wage,
or all three.

In other words, the Law of Substitution requires
that in measurement of price we should substitute
for the margin of cultivation of land a composite
margin of employment of land, capital, and labour,
at which is paid not necessarily the minimum f
rent, interest, and wage, but the lowest average
combination of the three. Supply-price will be
composed (under absolutely free competition) of
these marginal expenses.

Differential expenses of production above this
composite limit, whether they be rent, interest, or
wages, will not enter into the market-price of t^e
supply.


CHAPTER V.

THB OBADINO OF LABOUB AND CAPITAL. MARGI-
NAL AND DIFFBBENTIAL PAYMBNTS.

Pabt I.

§ 1. Haying indicated the changes in economic
conceptions and terminology requisite to enable
us to establish the general coordination of the
three factors of production and the application
in each case of the idea of a measurement of price
from a no-pay margin of cultivation or employ-
ment, we may proceed to investigate with more
particularity how far the marginal and differential
grading admitted in the case of land is applicable
to the other requisites, and how far the laws
which govern the increase in supply of land for
various markets operate in analogous fashion upon
the supply of labour and capital.

First, let us take labour. How far can we
apply to labour the system of grading which we
have employed in the case of land?

The tendency of earlier economists, motived by
theoretic considerations, was to impute too much
fluidity to labour, too much choice of occupation
to individual labourers, and (as an oft-quoted

160


QEADINQ OF LABOUR AND CAPITAL. 161

passage of Adam Smith illustrates) to make in-
sufficient allowance for differences of natural
aptitude between man and man. The early theo-
rists spoke too much of the labour-market, as
if to all intents and purposes it were one market,
as if each new-grown labourer had the whole field
of employment open to his choice, as if the removal
of certain legal barriers, such as the Law of Settle-
ment or gild regulations, would enable labour,
already specialised in some occupation, to leave
that occupation easily and freely and seek another,
where the wages or net advantages were higher.
They failed to give adequate recognition to the
fact that there exists not one but many labour-
markets, marked off from one another not merely
and not chiefly by locality, but by many racial,
educational, industrial, and social demarcations.
Between many of these labour-markets, even in
England to-day, the passage is so narrow and so
slow that there can hardly be said to exist an
effective tendency to equalise the net advantages
of the various employments. The wide differences
of class wages, and even of local wages, for similar
work, is ample testimony to this truth.

How far the causes which prevent the forces
making for equalisation of the net advantages of
labour from being fully operative are to be spoken
of as ^^ natural," in the same sense that the laws
which determine the contribution of land to dif-
ferent supplies are natural, we need not here dis-


162 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

CUSS. What does concern us is the fact that, as a
given kind of land in a given position is, partly
from natural, partly from social-economic causes,
confined to contributing toward a particular sup-
ply, so a given kind of labourer is by natural and
social-economic circumstances similarly limited
in the application of his labour-power. It may be
and is easier to alter some of the circumstances
which determine the application of labour than in
the case of land, though agricultural science and
machinery of transport have done much to impart
greater adaptability to land. But though the free-
dom and adaptability of labour be greater than of
land, if we take the existing supply of labour it
must be regarded as subject, though in a weaker
degree, to a gradation similar to that which we
trace in land.

§ 2. As we have land which is good for nothing
but rough grazing, the worst of which yields a
merely nominal rent, so we have a mass of low-
skilled, low-untrained labour, which earns in its
worst sorts a wage of bare physical subsistence. .
In fact, the lowest wage is less than a bare sub-
sistence wage, if by the subsistence of the indi-
vidual we mean his maintenance during the full
span of his natural life, or even through the whole
term of his effective working life. Slave-labour,
under an intelligent profit-monger, may require
provision to be made for a full working life, though
even under slavery it may sometimes pay to use


GBADING OF LABOUR AND CAPITAL. 163

up a slave by intense toil during a shorter period.
An eflfective system of poor law, which guaranteed
an adequate support to able-bodied labour out of
employment, upon terms not degrading to the
applicants, might, by offering an alternative to
ordinary wage-labour, secure economic conditions
which would raise the minimum wage of low-
skilled labour to a level of life subsistence. The
actual minimum wage under normal modem in-
dustrial conditions must be taken to be such a
wage as enables a worker to go on working until
he has provided through his family a substitute.
Of course if there is an increasing demand for
labour expected in the future, the minimum wage
must be such as to evoke more than one substitute,
i.e, to call for an increase of working population
in this lowest grade.

This dependence of growth of working popu-
lation upon wages is, of course, modified by the
operation of poor laws, private charity, and pub-
lic support of various kinds. It will therefore be
the case that population may grow at a somewhat
faster rate than would be brought about by the
play of wage-forces alone. ^

^ Early economists overstated the directness and the exacti-
tade of the influence of purely economic forces (wages) upon
the supply ol labour. The tendency at present is to under-
estimate it. In particular it has been pointed out that a higher
standard of wages in a country like England does not cause a
corresponding growth of the labouring population. On this
point three things may be said. First, it is often forgotten that


164 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

I have spoken of a certain minimum wage as
analogous to a depreciation or wear-and-tear fund
of capital. This sum, varying somewhat, of
course, with the various kinds of labour, as the
depreciation fund varies for different forms of
capital, I estimated at ISs. In a progressive in-
dustrial community, where an increase of labouring
population with a sufficient margin of unemployed
to be utilised in periods of booming trade was re-
quired, the minimum wage, or cost of subsistence,
must of course be more than this 15s. required to
keep a stable population in that grade ; and this
additional wage (say 3«.) required to raise the
population must be regarded as analogous to a
minimum interest required to call forth additional
capital. .

§ 3. If, then, in a community the lowest grade
of labour was paid 18«. for its least efficient mem-
bers, we should find rising above this grade various

one important eSect of a higher standard of comfort is that a
larger proportion of children grow to maturity. Secondly, with
a higher standard of comfort, the effective supply of labour is
increased, not only by the number of labourers, but also by
the quantity of labour-power each labourer represents, i.e. the
average working life is longer, and is capable of yielding in a
given time a larger quantity of efficient labour-power. Lastly,
the check which forethought and preventive methods have
placed upon the growth of population in the more intelligent
classes plays yet a very small part in the labour-markets of the
world.

It is still true that rising wages evoke an increased supply ot
labour-power.


GRADING OF LABOUR AND CAPITAL. 166

other grades paid upon higher scales. Speaking
generally, we should be able to classify the workers
by a sort of stratification beginning with the low-
skilled worker at the bottom, proceeding through
several strata of factory hands, the building trades,
skilled mechanics, into the salaried, professional,
and managing classes. The rate of payment will
be higher, as we rise, for the least efQcient labour
actually employed at the various levels. In other
words, we should find a number of class minimum
wages analogous to the different specific marginal
rents which mark off the margin of pasture land,
wheat land, hop land, city lands, etc. This strati-
fication of labour is now commonly admitted,
though to some economic thinkers it seemed novel
when Caimes gave his vigorous indorsement to
the idea. "What we find in effect is, not a whole
population competing indiscriminately for all oc-
cupations, but a series of industrial layers super-
imposed on one another, within each of which the
various candidates for employment possess a real
and effective power of selection, while those occu-
pying the several strata are, for all purposes of
effective competition, practically isolated from
each other. "^ It is not necessary to insist too
strictly upon this "practical isolation." Indi-
viduals can pass from one stratum to another;
new labour has some considerable choice. It is
sufiGicient to recognise that at any given time we

1 The Slave Power^ p. 73.


166 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

do find a gradation of labour with different rates
of wage for the least efficient members of each
grade. Again, within each group will be found
a number of different qualities of labour earning
different rates of remuneration. These, too, we
may measure from the position of "the determinant
labourer " of each class.

The same correction of the position assigned to
the " marginal labourer " is required as in the case
of marginal cultivation of land. In the labour-
market what is really sold is not labour-time, but
units of labour-power; the determinant labourer,
therefore, need not be the least efficient labourer,
but may be a superior labourer, who is "determi-
nant " in the sense that he is only just induced by
the class wage paid to contribute to supply. The
least efficient labourer might have no alternative
employment, and might be willing, therefore, to
accept a lower wage, if he were obliged; but a
superior labourer of the class might have an alter-
native employment so that the wage must be such
as to induce him to apply his labour-power to this
use. It is the economic position of this "deter-
minant " labourer which from the cost side helps to
determine the value of a unit of labour-power and
so to fix not merely the wage he himself receives,
but also the wage of the various other labourers
in his labour-market, whose actual wages depend
upon the number of units of this labour-power
they can give out. Thus the efficiency of the


GRADING OF LABOUR AND CAPITAL. 167

least efficient labourer in the class has no direct
determining power over the class wages, as is
sometimes suggested ; it is the economic power of
the "determinant labourer" which fixes the pay
of the least efficient labourer.

The system of piece wages makes this easily in-
telligible. The least efficient worker in a trade
may be earning by piece wages 20«. a week; tMs
may be regarded as a marginal wage in this class
of labour, differential wages of superior individual
skill rising above it. The " determinant " labourer
may be a superior worker earning 80«., 10«. being
a wage of individual ability within the class.
This labourer must receive 80«. in order that he
may do this kind of work in preference to some
other. He is the final seller in this labour-market,
whose action determines on the selling side the
price for the whole market.

But though this 30^. labourer may be accounted
the determinant labourer, it does not follow that
the whole of the 308. is necessary to divert him
from his alternative employment. Just as in our
grading of land we found that in addition to the
marginal and differential rents there might be a
rent of sheer "scarcity," where demand pressed
upon a short supply, so here it might be that the
alternative employment open to the " determinant "
labourer would yield him a wage of only 278. ; but
although any wage above 278. would secure his
contribution to the supply of labour under inves-


168 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBJBUTI0N.

tigation, he is able in his capacity of detenninant
seller to exact 30«., including a scarcity wage of
3«., which last sum corresponds to the forced gain
that accrued to the stronger member of the final
pair of bargainers in our horse-market.

The term "rent of ability," frequently applied
to the higher wages earned by a more competent
worker, shows that the analogy of classification of
land and labour has made some considerable way.
The margin in both cases is not rigid, but is con-
tinually shifting, faster, no doubt, in labour than
in land, but the same economic terminology ap-
plies.

§ 4. Moreover, the price of labour is seen to
enter into the price of commodities upon precisely
similar terms to the rent of land, when we exclude
the bare subsistence wage, as we exclude the
depreciation fund for land and capital. The 15«.
subsistence should rightly be regarded as a first
mortgage upon the product, along with the corre-
sponding provision of maintenance for capital and
land.

Beyond that necessary provision no element of
true wage (or labour profit) enters into the price
of the product of the lowest labour. But the
minimum wage of a Lancashire weaver (say 21». )
will yield a marginal rent measured from 15».,
amounting to Gs. This marginal or "class " wage
will enter into price. If a mason's minimum wage
be 80$., the excess of this sum over ISa. will simi-


PAYMENTS. 169

larly enter into price. But the individual wage
earned by a more skilful weaver or mason will
form no element in expenses of production, and
will not enter into price. Modem economists
often admit that only the wage of the least efficient
labour counts in price of the product, but not clearly
recognising the difference between the " determi-
nant " labourer and the " marginal " labourer, they
are often disposed to impute to the latter a determi-
nant influence which really belongs to the former.
All that we have to add is that there are a num-
ber of different marginal labourers for different
labour-markets. There are marginal rents of
labour (sometimes containing also a rent of scare-
ity) which are represented in "price," and there
are differential rents which are not represented.


Part II.

§ 5. How far may capital be submitted to a
similar process of marginal and differential grad-
ing ? How far can we distinguish different classes
of capital more or less profitable, and individual
differences within a class ?

How far does the alleged *' fluidity of capital,"
making for a single supply and a common level of
remuneration for its services, impugn this theory
of stratification ?

We have seen that this belief in an equality of


170 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

remuneration for capital arises partly from the fact
that capital is commonly reduced to terms of its
money-value — a process which assumes equality
of remuneration as its starting-point. When we
turn to the actual forms of concrete capital, we
certainly find wide variation of remuneration.
But can we regard these differences as analogous
to the specific and differential rents or earnings of
land and labour? It has been necessary to select
the term " interest " to describe the remuneration
of capital, but capital cannot earn interest of itself
or even in conjunction with land and labour.
Capital, in order to function in industry, must be
handled by a business man, and it is always pos-
sible to claim that a part at least of the net gain,
after all other deductions comjnonly named, is due
to skill or economy of handling.^ The extra gain
which comes from handling a large quantity of
capital, as compared with a small quantity, even
though this handling requires no more skill or
effort, is commonly assigned, not as payment for
use of capital, but as wages of management.

But though in practice it is extremely difficult,
perhaps impossible, to sever this interest, or pure

1 This claim is, of course, not confined to the remuneration
of capital; the productiveness of land and labour is also
dependent upon skilful handling, and it is possible to claim
as true earnings of management part of the results of in-
creased productiveness of land and labour. In the case of
labour, Mr. Mallock has pressed this claim, asserting that high
wages really include earnings of management.


PAYMENTS. 171

payment for use of capital, from other elements,
an orderly scheme of economic theory requires us
to do so. Now my suggestion is that if this sever-
ance were made, interest would certainly be shown
not to be equal for the use of all equal quantities
of capital. The different concrete shapes, which
equal quantities of " saving " take, will most likely
differ as widely in the profits they obtain for their
owners, as one 10-acre field differs in rent from
another 10-acre field, or one labourer differs from
another labourer in wages.

There is no force in operation which would
guarantee that the saving which went into a
steam-engine would earn for its owner an "in-
terest" identical in size with that for the same
quantity of saving which went into a shop-build-
ing, or that one railway carriage is as remunerative
as another railway carriage of equal quality.

In other words, some employments of capital
are more remunerative than others, and, within a
given employment, some pieces of capital are more
remunerative than others.

If these differences w6re due to the difference
of skill with which they were handled, they must
of course not be reckoned as differences of interest
in our sense.

But if there exist certain conditions which pre-
vent absolute fluidity of investment, which limit
and mark off certain fields of investment for cer-
tain owners of capital, and which give within a


172 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

field of investment special advantages to some
owners as compared to others, it will seem legiti*
mate to grade capital, as we grade land and labour,
into a number of practically non-competing groups
with differential gains within each group.

§ 6. If it were open to all savers to have full,
equal knowledge of every field of investment, and
to have equal access to all fields, real interest, like
money interest, would be uniform. But is this
the case ?

General Walker has explicitly denied the alle-
gation that different classes of investment differ
in the rates of profit they yield, and even suggests
that the differences of "interests" derived from
different pieces of capital in the same class are not
true interest.

"That different bodies of capital do, in fact,
yield different rates of interest is too evident to
require proof; but this is due to many causes,
which are irrespective of the nature of the capital
itself."!

General Walker enumerates three chief causes
for these differing rates of remuneration : (a) Dif-
ference in risk; ()8) miscalculation on the one
hand, or fortunate speculation on the other;
(7) disguised rent, disguised profits, or commer-
cial good-will.

Now, in the first place, it may be observed that
a and 13 are not different causes, but two ways of

1 Quarterly Journal of Economics, Jiily, 1891.


PAYMENTS. 178

looking at the same cause. A "risky" invest-
ment i! nothing else than an investment prone to
"miscalculation," or in which success is in large
measure the result of fortunate speculation ; a is
the objective, fi the subjective, view of the same
factor.

But does this fact meet the allegation that
different classes of investment differ in remunera-
tiveness? Not at all. It only helps to explain
why, within the same class of investment, the rate
of interest upon some pieces of capital is higher
than for others. The allegation that the nature
of the capital has something to do with determin*
ing the rate of interest means, of course, that in
certain employments of capital there is a higher
average rate of interest than in others. It is cer-
tainly strange that General Walker should have
failed to perceive that while his last cause (7)
refers to classes of investment, (a) and (/8) refer
only to individual investments within a class.

Turning to (7) it will be at once admitted that
disguised rent is a vera causa in determining what
seems to be the higher interest for certain classes
of investment. There are several ways in which
rent is liable to figure as interest.

Certain classes of business yield a higher rate
of interest because the capital invested in them is
protected from free and effective competition by
association with monopoly of land. Land- values
and capital-values are not always clearly distin-


174 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBJBUTIOIf.

guishable. If the term ^^ capital" is confined to
its only logical use, to express production-goods
and plant, we shall see that those engaged in the
early steps of converting the raw material of the
soil into early forms of capital are, in part land-
owners, in part capitalists. The businesses of ex-
tracting ore, of raising cattle, and the whole
industry of agriculture are businesses in which
land-yalues are not easily distinguishable from
capital- values or rent from interest. Even where
these operations are conducted on rented lands,
the custom of leasing does not enable us to clearly
or precisely determine whether in a given year
some profit has not been returned ba economic
rent and vice versa.

Where the .owners of a business are also the
owners of ground upon which it is conducted, a
growing element of land-value will often show
itself as a rise in interest. No consideration of
the value of surrounding land can wholly guard
against this confusion. If this is the case in
ordinary businesses, where the use of land is for
machinery and other plant, warehouses, etc., much
more is it the case where the elements of the soil
or spatial qualities play a direct part in the busi-
ness. Such a case is that of breweries. The
interest paid on capital engaged in gas or water-
works, or tramcars, is complicated, as we shall see
presently, by another monopoly influence ; but it
is rarely possible to separate, in the dividends


PAYMENTS. 175

paid to shareholders, the elements of economic
rent and interest. Most important is the part
placed by land limitation in transport industries.
Professor Marshall is of opinion that "the domi-
nant economic fact of our age is the development,
not of the manufacturing, but of the transport
industries."^ Now the transport industries, so
far as they are left in private hands, require a
monopoly of earth surface. Between any two
points of population there is only one shortest
way. Whether it be a railroad, a telegraph road,
or a tram line, the most advantageous route can
only be in the possession of one company at the
same time. Most transport companies obtain a
more or less permanent possession of the most
advantageous route, supporting this natural mo-
nopoly, in many cases, by a state privilege pro-
tecting them against competition, even beyond the
limits of their natural monopoly. Here, again,
it is impossible to say how far the higher rate of
interest paid by a successful railway or tramcar
company is really an economic rent of land, and
how far land monopoly has assisted certain other
monopoly powers inherent in certain uses of
capital.

If it be the case that more and more capital and
labour will be engaged in distributive than in
extractive or manufacturing processes, the impor-
tance of this close alliance of land ownership with

^ Principles of Economics, 2d ed., p. 724!


176 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

capitalism is a growing one. Where the effect
of land ownership is to restrict the competition of
capital in any given employment, it may fairly be
urged that any abnormal interest due to the re-
stricted competition or the power of capital is
ultimately traceable to land-power. But inasmuch
as this ^* specific rent" appears as interest and
cannot conveniently be separated from genuine
interest, it is rightly regarded as an element in
the specific differences of forms of investment.

By "disguised profits," General Walker may
mean one of two things. It may signify the
higher interest paid upon certain capital owing to
superior skill of management. In this case "rent
of ability" figures as interest. The skill of an
able manager who is paid by a fixed salary may
for a time secure higher dividends for the share-
holder, just as the mismanagement of an incom-
petent manager may lower the dividends. But,
unless it can be shown that a particular class of
business, by its very nature, presents special
attractions to managing ability, this form of dis-
guised profit is an individual affair and cannot be
placed on the same footing with disguised rent
as an explanation of specific differences in re-
munerativeness of capital.

But the term "disguised profits" may cover
a real form of class gain. Certain classes of
investment are, in fact, restricted to capital in
the possession of men who enjoy certain " class "


PAYMENTS. 177

advantages of position, education, or trade con-
nection. It is admittedly difficult for a poor
man who has saved a little money to find a
safe or remunerative investment. The spread
of education and improved methods of coopera-
tion may effect some change, but it is at pres-
ent true that capital invested by persons of means,
position, and intelligence is, on the average,
more remunerative than the capital invested by the
poorer and more ignorant. The restricted access
to knowledge and skill, where the use of capital
requires special skill, secures for certain classes a
practical monopoly of certain forms of investment.
Lawyers and bankers, it is generally held, possess
certain opportunities of profitable investment not
open to ordinary persons.

Any higher rate of interest secured by capital
invested under these conditions may, of course,
be regarded as a " marginal rent " due to special
advantages of education or opportunities, and, as
such, classed under the head of profit rather than
of interest. The vagueness still attaching to the
word "profit" as an economic term favours this
interpretation. But if, on the other hand, we
regard limitation of investment as a quality attach-
ing to capital, the "marginal rent" of such form
of capital may not unfairly be claimed as a "rent "
of capital.

While the restricted access to land or oppor-
tunity serves to explain the higher rate of real in-


178 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

terest for capital in certain forms of investment,
there are other causes, political, social, and eco-
nomic, which endow certain forms of capital with
a remunerativeness which is rightly regarded as
attaching to the nature of the species of invest-
ment.

First: privileges conferred or restrictions im-
posed by national or local authority limit the
freedom of competition in certain employment of
capital, t.e. endow certain capital with a power
of monopoly. \

Sometimes a charter gives to a particular body
of capitalists an absolute monopoly, with or with-
out restrictions as to maximum price of the
commodity they provide. No direct competition
touches the monopoly of gas or waterworks estab-
lished in a town and secured by charter for a given
body of capitalists. In addition to the maximum
price and to a maximum rate of interest, some-
times imposed but commonly evaded by watering
the stock or other, devices, there are two economic
limitations to such monopolies. The first is that
furnished by the Law of Substitution, the ability
of the consumer to dispense with the article of
monopoly and to use some other article in its stead.
If the price of gas were raised beyond a certain
point, the enlarged use of electricity, of oil, can-
dles, or other illuminants would check the rise.
Hence the monopoly of a water company is a
stronger one; for it would be more difficult to


PAYMENTS. 179

obtain another supply or to substitute some other
commodity than in the case of gas.

The second limit depends upon the complex
relations existing between supply-price and de-
mand in the particular case. Every rise in the
price of gas above the competitive price of two
rival companies would bring a certain shrinkage
of demand. Hence it arises that the highest price
does not necessarily yield the largest net profit.
Generally, it may be stated that the most profit-
able price is high in proportion as the article of
monopoly is indispensable.

Since neither of these qualifying conditions of
''monopoly" is of the nature of that competition
which tends to reduce to a common level ordinary
classes of investment, we have clearly a specific
interest which enables us to grade these protected
classes of investment according to the various
degrees of monopoly pressure which they possess.

The power vested in owners of valuable patents,
and even in those who, without legal protection,
have exclusive control of any market or of the sale
of any class of goods, is of a similar economic
character, and enables the capital invested in such
businesses to get a specific interest.

Protective tariffs, or bounties, in so far as they
succeed in restricting or limiting freedom of com-
petition in certain employments of capital, help
to maintain a special rate of interest in those
businesses in which new capital cannot easily


180 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

enter so as to share the advantage of the state-
granted monopoly. The only economic reason
which can induce any class of manufacturers to
seek protection for the goods they make, is the
desire to reap the marginal interest of capital
which this protection secures.

But the most important cause of marginal rents
(specific interests) of capital resides in the nature
of capital itself as a factor of production in cer*
tain classes of business, independently of all
social or political privileges or restrictions.

In whatever branches of industry the economic
Law of Increasing Returns prevails, that is to say,
where capital and labour are most advantageously
employed in large quantities, the capital invested
may obtain a special rate of interest. It is un-
necessary to enumerate the particular economies
which in most manufacturing and mercantile busi-
nesses give a net economic advantage to the big
capital. But it should be kept in mind that these
economies do not of themselves furnish any guar-
antee of a higher rate of interest. They operate
indirectly, by reducing the number of competitors
and abating the pressure of competition. If the
competition between the smaller number of large
capitals was as keen and constant as between the
larger number of small capitals invested in other
businesses, the advantage in higher interest which
these economies might seem to justify would
entirely disappear. But the size of the capitals


BATMEN Ta. 181

engaged prevents the competition from being so
keen and so constant. At certain periods, it is
true, competition may be as effective between two
or three competitors as between two or three
thousand. But where the competition is between
few, it is, on the average, less persistently effec-
tive. The different competitors exercise each a
certain practical monopoly over certain districts
or in certain lines of goods. Even where the com-
petition with a big competitor is keen, its keen-
ness is abated when prices are driven down so low
as to yield only a common rate of interest. Above
all, the opportunities of suspending competition,
or of forming agreements for maintaining jprices,
limiting supply, or keeping down wages, are
vastly greater in a trade given over to a few large
capitals than where there are many small compet-
ing capitals. The advantage given to capital in
controlling the price of labour in employments
most subject to the Law of Increasing Returns,
where a small number of large capitals is con-
stantly narrowing to the apex of a Trust, is most
significant. Certain disadvantages common to
most forms of labour in bargaining with capital
are greatly enhanced where the competition of
papitals is restricted to a few large masters.
"Labour," writes Professor Marshall, "is often
sold under special disadvantages, arising from the
closely connected group of facts, that labour-power
is 'perishable, ' that the sellers of it are commonly


182 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

poor and have no reserve fund, and that they can-
not easily withhold it from the market. " ^ A posi-
tion of vantage in bargaining with labour is one
of the chief economic advantages in those indus-
tries where the action of the Law of Increasing
Returns has thrown the business into the hands
of a few large firms.

The net economic advantages which large capi-
tals enjoy in industries where the Law of Increas-
ing Returns is more powerfully operative than the
Law of Diminishing Returns, secure to those capi-
tals a position of limited monopoly, i.e. a monopoly
limited by the consideration that a very high price
would bring new competitors into the market.
The gain which this limited monopoly secures is
a "specific marginal interest." Industries where
the monopoly is very limited draw a small specific
interest; industries where the monopoly is of a
prime necessary of life, a substitute for which
cannot easily be found, where a supply from a
more distant market cannot easily be procured,
where new capitmal cannot easily be applied to the
industry, and where a considerable reduction of
consumption is impossible, are in a position to
derive a very high marginal interest. The Law
of Increasing Returns forms the basis of economic
grading of capital, just as the Law of Diminishing
Returns forms the basis of grading in land-values.
According to the varying pressure of this law in

1 Principles of Economics, Vol. I, p. 600 (2d ecL).


PAYMENTS. 183

different industries, the capital engaged therein
enjoys a greater or less degree of monopoly power
and draws a greater or less specific interest, in
addition to the minimum interest socially required
to induce the "saving" of capital. Where the
economies of large-scale production are biggest,
the tendency is to bring about an absolute or
limited suspension of competition among hitherto
competing capitals and to secure the "saving of
friction" which attends the establishment of a
ring or trust, where the present action of com-
petition is reduced to a minimum.

The monopoly of a strong trust differs only in
degree, and not in kind, from the monopoly held,
in different proportions, by all large forms of capi-
tal protected against the competition of smaller
intruders by the advantage conferred by the opera-
tion of the Law of Increasing Returns. Of course
there are doubtless industries where this Law of
Increasing Returns ceases to be operative beyond
a certain point, or more strictly speaking, where
a decline in efficiency of management in a business
of ever growing magnitude would outweigh the
economies of a larger capital.^

But it is safe to say that in any industry within
the limits of the dominant operation of this Law

1 Professor Marshall, who has worked out the operation of
the Law of Increasing Returns and its limitations, considers its
operation from the standpoint of individual firms, not of classes
of investment. Bk. V, Ch. XL


184 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

of Increasing Returns, there is an element of eco-
nomic monopoly yielding a specific marginal rent.

We are now able to recognise that, in economic
theory at any rate, pieces of capital may be graded,
just as pieces of land may be graded, according to
their capacity of contributing to various supplies.

There are several reasons which explain why
this conclusion, which seems to follow so clearly
from the admitted operation of the Law of Increas-
ing Returns, should have so generally escaped
acknowledgment.

The great variety in forms of capital, its superior
mobility as compared with land, its more rapid and
intricate fluctuations of value, have materially con-
tributed to conceal the gradation of capital. More
important still is the fact that, since capital is meas-
ured in terms of money, actual forms of capital
are being continually revalued according to their
remunerativeness. This "marginal rent "of mo-
nopoly is constantly absorbed into the higher valu-
ation which is given to the capital. The outside
investor of <£100 gets no more interest by purchas-
ing: a share in a business reaping^ a hifi^h marginal
reft than in a business enjoying no such rent

Lastly, the confused and illogical connotation
given to the term "capital" by most English and
American economists has helped to obscure the
truth. 1

1 Professor Bdhm-Bawerk expresses a natural astonishment
that so many English economists, differing so widely in their


PATMENTB. 185

But, in addition to these causes which operate
to hide the nature of capital-values, there are
special reasons why marginal gains of capital have
escaped recognition among many who have clearly
grasped the conception of scarcity-value in land
and in natural ability.

First, there is the difficulty, to which attention
has been already called, of accurately distinguish^
ing interest of capital from other special gains
with which it coalesces. The interests of capital
drawn by the firms of Bass or Guinness are not
separable from the gains arising from certain forms
of land and water monopoly which form part of
the business ^^ capital " of these companies. It is
not possible to say precisely how much of the
monopoly rent which falls to Messrs. Carnegie is
due to monopoly of land, how much to the legal
protection of the tariff, and how much to the
competitive advantages of a large capital over a
small one in the steel rail industry. The capital
invested in a chemist's shop probably yields a
higher average interest than that employed in a
tobacconist's. It is not possible to say how much
of this advantage is due to the fact that it is
cheaper to stock a tobacconist's shop than a
chemist's, and that competition is, therefore,
keener among the former, and how much of the

definitionB of capital, should agree in the inconsistency of
including under capital consumption goods in the possession of
laboarers. {PotiUve Theory of Capital, p. 67.)


186 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

advantage should be regarded as rent of ability or
as rent of a legal monopoly, because any one may
purchase a license to sell tobacco, while certain
personal qualifications are required in a chemist.

This difficulty involved in a separate estimate
of capital is one of the chief reasons why the
specific marginal interests of capital have escaped
notice, and have generally been attributed to land,
legal monopoly, or natural ability, with the rents
of which they often coalesce.

Another reason why they escape notice is that
they are hidden generally by the greater promi-
nence of individual rents. Marginal rent is only
an approximately accurate term, selected for cer-
tain purposes of convenience. If we apply to
different employments of capital the Law of In-
creasing Returns, we see that it acts with varying
force in various employments. It thus gives rise
to a number of marginal rents of capital. But,
within each species of employment, it also applies
with varying force to various sizes of business.

If any evidence were required of the existence
of marginal and individual interest of capital, it
would be afforded by the persistent attempt which
is constantly made by a number of owners of small
capitals to obtain these special gains by massing
their small capitals into a single large one. The
starting of new joint-stock banks is strong evi-
dence of a belief in the inherent advantage of a
large capital over a small. One result of success-


PAYMENTS. 187

ful cooperation of a number of small capitals, in
employments once monopolised by a few rich
owners of large private capitals, is, of course, to
introduce that very element of keen competition,
the absence of which was the basis of the monopoly
rent. Where cooperative small capitals can com-
pete on equal terms with large private capitals,
marginal and differential rents of capital alike
tend to disappear. So far, however, as it is true
that a particular class of business requires a capital
of a given size in order that it may be conducted
with an ordinary chance of success, this limitation
is able to secure a marginal rent for the capital
employed in it with average business ability, as
within that business the advantage which a larger
capital has over a smaller constitutes a basis of
individual rent.

One further objection to the proposed grading
of capital requires an answer. It will doubtless
be urged that the differences upon which it is sug-
gested capital should be graded are not differences
inherent in the nature of capital, but rather differ-
ences in the conditions of its employment. The
answer is that the conditions under which any
given piece of capital are employed, the size in
which it is massed, the place it occupies in the
industrial machine, belong to the nature of this
material qv4i capital just as the element of relative
position belongs to the nature of land-values.
The value of particular forms of capital, of so


188 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

many engines, or pianos, or sovereigns, depends
in large measure upon where they are situated,
and in what quantities they are collected; accord-
ing as they are more or less advantageously situ-
ated in these respects, they help to earn a higher
or lower specific interest.

The other form this same objection takes, that
capital is inseparable from the guiding mind of
its employer, and that differences in rates of re-
muneration are entirely attributable to skill or
good fortune of the entrepreneur, needs no further
discussion. It has been already admitted that an
element of disguised profit is liable to figure as
interest, just as it may also figure as rent of land
when a rapacious landlord rack-rents the tenant of
a well-conducted shop. The intelligent activity
of man is requisite to the employment of capital
just as it is to the employment of land and labour-
power, if they are to be put to serviceable use
so as to yield a return in value. But the skill of
management is no more the cause of the rents of
capital which we are tracing than of the specific
rents of land.

In reckoning capital-values just as in reckon-
ing land-values, we are entitled to assume that
average human intelligence is at work in their
employment. It is important to keep this in
mind, for it furnishes a complete refutation to
a view which is often held respecting the high
rates of interest in certain classes of investments*


PAYMENTS. 189

Where successful firms obtain very high interest,
it is alleged that these high returns are balanced
by the low-interest, or the no-interest, or the
minus-interest, ue. failure, of less successful firms.
In kinds of employment of capital where the prizes
are high the blanks are more numerous.

Now it is only natural that the high monopoly
rents obtained by successful firms should tempt
foolish owners of capital to engage in rash specu-
lation with the view of sharing these monopoly
rents. But, in reckoning the specific rent or the
total interest of capital employed in such an in-
dustry as gold-mining, we have no right to count
in the sums which greenhorns hand over to the
floaters of bogus companies. We do not assess
good agricultural land at a minus rent because
many a fool has squandered his money in bad
farming. The specific rent of a given class of
land is what it will pay in the hands of a tenant
of average skill ; so the specific rent of gold-mining
or any other form of investment presupposes the ap-
plication of ordinary business intelligence. When
this is borne in mind, it will be seen that the rates
of interest, set (down in statistical reports of the
conditions of railways, banking, mining, and other
industries, generally conceal a portion or the whole
of the specific rent, by including in the capital
whose interest is averaged a great deal of capital
not applied under the above-named condition. If
we are to exclude, as is admittedly right, the ele-


190 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

ment of disguised profit, due to special skill of
management, we must also exclude the element
of disguised loss, due to the folly of ignorant in-
vestors and incompetency of management.

§ 7. The greater facility of transferring forms
of capital from place to place, the fact that a large
proportion even of "fixed" capital can be trans-
ferred, though at a loss, from one employment to
another, the large field of choice which an average
saver has for the storage of his saving power in
forms of capital, — these and other considerations
perhaps impart a larger fluidity and freedom of
competition to capital than to land, or even than
to labour.

But none the less, the idea of practically
non-competing groups with differential positions
within each group seems conveniently applicable
to the supply of all three factors of production.
In none of the three cases must we regard the
specific and individual status as a rigid one ; there
is a constant shifting of marginal and differential
values. But at any given time only a certain
quantity of land, of capital, of labour, is avail-
able for contribution to a class of supply: the
worst of this land may pay a rent, and this rent
will enter into price ; the worst of the labour may
earn a class wage above the unskilled labour-
ers, this wage will enter into price; the least
favourably situated mill or mine contributing to
the supply may be able to earn an interest above


PAYMENTS. 191

the minimum, this interest will enter into
price.

The individual superiorities enjoyed by special
pieces of land, labour, capital, though they pro-
cure for their owners special rates of rent, wages,
and interest, will not enter into price.

Following this analysis, if we took the market-
price of a supply of finished manufactured goods,
we should find that price representing a complex
of a large variety of marginal money-costs ; these
marginal costs would be the marginal rents of the
land, capital, and labour required at each stage in
the different processes of production. At some
stages no-rent land might be used; at other stages
the worst land in use would be rented; at other
stages no-interest businesses might be competing,
and profits would not figure in the costs at that
stage; in other processes unskilled labour at a
subsistence wage might be employed, and this
"wear and tear" alone would cost.

It is, however, all-essential to perceive the need
of a close coordination of the three factors of pro-
duction. Every price must contain a provision
against the wear and tear of the land, capital,
and labour employed at each stage of production
(whatever that wear-and-tear fund be called), and
it must contain a variety of positive costs required
to evoke the use of the " marginal " portion of the
land, capital, and labour required. These costs
may be merely nominal, as where no-rent land,


192 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

no-interest capital, no- wage (15«.) labour, be
used; or they may be positive, where the worst
portion of the land, capital, or labour in use
requires a positive marginal rent.


CHAPTER VI.

THE COORDINATION OP THE FACTORS OP PRODUC-
TION. EFFECTS ON THE THEORY OF PRICE AND
DISTRIBUTION.

§ 1. The results of our reasoning have been

(1) to coordinate the several factors of production
with regard to the application of a Law of Rent;

(2) to amplify the Law of Rent by distinguishing
a number of margins of employment with differen-
tial rents measured from these margins, the mar-
ginal rents entering into price, the differential
rents being excluded from price; (3) to substitute
a composite margin for the' land-margin in con-
sidering the effects of increased demand upon
production.

Now this restatement and expanded application
of the idea of rent throws* important light upon
two closely related matters : (1) the composition
of a price as an amalgam of payments for the use
of various factors of production ; (2) the theory of
Distribution or of the proportion in which price is
divided as income among the owners of factors of
production.

An increased demand for a coitunodity which,

193


194 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

by raising its price, stimulates an increased rate
of production, will in most cases lower the margin
of employment of all three factors, calling into
economic use inferior qualities of land, labour,
and capital. The new use, not only of land,
but of labour and of capital, will, considered as ^
a separate unit, be more expensive to buy than
the same quantity of the old use, for the same rent
which was paid before for an acre of marginal land
will now be paid for an acre of land below the
former margin; and, since a larger number of
acres will be required to furnish a given quantity
of productive power, the price of a unit of land-
use will be greater; so, likewise, an increased
number of inferior labourers must be employed at
the same wages previously paid to the marginal
labourers formerly employed, in order to obtain a
given increment of labour-power, and a higher
price must be paid for a given quantity of use of
new forms of capital. The case of capital should
be clearly understood. If there are in actual exist-
ence unused forms of capital, plant, machinery,
etc., somewhat inferior to those in previous use,
these stand precisely in an analogous position to
land which lies below the margin ; in order to get
out of them a given amount of productivity of capi-
tal, a larger number must be employed than of the
superior forms, and the payment will be the same
as in the case of these latter. This can only be
done by increasing the payment for the use of each


THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION. 195

mill, machine, or other concrete piece of capital,
which means a rise of price per unit of capital-
power and a corresponding raising of the differen-
tial rent or interest of the better sorts of forms
of capital which were formerly in use. The same
result occurs if, instead of bringing into use in-
ferior existing forms of capital, it is sought to
work more fully existing forms of capital already
in use ; this is analogous to an attempt to get more
land-power out of a given piece of land by intenser
cultivation ; in each case the added increment of
productive power is obtained at a greater expense,
which can only be defrayed on condition that forces
of supply and demand have raised the price of
a unit of productive power. Similarly, if no un-
used or half-used forms of capital exist, and the
new use of capital now required must be supplied
by new savings, these new savings can only be
brought into economic existence by raising the rate
of interest, so that the new forms of capital will
be paid at a higher price for their use than the old
forms were previously paid.

§ 2. At first sight this seems to indicate the
universal dominance of the Law of Diminishing
Returns over the whole field of industry. If
the demand for an increased use of each factor
calls into use an inferior quality of the factor,
involving an increased expense for a given quan-
tity of each sort of productive power, with every
increase of supply the marginal cost would rise,


/


196 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

and the price of the whole supply would be
enhanced.

Indeed, so long as a purely mechanical character
is accorded to the operation of productive forces,
and each new unit of force is simply regarded as
an addition to the old units, there is no escape
from the Law of Diminishing Returns. Why,
then, do we say that the Law of Diminishing
Returns dominates agriculture and the extractive
industries, and enters manufactures and other in-
dustries only in proportion as raw materials and
productive powers of nature are expenses of pro-
duction ? Why do we trace a Law of Increasing
Returns in many industries ?

The explanation is this. When the margin of
cultivation for land is lowered and inferior lands
are brought into use, the addition of the new in-
crements of land-use has no power to raise the
productiveness of the earlier increments of land-
use ; no doubt the same causes which have lowered
the margin of cultivation have raised the price of
the productivity of the better lands, but they have
not made them absolutely more productive; the
different portions of land stand in no strong or-
ganic relation, so that what happens to one piece
will affect the productivity of other pieces. To a
certain extent it is true that the enlargement of a
&rm by taking on inferior outlying land might
enable the farm to be more self-sustaining, by
promoting a more advantageous division of uses


THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION. 197

in the other land, the new inferior land perhaps
furnishing certain necessary accommodation which
would set free a better piece of land for a more
profitable use. But in every country for most
sorts of farming there are well-recognised limits
of size, and any further taking in of land beyond
the economic limit will not recoup the fanner for
the inferiority of the new land by any sufficient
gain in the arrangement of his operations.
^ The economies of division of labour which often
attend large farming as compared with small farm-
ing cannot of course be imputed to an increased
productivity of land-use, as they are not attained
by a mere addition of new increments of land.

Since the new units of inferior land-use, ob-
tained by lowering the margin of cultivation, have
no considerable or corresponding influence in rais-
ing the productivity of other productive force
resident in other portions of land, we obtain a
diminishing return from a given quantity of
labour applied to agriculture where inferior lands
are called into use.^

§ 3. With labour it is different. Though, if
we treat the new increment of labour-power as a
thing apart, it seems to give a diminishing return,
that diminution may be more than compensated

1 When agriculture has become chiefly a capitalist rather
than a land enterprise, it may sometimes conform to a Law
of Increasing Betums, as possibly in some forms of bonanza
farming.


198 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION'.

by its influence upon the aggregate of labour-power
with which it is cooperating. We have here to
consider a close organic structure of industry, so
that a lowering of the margin of employment of
labour may be followed by such improved efficiency
of the whole cooperative mass of labour-power as
shall enable the increased aggregate of supply of
commodities to be produced less expensively in
terms of labour-use than the former smaller
aggregate.

This is no more than to say that the Law of
Diminishing Returns is a law of matter, the Law
of Increasing Returns a law of mind. Just in
proportion as labour-power is low-skilled and
physical, its efficiency depends less upon intelli-
gent cooperation and is less amenable to speciali-
sation. A lowering of the standard of employment
in navvy labour or in the labour of fruit-pickers
may easily show that the industry conforms to the
Law of Diminishing Returns, i.e. that the infe-
riority of labour at the same pay is not compensated
by improved division of labour or other organic
economies of the particular business. It is just
in proportion as we rise to those grades of labour
in which physical power plays a relatively unim-
portant part, that we realise the operation of the
Law of Increasing Returns.

It is the inelasticity, the inorganic character of
the productive powers of nature, which Ricardo
signified by applying the epithets " inherent and


THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION. 199

indestructible," that explains the operation of the
Law of Diminishing Returns. The productive
powers of man must be so ordered by intelligent
cooperation that the addition of factors inferior to
those in former use may raise the volume of pro-
ductive power by a total larger than that repre-
sented by the numerical proportion which the new
units of labour-power bear to the old aggregate
supply.

§ 4. It is difficult to know whether we ought
to classify capital with land or with labour in
respect of increasing or diminishing returns. An
addition to the stock of capital obtained by lower-
ing the margin of employment may be represented
as giving an increased efficiency to the capital
in earlier use, by allowing more specialisation of
capital. But since this increased efficiency or
productivity would be inseparable from the em-
ployment of an increased volume and division of
labour-power, such increasing return would best
seem attributable to economy of increased labour-
power.

The actual effect of a demand for increased
capital is of course often to introduce improved
forms of capital, which, so far from needing for
their utilisation an increased supply of labour-
power, cause a net displacement of direct em-
ployment, taking the business as a whole. But
this case is not an illustration of a lowering
of the margin of employment, for the new forms


200 THJE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

of capital called into use are not inferior to the
old; it is parallel to the opening up of a new rich
tract of land, which may for a time reverse the
normal tendency whereby an increased demand
calls inferior lands into use.

If, however, this analogy does not dispose of
the case of improvements in quality of capital-
forms, it will be necessary to refer this apparent
application of a law of increasing returns for capi-
tal to the labour represented by the invention of
the new forms taken by the increment of capital.
The capitalist below the margin of employment is,
qua capitalist, capable of putting in the field of in-
dustry only the customary form of capital; the in-
terest paid him for this cost of saving is the price
for producing an increment of the old forms of
capital. These new copies of the old forms of
capital cannot, I think, be rightly or conveniently
regarded as giving such increased efficiency to
the similar forms which have been functioning in
industry as to afford an increasing return to the
increased aggregate.

While, therefore, I claim that it is convenient
to attribute direct productivity to forms of land
and capital, an increased demand for their use,
which compels recourse to inferior or more expen-
sive portions, can exercise this compelling power
only in conformity with the Law of Diminish-
ing Returns, by raising the former price of each
unit of land-use or capital-use. This is, of couise>


THE FACT0B8 OF PBODUCTION. 201

not inconsistent with the general tendency of the
rate of profit or real interest to fall. Although
there may be a growing willingness to save for a
lower rate of remuneration, still, if we compare
the actual saving which takes shape in capital
with the potential saving which might take shape,
we must regard the latter as lying below the mar-
gin of employment, and only capable of coming
into actual existence on condition of a higher rate
of interest than is paid for capital already in use.

Only when we take the productive prices of
labour-power which function at the command of
the human will, do we escape the limits set by
the material world upon industry. So long as we
persist in measuring labour-power in independent
units, we fail to understand the vital law of in-
dustrial growth. The Law of Increasing Returns
is simply the law of intelligent cooperation.

§ 5. This is nothing but a necessary theoretic
preface to the study of progressive production in
the several industries.

When we have grasped the idea that a composite
margin of employment must be substituted for a
land margin, we shall be obliged to work out in
each case of increased supply the problem how far
this new increment of supply lowers the margin,
and how the lower margin is composed.

At this point we perceive the identity of the
theory of the Composition of Price with the
theory of Distribution,


202 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

In order to illustrate the operation of the Law
of Rent as the determinant in distribution, it will
be best to take the case of an increase in the
product to be distributed. Our question then
will be, What determines the proportion of the
increased product which goes to the owners of the
three requisites of production ? or, in other words,
reverting to our general application of the law of
rent, What determines the rise of marginal and
differential rents in the case of land, capital, and
labour, respectively? Let us assume, for con-
venience, that the increased product requires for
its production an additional quantity of land,
capital, and labour, involving a propoi'tionately
equal increase in all three factors of production,
e.g. a rise of 10% in the quantity of each factor
industrially employed. How will this increased
demand for the use of the factors of production
affect the proportion in which the product shall
be distributed?

If the demand for use of more land, capital,
and labour can be met by the employment of a
new supply of each, lying just below the margin
of employment, but only nominally inferior to the
supply in previous use, the prices of use of land,
capital, and labour will not appreciably rise, and
the new product will be divided among the three,
in strict accordance with the previous proportions.
In that case, the fall of the margin of employment
and the rise in rental of each rent-paying portion


THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION . 203

of the land, capital, and labour in previous use
will be very slight — just sufficient to call into
economic existence the required increase of sup-
ply. But if, while there is plenty of land and
capital available, of barely inferior quality to that
on the margin of employment, an equal addition
to the supply of labour is not so easily procurable,
the growth of demand for labour acting in relation
to a fixed supply will raise the price or rent of
labour above the margin of employment until that
margin is driven down low enough to include the
required new supply. That is to say, while in
the case of land and capital a merely nominal fall
of the margin involving a nominal rise of rent has
produced the new supply, in the case of labour a
considerable fall of the margin, attended by a con-
siderable rise of rent, has been required to produce
a corresponding increase of supply. Thus, while
the rent of land and capital remain practically at
the same level as before, the rent of labour will
have risen greatly, and will absorb almost the
whole of the increased product, shifting the bal-
ance of proportion in the distribution of the aggre-
gate product among the industrial community.

The advantageous position here accorded to
labour may with equal reason be assigned to land
or capital. In proportion to the difficulty of sup-
plying each increased quantity of the several
requisites of production, will be the rise in price
of each unit of those factors already in use. The


204 THE ECONOMICS OF BISTBIBUTION.

mechanism by which this operates is very simple.
The rise of price will be caused by the deficiency
of available supply considered in relation to an
increased demand reckoned at former prices ; the
new supply can only be brought into the same
quantitative relation to the new demand by the
maintenance of a new price per unit of productive
power, the new price representing in relation to
the old the greater difficulty of keeping in eco-
nomic use the determinant portion of supply of
that factor of production.

Thus we reach the law that the proportion of the
aggregate product which is paid as rent of land,
of capital, and of labour varies with the difficulty
of keeping in economic use the quantity of each
lector of production required to maintain the rate
of current production. As there is yacanJLiand
below the margin of cultivation (i,e. yielding less
productive power per acre than can be utilised at a
given amount of expenses of cultivation per acre),
so there is potential capital (i.e. capital containing
powers of productivity too low to defray working
expenses at formerly current remuneration, but
which, given a sufficient motive, will become
active forms of capital) ; and, lastly, there is va-
cant labour of inferior quality (i.e. a larger quan-
tity of which is required to furnish a given
amount of effective labour-power). In each case,
the potential or unemployed factor is called into
economic use by a sufficient rise in the rent of that


THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION. 205

which lies above the existing margin of employ-
ment.

This theory that changes in the proportionate
payments to land, capital, and labour, are depend-
ent upon the comparative ease or difficulty of in-
creasing the supply of each, would seem so obvious
a truth that it could not have failed to secure ade-
quate recognition. That it has failed to do so
must be attributed to the extreme reluctance which
economists have shown to admit the truth, that the
only immediate cause of a change of price is a pre-
vious change in the quantitative relation of supply
and demand at current prices. If it were once
clearly recognised that a restriction of supply at
current prices were the only possible immediate
cause of a rise of price, and if this were kept in
mind in dealing with the prices of the use of land,
capital, and labour, the main difficulty in forming a
satisfactory theory of distribution would disappear.

It will perhaps be convenient to sum up the
conclusions so far reached in the following three
propositions: —

1. If there exists an indefinite quantity of each
of the factors of production just below the margin
of employment, of almost equal quality to that
upon the margin, an increase in production will
neither alter the proportion of distribution among
the owners of the three factors nor appreciably
raise the differential rent of each portion of a
factor above the margin.


206 THS ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

2. If there is not a sufficient quantity of any of
the factors of production easily available for new
supply, and the difficulty of procuring each piece
of additional supply is equal in the case of each
factor, the differential rent of each rent-pajdng
piece of land, capital, and labour will rise, but the
proportion of distribution of the aggregate pro-
duct will remain unchanged.

8. If there is a difference in the amount of
difficulty of procuring the increased supply of the
three factors, that difference will be accurately
measured by the relative rise in rent of the rent-
paying portion of each factor, and by a corre-
sponding alteration in the proportion of the
aggregate product which falls to each, i.e. if it
is desirable to increase by 20% the quantity of
each factor of production in order to increase the
product, and it is twice as difficult to procure the
increased quantity of land as of capital and labour,
one-half of the increased product will go as rent
to land, one-quarter as rent to capital, one-quarter
as rent to labour.

In applying the rule of measurement thus far,
we have assumed the case where the increase of
production acts as a call for an increase in the use
of the three factors which is proportionately equal.
But, in fact, it is of course seldom the case that
the proportionate part played by the respective
factors of production remains the same when
there is an increase of production. It by no


THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION. 207

means follows that if in the old quantity of pro-
duction the numbers 3, 2, 6, represent the respec-
tive contributions of land, capital, and labour, and
the production be doubled, the same proportion
will hold among the contributors. The Law of
Substitution is constantly operative, enabling capi-
tal to displace labour, economising land by in-
creased use of capital or labour.^ We know, in
fact, that every increase in the aggregate product
will be attended by a change in the proportion of
the contribution of the three factors. Hence the
practical application of our rule of measurement
is obviously no easy task. For every change in
the distribution of the aggregate product will de-
pend on the relative strength of two forces : first,
the relative growth in the demand for each factor
signified by the increased product; second, the
relative diflBculty of supplying that increased de-
mand. The frequent use of the word " relative "
here is itself a proof of the complex nature of the
problem. Before we can say in what degree an
increase of 10% in the aggregate production of a
community will affect the proportionate distribu-
tion, we should have first to ascertain two facts :
(x) the precise amount of land, capital, and labour

1 B5hm-Bawerk, in his treatment of The Value of Comple-
mentary Goods, clearly and accurately indicates the importance
of the Law of Substitution among the requisites of production in
determining the amount of remuneration which each of the
several factors obtains. He first shows relative indispensability
as the measure of economic force.


208 THE ECONOMICS OF BIBTBIBUTION.

required to take part in the new production and
the proportion each addition bears to the quantity
in previous use ; and {y) the extent of the fall in
margin of employment necessary to furnish in the
case of each factor the desired increase. Now,
each of these two facts, x and y, is itself a resultant
of various conflicting forces, and can only be as-
certained by an elaborate calculation.

A whole group of considerations affects the pro-
portionate increase of each factor of production
required by each increase in the aggregate pro-
duction. Among them the following are most
prominent : —

1. Improvements in the industrial art«, and
application of labour-saving machinery, (a) ena-
bling the same quantity of capital to suffice in
turning out an increased product, (6) enabling
capital to take the place of labour, so that what
might seem to be an equal demand for more capi-
tal and more labour, wiU act as a demand for a
large quantity of new capital and a small quantity
of new labour.

2. Social and industrial reforms, improving the
organisation of labour, or inducing greater care and
economy in the use of material and of machinery,
will, by adding to the average effectiveness of both
capital and labour, enable an increase in the aggre-
gate product to be achieved by a less than corre-
sponding increase of capital and labour. Even here
the movement is not simple, but complex. JE*g*


THE FACTORS OF PBOBUCTION. 209

in the case of economy effected by cooperation or
profit-sharing, so far as the economy consists in
greater care of machinery and less waste of mate-
rial, it might operate as an equal check upon the
increased quantity of both capital and labour re-
quired to furnish an increased product. So far
as it acted merely as a stimulus to greater work-
ing activity, it would figure chiefly as economy of
labour, so that an increased product might be
wrought by the same quantity of labour acting in
conjunction with an increased quantity of capital.

3. Every improvement of physique, morale, in-
telligence, and technical skill among the workers
will enable a demand for more labour-power to be
satisfied by a less than corresponding increase in
the number of workers.

4. Improvement in agricultural arts may en-
able a larger product to be obtained without a
corresponding fall in the margin of cultivation,
i.e. without a correspondingly increased employ-
ment of land.

These are some of the determining forces which
would require study before we could reach the
resultant x. Another set of forces and circum-
stances affect the ease or difficulty of procuring
increased supplies of the respective factors of
production. Such are the following: —

1. The effect of growing improvements in
communication, and the breaking down of inter-
national barriers for trading purposes, in their


210 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

respective bearing upon (a) the increase of the
effective land supply for a given community, (6)
the increased " fluidity " of capital, (<?) the easier
migration of labour.

2. The effect of war, political insecurity, na-
tional commercial restrictions, and the like, as
affecting (a) the available quantity of each requi-
site of production, (6) the relative fluidity of each
factor of production.

3. Effects of the growth of prudential motives,
increased sense of security, and fluidity of capital,
as affecting the ease with which an increased de-
mand for capital may be supplied.

4. Complicated effects of rising standard of
comfort, education, artificial checks on population,
and the like, in determining the increased supply
of labor at different degrees of availability.

It is not too much to say that each of these
considerations opens up a large field for specula-
tion and involves special difficulties of its own.
Each of them has an importance in assisting to
determine the resultants x and y. But, unfortu-
nately, ihis is not aU. x, representing the amount
of land, labour, and capital required for an in-
creased production of commodities, or any single
commodity, is not the simple composite we have
assumed it to be.'^ The land it represents is itself
composed of a great variety of land-uses entering
into the different processes of production, some
with differential rents measured from a no-rent


EFFECTS. 211

margin, others with differential rents measured
from positive margins. In some of these cases
the increased demand for commodities will greatly
lower the margin, raising largely the differential
rents; in other cases the increased supply can be
afforded by a very small fall of the margin; in
other cases, maybe, the fall of margin may be ob-
viated by a change of method of production which
will economise land-use by increasing uses of capi-
tal and labour in conformity with the Law of Sub-
stitution. Thus the effect of increased demand
for land-use will affect differently the land-use
employed in all the processes. The same will
apply to capital and labour, various specific and
individual forms of which will contribute to the
production of supply at different points. When,
therefore, we consider what would be the effect
of an increase of supply of 10 % of any com-
modity in affecting the proportion of the price
which will be paid to the owners of the different
factors, we are evidently faced by a very complex
computation. The determination of both x and y
has to be made first separately at each point in
production. But even that will not suffice. Not
only should we have to measure the relative press-
ure with which these two forces act at each sev-
eral point in the increase of production, in order
to reach the change in the proportionate distribu-
tion. For alas! x and y cannot be determined as
entirely different forces. These are not merely


212 TBE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

two varying forces, but varying forces which act
upon one another with a force which likewise
varies. What we mean is this: it is impossible to
state accurately how much new land capital and
labour would be used to furnish an increased
product, unless we know already the amount of
difficulty there would be in procuring that in-
creased supply; for we cannot without that know-
ledge determine how far labour-saving machinery
may be introduced instead of an increased quantity
of labourers, nor can we determine how far the
increased demand for land wiU operate in intenser
or more efficient culture of the land already above
the line of occupation, instead of stimulating the
enclosure of hitherto unused land. On the other
hand, it will be evident that we cannot ascer-
tain exactly the amount of fall in the margin
of employment of the three factors of produc-
tion, unless we know, not merely what increased
product is required, but also to what extent
this increased demand will act upon the three
factors of production respectively, — in fact, until
we know the resultant x. As the two main
forces, which for convenience we regarded as
distinct, are thus seen to modify one another, the
full nature of the complexity of the problem of
distribution begins to dawn upon us. In order
accurately to ascertain the disturbance in propor-
tionate distribution of the product between land,
labour, and capital caused by an increase or de-


EFFECTS. 213

crease of production, we have in effect to measure
the varying pressure of a number of industrial
forces (which pressure also varies in the rate of
its variation), each of which affects a number
of other forces with different degrees and varying
rates of attraction. We have u^ v, w^ x^ y, «, etc.,
all moving at different rates, and all affecting one
another to a different degree in proportion to the
force of their respective motions.

Such is the intricate theoretic setting of the
problems which have to be worked out by the
Z^r> of bu«n«»e. and by «., orgamir. of
labour. In each trade, at each time, in each
country, the problem will be different. Indeed,
if we take the standpoint of nationalism in eco-
nomics, and ask what the effect upon the demand
for the several factors for the different processes
in a particular country will be, arising from an
increased demand for a class of commodities, we
have to consider not merely the purely economic,
but also the political considerations which move
nations in this trade competition.

Those whose business it is to work out the
probable influence upon profits or wages of an
assumed increase or decrease of production in a
particular trade, are compelled to consider the
cooperation of all these forces, so far as they are
ascertainable. The success of a particular capi-
talist enterprise or of a labour movement will
ever more largely depend upon the skill and


214 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

experience of those responsible for such compu-
tation.

We have now discussed the changes in termi-
nology and in point of view requisite to coordinate
land, labour, and capital, so as to measure their
influence upon price and their respective strength
as claimants upon the general product. We have
seen that the conception of a margin of employ-
ment with differential rents for more productive
forms is equally applicable to all three factors,
while a right regard for the Law of Substitution
involves the application of a composite margin
of employment in considering the effect of an
increased or a decreased demand for productive
energy upon the distribution of the product
among the owners of the factors.

It has also appeared that the process of deter-
mining the price of a supply of land, labour, or
capital is substantially the same as the process of
determining the price of a supply of commodities,
when acres, labourers, and <£100's of capital are
reduced to some standard measure of the produc-
tive power which, underneath the irregularities
of form, is the real object of sale. The price-
point for. the sale of a unit of land-power, capital-
power, labour-power, is determined by the stronger
of a final pair of bargainers within limits reached
by competition of buyers and sellers of these fac-
tors of production. The wide external differences
between a market for goods and a market for sale


EFFECTS. 215

of the several factors, where competition is often
extremely slow, indirect, and incomplete, must not
blind us to the substantial identity of the economic
processes. When the competition is slight and
imperfect, the result is that the upper and lower
limits of price are wider apart than in a freely
competitive market for goods, so that the eco-
nomic force of the stronger of the final bargainers
has fuller scope. The contrast between the money-
market or the wool-market under normal condi-
tions, and the market for sale of land-uses in a
growing city, is no doubt a striking one; but
though competition lapses at a far earlier point
in the latter than in the former cases, the differ-
ence is one of degree and not of kind. In both
cases, competition between buyers and sellers,
in both cases, economic force are determinants of
price, though to different extents.

To those who are lovers of simplicity this may
not seem a very satisfactory result, but a large
part of the disrepute from which the science of
economics suffers among " practical " men is due,
not, as is often alleged, to an inherent distaste for
theoretic treatment, but to the hasty fabrication
of economic laws which are so delightfully simple
that an attempt is made to use them as ^^ rules
of thumb" in the actual movements of industry.
They are then found to be inapplicable, and the
practical man is not satisfied with the scientific
economist's elaborate explanations of the diificul-


216 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

ties inyolved in applying economic laws to details
of economic fact.

These intricate considerations teach caution*
They are often used to suggest inertia. Many
of the forces involved are quite incapable of accu-
rate measurement, and it may easUy be shown that
it is impossible to predict with any degree of cer-
tainty the effect upon profits or employment of
a particular industrial action involvipg a change
in demand for the several factors of production.
But this does not justify inaction. Human con-
duct is always speculative; the future never admits
of exact prophecy ; risk and faith are at all points
essential to progress. A reasonable man is pre-
pared to take ordinary chances, his calculations
are confined to a comparatively small number of
&ctors, and these not exactly measured; after a
reasonable computation of certain lai^e issues he
can often afford to ignore smaller ones. Wide
experience produces a capacity of judgment which
is apparently intuitive, though strictly ratiocina-
tive in its secret working.

Hence large industrial movements affecting the
production and the distribution of wealth are often
rigidly guided by a clear grasp of certain leading
facts or generalisations. For example, large or-
ganisations of labourers may be quite incapable
of working out all the intricate effects upon each
trade, of a general policy of higher wages or shorter
hours ; but they may have a right knowledge that


EFFECTS. 217

the conditions of bargaining between labourers
and employers are on the average so favourable
to the latter as to place in their hands a large
surplus of wealth, the diversion of which into
higher wages or more leisure is economically fea-
sible. Possessing such knowledge, they will not
rightly be deterred from action by the real risks
involved by the pressure of other unknown or in-
calculable forces upon certain sections of labourers.
It is sufficient if they make good use of such know-
ledge as they can get. Human conduct is notori-
ously enfeebled, or even sterilised, by the growing
conviction of risk and uncertainty which weighs
upon the student who comes to realise the infinity
of knowledge in any department of inquiry. The
practical man has to decide for himself how much
he may safely leave unknown, though he can never
know exactly how much this is, and what risks
he must be prepared to run, though the precise
size and nature of these very risks must always
baffle him.


CHAPTER VII.

BABQAINS FOB THB SALB OF LABOUB-POWBR.

§ 1. There are certain special considerations
affecting the sale of labour-power which make
the sellers of that commodity normally weaker
than the buyers.

This normal condition of inferior strength is
often summed up by saying that it is more im-
portant or more pressing for the individual owner
of labour-power to effect a sale than for the em-
ployer to effect a purchase.

This is evidently and particularly the case where
there exists an excess of any kind of labour-power
beyond the amount required at a price which would
enable minimum business profits to be earned. A
supply of goods or of land which, if it is placed
upon the market, would bring down prices to an
unprofitable level, can in most cases be withheld
from the market without sustaining irrepara-
ble damage. This is not the case with labour-
power. It must be sold ; if not sold for a week,
not only is the week's supply wasted, but the
aggregate of labour-power, the labour-capital, the
labourer himself, perishes. This labour-power

218


THE SALE OF LABOUR-POWER. 219

must be sold continuously ; it must be sold in
small quantities, commonly measured by the day
or week ; finally, it must be sold to a buyer who
knows the necessity under which the seller stands
to effect a sale. In a word, the labourer is selling
his labour-power under the conditions of a forced
sale. In a labour-market the bargain of the mar-
ginal pair (which directly rules the price) will be
that of a seller whose inability to refuse a bar-
gain is known all the time, to the buyer with
whom he is "higgling for a price." Under such
circumstances the superior force of the buyer is
so well recognised that he is commonly able to
avoid the necessity of higgling, and to dictate a
customary price of labour. Again, the organic
continuity of an individual's labour-power, the
fact that one week's energy is vitally connected
with the next week's, makes his weakness in bar-
gaining a cumulative disadvantage.^ A bad sale
for a number of weeks or months, a failure to
obtain regular and proper employment at reason-:
able wages, brings about a deterioration of work:
ing efficiency for the following weeks, and perhaps
a permanent injury to physique and morale.

These weaknesses of bargaining attach to labour-
power, as distinct from other things that are sold,
because labour-power cannot be detached from
the vitality of which it is a function.

Putting this peculiarity in another form, we

1 Cf. Marshall, Principles, 2d ed., Vol. I, p. 602.


220 THB SC0N0MIC8 OF DI8TBTBUTI0N.

may gay it resides in the faot that, while the
worker is selling a portion of his labour*power,
he is also buying the permission to live, and the
'J future production of his labour-power depends
•upon the terms of this purchase. Hence, while
the employer is directly concerned only with the
purchase of labour-power, the inevitable terms of
such a purchase give him power oyer other vital
functions which he does not buy, but which are
"thrown in for nothing." What I mean is ad-
mirably summed up by Mrs. Webb: "The wage-
earner does not, like the shopkeeper, merely sell
a piece of goods which is carried away ; it is his
whole life, which, for the stated term, he places
at the disposal of his employer. What hours he
shall work, when and where he shall get his
meals, the sanitary conditions of his employ*
ment, the safety of the machinery and tempera-
ture to which he is subjected, the fatigues or
strains which he endures, the risks of accident or
disease which he has to incur,— all these are mat-
ters no less important to the workman than his
wages. Yet about the majority of these vital
conditions he cannot bargain at all." ^

Even if he can bargain, he bargains at a grave
normal disadvantage. Even where collective bar-
gaining has largely taken the place of individual
bargaining, the power of labourers to get adequate
safeguards against the abuse of these individual

^ Commonwealth^ February, 1896.


THE BALE OF LABOUB-POWEB. 221

mks and hardships has been small, and as they
ore no proper part of what is offered in the sale of
labour-power, no monetary compensation is appro-
priate and no monetary valuation possible. ^^ All
that a man hath will he give for his life." The
necrosis of the phosphorus match-maker, the
phthisis of the Belfast Unen-spinner, are not part
of any bargain and are not paid for.

§ 2. How far the process of collective bargain-
ing improves the relative position of the sellers
of labour-power, so far as the price is concerned,
it is difficult to judge. Bearing in mind that
oapital is generally far more advanced in collec-
tive organisation than labour (each large employer
bringing a large number of closely welded units
of joint-stock capital to confront the much more
loosely and imperfectly welded units of labour-
power), it is difficult to believe that the substi-
tution of the labour-group for the single labourer
can redress the balance of advantage on the side
of the employer. This involves no depreciation
of trade-unionism ; a group of labourers bargain-
ing for a sale of labour-power over a long period
of time, through skilled agents, is absolutely in a
far stronger case than a single labourer,^higgling
like an ignorant amateur. But where organisa-
tion of capital has made similar advances, the
relative advantage of the employer may be as
great as ever. For any modern struggle between
equally developed organisations of manual workers


222 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

and employers, so far as it is left to economic
might, untempered by legal or charitable interfer-
ence, exhibits the superior power of the employer
resting on the fact that the sale of labour-power
involves the purchase of the right to live; the
power to starve labour into submission still sur-
vives as the final economic arbiter. So far as
organisations of labourers can modify or postpone
this superiority of the employer, it is not by the
mere substitution of collective for individual bar-
gains in sales of labour-power, but by amassing a
fund of capital so that they may no longer con-
tend as mere proletariat. The attempt of a trade-
union with accumulated funds to fight a body of
employers is a fight of capital against capital.

§ 8. The ordinary process by which the wage is
immediately determined is sometimes regarded as a
separate disadvantagfe to the labourer. Whereas
the employer may have before him a number of
appUcants for employment who will closely com-
pete and underbid one another, it does not often
happen that employers meet face to face and di-
rectly compete to buy the services of a labourer.
Thus it appears that the levelling tendency of
competition is less operative among the buyers
of labour than among the sellers. The immediate
position which faces an unorganised worker ap-
plying for a job is one which offers hunger and
possible starvation as the alternative to accepting
the offer of an employer; for though there may


THE SALE OF LABOUR-POWER. 223

be other employers who will each separately be
willing to make an offer, he cannot rely upon
this being the case, nor can he make these sev-
eral employers bid directly against one another.
Where, as is the case in many trades, the supply
of available labour is normally in excess of the
demand at the standar(} wage, the economic weak-
ness of the seller of labour is aggravated by this
mode of conducting the sale.

"The art of bargaining,", observed Jevons,
"mainly consists in the buyer ascertaining the
lowest price at which the seller is willing to part
with his object, without disclosing, if possible,
the highest price which he, the buyer, is will-
ing to give. . . . The power of reading another
man's thoughts is of high importance in business."
"Now the essential economic weakness of the
isolated workman's position is necessarily known
to the employer and his foreman. The isolated
workman, on the other hand, is ignorant of his
employer's position. Even in the rare cases in
which the absence of a single workman is really
inconvenient to the capitalist employer, this is
unknown to any one outside the ofl&ce. What is
more important, the employer, knowing the state
of the market for his product, can form a clear
opinion of how much it is worth his while to give,
rather than go without the labour altogether, or
rather than postpone it for a few weeks. But the
isolated workman, unaided by any trade-union


224 THK XCONOIiICa OF DISTBIBUTION.

official, and unable to communicate even with the
workmen in other towns, is wholly in the dark as
to how much he might ask." ^

The condition of bargaining for sale of labour-^
power which I have described, applies in its ful-
ness to low-skilled labour. Of such labour we
may say that the normal wage is one of bare
subsistence, unless some alternative of squatting^
stealing, begging, or public charity is able to
qualify it. To place the "marginal labourer"
of such a class upon a footing of equal power to
bargain with the marginal employer who buys his
labour, it would be necessary: —

(a) To guarantee him and his family a full
wage of economic efficiency as an alternative to
the acceptance of competitive employment.

(6) To safeguard him in his giving out of
labour-power, against conditions of work which
can impair his efficiency for future work.

Just in so far as certain individuals and classes
have practically obtained these securities, the
terms upon which they bargain for the sale of
their labour-power are superior to those above
described.

Bodies of skilled manual workers with a firm
hold on an important labour-market, where capi-
tal is in genuine competition, are often able to
maintain a standard ^ge for the marginal labour,
considerably higher than the wage of low-skilled

1 Webb, IndtAstrial Democracy^ Vol. n, p. 667.


TBS SALS OF LABOUB-POWEB. 225

labour. Possessing a "comer" of some highly
serviceable skill, and perhaps some resource of
capital, they can reduce considerably the advan-
tage which the capitalist-employer must naturally
possess in bargaining with a proletarian. As we
L, to th. p«,Lio^ »d other g»d« of .km«i
mental workers, we are dealing with persons who,
by reason of some assistance of capital, their own
or others, or from legitimate confidence in some
alternative employment, are often able to enter
on a bargain for sale of this skill, upon terms of
equal or even superior advantage with the buyer.

The marginal lawyer or the marginal doctor in
the West-end market is probably able at least to
hold his own in the slow and indirect forms of
bargaining which fix the price of his professional
skill.

In each labour-market there will be many in-
dividuals who can take high differential rents,
marking their superior, value over the marginal
seller. These differential rents seem to become
both absolutely and relatively larger as we ascend
to the higher grades of labour. Indeed, it would
be straining the system of gradation too far to
apply it with rigidity to the most highly remuner-
ated forms of personal or professional service,
where what is sold is not so much advice, so
much acting or singing, but where each indi-
vidual more or less constitutes a market of his
own, drawing monopoly rents rather than the


226 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

differential rents which arise where industrial
services of a more routine or impersonal order
are sold.

§ 4. Socialism and labour-movements in general
are chiefly motived by a more or less clear percep-
tion that bargains for the sale of labour-power
differ from other kinds of bargains in that there
is a considerable normal balance of economic
strength on the side of the buyers. An applica-
tion to a labour-market of the analysis applied in
Chapter I will show that true competition gives
way at a point which leaves a marginal labourer
face to face with a marginal employer, under con-
ditions which enable the latter to fix the price
close to the lower limit, thus assigning a ^^ forced
gain " to each buyer of labour-power.

It is the perception of this inequality which
places in the forefront of social questions the
rectification of methods of selluig labour-power.
"In any given state of industrial morality," writes
Mr. Charles Booth, "the social value of competi-
tion is measured by its equality — by the posses-
sion of equal powers both mental and material by
both sides to a contract or a bargain."^ No such
equality exists, or can exist, until equal access to
all economic and intellectual opportunities is open
to all.

^ Life and Labour of the People, Vol. IV, p. 214.


CHAPTER VIII.

BABQAINS FOR THE USE OF CAPITAL.

§ 1. Some special mystery has been often sup-
posed to attach to bargains for the use of capital.
This has arisen partly from people failing to
understand what was actually sold in a loan,
what it was that interest was paid to buy, and
partly from certain circumstances historically as-
sociated with lending and borrowing.

I have held a number of sovereigns in my
strong-box for some time past, and they lie there
neither increasing nor diminishing in number.
You come and entreat the loan of them, I let you
have them, and they begin to breed and return to
me in a year's time with added sovereigns. How
can this be?

Money does not breed ; the wisest of men — Solo-
mon, Aristotle, Bacon — are sure of that, and they
are convinced that I have come by the extra
sovereigns wrongfully, by some process of extor-
tion.

If I plead that you, after taking my sovereigns,
circulated them in commerce, buying goods with
them, taking these goods to other people and sell-

227


228 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

ing them, and that by processes of this kind you
obtained a oonsiderable increase of sovereigns and
had some over, even after returning my original
stock with increase, the above-named worthies
would not be appeased. For just as I had made no
increase of sovereigns by lending them to you, so
you have made no rightful increase by circulating
them in commerce. If I plead that you have
not been a loser, then you must have used my
sovereigns in cheating sovereigns out of others.
The process of lending money could give no
rightful increase, for it' cost me nothing to lend
my idle cash to you, and sovereigns cannot make
anything, but only pass from hand to hand.

There was to the ancien't mind no ground for
payment of interest upon money lent ; ^ no valu-
able service was rendejed, whatever origin you
give to value ; there was no apparent cost and no
apparent utility. Or if there was an obvious
utility, if I lent to you in your dire necessity, I

^ It seems, however, pretty clear that in Bahylonia as in
China, and probably in other ancient societies, a distinction was
early made between loans for need and loans for business. This
reasonable distinction would easily make itself manifest even in
the most primitive forms of lending. ** Among the primitive
progressive peoples who cultivated the wild wheat of Babylo-
nia, we may feel sure that the primitive instincts of hospitality
never sank so low, as for one man to ask another to give him
back with interest, the com borrowed and eaten in a day of
need. But the case is quite different as regards com to be
used, not for food but for seed, capable of bringing forth a hun-
dred fold." (Simcoz, Pfimitint Civilisation^ Vol. I, p. 19i.)


BARGAINS FOB THE UBS OF CAPITAL. 229

was able to trade upon your weakness, and exact
terms which were cruel and inequitable. , There
was very little fixed capital used, and compara*
tiyely little lending for trade; most loans were
made by the rich to the poor to purchase for the
latter current necessaries of life. Wherever in-
terest is especially associated with such loans, as
in Russia to-day, the condemnation alike of the
theory and the practice of interest is quite intel-
ligible.

§ 2. But even when we come to the conditions
of a modem industrial community, whece loans
are quite as often made to the rich as to the poor,
where some lenders plainly deprive themselves of
certain present opportunities of satisfaction, and
where it is quite clearly seen that what is bor-
rowed is not really money, but plant, machinery,
and goods, — though the necessity and even the
abstract justice of paying interest is generally ad-
mitted, — there is no clear apprehension of what
it is that is really bought and paid for by interest.

^^ The use of capital," it has been said ; but
that answer does not carry us far. For what is
that use? Capital performs a service in produc-
tion. Even Karl Marx allows that. But what
service, and why should it be paid in interest?
If the service of a piece of capital, (say) a
machine, consists in helping to work up raw
materials into finished goods, as it seems, then
this machine will wear itseU out in a few years,


280 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

or, if one prefers, it will itself be worked up or
consumed in the goods it helps to produce. Put
it on a par with the labour that tends it, secure
the machine against its wear and tear, procure for
it continuity of existence, by providing against
depreciation. But whence comes the interest?
You say " it is productive," but what it has pro-
duced is clearly the goods which have been sold :
how has it produced the interest actually paid its
owner, who, even after the actual machine is dead
and is replaced by another one, continues to re-
ceive this interest just the same?

§ 3. Just as the interest does not clearly seem
to correspond to any productivity, so again the
cost represented by its use is not so patent as in
the case of labour. Earlier economists of this
century, including Ricardo, inclined to resolve the
" cost " incurred by capital into the labour of mak-
ing the forms of capital. But this treatment of
capital as accumulated labour gives no explanation
and no justification of interest. McCuUoch's asser-
tion, "that profits of stock are only* another name
for the wages of accumulated labour," is simply a
denial of the validity of interest. Take the case of
the earliest form of capital, which we may assume
to be entirely made by labour. If the labourers
who made it sold it, when made, in a free market,
we should be obliged to say they obtained its full
value as the wages of their labour ; if, on the
other hand, they kept possession of it, and either


BARGAINS FOR THE USE OF CAPITAL. 231

used it to assist them in their labour, or loaned it
to others for a similar purpose, at the end of the
year they would obtain an added value which was,
ex hypothesi, not payment for the original labour
which went into making it, but was what we call
interest. In such a simple case it is easy to per-
ceive that, not the labour-cost of making it, but
some cost connected with the use of it either by
themselves or others during the year, was the
cause why interest comes to them. To the " some
yr cost," Senior gave the name of abstinence. These
men received the extra value as a reward for their
postponement of their immediate gratification.
But it was difficult for Senior to explain how
this cost of abstinence was the efficient cause of
any increase of wealth, analogous to the increase
of wealth due to the cost of an output of labour-
power. "How could mere abstinence, the nega-
tion of activity," he was asked, "possibly cause
an increase of wealth which went as interest ? " and
he had no valid answer.

How is the cost of abstinence productive ? It
is quite plain that the taker of interest need do
nothing but abstain; that is, in fact, the only
"cost" he undergoes. This was perhaps not
clearly seen when most capital was owned by
workers, who used it to assist their labour. But
when we turn to the normal use of capital for
investment, we see that all the owner need do to
earn the interest he receives is to abstain from


282 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

immediate consumptioD, to postpone satisfaction.
How can this negative action be productive of the
wealth returned as interest ?

For the answer to this question (there is an
answer), we must turn to another school of econo-
mists, who have, I think, unconsciously furnished
a clew to the mystery.

We have already seen the trouble caused by the
antagonism of two theories of Value — the "cost"
and the "utility" theories. I have shown how,
by approaching value through price, we reach a
true statement of value as the resultant of forces
operating from both sides, the relations of cost to
utility. Now it is worthy of remark that although
the question of capital and interest has commonly
been severed from the general theory of value and
submitted to separate investigation, the same di-
vergency of conflicting explanations has arisen.
One set of thinkers explains interest by absti-
nence — a cost theory ; another by productivity
— a utility theory.

It is not curious that this conflict should arise
in connection with an imperfect theory of value.
It is, however, of the utmost importance to recog-
nise that the question of interest is nothing ^Ise
than a particular case of price.

The Law of Price stated above applies to the
price of service of capital as to all other prices.
The loan market is subject to the same forces
which determine prices in other markets; there


BAB Am 8 FOB TBS USE OF CAPITAL. 288

is the same competition of bargaining pairs, the
same narrowing of the competitive price toward a
point finally determined by the will of the stronger
member of the final pair ; final cost and final
utility are represented here as in other markets
by the final pair.

The final pair in the loan market will, as in
other markets, consist of the lender who, among
those who conclude a loan, sets the highest valua-
tion upon the services he is selling, and the bor-
rower who, among actual borrowers, sets the lowest
valuation upon the service he is buying. The
former, in accordance with our general analysis
of value, will be the marginal saver (the person
incurring the largest "cost," or requiring the
largest inducement to "abstain" or "wait"), the
latter the marginal borrower (the person who
imputes the smallest utility to a loan),

§ 4. But the root questions stiU await an an-
swer : " How is the cost of abstinence the cause of
the utility of capital ? " " What is the ' utility '
of a concrete piece of capital which yields a con-
tinuous interest to its owner ? "

I build a house, let it to you, you pay me <£80
a year and undertake to keep it in repair at a cost
of £20 a year. You are paying <£106 a year^
£80 of which comes to me as rent or interest.
What does that interest and insurance buy for
you ? Clearly the shelter and other conveniences
furnished by the house. May we not say that


284 THE ECONOMICS OF biSTRIBUTION,

the house is engaged in producing a continuous
supply of shelter? You say the house is only
dead matter and cannot produce. This begs
the question that conscious human effort alone
produces. This again is only a question of con-
venience of terminology. I suggest that it is
convenient to regard both land and capital as
productive factors, and their rent and interest
as analogous to wages. Land is not dead, but
yields a recurrent supply of natural forces analo-
gous to the recurrent supply of labour-power put
forth by man, and upon similar conditions, viz.
that she is recouped artificially or is allowed to
recoup herself for the drains to which she is sub-
jected. Is it altogether fanciful to suggest that
the repairs done to the house correspond to the
subsistence wage paid to labour and to land to
maintain their continuous economic existence, and
that the interest paid the owner is for continuous
services rendered by the natural powers of the
materials of which the house is constructed, the
powers to resist rain, atmospheric influences, and
animal intruders? Do not these, in fact, consti-
tute the utility for which you pay £100 ?

There are those who would make a mystery of
the fact that capital can yield interest in perpe-
tuity. " A house or a machine or other piece of
capital is not," they say, " eternally productive ;
even allowing it is productive iu the way you
claim, it wears out in time, and yet after it is


BARGAINS FOB THE USE OF CAPITAL. 236

worn out and gone and is replaced by a different
house or machine you will continue to receive the
interest just the same."

Yet this difficulty disappears if we look more
closely at our example. My interest on my house,
the rent you pay me, is £80, but you value the
utility you get at £100, for you are willing not
only to pay me £80, but to spend £20 a year
in repairs. Now this arrangement about repairs
is not inherent to the theory of interest. I can
arrange that you shall pay me £100 a year instead
of £80, and I will do the repairs myself. Now in
either case provision is made that my capital, my
house, is eternally productive. The £80 I receive
will continue indefinitely as the payment for the
shelter furnished by my house ; this continuity or
preservation I furnish myself by additional labour
put into repairs. I may make you pay for these
repairs, but none the less they are to be deemed
my repairs, for the house is worth — for an in-
definite time — £100 to you, and I only take
£80 as profit. The case is perhaps still clearer
if I occupy my own house, enjoying the same
shelter, and doing the repairs with my own hands.
Here it matters little whether I speak of the house
as capital producing a profit of £100 or regard
£20 as my wages for current repairs.
I Continuous external existence of capital and
interest is only obtained by consenting to forego
a portion of a higher profit which could be taken


236 THMI ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

for a limited time. This interest foregone repre-
sents a continual repair, and since this repair can
(in theory at any rate) secure eternity for the
form of capital, there is no reason why the price
of a utility which still continues should cease to
be paid.i

Or take the case of a machine. If wear and
tear is provided for, as in the case of the house,
the objection against perpetuity of interest, on the
ground that the machine is worked up in a limited
time into a given quantity of goods, falls to the
ground. This machine has its continuity secured,
and it has a yearly productivity consisting of the
service it renders by cooperating with labour,
which brings in interest to its owner. This pro-
ductivity and interest will not, however, disappear
if, instead of fully providing against wear and
tear of this particular machine, it is allowed to
wear itself out and is replaced by another. For
it cannot matter either in the case of the house or
the machine whether the <£20, which measures the
yearly contribution to depreciation, is put into
repairs of the old structure or the gradual provi-
sion of a new fabric which shall take its place.

iB6hm-Bawerk begs the whole question when he asserts
(Capital and Interest, p. 249) that a house rented is ** a store
of energies to be released bit by bit/' Bohm-Bawerk confuses
the ** waste" of the material fabric of a form of capital with
the ** use " of which that waste is one among other conditionl.
lliat waste made good, as it is made good, the ^*use " becomes
perpetual.


BARGAINS FOB THJB USE OF CAPITAL. 237

The continuous existence of the house or the
machine does not really obscure or impair oux
understanding of the origin or the legitimacy of
interest.

If the owner hired out the machine, he could
get as rent or interest, say, £100, if he made no
stipulation as to the wear and tear; or he can
let it at <£80, on the understanding that it shall
be kept in repair or replaced when worn out.
Some people let out machines Qe,g. bicycles) upon
the former terms, others on the latter ; the former
yields a higher interest for a limited time, the
latter a lower interest without the limit. The
eternity of the capital is secured by what may be
regarded as a payment out of gross interest,
which accurately corresponds to a fund for main^
tenance of economic efficiency and payment of
rent and wages in the case of labour and of land.

In order that labour may command a price for
its use, three conditions are admittedly essential :
first, there must be objective or technical produc-
tivity, an actual increase of " goods " due to the use
of the labour ; secondly, there must be a subjec-
tive cost or painful expenditure of effort ; thirdly,
there must be a subjective utility or fund of en-
joyment afforded by the result of the labour.

All three conditions we have shown are present
in the case of the functioning of forms of fixed
capital. I A house or a machine when economi-
cally used gives out a continuous supply of objeo-


N/


238 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

tive economic goods to which value is attached,
and a ^ price " affixed by consideration of the rela-
tion between the marginal "cost" of that absti-
nence which is essential to secure their economic
existence, and that marginal " utility " which di-
rectly measures the economic importance attached
to them by borrowers.

The case of fixed capital is thus plainly seen to
be on all fours with the other factors of produc-
tion with regard to the conditions of value, and
the determination of price.

The case of loans which take shape as circulat-
ing capital, or as commodities for present consump-
tion, present at first sight a somewhat different
aspect, and have misled many economists into
adopting a special explanation of value and price
of the use of capital.

Instead of taking the loan of a house or a
machine, let us now consider the loan of capital
which takes shape in material of manufacture,
fuel for generating manufacturing power, or goods
which form the stock iii trade of a business. Do
these conform to the same conditions as fixed
capital ? Do they possess, as capital, continuous
existence, and can objective net productivity be
imputed to them? At first sight one is disposed
to give a negative answer to both these questions.
"Circulating" capital, in the very terms of its
most common definitions, ceases to exist after a
single use ; the raw cotton onoe spun is no longer


BARGAINS FOB THE USE OF CAPITAL. 239

raw cotton but yarn ; the coal once burnt ceases to
function as coal; the shop goods once bought by a
customer now only possess economic existence as
consumptive wealth. But this superficial view dis-
appears before a more exact conception of indus-
trial order. In the case of the labourer, the mere
fact that the material fabric of his body is con-
tinuously worn out in the course of his working
life, each particle of tissue being wasted and
replaced by another particle, does not impair our
conception of the identity and the continuous
existence of this fund of labour-power. In the
case of a building or a machine we are ready to
admit that the conservation of its identity does
not depend upon the fact that all or any of its
original material structure remains intact ; in the
long course of wear and repair every particle of
the original house or machine may disappear, and
yet we rightly recognise the continuous existence
of the capital it embodies. Now there is no real
or essential difference in this respect between
fixed and circulating capital : in the latter case
the change of the matter which represents the
capital is more rapid and more regular, that is all.
Just as a loan of capital, which takes shape as
a machine or a house, is kept in continuous
economic existence by replacement and repair of
wasted matter, so in the case of the capital which
takes shape as coal to feed an engine or to heat a
house. In the case of the latter as of the former,


240 THE SG0N0MIC8 OF DISTRIBUTION.

m

there is continuous waste (or "consumption" if
this ambiguous term be preferred), and continu-
ous replacement : the particular matter which
represents the capital is in incessant flux.

This is the true explanation of the mystery which
Bohm-Bawerk affects to find in the attribution of
** continuous use " to perishable goods. " It had to
be discovered that a hundredweight of coal can be
burnt to cinders on January 1, 1888, and yet be
* used ' uninterruptedly throughout the whole year,
and, perhaps, for five, ten, or a hundred years to
come; and what is best of all, that this lasting
use can always be bought for a particular price,
although and after the coal itself, and the right to
consume it to the last atom, has been given away
for another and a different price." ^ The "fiction"
which Bohm-Bawerk claims to be the animating
principle of this theory is only a " fiction " if con-
tinuous existence and continuous use were claimed
for the same material embodiment of a hundred-
weight of coal. But no such claim is preferred.
The economic continuity achieved by replacement
shifts the "capital" contained in the hundred-
weight of coal to a second, and a third, and an in-
definite number of hundredweights of coal, which
are the legitimate economic representatives and
successors of the first hundredweight and may
well survive for ten or a hundred years. So long
as the owner of the original hundredweight of

1 Positive Theory t p. 287.


BABQAINS FOB THE U8E OF CAPITAL. 241

ooal which was loaned stands out of his property,
his abstention is a legitimate economic cost, which
force preserves in economic existence and use a
hundredweight of coal or some other industrial
representative of it.

This is no fiction, but an important fact, the
understanding of which is essential to a compre-
hension of the working of modern industry. A
manufacturer maintains his stock of raw materials
or of fuel in the same way in which he maintains
his fixed capital, though his mode of book-keep«
ing may suggest a difference. Out of the gross
receipts from his sales he replaces the one as he
replaces and repairs the other. Or take the stock
of a retail store which does a regular trade, the
same quantity of the same kinds of wares wiU
constantly be there. The tobacconist's furnisher
who supplies on credit a small retail store, has
precisely the same claim to receive continuous
interest for that part of the capital which is in
cigars and pipes, as for that which takes the shape
of shop furniture and fixtures: the one is just as
permanent as the other, as cigars and pipes are
sold they are replaced by fresh orders just as the
fittings or furniture are replaced when they are
damaged or worn out. TIip. plfliryi^ f>f nhjoctivft

capital to c ontinuity of existence depend s not
upon continuity of su bstance^, but of ec onomic
|orm. ' This continuous existence of so-called
circulating capital also implies a continuous objec-


242 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

tive productivity which corresponds to that which
we discerned in fixed forms of capital. As a
machine continuously working is continuously
productive, so with the fuel which furnishes its
mechanical energy: when we recognise that the
existence of the fuel, as capital, is not dependent
on the permanence of any particular particles of
coal, we perceive that its use is continuously pro-
ductive of wealth, taking shape in the goods that
are manufactured by the machine. The same
must be said of the raw materials themselves
which, by the operation of machinery, are taking
serviceable shapes ; they, too, are functioning
productively in industry, and that productivity
is continuous so long as the supply of materials
which represents that form of circulating capital
is maintained.

Loans of commodities for which interest is paid
are often instanced in triumphant refutation of
the alleged need of objective productivity of
capital.^ A loan of corn for purposes of present
food, a loan of wine drunk as soon as it is bor-
rowed — these things may form sources of the
payment of continuous interest, though continuous
existence and productivity cannot be imputed to
them. What are we to say of such ca^es ? We
do not need to evade the issue by urging, as Bohm-
Bawerk, who raised the difficulty, enables us to

1 Cf. B5hm-Bawerk, Capital and Interest, pp. 214-269.


BARGAINS FOR THE IJlSE OF CAPITAL. 248

do, that such loans are not loans of capital^ and
that what is paid for their use is not true interest.
The fact is that, if the com lent is used to sustain
productive energy of labourers, so as to enable
them to produce more corn and out of this pro-
duce to repay capital and interest, the case is on
all fours with that of capital which functions as
fuel or as raw material, though it may for con-
venience be best to exclude consumptive goods
from ranking as economic capital ; the real source
and justification of interest is identical in the two
cases.

But what of the loan of wine which is drunk
as soon as borrowed, and cannot be regarded
as " consumed productively " ? Whence comes
the continuous interest that must be paid for this
loan so long as it remains an undischarged debt ?
No continuous use and no bbjective productivity
appears here. How, then, can interest arise?
The answer is that, if this case be taken by itself,
interest cannot arise at all, and the fact that it
cannot be paid is seen to rest upon the non-pro-
ductivity of this loan. Bohm-Bawerk, who ad-
duces this instance to refute the supporters of use
and productivity as the source of interest, is really
hoist with his own petard, for he cannot show

^ ** Consumptiye goods are not means of production ; they
are therefore not capital ; and the advantages which they con-
fer do not proceed from any productive power they possess.'*
(^I^gUive Theory of Capital, p. 272.)


244 THE BCONOMtCS OF BiaTMBUTION.

in such a case that the interest paid for the drunk
wine arises from a " ripening of future into present
goods" as his theory demands. In point of fact
the instance is invalid. No true interest can be
paid for such a loan ; if money interest is paid, it
is derived from the productivity of some other
factor of production. The case has no bearing
whatever on the theory of interest. The rent of
a piece of land must be paid even by a farmer who
is losing money, but we cannot on such a ground
deny that productivity of nature is a necessary
condition of payment of rent. If a borrower mis-
applies his capital, or converts it into wasteful
forms, he must pay that rate of interest which is
determined by the condition of its most effective
and productive economic use. If a piece of capital
is squandered, the interest must be paid out of the
productivity of some other piece of capital or some
other factor of production. If none such is avail-
able, eadit qu(B%tiOy the interest cannot be paid at
aU.

§ 6. I have found it necessary to dwell at length
upon this matter and to illustrate from the several
kinds of capital, because it appears to be thought
by many that modern representatives of the Aus-
trian School, Bohm-Bawerk in particular, have
destroyed the theory which would rank interest
with other payments, and have established a sepa-
rate origin and nature for this source of income.
Bohm-Bawerk has, at the close of his ** Positive


BABQAINB FOR THE USE OF CAPITAL. 245

Theory of Capital," ^ challenged economists to
prove the existence of an " ' enduring ' use of per-
ishable goods, for which interest is supposed to be
paid."

I claim, here, to have met this challenge and to
establish the "enduring use" and the enduring
objective productivity of the various forms of
capital as the source and the fundamental condi-
tion of the payment of interest. By showing the
economic provision for continuous replacement of
the matter in which a stock of " perishable goods "
is at any given moment embodied, I have removed
the difficulty which beset most of the older theo-
ries of dependence of interest upon productivity.*'

1 p. 296.

3 B5hm-Bawerk, in dealing with the arguments by which
Knies defends the view that interest arises from a durable use
in perishable goods, attempts to turn his opponent's position by
argumenta ad ridieulum which utterly eyade the issue. Admit-
ting (p. 289) that '*in a certain point of view the individual
goods replaced may be looked upon as if they were actually the
same individual goods which were given away in the loan ; they
have identically the same effect on the economical position of
the lender who receives them," he affects to deny that herein
i8 any evidence of ** continuous use " or ** productivity." One
might, he thinks, *' as well use the identity of perishable goods
to prove that oysters will keep fresh for ten years." It is, he
insists, really *'a question which must find its answer in con-
sidering the nature of the perishable good and the nature of the
use." But *Hhe nature of the use" is precisely what B5hm-
Bawerk does not consider. Had he done so he would have
perceived that the *' nature of the use" is such that the eco-
nomic consumption of a perishable form of capital replaces it


246 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

Interest is paid out of an increased product
whose existence requires the presence and ser-
vices of capital. But this increased product does
not necessarily constitute interest, nor does it pro-
vide a measure of the value of the use of capital.
A new machine introduced into a trade might
double the output, but of course it by no means
follows that the profit obtained by the owner of
the machine corresponds to the value of half the
increased output, still less to the value of the
whole of the earlier output. If the machine
were an absolute monopoly, its owner could
hold, against the encroachments of labour on
the one hand and the consumer on the other

by another form, and in addition yields a surplus which is
destined to figure as interest. This surplus (a net Nutzung)
arises from that productivity of use of capital which Bdhm-
Bawerk simply denies, but the non-existence of which he fails
to prove. He boldly asserts (p. 201) in following up Knies that
**the enjoyment of effects indirectly obtained from the con-
sumption of goods is not in the least a utility which we get
in addition to the consumption, it is just the utility we get
from the consumption,*' i.e. the consumption of a ton of ooal
cannot be productive in the sense that it not only 3rields a value
enabling another ton of coal to replace it, but a surplus value
which figures as interest. Whether Knies is technicaUy right
or wrong in his account of the indirect services arising from this
consumption, we have seen that the economic consumption of a
ton does yield a surplus over and above the ton which shall
replace it. Without such surplus we shall presently see there
exists no objective fund for payment of interest which is thus
thrown back upon a subjective fund that is impotent to explain
real interest.


BARGAINS FOB THE USE OF CAPITAL, 247

hand, the whole of the increased product, at a
value only lower than the value of the former
output by such fall of price as he deemed desir-
able to allow, in order to increase the sale of
goods to the point which would yield the maxi-
mum aggregate of net profits. But where the
machine is no monopoly, the competition of other
capitalists may oblige him to hand over part of
the increased productivity to consumers in large
reductions of price, or to labour in much higher
wages, receiving only a minimum profit which has
no fixed or directly assignable relation to the in-
creased productivity.

§ 6. The amount of the profit or the value of
this use of capital will, according to utility theo-
rists, be dependent, not upon the productivity of
each separate machine, but upon the subjective
utility imputed to the " marginal " machine, that
which is least effectively applied.

Needless to say, I reject this assertion that the
price and value of the use of capital is determined
by final utility. Utility and productivity are
essential conditions of interest, and interest may
be rightly regarded as paid out of increased pro-
ductivity; but the amount or proportion of the
added productivity required for profit is not to
be determined by confining attention to the util-
ity of capital.^

But a complete presentment of interest as a

1 This is Yon Wieser's mistake in Nixturcd Value,


248 THE ECONOMIC a OF DISTRIBUTION.

case of the general law of price requires not
only that the capital shall be coordinated with
other factors of production in relation to utility
and productivity, but also in relation to cost. If
the use of capital is what is sold and paid for by
interest, how are we to describe the " cost " from
which a price proceeds helping to determine that
price?

§ 7. No novel answer is required. Abstinence
still seems to me the best term to describe the
human effort which enables capital to be produc-
tive. Misunderstanding upon this theory of ab-
stinence as a cost arises from two sources: first,
as to the nature of the abstinence ; second, as to
the economic position of those who practise it.

Upon the nature of abstinence early economists
expressed themselves ambiguously. The absti-
nence which enables capital to function does not
consist in the original determination which leads
a saving person to abstain from making what he
can enjoy at once, in order to make something
which cannot be at once consumed, but which is
of service in production. That initial act is only
the beginning of the effort of abstinence. That
effort, or " cost," must be considered to be going
on all the time that capital is utilized ; the owner
of this capital must be conceived as exercising
a self-restraint which enables him to resist the
temptation to substitute for his capital a fund of
present enjoyment. This effort, moreover, need


BARGAINS FOB THE USE OF CAPITAL. 249

not be regarded as a purely negative action ; the
effort of self-restraint is as positive as any other
effort, and indeed has its psychical and physical
measurements, like the efforts which go out in
present labour-power. This effort of abstinence
is not, indeed, to be regarded as the efficient cause
of the productivity of capital; we cannot say in
so many words that abstinence is productive, but
this continued effort is plainly to be regarded ss
keeping capital in continuous economic life. If
that abstinence faU and owners demand instant
enjoyment, capital lapses, and its services are
withdrawn. Professor Marshall, I think, does
wrong to compromise the view by substituting
♦'waiting" for "abstinence." The human sub-
jective cost is the self-restraint implied by absti-
nence; the self-restraint as a psychical process
involves waiting, and waiting is but the imme-
diate condition which enables capital to operate
productively.

Precisely the same relation exists between ab-
stinence and the utility of capital which exists
between labour and the utility of commodities.
Philosophically, abstinence is to be regarded as a
form of human economic " cost " referable to some
common denominator with labour-power, and paid
for its sacrifice upon the same scale. Interest
from this point of view must be regarded as a
wage of abstinence. Abstinence must be regarded
as a form of painful effort voluntarily incurred by


250 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

individuals, paid for in interest out of a product
which owes its existence to the incurring of the
effort.

To some this is a " hard saying," which they
seek to deny, either by pointing to a possible
order of society in which individuals would not
be called upon to practise abstinence, or by allu-
sions to the Duke of Westminster and others
whose abstinence involves no effort, but consists
in a refusal to incur the positive discomfort of
increasing their consumption after all felt wants
are fully satisfied.

But neither of these objections is really sub-
stantial. The substitution of collective for indi-
vidual saving would not reaUy do away with
abstinence or even with the painful cost of it; it
would always be more pleasant, and perhaps more
immediately profitable, to a society to convert an
undue proportion of its energy into immediately
consumable goods, and so to make inadequate pro-
vision for the future. A rational society resisting
the temptation and making due provision for
future production must be held to practise absti-
nence and self-sacrifice analogous to that practised
by the individual now. In the administration of
such a collectivist society, no particular portion
of the increased wealth due to this provision
might be classed as interest ; the need of the old
terminology might have passed, but the thing
itself, the "interest," would be there.


BABQAINS FOB THE USE OF CAPITAL. 261

So also, under an individualist dispensation, as
long as the abstinence or postponement of gratifi-
cation on the part of any of those required to
contribute to the supply of capital involves a sac-
rifice, interest must remain. If, as some suppose,
a time might come when a sufficient number of
savers might consent to abstain in order to con-
sume more serviceably in the future the same
quantity or even a less quantity of goods, interest
in any positive shape might indeed be abolished ;
for if abstinence involved no painful effort, how-
ever much it might be serviceable in producing
wealth, it would receive no pay; it would be
among the bounties of nature which have no
value. ^

The fact that the Duke of Westminster suffers
no painful effort in saving, of course is beside the
point for all who have considered that waiting,
like all other *' costs," must be measured from the
marginal saver, and not from the saver whose
saving comes easiest. A large, an unduly large,
proportion of saving is performed by those whose
abstinence involves no pain or appreciable loss of
present enjoyment. Even the self-restraint of the
ordinary well-to-do saver may not greatly reduce
his current rate of enjoyment. But the total sup-
ply of capital employed in industry certainly con-

1 Subjective interest even then would not disappear. For a
discussion of the question, ** Is objective interest necessary ? '*
see Appendix at the close of this chapter.


262 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

tains some portions which are the result of a real
considerable sacrifice of present comfort. Not
only the superfluous income of the Duke of West-
minster, but some of the hard-won earnings of
John Smith of Oldham, are required to contribute
to the aggregate supply of capital. Now, while
the Duke might, and probably would, consent to
do his saying even if no interest was paid for its
use, John Smith probably would not consent* So
long as John Smith must receive 2^% in order
to evoke the genuine effort of abstinence, the
Duke must get the same payment for his formal
abstinence. It is economically necessary to pay
the Duke at the same rate at which we pay John
Smith, because, in the investment market, as in
any other market, there can only be one price
for the whole supply, that price measuring either
the cost of producing that portion of supply which
is produced most expensively, or the utility af-
forded by that portion of supply. The relation
between the cost of production to John Smith, and
the utility of the portion of capital which he fur-
nishes, determines the rate of profit. If it seems
unjust that the Duke of Westminster should be
paii for no actual effort or sacrifice incurred, we
must bear in mind two facts. First, our analysis of
the operation of bargaining has shown that the
distribution of gain in a bargain is not based on
any moral principle of distributive justice. The
injustice apparent in the payment of interest is


BABGAIN8 FOR THE USE OF CAPITAL. 268

also found in the payment of wages. A strong-
bodied labourer, who finds his work easy to per-
form, is paid as much as a weak-limbed labourer
who gives out a far more painful effort in the
performance of the same task. The first hour
of the working day, which may be nothing else
than a pleasurable exercise, is paid for at the same
rate as the last hour, which is exhausting and
injurious. So with saving, the effort of the mar-
ginal saver, not of the other savers, is the deter-
minant of profit from the cost side of the equation.
§ 8. "But," it may be further pressed, "the
analogy with labour is not complete, the labourer
whose labour is eaaiest at any rate gives out some
personal exertion; but the capitalist whose sav-
ings are only the self -accumulation of excessive in-
come does nothing at all." Now this statement is
indisputable, but the attack it suggests is misdi-
rected when it is applied to impugn the principle
of interest. The real gravamen of the charge,
against those whose interest is unattended by any
"cost" of abstinence, has reference, not to the
payment of interest, but to the modes by which
they have come into possession of the capital. In
other words, the frequent assertion that " the real
abstinence is of the worker and not of the capi-
talist," does not meet the point at issue. Sup-
posing it be true that the capitalist steals from the
worker a portion of the product and uses it for
capital, receiving interest for its use, a true bill of


254 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

indictment against him would rest, not upon the
wrongful receipt of. interest, but upon the prior
act of stealing the product of labour. If the in-
justice of paying interest to those who have earned
it by no effort be admitted, that injustice has no
special reference to bargains for the use of capital,
but must be located chiefly in prior bargains for
the sale of labour-power, or in other bargains
where the capitalist enjoys a superior power of
bargaining. Those who hold that capitalist em-
ployers forcibly extort from their workers a sur-
plus value, weaken their case when they enter a
specific attack against the payment of interest for
this surplus value after it has taken the form of
capital.

The economic necessity of interest and the law
of its payment is not really affected by the fact
that some of the capital for which interest is
received may have come wrongfully into posses-
sion of its owners.

§ 9. I claim by this argument to have shown
that the price of the use of capital, called interest,
is determined in the same way as the price of a
commodity in a market, i.e. by the establishment
of a relation between two bargainers, one repre-
senting final or marginal cost, the other final or
marginal utility. Abstinence and productivity
must be admitted each to contribute toward de-
termining the economic importance attached to
the use of a piece of capital.


BARGAINS FOB THE USE OF CAPITAL. 265

§ 10. According to this treatment, interest, the
price of capital-use, is determined like every other
market-price. There are, however, certain rea-
sons, other than those already named, which have
helped to remove the consideration of interest
from the general treatment of prices, and to apply
to its determination special laws and special ter-
minology. Both economists and moralists have
treated interest as a payment distinct in kind from
other payments. And it must be admitted that
certain conditions which apply to capital seem to
sever it naturally from other articles, the use of
which is bought and sold.

In the first place, until quite recent times in all
countries, and even now in all save the most de-
veloped countries, most loans of capital were not
for industrial purposes, but for consumption or
for some pressing temporary emergency. The
conditions of such loans have generally been far
removed from market competition of the kind
with which we have been dealing. The negotia-
tions of the money-lender with his client give to
the element of force or monopoly power a far
larger place than is commonly accorded in bargain-
ing. The practice of usury has thus been strongly
dissociated from ordinary dealings, and still yields,
even in advanced industrial communities, the most
striking instances of forced gains in the deter-
mination of a price. The lender has, from the
very nature of the case, so powerful an advantage


256 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

over the borrower, that both economics and ethics
hare been habituated to treat such bargains as a
thing apart. But though the balance is commonly
80 ill-adjusted for these bargains, they are not
intrinsically different from other bargains where
competition among sellers is closely restricted.

Again, when we turn to industrial capital, we
find that in most countries the great bulk of this
capital is used by its owners, and its profit is not
reckoned apart from the wages or the earnings of
management of a worker or an employer. The
proportion of savings which have been used for
investment outside the business of the owner has
been quite smaU until recent times, and many such
investments are determined by other than purely
competitive conditions.

Thus the conception of a fluid-market for the
investment of money in which two-sided competi-
tion exists, and where the lender cannot be deemed
to have any natural advantage over the borrower,
is of quite modern growth, and has not yet dis-
placed the conception of capital and interest asso-
ciated with the old order of things.

But in so far as the use of capital is the object
of a sale, whether on the older terms of usury or
in modern investments, the price is determined,
like the price of commodities, by the bargainers,
who represent final cost and final utility: the
supply of the use of a particular form of capital is
subject to the same laws determining its increase


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIU. 267

or decrease as the supply of land, or of labour, or
of goods.

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VHI.

Is Objective Interest Necessary f

There are those who think that even at the present
time objective interest is unnecessary as a stimulus to
saving, or, in other words, that there is no economic
cost in saving which requires a reward represented by
an objective increase in the quantity of goods returned
by the borrower. According to these thinkers, inter-
est is maintained by the option which an investor has
of buying land and drawing rent (H. George), or by
the further option of getting hold of a limited and
legalised " monopoly," money, and extorting usury for
its loan (M. FlUrscheim). If land and money were
removed from the field of investment, interest, they
maintain, would disappear. Those who hold this view
seem to me to weaken their case by limiting to land-
owning and money-lending the forms of investment
which support a positive interest. All other industries
which, by reason of the enjoyment of legal protection,
dependence upon land-use, or restricted competition,
due to purely economic forces, are enabled to tax the
consuming public, will, in as far as they are open to
investment, stand in the same position to support in-
terest as land and money. But if these forms of
protected industry were withdrawn from the field of
private investment, would interest disappear, or, in
other words, would the marginal saver lend without a
larger return ?


258 THE ECONOMICS OF BISTBIBUTION.

No direct or general answer can be given. The
question of the influence of reduced interest on saving
is often discussed as if the motives of the saver were
the only determinant. This is not so. The relation
of the motives of the saver to the amount of savings
socially required is the problem. It is a particular
case of " value," involving, as does every other case,
consideration of the relation of marginal cost to mar-
ginal utility.

Saving is due (1) partly to the self-accumulation of
surplus incomes not needed to satisfy any demand for
current satisfaction. A fall of interest, even to zero,
or below, might not appreciably affect this saving;
(2) partly to a desire to provide against old age, or
other infirmities, or to support a family. Saving
for such purposes is probably stimulated by a fall
of interest. If it is intended to expend the capi-
tal sum of the savings for these purposes, the rate
of interest will not have an important influence as
motive, but so far as it operates, a high rate will check
saving by enabling a somewhat smaller amount of sav-
ing, accumulating at interest, to achieve the desired
result. If, on the other hand, it is intended to make
provision, not by expending the capital, but by using
the income from that capital, a low rate of interest is
likely to evoke more saving because a larger capital
will be required to yield the necessary income.
Against this, however, must be set the consideration
that, if interest is so low that the task of accumulating
by saving sufficient capital to furnish it becomes too
difficult, or quite impossible, such saving will not be
undertaken. But when we remember how much saving


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII. 259

is often done in primitive industrial societies for these
purposes, and how much more would be done if politi-
cal and social conditions were such as to protect these
savings effectively, we shall be inclined to conclude
that a fall of interest is more likely to increase than
to reduce the aggregate of savings for purposes of
definite future expenditure.

(3) Savings are made by men of substance engaged
in industry, in order to extend their business, or gener-
ally to improve their financial position. In such cases
it is reasonable to hold that a high rate of interest will
stimulate saving. For, in the first place, the interest
upon capital, already in existence, must be regarded
as the portion of income out of which the largest pro-
portion of savings can be most easily made. Where
interest is high, the proportion of the general income,
which admits easily of saving, will be large. In spite
of the maxim "lightly earned, lightly spent,'' it is
reasonable to expect that a rise in the aggregate of
interest, or of any portion of income not earned by
direct labour, will be attended by an increase of sav-
ing. When a temjwrary rise of interest takes place
during some industrial boom, most careful business
men will try to reap a golden harvest while they
can, by using their abnormally high profits to extend
their businesses. A temporary, and even a normal and
gradual, fall of interest will reduce this sort of
saving.

Most economists,^ admitting the contrariety of mo-

1 This was not true of early economists, cf . Webb, Indus-
trial Democracy^ Vol. II, p. 622, etc. Mr. and Mrs. Webb,
however, are wrong in their interpretation of the view of Senior


260 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

tires, incline to the belief that on the whole a fall of
interest checks saving. But is this tme ?

If the Duke of Westminster, who saves because he
has a superfluous income, would save no less if interest
fell, while John Smith of Oldham, who saves in order
to provide against a rainy day, might save more, is
it certain that those who save with the more general
object of making' money would so far reduce their
savings as to bring down the aggregate savings of a
community below what was needed to furnish the
industrial capital required to maintain current con-
sumption, and to provide against increased consump-
tion in the future ?

Is it not possible that the automatic saving of sur-
plus elements of income, and such other saving as
was stimulated by a fall of interest, would suffice to
furnish the socially necessary capital ; in other words,
that the marginal saver might consent to save without
positive interest? It is at least conceivable. Much
would depend upon (a) the absolute amount of income,
(b) the distribution of wealth, (c) the condition of the
industrial arts, and (d) the nature of consumption,
(a) Where the income of the community is large, a
relatively large portion of this income may be taken
to be applicable to the satisfaction of weaker or less
urgent current desires. This portion of the income
of an individual or a class may, it is generally ad-
mitted, be saved at a low rate of interest. It is not
80 readily admitted that it may be saved at zero or
minus interest. Professor Marshall writes as if some

and McCuUoch. (Cf. N. Senior, Pol. Econ. 6th ed., p. 140,
and McCnlloch, Pol. Eeon., Pt. I, Ch. II, § 8.)


APPSNDIX TO CHAPTER VUI. 261

objective interest were essential because "the future
pleasure to be got in return for giving up a present
one could not be expected to be greater than it, but
rather to be less'' (IV, Ch. VII, par. 8). But this
is by no means true in cases where the present pleas-
ure given up is a little-valued luxury, and the future
pleasure placed in its stead is a necessary or an
important comfort. Professor Marshall here does not
exhibit the essentially subjective character of the
problem. A person who has just eaten a loaf will
consent to postpone the consumption of a second loaf
which he has in his possession, on condition that a
loaf or even less is given back to him at a future time
when he has no bread. For although the utility as a
future one is discounted, the satisfaction of the future
consumption of a necessary, when discounted, will be
greater than the present satisfaction of consuming a
superfluity. This is why, even in uneducated com-
munities, money and treasure are laid up in a stock-
ing. If a man found that he had ten years to live,
and that his income, £1000 for the first year, would
be £900 for the second, £800 for the third, and so
<m, he would, assuming his capacity of enjoyment and
Ids tastes to be steady, save at zero interest some of
his higher income in the earlier years when it would
have been spent in luxuries, in order to spend it in
comforts during the later years. He would not abso-
lutely equalise his expenditure over the period, for
such a course would imply that he did not discount
fature pleasures. The truth is, that, though he values
a present comfort higher than a similar future com-
fort, he values a future comfort higher than a present


262 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

luxury. It is evident from such a case that not merely
a zero but a uegative objective interest is possible,
because it is consistent with a positive interest which
forms the human motive of saving.

(b) The amount and the proportion of a community's
income which would be saved from such a motive at
zero interest or less would probably depend upon the
distribution of wealth, though it is not easy to assign
any general law for the influence of distribution upon
saving. At first sight, it would appear as if inequality
favoured saving, since it would set a larger total income
free for the purchase of superfluities or such luxuries
as had but a small hold upon the desires of consumers ;
in other words, a larger proportion of the income of
the rich might transcend their standard of comfort
and accumulate as savings. But further reflection
makes this position doubtful; for though the exist-
ence of a rich class may thus lead to the saving which
consists in self-accumulation of superfluous income,
equality of income would seem to favour deliberate
saving for old age and other emergencies. For in so
far as large incomes are drawn from the rent of land
or profits on investments, such incomes do not lapse
with old age or personal inability, and there is little
need for such a man to provide against special emer-
gencies. On the other hand, in a working community,
where an approximate equality of incomes existed, the
largest proportion of the people would be both enabled
and inclined to save. For the maintenance of a sound
standard of comfort for themselves throughout life
and for their family will involve an abstinence from
present luxuries for the sake of future necessaries or


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII. 263

prime comforts — that kind of saving whicli^ as we
have seen^ least requires an objective interest.

The total subjective interest of saving is greater
when the saving is applied to the future provision of
necessaries^ smallest when it is applied to the future
provision of luxuries. Therefore the aggregate sub-
jective interest attending a given amount of saving
would be greater where a larger proportion of it was
done by poorer persons than where a smaller propor-
tion was theirs. Thus it would appear that motived
saving should be larger where distribution was more
equal. How far this would be offset by the larger
unmotived saving of a wealthy class is of course
doubtful.

(c) Whether the quantity of saving which can be
induced without objective interest will suffice must,
however, largely depend upon the character of the
industry that is practised, or, in other words, upon
the relative importance of capital as compared with
the other factors of production. In a simple commu-
nity, where abundant material wealth might be drawn
by simple processes from rich natural resources, the
requisite amount of capital might be evoked without
interest ; whereas in a country with highly developed
machine-production, the same quantity of wealth might
require a much larger capital, some part of which would
not be brought into economic existence without objec-
tive interest.

(d) The imx)ortance of capital as compared with other
factors is not, however, merely a question of the devel-
opment of the productive arts, though it is sometimes
assumed that as civilisation advances, capitalism and


264 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

machine-produotion must occupy a part of ever grow-
ing promiiience. Much will depend upon the char-
acter of a progressive nation as expressed in modes
of consumption. A nation, which is dominated by a
constant craving for increased quantities of certain
common forms of material goods, will indeed assign
an ever increasing relative importance to machine-
processes and will exercise a correspondingly in-
creased demand for saving to be stored in material
forms of capital. A nation, on the other hand, whose
consumption, beyond a certain standard of common
material consumption, grows more qualitative and
demands the satisfaction of the taste ^d special
needs of its individual members, while it employs an
ever larger proportion of its income in demand for
intellectual goods, personal services, and other non-
material forms of wealth, may assign a place of rela-
tively diminishing importance to material capital, so
that the requisite saving might be done by those who
do not require the incentive of objective interest.

The problem is a highly speculative one, and no
adequate data exist for attempting a solution^ but the
considerations above stated entitle us to question the
generally accepted view that the marginal saving
always requires the stimulus of objective interest.
In a truly progressive society, where growing fore-
sight and precaution reduce the discount of future
utilities, where increased equalisation of incomes en-
ables a larger proportion of members to lay aside for
definite future uses, and where a coordinate improve-
ment in the arts of production and consumption enables
the production of routine material goods to be more


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIU. 265

easily achieved^ and consequently a larger proportion
of purchasing power to be directed to the demand for
consumables which lie outside of capitalist industry,
it is quite conceivable, perhaps even probable, that
the requisite amount of saving could be induced by
the stimulus of subjective interest alone.

The question whether private saving can be evoked
in sufficient quantity without objective interest has
too often been discussed with exclusive attention to
the "cost" side, the motives which actuate savers;
the influences operative upon demand are often ig-
nored. But the economic importance or value of the
marginal capital will be equally affected by forces
proceeding from both sides, as is the case in any
other market.


CHAPTER IX.

BOHM-BAWBBK'S P08ITIVB THBOBY OF OAPITAU

§ 1. The coordination of capital with nature
and labour as a factor of production, and of inter-
est with rent and wages as a price of a use of a
factor of production, differs so widely from a
recent theory of interest which has gained much
acceptance among economists, that it seems only
fair that I should make a formal investigation of
that theory and set forth the grounds for denying
its validity.

My rejection of the one-sided interpretation of
the general phenomena of value and price pressed
by disciples of the "marginal utility" school,
would necessarily involve a rejection of a theory
of interest which claims to be an application of
that same theory of value. The " Positive Theory
of Capital," however, if it were merely an appli-
cation of the marginal utility theory of value
to capital, treated as a productive factor along
with nature and laljour, would require no separate
consideration ; its strength and weakness would
be merely those of the general theory.

266


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 267

But the theory most closely associated with the
name of Bohm-Bawerk, by refusing at the outset
the position of a productive agent to capital, in-
volves an application of " marginal utility " which
differs widely in its results from its application
in the case of labour and nature. The "sub-
jective" elements in determination of value and
price will be found to be accorded a part essen-
tially different from and more important than
that accorded them in other cases of value and
price.

§ 2. It will be best to begin by a short presen-
tation of the cases by which Bohm-Bawerk un-
folds his theory in his work, the " Positive Theory
of Capital."

The simplest case is that of A, the owner of
jElOO, who, instead of using it now to buy con-
sumption goods, lends it to B, with the view of
receiving it again in a year's time and then using
it to buy consumption goods. £100 regarded in
terms of present consumption goods is more highly
esteemed than .£100 in terms of consumption goods
a year hence. Look at <£100 worth of goods a
year off — they look smaller. They look perhaps
only as large as <£96 worth of present goods.
Yet as the year passes to its close this quantity of
utility esteemed at <£96 rises to the full £100.
Thus the lapse of time, bringing future into
present goods, appears as a natural source of in-
terest, estimated in this case at nearly «£4. In-


268 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

terest arises because £100 in our hands now is
not the same as XlOO regarded a year hence.

So again the owner of a house or other durable
form of capital possesses "a sum of future uses
discounted according to their futurity" (XII).
Productive goods (i.e, raw material of manufac-
ture, machinery, land) are endowed at the begin-
ning of the year with a value imputed from the
utility of the consumption goods they are going
to make ; but since these goods are not existing
at the beginning of the year, their value is dis-
counted in our estimate of the machinery, etc.
During the year " future goods " ripen into " pres-
ent goods," and their increased value recoups the
original expenditure on capital and yields an
interest.

Take the case of a machine thus endowed with
a six years' life. At the opening of the first year,
the first year's utility is reckoned at 100. But
the total utility of the machine does not stand at
600, because its utility for the subsequent years
is estimated lower than for the first year. Let
the discount for the second year be 6% on the
estimate of the first year, and let the same rate
of discount be applicable to each following year.
Then the total utility viewed from the beginning
of the first year will be 100 + 96.23-1-90.70
+ 86.38 + 82.27 + 78.35 = 532.93.

At the beginning of the second year, each year's
valuation according to the first year's estimate


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 269

will have moved one step forward; the second
year upon last year's estimate, which was worth
95.23, has now become the first year and is worth
100 ; similarly with each succeeding year.

The total utility at the beginning of the second
year will therefore be 100+95.22 + 90.70 + 86.38
+ 82.27=454.58. In other words, the valuation
of the sixth year is knocked out, there being now
no sixth year. At the beginning of the third
year a similar forward movement of each year's
value takes place, the former fifth year having
disappeared. The total utility is now 100+95.22
+90.70+86.3=8 372,31, Similarly in the three
succeeding years, while he enjoys a current utility
of 100, the estimate of the total utility of the
machine is reduced by a less amount.

In other words, during the first year he has
realised a service worth 100, but taking stock at
the end finds he has lost only 78.85, because the
value represented by all the remaining years has
advanced.

At the beginning of the fifth year he has left
100 + 95.23, during the year he gets a service
worth 100, but at the end finds he still possesses
100, and so has only lost 95.23.

For simplicity, a definite life has been here
assigned to the machine, and so the amount of
what may be called "gross interest" is different
in the different years. If, however, a perpetuity
of life be secured for the machine, by means of a


270 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

fund for depreciation, it will easily appear that,
while the sum of the series of valuations now
reaches infinity, the net interest for each year will
be the same.

In Bohm-Bawerk's words, "The cause of net
interest " is " an increase of value of the future
services, which were previously of less value, but
during the period of the goods' use have pressed
forward into or toward the present."^

§ 3. This brief statement embodies the essence
of Bohm-Bawerk's teaching set forth at length in
his work, the "Positive Theory of Capital." His
chief points of divergence from the treatment
given in the last chapter may be stated in three
propositions, which I will first explain and after-
ward discuss.

1. Interest is not the price of the use of capital,
but the price of the purchase of present goods in
terms of future goods.a The underlying fact is
this, that "present goods are, as a rule, worth
more than future goods of like kind and number "
because, other things equal, present satisfaction is
valued higher than future satisfaction. A man
who has not present goods may buy them from
another man who has them, but he must pay for
them in a larger quantity of future goods. If the
loan is of money, " the borrower will purchase the


1 Positive Theory ofCapUaly p. 846.
> pp. 285, 286. Introduction, p.


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 271

money which he receives now by a larger sum of
money which he gives later. He must thus pay
an ^agio' or prsemium, and this ^agio' is interest.
Interest then comes in the most direct way, from
the difference in value between present and future
goods." ^ What. is sold, i.e. present goods, forms
the subject of a single act of purchase, though the
future goods paid for it are usually paid in instal-
ments at regular intervals over a term of time.
The annual interest, together with the principal
repaid at the end of the term of borrowing, forms
the single price of the present goods.

2. Bohm-Bawerk denies that the objective or
"technical" productivity of capital is essential
to the emergence of interest: the subjective
" productivity " which consists in the ripening of
future into present goods is deemed sufficient to
provide a fund for the payment of interest.

In the elaboration of his "Positive Theory,"
Bohm-Bawerk has given so much space and skill
to proving and illustrating the nature of the
technical productivity of capitalism that it is
likely that many of his readers do- not clearly
understand that his technical productivity is not
essential to his theory of interest. The most
serviceable portion of his work consists in the
analysis and explanation of the processes of
"roundabout production" with the object of prov-
ing the technical productivity of these processes.

1 p. 281.


272 TBE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N. \

This objective productivity — the increased quan-
tity of forms of wealth due to "roundabout"
methods — is both an incentive and a reward of
saving. It is one reason for postponing present
consumption that you are thereby enabled to have
more goods to consume in the future.

But from the examples we have given above,
and from the express statements of Bohm-Bawerk
himself, it is made manifest that interest does not
depend upon or require such objective produc-
tivity. The one essential feature, according to
his teaching, is the undervaluation of future as
compared with present goods. Objective or tech-
nical productivity is only one factor of this under-
valuation, and it is not indispensable. There are
three factors of this undervaluation, each of which
is, according to Bohm-Bawerk, by itself sufl&cient
cause for a difference in the value of present and
future goods, and an adequate reason why interest
should be paid. These factors are " the difference
in the circumstances of provision between present
and future, the underestimate due to perspective,
and, finally, the greater fruitfulness of lengthy
methods of production."^

§ 4. The first factor has reference to the real
services or satisfaction which the same goods
would yield now as compared with what they
would yield at some future time, and is con-
cerned with comparative capacity of enjoyment

1 Positive Theory^ p. 272.


POaiTIVB! THEOBT OF CAPITAL. 273

and comparative wealth at the two periods. The
second refers to the rate at which the same amount
of real services will be discounted by forethought
or intelligence. The third factor corresponds to
what is generally called "productivity of capi-
tal." It is, however, right to record the fact that
Bohm-Bawerk persistently repudiates the expres-
sion "productivity of capital" and refuses to
identify with it the factor which he denominates
"the greater fruitfulness of lengthy methods of
production." The significance of this "greater
fruitfulness" of capitalism consists, according to
him, in "the technical superiority of present
goods" rather than in the greater quantity of
products which arises from the productive use
of "present goods." The chapter in which this
"technical superiority of present goods" is un-
folded is the most diflScult portion of his treat-
ment, not from any obscurity in the texture of
the reasoning, but from the perversity with which
he labours to assign to time the productive power
commonly attributed to capital. He proposes at
the outset to substitute for " productivity of capi-
tal" what he terms "the facts." "These facts
are as follows : that, as a rule, present goods are,
on technical grounds, preferable instruments for
the satisfaction of human wants, and assure us,
therefore, a higher marginal utility than future
goods." ^ From the elaborate explanation which

ip. 260.


274 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

follows, this sentence appears to mean that a given
quantity of forms of capital or other productive
means in our possession now is superior both in
marginal utility and in value to the same quan-
tity to be possessed a year hence, because the
productivity of long-period production begins
earlier and is represented at any given time in
the future by a larger quantity of goods. This, of
course, is quite consistent with the ordinary view
of productivity of capital; capital which begins
now to be applied productively will be repre-
sented by a larger amount and a larger aggregate
value of goods in five years' time than the same
amount of capital which only begins to function
one year hence. The difference, however, be-
tween Bohm-Bawerk and the ordinary "produc-
tivity" economist is, that the former seems to
insist that the increased quantity of goods and
of value is due to a priority of time and not to
a productive use of the material forms of capital.
To this issue I shall presently return. It is here,
however, enough to point out that the third factor
to which Bohm-Bawerk alludes is virtually a pro-
ductivity of capital, though his explanation of
"the greater productiveness of lengthy methods
of production" assigns the efficient causality to
the length of time rather than to the "use" or
the "productive consumption" of the forms of
capital. However we explain it, this third factor
does yield an objective fund of wealth from which


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 276

objective interest can be paid. If, then, this third
factor were essential to all functioning of capital
and all payment of interest, Bohm-Bawerk's theory
would at any rate contain an objective fund of
productivity. But he denies explicitly that this
third faculty is essential, for he affirms that " each
of the three factors, independently of the others,
is adequate to account for a difference in value
between present and future goods in favour of
the former ; " ^ and this undervaluation of future
goods is continually put forward as the essence
of the problem of interest. In other words, the
change in human subjective valuations, which
takes place when the passage of time ripens future
goods into present goods, is assigned as in itself a
sufficient explanation of the payment of a sum of
objective goods in interest.

That Bohm-Bawerk does not deem the produc-
tive use of capital to be essential to the emergence
of interest is further attested by his treatment
of saving and abstinence. Of "saving," he says
that "it has its place, not among the means of
production, but among the 7notive% of production
— the motives whixjh decide the direction of pro-
duction." 2 Now, if our reasoning in the last chap-
ter is correct, we have shown that saving not only
determines the direction but the amount of pro-
duction, in that it enables ah increased productive
power to function in industry. This denial of sav-

1 p. 273. « p. 123.


276 THIS ECONOMICS OF BISTBIBUTION.

ing as a means of production is implicitly and
necessarily a denial of the productivity of capital.
The plainest denial of the productivity of capi-
tal, however, is conveyed in Chapter III where,
putting the question "whether capital is a third
and independent ' factor of production ' alongside
of labour and nature," he says "the answer must be
a most distinct negative." ^ " Capital has, first, a
symptomatic importance. Its presence is always
the symptom of a profitable roundabout produc-
tion. I say, deliberately, * symptom,' and not
'cause' or 'condition' of profitable methods of
production ; for as a fact, its presence is rather
the result than the cause."* From the context it
is evident this means not merely that some pro-
duction can be carried on without capital, and that
in this sense capital cannot rank on an equality
with nature and labour, but that in so-called
" capitalist production " capital is not a factor or
cause of production. A certain sort of "productiv-
ity " is admitted of capital. " It is first ' productive '
because it finds its destination in the production
of goods ; it is further productive because it is an
effectual tool in completing the roundabout and
profitable methods of production once they are
entered on; finally, it is productive indirectly
because it makes the adoption of new and profit-
able methods possible."^ But it is not an "inde-
pendent factor of production " along with nature

1 p. 95. « p. 92. « p. 99.


POSITIVE THEOBT OF CAPITAL. 27T

and labour, but only " the medium through which
the two original productive powers exert their
instrumentality. "

§ 5. It is not easy to deal with the mixed
thought embodied in these judgments. It is
true that capital cannot operate as an '^ indepen-
dent factor," but neither can nature or labour ; it
is true that these two latter factors have a claim
to be deemed " original " in a sense to which capi-
tal cannot lay claim, but for all that, as soon as
capital exists and functions as an integral part of
a more productive method, it is possible and per-
haps even necessary to treat it as a joint cause, or
at any rate " condition," of the increased produc-
tivity. It is of course possible to force language
so as to insist that capital is only a ^^ tool " by the
use of which the two original powers, nature and
labour, attain greater productivity, and to attrib-
ute the whole of this increased productivity
either to labour and nature, as Bohm-Bawerk
appears to do, or to labour alone, as socialism,
foUowing early English economists, does, or to
nature alone as did the physiocrats. But nothing
is gained by drawing such hairbreadth distinc-
tions between a cause and a condition, a condition
and a tool. If it is convenient, as it is generally
admitted to be, to separate capital from labour and
nature in tracing the organic operations of in-
dustry, and if, moreover, capital is admitted to be
necessary to the operation of the more productive


"^78 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

methods, no object is served by denying direct pro-
ductivity to capital ; the question whether it is an
" independent " factor is entirely beside the point.

The description of the actual place filled by
capital) which Bohm-Bawerk gives here and else-
where, amply justifies and even requires the attri-
bution of direct productivity to it, and so provides
a fund for the payment of real interest correspond-
ing to the fund which the admitted productivity
of nature and labour furnishes for the payment
of rent and wages. There is, of course, neither
"independent productivity" nor an independent
product, for the organic nature of cooperation of
the factors renders this impossible. But the ac-
count of the actual functioning of forms of capital
given by Bohm-Bawerk does not justify him in
placing capital on any different footing from
nature and labour in a theory of distribution.

§ 6. But while Bohm-Bawerk, as we see,
admits that capital as an instrument does assist
to increase objective productivity, he denies that
such objective productivity is essential to explain
the payment of interest. The "subjective pro-
ductivity," the ripening of future into present
goods by the passage of time, is deemed a sufficient
source of interest. Thus, time itself is given as a
sufficient explanation of the origin and payment
of interest.

Professor Smart puts this in unmistakable
terms : " The simplest case of interest is that in


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 279 *

which it appears in the loan for consumption.
Here we have a real and true exchange of a smaller
sum of present money or present goods for a
larger amount of future money or goods. The
sum returned principal plus interest is the *
market valuation and equivalent of the principal
lent. The apparent difference in value is simply
due to our forgetting that <£100 in our hands
now is not the same thing as <£100 a year hence.
This agio on present goods is interest. In other
words, interest is a complementary part of the
price — a part equivalent of the principal lent.
Apart altogether from an organised system of
production this agio would emerge, and has
emerged, as something claimed by the saving
from the unthrifty."^

§ 7. This passage summarising the extreme
claim of Bohm-Bawerk's theory will serve to bring
home to our minds its deficiencies. My first
criticism is that a theory which explains interest
by the rise of subjective valuation taking place
I when future goods become present goods, is inade-
quate, because it provides no fund for the pay-
ment of real or objective interest. I have already
shown that the instance of a loan of consumption
goods to an unthrifty person shirks the issue, be-
cause either the payment of interest is impossible
or it proceeds from the abnormal productivity of
some other factor : such payment is no more a
1 Preface to Positive Theory^ p. xi.


280 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

case of normal interest than the advance obtained
by a farmer to pay '* rent " which his land has not
justified, is a normal instance of rent. An ^^ agio "
of the kind Professor Smart describes, a mere rise

*of subjective valuation, cannot of itself explain
how a quantity of goods with an objective ex-
change value is paid as interest. A change of
estimate cannot of itself be capable of yielding au
increase of objectively measured values. The un-
dervaluation of a future as compared with a pres-
ent satisfaction provides in itself no economic
means of enlarging the objective source of the
future satisfaction when it comes. The lapse of
time cannot be held to cause forms of capital to
breed or grow so as to furnish an increased num-
ber for future enjoyment. Yet it is evident that
this objective interest is what we require to ex-
plain. If I lend goods represented by 100 pieces
and receive back at the end of the year goods rep-
resented by 105, no change of subjective valuation
will accoxmt for the existence of the extra 6,
Neither the lapse of time nor my change of view
will explain this origin. They must arise from
some industrial power to which the term "pro*
ductivity" may be given. Since it is admitted
that the service of capital as a tool is to lengthen

,the processes of production, and that "every
lengthening of the process is accompanied by a

/ further increase of the technical result," ^ in other

ip.84.


POSITIVE THEOBT OF CAPITAL. 281

words that "every extension of the productive
process leads to some surplus result," ^ it is
sorely wise to regard this surplus result as the
true source of objective interest. We have here
an objective productivity as a basis of interest.
If Bohm-Bawerk and Professor Smart had con-
fined their view to these cases of loans of capital
for productive purposes, they could at any rate
. have supported the theory of "Undervaluation" of
\ Future Goods as the source of "interest" by falling
©ack upon an objective product which should fur-
nish the goods to pay this interest. But the
hardihood of these instances in which this objec-
tive productivity is directly and purposely ex-
cluded invalidates this theory. Referring to
Professor Smart's statement, I cannot for one
moment admit that " apart altogether from an
organised system of production this agio would
emerge." If there were no organised system of
production, the subjective undervaluation of future
goods by a lender would in no wise enable him to
receive any material representative of this " agio "
in interest. Bohm-Bawerk's theory of production
idoes not require him to dispense with this " sur-
plus- product " of long-period production, and by
doing so he wrecks his theory. In a word, the
problem which appears to Bohm-Bawerk an es-
sentially "subjective" one is also objective.
Bohm-Bawerk and Professor Smart think that

3Lp. 86.


282 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

they have only to prove an emergence of subjec-
tive values, whereas they must prove an emergence
of objective values, or, other things equal, an
increase of products. Treatment of the problem
of loans in terms of money sometimes enables
them to evade this fact. The simple essential
setting of the problem of interest is not that of a
loan of £100, but the case where A lends B a saw
and receives back a saw plus a plank. Required
to explain the existence and pajrment of the plank.
§ 8. The truth seems to be that the part played
by time, and its treatment as a sort of agent of
production of value, is altogether misconceived by
Bohm-Bawerk. In his treatment of what he
terms, in a phrase which itself begs the question,
"the technical superiority of present goods,"
he asserts, "It is an elementary fact of experi-
ence that m^hods of production which take time
are more productive. That is to say, given the
same quantity of productive instruments, the
lengthier the productive method employed,
the greater the quantity of productivity that can
be obtained."^ Here he would make it appear
that the lengthiness of method is the cause of pro-
ductivity. He affects to have proved this, but he
has done no such thing. He has only proved that
time or "lengthiness" is one condition of those
roundabout processes which are technically more
productive.

1 p. 260.


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 283

The effort to attribute to lapse of time a causal
efficiency due really to the nature of the processes
which require time is most plainly manifested in
the following instance. "Suppose that, in the
year 1888, we have command of a definite quan-
tity of productive instruments, say, thirty days of
labour, we may assume something like the follow-
ing. The months of labour, employed in methods
that give a return immediately, and are, therefore,
very unrenumerative, will yield only 100 units of
product, but of course yields them only for the
year 1889 ; employed in a two years' process it
yields 280 units for the year 1890, and so on
in increasing progression ; say 350 units for 1891,
400 for 1892, 440 for 1893, 470 for 1894, and 500
for 1895."!

Here time is made to appear a cause of objective
productivity. But what are the facts ? It is not
the duration of the process which gives the in-
creased yield, but the nature of the processes
which take a longer time, i.e. the employment of
concrete forms of capital which are more pro-
ductive instead of concrete forms which are less
productive. Bohm-'Bawerk shirks the issue by tak-
ing for his example " 30 days of labour," a thing
which is not capital, and which is expressed in
terms of time. Let him take concrete forms of
capital and he will have difficulty in evading the
conclusion that " the technical superiority " consists

1 p. 261.


iv-


284 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

not in duration, but in the industrial character of
these forms. ^

When Bohm-Bawerk proceeds to claim ^ for dura-
tion of time increased value as well as increased
technical productivity, he falls into another error.
In . oouLutio,. J . theory of in«r«t he i,
required to prove that this time process yields
objective or exchange value. What he actually
claims for it is an increase of subjective value, or,
to quote his words, ^* If it puts more means of sat-
isfaction at our disposal, it must have a greater
importance for our well being." But this greater
" satisfaction " is only one factor in the attribution
of greater exchange or objective value to goods.

The confusion of thought, which is involved in
this whole attempt to make time do something
which it cannot do, is most curiously illustrated
in the final paragraph in which Bohm-Bawerk sum-
marises the "positive result" of his argument.
"The relation between want and provision for
want in present and future, the undervaluation of
future pleasures and pains, and, the technical ad-
vantage residing in present goods, have the effect
that, to the overwhelming majority of men, the sub-
jective use value of present goods is higher than
that of similar future goods. From this relation
of subjective valuation there follows, in the market

^ The tabular illustration on p. 262 only makes the same
assumption more elaborate,
a p. 263.


P08ITIVI! THEOBT OF CAPITAL. 286

generally, a higher objective exchange value and
market-price for present goods.'* ^ Passing over
the assumption contained in the last sentence, that
objective values are determined by the subjective
valuation of one of the two parties to an exchange
(the root fallacy of the Marginal Utility School), I
wish to call attention to the astonishing "argu-
ment" of the earlier sentence in which "the
undervaluation of future pleasures and pain" is
made a cause of the fact that " the subjective use
value of present goods is higher than that of
similar future goods," i,e. undervaluation is the
cause of undervaluation. .

The involved reasoning which arises in the vain
effort to impute objective results to purely subjec-
tive causes almost inevitably lands its author in
patent absurdities like this.

By stating the problem of interest as consisting
in the undervaluation of future goods, time is rep-
resented as a producer of values by undoing this
undervaluation. The point of view which the
familiar process of discount presents lends itself
not unnaturally to this subjective view of inter-
est which assigns to time itself a productive
power. But the attribution of such power to
time is quite erroneous. The change of subjective
valuation which comes with time indisputably
plays a part in determining the price of the use of
capital, or, in other words, how much of the total

1 p. 281.


286 THS ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

increase of objective productivity due to the
cooperation of capital with the other factors shall
be paid to the owner of the capital ; but the part it
plays is entirely different from that assigned to it
by Bohm-Bawerk. In the pages of the "Posi-
tive Theory" itself are expressions which might
have put its author on the right track. "The
disadvantage connected with the capitalist method
is its sacrifice of time"^ surely suggests that
time is a cost of capitalist production rather than
a creative force. So, again, we are told that capi-
talism "demands a sacrifice of time, but it has
an advantage in the quantity of product," which
surely suggests the entire truth that this "ad-
vantage in the quantity of product," affords a
fund out of which payment of interest is made for
the " cost " involved in " sacrifice of time."

§ 9. Not merely are we not justified in regard-
ing time as capable of the technical productivity
required to explain real interest, but we cannot
regard it as creative of a rise of subjective values.
Because my valuation of a house is £100 for this
year, £95 4«. for next, and because in a year's
time I shall value at £100 what I had valued at
£95 4»., Bohm-Bawerk insists that by lapse of
time a piece of goods, value £95 4«., has added
6 % to its value.

We have already noted the fallaciousness at-
tending the treatment of interest as payment for
the use of capital as valued in money. Since the

1 p. 82.


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 287

money value of capital is only obtained by capi-
talising the interest, this process assumes the very
point at issue, namely, the growth of value. For
if I receive for the use of forms of wealth, during
the past year, the sum of £5, 1 proceed to do a
little sum which enables me to say that what I
lent was worth £100 at the beginning of the year
and £105 including the interest at the end. But
by saying this, I beg the question of a growth of
value by my method of reaching the £100. I
only know that what I lent has been returned
with an addition of ^; I cannot, however, assume
that the increased quantity of goods returned has
^ greater value, either subjective or objective,
than the smaller quantity originally loaned, for
this is to assume an absolute stability or inherency
of value in material forms. I am not logically
entitled to assert that the bargain by which I get
£105 goods instead of £100 is a growth of value
from £100 to £105, for if instead of getting back
£106 I only get back £102, I should be obliged
to say that what I lent was not worth £100, but
a smaller sum of money. In other words, the
value of the capital is not a prime datwm^ but is
calculated from the interest by a method which
assumes that an increase of value has been brought
about by the process of lending. This increase of
value I suggest is due to the greater technical
productivity which Bohm-Bawerk himself admits
of capitalism.


288 THX XCONOMICa OF DISTRIBUTION.

§ 10. In other words, the ^^ ripening of fntnie
into present goods " hy process of time is really a
eOBt theory of interest. The positive and even the
productive complexion it puts upon the familis^
phenomenon of discount or undervaluation must
not deceive us. The statement of undervaluation
is simply the quantitative statement of the cost of
abstinence which involves time as a condition of
its operation. If I value the services of a house
at JSIOO for this year, my preference of present
to future enjoyment may lead me to value next
year's services at £95 48. But when next year
actually comes my £95 48. valuation has risen to
«filOO. But to say that I now esteem the current
year's services at £5 more than I esteem the pro-
spective services of next year is only another and
a less obvious way of saying that I estimate the
loss or pain of a year's postponement of satisfaction
at £5. If I could take out the whole satisfaction
at once, the man who shall persuade me to post-
pone it must pay me what the market determines
to be the price of this effort of abstinence or post-
ponement. It is evident what time does here, and
what it does not do. It does not create either
increased product or increased value, but does
constitute a condition of the cost which, by affect-
ing the supply of capital, helps to determine the
price of the use of that capital, or from the stand-
point of the capitalist the price of the effort of
abstinence. I have already shown that this absti-


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 289

nence is not a merely negative force, but one
which must be ranked as positive and productive,
at any rate in the sense that it is essential to the
existence and so to the technical productivity of
capital.

Undervaluation, or discounting of future values,
is simply one way in which the cost of abstinence
presents itself to the mind of the person who
saves or lends. It is not a source of interest, it
affords no explanation of the possibility of objec-
tive interest, it is simply one determinant of the
amount or rate of interest. As an economic
factor in the determination of price it ranks as a
subjective cost with the subjective cost of labour,
and as an expense of production must be defrayed
out of the extra product due to the productive
cooperation of the capital and labour.

§ 11. It is to be clearly understood that I do
not dispute any of the facts of Bohm-Bawerk's
statement of undervaluation, or that they have a
true bearing upon the problem of interest. Where
I join issue with him is that while he admits the
productive services of forms of capital, he refuses
to regard these services as the root and indispen-
sable condition of interest and finds instead a
purely subjective cause.

Let me briefly rehearse my objection to his argu-
ment as to the payment of interest for use of dura-
ble goods. He says, " If the current year's use of
a machine is worth 100, and the machine is capable


\


290 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

of doing work of equal quality for five years more,
the machine is not worth 6 x 100, but 100 + 95.28
+ 90.70 + 82.27 + 78.85 = 632.93." i The capi-
tal valuation of the machine at the beginning will
be 532.93 ; but, during the six years it lasts, the
total use or " consumption " of the machine will
work out at an aggregate value of 600. The
difference between the two sums affords a fund
out of which interest is payable. This fund ap-
pears to arise from the ripening process of time.
Now I dispute none of the facts in this statement,
but I assert that they do not furnish the required
explaoiation of the economic phenomena which
actually occur when a loan of durable goods is
made. As a matter of fact, when a loan of a
machine or other durable goods is made, the terms
are such as to secure a permanent life for the
machine ; interest does not fructify during six
years, but for a perpetuity. According to Bohm-
Bawerk's setting, it is possible to obtain the exact
value of the capital by adding up the value of the
services of six years ; in actual industry, though
the capital possesses an exact known value at the
outset, its value for purposes of loan or invest-
ment is not calculated by consideration of its gross
services during the time it lasts, but by capitalisa-
tion on the basis of the value of the net interest,
after provision for its continuous existence has
been made. If A rents to B a house or a machine,

ip.343.


POSITIVE THEORY OF CAPITAL. 291

he reckons the capital value of this loan by capi- ^
talising the rent or net interest, provision being .
made to repair or replace the house or machine.
Now, since an indefinite or eternal life is thus se-
cured to the house or machine, it cannot be pre-
tended that the capital value can be obtained by
adding the yearly* values, for these would come
out as infinity. Bohm-Bawerk's explanation of
interest- igpaores, in the first place, the actual in- y^
dustrial services or " productivity " of the capital
forms which are used, and whose use or consump-
tion do actually furnish the goods whose " value "
is returned as yearly interest to the owner, and
fiipids the cause of interest in what is really a con-
dition of this productivity. In the second place,
it posits a fixed duration to the functioning of ^
form of capital which is discordant with indus-
trial facts. For the actual phenomenon which
seeks explanation is the eternity of interest paid
for the loan of a material form whose existence
appears to be perishable. I have tendered an
explanation of this phenomenon by showing that
the economic existence of a material form of capi-
tal is not really terminable, but that it exerts a
productive force which can secure for it a per-
petuity of existence, and leave a margin of prod-
uct from which perpetual interest may be paid.
By ignoring the " productivity " of the services of
capital, which he yet generally admits to exist,
and confining his attention to a merely subjective


292 THM JBCOirOMICS of DIBTBIBUTION.

phenomenon, — the change in the mind of the
lender, — Bohn-Bawerk cuts himself off from all
possibility of explaining the real problem of a
perpetuity of net interest.

He rightly insists that, in order to support this
theory of interest derived from productivity, it is
necessary to prove a net surplus product after pro-
vision against wear and tear of capital, what he
terms a " net Nutzung." I claim to have shown,
by illustration from each of the several classes of
capital forms, that this surplus product or "net
Nutzung " does exist.

Thus, and thus alone, is it possible to place capi-
tal on the same footing with nature and labour.
In the case of these two factors, a net surplus
product, after replacement of wear and tear, is
admitted. The ordinary finance of the business
world enables us to attribute to capital a direct
productivity analogous to that of nature and la-
bour, of such size that, after similar provision for
replacement has been made, a positive surplus may
exist for payment of net interest.

Time is a condition, on the one hand, of the
effort of abstinence which keeps as productive
goods a value which would otherwise be consumed
as consumption goods; and, on the other hand,
of the productivity of the forms of capital which
this abstinence supports. The productivity thus
obtained furnishes a net product which forms a
material economic fund out of which real interest


POSITIVE THJEOBT OF CAPITAL. 298

may be paid ; the amount of this real interest is
determined directly by the relation between the
marginal cost of the abstinence, and the mar-
ginal utility of the " use of capital," which is the
effect of that abstinence.

§ 12. In thus repudiating the explanation of
Bohm-Bawerk, we do not return to a mere ** pro-
ductivity" theory of interest. Productivity is
not to be termed the efficient cause, but only the
essential material condition of interest. Produc-
tivity of capital is consistent with the non-emer-
gence of interest. The valiLe and price of use of
capital emerge, as do all values and prices, from j
the interaction of marginal cost and marginal
utility of that which is bought and sold.

The representation of the problem of interest,
as residing in an exchange of present against
future goods, does not accord with the facts of
commercial life, and throwing the whole issue
upon conditions of subjective valuations, or differ-
ences in the mental vision of buyers and sellers, it
furnishes no fund for the payment of objective in-
terest. What is actually bought and paid for by
net interest is use of capital, and, in order that
payment may be made, that use must find expres-
sion in perpetual productivity.

I may, in conclusion, sum up my objections
against Bohm-Bawerk's theory of Interest, in these
four sentences : -^—

1. By den3dng the necessity of attributing ob-


294 TEE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

jective productivity to capital, he provides no fund
for the payment of objective interest.

2. He furnishes no explanation of the actual
phenomenon of the eternity of interest.

8. He misrepresents the transaction as an ex-
change of present against future goods, making
the issue one of subjective valuation alone.

4. The undervaluation of future goods assigned
as the economic cause of interest is in reality a
" cost " of the functioning of capital, and furnishes
one side of the forces which determine the value
and the price of use of capital.


CHAPTER X.

THB THBOBY OF SUBPLUS VALUE— IT9 INFLUENOB

UPON DISTRIBUTION.

§ 1. If the analysis of economic bargaining
given in the preceding chapters is correct, it can-
not fail to have an important corrective influence
upon the theory and the practice of Distribution.

Although the direct treatment of ethical con-
siderations is still commonly ruled out of economic
theory, it has always been tacitly assumed by
laissez-faire economists that the laws regulating
distribution normally assign to each owner of a
factor of production that portion of the product
which is economically necessary to evoke and
maintain the efficient operation of his factor, and
nothing more.

It is claimed that competition, or the free play
of enlightened self-interest, among the owners of
capital, organising ability, and labour-power, pre-
vents the capitalist undertaker or the labourer
from receiving any more than the minimum so-
cially necessary under existing circumstances to
secure the service he is capable of rendering.
Any interference with the operation of this natural

295


296 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION. -

law has been represented as slight and transitory
— a necessary friction for which special allowance
is to be made. There are no powerful or enduring
economic forces which enable the owners of any
class of land, labour, capital, or business ability to
secure more than the necessary minimum. The
freedom of competition among the owners of the
several factors, if not absolute, is such as to
provide a process of filtration by which the whole
advantage of improvements in methods of produc-
tion of wealth passes into the hands of the oon-
sumer. ^' It is the consumer who is the residual
claimant in the results of modern industry." ^

Each producer gets his minimum ; the rest goes
to the consumer, and as all are consumers, the
operation of the Law of Distribution is even con-
formable to a general sense of justice or of social
expediency. Some little hitch rises in the mat*
ter of economic rent of land; from Adam Smith
downward the laizsez-faire economists felt that the
power of the landowner to reap where he had not
sown failed to harmonise with the moral symme-
try which, in spite of occasional disclaimers, they
really esteemed as a buttress of economic doctrine.

But, after all, rent did not affect directly the
consumer ; it did not enter into price, nor did it
defraud labourer or capitalist, who got their due
wage and profit.

Taxes levied upon the agricultural classes and

^ Hadley, Economics^ p. 318.


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 297

more or less upon manufactures and commerce
tended to settle upon rent, and an extension of
this poUcy might enable the community to remedy
what might seem to be a natural injustice.

It is curious to note how seldom economists
since Rioardo have taken the trouble to probe
the loose and flabby notion which represents the
consumer as a fourth party in the act of distribu-
tion, in whose interests the antagonisms of land,
labour, capital, find an ultimate harmony. Pro*
fessor Hadley speaks of the consumer as ^Hhe
residual element,'' seeming to imply that all con*
sumers must be equally able to hold and to enjoy
the benefits of improved industry which reach
them in the shape of lower prices.

Now if the labourer, in his capacity of con-
sumer, is able to hold all the adva.ntages of falling
prices, then his real wages, the only source of the
money income which he spends, are capable of
rising indefinitely above the necessary minimum.
The same holds of the interest of the capitalist.
Again, if classes of labourers and capitalists are
necessarily able to maintain rates of real wages
and real interests beyond the minimum, they will
exert their power as producers, and this rise of
real wages and interests would prevent prices from
falling, for it would imply a stability in those
expenses of production which admittedly enter
into price. The forces upon which the laisaez-
faire economist relies to prevent capital and


298 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

labour from taking more than minimum profits
and wages, will seem to prevent labourer or capi-
taUst from holding the advantage assigned to them
as consumers.

The theory of the incidence of taxation suffers
from this same confusion. It is often urged that
a tax laid upon some product or some factor of
production will be shifted on to the consumer
through a rise of prices. But this, though often
true, is no ultimate istnalysis. For it will be ad-
mitted that consumers can in some cases throw
back the tax upon some body of producers. The
only consumers who must be deemed taxable, gpia
consumers, are those in receipt of a guaranteed
money income; those whose income is derived
from and fluctuates with the value of some factor
of production will be liable to have their income
affected by a tax which is imposed upon them in
an enhanced price of commodities. It would be
necessary to investigate the sources of income of
each consumer closely in order to ascertain how
• far he ultimately bore a tax which raised the price
of the commodities he consumed. The ability to
throw back a tax upon producers and the rapidity
of such rejection are matters for detailed practical
inquiry. But in a theory of Taxation every part
of a tax must in its ultimate incidence be traced
to some class of producers, if we are to understand
its effect upon the distribution of wealth.

In a word, for purposes of the theory of Distri-


THE THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 299

bution, the antithesis of producer and consumer is
a false one. The problem of distribution is that
of the payment of owners of factors of produc-
tion, and whatever advantage may actually accrue
to each or any of the producers, by reason of a fall
of prices to consumers, must be reckoned as a part
of the real rent, wages, or interest which they
receive.

We are entitled to dismiss altogether the con-
sideration of the consumer in dealing with the
theory of distribution, provided that we deal with
real payments for the use of factors of production.

§ 2. It is, however, the consideration of the
composition of a price which brings out the differ-
ence between our theory and the ordinary theory
of English text-books. According to the latter,
the price of a consumption good is entirely resolva-
ble into a number of expenses of production at the
several stages of production which represent the
marginal cost of the labour and capital there em-
ployed. Now the whole tenor of our analysis has
gone to show that the price of a commodity is not
exhausted by the payment of these various mini-
mum money-costs of production.

Let me briefly rehearse the method of reasoning
adopted.

First, by analysis of the process of determining
a price of commodities in a market, we recognise
the existence of an element of price which was
not explained by competition, which was not nee-


300 THE EOONOMlCa OF DISTRIBUTION.

essarj to induce the final pair of bargainers to
complete that bargain whose terms set the price
for the market. In other words, we recognised the
actual existence of an element of ^^ forced gain/'
something not paid for as a ^^ cost " of production,
but yet forming an expense.

Next, resolving the price of a commodity into
the several prices of uses of factors of production
which entered into it, we investigated the condi-
tions of determining the price of the use of land.
Here we saw that while differential rents of land
did not enter into price, the worst land in use for
most specific purposes yielded a positive rent, that
this marginal rent being necessary to evoke the
use of land for this purpose must enter into price,
and that the price of a consumption good will
contain various marginal rents of land.

Investigating in similar fashion the determina-
tion of the prices for use of capital and labour,
we found that they did not differ essentially from
land in yielding marginal rents ; that both capital
and labour could rightly be divided into practi-
caUy non-competing groups, from which emerged
a number of marginal class interests and wages,
which entered into price.

Under the logical system of laissez-faire eco-
nomics, there was properly no social problem of
distribution to be solved, unless it were the ques-
tion of the advisability of permitting private own-
ership of land ; the complete harmony of capital


THB THEOBT OF SURPLUS VALUE. 301

and labour was secured by the competition of
owners of capital and labour-power, which would
prevent the existence of any surplus beyond the
necessary payments to the capital and the labour
employed under the least favourable circumstances.
Even allowing that the operation of the law of
increasing returns would yield to the larger busi-
nesses a gain over and above this minimum inter-
est, it would be difficult to regard this differential
gain as a cause of discord between capital and
labour, for it would not be possible for the la-
bourers employed in these more profitable busi-
nesses to obtain a higher price for the sale of their
labour-power than those employed in the least
profitable businesses. So long as it is held that
only the bare money costs of marginal capital and
labour enter into price, while rent of land is alto-
gether excluded, the problem of distribution is of
a mechanical and business nature which cannot
rightly engage the feelings or activities of the
owners of factors of production.

The analysis offered here entirely changes the
character of the problem. The prime distinction
is no longer interest, wages, and rent, but between
costs of 'subsistence of various factors of produc-
tion on the one hand, and a variety of marginal
and differential " rents " supported by various de-
grees of economic necessity upon the other.

It is of the first importance to understand what
is respectively comprised under these two heads.


302 THE ECONOMIC 8 OF DISTRIBUTION.

Distribution is achieved, excepting the cases of
annuitants, officials with fixed salaries, etc., by a
series of variable payments for the use of labour-
power,^ forms of capital, or land. These pay-
ments are made at each stage in the processes of
production out of moneys received from the sales
of goods or services.

The money paid as the price of retail goods is
partly used by the shopkeeper to maintain his re-
duced stock and his premises, etc., partly to pay
wages, profit, rent for the factors of production
he employs. The merchant from whom he pur-
chases goods effects a similar distribution, and so
does the manufacturer, the farmer, and the other
responsible managers of the earlier processes of
production. Thus the circulation of the money
said to be " spent " is achieved: the money which,
being " saved," is used by the saver to buy new
forms of capital, undergoes a similar process of
distribution.

Thus the aggregate payment for a supply of
commodities is resolvable into a number of sepa-
rate payments for the use of the factors that are
engaged in the several processes of production.
Now the central problem of distribution consists

1 In this general setting of the Theory of Distribution, I have
thought it best to include under wages all kinds of payment
for industrial work, including earnings of management, and
much, if not most, of what is commonly included under profit,
because no different principle is involved in the determination
of these earnings.


THE THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 303


in the varying degrees and conditions of necessity
attaching to the different parts of these payments
for use of factors of production.

In restating this problem a simple diagram
will help to mark the distinctions. AI represents
the total supply of a f actor, either land, labour,


k^


II


B


kCMfldkLBENTiO/

ao/

L 80B8I6TEM0E 20/


or capital, toward a specific market, comprised of
units AB, BC, CD, etc., with varying degrees of
value, HI being the marginal or least valuable
unit of supply. The total payment for the use
of this factor of production is the figure on the
base AI. Following our analysis we may repre-
sent this payment as divisible into the following
parts : the lowest portion will be a payment of
subsistence or maintenance, the sum just sufficient


804 THE ECONOMICS OF DIBTBIBUTIOlSr.

to secure the economic use of the unit in default
of any alternative use. This amounts in the
present case to 20«, per unit of supply. In the
case of labour we posited a subsistence wage of
15«. for labour of lowest skill ; in the case of capital
a minimum interest of 2^ % . In the case of land
a payment infinitesimally small would, in theory,
be able to secure the use, so that here the line KL
would fall so as to stand only just above AI.

In the case set forth in our diagram the worst
or "marginal" portion of supply gets something
more than this " rent " of bare subsistence. The
" rent" it actually receives, the " marginal rent," is
40«. instead of 2.0«. It can obtain the additional
20«. chiefly because one or more of the units of
supply have an alternative use open to them from
which they could earn a high differential rent.
Say that AB has such alternative use open to it.
In order to secure AB for the supply in question
it may be necessary to pay it at the rate of 65«.,
because its alternative use would yield 64«.

This explains the major part of what figures on
the diagram as marginal rent, but not the whole.
For if AB only got 668., HI, the marginal unit of
supply, would only get a marginal rent of 30«.
instead of 408., for we have seen that the actual
margin is determined (other things equal) by the
necessary price of that portion of supply with an
alternative use, which we call the "determinant
portion of supply. " Now if AB could only get


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 805

66«. and HI 30«., the dotted line would represent
the margin.

But we have seen that although AB could be in-
duced to contribute to supply at 65«., he may for all
that be able to claim 75«., if in the bargaining for
a price he is the stronger party, and can claim a
"forced gain/' The actual margin of 40«. in our
diagram supposes that AB is in a position to take
this forced gain of 10«., being able to secure for
his services not 65«. but 15s, If he has this
power, each of the other contributors to supply
will profit by it, since their payment is deter-
mined by his. If he can take 758., the next
productive unit can get 7.0«., although he may
have no alternative use open to him and would
therefore, if necessary, have been willing to accept
a far lower price. The determinant portion of
supply fixes the marginal, rent or price. In our
present case the marginal rent is 40^., of which
20s. is payment of subsistence, lO^. dependent
upon an alternative use of some portion of supply,
and lOs. a "forced gain." In addition to the 40«.
at the margin, superior units of supply can take
differential rents marking the degrees of their
superiority.

Now we have seen that all these payments are
" necessary " in the sense that they issue naturally
from processes of competition and bargain in
which each competitor and bargainer seeks to
get the maximum gain for himself.


306 THS ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

But they are not equally necessary in the sense
that they are payments essential as economic
motives to the application of the productiTe force
for which they are paid, and cannot be refused or
diverted without interference with the present
course of industry.

The issue is fraught both with theoretical and
practical importance. It can be best approached
from the standpoint of taxation. Power to resist
taxation is the most efficacious test of economic
necessity. Let us therefore inquire what is the
relative ability of subsistence payment, marginal
rents (comprising forced gain and a differential
rent), and differential rents to resist direct and
indirect taxation.

The taxability of subsistence payments need not
detain us long. True wages of subsistence for
labour or for capital cannot be taxed : non-taxi-
bility is in reality implied in the very nature of
a subsistence payment. It may, however, be
briefly illustrated thus. Let us suppose that the
marginal wage of unskilled labour in a town
stands at a 159. subsistence wage, and that an
attempt is made under an old-age pension scheme
to stop 1«. per week out of wages as a tax con-
tributory to a pension. What happens? There
exist ex hypothesi unskilled labourers who, if the
real wages represented by 15«. are reduced, will
refuse to contribute to the supply of labour.
These " determinant owners of supply " would go


TMS THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 307

on tramp, cadge, beg, or steal, if 15«. is not
guaranteed to them. If employers, therefore,

^were empowered to stop 1«. out of the 16«.
wages, the refusal of these men to work would
reduce the supply of labour, and, since the effec-
tive demand must be presumed to be constant, the
price or wages will rise and the 1«. per week will
be stopped out of 16». instead of out of 15«., this
rise of money wage preventing the withdrawal of
labour from assuming any considerable propor-
tions. At this stage it appears as if the employer
must pay an extra shilling, representing the tax,
out of his own pocket. If his business is earning
for him a higher rate of profit than is economically
necessary to support the capital and skill engaged

In it, the tax will probably be defrayed, in large
part at any rate, out of these surplus profits, as it
will probably not pay him to raise prices which
are not fixed by conditions of close competition.
If, however, the employer's profits are already cut
down to a "subsistence" rate, the tax cannot be
defrayed by him. If the trade is one into which
scarcity rents of land enter as an expense of pro-
duction, a portion, at any rate, of the tax may at
this stage be shifted on to the landowner through
a pressure by tenants operating through reduction
in demand for land-use. But it is safer to assume
that an increased wage-bill, shared by all the
employers in a trade, will oblige them to raise the
prices of the goods they sell, and pass the tax on


808 THB ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

to the consiuner through enhanced prices. But
we have already seen that the consumer is a purely
fictitious halting-place in the theory of Distribu-
tion, Making the consumer pay is no final policy.
Our 16«. low-skilled labourer is a consumer. It
appears therefore, that though he has thrown off
the tax imposed upon him as producer, he must
take up his share as consumer, by paying higher
prices for the goods he buys. But this is not the
case. He must have guaranteed to him as a con-
dition of contributing to the labour-market such
weekly sum of commodities as 168. would have
bought for him. If owing to the rise of prices a
net wage of 16«. will no longer buy these com-
modities, his money wage must undergo a f urther
increase by virtue of the same economic /pnce?
which raised his normal wage from 15«. toTBST
to meet the stoppage of Is. from his wages. This
rise of wage is in effect another tax, which will
pass on a similar journey to the first, seeking some
** surplus " or unnecessary element of income upon
which to lie. What holds of the subsistence
wage of unskilled labour can equally be shown to
hold of all other subsistence payments. If it were
necessary to evoke the savings of the " determi-
nant saver " by paying 2J% interest, it will not be
possible to tax this element of income in the form
of an income tax or indirectly through the prices
of commodities.

This argument assumes, of course, that subsist-


TH:E TffEOBT OF SURPLUS VALUB. 309

ence wages are based upon natural necessities
and not on conventional necessities. The latter,
though possessing a strong power of resisting
taxation when firmly embedded in a customary
standard of life, may be defeated and rendered
taxable by a steady prolonged attack. Moreover,
though true subsistence payments are not really
amenable to taxation, attempts to tax them,
especially when levelled at skilled labour whose
true subsistence is more expensive, may be fraught
with grave injury by degrading the standard alike
of working efficiency and life of a class of work-
ers. Taxation has been commonly directed so as
to prevent a rise of efficiency in work and life of
thei working classes in a country. None the less
it is true that true subsistence wages, i.e. such
wages as a really enlightened employer will find
it profitable to pay, resist taxation.

§ 3. Turning next to marginal and differential
rents, it is convenient first to deal with the ele*
ment in marginal rents called "forced gain."
These forced gains issue, as our analysis dis*
closes, in the determination of a price where one
of the final pair is able to force the price up,
beyond what he would be willing to take, to
the utmost that his opponent is willing to give.
When markets are small and competition very
slight and ineffective, we saw that these forced
gains made a large element in prices. Their dis-
tinctive character is that they are not earned by


310 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

any effort of production, but constitute a gratu-
itous surplus which is obtained by the stronger
bargainer. Forming no economic motive to any
bargains, they cannot, in theory at any rate, resist
taxation. A tax imposed upon them as an ele-
ment of income could not be transferred to any
other element of income.

But these " forced gains," forming, as we hare
seen, a part of "marginal rents," enter into the
prices of commodities as portions of the marginal
expenses of production. It is therefore impor-
tant to consider whether a tax levied upon the
price of commodities with which they enter will
fall upon them.

The commonly accepted theory that taxes upon
commodities generally fall upon the consumer is
based upon the supposition that their prices only
measure the necessary money-costs of producing
the portion of supply produced under the l^ast
favourable circumstances. Taxes upon commodi-
ties, in conformity with this supposition, must nor-
mally fall upon the consumer who pays the tax
in enhanced prices. Are these "forced gains"
necessary money-costs in this sense?

Mill, in his formulation of the principle that
a tax upon commodities falls upon the consumer,
admits an exception in cases where "the article is a
strict monopoly and at a scarcity price." ^

" The price in this case being only limited by

^ Principles^ p. 616.


THE THEOBY OF SUBPLUS VALUE. 311

the desires of the buyer; the sum obtained for
the restricted*'8iipply being the utmost which the
buyers would consent to give rather than go
without it; if the treasury intercepts a part of
this, the price cannot be further raised to compen-
sate for the tax, and it must be paid from the
monopoly profits." Now it will be evident, if our
analysis of price is correct, that every commodity
will be sold at a price, which, however subject to
the keenest competition in its final retail market,
will contain monopoly elements derived from
the scarcity of one or other of the requisites of /'
production at different stages. Now a tax im- /
posed upon commodities will not be represented
by a rise of prices until €hese forced gains have
been absorbed. We must admit that the prices
of these commodities, however keen the competi-
tion of retailers in the fin^l stage, are scarcity
prices, and are therefore squeezable by taxation to
the extent of the forced element they embody.
Mill admits " that a tax on rare and high-priced
wines will fall wholly on the owners of the vine-
yards." Why? Not because the owners of some
vineyards can extort a high rent for differential
advantages over the other vineyards contributing
to the same market. If the worst vineyards con-
tributing to this supply paid no rent, the tax
would not lie upon the owners of better vineyards,
for the first effect of the tax in making unprofit-
able the production of wine upon the worst vine-


812 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

yards, and so raisin&f the margin of cultivation
and lowering differential rentsf wiU be checked
and counteracted by the rise of price which would
follow such a reduction of supply. This counter-
acting rise of price would prevent the worst vine-
yards from passing out of cultivation: differential
rents would remain as before, enhanced prices
would be paid by consumers, if we accept for the
nonce the conventional view of the consumer as
a possible ultimate object of taxation. So far as
this enhanced price reduced demand for the wine,
it might operate upon supply and raise somewhat
the margin of cultivation, but even then the tax
would only partially — not wholly — fall upon the
owners of the vineyards. What Mill is really
looking to is the case of vineyards producing a
rare wine under conditions in which the worst
lands yield a high rent. Here a tax upon the
price of the wine must fall wholly upon the "forced
gain " or scarcity rent until that is exhausted. For
if the scarcity rent amounted to <£2 an acre, no
tax upon wine which did not eat up the £2 for
the produce of an acre would make either the
land or the capital and labour employed no longer
profitable': so long as the labour and capital
received subsistence wages and interest and any-
thing was left for rent above the rent which could
be got from converting the " determinant " vine-
land into other uses, the supply would not be
reduced. If the supply remained as before, and


THE TBEOBT OF SURPLUS VALUE. 318

the demand be assumed to stand unchanged, the
price of the wine could not rise.

We have, therefore, in this case a crucial test of
the allegation that a tax upon commodities will
settle upon a rent of land which is represented by
a monopoly price.

If, therefore, similar rents emerge from the em-
ployment of certain species of capital and labour
entering into prices like the monopoly rents of
land, these two will be amenable to taxation.
Take once more the case of beer : if public-house
property and breweries yield to their owners a rate
of real interest (not interest on watered capital)
higher than is necessary to remunerate the neces-
sary amount of capital employed in these pro-
cesses, the price of beer must be so high as to pay
this monopoly element of interest, as well as to
pay the specific rent of lands employed in grow-
ing hops and barley. A tax upon beer would
then fall upon the interest of brewing and public-
house property, as well as upon monopoly rents of
hop-lands.

Although the special conditions of the produc-
tion and distribution of beer give peculiar force
and emphasis to the application of this principle,
the difference between beer and other commodities
is only a matter of degree, so far as the presence
of the forced or scarcity element in price is con-
cerned. If we took the price of bread or boots or
any ordinary commodity and. traced it back to its


314 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

constituent parts through the various processes
from the raw materials, we should find the differ-
ent market-prices containing some element, how-
ever small, of the same superiority of bargaining
power which we have styled "forced gain." If
this theory of Determination of Market-prices is
correct, there must in every commodity price be a
certain portion which, representing monopoly or
scarcity, is thus amenable to taxation. It would
therefore not be true that " every tax on a com-
modity tends to raise its price," save in so far as
such tax exceeded the aggregate of "forced gains"
which entered into the price. That a tax on the
tent of land or upon house-rents containing a large
element of land-rent cannot be shifted, but must
be borne by the landowner, is a generally received
doctrine of economists. It is also frequently ad-
mitted that a tax on wages, so far as it relates to
the higher grades of mental or educated labour,
which enjoy some monopoly of opportunities,
must be borne by these classes and cannot be
shifted on to other members of the community.^
If the same admission is not made regarding
interest of monopolies in capital, it is only because
these are regarded either as abnormal things or
as the products of fortuitous and passing circum-
stances. There is, however, ample evidence to
show that economists are quite aware that certain
kinds of taxes upon articles sold at scarcity or

1 MiU, Bk. V, Ch. m, par. 4.


THE THJEORT OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 816

monopoly prices will settle upon and be borne by
the owners of these monopolies. If, then, we can
discover similar elements of unnecessary gain in-
herent in all prices, we shall recognise a large
surplus which is represented in prices and which
forms a fund upon which taxation must naturally
settle.

§ 4. The conclusion suggested by this kind of
reasoning is that a tax imposed upon any class of
commodities will percolate through the various
channels of production, will be rejected from all
necessary or subsistence payments of capital and
labour, and will, either directly or through the
agency of consumers, settle upon " forced gains "
or unearned income.

This conclusion may appear at first sight to be
opposed to certain well-grounded judgments con-
cerning the taxation of monopolies. It is a cor-
rect and generally admitted fact that a tax upon
the price of monopolised commodities may have
the effect of raising their price, and it appears as
if the monopolist, in this way, could exercise a
power to resist completely the taxation of his
rents of monopoly. A closer investigation of the
matter will, however, show that everything de-
pends upon the kind of tax which is imposed.

A monopolist fixes his price so as to obtain for
himself the largest net revenue from sales. He
may sell a smaller quantity at a higher price, or a
larger quantity at a lower price. The price at


316 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

which it will be most profitable for him to seU
will, in default of any tax or other external inter-
ference, depend upon the elasticity of demand on
the one hand, and the elasticity of supply upon
the other.

It can easily be shown that the effect of a fixed
tax upon monopolised commodities may be the
sale of a smaller quantity at a higher price. The
simplest test is that of a monopoly which in its
expenses of production conforms to the Law of
Constant Returns, each new increment of product
being produced at the same expense as each past
increment.

Take the case of a coal monopoly, where the
mines are so rich that a virtually unlimited amount
of coal can be produced at a selling price of 12
shillings per ton, which will include under ex-
penses of production ordinary interest upon capi-
tal and earnings of management.

The line XY represents possible supply, divided
into increments of 1 million tons. While the cost
per ton is constant with every increase of supply,
the selling price falls. The perpendicular AB
represents the selling price of 20 shillings per ton
where 1 million tons are sold. If 2 millions are
sold, the price is 19 shillings ; if 3 millions, 18
shillings. So the selling price falls 1 shilling on
each increment of 1 million tons, until we reach 9
million tons, which can only be sold at 12 shillings,
or just enough to defray expenses of production.


THE THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 317

Now, in order to ascertain what quantity of
production and sales will yield the largest net
revenue of monopoly rents, let us compare the
difiFerent quantities of supply.

If 1 million tons were sold, the receipts would
be 20 million shillings; deduct expenses of pro-
duction, 12 milUon shillings, at 12 shillings per


ton, and the monopoly revenue stands at 8 million
shillings. If 2 millions were sold, receipts would
be 38 million shillings (19 x 2) and expenses 24
millions, yielding a monopoly revenue of 14 mill-
ion shillings. By similar calculation the net
revenue of 3 millions is found to amount to 18
million shillings, of 4 millions to be 20 million
shillings ; 5 millions yields the same net revenue
as 4 millions. After 5 millions a decline of net


318 THE ECONOMIC a OF DISTRIBUTION.

revenue appears; 6 million tons only yielding
18 million shillings and 7 million tons only 14
million shillings.

It is evident that a monopolist unhampered by
taxation will produce 4 or 5 million tons, selling
them at a price of 17 shiUings or 16 shiUings per
ton, and taking on each ton a monopoly rent of
4 or 5 shillings.

Now what would be the effect of imposing a
fixed tax upon a ton of coal, with the view of
forcing rents of monopoly ? Let us suppose a tax
of 6 shillings per ton to be imposed. The effects
are obvious. In the first place, since from the
standpoint of the producer, expenses of produc-
tion are now raised from 12 shillings per ton to
18 ShiUings, no sale is possible at a less price than
18 shillings. Instead of selling 4 or 5 million
tons at 16 shillings or 17 shillings per ton, he is
economically forced to raise his price to 18 shil-
lings and sell 3 millions at that price. But at
18 shillings, though he pays the enlarged expenses
of production, he earns no monopoly revenue.
Has the tax then succeeded in taking the monop-
oly rents? No. Just as it was not to his interest
at the lower level of expenses, 12 shillings, to sell
8 million tons at that figure, so at the artificially
heightened level of expenses, 18 shillings, it is not
his interest to sell 3 million tons at that price.
It is his interest to sell some smaller quantity at
a higher price so as to earn monopoly rents. In


THB THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 319

the case we have taken, the new net maximum
revenue of monopoly will be obtained by selling
2 million tons at 19 shillings per ton.

A fixed tax upon monopolised commodities will
not succeed then in taking the whole of the mo-
nopoly revenue, and will succeed in restricting
production so as to force consumers to pay a
higher price, which shall remain a monopoly price,
for their commodities.^

If, instead of a production conforming to the
Law of Constant Returns, the production were
subject to the law either of diminishing or in-
creasing returns, the calculation would be far more
intricate, but the same general law would hold.
Unless the curve of expenses happened to vary
directly in exact proportion and for an indefinite
extent with the curve of demand, so that the
monopoly element in price per ton did not fall
with the fall of selling price, a fixed tax on mo-
nopolies must have the effect assigned to it in the
instance above taken.

If we were able to take into accurate account
the eccentricities of both demand and supply
curves in any actual trade, we should perceive, as
Professor Marshall has shown, that there may be
a number of equilibria between supply and de-
mand, the prices at which yield an equal net

1 See Professor Edgeworth's note in the Economic Journal,
June, 1898 (pp. 236-6), for the mathematical proof of the
effect of a specific tax on monopolised articles.


320 THW ECONOMICS OF DISTSIBUTIOlf.

revenue to the seller. In such caae a fixed tax
upon commodities would in many cases be evaded
in large measure by a monopolist choosing the
equilibrium where the most restricted supply was
sold at the highest price. The tendency of such
a tax must always be to produce a restriction of
supply and a rise of prices. Professor MarshaU
stmis up the matter with admirable lucidity : ^^ A
tax proportional to the amount produced causes
a greater total loss of monopoly revenue when
the amount produced is large than when it is
small, and we shall find it causes the sales which
afford the maximum revenue to be somewhat
smaller than before, and offers an inducement
to the monopolist to raise his prices and con-
tract his sales."! a fixed tax upon commodities
is a "tax proportional to the amount produced."

But it must be borne in mind that the partial
ability of a monopolist to resist such a tax, and
the injury such tax inflicts upon consumers by
restricting supply and enhancing prices, by no
means justifies a general condemnation of a tax
upon monopolised commodities, but only of the
fixed tax.

The failure of a fixed tax upon each unit of sup-
ply is due to the fact that while the value of the
tax is fixed, the value of the commodity on which
it falls is variable.

A tax upon monopolised commodities so regu-

1 PrincipUs, 2d ed. p. 617.


THE THEOBT OF SUBPLUS VALUE. 321

lated as to take the same proportion, or even the
whole, of the monopoly rent at each price, would
not be open to valid criticism on grounds of theory.
But the application of such a tax would imply the
possibility of an accurate assessment of the rela-
tions between monopoly rents, expenses of pro-
duction, and selling prices. An ad valorem tax
upon the selling price of commodities would be
open to the same objection, though in a less de-
gree, as that which applies to a fixed tax upon
each unit of supply. Since we could not pre-
sume the monopoly rent to vary directly and pro-
portionately with the selling price, an ad valorem
tax upon seUing prices might make it more profit-
able for a monopolist to restrict production and
raise prices.

The scientific basis of taxation of monopolies is
an ad valorem tax upon the monopoly element in
prices. Theoretically, this might be levied upon
each unit of commodity ; practically, it can only be
safely and conveniently levied upon net revenues
of monopoly as represented in annual incomes.

We saw how a tax placed upon subsistence
wages of labour was shifted directly and indirectly
upon those elements of income which, not being
payments necessary to evoke the use of the factor
of production for which they were paid, had no
power to resist the tax. What is true with regard
to subsistence wages of labour, is equaUy true of
any other element in expenses of production.


822 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

Subsistence payments cannot be taxed; forced
gains, of which the monopoly element in price of
commodities is one plain instance, cannot resist
taxation properly directed against it, whether the
taxation be of net revenue, or an ad valorem tax
levied upon the monopoly gains in each act of
sale.

§ 6. But forced gains or scarcity rents only
form one part of " marginal rents " ; it remains to
consider the taxability of the other part of mar-
ginal rents, and of the individual differential rents.

A reference to the diagram on p. 303 will make
it clear that when we remove from a marginal
rent any element of " forced gain " that may in-
here in it, the rest of that marginal rent is im-
posed by the determinant owner of supply, and
measures the pecuniary inducement which causes
him to abandon a differential rent he might have
earned in some other supply. For example, if the
marginal rent of 20«. for wheat land is determined
by the fact that some of this wheat land above the
margin, drawing (say) 25«., as wheat land, has
an alternative use for pasture land which would
afford a rent of 24d. 6(2., it is evident that the
marginal rent of wheat land depends upon a dif-
ferential rent of pasture land, and that any cause
which raised differential pasture rents would dis-
turb this margin of wheat land. Under such
circumstances we have a clear answer to the ques-
tion. Can marginal rent (apart from the forced


THE THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 823

gain it contains) be taxed? A tax levied on mar-
ginal rent will fall also upon the units of supply
earning differential rents. If the marginal rent
of wheat land, 20«., is taxed 1%. per acre, the
determinant portion of supply, land earning previ-
ously a rent of 26«., is now reduced to 24«. This
land, ex hypoihen^ possesses an alternative use for
which it can earn 24«. 6c?. ; it will therefore cease
to contribute to the supply of wheat land, and
convert itself into pasture at 24«. 6(Z., thus re-
ducing the total supply of wheat land, and raising
the margin to a nominal rent of 21«. by the action
of some other portion of supply which now be-
comes the determinant. An attempt thus to tax
the marginal rent for some specific supply, will
have the necessary effect of driving some portion
of supply into an alternative use, and, by reducing
the specific supply, will enable the whole of the
contributors to that supply to evade the tax.

What holds of specific margins of land, holds
similarly of specific margins of capital and labour.
A tax upon '^ marginal rents " can only lie on con-
dition that the alternative employment is similarly
taxed. A tax upon the rent of marginal wheat
land cannot be resisted if a similar tax falls upon
pasture rents and rents for other uses of land.

The fact that the marginal rent for one specific
use of land depends upon the rents for other uses,
proves that the markets for land-usfes, though
conveniently separated for certain purposes, are


824 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTION.

organically related at certain points, forming a
single supply of land.

So far then, as taxability is concerned, the mar-
ginal rent (forced gains excepted) may be treated
as differential rents, and the real. issue relates to
the taxability of these differential rents.

§ 6. It is generally agreed by economists that
differential rents of land cannot resist taxation.
A tax of 10«. or Ids, in the pound upon all rent
of land could not be transferred by the landowner
to his tenant in rise of rent or to any other person
with whom he has dealings.

How far is this economic precept applicable to
capital and labour? In so far as our gradation
of investments is valid, an ad valorem tax upon
differential and marginal interests could not be
resisted, for these are not necessary motives to the
application of capital in the directions to which it
is actually applied. Looking to the real and not
the money forms of capital, we must place it upon
precisely the same footing with land as regards
taxability. Of land it has been said that differ-
ential rents cannot resist taxation, if the tax be
levied upon all rents for all uses of land. For so
long as any rent remains, no land will be with-
drawn from supply. The whole, however, of
these differential rents of land could not advan-
tageously be taken, because some minimum dif-
ferential rent is necessary to induce the landowner
to put his land to its best economic use. It is


THE THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 326

n=«a«„y to preserve «m. taa»o.»ent .^ci.«.
to persuade the owner of good vine-land to apply
his land to this purpose rather than to wheat grow-
ing or some other less productive use.

Similarly with differential and marginal rents
of capital. If an attack was made upon a speclfk^
kind of capital drawing high marginal and differ-
ential rents, by imposing a tax either upon the
estimated forced element of price or upon the
net surplus revenue, this tax might be evaded,
supposing that some of this capital could be di*
verted without much waste to an alternative use
nearly as profitable where it would not be taxed.
If the capital engaged in brewing earned a rate of
profit 6% higher than any of the owners could
get in alternative investments open to them,
almost the whole of that surplus rent could be
taken by taxation. But if some portion of that
capital were capable of being transferred with in-
considerable loss to another use almost as profit-
able, a special tax on brewing profits would not lie.

In a progressive condition of industry this tax-
ability would not generally depend upon the
adaptability of existing forms of capital to some
other use, but upon the alternative employment
open to the new savings which might be engaged
in increasing the real capital of the brewing trade.

In capital, as in land, differential rents can only
be safely taken by taxation, applied, not specifi-
cally, but generally. A general tax imposed upon


326 THE B1C0N0MIC8 OF DISTRIBUTION.

all interest above subsistence rate will lie without
disturbance of industry, provided it is imposed in
accordance with the principle evolved in our in-
vestigation of taxation of monopoly prices. The
whole of differential rents of capital could not,
however, be taken by taxation. If the special
profits of a particular brewery were derived from
a closer monopoly of "tied houses," this extra gain
could doubtless be taxed; such gain, however,
would not properly be a differential rent but
rather a " forced gain " or " scarcity rent " made
in a restricted market by means of monopoly
prices for beer. If the brewery was really com-
peting in a market with other breweries, its higher
profit, or differential rent (if not disguised earn-
ings of superior management), would be derived
from economics of large-scale production with the
use of the best plant and labour. An attempt to
take by taxation the whole of this advantage would
diminish the incentive of capitalists to make the
most productive use of their capital. In a word,
the superior differential productivity of capital,
though not of necessity rightly attributed to skill
of management (which is but one factor in produc-
tivity), is conditioned by such skill ; unless the
capital has some element of differential interest
secured to it, there is danger it may not be fully
utilised. This consideration involves no general
denial of the taxability of differential interest of
capital, but merely enforces the retention of what-


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 827

ever minimum inducement in the shape of higher
interest (or profit) may be found necessary to pro-
mote the most economical use of capital.

A tax rightly adjusted so as to take even 99%
of the net revenue derived from such differential
rents cduld not be resisted, and would have no
effect in disturbing the application of existing
capital, or the saving for the establishment of new
capital. Differential rents are no necessary eco-
nomic motive to saving ; they do not enter into
the market-price of saving, which is measured
from the cost or the utility of the marginal saver,
who is willing to-day to save for some 2^%.

§ 7. Now let us turn to wages of labour. Mar-
ginal class wages, so far as they do not consist
of " forced gains " or " scarcity rents " artificially
maintained, depend upon the option which some
labourers possess to take a differential rent in
some other trade. The transferability of some
part of a given labour-market from one employ-
ment to another, is positively easier and freer than
in the case of land and existing forms of capital,
so that the question easily appears to resolve itself
into that of a general power to tax differential
wages over the whole field of labour; in other
words, an income tax on wages above subsistence
margin.

So far as a differential wage is really a wage of
superior skill or productivity, and not a scarcity
wage maintained by some artificial ordering of


328 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

the market, it appears to stand on a different foot-
ing from other differential rents with regard to
the power to resist taxation.

It is even commonly supposed that such a tax
would be defeated by a refusal of labourers to
apply their full productive power unless the full
rent of individual productivity were secured to
them. But closer scrutiny indicates that no such
general judgment can be pronounced. At first
sight, it doubtless seems as if a man, who gives out
twice as much productive power in a day's work as
another, must have twice as much secured to him.
in real wages, and that he can keep these wages
against all attempts to tax them. But is this nec-
essarily true ? Suppose A, B, C are three work-
ers in a trade, and A produces a product 30, B 20,
and C 15 ; if a tax amounting to the value of 2
were placed on B's wage, and pne of 6 on A's
wage, would they necessarily withhold part of
their labour-power? To argue that they necessa-
rUy would withhold, is to make productivity the
sole determinant of value and price, and to ignore
effort. The subjective basis of endurance enters
in as a chief determinant of supply, and requires
that certain units of labour-power, even in the
same market, shall be remunerated at a higher rate
than others. This does not contravene the princi-
ple of an equal price for an equal quantity in a mar-
ket. What is really bought in the labour-market,
is not the objective units of labour-power for which


THE THEOBY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 829

the wage is nominally paid, — the piece work or
the hour, — but the subjective or vital effort which
underlies it. The subjective effort of the deter-
minant owner of labour-power in a given supply
really determines, from the supply side, the price
per unit of the whole supply, the supply price
being the result of his bargaining with the repre-
sentative of marginal utility on the demand side.

In the case taken above, the subjective effort of
C may be the determinant on the supply side, and
his bargaining with the marginal buyer may have
fixed a price per unit of labour. If, now, B can
produce one-third more units of labour in a day,
and A twice as many, with the same amount of
subjective effort as C gave out in producing 15,
they take a differential rent of 5 and 15 respec-
tively. But it by no means follows that they
could resist a tax which reduced this rent by 2 and
6 ; for 5 and 15 are not necessarily the sums they
insist upon receiving as conditions of giving out
the same subjective effort as C gave out. Some-
thing more than C receives they must receive, or
they will reduce their objective productivity to
the level of C, but the '' how much " is a problem
separately determinable in each case.

In some kinds of work it might be the case that
a man will consent to give out his superior energy
or skill for a wage which is not proportionately
higher than the wage of the marginal worker in
bis trade. In other cases, the greater intensity or


880 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

skill can only be evoked by a fully proportionate
^7 y increase of wage. No general principle could
therefore be applied in taxation of differential
wages. The taxability would vary, not only with
the varying character and conditions of the work,
but even with the individual nature of the worker,
and with the character of the wants he used the
later increments of his income to satisfy. In many
kinds of work the utmost intensity of exertion can
only be evoked by a rate of payment even higher
than what is paid for an equal product achieved
by slower and less intense exertion, — a fact recog-
nised in various schemes of task or piece wages, bs
also in special rates for overtime. In other kinds
of work less disagreeable or exhausting, a capable
worker might consent to express his capability,
even if he could not reap the' full advantage of his
superiority over the least effective labourer by a
correspondingly higher wage.

We must always keep clearly in mind the real
nature of these "rents of ability." It is only
when we take the individual man or a portion of
his labour-time for our standard of measurement,
that the rate of remuneration seems differential.
If we regard the worker as a seller of productive
efficiency, the one who sells more than another of
his commodity, or who sells a better quality, natu-
rally gets a correspondingly larger amount of pay.
If, however, we retain the idea of differential rents
of labour, we must admit that they are not amen-


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU3 VALUE. 331

able to taxation in the same way and to the same
degree as differential rents of land.

§ 8. The difference which manifests itself in the
taxability of differential rents of labour on the one
hand, and of land and capital on the other, is not
difficult to understand.

Differential rents, beyond a bare minimum, are
not economic inducements to owners of land and
capital to apply these factors of production ; for
existing forms of land and capital a minimum rent
and profit suffices to retain their economic service,
and though new capital is only brought into exist-
ence by a certain subsistence rate of interest, no
higher rate for any special purpose is an economic
motive of saving.

But labourers will withhold part of their pro-
ductive power unless some differential wage of
ability is secured for them. Inanimate nature has
no ability to withhold its continuous output of
productive powers ; the owner of a more fertile
field, who withheld its use because its differential
rent was taxed, would be cutting his own throat,
unless the tax swallowed the entire economic rent.
The value of such supply is determined on the sup-
ply side by natural scarcity. Where the supply
depends upon voluntary effort, as in the supply of
labour-power, the option to withhold enables the
owner to make conditions which shall secure for
him a differential rent, some indeterminate propor-
tion of which must be even secure against taxation.


832 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

§ 9. Our analysis of the taxability of the vari-
ous payments made out of money spent on com-
modities, resolves these payments into necessary
expenses of production, subsistence payments for
use of labour and capital, which cannot be taxed,
and marginal and differential rents which are in
various degrees and to various extents amenable
to taxation. Forced gains or scarcity rents to-
gether with differential rents of land and capital
Le no power to resist direct taxation imposed
upon them as elements in income. Forced or
scarcity rents of labour, together with certain por-
tions of differential rents of labour, are also in
theory directly taxable.

The general tendency of this analysis is to
justify the economic superiority of taxation upon
incomes or net revenues over taxation imposed
upon special classes of commodities or upon special
classes of rents or profits.

A general income tax, graduated upon the sup-
position that the proportion of unearned and there-
fore economically taxable income varies directly
with the absolute size of incomes, on the one
hand, escapes the supreme difficulty of discrimi-
nation of the origins of special forms of gain^ and,
on the other hand, can be shown to have a genu-
ine, rapid, and accurate tendency to discover and
settle upon the various portions of incomes which
are unearned in the sense that they furnish no
necessary inducement to owners of factors of pro-


THE THEOBT OF SURPLUS VALUE, 338

duction to put these factors to their best economic
use.

But while our investigation of the incidence of
taxation exhibits the superior economy of direct
taxes upon monopoly revenues or other unearned
elements in income wherever they can be ascer-
tained and measured, and approved a general grad-
uated income tax upon the ground that it will
discover and settle upon such elements of income,
the condemnation of specific or even of ad valorem
taxes upon commodities must not be misunderstood.
We have seen that a monopolist appears to exer-
cise a power to resist both these latter forms of
taxation of monopolised commodities by restrict-
ing production and raising prices. By raising
prices he appears to shift a portion, if not the
whole, of the tax he nominally pays, on to consum-
ers. But following the line of reasoning laid
down in our discussion of the attempt to tax sub-
sistence wages for an old age pension scheme, we
perceive that such enhanced prices paid by con-
sumers living on subsistence wages or subsistence
rate of interest, have the effect of raising the
money payments for subsistence, and thus of trans-
ferring the tax up to other persons who must
eventually pay it out of unearned elements of
income. To shift a tax upon to " the consumer,"
as we have seen, is no final determinant of inci-
dence : a tax must always be deemed to settle
upon some element of income ; the power of sub-


/


834 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

Bistence payments to resist taxation we have seen
is absolute so long as there exist unearned ele-
ments of income upon which they can be placed.
The particular monopolist, therefore, can only re-
sist specific or ad valorem taxation of his monopo-
lised articles by imposing the tax upon the unearned
incomes of certain classes of consumers, and not
by distributing it over all classes of consumers.
The same general principle applies to all taxation
of commodities, monopolised or free : no such tax
can settle upon incomes which are subsistence pay-
ments for factors of production, until all forms of
unearned income have been exhausted.

The chief condemnation of such forms of indi-
rect taxation is not that they are liable to be paid
indiscriminately by rich and poor, by those who can
and those who cannot bear them, but that they
tend in many cases by checking production to
restrict the most efficient use of factors of pro-
duction, and so to decrease the general output of
commodities.

If this analysis be correct, the practical impor-
tance of its conclusions is very great. By indi-
cating the existence of a vast " surplus '* of rents
analogous to the economic rent of land in its
taxability, it strengthens immensely the economic
means of social progress. By exploding two fal-
lacious notions, that taxes are paid by the poorer
classes of the working population, and that high
taxation is injurious to trade, our analysis removes


THE THEORY OF SURPLUS VALUE. 386

chief barriers to that increase of taxation and of
wise public expenditure which are essential to a
sound progressive social policy,

§ 10. Differential rents play so considerable a
part in determining the inequality of incomes in
an industrial society that it may be well to append
to this discussion of their taxability some consid-
erations of a more general character.

A progressive social economy is by no means
confined to the difficult, sometimes hazardous, and
always wasteful processes of taxation in order to
procure for society some of these differential pay-
ments which are shown not to be necessary in-
ducements to their recipients to take part in
production. More enlightened methods of pro-
duction, increased equality of economic oppor-
tunities, organisation of employers or of workers,
will often succeed in effecting large reductions
of differential rents. In respect of land this was
seen by Ricardo and explicitly stated by J. S.y
Mill,^ who argued that improvements of agri-
cultural science or of means of carriage which
increased or rendered more available the output
of more fertile farms would, by rendering it no
longer profitable to work farms on the margin^
of cultivation, raise that margin and so reduce
differential rents. In similar fashion the differ-
ential rents or interests of capital may be reduced
by such organisation of employers or of workers

1 FHmiples, Bk. IV, Ch. Ill, § 4.


886 THB ECONOMICS OF DISTBlBUTIOIf.

as throws a larger proportion or the whole of a
trade into the hands of the largest, best-equipped,
and most profitable firms.

Where an organisation of employers by organis-
ing a syndicate or a trust achieves this result by
weeding out the weaker mills, it commonly suc-
ceeds in preventing this economy of differential
rents from passing to the consuming public in the
shape of lower prices, and, instead, substitutes a
monopoly or scarcity rent for these differential
rents. But none the less is it true that this
"weeding out" or "crushing out" of feebler com-
peting firms signifies a reduction of the differ-
ential rents which were formerly necessary to
keep the requisite supply of capital in operation.
The more far-sighted labour leaders are quite
aware that their true interests lie in promoting
this same improvement of trade organisation, pro-
vided that they can maintain among employers
such competition as will enable them to take in
a rise of wages the reduction of differential rents.

This policy, indeed, forms one of the stoutest
arguments in favour of that attempt to acquire
by legislation, or by trade unionism, a recognised
standard of subsistence, of hours of labour, and
of other terms of employment. This movement
for better conditions of employment, implying a
rise in current expenses of production which seems
to press unendurably upon the weaker employers,
is thus seen to be a positive instrument of eco-


THE THEOBT OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 887

nomic progress. Upon this topic Mr. and Mrs.
Webb thus write : " It is obviously to the inter-
est of the trade union so to fix the common rule
as to be constantly * weeding out ' the old-f ash^
ioned or stupid firms, and to concentrate the
whole production in the hands of the more effi«-
cient * captains of industry/ who, however, have to
lower the cost of the product without lowering the
wage. Thus, so long as the more advantageously
worked establishments in the trade are not work*
ing up to their full capacity, or can, without losing
this advantage, be further enlarged, the trade
union could theoretically raise its common rule,
to the successive exclusion, one after another, of
the worst employers, without affecting price or the
contmmers' demand, and therefore without dimin-
ishing the area of employment. By thus ' raising
the margin of cultivation,* and simultaneously in-
creasing the output of the more advantageously
situated establishments, this device of the com-
mon rule may accordingly shift the boundary of
that part of the produce which is economical of
the nature of rents, and put some of it into the
pockets of the workmen."^

The failure of most economists to recognise the
large proportion of "forced gains" and scarcity, or
differential rents, which are included in the net
profits of a trade, is chiefly responsible for the tone
of disparagement in which even the most liberal

1 Industrial Democracy, Vol. II, pp. 720-^.


338 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

minded amongst them speak of the economic effi-
cacy of trade-union efforts to raise wages. That
wages at any given time are fixed absolutely by
the operation of economic laws which are immuta-
ble, few would now contend, but even Jevons and
Professor Marshall, while generally favourable to
trade unionism, are apt to deny its validity when
they come to apply economic reasoning. "The
power of unions to raise general wages by direct
means is never great,** writes Professor Marshall,^
while Jevons boldly affirmed that, though organisa-
tion might enable one class of workers to increase
this wage, this increase was paid for by other
classes in their capacity of consumers-^ The gen-
eral tendency is to insist that trade unionism is
confined, so far as efficacy in raising wages is con-
cerned, to securing rises that are already justified
by increased prices and profits, and to obtaining
such rises as are attended by a correspondent in-
crease of productivity of labour, such increase, for
example, as is sometimes claimed to follow a rais-
ing of the standard of comfort.

Our analysis, if it be correct, involves the recog-
nition of a great fund of surplus profits, which is
available for higher wages, as it is also amenable
to taxation, and which can be obtained by a suffi-
ciently strong pressure of trade unionism.

In other words, forced gains and differential

1 Elements of Economics of Industry (1892), pp. 407-8-

2 The State in Belation to Labour^ pp. 105-7.


THE THEOBT OF 8UBPLUS VALUE. 839

rents of capital are not permanently necessary
payments to the owners of capital who take
therxh, and may be transferred, either to the
public by taxation, or to the workers by a rise
of wages. It is not difficult to see that differ-
ential rents of labour, mental or manual, may
be reduced or transferred in similar ways. Pri-
mary public education has had a plainly recognised
effect in reducing the differential rents of ordinary
clerical employments. Technical education, in so
far as it extends to larger social areas the oppor-
tunity of successfully learning high-skilled and
well-paid trades, makes in the same direction. In
fact, every enlargement of education, in so far as it
makes for greater equality of economic opportuni-
ties, tends to reduce differential rents of employ-
ment and likewise the marginal specific rents which
are seen to depend upon them. If the marginal
physician is better paid than the marginal corn-
porter, it is not because of any greater inherent
skill in the former calling which gives its services
a higher marginal value. We pay the marginal
physician a relatively high fee because the present
distribution of economic and educational oppor-
tunities is such that only a small proportion of
the population can equip their sons for competi-
tion in that market, hence the competitors, by
fairly close organisation, can maintain a high rate
of piece wages. The high rate does not depend
on a natural scarcity of high skill. When it is


840 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

made as easy to any lad who has the desire to pre-
pare himself for medicine as it is to become a dock
labourer, the piece wage for the former work will
be as low and probably lower than the piece wage
for the latter, so far as the marginal labourer is
concerned. Even those high fees which pro-
fessional talent of a distinguished rank can draw
wiU be greatly cut down when every career is
open to natural talent from any social or economic
grade. A distinguished specialist in surgery may
now take a fee of £1000 for a single delicate opera-
tion. He will not now do it for less because he
can actually get this sum. But his ability to get
it depends on two facts, one relating to supply,
the other to demand, neither of which is a per-
manent necessity. The first fact consists in the
limitation of supply of finest surgical talent by
reason of the exclusion of most children from any
opportunity to discover such a talent, to educate
it, and to enter upon a medical career. Destroy
this artificial limitation of supply, and instead of
one surgeon able and willing to do this job we
should have three or four upon a fairly equal level
iof skill and reputation, whose competition direct
or indirect, would bring down the fee from £1000
to say £20. On the other side, there is the fact
of the existence of a certain number of very wealthy
people who, drawing large elements of unearned
income from various rents, can afford to pay
£1000. Every equalisation of economic oppor*


THE TJSSORT OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 841

tunities, each application of sound principles of ^
progressive taxation, will reduce this number, and
reduce the effective demand for work at such a
price.

Thus it is seen that there is nothing inherent or
immutable in these differential rents of ability
which are soinetimes regarded as a necesBary re-
ward for superior skill which cannot be refused or
materially reduced.

§ 11. I have for convenience reserved for a spe-
cial) separate consideration those payments to which
Professor Marshall gives the name "quasi-rents."
He has done more than any other economic writer
to break down the barrier which has separated land
from other factors of production, and to extend
the name and the application of the Law of Rent»
The rent of land is to him *^ no unique fact, but
simply the chief species of a large genus of eco-
nomic phenomena," and he recognises ^ that there
is a continuous gradation from the true rent of
those free gifts which have been appropriated by
man, through the income derived from permanent
improvements of the soil, to those yielded by farm
and factory buildings, steam engines, and less dur-
able goods." ^

A careful consideration of the chapters in which
the theory of quasi-rents receives full treatment,^
shows that the quasi-rents are analogous, not to

1 Bk. VI, Ch. IX.

« (Bk. V, Chs. Vm, IX, and Bk. VI, Ch. IX.)


842 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

differential rents of land, but to scarcity rents.
First to illustrate his meaning he takes tJie cases
of a find of meteoric stones and of the ownership
of the pictures of a dead artist. Here we have
an absolute monopoly selling at a monopoly price
and yielding what Marshall terms a ^^true rent."
A tax upon such articles falls entirely on their
owners. If, however, by labourers* search other
meteoric stones could be found, or if we were deal-
ing with the pictures of a living artist who still
continued to produce, the monopoly price or rent
would only last for a short season, since it would
serve to stimulate such exertion and would equate
supply and demand at ordinary expenses of pro-
duction. But while the higher price lasted, the
stones or pictures might be regarded as yielding a
quasi-rent. In other words, a quasi-rent or mo-
nopoly element would figure in short period or
market-price, and would gradually disappear as
the period was lengthened and what is commonly
termed a normal price was reached. Any supply
of highly specialised capital, ability, or labour,
which cannot be quickly and widely replenished,
may for a season stand in the position of being
able to take, in addition to ordinary rate of profit,
a quasi-rent which must, however, disappear when
the lapse of time brings into the market a suffi-
cient number of new forms of specialised capital
and labour.
Now it is evident that these quasi-rents marking


THE THEOBT OF SURPLUS VALUE. 843

short-time monopolies are nothing else than the
more variable forms of monopoly or scarcity rents
of capital and labour, and it is not easy to under-
stand why the disparaging epithet *^ quasi " should
be appended to them. So long as they exist they
are as true rents as any land-rents, nor are they
necessarily of brief duration : highly specialised la-
bour and capital are frequently able, by checking
investments of outside capital and labour, to hold
up market-prices above ^^ marginal expenses of
production" for long periods. Some of these
ilionopolies may be as stable and as strong as
the monopolies of natural resources which are
admitted to draw true rents.

It appears that these quasi-rents are simply less
enduring forms of monopoly rent. The test of
rent commonly accepted is this. Will it bear a
tax ? Marshall asserts in one passage that wealth
drawing quasi-rents is taxable. ^^ A tax on any set
of things that are already produced falls exclu-
sively on the owners of those things, if it is not ac-
companied by a tax, or the expectation of .a tax, on
the production of, or bringing into use of, similar
or rival things. If it falls also on all rival things,
and the supply of them is not absolutely fixed, its
incidence will be gradually transferred to the con-
sumers. . . . For a shorter period in which the
tax falls mainly on the owners, the income may be
regarded as more or less of the nature of rent." ^

1 Bk. V, Ch. vm, par. 2.


844 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTIOIf.

Under the class ^^ quasi-rent" come the earnings
of improvements of land,^ buildings, machinery,
etc.,^ nearly all the profits of business institutions,^
and in one passage it is suggested that all ^^ skUl,
material capital, and business connections" when
and in so far as they are specialised, ^^ cease to
exert a direct influence on the value of the prod-
ucts due to them; and, on the other hand, the
value of these products • . • determines the in-
come which can be derived from these factors, t.e.
it determines what we have called their quasi-
rent."*

§ 12. Now Professor Marshall does not explic-
itly discuss this theory of Quasi-rents in relation
to taxation, though a passage previously quoted
seems to signify that they are taxable. But Mr.
Cunningham, in a discussion of these quasi-rents,
considers that not merely are they directly amen-
able to taxation, but that a tax upon products
into which they enter will lie upon them. Ac-
cording to him, the profit, upon capital that is
"irrevocably fixed" is "of the nature of rent,"
and he concludes lay saying, "It follows from
what has gone before that a tax on production
will affect price in so far as it is not paid out of
that part of price which is of the nature of rent.
And whenever a tax is laid upon production,
whenever it can come out of rent, it will do so." *

ipp. 666, 460. a p. 670. 'p. 669. *p. 666.

^ Economic JoumcU^ March, 1802.


THE THEOBT OF SUBPLUS VALUE. 846

Now it is certainly true that forms of capital
which are "irrevocably fixed" are in the first
instance liable, like rent of land, to bear a specific
or an ad valorem tax upon the products to which
they contribute. But it by no means follows that
they cannot recoup themselves by causing a rise
of prices. Take the case of the interest on capital
sunk in houses ; houses already built would not
be withdrawn from supply if the interest upon
the. sunk capital fell toward zero, but it is equally
certain that a tax upon houses could not and
would not be borne by this capital. For there is
a constant flow of fluid capital toward houses so
long as this capital is able to earn normal interest,
which flow would be checked ^ by a tax upon the
capital already " irrevocably appropriated " in the
form of houses. In one passage Mr. Cunningham
does seem to admit that the taxation of quasi-*rents
might affect price and production, but he urges
that it would do so "very slowly after a time."
Now this is not correct ; in any trade open to
investment and vitally sustained by a flow of
capital from without, the effect of taxing the
quasi-rents of fixed forms of capital would be
rapid and immediate. It is only when such "ir-
revocably appropriated " capital enjoys a power of

^ This check might operate either by a restriction of saving
in case the tax reduced the rate of interest below that required
by the marginal saver, or it might divert new capital from
building into other forms of investment.


346 TH£ ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

monopoly, derived from checking the flow of out-
side capital, that the profits on fixed capital will
be unable to resist taxation on production. If
the brpweries of a district have a corner upon the
supply of public houses, so that interests on fixed
capital in brewing are 2% higher than normal out-
side interests, that 2% is indeed amenable to taxa-
tion, but it is so amenable, not because it takes
the form of " irrevocably appropriated capital,"
but because the interest of such capital enjoys
a power of restricting the inflow of outside capital
and so of earning a special rate of interest. This
special interest is what I term " a forced gain or
scarcity rent." It may be included in the quasi-
rent of Professor Marshall, but it differs vitally
from the ordinary interest on fixed capital in
being unable to resist taxation by raising prices.
In the supposed case, a tax upon beer would fall
upon the 2% excess interest and could not be
recouped by raising prices ; it could not fall upon
any further part of the interest without reducing
brewing profit below the normal rate and prevent-
ing the fresh influx of capital required to sustain
a growing trade, or even to maintain a deprecia-
tion fund.

The mere fact, then, that capital or labour is
specialised and cannot be withdrawn does not en-
title us to regard the earnings of such specialised
factors as a surplus, so long as the industry is
open to fresh investments of capital and labour.


THE THEORY OF 8URPLU8 VALUE. 347

A tax will not lie upon these specialised forms,
but will be transferred to the consumer by en-
hanced prices to be bore ultimately by such " con-
sumers " only as enjoy some unearned elements of
income. Only in cases where some natural or
economic power restricts the inflow of capital
or labour will the earnings be rightly regarded
as a surplus and liable to bear taxation; and in
such a case the tax, so far as it falls upon interests
or wages which are results of monopoly, and are
in excess of " competition rates," will not be con-
fined to the capital which is "specialised." In a
word, the specialisation of capital or labour is not
really a condition which assimilates its earnings
to rent.

§ 13. These quasi-rents, then, in so far as they ;
are rents at all, are monopoly or scarcity rents
and are liable to taxation. They also enter into
prices, for we have seen that wherever a scarcity
rent exists, the marginal portion of supply is able
to obtain it, and it will figure in supply prices.
Professor Marshall indeed denies that they enter
into price, but when the marginal labourer in a
class of labour or the marginal mill in a particular
industry obtams a higher wage or a higher interest
than "free competition" would assign, that mar-
ginal wage or interest must figure in expenses of
production and in price. It can only be excluded
by the fallacious " dosing " application of the Law
of Diminishing Returns.


348 TEJB ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTIOJIf.

Professor Marshall himself illustrates a *^ quasi*
rent " of labour by the high wages miners drew in
1878. Now it would scarcely be possible for him
to affirm that the high piece wages then paid did
not "enter into" the price of a ton of coal, for
every ton of coal paid this piece wage. If it be
admitted that the quasi-rent here " enters into "
the price of coal, it may be contended that it does
not help to determine the price of coal, but con-
sists in a surplus which remains after the neces-
sary "expenses of production " are defrayed from
the price. But even here the denial that the
quasi-rent helps ^^ flfitrfif"'^'"^ the price is a mere
verbal quibble. For the quasi-rent is a direct
measure of the pressure of scarcity, which is as
much, and in the same sense, a determinant of
value and of price as the utility measured by
demand. The quasi-rent is under the circum-
stances a necessary payment of marginal labour,
it is not a mere surplus in the sense that it takes
what remains after expenses are paid out of price, '
for that implies that price is determined exclu-
sively from the demand side, which, as we have
already seen, is not true, even of the closest mo-
nopolies. The quasi-rent of the miner not only
enters price, but helps to determine price. It is
true that it is also determined in its amount by
price, but this only means that it is one of a
number of mutually determinant factord of price.

If, however, the quasi-rent of miners enters


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 849

price and helps to determine price, the same is
true of every other quasi-rent of labour, capital,
or ability. It is only differential rents, whether
♦* true rents " or quasi-rents, which do not enter
into* or determine price, because they form no part
of the expenses of the marginal supply.

Such, then, of these quasi-rents as deserve to
have the term ^^rent" applied to them should
receive it without the timid justification of quasi.
They are to all intents as much true rents as the
scarcity rent of land, entering price as an addition
to marginal expenses and being unable to resist
taxation.

§ 14. We have seen that elements of forced
gain marking superiority of bargaining power
arise in aU the processes of exchange, and that
an accurate analysis of the payments for finished
commodities would disclose a large number of
such ** gains " payable to owners of factors of pro-
duction at various stages. Our investigation of
the markets for the use of the several factors
indicates that, while any of these factors may
assume this position of superiority of bargaining,
there is no warrant for supposing it to be equally
distributed among them, even in the long run.

A closer regard to the actual mechanism of
modern industry seems to indicate that an increas-
ing proportion of this power to take "forced"
gains adheres to the class called entrepreneurs^ or
undertakers, and is included under the vague


860 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

title of profits. The undertaker is sometimes the
owner of one of the factors of productive capital
or business capacity, or both, who buys the use
of the other factors, and, organising them for
productive purposes, is able to sell the products
upon terms which are highly "profitable." These
profits, in so far as they exceed necessary interest
and necessary wages of management, consist of
*' forced gains," not necessarily extracted entirely
out of bargains with labourers, but partly perhaps
by bargains with owners of capital; and partly by
restriction of free competition in the markets in
which he disposes of the products.

The typical form of private business to-day is
one in which the undertaker buys in the cheapest
market each of the factors of labour, capital, and
land which he requires, and organising their uses
for production, sells the product in the dearest
market he can command. Our analysis of the
relation of buyers and sellers indicated that
the buyer was in modem industry normaUy
the stronger bargainer, so that the undertaker
may well exert a power to take " forced gains " in
his bargains for the use of labour and capital. The
real crux lies in the question, "Can he retain for
himself these gains when he assumes the position
of seller in disposing of his products ? " Where
competition is said to be free, he cannot, and must
hand over to consumers such portions of his
" forced gains " as are not swaUowed up in ex-


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 851

penses of competition. He can only hold these
" forced gains " by restricting freedom of compe-
tition in markets where he is seller. Hence,
everywhere he is devoting his energies to one of
two policies. Arranging price-lists by agreement
with competitors, entering into closer agreements
with these competitors, and eventually organising
alliances, syndicates, or trusts, he labours to
strengthen the bargaining power of his "trade"
in these dealings with middlemen or consumers.
Or else he strives, by striking out some slight
novelty in goods or by securing a supremacy over
a particular part of the market, to be able to
evade the superior bargaining power which nor-
mally belongs to the buyer.

His success in achieving these results is the
dominant feature of modern industry so far as the
distribution of wealth is concerned. There is
good reason to believe that an increasing propor-
tion of " forced gains " or " unearned income "
continually assumes the form of the business
profits of undertakers.

Even where formally it is capital that takes the
initiative, as where a number of capitalists pool
their capital and form a joint-stock company, capi-
tal buying the use of labour and law and manage-
ment, a closer scrutiny will generally disclose the
fact that the real gains of such an enterprise are
absorbed, often by anticipation, by one or two
business men who as financiers, promoters, or


852 THJE B00N0MIC8 OF MBTBIBUTIOS.

mam^ing directors, have organised the bnslDess
in their own interests.

The recognition of these ** forced gains " or sur-
plus elements in price involves important conse-
quences in considering methods of social reform.

§ 15. If price contains no surplus beyond neces-
sary payment of money costs, the arguments, by
which not merely ^ old " economists, but so mod-
em an economist as Jevons, proved the futility
of trade-union organisation in seeking to achieve
a general rise of wages, would be valid. If the
profits of the marginal supply of capital are kept
at a minimum in all classes of investment, it will
be evident that a rise of wages (unless attended
by a corresponding increase of efficiency of la-
bour) would be impossible, and any attempt to
extort such a rise would be injurious. A simi-
lar condemnation must be passed upon the eight
hours' movement, or upon any other progressive
movements which would raise the wage bill. The
portion of the real income of the nation which
went as differential rents to owners of land or
capital or ability, could not be touched by such
a policy. In other words, differential rents do
not constitute a surplus value. But marginal
rents, which enter into price, do constitute such
a surplus.

We have seen that, if a single business in a
trade, owing to exceptional advantages, is earning
a higher rate of profits than others, it is not pos-


THE THEORY OF SUBPLUS VALUE. 868

sible, under normal conditions, for the employees
to take this profit in higher wages ; if by special
organisation of a group it were possible to take
the whole or part of it, it would only pass from
being a differential rent of capital into a differ-
ential rent of labour, i.e. a certain group of
workers would have established a sectional mo-
nopoly in a labour-market. If, on the other hand,
a whole trade were earning a higher profit than
was necessary to keep the required capital in the
trade, a surplus exists, which can raise the price
of labour for a whole market, provided labour is
su£Giciently well organised to take it. If it can be
shown that not merely do certain trades rise for
brief seasons into the condition of earning surplus
profit, but that other trades, by reason of special
limitations upon the field of investment, are per-
manently in that condition, the existence of a
large element of surplus profit gives to the labour
movement that firm economic basis of support
which otherwise is lacking.

§ 1^ Karl Marx was right in his insistence
upon the fundamental importance of recognising
the idea of surplus value. He was wrong in re-
garding the surplus value as exclusively the pro-
duct of labour-power taken by capital in the
process of bargaining for the sale of labour-
power. He failed to explain why labour, alone
of the factors, should be conceived as making all
the '^ value" of material marketable goods. He


864 THE ECONOMICS OF DI8TBIBUTI0N.

failed also to explain what the nature of the power
was by which capital took the surplus value made
by labour ; and, finally, he failed to show how any
individual capitalist who took it was not compelled
to relinquish it under the stress of competition
with his fellow-capitalists.

The surplus value here described issues, not
merely from one class of bargains (between capi-
tal and labour), but from every class ; it represents
the economic might of the stronger in every mar-
ket. The true economic motive of the organisa-
tion alike of labour and of capital is to establish
such a power of bargain at some point or other in
the field of industry as to obtain some of this sur-
plus. Capital, by various processes, limits free
competition; price-lists and other trade agree-
ments regarding prices and wage-rates, corners,
and other temporary coups, syndicates, amalgama-
tions^ trusts, are all endeavours to enable the capi-
tal in a given market to obtain a rate of profit
above the necessary minimum, by raising prices,
reducing wages, or both. So far as capital suc-
ceeds, these higher profits are represented in
market-prices which exceed the economically
necessary money-costs of production.

The organisation of labour must also be con-
sidered to be directed, in the main, by a similar
motive. So far as trade unionism is confined to
protecting a class of labour against specially in-
jurious conditions of low wages, irregular employ-


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE, 365

ment, and other risks imposed by the greed or
carelessness of emplojj^rs, and in thus securing
a bare maintenance for labour, we are entitled to
discriminate trade unionism from organisation of
capital. But trade organisations in most skilled
trades are evidently devoted, not to a merely pro-
tective policy, but to a strengthening of their capac-
ity for bargains by restricting competition in the
labour-market, so that they may obtain in higher
wages or increased leisure a surplus corresponding
in nature to the higher profits of capital.

In every process of production where capital,
labour, and land are employed, one or other,
^j^hether by organised contrivance of its owners,
or else by what may be termed accident, is apt to
be relatively short in supply: in such case the
whole supply of this factor will take a price
containing a "surplus" element.^ Where many
different sorts of capital or labour or land are
required to contribute directly or indirectly to a
given process, a number of these elements of
surplus will emerge, attached sometimes to one,
sometimes to another factor. So if we followed
the raw material of any commodity from its
earUest extractive stages to the final form it
received as it passed over the retail counter, we
should find it gathering, not only " costs " of pro-

^ Le, the final seller in the market for the use of this factor
of production will be stronger than the final buyer, and will
extract a large element of *' forced gain/*


866 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION.

duction, but surplus elements at yaxious stages
of its advance, the final ])rice of the commodity
containing the aggregate of these costs and sur-
pluses.

The price of any ordinary material commodity
of a complex order will probably contain scores of
these elements derived from the component prices
of the productive goods and of portions of the
services of land, labour, and capital, which have
contributed to the final result.

In any given condition of industry, land, labour,
and capital will probably all share in this surplus,
but in very different proportions. Our general
analyses of the bargaining powers of owners o»
land and of many kinds of capital indicate that
in the bargains for the use of these factors their
owners will normally occupy the stronger position,
whereas in the bargains for the sale of labour-
power, the sellers (save in special cases where
they are aided by monopoly of skill or economic
opportunity) will be weaker than the buyers. If
the large portion of surplus which passes to the
commercial entrepreneur and the financial classes
be regarded as wages of management rather than
as interest upon the capital which they operate^
these grades of skilled labour must be regarded
as possessed of a monopoly of business opportuni-
ties which assigns high marginal rents of labour
to the work they undertake.

The fact that among these entrepreneur classes,


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLUB VALUE. 867

as also among the professional classes, some indi-
viduals fail to make a living, while among those
who succeed there is the widest variety of success,
must not blind us to the inequality of economic
and educational opportunities which secures for
these and other forms of skilled work marginal
rates of remuneration that measure the strength
of the protection which is applied to them.

§ 17. Surplus value, then, is not something which
emerges in the dealings of capital with labour or
of land with labour; it emerges in every competi-
tive bargain and adheres to the stronger bar-
gainer; it is only because in modem industry the
owner of capital, land, or business capacity is nor^
mally found to be the stronger bargainer, that he
obtains most of the surplus. Labour, even manual
labour in certain markets and at certain times,
shares this surplus, takes in wages what is not
essential to the maintenance of labour-power.
The fact that the labourer gets so little as com-
pared with the capitalist, landowner, and entre-
preneur^ ought not to lead us to adopt a false or
one-sided theory of the origin and nature of sur-
plus value. The amount and the proportion of
the surplus which goes to the owners of the sev-
eral factors will be determined by two general
conditions closely related to one another: (1) the
character of consumption; (2) the growth of in-
dustrial arts in relation to natural conditions of
supply. It i8 needless here to rehearse the chief


368 THE ECONOMICS OF DISTBIBUTION.

laws that govern these forces. It must suffice
briefly to summarise the influence which these
forces exercise upon distribution of the surplus.

(1) In a community where a rapid growth of
population, or a low order of individual culture,
causes a larger increase of effective demand for
common articles of food and other material goods
than for intellectual, artistic, and, in general, more
qualitative goods, the owners of sources of raw
materials and the organisers of manufacture and
of transport machinery will find the requisites
they own to be ever in larger demand, and the
proportion of surplus or "marginal rents " which
accrues to them wiU be larger. Whereas, in a
community where the demand for large masses of
material goods was subordinated to a growing
demand for highly qualitative goods, either mate-
rial or non-material in character, the demand for
land, machinery, and capital in general would be
reduced, the demand for skilled manual and men-
tal labour increased, and the surplus would tend
to be distributed in accordance with the new
conditions.

(2) Changes in the industrial arts wiU obvi-
ously affect distribution of the surplus by giving
a greater or' a less importance to one or other of
the factors. The application of machinery and
steam-power is, of co\^se, a most f amiUar example
of a substitution of capital for labour in the pro-
duction of a given quantity of many classes of


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 869

goods. But, as we have seen, the Law of Substi-
tution has countless applications; new materials,
new sources of supply of old materials, the open-
ing of new fields of cheap labour, the training of
large quantities of skilled labour, new processes
or methods of industrial organisation, — all these
familiar movements change the balance of power
in bargaining among the different classes of own-
ers of capital and labour- power who contribute to
the production of a commodity, and so affect the
distribution of the surplus.

§ 18. We may briefly sum up our reasoning as
follows: Distribution consists in, or is conducted
by, the process of fixing market-prices, the price
of goods in the various stages of production, and
the price of the use of the various forms of land,
capital, and labour, which are serviceable in pro-
duction. The sales of goods, of land-use, capital-
use, or labour-power in the various markets, are
conducted by a process of bargains which does
not even tend to an equal division between each
pair of bargainers of the gain of the bargaining,
bemg determined in part by the superior economic
strength or cunning of the marginal buyer or
seller, in part by the differential estimates of the
several buyers or sellers as measured from the
margin, which estimates are themselves referable
to a complex of unequal needs and economic
opportunities in the various bargainers on either
side.


360 THX JBC0N0MIC8 OF DISTRIBUTION.

In a very large proportion of these bargains one
side is notoriously the stronger, forcing a sale upon
conditions which giye to its members almost the
whole gain of the bargain, leaving to the weaker
only a minimum inducement. So far from com-
petition being free, it is fettered and impeded
everywhere by the growth of innumerable forms
and degrees of monopolies and forced gains. The
theory that the enlightened self-interest of pro-
ducers keeps down normal prices to the bare
expenses of production, and that in consequence
the whole gain of modem industrial improvements
filters down to the community in their capac-
ity of consumers, is seen to be quite unwarranted.
Indeed, the whole notion of the consumer as re-
siduary legatee is as groundless in theory as in
practice. There exists no such fourth party in
the working of distribution : the various owners
of land, capital, and labour take each according
to his strength. Thus emerges the true surplus
value, derived not from some vague, unintelligible
idea of tyranny, but from the various hindrances
to perfect equality of bargaining-power in the
owners of the various factors of production and
the consequent establishment of different forms
and pressures of economic force.

The recognition of this force explains the
opposing theories and policies of economics. For
the imperfection of equality of competition may
be met and overcome by securing equality of eco>


THE THEORY OF 8UBPLU8 VALUE. 361

nomic opportunity for individuals. This is the
idea of laissez-faire economists, though they have
commonly, or perhaps universally, failed to pro-
vide or even to advocate equality of opportunity
for obtaining possession or use of land and capital.
Or else, recognising the difficulty or the impossi-
bility of maintaining perfect equality in all depart-
ments of economic activity by the free play of
individual interests, we may allow such inequality
to issue in " forced gains," and afterward attempt
to redress this inequality by taxation. If this
method of redress prove too difficult or too uncer-
tain, economic progress will demand the substi-
tution of a public monopoly for those private
monopolies which inequality of economic oppor-
tunity has founded, and to which inequality of
bargaining assigns "forced gains."


DEMOCRACY AND EMPIRE

With Studies of their Psychological, Economic, and Moral Founda-
tions, by Franklin H. Giddings. Cloth. 8vo. $2.50

" The work as a whole is the most profound and closely reasoned defence of
territorial expansion that has yet appeared. . . . The volume is one of rare
thoughtfulness and insight. It is a calm, penetrating study .of the trend of
civilization and of our part in it, as seen in the light of history and of evolution-
ary philosophy.'' — The Chicago Tribune,

" The question which most interests both Professor Giddings and his readers
is the application of his facts, his sociology;, and his prophecy, to the future of
the American Empire. . . . The reader will rise from it with a broader charity
and with a more intelligent hope for the welfare of his country."

— The Independent.

THE PRINCIPLES OF SOCIOLOGY

An Analysis of Phenomena of Association and of Social Organiza-
tion, by Franklin Henry Giddings, M.A. (Columbia
University Press.) 8vo. Cloth. $3.00, net


u


It is a treatise which will confirm the highest expectations of those who
have expected much from this alert observer and vinle thinker. Beyond a
reasonable doubt, the volume is the ablest and most thorouzhly satisfactory
treatise on the subject in the English language." — Literary World,

"The distinctive merit of the work is that it is neither economics nor
history. . . . He has found a new field and devoted his energies to its exploita-
tion. . . . The chapters on Social Population and on Social Constitution are
among the best in the book. It is here that the method of Professor Giddings
shows itself to the best advantage. The problems of anthropology and ethnology
are also fully and ably handled. Of the other parts I like best of all the dis-
cussion of tradition and as social choices; on these topics he shows the greatest
orighiality. I have not the space to take up these or other doctrines in detail,
nor would such work be of much value. A useful book must be read to be
understood."— Professor Simon N. Pattbn, in Science.

THE ELEMENTS OF SOCIOLOGY

A Text-Book for Colleges and Schools, by Franklin Henry
Giddings, M.A., Professor of Sociology in Columbia Univer-
sity. 8vo. Qoth. $1.10 M^/


M '


It is thorou{;hly intelligent, independent, and suggestive, amd manifests an
unaffected enthusiasm for social progress, and (m the whole a just ahd sober
apprehension of the conditions and essential features of such progress."

Professor H. Sidgwick in The Economic Journal.

** Of its extreme interest, its suggestiveness. its helpfulness to a reader to
whom social questions are important, but who nas not time or inclination for
special study, we can bear sincere and grateful testimony."— iV>w Vorh Timet.

" Professor Giddings impresses the reader equally by his independence of
judgment and by his thorough mastery of every subject that comes into his
view."— The Churchman.


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK


The Qtizen's Library of Economics^

\f and Sociology


Uin)XR THE GENSSAL BDITORSHIP OP

RICHARD T. SLY, PIlD., LL.D.

Dirtcifr if As Sch^oi of EeMt0tmict, and PoUHeal Seitncg ami Huimy:
Fr^fu—r ff PoUUcal Ec^tmasf at tks Unio^rH^ qf IVi*


MONOPOLIES AlTD TRUSTS

By Richard T. Ely, Ph.D., LLJ). Half Morocco. 121110.

$1.25

"It is admiwHo It if the Mondest oontribntioB on the solgect tliat has
appealed."— PioiiBSior John R. Commons.

" By all odds the best written of Professor Ely's works."

— Fxoiessor Simon N. Pattbn, Univeisity of Peon.

THE ECONOMICS OF DISTRIBUTION

By John A. Hobson, author of "The Eyolution of Modem
Capitalisiii," etc

IN PREPARATION FOR EARLY ISSUE ARE

ESSAYS IN THE MONETARY HISTORY OF
THE UNITED STATES

By Charles J. Bullock, Ph.D., AMiituit Ftolenor cf
Political Economy, Williams College.

ECONOMIC CRISES

By Edward D. Jones, Ph.D^ Instmctor In Eoonomics and
Statistics, Unirersity of WisconriiL

WORLD POLITICS

By Paul S. Reinsch, Ph J)., LL.B., Aniatant FtofoKw of
Political Science, Uniyersity of Wisconsin.

GOVERNMENT IN SWITZERLAND

By John Martin Vincent, Fh.D., Associate ProfesKX of
History, Johns Hopkins Uniyersity.

HISTORY OF POLITICAL PARTIES IN THE
UNITED STATES

By Jesse Macy, LLJD., Professor of Political Science in Iowa
CbUege.


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

« niTH AVKiniX, HXW YORK
