The Industrial System
John A. Hobson (1909)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): John A. Hobson's 'The Industrial System: An Inquiry into Earned and Unearned Income' (London: Longmans, Green, 1909). Scan via Internet Archive (University of California). Scan artifacts trimmed from the front; ends with the edition's index, 'THE END' and printer's imprint. This 1909 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM


THE


INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM

AN INQUIRY INTO

EARNED  AND  UNEARNED  INCOME


BY


J.  A. HOBSON

AUTHOR  OF  'THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MODERN  CAPITALISM,'  ETC.


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW.  LONDON

NEW  YORK,  BOMBAY,  AND  CALCUTTA

1909

All righis reserved


PREFACE

It  may  fairly  be  claimed  of  anyone  who  puts  forth  a  volume  with
so  comprehensive  a  title,  that  he  shall  present  in  his  Preface  a
prima  facie  case  for  his  claim  that  it  shall  be  read.  Perhaps  the
best  way  of  doing  this  is  to  explain  how  and  why  it  came  to  be
written.  As  a  student  of  those  economic  writings  which  professed
to  set  forth  the  general  principles  of  modern  industry,  I  failed  to
find  any  consistent  and  convincing  exposition  of  the  methods  by
which  wealth,  the  product  of  industry,  was  distributed  among  the
owners  of  the  several  factors  of  production.  After  one  or  two
unsatisfactory  attempts  to  formulate  an  independent  theory  of
distribution  by  correlating  the  accepted  laws  of  rent,  wages,  and
interest,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  proper  way  to  under-
stand how  wealth  was  distributed  was  to  study  the  various  sorts
of  acts  of  distribution,  i.e.  the  payments  actually  made  to  owners
of  labour,  ability,  land,  and  capital,  in  the  different  processes  of
industry.  This  involves  as  a  preliminary  the  construction  of  an
image  of  the  actual  concrete  system  of  industry.  With  this  object
in  view,  in  the  opening  chapters  of  this  book  I  have  endeavoured
to  describe,  first,  the  structure  of  the  various  types  of  business ;  then
their  grouping  in  a  trade ;  next,  the  relations  of  a  trade  to  the
trades  which  precede  it  or  succeed  it  in  a  stream  of  industrial
and  commercial  processes  converting  raw  materials  into  final
commodities ;  and  finally,  the  contacts  which  these  several  streams
of  industry  have  with  one  another  by  drawing  upon  common
sources  of  material  and  power  and  by  supplying  wants  related  by
sympathy  or  opposition  in  standards  of  consumption.  In  other
words,  I  have  sought  to  give  a  true  outline  picture  of  the  industrial
system  of  the  present  day  as  a  single  organic  whole,  continuously
engaged  in  converting  raw  materials  into  commodities,  and  appor-
tioning them  by  a  continuous  series  of  payments  as  incomes  to  the
owners  of  the  factors  of  production  in  the  different  processes.

This  continuous  distribution  of  the  products  is  achieved  by  a
number  of  detailed  money  prices  paid  to  workers,  capitalists,  land-
owners, entrepreneurs,  for  productive  services  rendered,  and  each
pa37ment  evokes  a  fresh  application  of  productive  power. The


vi  PREFACE

primary  effect  of  this  distribution  of  wealth  is  to  cause  the  different
factors  of  production  to  dispose  themselves  in  the  appropriate
forms  and  quantities  throughout  the  industrial  system,  and  to  give
out  their  full  productive  power  in  regular  response  to  the  stimuli  of
payments.

If  we  were  justified  in  holding  that  the  whole  of  the  product  of
industry  was  thus  regularly  and  automatically  absorbed  in  the
payments  necessary  to  evoke  from  the  owners  of  the  factors  the
output  of  this  productive  energy,  no  problem  of  distribution  would
arise.  Such  has  in  effect  been  the  assumption  underlying  the  main
body  of  authoritative  economic  theory  in  this  and  other  countries.
Competitive  industry,  it  was  held,  actually  apportions  the  product
among  the  various  classes  of  producers  according  to  the  respective
importance  of  the  services  they  render,  and  such  portions  are  nor-
mally the  minimum  payments  required  to  secure  these  services.
To  this  '  law '  there  has  been  one  exception  and  one  qualification.
The  economic  rent  of  land,  the  payment  made  to  land-owners  as
such,  though  usually  justified  on  other  grounds,  political  or  eco-
nomic, was  never  regarded  as  a  payment  necessary  to  evoke  the
use  of  land.  This  was  the  exception.  The  qualification  consisted
in  recognising  some  '  friction  '  or  failure  in  the  complete  fluidity  of
competition  in  the  other  factors  of  production,  causing  a  certain
quantity  of  waste  in  the  application  of  the  stimuli  to  production.
But  normally,  it  was  held,  distribution  took  place  by  means  of  a
number  of  minimum  payments  necessary  to  evoke  the  continued
use  of  labour,  capital,  and  ability,  while  the  '  rent  '  paid  to  land-
owners was  not  a  deduction  from  the  proper  and  economically
necessary  share  of  any  class  of  producers,  but  a  '  surplus.'  So
long  as  no  serious  attempt  was  made  to  regard  industry  as  a  single
living  system,  some  plausibility  attached  to  this  view,  which  was
enforced  by  the  statement  of  separate  laws  regulating  the  payment
of  labour,  capital,  ability,  and  enterprise.

The  criticism  poured  from  various  quarters  upon  this  rigorous
laissez  faire  theory  was  usually  vitiated  by  the  same  '  separatist  '
treatment,  the  same  failure  to  realise  an  industrial  system  in  which
production  and  distribution  are  continuous  and  inseparable  pro-
cesses. The  conception  of  a  '  surplus,'  to  the  recognition  of  which
Ricardo  in  this  country  had  given  the  sharpest  emphasis,  gave
rise  to  several  conflicting  theories  of  distribution.  A  '  land  '  school
of  economists  arose,  who  argued  that  while  competition  works  well
enough  in  the  relations  of  capital  and  labour,  the  private  possession
of  land  enables  its  owners  to  take  as  their  surplus  the  whole  of  the
growing  product  of  industry  beyond  the  minimum  payment  required
to  maintain  labour  and  capital  m  the  present  state  of  productive


PREFACE  vii

efficiency.  A  '  socialist  '  school  claimed  that  employers  took  this
surplus  as  fast  as  it  was  produced  by  labour,  keeping  most  of  it
as  '  unearned  '  profits  and  interest,  and  handing  the  rest  to  land-
owners as  rent.  A  third  variation  in  what  is  essentially  the  same
separatist  analysis,  presented  most  effectively  by  General  Walker,
contended  that  after  capital  and  ability  had  been  paid  their  neces-
sary minimum  rewards  the  main  body  of  the  surplus  passed  to
wages,  labour  being  the  residual  claimant  to  the  increasing  product.
Now  the  presentation  offered  here  destroys  the  fallacious  sim-
plicity of  the  separatist  analysis  of  a  competitive  system.  In  the  first
place,  it  defines  the  problem  of  distribution  by  drawing  the  funda-
mental distinction  between  costs  and  surplus.  Costs,  or  the  payments
necessary  to  evoke  and  maintain  the  use  of  the  existing  powers
of  production,  represent  the  permanent  harmony  between  capital,
labour,  and  ability  ;  the  distribution  of  that  portion  of  the  product
required  for  this  purpose  admits  of  no  real  disturbance  or  evasion.
Where  industry  creates  a  product  larger  than  is  needed  for  these
costs  of  maintenance,  the  surplus  is  not,  however,  distributed  by
any  such  necessary  law.  It  is  taken  by  the  owners  of  the  several
factors  of  production  in  accordance  with  the  economic  '  pull  '  they
are  respectively  able  to  exercise.  The  strength  of  this  pull  varies
with  the  degree  of  scarcity,  natural  or  contrived,  which  the  owners
of  a  factor  are  able  to  secure  for  the  factor,  and  with  the  economic
importance  attaching  to  this  scarcity.  A  '  monopoly  '  of  land,
where  it  exists,  is  evidently  able  to  take  the  whole  of  any  surplus
beyond  necessary  costs  :  but  this  is  also  true  of  a  monopoly  of
any  other  special  requisite  of  production  in  a  particular  industry.
Investigation  of  the  actual  course  of  modern  industry  shows  that,
wherever  the  different  factors  are  co-operating  in  the  various  pro-
cesses of  production,  one  or  other  will  be  relatively  scarce,  and  will
be  able  to  take  a  surplus  payment  by  refusing  to  co-operate  unless
it  gets  it.  Sometimes  it  will  be  a  particular  sort  of  land,  sometimes
of  capital,  sometimes  of  ability,  or  even  of  manual  labour,  that  will
take  this  surplus.  No  single  factor  can  be  regarded  as  the  residual
claimant.  The  '  surplus  '  passes  in  innumerable  fragments  to  the
owners  of  a  scarce  factor  of  production  wherever  it  is  found.  The
'  natural '  scarcity  of  land  does  not  secure  for  its  owners  any  power
to  take  a  larger  share  of  surplus  than  the  artificial  scarcities  which
capital  or  specialised  ability  are  able  to  enjoy  in  many  fields  of
industry.  Only  by  following  closely  the  actual  course  of  each
stream  of  industry  by  which  raw  materials  pass  by  various  processes
of  manufacture,  transport,  and  commerce,  into  the  possession  of
consumers,  can  we  ascertain  the  different  forms  and  sizes  of  extra
payment  or  surplus  that  emerge.


viii  PREFACE

But  in  considering  the  economic  nature  and  functions  of  this
surplus  a  distinction  of  prime  importance  arises  between  that  por-
tion which,  though  not  requisite  to  sustain  the  current  rate  of
productivity  in  the  factor  that  receives  it,  operates  so  as  to  evoke
and  feed  an  increased  or  an  improved  supply  of  productivity,  and
that  which  exercises  no  such  power.  Some  '  surplus,'  coming  as  a
rise  of  interest,  profit,  or  wages,  causes  growth  in  the  industrial
structure  by  bringing  into  productive  use  more  or  better  capital,
labour,  or  ability.  This  may  be  classed  as  '  productive  surplus.'
So  far  as  the  industrial  system  provides  for  the  due  application  of
this  portion  of  the  surplus  to  promote  increased  productivity,  no
conflict  of  distribution  arises,  and  no  waste.  But  where  scarcity
enables  a  factor  to  extort  a  price  for  its  use  which  is  not  effective
for  stimulating  an  increased  or  an  improved  supply,  such  surplus
is  unproductive.  *  Unproductive  surplus  '  includes  the  whole  of
the  economic  rent  of  land,  and  such  payments  made  to  capital,
ability,  or  labour,  in  the  shape  of  high  interests,  profits,  salaries,  or
wages,  as  do  not  tend  to  evoke  a  fuller  or  a  better  productivity  of
these  factors.

This  unproductive  surplus  is  the  principal  source  not  merely  of
waste  but  of  economic  malady.  For  it  represents  the  encroach-
ment of  a  stronger  factor  upon  a  fund  which  is  needed,  partly  for
increasing  the  efficiency  of  other  factors,  labour  in  particular,  partly
as  social  income  to  be  expended  in  enlarging  and  improving  public
life.  This  unproductive  surplus,  moreover,  as  '  unearned  income  '
acts  upon  its  recipients  as  a  premium  on  idleness  and  inefficiency :
spent  capriciously  on  luxuries,  it  imparts  irregularity  of  employ-
ment to  the  trades  which  furnish  these ;  saved  excessively,  it  upsets
the  right  balance  between  the  volume  of  production  and  consump-
tion in  the  industrial  system.

The  '  unproductive  surplus  '  therefore  represents  the  failure  of
the  competitive  system  to  compete  :  it  represents  the  powers  of
combination  and  monopoly.  Our  actual  study  of  the  forms  and
forces  of  combination  in  the  various  branches  of  the  extractive
industries,  manufacture,  commerce,  transport,  and  finance  shows
'  free  competition  '  prevailing  over  a  very  limited  area  of  business
operations,  while  everywhere  else  natural  or  artificial  combination
takes  forcible  toll  at  some  point  or  other  in  the  stream  of  industry.
Instead,  however,  of  imputing  this  abuse  of  economic  power  to  some
single  class — the  land-owner,  the  entrepreneur,  the  capitalist — we  find
this  surplus  composed  of  forced  gains  extracted  in  many  diverse
ways  wherever  the  use  of  any  factor  of  production  is  bought  or  sold.

As  '  unearned  income '  this  unproductive  surplus  is  seen  to  be
the  only  properly  taxable  body,  for  any  tax  which  falls  upon  that


PREFACE  ix

income  which  is  either  cost  of  production  or  productive  surplus
encroaches  on  the  fund  of  maintenance  or  progress,  thus  reducing
the  future  efficiency  of  industry.  It  is,  therefore,  of  paramount
importance  to  the  State  to  discover  the  forms  and  the  magnitude
of  the  '  unproductive  surplus.'  For  a  sound  fiscal  policy  will  be
directed  to  secure  for  the  State  from  this  source  such  public  income
as  it  requires  for  the  development  of  public  services.  Only  in  the
light  of  this  same  conception  can  an  economic  justification  be  found
for  Trade  Unionism  and  those  other  movements  by  which  labour
endeavours  by  private  or  political  organisation  to  secure  for  wages
a  larger  share  of  the  industrial  product.

In  seeking  to  give  more  precision  to  the  conception  of  a  surplus
fund  of  wealth  available  for  industrial  and  social  progress,  I  have
been  forced  to  depart  from  the  ordinary  method  of  measuring  the
productive  power  of  land,  labour,  capital,  and  ability.  To  construct
any  consistent  industrial  system  in  which  the  payment  for  land  is
per  acre  per  annum,  for  capital  per  ;^ioo  per  annum,  for  labour  per
man  per  hour,  is  quite  impracticable.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary
to  regard  industrial  power  as  issuing  from  the  factors  in  standard
units,  good  acres  or  men  or  machines  giving  out  more  of  these
units,  bad  ones  less.  This  unitary  method  of  measuring  industrial
power  and  of  paying  for  it  gets  rid  of  a  noxious  fallacy  by  which
'  margins  '  of  the  various  factors  have  been  supposed  to  exercise  a
regulative  and  a  causative  influence,  upon  expenses  of  production  on
the  one  hand,  the  course  of  distribution  on  the  other.  For  the
unitary  method  of  measurement  shows  that  all  '  margins  '  are
themselves  determined,  and  that  the  land,  capital,  and  labour  on
the  '  margin  '  exercise  no  peculiar  influence  whatever  upon  costs,
prices,  or  distribution.  Only  by  study  of  the  actual  conditions  of
the  markets  for  the  sale  of  the  uses  of  the  several  factors  of  pro-
duction and  of  the  various  sorts  of  goods  and  services  that  are  in
process  of  production  can  we  learn  how  far  the  industrial  system  is
competitive,  distributing  wealth  economically  as  necessary  stimuli
of  industry,  or  how  far  combinative,  distributing  unearned  incomes
which  depress  industry  and  disorganise  the  system.  In  such  a
study  one  point  of  great  significance  emerges — the  growing  part
taken  by  finance  in  the  regulation  and  direction  of  modern  industry,
and  the  increasing  share  of  the  surplus  which  tends  to  pass  into  the
hands  of  the  entrepreneurs  and  capitalists  who  apply  their  enter-
prise and  capital  through  instruments  of  general  finance.  Though
no  full  or  sufficient  discussion  of  Socialism  falls  'v\ithin  the  scope  of
this  volume,  an  attempt  is  made  to  interpret  the  main  current  of
modern  industrial  and  social  legislation  as  an  endeavour  to  regulate
the  disposal  of  the  '  surplus  '  for  the  improvement  of  the  conditions
of  the  labouring  classes,  on  the  one  hand,  and  for  the  enlargement

«3


X  PREFACE

of  the  productive  and  regulative  activities  of  the  State,  on  the
other.  A  survey  of  industry,  indicating  those  processes  in  which
combination  is  most  successfully  displacing  competition,  is  of
supreme  importance  for  the  understanding  of  the  development  of
the  economic  functions  of  the  modern  State,  alike  from  the  stand-
point of  the  student  and  from  that  of  the  statesman.

Of  some  of  the  defects  of  this  treatment  I  am  well  aware,  though
others  may  have  escaped  me.  Not  a  few  important  controversial
issues  have  been  ignored  or  slighted,  such  as  the  effect  of  rate  of
interest  on  saving  and  the  intricacies  of  taxation  of  monopolies.
But,  in  opening  out  an  interpretation  of  industry  which  applied
unusual  methods  and  necessitated  some  complexity  of  reasoning,
I  have  felt  it  essential  to  keep  as  closely  as  possible  to  my  main
purpose,  and  not  to  turn  aside  into  controversial  by-paths  even  for
the  purpose  of  meeting  anticipated  criticism.  ^

How  far  I  have  succeeded  in  presenting  a  coherent,  intelligible
account  of  the  main  operations  of  industry,  and  in  particular  of  the
origin  and  nature  of  the  '  unproductive  surplus,'  I  cannot  foresee.
For  though  I  have  avoided  as  far  as  possible  the  more  abstract
terminology  of  economic  science,  I  have  been  compelled  to  impart
either  a  somewhat  novel  or  a  selected  meaning  to  a  few  terms
often  used  in  other  or  in  various  meanings,  in  order  to  obtain  the
necessary  instruments  for  my  analysis.  Though  I  have  tried  to
give  the  requisite  precision  to  such  terms  as  '  Cost,'  '  Expenses,'
*  Surplus,'  '  Profit,'  and  the  like,  history  has  worn  them  into  such
smoothness  and  plasticity  that  there  always  remains  a  risk  of  their
turning  in  one's  hands  or  working  out  of  line  in  use.  This  I  have
tried  for  my  own  benefit,  as  for  that  of  readers,  to  guard  against,
by  hanging  in  the  entrance  door  a  standard  measure  of  the  meaning
of  the  chief  of  these  terms,  though  fully  aware  that  the  logic  of  the
social  sciences  is  such  that  in  so  doing  I  am  forging  weapons  for  the
use  of  hostile  criticism.

In  conclusion,  I  desire  to  express  my  deep  sense  of  gratitude  to
several  friends  who  have  been  so  kind  as  to  read  the  whole  or
portions  of  the  manuscript  of  this  work,  and  in  particular  to
Professor  E.  J.  Urwick  and  Professor  L.  T.  Hobhouse,  to  whose
valuable  criticism  I  am  indebted  for  the  removal  of  many  errors
which  would  have  otherwise  escaped  detection,  and  for  many
improvements  in  my  argument.

J. A. HOBSON.
March  1909.

'  The  single  exception  to  this  rule  is  in  the  shape  of  a  short  formal  refutation
of  the  central  fallacies  of  the  modern  '  marginal  theory  of  distribution  '  as  set
forth  by  certain  prominent  American  and  English  economists.  This  controversial
argument  is  contained  in  an  Appendix  to  Chapter  V.


THE  MEANING  OF  TERMS

1.  Costs  are  that  part  of  the  product,  or  its  equivalent  in  other  goods,
necessary  as  payments  to  maintain  the  current  output  of  productive  energy
in  a  factor  of  production.

2.  Surplus  is  that  part  of  the  product  which  remains  after  costs  are
defrayed. It  is  divisible  into  productive  and  unproductive  surplus.

3.  Productive  Surplus  consists  of  such  payments  to  owners  of  factors
of  production  in  excess  of  cost  as  are  necessary  to  evoke  such  increase  of
industrial  structure  or  power  as  can,  by  co-operation  v>ith  a  proportionate
growth  of  other  factors,  yield  an  increased  quantity  or  improved  quality  of
product.

4.  Unproductive  Surplus  consists  of  such  payments  (in  the  form  of  rent,
excessive  interest,  profit,  or  salary)  to  owners  of  factors  of  production  as
evoke  no  such  increase  of  product.

5.  Expenses  of  Production  are  payments  which  must  be  made  to  owners
of  the  several  factors  of  production  under  the  actual  conditions  of  the  market
for  the  supply  of  those  factors.  They  comprise  (i)  costs,  (2)  any  productive
or  unproductive  surplus  accruing  to  the  owner  of  a  factor  of  production
through  natural  or  contrived  scarcity  of  supply.

6.  Supply  means  (i)  the  amount  offered  for  sale  at  a  given  price  in  a
given  time,  or  (2)  the  rate  at  which  goods  enter  a  market.

7.  Demand  means  (i)  the  amount  withdrawn  from  supply,  i.e.  demanded,
at  a  given  price  in  a  given  time,  or  (2)  the  rate  at  which  goods  pass  out  of  a
market.

8.  Price-change  is  the  monetary  register  of  a  change  in  the  relations
between  Supply  and  Demand.

9.  Profit  is  the  portion  of  the  product  left  to  the  undertaker  or  controller
of  a  business  after  the  expenses  of  the  factors  of  land,  capital,  and  labour  have
been  defrayed.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  I

A BUSINESS

PAGES

■  §  I.  Businesses  are  units  of  production,  extractive,  manufacturings-
transport,  trading,  financial,  professional,  artistic,  recreative,  domestic. —
§  2.  Businesses  differ  in  (a)  size,  (b)  relative  importance  of  their  factors,
(c)  ownership  and  control.— §  3.  Capital  comprises  buildings,  machines
and  tools,  fittings,  fuel  or  power,  materials,  stock,  money,  some  of  which
are  '  fixed,'  others  *  circulating.'  Land,  labour  and  management  are
treated  as  separate  factors. ........ i-io


CHAPTER  II

TRADES  AND  THEIR  PLACE  IN  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

§  I.  Businesses  are  recognised  as  members  of  a  trade,  with  sym-
pathies and  antagonisms  arising  from  the  fact  that  they  are  buyers  and
sellers  in  the  same  markets. — §  2.  Markets  and  trades  differ  widely  in
area  and  in  degree  of  contact.  Trades  are  found  to  arrange  them-
selves in  series  contributing  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  production  of
classes  of  goods.  Earlier  processes  are  more  general,  later  processes
more  special. — §  3.  The  general  currents  of  production  are  connected,
drawing  from  common  sources,  and  form  a  single  stream  of  industry.
Certain  fundamental  trades,  agriculture  and  mining,  are  connecting
links,  and  transport  is  a  strong  bond  of  unit  v. — §  4.  Numerous  relations
of  harmony  and  opposition  exist  between  the  several  trades,  (a)  drawing
on  common  sources  of  supply,  (b)  complementary  or  competitive  in  their
products  or  processes. — §  5.  Trades  are  also  related  through  standards
of  consumption. — §  6.  Every  force  affecting  one  trade  passes  on  by
industrial  or  local  contagion  to  others,  some  forces  being  spent  locally,
others  spreading  through  the  industrial  system .  .  .  .11-38


CHAPTER  III

SPENDING AND SAVING

§  I.  In  any  series  of  processes  directly  and  indirectly  producing
any  class  of  goods,  a  quantitative  relation  must  subsist  between  the
capital  and  labour  employed  in  the  several  processes  ;  also  between
the  rate  of  production  and  the  rate  of  consumption,  or  withdrawal.
This  rule  will  also  hold  of  industry  as  a  whole. — §  2.  In  a  stationary
society  the  money  spent  by  consumers,  passing  up  the  industrial  stream,
stimulates  the  continuous  processes  of  production  and  furnishes  all
money  incomes.  The  real  income  consists  of  commodities  and  services,
which  are  consumed  as  fast  as  they  are  produced. — §  3.  In  a  progressive

xiii


xiv  CONTENTS

PAGES

society  some  money-income  must  be  saved,  i.e.  applied  to  buy
more  new  capital-goods.  Saving  is  a  stimulation  of  certain  parts  of
the  industrial  system  in  preparation  for  enhanced  spending  and  con-
sumption. Individual  saving  need  not  cause  increase  of  productive
capital,  social  saving  must. — §  4.  There  exists  at  any  time  an  economi-
cally right  ratio  of  saving  to  spending,  having  regard  to  the  probable
growth  of  future  consumption  and  the  changes  in  industrial  arts.
This  right  adjustment  may  be  disturbed  by  over-spending  or  over-saving  39-55


CHAPTER  IV

COSTS AND SURPLUS

§  I.  Production  and  distribution  are  simultaneous  and  in  a  sense
identical  processes.  Payments  for  factors  of  production  are  orders  on
goods.  The  payment  of  the  entrepreneur  requires  separate  treatment. — -
§  2.  For  a  theory  of  distribution  co-ordination  of  the  factors  is  the  first
essential.  Capitalisation  and  differential  grading  are  both  defective
bases.  Productive  powers  must  be  expressed  in  standard  units. —
§  3.  The  first  charge  on  the  product  is  the  subsistence  wage.— §  4.  A
rise  in  price  per  unit  of  labour  stimulates  an  increased  supply,  by  calling
in  more  labourers  or  intensifying  labour.  Similarly,  improved  qualities
of  labour  are  evoked  by  the  stimulus  of  higlier  pay. — §  5.  Capital  has
two  similar  costs,  first  of  subsistence,  second  of  growth.  Minimum
interest  is  a  cost  of  subsistence.  — §  6.  Capital  may  be  graded  like  labour
into  different  markets  with  different  market  prices  per  unit.  A  rise
of  interest  stimulates  saving. — §  7.  Land,  as  regards  maintenance  and
increase,  ranks  as  capital. — §  8.  So  far  as  '  costs  S  are  concerned,
harmony  exists  in  the  industrial  system  ;  the  '  surplus  '  introduces  dis-
cord.— §  9.  Modern  industry,  enhancing  the  surplus,  emphasises  the
discord  ........... 56-81


CHAPTER  V

WAGES, INTEREST, AND RENT

§  I.  Family  maintenance  is  the  basis  of  a  wage-system.  Individual
wages  are  adjusted  to  the  wages  obtainable  by  other  members  of
the  family. — §  2.  Grade  wages  vary  with  the  physical  and  moral  con-
ditions of  the  work :  many  factors,  personal,  adventitious,  social,
determine  the  price  per  unit  of  the  different  sorts  of  labour-power. —
§  3.  The  tendency  of  wages  towards  a  minimum  is  normally  true.  The
seller  is  usually  weaker  than  the  buyer  in  the  bargain. — §  4.  Non-com-
petitive conditions  qualify  this  tendency.  A  scarcity  or  surplus  wage
sometimes  is  obtained. — §  5.  Combinations  secure  similar  surplus
interest  for  capital. — §  6.  Rent  of  land,  though  not  a  '  cost,'  is  an
'  expense  of  production,'  measured  in  terms  of  the  price  of  units  of
land-power.  There  are  many  supplies  of  land  for  different  uses  :  the
worst  or  '  marginal '  land  for  each  use  pays  least  rent,  because  it  yields
the  smallest  number  of  units. — §  7.  Margins  are  directly  '  determined
by,'  do  not  directly  '  determine,'  prices  of  land-use.  All  three  factors
have  their  margins,  which  similarly  rise  and  fall  with  rise  or  fall  of  prices.
Price  changes,  however,  may  affect  supply  not  at  the  extensive  margin
but  at  some  higher  point,  or  at  the  intensive  margin. — §  8.  Differential
rents,  then,  play  no  real  part  in  formulating  a  theory  of  distribution. —
§  9.  Unproductive  surplus,  entering  into  prices,  is  a  'necessary'
payment  only  so  long  as  '  monopoly  '  or  '  scarcity  '  is  maintained 82-114


CONTENTS  XV

CHAPTER  VI

ABILITY

PAGES

§  I.  A  modern  business  is  an  organisation.  Organisation  is  a  process
enabling  the  various  factors  to  function  more  productively.  The  cause
or  condition  of  an  enlarged  product,  it  requires  a  payment  therefrom.
The  organiser's  payment,  or  profit,  depends  on  the  size  of  this  enlarged
product  and  the  amount  he  can  hold  in  competition  with  other
organisers. — §  2.  Where  equal  opportunities  exist  for  '  undertaking,'
profits  are  at  a  minimum.  The  power  of  the  entrepreneur  lies  in  areas
of  progressive  industry.  His  main  function  is  the  application  of  profit-
able notions. — §  3.  Profit  is,  however,  applied  to  payments  for  several
sorts  of  '  creative'  or  '  competitive'  work.  Profit  is  less  regular  and  less
fixed  than  the  payment  for  other  factors. — §  4.  Profit  is  represented
as  the  necessary  price  of  progress.  But  it  is  not  actually  applied  so
as  to  evoke  the  maximum  ability.  Nor  does  competition  normally  serve
to  keep  profit  at  the  economic  minimum.  So  ability  can  take  a  larger
quantity  of  '  surplus,'  often  '  sweating  •  the  investor  as  well  as  the
labourer. — §  5.  The  entrepreneur  comes  nearest  to  the  position  of  residual
claimant. — §  6.  But  no  sharp  separation  of  profit  from  other  payments
is  feasible,  though  certain  sorts  of  ability  obtain  an  increasing  share
of  wealth  in  modern  industry ....... 115-129


CHAPTER  VII

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SURPLUS BY PULLS

§  I.  Free  competition  can  furnish  no  theory  for  the  distribution  of  the
surplus,  which,  accumulating  at  various  stages  of  production,  is  repre-
sented in  the  prices  of  commodities. — §  2.  A  classification  of  the
different  sorts  of  surplus  exhibits  them  as  waste,  impairing  efficiency.
— §  3.  Prices  of  various  final  commodities  contain  different  proportions
of  surplus  :  some  surpluses  are  permanent,  others  evanescent  . 130-138


CHAPTER  VIII

PRICES AND THE RATIO OF EXCHANGE

§  I.  Neither  marginal  costs  nor  marginal  expenses  can  afford  an
explanation  of  rates  of  exchange  for  goods. — §  2.  The  '  marginal '
determination  is  based  on  a  false  imputation  of  separate  costs  to  different
parts  of  a  supply.  Neither  theory  nor  business  practice  supports  the
separation.  Normal,  not  marginal,  expenses  determine  supply  prices.
Productive  power  tends  to  flow  into  the  most  efficient  bu.siness  type,
and  the  expenses  of  this  normal  business  regulate  prices.  This  holds
both  of  manufacture  and  of  agriculture. — §  3.  In  any  given  market
mean  expenses  govern  prices.  The  same  analysis  applies  to  demand
prices  :  mean,  not  marginal,  utility  determines  them.  Selling  prices
are  the  equilibrium  of  mean  expenses  and  mean  utility,  as  expressed
through  demand  .......... 139-148


xvi  CONTENTS

CHAPTER  IX

THE MECHANISM OF MARKETS


§  I.  Economic  bargaining  approaches  but  does  not  usually  reach  a
definite  market  price.— §  2.  An  equilibrium  of  supply  and  demand  prices
involves  infinite  divisibility  of  the  supply. ^§  3.  Various  restrictions
impair  the  '  freedom  '  of  a  market ...... 149-155

II

§  I.  Analysis  of  the  different  markets  for  the  sale  of  factors  of  pro-
duction and  of  goods  and  commodities  shows  that  free  bargaining  only
operates  over  a  small  portion  of  the  industrial  field. — §  2.  Most  final
commodities  contain  elements  of  surplus  which  pass  into  their  price
by  '  pulls  '  or  '  scarcity  rents  '  at  various  stages  of  production . 155-162


CHAPTER  X

THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND

§  I.  Supply  and  demand  must  be  treated  as  '  flows,'  not  '  fixed
funds.'  Price-change  is  then  seen  as  shifting  Avith  the  rate  of  flow  :  its
cause  will  be  an  increase  or  decrease  of  demand  in  relation  to  supply. —
§  2.  Industrial  causes  affecting  supply  relate  to  (a)  changes  in  economy
of  industrial  arts,  (b)  changes  in  supply  of  the  several  factors. — §  3.  On
the  demand  side,  (i)  changes  in  the  art  of  consumption,  (2)  changes  in
the  number  of  consumers  or  their  aggregate  income,  are  disturbing
influences  on  prices. — §4.  A  fall  in  expenses  of  production  will  affect
price  according  to  '  elasticity  of  demand.'  There  maj-  be  several
possible  new  price  levels. — §  5.  Elasticity  of  demand  varies  with
(1)  the  degree  of  importance  attaching  to  the  article,  (2)  the  effect
of  a  price  change  upon  the  other  elements  in  a  standard  of  consump-
tion.— §  6.  Elasticity  of  supply  is  quicker  and  less  calculable  in  its
working,  for  the  arts  of  production  are  less  conservative  than  the  arts
of  consumption  ......... 163-176


CHAPTER  XI

THE SIZE OF BUSINESSES

§  I.  There  is  no  universal  tendency  for  businesses  to  grow  in  size.
The  extractive  industries  show  large  numbers  of  small  business  forms. —
§  2.  Transport  in  all  advanced  countries  tends  towards  large  capitalistic
forms.  So  does  manufacture  in  its  chief  staple  branches. — §  3.  Whole-
sale trade  is  in  big  and  growing  forms  :  retail  trade  shows  opposite
tendencies,  though  the  small  surviving  businesses  have  only  a  semi-
independence.  Finance  is  a  domain  of  large  businesses  :  the  arts  and
professions  of  small  businesses ....... 177-184


CONTENTS  xvii

CHAPTER  XII

TRUSTS AND MONOPOLIES

PAGES

§  I.  The  size  of  '  the  cheapest  unit  of  production  '  is  determined  by
the  relative  importance  of  (i)  cost  of  raw  materials,  (2)  wages,
(3)  standing  expenses,  in  the  several  sorts  of  industry. — §  2.  The  cheapest
business  unit  may  exceed  the  cheapest  establishment  unit.  Businesses
may  grow  beyond  the  unit  of  cheap  production,  seeking  the  largest
aggregate  profit. — §  3.  Trusts  or  combinations,  largely  exceeding  the
'  cheapest  unit,'  may  arise,  provided  they  have  superior  access  to
materials  or  power  or  transport,  tariff  supports  or  other  legal  privileges.
— §  4.  The  United  States  Steel  Corporation  illustrates  the  growth  of  a
trust  by  lateral  and  vertical  expansion.  But  the  chief  experiments  of
capitalism  are  in  forms  of  federal  business  structure. — §  5.  The  power
of  a  trust  or  other  monopoly  over  prices  is  always  limited,  by  elasticity
of  demand  and  by  substitution.  Its  control  over  labour,  though  great,
is  seldom  absolute ......... 185-200


CHAPTER  XIII

THE LABOUR MOVEMENT

§  I.  Inadequate  defences  for  trade  unionism  are  found  in  '  the
economy  of  high  wages '  and  the  alleged  power  to  give  labour  a  share
in  '  booms.' — §  2.  So  far  as  minimum  costs  are  concerned,  there  is  har-
mony of  capital  and  labour,  though  labour  is  not  necessarily  precluded
from  pressing  for  rises  of  wages. — §  3.  The  surplus  forms  the  economic
objective  of  the  labour  movement.  Where  it  arises  labour  can  get
some  of  it,  if  strongly  organised.  Such  surplus,  got  by  labour,  will
usually  be  productive  of  efficiency. — §  4.  The  endeavour  to  get  surplus
is  the  main  motive  of  labour-politics,  and  social  reforms  are  chiefly
valued  as  strengthening  the  power  of  collective  bargaining .  . 201-2 11


CHAPTER  XIV

SOCIALISM AND THE SOCIAL INCOME

I

§1.  State  'interference'  with  industry  takes  three  chief  forms:
(i)  State  regulation,  (2)  State  operation,  (3)  Taxation.  The  main
object  and  result  of  (i)  and  (2)  are  the  diversion  of  some  '  unearned  '
income,  actual  or  potential,  to  social  use,  either  for  the  workers  in  a
trade,  the  consumers,  or  the  general  public. — §  2.  The  doctrine  of  a
surplus  affords  a  new  interpretation  to  '  ability  to  bear  '  as  a  canon  of
taxation.  For  surplus  alone  has  such  ability. — §  3.  The  single-tax
interpretation  of  '  surplus  '  has  barred  the  acceptance  of  this  theory
of  taxation.  Marxian  Socialism  fails  to  distinguish  costs  from
surplus  by  its  exclusive  stress  upon  labour  as  basis  of  value. — §  4.  The
supreme  issue  of  public  finance  is  the  determination  of  the  proportion
of  the  surplus  which  can  be  profitably  applied  to  public  work.  The
solution  depends  upon  the  relative  power  of  individuals  and  states  to
apply  incomes  for  progress ........ 212-226


xviii  CONTENTS

II

PAGES

§  I.  Taxing  policy  demands  close  consideration  of  incidence.  Every
tax  on  a  cost  tends  to  be  shifted  on  to  a  surplus.  All  taxes  are  borne
by  producers. — §  2.  But  taxes  on  costs  tend  also  to  remain  where  they
are  put,  and  this  shifting  is  a  slow  and  wasteful  process.  This  applies
especially  to  taxes  on  wages  or  working-class  expenditure. — §  3.  Some
surpluses  can  be  measured  and  taxed  separately,  but  most  cannot.
Hence  a  graduated  income  tax,  based  on  the  hypothesis  that  surplus
varies  directl}'^  with  income,  is  the  best  instrument. — §  4.  It  may,  how-
ever, be  supplemented  by  indirect  taxes  imposed  in  the  interest  of  social
order,  or  falling  upon  specific  luxuries. — §  5.  Our  industrial  treatment
of  the  use  of  wealth  requires  correction  when  a  wider  view  of  individual
and  social  life  is  taken  ........ 226-236

CHAPTER  XV

TAXATION OF IMPORTS

§  I.  There  is  no  ground  for  a  separate  law  of  exchange  for  inter-
national trade,  or  for  a  special  law  of  incidence  of  taxes  upon  imports.
Political  areas  are  not  economic  areas. — §  2.  Even  were  two  nations
isolated  so  far  as  direct  flow  of  capital  and  labour  is  concerned,  an
import  tax  will  lie  upon  surplus  incomes  in  the  exporting  or  the  import-
ing nations,  irrespective  of  political  area.  It  cannot  normally  be  used
merely  to  tax  the  foreigner. — §  3.  Only  where  rent  of  land  or  other
surplus  is  a  normal  expense  of  production  can  any  part  of  an  import
duty  fall  on  the  foreigner.  The  proportion  of  a  wheat  tax  borne  by
the  producer  will  be  very  small. — §  4.  Such  slight  contribution  by
the  foreigner  is  more  than  offset,  where  the  duty  is  protective,  by  the
injury  done  to  the  taxing  country  by  protection.  It  can  only  take
foreign  surplus  which  foreign  governments  have  failed  to  take. —
§  5.  Protective  duties  reduce  the  aggregate  wealth  not  merely  of  the
world  but  of  the  protecting  country.  They  also  reduce  the  share  of
this  reduced  aggregate  taken  by  the  workers  in  wages,  enhancing  the
proportion  of  '  surplus '........ 237-248

CHAPTER  XVI

MONEY  AND FINANCE

I

§  I.  All  other  uses  of  money  are  subsidiary  to  its  use  as  medium  of
exchange.  Everything  with  currency  is  money.  Government  usually
maintains  a  standard  unit  of  money. — §  2.  Most  currency  is  paper,  made
by  Government,  as  notes,  or  by  private  enterprise,  as  cheques  and  bills.
A  cheque  is  the  joint-product  of  an  individual  and  a  bank. — §  3.  Credit
in  the  shape  of  bill-discounts  and  bank  loans  is  based  upon  vendible
property  of  all  sorts  with  a  gold  guarantee  against  undue  shrinkage
or  collapse  of  the  property  basis. — §  4.  The  tendency  of  modern  industry
is  to  use  all  assets,  material  and  immaterial,  as  a  basis  of  credit-
money.  Money  based  on  fictitious  capital  thus  becomes  a  dangerous
element  of  currency ......... 249-259

II

§  I.  Governments,  banks  and  money-lenders  are  the  only  con-
siderable '  owners  '  of  money  :  others  '  hire  '  its  use  from  them,  paying


CONTENTS  xix

PAGES

interest  or  discount,  directly  or  indirectly. — §  2.  An  increase  or  decrease
of  gold  supply  has  no  regular  or  proportionate  effect  on  volume  of
currency  or  on  prices.  Such  effect  as  gold  exercises  is  confined  to  the
stimulation  of  demand  for  commodities. — §  3.  Quantity  of  currency
varies  with  the  work  of  conveyance  of  property  to  be  done.  Currency
rests  ultimately  not  on  gold  but  on  general  wealth  realisable  by  taxation,
though  some  gold  Is,  under  existing  circumstances,  essential  to  maintain
confidence  .......... 259-267


CHAPTER  XVII

INSURANCE

§  I.  Insurance  produces  four  utilities,  (i)  reducing  the  pain  or
subjective  injury  of  an  accident,  (2)  producing  a  sense  of  security,
(3)  evoking  productive  energy,  (4)  preventing  objective  waste. —
§  2.  Economy  of  provision  against  risks  drives  insurance  into  very
large  business  forms.  The  state  tends  to  displace  private  enterprise  so
far  as  the  chief  working-class  risks  are  concerned.  The  investment  side
of  the  insurance  business  constitutes  a  formidable  barrier  against  full
nationalisation  ......... 268-273


CHAPTER  XVIII

UNEMPLOYMENT

§  I .  Cyclical  unemployment  cannot  be  attributed  to  failure  of  wheat
harvests,  for  (i)  statistics  show  no  correspondence  between  changes
in  world  production  of  wheat  and  fluctuation  of  employment,  (2)  the
efiect  of  a  shortage  of  wheat  upon  the  aggregate  employment  could
not  be  large.  A  simultaneous  shortage  of  several  important  raw
materials  may  appreciably  affect  employment,  but  statistical  evidence
does  not  indicate  such  shortage  as  a  chief  cause  of  cyclical  unemploy-
ment.— §  2.  Machinery  or  other  improvements  in  an  industry  may  cause
an  increase  or  decrease  of  employment  in  that  trade  or  related  trades,
according  to  '  elasticity  of  demand,'  but  cannot  account  at  any  given
time  for  any  large  proportion  of  displacement. — §  3.  For  the  main
cause  of  unemployment  we  must  look  to  the  action  of  the  '  unproduc-
tive surplus  '  in  stimulating  automatic  saving  at  a  higher  rate  than  is
needed  and  can  be  used  to  assist  in  making  provision  against  future
consumption.  Economic  checks  on  over-saving  only  operate  when
much  mischief  is  done.  The  unemployed  problem  is  that  of  the
existence  of  a  simultaneous  excess  of  all  factors  of  production. —
§  4.  Analysis  of  the  course  of  actual  depressions  confirms  this  interpreta-
tion. The  psychological  or  '  credit'  explanation  turns  ultimately  on  the
known  inability  of  business  men  to  dispose  of  goods  at  profitable  prices,
i.e.  the  failure  of  consumption  to  keep  pace  with  power  of  production.
— §  5.  The  existence  and  amount  of  over-saving  is  concealed  by  the
mechanism  of  investment.  In  depressed  trade  over-savings  need  not
stand  in  a  growing  pool  of  idle  capital  :  their  owners  may  invest
them,  not  in  setting  up  new  capital  forms,  but  in  acquiring  property
from  impoverished  owners. — §  6.  This  analysis  furnishes  a  test  of  the
efficacy  of  all  remedies  or  palliatives  of  unemployment.  The  validity
of  remedies  depends  upon  their  power  to  stimulate  consumption  by
increasing  the  proportion  of  spending  power  vested  in  the  workers  or
in  public  bodies .......... 274-301


XX  CONTENTS

CHAPTER  XIX

THE HUMAN INTERPRETATION OF INDUSTRY

PAGES

§  I.  The  industrial  system,  here  treated  objectively,  can  be  interpreted
in  terms  of  human  will  and  satisfaction.  The  operation  of  each  factor
of  labour,  capital,  ability,  involves  expenditure  of  human  energy
consciously  directed  to  some  definite  end.  The  thought  and  will  com-
prised in  these  activities  differ  widely  in  quality,  some  acts  being  more
creative,  others  more  imitative. — §  2.  Industrial  progress  consists  largely
in  the  better  economy  of  will  and  intellect  throughout  the  industrial
system.  Criticism  of  the  competitive  system  rests  ultimately  on  the
waste  of  social  or  co-operative  energy  involved  in  a  clash  of  wills  and
a  crossing  of  purposes.  This  waste  differs  widely  according  as  the
technique  of  a  profession  or  trade  gives  prominence  to  direct  self-
seeking.  The  growth  of  combination  brings  a  fuller  consciousness  of
common  purpose,  though  this  is  offset  by  diminished  regard  for  the
consumer's  interests.  The  diminishing  sense  of  social  utility  of  labour
due  to  the  complexity  of  modern  industry  is  its  greatest  injury. —
§  3.  From  a  subjective  economy  the  land  factor  must  be  eliminated,
nature  being  given.  A  '  Crusoe'  or  a  socialistic  system  is  easily  realised
as  a  calculus  of  human  '  costs'  and  '  utilities.'  In  order  to  apply  such
a  calculus  to  our  system,  so  as  to  make  commercial  values  correspond
with  human  values,  it  will  be  necessary  to  consider,  (i)  the  technical
conditions  of  the  work,  (2)  the  nature  of  the  workers,  (3)  the  distribu-
tion of  the  labour-cost,  upon  the  cost  side  ;  and  similarly,  (i)  the
technique  of  the  consumption,  (2)  the  sort  of  consumers,  (3)  the  dis-
tribution of  the  commodities,  upon  the  utility  side. — §  4.  An  art  of
social  progress  will  further  require  the  calculus  of  current  hedonism
to  be  reduced  to  terms  of  social  good  as  tested  by  some  ideal  standard.
The  conscious  control  of  industry  will  thus  be  realised  as  a  contribu-
tion towards  the  wider  art  of  politics.  Social  economy  in  industry
aims  at  securing  a  natural  relation  between  production  and  consumption
among  classes  and  individuals  in  accordance  with  the  maxim,  '  from  each
according  to  his  powers  :  to  each  according  to  his  needs.*  This  is  a
general  law  of  distribution  in  the  organic  world  admitted  by  Indivi-
dualism as  by  Socialism.— -§  5.  A  subjective  interpretation  of  the
'  surplus  '  would  express  it  in  waste  of  life  and  of  work.  An  economical
use  of  the  surplus  for  health,  education,  and  security  would  develop
and  enrich  individual  personality,  substituting  a  more  qualitative  for
a  quantitative  economy.  Individuation  of  needs  will  react  on  the
character  of  work,  imparting  new  elements  of  skill  and  arts  :  each  gain
Is  twofold,  reducing  some  vital  cost  while  raising  some  vital  utility  of
consumption.  Thus  reformed  distribution  would  issue  in  (i)  enlarged
production  of  objective  wealth,  (2)  diminished  vital  cost  and  increased
vital  utility  per  unit  of  production .  .  .... 302-324


INDEX 325-328


THE INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM


CHAPTER I

A BUSINESS

§  I.  Businesses  are  units  of  production,  extractive,  manufacturing,  transport,
trading,  financial,  professional,  artistic,  recreative,  domestic. — §  2.  Busi-
nesses differ  in  (a)  size,  (h)  relative  importance  of  their  factors,  (c)  owner-
ship and  control. — §  3.  Capital  comprises  buildings,  machines  and  tools,
fittings,  fuel  or  power,  materials,  stock,  money,  some  of  w'hich  are  '  fixed,'
others  '  circulating.'  Land,  labour,  and  management  are  treated  as
separate  factors.

§  I. — Most  men  are  related  to  the  business  world  in  two  ways  :  as
workers  they  are  attached  to  some  particular  business  engaged  in
producing  some  special  sort  of  goods  or  services;  as  consumers  they
are  attached  to  general  industry  by  a  great  number  of  suckers.  In
seeking  to  understand  the  industrial  system  a  man  is  thus  furnished
with  two  approaches :  his  narrow  concentrated  interest  as  producer,
his  broad  diffused  interest  as  consumer.  He  learns  at  both  ends,
but  his  curiosity  is  more  strongly  and  more  constantly  directed  by
what  goes  on  in  the  little  corner  of  the  industrial  world  in  which
he  earns  his  living,  the  business  in  which  he  is  employed.

Turning  his  mind  from  the  particular  process  on  which  he  is
mainly  occupied,  as  a  machine  tender,  a  clerk,  a  labourer,  a  shop
assistant,  to  what  is  taking  place  around  him,  he  soon  comes  to  get
a  grip  of  the  main  features  of  the  structure  of  the  business  to  which
he  '  belongs.'

Here  is  an  employee  in  a  shoe  factory  :  he  sees  around  him  a
number  of  other  wage-earners,  most  tending  some  machine,  others
clerks  in  the  office  ;  there  is  the  factory  itself  and  the  premises  it
occupies,  the  machinery  and  fittings,  the  stock  of  leather  and  shoes
in  various  stages  of  production;  lastly  comes  the  management,
summarised  in  the  employer  or  '  boss.'

Such  are  the  main  ingredients  of  the  business  as  he  sees  it  en-
cased in  the  four  walls  of  the  factory  yard  :  in  outline  he  comes  to
know  how  these  ingredients  are  related,  and  he  grasps  the  business
as  an  organisation  under  the  direction  of  the  manager.

B


2  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

If  he  tried  to  visualise  the  business  in  this  broad  outline  it  would
take  some  such  shape  as  this  : —


As  soon  as  he  came  to  realise  the  business  as  a  whole,  he  would
recognise  that  in  the  counting-house  or  the  bank  there  was  some
money  that  belonged  to  the  business.

A  shop  assistant  or  a  mercantile  clerk,  who  was  not  engaged  in
making  goods  but  in  collecting  them,  arranging  and  selling  them,
would  find  the  general  structure  of  his  business  similar,  though  the
sort  of  work  done  and  the  instruments  were  different :  plant  would
play  a  smaller  part,  there  being  very  little  machinery  or  tools ;
materials  and  stock  would  only  be  a  different  arrangement  of  the
same  goods,  and  would  occupy  a  much  more  prominent  place  ;  as
buying  and  selling  seemed  the  soul  of  such  businesses,  money  would
bulk  larger  in  his  conception  of  the  business.


A  farm  labourer  would  see  his  business  as  a  different  sort  of
composition  :  land,  which  formed  a  small  element  in  the  factory
premises,  and  did  not  bulk  very  large  even  in  the  city  warehouse
or  shop,  would  occupy  a  very  prominent  place  in  the  farm  ;
machinery  might  be  a  small  factor,  and  the  number  of  employees
very  few.


A  BUSINESS  3

The  bricklayer  working  for  a  firm  of  builders  would,  again,  form
a  different  idea  of  his  business,  which,  except  as  regards  a  small
yard  and  office,  was  not  really  contained  in  fixed  premises,  but
consisted  rather  in  a  number  of  fluctuating  contracts  which  affected
him  as  '  jobs.'  But  though  the  material  outlines  of  his  business
would  be  less  fixed  and  less  clearly  defined,  he  would  come
to  recognise  that  his  employer  was  in  control  of  a  number  of
workers,  business  premises,  a  stock  of  building  materials,  and  some
machinery,  as  well  as  money  to  buy  materials  and  pay  wages.

To  a  keen  observant  worker  the  structure  of  the  business  in  which
he  works  would  thus  take  shape,  some  of  the  necessary  parts  being
clearer  and  better  realised  than  others.  The  young  business  man,
who  enters  the  factory  or  the  shop  as  a  clerk,  will  see  things  from  a
somewhat  different  view-point  from  that  of  the  manual  worker ;  the
employer's  son,  adopting  from  the  first  a  managerial  attitude,  will
more  quickly  get  a  more  accurate  outline  of  the  working  of  the
business  as  a  whole.  The  worker,  to  whom  the  commercial  or
financial  part  of  the  factory  or  mine  or  warehouse  is  unexplored,
often  wrongly  identifies  his  work-place  as  a  complete  business,
whereas  it  is  often  only  one  branch  or  department  of  a  larger
business  unit  broken  into  a  number  of  locally  severed  parts,  each
of  which  may  seem  to  him  an  independent  economic  thing.

The  intelligent  observer,  studying  his  own  business  from  inside
and  others  from  outside,  will  soon  see  that  the  true  size  and  limits
of  a  single  separate  business  can  best  be  determined  by  watching
the  element  of  management.  Is  there  practically  independent
management,  and  if  so,  what  is  the  area  of  its  control  ?  is  the  impor-
tant question  to  him.  If  the  manager  of  a  factory  or  shop  receives
his  orders  from  outside,  or  in  other  important  ways  is  instructed  in
the  uses  to  which  he  puts  his  employees,  his  machinery,  &c.,  and
in  the  buying  and  selhng  essential  to  his  business  fife,  it  becomes
evident  that  such  a  factory  or  shop  is  not  a  complete  business,  but
only  part  of  some  larger  business.

When  we  examine  the  grouping  of  businesses  in  trades  and
markets,  we  shall  see  many  ways  in  which  the  liberty  of  manage-
ment in  businesses  that  seem  to  the  ordinary  employee  free  is
curtailed ;  not  only  in  retail  trade,  but  in  manufacturing,  mining.
and  other  industrial  processes,  many  businesses  which  look  to
the  uninformed  outsider  free  are  tied  by  investments,  contracts,
mortgages,  or  other  bonds  of  business  life.

Here,  as  elsewhere,  liberty  is  a  matter  of  degree.  But  at  present
it  must  suffice  to  say  that  substantial  independence  of  management
constitutes  a  separate  business  ;  where  the  emploj^er  or  manager
has  substantial  liberty  in  buying  and  selling  and  arranging  his

B 2


4  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

factory  or  shop  or  warehouse  as  he  thinks  best,  we  call  his  a  separate
business.

We  must,  however,  if  we  are  to  carry  out  our  intention  of
including  in  our  inquiry  all  processes  of  earning  incomes  or  liveli-
hoods, extend  the  use  of  the  term  '  business '  from  the  processes
engaged  in  making  and  distributing  material  goods  to  those  which
make  or  distribute  non-material  goods  that  are  bought  and  sold.
So  a  lawyer's  firm,  a  doctor's  practice,  an  artist's  studio,  a  '  cure
of  souls,'  a  writer's  literary  connexion,  or  any  other  production
and  sale  of  skill  or  services  which  are  under  the  control  of  a  person
or  set  of  persons  and  form  the  basis  of  a  hvelihood,  must  be  counted
as  a  business.

The  whole  of  the  business  world  must  be  conceived  as  producing
quantities  of  material  or  immaterial  articles,  the  sale  of  which
famishes  the  livelihood  of  the  community,  and  the  active  units
in  these  processes — extractive,  manufacturing,  transport,  trading,
financial,  professional,  artistic,  recreative,  domestic,  &c. — are
businesses.

§  2. — Such  businesses  evidently  differ  from  one  another  very
widely,  {a)  in  size,  (b)  in  the  relative  importance  of  their  con-
stituent parts,  and  (c)  in  the  ownership  and  control  of  the  business.

(a)  As  regards  size,  an  investigation  of  the  industrial  world
shows  immense  variety  even  within  the  same  sorts  of  trade.  In
more  primitive  or  backward  countries  very  few  large  businesses
exist  in  which  a  number  of  workers  are  brought  together  to  work
under  a  single  management  with  large  quantities  of  tools  and
materials.  In  such  a  country  as  China,  or  even  Russia,  the  vast
majority  of  businesses  are  confined  to  small  workshops  or  home
industry,  where  the  manager  works  alone  or  with  a  few  others,
with  simple  tools  and  small  stock  of  materials.  Even  in  the  most
advanced  industrial  countries  a  large  proportion  of  the  businesses
remain  in  this  small  size  ;  the  most  highly  developed  industries  in
England  or  the  United  States  still  retain  large  quantities  of  home
workers  or  other  little  business  units.

In  most  departments  of  industry,  even  when  great  capitalist
enterprise  is  prominent,  great  quantities  of  little  simple  businesses
survive.  The  small  peasant,  working  his  plot  of  land  with  the
labour  of  his  own  family,  and  living  on  the  produce,  still  con-
tinues to  exist  in  large  numbers  in  most  highly  advanced  nations  :
most  of  the  world's  food  supply  is  still  produced  by  these  little
independent  farmers.  Though  large  and  expensively  equipped
factories  have  absorbed  certain  important  branches  of  manufacture,
and  are  constantly  extending  the  reign  of  machinery  over  new
fields  of  production,  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  manufacturing


A  BUSINESS  5

arts  still  remains  in  small  businesses,  even  in  those  textile  and  metal
trades  where  large  capitahsm  has  established  itself  most  strongly.
Railroads,  steamships,  and  carrying  companies  have  not  taken
over  all  the  transport  industry ;  the  small  boatman,  car  driver,  and
carrier  still  keep  a  hold  on  important  branches  of  retail  local  traffic.
In  the  building  trades  the  big  contractor  leaves  a  lot  of  smaller  or
subsidiary  work  for  little  builders.  Departmental  stores  and  branch
companies  hold  a  large  share  of  retail  distribution,  but  they  do  not
prevent  immense  quantities  of  small  shopkeepers  from  earning  a
precarious  but  independent  livelihood.  Even  in  mining  and
finance,  two  departments  of  activity  where  capitalism  is  supreme,
there  still  remains  an  area  for  the  '  placer  '  and  the  small  jobber  or
money  dealer.  Regarding  the  professions  from  the  standpoint  of
business  structures,  we  perceive  the  individual  or  the  small  firm
still  in  possession  of  the  field,  except  in  a  few  branches  of  the
recreative,  educational,  and  publishing  arts.

Whenever  we  look  in  any  part  of  the  industrial  system  we  see
businesses  set  out  in  different  sizes,  ranging  from  the  single  worker,
who  moulds  some  material  into  a  useful  shape  by  the  strength  of
his  own  body  and  the  use  of  some  simple  tool,  to  the  huge  im-
personal joint-stock  company  employing  millions  of  capital  and
thousands  of  employees  in  various  parts  of  the  habitable  globe,
and  between  these  two  extremes  a  vast  variety  of  intermediate
sizes.

(b)  Certain  characters  in  the  structure  of  a  business  correspond
to  differences  of  size.  A  small  business  is  usually  much  simpler  in
structure  ;  if  it  is  engaged  in  handling  materials  to  shape  them  into
commodities,  the  element  of  labour  usually  bulks  more  largely
than  the  others.  Done  usually  in  the  home  or  workshops  attached
to  the  home,  it  has  no  need  of  specialised  buildings;  tools  or
machinery,  though  essential,  do  not  represent  a  large  expenditure ;
the  power  used  in  shaping  or  moving  the  materials  is  mostly  got
from  the  bodies  of  the  workers,  and  not  from  coal  or  other  non-
human  source.  As  a  rule,  such  little  businesses  can  be  conducted
with  a  very  little  store  of  cash.

As  we  ascend  towards  businesses  of  larger  size,  the  relative  im-
portance of  these  factors  shifts.  Separate  expensive  buildings  are
usually  required  ;  the  quantity  of  machiner}^  and  other  plant  grows
so  large  that  in  many  a  modern  mill,  mine,  railroad,  or  steamship,
several  thousand  pounds'  worth  of  plant  co-operates  with  each
worker  ;  fuel  and  the  supply  of  power  become  enormously  important
items  ;  the  financial  side  of  the  business  involves  cash  or  credit,  the
use  of  money,  as  a  large  factor  ;  while  management,  which  in
the  small  simple  business  was  a  merely  incidental  function  of  the


6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

independent  worker,  becomes  a  specialised  separate  department
of  supreme  significance.

(c)  The  most  vital  of  all  differences  between  the  small  primitive
business  unit  and  the  large  capitalist  unit  has  reference  to  the
ownership  and  control  of  the  various  factors  composing  the
business.

The  factors  in  a  business,  as  we  have  seen,  are  land,  buildings,
machinery  and  tools,  power,  raw  materials  and  stock,  money,
labour,  and  management.  Every  business  which  handles  material
goods  requires  some  of  each  of  these  factors,  though  in  widely
different  proportions.  In  the  smallest  simplest  business  form,  where
a  workman  works  alone  on  his  own  account  in  his  own  house  or
work-place,  he  commonly  is  himself  the  owner  of  all  these  factors.
Such  is  the  smallest  peasant  freeholder  in  many  countries,  working
his  own  land  with  his  own  tools  and  cattle,  sowing  his  own
seed,  and  owning  his  house  and  sheds  and  the  farm  produce.
The  village  smith  or  other  small  artisan,  certain  cabinet  makers,
and  other  little  manufacturers  in  London,  still  represent  this  early
type.  Large  numbers  of  little  makers,  e.g.  tailors,  cobblers,
owning  all  the  factors  except  the  raw  material,  which  they  receive
from  their  customers  or  from  some  merchant  to  whom  they  sell  their
product,  everywhere  survive.  Here  we  may  say  that  the  worker
is  the  owner  of  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  factors,  including  manage-
ment. As  we  grade  the  various  forms  of  business  up  from  this  to
the  most  developed  form  of  modern  '  capitalist '  enterprise,  we  see
one  after  another  of  the  factors  removed  from  the  ownership  and
control  of  the  worker  and  transferred  to  '  management.'  In  the
complete  capitalist  business,  land,  machinery  and  tools,  power,  raw
materials  and  stock,  money,  labour-power,  are  owned  and  controlled
by  the  management,  the  single  check  upon  absolute  ownership
being  that  the  management  does  not  own  the  labourers  themselves
(as  it  owns  the  coal  that  furnishes  machine  power),  but  only  the
portions  of  labour-power  as  they  are  released  from  the  persons  of
the  workers.  In  certain  great  businesses  some  other  factor,  as,  for
instance,  electric  power  or  the  land  on  which  business  premises
stand,  may  be  similarly  hired,  not  owned.  But,  speaking  generally,
the  management  in  the  highly  developed  capitalist  business  owns
and  controls  all  the  other  factors.

Between  these  two  types  a  great  number  of  intermediate  types
of  businesses  will  be  found.  An  immense  variety  of  small  farms,
workshops,  shops,  and  other  commercial  or  professional  businesses
exist  where  the  manager  begins  to  separate  from  the  workers,  still
working  himself,  but  hiring  other  workers  who  have  no  part  in
management,  though  they  may  still  own  the  tools  with  which  they


A  BUSINESS  7

work,  and  even,  as  in  many  farms,  fishing  or  mining  businesses,
some  share  of  the  stock  and  product.

In  some  sorts  of  business  the  manager  or  employer  owns  mate-
rials, which  he  gives  out  to  workers  to  do  in  their  own  homes,  or  in
workshops  which  they  provide,  either  letting  out  to  them  machines
or  tools,  or  leaving  the  provision  of  machinery,  sometimes  also  of
power,  to  the  workers.  In  agriculture  and  in  the  textile  and  metal
manufactures  of  England  to-day  one  finds  every  stage  of  the
business  form  represented,  from  the  simplest  type  of  the  self-
sufficient  single  worker  to  that  of  the  joint-stock  company  owning
and  controlling  every  factor  in  production.

In  agriculture  the  small  freeholder  or  yeoman,  the  tenant  farmer,
the  market  gardener,  the  allotment  worker,  represent  widely  diver-
gent types  of  ownership  of  land,  fencing,  tools,  crops,  &c.  ;  fishing
and  mining  are  full  of  anomalies  in  ownership  of  tools,  product,  and
management ;  the  textile  and  clothing  trades  show  every  variety
of  business  form,  from  the  home  workshop  where  the  worker  finds
machinery,  and,  in  part,  raw  materials,  to  the  completely  centralised
factory ;  the  metal  trades  exhibit  in  the  higher  form  great  engi-
neering or  steel-making  firms  owning  everything  they  use,  even  coal
and  iron  mines,  trucks  and  ships,  but  furnish  a  basis  of  survival
not  only  for  small  Birmingham  workshops  working  with  hand-power
on  materials  sometimes  owned,  sometimes  provided  for  outside,
but  for  Sheffield  grinders  receiving  rough  blades  to  be  finished  in
their  own  workshops  with  hand-power,  and  small  watchmakers  in
London  or  Coventry  keeping  up  the  earliest  type  of  self-sufficing
home  workshop.

Or  turning  to  retail  trade,  we  find  every  variety  still  surviving
in  a  large  city  :  though  perhaps  few  shopkeepers  are  owners  of  the
land  and  shop  premises,  as  regards  stock,  fittings,  management,
and  labour,  we  see  a  gradation  from  the  small  independent  shop-
keeper, owning  his  own  stock  and  employing  only  his  own  family,  to
the  great  store  which  resembles  the  most  highly  evolved  capitalist
manufactures  in  every  other  feature  except  the  part  played  by
machinery  and  non-human  power.

When  from  the  numerous  types  of  business  unit  represented  in
these  agricultural,  manufacturing,  and  commercial  occupations,  one
turns  to  finance,  including  great  banking  and  insurance  firms  and
small  money-lending  businesses,  or  to  the  professions,  the  fine  arts,
the  recreative  arts,  and  the  countless  businesses  engaged  in  supplying
'  personal  '  services,  from  the  Turkish  bath  and  barber's  saloon
down  to  the  individual  domestic  service  of  a  household — when  one
takes  stock  of  all  these  sizes  and  sorts  of  industry,  the  shapes  of
the  business  seem  to  defy  classification. But  omitting  the  delicate


8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

question  whether  certain  occupations  are  entitled  to  be  called
separate  businesses,  and  confining  our  attention  to  those  which
are  commonly  admitted  so  to  rank,  we  find  that  while  differing
immensely  in  size,  relative  proportion  of  importance  for  several
factors,  and  nature  of  ownership  and  control,  they  preserve  certain
common  features.

In  all  businesses  concerned  with  extracting,  shaping,  or  moving
matter  wc  find  the  matter  itself  to  which  the  work  is  applied,  the
machines  or  tools  by  which  the  matter  is  manipulated,  the  money
required  for  buying  what  is  needed,  the  buildings  or  premises
where  the  material  is  stored,  or  the  tools  kept,  or  the  work  carried
on,  with  the  necessary  fittings  or  fixtures,  the  land  from  which  the
matter  is  extracted  or  upon  the  surface  of  which  work  is  done,  the
workers  who  do  the  work,  and  the  employers  or  management.
Even  in  businesses  concerned  with  producing  not  material  goods,
but  non-material  services,  such  as  professional  advice,  music,  and
other  recreative  services,  &c.,  all  these  requisites,  except  in  some
cases  raw  materials,  are  needed,  for  the  non-material  services  are
produced  under  material  conditions  of  space  and  shelter  by  workers
who  actually  require  tools  or  instruments  and  skilled  direction  or
organisation.

In  developing  our  picture  of  industry  we  may,  however,  legiti-
mately confine  our  attention  chiefly  to  those  industries  engaged  in
producing  material  commodities,  with  merely  occasional  references
to  the  arts  concerned  with  non-material  services.

§  3. — For  certain  useful  purposes  of  understanding  how  the
mechanism  of  industry  works,  it  will  be  convenient  sometimes
to  gather  together  under  a  single  class  several  of  the  factors
or  requisites  of  business  which  have  here  been  separately  described.
So  all  the  non-human  factors  in  a  business,  except  the  land,
may  be  grouped  under  the  head  of  'capital,'  comprising  buildings,
machines  and  tools,  fittings,  fuel  or  power,  materials,  stock,  money.
Some  would  include  land  under  capital,  but  for  reasons  which
will  be  given  later,  we  shall  find  it  best  to  distinguish  the
services  directly  rendered  to  production  by  earth,  natural  forces,
and  space,  from  those  rendered  by  the  other  factors.  Thus
distinguishing  land  from  capital,  we  may  also  distinguish  the
materials  which  it  is  the  object  of  the  business  to  extract,
shape,  or  move,  from  those  material  factors  which  are  instru-
ments for  these  productive  processes,  and  which  are  used  up  with
more  or  less  rapidity  as  they  do  this  work.  The  first,  which
is  a  continual  stream  of  matter  flowing  through  the  business  and
passing  out  of  it  to  customers,  may  be  called  '  circulating  '  capital ;
the  factories  and  other  buildings  where  the  work  is  done,  machines.


A  BUSINESS  9

tools,  railways,  ships,  carts,  &c.,  ma}'  be  called  '  fixed  '  capital,
standing  as  it  does  at  some  fixed  point  in  the  industrial  stream  to
forward  the  passage  of  the  raw  material  or  unfinished  goods  towards
their  final  destiny  as  commodities.  Of  course  every  other  sort  of
capital  is  used  up  in  its  work  of  helping  to  shape  or  move  raw
materials  into  their  final  form  or  place,  and  this  '  wear  and  tear  '
may  be  considered  as  passing  into  the  goods  that  are  produced,  and
so  as  '  circulating  '  in  the  industrial  world.  But  it  is  altogether
more  convenient  to  mark  out  the  material  whose  manipulation  is
the  direct  and  express  object  of  a  business,  from  the  materials
which  are  only  means  towards  this  process.

Certain  sorts  of  capital  it  has  been  found  difiicult  to  classify.
Fuel,  if  regarded  as  merely  instrumental  to  the  operation  of  a
machine,  may  be  treated  as  '  fixed  '  ;  but  it  is  more  conveniently
regarded  as  a  form  of  raw  material  worked  into  the  main  current
in  the  form  of  power,  and  so  classed  as  'circulating.'

Whether  the  money  required  to  run  a  business  is  to  be  called
'  fixed  '  or  '  circulating  '  is  not  certain.  That  money  which  goes
in  buying  raw  materials  and  comes  in  selling  products  may  perhaps
be  considered  circulating  in  the  same  sense  as  those  raw  materials
and  goods  of  which  the  money  is  the  financial  equivalent  or  shadow.
But  from  another  point  of  view  the  entire  stock  of  money,  or  com-
mand of  credit,  which  is  utilised  in  the  working  of  the  business
may  be  regarded  as  a  '  fixed  '  body  of  financial  machinery.  The
part  played  by  money  or  credit  in  the  life  of  a  business  is,  however,
so  peculiar  that  it  cannot  be  profitably  studied  until  a  more
definite  meaning  is  given  to  '  circulation  '  by  a  study  of  the  opera-
tions of  the  whole  industrial  organisation.  At  present  we  shall
name  money  or  credit  as  an  element  in  the  capital  of  a  business.

Having  thus  designated  the  non-human  factors  of  the  business
under  land  (or  Nature)  and  capital  (fixed  or  circulating),  we  come
to  the  human  factors  spoken  of  as  labour-power  and  management.
As  in  the  other  cases,  no  absolutely  rigid  distinction  can  be  made.
We  cannot  confine  labour-power  to  the  manual  or  physical  work  in
a  business,  reserving  management  for  the  mental  guidance  and
organisation.  For  all  manual  labour,  regarded  as  production,  con-
tains mental  and  moral  energy,  nor  is  management  devoid  of  all
output  of  physical  exertion.  From  the  standpoint  of  ph3^sical  and
mental  it  would  be  possible  to  find  a  nice  gradation  in  a  complex
modern  business  from  the  purely  routine  hand  worker  up  to  the
general  manager  in  his  office,  but  nowhere  could  one  find  the  point
where  mental  exertion  began  or  physical  left  off.  Nor  can  we  defi-
nitely divide  them  as  employer  and  employees,  though  for  some
purposes  this  division  will  work  well. For  in  most  great  modern


10  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

businesses  the  manager  is  nominally,  often  really,  an  employee  of
the  directors  or  the  shareholders,  and,  so  far  as  the  practical  arts  of
management  are  concerned,  they  are  not  confined  to  the  manager,
but  are  largely  delegated  to  sub-managers,  overseers,  inspectors,
and  other  '  ofhcials.'

Many,  bearing  these  difficulties  in  mind,  wish  to  lump  all  the
human  exertion,  physical  and  mental,  under  the  general  name
'  labour. '  But  there  are  practical  reasons  for  rejecting  this  solution.
The  part  played  by  the  man  or  men  who  direct  the  course  of  a
business,  the  interest  they  have  in  the  business  and  the  gain  they
receive  from  the  business,  are  in  most  instances  so  different  from
the  part  played  by  the  men  who  merely  receive  and  follow  orders.


and  their  interest  and  gain,  that  it  is  desirable  to  treat  the  two  as
different  factors  of  a  business.

In  most  businesses  '  direction  '  ^  and  '  management  '  are  not
sufficiently  distinct  to  warrant  any  further  distinction.  In  our
preliminary  analyses  of  the  business  unit  we  shall  therefore  treat
them  as  one,  and  regard  both  direction  and  management  of  the
business  as  comprised  for  the  most  part  in  the  manager  or  em-
ployer. Adopting,  then,  the  commonly  accepted  distinctions,  wc
may  bring  our  more  numerous  factors  of  a  business  under  the  four
conventional  heads,  land,  capital,  labour,  and  management,  thus
simplifying  our  portrait  of  the  business  as  the  unit  of  industry.


'  In  many  '  companies  '  the  personnel  and  the  interests,  as  well  as  the  work
of  director  and  manager,  are  of  course  separated.


CHAPTER II

TRADES AND  THEIR PLACE IX THE INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM

§  I.  Businesses  are  recognised  as  members  of  a  trade,  with  sympathies  and
antagonisms  arising  from  the  fact  that  they  are  buyers  and  sellers  in  the
same  markets. — §  2.  Markets  and  trades  differ  widely  in  area  and  in
degree  of  contact.  Trades  are  found  to  arrange  themselves  in  series
contributing  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  production  of  classes  of  goods.
Earlier  processes  are  more  general,  later  processes  more  special. —
§  3.  The  general  currents  of  production  are  connected,  drawing  from  com-
mon sources  and  from  a  single  stream  of  industry.  Certain  fundamental
trades,  agriculture  and  mining,  are  connecting  links,  and  transport  is  a
strong  bond  of  unity. — §  4.  Numerous  relations  of  harmony  and  opposi-
tion exist  between  the  several  trades,  (a)  drawing  on  common  sources  of
supply,  (b)  complementary  or  competitive  in  their  products  or  processes.
— §  5.  Trades  are  also  related  through  standards  of  consumption. —
§  6.  Every  force  affecting  one  trade  passes  on  by  industrial  or  local  con-
tagion to  others,  some  forces  being  spent  locally,  others  spreading  through
the  industrial  system.

§  I. — The  real  life  of  the  business  and  the  respective  parts  played
by  the  several  factors  only  become  clear  when  we  see  the  business
in  its  environment,  tracing  its  relations  to  other  businesses,  and
so  realising  its  contribution  to  industry  as  a  whole.

Let  us  return  again  to  the  standpoint  of  the  intelligent  worker
in  a  factory  or  a  shop,  who  has  got  a  fairly  accurate  understanding
of  the  several  parts  of  his  business  and  wants  to  get  a  wider  under-
standing of  industry.  He  will  come  to  know  that  his  business  is
only  one  among  a  number  of  similar  units,  and  that  it  makes  a
good  deal  of  difference  to  his  business  what  the  others  are  doing.
He  may  be  brought  into  contact  with  workers  in  these  other  mills
or  shops,  may  join  them  in  common  action  ;  in  many  cases  these
other  businesses,  or  some  of  them,  lie  in  close  proximity  to  his.

So  the  employee  in  the  Northampton  shoe  factory  finds  a
number  of  other  shoe  factories,  the  Lancashire  spinner  comes  to
know  that  Lancashire  is  full  of  spinning  mills,  the  compositor  in
Fleet  Street  is  powerfully  impressed  by  the  presence  of  other  busi-
nesses. In  various  waj^s  the  cluster  of  businesses  doing  similar
work  takes  definite  shape  in  his  mind  as  a  trade,  the  various  units
of  which  have  much  in  common,  and  also  much  in  opposition.  The
extent  and  limits  of  a  trade  are  at  first  dimly  seen  by  the  worker
in  a  business.


12  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

At  first  the  operative  in  the  Northampton  shoe  factory  may
only  recognise  the  shoe  trade  as  comprised  in  Northampton,  but  he
soon  learns  to  extend  his  idea  of  the  trade  to  Leicester,  Leeds,  &c.,
taking  in  all  the  shoe  factories  in  the  country.

But  he  soon  hears  of  American  competition,  and  that  some  high-
grade  shoes  are  made  b}^  skilled  cobblers,  and  that  sweating  work-
shops turn  out  cheap  articles  competing  with  the  factory  product,
and  he  learns  to  include  all  these  in  his  idea  of  the  trade.

All  the  businesses  that  make  this  trade,  though  entirely  separate
in  their  order  and  arrangements,  and  antagonistic  in  many  of  their
actions,  have  certain  sympathies  arising  from  the  fact  that  they  are
doing  the  same  sort  of  work  with  the  same  sorts  of  instruments.
Anything  which  checks  the  supply  of  leather — a  war,  or  a  foreign
tariff  which  cuts  off  or  injures  a  market,  a  concerted  action  of
labour  to  raise  wages — is  seen  to  affect  all  or  most  businesses  in
the  same  way.

Other  occurrences,  on  the  other  hand,  bring  out  the  separate
and  opposed  interests  of  the  businesses  within  the  trade  :  a  con-
tract or  order  gained  by  one  firm  is  lost  by  the  others,  their  buyers
fight  for  the  cheapest  and  best  supply  of  leather,  and  in  securing
machinery  and  other  business  requirements  they  may  be  opposed.

Of  course  these  relations  of  sympathy  and  opposition  are  much
closer  in  some  trades  than  others,  and  between  some  parts  of  a  trade
than  others.  While,  theoretically,  every  shoe  factory  over  the  world
and  every  cobbler  or  maker  of  anything  that  can  be  called  a  shoe
may  be  members  of  a  single  world-wide  trade,  the  connexion
between  some  parts  of  this  trade  is  so  slight  and  indirect  that  it
may  be  ignored  :  the  shoe  hand  in  Northampton  is  not  in  effective
competition  with  the  cobbler  in  some  village  of  Central  China,  and
though  Great  Britain,  America,  and  Germany  are  in  many  places
close  competitors,  we  may  still  legitimately  speak  of  the  English
shoe  trade,  the  American  shoe  trade,  as  we  speak  of  the  Lancashire
cotton  trade,  or  the  South  Wales  coal  trade.

So,  although  a  trade  is  sometimes  used  to  describe  the  aggre-
gate of  businesses  engaged  in  producing  the  same  sort  of  goods  or
services,  narrower  meanings  are  commonly  employed.  The  busi-
nesses comprised  in  a  trade  must  employ  somewhat  similar  pro-
cesses of  work,  for  most  purposes  they  must  be  contained  within
the  same  country,  for  many  within  the  same  neighbourhood.

In  point  of  fact,  the  limits  of  a  trade  are  usually  the  limits  of
its  market.  The  aim  or  end  of  a  business  is  to  effect  regular  and
profitable  sales  (this  is  the  standpoint  of  direction  or  management),
and  the  market  is  the  area  of  this  selling  :  all  businesses  which
meet  in  a  market  are  regarded  as  members  of  a  trade.


TRADES  AND  THEIR  PLACE  13

Until  our  inquiring  workman  has  got  some  notions  about
markets,  his  understanding  of  the  businesses  round  him  as
comprising  a  trade  does  not  carry  him  far.

The  mere  gathering  of  similar  businesses  into  a  trade  may  be
figured  thus,  the  connecting  lines  conveying  some  ill-conceived
general  community  and  opposition  of  interests  :—


But  even  then  he  will  not  understand  the  meaning  of  the  lines
which  form  a  sort  of  connective  tissue  between  the  businesses  until
he  realises  that  the  substantial  unity  of  the  trade  consists  in  the
fact  that  the  members  of  it  are  buyers  and  sellers  in  the  same
market.  Primarily  it  is  the  fact  that  the  various  shoe-making
businesses  are  selling  in  the  same  market,  are  competing  against
one  another  for  the  same  customers,  that  makes  them  members  of
one  trade.  Their  closest  community  and  diversity  of  interests  lies
in  the  market  where  they  sell  their  products  ;  but  their  relations
in  the  markets  where  they  buy  their  chief  raw  material,  their
leather,  are  scarcely  less  close.

§  2. — A  market  is  thus  defined :  '  Economists  understand  by  the
term  Market,  not  any  particular  market-place  in  which  things  are
bought  and  sold,  but  the  whole  of  any  region  in  which  buyers  and
sellers  are  in  such  free  intercourse  with  one  another  that  the  prices
of  the  same  goods  tend  to  equality  easily  and  quickly.'

It  is  the  principle,  '  The  same  price  for  all  articles  of  the  same
sort,'  that  constitutes  a  market.

It  is,  therefore,  only  when  our  workman  understands  the  rela-
tion of  the  business  in  which  he  works  to  other  similar  businesses
buying  and  selling  in  the  same  markets,  that  he  really  comprehends
the  nature  of  the  group  of  businesses  he  calls  a  trade.i

^  It  may  be  contended  that,  in  thus  identifying  the  area  of  a  trade  with  that
of  a  market,  we  are  departing  somewhat  from  common  usage,  which  groups
businesses  in  a  trade  by  virtue  of  employing  a  common  process  rather
than  as  turning  out  products  which  sell  in  the  same  market.  In  thinking  of  a
trade  we  do  look  directly  at  the  process  rather  than  the  product,  and  for  purposes
of  convenience  we  often  narrow  trade  still  further  by  local  or  other  divisions.
Thus  we  speak  of  the  building  trade,  the  London  building  trade,  the  plastering
trade,  the  fruit  trade,  the  Channel  Islands  fruit  trade,  the  strawberry  trade.

But,  though  loose  and  varying  uses  are  made  alike  of  trade  and  market,  one
grouping  of  businesses  which  make  and  sell  the  '  same  '  sort  of  product  in  a
single  trade  does  not  involve  any  serious  straining  of  tlie  natural  interpretation  of
facts.  Businesses  employing  the  same  sort  of  process  and  materials  are  engaged
upon  products  of  the  same  sort  which  meet  in  the  same  market.


14  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

The  exact  area  of  a  market  is  often  as  difficult  to  define  as  that
of  a  trade.  When  there  is  close  competition  in  buying  and  selhng
in  a  locaUty,  while  the  businesses  in  these  localities  have  very  slight
relations  with  those  in  other  localities,  we  say  these  are  separate
trades  and  separate  markets.

So  for  a  few  articles,  e.g.  gold,  diamonds,  certain  classes  of
securities,  we  say  there  is  one  world-market,  buyers  and  sellers  com-
peting over  the  entire  industrial  world.  To  certain  sorts  of  cotton
and  woollen  goods,  to  wheat,  and  some  other  non-perishable  articles
of  general  use,  we  may  also  ascribe  a  world-market,  though  a  large
part  of  the  products  of  these  kinds  are  locally  produced  and  con-
sumed under  conditions  which  make  their  influence  on  the  world-
market  very  slight  and  indirect.

The  markets  for  cheap  perishable  goods,  e.g.  common  fruits,
are  very  numerous  and  small ;  the  same  holds  of  some  cheap  durable
goods,  e.g.  bricks  ;  and  for  most  articles  there  are  many  markets
locally  limited,  not  one  world-market.

So,  too,  every  market  is  a  tolerably  complex  thing,  for  the
doctrine,  '  The  same  price  for  the  same  article,'  does  not  carry  us
far.  When  we  examine  the  cotton  or  wheat  market  we  find  many
sorts  of  wheat  and  cotton  not  directly  competing  with  one  another,
and  each  with  its  own  market  price  :  so  each  sort  of  wheat  or  cotton
may  have  several  definitely  recognised  grades  or  qualities,  each
grade  forming  in  a  way  a  separate  market,  though  of  course  affected
by  the  general  market  in  which  it  lies.  Time  also  enters  in  :  for
certain  purposes  we  may  say  the  wheat  market  to-day  is  not  the
same  as  that  of  yesterday,  and  so  on.  The  full  complexity  of
market  and  trade  can,  however,  only  be  suggested  here.

All  the  businesses  in  the  shoe  trade  buy  leather  from  tanners  ;
they  also  sell  shoes  to  retail  shops  :  i  in  these  two  markets  they
appear  respectively  as  buyers  and  sellers.  In  order  to  gain  a  clearer
idea  of  the  situation  let  us  set  out  the  shoe  manufacturing  trade  in
its  relation  to  these  two  markets,  thus  : —


Tanners. S/f/)e7tiakers .  S/we  s/iops.


Our  shoe  operative,  a  labour  unit  in  the  business  A,  will  see  his
business  to  be  one  of  a  cluster  of businesses  forming  the  shoe-

*  Or  directly  to  consumers  through  retail  stores  of  their  own,  a  growing
custom  which  we  may  here  ignore.


TRADES  AND  THEIR  PLACE


15


making  trade,  and  this  cluster  he  will  see  connected  by  a  number
of  close  bonds,  with  a  similar  cluster  of  businesses  forming  the
tanning  trade,  and  with  a  third  cluster  forming  the  mercantile  or
retail  trade,  the  three  trades  forming  part  of  a  regular  industrial
series  of  processes  with  a  number  of  continually  shifting  relations
between  the  businesses  in  each  trade.

But  he  will  soon  learn  that  the  shoe  factory  in  which  he  works,
and  the  shoe  trade  to  which  it  belongs,  have  relations  with  other
sorts  of  businesses  and  trades  nearly  as  close  as  those  with  the  tan-
ning and  the  shoe-selling  trades.  There  is,  for  instance,  the  plant
and  machinery  of  the  factory,  which  continually  requires  repair
and  improvement.

Taking  the  machinery  and  other  '  fixed  '  capital  alone,  we  see
that  the  shoe-making  trade  is  thus  dependent,  not  only  on  the
tanning  trade  which  precedes  and  the  mercantile  trade  which  follows
in  a  lateral  line,  but  that  it  is  also  connected  with  a  vertical
series  of  trades  engaged  in  making  machines  and  providing  fuel,  &c.
So  we  further  enlarge  our  picture : —


Steel  making.


Tanmn/f


Bhoerruikln^.


Shoe  shops.


Further  acquaintance  with  the  actual  conditions  of  his  shoe-
making  business  will  show  that  there  are  other  auxiliary  or  sub-
sidiary trades  from  which  the  shoe-making  trade  buys  materials  or
services  that  are  of  great  importance,  as,  for  instance,  the  coal
trade,  which  furnishes  it  fuel,  and  the  railroads,  which  supply
carriage,  to  name  the  two  most  important.

Extending  farther  the  range  of  his  vision,  he  will  perceive  that
the  lateral  series  stretches  beyond  tanning  to  a  trade  of  hide  mer-
chants and  a  trade  of  farmers  who  produce  the  cattle  whose  hides
are  made  into  shoes. So,  looking  farther  down  the  vertical  line


i6


THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM


TRADES AND THEIR PLACE


17


of  trades  needed  to  furnish  his  macliines,  &c.,  he  will  trace  behind
the  machine-making  industry  a  steel-making  industry,  behind
that  the  foundries  and  iron-workers  that  produce  pig-iron,  behind
that  the  great  industry  of  mining.

Finally,  he  will  recognise  that  each  trade  in  the  direct  lateral
series,  farming,  cattle-dealing,  tanning,  as  well  as  the  further  stage
of  the  shoe  trade,  must  be  supplied  with  machinery,  plant,  and  other
'  fixed '  capital  by  a  vertical  line  of  trades  similar  to  those  he  has
already  described  as  the  machine-making  trades  subsidiary  to  his
shoe-making.

Throwing  this  into  a  simple  diagrammatic  form,  he  pictures  it
as  on  p.  16.

Now,  if  instead  of  starting  from  the  standpoint  of  a  shoe  opera-
tive, we  took  a  baker's  assistant  or  a  compositor  in  a  printing  office,
we  should  get  a  similar  series  of  lateral  trades  engaged  in  producing
loaves  or  books.  It  would  run  thus  if  confined  to  the  main  stream
of  production  : —


Loaves.


Farming.


Corn-
dealin^.


Milling.


Baking.


Here  the  final  process  of  making  is  commonly  united  with  the
retail  trade  process.  At  each  of  the  four  processes  machinery,
buildings,  or  other  fixed  capital  is  needed,  and  is  supplied  by  a
number  of  vertical  series  of  trades  corresponding  to  those  described
in  the  shoe  trade.


Forestrrf. Paper-  Printing, Publishim;. Book-

m/iJdn^ BuzhUng  &c.  seUing.


This  crude  illustration,  of  course,  regards  a  book  as  a  purely
material  product  made  by  converting  trees  into  wood-pulp,  wood-
pulp  into  paper,  paper  into  books.

If  we  inserted  even  the  most  important  factors  thus  ignored — the
author's  work  of  production,  the  trades  supplying  other  materials
of  paper  and  of  buildings,  the  wholesale  distributive  stage  in  the
book  trade — we  should  have  a  longer  and  a  more  complex  line

c


i8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  trades  linked  together  for  the  direct  production  of  books.  At
each  stage,  here  also,  would  enter  a  vertical  series  of  trades
furnishing  the  machines,  buildings,  and  other  plant  required.

So  far  we  have  taken  the  standpoint  of  an  employee  in  a  busi-
ness, a  shoe  operative,  or  a  clerk,  or  a  compositor,  approaching
industry  from  a  particular  place  inside,  seeing  first  the  make-up  of
the  business  in  which  he  works,  then  pushing  out  to  a  view  at  once
widening  and  clarifying  until  he  sees  his  business  and  his  trade
linked  with  other  businesses  and  other  trades,  first  near,  and  then
more  distant.  Note  also  that  our  employee  gets  a  wider  productive
view  by  contact  with  workers  in  other  trades.

But  our  employee  is  also  a  consumer,  and  he  will  bring  his  con-
sumer's interest  and  outlook  to  assist  his  experience  as  producer,
so  as  to  gain  for  himself  a  fuller  and  more  orderly  conception  of
industry  as  a  whole.  Though  his  producer's  knowledge  is  more
intimate  within  a  certain  narrow  area,  as  consumer  he  touches  all
the  principal  lines  of  industrial  processes,  and  comes  to  recognise
in  them  a  great  number  of  sets  of  processes  related  in  series  much
resembling  the  set  he  finds  in  the  boot-making  or  book-making
industries.

We  may  then  take  it  as  admitted  that  the  diagram  representing
the  relation  of  businesses  and  trades  in  the  production  of  shoes  is
in  substance  applicable  to  the  relations  of  all  other  trades  engaged
in  forwarding  the  production  of  any  sort  of  commodity.

It  will,  therefore,  be  well  to  look  a  little  more  closely  at  that
diagram  and  see  whether  we  cannot  represent  a  little  more  accu-
rately the  trade  relations  there  indicated.

The  first  point  that  strikes  us  is  that  while  all  the  trades  in  the
direct  horizontal  series — farming,  cattle-dealing,  tanning,  &c. — are
separate  trades,  this  is  not  the  case  when  we  look  up  the
vertical  lines.  There  we  find  much  repetition,  the  same  machine-
making  trades  figuring  in  several  of  the  series,  iron-  and  steel-making
in  many,  and  mining  in  nearly  all.  In  other  words,  the  more  funda-
mental trades  of  iron  and  steel  and  of  mining  evidently  are  con-
nected with  shoe-making  through  a  number  of  various  channels.
But  if  this  is  so,  our  picture,  which  seems  to  show  a  number  of
separate  iron  and  steel  and  mining  trades,  requires  correction  in
order  to  bring  it  more  closely  in  accord  with  the  facts  of  the  case.
Instead  of  having  two  separate  iron  and  steel  trades  in  the  series
contributing  to  the  tanning  and  the  shoe-making,  we  ought  clearly
to  have  one  iron  and  steel  trade  on  which  they  are  both  drawing.
So  with  the  other  cases  :  the  mining  trade,  which  figures  at  the  base
of  so  many  of  the  series,  must  be  seen  as  one  trade  through  which
all  the  trades  that  use  iron  and  coal  are  connected.


TRADES AND THEIR PLACE  19

On  wliat  principle  shall  we  alter  our  picture  so  as  to  make  it
more  closely  descriptive  of  the  facts  of  the  industrial  processes  ?
If  in  our  shoe  diagram  we  conceive  that  the  end  of  the  whole  set  of
processes  is  to  supply  consumers  with  shoes,  and  taking  our  stand
at  the  final  stage  of  the  retail  shoe  trade  look  down  the  whole
series,  we  shall  see  that  there  is  a  change  in  the  nature  of  the  trades
as  they  approach  nearer  to  the  goal.

Taking  in  order  the  farming,  cattle-dealing,  tanning,  shoe-
making,  and  shoe  trade,  we  perceive  that  the  earlier  processes  are
more  general,  the  latter  more  special.  Though  farming  figures  in
the  series  of  shoe-producing  processes,  because  hides  are  needed,  it
plays  a  similar  part  in  various  other  productive  series,  supplying
wheat  to  the  loaf-making  series,  wood  to  the  paper-making,  and  so
forth.

Farming  and  cattle-dealing  are  not  confined  to  any  one  or  two
series  ;  even  tanning  has  many  other  uses  than  that  of  furnishing
leather  to  the  shoemakers  :  it  stands  in  a  similar  relation  to  the
saddlery,  trunk-making,  and  even  to  the  bookbinding  trades,
amongst  many  others.

This  process  from  more  general  to  more  special  trades  is  equally
obvious  if  we  follow  the  tributaries  which  feed  each  stage  in  the
main  stream  of  production  with  machinery,  plant,  &c.  Follow
up  these  vertical  lines,  from  the  particular  kinds  of  machines,
buildings,  &c.,  which  they  supply  at  each  main  process,  to  the
machine-making  and  building  trades,  and  then  on  to  the  iron  and
steel  trades,  and  finally  the  mining  industry,  we  clearly  make  the
same  journey  from  special  to  general  trades,  from  trades  which
only  make  and  sell  one  sort  of  machine  or  fitting,  to  those  which
supply  a  great  number  of  different  markets.

Boldly  pursuing  our  path  of  inquiry,  and  recognising  that  the
structure  of  the  group  of  trades  connected  with  shoe-making  is
typical  of  industry  in  general,  let  us  try  to  convert  our  shoe  diagram
into  a  general  outline  of  industrial  structure,  showing,  {a)  the  busi-
ness unit,  (6)  the  trade,  (c)  the  clusters  or  connected  series  of  trades.
We  shall  expect  them  to  arrange  themselves  so  that  the  trades
associated  with  the  final  goods  or  services  will  be  the  most  special,
while  those  associated  with  the  earliest  processes  will  be  the  most
general.

As  regards  the  main  order  we  shall  encounter  no  difficulty :  the
order  of  production  in  time  will  generally  correspond  with  the
degree  of  specialisation,  the  processes  which  take  place  first  being
the  most  general,  those  which  take  place  last  the  most  special.

First  will  come  the  trades  connected  with  getting  raw  materials
out  of  the  earth,  agriculture  and  mining  being  the  two  chief  branches,

c  2


20  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

with  fishing  as  a  minor  branch.  These  we  shall  class  as  the  Extrac-
tive Trades.  They  are  the  most  general  i  in  the  sense  that  the
agricultm-al  and  mining  products  are  the  raw  materials  of  all  the
later  processes  of  production.

The  chief  products  of  these  extractive  trades — grains,  fruits,
timber,  textile  fabrics,  iron,  coal,  stone,  cla}',  &c. — go  to  feed  an
immense  variety  of  particular  trades.

Next  will  come  the  early  processes  of  shaping  the  raw  products
of  the  earth  in  order  to  make  them  into  serviceable  commodi-
ties or  instruments  of  production,  the  manufactures  of  the  first
order.

To  this  order  would  belong  the  ironworks  and  rolling  mills,
&c.,  producing  bars  and  sheets  of  iron  and  steel,  saw  mills,  flour
mills,  sugar  and  oil  refineries,  and  perhaps  the  textile  factories  pro-
ducing various  sorts  of  cloth.  To  prepare  raw  materials  by  expel-
ling foreign  bodies,  to  sift  and  grade,  to  break  up  and  to  combine
so  as  to  produce  certain  combinations  of  stock  shapes  and  sizes
adapted  for  further  processes  of  conversion — this  standardisation  of
raw  materials  forms  the  object  of  our  manufactures  of  the  first
order.

Manufactures  of  the  second  order  will  receive  the  standardised
materials  from  the  earlier  processes,  the  bar  and  sheet  iron  or  steel,
the  sawn  timber,  the  flour  or  sugar,  the  cotton  or  woollen  cloth,
&c.,  and  will,  by  a  series  of  fmther  manipulations,  fit  them  to  shapes
and  characters  capable  of  serving  human  wants,  or  of  assisting  as
instruments  in  some  process  of  industry.  From  the  iron  and  steel
trades  we  shall  here  pass  to  the  engineering,  machinery,  and  tool-
making  trades,  and  to  the  great  variety  of  hardware,  instruments,
jewellery  and  other  metal  trades  ;  from  saw  mills  and  brick  kilns
we  pass  to  the  building  trades ;  the  textile  goods  will  carry  us  into
the  innumerable  branches  of  the  clothing  trades ;  while  from  flour,
sugar,  &c.,  we  should  come  into  the  confectionery  and  other  trades
concerned  with  preparation  of  foods.

Exact  limits  cannot,  of  course,  be  set  between  the  first  and  the
second  order  of  manufactures,  but  the  latter  will  be  marked  by  a
double  specialisation — one  horizontal,  one  vertical.  The  engineer-
ing and  machine-making  trades  that  take  up  the  iron  and  steel
from  the  first  order  of  manufactures  will  apply  them  in  a  number
of  widely  divergent  uses,  i.e.  for  making  ships,  or  locomotives,  or
machine  tools,  or  building  apparatus,  or  steel  rails,  grates,  or  bed-
steads ; the  cotton  or  woollen  cloths  will  feed  a  variety  of  different

'  This  is,  of  course,  consistent  with  the  fact  that  some  farming  may  be
highly  speciaUsed,  e.g.  producing  some  special  fruit  ;  likewise  some  mining,  e.g.
diamonds.


TRADES AND THEIR PLACE  21

trades  which  make  coats,  shirts,  hats,  carpets,  upholstery,  sacks,
&c.,  and  so  with  the  other  materials.

This  horizontal  specialisation  is  attended  by  a  v'ertical,  as  where
the  conversion  of  steel  into  knives,  cotton  cloth  into  shirts,  passes
through  a  long  series  of  separate  sorts  of  business,  for  many  of
these  horizontal  special  processes  are  often  gathered  into  a  single
business.  But  so  far  as  manufacturing  processes  are  concerned,
manufactures  of  the  second  order  exhibit  a  greater  number  and  a
more  highly  specialised  character  than  those  of  the  first.  In  the
'  making  '  industries,  the  farther  one  advances  from  the  extractive
stages  of  agriculture  and  mining,  the  more  numerous  and  the  more
highly  specialised  the  processes  become.

Following  the  flow  of  the  raw  materials  you  will  find  the  stream
thus  widening  : —

Extractive  Manufacturing  1  Manufacturing  2

A  B  A  B  C D


But  when  the  manufacturing  or  making  processes  are  complete,
and  what  are  called  the  distributive  processes  begin,  the  specialising
tendency  is  reversed,  and  we  pass  into  trades  which  are  more  general
in  regard  to  the  sort  of  goods  they  handle  and  the  work  they  do  in
moving  them  from  the  specialised  factories  or  workshops  where
they  are  made,  towards  the  retail  counter  over  which  they  pass
into  the  hands  of  the  consumers.

In  speaking  as  if  '  dealing  '  always  followed  '  making,'  goods
being  first  made  and  then  distributed,  we  are,  of  course,  simplifying
the  actual  course  of  industry.  Between  the  extractive  processes
and  the  primary  manufactures,  or  anywhere  between  two  processes


22  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  manufacture,  a  mercantile  or  dealing  trade  may  insert  itself,  or,
indeed,  a  series  of  trades  connected  with  the  collection,  carriage,
purchase,  or  insurance  of  the  material  or  goods  in  question.
Between  the  cotton  grower  in  Georgia  and  the  manufacturer  of
yarn  in  Lancashire  there  are,  of  course,  a  number  of  middlemen,
and  there  are  perhaps  few  cases  of  trades  where  it  is  general  for  the
manufacturers  to  buy  raw  materials  from  the  farm  or  mine  without
some  intermediary  trade.  Indeed,  many  of  the  most  important
classes  of  wholesale  dealers  are  planted  between  two  sorts  of  pro-
ductive processes  throughout  the  industrial  world,  in  order  to
facilitate  i  the  process  by  which  materials  or  goods  pass  from  one
set  of  makers  to  another.

But  for  our  present  purpose,  which  is  the  simplest  setting  of
the  main  structural  outline  of  industry,  we  will  ignore  these  classes
of  '  distributors,'  and  will  confine  our  attention  to  the  wholesale
merchants  who  receive  '  finished  '  wares  from  manufacturers  and
other  producers,  and  who  sell  them  to  retail  shopkeepers,  from
whom  they  pass  to  consumers.  In  the  history  of  many  commodities
the  wholesale  stage  is  omitted,  retailers  buying  direct  from  makers,
or  makers  supplying  the  consuming  public  through  shops  of  their
own.

But  the  existence  of  distinct  classes  of  wholesale  merchants  or
importers  and  retail  shopkeepers  still  holds  so  large  a  proportion
of  modern  commerce,  that  it  is  rightly  acknowledged  in  our  general
scheme  of  industry.

Our  broad  picture  as  presented  to  the  ordinary  intelligent  con-
sumer will  then  show  goods  pouring  from  the  final  stages  of  manu-
facture or  other  production,  into  the  possession  of  merchants  whose
function  it  is  to  collect  them,  assort  them,  and  transmit  them  to
retailers.

Though  there  is,  of  course,  a  considerable  quantity  of  specialisa-
tion in  this  work,  the  typical  mercantile  firm,  or  firm  of  produce
dealers,  handles  a  far  greater  variety  of  goods  than  is  handled  by
any  one  firm  of  producers.  Even  those  importers,  merchants,  or
brokers  who  confine  themselves  to  dealing  in  some  one  commodity,
such  as  wool,  fruit,  grain,  timber,  usually  cover  a  far  wider  range
of  material  than  is  covered  by  any  of  the  producers  from  whom
they  buy.  In  a  word,  w^hile  a  good  deal  of  specialisation  remains
in  the  wholesale  mercantile  stages,  not  only  as  regards  the  sort  of
goods,  but  as  regards  market  areas  from  which  they  are  collected,
the  specialisation  is  far  less  than  in  the  manufacturing  stages.

'  Though  there  may  grow  up  in  the  interstices  of  the  productive  process
classes  of  speculative  middlemen  who  do  not  facilitate  but  impede  trade,  living
parasitically  upon  it,  they  commonly  retain  some  shred  of  an  original  service
which  consists  in  facilitating  purchase  or  transfer.


TRADES AND  THEIR PLACE  23

When  we  pass  from  wholesale  to  retail  trade  the  tendency
towards  the  general  is  still  more  apparent,  as  regards  the  main
current  of  ordinary  commerce.

Though  a  large  number  of  retail  shops  exist  in  our  cities  confined
to  the  sale  of  some  single  class  of  food  or  clothing,  &c.,  in  some
instances  to  a  single  narrow  sort  of  grade  of  hat,  tea,  gloves,  or
tobacco,  the  specialisation  is  nowhere  carried  as  far  as  in  the  later
manufacturing  processes,  while  as  regards  the  general  body  of  retail
goods  the  opposite  tendency  is  obviously  dominant.

The  universal  provider,  the  co-operative  store,  the  development
of  the  grocer,  the  oilman,  the  hardware  shop,  into  a  '  general '  shop,
is  the  most  salient  fact  in  modern  trade.

When  we  come  to  study  the  history  of  the  structural  changes
in  modern  industry  we  shall  recognise  that  everywhere  the  two  ten-
dencies of  division  of  labour  and  of  union,  of  differentiation  and  of
integration  of  processes,  have  been  operating  both  in  the  business
and  the  trade,  proceeding  at  different  paces  and  with  different
forces.  At  every  stage  of  industrial  process  we  find  examples  of
businesses  which  have  fallen  so  strongly  under  the  differentiating
force  that  they  are  devoted  to  making  a  single  size  or  grade  of  a
single  sort  of  cotton  or  iron  goods,  or  the  growth  of  a  single  sort  of
fruit  or  animal  ;  side  by  side  with  this  we  find  trades  of  manufac-
ture or  repair  which  turn  out  a  great  variety  of  goods  by  hand  or
in  part  by  machinery.  The  same  is  true  if  we  turn  from  sorts  of
goods  to  processes  :  it  is  not  possible  to  say  whether  the  stronger
tendency  in  Lancashire  to-day  is  towards  a  business  which  unites
the  different  processes  of  spinning  and  weaving,  &c.,  and  handles  a
variety  of  grades,  or  towards  a  single  process  and  a  single  grade.

And  this  is  typical  of  the  whole  of  trade  :  in  farming,  mining,
manufacture  by  hand,  as  by  machines,  in  all  the  mercantile  pro-
cesses and  in  transport,  we  find  a  great  variety  of  types  of  business
determined  by  the  relative  strength  of  the  speciaUsing  and  the
generalising  forces.

But  turning  from  these  finer  considerations  to  our  rude  outline
of  the  main  industrial  structure,  we  shall  find  it  true  that  the  forces
making  for  differentiation  or  specialisation  of  trades  and  businesses
are  dominant  in  the  '  making  '  processes,  reaching  their  height  in
the  later  manufacturing  trades,  and  that  the  integrating '  or  gene-
ralising forces  assert  themselves  more  prominently  in  the  commercial
processes.

'  Students  of  evolutionary  method  will,  of  course,  observe  that  the  '  integra-
tion '  of  the  latter  processes,  e.g.  as  illustrated  in  the  general  store,  is  not  a  mere
reversal  of  differentiation,  not  a  return  to  a  merely  '  general  '  form.  The  great
modern  store  is  a  federal  industrial  state  of  largely  self-governing  departments,
not  a  centralised  unity.


24  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

§  3. — Our  shoe  operative  or  compositor,  now  gathering  into  a
more  general  form  the  knowledge  of  the  industrial  structure  he  has
got  from  his  related  studies  as  producer  and  consumer,  will  try  to
represent  industry  in  some  single  figure.  Generalising  what  he  sees
in  the  case  of  shoes  and  loaves  or  books,  he  may  picture  the  whole
industrial  movement  as  a  stream  of  raw  materials  issuing  from  the
earth  in  the  extractive  trades,  then  carried  on  through  a  series  of
manufactures  of  the  first  and  second  order,  flowing  next  in  finished
shapes  through  wholesale  and  retail  commerce  until  they  are
emptied  out  of  the  retail  mouth  into  the  hands  of  the  consumer.
Or  he  may  picture  the  whole  affair  as  working  after  the  manner  of
a  mill,  some  automatic  flour  or  paper  mill  which  sucks  raw  stuff
into  its  hopper,  shapes  and  mixes  it  in  various  processes,  carries  it
in  tubes  from  tank  to  tank,  and  finally  deposits  it  sorted  and  packed
for  the  market.  A  number  of  separate  processes,  each  in  due
order,  contribute  to  the  transportation  of  the  material,  the
several  machines  drawing  their  power  originally  from  the  same
dynamos.

As  he  turns  over  these  images  in  his  mind,  our  practical  student
will  recognise  that  this  series  of  processes,  extractive,  manufacturing,
wholesale  and  retail  commerce,  do  not  exhaust  the  physical  re-
quirements of  the  great  industrial  process.  Everywhere  some
transfer  of  matter  from  place  to  place  is  involved,  not  only  for  the
'  distributive  '  work  of  commerce,  but  in  the  interstices  of  the
'  making  '  processes,  goods  must  be  conveyed  from  farm  and  mine  to
factory,  and  from  one  manufactory  to  another.  In  a  word,  the
transport  industrj^,  the  most  general  of  all  the  subsidiary  trades,
must  be  inserted  in  the  picture.

The  general  order  of  the  processes  in  their  relations  to  one
another  would  take  shape  in  some  such  image  as  on  the  following
page.

Raw  materials  entering  the  stream  of  industry  through  the
extractive  trades  are  shaped  and  combined  and  carried  through  a
series  of  manufacturing  processes,  and  then  are  bought  and  sold  by
commercial  classes  of  merchants  and  retailers  who  take  them  from
the  makers  and  bring  them  to  consumers.  Here  we  have  the  main
current  of  industry  carrying  the  products  of  the  field  and  mine  to
the  consumer.  This  work  of  transformation  and  transmission  is
done  by  the  application  of  productive  energy  at  a  number  of  points
along  the  industrial  stream.  At  each  of  these  points  there  stands
a  group  of  trades  composed  of  businesses  in  which  workers  are
operating  machinery  and  other  plant.  This  machinery  and  plant,
as  we  saw,  was  itself  the  product  of  a  series  of  processes  resembling
that  in  the  main  stream  in  which  the  mine  and  the  field  are  once


TRADES  AND  THEIR PLACE


25


26  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

more  utilised,  not  for  the  direct  supply  of  commodities,  but  for  the
supply  of  instruments  of  production,  forms  of  '  fixed  '  capital.

The  main  current  of  industry  is  thus  fed  by  the  energ\^  of
tributary  streams  which  enter  it  at  the  various  productive  processes.

As  the  main  stream  and  the  tributaries  all  take  their  rise  from
the  earth  in  the  extractive  processes,  so  these  agricultural  and
mining  processes  form  a  strong  and  constant  bond  of  sympathy
and  unity  throughout  the  industrial  system.

But  while  agriculture  and  mining  are  at  times  to  be  regarded  as
the  most  fundamental  processes,  the  unity  of  modern  industry  is
even  more  clearly  marked  by  the  common  dependence  of  all  trades
upon  the  transport  trades.  This  dependence  is  direct :  all  trades
require  carrying  processes,  and  most  of  this  carrying  work  to-day
is  done  by  organised  systems  of  transport  involving  machinery  and
power,  and  driving  back  by  another  channel  to  the  extractive  arts
and  their  mother  earth.

We  have  now  got  a  general  conception  of  the  outlines  of  the
industrial  system  as  a  material  structure,  marking  the  chief  bonds
of  connexion  between  its  main  divisions.  But  in  doing  so  we  have
been  driven  to  quit  the  closer  details  which  first  engaged  the  atten-
tion of  our  shoe  operative  or  compositor,  and  to  deal  with  the  large
general  conceptions  of  '  extractive '  industry,  '  manufacture,'
'  commerce,'  '  transport,'  and  the  like.

There  is  some  danger  here  of  stretching  the  analogy  of  the
'  river  '  or  the  '  machine  '  so  as  to  convey  an  exaggerated  and  a
false  notion  of  the  amount  or  the  sort  of  harmony  or  unity  that
exists  in  the  industrial  world.

As  a  corrective  let  us  look  a  little  closer  at  what  we  have  called
the  main  stream,  which  carries  the  raw  materials  from  farm  and
mine  to  the  retail  counter.  We  illustrated  this  flow  first  through
boots  and  loaves,  and  then  passed  to  commodities  in  general,
showing  how  the  process  was  generally  applicable.

But  looking  nearer  at  this  main  stream,  we  shall  see  that  it  is
not  a  single  smooth  harmonious  flow.  Our  shoe  operative  in  his
early  expanding  outlook  of  the  shoe  trade  saw  that  there  were  both
harmony  and  antagonism  between  the  various  businesses,  both
community  and  diversity  of  interests.  So  his  wider  outlook  on
trade  as  a  whole  will  show  him  that  this  main  stream  of  commodities
is  really  a  number  of  currents  which  flow  along  a  course,  each  its
own,  inside  the  general  industrial  channel,  and  that  these  currents
sometimes  flow  peacefully  side  by  side  in  a  broad  smooth  bed  along
an  evenly  graded  fall,  sometimes  cross  and  conflict,  struggling
against  one  another  for  some  easier  passage  as  the  bed  narrows  or
curves.


TRADES  AND THEIR PLACE  27

In  other  words,  he  will  realise  that,  as  the  several  businesses  in
his  trade  have  certain  interests  in  common  and  others  which  divide
them,  so  with  the  trades  and  with  the  series  of  trades  connected
with  the  production  of  different  sorts  of  commodities.  There  is  a
great  variety  of  co-operation  and  a  great  variety  of  competition  or
antagonism  in  the  industrial  system.

So  far  as  it  is  a  system,  the  co-operative  (or  harmonious)  must
be  regarded  as  predominant,  and  competition  must  be  regarded
provisionally  as  a  method  of  co-operation.

For  close  study  let  us  detach  from  the  general  main  stream  of
production  the  streams  of  processes  connected  with  three  sorts  of
commodities  which  seem  not  to  be  closely  associated,  viz.  boots,
loaves,  and  shirts.  We  soon  perceive  that  the  three  sets  of  pro-
cesses engaged  in  producing  these  commodities  do  not  form  entirely
separate  industrial  streams,  each  running  in  its  own  isolated  bed,
but  that  they  are  at  certain  points  connected  with  one  another,
and  with  various  other  trades.

The  same  farmers  who  raise  cattle  and  sell  the  hides  which  go
to  make  boots  may  also  raise  wheat,  and  anything  which  affects
the  relative  prices  of  boots  and  loaves  will  evidently  affect  the
amount  of  farm  labour  and  capital  which  is  put  to  arable  and
pasture  uses.

Even  the  land  and  labour  occupied  in  raising  cotton  crops,
though  less  transferable,  is  not  so  absolutely  fixed  as  to  be  un-
affected by  other  agricultural  changes.  Certain  farming  require-
ments in  the  shape  of  buildings,  implements,  carts,  fertilisers,  &c.,
will  figure  in  each  of  the  extractive  processes.

So,  too,  the  carrying  trades  form  a  common  element  of  ever-
increasing  importance  in  all  three  series  :  the  same  railroads,  the
same  ships  (or  ships  built  by  the  same  firms  or  under  the  same  con-
ditions) will  carry  the  raw  materials  to  the  manufacturer,  and  the
finished  products  to  the  merchants  or  retailers  in  each  case.  Each
set  of  processes  will  demand  the  assistance  of  the  building  trades
to  set  up  farmhouses,  factories,  warehouses,  shops,  and  the  mining
and  metal  trades  to  supply  the  fuel,  fittings,  machines,  &c.,  required
in  the  different  businesses.

Certain  bonds  of  industrial  sympathy  and  antagonism  between
the  three  streams  of  production  are  thus  indicated.  Anything
which  opens  up  new  tracts  of  generall}^  fertile  or  accessible  land
may  be  good  for  all  three,  reducing  the  cost  of  producing  shoes,
loaves,  and  shirts  :  or  an  opening  up  of  new  wheatlands  lowering
the  price  of  bread  may  stimulate  cattle-raising,  and  reduce  the  price
of  hides  :  a  new  economy  in  use  of  fuel  will  in  different  proportions
affect  all  three  commodities.


28  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

A  rude  diagrammatical  expression  of  these  industrial  junctions
may  be  thus  given,  the  three  main  streams  of  industrial  processes
connecting  with  one  another  through  common  sources  and  common
tributaries.


/

B

/ B'/

.../L

/

Although  the  three  commodities,  boots,  loaves,  shirts  (here  indi-
cated by  A,  B,  C  respectively),  have  no  specially  close  relations
with  one  another,  it  is  evident  that  a  minute  examination  would
show  that  they  are  economically  connected  with  one  another  by
many  more  ties  of  common  interest  than  this  diagram  suggests.

§  4. — Following  the  lines  of  investigation  suggested  b}'  this
illustration,  we  shall  come  more  clearly  to  know  the  nature  of  the
bonds  of  harmony  and  of  repulsion  among  trades.

(a)  The  closest  relations  of  common  interest  will  evidently  exist
between  trades  which  draw  upon  some  single  source  of  supply  of
raw  materials  or  productive  power.

All  trades  whose  chief  material  is  wool  or  leather,  or  timber  or
steel,  pulling  at  some  common  supply,  must  look  closely  after  one
another  ;  anything  which  increases  or  reduces  the  common  supply
affects  them  all  alike,  so  there  is  community  of  interest  ;  anything
which  gives  one  of  them  a  better  pull  upon  the  supply  than  the
others  affects  these  latter  injuriously,  so  far  there  is  diversity  of
interest.  The  same  evidently  holds  where  a  number  of  local  manu-
factures are  dependent  for  coal  or  other  source  of  power  upon  the
same  supply.  Dependence  on  some  subsidiary  material  or  other
trade  accessory  will  set  up  a  similar  relation,  important  or  trivial,
according  to  the  part  played  by  such  material  in  the  respective
trades.  The  recent  condition  of  the  '  rubber  '  market  is  a  striking
example  of  the  influence  of  an  important  trade  accessory  acting
upon  a  large  number  of  different  trades.

(i)  Trades  that  are  complementary  or  subsidiary  to  one  another
in  some  direct  way  are,  as  we  have  seen,  in  closest  harmony.  The
coal  and  iron  trades  are  the  largest,  most  obvious  instance,  but


TRADES AND THEIR PLACE  29

every  art  of  production  of  course  throws  a  number  of  trades  into
similar  dependency  on  one  another.  Whenever  a  number  of  mate-
rials must  be  put  together  to  make  a  commodity,  such  direct  unity
of  interest  is  established  among  tlie  trades  that  handle  each  mate-
rial. Such  are  the  relations  between  the  fruit-growing  and  the
sugar-refining  trades,  between  the  wine-growing  and  the  bottle-
making  trades,  between  the  numerous  trades  which  go  to  feed  with
materials  the  building  trade.

It  is,  of  course,  very  uncommon  for  these  complementary  trades
to  be  entirely  dependent  upon  one  another  :  the  bottle-making
trade  is  related  also  to  the  brewing  and  the  fruit  trades,  sugar
refining  also  to  the  confectionery  and  the  mineral-water  trade,  and
so  forth.  But  the  trades  which  prepare  the  various  ingredients  for
any  important  commodity  are  evidently  kept  in  close  harmony
with  one  another.

(c)  Where  two  sorts  of  material  or  two  sets  of  processes  are
alternatives  for  production,  a  keen  antagonism  exists  between
them.  Here  we  first  come  across  the  relation  known  as  substitu-
tion, which  plays  so  important  a  part  in  industrial  progress.

Bedsteads  are  made  of  wood  or  steel,  so  are  many  other  articles
of  furniture  or  fittings  ;  sugar  may  be  made  from  cane  or  beet ;
cotton,  linen,  wool  are  alternatives  for  many  kinds  of  dress  or  other
fabrics  ;  electricity,  gas,  oil,  steam  are  competing  against  one
another  as  sources  of  industrial,  locomotive,  or  domestic  energy.
Just  here  we  are  not  concerned  between  different  sorts  of  goods
which  satisfy  the  same  want,  but  with  the  choice  exercised  by
producers  between  different  materials  and  processes  which  can  be
substituted  for  one  another  in  some  business  process.  The  choice
exercised  by  the  consumer  has  generally  some  influence  in  the
selection  of  material  or  method  of  production,  as,  for  instance,  in
determining  the  alternative  use  of  wood,  vulcanite,  amber  in
making  pipe-stems,  but  for  present  purposes  we  may  separate  the
interaction  of  producer  and  consumer,  and  distinguish  substitu-
tion as  a  force  which  antagonises  various  trades  that  compete  by
offering  some  alternative  material  to  manufacturers.

But  as  the  law  of  substitution  opens  out,  we  get  glimpses  of  a
wider,  more  general,  sympathy  and  opposition  between  trades.
The  productive  energy  of  man,  directly  operative  through  labour,
indirectly  through  capital,  is  within  certain  limits  free  to  choose
among  all  the  various  channels  of  industry :  they  are  all  open  to
him  as  alternative  occupations.  So  there  is  a  more  universal
sympathy  and  opposition  between  all  trades  than  any  yet  named.
All  causes  affecting  the  volume,  fluidity,  and  efficiency  of  the  capital
and  labour  in  a  community  will  affect  all  trades  in  common. In


30  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

proportion  as  labour  and  capital  arc  free  to  enter  several  trades,
and  even  to  transfer  themselves  from  one  occupation  to  another,
they  must  be  regarded  as  forming  a  common  fund  of  industrial
energy  which  pulsates  through  the  whole  framework  of  industry^
as  the  blood  courses  through  the  various  organs  and  cells  of  the
body,  energising  all  alike.  Though,  as  will  appear  on  closer  exami-
nation, the  flow  of  labour  and  also  of  capital  is  far  from  free,  and  is,
in  fact,  impeded  by  many  economic  barriers,  there  is  enough  fluidity
to  give  a  real  unity  to  the  terms  '  labour  market '  and  '  market
of  loanable  capital.'  Capital  and  labour  can  flow  into  various
channels  of  production  with  sufficient  freedom  to  make  every  trade
sensitive  to  the  expansion  and  contraction,  the  prosperity  and
depression,  of  every  other  trade.

§  5. — But  trades  are  connected,  not  only  through  common
interests  in  processes  of  production,  but  through  changes  in  methods
of  consumption.  The  '  standard  of  comfort '  of  different  classes  is
constantly  changing :  every  rise  or  fall  of  wages  alters  the  proportion
of  working-class  incomes  spent  on  different  commodities,  and  so
directly  stimulates  or  depresses  groups  of  trades  ;  the  great  change
from  rural  to  city  life  has  revolutionised  the  expenditure  of  large
masses  of  our  population  ;  new  articles  of  consumption,  or  the
cheapening  of  old  articles  which  brings  them  in  reach  of  poorer
classes,  create  or  stimulate  new  tastes  which  not  merely  absorb
new  increments  of  income,  but  displace  older  articles  of  consump-
tion. Taste,  fashion,  and  caprice  constantly  exert  a  larger  influ-
ence on  the  expenditure  of  larger  sections  of  the  public.  Every
article  of  a  man's  consumption  is  in  a  sense  competing  with  every
other  article  for  a  larger  share  in  his  expenditure.

Any  change  in  standards  of  consumption  brings  other  changes
by  reason  of  affinity  ;  a  man  who  takes  to  drink  not  only  spends
more  on  beer,  but  often  more  on  tobacco,  sport,  and  betting,  while
a  man  who  gives  up  beer  and  stays  at  home  is  likely  to  spend  more
not  only  on  tea,  but  on  reading  and  quiet  recreations.

The  rapid  spread  of  the  taste  for  cychng  which  followed  the
invention  of  the  safety  bicycle,  besides  its  direct  competitive  effect
upon  the  use  of  riding-horses  and  the  carriage  trade,  had  a  large
number  of  clearly  traced  subsidiary  effects,  reducing  the  sale  of
cheap  pianos  and  jewellery,  damaging  the  book  trade,  altering  the
nature  of  the  clothing  trades,  stimulating  the  sale  of  non-alcoholic
drinks,  and  reviving  the  country  inns.  Nor  are  these  influences
confined  to  changes  of  material  consumption.  The  increased  de-
mand for  education  in  England,  by  its  excessive  strain  upon  the
intellectual  machinery  of  the  nation,  not  only  stimulates  the  teach-
ing, the  printiiig,  and  })aper-making  trades,  it  causes  an  immense


TRADES  AND  THEIR PLACE  31

expenditure  of  English  money  upon  Swiss  holidays,  and  helps  to
revolutionise  the  economic  structure  of  that  country.  In  America
electric  transit  and  the  telephone  not  only  give  rise  to  a  series  of
new  mechanical  industries,  but  by  contributing  to  that  widespread
neurotic  condition  known  as  Americanitis,  have  caused  on  the  one
hand  an  immense  expansion  of  the  '  drug  '  trade,  on  the  other  a
demand  for  the  building  of  innumerable  temples  of  Christian
Science  as  a  reaction  against  the  tyranny  of  the  medical  profes-
sions. You  cannot  touch  the  consumer  at  any  point  in  his
expenditure  without  altering  in  countless  seen  or  unseen  ways
his  whole  standard  of  valuations,  and,  through  alterations  of  this
standard,  affecting  the  entire  series  of  industrial  processes  which
support  it.

§  6.— Thus  the  growth  of  harmonious  and  conflicting  desires  of
consumers  weaves  the  closest  and  most  intricate  network  of  relations
between  all  the  various  productive  processes  of  the  industrial  world.

The  closer  we  examine  any  section  of  the  industrial  system,  the
more  numerous  and  complex  the  relations  between  the  businesses,
the  trades,  the  groups  of  trades  contained  in  it :  the  ramifications
come  to  resemble  those  which  the  microscope  displays  in  the  section
of  a  leaf  or  a  bit  of  animal  fibre.

As  we  recognise  the  fineness  of  these  relations,  we  come  uncon-
sciously to  shift  the  metaphors  we  use,  and  to  regard  industry  less
as  a  stream  or  a  machine  and  more  as  a  live  organism  with  some-
thing like  a  common  flow  of  blood,  a  common  system  of  nerves,  and
an  organic  co-ordination  of  parts  resting  upon  a  complexity  of
business  cells.  None  of  these  metaphors  is  strictly  applicable  :
industry  is  neither  river,  machine,  nor  organism,  but  there  are  many
points  in  which  the  last  term  gives  the  most  correct  impression.
If  we  could  follow  out  far  enough  the  ties  between  businesses
and  trades  and  trade-groups  in  what  we  call  the  industrial
world,  we  should  find  a  sort  of  common  connective  tissue  running
throughout,  thinner  and  coarser  in  some  parts,  stouter  and  finer  in
others,  but  binding  the  whole  sets  of  industrial  operations  so  closely
together  that  any  touch  bestowed  at  any  point  may  be  communi-
cated to  the  most  distant  parts.

Take  any  local  trade :  it  is  most  closely  linked  with  those  trades
which  supply  it  with  raw  materials,  fuel,  and  other  important
essentials  of  production,  and  with  those  trades  or  customers  which
buy  the  goods  it  has  to  sell :  these  trades  may  be  widely  scattered
over  the  earth.  But  it  is  also  closely  linked  with  other  trades  in
the  same  locality  not  engaged  in  producing  or  using  the  same
goods.  The  bond  of  neighbourhood,  though  not  so  strong  in  an
advanced  as  in  a  primitive  industrial  community,  always  retains


32  THE INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

considerable  force.  The  labour  market  remains  largely  local :  an
increased  or  diminished  demand  for  labour  in  one  local  trade
affects  others  :  in  smaller  industries  capital  is  still  largely  drawn
from  the  locality,  so  that  the  prosperity  or  adversity  of  one  local
trade  affects  others  :  most  trades,  though  highl}'  developed,  depend
for  some  of  their  materials  and  plant  on  local  industries,  and  find
for  some  of  their  products  or  by-i)roducts  the  most  remunerative
market  close  at  hand.  Indeed,  it  is  only  a  comparatively  small
number  of  highly  evolved  manufactures  that  are  substantially
independent  of  local  conditions  :  the  transport  trades  usually  are
very  sensitive  to  local  conditions  ;  the  building  trades  are  essentially
local,  both  as  regards  materials  and  demand  for  their  products  ;
banking,  brewing,  and  other  well-developed  industries  are  very  local
in  their  main  conditions  of  success  ;  the  vast  quantity  of  industry
in  small  manufactures,  in  retail  trade,  and  in  personal  services,  is
keenly  sympathetic  with  other  local  industries.  Thus  any  large
sudden  change  causing  expansion  or  contraction,  success  or  injury
to  any  trade,  vibrates  throughout  the  whole  complex  of  industry  by
two  wave-movements,  the  one  conveyed  through  other  trades  be-
longing to  the  same  productive  series,  the  other  operative  through
alien  trades  in  the  same  locality.  Though  both  waves  weaken  as
the  movement  passes  to  trades  more  distant  in  organic  or  local
connexion,  both  attest  the  solidarity  of  industry.  This  double
bond  of  sympathy  is,  of  course,  marked  in  the  organisation  of
capital  and  of  labour.  Capital  draws  together  not  only  by  amal-
gamation of,  or  stable  contracts  and  agreements  between,  the
various  processes  in  the  same  stream  of  production,  as  where  manu-
facturers purchase  sources  of  raw  materials  and  establish  their  own
retail  agencies,  but  also  by  local  associations  of  employers  for
dealing  with  common  local  interests,  such  as  transport  facilities,
street  improvements,  local  taxation,  and  the  labour  market.
Labour  similarly  combines  upon  the  double  basis  :  the  federation
of  the  building  or  the  transport  trades' representing  one  mode  of
organisation,  local  trades  councils  the  other.

The  industrial  atmosphere  is  thus  kept  continually  vibrating
with  waves  passing  in  direct  currents  from  one  trade  to  another
distant  trade,  or  widening  from  some  local  centre  in  ever  larger,
weaker  waves  over  general  trade  until  they  disappear.  Regarding
the  industrial  world  as  a  unity,  consisting  of  all  those  persons
who,  as  buyers  or  sellers,  are  in  direct  or  indirect  industrial  contact
with  one  another,  one  may  say  there  is  no  single  industrial  happen-
ing which  does  not  exercise  some  influence  upon  every  person
throughout  the  world.  But  we  must  not  exaggerate  the  operation
of  these  forces. The  vast  majority  of  these  waves  spend  their


TRADES AND THEIR PLACE  33

force  in  small  local  areas  and  are  negligible  factors  for  trade  in
general ;  nationality,  race,  language,  distance,  difference  of  soil,
climate,  and  social  organisation,  limiting  the  free  flow  of  capital,
labour  and  trade,  over  wide  areas,  must  be  regarded  as  breaking
up  the  industrial  world  into  a  number  of  subordinate  industrial
unities,  chiefly  nations,  for  most  industrial  purposes.

Thus  every  really  large  physical  or  political  event,  such  as  a
drought  in  India,  a  new  tariff  in  America,  a  war  in  the  Far  East,
creates  an  economic  shock  or  a  series  of  economic  shocks  which  are
sensibly  felt  over  large  areas  of  the  more  developed  countries  of
the  West,  and  over  contiguous  countries  which  are  less  developed,
while  some  weaker  effects  are  traceable  all  over  the  other  parts  of
the  world  ;  but  smaller  shocks  affecting  less  or  more  remote  trades
or  areas  expend  their  force  locally,  or  are  affected  in  their  wider
influence  by  counteracting  forces.  Indeed,  the  comparative  sta-
bility of  industry  in  the  world  is  the  equilibrium  of  myriads  of
minor  forces  of  disturbance  which  are  thus  compensating  and
cancelling  one  another.

It  is  only  when  some  main  source  of  world  supply  in  the  pro-
duction of  a  staple  commodity  is  affected,  as  by  a  grain  or  cotton
famine  over  a  wide  area,  or  some  large  blow  is  dealt  to  the  credit
of  a  nation  by  financial  failure,  or  where  some  great  political  revo-
lution changes  the  tide  of  immigration  or  opens  up  some  large  new
market,  that  swift  transformations  and  dislocations  of  industry
are  occasioned  in  nations  far  remote  from  the  base  of  disturbance.
For  most  purposes  and  on  ordinary  occasions  there  are  a  number
of  industrial  worlds.  Even  Great  Britain,  which  stands  more  ex-
posed than  any  other  country  to  foreign  industrial  influences,  is
confined  within  her  own  borders  for  the  buying  and  selling  of  five-
sixths  of  the  goods  and  services  she  buys  and  sells,  while  the  law
of  compensation,  in  its  operation  on  the  numerous  foreign  influences
which  affect  her,  serves  so  as  to  secure  for  her  at  least  as  much
general  stability  of  internal  industry  as  those  nations  enjoy  who
are  by  their  economic  structure  and  policy  less  exposed  to  waves
of  external  influence.

In  this  picture  of  the  structure  of  industry  we  have  confined
our  attention  to  the  production  of  material  commodities.  But  a
scientific  interpretation  of  industry  will,  of  course,  require  us  to
include  those  processes  which  are  concerned  with  producing  the
non-material  goods  commonly  classed  as  services,  the  administrative
services  of  public  officials,  the  skilled  professional  advice  of  doctors
and  lawyers,  the  performances  of  actors,  the  personal  services
of  domestic  attendants,  &c.  These  official,  professional,  recrea-
tional, domestic  services,  as  productive  processes,  must  be  included

D


34  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

in  our  wide  meaning  of  industry  :  many  of  them  are  the  product  of
a  series  of  educative  and  other  preparatory  processes,  involving
the  organised  use  of  capital  and  labour  in  businesses  and  trades,
analogous  to  the  series  which  we  have  traced  for  material  commo-
dities, though  not  usually  so  elaborate.  Though  most  of  our
illustrations  will  be  drawn  from  the  trades  which  produce  material
commodities,  this  will  be  for  the  greater  clearness  in  tracing  move-
ments of  materials  and  the  activities  concerned  with  them,  not  for
the  sake  of  excluding  from  '  industry  '  the  processes  of  producing
non-material  goods  which  engage  a  large  and  always  growing  pro-
portion of  productive  energy  in  the  more  civilised  parts  of  the
industrial  world.  It  would,  indeed,  be  impossible  to  understand
the  industrial  system  as  a  progressive  institution  were  we  to  confine
ourselves  to  the  production  of  material  forms  of  wealth.


APPENDIX

CLASSIFICATION OF INDUSTRIES

The  object  of  the  analysis  of  industry  given  in  this  chapter  has
been  to  impress  upon  the  reader  the  general  outlines  of  the  struc-
ture, taking  for  this  purpose  a  rude  classification  of  industrial  pro-
cesses. It  may  be  well,  following  in  the  main  the  classification  of
Jevons,!  to  append  the  fuller  analysis  of  industry  which  a  scientific
census  of  occupations  would  yield  :—

Proprietors  of  Land  and  natural Landowners,
sources  of  supply.  Quarry  Owners,

Mine  Proprietors,
Owners  of  Fishing  Rights
(Functions  generally  of  a  passive
kind).

Producers  of  Raw  Materials .... Agriculturists,

Gardeners,
Woodmen,
Shepherds,
Herdsmen,
Hunters,  &c.

Miners,
Colliers,
Fishermen.

' '  Principles  of Economics,'  p.  io8,  &c.


CLASSIFICATION  OF  INDUSTRIES


35


Dealers  in  Raw  Materials
(middlemen between Pro-
ducers and  Manufacturers)


e.g.  Corn  Merchants,
,, Agents,
,,  Factors,
,, Chandlers,
Cotton  Importers,
,, Merchants,
,, Brokers,
,, Agents,
Salesmen.


Manufacturers
(first  order).


e.g.,  Corn

Miller,
Cotton

Spinner,
Timber

Sawyer,
Iron

Smelter.


Dealers

(between  two  or  more  manu-
facturing processes).


e.g.  Flour  Merchant

(between  Miller  and  Baker).
Yarn  Merchant

(between  Cotton  Spinner  and

Manufacturer) .
Timber  Merchant

(between  Sawyer  and  Carpenter,

&c.).


Manufacturers . .
(second  order).


Baker,  Confectioner,  Cotton  Weaver,
Dyer,  Printer,  Shirtmaker,  cSrc.

Cabinet  Maker,  Carpenter,  &c.

Rolling  Mills,

Engine  Works,

Cutlery,  &c.

(Between  any  two  processes  a  class
or  more  of  dealers  may  intervene).


Wholesale  dealers  in  Com-
modities.


Warehousemen,

Produce  Merchants,

Exporters,  &c.

(Wholesale  dealers  in  manufac-
tured goods  are  often  '  general
stores.'  In  Foreign  Trade,
however,  they  specialise  often

(A)  according to sea  routes;

(B)  according  to  classes  of
manufacture,  e.g.  cotton
goods,  iron  trade,  &c.).


Retail  Dealers


Shopkeepers,
Hawkers,
Costermongers,
Licensed  Victuallers,  &c.

(often  comprising  a  final  act  of
manufacture, e.g. butcher,
confectioner,  dressmaker,  &c.),
D  2


36  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTE:\I

Transport Carriers  on

(Distributive Industry ac-  Railways,

cording  to  Jevons).  Canals,

Ships,
Docks,
Roads.
Carriages,
Horses
(carrying raw materials from
farm,  mine,  &c.,  to  manufac-
ture ; carrying half-made
goods  between  difterent  orders
of manufacture  ; carrying
commodities between fac-
tories,  wholesale dealers, re-
tailers, and  consumers).

Subsidiary  Trades e.g.  Subs,  to  Landowner

('  Any which merely as.sist Estate  Agent,  Steward,
other  trades  by  supplying  the Solicitors,  Surveyors,  &c.
minor  requisites').

Subs,  to  Farmers

Agricultural  Implement  Makers,
Seed  Merchants,  Manure  Mer-
chants, &c.

Subs,  to  Corn  Merchant

Granary  Maker,  Sack  Maker,
Corn-measure  Maker,  &c.

Subs,  to  Miller

Millwright,  Machinist,  Millstone
cutter,  &c.

Subs,  to  Baker

Oven  Builder,  Peel  Maker,  Fuel
Merchant,  &c.

Finance Banking,  Insurance,  &c.

This  classification  is  based  upon  consideration  of  industrial
processes,  and  marks  the  standpoint  of  the  producer.

The  consumer's  standpoint  would  yield  a  transverse  classifica-
tion on  the  basis  of  the  sorts  of  utility  or  satisfaction  afforded  by
the  commodities.

Taking  the  chief  orders  of  utility,  wc  should  classify  along  the
following  lines  : —

Food Bread  Stuffs,

Dairy  Produce,
Meat,
Groceries,
Beer,  Wine,  &c.

(or according to materials,
wheat,  sugar,  milk,  &c.).


CLASSIFICATION  OF  INDUSTRIES  37

Clothing Over  Wear

(Suits,  Dresses,  &c.).
Under  Wear,
Hats,
Boots,
Gloves,  &c.

(or  according  to  material,  Cotton,
Wool,  Flax,  Silk,  Leather,
India-rubber,  &c.).

Lodging Dwelling-houses,

Furniture,
Crockery,  &c.

(according to materials — Wood,
Stone,  Steel,  Brick,  &c.).

Refinements Ornaments,

Amusements,
Literature,  &c.

Jevons,  in  suggesting  the  classification  of  occupations  according
to  '  commodity,'  based  upon  the  four  great  classes,  food,  clothing,
lodging,  refinements,  does  not,  however,  as  might  have  been  ex-
pected, cleave  to  the  consumer's  standpoint  (which  I  have  here
preferred),  but  divides  his  classes  according  to  kinds  of  material
used,  not  according  to  the  '  wants  '  satisfied.

A  really  scientific  classification  from  the  consumer's  standpoint
would  be  based  upon  a  psycho-physical  analysis  of  wants,  beginning
with  food,  shelter,  clothing  in  their  elementary  uses  as  life  pre-
servers, and  proceeding  to  the  higher  and  more  specialised  wants
(conveniences,  luxuries,  &c.),  as  they  arise  in  natural  order  from
the  satisfaction  of  the  primary  physical  wants.

Industries  and  occupations  would  then  be  classified  in  relation
to  these  needs  or  wants.  The  term  refinements  cannot  even  be
regarded  as  containing  the  germ-idea  of  such  a  classification.

The  classifications  of  occupations  adopted  in  the  British  and
American  censuses  are  monuments  of  illogic.  They  are  based  on
a  blending  of  three  fundamenta  divisionis,  material,  commodity,
and  process.

The  first  division  of  occupations  into  classes  in  the  British
census  is  based  on  a  blend  of  commodity  and  process,  i.e.  partly  on
the  '  nature  '  of  the  work  involved  in  producing  them.  This  gives
us  the  following  classes :  professional,  domestic,  commercial,
agricultural  and  fishing,  industrial.  It  is  sufficient  comment  upon
the  merit  of  this  classification  to  remark  that  mining  comes  under
industrial,  most  retail  dealing  under  industrial,  while  professional
includes  makers  of  dental  apparatus,  and  photographers.

Transport  is  a  mere  branch  of  commercial.  But  it  is  the  divi-
sions of the  industrial  class  that  exhibits  the  greatest  confusion.


38  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

For  while  the  earlier  divisions  are  based  on  consideration  of  the
character  of  the  products  or  the  uses  they  serve,  e.g.  (i)  books,
prints,  maps ;  (2)  machines ;  (3)  houses,  furniture  and  decora-
tion 5  (4)  carriages  and  harness,  we  soon  pass  into  a  distinction
between  textile  fabrics  and  dress  which  is  evidently  based  upon
the  time  order  in  the  processes  of  manufacture,  and  finally  we  are
plunged  into  animal  substances,  vegetable  substances,  mineral
substances,  reverting  to  the  basis  of  nature  of  the  material.

Needless  to  say,  this  ill-constructed  net  fails  entirely  to  catch
certain  large  and  important  classes  of  workers,  and  '  general  shop-
keepers,' costermongers,  contractors,  manufacturers,  managers
(undefined),  general  labourers,  and  a  considerable  class  of  engine
drivers,  stokers,  &c.,  artizans,  machinists,  factory  labourers  are
thrown  into  a  general  rubbish  heap  at  the  end,  under  the  title,
'  general  or  unspecified  commodities.'


CHAPTER  III

SPENDING AND SAVING

§  I.  In  any  series  of  processes  directly  or  indirectly  producing  any  class  of
goods,  a  quantitative  relation  must  subsist  between  the  capital  and
labour  employed  in  the  several  processes ;  also  between  the  rate  of
production  and  the  rate  of  consumption,  or  withdrawal.  This  rule  will
also  hold  of  industry  as  a  whole.— §  2.  In  a  stationary  society  the  money
spent  by  consumers,  passing  up  the  industrial  stream,  stimulates  the
continuous  processes  of  production  and  furnishes  all  money  incomes.
The  real  income  consists  of  commodities  and  services,  which  are  con-
sumed as  fast  as  they  are  produced.— §  3.  In  a  progressive  society  some
money-income  must  be  saved,  i.e.  applied  to  buy  more  new  capital-goods.
Saving  is  a  stimulation  of  certain  parts  of  the  industrial  system  in  prepara-
tion for  enhanced  spending  and  consumption.  Individual  saving  need
not  cause  increase  of  productive  capital,  social  saving  must.— §  4.  There
exists  at  any  time  an  economically  right  ratio  of  saving  to  spending,
having  regard  to  the  probable  growth  of  future  consumption  and  the
changes  in  industrial  arts.  This  right  adjustment  may  be  disturbed  by
over-spending  or  over-saving.

§  I. — Our  shoe  operative  or  shop  assistant  expanding  his  area  of
knowledge  from  his  two  standpoints  of  producer  and  consumer,  lias
got  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  industrial  system  in  the  world  as  a
great  complex  organised  grouping  of  trades  engaged  in  converting
the  raw  materials  and  powers  of  Nature  into  commodities  for  the
use  of  man.  He  will  distinguish  a  main  stream  of  processes,
extractive,  manufacturing,  commercial,  along  which  these  raw
materials  constantly  flow  towards  consumption,  and  the  number
of  tributaries  which  continually  feed  the  processes  along  the  main
stream,  with  the  plant  and  other  means  which  enable  them  to  do
this  work  of  forwarding  the  production  of  commodities.  At  each
point  of  production  along  the  main  stream  and  along  the  tributaries
he  will  see  a  cluster  of  trades,  each  composed  of  a  group  of  busi-
nesses whose  structure  is  built  of  units  of  capital,  labour,  land,  and
management.  So  far  as  this  system  is  working  economically  it
seems  evident  that  there  will  be  a  definite  relation  between  the
quantity  of  the  capital,  labour,  and  other  factors  at  each  of
the  various  processes,  both  in  the  main  stream  and  along  the
tributaries.

39


40  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

Cattle Hides Leather Boots Shop  Boots
R.M.^ A  ?  C  ?  E < Com.


A

B

C

D

a

b

c

d

a'

b'

c'

d'

Taking  the  section  of  industry  concerned  with  production  of
boots,  we  shall  recognise  that  some  sort  of  definite  quantitative
relations  must  be  maintained  between  the  trades  along  the  main
series  of  processes  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  i.e.  there  must  be  some  proportion
between  the  rate  at  which  cattle  are  converted  into  hides,  hides
into  leather,  leather  into  boots,  and  boots  into  consumers'  commo-
dities. Shop  boots  at  E  cannot  be  handed  over  the  counter  to
consumers  at  a  faster  rate  than  the  capital  and  labour  at  A,  B,  C,
D  respectively  permits  them  to  be  forwarded  ;  nor  can  hides  and
leather  continue  to  be  produced  at  a  faster  pace  than  boot  shops
will  receive  them  for  supplying  customers.

In  fact,  it  is  quite  evident  that  if  we  have  a  *  system  '  at  all,
that  system  must  involve  a  definite  proportion  between  the  quan-
tity of  capital,  labour,  and  other  factors  employed  at  the  several
processes  of  converting  cattle  into  boots.

Confining  ourselves,  for  convenience,  to  Capital  and  Labour,  we
shall  say  then  that  the  quantity  of  employment  of  Capital  and
Labour  at  the  points  A,  B,  C,  D,  E  will  be  mutually  inter-depen-
dent. It  will  be  equally  evident  that  what  applies  to  the  trades  in
the  main  current  will  also  apply  to  the  tributaries  which  supply
the  plant,  machinery,  &c.,  to  the  main  processes.  So  the  quantity
of  capital  and  labour  employed  at  a  and  ai  will  be  directly  deter-
mined by  the  quantity  employed  at  A,  that  employed  at  b  and  bi
by  the  quantity  employed  at  B,  and  so  on,  so  that  the  quantitative
relation  subsisting  between  the  main  processes  will  apply  likewise
to  the  subsidiary  processes,  all  the  trades  directly  and  indirectly
concerned  with  making  boots  having  their  sizes,  or  their  quantity
of  employment  of  capital  and  labour,  determined  by  one  another.

Now  what  holds  of  the  series  of  boot-making  trades  will  hold
equally  of  bread-making  or  shirt-making,  or  of  trades  in  general.
Removing,  then,  our  special  application  to  boots,  we  shall  assert
the  general  truth  that  in  the  system  of  industry  there  will  be  at
any  given  time  a  definite  relation  between  the  quantity  of  capital
and  labour  employed  in  the  various  sorts  of  work,  extractive,
manufacturing,  transport,  mercantile,  retail  trade,  so  far  as  the
system  is  operating  economically.  If  we  take  either  the  most
general  or  the  most  particular  view  of  industr}^  we  shall  recognise
that  the  '  system  '  involves  a  delicate  provision  of  adjustment
between  the  amount  of  energy  employed  at  the  several  points  and


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  41

between  the  quantity  of  the  instruments  of  production  giving  out
this  energy.

Applying  to  general  industry  our  simplified  diagram —

(Extractive) (Man.  i) (Man.  2)  (W holes' le)  (Retail)
R.  M.


^^  commodities

A

B

C

D

E <

a

a'

b
b»

c
c'

d

e

^  consumption

we  should  first  perceive  that  as  the  trade  groups  placed  respectively
at  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  and  at  a,  ai,  b,  bi,  &c.,  were  all  engaged  in  carrying
R.  M.  (materials)  towards  consumption,  there  must  be  a  definite
proportion  between  the  work  done  at  these  several  points  and,
therefore,  between  the  capital  and  labour,  &c.,  engaged  in  doing  it.

We  should  next  recognise  that  the  amount  of  this  productive
energy  given  out,  both  as  an  aggregate  and  as  apportioned  between
the  several  processes,  will  appear  to  be  directly  determined,  on  the
one  hand,  by  the  rate  at  which  raw  materials  (R.  M.)  are  put  in  at
one  end  of  the  stream  ;  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  rate  at  which
they  are  taken  out  as  commodities  by  consumers  at  the  other  end.

A  slackening  of  the  rate  at  which  raw  materials  enter  the  stream
at  the  source  will  appear  to  involve  a  corresponding  slackening  of
industry  (a  reduction  of  employment  of  capital  and  labour)  at  each
process  of  production,  and  also  a  corresponding  reduction  of  the
pace  at  which  commodities  flow  out  into  consumption  :  a  quickening
of  the  inflow  of  the  raw  materials  will  appear  to  cause  a  corre-
sponding quickening  of  industry,  for  more  raw  materials  cannot
continue  to  enter  the  stream  of  production  than  are  capable  of
being  carried  forward  down  the  stream.  On  the  other  hand,  a
slackening  of  the  pace  of  consumption  (of  the  rate  at  which  com-
modities are  withdrawn  from  the  end  of  the  stream)  would  seem
equally  to  involve  a  slackening  of  every  process  of  production,  for
any  attempt  to  maintain  at  any  point  the  former  pace  of  production
would  appear  to  cause  congestion  and  stoppage  :  a  quickening  of
the  pace  of  consumption  (a  more  rapid  withdrawal  of  commodities)
must  involve  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  production,  for  without
such  increase  of  the  rate  of  production  no  increased  rate  of  con-
sumption is  possible.

If  now  we  regard  the  entrance  of  raw  materials  into  the  indus-
trial system  as  the  first  stage  in  production,  we  shall  come  to  the
conclusion  that,  pooling  together  all  the  productive  processes,  there
must  be  a  definite  quantitative  relation  between  the  rate  of  pro-
duction and  the  rate  of  consumption,  or,  in  other  words,  between
the  quantity  of  employment  of  capital  and  labour  and  the  quantity


42  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  commodities  withdrawn  from  the  productive  stream  within  any
given  time.

Recognising  this  fixed  proportion  between  the  rate  at  which
raw  materials  enter  the  stream  and  the  rate  at  which  commodities
are  drawn  out,  we  need  not  yet  concern  ourselves  with  the  question
how  far  the  one  or  the  other  determines  or  regulates  the  flow  of
industry.  The  law  of  gravitation,  according  to  which  water  flows
from  the  high  lands  towards  the  sea,  seems  to  exhibit  a  pushing
force  as  we  watch  the  stream  from  below,  a  pulling  force  as  we
watch  from  above.  So  with  the  push  and  pull  of  the  industrial
process.

§  2. — Before  we  consider  what  it  is  that  makes  the  industrial
system  work,  what  that  energy  of  push  and  pull  is  that  corresponds
to  gravitation  in  a  stream,  we  need  to  look  a  little  nearer  at  the
object  which  this  system  seems  to  have  set  before  it,  the  result  or
product  of  all  its  activity.

As  this  object  for  the  individual  '  producer  '  is  said  to  be  his
'  income,'  so  we  may  say  that  the  prima  facie  object  of  industry  is
to  produce  an  income  for  the  industrial  society.

Now  what  is  that  income  ?  We  are  accustomed  to  express
income  in  money,  but  we  are  also  familiar  with  the  notion  that  real
income  is  what  that  money  will  buy,  and  in  considering  the  income
of  industrial  society  we  must  begin  with  this  real  income.  What
will  be  the  real  income  which  the  industrial  system  yields  ?  The
answer  to  this  question  will  depend  upon  our  concept  of  the  indus-
trial society.  If  that  society  were  in  an  absolutely  stationary
condition,  with  a  fixed  population,  fixed  wants  and  fixed  methods
of  industry,  the  income  for  each  year  would  consist  in  the  quantity
of  commodities  (goods  and  services)  produced  for  consumption  and
handed  over  to  consumers  during  the  year.  This,  of  course,  does
not  mean  that  all  the  industrial  energy  expended  that  year  was
represented  in  these  consumption  goods,  for  some  industrial  energy
must  go  into  replacement  of  plant  or  provision  against  wear  and
tear.  This  provision  against  wear  and  tear  does  not,  however,
rank  as  income,  either  from  the  standpoint  of  social  or  of  individual
production.  In  our  fixed  or  static  society  all  productive  energy,
after  provision  for  wear  and  tear  fund,  would  be  represented  by
consumption  goods  and  services.  The  total  output  of  commodities
would  be  identical  with  the  income  :  the  new  boots,  loaves,  shirts,
doctoring,  musical  performances,  governmental  care,  &c.,  produced
during  the  year  would  constitute  the  real  income  for  the  year.

Although  there  is  no  real  society  living  in  a  '  static  '  condition,
it  is  convenient  to  examine  how  such  an  industrial  system  would
work. We  should  perceive  a  constant  even  flow  of  raw  materials


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  43

entering  the  stream  of  industry,  passing  through  the  various
processes  and  emerging  as  commodities,  and  the  same  even
flow  would  take  place  down  the  tributary  streams  engaged  in
maintaining  the  plant  and  other  fixed  capital  in  the  several
processes.

So  far  we  have  spoken  of  the  movement  of  materials  and  goods
as  a  '  flow,'  without  seeking  more  closely  an  explanation  of  '  how  '
materials  pass  from  one  stage  of  production  to  the  next  stage,  and
hnally  pass  from  retail  shopkeepers  to  consumers.

If  we  are  to  retain  the  '  flow  '  metaphor,  we  must  supplement
our  view  of  the  industrial  movement  by  introducing  another  '  flow  '
which  moves  in  a  reverse  direction  to  the  flow  of  goods.  This  is
the  '  flow  '  or  circulation  of  money.  What  money  is  we  need  not
here  pause  to  ask  :  we  may  treat  anything  as  money  the  payment
of  which  enables  him  who  pays  to  buy  what  he  requires  for  con-
sumption or  for  some  service  of  production.  Now  if,  turning  to
our  stream  of  boot-producing  processes,  we  ask  how  hides  pass  from
the  tanner's  possession  into  that  of  the  shoe  manufacturer's,  we
perceive  at  once  that  it  is  because  money  passes  from  the  shoe
manufacturer  to  the  tanner  :  so  with  the  movement  of  shoes  from
the  manufacturer  to  the  shop  of  the  merchant,  it  is  attended  by  a
corresponding  passage  of  money  the  opposite  way.

In  the  stable  industrial  society  we  are  investigating,  it  is  easy
to  see  how  the  two  streams,  the  goods  flowing  from  raw  materials
to  commodities,  the  money  flowing  from  the  consumers  up  the
series  of  industrial  processes,  inter-act  and  correspond.  The  raw
material  gathers  utility,  i.e.  it  reaches  a  shape  or  a  place  where
it  is  nearer  towards  satisfying  some  human  want  than  in  its
earlier  shape  or  place,  at  each  stage  in  production  by  the  operation
of  the  capital  and  labour  which  act  upon  it,  until  at  the  end  it
takes  the  finished  form  of  a  commodity.

Now  follow  the  course  taken  by  the  money  which  is  paid  for  this
commodity,  boots  or  loaves,  or  other  shop  goods.  The  consumer,
in  buying  the  commodity,  hands  over  in  return  a  sum  of  money,
the  price.  What  does  the  shopkeeper  at  E  do  with  this  money?
With  part  of  it  he  defrays  the  expenses  of  shopkeeping,  he  pays
his  rent,  expenses,  the  wages  of  his  shop  assistants,  establishment,
the  interest  on  his  borrowed  capital,  profits  or  earnings  of  manage-
ment to  himself.  This  disposes  of  a  certain  fraction  of  the  money.
The  rest  he  passes  on  to  the  wholesale  merchant  at  D,  or  the  manu-
facturer at  C,  in  payment  for  more  goods  to  replace  the  boots  or
shirts  he  has  sold,  or  more  commonly  to  meet  a  bill  in  pay-
ment for  goods  previously  received.  In  fact,  then,  the
merchant  who  has  advanced  on  credit  the  boots  or  flour  which


44  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

the  retailer  has  sold  to  customers  receives  a  part  of  the
money  paid  by  the  customers,  handed  over  to  him  by
the  retailer  so  as  to  maintain  his  stock.  So  a  part  of  the
money  paid  to  the  retailer  at  E  goes  to  maintain  in  productive  work
the  retail  capital  and  labour,  &c.,  the  rest  is  passed  on  to  the  mer-
chant at  D,  stimulating  by  its  passage  the  flow  of  goods  from  the
merchant  to  the  retailer.  Now  the  w'holesale  merchant  or  importer
of  shoes  or  shirts,  when  he  has  received  the  money  from  the  retailer
in  demand  for  more  shoes  or  flour,  will  use  this  money,  partly  to
defray  his  current  expenses,  rent,  wages,  profit,  &c.,  partly  to  re-
plenish and  maintain  his  stock  b}^  sending  more  orders  to  the
manufacturer  of  shoes  or  shirts  at  C.  Whether  he  actually  pays
ov^er  the  money  when  he  sends  the  order  or  receives  the  goods,  or
whether  he  accepts  a  bill,  does  not  affect  the  substance  of  the  act  :
part  of  the  money  which,  starting  from  the  purse  of  the  consumer,
reached  him  through  the  retailer,  is  used  to  pay  the  manufacturer
for  a  fresh  supply  of  shoes  or  shirts.  Here,  too,  the  flow  of  the
money  from  the  merchant  to  the  maker  (D  to  C)  is  the  means  of
driving  goods  to  pass  from  maker  to  merchant  (C  to  D).  The  shoe
manufacturer  or  shirt-maker  makes  a  similar  use  of  the  part  of  the
price  of  shoes  or  shirts  that  reaches  him,  in  paying  his  various  ex-
penses and  in  buying  a  fresh  stock  of  raw  materials,  leather  or
cotton  cloth,  from  the  manufacturer  of  those  goods  at  B.  These
latter,  in  their  turn,  after  paying  their  expenses  of  production,
apply  the  money  thus  received  in  buying  a  fresh  stock  of  hides  or
cotton  from  farmers  or  growers  at  A,  which  latter  use  the  money
in  maintaining  the  productive  processes  by  which  they  '  extract  '
their  raw  material  (cattle  or  cotton)  from  Nature.  If  we  looked  a
little  closer  at  the  payments  made  at  each  stage  under  the  head  of
'  expenses,'  we  should  find  that  some  of  it  went  to  repair  and  re-
place buildings,  machinery,  and  other  forms  of  '  capital '  required
to  assist  production,  and  involved  payments  to  machine-makers
and  others,  who  are  represented  in  our  diagram  by  the  letters  a,
b,  c,  d,  e.  These  makers,  as  we  saw,  stand  at  the  head  of  a  series
of  tributary  trades  whose  flow  joins  the  main  current  at  A,  B,  C,
D,  E.  A  fraction  of  the  consumer's  money  flows  into  each  of
these  tributary  channels,  and  causes  an  onward  flow^  of  rawmatcrials
towards  new  finished  plant  and  machinery,  corresponding  to  the
flow  of  goods  along  the  main  channel  of  industry.  This  illustration
makes  it  evident  that  in  the  stationary  society  we  are  examining
the  money  paid  over  the  retail  counter  by  the  consumer  in  pay-
ment for  commodities  is  the  actual  source  of  all  money-incomes
received  throughout  the  industrial  system  by  the  owners  of  capital,
labour,  land,  &c.,  and  that  its  flow  upward  through  the  main  and


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  45

tributary  channels  of  industry  is  the  stimulus  to  each  movement
by  which  raw  materials  and  goods  are  carried  down  the  stream
towards  consumption.

A  portion  of  the  money  paid  over  the  retail  counter  is  then
deposited  at  each  stage  in  payments  to  owners  of  labour,  capital,
land  there  employed,  then  the  rest  flows  on  to  the  next  stage.
These  payments  are  the  direct  industrial  stimuli  of  the  continued
production  ;  though  in  form  they  represent  work  already  done
by  some  factor,  they  are  in  fact  material  conditions  and  moral
inducements  to  the  owners  of  labour,  capital,  and  land,  to  apply
these  factors  in  further  industrial  work.  The  money  thus  paid  in
wages  to  labour,  expended  in  food,  &c.,  replaces  the  labour- power
that  has  been  depleted,  and  furnishes  a  new  supply  of  productive
energy  :  though  paid  for  work  already  done,  this  payment  evokes
further  work  by  supporting  the  conviction  that  this  work  also
will  in  due  course  receive  payment.  So  with  the  owner  of  capital,
the  money  paid  him  for  the  past  service  rendered  by  his  capital
goes  partly  to  replace  its  wear  and  tear,  partly  to  induce  him
to  continue  its  industrial  employment.  The  same  holds  likewise
of  the  landowner's  rent.^

The  money-income  received  by  any  person  engaged  at  any
point  in  the  industrial  process  as  worker,  capitalist,  landowner  is
composed  of  these  payments  made  to  him  for  single  uses  of  some
factor  of  production,  and  is  seen  to  come  out  of  a  fund  which  flows
from  the  consumer.  The  total  money-income  of  this  industrial
community  would  in  this  case  be  equivalent  to  the  aggregate  of
money  expended  by  consumers  for  commodities  which  would  be
distributed,  as  we  see,  throughout  the  industrial  world  in  payments
for  the  use  of  labour,  capital,  and  land  so  as  to  maintain  these
factors  and  keep  them  in  productive  operation.  The  real  income
of  the  community  would  consist  of  the  aggregate  of  commodities
which  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  consumers,  or,  in  other  words,
the  goods  purchased  for  consumption  by  the  recipients  of  the
money-incomes.

The  meaning  of  income  is,  however,  somewhat  confused  by
other  circumstances  which  require  notice.  So  far  we  have  treated
the  industrial  mechanism  as  engaged  in  producing  material  com-
modities only.  But  political  economy  is  concerned  with  all  forms
of  marketable  wealth,  services  as  well  as  material  wares.  Now
the  production  and  consumption  of  services  differ  in  no  essential
point,  so  far  as  the  structure  and  working  of  industry  is  concerned,
from  the  production  and  consumption  of  material  goods.

'  The  question  of  the  necessity  of  these  payments  remains  for  later  and
more  appropriate  discussion. It  is  not  germane  to  the  present  inquiry.


46  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

If  I  pay  half  a  crown  to  attend  a  lecture  or  5s.  for  a  doctor's
advice,  these  payments  must  be  treated  as  equivalent  to  the  pay-
ments of  another  half-crown  for  the  text  book  I  use  at  the  lecture,
and  of  another  5s.  which  I  pay  to  a  chemist  for  the  drugs  the
doctor  orders  me  to  take.  Just  as  there  exists  a  series  of  industries
engaged  in  forwarding  the  production  of  books  and  drugs,  there
exists  a  series  of  processes  engaged  in  putting  into  the  lecture  and
the  doctor  the  serviceable  information  which  is  bought  from  them.
Schools  and  colleges,  laboratories,  hospitals,  and  work  of  profes-
sional research  are  all  processes  which  go  to  produce  the  skilled
information  that  is  sold,  and  though  the  continuity  of  the  chain
of  productive  processes  is  less  visible,  and  in  some  regards  less
regular,  it  is  there,  and  is  maintained  from  the  payments  for  retail
services.  Though  the  individual  fee  you  pay  a  doctor  or  a  lawyer
cannot  often  be  traced  back  in  distribution  to  the  earlier  stages  of
production  of  medical  and  legal  skill,  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  a
demand  for  medical  advice  is  a  demand  for  medical  schools,  hospi-
tals, and  scientific  research,  and  that  any  increase  of  expenditure
on  litigation  tends  to  swell  the  profession,  and  to  react  along  the
paths  of  professional  and  general  education.  Moreover,  it  must
be  remembered  that  a  demand  for  services  is  not  only  a  demand
for  the  teaching  of  their  forms  of  skill,  but  for  various  material
instruments  subsidiary  to  these  services  :  offices,  books,  surgical
instruments,  and  other  tools  of  the  craft  are  '  demanded  '  by  the
demand  for  professional  services.  The  real  income  of  a  nation
will,  therefore,  include  all  professional  and  other  personal  services
valued,  as  material  commodities  are  valued,  according  to  their
selling  prices.  So,  too,  in  reckoning  the  money-income  of  the
nation  we  shall  reckon  the  incomes  of  professional  men,  officials,
domestic  servants,  &c.,  not  as  derived  from  or  paid  out  of  the
incomes  of  those  who  employ  them,  but  as  directly  representing
non-material  wealth  produced  Ijy  them  which  forms  part  of  the
real  income  of  the  nation. 1  It  may  seem  a  hard  saying,  but  a
gamekeeper  or  a  secretary  of  state  must  be  considered  to  produce
real  wealth  in  the  preservation  of  game  or  of  empire,  which  is  the
equivalent  of  the  salary  they  respectively  receive. The  questions

'  If  I  am  a  manufacturer  receiving  /5000  a  year  in  profits  from  my  mills,
I  am  considered  as  creating,  or  causing  to  be  created,  a  quantity  of  goods
corresponding  to  that  sum,  the  product  of  my  skill  or  enterprise.  If  I  employ
a  private  tutor  for  my  boys,  and  pay  him  ;{3oo  out  of  my  ;^5ooo,  his  tutorial
services  constitute  another  real  income,  though  a  non-material  one.  Though
I  am  said  to  pay  him  his  ^300  out  of  my  ^^5000,  the  real  income  produced  by
the  two  of  us  corresponds  to  ;^5300,  and  the  income  tax  commissioners  rightly
assess  me  on  the  whole  ;^50oo  and  liim  on  the  /300.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
I  also  out  of  my  ;^5ooo  make  an  allowance  of  ;^300  to  my  son,  no  real  income
corresponds  to  that  /300,  and  my  son  is  not  assessed  on  it  for  income  tax.


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  47

whether  such  work  is  socially  desirable  or  is  overpaid  are  entirely
irrelevant  in  such  an  analysis.

A  scientific  theory  which  includes,  under  wealth,  all  marketable
things,  must  include  all  paid  services  in  this  national  income,  and
the  payment  for  them  as  independent  items  of  the  money-income
of  the  nation.

Our  diagram  of  industry,  with  its  main  and  subsidiary  streams
of  production,  its  statements  of  the  quantitative  relations  between
the  factors  of  production  and  the  rate  of  consumption,  will  be  just
as  applicable  to  the  production  and  consumption  of  non-material
as  of  material  wealth,  except  that  material  factors  of  land  and
capital  play  a  smaller  and  a  less  direct  part  in  the  processes  of  pro-
duction or  preparation  of  most  saleable  services,  and  that  the  series
of  processes  of  production  may  be  shorter  and  less  regular.

The  raw  material  of  some  rude  human  faculty  is  selected  from
a  mass  of  human  faculties,  trained,  informed,  and  adapted  to  the
rendering  of  some  special  service  in  a  profession,  art,  or  office,  by
the  application  of  a  carefully  ordered  machinery  of  education
employing  various  forms  of  intellectual  labour  wielding  material
tools  of  instruction  :  the  result  of  these  processes  is  to  refine  a  raw
human  capacity  of  small  utility  and  value  into  a  powerful  and
finely  serviceable  capacity  with  high  market  value.  So  far  as  the
intellectual,  and  even  the  moral  and  spiritual,  activities  of  man  are
bought  and  sold,  the  laws  of  their  production  and  consumption  do
not  differ  from  those  of  material  goods  as  regards  the  application
of  these  fundamental  laws.

If  we  are  dealing  with  a  community  fixed  in  its  numbers  and
its  modes,  alike  of  production  and  consumption — an  absolutely
stable  industrial  society — our  simple  analysis  of  production  and
consumption  would  suffice.  The  whole  of  the  money-income  paid
as  rent,  profits,  wages,  &c.,  to  members  of  the  society  would  be
spent  in  demanding  commodities  for  personal  consumption.

The  net  real  income  of  the  community  would  consist  of  the
aggregate  of  the  finished  commodities  and  services  produced  and
consumed  in  the  year,  the  net  money-income  of  the  money  values
which  these  commodities  and  services  represented.  The  prices
which  described  their  money  values  would  include  payments  made
to  the  owners  of  capital  and  labour  who  replaced  the  waste  of  fixed
capital  and  land.  Thus  the  two  currents,  the  stream  of  production
from  raw  materials  to  commodities,  and  the  reverse  flow  of  money
from  the  consumer  down  the  channels  of  production,  would  main-
tain a  regular  amount  of  production  and  consumption.  In  such  an
industrial  society  as  we  have  been  considering,  statical  in  popula-
tion, in  the  arts  of  production  and  in  standard  of  consumption,  the


48  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

entire  real  income  would  be  consumed  in  material  commodities  and
services,  and  the  entire  money-income  of  all  its  members  would  be
spent  in  paying  for  them. No  saving  would  be  necessary  or  possible.

§  3. — But  this  is  not  the  actual  industrial  system  in  which  our
inquiring  workman  will  find  himself  living.  The  industrial  commu-
nity, whether  he  regards  it  as  a  nation,  or  more  accurately  as  the
industrial  world,  must  be  regarded  not  as  stationary  but  as  changing,
and  the  change  is,  on  the  whole,  a  growth.  The  structure  and
working  of  the  actual  industrial  system  must  take  account  of
growth  of  population,  a  rising  standard  of  consumption  and  im-
proved economies  in  the  arts  of  production.

These  changes  involve  some  important  modifications  in  our  plan
of  the  industrial  system.  If  provision  is  to  be  made  for  commodi-
ties to  meet  the  growing  needs  of  an  increasing  population,  the
industrial  system  must  be  enabled  to  set  up  along  all  its  productive
channels  an  increased  quantity  of  the  instruments  of  production  ;
before  a  larger  variety  of  shop  goods  can  be  sold  at  a  faster  pace
over  the  retail  counter  to  an  increasing  number  of  customers,  more
capital  and  labour  must  previously  have  been  set  in  operation  at
each  of  the  processes  of  production.

Now  in  the  modern  industrial  world  there  is  only  one  way  of
bringing  this  about.  The  whole  money-income  of  the  community
must  not  be  expended  in  buying  finished  commodities  at  the  end
of  the  industrial  process  for  consumption  ;  some  of  it  instead
must  be  expended  in  paying  workers  to  make  and  set  up  more  plant,
machinery,  &c.,  than  existed  before  at  the  various  points  in  the
main  stream  and  the  tributaries  of  production,  and  to  use  this
increased  capital  to  work  up  raw  materials  in  the  different  produc-
tive processes,  so  as  to  be  able  to  put  into  the  shops  of  retailers  a
larger  flow  of  commodities  to  be  sold  by  them  to  consumers.

So  whereas  in  a  stable  industrial  society  all  the  money-income
received  for  productive  services  by  capitalists,  labourers,  land-
owners, &c.,  was  applied  at  E  in  purchase  of  consumption  goods,
in  a  progressive  society  some  of  it  will  be  applied  at  A,  B,  C,  and
D,  and  down  the  tributary  channels  a,  ai,  b,  bi,  &c.,  to  set  up  new
instruments  of  production  and  to  work  them.  In  the  stable  society
the  money  which  circulated  through  the  industrial  system,  stimu-
lating productive  activity  at  each  point,  and  causing  the  movement
of  goods  down  the  stream  of  industry,  was  inserted  entirely  at  the
end  of  the  industrial  process  in  purchase  of  retail  goods.  In  the
actual  progressive  society  some  of  this  money  is  inserted  directly
at  the  different  points  of  production,  and  serves  to  stimulate  pro-
duction at  these  points  beyond  the  rate  needed  to  maintain  the
former  activity  of  production.


SPENDING AND  SAVING  49

How  it  operates  is  quite  clear.  If  we  suppose  the  stable  society
illustrated  in  our  diagram  to  become  progressive,  saving  so  as  to
provide  for  increased  consumption  in  the  future,  what  will  happen
is  this.  Some  of  the  money  which  was  regularly  applied  at  E  in
bringing  retail  goods  will  no  longer  be  applied  there  ;  and  the  re-
tailers at  E,  having  less  custom,  will  reduce,  as  far  as  they  can,
their  expenses,  employing  less  capital  and  labour,  &c.,  and  handing
on  less  money  to  wholesale  merchants  in  fresh  orders.  The  mer-
chants at  D,  finding  their  business  similarly  slack,  will  also  curtail
expenses  and  reduce  their  orders  from  makers  ;  and  so  the  reduc-
tion of  spending  at  E  will  cause  a  general  slowing  down  of  all  the
industrial  processes,  both  along  the  main  stream  and  down  the
tributaries.  This  is  what  happens  as  the  direct  effect  of  a  reduc-
tion of  spending  upon  commodities.  But,  as  we  have  recognised,
saving  (as  distinct  from  hoarding)  does  not  mean  a  refusal  to  apply
the  money  stimulus,  but  only  a  refusal  to  apply  it  at  the  retail
stage  in  '  demand  '  for  commodities.  The  '  saving  '  persons  who
reduce  the  '  demand  '  for  commodities  apply  the  same  quantity  of
'  demand  '  at  various  interim  points  in  the  industrial  process.  They
pay  more  money  for  developing  new  mines,  they  place  contracts  for
putting  up  more  mills  and  workshops,  they  give  more  orders  for
machinery.  In  other  words,  instead  of  applying  all  their  money
at  E,  they  apply  some  of  it  directly  at  A,  B,  or  C,  so  as  to  set  up
more  forms  of  plant,  &c.,  at  these  points  in  production.

The  money  thus  applied  at  A,  B,  or  C  not  only  stimulates  their
increased  activity  of  capital  and  labour,  but  some  of  it  is  passed  on
to  the  trades  on  the  tributaries,  a,  ai,  b,  bi,  &c.,  stimulating  indus-
try there.  If  the  saving  be  taken  as  a  general  process,  it  will  flow
in  regular  proportions  through  the  building,  machinery-making,  and
other  trades,  which  set  up  plant,  and  the  stimulus  will  then  pass
through  the  early  processes  of  the  extractive  and  manufacturing
industries,  so  that  a  fuller  flow  of  raw  materials  than  before  will
begin  to  pass  down  the  main  stream  towards  the  consumer.

The  first  effect  of  saving,  which  alone  concerns  us  just  now,
is  thus  seen  to  be  a  slackening  of  the  former  even  circulation  of
money  and  stimulation  of  industrial  energy,  and  a  substitution  of
an  enhanced  circulation  and  stimulation  in  certain  parts  of  the
industrial  system  in  preparation  for  a  general  increased  flow  of
productive  energy  towards  commodities.

In  the  stable  society  the  only  productive  energy  applied  to
making  the  forms  of  capital  was  confined  to  providing  against  wear
and  tear,  so  as  to  maintain  the  existing  stock  of  capital,  and  this  is
not  saving.  In  the  progressive  society  productive  energy  is  applied
to  making  more  forms  of  capital,  setting  up  more  mills,  foundries,

E


50  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

workshops,  machines,  and  passing  through  them  larger  quantities
of  raw  materials  than  before  : this  is  saving.

Spending  means  buying  commodities  with  income ;  saving
means  buying  productive  goods  or  instruments  with  income.
Spending  causes  more  commodities  to  be  produced  ;  saving  causes
more  forms  of  capital  to  be  produced.

The  sort  of  stimulus  applied  by  spending  and  by  saving  is  the
same  :  in  each  case  the  application  of  the  money  circulating  down
the  scries  of  productive  processes  from  the  point  where  it  is  applied
sets  up  or  maintains  industrial  activity  in  all  the  preceding  pro-
cesses, and  causes  material  to  flow  from  one  stage  of  production  to
another.  In  spending,  however,  the  net  result  is  to  withdraw  some
commodities  from  the  industrial  system  for  consumption,  replacing
what  was  withdrawn  by  another  set  of  similar  commodities,  so
that  the  general  stream  of  industry  remains  as  before  :  in  saving,
the  net  result  is  to  add  some  new  forms  of  capital  (buildings,
machines,  material,  goods),  leaving  the  productive  apparatus  of  the
system  larger  than  before  in  the  various  processes  of  industry,  and
so  stimulating  production,  not  from  the  end  of  the  whole  process,
but  from  various  interim  points.  Spending  means  buying
consumption  goods  ;  saving  means  buying  production  goods.

That  all  saving  implies  demand  for  creation  of  more  forms  of
fixed  or  circulating  capital  is  not  at  first  obvious.  From  the  stand-
point of  the  individual  who  saves,  his  action  consists  in  a  refusal  to
demand  commodities,  a  not-spending,  or,  more  strictly,  a  postpone-
ment of  spending.  In  primitive  industrial  societies,  or  in  disturbed
conditions  of  more  advanced  societies,  much  refusal  to  spend  takes
the  form  of  hoarding  money.  Though  hoarding  may  be  fully  justi-
fied as  an  individual  precaution,  its  effect  in  industry  as  compared
with  spending  is  to  check  the  flow  of  the  industrial  stream,  causing
a  smaller  employment  of  capital,  labour,  and  land  than  would  be
afforded  by  the  spending  of  the  money  that  was  hoarded.  An  in-
crease of  hoarding  inevitably  tends  to  depress  trade,  though  the
subsequent  spending  of  hoarded  treasure  will  ultimately  redress
the  balance  by  affording  a  corresponding  stimulus.

In  modern  industrial  societies,  however,  hoarding  is  abnormal.^
A  person  who,  instead  of  spending,  saves,  invests  his  savings.
Now  there  are  two  ways  in  which  he  may  invest  his  savings.  He
may  hand  over  the  money  to  someone  who  wishes  to  spend  it  on
commodities,  buying  property  which  the  other  sells,  or  loaning  it
on  mortgage. This  is  the  saving  effected  when  a  money-lender

'  In  a  later  discussion  of  commercial  depressions,  and  their  accompanying
unemployment,  we  shall  perceive  that  abnormal  hoarding  may  sometimes  play
a  critical  part.


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  51

advances  money  to  a  spendthrift.  In  this  case  A,  not  wishing  to
spend  himself,  simply  transfers  for  a  consideration  the  power  to
spend  to  B,  who  does  wish  to  spend.  Though  A  saves  and  invests
his  saving,  no  effect  is  produced  upon  the  total  volume  of  spend-
ing or  saving  :  all  that  has  happened  is  that  B  spends  instead
of  A,  and  that  some  '  capital '  which  existed  before  in  B's  hands
now  belongs  to  A.

(This  is  not  quite  all,  for  A  does  not  hand  over  to  B  all  his
power  of  spending  which  he  saves  ;  he  keeps  back  a  certain  share,
say  five  per  cent.,  which  he  receives  as  interest.  Thus  A,  who  has
saved  /lOO  and  '  invests  '  it  with  spendthrift  B,  receiving  from  B  a
mortgage  deed  and  £5  per  annum,  really  hands  over  £95  of  spend-
ing power,  which  B  uses.  If  A  does  not  save  but  spends  his  ^^5
interest,  the  total  amount  of  spending  is  just  as  much  as  if  A  had
not  '  saved,'  for  B  spends  £()$  and  A  spends  £$  instead  of  A
spending  the  whole  ;^ioo.)

Neither  '  hoarding  '  nor  this  sort  of  saving  makes  provision  for
expansion  of  production  and  of  consumption  in  a  progressive  com-
munity. But  if,  instead  of  lending  money  to  a  spendthrift,  A
invests  it  in  his  own  business  or  in  someone  else's  business,  so  as
to  extend  industrial  operations,  what  becomes  of  the  money  ?
Though  saved,  it  is  nevertheless  spent.  But  instead  of  being  spent
in  demanding  commodities  which,  when  demanded,  are  destroyed
in  consumption,  it  is  spent  in  demanding  productive  goods,  e.g.
new  mills,  machines,  warehouses,  raw  materials,  ^c,  which,  when
demanded,  are  not  straightway  destroyed,  but  form  an  addition  to
the  amount  of  material  wealth  in  the  community.  Whereas  spend-
ing means  paying  capital  and  labour  to  produce  finished  commodi-
ties which  are  immediately  withdrawn  from  the  industrial  stream
and  destroyed,  saving  means  paying  the  same  amount  of  capital
and  labour  to  produce  additional  productive  goods  (i.e.  forms  of
capital)  which  are  not  withdrawn,  but  remain  an  addition  to  the
producing  power  of  the  community.  Such  acts  of  saving  employ,
directly,  just  the  same  amount  of  capital  and  labour  as  if  the  money
were  spent  on  commodities,^  the  difference  being  that  in  the  former
case  the  capital  and  labour  are  employed  in  producing  more  produc-
tive goods,  in  the  latter  in  producing  more  consumptive  goods.

§4. — It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  any  proportion  of  the  income
of  a  community  can  advantageously  be  saved.  But  this  is  not  the
case.  We  saw  how  in  a  stable  community  a  fixed  proportion  was
maintained  between  the  amount  of  productive  energy  employed  at
the  various  processes,  and  only  a  given  aggregate  of  capital  could

'  J.  S.  Mill,  in  one  of  his  most  confused  passages,  argued  that  they
employed  more.

E  2


52  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

be  employed  in  lonvarding  the  work  of  turning  out  the  fixed  output
of  commodities.

Of  course,  this  hmitation  of  useful  capital  no  longer  holds  of  a
progressive  community  ;  a  larger  amount  of  saving  is  continually
wanted  to  supply  capital  to  meet  not  only  the  current  but  the
prospective  increase  of  consumption.  But,  though  the  limits  of
saving  are  made  more  elastic,  they  are  not  entirely  cancelled.  In
a  primitive  industrial  community,  however  progressive  in  popula-
tion and  in  needs,  the  quantity  of  '  saving  '  that  can  usefully  be  done
will  be  restricted  by  the  simple  methods  of  industry  in  vogue.  Where
almost  all  production  is  by  hand  labour  with  simple  tools,  the  limit
of  saving  as  compared  with  spending  must  remain  very  narrow.

In  the  modern  capitalist  society  there  is,  of  course,  an  enor-
mously extended  possibiUty  of  socially  useful  saving.  A  large
proportion  of  the  modern  social  income  can  be  saved  because  it  is
possible  to  put  it  into  costly  forms  of  capital,  the  services  of  which
will  fructify  in  the  shape  of  consumption  of  goods  a  long  time  hence  :
railroads  may  be  made,  opening  new  tracts  of  the  earth  in  distant
lands,  new  harbours,  mining  explorations,  afforestation,  drainage,
and  other  v'ast  public  or  private  enterprises,  destined  at  some  dis-
tant future  to  facihtate  the  production  of  actual  commodities.  Such
investments  may  swallow  up  large  masses  of  new  savings.  But
while  it  thus  might  seem  that  the  opportunities  of  useful  saving
were  infinite,  i.e.  that  any  proportion  of  the  current  general  income
could  serviceably  be  saved  provided  that  at  some  distant  time
society  increased  correspondingly  its  rate  of  consumption,  this  is
not  truly  the  case.  Those  alterations  in  the  arts  of  industry  which
give  so  much  importance  to  capital  applied  in  various  direct  and
indirect  processes  of  production,  while  greatly  extending  the  limits
of  saving  as  compared  with  more  primitive  production,  still  leave
some  limits.  Two  important  considerations  maintain  these  limits.
In  the  first  place,  most  forms  of  new  capital,  even  in  this  age  of
elaborated  indirect  production  by  machiner}^,  very  soon  result  in
promoting  an  increased  flow  of  finished  goods,  and  unless  the  pro-
portion of  spending  to  saving  were  speedily  readjusted  so  as  to
take  off  this  increased  flow  by  freer  spending,  at  the  same  time
checking  the  '  saving  '  which  sets  up  these  sorts  of  capital,  the
machinery  of  industry  must  become  congested  and  clogged  by
excessive  goods  and  commodities  unable  to  find  an  exit  in  consump-
tion. Secondly,  the  proportion  of  new  saving  which  can  be  so
applied  as  to  fructify  at  some  far  distant  date  is  necessarily  small,
restricted  principally  by  our  inability  to  forecast  far  ahead  either
the  needs  of  coming  men  or  the  most  economical  modes  of  provid-
ing for  them.


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  53

Though  the  amount  of  saving  that  can  take  material  shape  in
new  railroads,  harbours,  and  other  great  capitalist  enterprises  of  a
foundational  character  is  large  in  itself,  it  constitutes  a  small
proportion  of  the  total  saving,  nor  is  it  capable  of  indefinite
expansion.

The  very  pace  at  which  mechanical  improvements  arc  taking
place,  the  rapidity  of  shifts  of  population  and  of  industry,  the  swift
transformation  in  methods  of  living,  form  considerable  checks  upon
the  more  enduring  shapes  of  capital.  It  seldom  pays  to  put  up  a
city  building  timed  to  last  more  than  a  few  decades,  the  feasibility
of  rail-less  locomotion  is  cutting  down  railroad  investment,  manu-
facturers attribute  an  ever-shortening  life  to  their  most  expensive
machinery.

The  great  bulk  of  capital  fructifies  in  an  early  increase  of  com-
modities, and  so  the  saving  embodied  in  it  is  only  socially  useful
on  condition  that  an  early  increase  of  consumption  proportionate
to  the  increased  saving  takes  place.

A  little  reflection  will  make  it  evident  that  this  implies
the  maintenance  of  a  definite  proportion  between  the  aggregate
of  saving  and  of  spending  over  a  term  of  years.  An  individual
may,  of  course,  continue  to  save  any  proportion  of  his  income  :
a  class  of  persons,  or  even  a  whole  nation,  may  do  the  same
provided  they  can  find  other  classes  or  other  nations  ready  to
borrow  and  to  spend  what  they  are  saving.  But  the  industrial
community  as  a  whole  cannot  save  at  any  given  time  more  than
a  certain  proportion  of  its  income  :  that  proportion  is  never
accurately  known,  and  it  is  always  shifting  with  changes  in  the
arts  of  production  and  consumption,  but  it  imposes  as  real  a
limit  on  the  economy  of  saving  for  the  industrial  community
to-day  as  there  was  for  Robinson  Crusoe  on  his  island  or  for
a  primitive  isolated  tribe  of  men  before  the  era  of  machine
production.

If  this  proportion  is  exceeded  one  year  it  must  be  curtailed  the
next,  so  that  over  a  term  of  years  a  real  proportion  must  be
maintained  between  saving  and  spending.  It  is  only  by  taking
the  partial  standpoint  of  an  individual  or  a  group  of  individuals,
or  some  other  part  of  the  industrial  whole,  that  it  seems  plausible
to  hold that  there  is  no limit  to  efficacious  saving.

Though  the  proportion  of  efficacious  saving  to  spending  is  always
slowly  changing,  at  any  given  time  it  must  rightly  be  regarded  as
fixed  in  the  sense  that  there  is  an  exact  proportion  of  the  current
income  which,  in  accordance  with  existing  arts  of  production  and
existing  foresight,  is  required  to  set  up  new  capital  so  as  to  make
provision for the maximum consumption throughout the near


54  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

future.  Any  miscalculation  or  other  play  of  social  forces  which
disturbs  this  proportion,  inducing  either  too  much  saving  or  too
much  spending,  causes  a  waste  of  productive  power  and  a  restriction
in  aggregate  consumption.

In  a  stable  society,  as  we  saw,  all  the  income  is  spent :  there
is  no  place  for  saving.  But  in  a  progressive  society  where  the
future  rate  of  consumption  is  to  exceed  the  present,  for  a  larger
population  with  a  higher  standard  of  comfort  saving  is  essential.
A  little  saving  will  only  make  provision  for  a  slight  rise  in  the
volume  of  consumption ;  more  saving  is  needed  for  a  larger  rise.
The  right  amount  of  saving  out  of  a  given  income,  i.e.  the  right
proportion  of  saving,  will  be  determined  by  the  amount  of  new
capital  economically  needed  to  furnish  a  given  increase  of  con-
sumption goods.  Over  a  period  of  years  there  will  be  a  rate  of
saving  which  will  assist  to  produce  the  maximum  quantity  of
consumption  goods.

Any  spending  which  reduces  the  rate  of  saving  is  over-spend-
ing, and  involves  a  waste  of  general  productive  power  analogous
to  that  which  was  attributed  to  over-saving.  Over-spending
retards  the  rate  of  progress  in  production  and  consumption
of  commodities,  sacrificing  the  future  to  the  present.  It  does
not,  however,  imply  '  getting  into  debt  '  or  '  living  upon
capital.'  These  terms  are  only  applicable  to  the  over-spending  of
individuals,  classes,  or  other  parts  of  the  industrial  community.
The  community  as  a  whole  cannot  get  into  debt,  for  there  is  no
'  outside  '  to  borrow  from.  Nor  can  it  '  live  upon  its  capital,'  for
that,  too,  implies  borrowing.  Even  if  the  industrial  community
became  so  reckless  in  its  expenditure  as  not  merely  to  make  no
*  saving,'  but  to  refuse  to  provide  against  '  wear  and  tear  '  of
existing  forms  of  capital,  such  extravagance  could  only  be  momen-
tary ;  it  would  be  checked  at  once  by  the  slackened  pace  at  which
raw  materials  and  production  goods  would  pass  through  the  pro-
cesses of  industry  into  the  retail  shops.  It  is  manifestly  impossible
for  society  to  spend  more  than  its  actual  current  income,  i.e.  to
take  out  at  the  end  of  the  productive  process  more  commodities
than  flow  through  the  stream  of  industry.  An  individual  may
exceed  his  current  income  by  his  expenditure,  a  nation  may  do
the  same,  but  the  industrial  community  as  a  whole  cannot  do  so.
Over-spending  on  the  part  of  the  community  does  not  mean  spend-
ing more  than  its  income  :  it  means  a  refusal  to  spend  less  now,
so  as  to  provide  for  an  increased  future  rate  of  expenditure.

We  saw,  then,  that  just  as  in  a  stable  society  there  was  a  fixed
ratio  between  the  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  at  the  various
points  of  production,  and  also  between  the  aggregate  of  capital


SPENDING  AND  SAVING  55

and  the  aggregate  of  consumption,  so  in  a  progressive  society  there
is  at  any  given  time  a  similar  ratio.

There  exists  at  the  present  moment  a  right  proportion  between
saving  and  spending  in  the  income  of  the  industrial  community,
yielding  the  maximum  rate  of  consumption  over  such  a  period  of
time  as  is  open  by  reasonable  foresight  to  capitalist  investment.
Industrial  progress,  or  the  economical  working  of  the  industrial
system,  consists  largely  in  the  ascertainment  of  this  proportion
and  the  adjustment  of  industry  to  it :  any  disregard  or  disturbance
of  this  proportion  involves  industrial  waste.

How  far  these  considerations  of  the  limits  of  saving  and  spend-
ing, strictly  applicable  only  to  the  industrial  world  as  a  whole,  can
be  held  to  have  a  valid  bearing  upon  the  industrial  life  of  Great
Britain  or  any  other  single  nation,  is  a  question  which  may  be
reserved  for  later  discussion.

Thus  we  recognise  that  the  annual  income  of  industrial  society
means  two  things.  First,  the  net  yield  of  goods  (capital  goods  and
commodities)  and  services  from  processes  of  industry  during  the
year.

Second,  the  addition  of  the  money  payments  made  as  rent,
salaries,  wages,  and  profits  to  owners  of  factors  of  production  taking
part  in  industry.  This  annual  income  is  partly  spent,  partly  saved.
Spending  signifies  a  removal  from  the  industrial  system  of  goods
and  services  which  are  consumed  by  those  who  remove  them.
Saving  signifies  an  increase  of  capital-forms  which  remain  within
the  industrial  system,  representing  an  increased  power  of  production.

While  in  any  given  year  (or  short  period)  there  is  no  limit  to
the  proportion  of  income  that  may  be  spent,  and  no  limit  to  the
proportion  which  may  be  saved,  except  as  regards  expenditure  on
necessaries  of  working  life,  over  a  longer  period  of  time  a  quantita-
tive relation  exists  between  spending  and  saving  so  as  to  secure
the  maximum  productivity  over  the  whole  period.

The  right  proportion  of  saving  to  spending  at  any  given  time
depends  upon  the  present  condition  of  the  arts  of  production  and
consumption,  and  the  probabiUties  of  such  changes  in  modes  of  work
or  living  as  shall  provide  social  utility  for  new  forms  of  capital
within  the  near  or  calculable  future.


CHAPTER IV


COSTS AND SURPLUS


§  I.  Production  and  distribution  are  simultaneous  and  in  a  sense  identical
processes.  Payments  for  factors  of  production  are  orders  on  goods.
The  payment  of  the  entrepreneurs  requires  separate  treatment. — §  2.  For
a  theory  of  distribution  co-ordination  of  the  factors  is  the  first  essential.
Capitalisation  and  differential  grading  are  both  defective  bases.  Pro-
ductive powers  must  be  expressed  in  standard  units. — §  3.  The  first
charge  on  the  product  is  the  subsistence  wage. — §  4.  A  rise  in  price  per
unit  of  labour  stimulates  an  increased  supply,  by  calling  in  more  labourers
or  intensifying  labour.  Similarly,  improved  qualities  of  labour  are  evoked
by  the  stimulus  of  higher  pay. — §  5.  Capital  has  two  similar  costs,  first  of
subsistence,  second  of  growth.  Minimum  interest  is  a  cost  of  subsistence.
— §  6.  Capital  may  be  graded  like  labour  into  different  markets  with
different  market-prices  per  unit.  A  rise  of  interest  stimulates  saving. —
§  7.  Land,  as  regards  maintenance  and  increase,  ranks  as  capital. — §  8.
So  far  as  '  costs '  are  concerned,  harmony  exists  in  the  industrial  system  :
the  '  surplus  '  introduces  discord. — §  9.  Modern  industry,  enhancing
the  surplus,  emphasises  the  discord.

§  I. — After  the  general  survey  of  the  structure  and  working  of  the
industrial  system,  an  economic  student  will  naturally  turn  to  a
closer  investigation  of  the  movements  which  comprise  at  once  the
production  and  the  distribution  of  wealth.  These  movements
which  he  has  perceived  to  occur  continuously  at  each  stage  in  every
industrial  series  consist  in  the  payments  of  sums  of  money  which
are  seen  to  stimulate,  first,  the  passage  of  goods  from  one  stage  to
another  along  the  stream  of  industry ;  secondly,  the  putting-out  of
industrial  energy  by  all  the  factors  of  production,  land,  capital,
labour,  ability,  to  which  the  money  stimulus  is  applied.  As  the
money  circulates  up  the  stream,  it  is  seen  by  its  touch  to  liberate
industrial  energy  at  each  point,  and  to  cause  raw  materials  or  goods
to  move  one  step  further  towards  the  condition  of  shop  goods  and
commodities.

This  regular  series  of  monetary  payments  has  so  far  been  re-
garded merely  as  an  instrument  of  the  productive  system.

But  it  is  now  time  to  recognise  that  these  same  payments  con-
stitute what  is  called  the  distribution  of  wealth.  We  do  not  first
produce  a  lot  of  wealth  and  then  afterwards  distribute  it  : the

56


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS


57


production  and  distribution  not  only  take  place  simultaneously,
but  are  in  a  sense  identical  processes.

The  payments  of  money  which  constitute  distribution  are  in
effect  orders  upon  the  very  goods  which  are  being  made  or  have
just  been  made  :  the  acts  by  which  wealth  is  distributed  are  acts
by  which  new  productive  energy  is  evoked  and  the  general  process
of  production  is  kept  going.

We  cannot  therefore  properly  study  the  production  and  the
distribution  of  wealth  apart,  since  the  actual  payments,  which  form
distribution,  are  the  efficient  causes  of  the  several  industrial
activities.

We  saw  how  all  industrial  incomes  came  from  the  breaking-up
and  distribution  of  prices  paid  for  retail  goods  and  services,  or  for
new  pieces  of  capital.  Taking  the  money  paid  over  the  counter  of
shoe-stores  for  shoes,  we  saw  how  it  served  to  pay  four  classes  of
income  at  each  stage  in  production — rent,  wages,  interest,  and
profit — and  how  fragments  of  it  passed  down  the  tributaries  which
furnished  the  machinery  and  other  *  fixed '  capital  required  at  the
several  stages,  being  distributed  along  these  tributaries  in  payments
for  land,  labour,  capital,  and  management  there  employed.

This  last  set  of  payments  for  maintaining  the  buildings,  plant,
and  other  fixed  capital  will,  of  course,  rank  as  '  wear  and  tear  '  at
the  several  stages,  though  each  payment  under  this  head  is  after-
wards broken  up  into  rent,  wages,  interest,  and  profits.

Taking,  then,  £ioo,  received  in  a  week  over  the  counter  in  a
retail  shop,  for  shoes  or  for  commodities  in  general,  and  tracing  its
movement  along  the  main  channel,  we  should  find  it  broken  up  in
some  such  way  as  the  following  i  : —

Extractwe. Manio.  I. Manu.II. Wholesale. RetaiZ.  >


What  happens  at  each  of  these  stages  is  that  a  manager  or
entrepreneur  hands  over  goods  to  the  entrepreneur  at  the  next
stage  (or  in  the  case  of  a  retailer  to  consumers),  receives  from  him
a  sum  of  money,  out  of  which  he  pays  his  rent,  wages,  and  interest.


'  This  analysis  omits  payments  made  at  various  stages  for  transport  and
other  subsidiary  services,  which,  of  course,  in  their  turn  are  resolved  into  sets
of  payments  of  wages,  rent,  interest,  profit,  &c.


58  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

buys  goods  or  material  from  the  earlier  stage  in  order  to  continue
his  productive  operation,  and  keeps  the  residue  for  his  own  profit.

While  for  convenience  we  have  hitherto  classed  profit  with  other
payments,  regarding  '  management  '  as  a  factor  of  production
equally  with  labour,  land,  and  capital,  it  is  well  now  to  mark  that
it  stands  on  a  different  footing  from  the  others,  and  that  the  pay-
ment made  on  account  of  it  is  somewhat  differently  determined.
Rent  is  the  price  paid  to  the  landowner  for  the  use  of  land,  wages
the  price  paid  to  the  labourer  for  the  use  of  labour-power,  interest
the  price  paid  the  capitalist  for  use  of  capital,  but  it  cannot  be  said
in  the  same  sense  that  profit  is  the  price  paid  to  the  entrepreneur
for  the  use  of  managing  ability.

The  entrepreneur  is  more  than  a  mere  manager.  He  has  an
eye  for  a  profitable  project,  he  plans  a  business,  buys  the  uses  of
land,  labour,  and  capital  of  various  sorts,  embodies  their  productive
power  in  materials  which  he  likewise  purchases,  and  markets  the
product.  The  difference  between  these  expenses  of  production
and  the  prices  obtained  for  the  product  constitutes  his  profit.
Speculation,  enterprise,  organisation,  bargaining  skill,  as  well  as  the
relatively  routine  faculty  of  management,  are  sources  of  profit,  help-
ing to  determine  the  gain  which  comes  to  him.  Though  all  these
functions  may  be  classed  together  as  business  ability  and  regarded
as  a  single  factor  of  production,  the  differences  between  the  part
played  by  this  and  the  other  factors,  and  between  the  actual  methods
by  which  the  payments  for  the  two  are  respectively  determined,
are  so  great  that  a  refusal  to  distinguish  them  in  presenting  the
principles  of  distribution  would  be  a  grave  source  of  error.

We  cannot  with  advantage  treat  profits  as  we  do  rent,  wages,
and  interest,  as  payment  for  so  much  quantity  of  productive  energy
utilised  in  the  industrial  processes.

Therefore,  while  some  of  the  functions  of  the  manager  or  entre-
preneur may  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  mental  labour-power,  whose
price  is  determined  in  something  like  the  same  way  as  payments
for  other  labour,  a  closer  investigation  of  profit  will  show  that  its
essentially  speculative  nature  requires  it  to  be  submitted  to  a  sepa-
rate analysis  in  order  that  we  may  understand  the  part  it  plays  in
the  direction  of  industry.

For  these  reasons  we  shall  first  examine  separately  the  pay-
ments made  for  use  of  land,  labour,  and  capital,  and  the  influences
which  determine  these  prices,  viz.  rent,  wages,  interest,  reserving
for  later  and  special  treatment  the  payment  of  profits.

§  2. — For  the  maintenance  and  growth  of  industry  a  constant
influx  of  new  energy  is  required.  As  the  human  organism  requires  for
its  purposes  so  many  units  of  nitrogenous,  carbo-hydrate  and  other


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  59

sorts  of  foods  in  regular  proportions,  so  the  industrial  organism
requires  the  continuous  intake  of  new  industrial  energy  conveyed
in  a  duly  proportioned  application  of  the  productive  powers  of
land,  labour,  and  capital  in  their  several  sorts.

Much  of  the  obscurity  of  the  '  theory  of  distribution  '  is  due  to
the  want  of  a  clear  system  of  measuring  industrial  energy.  The
actual  instruments  of  industrial  energy,  as  we  have  seen,  are
workers  commonly  measured  by  hours'  or  weeks'  work  ;  pieces  of
land  measured  in  acres  ;  machines,  factories,  stock,  and  other  forms
of  capital  not  usually  measured  by  any  reference  to  their  concrete
character,  but  expressed  in  values  of  so  many  hundred  pounds.

So  long  as  these  separate  conventional  methods  of  reckoning  the
prices  paid  for  the  use  of  labour,  capital,  and  land  are  retained,  no
intelHgible  and  consistent  statement  of  the  distribution  of  wealth
is  possible.

Now  the  co-ordination  of  the  factors  of  production  for  the
application  of  a  common  mode  of  measurement  might  be  compassed
in  several  different  ways.  It  would  be  possible  to  apply  to  all  three
the  method  that  is  applied  to  the  forms  of  capital :  the  productive
energy  of  acres  and  of  labourers  might  be  capitalised,  i.e.  might  be
expressed  in  terms  of  so  many  £100,  and  rent  and  wages  so  reduced
to  interest  on  these  capital  values.  If,  then,  a  superior  acre  of
market  garden  land  was  capitalised  at  ;£200,  fetching  a  rent  of  £8
per  annum,  while  an  inferior  acre  was  capitalised  at  ;£ioo,  fetching
a  rent  of  £4,  we  should  have  applied  to  land  the  same  method  of
valuation  that  holds  of  buildings,  machinery,  and  stock.  Labour
could  be  expressed  similarly  by  capitalising  the  w^orking-power  of
each  worker  on  the  basis  of  his  earning-power  per  year.

But  though  this  method  is  sometimes  employed  in  attempts  to
assess  the  capital  wealth  of  a  nation,  its  effect  is  to  fuse  all  distinc-
tions between  the  different  factors,  and  to  bring  them  into  a  single
pool  of  productive-power.  It  is  therefore  disqualified  from  serving
as  a  mode  of  explaining  the  distribution  of  the  product  among  the
several  factors.  This  purpose  requires  us  to  keep  closely  to  the
concrete  nature  of  industry,  and  to  express  capital  in  terms  of
industrial  forms  rather  than  to  reduce  land  and  labour  to  financial
values.

But  another  mode  of  co-ordination  has  been  sometimes  em-
ployed, by  which  the  differential  grading  of  acres  of  land  is  applied
to  labourers  and  to  forms  of  capital.

As  acres  of  wheat  land  differ  in  degrees  of  fertility  and  receive  a
higher  or  a  lower  rent  per  acre  accordingly,  similarly  weavers  or
compositors  may  be  graded  according  to  their  output  with  corre-
sponding differences  of  weekly  earnings,  while  machines  and  other


6o  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

pieces  of  concrete  capital  similarly  graded  according  to  their  work-
ing efficiency,  may  be  held  to  earn  different  rates  of  '  real '  interest.
But  if  this  grading  really  has  reference  solely  to  the  differences
of  quantity  of  productive-power  given  out  by  different  acres,  differ-
ent men,  different  machines,  &c.,  is  it  not  simpler  and  more  effective
to  furnish  a  direct  measure  of  this  quantity  of  productive-power,
expressing  acres  directly  in  terms  of  units  of  land-power,  labourers
in  units  of  labour-power,  machines,  &c.,  in  units  of  capital-power?
For  this  is  the  true  attitude  of  the  entrepreneur  and  the  consumer
who  exercise  the  direction  of  industrial  processes.  What  the  entre-
preneur who  plans  and  controls  industry  is  buying  is  quantities  of
different  sorts  of  productive-power ;  prima  facie  he  is  not  concerned
with  the  proportions  in  which  this  power  is  given  out  by  the  differ-
ent labourers  or  acres  or  machines.  Again,  what  the  consumer
buys  is  quantities  of  the  same  power  stored  in  commodities  ;  he,
too,  is  not  directly  concerned  with  the  varying  productivity  of  the
different  acres  or  workers  or  machines.  What  we  need,  therefore,
is  a  direct  measure  of  units  of  productive-power  ;  for  it  is  these  units
that  are  really  bought  and  sold  under  the  guise  of  acre  productivity
per  annum,  labourer  productivity  per  week,  machine  or  concrete
capital  productivity  per  annum.

Let  us  then  firmly  take  the  position  of  regarding  the  productive
power  of  land,  of  labour,  or  of  capital,  which  the  entrepreneur  buys
and  uses  for  productive  purposes,  as  consisting  of  so  many  units  of
these  several  sorts,  an  acre  good  or  bad  containing  so  many  units
of  land  power  per  annum,  a  labourer  so  many  units  of  labour-
power  per  week,  a  factory  or  a  machine  so  many  units  of  produc-
tive power  of  capital.  Most  labour-power  is  already  reckoned  and
remunerated  by  this  unitary  method  ;  piece-wages  or  time-wages
are  payments  for  units  of  labour-power  adjudged  to  be  of  standard
size,  the  price  per  unit  of  labour-power  is  the  direct  determinant  of
the  weekly  or  yearly  income  of  each  labourer.  The  extension  of
this  unitary  method  to  land  will  resolve  differential  rents  per  acre
into  differences  in  the  number  of  units  of  land-power  given  out  for
wheat-growing  or  other  use  ;  its  extension  to  capital  will  require
the  application  of  differential  interests  per  factory,  machine,  or
other  piece  of  concrete  capital  in  accordance  with  the  number  of
units  of  productivity  it  gives  out.  This  last  conception  is  not  so
novel  as  it  may  appear  to  some.  Modern  systems  of  cost-taking
often  employ  it,  records  being  kept  of  the  comparative  costs  and
outputs  of  the  several  machines,  just  as  in  a  well-managed  dairy
farm  the  milk-yield  of  each  cow  is  separately  kept.

If  we  are  to  escape  the  confusion  due  to  the  attempt  to  build
up  a  theory  of  distribution  by  loose  correlation  of  separate  laws  of


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  6i

wages,  rent,  and  interest,  it  is  necessary  to  bring  all  the  factors
under  some  single  law  applicable  to  all  buying  and  selling,  whether
of  productive-powers  or  of  commodities.

Now  just  as  a  scientific  treatment  of  food  requires  that  the
various  sorts  of  intake  shall  be  reduced  to  some  common  standard
and  expressed  in  units  of  that  standard,  so  with  industrial  energy.
The  flow  of  industrial  energy  through  the  system  must  be  expressed
in  some  common  terms  so  that  the  contribution  made  by  the
several  human  or  non-human  instruments  may  be  rendered  com-
parable and  capable  of  accurate  measurement.

The  labour-power  given  out  by  such  and  such  a  worker  during
a  w^eek  or  a  year  must  be  expressed  in  labour-units  ;  similarly  the
employment  of  an  acre  of  land  for  agriculture  or  for  site  must  be
reduced  to  units  of  land  use,  the  services  of  a  cotton  factory,  a  ton
of  coal,  a  locomotive,  must  be  reduced  to  units  of  capital  use.  A
unit  of  labour-power  will  mean  a  given  quantity  of  productive-
power  of  a  certain  sort,  irrespective  of  the  number  of  workers  or
the  individual  output  of  the  several  workers  who  give  out  the  unit.
So  likewise  a  unit  of  capital-power  will  mean  a  given  quantity  of
productive-power  of  a  certain  sort  given  out  by  machinery,  plant,
&c.,  irrespective  of  the  number  of  such  machines  :  a  unit  of
land-power,  e.g.  for  wheat -growing,  will  be  so  much  productive
power  of  land,  irrespective  of  the  number  of  acres  employed  in
giving  it  out.

In  the  application  of  this  unitary  standard  of  productivity  to
individual  factors,  due  account  must,  of  course,  be  taken  of  the
pace  of  productivity.  A  worker  who  can  turn  out  twenty  pieces
per  week  is  usually  to  be  accounted  as  more  than  twice  as  produc-
tive as  one  who  can  only  turn  out  ten.  This  is  commonly  recognised
by  a  bonus  upon  quantity  of  output  per  week  in  addition  to  the
piece-wage.  There  are  two  reasons  for  recognising  pace  of  produc-
tivity as  well  as  number  of  pieces.  In  the  first  place,  labour-power
more  quickly  given  out  means  goods  coming  into  supply  at  an
earlier  time  than  they  would  otherwise  have  done,  and  since  present
goods  are  worth  more  than  future  goods,  this  quickening  of  supply
enhances  wealth  as  measured  by  quantity  of  satisfaction.  In  the
second  place,  where  labour  co-operates  with  other  factors,  slow
labour  may  keep  down  their  productivity,  as  is  the  case  where  a
slow  workman  is  set  to  feed  a  rapid  machine  or  where  he  determines
the  pace  for  a  gang  of  workers.  Any  separate  reckoning  of  the
productivity  of  labour  must  take  into  account  such  retardation  of
the  productivity  of  other  factors.  In  any  really  scientific  cost-
taking  the  number  of  units  of  productivity  attributed  to  a  particu-
lar workman  will  thus  take  the  rate  of  output  into  account. The


62  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

same  qualification  will,  of  course,  be  applicable  to  the  other  factors.
A  machine  turning  out  loo  pieces  of  work  will  be  worth  more  than
twice  one  that  turns  out  fifty.  In  regarding  rent  as  the  payment
for  the  productivity  of  wheat  land,  it  is  quite  evident  that  we
cannot  treat  a  bushel  as  a  unit  of  measurement  of  productivity :
the  pace  at  which  bushels  are  produced  by  a  given  acre,  i.e.  the
number  produced  in  a  given  time,  is  of  the  essence  of  land
productivity.

Concerned  as  we  are  with  the  primary  need  of  getting  a  sound
co-ordination  of  the  several  factors  of  production,  so  as  to  apply  a
common  rule  of  payment  for  these  uses,  it  is  of  the  first  importance
to  realise  that  the  truth  underlying  the  law  of  differential  rent  is
applicable  to  all  the  other  factors.  When  we  are  measuring  for
purposes  of  payment  the  separate  productivity  i  of  an  acre,  or  a
machine,  or  a  worker,  rate  of  emission  of  productive-power  as  well
as  quantity  of  product  must  be  taken  into  account  in  measuring
the  aggregate  productivity  or  the  number  of  its  units.

§  3. — Having  thus  built  up  in  our  minds  a  clear  conception  of
the  industrial  system  as  a  single  whole  employing  various  sorts  of
industrial  energy  in  turning  out  commodities,  we  need  to  get  a
fuller  understanding  of  the  methods  by  which  the  inevitable  waste
of  structure  is  repaired,  by  which  new  or  increased  structure  is
created,  and  by  which  fresh  quantities  of  energy  are  got  into  the
system.  This  repair  and  growth  of  structure,  replenishment  and
increase  of  energy,  are  directed  by  the  processes  of  distribution  of
income  absorbing  continuously  the  greater  part  of  the  results  of
production.

The  industrial  system  will  work  for  its  keep  ;  each  of  its  organs
or  instruments  will  continue  to  operate  productively,  provided  it
is  kept  constantly  in  repair  and  the  energy  it  gives  out  in  produc-
tion is  constantly  replaced.

A  growing  industrial  system  requires  more  than  its  keep  :  it
must  be  furnished  with  surplus  matter  and  energy  to  make  new
tissue  and  to  do  more  work.

In  considering  the  distribution  of  the  product  of  industry,
through  incomes,  to  the  different  factors  of  production,  we  may
conveniently  distinguish  the  portion  which  goes  to  maintenance
from  that  which  goes  to  growth.

What  is  the  '  keep  '  or  '  maintenance  fund  '  of  labour  ?  It  is
not  wages  but  only  a  part  of  wages. Every  sort  of  labourer  giving

'  Though  our  existing  system  of  distribution  is  mainly  based  upon  this
imputation  of  a  separable  productivity;  fuller  analysis  of  the  organic  co-opera-
tion of  factors  in  a  business  discloses  the  inherent  defectiveness  of  this  theory
and  of  the  practice  It  supports. See  appendix  to  chap.  v.


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  63

out  muscular  and  nervous  energy  and  consuming  tissue  in  his
labour,  must  receive  in  income  the  food,  clothes,  shelter,  &c.,  re-
quired to  maintain  him  in  his  working-power.  Since  he  is  mortal,
this  work  of  individual  restoration  cannot  be  kept  up  for  ever ;  if,
then,  the  supply  of  labour-power  is  to  be  maintained,  the  material
means  of  bringing  up  children  to  replace  aged  workers  must  be
provided.

This  gives  us  the  physical  basis  of  the  '  minimum  wage  '  or  *  the
bare  subsistence  wage.'  This,  however,  will  not  be  the  same  for  all
kinds  of  labour.  Where  greater  intensity  of  physical  energy,  more
skill,  mental  exertion,  or  responsibility  is  involved,  these  higher
grades  of  productive  energy  usually  require  a  higher  standard  of
living  or  a  larger  income.

This  brings  us  to  what  may  be  called  the  moral  basis  of  the
subsistence  wage.  Man  is  not  a  mere  automaton  who  will  work  if
food  is  put  into  him  :  he  is  a  human  being  operated  by  '  motives.'
The  payment  he  receives  for  work  must,  therefore,  suffice  not  only
to  replenish  his  physical  output  and  to  restore  his  bodily  waste,  it
must  stimulate  his  will.  Under  some  conditions  this  '  motive  '
does  not  involve  any  more  payment  than  suffices  for  physical  sub-
sistence; a  great  deal  of  routine  work  of  peasants  and  other  labourers
has  always  gone  on  upon  a  basis  in  which  conscious  motive  involves
no  higher  pay  than  a  physical  subsistence  ;  or  else,  as  in  slave  and
serf  labour,  fear  of  punishment  or  some  other  sort  of  negative
payment  has  furnished  the  conscious  '  stimulus.'  But  when  we
come  to  civilised  industrial  communities,  where  the  workers  have
some  sense  of  personal  dignity,  and  perhaps  some  alternative  to
wage  labour,  most  of  them  will  be  apt  to  demand  a  rate  of  pay
which  may  be  termed  the  moral  subsistence  wage,  that  will  be
somewhat  above  the  physical  subsistence  level.  This  payment,
though  not  necessarily  identical  with  the  whole  '  standard  of  com-
fort,' approximates  to  it,  and  at  any  given  time  must  be  regarded
as  comprising  part  of  the  wear  and  tear  or  subsistence  wage.  This
moral  element  plays  a  large  part  in  determining  class  wages,  and
rises  in  importance  with  the  skilled  and  highly -paid  grades  of  workers.
Thus  the  higher  subsistence  wage  for  an  engine-driver  or  a  com-
positor, as  compared  with  a  general  labourer,  is  only  explained  in
part  by  the  physical  necessity  of  maintaining  a  more  efficient  and
highly  organised  instrument  of  labour,  involving  a  larger  displace-
ment and  repair.  The  actual  subsistence  wage  will  include  the
necessary  stimulus  of  motive.  This,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  does
not  explain  fully  the  differences  of  class  wages,  but  it  is  one
factor.

Taking  the  industrial  system  as  it  is,  we  find  a  large  variety  of


64  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

subsistence  wages  which  are  funds  for  replacing  the  wear  and  tear
of  labour.

Within  each  grade  of  labour  the  output  of  energy  and  the  waste
are  greater  in  some  workers  than  others,  and  a  larger  subsistence
wage  is  required,  and  so  far  as  output  is  a  measure  of  waste,  is
obtained  under  a  piece-wage  system.

These  subsistence  wages,  required  to  maintain  the  existing
supply  of  labour-power,  may  be  held  to  constitute  a  first  charge
upon  the  industrial  product  on  behalf  of  labour.  If  there  is  a
failure  anj^where  to  provide  this  subsistence,  the  industrial  system
is  weakened  and  diminished  in  productivity.  A  wage  below  this
subsistence-point  is  a  '  sweating  wage.'  The  payment  of  such  a
wage  may  sometimes  be  profitable  to  an  employer  or  even  to  a  class
of  employers  who  have  at  hand  a  large  supply  of  reserve  labour  to
draw  upon  for  the  unskilled  or  low-skilled  work  which  they  require.
Just  as  it  was  sound  *  economy  '  for  certain  southern  planters  to
work  slaves  to  death  in  five  or  six  years'  labour  in  the  rice  fields,
so  it  may  '  pay  '  employers  in  some  branches  of  the  London  clothing
trades  to  give  out  work  to  women  for  rates  of  pay  insufficient  to
maintain  them  in  health  and  physical  efficiency,  provided  that
there  are  plenty  of  other  women  obliged  for  lack  of  any  other  alter-
native to  take  this  work  on  the  same  terms.

All  such  '  sweating  '  is,  however,  a  damage  to  the  industrial
system,  which  it  underfeeds.

Or  perhaps  a  sweating  trade  may  rather  be  regarded  as  diseased
or  moribund  tissue  in  the  economic  system,  whose  lingering  process
of  decay  involves  waste  of  labour-power,  which  might  otherwise  be
properly  supported,  and  put  to  healthy  employment.

§  4. — Though  this  wage  of  subsistence  suffices  to  maintain  labour
in  a  stable  industrial  system,  it  makes  no  provision  for  its  growth.
If  the  production  of  the  industrial  system  is  to  increase  in  volume
and  improve  in  quality,  provision  must  be  made  for  procuring
more  labour-power  and  for  raising  its  quality.  This  quantitative
and  qualitative  growth  involves  an  expenditure  on  wages  beyond
the  subsistence  fund.

An  increased  quantity  of  labour-power  can  be  got  in  two  ways  :
I.,  by  bringing  into  industry  an  increased  number  of  workers;
II.,  by  inducing  and  enabling  the  existing  workers  to  give  out  a
larger  amount  of  labour-power.

I.  The  direct  influence  of  a  rise  of  wages  in  promoting,  or  a  fall
of  wages  in  checking,  the  growth  of  the  labouring  population  is
very  difficult  to  assess.  In  Great  Britain  and  most  industrial
countries  until  recent  times  a  rise  of  real  wages  was  normally
attended  by  an  increase  in  the  growth  of  the  working  population,


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  65

partly  by  promoting  early  and  fertile  marriages,  partly  by  keeping
down  infant  mortality,  and  by  increasing  the  average  length  of  the
working  life.  So  far  as  the  birth-rate,  however,  is  concerned,  in
most  civilised  countries  it  is  clear  that  a  rise  of  wages  and  of  the
standard  of  comfort  and  intelligence  is  at  present  attended  by  a
diminution  in  the  growth  of  workers,  and  that  this  tendency  is  not
adequately  offset  by  reduction  of  infant  mortality  and  increased
longevity  of  workers.  But  important  as  is  this  qualification  of  the
former  power  of  rising  wages  to  evoke  more  labour,  it  must  not  be
exaggerated  in  dealing  with  the  industrial  system  as  a  whole.
Most  of  the  great  populations  of  the  world  have  not  attained  the
level  of  subsistence  or  of  education,  which  brings  them  under  the
influences  which,  in  Western  Europe  and  in  countries  colonised
therefrom,  are  reducing  the  birth-rate,  with  a  rising  standard  of
wages.  While,  therefore,  I  am  well  aware  that  wages  can  be
accounted  only  one  among  many  social  determinants  of  growth
of  population,  I  think  it  must  still  be  admitted  that  a  rise  of
wages  causes  some  increase  of  working  population  through  its  effect
upon  birth-rate  and  infant  survival  in  most  parts  of  the  industrial
system.

But  the  effect  of  rising  wages  in  increasing  the  number  of
industrial  workers  is  not  confined  to  its  effect  in  stimulating  the
population  already  inside  the  industrial  system.  It  may  operate
by  bringing  in  suppHes  of  labour  from  countries  which  lie  outside
our  industrial  system,  or  by  extending  the  area  of  the  system
itself.  The  former  may  be  illustrated  by  the  use  of  wage-stimuli  to
bring  into  our  industrial  system  Chinese,  Kaffirs,  Malays,  and  other
workers  who  formerly  were  outside,  the  latter  by  the  exploitation
of  the  labour  of  new  countries,  such  as  the  Congo  or  Rhodesia,  by
means  of  hitherto  non-industrial  populations.

II.  More  work  may  sometimes  be  got  out  of  the  same  workers
by  increasing  the  hours  of  labour,  or  by  speeding  up  machines  and
otherwise  increasing  the  intensity  of  labour.

Whether  we  regard  the  industrial  system  as  a  whole  or  some
single  branch  or  trade,  we  are  confronted  by  these  two  modes  of
increasing  the  quantity  of  the  supply  of  labour-power,  a  larger
number  of  workers,  or  a  larger  amount  of  work  per  worker.

Now  both  these  methods  operate  by  means  of  a  rise  of  wages
above  the  limit  of  the  subsistence  rate.  If  more  workers  are  to  be
got  into  use,  either  by  stimulating  the  growth  of  the  working  popu-
lation in  a  country,  or  by  opening  up  new  supphes  in  other  countries,
or  by  bringing  in  these  new  supphes,  a  rise  in  the  price  per  unit  of
labour-power  is  the  means  of  doing  this.

Similarly,  if  more  work  is  to  be  got  out  of  the  existing  supply  of

F


66  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

workers,  the  greater  drain  upon  the  muscular  and  nervous  system
involves  a  higher  rate  of  pay,  while  the  increase  of  painful  effort
reinforces  the  demand  through  the  operation  of  the  human  will.
Men  will  not  work  harder  except  for  a  higher  rate.

Let  us  examine  this  mechanism  of  the  increase  of  supply  of
labour  in  a  particular  local  trade,  applying  our  unitary  mode  of
measuring  productions.

Here  is  a  shoe  trade  or  a  bicycle  trade  employing  300  men  of
different  grades  of  efficiency.  A  unit  of  labour-power  costs  (let  us
say)  5s.,  and  the  100  workers  constituting  the  lowest  grade  give
out  four  units  each  a  week,  earning  a  minimum  efficiency  or  sub-
sistence wage  of  20S.  The  two  other  grades  of  men,  100  in  each,
produce  respectively  five  and  six  units  per  week,  earning  25s.  and
30s.

This  is  the  state  in  a  stable  condition  of  the  industry.  Now
there  exists  a  number  of  men  in  this  town,  either  unemployed  or
working  as  unskilled  labourers,  capable  of  working  in  the  shoe  or
bicycle  factory,  but  being  less  efficient  than  the  lowest  of  the  three
grades  in  actual  use,  they  could  give  only  three  units  of  labour-
power  per  week,  thus  earning  only  15s.,  or  less  than  is  required  to
support  them  in  this  work.

These  potential  workers  below  the  margin  of  employment  in
this  trade  can  only  be  employed  on  condition  of  a  rise  in  the  price
per  unit  of  labour-power,  or,  as  it  is  generally  described,  a  rise  of
wages.

If  a  growth  in  these  trades  is  to  occur,  it  can  only  occur  through
a  rise  in  price  per  unit  of  labour-power  to  such  a  point  that  6s.  8d.
is  the  price  instead  of  5s.,  thus  enabling  the  workers  only  equal  to
three  units  per  week  to  earn  the  minimum  subsistence  wage.

Thus  the  margin  of  employment  is  lowered  so  as  to  take  in  out-
side workers  and  to  enlarge  the  structure  of  the  trade.  But  there
is  an  alternative  course.  Instead  of  taking  in  an  inferior  grade  of
labour  from  outside,  the  existing  employees  may  work  overtime,
or  on  a  bonus  system  may  consent  to  turn  out  25  per  cent,  more
output  per  week  than  before.  In  order  to  get  this  result,  however,
the  employers  will  have  to  pay  a  rise  of  the  general  piece  rate,  or
'  time  and  a  half '  for  overtime.  This  is  equivalent  to  a  rise  in
price  per  unit  of  labour-power,  required  to  call  into  use  a  lower  or
more  costly  grade  of  labour-power  not  outside  but  inside  the
trade.

The  higher  price  is  here  economically  necessary,  first  to  provide
against  the  greater  wear  and  tear  or  waste  of  an  intenser  working
week  ;  secondly,  to  induce  the  will  of  the  workers  to  undertake  a
greater  and  more  painful  effort.


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  67

To  get  a  larger  supply  of  labour-power  by  either  mode,  a  lower-
ing of  the  extensive  or  the  intensive  margin  of  employment,  more
and  worse  men  or  more  and  worse  power  from  the  same  men,  an
increased  price  per  unit  must  be  paid.

We  have  supposed  the  labour  below  the  margin  of  employment
to  be  inferior  in  quantity.

It  may  be,  commonly  is,  inferior  in  quality,  whether  it  is  vested
in  a  body  of  less  skilful  or  reliable  workers,  or  in  the  less  effective
output  of  the  overtime  of  tired  emploj^ees.  But  whether  the  infe-
riority be  of  quantity  or  quality,  the  enlargement  of  the  structure
of  the  trade  can  only  be  brought  about  by  raising  the  price  per  unit
of  labour-power  reckoned  at  the  earlier  standard.  If  the  workers
below  the  margin  of  employment,  or  the  overtime  work  of  the
existing  employees,  are  not  only  inferior  in  quantity  but  in  quality,
the  price  per  unit  will  have  to  rise  more  than  25  per  cent,  so  as  to
enable  the  producers  of  three  units  per  week  of  a  worse  sort  of
labour-power  to  earn  the  subsistence  wage  of  20s.

Our  example  is  chosen  to  illustrate  the  way  in  which  a  growth
in  size  of  a  trade  must  be  brought  about,  so  far  as  the  increase  of  its
labour-power  is  concerned.  Only  by  regarding  labour-power  as
expressed  in  some  unit  of  standard  size  and  quality  can  we  clearly
present  the  process.

The  workers,  or  the  labour-power,  give  out  so  many  units  of
productive  energy  as,  reckoned  at  the  market  price  per  unit,  afford
a  subsistence  wage  to  the  worst  of  those  employed.  An  enlarge-
ment of  output  can  only  be  got  by  a  rise  of  price  per  unit  which
lets  in  labour-power  that  could  not  economically  be  sustained  before.

Now  take  the  case  of  a  trade  which  needs  to  improve  not  the
quantity  but  the  skill  or  character  of  its  labour-power,  to  add  not
more  tissue  or  raw  muscular  energy  to  its  system,  but  more  accu-
rate and  complex  application  of  existing  energy.  This  conversion
of  ruder  into  finer  service  involves  the  direction  of  mental  and
moral  power  to  acquiring  more  skill  of  manipulation,  more  resource-
fulness in  meeting  detailed  difficulties,  more  concentration  and  a
higher  sense  of  individual  responsibility.  A  change  from  rough
routine  labour  to  such  labour  as  is  required  in  a  skilled  mechanic
involves  the  acquisition  and  employment  of  these  new  powers.  Now
to  evoke  and  maintain  these  finer  sorts  and  uses  of  human  energy
will  involve  the  existence  of  a  higher  standard  of  life  and  a  higher
rate  of  pay.  For  each  unit  of  the  finer  sort  of  productive-power  a
higher  price  is  necessary  than  sufficed  for  a  unit  of  the  ruder  power.
It  is  partly  a  question  of  physical,  partly  of  moral  motive.  Fine
and  reliable  work  cannot  be  got  out  of  workers  living  upon  a  bare
subsistence  wage  : coarse  material  surroundings  and  the  presence

F  2


68  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  poverty  do  not  support  a  nervous  system  capable  of  the  nicer
adjustments  of  muscle  and  brain  involved  in  fine  work  of  any  sort :
there  is  neither  the  physical  nor  the  moral  stimulus  to  acquire  and
to  apply  such  power.

If,  then,  a  trade  is  to  grow  in  quality  as  in  size,  this  growth
involves  a  rise  in  price  per  unit  of  human  energy.  As  we  saw  that
certain  reserve  quantities  of  labour-power  in  men  already  employed
for  an  ordinary  working-day  could  be  evoked  in  the  form  of  over-
time, or  of  quicker  work,  by  a  rise  in  the  rate  of  pay,  so  we  now
recognise  that  there  are  reserve  qualities  of  labour-power  which  can
similarly  be  evoked.

If  a  trade  is  to  grow  simultaneously  both  in  size  and  in  charac-
ter of  work,  both  stimuli  of  higher  pay  must  be  applied.  This  is
the  real  significance  of  the  rise  of  rate  of  pay  which  has  taken  place
in  the  skilled  cotton  trade  of  Lancashire  during  the  last  half-cen-
tury, as  also  in  many  other  manufactures  where  a  growth  in  volume
of  work  has  been  accompanied  by  improved  skill,  care,  regularity,
and  responsibility.

The  rise  of  wages  has  been  essential :  (i)  to  evoke  a  greater
supply  of  labour  by  bringing  more  workers  into  the  labour  market,
and  by  getting  more  labour-power  out  of  those  in  employment
(extensive  and  intensive  lowering  of  the  margin  of  employment)  ;
(2)  to  evoke  an  improved  character  of  labour-power  out  of  the
enlarged  supply.

This  is  the  so-called  '  economy  of  high  wages,'  assisted,  doubt-
less, in  its  mode  of  operation  by  the  organisation  of  the  workers,
but  primarily  based  upon  economic  necessity,  which  is  ultimately
traceable  to  the  play  of  physical  and  moral  stimuli  or  motives
operating  upon  individual  workers  and  moulding  class  standards
of  life.

§  5. — In  regarding,  then,  the  industrial  system  as  a  growing
system,  we  must  assign  to  labour  two  necessary  payments  out  of  the
industrial  income,  first,  a  subsistence  wage  required  to  maintain  the
labour  portion  of  the  system  unimpaired,  secondly,  a  wage  of  pro-
gressive efficiency  required  to  evoke  an  increasing  quantity  of  more
effective  labour-power.  The  former  is  a  simjile  wear-and-tear  fund,
the  latter  an  improvement  fund.  Both  are  necessary  expenses  of
labour  in  a  progressive  industrial  community.

Now  when  we  turn  to  capital  we  fmd  two  corresponding
costs :  one  of  mere  maintenance,  the  other  of  progress.  By
capital  we  here  mean  the  concrete  forms  of  buildings,  tools,
machines,  stock,  &c.,  which  assist  industry,  not  their  financial
equivalent  or  measure.  This  capital  is  continually  being  worn
out  or  used  up  in  the  processes  of  industry,  and  the  maintenance  of


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  69

industry  requires  that  this  loss  shall  be  continually  replaced-
In  our  analysis  of  the  distribution  of  income  at  each  stage  we
described  this  payment  under  the  head  of  '  wear  and  tear.'

Now  in  dealing  with  this  '  wear-and-tear  '  fund  of  capital,  the
same  distinction  as  in  the  case  of  la])our,  between  physical  and
moral  stimulus,  is  ai)plicable.

What  payment  out  of  the  product  must  be  made  to  procure
the  maintenance  of  the  existing  fabric  of  capital,  the  buildings,
machinery  and  other  plant,  the  raw  materials,  &c.  ?  These  forms  of
capital  are  continually  being  worn  out  or  used  up,  and  need  constant
regular  replenishment.  What  payments  must  be  made  to  secure
this  ?  The  purely  physical  condition  of  their  maintenance  is  that
material  repairs  and  replacement  shall  continually  take  place.  In
other  words,  a  provision  corresponding  to  the  physical  subsistence
fund  of  labour  must  be  made.  This  is  furnished  through  what  is
commonly  termed  a  depreciation  fund.  Interpreted  in  terms  of
industrial  energy,  this  means  that  some  energy  which  might  otherwise
have  been  applied  to  the  immediate  purpose  of  turning  out  more
consumable  commodities  is  diverted  into  the  repair  of  factories,
machinery,  &c.

Now  this  sort  of  '  saving  '  which  goes  to  maintain  the  capital
structure  of  a  business  is  not  commonly  classed  as  'saving,'  for  it
brings  no  increase  of  capital,  nor  is  the  payment,  or  book-keeping
transaction  it  involves,  called  interest.

It  looks  at  first  sight  as  if  this  depreciation  fund  corresponded
to  the  entire  subsistence  wage  of  labour,  for  its  provision  seems  to
secure  the  maintenance  and  operation  of  the  material  forms  of
capital.

■  '■■  Indeed,  if  we  were  at  liberty  to  assume  the  existence  of  a  com-
pletely-equipped industrial  system  and  merely  to  take  account  of
its  physical  wear  and  tear,  this  depreciation  fund  would  be  all  that
is  necessary  to  provide  for  capital.  But  if  we  are  to  take  into  con-
sideration the  costs  of  bringing  into  existence  this  industrial  system,
as  we  must,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  take  it  as  a  miracle,  we  shall
be  compelled  to  distinguish  the  full  subsistence  fund  of  capital
from  that  of  labour.  For  in  the  case  of  labour,  there  is  no  economic
cost  of  production  in  addition  to  the  cost  of  continuous  mainten-
ance. In  the  incipience  of  an  industrial  system.  Nature  must  be
held  to  have  produced  a  quantity  of  raw  labour-power  as  '  freely  '
as  she  has  produced  the  natural  power  of  land,  and  any  voluntary
expenses  incurred  by  parents  or  others  in  converting  this  raw
labour-power  into  the  various  sorts  of  skill  required  for  the  working
of  the  industrial  system,  are  compensated  in  the  higher  scale  of
subsistence  wages  for  these  grades  of  labour. Subsistence  wages,


70  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

therefore,  provide  fully  both  for  the  production  and  the  mainten-
ance of  the  labour  factor  in  a  statical  industrial  fabric.  But  a
depreciation  fund  does  not  similarly  provide  for  the  production  of
the  capital  factor.  The  maintenance  fund  of  capital  must  contain
a  payment  for  the  effort  of  saving  required  to  bring  into  existence
the  forms  of  material  capital.

A  practical  proof  of  this  necessity  of  minimum  interest  is  afforded
by  the  evident  fact  that,  in  default  of  such  provision,  the  owners  of
capital  would  refuse  to  make  provision  against  depreciation  of  their
capital,  devoting  the  payments  involved  in  this  process  to  the
temporary  payment  of  interest  and  '  letting  down  '  the  plant,
buildings,  &c.,  which  constituted  the  capital.

The  minimum  rate  of  interest  needed  under  individual  enter-
prise to  evoke  saving  must  therefore  rank  as  a  part  of  the  sub-
sistence fund  of  capital.  No  point  in  economics  is  more  frequently
misunderstood.  The  saving  which  is  paid  for  by  interest  is  best
described  in  the  accepted  economic  language  as  effort  of  abstinence
or  of  waiting.  So  long  as  individuals  are  required  to  postpone
some  present  satisfaction  of  consumption,  this  exertion  of  self-
denial  must  be  paid  for  like  every  other  effort  useful  for  industry.
Whether  '  saving  '  or  waiting  can  be  properly  described  as  a  process
'  productive  of  wealth  '  is  quite  immaterial :  if  it  involves  some
personal  effort  and  is  necessary  to  the  productive  activity  of  other
instruments,  e.g.  labour  and  land,  it  must  have  its  price.

Nor  is  this  affected  by  the  fact  that  much  or  most  saving
involves  no  appreciable  effort  of  self-denial.  Just  as  every  unit  of
labour-power  receives  a  price  measured  by  the  expense  of  evoking
the  most  expensive  part  of  the  supply,  though  some  output  of
labour-power  may  be  pleasurable  to  the  worker,  so  all  the  saving
receives  the  price  which  must  be  paid  to  the  most  expensive  savers,
those  who  would  not  save  at  all  unless  they  were  paid,  say,  three
per  cent.  So  long  as  the  easy  automatic  saving  of  the  Duke  of
Westminster  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  the  hard-felt  saving  of
John  Smith,  of  Oldham,  the  former  must  receive  the  same  price
per  unit  of  saving  as  the  latter.^

One  other  misunderstanding  must  be  removed.  The  effort  of
saving  for  which  payment  is  made  does  not  lie  in  the  single  act  of
producing  capital  goods  instead  of  consumption  goods.  The  effort  is
not  over  when  the  factory,  the  machine,  or  the  raw  materials  which
form  real  capital  have  been  brought  into  the  field  of  industry.

'  Most  of  the  criticism  of  the  morahty  or  rationality  of  interest  from
Aristotle  to  Ruskin  is  based  on  a  misconception  of  the  nature  and  uses  of
saving.  Whatever  is  valid  in  such  criticism  applies  not  to  the  justice
or  necessity  of  paying  interest  for  saving,  but  to  the  processes  by  which
much  of  the  accumulation  which  enables  saving  to  be  made  has  been  achieved.


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  71

If  Jolm  Smith,  though  desirous  to  consume  /^loo  worth  of
commodities,  is  induced  instead  to  devote  his  iiTioo  to  putting  up  a
piece  of  industrial  machinery,  he  must  be  paid  at  regular  intervals
so  long  as  he  allows  his  power  to  consume  his  ;^ioo  worth  of  com-
modities to  lie  in  abeyance.  For  if  the  original  act  of  substituting
productive  capital  for  consumption  involves  a  sacrifice  on  his  part
deserving  payment,  this  sacrifice  continues  all  the  time  this  capital
is  operating  in  industry.

If  it  is  worth  ;f  100  John  is  entitled  to  receive  his  £-^  per  annum,
because  the  real  payment  which  this  £'^  conveys  is  essential  to
induce  John  to  leave  his  £100  machine  operating  instead  of  selling
it  outright  and  taking  for  consumption  his  ;/^ioo  worth  of  consum-
ables.

There  is  no  mystery  whatever  attending  the  so-called  eternity
of  the  ;;rioo  machine.  He  gets  £3  per  annum  for  ever  for  it.  He
could  get,  say,  £^  for  a  certain  short  number  of  years,  if  he  were
willing  to  accept  this  higher  price  for  its  use  so  long  as  it  lasted  in
its  original  form,  instead  of  a  lower  price  which  threw  on  the  user
the  obligation  of  keeping  it  in  complete  repair  and  replacing  any
part  of  it  which  wore  out.  Thus  capital  is  not  merely  crystalhsed
labour.

The  material  wear-and-tear  fund,  plus  the  minimum  payment
for  saving,  constitutes  the  subsistence  or  maintenance  fund  of
capital  corresponding  to  the  subsistence  wage  for  labour.  It  will
differ  as  regards  different  sorts  of  capital  in  proportion  as  the  actual
wear  and  tear  is  light  or  heavy.

§  6. — When  more  saving  is  required  for  an  expensive  or  progressive
industrial  life,  a  somewhat  higher  interest  (i.e.  price  per  unit  of
capital-power)  must  be  paid.  Indeed,  the  actual  payment  for
maintaining  the  existing  forms  of  capital  in  a  modern  community
is  probably  extremely  low,  a  little  more  than  a  nominal  addition  to
the  actual  wear  and  tear.  The  price  of  new  saving,  so  far  as  a  free
field  of  investment  exists,  is  low  and  tolerably  uniform,  as  compared
with  earlier  times.  Savers  can  be  induced  to  place  considerable
quantities  of  new  plant  and  stock  in  the  industrial  field  in  return
for  a  share  of  the  industrial  product  which  measures,  say,  only  three
per  cent,  of  the  value  of  the  plant  and  stock  itself.  If  in  any  section
of  the  industrial  world  a  sudden  demand  for  a  great  application
of  new  capital  arises,  the  price  of  saving,  of  course,  rises  for
a  while.

So  far,  however,  as  freedom  of  investment  (i.e.  of  the  flow  of
new  capital)  exists  throughout  the  industrial  world,  a  uniform  rate
ofjpayment  for  fresh  saving  exists.  This  uniformity  is,  of  course,
concealed  by  the  difference  of  risks  attached  to  different  sorts  of


72  ' THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

application  of  capital.  The  payment  for  incurring  these  risks  is
not,  however,  interest,  and  should  be  treated  separately  ;  if  differ-
ences of  risk  were  allowed  for,  the  rate  of  interest  throughout  the
industrial  world  would  be  fairly  uniform,  so  far  as  free  fields  of
investment  exist.

But  though  saving,  or  the  process  of  applying  capital  for
productive  use,  is  in  most  parts  of  the  industrial  system  far  more
pliable  than  labour,  for  many  purposes  there  still  remain  separate
markets  for  investment  of  new  real  capital.  It  is  open  to  any
saving  man  in  England  to  convert  his  saving  into  a  share  of  the
steel  rails  and  rolling  stock  of  any  railroad  quoted  on  the  Stock
Exchange,  or  into  the  machinery  and  other  goods  required  for
manufacturing  cotton  cloth,  beer,  or  bicycles.  But  there  still
remain  large  quantities  of  real  capital  in  whole  trades  and  countries
which  are  the  embodiment  of  the  saving  of  some  particular
family  or  some  small  locality,  or  small  close  group  of  favoured
investors.

Because,  then,  three  per  cent,  may  suffice  to  stimulate  the
normal  growth  of  capital  in  fully  evolved  competitive  joint-stock
enterprises,  it  does  not  follow  that  such  a  payment  will  have  the
same  stimulative  effect  in  the  detached  local  markets  for  investment
or  that  more  real  capital  can  be  got  into  a  simple  family  business
at  such  a  rate  of  payment.  Over  large  areas  of  the  earth  which  for
certain  productive  purposes  are  in  touch  with  world  markets,  as  in
the  case  of  Asiatic  countries  which  furnish  wheat,  tea,  cotton,  &c.,
the  real  capital  engaged  in  such  production  is  often  raised  at  rates
of  interest  far  higher  than  three  per  cent.,  determined  by  distinc-
tively local  conditions.  Thus,  taking  in  our  view  the  whole  amount
of  saving  and  creation  of  real  capital  required  to  feed  the  industrial
system,  we  shall  recognise  a  great  number  of  separate  areas  of
capitalisation  as  tliere  are  separate  markets  for  labour,  each  with
its  own  rate  of  interest,  as  each  labour  market  has  its  class  or
specific  wage.  A  given  rise  of  actual  interest  will  operate  with
different  effect  in  tlieir  different  markets  for  saving,  though  the
modus  operandi  will  be  similar.  Each  business,  moreover,  within
such  detached  area  of  investment,  appealing  for  the  required  saving
to  its  single  owner  or  his  family  or  immediate  associates,  will  com-
monly have  a  particular  rate  of  payment  which  corresponds  to  the
individual  subsistence  wage  in  a  special  labour  market.  As  in  the
case  of  labour,  a  rise  in  the  price  per  unit  of  labour-power  stimulates
an  increased  supply  (a)  by  bringing  into  use  workers  from  outside,
{b)  by  evoking  increased  duration  or  intensity  of  labour  from
existing  workers ;  an  increase  in  the  effective  supply  of  capital  is
similarly  brought  about  by  a  rise  in  the  price  per  unit  of  capital-


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  73

power.  A  rise  in  the  rate  of  real  interest,  i.e.  in  the  amount  of
concrete  goods  paid  to  savers  for  bringing  into  use  a  fresh  unit  of
capital-power,  operates  in  two  ways.  First,  by  offering  a  higher
reward  for  saving,  it  causes  a  larger  quantity  of  new  forms  of  capital
to  come  into  the  economic  field.  When  we  are  considering  the
structure  of  a  business  or  a  trade,  such  rise  of  interest  evidently
draws  into  this  business  or  trade  a  larger  proportion  than  before  of
the  new  saving  that  was  seeking  investment,  i.e.  a  rise  of  interest
in  the  cotton  trade  causes  new  cotton  mills,  machines,  and  raw  cotton
to  be  produced,  instead  of  more  steam  engines,  boot  machines,
brewing  vats,  &c.  When  we  consider  the  industrial  system  as  a
whole,  a  general  rise  of  real  interest  causes  a  larger  proportion  of
the  real  income  of  the  community  than  before  to  be  saved  instead
of  spent,  i.e.  to  be  taken  in  the  shape  of  new  capital-forms  instead
of  in  the  shape  of  retail  goods  for  consumption. ^

Secondly,  a  rise  of  real  interest  will  cause  a  fuller  or  intenser
use  than  before  to  be  made  of  existing  forms  of  capital.  As  a  rise
in  price  of  labour-power  causes  more  to  be  got  out  of  the  present
labour  supply  through  overtime  and  intenser  working,  so  with  the
machines  and  other  forms  of  '  fixed  capital.'  Three  shifts  instead
of  two,  speeding  up  with  more  risk  of  breakdown  and  more  waste,
the  continuous  operation  of  reserve  machines,  &c.,  will  be  brought
into  play.

These  effects  evidently  correspond  to  the  extensive  and  intensive
lowering  of  the  '  margin  of  employment '  in  labour  which  we  saw
followed  an  increase  of  the  price  per  unit  of  labour-power.

>  It  is  sometimes  held  that  a  fall  in  the  rate  of  interest  does  not  evoke
less  saving,  or  a  rise  in  the  rate  of  interest  more  saving,  in  a  modern  civilised
nation.  This  contention  is  based  on  the  view  that  some  sorts  of  saving,
e.g.  saving  to  secure  a  definite  income  as  provision  for  old  age  or  as  provision
for  a  familv  in  case  of  death  or  disability,  would  be  stimulated  and  not
depressed  by  a  fall  of  interest,  because  more  saving  would  be  required  to  attain
the  desired  end.  But  though  some  saving  would  undoubtedly  take  place  at
o  per  cent,  interest,  or  even  at  a  minus  rate  of  objective  interest  (i.e.  some
persons  would  lend  ;/^ioo  out  of  a  large  income  earned  in  prosperous  middle-
age  on  condition  of  receiving  back  £(j^  when  they  were  old  and  earning  nothing,
provided  no  more  advantageous  terms  were  open  to  them),  it  cannot  be  de-
duced from  this  that  positive  interest  is  now  an  unnecessary  payment.  Though
some  labour  would  be  done  for  pleasure,  wages  are  necessary.  So  in  the  case
of  a  fall  of  interest,  though  some  would  save  as  much  or  even  more,  it  remains
true  that  a  rise  in  the  price  of  saving  will  evoke  a  larger  aggregate  supply,  and
a  fall  will  reduce  the  supply.  Nor  is  the  argument,  that  saving  for  a  definite
deferred  income  would  be  stimulated  by  a  fall  of  interest,  so  strong  as  at  first
sight  it  seems.  For  among  many  would-be  savers  the  difficulty  of  saving
enough  at  the  lower  rate  may  approach  impossibility  and  deter  them  from
the  attempt.  This  would  certainly  be  the  case  if  there  were  reason  to  fear
that  a  continuous  decline  of  rate  of  interest  had  set  in.  Upon  the  whole  the
weight  of  evidence  strongly  supports  the  application  of  the  ordinary  laws  of
price  to  the  effort  of  saving.  (The  fullest  account  of  the  psychology  of
saving  is  contained  in  Professor  Conner's  little  book  '  Interest  and  Saving.')


74  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

In  a  progressive  community  improved  plant,  machines,  tools,
&c.,  better  than  any  or  most  of  those  at  present  in  use,  have  been
discovered,  and  are  available  as  soon  as  it  pays  to  scrap  the  older
forms  and  substitute  these  new  ones.  The  rate  of  this  scrapping
and  substitution  is  directly  determined  by  the  rate  of  real  interest.
Improved  plant  may  mean  either  of  two  things  :  plant  capable  of
turning  out  a  higher  quality  of  work  than  the  present  plant,  or
plant  capable  of  co-operating  with  labour  so  as  to  turn  out  a  larger
quantity  of  work  in  proportion  to  the  cost  of  making  it.  But  in
either  case  the  admission  of  the  improved  plant  depends  upon  the
economy  of  scrapping  old  plant,  and  a  rise  in  the  price  per  unit  of
capital-power  will  impart  a  larger  gain  than  before  to  this  substi-
tution, and  so  will  stimulate  the  change.  This  corresponds  to  the
economy  of  high  wages  in  improving  the  quality  of  the  labour
factor.

Thus  for  the  use  of  capital  in  a  progressive  industrial  system,
two  payments  are  made  :  a  wear-and-tear  fund  with  minimum
interest  for  the  production  and  maintenance  of  the  existing  fabric,
and  a  further  payment  of  interest  to  evoke  new  capital-forms  for
the  quantitative  and  qualitative  growth.

§  7. — It  is  sometimes  thought  that  land  must  be  treated
differently  from  labour  and  capital,  because,  while  the  supply  of
the  use  of  the  two  latter  depends  upon  the  effort  and  will  of  man,
the  former  does  not.  Nature  yielding  her  sources  and  powers  of
production  freely.

But  important  though  this  distinction  is,  it  is  not  relevant  at
the  present  stage.  Our  general  standard  of  measurement  for  units
of  productive  energy  must  be  applied  to  land-power  as  to  the  power
which  emanates  from  workers  and  pieces  of  capital,  and  the  pay-
ments made  where  land  use  is  bought  and  sold  must  be  referred
to  the  same  general  law.

Is  there  then  a  payment  to  be  made  to  the  owner  of  land  corre-
sponding to  the  subsistence  wage  of  labour  and  the  wear-and-tear
provision  for  capital  ? Certainly.

Whenever  anything  is  taken  out  of  the  land  beyond  what  is
replaced  by  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature,  provision  must  be  made
against  this  loss  or  waste.  If  land  has  to  be  manured  and  ploughed
up,  irrigated  and  drained  in  order  to  maintain  its  fertility  ;  if  it
requires  to  be  hedged,  fenced,  and  otherwise  protected,  these  pay-
ments for  keeping  up  the  land  clearly  belong  to  the  same  class  as
subsistence  wage  and  the  depreciation  fund  for  capital.  They  are
not,  however,  rent,  and  are  not  usually  classed  as  such.  This  claim
to  maintenance  of  the  land  precedes  rent.

If  Nature, as  represented  by  the  productive powers  of  land,


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  75

is  required  to  contribute  more  to  support  a  progressive  industry,
yielding  more  food,  raw  materials,  fuel,  &c.,  either  more  land
hitherto  unused  must  be  brought  into  requisition,  or  the  land
already  worked  must  be  more  intensely  worked.  In  the
former  case,  new  roads  must  be  made,  virgin  land  broken  in,
and  a  number  of  expenses  must  be  incurred  for  bringing  into
economic  use  the  new  supply  of  land.  In  the  latter  case,  where
the  land  is  worked  more  intensively,  it  will  be  more  quickly
exhausted  and  the  cost  of  restoration  will  be  greater.  Even  if  land
remained  '  free  '  to  every  user,  this  further  provision  for  maintaining
land  to  supply  natural  resources  to  a  progressive  industrial  system
involves  an  expenditure  beyond  what  is  required  to  maintain  the
existing  industrial  fabric.  This  further  payment  is  not  rent  any
more  than  the  earlier  payment  ;  it  is  simply  an  expense  incurred
in  feeding  the  industrial  system  with  an  increase  of  land-power.
But  it  means  that  out  of  the  industrial  product  a  portion  must  be
applied  to  evoke  and  maintain  new  land-power  in  addition  to  the
payment  made  for  the  maintenance  of  existing  land.  Both  these
payments  would,  in  our  analysis  of  income,  come  under  the  head  of
wear  and  tear,  and  interest.  The  making  of  roads,  irrigation,
fencing,  manuring,  &c.,  which  serve  to  repair  land  in  use  and  to
bring  fresh  land  into  use,  differ  in  no  wise  from  the  expenditure  in
maintaining  and  enlarging  capital,  the  repair  work  corresponding  to
the  depreciation  fund,  and  the  expansion  work  corresponding  to
the  capital  growth  which  requires  interest  to  evoke  it.

In  other  words,  land,  so  far  as  maintenance  and  improvements
are  concerned,  is  capital.  The  payment  called  rent,  as  we  shall  see,
belongs  to  a  different  category.

§  8. — Following,  then,  the  distribution  of  the  industrial  product  as
it  is  achieved  by  the  breaking-up  of  prices  at  the  various  stages  of
production  in  payment  for  the  uses  of  labour,  capital,  and  land,  we
perceive  that  definite  portions  are  allotted  for  the  maintenance  or
subsistence  of  the  industrial  system,  and  for  the  enlargement  and
improvement  of  that  system  in  a  progressive  community.

So  far  as  the  distribution  of  the  industrial  product  necessary
for  these  payments  is  concerned,  we  recognise  a  close  co-ordination
of  the  three  factors  of  production.

A  maintenance  wage  or  wear-and-tear  fund  is  required  in  each
case  alike.  So  likewise  an  increase  in  the  quantity  of  labour-
power,  capital-power,  land-power,  so  as  to  provide  for  the  growth
of  a  business,  a  trade,  or  the  industrial  system,  is  procured  by  a
rise  of  price  per  unit  of  productive-power  which  acts  in  each  case

{a)  By  lowering  the  extensive  margin  of  employment,  and  so
calling  into  economic  use  outside  agents  of  production.


76  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

(b)  By  lowering  the  intensive  margin  of  employment,  and  so
evoking  the  use  of  lower  grades  of  productive-power  in  the  factors
already  employed.

Qualitative  growth  of  industrial  structure  is  similarly  brought
about  by  a  rise  in  price  per  unit  of  productive-power,  which  brings
into  use  superior  sorts  of  power  which  it  did  not  pay  to  substitute
for  the  existing  sorts  at  former  prices.

In  the  case  of  each  factor  the  lowering  of  the  margin,  extensive
or  intensive,  is  directly  due  to  a  rise  in  price  per  unit  of  the  produc-
tive-power that  factor  supplies  ;  similarly  a  fall  in  the  price  per
unit  causes  a  raising  of  the  margin.

This  is  the  way  in  which  the  industrial  system  works  and  grows.
Each  one  of  these  payments  made  to  labour,  capital,  and  land  is  a
strictly  necessary  cost  of  production.  These  laws  of  the  mainten-
ance and  growth  of  the  industrial  system  are  recognised  to  be
analogous  in  their  nature  and  operation  to  those  relating  to  a  bio-
logical organism  which  provides  itself  with  food  to  repair  its  waste
of  tissue  and  of  energy,  and  to  provide  for  its  growth.  In  neither
case  is  the  method  of  maintenance  and  growth  purely  physical  :
the  psychical  factor  enters  into  both.

As  the  craving  for  the  satisfaction  of  hunger  is  essential  to  evoke
the  output  of  organic  energy  in  the  work  of  acquiring  food  for  the
organism,  so  in  the  industrial  system  the  felt  pressure  of  demand
for  the  satisfaction  of  needs  constantly  operates  in  the  will  of  social
groups,  evoking  fresh  output  of  co-operative  energy  in  the  several
branches  of  industry.

Now  at  first  sight  it  does  not  seem  inevitable  that  any  problem
of  distribution,  not  directly  and  even  automatically  solvable,  should
arise.  If  the  result  of  the  working  of  the  industrial  sj'stem  were
merely  to  produce  a  fund  of  food  and  other  necessaries  just  sufficient
to  replace  the  wear  and  tear,  and  so  to  maintain  intact  the  system,
no  problem  of  distribution  would  come  up.  Capital  could  not,  even
if  it  would,  encroach  upon  the  maintenance  wage,  nor  could  labour
deprive  capital  of  the  provision  for  replacing  worn-out  tools  and
material.  Improper  distribution,  or  excessive  payment  to  any
factor  of  production,  is  not  possible,  at  any  rate  for  long,  in  such  a
case.

But  where,  as  is  usual,  the  industrial  system  turns  out  a  product
larger  than  suffices  for  maintenance,  conflicts  of  interest  in  distri-
bution may  arise.  We  are  now  confronted  with  the  question  of
disposing  of  a  '  surplus  '  over  and  above  the  requirements  for  mere
maintenance.  Such  *  surplus,'  as  we  see,  may  be  regarded  in  the
first  instance  as  a  natural  provision  for  organic  growth,  acting  in
the  shape  of  minimum  stimuli  to  evoke  proportionate  increases


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  ^^

of  the  various  sorts  of  labour,  capital,  and  land-powers,  for  the
enlargement  of  the  industrial  system  and  its  output.

The  industrial  system  produces  more  than  its  keep  ;  does  the
whole  of  the  surplus  flow  along  certain  necessary  channels  for  the
stimulation  of  industrial  growth  ?  It  may  appear  that,  whereas
the  amount  required  for  maintenance  is  at  any  time  strictly  limited,
progressive  efficiency  knows  no  such  limits.  There  is,  perhaps,  no
assignable  limit  to  the  amount  of  goods  and  services  which  could
be  consumed  in  such  ways  as  to  add  to  the  productive  efficiency  of
mental  and  physical  workers  becoming  more  and  more  skilful,
intelligent,  informed,  and  resourceful,  and  to  evoke  the  increased
quantity  of  saving  and  new  forms  of  capital  required  to  co-operate
effectively  with  this  increased  and  improved  labour  power.

That  the  whole  of  any  possible  increase  in  the  product  of  an
industrial  system  is  capable  of  being  distributed  and  consumed,  so
as  to  promote  the  increased  efficiency  of  the  industrial  system,  is  a
reasonable,  if  not  an  incontrovertible,  assumption.

For  though  the  rate  at  which  a  rise  of  wages  or  of  profits  may
be  assimilated  in  a  rising  standard  of  life,  so  as  to  promote  economic
efficiency,  is  subject  to  certain  physical  and  moral  limitations,  if
one  regards  a  particular  trade  or  class  of  producers,  it  is  not  reason-
able to  suppose  that  normally  the  progress  of  the  arts  of  industry
could  exceed  the  pace  at  which  the  increased  product,  properly
distributed,  would  serve  to  maintain  and  further  to  promote
efficiency.^

We  may  then,  accepting  provisionally  this  view  of  the  economy
of  progress,  insist  that  every  '  surplus  '  can  theoretically  be  distri-
buted so  as  to  figure  as  a  necessary  cost  of  industrial  growth,
feeding  the  industrial  organism.  There  is,  indeed,  in  every  pro-
gressive community  a  successful  tendency  towards  such  a  natural
or  productive  distribution  of  the  surplus.

But  the  success  of  this  tendency  is  notoriously  qualified  :  the
surplus  is  not  so  distributed  as  to  produce  the  maximum  amount
of  economic  progress.  Portions  of  the  '  surplus  '  w^hich  might  have
gone  as  stimuli  of  growth  are  taken  as  unnecessary  or  excessive
payments  which,  instead  of  stimulating,  depress  activity,  and  so
the  rate  of  growth  is  kept  unnecessarily  low. For,  though  it  is

'  Two  qualifications  of  this  doctrine  are  reserved  for  later  consideration.
The  first  has  reference  to  the  claim  and  the  ability  of  the  State  to  take  its  share
in  the  surplus  in  order  to  secure  the  maintenance  and  progressive  efficiency
of  public  functions.  The  second  arises  when  we  endeavour  to  relate  the
specifically  industrial  life  of  society  with  which  we  are  here  concerned  with
the  larger  conception  of  a  progressive  society,  in  which  allowance  is  made  for
the  subordination  of  distinctively  economic  activities  and  wealth  to  a  wider
conception  of  social  activity  and  wealth.


78  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

possible  and  socially  desirable  that  the  whole  of  the  surplus  be
distributed  with  the  same  natural  equity  that  determines  the  distribu-
tion of  the  maintenance  or  wear-and-tear  fund,  it  is  not  inevitable
that  this  should  happen.  Nor  does  it  happen.  The  abuse  or  un-
economical use  of  the  surplus  product  is  the  source  of  every  sort  of
trouble  or  malady  of  the  industrial  system,  and  the  whole  problem
of  industrial  reform  may  be  conceived  in  terms  of  a  truly  economical
disposal  of  this  surplus.

For  though  it  is  not  possible  for  the  owners  of  one  factor  of
production  to  encroach  far  upon  the  subsistence  fund  of  any  of  the
others,  or  for  the  owners  of  one  trade  or  province  of  industry  to
rob  with  impunity  the  owners  of  another  trade  or  province  of  its
wear-and-tear  fund,  it  is  possible  for  one  section  or  interest  or
industry  to  effect  a  considerable  separate  gain  by  encroaching  upon
the  portion  of  the  surplus  required  to  furnish  growth  to  some  other
part  of  the  industrial  system.  There  exists  no  such  close  harmony
in  the  system  as  shall  furnish  an  automatic  check  upon  such  depre-
dations. An  industrial  system  may  still  survive  and  even  grow,
though  not  so  freely  or  so  rapidly,  if  a  landlord  class  claims  a  large
piece  of  the  '  surplus,'  the  payment  of  which  is  not  essential  to
evoke  the  use  of  his  land,  or  if  a  class  of  capitalists  draw  an  interest
or  a  profit  larger  than  is  sufficient  to  induce  the  application  of  their
capital  or  ability,  or  if  some  favoured  and  protected  professions  or
trades  take  salaries  or  wages  which  are  more  than  sufficient  to
stimulate  any  improved  efficiency  they  give  out.  In  these  waj'S
'  surplus  '  may  be  diverted  from  its  proper  work  of  furnishing
growing-power  and  become  '  unearned  income.'  It  is  notorious
that  combination  is  primarily  directed  to  secure  some  such  element
of  superfluous  gain.  There  is  friction  and  antagonism  between  the
buyers  and  sellers  of  land-power  (i.e.  landowners  and  tenants),
between  the  buyers  and  sellers  of  labour-power  (i.e.  employers  and
employees),  between  the  buyers  and  sellers  of  capital  (i.e.  investors
and  entrepreneurs) ,  while  the  conflicts  between  buyers  and  sellers
of  various  goods  and  services  represent  the  struggle  of  trades,
each  seeking  to  get  a  larger  share  of  the  general  product  by  appre-
ciating its  particular  product.

So  far  as  the  wear-and-tear  or  maintenance  fund  is  concerned,
no  real  problem  of  distribution  arises,  a  law  of  natural  harmony  of
interests  among  the  owners  of  the  factors  of  production  determines
the  distribution.

So  far  as  labour  is  concerned,  a  '  subsistence  '  wage,  as  we  have
seen,  does  not  necessarily  provide  a  full  living  wage  for  workers  in
a  trade  where  an  ample  margin  of  '  unemployed  '  or  cheap  immi-
grants is  attainable. But  within  these  limits  the  distribution  of


COSTS AND SURPLUS  79

the  portion  of  the  product  which  goes  for  wear  and  tear  involves
no  conflict  of  real  interests  among  the  owners  of  the  several
factors.

The  importance  of  this  harmony  is  often  under-estimated  :  it
furnishes  a  genuine  and  substantial  basis  of  orderly  co-operation
over  the  whole  industrial  field.  In  most  countries  and  at  most
times  the  great  bulk  of  the  wealth  produced  is  normally  and  natu-
rally apportioned  in  this  way  to  the  support  of  the  existing  industrial
fabric.  Until  the  rise  of  modern  capitalist  industry  only  a  compara-
tively small  proportion  remained  over  as  a  surplus,  either  to  furnish
the  means  of  industrial  progress,  or  to  pass  as  unearned  income  to
enrich  a  class  of  landlords,  usurers,  or  officials.

§  9.— The  increased  prevalence  and  intensity  of  the  conflicts,  not
only  between  workers,  capitalists,  and  landlords,  but  between  trades
and  groups  of  trades,  which  distribute  modern  industry,  are
primarily  due  to  the  improvement  of  the  industrial  arts,  which  has
enhanced  the  relative  importance  of  the  surplus.

If  there  were  no  surplus  there  w^ould  be  industrial  peace,  for
necessary  payments  would  absorb  the  product.  If  there  were  a
surplus,  the  whole  of  which  was  as  automatically  and  as  naturally
apportioned  to  feed  the  growth  of  the  several  parts  of  the  industrial
system  as  is  the  w^ear-and-tear  fund,  there  would  still  be  peace.
But  the  fact  that  this  surplus,  which  should  be  absorbed  in  stimuli
to  progress,  may,  instead,  be  forcibly  diverted  as  excessive  and
'  unearned  '  payment  by  the  owners  of  some  one  or  other  factor  of
production,  breaks  this  natural  harmony  and  furnishes  a  ground
for  class  or  trade  conflict.

The  distinctive  character  of  this  doctrine  of  distribution  consists
in  assigning  the  priority  of  significance  to  the  division  of  the  pro-
duct into  costs  and  surplus  instead  of  into  wages,  interest,  and  rent.
Not  until  the  surplus  has  been  separated  from  the  full  subsistence
fund  of  costs  does  any  real  problem  of  distribution  as  between
the  several  factors  arise.  Moreover,  so  far  as  the  normal  working
of  industry  makes  stable  provision  for  allocating  some  of  the  surplus
to  the  several  factors  as  stimuli  of  growth,  the  economy  of  costs
may  be  extended  to  this  portion.  Both  the  subsistence  fund  and
the  portion  of  the  surplus  thus  productively  applied  as  food  for
industrial  growth  in  a  progressive  society  must  be  sharply  separated
from  the  unproductive  surplus  taken  as  economic  rent,  excessive
interest,  profits,  or  salaries,  which  furnishes  no  incentive  to  industry
in  its  recipients.

The  following  rough  figure  expresses  the  threefold  distinction,
though  the  proportions  assigned  to  the  parts  are  purely  hypo-
thetical : —


8o  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM


Unproductive  Surplus  (unearned  increments).


Productive  Surplus  (costs  of  growth);


Maintenance  (costs  of  subsistence).


C.
B.
A.


A.  Maintenance  includes  (i)  minimum  wages  for  various  sorts
of  labour  and  ability  necessary  to  support  and  evoke  their
continuous  output  at  the  present  standard  of  efficiency ;  (2)
depreciation  or  wear  and  tear  for  plant  and  other  fixed  capital  ;  {3)
minimum  interest  necessary  to  support  the  '  saving '  involved  in  the
production  and  maintenance  of  the  existing  fabric  of  capital ;  (4)  a
*  wear-and-tear  '  provision  for  land.

B.  The  productive  surplus  includes  (i)  minimum  wage  of  pro-
gressive efficiency  in  quantity  and  quality  of  labour  and  ability  of
various  grades  ;  (2)  such  rise  of  interest  above  the  subsistence  rate
as  is  required  to  evoke  and  maintain  the  increase  of  saving  required
for  industrial  progress.

C.  The  unproductive  surplus  consists  of  (i)  economic  rent  of
land  and  other  natural  resources  ;  (2)  all  interest  beyond  the  rate
involved  in  A  and  B  ;  (3)  all  proiit,  salaries,  or  other  payments  for
ability  or  labour  in  excess  of  what  is  economically  necessary  to
evoke  the  sufficient  use  of  such  factor  of  production.

Modern  industry  tends  continually  to  increase  the  size  of  the
surplus.  Part  of  it  settles  down  gradually  into  a  permanent  pro-
vision for  industrial  growth,  in  accordance  with  the  law  we  have
already  traced,  raising  the  price  for  use  of  labour  and  capital  above
the  bare  subsistence  point.  A  great  deal,  however,  does  not  so
settle,  but  forms  a  bone  of  contention.  No  law  for  its  apportionment
exists  except  the  law  of  superior  force.  Landowners,  capitalists,
labourers,  entrepreneurs,  or  combinations  of  these  owners  of  the
factors  of  production  can,  if  they  are  strong  enough,  secure  as
unearned  and  excessive  gains  lumps  of  this  surplus.  Such  unearned
elements  of  income  arise,  as  we  shall  recognise,  in  various  parts  of
the  industrial  system.  Where  they  are  in  the  aggregate  a  relatively
small  share  of  the  product,  they  cause  little  trouble.  But  when
they  form  a  large  proportion  of  the  whole,  as  in  some  developed
industrial  countries,  they  not  only  cause  deep  conflicts  of  industrial
interest  between  the  different  classes,  but  are  directly  responsible
for  those  great  oscillations  of  industry  and  employment  which
involve  so  much  waste  and  misery  in  our  social  S3^stem.  The
principal  problem  of  modern  industrial  civiUsation  consists  in
devising  measures  to  secure  that  the  whole  of  the  industrial  surplus


COSTS  AND  SURPLUS  8i

shall  be  economically  applied  to  the  purposes  of  industrial  and
social  progress,  instead  of  passing  in  the  shape  of  unearned  income
to  the  owners  of  the  factors  of  production,  whose  activities  are
depressed,  not  stimulated,  by  such  payments.

How  far  the  most  economical  distribution  of  this  unproductive
surplus  can  be  achieved  by  its  direct  partition  among  the  owners  of
the  several  factors,  in  accordance  with  some  ascertained  rules  of
equity  and  utility,  or  how  far  it  is  rightly  regarded  as  social  income
to  be  taken  and  used  by  the  State  for  general  purposes  of  the  com-
mon good,  is  a  question  which  must  await  later  consideration.


CHAPTER V

WAGES, INTEREST, AND RENT

§  I.  Family  maintenance  is  the  basis  of  a  wage  system.  Individual  wages  are
adjusted  to  the  wages  obtainable  by  other  members  of  the  family.—
§  2.  Grade  wages  vary  with  the  physical  and  moral  conditions  of  the
work  :  many  factors,  personal,  adventitious,  social,  determine  the  price
per  unit  of  the  different  sorts  of  labour-power. — §  3.  The  tendency  of
wages  towards  a  minimum  is  normally  true.  The  seller  is  usually  weaker
than  the  buyer  in  the  bargain. — §  4.  Non-competitive  conditions  qualify
this  tendencv.  A  scarcity  or  surplus  wage  sometimes  is  obtained. —
§  5.  Combinations  secure  similar  surplus  interest  for  capital. — §  6.  Rent
of  land,  though  not  a  '  cost,'  is  an  '  expense  of  production,'  measured  in
terms  of  the  price  of  units  of  land-power.  There  are  many  supplies  of
land  for  different  uses  :  the  worst  or  '  marginal  '  land  for  each  use  pays
least  rent,  because  it  yields  the  smallest  number  of  units. — §  7.  Margins
are  directly  '  determined  by,'  do  not  directly  '  determine,'  prices  of
land-use.  All  three  factors  have  their  margins,  which  similarly  rise  and
fall  with  rise  or  fall  of  prices.  Price  changes,  however,  may  affect  supply,
not  at  the  extensive  margin,  but  at  some  higher  point,  or  at  the  inten-
sive margin. — §  8.  Differential  rents,  then,  play  no  real  part  in  formu-
lating a  theory  of  distribution. — §  9.  Unproductive  surplus,  entering
into  prices,  is  a  '  necessary  '  payment  only  so  long  as  '  monopoly  '  or
'  scarcity  '  is  maintained.

§  I. — At  every  stage  in  the  current  of  production  we  saw  entrepreneurs
buying  the  use  of  land,  labour  and  capital,  paying  for  it  out  of  the
prices  they  received  for  the  goods  they  sold  to  the  next  set  of  entre-
preneurs or  to  the  consumers,  and  keeping  the  rest  of  the  price  for
profit.  The  actual  distribution  takes  place  through  these  acts  of
sale.

If,  therefore,  any  *  surplus  '  passes  as  unearned  income  over  and
above  necessary  '  costs  '  of  production  and  progress,  we  shall  expect
to  trace  it  in  the  processes  which  fix  the  prices  of  the  uses  of  the
several  factors  of  production  and  of  the  goods  which  are  bought
and  sold  at  the  several  stages.

In  other  words,  such  '  unproductive  surplus  '  will  appear  as
excessive  wages,  excessive  interest,  rent,  or  excessive  profit.

Let  us,  then,  put  ourselves  in  the  position  of  the  entrepreneurs
who  are  engaged  in  these  several  classes  of  bargain,  buying  the  use
of  land,  labour,  and  capital  and  selling  their  product.  Of  course,
the  entrepreneur  may  be  himself  tl\c  owner  of  one  or  more  of  the

82


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  83

other  factors,  using  his  own  labour  on  his  own  land,  as  a  small
peasant,  or  an  artisan  working  on  his  own  account,  perhaps  with
his  own  material  and  tools,  or  a  little  retailer  hawking  his  own
wares.

But  these  classes,  important  enough  in  many  fields  of  industry,
are  not  typical  of  modern  industry,  and  do  not  serve  well  to  illus-
trate the  actual  working  of  the  forces  which  determine  the  flow  of
industry  and  the  distribution  of  its  product.

The  typical  modern  business  is  one  where  the  entrepreneur  is  an
organiser  and  dealer,  simply  buying  from  three  sets  of  persons  the
factors  of  production  and  selling  the  product  to  a  fourth  set.

Each  of  these  markets  has  its  special  conditions.

Take  first  the  labour  market,  or  rather  the  set  of  labour  markets,
some  closely  connected  with  one  another,  some  standing  apart — •
exclusive  repositories  of  particular  sorts  of  labour-power.  Every-
where throughout  the  industrial  system  the  group  of  entrepreneurs
whose  businesses  form  a  trade,  are  engaged  in  buying  particular
sorts  of  labour-power.  How  is  the  price  they  pay  determined  ?  The
ordinary  minimum  price,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  sum  of  money
sufficient  to  maintain  the  worker  in  the  working  efficiency  required,
and  to  bring  up  a  family  which  will  keep  up  the  supply.  The  wage  for
a  class  of  labour  may,  however,  fall  for  a  time  indefinitely  below  this
'  ordinary  '  maintenance  wage.  Where  the  supply  of  labourers  at
a  maintenance  wage  is  larger  than  the  demand,  as  is  sometimes  the
case  in  a  skilled  trade  which  is  failing  or  depressed,  the  wage  may
fall  below  the  full  subsistence  rate,  the  labour-power  being  drained
out  of  the  workers  in  a  short  working  life,  and  the  supply  being
maintained  out  of  the  unemployed  margin.  Many  parts  of  the
unskilled  or  low-skilled  labour  market  are  constantly  in  this  con-
dition. The  minimum  wage  here  is  not  one  of  full  maintenance  and
replacement  ;  it  must  suffice  to  enable  the  worker  to  keep  working
for  some  time,  but  it  need  not  enable  him  to  live  out  his  full  life
or  to  bring  up  a  family.

Moreover,  the  true  maintenance  wage  is  composed  of  the  added
wages  of  the  wage-earners  in  an  ordinary  working  family.  Where
economic  and  social  conditions  allow  several  workers  in  a  family  to
contribute  to  the  family  income,  the  aggregate  wages  must  usually
form  a  full  maintenance  fund,  but  the  workers  need  not  contribute
proportionately  to  this  family  wage.  Where  it  is  customary  foi'
women  and  children,  as  well  as  men,  to  work  for  wages,  their  wages
usually  fall  considerably  below  the  level  sufficient  for  their  full
personal  maintenance,  the  trades  in  which  they  are  engaged  being
to  this  extent  parasitic  upon  the  trade  of  the  chief  wage-earner.

In  towns  where  the  chief  employment  is  some  metal  trade  in

G  2


84  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

which  adult  male  labour  alone  is  used,  women's  labour  is  usually
cheap.  This  notorious  fact  has  led  to  the  introduction  of  textile
trades  into  such  metal  towns,  the  payment  for  this  textile  work
being  lower  than  the  necessary  wage  in  towns  which  are  entirely  or
chiefly  textile  towns.  Where  such  textile  employment  for  the
women  is  considerable,  it  also  exercises  a  depressing  influence  upon
the  wages  of  the  male  metal  workers,  who  will  not  offer  the  same
amount  of  resistance  to  reductions  of  wages  in  bad  times  which
they  would  offer  if  the  entire  support  of  the  family  rested  upon  the
metal  wage.

Where  there  is  a  market  for  child  labour,  the  same  depressing
influence  is  exercised  upon  the  parents'  wages.  The  only  economi-
cally necessary  wage  is  the  family  wage,  and  when  employment  is
available  for  husband,  wife,  and  children,  there  exists  no  securitj^
that  a  child,  a  woman,  or  even  a  man  working  for  his  own  keep
alone  can  earn  a  maintenance  wage.

Women  are,  of  course,  impeded  most.  Probably  most  women's
labour  is  bought  at  a  price  below  the  minimum  of  personal  main-
tenance, partly  because  it  is  subsidised  by  other  portions  of  the
family  wage,  partly  because  the  labour  market  for  most  women's
work  is  permanently  overstocked.

This  consideration  of  the  family  maintenance  as  the  unit  of  the
wage-system  involves  some  amendment  of  our  first  statement  that
the  price  of  a  unit  of  labour-power  must  be  such  as  to  maintain
and  evoke  the  productive  effort  of  the  worker.  In  saying  that  the
price  of  any  sort  of  labour-power  must  enable  the  worker  to  provide
such  a  proportion  of  the  family  maintenance  as  the  conditions  of
local  employment  impose  upon  him,  as  a  member  of  a  family,  we
shall  approach  the  truer  statement  of  the  wage  basis.

In  a  mining  village  or  a  specialised  metal  town  the  adult  male
worker's  wage  must  be  sufficient  to  support,  say,  four-fifths  of  a
normal  family  of  four  or  five  members  ;  in  the  labouring  classes  of
an  ordinary  industrial-commercial  town,  the  adult  male  wage  need
only  cover,  say,  three-fifths,  in  a  Lancashire  cotton  town  only  one-
half,  of  the  family  maintenance  wage.

The  proportion  of  the  adult  male  or  female  wage  to  the  aggre-
gate family  wage  will  vary  widely  according  to  the  district  and
trade,  and  may  be  affected  greatly  by  legal  and  customary  con-
siderations.

At  any  given  time  and  place,  the  price  an  eniyeprcnenr  will
have  to  pay  in  setting  up  a  business  will  be  determined  by  the
proportion  the  men  or  women  he  employs  have  to  contribute  to
the  conventional  standard  of  living  in  their  class.

§  2. — This  brings  us  to  the  important  distinction  of  grade  wages.


WAGES,  INTEREST.  AND  RENT  85

In  our  last  chapter  we  recognised  that  there  was  a  natural  basis  for
the  dil'tercnt  rates  of  pay  for  different  sorts  of  work.  Work  which
takes  more  out  of  the  worker  necessitates  a  larger  '  wear-and-tear  '
payment  ;  work  which  is  more  than  usually  disagreeable  or  danger-
ous usually  requires  the  application  of  a  stronger  motive  to  the  will
of  the  worker,  and  this  stronger  motive  usually  means  a  higher
rate  of  pay.  These  '  natural  '  causes  explain  some  differences  of
grade  or  trade  wages.  Strength  and  endurance  explain  why  British
navvies,  stevedores,  and  certain  groups  of  workers  in  the  metal-
working  and  engineering  trades  get  high  rates  of  pay  for  relatively
low-skilled  work.  Danger,  however,  is  only  a  cause  of  higher  pay
where  it  is  realised,  and  so  acts  as  a  deterrent  to  undertaking  work.
Some  of  the  industrial  work  most  dangerous  to  health  or  life  is  paid
at  the  lowest  rates  either  because  when  the  wage-bargain  is  struck
the  danger  is  not  recognised,  or  because  competition  for  employ-
ment is  so  keen  that  it  is  ignored.  Chemical  workers  and  phos-
phorus-match workers  or  Belfast  linen  w^eavers  get  no  compensation
for  their  industrial  dangers  in  their  wages.  The  same  apphes  to
dirt  and  other  disagreeable  conditions.  Where  such  work  can  be
done  by  common  labourers  who  are  not  squeamish  or  sensitive,
these  conditions  bring  no  higher  pay.  In  a  refined  community  the
assistants  in  a  butcher's  shop  would  earn  a  very  high  grade  wage,
but  so  long  as  plenty  of  labour  which  does  not  feel  the  brutalising
conditions  is  available,  there  is  no  grade  wage.

Responsibihty,  implying  a  high  degree  of  regularity,  judgment,
and  probity,  has  a  market  value.  W^ork  upon  the  due  performance
of  which  the  lives  of  many  persons,  the  safety  of  valuable  machinery,
money,  and  other  property,  the  honour  or  efficiency  of  a
business  or  a  public  office  depend,  is  generally  remunerated  at  a
rate  which  implies  that  the  workers  have  a  '  position  to  keep  up,'
or,  at  any  rate,  that  they  should  not  be  tempted  by  the  pressure  of
personal  needs  to  neglect  or  scamp  their  work.  A  decently  high
standard  of  comfort  is  recognised  not  merely  in  official  but  also  in
many  departments  of  industrial  work  as  a  necessary  factor  in  the
wages  of  such  men.  As  the  technical  and  the  financial  structure
of  modern  business  becomes  more  complex  and  more  delicate,  this
utility  of  high  grade  wages  for  the  various  classes  of  managers  and
overseers  is  more  widely  recognised.  The  respectability  or  dignity
which  tradition  attaches  to  certain  learned  professions  and  officials,
instead  of  operating  to  reduce  their  rate  of  pay,  often  serves  to
enhance  it,  because  it  is  recognised  that  the  physician,  the  lawyer,
the  municipal  official,  ought  to  live  in  a  style  consistent  with  the
dignity  of  the  post  or  profession  he  occupies.  This,  however,  does
not  always  hold. In  America  and  in  Germany  skilled  officials  are


86  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

commonly  paid  lower  incomes  than  they  would  earn  by  private
practice,  regularity  of  employment  and  of  income,  together  with
the  prospect  of  a  pension,  being  often  discounted  in  their  present
rate  of  pay.

But,  of  course,  by  far  the  most  powerful  determinant  of  grade
wages  is  the  degree  of  skill  and  knowledge  required  to  secure  regular
employment  in  a  trade  or  profession  or,  more  strictly  speaking,  the
difficult}^  of  acquiring  this  skill  or  knowledge.

The  possession  and  discovery  of  natural  aptitudes,  foresight,  and
outlay  in  the  preparation  for  a  trade,  personal  connexions  and
social  opportunities,  mobility  and  trade  organisation,  this  complex
of  conditions,  partially  personal,  partly  adventitious,  partly  social,
determines  whether  the  sort  of  work  a  man  does  commands  a  high
or  a  low  rate  per  unit  of  productive  energy.

We  cannot,  however,  here  closely  consider  how  far  the  higher
rate  of  piece  or  time  work  which  a  doctor  in  an  ordinary  practice  or
a  foreign-office  clerk  receives  as  compared  with  that  of  a  carpenter
or  a  railway  porter,  is  to  be  regarded  as  interest  upon  the  capital
outlay  in  his  education  and  equipment,  or  as  a  prize  for  success  in
a  competition  in  which  many  fail  to  get  regular  employment.
There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  most  middle  class  parents  make
any  proportionately  greater  effort  to  equip  their  children  for  eco-
nomic success  than  most  working-class  parents,  or  that  a  decline  in
the  class  wage  of  the  professions  or  the  public  services  would
materially  affect  their  outlay  upon  their  education.  Neither  can  it
be  asserted  that  the  risks  of  failure  are  greater  in  these  higher
walks  of  life  than  in  a  skilled  or  unskilled  trade,  while  in  the  latter
the  penalties  of  failure,  unmitigated  by  '  private  income  '  or  family
sup])orts,  are  incomparably  heavier.

Seeing  that  the  possession  of  special  skill,  usually  combined
with  trade  or  professional  organisation  for  the  maintenance  of  the
market  value  of  this  skill,  is  the  main  source  of  differences  of  trade
wages,  how  far  must  we  regard  these  differences  as  '  necessary  '
expenses  in  production,  or  how  far  as  '  surplus  '  or  '  excessive  '
gains  ?

The  case  of  the  commercial  clerk  is  instructive  upon  this  point.
Facility  in  reading,  writing,  and  arithmetic  was  once  a  rare  accom-
plishment confined  to  a  small  section  of  men  whose  natural  aptitude
was  assisted  by  special  opportunity  of  education.  The  price  of
this  sort  of  labour-power  was  then  high  as  compared  with  the  price
of  most  sorts  of  skilled  manual  labour.  Now  that  our  public
system  of  free  schooling  enables  everyone  to  acquire  this  skill,  its
price  has  fallen  below  that  of  most  branches  of  skilled  manual
labour. While  it  is  quite  likely  that  the  special  conditions  of  the


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  87

market  for  this  class  of  labour  may  have  driven  its  price  below
the  '  sweating  '  margin,  it  is  also  probable  that  in  the  earlier
era  this  class  wage  contained  an  element  of  *  unproductive
surplus,'  which  has  been  eliminated  by  the  enlargement  of
competition.

Where  a  rapid  extension  of  demand  takes  place  for  a  class
of  labour  which,  because  of  the  skill  or  experience  involved,
or  because  of  the  trade  union  limitations,  cannot  easily  be  met
by  an  increase  of  supply,  the  grade  wage,  or,  more  strictly  speak-
ing, the  price  per  unit  of  this  grade  of  labour-power,  may
stand  for  a  considerable  time  above  the  efficiency  level,  con-
taining elements  of  '  surplus  '  gain  which  are  not  absorbed  in
stimulating  industrial  progress,  and  simply  represent  '  unearned
income  '  upon  the  part  of  a  class  of  workers.  At  periods  of
abnormal  activity,  large  groups  of  miners,  shipbuilders,  and
other  workers  stand  in  this  position,  sharing  to  some  little
extent  the  power  exercised  by  the  employers  and  capitalists
in  these  trades  to  tax  for  their  special  benefit  the  general  industry
of  the  country.

§  3. — But  in  applying  to  individual  cases  this  conception  of  a
grade  minimum  wage,  an  important  distinction  must  be  made.
The  least  efficient  labourer  in  each  grade  must  normally  earn  a
weekly  wage  sufficient  for  subsistence  or  conventional  consumption
of  himself  and  such  portions  of  a  family  as  his  wage  must  help
to  keep.  If  the  least  efficient  worker  can  get  this,  more  efficient
workers  who  do  more  or  better  work  in  a  week  will  get  a  wage
exceeding  this  necessary  minimum.  In  kinds  of  work  where  the
difference  of  productivity  between  the  best  and  the  worst  workers
in  actual  employment  is  large,  this  differential  wage,  marking
the  superiority  of  workers  over  the  marginal  worker,  may  be
considerable.

When  the  pace  and  quality  of  the  work,  or  both,  are  levelled
for  the  workers  by  machinery  or  other  conditions  of  their  work,  or
by  agreement  among  the  workers  not  to  make  full  use  of  their
individual  differences  of  strength  or  skill,  the  weekly  wage  of  the
marginal  workers  may  be  virtually  the  normal  wage  of  the  grade.
This  is  the  tendency  of  the  machine  to  equalise  the  workers.

The  differences  of  weekly  earnings  between  superior  and  inferior
M'orkers  in  a  class  of  labour  follow  necessarily  from  the  fact  that  so
far  as  labour-power  is  treated  as  an  article  of  commerce,  to  be
bought  and  sold  in  a  labour  market,  each  unit  of  labour  must  be
bought  and  sold  at  the  same  price.  If,  therefore,  the  marginal
worker  only  gives  out  six  units  of  labour  per  week,  while  the  more
efficient  workers  give  out  ten  units,  their  weekly  wage  will  contain


88  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

a  differential  wage  which  measures  this  excess,  ^  most  of  which  may
be  utihsed  in  building  a  higher  standard  of  comfort  within  the  class.
I  say  '  most,'  not  all,  for  it  may  be  assumed  in  some  cases  that  the
greater  output  of  energy  required  to  earn  the  larger  wage  implies  a
larger  expenditure  in  personal  wear  and  tear.

Regarding  labour-power  as  productive  energy  bought  in  labour
markets,  we  may  say  that  the  minimum  price  per  unit  of  each  kind
is  such  that  the  weekly  sum  earned  by  the  marginal  worker  just
supports  the  conventional  standard  of  life.  If  the  least  effective
workers  in  a  factory  trade  require  20s.  to  support  this  standard  and
give  out  four  units  of  labour-power  per  week,  the  minimum  price
per  unit  of  labour-power  is  5s.,  and  any  superior  workers  who  give
out  six  units  per  week  (as  measured  by  piece  or  otherwise)  can  get
30s.  weekly  wage.

This  marginal  labour,  of  course,  must  not  be  understood  as
determining  the  price  of  this  grade  of  labour-power.  The  assumption
is  simply  this,  '  If  so  much  labour-power  is  required  for  this  industry
as  to  involve  the  employment  of  this  four-unit  labour  as  the  low
limit,  the  price  per  unit  cannot  be  less  than  5s.'

So  far  as  there  exists  freedom  and  fluidity  of  labour,  young
labour  being  able  to  exercise  choice  in  its  application,  and  enjoying
some  liberty  to  pass  from  place  to  place  and  even  from  trade  to
trade,  according  as  wages  and  other  advantages  are  greater  or  less,
the  wages  of  each  class  of  labour  tends  to  remain  at  a  conventional
minimum  for  the  marginal  labour  of  each  class.

This  is  the  truth  underlying  the  too  rigorous  dogma  of  the
'  Iron  Law  of  Wages.'  The  general  condition  of  the  labourers  as
bargainers  for  the  sale  of  labour-power  is  such  that  the  price  they
get  tends  to  remain  at  the  lower  level  of  the  conventional  standard  of
comfort  of  each  grade,  and  this  conventional  standard  approximates

^  Though  the  superior  amount  or  quality  of  output  is  the  basis  of  this
differential  wage,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  the  excess  of  output  attending
the  employment  of  a  superior  worker  is  the  measure  or  the  separate  result  of
his  superior  personal  efficiency.  If  the  '  marginal '  or  worst  worker  in  a  mill
produces  6  units  per  week  and  a  better  worker  12  units,  it  must  not  be  assumed
that  the  latter  as  a  worker  is  twice  as  efficient  as  the  former.  For  the  product
is  due  to  co-operation  of  the  worker  with  the  machinery  and  other  factors  in
the  mill.  When  a  more  efficient  worker  is  employed,  more  productivity  is
got  out  of  the  machinery  and  other  factors  in  a  given  time  than  when  a  less
efficient  worker  is  employed.  Part  of  the  difference,  then,  between  the  12
and  6  units  is  properly  attributable  \o  the  more  effective  working  of  the
other  factors.  The  differential  weekly  wage  may,  but  need  not,  probably
in  most  cases  does  not,  cover  payment  for  the  whole  of  the  6  units  which  are
got  by  employing  the  more  efficient  as  compared  with  the  marginal  worker.
Ultimately  this  criticism  implies  that  no  separate  productivity  as  measured
by  product  can  be  imputed  to  a  particular  worker,  or  a  particular  piece  of
capital  or  land,  all  productivity  and  all  products  being  due  to  an  organic
co-operation  of  the  several  factors.


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  89

to  the  bare  wage  of  efficiency.  This  interpretation  is  consistent
with  the  fact  that  the  actual  wage  of  most  grades  of  labour  has
risen  in  civilised  nations  during  the  last  two  generations.  New
methods  of  industry,  especially  under  machine  economy,  involve  a
more  intense  industrial  life,  higher  intelligence,  and  a  larger  nervous
output,  which  can  only  be  supported  by  a  higher  actual  standard
of  expense.

While,  therefore,  the  '  minimum  '  in  modern  industry  is  not  the
physical  subsistence  minimum  of  the  older  doctrine,  it  none  the  less
remains  true  that  the  conditions  of  the  sale  of  labour-power  are
normally  such  as  to  keep  the  price  down  to  the  point  of  marginal
costs  of  production,  that  is  the  conventional  standard  of  comfort  of
the  worst  labour  in  each  grade.

As  soon  as  we  reahse  the  actual  conditions  of  the  ordinary  sale
of  labour-power,  it  becomes  obvious  that  the  buyers  possess  such  a
normal  superiority  of  bargaining  power  as  enables  them  to  keep
the  price  of  labour  at  this  limit.

There  is  not  for  labourers  the  same  liberty  to  refuse  to  sell  their
labour-power  as  there  is  for  employers  to  refuse  to  buy.  If  a
starving  man  meets  a  baker  he  will  pay  all  the  money  in  his  purse
for  a  loaf  of  bread  ;  the  baker  here  exerts  the  maximum  of  economic
power  in  bargaining  for  the  price  of  his  bread.  Now  a  labourer
bargaining  with  an  employer  for  the  sale  of  his  labour-power  is  in
an  analogous  case.  He  must  sell,  and  he  must  sell  now.  The
employer  is  not  under  the  same  compulsion  to  buy  or  to  buy  now.
If  the  labourer  does  not  sell  he  starves  ;  if  the  employer  does  not
buy  he  loses  some  profit.  If  the  labourer  can  find  two  employers
and  make  them  bid  for  his  labour,  he  can  sell  at  a  price  above  the
bare  subsistence  price,  i.e.  at  a  price  which  is  measured  by  the
minimum  profit  at  which  one  of  the  two  employers  will  conduct  his
business.  If,  however,  the  two  employers  can  find  three  labourers,
two  of  which  they  wish  to  hire,  they  bring  down  the  conditions  of
the  price  of  labour  to  the  starving-man  limit.

Whenever,  then,  the  ordinary  condition  of  a  labour  market  is
such  that  there  are  more  willing  sellers  than  willing  buyers,  the
price  is  virtually  dictated  to  the  seller  by  the  buyer  at  the  limit
which  we  have  already  defined,  that  of  the  minimum  standard
wage.  Now  the  larger  part  of  the  labour  market  of  the  world
remains  in  this  condition,  offering  at  any  given  moment  a  surplus
supply  of  labour  willing  to  work  at  the  ordinary  conventional  sub-
sistence wage.  Such  labour  is  virtually  obhged  to  sell  its  use  for
the  marginal  cost  of  producton,  i.e.  for  that  share  of  the  general
product  of  industry  just  sufficient  to  maintain  it  in  its  accepted
standard  of  living.


90  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

It  is  sometimes  objected  that  though  employers  are  animated
by  an  intrinsically  weaker  motive,  viz.  profit-making,  than  workers,
their  competition  to  employ  competent  workers  is  as  keen  as  that
of  competent  workers  to  get  employment.

This,  however,  is  untrue  unless  an  artificial  meaning  is  given  to
the  term  '  competent '  as  applied  to  workers.

The  normal  condition  of  trade  is  such  as  to  make  it  easier  for  an
employer  to  get  additional  workers  up  to  the  standard  of  the  less
efficient  labour  he  already  employs,  than  for  such  workers  to  find
employers  who  will  buy  their  labour.

There  exists  a  normal  excess  of  units  of  supply  of  labour-power
over  the  demand  at  a  price  measuring  the  accepted  standard  of
living  for  most  working  classes.

If  rigorous  logic  of  bargaining  prevailed  throughout  the  field  of
industry,  wages  could  nowhere  rise,  except  in  so  far  as  increased
intensity  or  higher  quality  of  working  energy  involved  in  industrial
changes  required  the  provision  of  a  larger  human  wear-and-tear
fund.

§  4. — The  labour  market  is,  however,  qualified  in  its  working,
more  than  any  other  sort  of  market,  by  non-competitive  or  only
indirectly  competitive  conditions.  Custom,  personal  considerations,
public  opinion,  and  legal  enactments  have  always  tempered
competition,  sometimes  enabling  the  labourers  to  fare  better  than
they  would  otherwise  have  fared,  sometimes  worse.  Though  law
and  custom  are  now  far  weaker  as  direct  determinants  of  wages,
considerations  of  humanity,  sometimes  of  fear,  have  been  more
widely  operative  in  establishing  conventional  standards  of  comfort
above  the  margin  of  competitive  wages.  These  standards  them-
selves have  been  materially  raised  by  legal  requirements  regarding
safety  and  sanitation,  and  though  we  are  far  from  the  establishment
of  a  legal  minimum  wage,  the  tendency  of  much  industrial  legislation,
together  with  the  adoption  of  non-competitive  standard  wages  by
many  public  and  some  private  employers,  has  helped  to  raise  many
conventional  standards  of  comfort.

But  within  this  competitive  system  itself  we  find  certain  grades
of  labour  which  have  raised  their  price  above  the  minimum  limit
so  as  to  secure  by  organised  action  a  share  of  what  we  term  the
surplus.

There  is  only  one  way  of  achieving  this,  namely,  by  limiting
the  supply  of  labour  in  some  particular  field  of  employment  so  as
to  create  a  scarcity  and  raise  '  the  standard  wage.'

Whenever  labour  can  put  itself  in  this  position,  it  can  exact  a
wage  higher  than  the  standard  minimum  :  how  much  higher  will
depend  upon  the  terms  upon  which  employers  can  buy  the  other


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  91

factors  of  production,  and  the  terms  on  which  they  can  sell  their
products  in  the  market.  Every  successful  enforcement  of  a  '  stand-
ard rate  '  by  a  trade  union  involves  some  such  restriction  of  supply.
This  is  not,  indeed,  always  apparent  in  the  process  of  collective
bargaining,  which  is  the  instrument  for  securing  or  maintaining  a
'  standard  rate.'  But  collective  bargaining  is  only  efhcacious  where
a  union  limits  its  membership  by  requiring  evidence  of  efficiency,
by  limitation  of  apprentices,  or  by  regulation  of  output.  Where
none  of  these  conditions  are  available,  a  '  standard  rate '  cannot  be
maintained.  A  trade  union  which  freely  admitted  everyone  who
said  he  was,  or  wished  to  be,  a  worker  in  the  trade  could  not  bargain
collectively  with  any  success.

In  order  that  workers  may  raise  the  price  of  their  labour  above
mere  '  maintenance,'  they  must  be  able,  by  limiting  the  supply  of
labour-power  below  that  amount  which  employers  believe  they
could  profitably  apply  to  production,  to  throw  the  strain  of  com-
petition upon  the  employers.  If  by  organisation  they  can  present
a  labour  market  in  which  every  willing  worker  is  confronted  by  two
willing  employers,  it  becomes  more  important  for  any  given  employer
to  secure  a  worker  than  for  any  given  worker  to  secure  a  particular
employer,  and  this  situation  is  reflected  in  a  higher  price  for  labour.

No  trade,  however,  can  do  this  except  by  utilising  some  natural
scarcity  of  skill  or  opportunity,  or  by  making  it  difficult  for  out-
siders to  acquire  or  to  offer  for  sale  the  particular  sort  of  labour  in
which  the  trade  deals.

Where  some  new  rapid  demand  for  labour  arises  in  a  new
country  or  in  some  new  trade,  organised  action,  for  a  time  at  any
rate,  may  not  be  needed  to  secure  a  *  surplus  '  wage.  Examples  of
this  are  found  where  capital  has  flowed  in  advance  of  labour  in  the
process  of  developing  some  new  country.  Agricultural  and
mechanical  labour  in  the  new  Western  States  of  America  and  in
Canada  has  enjoyed  this  position  of  vantage ;  sheep  shearers  in
Australia,  miners  in  the  Transvaal,  artisans  in  Argentina,  have
from  time  to  time  been  able  to  take  high  wages,  less  by  reason  of
concerted  action  than  because  labour  was  short  in  relation  to
the  demand  for  its  profitable  use.  But  in  order  fully  to  utilise
and  to  maintain  such  a  position  of  vantage,  organisation  is  usually
requisite.

In  settled  countries  there  have  been  conspicuous  instances  of
this  same  power.  The  building  trades  in  certain  American  cities
have  been  able  to  raise  their  wages  considerably  above  the  normal
standard  where  rapid  expansion  or  reconstruction  has  favoured
them.  Among  the  building  trades  some  single  class  of  labour,  e.g.
plasterers  or  masons  in  certain  parts  of  England,  have  been  able  to


92  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

raise  the  price  of  their  labour  relative  to  that  of  the  other  building
trades.  Wherever  this  scarcity  can  be  maintained,  the  extra  price
of  labour  which  it  procures  ought  to  be  clearly  distinguished  from
the  normal  standard  wage.

So  far  as  this  surplus  or  scarcity  wage  gradually  operates  through
a  rise  in  the  class  standard  of  comfort  to  increase  the  efficiency  and
productivity  of  labour,  it  need  not  cause  any  rise  in  the  expenses
of  production  in  the  trade,  for  '  the  economy  of  high  wages  '  may
keep  the  price  of  a  unit  of  labour-power  flowing  from  more  efficient
labourers  as  low  as  before.  When  this  directly  economic  gain  can-
not be  ascribed  to  it,  the  surplus  wage  serving  to  raise  the  condition
of  the  labourers  in  ways  not  directly  or  proportionately  conducive
to  increased  productivity,  the  surplus  implies  an  enhanced  price  per
imit  of  labour-power,  and  raises  the  expenses  of  production  of  the
goods  into  which  it  enters.  Such  a  'surplus,'  where  it  arises,  must
clearly  be  distinguished  from  the  standard  wage,  in  that  it  is  not  a
necessary  inducement  to  the  labourers  to  apply  their  labour-power
(though  it  may  become  so  if  it  be  held  long  enough  to  build  a  new
conventional  standard  of  comfort),  but  is  a  bonus  of  the  nature  of
monopoly  price.  Since  the  most  vital  issue  in  the  theory  and  the
practice  of  the  distribution  of  wealth  rests  upon  the  distinction
between  necessary  costs  of  production  and  surplus,  it  is  impor-
tant to  recognise  that  labour,  though  normally  unable  to  obtain  a
wage  of  true  efficiency,  may  sometimes,  in  certain  trades,  hold  this
position  of  scarcity  or  relative  monopoly.

§  5. — The  payments  made  by  entrepreneurs  at  various  industrial
points  for  the  use  of  the  concrete  forms  of  capital  they  employ  fall
under  the  same  general  categories  of  maintenance  and  surplus.

The  payments  for  maintenance,  as  in  the  case  of  labour,  differ
in  the  case  of  a  stationary  and  a  progressive  industry.

Large  preserves  of  industry  are  marked  out  in  which  the  real
capital  earns  a  higher  rate  of  real  interest  than  outside.  As  workers
can  earn  a  scarcity  wage  by  creating  and  maintaining  a  scarcity  of
labour-power  in  a  particular  trade,  so  can  the  capitalists  or  investors
who  have  secured  for  their  special  advantage  a  particular  field  of
investment,  marking  it  off  from  the  area  of  the  free  flow  of  new
capital.

To  the  business  man  the  capital  upon  which  he  pays  interest  is
usually  considered  in  terms  of  money,  not  of  plant  and  stock.  But
if  we  are  to  place  the  use  of  capital  and  its  price  on  a  footing  analo-
gous to  the  use  of  labour  and  its  price,  we  must  consider  interest  as
a  part  of  the  product,  or  real  income  of  the  community,  paid  to
investors  who  supply  plant  and  stock  for  the  purposes  of  assisting
production. When,  therefore,  we  represent  certain  capitalists  as


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  93

exercising  a  monoj^oly,  absolute  or  relative,  over  some  trade,  we
mean  that  they  enjoy  some  advantage  which  enables  them  to  pre-
vent outside  investors  from  setting  up  plant  and  stock  in  this  trade
with  equal  opportunities  of  production  and  sale,  thus  securing  a
limited  supply  of  plant  and  stock  and  a  scarcity  price  for  the  use
of  the  same.

If  it  be  the  case  that  no  one  but  the  capitalists  of  the  Standard
Oil  Company  can  set  up  oil  plant  so  as  to  operate  successfully  in
most  States  of  America,  it  is  quite  evident  that  they  are  able  to
get  a  high  price  for  the  use  of  this  plant.  If  any  other  set  of  capi-
talists can  acquire  in  other  trades,  not  necessarily  a  monopoly  so
strong  as  this,  but  so  strong  a  hold  upon  the  whole  or  some  part  of
their  market  as  to  exercise  a  similar  sort  of  control,  they  can  use
this  power  to  secure  a  price  for  the  use  of  their  capital  above  that
whicli  obtains  in  markets  subject  to  free  investment  and  free  com-
petition. It  is  a  main  purpose  of  trusts,  syndicates,  pools,  corners,
and  other  combinations  or  arrangements,  local  or  general,  temporary
or  permanent,  to  place  certain  trades  in  such  a  condition  that  the
owners  of  the  sort  of  plant  and  stock  engaged  in  them  may  take  a
rate  of  real  interest  higher  than  the  two  and  a  half  or  three  per
cent,  which  suffices  to  procure  the  application  of  '  free  '  capital.
When  this  end  is  achieved,  the  owners  of  the  worst  equipped  mills
or  mines  or  workshops,  '  the  marginal '  capital,  are  able  to  obtain
a  surplus  price  for  the  use  of  their  factor  of  production. ^

Though  the  relations  between  the  owners  of  the  real  capital  and
the  entrepreneurs  in  most  trades  are  much  closer  than  those  between
the  workers  and  the  entrepreneurs,  it  is  not  necessary  to  identify
capitalist  with  entrepreneur  and  to  assume  that  their  interests  are
the  same.  The  control  of  a  trade  and  of  a  market  may  be  obtained
and  held  by  a  group  of  capitalists  in  order  that  by  limiting  the
entrance  of  capital  they  may  earn  a  '  scarcity  '  rate  of  interest  on
their  capital.  Though,  as  we  shall  see,  this  is  not  the  typical
modern  form  of  industrial  monopoly,  it  obtains  in  many  trades  and
in  many  markets.  The  cases  where  the  real  capital  in  a  trade
secures  a  surplus  interest  of  this  kind,  measuring  its  scarcity
value,  are  far  more  frequent  than  the  cases  where  labour,  manual  or
mental,  exercises  this  power.

§  6. — When  we  come  to  the  case  of  land  and  the  price  of  its  use,
we  seem  at  first  to  require  a  new  set  of  principles.  Almost  every-
where  in the  industrial system where entrepreneurs  defray  the

'  Whether  or  to  what  extent  this  surplus  should  rank  as  the  profits  of
entrepreneurs  rather  than  as  surplus-interest  is  a  question  left  for  later
consideration.


94  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

expenses  of  production  out  of  the  money  they  get  for  their  goods,
some  of  it  goes  for  rent.  Is  rent,  then,  a  necessary  cost  of
production  in  the  same  sense  as  the  minimum  wage  and  the  mini-
mum interest  ?  We  have  seen  that  the  wear  and  tear,  or  other
depreciation  of  land,  is  a  cost  that  must  be  provided  for  out  of
current  income,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  use  of  machinery  or  other
capital.  In  fact,  so  far  as  the  payment  for  maintenance  or
improvement  of  land  is  concerned,  land  may  be  treated  as  a  form
of  capital. But  rent  is  totally  distinct  from  such  payments.

In  the  case  both  of  labour-power  and  capital  we  saw  that  a
human  effort  was  involved  in  the  case  of  the  marginal  workers  and
savers  which  required  a  payment  to  evoke  and  sustain  it.  No  such
payment  seems  essential  to  the  owners  of  marginal  land  (i.e.  the
worst  land  in  use  for  any  kind  of  service),  because  the  application
of  this  factor  of  production  involves  no  human  effort.  It  would
seem,  therefore,  that  all  rent  of  land  ranks  as  a  surplus  pay-
ment, a  price  obtained  by  owners  of  a  factor  which  is  limited
in  supply  and  can  extort  from  those  who  need  its  use  a  scarcity
value.  This  is  actually  the  case.  The  marginal  land  for  a  par-
ticular purpose,  e.g.  growing  wheat,  market  gardening,  city
building,  in  developed  industrial  communities,  almost  always
pays  a  rent  which  signifies  that  there  exists  a  scarcity  of  this
supply  of  land.

If  the  marginal  hop  land  in  Kent  pays  a  rent  of  {^2  per  acre,
this  means  that  the  owners  of  land  fit  for  hops  find  themselves  in
bargaining  with  growers  in  a  strong  position,  owing  to  the  scarcity
of  hop  land.  If  hops  were  necessaries  of  life,  and  could  be  procured
nowhere  else,  their  bargaining  power  would  resemble  that  of  the
single  baker  bargaining  with  the  starving  man.  Their  power  is
much  less  than  this,  and  is  in  fact  limited  by  the  fact  that  growers
cannot  raise  their  selling  price  beyond  a  certain  point  without
causing  a  large  shrinkage  of  demand,  but  it  is  sufficient  to  enable
the  owners  of  the  marginal  hop  land  to  demand  {2,  an  acre.  This
scarcity  price  for  the  use  of  hop  land  is  determined  in  precisely
similar  fashion  to  the  scarcity  or  surplus  payment  for  use  of  some
particular  kind  of  labour-power  or  capital.

All  kinds  of  land  are  no  more  '  free  '  to  compete  for  hop-growing
than  are  all  kinds  of  savings  to  enter  the  oil-rcfming  business,  or  all
kinds  of  labour  to  enter  the  engineering  or  the  medical  professions.
Natural  or  organised  scarcity  is  everywhere  the  origin  of  surplus
payments,  and  the  £2  per  acre  payment  for  the  marginal  hop  lands
stands  in  this  respect  on  just  the  same  footing  as  the,  say,  surplus
IDS.  per  week  which  a  plasterer  gets  by  means  of  his  strong  trade
organisation,  or  the  surplus  five  per  cent,  which  may  accrue  to


WAGES,  INTEREST.  AND  RENT  95

the marginal capital in cotton thread or English banking
companies.  ^

If,  on  a  basis  of  scarcity  in  relation  to  the  selling  prices  of  hops,
the  marginal  hop  land  can  extort  £2  an  acre,  better  hop  land  takes
a  higher  rent,  not  because  its  owners  have  a  greater  bargaining
power  than  the  owner  of  the  marginal  land,  but  simply  because
what  is  really  sold  is  hop-growing  power  of  land,  and  land  which
has  more  units  of  this  power  per  acre  when  paid  at  the  same  rate
as  the  worst  land,  naturally  receives  a  higher  actual  rent.  Rent  is
simply  the  price  per  unit  for  land-use  reckoned  per  acre.

The  same  is  true  of  other  land  employed  for  various  purposes.
Each  purpose  must  be  regarded  as  denoting  a  separate  supply  of
land  :  the  price  or  rent  paid  per  acre  for  the  worst  land  in  each
supply  marks  the  scarcity  or  monopoly  power  of  the  owners  of  this
sort  of  land,  the  better  lands  taking  a  differential  rent,  measuring
the  larger  number  of  units  of  productive  power  this  land  yields  as
compared  with  the  worst.

The  old  economic  theory  held  that  the  marginal  land  paid  no
rent.  But  this  is  certainly  untrue  of  most  uses  of  land  in  developed
countries.  It  may  be  true  even  in  England  to-day  that  there  is
rough  land  used  for  grazing  which  pays  a  merely  nominal  rent.
This  *  marginal '  grazing  land  is  no-rent  land.  This  means  that
the  price  per  unit  of  grazing  use  is  such  as,  spread  over  a  large
quantity  of  poor  land,  is  a  negligible  sum.  But  the  same  is  not
true  for  wheat-growing  :  the  worst  wheat-growing  land  pays  some
rent.  The  marginal  land  for  market  gardening  pays  a  considerable'^
rent,  and,  where  we  come  to  city  building  ground,  the  least  eligible
sites  pay  a  rent  far  above  the  ordinary  level  for  agricultural  uses.

If,  ignoring  all  differences  of  quality  of  soil  and  position,  we
lump  all  land  together  and  regard  every  piece  as  eligible  for  grazing,
arable,  market  gardening,  building,  and  other  purposes,  we  can  find
land  which  only  secures  for  its  owners  a  nominal  or  no  rent,  and
measuring  the  value  of  the  yield  of  all  better  lands  for  all  sorts  of
purposes,  we  can  treat  the  rent  they  afford  as  purely  differential
rent,  which  marks  superior  productivity  as  compared  with  the  no-
rent  land  on  the  margin.

But  this  treatment  is  too  remote  from  industrial  reality.
Though  in  a  certain  sense  there  is  one  labour  market,  each  part  of
which  has  some  contact  with  every  other,  for  practical  purposes
we  have  to  distinguish  various  skilled  and  unskilled  markets,  each
with  its  own  minimum  standard  wage.

'  The  fact  that  rent  of  land  rests  on  a  natural  scarcity  which  no  social
or  industrial  reforms  can  eliminate,  while  the  other  surplus  payments
usually  rest  on  what  may  be  termed  artificial  restrictions,  is  no  reason  for
distinguishing  the  two  at  this  stage  in  our  analysis.


96


THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM


So  with  land.  Natural  conditions,  habits  of  local  industry,
availability  for  markets,  determine  the  use  of  land  in  particular
localities  much  as  they  do  the  use  of  labour.  The  supply  of  land
in  a  country,  or  throughout  the  industrial  world,  may  thus  be
divided  into  a  number  of  supplies  which  are  tolerably  distinct.
Some  land  may  be  transferred  from  pasture  to  arable,  or  vice  versa  ;
agricultural  land  passes  into  town  land,  and  so  forth  ;  but  at  any
given  time  there  is  a  supply  of  wheat  land,  a  supply  of  cotton  land,
a  supply  of  fruit  land,  &c.,  for  the  world  market  or  for  any  national
or  local  market.  The  least  productive  land  in  employment  for  each
particular  purpose  is  the  marginal  land  for  this  market,  and  the
superiority  of  better  land  is  measured  from  this  margin.  We  have
thus  a  number  of  margins  :  the  land  on  most  of  these  margins  pays
a  positive  rent,  which  denotes  the  scarcity  of  productive  land  for
the  particular  supply  in  question.

This  division  and  grading  of  land  supplies  may  be  set  out  by
the  following  diagram.  Take  a  developed  self-contained  industrial
country  with  a  variety  of  lands  and  industries  :  suppose  the  centre
to  be  a  populous  manufacturing  and  residential  district,  while  the
belts  of  land  around  this  centre  are  given  to  the  more  intensive
agricultural  uses,  the  poorer  land  in  the  remoter  parts  being  given
to  ruder  agriculture  and  pasture.  The  picture  will  take  some  such
form  as  the  following  : —


Taking  first  the  pasture  belt,  we  will  suppose  that  the  poorest
land  in  use  lies  on  the  outer  edge,  and  that  as  we  approach  the
wheat  belt  the  pasture  improves.


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  97

A  traveller  entering  this  country  at  N,  and  taking  a  straight
road  to  the  city  in  the  centre,  will  first  have  to  traverse  the  rough
pasture  belt  A,  the  pasture  gradually  improving  as  he  approaches
the  inner  boundary  O.  When  he  crosses  this  boundary  into  B  he
finds  himself  in  a  wheat  belt,  the  poorest  wheat  land  near  the  O
boundary,  the  best  near  the  inner  boundary  P.  Proceeding  farther
and  crossing  at  P.  he  enters  a  suburban  belt  given  up  to  market
gardens,  brickfields,  &c.,  and  graduall}^  improving  in  quality  as  it
approaches  O,  the  actual  city  boundary.  Crossing  at  Q  into  the
city  he  finds  here,  too,  a  constant  rise  in  the  value  of  the  land
imtil  he  reaches  the  centre  where  site-value  is  highest.

In  order  further  to  simplify'  our  analysis,  we  will  assume  that
the  pasture  land  which  we  saw  was  improving  as  the  inner  boundary
of  the  pasture  belt  was  reached  at  O,  would  have  gone  on  improving
as  one  went  farther,  if  the  land  had  not  been  applied  to  wheat  or
other  more  profitable  use,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  various  grades  of
wheat  land  in  B  would  have  made  better  pasture  land  than  the
best  actual  pasture  in  A.  Similarly,  let  us  suppose  that  the  best
actual  wheat  area  in  B,  viz.  the  part  bordering  on  P,  is  not  so
good  for  growing  wheat  as  the  worst  land  across  the  border  P,
now  used  for  market  gardens,  would  have  been,  or,  in  other  words,
that  for  wheat-growing,  as  for  pasture,  all  the  land  improves  as  it
gets  nearer  the  centre.  So,  too,  with  the  market  garden  belt  C  :
not  merely  does  it  improve  as  it  nears  the  city  boundary  at  O,  but
the  actual  city  land  itself  would  have  made  better  garden  land
than  any  that  is  in  actual  use,  had  it  not  been  wanted  for  more
valuable  building  uses.

In  a  word,  our  assumption  is  that  for  each  use  the  land  improves
in  quality  as  it  nears  the  centre.  Now  let  us  look  more  particularly
at  the  pasture  belt  A.  Before  our  traveller  crosses  the  boundary
at  N  he  passes  through  some  scrub  land  which,  from  soil,  vegeta-
tion, and  position,  was  not  quite  so  good  for  pasture  as  the  worst
pasture  land  in  actual  use  across  the  boundary,  the  pasture
marked  i.

This  worst  pasture  land  in  actual  use  can  only  be  used  if  the
owner  will  let  it  for  a  merely  nominal  rent  per  acre,  for  the  farmer
who  puts  cattle  on  it  finds  the  feed  so  poor  as  only  just  to  make  it
worth  his  while  risking  the  loss  of  his  beasts  and  paying  the  herd
to  look  after  them.  Some  cattle  thus  are  raised  on  land  which  may
be  said  to  pay  no  rent.  Farmers  who  prefer  to  put  their  cattle
upon  better  grazing  land  farther  from  the  outer  boundary  N,  even
on  the  next  worst  land,  marked  2,  must  pay  rent  to  the  landowner.
How  much  ?  Evidently  that  sum  per  acre  which  measures  the  full
superiority  of  land  in  A2  over  land  in  Ai  for  grazing  purposes. If

H


98  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

every  hundred  acres  in  A2  furnishes  so  much  better  feed  as  to
enable  a  farmer  to  sell  a  thousand  pounds  more  meat  per  annum
than  a  farmer  with  cattle  on  Ai,  then  the  price  of  the  thousand
pounds,  say  250s.,  will  be  absorbed  in  paying  rent  at  2s.  6d.
per  acre  to  the  landowner.  He  must  pay  this  2S.  6d.  rent,  for,  if  he
objected  to  pay  more  than  2s.,  it  is  evident  that  our  farmer  who
has  been  grazing  his  cattle  at  no-rent  land  in  Ai,  will  be  willing  to
take  his  place,  bidding  for  the  land  any  sum  up  to  2s.  6d.,  for  by
taking  A2  land  at  less  than  2S.  6d.  he  will  do  better  than  on  the
inferior  no  rent  land.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  clear  that
the  landowner  of  the  better  grazing  lands  cannot  get  more  than
2S.  6d.  per  acre,  lor  if  he  tried  to  insist  upon  3s.,  or  anything  over
2S.  (id.,  it  would  pay  the  farmer  to  go  on  to  the  no-rent  land  in  Ai.

The  rent,  then,  of  the  better  grazing  land  in  A2  is  measured  by
the  excess  of  the  productivity  of  this  land  over  the  land  which  is
only  used  on  condition  that  no  rent,  or  a  nominal  rent,  is  paid.  If
rent  were  paid  in  kind,  the  thousand  pounds  of  meat  per  hundred
acres  would  be  taken  :  the  money  rent  will,  of  course,  depend
upon  the  selling  price  of  meat.i

§  7. — But,  though  in  measuring  the  rent  of  particular  pieces  of
land,  reference  to  the  '  marginal  '  or  worst  land  in  use  is  found
convenient,  we  must  carefully  guard  against  the  false  notion  that
such  marginal  land  in  any  special  causative  sense  '  determines '  rent.
The  quantity  and  quality  of  the  worst  land  in  use  for  grazing  plays
exactly  the  same  part  in  helping  to  determine  rent  as  the  quantity
and  quality  of  the  better  grades  of  grazing  land.  Rent  is  the  price
of  a  unit  of  grazing-power  of  land.  Land  that  contains  a  large
amount  of  grazing-power  obtains  a  high  rent  per  acre,  land  that
contains  a  small  amount  a  low  rent  per  acre.  The  rise  and  fall  of
the  price  of  grazing-power  determines  at  a  given  time  what  shall
be  the  marginal  grazing  land,  this  rise  or  fall  being  itself  caused  by
the  pressure  of  various  forces  affecting  the  demand  and  the  supply
for  grazing-power.  If  there  is  some  grazing  land  in  use  at  a  merely
nominal  rent,  whereas  the  worst  wheat  land  in  use  pays  105.  per  acre,
this  merely  implies  that  there  exists  a  practically  unlimited  amount
of  low-grade  grazing  land,  which  has  no  other  remunerative  use,
and  some  of  which  it  is  just  worth  while  to  employ  at  current  prices
for  cattle,  whereas  the  price  of  wheat  is  such  as  to  impose  a  price
per  unit  of  wheat-growing  which  yields  los.  per  acre  of  the  worst

'  In  the  long  run,  economic  rent,  if  paid  in  money,  must  conform  to
changes  of  prices  of  produce.  Where,  however,  no  easy  method  of  adjust-
ment is  offered  by  custom  or  law,  a  fall  of  agricultural  prices  has  often
inflicted  grave  injury  upon  tenants  who  are  called  upon  to  pay  a  larger
quantity,  often  a  larger  proportion,  of  the  product  of  their  labour  on  the
land  in  rent.


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT


99


wheat  land  drawn  away  from  grazing  or  some  other  use  for  which
it  could  have  got  9s.  per  acre.  Though  the  rent,  or  price  per
acre,  ma}'  be  measured  from  the  marginal  land,  the  margin  is
directly  determined  by  the  price,  and  only  in  a  slight  and  secondary
sense  helps  to  determine  the  price.  As  soon  as  it  is  clearly  com-
prehended that  rent  is  the  price  of  a  unit  of  land-use  in  precisely
the  same  sense  as  wages  are  the  price  per  unit  of  labour-use,  and
that  the  rent  per  acre  depends  on  the  number  of  land  units  it
contains,  just  as  the  weekly  piece  wage  of  a  labourer  depends  on
the  number  of  units  of  labour-power  he  gives  out  in  a  week,  the
notion  that  there  is  a  law  of  rent,  differing  radically  from  the  law
of  wages  or  of  interest  on  capital,  and  depending  in  some  mysterious
manner  upon  '  marginal '  land,  will  entirely  disappear.

The  fact  that  rent  is  always  a  'scarcity'  price,  a  surplus  pay-
ment, does  not  in  the  least  affect  the  truth  that  rent,  though  not  a
'  cost,'  is  an  *  expense  '  which  enters  as  an  element  into  the  price
of  a  stock  of  goods  just  as  wages  and  interest  enter.  That  element
which  enters  price  is,  of  course,  not  a  '  marginal '  payment  for  the
worst  worker,  the  worst  machine,  or  the  worst  acre,  but  the  price
per  unit  for  the  use  of  labour-power,  machine-power,  land-power,
of  the  several  sorts  required  in  the  process  of  production.  Margins,
whether  extensive  or  intensive,  are  derivative,  not  determinative.

The  simplest  co-ordination  of  the  three  factors  of  production  in
relation  to  the  payment  for  their  uses  may  be  expressed  in  the
following  diagram  : —


10

9

8

7

6

5

..„..

"3":

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H  i

A  trade  requires  for  its  operation  the  use  of  productive-power,
issuing  from  land,  capital,  labour  in  some  stable  proportion,  i.e.
so  many  thousand  units  of  land,  so  many  thousand  of  labour  and  of

H  2


100  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

capital.  The  supply  of  these  units  is  represented  by  acres,  men,
and,  for  simplicity,  we  will  say  machines,  taking  these  as  represen-
tative forms  of  concrete  capital.  An  acre,  a  man,  or  a  machine
may  contain  many  or  few  units  of  productive-power,  according  to
its  quality.  The  best  quality  of  acre,  man,  or  machine,  viz.  A,
gives  out  ten  units  per  annum ;  the  next  quality,  B,  gives  out  nine.
The  worst  quality  of  each  factor  in  actual  use  is  F,  giving  out  five
units,  but  there  are  other  lower  qualities  capable  of  being  brought
into  use,  if  it  pays  to  do  so,  viz.  G,  producing  four  units,  and  H,
producing  three.  F  is  the  '  margin  '  in  each  case.  The  fact  that
it  is  the  margin,  and  not  E  or  G,  is  seen  to  be  determined  by  the
relation  between  the  market  price  per  unit  and  the  minimum  sub-
sistence payment  required  by  a  man,  a  machine,  or  acre  irrespective
of  its  yield.  The  five-unit  labourer  at  F  is  the  worst  labourer
employed,  because  the  price  per  unit  of  labour  is  just  enough  to
keep  him  in  working  efficiency  according  to  his  standard  of  living.
If  the  price  per  unit  rose,  some  labour  at  G  (four  units)  might  be
brought  into  use,  i.e.  the  extensive  margin  would  have  fallen  ;  if
the  price  per  unit  fell,  labour  at  F,  unable  to  subsist  according  to
its  accepted  standard,  would  tend  to  seek  other  employment,  and
the  margin  would  stand  at  E.

If  instead  of  labourers  we  say  machines,  the  same  law  holds
good.  It  is  the  price  per  unit  of  capital-power  in  relation  to  the
differential  productivity  of  the  various  sorts  of  machine  that  will
determine  what  is  the  worst  sort  in  actual  use.  The  real  buying
of  use  of  capital  is  by  units.  If  a  machine  of  five-unit  power  is  just
kept  in  use,  it  is  because  the  price  per  unit  just  furnishes  a  wear-
and-tear  payment  and  minimum  interest  ;  if  a  great  new  demand,
raising  price  per  unit,  makes  it  pay  either  to  employ  some  anti-
quated machines  worth  only  four  units  which  had  fallen  out  of  use,
or  to  incur  the  expense  or  risk  of  embarking  in  some  new  machines
of  dubious  value,  which  likewise  lie  below  the  present  margin  of
employment,  the  capital  margin  will  fall  to  four.  A  fall  in  price
per  unit  will  conversely  throw  out  of  use  the  five-unit  machines  at
F,  raising  the  capital  margin  to  E.

The  case  of  acres  of  land  and  their  payment  is  not  different.  It
is  true  that  the  limitation  of  supply  of  acres  at  different  levels  of
efficiency  is  natural,  and  is  not  directly  determined  by  the  will  and
needs  of  man,  as  in  the  case  of  labour  and  capital,  but  the  deter-
mination of  the  margin  is  the  same.  It  is  fixed  at  five-unit  acres
or  F,  because  the  price  per  unit  makes  it  just  more  profitable  for
some  F  acres  to  apply  themselves  to  this  use  than  to  some  other
use  that  is  available  :  G  acres  are  below  the  margin,  either  because
they  have  some  other  use  for  which  they  are  more  productive,  or


WAGES,  INTEREST,  AND  RENT  loi

where  their  units  of  productivity  eommand  a  higher  price,  or  else
because  the  '  wear-and-tear  '  fund  would  absorb  the  whole  price  of
four  units,  i.e.  because  they  have  no  true  economic  rent.

In  each  case  the  margin  is  seen  to  be  determined  by,  and  runs
and  falls  according  to,  the  price  per  unit  of  productive-power.

If  a  rise  or  fall  of  price  per  unit  of  productive-powder  must  always
and  only  operate  by  raising  or  lowering  the  margin  of  employment,
in  the  sense  of  bringing  in  or  putting  out  of  supply  acres,  men,  or
machines  at  the  bottom  of  the  supply,  this  diagram  would  do  all
that  is  wanted  in  the  way  of  illustration.

But  the  changes  in  supply  are  not  solely  effected  at  this  lower
margin.  If  the  price  per  unit  of  wheat -growing  power  should  rise,
it  may  operate  not  only  or  not  chiefly  by  bringing  into  use  acres
worse  for  wheat-growing  than  the  worst  previously  in  use  :  it  may
divert  from  some  other  use  into  wheat-growing  better  land,  pro-
ducing not  four  units  per  acre,  but  perhaps  ten  or  nine  units,  thus
adding  to  the  supply  of  the  most  productive  acres.  The  same  holds
of  labour  and  of  capital.  A  rise  in  the  price  of  labour-power  in
Lancashire  coal  mines  might  bring  into  the  supply  not  only  rem-
nants of  the  local  rural  population,  already  weakened  by  the  migra-
tion of  their  most  vigorous  members,  but  new  drafts  of  powerful
Irish  labourers  from  Connemara,  feeding  the  supply  not  by  lowering
the  margin  from  five  units  to  four,  but  by  bringing  in,  say,  eight-
unit  labourers.  So  likewise  with  the  machinery,  which  we  take  as
representative  of  capital.  A  rise  in  price  per  unit  of  this  industrial
power  mav  not  only  for  a  while  bring  back  into  use  some  old  and
disused  machines,  but  will  lead  to  the  increased  application  of  the
best  machines.  Indeed,  it  is  evident  that  this  will  be  the  more
normal  effect  in  the  case  of  capital.  Similarly,  a  fall  in  price  per
unit  of  productive-power  may  not  operate  chiefly  by  driving  out
of  employment  the  worst  portion  of  supply,  but  by  driving  some
better  portions  into  other  uses.

Finally,  a  rise  or  fall  of  price  per  unit  of  land,  labour,  or  capital
may  operate,  not  to  bring  into  use  new  acres,  men,  or  machines,  or
to  put  out  of  use  some  of  those  already  in  use,  whether  upon  the
margin  or  at  some  higher  grade,  but  to  evoke  more  units  of  produc-
tivity from  existing  factors.  Instead  of  bringing  in  new  acres,  an
intenser  use  of  existing  acres  may  be  evoked  ;  overtime  or  speeding
up  may  be  applied  to  men  and  to  machines,  so  that  out  of  those  in
use  a  larger  number  of  units  per  man  or  per  machine  may  be  got.
This  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  lowering  the  intensive  margin  of
employment.

§  8. — The  advantages  of  adopting  what  we  term  the  '  unitary  '
method  of measurement are  now  apparent. It  enables  us to


102  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

distinguish  the  three  several  ways  in  which,  by  means  of  a  change
in  the  price  of  industrial  power,  the  supply  of  factors  of  produc-
tion is  changed,  and  to  recognise  that  the  method  of  controlling
the  supply  in  the  case  of  the  three  factors  is  identical.

It  also  enables  us  to  get  rid  of  certain  misconceptions  which
sometimes  arise  as  to  the  part  played  by  the  so-called  '  marginal
factors  '  of  supply  in  determining  the  price  of  the  whole  supply.
The  only  sense  in  which  the  worst  acres  of  land,  or  the  worst  workers,
or  the  worst  machines  can  be  said  to  '  determine '  the  price  per  unit
of  these  several  factors  of  production  is  that  this  price  is,  and  must
be,  just  enough  to  evoke  their  use.  The  same  is  true  if  we  take
the  '  intensive  margin ' :  the  price  paid  must  be  just  enough  to  evoke
the  most  intensive  or  expensive  use  of  the  existing  acres,  labourers,
or  machines.  But  this  does  not  imply  that  the  marginal  factors
exercise  any  special  determinant  influence  as  '  causes  '  of  the  price.
The  price  per  unit  of  each  sort  of  industrial  power  is  '  caused  '  or
'  brought  about  '  by  a  variety  of  forces  of  demand  and  of  supply,
in  which  the  marginal  factors  play  no  appreciable  part.  How  can
they  ?  How  is  it  possible  to  say  that  the  five-unit  acres,  men  and
machines,'  determine  '  in  the  way  of  causing  the  price  of  a  unit  to
be  so  much,  when  we  perceive  that  the  price  of  the  unit  has  directly
caused  these  five-unit  factors,  and  not  four-unit  or  six-unit  factors,  to
be  marginal  ?  It  is  far  more  accurate  to  say  that  the  price  per  unit
causes  the  margin  to  be  where  it  is,  than  to  attribute  any  causative
power  to  the  margin,  as  margin,  in  relation  to  the  price  per  unit.

It  is  quite  true  that  the  amount  of  five-unit  land  or  five-unit
labour  available  will  have  some  effect  in  causing  the  price  per  unit
to  be  what  it  is,  but  it  will  have  no  more  effect  than  that  which
belongs  to  other  better  land  or  labour,  its  effect  being  only  propor-
tionate to  the  part  it  plays  in  the  whole  suppl}'-,  and  having  no
relation  to  its  marginal  character.  In  a  word,  prices  determine
(causatively)  margins — margins  do  not  determine  prices.  The  fact
that  the  price  per  unit  must  be  just  such  as  to  remunerate  sufficiently
the  worst  extensive  or  intensive  power  in  use,  whether  of  land,
labour,  or  capital,  does  not  justify  us  in  assigning  any  special  place
to  these  marginal  factors  in  our  law  of  distribution  of  the  product.
The  grave  abuses  which  have  arisen  from  an  attempt  to  erect  a
theory  of  the  distribution  of  the  product  upon  a  basis  of  marginal
causation  are  discussed  in  the  Appendix  to  this  chapter.

Applying,  then,  in  conclusion,  the  fundamental  distinction
between  costs  and  unproductive  surplus  to  the  several  factors  of
production,  we  shall  insist  in  applying  it  to  the  units  of  supply,  and
not  to  the  particular  acres  or  men  or  machines  that  give  out  these
units. In other  words, we  neglect what are  sometimes  called


WAGES,  INTEREST.  AND  RENT  103

'  differential  rents '  of  land,  or  of  ability  or  efficiency,  which  make
and  measure  the  superiority  of  the  better  over  the  worst  acres,  the
better  workers  or  machines  over  the  worst,  because  these  measure-
ments are  really  irrelevant  to  the  statement  of  a  law  of  distribution.
Of  coarse  an  acre  that  gives  out  twice  as  much  productive-power
as  another  acre  gets  twice  as  much  payment  in  rent  ;  of  course  a
worker  who  gives  out  twice  as  much  labour-power  as  another  gets
double  his  piece  wages.  This  obvious  consideration  can  throw  no
light  upon  any  principle  or  law  apportioning  the  product  among
the  several  members  of  the  several  factors.

The  real  issue  with  which  a  theory  of  distribution  is  concerned
is  to  discover  and  define  the  forces  which  determine  what  shall  be
the  respective  payments  per  unit  for  the  various  sorts  of  productive-
power  given  out  b}'  the  several  factors  of  production.  It  is  the
composition  of  the  payment  for  these  units  that  matters  for  pur-
poses of  industrial  progress  :  for  the  analv?is  of  these  pavments
discloses  the  use  or  abuse  of  the  surplus,  its  productive  apphcation
as  a  food  and  stimulus  of  progress,  or  its  unproductive  application
as  an  '  unearned  '  element  of  income  checking  industry  and  robbing
some  other  factor  of  its  stimulus.

Given  the  payment  per  unit  of  land-power  or  labour-power,  the
difference  in  rent  between  one  acre  and  another,  one  worker  and
another,  follows  from  a  simple  'rule  of  thumb,'  and  exercises  no
influences  whatever  upon  the  theory  or  the  practice  of  distribution
of  wealth.  No  one  would  think  of  suggesting  that  the  fact  that
twice  as  much  money  is  paid  for  two  bushels  of  wheat  as  for  one
has  any  influence  in  determining  the  price  of  wheat ;  why,  then,
should  the  fact  that  an  acre  yielding  forty  bushels  is  i)aid  twice  the
rent  paid  for  an  acre  yielding  twenty  bushels,  be  considered  to  have
any  '  determinant '  influence  on  the  price  of  the  use  of  land  ?
The  fact  that  there  are  various  qualities  of  land  or  labour,  that  some
is  better,  some  worse,  some  worst,  and  that  each  acre  or  man  is
remunerated  according  to  his  or  its  quality,  is  a  detail  of  book-
keeping for  agriculturalists  and  manufacturers,  not  a  '  law  '  or
'  principle  '  of  economic  science.

§9. — Having  examined  the  chief  conditions  under  which  indus-
trial power,  proceeding  respectively  from  labour,  capital,  and  land,
is  sold,  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  the  relation  of  the
three  sorts  of  power  as  expenses  of  production,  and  to  state  a
common  law  of  remuneration.

Every  stock  of  commodities  represents  the  application  of  a
number  of  units  of  these  different  sorts  of  power  working  together
in  organised  co-operation.  This  organised  co-operation  is  conducted
by  the  directive  energy  of  a  business  man,  an  entrepreneur. How


104  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

far  this  directive  energy  can  be  treated  as  a  productive-power,
reducible  to  the  same  standard  as  the  other  factors,  and  evoked
and  remunerated  in  accordance  with  the  same  laws,  is  a  question
which  is  deferred  for  separate  and  closer  consideration.  Here  we  are
concerned  with  tracing  the  common  part  played  by  labour,  capital,
and  land  as  concrete  powers  entering  into  a  stock  of  commodities.

Taking  any  such  stock  of  shoes,  cotton  cloth,  or  motor-cars,  we
find  it  contains  the  use  of  so  many  units  of  labour-power,  capital-
power,  and  land-power  respectively,  that  the  price  of  these  several
sorts  of  units  enters  as  expenses  of  production  into  the  price  paid
for  the  commodities,  and  is  paid  out  to  the  owners  of  the  several
factors  of  production,  according  as  the  money  which  purchases  the
commodities  passes  down  the  '  system,'  and  is  broken  into  separate
payments  (income)  at  the  various  stages  of  production.

The  first  set  of  payments  consisted  of  those  required  to  produce
and  maintain  all  parts  of  the  existing  fabric  of  industr3^ — a  main-
tenance fund.  The  product  which  remained  after  these  payments
were  provided  was  termed  the  '  surplus.'  A  portion  of  this  surplus
is  '  productive,'  inasmuch  as  it  is  distributed  so  as  to  evoke  an
increased  size  and  improved  character  of  industry.  In  a  progres-
sive industrial  society  both  of  these  sets  of  payments  rank  as  costs
of  production.  The  rest  of  the  surplus,  economic  rent  of  land,
excessive  interest,  profit,  salaries,  or  wages,  is  '  unproductive  '  :  it
evokes  no  efficiency.

Now  in  dealing  with  the  terms  upon  which  owners  of  the  factors
sold  the  use  of  labour,  capital,  or  land,  we  saw  that  certain  pay-
ments were  economically  necessary  in  the  sense  that  they  were
required  to  support  some  human  effort  of  production,  but  that
further  payments  might  be  obtained  by  the  owner  of  any  factor
whose  use  was  indispensable  and  short  in  supply.

It  is,  however,  important  here  to  recognise  that  these  surplus
payments,  whether  stimulative  or  wasteful,  are  in  a  given  condition
of  industry  as  '  necessary  '  as  the  others,  in  the  sense  that  they
'  must '  be  paid.  They  all  rest,  as  we  have  seen,  upon  the  relative
scarcity  or  shortage,  natural  or  contrived,  of  some  sort  of  industrial
power  which  must  be  bought  from  its  owners.  Although  the  owner
of  land  in  the  centre  of  a  city  would  sell  its  use  for  is.  per  acre  per
annum  if  he  could  not  get  more,  he  must  be  paid  jTioo  per  acre
because  there  is  a  very  small  supply.  If,  owing  to  some  great
improvement  of  transport,  a  quantity  of  other  land  were  made
equally  desirable  for  business  and  residence,  the  £ioo  might  drop
to  £50  or  £20  without  causing  any  owner  to  withdraw  his  land  for
its  former  use  ;  the  landowner  would  consent  to  take  a  lower  rent,
and  this  '  expense  of  production  '  would  fall,  the  '  surplus  '  or  excess


WAGES.  INTEREST.  AND  RENT  105

being  squeezed  out.  But  so  long  as  the  '  scarcity  '  remains,  the
high  rent  is  '  necessary.'

So  likewise  with  certain  concrete  forms  of  capital  which,  under
special  circumstances,  may  obtain  real  interest  far  above  what  is
necessary  to  induce  saving  persons  to  create  these  forms  of  capital.
The  possession  of  a  patent  or  a  secret  process,  or  some  superior
access  to  raw  materials,  or  to  the  market,  may  enable  the  owner  of
such  real  capital,  by  restricting  its  supply,  to  obtain  a  rate  of  interest
far  above  that  which  he  would  consent  to  take  if  he  could  not  get
more.  This  is  best  illustrated  by  the  power  which  the  Linotype
Company,  or  the  American  Boot  and  Shoe  Corporation,  have  been
able  to  exert  through  royalties,  or  by  the  high  interest  secured  by
the  Standard  Oil  and  certain  other  American  Trusts.  Wherever
limitation  of  output  can  successfully  be  maintained,  the  concrete
capital  in  a  business  can  obtain  a  '  surplus '  interest.  So  long
as  the  conditions  supporting  this  scarcity  hold,  this  surplus  expense
must  rank  as  a  necessary  payment,  and  enters  into  the  price  of  the
commodities.  But  its  necessity  having  no  *  natural '  basis  in  human
stimulus  to  effort,  may  be  overthrown  at  any  moment  by  some  new
invention,  or  lapse  of  patent,  or  by  some  other  change  in  the  shape
of  an  enlargement  of  supply.

Similarly  with  labour-power.  Whenever  a  professional  or  trade
organisation  can  secure  a  close  preserve  for  the  sale  of  such  human
skill  or  effort,  a  '  scarcity  '  or  unearned  element  may  be  added  to
the  efficiency  wage  in  fees,  salaries,  and  wages.

Apart  from  the  causes  of  scarcity  here  named,  a  sudden  pressure
of  demand  for  some  class  of  commodities,  or  failure  in  some  source
of  supply,  may  place  the  owners  of  some  factor  of  production  in  a
position  to  claim  a  scarcity  price,  which  for  the  time  being  will
rank  as  a  necessary  payment.

They  are  necessary  payments,  or  expenses  of  production,  in  so
much  as  the  owners  of  the  factors  of  production  for  whose  use  they
are  paid  can  extort  them  from  those  who  need  these  factors.  They
are  unnecessary  payments  in  the  sense  that,  if  any  change  in
economic  circumstances  caused  them  to  be  withheld,  this  with-
holding would  not  cause  their  owners  to  refuse  the  use  of  them.

They  are  also  unnecessary  in  the  sense  that,  after  they  have  been
paid,  they  can  be  taken  in  taxation  without  any  disturbance  of  the
industrial  use  of  the  factor  of  which  they  rank  as  surplus  payment.!

'  Economists  have  often  distinguished  the  several  payments  here  grouped
under  surplus  as  rents  and  quasi-rents,  and  have  usually  excluded  them  from
ranking  as  expenses  of  production  or  as  '  entering  '  into  price.  But  following
their  actual  emergence,  persistence,  and  disappearance  in  industrial  history,
we  can  recognise  no  advantage  in  distinguishing  rents  from  quasi-rents.
Some  of  the  elements  of  surplus  are  more  stable  and  more  enduring  than


io6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

APPENDIX

MARGINAL PRODUCTIVITY AS BASIS OF DISTRIBUTION

Our  analysis  has  shown  that,  in  any  industrial  system  where  the
total  product  only  just  sufficed  to  furnish  wear-and-tear  funds  for
the  maintenance  of  the  several  factors  of  production,  no  problem
of  distribution  need  arise.  In  such  a  system  it  might  be  fairly  held
that  each  factor,  and  even  each  unit  of  each  factor,  received  in
payment  the  value  of  what  it  produced.  Indeed,  if  value  were
measured,  as  it  reasonably  might  be,  by  expenditure  of  energy,  the
statement  that  each  factor,  in  receiving  as  payment  its  wage  of
maintenance,  was  receiving  the  value  of  its  product,  would  be  an
identical  proposition.

But  where  in  an  industrial  system  a  surplus  is  produced  over
and  above  the  necessary  expenses  of  maintenance,  can  it  be  con-
tended that  the  distribution  of  the  entire  product  tends  to  be  such
that  each  factor  receives  the  value  of  what  it  has  produced  ?  Or
if  each  factor  does  receive  '  the  value  of  what  it  has  produced,'  does
this  mean  anything  more  than  that  each  factor  receives  what  it  can
get?

Within  the  last  few  years  American  and  English  economists
have  built  up  among  them  a  theory  of  distribution  by  marginal
productivity  according  to  which  each  unit  of  each  factor  of  pro-
duction tends  to  get,  and  normally  does  get,  the  value  of  its  separate
contribution  to  the  product.

In  discussing  the  validity  of  this  theory  it  will  be  best  first  to
approach  it  as  a  wage  theory,  because  it  is  in  that  form  that  it  has
been  most  fully  evolved  and  has  drawn  most  attention.

Since  this  doctrine  owes  its  fullest  development  to  Professor
J.  B.  Clark,  of  Columbia  University,  it  may  be  best  to  set  it  forth
as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  form  it  takes  in  his  latest  work,
'  Essentials  of  Economic  Theory  '  (Macmillan  and  Co.,  1908).

If  we  were  to  take  a  quantity  of  capital  capable  of  effective  co-
operation with  a  number  of  units  of  labour,  and  were  to  use  it  all
in  conjunction  with  one  unit  of  labour,  i.e.  a  small  group  of  workers,
this  labour  would  be  so  flushed  with  assistance  from  capital  that  it
would  turn  out  a  very  large  product  per  man. If  a  second  unit  of

others,  being  grounded  upon  some  '  scarcity  '  which  is  more  difficult  to  over-
come;  but,  so  long  as  they  exist,  they  play  the  same  part  in  distribution,
enabling  their  owners  to  get  a  gain  which  furnishes  no  stimulus  to  economic
activity.  Our  setting  of  the  sale  of  factors  of  production  in  terms  of  a
standard  unit  disposes  of  the  fallacious  reasoning  by  which  it  was  argued
that  rent  does  not  enter  into  expenses  of  production.  Of  course  differential
rent  does  not ;  but  scarcity  rents  do.


MARGINAL  PRODUCTIVITY  107

labour  were  added  to  the  same  quantity  of  capital,  the  amount  of
capital  would  still  be  so  ample  that  the  product  would  be  very  large,
though  somewhat  less  than  twice  as  large  as  it  was  before.  Add
a  third  and  a  fourth  unit  of  labour,  and  though  the  capital  is  still
abundant,  the  product  added  by  the  third  unit  is  less  than  that
added  by  the  second,  and  that  added  by  the  fourth  less  than  that
added  by  the  third.

'  If  we  continue  this  process  until  we  have  ten  units  of  labour,
employing  the  same  amount  of  capital  as  was  formerly  used  by
one,  we  shall  find  that  each  unit  as  it  begins  to  work  adds  less  to
the  previous  product  than  did  the  unit  which  preceded  it,  and  that
the  tenth  adds  the  least  of  all  '  (p.  137).

The  owner  of  the  capital  will  evidently  go  on  adding  units  of
labour  until  he  finds  that  the  last  unit  added  only  just  increases
the  product  by  the  amount  which  he  must  pay  in  wages  in  order  to
induce  this  unit  of  labour  to  prefer  this  employment  to  any  other
that  was  available.  In  a  word,  this  is  marginal  labour  which  it  is
only  just  worth  employing.  It  will  receive  in  wages  just  what  it
is  worth,  the  value  of  the  product  its  co-operation  adds.  But  if
the  last  or  marginal  unit  of  labour  receives  in  wages  just  what
it  produces,  so  must  the  other  nine  units  :  for,  when  the  ten  are
together  co-operating  with  the  same  lot  of  capital,  each  of  the  ten  is
producing  the  same  amount  of  the  product  and  receiving  the  same
remuneration.  Therefore  this  labour  force  as  a  whole,  and  each
unit  of  it,  receive  their  full  product,  neither  more  nor  less.

Now  the  theoretical  and  practical  validity  of  this  theory  hinges
upon  the  mode  of  measuring  the  productivit}^  of  the  marginal  or
any  other  single  unit. Here  is  Professor  Clark's  method  :—

'  How,  then,  do  we  measure  the  true  product  of  a  single  unit  of
labour  ?  By  withdrawing  that  unit,  letting  the  industry  go  by  the
aid  of  all  the  capital  and  one  unit  of  labour  the  less.  Whatever
one  of  the  ten  units  of  labour  we  take  away,  we  leave  only  nine
working.  If  the  forms  of  the  capital  change  so  as  to  allow  the  nine
units  to  use  it  advantageously,  the  product  will  not  be  reduced  to
nine-tenths  of  its  former  size,  but  it  will  still  be  reduced  :  and  the
amount  of  the  diminution  measures  the  amount  of  product  that
can  be  attributed  to  one  unit  of  bare  labour.  Or  we  may  add  a
certain  number  of  workmen  to  a  social  force  already  at  work,
making  no  change  in  the  amount  of  the  capital — though  changing
its  forms — and  see  how  much  additional  product  we  get.  That
also  is  a  test  of  final  productivity  '  (p.  140).

Now  is  it  correct  to  attribute  as  the  exclusive  and  separate  pro-
duct of  one  unit  of  bare  labour  that  diminution  in  the  aggregate
product  which  follows  its  withdrawal,  or  that  addition  to  the  former


io8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

aggregate  product  which  follows  its  accession  ?  If  the  tenth  unit
of  '  bare  labour  '  is  withdrawn,  we  are  to  suppose  that  each  of  the
nine  units  of  '  bare  labour  '  that  is  left  thereby  becomes  more  pro-
ductive than  before.  Now  we  know  that  what  really  happens  is
that  each  of  these  nine  units  is  not  more  productive,  as  '  bare
labour,'  but  because  by  the  removal  of  the  tenth  labour  unit  it  gets
a  fuller  use  of  capital.  It  is  quite  clear  that  what  is  added  to  the
product  by  the  entrance  of  the  tenth  unit  of  labour,  and  what  is
lost  by  its  exit,  is  not  the  measure  of  the  *  bare  productivity '  of
that  unit,  but  of  the  difference  in  the  aggregate  productivity  of  the
whole  complex  of  units  of  capital  and  labour.  In  other  words,  the
separatist  treatment  of  productivity  breaks  down  :  even  if  it  is
possible  to  attribute  a  separate  productivity  to  the  marginal  unit
co-operating  with  the  other  units  of  labour  and  the  units  of  capital,
that  productivity  could  not  be  measured  by  the  difference  made  to
the  productivity  of  the  whole  complex  by  its  withdrawal  or  entrance.

A  very  simple  instance  of  a  co-operative  group  of  labourers,  in
a  business  where  the  capital  element  may  be  ignored,  will  serve  to
expose  the  fallacy.  In  a  primitive  fishery  let  us  say  that  one  man
fishing  alone  could  make  a  catch  of  ten  ;  a  two-man  group  a  catch
of  twenty-two  ;  a  three-man  group  of  thirty-seven  ;  a  four-man
group  of  sixty  ;  a  five-man  group  of  seventy-two.  Here  a  four-
man  group  is  evidently  the  most  advantageous,  and  that  fishery
would  be  worked  upon  this  basis.  Now  in  this  business  the  fourth
man  ranks  as  the  marginal  worker.  His  presence  or  his  withdrawal
from  the  group  makes  a  difference  of  twenty-three  fish,  i.e.  the
difference  between  thirty-seven  and  sixty.  Is  that  to  be  taken  as
representing  his  separate  product  ?  It  ought,  upon  the  lines  of
Professor  Clark's  reasoning.  But  it  cannot  be  so  taken.  For  the
fourth  fisher  is  no  more  productive  than  the  other  three,  and  if  the
fourth  fisher's  product  is  twenty-three,  the  product  of  all  four
together  must  be  ninety-two.  But,  as  we  saw,  it  was  sixty.  His
so-called  separate  product,  therefore,  must  be  fifteen,  and  not
twenty-three.  It  is  impossible  to  take  what  his  presence  adds,  or
his  absence  from  the  group  removes,  as  measuring  his  individual
productivity  or  as  determining  his  wage.

But,  though  Professor  Clark's  tests  of  marginal  productivity
evidently  break  down,  it  may  be  contended  that  the  principle  still
holds  good.  The  marginal  productivity  of  labour  in  the  fishing,  it
may  be  said,  is  fifteen  fish,  not  twenty-three.  But  there  is  evidently
no  '  marginal '  determination  in  the  matter.  The  fact  is  that  fifteen
is  the  average  productivity  of  a  unit  of  labour  where  labour  is
arranged  in  this  most  advantageous  grouping.  Neither  in  theory  nor
in  practice  does  the  margin  determine  productivity. The  fishermen


MARGINAL  PRODUCTIVITY  109

say,  '  A  five-man  group  is  better  than  a  four-  or  six-man  group,'
not  because  of  the  productivity  of  any  single  man,  '  marginal '  or
other,  but  because  they  know  that  this  co-operation  is  the  most
productive.

So  with  the  case  of  the  '  marginal  shepherd,'  the  tenth  man
whom  a  farmer  calculates  it  is  just  worth  his  while  to  employ  because
he  can  get  him  for  the  price  of  twenty  sheep  a  year,  and  he  will
just  save  that  number  by  his  work.  Of  course  no  farmer  really
plans  his  farm  this  way.  If  he  comes  to  employ  ten  shepherds
instead  of  nine  or  eleven,  it  is  because  he  reckons  that  ten  will  give
the  best  division  of  labour,  and  will,  as  a  co-operative  whole,  enable
him  to  get  the  most  out  of  his  farm.  If  the  employment  of  a  tenth
shepherd  means  twenty  more  sheep  per  annum  than  the  employ-
ment of  nine,  it  cannot  be  maintained  that  twenty  sheep  form  the
separate  product  of  the  tenth  shepherd,  but  only  that  a  ten  group
is  more  productive  by  twenty  sheep  than  a  nine  group.

It  certainly  does  not  follow  that  twenty  sheep  can  be  said  to
represent  a  single  shepherd's  product  in  a  ten-man  farm,  and  that
there  is  any  tendency  in  a  wage  law  of  marginal  productivity  to
assign  twenty  sheep  or  their  value  as  the  shepherd's  wage.  For
there  may  not  be  as  many  as  200  sheep  to  divide,  without  reckoning
any  for  the  interest  or  profit  of  the  farmer  himself.  A  nine-man
farm  may  only  yield  140  sheep,  so  that  when  the  tenth  man  is  added
there  are  160  sheep,  which,  equally  divided  as  product  or  as  wages,
would  give  only  sixteen  sheep  per  man,  not  the  twenty  which  the
presence  of  the  tenth  man  seemed  to  add.  That  an  eleventh  man
is  not  taken  on  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  ten  men  form  so  nearly
the  full  complement  of  labour  required  for  the  effective  working  of
the  farm,  that  an  eleventh  would  only  add  five  sheep,  whereas
every  potential  shepherd  has  an  alternative  employment  worth  a
wage  of  twelve  sheep.

It  is  thus  quite  evident  that  adding  doses  of  labour  and  noting
the  increase  of  the  aggregate  product  throws  no  serviceable  light
upon  the  determination  of  wages.  The  so-called  marginal  dose,
with  its  so-called  separate  product,  is  only  intelligible  when
regarded  as  an  average  dose  in  a  fully  equipped  farm,  factory,  shop,
or  other  business  :  no  separate  dose  has  any  separate  product,  and
the  only  method  of  assigning  to  it  any  product  is  to  divide  the
whole  product  equally  among  the  constituent  labour  units,  as  if  it
represented  the  mere  addition  of  their  individual  productivity
instead  of  their  joint  co-operative  productivity.

In  setting  out  the  problem  of  the  sheep-farm,  the  only  valid
method  runs  thus  : —


no  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

In  a  farm  worked  by  an  eight  group  the  yield  is  (say)

125,  or  i5f  per  man
„  ,,  a  nine  group  the  yield  is  (say)

140,  or  I5f  per  man
,,  ,,  a  ten  group . 160,  or  16 per  man

,,  ,,  an  eleven  group  . 165,  or  15 per  man

In  other  words,  the  so-called  final  or  marginal  productivity
turns  out  to  be  nothing  other  than  an  average  productivity  which
varies  with  the  efficiency  of  the  group,  and  really  measures  that
efficiency,  splitting  it  up  and  imputing  it  in  equal  proportions  to
the  constituent  members.  The  whole  notion  that  there  is  a
marginal  increment,  or  that  it  produces  a  special  product,  or  that
it  plays  any  special  part  in  determining  wages  for  members  of  the
group,  is  entirely  fallacious.

But  supposing  we  substitute  the  average  productivity  per  unit
of  labour  in  the  most  effective  grouping  for  marginal  productivity,
are  we  any  nearer  a  law  of  wages  ?  Is  there  any  reason  to  hold
that  the  ten  shepherds  in  the  fully  equipped  farm  will  get  in  wages
(not  the  twenty  sheep  of  the  '  marginal '  shepherd,  for  that  is  impos-
sible !)  the  sixteen  sheep  which  are  said  to  measure  their  average
productivity  ?  Setting  aside  the  question  of  the  farmer's  interest
or  capital,  which  we  will  suppose  already  accounted  for  in  extra
sheep  or  otherwise,  is  there  any  law  which  will  tend  to  secure  the
wage  of  sixteen  sheep  for  each  shepherd  ?  Yes,  upon  one  suppo-
sition, viz.  that  there  is  a  larger  proportionate  number  of  farmers
freely  competing  for  shepherds  than  there  is  of  shepherds  competing
for  farming  jobs.  If  farmers  can  afford  to  pay  sixteen  sheep  as
wages  (having  already  secured  their  other  expenses,  including  nor-
mal interest  and  profit),  they  may  be  compelled  to  do  so,  provided
that  shepherds  are  short  in  supply,  i.e.  if  there  are  more  offers
at  sixteen  than  there  are  applicants  at  that  wage.  In  that  event
the  average  shepherd  gets  as  wages  what  has  been  regarded  as  his
full  productivity.  If,  however,  there  is  fuller  and  more  genuine
competition  among  shepherds  than  among  farmers  for  jobs  at
sixteen  sheep,  the  actual  rate  of  pay  will  be  less  than  sixteen,
say  fourteen.  If  the  alternate  work  open  to  a  shepherd,  e.g.  as
a  separate  squatter,  is  worth  twelve  sheep,  it  may  take  a  wage
of  fourteen  sheep  to  draw  a  requisite  number  of  shepherds  into
hired  service.

In  other  words,  the  so-called  separate  productivity  of  the  worker
furnishes  the  upper  limit  of  his  possible  wages,  as  the  conditions  of
alternative  employment  open  to  him  furnish  a  lower  limit.  Whether
his  actual  wages  approaches  the  higher  or  the  lower  limit  is  a  matter


MARGINAL  PRODUCTIVITY  iii

of  the  relative  effectiveness  of  competition  among  employers  on  the
one  hand,  and  workers  on  the  other.

It  is  no  doubt  true  that,  if  possible  shepherds  had  not  one
alternative  occupation  at  twelve  sheep  value,  but  a  great  number
of  different  alternatives,  some  of  which  were  worth  anything  up  to
sixteen  sheep,  with  no  unemployed  margin,  they  would  get  as  wage
their  '  full  productivity,'  provided  always  there  was  such  freedom
and  abundance  of  competing  capital  in  all  emiployments  as  allowed
the  payment  of  this  wage.  As  we  shall  see,  such  absolute  fluidity
of  competition  would  bring  together  to  a  single  point  the  upper  and
the  lower  limits  in  a  price  bargain.  This  brings  us  to  the  real
underlying  assumption  of  the  '  marginal  determinants.'  We  have,
so  far,  treated  it  as  a  wage  theory.  But  its  adherents  claim  that
the  remuneration  of  capital  and  of  ability  is  equally,  or  at  least
substantially,  determined  in  the  same  way  by  the  productivity  of
marginal  units.  The  same  criticism  we  have  applied  to  the  marginal
method  of  measuring  the  productivity  of  labour,  of  course  applies
to  capital :  the  productivity  of  the  last  dose  of  capital  is  not  a
separate  or  separable  amount,  but  can  only  be  treated  as  a  fraction
of  the  productivity  of  the  entire  complex  of  co-operative  units  of
capital.  So  with  ability,  or  any  other  productive-power  which  is
broken  into  units.  It  is  not  even  true  that  there  is  any  theoretical
or  practical  method  of  determining  the  separate  productivity  of  the
whole  aggregate  of  capital,  or  of  labour,  or  of  ability,  in  a  business
in  which  all  the  units  of  all  these  factors  are  functioning  in  organic
co-operation.  We  can,  and  do,  only  determine  what  must  under
the  circumstances  be  paid  to  the  owners  of  each  factor  for  an
average  unit,  not  what  this  factor,  still  less  each  separate  unit,
actually  produces.

There  is  only  one  industrial  phenomenon  which  appears  to  give
importance  to  operations  of  margins.  In  our  investigation  we  have
seen  that,  so  far  from  the  supply  of  any  marginal  factor  having  any
special  determinant  influence  on  the  price  of  that  factor,  the  oppo-
site is  the  case  :  the  complex  of  forces  which,  through  supply  and
demand,  determines  the  price  per  unit  of  each  factor,  determines  the
margin  ;  with  a  rise  or  fall  of  this  price  the  margin  (extensive  or
intensive)  rises  or  falls.  With  each  rise  or  fall  of  a  margin  there  is
an  actual  or  potential  transfer  of  some  factor — labour,  capital,  land,
ability — from  one  trade  to  another,  from  one  business  in  a  trade  to
another  business,  from  one  department  in  a  business  to  another
department,  and  so  forth.  Not  only  the  new  supply  of  labour  and
of  capital  seeks  its  employment  in  the  most  remunerative  and,  on
the  whole,  the  most  productive  occupations,  but  each  rise  or  fall  of
price  of  capital  or  labour  tempts  some  of  these  factors  from  one


112  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

occupation  to  another.  So  as  between  trade  and  trade,  business
and  business,  the  apportionment  of  the  factors  is  conducted  by  a
levelling  process,  which  is  most  conveniently  watched  and  measured
from  the  lower  limits.  A  rise  in  price  of  wheat  brings  new  land
into  cultivation,  just  not  worth  cultivating  before  :  here  is  a  mar-
ginal movement  which  rightly  draws  attention.  The  opening  of  a
new  mine  draws  off  spare  labour  from  the  country  villages.  An
expansion  of  electrical  development  draws  off  some  ability  from
civil  or  mechanical  into  electrical  engineering,  and  some  capital
that  otherwise  was  destined  for  other  industrial  uses.  As  such
movements  are  naturally  regarded  as  taking  place  at  the  bottom,
in  the  sense  that  the  new  factors  as  they  enter  take  the  least  advan-
tageous places,  so  the  mechanics  of  the  procedure  is  visualised  in
margins.

But  any  special  causative  or  determinative  importance  given  to
margins  is  quite  unwarranted.

Regarded  as  a  theory  of  distribution  of  the  product,  the  mar-
ginal productivity  theory  is  a  misapplication  of  an  unsound  and
unprofitable  assumption.

The  assumption  is  that  we  may  profitably  treat  the  industrial
system  as  composed  of  factors  of  production,  infinite  in  quantity
and  absolutely  fluid  and  competitive  in  character,  afterwards
making  some  allowance  for  their  not  being  what  we  have  supposed
them  to  be.

If  all  the  labourers  in  a  community  had  full  knowledge  of  their
capacities,  full  power  to  educate  them,  full  knowledge  of  every
labour  market,  full  freedom  to  enter  any,  full  access  to  the  ranks
of  the  employers  in  case  they  had  ability,  and  to  the  requisite
capital  or  credit ;  if  all  capital  were  equally  free  to  dispose  itself  to
the  best  advantage,  and  the  owners  of  land  and  ability  were  equally
free  and  intelligent — in  that  event  the  whole  of  the  industrial  power
would  organise  itself  in  business  units  of  the  most  productive  size
and  character  in  the  several  industries.  Freedom  to  pass  from  the
employed  to  the  employing  class  would  perfectly  secure  the  former
from  exploitation  by  the  latter,  wages  of  ability,  profits,  or  what-
ever term  weie  used,  being  reduced  to  a  common  level  of  produc-
tivity and  of  payment  with  wages  throughout  the  whole  of  industry,
as  they  are  even  now  approximately  in  an  East-end  sweating  den.
Wages  would  measure  accurately  the  net  cost  in  painful  effort  of  an
average  unit  of  the  different  sorts  of  labour  ;  real  interest  would
stand  at  the  same  level  for  all  uses  of  capital.  '  Rents  '  of  individual
energy,  measuring  super-normal  output  of  energy  or  skill,  would  still
survive.  In  such  an  industrial  society  distribution  might  be  said
to  be  effected  in  strict  accordance  with  productivity,  every  unit  of


MARGINAL  PRODUCTIVITY  113

each  factor  being  put  to  its  most  productive  purpose  in  co-operative
action  with  other  units.  All  the  cotton-spinning  mills  would  be  of
one  or  two  or  three  approximately  equally  effective  sizes  and  stan-
dards, for  all  the  cotton  capital  and  labour  would  gravitate  into
these  moulds,  and  so  with  every  other  business,  while  the  number
of  businesses  in  the  several  trades  would  be  determined  by  equally
rigorous  conditions.

Any  new  economy  of  production  introduced  into  an  industry
which  made  it  advantageous  to  alter  the  structure  of  the  business,
reducing,  say,  the  units  of  labour  from  200  to  150,  or  employing  a
different  sort  of  cheaper  raw  material,  would  lead  to  a  quick  auto-
matic readjustment,  workers  leaving  each  mill  and  either  fitting
themselves  into  new  mills  of  the  new  approved  character  or  flowing
into  other  industries,  the  value  of  whose  goods  were  now  appreciated
in  comparison  with  those  of  the  trade  into  which  a  new  economy
had  entered.

So  in  such  a  society  every  change  in  the  costs  of  pro-
duction or  consumption  would  be  attended  by  a  shift  of  the
less  effective  or  '  marginal  '  units  of  the  several  factors  from
one  trade  to  another,  while  the  new  units  of  each  factor
would  fasten  themselves  on  where  their  productivity  was
greatest.

This  is  the  ideal  of  a  freely  competitive  industrial  society  in
which  distribution  will  take  place  in  accordance  with  productivity,
though  even  here  the  particular  productivity  of  the  marginal  units
determines  nothing.  For  the  theoretic  feasibility  of  the  working  of
such  a  society  it  is,  however,  necessary  to  assume  either  that  the
several  factors  are  '  freely '  transferable  in  the  sense  in  which,  within
narrow  limits,  machinery  and  manual  labour,  work  of  management
and  ordinary  labour,  are  sometimes  transferable,  or  else  that  there
is  an  indefinite  amount  of  each  factor  procurable.  For  unless  one
of  these  assumptions  is  made,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  one  of
the  factors,  say  land  or  capital,  from  being  relatively  scarce  com-
pared with  the  others,  and  upsetting  the  balance  of  distribution
through  productivity  by  drawing  scarcity  rents.  Finally,  even  if
we  grant  all  the  suppositions  required  to  give  plausibility  to  the
hypothesis,  it  does  not  seem  easy  to  conceive  how  a  common  standard
measure  for  the  different  sorts  of  productivity  will  be  established,
so  as  to  secure  a  regular  and  accepted  distribution  of  the  whole
product.  For  the  product,  after  all,  will  be  the  product  of  the  co-
operative complex  of  units  of  the  several  factors,  and  there  will  be
no  means  of  splitting  it  into  separate  products  attributable  to  each.
In  other  words,  the  theory  of  productivity,  marginal  or  even
average,  as  a  determinant  of  the  distribution  of  that  part  of  the

I


114  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

product  which  remains  as  '  surplus  '  over  and  above  necessary
expenses,  has  no  validity.

Moreover,  the  assumption  of  an  industrial  system  in  which  this
general  full  freedom  of  competition  and  substitution  prevails  is  not
sufficiently  related  to  the  actual  industrial  S37stem  to  make  it  ser-
viceable. To  treat  natural  and  contrived  scarcity  and  the  forced
gains  which  proceed  therefrom  as  mere  '  friction,'  of  which  account
can  be  taken  afterwards,  is  an  unscientific  method  of  procedure.
In  the  industrial  system  regarded  as  a  productive  and  distributive
instrument,  combination  is  as  much  a  real  factor  as  competition,
and  the  scarcities  of  various  sorts  and  degrees  which  occur  through-
out the  system  are  as  much  determinative  facts,  both  of  production
and  of  distribution,  as  the  free  flows  which  they  negative.

The  claim  of  the  '  marginalists '  is  that  a  natural  law,  the  opera-
tions of  which  they  profess  to  describe,  tends  to  give  to  every
agent  of  production  the  amount  of  wealth  which  that  agent  pro-
duces. '  So  far  as  it  is  not  obstructed,  it  assigns  to  every  one  what
he  has  specifically  produced.' i  But  in  the  first  place  this  notion
of  the  specific  product  of  any  agent  or  of  any  part  of  any  agent  is
opposed  to  the  co-operative  working  of  the  industrial  system.  In
the  second  place,  what  are  by  marginalists  regarded  as  obstructions
are  real  and  important  parts  of  the  industrial  system.  Professor
Clark's  '  so  far  as  it  is  not  obstructed  '  means  simply  '  if  it  were  a
different  system  from  what  it  actually  is.'  If  there  were  a  free,
elastic  system  of  industry  in  which  production  was  a  merely
mechanical  instead  of  an  organic  co-operation,  so  that  a  separate
product  could  be  attributed  to  each  factor,  then  each  factor  would
get  what  it  made,  no  doubt. But  there  is  no  such  system.

'  Clark,  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Preface  I.


CHAPTER VI

ABILITY

§  I.  A  modern  business  is  an  organisation.  Organisation  is  a  process  enabling
the  various  factors  to  function  more  productively.  The  cause  or  condition
of  an  enlarged  product,  it  requires  a  payment  therefrom.  The  organiser's
payment,  or  profit,  depends  on  the  size  of  this  enlarged  product  and  the
amount  he  can  hold  in  competition  with  other  organisers. — §  2.  Where
equal  opportunities  exist  for  '  undertaking,'  profits  are  at  a  minimum.
The  power  of  the  eyitrepreneur  lies  in  areas  of  progressive  industry.  His
main  function  is  the  application  of  profitable  notions. — §  3.  Profit  is,  how-
ever, applied  to  payments  for  several  sorts  of  '  creative  '  or  '  competitive  '
work.  Profit  is  less  regular  and  less  fixed  than  the  payment  for  other
factors. — §  4.  Profit  is  represented  as  the  necessary  price  of  progress.
But  it  is  not  actually  applied  so  as  to  evoke  the  maximum  ability.  Nor
does  competition  normally  serve  to  keep  profit  at  the  economic  minimum.
So  ability  can  take  a  larger  quantity  of  '  surplus,'  often  '  sweating  '  the
investor  as  well  as  the  labourer. — §  5.  The  entrepreneur  comes  nearest  to
the  position  of  residual  claimant. — §  6.  But  no  sharp  separation  of  profit
from  other  payments  is  feasible,  though  certain  sorts  of  ability  obtain
an  increasing  share  of  wealth  in  modern  industry.

§  I. — If  the  units  of  individual  power  furnished  by  labour,  capital,
and  land  were  able  by  some  automatic  process  to  arrange  them-
selves so  as  to  maintain  and  adjust  the  structure  and  working  of
industry,  we  should  now  be  in  possession  of  a  complete  general  law
of  distribution.

A  part  of  the  general  product  of  the  industrial  system  would
be  carried  automatically  to  maintain  the  industrial  fabric  through
provision  for  repairs,  or  to  stimulate  a  growth  of  structure  and
activity  at  various  points  of  production  :  the  rest  would  be  taken
as  '  scarcity  '  payments  or  '  unearned  income  '  by  the  owners  of
any  factor  which  at  any  point  was  short  in  supply  as  compared
with  other  factors.

Here  in  a  new  and  rapidly  growing  city  there  might  be  plenty
of  all  required  sorts  of  labour  and  of  concrete  capital,  but  suitable
and  convenient  sites  might  be  restricted  in  quantity  :  the  price  per
unit  of  building  land  would  emerge  as  a  scarcity  payment,  entering
into  price  and  assigning  the  various  differential  rents  per  acre.

Or,  again,  in  a  new  farming  country  there  might  be  plenty  of
fertile  and  equally  available  land  and  plenty  of  pioneer  farmers,
but capital might be short  ;  so the '  surplus ' product, after

"5  I  2


][i6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

defraying  minimum  *  costs  '  of  labour  and  land,  would  go  in  high
interest  on  mortgages  or  on  bank  loans.

Or  where  both  land  and  credit  could  be  got  on  easy  terms,
either  from  a  government  or  from  private  sources  of  supply,  as  in
Canada,  wage  labour  might  be  relatively  scarce  and  wages  might
rise  so  as  to  take  a  surplus.^

So  the  factors  of  production  grouping  themselves  for  various
industrial  purposes  would  distribute  their  product  as  costs  of  pro-
duction, or,  wherever  a  shortage  of  a  factor  is  found  or  contrived,
as  a  surplus  or  scarcity  rent.

But  the  defectiveness  of  this  account  of  distribution  is  made
apparent  by  any  close  consideration  of  large  areas  of  industry  in
which  no  scarcity  of  any  of  these  factors  is  discernible,  and  where
wages  and  interest  are  both  low,  while  rent  does  not  make  any
large  claim  on  the  product.

The  old  economic  text-book  view  of  the  three  factors  of  produc-
tion somehow  combining  for  productive  process  and  dividing  the
product  according  to  some  '  laws '  of  wages,  interest,  and  rent,  has
little  relation  to  facts.  Its  main  defect  is  a  failure  to  give  adequate
and  separate  consideration  to  the  industrial  activity  of  organisation.
Modern  industry  we  see  as  an  organised  co-operation  of  factors  of
production.  What  about  the  organiser,  the  energy  he  gives  out
and  the  payment  he  receives,  and  the  relation  of  this  factor  to  the
other  three  ?  To  refuse  separate  consideration  to  these  questions
by  classing  the  employer's  work  as  a  sort  of  mental  labour,  to  be
reckoned  along  with  other  sorts  of  labour  and  as  remunerated  by  a
'  wage  of  management  '  determined  like  other  wages,  implies  a  dis-
torted view  of  the  industrial  structure,  and  is  utterly  destructive
of  any  clear  principle  of  distribution.

We  must  give  separate  consideration  to  the  entrepreneur,
regarding  him  as  the  owner  of  a  factor  of  production  called  ability,
for  the  use  of  which  he  receives  a  portion  of  the  product  known  as
profits.  This  term  '  profit '  is  so  elusive  that  I  must  here  insist  upon
fastening  it  down  as  payment  for  the  activity  of  the  entrepreneur,
excluding  from  it  entirely  interest  and  paj^ment  for  risks,  but
including  what  is  commonly  termed  wages  of  management  or
superintendence,  so  far  as  these  functions  are  performed  by  the

'  How  far  wages  obtained  where  labour  is  relatively  scarce  rank  as  wages
of  progressive  efficiency  or  as  a  '  surplus '  payment  will  depend  upon  the
character  of  the  labourers  and  the  social  surroundings  of  their  life.  A  body
of  Connemara  labourers  suddenly  transplanted  to  Liverpool  dock  work,  where
they  can  earn  three  times  their  former  wage,  will  largely  misspend  the  higher
wage,  which  thus  ranks  as  unproductive  '  surplus.'  A  more  assimilative  type
of  worker,  or  a  more  gradual  rise  of  wages,  will  imply  the  absorption  of
higher  pay  in  improved  efficiency  of  life,  the  scarcity  pay  thus  ranking
as  wage  of  progressive  efficiency.


ABILITY  117

entrepreneur.  Though  payments  for  the  use  of  ability  apphed  in
industry  go  to  other  persons,  such  as  inventors,  who  are  not,  strictly
speaking,  entrepreneurs,  it  is  with  the  ability  of  this  latter  class  we
are  primarily  concerned  here.

First  let  us  look  at  the  entrepreneur  in  the  regular  operation
of  what  is  called  '  static  '  industry,  i.e.  where  fixity  of  industrial
method  is  assumed.

When  we  consider  the  working  of  joint  stock  companies  we
shall  see  that  a  large  part  of  this  work  may  be  detached  from
'  enterprise  *  and  paid  for  by  a  wage  which  is  conveniently  severed
from  profit,  but  it  is  best  to  approach  the  issue  from  the  standpoint
of  the  entrepreneur,  who  organises  and  works  on  his  own  account  a
private  business.

His  work  falls  under  four  heads  : —

1.  He  plans  in  his  mind  the  working  of  a  business,  selecting
among  existing  methods,  lines  of  goods,  markets,  one  best  adapted
to  his  ability  and  his  access  to  the  other  factors  of  production.

2.  He  buys  the  various  quantities  of  the  different  factors  of
production  required  to  carry  out  his  plan.

3.  He  organises  the  factors  for  the  various  processes  of
production.

4.  He  markets  the  product.

Though  each  of  these  functions  may  be  regarded  as  productive
in  as  far  as  it  is  essential  to  the  present  working  of  industry,  it  is  to
the  organising  function  that  we  must  look  as  the  chief  objective
source  of  profit.^

A  single  unit  of  labour-power  left  to  find  capital  or  land  for
fruitful  action,  a  single  unit  of  capital  seeking  profitable  use  in
conjunction  with  a  worker,  an  acre  of  land  looking  round  for  a
farmer,  can  produce  very  little.  The  right  number  of  each  of  these
sorts  of  units,  properly  combined  and  directed,  can  produce  much.
The  difference  between  the  sum  of  the  little  products  that  would
issue,  if  the  units  worked  singly  by  and  for  themselves  (with  such
assistance  from  a  unit  of  another  factor  as  it  could  itself  acquire) ,
and  that  which  accrues  from  their  co-operative  working  under
skilled  guidance,  is  the  product  of  organisation  and  the  economic
fund  out  of  which  profit  is  paid.

Whether  the  entrepreneur  as  '  oiganiser  '  can  claim  to  be  the
'  creator  '  or  '  maker  '  of  this  product,  or  whether  his  organising

'  Profit  in  a  particular  business  m^y  arise  frorii  (i)  an  increase  of  the
amount  of  the  product  due  to  action  of  the  entrepreneur,  or  (2)  an  increase  in
the  value  of  the  product  due  to  some  contrived  or  chance  rise  of  price  in  the
market.  In  approaching  the  work  of  the  entrepreneur  as  part  of  the  machinery
of  industry,  we  first  confine  our  attention  to  the  former  function,  the  .socially
productive  one.


ii8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

action  is  to  be  regarded  only  as  a  means  whereby  the  other  factors
are  enabled  to  function  more  productively,  is  not  a  question  we
need  answer  here.  The  voluntary  activity  of  the  entrepreneur  is
essential  to  the  emergence  oi  the  increased  product,  and  the  whole
or  part  of  it  is  taken  in  actual  industry  as  his  payment.

The  ideally  strong  entrepreneur  would  buy  his  labour  at  a  price
determined  by  what  the  worker  could  get  by  working  for  himself
on  such  free  land  or  cheap  capital  as  was  available,  or  by  doing  odd
jobs,  begging,  stealing,  or  living  on  public  charity.  He  might  have
to  add  something  to  this  price  if  the  separate  productivity  of  the
worker  was  not  enough  to  furnish  him  a  livelihood  adequate  to
maintain  his  working-power  in  the  efficiency  required  for  organised
industry.

The  individual  product  of  an  Englishman,  or  even  of  a  Kaffir,
on  free  land  would  be  small,  perhaps  too  small  to  keep  him  in
health  and  strength  for  digging  all  day.

If  so,  this  individual  production  must  be  subsidised  out  of  the
product  of  organised  industry.

In  a  word,  a  wage  of  personal  efficiency  may  sometimes  be
substituted  for  a  wage  measuring  the  separate  productivity  of  the
worker.

So  with  capital.  The  strong  entrepreneur  planning  a  big
business  may  scrape  in  little  units  of  savings  at  a  rate  of  interest
determined  by  the  opportunity  the  small  savers  have  in  their  own
little  business,  or  in  such  small  investments  as  lie  open,  or  in  the
Post  Office.

The  same  with  land  where  it  is  wanted,  e.g.  the  Transvaal
Gold  Company  buys  the  Boer  farm  at  a  low  agricultural  price  and
a  bit  over.

Having  thus  got  his  units  of  productive-power  at  prices  which
strictly  represent  their  separate  or  unorganised  productivity,  he
organises  them  effectively,  so  as  to  produce  a  large  surplus-product,
which  he  sells  so  as  to  realise  the  whole  difference  in  profit.

The  theoretically  maximum  profit  thus  consists  in  the  whole  of
the  difference  between  the  sum  of  the  productivity  of  the  separate
unorganised  units  of  the  factors  of  production  and  the  sum  of  their
productivity  when  organised.

There  is  also  a  theoretic  minimum  profit,  i.e.  a  payment  neces-
sary to  evoke  and  to  support  the  energy  of  the  entrepreneur,  deter-
mined at  its  lowest  limit  by  his  alternative  individual  productivity
as  a  worker.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  master  sweaters  in  some
clothing  trades,  the  profit  is  forced  and  kept  down  to  this  minimum.

The  actual  profit  lying  between  this  upper  and  lower  margin  is
determined  chiefly  by  two  conditions : —


ABILITY  119

First,  by  the  capacity  of  the  entrepreneur  to  hold  the  product
of  organisation  as  against  the  pull  of  one  or  other  of  the  three
factors  which  he  has  to  buy.  Where  in  the  buying  of  units  of
producing-power  for  the  organisation  of  a  *  profitable  '  business  he
finds  one  of  them  short  in  regular  '  supply,'  or  possessed  of  some
high-priced  alternative  employment,  he  is  often  forced  to  buy  such
factor  at  a  '  scarcity  rent,'  which  swallows  much  or  most  of  his
potential  profit.  High  wages  must  be  paid  for  some  skilled  labour
in  large  demand,  or  in  short  supply.  Coal  must  be  bought  at
monopoly  prices ;  or  the  owner  of  some  central  site  essential  for
business  premises  can  make  a  large  encroachment.

Secondly,  even  if  he  can  buy  all  he  wants  of  the  three  factors  at
low  prices,  he  may  be  obliged  to  part  with  the  bulk  of  the  value  of
the  technical  result  of  organisation  to  the  consumer,  by  reason  of
the  keen  competition  of  other  entrepreneurs  who  force  down  the
price  of  the  product.

§  2. — In  other  words,  if  the  competing  supply  of  business  ability
is  as  abundant  as  the  supply  of  the  other  three  factors,  its  price,  like
theirs,  will  be  driven  to  the  minimum.  The  normal  price  of  goods
thus  produced  would  contain  no  surplus  element,  but  would  be
composed  only  of  minimum  costs  of  production.  The  technical
productivity  of  organisation  (apart  from  the  '  minimum  profit  ')
would  go  in  the  processes  of  exchange  to  the  owners  of  other  goods
not  produced  under  such  *  free  conditions.'

Wherever  the  competition  among  entrepreneurs  is  as  keen  as
that  among  the  owners  of  the  other  factors  of  production,  profit
falls  down  to  a  '  living  wage  '  of  ability,  through  a  rise  in  the  price
of  the  three  factors  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  fall  of  price  of  the
product  on  the  other.

To  buy  the  other  factors  cheap,  organise  them  effectively,  and
to  market  the  product  dear — these  are  the  aims  of  the  successful
entrepreneur.

Success  in  doing  this  depends  upon  restricting  the  effective  com-
petition among  entrepreneurs.  For  this  restriction  operates  both
in  buying  factors  and  in  selling  the  product.

Wherever  the  structure  of  society  is  such  that  every  man  has
equal  access  to  education,  business  training,  and  other  opportunities,
profit  in  '  statical '  industry  tends  to  stand  near  the  minimum.
Where  it  is  easy  for  a  man  to  quit  wage  earning  and  to  set  up  '  for
himself  '  on  borrowed  capital,  as  in  many  branches  of  retail  trade,
profits  sink  to  a  bare  living.

This  is  sometimes  said  to  be  the  normal  and  necessary  condition
of  stationary  industries.  It  would  be  so  if  equality  of  educational
and  other opportunities existed. But under actual conditions


120  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

ability  of  entrepreneurs  is  often  relatively  short ;  it  thus  becomes
the  limiting  factor  :  can  keep  down  prices  of  the  other  factors  by
restricting  demand,  and  keep  up  the  prices  of  its  product  by
limiting  output  or  by  partial  or  local  monopoly.

Nevertheless,  in  ordinary  steady  industry  profit  is  not  high,  for
the  kind  and  degree  of  skill  and  other  powers  of  the  entrepreneurs
are  not  scarce.

Little  foresight  or  strategy  is  required  :  even  the  method  of
organisation  is  stereotyped,  and  both  buying  and  selling  are
conducted  in  fairly  settled  markets  under  known  conditions.

The  real  power  of  the  entrepreneur  lies  in  areas  of  progressive
industry.

It  is  here  that  we  enter  on  what  is  perhaps  the  largest  and  most
debated  issue  of  distribution.

It  is  indisputably  true  that  to  the  ingenuity,  judgment,  calcu-
lating power,  and  enterprise  of  a  small  number  of  men  are  directly
attributable  those  great  changes  of  industrial  methods  which  have
led  to  a  vast  increase  of  the  product.

Scientists  have  made  new  discoveries,  inventors  have  applied
their  principles  to  the  technique  of  production,  financiers  and  other
business  men  have  selected  among  the  inventions  those  which  can
be  '  profitably  '  applied  in  actual  industry  and  have  applied  them,
while  the  constant  reorganisation  of  the  business  structure  thus
required  calls  for  fine  aptitudes  of  judgment  in  the  managers.
These  rare  and  conspicuous  acts  and  qualities  of  mind  are,  it
is  contended,  productive  in  another  sense  than  the  ordinary
factors  :  the  productivity  of  an  improvement  in  a  process  or
of  the  invention  of  a  new  machine  is  infinitely  great,  for  it
adds  to  the  productivity  of  an  infinite  number  of  productive
acts  proceeding  from  the  other  factors  of  production.  Ability
is  creative  :  labour  (and  the  productive  operations  of  concrete
capital  and  nature)  is  imitative.  Such  is  the  radical  nature  of
the  distinction  that  is  drawn.  It  virtually  attributes  the  whole
of  the  increased  productivity  of  progressive  industry  to  this  small
number  of  directing  minds,  and  finds  in  the  result  of  this  increased
productivity  a  vast  fund  which  may  be  classed  and  claimed  as  profit.
Now,  though  much  of  the  ability  which  thus  fructifies  in  industry
is  not  that  of  the  entrepreneur,  and  its  remuneration  cannot  be
strictly  designated  profit,  the  entrepreneur  is  the  instrument  through
whom  all  such  ability  functions  in  industry,  and  through  whom  the
payment  which  goes  to  the  scientist,  the  inventor,  and  other  outside
promoters  of  industrial  progress,  is  made.  Through  him  the  abilities
of  the  others  are  made  available.  While,  therefore,  the  particular
issues  relating  to  the  nature  of  invention,  the  direction  of  inventing-


ABILITY  121

power,  and  the  rewards  of  invention,  are  well  deserving  of
separate  consideration,  it  will  be  better  to  confine  our  attention
here  to  the  services  which  more  closely  belong  to  the  organisers  and
directors  of  businesses.  Their  most  skilled  and  most  serviceable
activities  distinctly  belong  to  the  '  creative  '  class.  As  regards  the
new  mechanical  and  other  scientific  inventions  which  continually
present  themselves  for  industrial  use,  their  work  is  that  of  selection
and  of  application.  If  the  invention  is  of  a  new  product,  the
business  man  must  calculate  the  cost  of  producing  it  in  such
quantity  as  is  likely  to  find  a  market,  the  competition  it  will  meet
from  other  products  which  appeal  to  similar  tastes  or  fulfil
similar  purposes,  the  length  of  time  it  can  be  expected  to  hold
the  market,  and  a  variety  of  kindred  matters.  His  judgment
will  be  based  on  a  simultaneous  consideration  of  all  these  relevant
issues.

Hardly  less  critical  is  his  judgment  in  the  case  of  a  new  process
for  producing  an  established  product.  Though  these  acts  of  judg-
ment form  but  a  small  part  of  the  function  of  the  ordinary
entrepreneur,  their  part  in  determining,  not  merely  the  success
of  a  particular  business,  but  the  progress  of  an  industry,  is  of  the
first  importance.

Detailed  improvements  in  the  organisation  of  a  business,  in
economy  of  labour  or  of  materials,  selection  among  alternatives  in
the  kinds  and  qualities  of  products,  exhibit  in  a  lower  degree
the  same  qualities  of  mind,  and  are  attended  by  similar  results
in  increased  productivity.  The  other  two  departments  of  the
entrepreneur,  finance  and  the  arts  of  buying  and  selling,  though
exhibiting  fine  qualities  of  mind,  may  be  distinguished  as  partaking
more  of  competitive  skill,  which,  though  promoting  the  success  of  a
particular  business,  does  not  involve  an}^  corresponding  progress  in
the  productivity  of  industry.

If  we  regard  the  entrepreneur  as  the  instrument  by  which  new
productive  ideas  are  realised  in  industry,  and  by  which  the  regular
effective  co-operation  of  the  other  factors  of  production  is  procured
and  maintained,  we  shall  recognise  the  necessity  in  a  progressive
society  of  securing  to  the  entrepreneur  out  of  the  total  product  a
payment  sufficient  to  evoke  and  to  support  these  industrial  activi-
ties. The  profit  which  remains  to  him  after  paying  the  services  of
labour,  capital,  and  land,  must  suffice  to  evoke  these  personal
activities,  and  to  reward  the  inventors  and  other  innovating
speciahsts  whose  ideas  he  utilises.

§  3. — The  work  of  the  undertaking  and  control  of  industry  is,
however,  in  modern  times,  not  confined  to  the  persons  who  are
strictly  employers or  managers  of  businesses,  nor  can  the  term


122  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

'  profits  '  be  properly  confined  to  the  payments  made  to  these  orders
of  business  men.

The  productive-power,  here  termed  abihty,  to  the  payment  of
which  profit  is  applied,  is  divided  among  different  classes.

First  comes  the  financier.  Under  this  head  we  place  un-
specialised  '  capitalists,'  promoters  of  companies,  bankers,  and  other
money-lenders,  who  deal  in  profitable  notions,  and  whose  produc-
tive function  is  to  determine  the  application  of  real  capital  and
labour  to  different  industrial  undertakings.  A  large  part  of  that
skill  of  the  entrepreneur  which  consists  in  discussing  and  selecting
new  inventions  is  performed  by  these  men,  who  are  primarily
engaged  in  allocating  to  various  industrial  uses  the  new  saving  of
the  investing  classes.  It  must  not,  however,  be  forgotten  that  to
the  ordinary  investor  himself  must  be  accredited  some  skill  of
discernment  and  judgment  in  choosing  among  the  competing  enter-
prises offered  to  him  for  investment.  The  investor  who  is  no
mere  plunger,  but  who  acts  on  advice  and  weighs  this  advice,
must  be  considered  to  exercise  a  genuinely  productive  function
in  thus  determining  the  use  of  capital.  The  gambling  aspect
of  finance  must  not  blind  us  to  this  genuinely  productive  work.

A  portion  of  this  financial  work,  together  with  part  of  the  more
general  work  of  '  undertaking,'  is  performed  in  the  joint  stock
company  of  modern  times,  by  the  board  of  directors,  who  are  com-
monly also  large  shareholders  and  often  possess  personal  experience
in  the  business  they  control.  Exercising  a  general  supervision,  and
determining  large  matters  of  policy,  they  divide  with  the  salaried
managers  the  organisation  of  the  productive  forces.

The  more  detailed  work  of  management,  involving  many  acts
of  judgment  which  belong  distinctive^  to  the  '  creative  '  function,
is  performed  chiefl}'  by  salaried  officials.  It  is  not  confined  to  one
or  two  heads,  but  is  distributed  in  various  degrees  over  a  large  staff.

Indeed,  a  close  analysis  of  business  operations  impairs  con-
siderably the  sharpness  of  the  distinction  between  ability  and
labour  by  showing  that,  even  in  what  is  distinctively  manual  and
sometimes  unskilled  manual  labour,  important  minute  elements  of
judgment  and  responsibility  enter  which  are  creative  and  dis-
tinguish human  labour  from  the  purely  imitative  operations  of
machines.

But  this  criticism  does  not  invalidate  the  importance  and  the
convenience  of  placing  in  a  separate  category  the  work  of  ability
as  a  claimant  for  profit.

Profit,  then,  must  here  be  taken  to  include  a  variety  of  payments,
to  some  of  which  the  term  is  not  commonly  applied.

It  must  include  (a)  the  incomes  of financiers  so  far  as  these


ABILITY  123

exceed  the  normal  interest  upon  the  capital  engaged  in  their  pro-
fession ;  (6)  the  royalties  and  other  payments  made  to  inventors
and  patentees  ;  (c)  the  fees  of  directors  and  the  salaries  of  officials
of  companies,  for  though  these  can  in  some  sort  be  set  on  a  level
with  other  labour  markets,  the  work  done  for  them  belongs  to
the  entrepreneur ;  {d)  a  portion  of  the  so-called  interest  paid
to  shareholders  who  contribute  ability  in  the  selection  of  their
investments.

There  will  appear  to  some  a  certain  artificiality  in  this  analysis.
In  the  actual  business  world  many  of  the  payments  here  ranked  as
'  profit  '  are  set  by  the  great  financial  manufacturing,  and  commer-
cial entrepreneurs,  the  great  capitalist  managers,  on  the  same  foot-
ing with  payments  for  ordinary  capital  and  labour  :  they  buy
inventive  or  designing  ability  as  they  buy  their  various  grades  of
managerial  skill,  very  much  as  they  buy  coal  or  machinery.  These
men,  great  financiers,  railway  kings,  trust-makers,  mine-owners,  buy
all  the  sorts  of  ability  they  want,  and  applying  them  to  work  the
ordinary  factors  of  production,  pay  all  these  '  costs  of  production  '
out  of  the  proceeds  of  their  business,  and  keep  the  residue  as  their
'  profit.'

This  view  is  more  closely  accommodated  to  the  recent
evolution  of  large  industry,  where  many  sorts  of  ability  become,
so  to  speak,  '  standardised,'  and  brought,  as  regards  use  and
payment,  under  the  ordinary  economy  of  business  adminis-
tration.

But  whether  we  take  this  narrower  or  the  wider  view  of  the
'  ability  '  for  which  profit  is  paid,  it  is  equally  evident  that  the
payment  for  ability  stands  on  a  somewhat  different  footing  from
other  payments,  partly  by  reason  of  the  peculiar  position  of  the
entrepreneur  in  industry,  and  partly  by  the  special  character  of  his
motives  and  incentives.

So  far,  at  any  rate,  as  business  '  profits  '  are  regarded  as  earnings
of  ability,  they  are  far  more  irregular  in  amount  and  far  less  assured
than  the  payment  for  the  use  of  other  factors.  In  most  new  or
growing  trades,  at  any  rate,  and  in  many  professions,  the  profits
and  other  payments  for  ability  are  so  essentially  '  speculative  '  that
it  seems  difficult  to  regard  them  as  having  any  strong  tendency
towards  any  normal  rate  of  pay  such  as  is  required  to  co-ordinate
this  factor  with  the  others.  The  motives  or  incentives  appear
different  from  those  which  evoke  the  regular  application  of  labour
or  saving  :  the  hope  of  large  gains  rather  than  the  certain  expecta-
tion of  regular  gains  operates  largely  among  entrepreneurs,  and  the
large  proportion  of  failures  in  most  sorts  of  business  enterprise  is
often  adduced  as  evidence  that  the  average  rate  of  profits  or  wages


124  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  enterprise  is  very  low,  since  there  are  a  few  great  prizes  to  many
blanks  or  actual  losses.

But,  though  both  the  psychology  of  profit-seeking  and  the  ap-
portionment of  profits  differ  widely  from  those  of  the  other  factors
of  industry,  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  sufficient  reasons  for  refusing
to  apply  to  ability  our  main  principle  of  distribution,  the  distinc-
tion between  necessary  and  superfluous  payments.  Certain  con-
siderable industries  are  highly  speculative,  even  as  regards  the
rewards  of  the  ordinary  labour  engaged  in  them  :  gold-mining  is  a
notorious  example,  but  many  departments  of  the  engineering  and
other  metal  trades,  where  both  wage-rates  and  emploj^ment  fluc-
tuate widely,  are  of  the  same  order.  But  the  speculative  character
does  not  prevent  us  from  recognising  that  the  normal  law  of  wages
is  applicable  to  such  trades.  So  with  profits  :  the  real  chances  of
gain  or  loss  are  calculated  and  discounted  according  to  the  estimated
apportionment  in  the  several  trades ;  ability  is  distributed  among
the  various  trades  according  to  genuine  prospects  of  gain  based  on
experience,  though  the  distribution  will  be  much  less  exact  than  in
the  case  of  other  factors.

While,  therefore,  the  peculiar  structural  position  of  the  entre-
preneur has  made  it  desirable  to  give  separate  consideration  to  the
payment  for  ability,  the  system  of  distribution  brings  profits  under
the  same  general  laws  of  payment  as  operate  among  the  other
factors.

§  4. — We  have  seen  that  profit  consists  in  what  remains  to  the
entrepreneur  after  he  has  paid  for  the  uses  of  the  ordinary  factors
of  production.  Is  that  profit  normally  or  naturally  identical  with
what  is  required  for  the  expense  of  producing  ability  ?

Is  there  any  tendency  for  profit  to  become  that  minimum  pay-
ment requisite  to  reward  energy  of  management  and  to  stimulate
the  arts  of  industrial  progress  ?

A  new  justification  of  the  competitive  system  of  distribution  is
sometimes  based  on  the  contention  that  profits,  as  they  are  now
obtained,  are  a  necessary  payment  for  the  contribution  of  ability
to  industrial  progress  This  theory  gives  point  to  the  question  we
have  put.  It  is  contended  that  all  profit,  over  and  above  the
wages  of  management  in  a  static  business,  is  a  merely  temporary
reward  obtained  by  a  pioneer  in  some  new  trade  or  process  :  it  is
a  prize  won  by  the  man  who  is  first  in  the  field  ;  it  helps  to  stimulate
others  to  adopt  the  new  invention  and  the  new  method  ;  when  the
adoption  has  become  general  throughout  the  trade,  the  competition
of  the  various  firms  will  eliminate  the  '  profit,'  which  will  then
pass  in  reduced  prices  to  the  consumer.

Now,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is  a  large  variety  of  different


ABILITY  125

elements  of  ability  which  enter  into  industrial  progress.  Two
questions  of  critical  importance  are  therefore  raised  by  the  theory
of  profit  as  the  price  of  progress.  First,  is  there  any  provision  that
the  first  recipient  of  profit,  the  entrepreneur  in  the  strict  meaning,
shall  apportion  the  profit  among  the  various  contributors  towards
the  arts  of  progress,  so  as  to  evoke  their  best  contribution  ?
Secondly,  is  there  any  security  that  the  competition  of  other  entre-
preneurs shall  be  early  enough  or  sufficiently  keen  to  secure  the
gain  for  the  consumer  as  soon  as  the  stimulus  has  served  its  purpose  ?

Consideration  of  the  actual  circumstances  which  attend  the
payment  of  profit  shows  that  no  satisfactory  answer  can  be  given
to  either  question.  In  actual  business,  as  we  have  seen,  the  entire
residue  of  the  product,  or  of  its  value,  after  defraying  the  expenses
of  buying  the  other  factors,  falls  to  the  entrepreneur  as  his  profit.
It  is  great  or  small  according  as,  upon  the  one  hand,  he  can  buy
the  other  factors  cheap,  and,  upon  the  other  hand,  as  he  can  sell
the  product  dear.  The  check  furnished  by  the  bargaining  power
of  the  owners  of  some  factor  short  in  supply  we  have  already  con-
sidered ;  but  the  principal  check,  upon  which  the  upholders  of  the
current  theory  depend,  lies  in  the  supposed  power  of  free  competi-
tion among  the  other  entrepreneurs  to  force  down  the  profit  by  a  fall
of  price.  But  the  effective  operation  of  this  check  assumes  that
competition  of  employers  or  entrepreneurs  is  normally  as  free  and  as
reliable  in  operation  as  competition  among  owners  of  labour-power
or  of  capital.  If  the  assumption  is  unwarranted,  there  is  nothing
to  prevent  profits  from  remaining  at  a  far  larger  sum  than  is  required
to  stimulate  ability  to  function  properly  in  individual  progress.

It  can  hardly  be  maintained  by  any  one  experienced  in  trade
that,  when  a  new  machine  or  a  new  method  is  mtroduced  into  an
industry,  the  amount  of  the  gain  which  accrues  to  the  firm  which
first  practises  this  economy  has  any  ascertainable  relation  to  the
amount  necessary  to  induce  the  inventor  to  discover  the  new
method,  or  the  employer  to  apply  it.  The  gain  he  takes,  so  long
as  he  has  a  monopoly  of  the  new  method,  may  exceed  by  any
amount  the  necessary  stimulus  to  the  art  of  progress.  Neither  can
it  be  said  that,  when  other  employers  in  his  trade  are  free  to
adopt  the  improvement,  the  profit  necessarily  falls  either  at  once
or  in  the  long  run  to  the  minimum,  so  as  to  turn  over  the  whole  of
the  value  of  the  improvement  to  the  consuming  public.  The
hypothesis  that  competition  normally  works  as  freely  and  as  keenly
among  entrepreneurs  as  among  labourers  is  notoriously  false.  It
rests  really  upon  an  assumption  that  any  worker  is  free  to  become
a  small  employer,  and  any  small  employer  to  become  a  large
employer,  so  that all  potential employing ability  can function


126  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

competitively  in  actual  industry.  If  this  assumption  were  correct,
it  is  true  that  the  gain  of  each  progressive  step  in  industry  would
pass  to  society  as  soon  as  it  was  open  to  the  competing  businesses
in  a  trade,  though  even  then  there  is  no  provision  for  distributing
the  original  bonus  so  as  to  reward  proportionately  the  ability  of
the  pioneers.  But  in  many  large  fields  of  industry  competition  is
not  thus  free  or  keen  :  either  it  is  difficult  for  new  entrepreneurs
to  equip  themselves  for  successful  competition,  or  else  agreements
more  or  less  close  and  binding  between  competitors  hold  up  prices,
and  with  prices,  profits.

Putting  the  same  point  in  another  way,  the  number  of  competing
entrepreneurs  buying  the  other  factors,  and  selling  the  product  of
their  co-operative  working,  is  much  smaller  than  the  number  of
separable  units  of  labour-power,  capital  and  land,  which  are  com-
peting to  find  purchasers,  and  the  competition  of  the  former  is  less
keen,  constant,  and  ubiquitous  than  that  of  the  latter.

This  being  so,  by  our  general  law  of  distribution,  which  assigns
the  '  surplus  '  according  to  the  relative  shortness  of  supply  of  the
factors,  the  entreprencitrs  are  able  to  take  a  profit  normally  in
excess  of  their  expense  of  production.  The  economy  of  large  capi-
talism of  course  favours  this  power  by  reducing  the  number  of
competing  businesses  in  many  fields  of  industry,  especially  in  those
where  the  gain  from  organising  many  units  of  producing-power  is
greatest.

§  5. — Upon  the  whole,  the  entrepreneur  has  the  pull  in  modern
industry  :  each  step  in  improved  industrial  arts  brings  him  a  gain
much  larger  than  is  economically  necessary  to  evoke  this  step,  and
is  held  in  large  part  by  other  members  of  the  trade  who  are  mere
imitators  and  not  innovators.  To  certain  classes  of  these  able  men
an  increasing  proportion  of  the  '  surplus  '  of  industry  has  been
passing  in  recent  times.  The  real  industrial  struggle  is  far  less  keen
between  capital  and  labour  than  between  strong  groups  of  entre-
preneurs on  the  one  side  and  weak  owners  of  capital  and  labour  on
the  other.  The  small  investor  is  as  likely  to  be  '  sweated  '  in  this
struggle  as  the  worker  :  and  a  living  interest  is  almost  as  difficult
for  large  classes  of  savers  to  secure  as  a  living  wage  for  low-skilled
workers.

Though  in  modern  industrial  development  the  organisers  of  a
great  manufacturing  trust  or  a  transport  company  may  sometimes
be  rack-rented  by  the  owners  of  some  natural  source  of  supply,  and
in  certain  instances  some  strong  union  of  skilled  workers  may
encroach  upon  the  surplus  which  would  go  as  profit,  the  entrepre-
neurs, amongst  whom  are  to  be  included  the  original  subscribers  of
monetary  capital,  are  usually  able  to  secure  in  profit  (inclusive  of


ABILITY  127

high  fees,  bonuses,  '  free  '  shares,  abnormal  interest,  and  other
emoluments)  a  growing  share  of  the  surplus.  Their  ability  to  do
this  rests  ultimately,  as  we  see,  upon  the  checks  they  set  on  compe-
tition. To  some  workers  it  appears  as  if  this  relative  strength  of
the  owners  of  directive  and  organising  ability  were  due  to  some
natural  scarcity,  and  that  therefore  their  large  gains  might  be  in
some  sense  necessary.  But  this  is  a  double  misconception.  The
sort  of  ability  in  business  which  gets  the  largest  aggregate  amount
of  the  general  surplus  is  not  naturally  scarce.  It  exists  plentifully
in  salaried  officials  of  companies  and  in  high  pubhc  servants,  and,
if  education  were  fully  and  well  applied,  a  virtually  unlimited
amount  could  be  evoked.  It  does  not  imply  any  such  high  natural
scarcity  as  limits  the  output  of  great  art  or  literature.

Moreover,  though  the  ability  to  seize  and  utilise  inventions  and
other  profitable  notions,  to  organise  the  factors  of  production,  to
forecast  or  stimulate  demand,  to  control  markets,  is  a  chief  source
of  profit,  many  business  gains  included  under  profit  imply  no  such
output  of  abilit}' .  Only  those  intimately  acquainted  with  a  trade
know  how  large  a  part  sheer  '  luck  '  plays  in  success,  and,  where
ability  does  function,  it  is  often  little  more  than  the  skill  to  recog-
nise and  utilise  a  stroke  of  luck.  No  small  portion  of  the  income
ranking  as  profits  is  distributed  by  '  luck  '  rather  than  by  clear-
sighted ability.  Nor  must  the  support  given  to  the  profits  of  an
established  and  successful  business  by  goodwill  and  mere  repu-
tation, operating  as  superstitious  adjuncts  to  the  real  merits  of  a
'  make,'  be  left  out  of  consideration.

Thus  it  appears  that  a  great  deal  of  profit  is  not  derived  from,
or  attached  to,  any  output  of  personal  ability.  But,  where  ability
is  employed,  there  is  no  reasonably  accurate  adjustment  between
its  utility  and  the  profit  its  owner  can  receive.

Even  if  one  admits  that  there  is  scope  for  a  few  men  of  tran-
scendent natural  gifts,  as  is  quite  likely,  the  notion  that  the  amount
of  *  surplus  '  which  they  can  and  do  take  is  necessary  to  induce
them  to  apply  their  rare  powers  of  mind  effectively  in  industry  has
no  warrant.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  a  Rothschild  will
give  out  more  skill  in  the  act  of  finance,  if  circumstances  enable
him  to  earn  £1000  a  day  instead  of  ;^ioo,  or  that  Mr.  Rockefeller
requires  10,000,000  dol.  a  year  to  stimulate  his  organising  genius
to  function.

It  has  seemed  desirable  to  discuss  the  ability  of  the  entrepreneur
separately  from  the  other  factors  of  production  on  account  of  the
determinant  part  it  plays  in  directing  the  working  of  the  industrial
system  and  in  introducing  changes.

This position makes the  entrepreneur appear the residual


128  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

claimant  to  the  product  of  industry  after  the  expenses  of  purchasing
the  use  of  the  other  three  factors  have  been  defrayed.  Making
allowance  for  the  power  which  the  owners  of  any  of  the  three  factors
short  in  supply  can  exercise  to  take  out  of  the  product  a  payment
in  excess  of  what  is  necessary  to  evoke  its  use,  this  residual  claim
is  made  valid  by  the  normal  state  of  restricted  competition  among
entrepreneurs.  After  land,  or  capital,  or  labour  of  some  sort  has
taken  its  pull  out  of  the  surplus  product  by  exacting  some  surplus
in  the  price  it  compels  the  entrepreneur  to  pay,  the  rest  of  the
surplus  tends  to  remain  for  long  periods  of  time  with  the  entrepre-
neurs as  an  excessive  profit.  Although  even  a  close  monopolist
may  find  it  pay  to  give  the  consumer  some  advantage  out  of  the
economy  of  improved  production,  by  lowering  prices  and  securing
the  largest  aggregate  of  profit  out  of  a  greatly  enhanced  sale,  this
natural  check,  which  enlightened  self-interest  imposes  upon  the  per-
centage of  profit  that  such  monopolist  can  draw  from  each  act  of
sale,  does  not  greatly  weaken  the  position  of  vantage  occupied  by
the  entrepreneur  as  the  determinant  of  production  and  the  recipient
of  the  residue  of  the  product  after  the  owners  of  other  factors  are
paid  off.

Though,  therefore,  the  growing  size  and  importance  of  the  work
done  by  ability,  as  a  factor  in  modern  industry,  would  necessarily
imply  that  a  larger  amount  of  wealth  went  as  payment  to  entre-
preneurs, there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  increased  share  of
the  product  of  industry,  which  to-day  passes  into  their  hands,  is
any  true  measure  of  the  increased  utility  of  this  work.  On  the
contrary,  their  strong  strategic  position  in  the  industrial  system
makes  it  tolerably  certain  that  a  large  share  of  their  income  repre-
sents, not  a  necessary  cost,  a  natural  stimulus  to  the  production
and  display  of  such  abihty,  but  a  scarcity  rent  or  unearned  income
which  they  take  because  their  superior  bargaining  power  enables
them  to  exact  it.

§  6. — But  having  thus  asserted  the  technical  difference  between
ability  and  the  other  factors  as  agents  in  industry  and  as  claimants
to  the  product,  it  is  necessary  to  admit  that  no  practical  theory  of
economic  policy  can  be  based  on  an  attempt  closely  to  discriminate
between  profit  in  the  sense  of  '  rent  of  ability  '  and  other  payments
which  are  inextricably  mixed  with  it  in  the  actual  distribution  of
wealth.

The  most  that  can  be  done  with  advantage  is  to  note  the  grow-
ing strength  of  certain  t5rpes  of  entrepreneur  in  important  fields  of
industry,  and  to  recognise  the  hold  which  they  are  able  to  maintain
upon  the  '  surplus  '  product,  partly  in  this  capacity  of  entrepreneur
and  partly  as  capitalists,  landowners,  and  owners  of  legal  privileges.


ABILITY


129


A  general  survey  of  modern  industry  in  advanced  countries  will
show  that  this  power  to  secure  unearned  or  surplus  gain  is  shared
by  entrepreneurs  with  owners  of  other  factors  whose  use  they  have
to  buy,  unless,  as  is  commonly  the  case,  they  have  themselves
become  owners  of  the  other  factors  which  were  competing  with
them  as  claimants  for  the  surplus.  If  a  great  manufacturing  trust
is  formed,  it  often  obtains  possession  of  favoured  sources  of  raw
material  or  fuel,  or  organises  special  facilities  of  transport,  or  obtains
the  protection  of  tariff  duties,  or  government  contracts  or  other
public  'aid.'  Such  advantages  often  render  it  impossible  to  dis-
tinguish in  '  profits  '  the  elements  which  are  true  profit  in  the  sense
of  payment  for  ability.

Recent  tendencies  show  that  a  larger  share  of  '  surplus '  wealth
has  been  passing  into  the  hands  of  certain  large  interests,  amongst
which  we  may  distinguish  the  banker  and  financier,  the  transport
company,  city  ground  owners,  manufacturers  of  protected  or
patented  goods  in  wide  demand,  brewers  and  distillers,  contractors
for  public  works.

But  were  it  possible  accurately  to  separate  true  profits  from
other  payments,  it  would,  I  think,  become  evident  that  certain
classes  of  ability  in  the  direction  and  organisation  of  industry,  and
in  the  manipulation  of  markets,  were  gaining  upon  the  owners  of
other  factors  in  their  power  to  take  surplus  wealth,  irrespective  of
their  economic  need  of  it  for  the  stimulation  of  industrial  progress.

In  England  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  this  is  the  case.  Setting
the  rise  of  annual  land  values  for  city  sites,  mines,  transport  and
other  services  into  which  land  values  enter,  against  the  decline  in
rural  land  values,  it  is  probable  that,  though  the  aggregate  of
annual  income  constituting  rent  is  rising,  the  proportion  which
such  rent  bears  to  the  aggregate  income  of  the  country  is  falling.
This  statement  is,  of  course,  consistent  with  holding  that  rent  forms
a  growing  proportionate  charge  upon  the  surplus  as  distinct  from
the  entire  income.

The  abundance  of  concrete  capital  at  ordinary  times  keeps  down
the  rate  of  real  interest  so  low  that  it  is  tolerably  certain  that,  in
spite  of  the  expanding  use  of  capitalist  methods  over  large  fields
of  industry,  the  proportion  of  the  national  product  paid  in  interest
is  declining.

Though  real  wages  for  almost  all  grades  of  regular  labour  have
risen  considerably,  there  is  no  reason  for  holding  that  the  rise  has
kept  full  pace  with  the  increased  rate  of  productivity  of  industry.
If  these  conclusions  are  substantially  sound,  an  increase  of  the
proportionate  claim  of  profit  on  the  aggregate  product  is  involved.


CHAPTER VII

DISTRIBUTION OF  THE SURPLUS  BY PULLS

§  I.  Free  competition  can  furnish  no  theory  for  the  distribution  of  the  surplus
which,  accumulating  at  various  stages  of  production,  is  represented  in
the  prices  of  commodities. — §  2.  A  classification  of  the  different  sorts  of
surplus  exhibits  them  as  waste,  impairing  efficiency. — §  3.  Prices  of
various  final  commodities  contain  different  proportions  of  surplus  :  some
surpluses  are  permanent,  others  evanescent.

§  I, — Absolutely  free  competition,  though  furnishing  a  consistent
and  thinkable  system  of  production,  furnishes  no  thinkable  theory
of  distribution  or  exchange.  Its  strict  condition,  as  we  saw,  was
an  equal  abundance  of  all  the  various  sorts  and  qualities  of  land,
labour,  capital  and  managing  ability,  for,  if  any  one  at  any  point  is
relatively  short  in  supply,  it  can  suspend  free  competition  and
extort  a  rack-rent  or  forced  gain.

Under  such  free  competition  (assuming  also  full  knowledge  in
the  owners  of  the  factors)  each  industry  would  consist  of  equally
effective  businesses,  and  every  factor  would  be  paid  what  was
necessary  to  evoke  its  use,  only  these  subsistence  payments
entering  into  price.

But  we  recognise  that  in  modern  industry  the  aggregate  pro-
duct of  such  industrial  system  will  be  far  larger  than  is  required
for  these  payments  of  maintenance.  If  the  industrial  system  is  to
grow  in  size  and  improve  in  quality,  this  actual  industrial  surplus
must  be  utilised  to  stimulate  and  feed  this  progress.  In  other
words,  there  must  be  some  method  of  adding  to  the  subsistence
payments  such  portions  of  this  surplus  as  will  evoke  the  proper
proportion  of  increased  productive  energy  for  future  enlarged
production.

Now,  under  the  conditions  of  absolutely  free  competition,  with
payments  of  all  factors  at  a  minimum,  no  provision  exists  for
securing  this  or,  indeed,  any  apportionment  of  the  surplus.  There
would  be  an  annual  surplus  which  belonged  to  none  of  the  factors,
and  which  none  of  them  was  any  better  able  to  take  than  the  others.
This  unappropriated  surplus  would,  unless  it  wandered  ownerless
and  ran  to  waste,  have  to  be  appropriated  by  the  State  and  applied
by  some  canon  of  social  utility  to  its  proper  purpose  of  stimulating

130


DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  SURPLUS  BY  PULLS 131

industrial  progress,  except  so  far  as  it  was  needed  for  other  public
purposes.

»"^  ■  But  the  actual  conditions  of  industry,  as  we  see,  are  widely
different  from  this  'free  competition.'  In  every  process  of  every
industry,  some  one  or  other  of  the  factors  is  relatively  scarce,  either
by  nature  or  human  contrivance,  and  can  extort  a  piece  of  *  surplus  '
payment  over  and  above  that  payment  for  which  its  owners  would
consent  to  apply  it  in  production,  if  they  could  not  get  this  surplus.
This  relative  scarcity  is  everywhere  assisted  by  lack  of  mobility  and
lack  of  knowledge.  These  pieces  of  surplus  enter  into  the  price  of
goods,  thus  weighting  their  rate  of  exchange,  and  so  determining
the  amount  of  the  *  pull '  exerted  by  the  industries  contributing
to  make  one  sort  of  goods,  as  compared  with  that  exercised  by
industries  contributing  to  make  other  sorts,  upon  the  aggregate
product.

So  it  comes  to  pass  that,  instead  of  an  exchange  and  distribution
based  on  minimum  costs  of  production,  we  have  an  exchange  in
which  these  costs  are  weighted  by  varying  amounts  of  *  surplus  '
which  express  themselves  in  value  through  price.

This  is  not  the  ordinarily  accepted  difference  between  normal
(natural)  and  market  price,  or  even  between  long-time  prices  and
short-time  prices.  For  our  investigation  of  the  sale  of  the  several
factors  indicates  that  many  of  these  scarcity  rents  or  other  exces-
sive payments  are  normal  and  enduring,  though  doubtless  shifting
in  intensity.  In  certain  industries,  or  professions,  ability  or  con-
crete capital  exercises  a  normal  pull,  in  other  cases  certain  sorts  of
land  continue  to  take  rent  of  scarcity,  and  even  certain  special
labour  organisations  can  maintain  a  long-time  scarcity.

It  matters  not  whether  one  measures  the  prices  in  which
these  *  pulls  '  find  expression  at  the  margin  of  production  or  on
the  average  :  they  imply  that  the  exchange  of  goods  and  the
distribution  of  wealth  are  normally  and  largely  directed  by  these
pulls  in  which  a  surplus  is  divided  according  to  the  degree  of  scarcity
attaching  to  the  several  factors  of  production.

A  closer  consideration  of  the  actual  mode  of  distribution  of  the
surplus  is,  however,  desirable.

For  it  is  apparently  contended  by  some  economists  that  this
distribution  of  the  surplus  according  to  relative  scarcity  of  the
factors  of  production  is  the  natural,  necessary  and  socially  desirable
method  of  overcoming  this  scarcity,  and  so  promoting  industrial
progress.  The  argument  runs  thus.  If,  in  a  particular  industry,
labour  or  capital  were  relatively  short,  a  rise  of  wages  or  of  interest
is  the  most  economical  method,  indeed  the  only  method,  of  securing
industrial  growth. Though  this  method  involves  an  unnecessarily

K  2


132  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

high  payment  for  a  time  to  the  labour  or  the  capital  already  in  use,
this  is  a  necessary  incident  in  industrial  progress,  and  it  may  even
be  held  that  the  occasional  chance  of  such  a  rise  is  a  wholesome
stimulus  to  the  normal  flow  of  capital  and  labour  into  such  a  trade.
In  particular,  it  is  urged  that  high  profits  in  certain  industries,
which  absorb  so  large  a  share  of  the  '  surplus,'  are  necessary  and
socially  desirable  as  a  stimulus  of  that  ability  to  which  industrial
progress  is  chiefly  attributable.

So,  it  is  contended,  there  exists  a  fairly  satisfactory  natural
economy  in  the  apportionment  of  the  surplus  for  the  stimulation  of
industrial  progress,  the  results  of  which  are  in  some  measure  shared
by  the  owners  of  other  factors  of  production,  including  labour.

§  2. — We  are  thus  brought  to  confront  the  question  :  Is  the
distribution  of  the  surplus  according  to  the  relative  pulls  of
natural  and  contrived  scarcity  of  the  factors  an  economical
method  of  stimulating  improved  productivity  ?  Does  it  divide
the  general  surplus  among  the  different  owners  of  the  various
factors  of  production  in  the  various  industries  in  the  proportion
which  so  stimulates  production  as  to  yield  the  maximum  increase
of  utility  to  the  consuming  public  ?

Now  the  payments  into  which  this  surplus  falls  may  be  thus
classified  : —

First.  Rents  for  the  use  of  land  and  natural  powers.  These
rents  are  in  substance  prices  for  different  sorts  of  land  use.  The
price  for  a  unit  of  grazing-power  is  so  much,  the  worst  acres  of
grazing  land,  producing  each  a  small  fraction  of  a  unit,  take  a
nominal  rent,  the  best  acres  a  somewhat  higher  rent  :  the  prices  of  a
unit  of  wheat-growing  and  of  market-gardening  or  building  land
are  on  a  higher  scale,  differential  rents  measuring  the  relative
productivity  of  an  acre  within  each  use.  All  these  prices  of  land
use  are  obtainable  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  supply.  So  long
as  land  is  in  private  ownership,  it  is  economically  necessary  to  apply
to  its  owners  such  an  inducement  as  will  cause  them  to  apply  the
requisite  quantity  of  their  land  to  the  several  uses,  so  as  to  yield
the  maximum  utility.  If  the  utility  of  wheat,  for  example,  is  rising
as  compared  with  potatoes,  so  that  it  is  socially  desirable  to  put
into  wheat  some  land  formerly  used  for  potatoes,  that  can  only  be
brought  about  by  paying  a  slightly  higher  price  per  unit  of  wheat
land  than  before,  and  so  seducing  some  land  from  potato  use.  So
with  other  land  uses.  Wherever  there  are  alternative  uses  for  land,
a  pecuniary  inducement  is  necessary  in  order  to  achieve  the  most
productive  distribution  of  land  among  these  uses.

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  these  '  rents  '  originate  in
private  ownership  of  land,  or  that  with  the  substitution  of  public


DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  SURPLUS  BY  PULLS 133

ownership  they  would  disappear.  These  various  prices  of  land  uses
are  the  valuations  set  by  social  needs  upon  natural  qualities  of  land
which  are  scarce.  The}'  measure  the  utility  of  these  several  sorts
of  scarcity.  Neither  the  utility  nor  the  scarcity  arises  from  the
fact  that  individuals  are  permitted  to  own  land  and  take  these
prices.  If  all  these  sorts  of  land  were  nationalised,  the  scarcity  and
the  utility  would  remain  substantially  the  same,i  and  the  State
would  take  the  rents  which  individual  owners  took  before.  For  if
the  State  did  not  take  this  surplus  it  would  not  disappear,  but
would  simply  pass  to  the  occupants  of  the  land,  who  would  thus
enjoy  the  '  unearned  '  income  which  private  landowners  at  present
enjoy.  Public  policy  might  modify  in  certain  ways  the  scarcity  of
land  for  some  uses  by  improved  and  cheapened  transport,  cheap
capital  for  scientific  culture,  &c.  Bat  so  far  as  unalterable  qualities
of  fertilit}',  site,  &c.,  are  the  bases  of  specific  prices  of  land  use,  the
surplus  represented  by  these  rents  is  not  attributable  to  the  oppres-
sive action  of  landowners  but  to  the  natural  limitations  of  supply.

The  wide  differences  represented  by  these  specific  rents  are  not
appreciably  affected  by  the  conduct  of  landowners.  If  a  new  dis-
covery of  wheat  land  or  a  new  railway  increases  the  supply,  down
goes  the  price  per  unit,  and  owners  of  wheat  land  get  less  rent  :  if
a  new  population  springs  up  in  a  locality,  up  goes  the  price  per  unit
of  site  use,  and  owners  get  more  rent  ;  neither  rise  nor  fall  is  affected
l)y  anything  the}-  do.  In  a  particular  locality  land  value,  reckoned
by  units,  not  acres,  might  run  thus  : —

A  unit  of  building  land  costs  . . £10  per  annum

„  market  garden  costs . .  £4  per  annum

,,  wheat  land  costs  . .  £2  per  annum

grazing  land  costs  ..  £1  per  annum

These  wide  divergences  of  price  are  not  produced  by  the  land-
owners but  are  imposed  upon  them  by  the  presence  of  public  needs
and  natural  conditions  of  relative  scarcity.  They  are  necessary  pay-
ments from  the  standpoint  of  the  tenant,  who  must  pay  them  to
get  the  use  of  land  :  they  are  necessary  in  that  they  are  based  on
permanent  differences  of  nature.  They  are  not,  however,  necessary
payments  in  the  sense  of  inducements  to  these  recipients  to  perform
any  useful  action.

Second.  Dealing  with  the  payments  for  the  use  of  concrete
forms  of  capital,  real  interest,  we  saw  that  in  modern  civilised
communities  a  low  and  a  diminishing  rate  must  be  paid  to  savers

'  Certain  artificial  actions  and  usages  of  landlordism  which  interfere  with
the  economical  application  of  land  for  certain  uses,  withholding  some  lands
from  all  uses,  restricting  other  uses,  and  substituting  non-economic  for  eco-
nomic uses,  would  presumably  be  remedied  by  substituting  public  for  private
ownership.


134  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

to  induce  them  to  postpone  some  of  their  consuming  power  and  to
apply  it  to  setting  up  more  and  better  instruments  of  production
furnished  with  increased  quantities  of  materials.  The  amount  of
such  saving  as  is  socially  desirable  in  a  community  at  any  given
time  depends,  as  we  saw,  upon  the  condition  of  the  arts  of  industry
in  relation  to  the  anticipated  volume  of  consumption.  This  payment
is  a  strictly  necessary  cost  which  does  not  rank  as  '  surplus.'  But
our  analysis  of  the  part  played  by  actual  capital  shows  us  that,  in
many  industries,  monopoly,  combination,  superior  access  to  or  con-
trol of  markets,  protection,  and  other  public  aids,  enable  certain
supplies  of  capital  to  take  a  higher  rate  than  is  economically  neces-
sary to  draw  free  capital  into  the  use.  Such  payments  must  be
carefull}^  distinguished  from  the  high  interest  paid  in  certain  highly
speculative  investments,  which  is  not  really  interest  at  all  but
payment  for  risks,  and  which,  if  properly  discounted,  would  leave
interest  at,  or  often  even  below,  the  normal  rate.  The  high  interest
taken  b}^  artilicially  protected  capital  cannot,  excepting  to  a  mini-
mum extent,  be  regarded  as  socially  serviceable  in  the  sense  of
stimulating  increased  productivity.  If  it  is  desirable  that  certain
industries  shall  grow  faster  than  certain  others,  and  that  an  in-
creased flow  of  fluid  capital  shall  be  drawn  into  the  former,  this
enhanced  flow  can  be  obtained  by  a  very  trifling  premium,  and
requires  no  such  large  surplus  interest  as  is  paid  to  the  protected
capital.

In  a  modern  civilised  community  the  socially  profitable  appli-
cation of  new  savings  can  be  achieved  by  fractional  payments  (not
interest  at  all)  made  to  financiers  whose  skilled  business  it  is  to
distribute  fluid  capital  according  to  its  most  productive  use.  At
present  this  socially  useful  work  is  grievously  impaired  by  the  fact
that  this  distribution  of  new  capital  is  affected  and  often  dominated
by  other  considerations  than  those  of  its  socially  useful  productivity.
But  our  present  point  is  this,  that  all  genuine  interest,  over  and
above  the  minimum  rate  needed  to  evoke  the  new  saving  required
to  further  increased  production,  does  not  stimulate  industrial
efficiency,  and  is  waste  in  the  same  sense  as  the  economic  rent  of
land.

Third.  Using  the  term  '  labour  market  '  to  include  all  sorts  of
human  services  paid  by  wages,  fees,  salaries,  we  have  seen  that,
though  in  various  grades  of  work  payments  considerabl}^  above
subsistence  wage  are  socially  necessary  to  evoke  and  maintain
industrial  progress,  the  actual  apportionment  of  such  payments  had
little  relation  to  the  economic  stimuli  or  to  the  increase  of  efficiency.

Monopoly  of  educational  or  other  opportunities  has,  we  saw,
raised  the  actual  prices  of  certain  sorts  of  mental  and  even  manual


DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  SURPLUS  BY  PULLS 135

labour  so  high  that  much  of  the  payment  is  a  '  scarcity  '  rent  of  the
same  kind  as  that  obtained  by  naturally  scarce  land  or  protected
capital,  while  the  flooding  of  other  labour  markets,  owing  to  the
establishment  of  these  preserves,  has  brought  down  the  price  of
their  labour  so  low  as  to  deprive  it  of  any  adequate  stimulus  to
improved  efficiency.  This  is  one  important  setting  of  the  labour
question,  viz,  that  the  superior  pull  of  stronger  and  better  organ-
ised factors  of  production  upon  the  surplus  robs  ordinary  labour  of
that  share  of  the  general  product  required  to  evoke  the  technical
improvement  in  its  efficiency  which  is  essential  to  general  progress.
This  is  the  true  doctrine  of  the  economy  of  high  wages.  The  suc-
cessful attempt  of  the  stronger  factors  to  exhaust  the  surplus  by
wasteful  payments  in  rent,  surplus  interest  and  profits  has  con-
tinually retarded  the  rate  of  improvement  in  efficiency  of  labour,
and  so  has  sterilised  much  of  the  over-stimulation  of  capital  and
ability.

There  is,  however,  much  waste  in  the  portion  of  the  surplus
which  passes  to  the  small  grades  of  protected  labour  in  high  places.
Our  consideration  of  the  economy  of  high  salaries  shows  that,  after
a  certain  reasonable  rate  of  progress  in  standard  of  life  is  provided,
further  payment  is  not  merely  waste  but  often  a  wage  of  progressive
inefficiency.  This  is  best  illustrated  in  the  highest  grades  of  the  arts,
where  genius  is  distorted  to  win  evil  popularity  or  enslaved  to
plutocratic  patronage.

The  '  economy  '  of  high  wages  has  its  limits  :  when  incomes
rise  beyond  a  certain  pace,  each  increment  is  attended  by  a  dimin-
ishing improvement  in  efficiency,  and  a  level  is  reached  beyond
which  every  further  increase  of  income  involves  luxurious  waste
and  impairs  industry  and  efficiency.

There  is,  as  we  see,  no  economic  law  relating  scarcity  payments
for  ability  or  labour  to  this  economy,  or  preventing  the  payment
of  fees,  salaries,  or  wages  upon  a  scale  which  involves  waste  and
stimulates  inefficiency.

Fourth.  Our  examination  of  the  functions  of  the  entrepreneur
in  industry  and  finance,  and  the  modes  in  which  the  payment  for
his  services  were  determined,  showed  that  our  system  of  distribu-
tion made  no  adequate  provision  for  regulating  his  share  of  wealth
with  regard  to  economy.  Over  large  areas  of  industry  effective
competition  among  entrepreneurs  does  not  exist,  the  result  being
that  the  price  of  their  services  contains  a  large  scarcity  rent  which
enters  into  price.  High  profits,  as  we  saw,  represent  the  power  of
the  entrepreneur  to  buy  units  of  the  different  factors  of  pro-
duction at  a  relatively  low  price,  so  organise  their  co-operative  use
as  to  greatly  enhance  their  aggregate  productivity,  and  to  secure  as


136  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

prolit  the  whole  or  the  greater  part  of  this  difference  between  the
bu\nng  price  of  the  factors  and  the  selHng  price  of  their  joint  product.

If  competition  were  as  keen  and  constant  among  entrepreneurs
as  between  the  owners  of  the  labour-power  and  the  capital  they
buy  and  organise,  their  profits  would  be  cut  down  to  the  economic
minimum  hy  the  fall  of  prices.  But  over  a  large  part  of  the  in-
dustrial field  they  check  this  competition,  and  so  secure  rates  of
profit  far  liigher  than  are  necessary  to  induce  them  to  perform  their
function  as  organisers  and  developers  of  industry.  Among  entre-
preneurs the  financier  or  manipulator  of  fiuid  capital  and  of  credit
is  at  present  in  a  position  of  such  vantage  that  his  share  of  the
surplus  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  his  services.

§  3. — This  analysis  has  shown  that  the  present  system  of  industry
distributes  the  surplus  wealth  over  and  above  the  necessary  current
expenses  of  production  b\"  a  system  of  '  pulls  '  which  have  no  right
relation  to  the  stimulation  of  economic  progi^ess  throughout  the
system.  Much  of  the  surplus  goes  in  overpayments  which  check,
instead  of  stimulating,  efficiency-  and  progress,  while  ocher  portions
of  the  sj'stem,  especially  the  lower  grades  of  labour,  are  deprived
of  the  share  needed  to  evoke,  educate  and  support  the  growing
efficiency  requisite  for  participation  in  the  more  rapid  march  of
modern  industry.

This  unequal  distribution  of  the  '  surplus  '  of  current  industry
is  reflected  in  the  normal  prices,  and  so  in  the  rates  of  exchanges
between  the  various  classes  of  goods.  For  if  we  were  to  trace  the
different  processes  of  industry  by  which  goods  of  different  sorts
passed  from  raw  materials  to  commodities  in  the  possession  of  con-
sumers, analysing  closely  the  sale  of  the  units  of  the  factors  of
production  in  the  agricultural  and  mining  processes,  the  manufac-
turing, wholesale  and  retail  distributive  processes,  in  the  various
transport  and  financial  processes  connected  with  the  moving  of
goods  and  of  the  instruments  of  capital  and  labour  ;  if,  further,  we
scrutinised  the  \-arious  professions,  such  as  engineering,  architecture
and  the  like,  subsidiary  to  the  production  of  material  commodities,
we  should  find  that,  at  each  stage  in  this  long  process,  some  owner
of  a  factor  of  production  was,  by  reason  of  a  natural  or  contrived
shortness  of  supply,  able  to  extract  a  '  forced  gain  '  or  surplus  price
which  entered  into  and  enhanced  the  price  of  this  particular  process,
and  so  was  passed  on  until  it  was  reflected  in  the  retail  price  of
the  commodity.  Sometimes  it  would  be  a  mining  entrepreneur,  as
in  the  case  of  diamonds,  who  would  get  the  chief  pull,  sometimes
a  landowner  extorting  high  ground  rents,  sometimes  a  railway
company  charging  '  all  the  traffic  will  bear,'  sometimes  a  financier
effecting a '  combine,' sometimes a manufacturer thriving on


DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  SURPLUS  BY  PULLS 137

sweated  labour,  a  banker  thriving  on  higli  discount  for  loans
and  overdrafts,  contractors  securing  tenders  by  agreement  at  profit-
able rates,  coal  merchants  cornering  supplies  and  holding  up  prices,
or  rings  of  local  tradesmen  raising  the  margin  between  wholesale
and  retail  prices  for  milk  and  bread.  Every  retail  price  of  commo-
dities contains  some  of  these  surplus  elements  which  have  entered
in  at  different  points  in  the  series  of  productive  and  distributive
processes  :  in  most  cases  there  will  be  a  large  number  of  these
additions  to  the  strictly  necessary  expenses  of  production.  In  many
cases  the  large  addition  will  take  place  at  some  one  point  where  a
powerful  monopoly,  or  a  close  scarcity,  gives  a  particularly  powerful
'  pull '  to  some  protected  interest,  some  combine  or  some  owner
of  a  natural  source  of  supply.  But  the  proportion  in  which  these
surplus  payments  enter  into  the  retail  prices  of  various  commodities
will  be  widely  different :  in  some  cases  price  will  be  mostly  surplus,
in  other  cases  keen  competition  down  a  whole  line  of  processes  will
keep  down  the  price  near  to  the  strictly  necessary  expenses  of
production.

These  differences  will  all  be  reflected  in  normal  prices,  expressing
the  values  of  different  commodities.

If  the  analogy  of  '  rent  '  be  applied  to  these  various  sorts  of
surplus  payment,  it  must  always  be  insisted  that  these  rents  are
specific  rents  paid  for  all  portions  of  a  supply,  not  differential  rents
measuring  the  superior  qualities  or  opportunities  of  some  particular
portion  of  a  supply.  These  differential  rents,  which  disappear  under
the  application  of  our  unitary  method,  are,  of  course,  not  repre-
sented in  price.  The  specific  rents  are  so  represented,  for  they
imply  that  the  price  per  unit  of  supply  of  land,  capital,  labour,
ability  is  increased  by  the  presence  of  these  several  sorts  of  surplus.

These  rents  or  '  forced  gains  '  or  '  excessive  payments  '  have,
for  convenience,  been  treated  as  permanent  or  normal  elements  in
price,  to  be  distinguished  from  merely  temporary  rises  of  price  due
to  some  new  swelling  of  demand  or  some  casual  shortage  of  supply.
But  this  distinction  between  normal  and  market  prices  has,  of  course,
no  clear  logical  validity.  Some  of  our  '  rents  '  or  '  forced  gains  '
are  based  upon  fairly  permanent  restrictions  of  supply  or  competi-
tion, others  upon  less  reliable  restrictions.  Many  of  these  '  rents,'
though  based  on  permanent  conditions,  yet  fluctuate  in  amount.
Some  of  them  are  short-time  rents,  casual  or  recurrent,  and  are,  in
fact,  indistinguishable  from  the  short  movements  of  market  prices.
In  fact,  every  change  of  industrial  methods,  or  of  size  and  character
of  consumption,  affects  these  '  rents  '  so  that,  as  regards  many  of
them,  the  particular  points  of  their  emergence  and  their  size  are
constantly  shifting. Closer  study,  however,  shows  that  some  of


138  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

them  possess  a  high  degree  of  strength  and  permanency,  especially
those  related  to  the  main  processes  in  the  production  of  some
necessary  or  prime  convenience  of  life  strongly  fixed  in  the  standard
of  consumption  of  a  people.

The  unsubstantial  and  fluctuating  character  of  many  of  these
rents,  reflected,  of  course,  in  price  changes,  is  a  source  of  great
inconvenience  and  loss  in  the  working  of  our  industrial  system,
quite  apart  from  the  main  waste  which  the  uneconomical  distribution
of  the  surplus  represents.  If  all  goods  exchanged  according  to
their  strictly  necessary  expenses  of  production,  or  according  to
these  expenses  increased  by  a  regular  proportion  of  the  surplus
applied  by  some  law  for  the  encouragement  of  industrial  growth,  a
high  degree  of  stability  of  prices  would  give  security  to  commerce,
and  would  enable  producers  and  consumers  to  exercise  more  intelli-
gent foresight  in  the  use  of  their  resources.  In  a  word,  it  would
eliminate  a  large  element  of  hazard  involving  waste  of  mental  energy
and  of  material  wealth.

From  whatever  point  of  view  we  regard  the  distribution  of  this
surplus  of  '  unearned  '  and  forced  gains  we  shall  see  in  it  the  prime
cause  of  almost  all  the  maladies  of  our  industrial  system.


CHAPTER VIII

PRICES AND THE RATIO OF EXCHANGE

§  I.  Neither  marginal  costs  nor  marginal  expenses  can  afford  an  explanation
of  rates  of  exchange  for  goods. — §  2.  The  '  marginal  '  determination  is
based  on  a  false  imputation  of  separate  costs  to  different  parts  of  a  supply.
Neither  theory  nor  business  practice  supports  this  separation.  Normal,
not  marginal,  expenses  determine  supply  prices.  Productive  power
tends  to  flow  into  the  most  efficient  business  type,  and  the  expenses  of
this  normal  business  regulate  prices.  ,.  This  holds  both  of  manufacture
and  of  agriculture. — §  3.  In  any  given  market  mean  expenses  govern
prices.  The  same  analysis  applies  to  demand  prices:  mean,  not  marginal,
utility  determines  them.  Selling  prices  are  the  equilibrium  of  mean
expenses  and  mean  utility,  as  expressed  through  demand.

§  I. — Our  analysis  of  prices  has  shown  that  the  price  of  any  supply  of
goods  consists  of  and  breaks  up  into  a  number  of  payments  made  in
the  different  stages  of  production  to  the  owners  of  labour,  capital,
land  and  ability,  for  units  of  these  factors  of  production  bought  at
varying  prices.  These  payments  are  all  expenses  of  production,
which,  under  the  social  circumstances  of  supply  in  each  case,  must
be  paid  ;  but  the  expenses  are  not  all  necessary  in  the  same  sense.
For  while  some  parts  of  the  expenses  are  physically  and  morally
necessary  to  support  and  to  evoke  the  power  of  production  given
out,  other  portions  are  only  necessary  in  the  sense  that  they  can  be
got  by  use  of  an  economic  pressure  resting  upon  a  natural  or  con-
trived scarcity  of  a  factor.

But  so  far  as  the  composition  of  prices  is  concerned,  no  distinc-
tion can  be  made  between  the  necessary  costs  in  the  narrower  sense
and  the  surplus  elements.  As  we  have  seen,  the  latter  enter  into
p)rice  equally  with  the  former,  the  price  of  units  of  land  use  equally
with  the  price  of  units  of  unskilled  labour,  though  the  latter  contains
no  '  surplus,'  while  the  former  is  entirely  surplus.  The  fact  that  in
the  one  case  painful  human  effort  is  involved,  while  in  the  other
Nature  gives  out  her  free  energy,  makes  no  difference  as  regards
the  constitution  of  the  price  of  the  goods  into  which  these  payments
enter.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  why  different  sorts  of
goods  exchange  with  one  another  at  the  rate  they  do  ;  why,  for
example,  a  top  hat  of  a  particular  make  exchanges  on  equal  terms
with  a  ton  of  coal,  but  will  take  two  pairs  of  low-grade  boots  to

139


140  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

purchase  it.  In  other  words,  the  ratio  of  exchange,  the  respective
values  set  on  different  sorts  of  articles  expressed  in  their  prices,  will
become  manifest.

The  top  hat  and  the  ton  of  coal  exchange  on  equal  terms,  each
with  a  price  of  £i,  because  analysis  of  the  price  in  each  case  shows
that  the  sums  of  the  price  of  the  different  units  of  factors  of  pro-
duction happen  to  come  to  the  same  figure,  whereas  the  sum  of  the
])rice  of  the  productive  units  in  a  pair  of  boots  only  comes  to  half
that  figure.

This,  of  course,  only  amounts  to  saying  that  supplies  of  goods
exchange  according  to  their  expenses  of  production,  their  prices
being  composed  of  these  expenses.

It  is  commonly  held  by  those  economists  who  look  at  prices,  or
exchange  ratio,  from  the  side  of  production,  that  the  expenses
which  determine  (or  measure)  the  normal  selling  price  of  a  supply
of  goods  are  the  marginal  expenses,  i.e.  the  expenses  of  producing
that  portion  of  the  supply  produced  by  the  worst-equipped  mill  or
least  efficient  labour,  or  the  least  fertile  land,  or  the  least  efficient
combination  of  factors.  Now  it  is  obviously  true  that  some  of  the
material  or  mental  factors  contributing  to  the  production  of  a
supply  are  inferior  to  others,  and  that  the  selling  price  for  the
whole  supply  must  be  sufficient  to  furnish  to  the  worst  combination
of  factors  an  inducement  to  contribute  towards  the  supply.  If
there  were  an  equal  abundance  of  all  the  factors  of  production  (the
quantity  of  each  grade  being,  however,  limited)  and  perfect  freedom
to  enter  the  industry,  and  contribute  to  supply,  the  selling  price
would  evidently  be  just  sufficient  to  remunerate  the  worst  combi-
nation of  factors.  It  might  then  be  correctly  said  not  only  that
the  marginal  costs  of  production  measured  the  selling  price,  but
even  that  they  '  determined '  it,  in  the  sense  that  any  increased
demand  for  goods  at  this  price  would  be  checked  by  the  limitation
of  the  supply  of  these  least  efficient  factors,  and  by  the  necessity
of  having  recourse  to  still  less  efficient  ones.  The  selling  price  in
such  a  case  would  just  cover  wear  and  tear  and  minimum  wages,
interest  and  profit  at  this  margin  :  owners  of  more  efficient  factors
would,  of  course,  receive  payments  measuring  the  superiority  of
this  efficiency  over  that  of  the  factors  at  the  margin.  If  industry
in  general  conformed  to  this  idea,  the  selling  prices  of  all  goods  and
services  would  be  exactly  measured,  and  in  this  sense  determined,
by  these  marginal  costs  of  production  ;  and  since  selling  prices  are
only  the  instruments  for  exchanging  goods  against  goods,  we  should
have  a  quite  simple  and  satisfactory  law  of  exchange  based  on  the
relative  costs  of  producing  marginal  supplies  of  the  several  sorts  of
products.


PRICES  AND  THE  RATIO  OF  EXCHANGE  141

Now,  as  we  have  seen,  industry  does  not  in  general  conform  to
this  idea  so  far  as  to  secure  that  the  least  efficient  combination  of
factors  in  a  trade  must  receive  or  does  receive  nothing  but  these
bare  minimum  costs.  There  is  not  normally  an  equal  abundance
of  all  the  factors,  but  a  relative  scarcity  of  one  or  another :  there
is  not  perfect  freedom  of  the  owners  of  all  factors  to  apply  their
factor  in  any  trade.  This  normal  and  general  interference  with  free
fluidity  of  productive  powers  is  such  that  the  '  expenses  '  of  produc-
tion by  the  least  efficient  businesses  in  most  trades  contains  elements
of  '  surplus  '  which  also  enter  into  the  selling  price  as  measured
from  the  margin.

But,  though  admitting  that  the  marginal  expenses  of  production
may  often,  or  even  usually,  be  weighted  with  some  of  these  '  sur-
plus '  elements,  it  may  still  be  contended  that  the  most  serviceable
law  of  exchange  is  one  which  compares  them  at  the  margin,  and
holds  that  goods  tend  to  exchange  in  the  ratio  of  their  marginal
expenses  of  production.

Now  the  practical  utility  of  such  a  law  of  exchange  has  never
been  apparent,  and  our  analysis  of  the  actual  co-operation  of  factors
in  production  has  partially  exposed  the  nature  of  its  inutility.  For
it  has  shown  that  in  a  business  or  trade  the  question  where  the
margin  shall  lie,  i.e.  what  particular  acres,  machines,  men  shall  be
the  worst  in  use,  is  itself  directly  determined  by  the  price  of  the
goods  ;  while  the  part  played  by  the  marginal  supply  in  helping  to
determine  the  price  of  the  goods  is  neither  greater  than,  nor  different
from,  that  played  by  any  other  portion  of  the  supply.

It  is  absolutely  true  that  the  worst  factors  of  production  con-
tributing to  a  given  supply  must  receive  a  price  just  adequate  to
evoke  their  productive  power,  and  can  only  receive  more  where
monopoly  conditions,  restriction  of  supply  of  some  factor,  exist.
If,  as  the  result  of  a  growth  of  demand,  there  is  a  lowering  of
the  margin,  worse  factors  being  taken  on,  the  price  per  unit  of
productive  power  must  rise  so  as  to  remunerate  these  worse  factors
which  would  not  have  been  adequately  remunerated  at  the  former
price  per  unit.  But  it  is  not  true  that  the  factors,  i.e.  men  or  acres,
at  the  former  margin  must  be  getting  at  the  new  supply  prices  a
rise  of  price  measuring  the  separate  superiority  of  their  productivity
over  that  of  the  men  or  acres  at  the  new  margin.  The  enhanced
price  they  will  get  will  be  determined  by  the  enhancement  of  the
mean  expense  of  the  new  complex  of  factors  as  compared  with  the
old  complex,  and,  though  this  new  complex  will  imply  a  larger
expense  per  unit,  the  amount  of  this  increase  is  not  determined  by
comparing  the  old  margin  with  the  new.

The  whole  idea  of  attributing  a  separate  productivity  to  men  or


142  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

acres  or  machines  at  a  margin  of  employment,  and  of  regarding
expenses  for  the  whole  supply  as  determined  or  even  measured  by
this  separate  productivity,  is  inconsistent  with  the  rationale  of
business  structure.

§  2. — A  somewhat  more  formal  refutation  of  the  validity  of  the
'  marginal  expense  '  theory  of  exchange  is,  however,  here  necessary.

Let  us  restate  our  question  thus  :  How  far  is  it  true  that  within
a  business  or  within  a  trade  the  separate  expenses  of  production  of
the  '  marginal '  portion  of  supply  can  be  ascertained,  and  if  they  can
be  ascertained,  does  this  portion  of  supply  exercise  any  greater
influence  in  determining  the  price  of  the  whole  product  than  any
other  portion  ?

So  far  as  a  single  business  is  concerned,  it  cannot  be  shown  that
any  separate  expense  of  production  exists  for  a  particular  portion
of  the  output.

The  true  theory,  agreeing  substantially  with  the  business
practice,  denies  the  existence  of  a  number  of  separate  expenses  of
production  applied  to  different  portions  of  an  aggregate  supply.

The  true  formula  runs  thus  :  If  looo  tons  be  produced,  each
ton  costs  IDS.  ;  if  2000  tons  be  produced  each  ton  costs  8s.  ;  if
5000  tons  7s.,  and  so  on.  But  if  the  cost  1  of  a  ton  always  depends
upon  the  number  of  other  tons  produced  along  with  it,  a  ton  can
never  be  rightly  regarded  as  a  separate  economic  unit  with  a
separate  cost. It  is  only  the  whole  output  that  has  a  true  cost.

This  is  the  view  taken  by  a  business  man,  a  manufacturer  who
contemplates  laying  down  a  new  plant.  He  calculates  that  by
laying  down  such  and  such  a  plant,  he  can  turn  out  so  many
thousand  tons  and  can  sell  them  at  such  a  price,  earning  such  a
margin  of  profit.

He  treats  the  process  of  production  as  a  whole,  recognising  the
fallacy  of  regarding  any  particular  quantity  of  capital  and  labour
as  allocated  to  the  production  of  a  particular  part  of  the  output.
He  compares  in  his  mind  the  differences  in  net  gain  from  producing
on  various  scales,  but  it  is  always  one  aggregate  product  he  sets
against  another,  not  the  different  increments  of  the  same  product.

Even  when  he  considers  whether  a  particular  order,  involving
overtime,  is  worth  taking,  he  does  not  in  fact  treat  this  order  as  an
entirely  separate  thing,  asking  whether  on  this  order  he  is  earning
a  living  profit  on  his  capital  invested.  He  sometimes  treats  it
separately  as  regards  '  prime  cost,'  asking  whether  it  yields  any
margin  •  but  usually  he  has  regard  to  the  general  effect  upon  his
future  trade  of  accepting  or  refusing  the  order. If  he  sees  his  way

'  Here  we  use  the  term  in  its  ordinary^business  signification  as  equivalent
to  '  expenses.'


PRICES  AND  THE  RATIO  OF  EXCHANGE  143

to  cover  prime  costs,  he  is  usually  contented,  though  aware  that
certain  other  fixed  expenses  are  involved.  He  is  aware  that  he
cannot  justifiably  reckon  a  separate  total  expense  of  production  for
this  order,  because  of  the  inability  to  make  a  true  allowance  for
fixed  expenses  and  for  the  general  effects  of  this  order  on  the
organisation  of  his  business  and  upon  his  market.

In  planning  a  business,  it  may  be  urged,  he  surely  considers
whether  he  shall  put  down  a  plant  worth  £10,000  or  /i2,ooo  or
/|i5,ooo.  If  he  selects  the  second  it  is  because  the  difference  of
output  between  that  of  a  ;£io,ooo  and  a  ;fi2,ooo  plant  is  just  worth
while  producing.  But  in  operating  the  ;^i2,ooo  plant,  upon  which
he  decides,  it  cannot  be  pretended  that  any  part  of  the  output
is  produced  at  a  different  cost  from  any  other,  and  this  is  the
assumption  required  for  the  marginal  cost  theory.

What  he  calculates  is  the  normal  '  cost '  of  producing  a  ton
upon  a  larger  or  a  smaller  scale,  and  he  selects  that  scale  upon
which  any  ton  can  be  produced  so  as  to  yield  a  margin  of  profit
which,  taking  the  whole  trade,  will  yield  a  maximum  net  profit.

Now,  so  far  as  clear  knowledge  of  industrial  conditions  and  free
access  of  capital  and  labour  into  the  industry  exists,  it  seems  mani-
fest that  the  productive  power  within  the  trade  will  tend  to  throw
itself  into  businesses  whose  shape  and  size  will  depend  upon  those
technical  conditions  which  determine  the  cheapest  rate  at  which  a
ton  can  be  turned  out.  If  the  price  of  a  ton  of  steel  rails  in  England
or  America  is  30s.,  does  that  mean  the  price  is  determined  by  the
condition  of  the  worst  equipped  mill  or  the  least  efficient  labour
employed  in  the  trade  ?  No,  it  means  that  the  normal  type  of  the
most  efficient  mill,  to  which  all  businesses  in  the  industry  tend  to
conform,  turns  out  goods  which,  at  that  price,  pay  the  '  cost '  of
producing  a  ton,  together  with  any  margin  of  surplus  due  to
combination  or  lack  of  free  competition.  \ -;

But  even  if  we  suppose  free  competition,  the  same  is  true  :  the
expense  of  producing  not  the  '  last '  but  a  unit  of  the  product  by
a  normal  type  of  efficient  business  must  be  said  to  be  the  direct
determinant  of  the  normal  supply  price.

The  superior  ability,  or  other  special  technical  economies  inac-
cessible to  the  body  of  the  trade,  may  enable  a  few  businesses  to
produce  a  ton  more  cheaply  than  the  typical  business  :  if  so,  the
supply  price  yields  them  a  differential  rent :  a  few  others  may  sur-
vive for  a  time  with  old-fashioned  machinery  or  antiquated  methods,
barely  paying  their  way.  The  abnormally  high  profits  of  the  former,
the  abnormally  low  profits  of  the  latter,  are  evidently  determined
by  prices  dependent  on  the  expenses  of  production  of  the  normal
mill.


144  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

In  an  industry  where  perfect  freedom  of  competition  exists,
including  equal  access  to  materials,  equal  knowledge  of  methods  of
production  and  of  business  organisation,  equal  access  to  markets,
it  is  clear  that  all  businesses  would  closely  conform  to  one  type,  or
at  least  to  two  or  three  equally  effective  types.  In  such  an  industry
any  aberrations  of  expenses  of  production  above  or  below  the
normal  would  evidently  be  temporary  and  in  no  sense  real  deter-
minants of  price.  Though  such  degree  of  freedom  of  competition
is  seldom  attained,  the  law  still  holds  good,  at  any  rate,  so  far  as
the  businesses  below  the  normal  in  efficiency  are  concerned  ;  ^  they
cannot  long  survive,  for  the  dominant  part  played  by  the  compe-
tition of  normally  equipped  and  ordered  businesses  in  determining
expenses  and  price,  by  denying  them  a  living  profit,  must  gradually
starve  them  out.  It  is,  therefore,  not  to  the  least  efficient,  but
to  the  normal  business,  that  we  must  look  for  the  expenses  of
production  that  determine  and  measure  normal  prices.

In  a  freely  competitive  industry  the  vast  majority  of  the
*  supply  '  will  be  produced  by  businesses  of  '  normal  '  efficiency.  It
may  be  said  that  in  this  case  the  normal  is  the  marginal.  But  this
is  not  actually  true.  We  should  do  better  to  keep  to  the  actual
facts  of  industry,  which  show  that  at  any  given  time  in  such  an
industry,  a  few  super-normal  and  a  few  sub-normal  mills  are
contributing  to  supply.  If  so,  the  sub-normal  will  inevitably  appear
to  be  '  marginal,'  though  their  continued  operation  is  not  assured.
So  long  as  they  operate  their  output  has  some  slight  effect  in
determining  supply  price,  but  the  operation  of  the  normal  makes
it  the  main  determinant.

The  same  will  hold  of  agricultural  production  so  far  as  it  is
regarded  as  subject  to  free  flows  of  industrial  power.  A  farmer
settling  in  Canada  will  calculate  how  much  capital  and  land  he  shall
put  into  wheat,  working  it  with  ordinary  machinery  and  ordinary
labour,  knowing  how  much  he  must  pay  for  his  land  and  his  labour,
and  reckoning  whether  current  or  expected  prices  will  yield  a
margin.  It  is  more  speculative  than  in  manufacture,  but  essen-
tially the  same  method  :  he  reckons  a  normal  cost  of  production
for  a  given  output  to  be  sold  at  a  given  price.  This  type  of  farmer
may  be  said  to  fix  the  normal  expenses  of  production  per  quarter,
and  the  supply  price  conforms  to  it  ;  lucky  or  superior  farmers  get
more  profit,  unlucky  or  inferior  farmers  get  less  :  this  divergence
ranks  as  a  surplus  or  a  deficit.

On  a  particular  farm  no  part  of  the  wheat  can  be  said  to  be

'  In  chap.  xii.  we  shall  see  that  certain  special  forces  tend  in  some
trades  to  raise  the  business  to  a  size  exceeding  the  true  '  economic  unit  of
efficient  production.'


PRICES  AND  THE  RATIO  OF  EXCHANGE  145

more  expensive  to  produce  than  any  other  part.  The  '  marginal
labourer  '  working  with  the  '  marginal  use  of  machines,'  ploughing,
fencing,  &c.,  is  a  fictitious  creature,  the  product  of  an  illicit  separa-
tion of  the  farm  which  is  an  organic  whole  for  production.  There
may  be  a  field  just  worth  sowing,  a  hand  just  worth  hire,  but  this  is
because  such  enlargement  of  the  business  so  affects  the  arrangement
of  the  factors  of  production  as  a  whole,  as  to  make  it  hardly  more
productive  than  before,  not  because  the  particular  wheat  due  to
this  last  field  or  last  hand,  determines  the  supply  price.  What  our
farmer  would  ask  is  :  '  How  would  the  employment  of  this  new  field,
or  this  new  hand,  affect  the  general  expense  of  production  of  a
bushel  on  my  farm,  through  altering  the  disposition  of  the  capital
and  labour  in  use,  and  how  far  wiU  the  estimated  increase  of  supply,
at  perhaps  a  slightly  enhanced  expense  per  unit,  yield  a  larger
aggregate  profit  ?  '

§  3. — There  is,  however,  some  danger  in  laying  too  great  stress
upon  the  statement  that  the  expenses  of  production  of  a  unit  of
supply  by  a  normal  business  determines  the  supply  price  for  the
whole  supply.

The  number,  relative  importance,  and  endurance  of  abnormal
types  of  business,  above  and  below  the  normal,  wiU  evidently
exercise  some  modifying  influence  on  the  supply  price.  Indeed,
strictly  speaking,  every  unit  of  supply  exercises  an  equal  influence
with  every  other  upon  supply  price,  and  the  conditions  affecting
any  of  these  units  affect  price  equally.  Contributing  to  the  supply
of  a  given  class  of  shoes  there  may  be  some  factories  with  the  best
up-to-date  machinery,  others  with  old-fashioned  machines,  and
some  hand-made  work  just  managing  to  pay  a  declining  wage  in
competition  with  machinery.  Though  the  latter  evidently  exercises
no  special  determinant  influence  on  prices,  yet  so  long  as  it  furnishes
part  of  the  supply,  it  may  be  held  to  have  a  proportionate  influence  ;
if  it  were  suddenly  withdrawn,  prices  would  rise  until  machine
production  was  increased  to  take  its  place.  But  in  looking  at
price  change  through  supply,  we  should  not  look  at  this  least
remunerative,  or  marginal,  section  of  the  trade.  Price  change
may  equally  occur,  and  far  more  commonly  does  occur,  as  we  have
seen,  through  some  cause  affecting,  not  the  margin,  but  other  parts
of  the  supply,  e.g.,  the  introduction  of  an  improved  clicking  machine
into  the  best-equipped  factories,  or  some  rise  of  wages  among  the
well-organised  section  of  the  trade,  directly  affecting,  not  the
margin,  but  perhaps  only  the  middle  section  of  the  trade  located
in  some  centre  which  has  not  kept  pace  with  the  latest  labour-
saving  improvements.

The  same  holds  of  the  wheat  supply. It  is  not  true  either

L


146  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

that  the  wheat  grown  on  the  worst  EngUsh  soil,  or  with  some
'  final '  dose  of  capital  and  labour  on  ordinary  soil,  or  the  wheat
grown  on  the  recently  opened  free  lands  in  Canada,  ever  exerts
any  peculiar  force  in  determining  wheat  prices  in  England.  The
conditions  under  which  all  these  different  crops  are  raised  affect
price  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  several  crops,  and,  if  we  are
studying  the  reasons  for  some  normal  rise  or  fall  in  wheat  prices,
we  should  not  look  to  what  happens  to  marginal  wheat  so-caUed,
more  than  to  wheat  grown  under  more  advantageous  conditions.
Of  course,  it  is  true  that  the  worst  shoe  factory  which  keeps  on
turning  out  shoes,  and  the  least  productive  farm  that  continues
growing  wheat,  must  cover  their  '  expenses,'  and  cannot  do  more,
but  it  is  not  true  that  they  determine  in  any  special  way  the  supply
prices  for  shoes  or  wheat.  Moreover,  a  type  widely  diverging
from  the  normal  cannot  long  survive.  Neither,  on  the  contrary,
is  it  strictly  true  that  they  exercise  no  influence  on  prices.  Their
influence  is  simply  commensurate  with  the  proportion  of  their
contribution  to  supply.

If  this  is  correct,  it  is  the  mean  expenses  of  production  that
directly  determine  supply  price,  and  what  we  called  the  normal
type  of  business  only  determines  it  so  far  as  it  represents  this  mean.
Whenever,  in  any  industry,  the  play  of  industrial  forces  is  free,  and
one  type  of  business  efficiency  prevails,  this  normal  type  so  far
absorbs  the  whole  of  the  production  that  it  is  seen  to  dominate
the  supply  price.  So  in  America  one  may  reasonably  recognise
that  the  price  of  steel  rails  is  determined  by  the  well-equipped
Pittsburg  mill.  Given  free  fluidity  of  capital  and  labour,  with
equal  access  to  technical  and  business  information  and  to  markets,
the  whole  of  a  manufacturing  industry  tends  to  crystallise  in  one
or  two  types  of  business  of  the  same  size  and  structure,  and  the
supply  price  measures  the  expenses  of  production  (with  or  without
a  '  surplus  '  representing  restriction  of  suppty).

In  a  word,  the  poorest  farm,  the  worst  field,  the  last  ploughing,
exerts  no  special  determinant  influence  on  the  supply  price  of
wheat.  The  worst  steel  plant,  the  last  hour's  work  of  the  least
efficient  shift  of  labour,  exerts  no  special  determinant  influence
on  the  supply  price  of  steel  rails.

Mean  expenses  of  production  determine  the  supply  price  of
wheat,  and  this  supply  price  determines  what  shall  be  the  poorest
land  in  use  and  how  many  ploughings  are  worth  while.  Similarly
with  steel  rails  and  with  all  other  products.  Mean  expenses  of
production,  not  marginal,  determine  supply  prices.

A  corresponding  analysis  is  applicable  on  the  demand  side.
The normal or mean,  not the marginal, utility to consumers


PRICES  AND  THE  RATIO  OF  EXCHANGE


147


determines  demand  prices,  i.e.  determines  the  amount  of  money
(ultimately  of  other  goods)  which  will  be  paid  for  a  given  quantity  of
supply  at  a  given  price.  The  schedule  of  demand  prices  for  a  ton
of  steam  coal  is  chiefly  determined  by  the  normally  well-equipped
modern  steamer,  and  an  ill-equipped  steamer  has  to  pay  this  price  ;
a  new  steamer  with  a  new  superior  boiler  need  pay  no  more.
Similarly,  it  will  be  recognised  that  the  demand  price  for  a  gallon
of  whisky  is  fixed  by  the  place  whisky  occupies  in  the  normal
standard  of  consumption  of  regular  drinkers,  not  by  the  marginal
utihty  as  represented  by  the  demand  of  occasional  drinkers  (the
extensive  margin)  or  as  represented  by  the  utility  of  the  last  glass
of  topers  (the  intensive  margin).  Where  these  margins  fall  is
itself  determined  by  the  demand  prices  which  the  normal  or  mean
utility  has  fixed.

The  amount  of  demand  at  these  margins  only  operates  upon
demand  prices  in  proportion  to  its  extent,  as  in  the  case  of  margins
of  supply.

Given  our  scales  of  normal  supply  and  demand  prices  thus
determined  by  mean  '  cost  '  and  mean  utility,  the  equilibrium
of  a  normal  selling  price  is  reached.


a  b  is  SL  line  of  ascending  prices  rising  from  zero  at  a  to  15s.  at
b.  a  c  is  the  supply  curve  expressing  the  relation  between  rise  of
price  and  increase  of  supply,  the  increase  of  supply  at  each  point
being  measured  by  the  perpendicular  rising  from  the  base  and
intersecting  the  supply  curve,  b  dis  the  demand  curve  representing
the  increase  of  demand  as  the  price  falls  from  the  maximum  15s.
towards  zero.  The  supply  and  demand  curves  intersect  at  e,  the
perpendicular  from  6,  thus  giving  6s.  as  the  normal  selling  point,
that  where  the  supply  equilibrates  the  demand.

L  2


148  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

The  selling  price  may  be  considered  to  measure  either  the
mean  expenses  of  production  or  the  mean  utility  of  consumption,
and  the  ratio  of  exchange  thus  attained  between  various  classes
of  goods  and  services  may  be  regarded  from  either  point  of  view.

From  the  business  standpoint  the  ratio  of  exchange  will  be
reckoned  according  to  the  respective  expenses  of  production ;
from  the  sociological  standpoint  the  standard  will  be  mean  utility.  ^

Since  we  are  here  primarily  engaged  in  analysis  of  industrial
operations,  we  shall  prefer  in  the  present  stage  of  our  investigation
the  former  standpoint,  taking  for  our  standard  of  exchange  the
mean  expenses  of  production  of  the  various  goods.

In  setting  out  the  respective  '  values  '  of  various  sorts  of  goods,
as  represented  in  their  normal  selling  price,  we  shall  then  be  simply
measuring  their  relative  mean  expenses  of  production.  But  in
these  expenses,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  we  reckon  all  the  elements
which  a  business  man  would  reckon,  including  elements  of
surplus  gain,  or  scarcity  rents,  which  are  extorted  in  some  of  the
processes  of  production  contained  in  the  history  of  the  goods  in
question.

;  Round  the  normal  price  thus  interpreted  the  market,  or  short-
range,  prices  will  fluctuate.  The  difference  between  long-time,  or
normal,  and  short-time,  or  market,  prices  has  of  course  no  logical
basis,  it  is  a  matter  merely  of  convenience.

Changes  in  the  relative  expenses  of  production,  and  utility  of
consumption,  of  different  sorts  of  goods  are  continuall}^  going  on  ;
some  are  slow  and  regular,  others  quick  and  irregular.

If  we  turn  to  the  distribution  of  the  surplus,  it  is  not  vitally
affected  by  the  difference  between  normal  and  market  prices,
though  in  certain  markets,  as  for  instance  the  money  market,
considerable  changes  in  the  distribution  of  surplus  gains  are  due
to  contrived  short-time  scarcities.  The  fluctuations  of  a  market
round  normal  prices  cannot  cancel,  as  is  sometimes  supposed,  the
major  gains  derived  from  the  strong  positions  held  by  owners  of
factors  which  are  scarce  by  nature  or  by  durable  contrivances.
For  if  we  examine  the  various  classes  of  markets  in  which  the  uses
of  the  several  factors  of  production,  or  the  various  classes  of  material
or  immaterial  goods,  from  raw  materials  to  finished  commodities,
are  sold,  we  shall  find  that  in  these  markets  sellers  or  buyers,  as  a
body,  are  unequally  matched,  in  some  markets  the  sellers,  in  others
the  buyers,  being  the  stronger,  and  able  to  impose  their  strength
in  the  process  of  fixing  a  market  price.

'  This  docs  not,  however,  signify  that  sociology  is  indifferent  to  llic  '  cost '
side  of  the  problem.  This  will  clearly  come  into  it  in  terms  of  the  '  disutility  '
of  production.


CHAPTER IX

I

THE MECHANISM OF MARKETS

I

§  I.  Economic  bargaining  approaches  but  does  not  usually  reach  a  definite
market  price. — §  2.  An  equilibrium  of  supply  and  demand  prices  involves
infinite  divisibility  of  the  supply. — §  3.  Various  restrictions  impair  the
'  freedom  '  of  a  market.

II

§  I.  Analysis  of  the  different  markets  for  the  sale  of  factors  of  production  and
of  goods  and  commodities  shows  that  free  bargaining  only  operates  over
a  small  portion  of  the  industrial  field. — §  2.  Most  final  commodities
contain  elements  of  surplus  which  pass  into  their  price  by  '  pulls  '  or
'  scarcity  rents  '  at  various  stages  of  production.


§  I. — Commerce,  or  the  art  of  exchange,  enables  any  person  with  a
claim  upon  some  particular  product  to  convert  it  into  a  claim  upon
any  other  sort  of  product.  A  person  thus  exchanging  anything  for
something  else  is  actuated  by  one  of  two  motives  :  either  he  desires
to  exchange  his  superfluous  product  in  order  to  get  some  other
articles  which  he  wishes  to  consume,  or  else  he  desires  to  get  some
materials,  tools,  or  other  concrete  capital  to  use  in  some  process  of
production.

All  buying  and  selling  has  one  of  these  two  ends  in  view,  to
assist  production  or  to  assist  consumption,  by  enabling  persons  to
convert  the  ownership  of  some  particular  goods  into  the  ownership
of  some  other  goods.

In  other  words,  it  enables  every  person  receiving  his  income  in
the  shape  of  a  claim  upon  particular  goods,  which  by  the  use  of  his
labour-power,  ability,  land  or  capital  he  has  helped  to  produce,  to
realise  that  claim  in  any  other  sort  of  goods  which  he  prefers.

The  general  economic  functions  of  exchange  are  two  :  first,  to
increase  the  utility  of  an  income  for  purpose  of  consumption  ;
secondly,  to  increase  the  utility  of  the  factors  of  production.  In  a
primitive  society  where  there  is  no  exchange,  but  where  every
family  is  a  self-sufficing  economic  system,  the  productive  power  is
wasted  because  it  will  be  necessary  for  all  land,  labour  and  tools
to  be  employed  in  some  few  processes  without  much  division  of

149


150  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

labour  or  other  effective  co-operation,  while  the  consumption  of
the  results  of  labour  will  be  correspondingly  restricted.  Where
exchange  is  confined  within  a  small  local  area,  thinly  peopled,  the
economy  of  production  and  of  consumption  remain  similarly
restricted.  Every  expansion  of  the  area,  every  improvement  of  the
mechanism  of  exchange,  increases  the  wealth  of  each  member  of
the  economic  society,  by  enhancing  the  productive  efficiency  of  his
particular  factor  of  production,  and  by  making  his  command  over
commodities  more  general,  so  enlarging  the  variety  and  amount
of  satisfaction  he  can  get  by  spending  his  income.

Regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  modern  industry,  the  prime
function  of  exchange  is  as  the  instrument  which  apportions  the
proper  quantities  of  the  several  factors  of  production  at  each  point
in  the  industrial  system.  This  is  accomplished  by  the  buying  and
selling  of  the  various  factors  of  production,  until  they  are  disposed
in  places,  in  quantities,  and  in  combinations,  which  render  their
use  most  productive  or,  at  any  rate,  most  profitable  to  the
entrepreneur  whose  work  it  is  to  plan  the  organisation  of  the
several  businesses.

Though  the  various  markets  have  each  its  own  peculiar  con-
ditions, which  deserve  separate  consideration,  certain  common
characters  are  seen  in  every  market,  whether  for  the  sale  of  factors
of  production  or  of  consumable  commodities  or  services.

A  market,  as  has  been  pointed  out  in  an  earlier  chapter,
consists  of  a  certain  restricted  area  of  place  and  time  in  which  there
is  effective  bargaining  between  buyers  and  sellers.  Remembering
that  what  takes  place  immediately  in  every  modern  market  is  an
exchange  of  specific  against  general  wealth  by  means  of  a  monetary
transaction,  we  shall  do  well  to  try  to  ascertain  how  this  transaction
takes  place,  or,  in  other  words,  bow  a  market  price  is  actually
attained.

A  fisherman,  with  one  fish  in  his  basket,  who  met  a  shipwrecked
sailor,  starving,  with  ;£20  in  his  pocket,  coald,  if  he  knew  the
circumstances,  get  the  whole  sum  of  money  as  the  price  of  his  fish.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were  two  fishermen  each  with  a  fish
and  no  other  possibility  of  selling  it  before  it  went  bad,  the  sailor
could  get  either  of  the  fislies  for  a  penny,  though  the  mean  expenses
of  catching  a  fish  might  he  ^d.

Here  is  the  force  of  monopoly  in  the  determination  of  a  market
price.

Now  let  us  approach  a  little  nearer  to  an  actual  market.  A
has  a  horse  which  he  will  sell  at  /30,  or  as  much  more  as  he  can
get.  a  and  b  are  two  men  willing  to  buy  this  horse,  and  having
no  other  horse  in  view ;  a  would  go  as  high  as  £^6,  b  as  high  as  £40.


THE  MECHANISM  OF  MARKETS  151

If  all  the  parties  knew  the  circumstances,  it  is  evident  that  bidding
between  a  and  b  will  go  on  until  the  price  is  driven  up  to  £36,  and
at  any  point  just  above  that  sum  the  horse  will  be  knocked  down
to  h.  Both  parties  to  the  sale,  A  and  h,  will  get  a  substantial  gain,
but  an  unequal  one,  A  making  £6  more  than  he  would  consent  to
take,  6  nearly  £^  less  than  he  would  consent  to  give.

Now  let  us  set  the  market  differently  by  putting  in  a  second
seller  with  a  different  minimum  price.

A,  a  seller  with  a  minimum  price  of  ;^30

B,  „' „  „  „  £34

a,  a  buyer  with  a  maximum  price  of £36

b,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  £40

B,  by  refasing  to  come  into  the  market  at  less  than  £34,  makes
that  the  minimum  market  price,  for  a  and  b  will  run  the  price  up
to  that  point  at  once  in  competing  to  bay  A's  horse,  a,  dropping
out  of  the  bidding  at  £36,  makes  that  the  maximum  market  price,
for  above  that  point  b  is  confronted  by  two  willing  sellers  and  can
fix  his  terms.  Between  £^4  and  £^6  there  are  two  willing  sellers
and  two  willing  buyers  :  all  would  take  part  in  an  act  of  sale  at
any  point  between  £34  and  ^^36  indifferently.  No  bargaining  can
take  place  between  these  points.  If  we  isolate  the  market,  and
assume  full  knowledge  on  both  sides,  competition  or  higgling  cannot
fix  a  price.

Let  us  now  add  a  third  party  to  each  side  with  a  separate
reserve  price. The  market  will  then  be  thus  set  out : —

A,  seller  with  minimum  price  £30

B,  „ „ „ „ £34

C,  „ „ „ „ £35

a,  buyer  with  maximum  price  £36

b,  ,, ,, ,, ,,  /40

c,  ,, ,, ,, ,,  £42

If  the  bidding  began  at  £30,  there  is  only  one  willing  seller  and
three  willing  buyers ;  the  latter  will  raise  the  price  by  their
bidding,  and  at  £34  another  seller,  B,  enters  the  market.  But,  as
there  will  still  be  three  buyers  to  two  sellers,  the  price  will  rise
higher  until  at  £35  C  enters  in,  and  there  are  three  sellers  and  three
buyers.  £35  is  thus  fixed  as  the  minimum  market  price,  for  all  are
willing  to  buy  and  to  sell  at  that  price.  Similarly,  it  can  be  shown
that  £36  is  the  maximum  price,  for  at  any  point  above  there  are
more  willing  sellers  than  buyers,  and  the  odd  seller,  afraid  of  being
left  out,  will  keep  the  price  from  rising  above  £36.  The  market
price  must  stand  between  £35  and  ^36,  but  may  stand  anywhere
between,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  process  of  bargaining  to
determine  where.


152  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

In  either  of  these  two  markets  the  price-point  between  the
minimum  and  maximum  must  be  reached  by  extra-economic  means  :
the  parties  must  toss  up.  This  is  on  the  assumption  that  aU  the
parties  have  full  knowledge  of  the  respective  valuation  of  all  the
buyers  and  sellers.  In  a  point  of  fact  bluff,  based  on  ignorance,  and
not  chance,  would  usually  fix  the  price-point.  It  is  evident  that  we
may  add  a  fourth,  a  fifth,  or  any  limited  number  of  competitors  to
the  supply  or  the  demand  side  of  this  market  without  affecting,  save
in  degree,  this  method  of  determining  price.  The  larger  the  number
of  competing  buyers  and  sellers,  or  the  nearer  their  respective
valuations  to  one  another,  the  closer  will  be  the  upper  and  lower
price  limits  within  which  the  price-point,  the  actual  market  price,
should  fall.  But  unless  there  is  an  infinite  number  of  units  of  supply
and  units  of  demand,  or  unless  the  valuations  of  the  determinant
buyers  and  sellers  should  happen  to  coincide,  the  process  of  bar-
gaining by  itself  could  never  reach  a  price-point.  Now,  in  the
application  of  economic  theory  to  economic  price,  the  recognition
of  this  fact  is  of  great  importance.  Let  us  formulate  it  thus  :  *  So
long  as  the  number  of  willing  buyers  is  equal  to  the  number
of  willing  sellers  no  movement  of  price  can  occur,  and  within
the  limits  of  this  equality  of  suppty  and  demand  no  price-point
can  be  reached.'

'  Increase  the  numbers  of  buyers  and  sellers,  approximate  their
expenses  of  production  and  their  purchasing  power,  reduce  the  size
of  the  units  of  supply,  the  competition  becomes  closer,  and  the
upper  and  the  lower  margins  nearer  together.  But  except  in  an
ideal  market  they  do  not  touch.  There  remains  an  unearned  gain
distributed  by  chance  or  force.'

And  yet  in  practice  we  constantly  see  market  prices  reached  and
changed  by  means  of  bargaining.

§  2. — The  theory  of  the  determination  of  a  market  price,  as  com-
monly set  out  in  economfc  text-books,  starts  with  an  assumption  of
an  infinite  divisibility  of  supply.  It  is  evident  that,  if  instead  of  our
market  for  live  horses,  we  put  a  market  for  dead  horse-flesh  selling
by  the  pound,  the  bargaining,  even  in  so  small  a  market  as  we
provided,  would  bring  the  upper  and  the  lower  margins  of  price  so
close  together  that  the  difference  might  be  negligible,  and  so  what
was  to  all  intents  a  price-point  might  be  got  by  mere  bargaining.
For  A  could  not  then  be  accredited  with  one  fixed  minimum  price
for  his  single  unit  of  supply.  We  should  have  to  set  out  a  much  more
elaborate  valuation  for  A  as  the  owner  of  looo  lbs.  of  horse-flesh,
unless  we  assume  the  conditions  of  a  forced  sale,  which  we  did  not
before.  We  shall  suppose  that  the  number  of  pounds  A  will  sell  will
vary  with  the  price  he  can  get  :


THE  MECHANISM  OF  MARKETS


153


A  will  sell  1000  lbs.  at  dd.  per  lb.

„ „ ,. 900 » " 5^-
,, ,, ,, 800 ,, ,, /\\d. ,,
and  so  forth.

Similarly  with  B  and  his  1000  lbs.  of  horse-flesh,  except  that  his
supply-schedule  will  vary  indefinitely  from  that  of  A.  B's  schedule
might  run  thus  :

B  will  sell  1000  lbs.  at  yd.  per  lb.
,, ,, ., 900 ,, ,, G^d. ,,
,, 800 ,, ,, $d. ,,
So  C's  scale  will  also  vary  from  that  of  A  and  B,  not  merely  as
to  the  price  at  which  he  would  sell  his  entire  stock  of  1000  lbs.,  but
as  to  the  amount  of  reductions  at  which  he  would  sell  various  smaller
quantities.

But  in  the  market,  A  and  B  and  C  do  not  separately  offer  their
different  sections  of  supply.  For  purposes  of  the  market  it  is  a
matter  of  indifference  whether  a  buys  from  A  or  from  B  or  C,  or  how
much  from  each  :  he  only  looks  to  see  how  many  pounds  he  can
buy  at  such  a  price.  We  must  therefore  set  the  supply  in  terms
of  so  many  pounds  offered  at  such  a  price,  so  many  more  pounds  at
such  a  lower  price.  In  order  to  get  this  setting  we  must  *  pool '
the  special  valuations  of  the  separate  owners  of  supply.  The  supply
schedule  might  then  run  thus  :

3000  lbs.  supplied  at  6^d.  per  lb.
2900 ,,
2800 ,,


2700
2600
2500


6d.
5\d.


and  so  forth.

Similarly  we  must  handle  the  demand  schedule  of  the  buyers.
a  and  h  and  c  will  be  wilhng  to  buy  different  quantities  at  various
prices  :  these  variations  will  differ  for  the  three  buyers  respectively,
according  to  the  urgency  which  drives  them  to  buy  much  or  little.
So  we  should  get  one  generalised  demand  schedule  corresponding
with  the  supply  schedule  but  reversed  in  form.

3000  lbs.  demanded  at  ^d.  per  lb.


2900  „

„  4K 55

2800  ,,

„  a¥. „

2700  „

,5  5^-

2600  ,,

55  5¥- 5,

2500  „

„  ed. „

Here,  if  no  smaller  units  than  100  lbs.  were  saleable,  it  is  evident
that  no  exact  equilibrium  would  be  reached  where  supply  would


154  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

equal  demand  at  a  price-point.  The  price  ultimately  reached
would  be  at  any  point  between  5^^.  and  6d.  for  2500  lbs.  But  if,
as  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  after  the  preliminary  bargaining  had
brought  the  two  parties  nearly  to  a  price,  by  bids  for  not  less
than  100  lbs.,  they  began  to  make  interim  bids  between  2600  and
2500,  bidding  by  tens  and  finally  by  single  pounds,  they  might  be
able  to  reach  what  would  be  virtually  a  price-point  which  would
effect  an  aggregate  sale  of  (say)  2540  lbs.  at  $%d.

Thus  the  ability  of  the  bargaining  process  to  reach  a  price-point
varies  with  the  area  of  the  market,  and  with  the  divisibility  of  the
commodity  for  purposes  of  sale.  Even  in  a  small  market  where
wheat  or  cotton  is  sold,  bargaining  between  a  small  number  of
buyers  and  sellers  can  reach  a  price-point.

§  3. — A  good  deal  of  practical  importance  in  the  determination
of  the  distribution  of  wealth  depends  upon  the  question  of  the
proportion  of  markets  which  are  approximately  free,  in  that  the
bargaining  is  ordinarily  such  as  to  reach  a  price-point  without  the
intervention  of  force  or  bluff.

The  following  are  the  chief  conditions  which  determine  how
far  a  class  of  goods  is  suitable  for  a  '  free  '  market.

(i)  Quantity  of  supply  here  and  now.  Where  {a)  nature,  or
[b]  the  circumstances  of  production,  or  (c)  artificial  limitation,
reduces  the  supply  to  a  small  number  of  indivisible  objects,  com-
petition of  buyers  and  sellers  is  seldom  such  as  to  reach  a  true
price-point.  An  instance  of  [a)  would  be  the  building  sites  in  a
particular  locality ;  of  (6) ,  the  pictures  of  a  particular  master ;  (c) ,  the
fifty  copies  of  an  edition  de  luxe.

(2)  The  time  limit.  Perishable  goods  or  services  have  a  narrow
time-market.  The  fact  that  they  must  be  sold  now  confines  the
effective  demand  to  those  accessible  persons  who  want  to  buy  now
and  have  the  wherewithal  to  pay.

Examples  are  the  fruit  market  for  cheap  fruits,  and  in  general
the  labour  market.

(3)  The  place  limit.  This  area  of  an  effective  market  will
differ  for  different  commodities.  Bulk  in  relation  to  value  is  the
principal  determinant  here,  though  much  depends  upon  the  means
of  transport.  Where  a  class  of  goods  is  not  portable,  the  conditions
of  their  use  for  production  or  consumption  often  limits  the  number
of  units  of  supply.  Ordinary  luiilding  stone  will  have  a  small
local  market  ;  so  will  houses,  means  of  transit,  &c.

(4)  Even  where  the  quantity  of  supply  is  small,  as  we  have
seen,  divisibility  may  be  such  as  to  secure  '  free  '  competition  in  a
market.  But  where  the  organic  principle  of  life  determines  the
size,  as  in  the  horse  market  or  in  the  case  of  valuable  shrubs  ; or


THE  MECHANISM  OF  MARKETS  155

where  a  certain  size  and  structure  are  essential,  as  in  the  case  of  a
house,  or  a  workshop,  or  a  machine,  the  local  available  supply
may  often  be  such  as  to  restrict  greatly  the  power  of  '  free  '  bar-
gaining.

(5)  Even  in  the  case  of  goods  which  are  divisible  and  in  large
supply,  competition,  as  a  determinant  of  price,  is  not  fully  effective
unless  there  is  a  guarantee  of  the  quality,  size,  &c. ,  of  the  parts  of
the  supply.

A  fully  effective  market  involves  methods  of  production  which
afford  reliable  standards  of  goods  and  full  confidence  on  the  part
of  buyers  in  the  reliabihty  of  these  standards.  Without  this
standardisation  each  fraction  of  a  supply  stands  more  or  less  on
its  own  known  or  imputed  merits,  and  the  market  lacks  the  unity
required  for  effective  competition  ;  each  portion  of  the  supply
forms  a  separate  centre  for  bargaining,  which  is  thereby  reduced
in  freedom  and  efficacy  for  the  attainment  of  a  price-point.  In  a
horse  market,  however  large,  the  facts  that  (i)  no  two  horses  have
the  same  combination  of  qualities,  (2)  that  no  two  sellers  and  no
two  buyers  set  the  same  value  on  any  two  horses,  cause  the  elements
of  chance  or  bluff  to  reach  a  maximum.

Where  a  supply  is  m.inutely  graded,  as  in  the  sale  of  many  raw
materials  of  manufacture,  such  as  grains,  cotton,  wool,  though  the
grading  implies  a  corresponding  specialisation  of  markets  and  a
reduction  of  the  number  of  buyers  and  sellers  within  these  limits,
there  is  sufficient  play  for  substitution  of  neighbouring  quahties
and  grades  to  secure  the  conditions  of  a  set  of  price-points  obtained
by  bargaining.

(6)  Closely  related  to  the  first  condition,  quantity  of  supply,
is  a  corresponding  condition  of  wide  and  regular  demand  on  the
part  of  buyers.  A  small,  Ifuctuating  and  capricious  demand
obviously  disorganises  a  market,  reacting  upon  production  and
supply.  Special  grades  of  luxury  goods,  dependent  on  the  taste
and  fashion  of  small  classes  of  rich  or  peculiar  persons,  do  not  lend
themselves  to  '  free  '  bargaining.  The  prices  of  early  fruits,  a  new
fashionable  hat,  diamonds,  or  high-priced  opera  seats  are  determined
as  much  by  caprices  of  consumers  as  by  restrictions  of  producers.


II

§  I. — The  various  restraints  upon  freedom  of  bargaining  in
markets  affect  vitally  the  problem  of  the  distribution  of  wealth.  A
slightly  more  detailed  survey  of  the  chief  classes  of  markets  for
the  sale  of  goods  and  services  will  help  us  to  understand  the  extent


156  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

to  which  other  practices  quahfy  or  supplant  bargaining  and  free
competition  in  the  fixing  of  prices.

Let  us  turn  first  to  the  bargains  for  the  price  of  factors  of  pro-
duction, and  inquire  how  far  such  prices  are  reached  in  open  markets
with  freely  competing  buyers  and  sellers.

Land. — Prices  for  the  sale  of  land  or  its  use  are  notoriously
subject  in  most  countries  to  a  variety  of  special  conditions  which
are  not  those  of  a  free  market.  Land  is  seldom  put  up  for  sale
oriental  in  any  form  of  market  which  permits  close,  thoroughly
informed  bargaining  between  groups  of  sellers  and  buyers.  Even
in  new  countries,  where  land  can  be  bought  from  Government,
from  railroads  or  lands  companies,  the  sellers  are  few,  and  often
fix  supply-prices  by  agreement  ;  the  expense  and  difficulty  of
inspection,  the  lack  of  adequate  standardisation  of  land  values,
and  the  practical  limitation  of  divisibility  to  a  quarter  section,
the  needs  of  housing,  of  capital,  the  means  of  transport,  constitute
great  interferences  with  bargaining.  Neither  the  articles  them-
selves nor  reliable  samples  can  be  assembled  under  conditions
that  favour  free,  genuinely  informed  bargains.

In  old  countries  various  other  barriers  intervene.  Free  supply
is  impeded  by  legal  conditions,  such  as  laws  of  entail  and  primo-
geniture, expenses  of  conveyance,  or  by  custom  or  class  feeling,
which  limit  sale  or  impose  hampering  conditions.  Similar  restric-
tions are  operative  in  the  renting  of  most  land  for  agricultural
or  other  uses.  Attachment  to  particular  localities,  limitations
of  quantity  and  the  immobility  of  land  inevitably  break  up  the
market  for  land  into  a  large  number  of  semi-independent  markets  ;
feelings  relating  to  tenancy  upon  the  side  of  landlords  and  of  tenants
play  so  large  a  part  in  determining  to  whom  and  on  what  terms
land  shall  be  let  or  sold,  and  the  possibilities  of  bluff  and  squeeze
are  so  numerous,  that  most  land-prices  for  sale  or  hire  cannot  be
regarded  as  reached  by  bargaining  in  a  free  market.  Sometimes
class  sentiment,  personal  fancy,  pride,  or  obstinacy  enormously
affects  the  supply  and  the  supply  prices,  while  land-hunger,  only
in  part  economic,  similarly  affects  demand  prices,  often  leading
to  prices  which  are  in  no  true  sense  market  prices.

Only  in  the  sale  or  hire  of  real  estate  in  or  near  a  large  city  can
it  be  said  that  the  conditions  approximate  to  those  of  a  '  free  '
market,  and  even  then,  especially  when  the  land  is  bought  or  hired
for  housing  purposes,  the  differences  of  position  and  other  detailed
distinctions  in  the  several  '  lots  '  generally  allow  some  margin
for  bluff  or  chance.

Labour. — Seldom  arc  the  conditions  of  the  sale  of  labour-
power  those  of  a  large  free  market. In  countries  where  labourers


THE  MECHANISM  OF  MARKETS  157

were  sold  as  slaves  or  serfs,  sometimes  an  actual  market  was  set
forth  with  competing  buyers  and  sellers,  though  even  then  the
personality  and  individual  qualities  and  the  indivisibility  of  the
articles  of  sale  precluded  competition  from  reaching  an  exact  price.
Slave-dealing  as  a  rule  was  not  a  fme  economic  art ;  deceit  played
an  even  larger  part  than  in  a  horse  market.

Turning  to  what  is  termed  to-day  the  labour  market,  we  see
it  break  up  into  a  great  number  of  trade  and  local  sections,  inde-
pendent for  purposes  of  market  prices.  Though  employers  un-
doubtedly compete  among  themselves  for  the  most  efficient  labour,
and  occasionally  for  the  largest  share  of  a  limited  supply,  it  cannot
be  said  that  the  setting  of  the  labour  market  from  the  side  of  the
buyers  favours  close  bargaining.  Where  large  organised  trades
are  concerned,  the  bargaining  is  usually  conducted  by  a  trade  union
and  a  large  employer  or  federation  of  employers.  Though  non-
union firms  and  non-union  workers  may  temper,  by  actual  or
potential  competition,  the  arrangements  made  by  these  collective
processes  of  bargaining,  they  do  not  so  compete  as  to  fix  a  price.
Nor  can  it  be  said  that  collective  bargaining  fixes  a  price  by  the
iiiggling  of  the  market ;  a  standard  wage  built  up,  partly  on
competition,  partly  on  custom,  partly  on  economic  force,  is  raised
or  lowered  by  bluff  or  force,  with  some  reference  to  supposed
profits  and  the  conditions  of  trade  ;  a  price  thus  fixed  for  the  bulk
of  a  trade  becomes  more  or  less  a  customary  wage  for  the  rest  of
the  trade,  with  variations  in  the  shape  of  bonuses  or  sweating.  It
cannot  be  maintained  that  in  such  industries  as  mining,  railways,
docks,  the  main  branches  of  metal  and  textile  trades,  printing,
bailding,  shoemaking,  or  in  public  employments,  wages  are  market
prices  closely  reached  by  competitive  bargaining.

"Where  labour  is  little  organised,  as  in  most  low-skilled  manual
trades,  in  nearly  all  women's  trades,  and  in  most  distributive
industries,  there  exists  keen  indirect  competition  on  the  sellers'  side,
but  the  method  of  securing  employment  affords  the  sellers  no
opportunity  of  making  the  buyers  compete,  and  the  latter  generally
impose  a  customary  price,  which  is  in  no  adequate  degree  a  market
price.

In  agriculture  and  most  country  employments,  as  well  as  in
town  workshops  and  other  smaller  businesses,  it  cannot  be  said  that
competition  fixes  prices,  though  it  affects  them,  altering  more  or
less  the  local  customary  prices  for  labour.  In  most  instances,
unskilled  or  low-skilled  workers  are  powerless  to  make  the  few
employers  accessible  to  them  compete,  the  surplusage  of  the  labour
supply  being  normally  such  as  to  render  this  competition  un-
necessary. In  any  case,  the  setting  of  the  market  is  such  as  to  make


I5S  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

the  competition  one-sided.  The  nearest  approach  to  a  true  labour
market  in  form,  though  hardly  in  substance,  is  the  statutory  fair
where  farm  labourers  and  other  servants  present  themselves  for
hire,  employers  inspecting  them  and  making  open  offers.

Labour  exchanges,  as  established  in  certain  cities  of  Germany,
where  employers  can  appl}'  and  arrange  terms  with  individual
workers,  furnish  some  of  the  conditions  of  a  true  market.

But  the  general  habit  by  which  a  worker  out  of  employment
hawks  his  labour  round  to  employers,  offering  it  to  them  one  by
one,  does  not  secure  a  wage-point  by  competitive  bargaining.

Ability. — Though  there  is  often  keen  competition  to  secure
managerial,  official,  and  other  professional  posts  in  private  or  public
services,  this  competition  is  but  slightly  and  seldom  directed  to  the
determination  of  a  price.  That  there  exists  a  sort  of  market  price
for  the  manager  of  a  cotton  mill,  for  the  town  clerk  of  a  city  of
100,000  inhabitants,  for  a  first-grade  civil  servant,  is  in  a  very  rough
sense  true ;  but  these  prices  are  seldom  such  as  would  obtain  if
the  competitors  were  allowed  to  bid  against  each  other  for  salaries.
In  most  of  such  instances  the  price  of  ability  is  not  closely
fixed  by  competition,  even  in  indirect  ways,  but  is  determined
by  a  combination  of  customary,  personal,  and  competitive
considerations.

Capital. — In  its  concrete  form,  as  we  use  it,  capital  consists  in
the  machinery  and  other  plant,  materials  and  goodwill,  &c.,  of  a
business.  All  these  things,  save  the  last,  are  separately  saleable  as
goods,  and  fall  within  the  ordinary  conditions  of  such  sales.

But  when  the  ownership  of  a  business,  as  a  whole  or  in  shares,  is
bought  and  sold,  we  have  to  deal  with  a  special  sort  of  market,  the
market  for  investments.

The  ordinary  way  in  which  such  ownership  is  conveyed  is  in  the
money  market,  where  it  is  sold  as  stocks  and  shares.  These  are  so
abstract  and  intangible  in  form  that  it  is  seldom  adequately  realised
that  when  a  man  buys  for  £140  a  share  of  railroad  stock  nominally
worth  ;fioo,  he  is  buying  a  certain  quantity  of  rails,  engines,  &c.,
becoming  part  owner  of  the  whole  concrete  capital.

This  sort  of  buying  and  selling  is  in  general  the  nearest  approach
to  an  absolutely  free  market,  for  it  enables  the  most  indivisible
objects,  such  as  a  railway  station  or  a  steam  engine,  to  become
infinitely  divisible,  the  most  perishable  things  to  become  permanent,
the  most  various  objects  to  be  standardised,  the  most  distant  objects
to  be  grouped  together.  Moreover,  the  structure  of  the  money
market  enables  the  freest  and  most  constant  competition  to  take
place  between  vast  numbers  of  actual  and  potential  buyers,  in  a
market  whose  area,  usually  large,  may  become  world-wide.


THE  MECHANISM  OF  MARKETS  159

By  a  similar  linancial  machinery  concrete  forms  of  capital  are
loaned  or  rented  to  entrepreneurs  or  employers,  who  pay  the  price
for  their  use,  which  we  call  interest.  The  terms  upon  which  these
loans  arc  effected  are  determined  in  large  modern  businesses  by  the
processes  of  company  promotion  with  its  flotation  of  shares.  In
smaller  or  less  organised  businesses,  capital  can  be  borrowed  from
banks  or  other  professional  money-lenders,  or  from  private  friends  :
in  almost  all  cases  this  capital  is  loaned  in  the  shape  of  money,
l)ut  since  the  money  is  converted  into  plant,  machinery,  &c.,  for
business  use,  the  substance  of  the  proceeding  is  the  hiring  of  this
concrete  capital,  and  the  interest  is  the  rent  for  its  use.  Such
loans  of  capital  for  the  establishment  or  enlargement  of  a  business
are  usually  the  subject  of  close  competitive  bargaining  on  the  part
of  the  investors,  so  far  as  the  conditions  of  the  business  enable
them  to  understand  the  risks  and  chances  of  gain  that  are  involved.
Indeed,  with  this  proviso  it  may  be  urged  that  for  large  bodies
of  investors  there  exists  a  single  investment  market,  the  price  of
such  use  of  capital  being  fixed  by  freest  conditions  of  competition.
But  by  no  means  all  advances  of  capital  for  interest  are  of  this
character.  Not  only  in  agriculture  the  world  over,  but  in  many
departments  of  small  business,  capital  is  loaned  by  banks,  usurers,
manufacturers  or  wholesale  merchants,  upon  terms  virtually  dictated
by  the  lender,  and  accepted  by  the  necessity  rather  than  the  free
will  of  the  borrower.  The  price  or  interest  for  such  loans  is  no  sense
a  market  price.

Goods. — If  we  follow  the  series  of  acts  of  sale  which  material
forms  of  wealth  undergo  in  their  passage  from  raw  materials  to  shop
goods,  we  shall  recognise  that  competitive  bargaining  differs  very
widely  in  form  and  in  degree.  The  producers  of  raw  materials,
farmers,  hunters,  fishers,  are  usually  in  a  weak  position  as  sellers —
much  of  their  product  is  perishable,  and  must  be  sold  in  distant
markets  by  agents  whose  negotiations  they  cannot  check  ;  even
lumbermen,  stockraisers,  and  large  growers  of  cotton,  tobacco,  and
other  valuable  crops,  are  liable  to  meet  serious  obstacles  to  free
bargaining  in  the  shape  of  combines  and  corners.  Producers  of
coal,  metals,  and  other  non-perishable  products  of  the  soil  are  usually
in  a  better  position  as  sellers,  and  the  markets  in  which  they  sell  are
normally  free,  while  the  nature  of  the  goods  permits  close  higgling
for  a  market  price.

Where  materials  or  semi-manufactured  or  wholly  manufactured
goods  of  staple  kinds  are  sold  in  advanced  industrial  communities,
the  competitive  bargaining  is  usually  close.  It  is  in  fact  the  promi-
nence assigned  to  these  classes  of  markets  that  chiefly  supports  the
belief  that  a  market  price  is  reached  entirely  by  the  higgling  among


i6o  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

buyers  and  sellers  acquainted  with  the  goods  and  the  circumstances
of  the  market.

The  prices  paid  by  millers  for  grain,  by  weaving  mills  for  cotton
or  woollen  yarn,  by  shoemakers  for  leather,  or  machine  makers  for
steel  bars,  are  rigorously  determined  by  competition  of  buyers  and
sellers,  except  so  far  as  trade  agreements  among  sellers,  or  more
rarely  temporary  corners  of  supply,  upset  the  nicer  mechanism  of
the  market.  Attempts  by  organisations  of  sellers  to  hold  up  prices
by  fixing  minimum  selling  prices  are,  however,  playing  a  part  of
growing  importance  in  the  iron  and  steel  and  in  some  other  markets
for  staple  manufactures.

Commodities. — In  retail  trade,  bargaining,  though  very  keen,  is
for  the  most  part  one-sided.  The  seller  appears  at  first  sight  to
have  two  advantages  :  in  the  first  place,  he  is  a  specialist  as  regards
the  goods  he  sells,  while  the  buyer  is  usually  an  amateur  ;  in  the
second  place,  the  seller  usually  fixes  a  price  and  the  buyer  accepts
it  without  higgling.  But  these  apparent  advantages  of  the  seller
are  in  large  measure  affected  by  the  close  and  often  cut-throat
competition  of  other  sellers,  which  forces  him  to  fix  a  price  that
cancels  his  technical  advantage  in  dealing  with  customers.  So  far,
at  any  rate,  as  prices  are  concerned,  this  keenness  of  competition
among  sellers  enables  consumers  to  do  almost  as  well  as  if  they
were  close  bargainers  themselves.  In  this  condition  of  trade  the
retailer  is  driven  more  and  more  to  take  his  advantage  indirectly
in  passing  off  adulterated  or  inferior  goods  for  accepted  brands.
Where  goods,  by  teason  of  their  perishable  or  bulky  nature,  must
usually  be  bought  near  at  hand,  trade  agreements  may  often  operate
on  local  prices,  as  in  milk,  bread,  or  coal.  Moreover,  retail  prices
have  for  most  buyers  a  customary  support  which  enables
retailers  to  obtain  higher  prices  for  some  time  after  a  fall  of  whole-
sale prices  would  enable  keen  consumers  to  claim  a  corresponding
reduction.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  a  considerable  and  a  growing
proportion  of  the  income  of  most  consumers  is  spent  upon  buying
from  public  or  semi-public  bodies  commodities  and  services  the
price  of  which  is  not  determined  appreciably  by  bargaining.  The
water,  gas,  and  tramway  transport,  street  accommodation,  lighting,
police,  use  of  parks,  libraries,  &c.,  which  he  buys  with  rates,  or  at
tariffs  fixed  by  the  corporation  or  some  non-competing  local  com-
pany, the  various  state  services  in  the  form  of  military  and  judicial
support,  public  health,  education,  &c..  are  not  bought  at  market
prices.  The  bargaining  factor  in  the  determination  of  transport
rates  for  his  person  or  his  property,  by  rail  or  water,  or  by  other


THE  MECHANISM  OF  MARKETS  i6i

local  services,  is  slight :  professional  fees,  subscriptions  to  clubs,
societies,  tickets  for  concerts,  theatres  and  other  entertainments,
retail  prices  for  books,  newspapers,  &c.,  and  a  large  variety  of  other
large  and  small  prices  are  not  directly  or  immediately  susceptible
to  the  higgling  of  the  market.  Considerations  of  public  utility,
private  monopoly  more  or  less  restrained  by  legal  and  other  condi-
tions, trade  or  professional  agreement,  custom  and  sheer  inertia  on
the  part  of  buyers,  keep  large  provinces  of  retail  price  outside  close
competition.

§  2. — This  short  survey  suffices  to  show  that  the  theory  of
markets  in  which  freely  competing  buyers  and  sellers  reach  the
equilibrium  of  a  market  price,  by  elaborate  schedules  of  supply
and  demand  prices,  is  only  applicable  to  a  small  fraction  of
actual  sales.

Though  the  competition  of  buyers  or  of  sellers,  or  of  both,  is
usually  present  in  some  measure,  its  operation  is  seldom  such  as  to
determine  a  market  price.

This  means,  of  course,  that  in  most  market  prices  as  well  as
in  most  '  normal  prices  '  there  is  an  element  of  unearned  and
unnecessary  payment,  which  represents  not  a  genuine  cost  of
production,  but  a  superior  power  of  bargaining.

Though  for  convenience  we  have  accepted  the  common  dis-
tinction between  normal  and  market  prices,  and  have  made  a
separate  analysis  of  the  modes  of  their  determination,  it  is  well
once  more  to  emphasise  the  artificial  nature  of  the  distinction.
The  natural  or  contrived  scarcities,  which  are  found  to  be  the
sources  of  the  various  surplus  or  unearned  elements  in  normal
prices,  likewise  express  themselves  in  the  limitations  of  freedom  of
bargaining  which  most  markets  exhibit.  Since  market  prices,  so
called,  are  the  actual  prices  which  are  paid  and  received,  in  them
we  must  expect  to  find  the  elements  of  surplus  expenses  which  have
gathered  in  the  various  direct  and  indirect  processes  of  production
that  go  to  the  making  of  every  class  of  commodities.  If  we  could
take  the  retail  price  of  a  loaf  of  bread  in  London,  we  should  find  it
to  consist  not  only  of  a  number  of  necessary  costs  of  production
incurred  by  farmers,  carriers,  merchants,  millers  and  bakers,  re-
solvable into  a  great  variety  of  payments  for  the  factors  of  produc-
tion employed  at  these  several  stages,  but  of  other  surplus  expenses
which  might  imply  '  squeezes  '  of  the  Elevator  Company,  the  Ship-
ping Combine,  the  Harvester  Trust,  the  English  Railway,  the
Miller,  a  local  Bakers'  Combine,  each  or  all  of  these,  with  various
minor  squeezes  of  landlords  in  rent,  coal  owners,  makers  of  milling
machinery,  &c.  The  price  of  $d.  a  loaf  might  contain  fractions  of
such  squeezes  amounting  to,  say,  twopence,  added  to  the  3^.  which

M


i62  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

represented  the  necessary  pajTnents  to  evoke  productive  energy  in
the  various  processes.  There  are  probably  few,  if  any,  final  com-
modities where  a  shortage  of  some  factor  has  not  occurred  in  some
necessary  process,  stamping  its  impress  upon  the  price  in  the  shape
of  such  a  '  surplus.'


CHAPTER X

THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND

§  I.  Supply  and  demand  must  be  treated  as  '  flows,'  not  fixed  '  funds.'
Price-change  is  then  seen  as  shifting  with  the  rate  of  flow  :  its  cause  will
be  an  increase  or  decrease  of  demand  in  relation  to  supply. — §  2.  In-
dustrial causes  affecting  supply  relate  to  (a)  changes  in  economy  of
industrial  arts  ;  {b)  changes  in  supply  of  the  several  factors. — §  3.  On  the
demand  side  (i)  changes  in  the  art  of  consumption,  (2)  changes  in  the
number  of  consumers  or  their  aggregate  income,  are  disturbing  influences
on  prices. — §  4.  A  fall  in  expenses  of  production  will  affect  price  according
to  '  elasticity  of  demand.'  There  may  be  several  possible  new  price  levels.
— §  5.  Elasticity  of  demand  varies  with  (i)  the  degree  of  importance
attaching  to  the  article,  (2)  the  effect  of  a  price-change  upon  the  other
elements  in  a  standard  of  consumption. — §  6.  Elasticity  of  supply  is
quicker  and  less  calculable  in  its  working,  for  the  arts  of  production  are
less  conservative  than  the  arts  of  consumption.

§  I. — We  have  seen  how  the  expenses  of  prodaction  are  composed
that  constitute  and  determine  the  normal  prices  which  express  the
rates  of  exchange  between  various  classes  of  commodities  ;  we  have
also  seen  how  market  or  short-time  and  short-place  deviations  from
normal  prices  are  determined.  It  remains  for  us  to  get  a  closer
and  clearer  understanding  of  the  mechanism  of  price-changes,  the
direct  instrument  of  alterations  in  the  rate  of  exchange  for  goods
and  services,  and  so  of  the  distribution  of  wealth,  among  various
classes  of  producers.

This  mechanism  is  commonly  spoken  of  as  '  the  law  of  supply
and  demand.'  But  what  is  meant  by  the  law  ?  First  of  all  we
must  define  the  terms.

The  supply  which  thus  operates  in  price-change  evidently  does
not  mean  the  total  stock  of  goods  in  existence,  but  the  quantity
which  sellers  are  willing  and  able  to  sell  at  the  current  price.  Simi-
larly with  demand.  If  we  are  to  place  it  in  true  relation  with  this
supply,  demand  must  mean  either  the  quantity  of  goods  which
buyers  are  willing  and  able  to  buy  at  the  current  price,  or  the
quantity  of  money  buyers  are  able  and  willing  to  pay  for  goods  at
the  current  price.  If,  however,  taking  these  meanings  of  the  terms,
we  turn  to  the  mechanism  of  the  market,  we  find  them  defective  in
that  they  furnish  a  merely  statical  setting  to  a  dynamic  problem.
Supply and demand, thus conceived, are stationary amounts.

163  M  2


i64  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

Now  price-change  is  a  process,  and  in  order  to  understand  this
process,  what  we  have  to  estimate  is  the  rate  at  which  the  stock  of
goods  is  increased  and  depleted — a  flow  and  not  a  fund.  But  if
we  conceive  supply  and  demand  as  quantities  of  goods  (or  money)
regarded  at  a  particular  time,  we  conceive  them  as  funds.  In  order
to  study  price-change  properly,  we  must  express  supply  and  demand
as  flows,  i.e.  measure  them  as  processes  taking  place  in  time.
Consistently  with  this  purpose,  supply  may  mean  the  total  stock
offered  for  sale  at  a  price  during  any  given  time,  and  demand  may
mean  quantity  of  purchases  at  a  price  within  a  given  time,  or
quantity  of  money  expended  at  a  price  within  a  given  time.  But
it  will  be  more  convenient  to  define  the  terms  more  narrowly,
confining  supply  to  the  rate  of  increase  of  stock  :  demand  to  the
rate  of  withdrawal  from  stock  (or  the  rate  of  payment  of  money
withdrawing  from  stock) .  Thus  alone  do  we  rightly  come  to  regard
supply  and  demand  as  processes  or  '  flows,'  and  the  supply  and
demand  with  which  we  concern  ourselves  will  be  equivalent  to  the
rate  of  production  and  of  consumption.!  Where  goods  flow  out  of
a  stock  at  the  same  rate  as  they  flow  in,  the  price  remains  firm,
and  demand  and  supply  will  be  said  to  be  equilibrated  ;  where  the
inflow  is  faster  than  the  outflow,  prices  fall,  and  supply  will  be  said
to  exceed  demand  ;  where  the  outflow  is  faster,  prices  rise  and
demand  exceeds  supply.  This  setting  regards  demand  primarily  as
a  rate  of  outflow  of  goods.  But  if  we  regard  demand  as  a  power
exercised  by  the  purchaser,  it  signifies  and  is  measured  by  an  inflow
of  money.  The  quantitative  relation  of  supply  and  demand  may
be  expressed  in  either  measure  of  demand.  But  in  dealing  with
the  mechanism  of  exchange,  it  is  best  to  regard  demand  as  an  action
proceeding  from  the  buyer  and  to  measure  it  in  the  terms  of
purchasing  power.

Any  increase  or  decrease  of  money,  expended  upon  goods  at  a
given  price  within  a  given  time,  implies  a  corresponding  increase
or  decrease  in  quantity  of  goods  bought,  so  that  no  error  will  arise
from  sabstituting  the  money  measure  for  the  goods  measure  of
demand,  and  regarding  it  as  an  inflow  of  money  from  the  purchaser
instead  of  an  outflow  of  goods  from  the  seller.

Keeping  clearly  in  mind  this  conception  of  supply  and  demand
as  a  rate  of  flow,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  misstate  the  law  of  price
change.

'  The  term  '  consumption  '  is  here  used  in  the  loose  business  sense,  in
which,  for  instance,  it  is  said  cotton  yarn  or  iron  is  consumed  when  it  is
utilised  in  manufacturing  processes.  In  strict  statements  of  economic  theory
it  is  desirable  to  confine  consumption  to  the  use  of  retail  goods  by  so-called
consumers.


THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND  165

So  long  as  a  body  of  sellers  in  a  market,  maintaining  the  same
stock  of  goods,  can  sell  those  goods  at  the  same  pace  at  which  they
have  sold  them  hitherto,  they  \\dll  not  lower  and  cannot  raise  the
price.  If  they  lower  the  price,  this  act  means  either  a  fall  of^  in
the  pace  at  which  buyers  ask  for  goods,  or  it  means  that  they  have
increased  their  stock,  and  in  order  to  make  sales  correspond  with
this  increased  rate  of  supply,  they  must  stimulate  demand  by
lowering  prices  ;  if  they  raise  their  price,  it  means  either  a  reduction
of  supply  in  face  of  a  constant  or  an  increasing  demand,  or  a  growth
of  the  rate  at  which  purchases  are  made  from  a  constant  or
decreasing  supply.

Thus  the  immediate  cause  of  a  rise  of  price  is  always  a  decrease
of  supply  or  an  increase  of  demand  ;  the  cause  of  a  fall  of  a  price,
an  increase  of  supply  or  a  decrease  of  demand.

Here  we  have  the  general  law  of  price-change  so  far  as  it  relates
to  the  play  of  economic  forces  and  not  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  a
government  or  a  private  monopolist  or  combine.^

So  self-evident  is  the  logic  of  this  '  law  '  that  it  would  appear
impossible  for  economic  reasoning  upon  prices  to  evade  it.  Yet
there  has  been  no  more  frequent  source  of  error  than  such  evasion.
Though  the  direct,  immediate,  efficient  causes  of  price-change
are  always  shifts  in  the  relation  between  supply  and  demand,
there  are  diverse  causes,  near  or  remote,  of  these  shifts  ;  and
nothing  is  more  common  than  for  business  men,  or  economists,
to  leap  from  some  industrial  or  financial  fact  to  its  assumed  effect
on  prices  without  taking  the  trouble  to  show  how  the  fact  in  question
operates  upon  supply  or  demand  for  commodities.

A  bad  harvest,  a  large  new  discovery  of  gold,  heavy  taxation
for  war  expenditure,  a  rapid  growth  of  population,  a  cheaper
generation  of  industrial  energy,  an  extension  of  bank  facilities,
these  and  many  other  changes  affect  prices  ;  but  unless  the  mode
of  their  operation  upon  the  supply  and  the  demand  for  commodities
and  services  is  clearly  traced,  the  nature  and  importance  of
their  effect  on  prices  is  likely  to  be  gravely  misunderstood.
When  we  treat  of  money  we  shall  see  how  persistently  the
upholders  of  the  strict  '  quantity  of  money  '  doctrine  have  erred
by  their  habitual  refusal  to  trace  how  an  increase  or  decrease
of  gold,  or  other  money,  operates  upon  the  supply  or  demand  for
commodities.

§  2. — Let us  now  classify  the  chief  industrial causes  which.

'  It  may  be  observed  from  history  that  attempts  on  the  part  of  govern-
ment or  of  monopoUsts  to  fix  or  change  prices,  for  commodities,  for  land,  for
capital,  for  labour,  in  defiance  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  are  usually
frustrated  or  set  at  naught.


i66  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

increasing  or  diminishing  the  supply  or  the  demand  of  goods  at
existing  prices,  alter  these  prices.

First  turn  to  supply.  An  increased  rate  of  supply  of  freely
produced  goods  at  a  given  price  can  only  occur  through  a  reduction
in  mean  expenses  of  production.

This  reduction  of  mean  expenses  of  production  may  be  due
(i)  to  improved  economy  in  the  arts  or  methods  of  production,  or
(2)  to  an  increase  in  supply  of  one  or  more  of  the  factors  of
production  reducing  its  surplus  value  and  its  price.

I.  Under  the  head  of  improved  economy  of  production  we
may  place —

(a)  Improved  appliance  of  mechanical,  chemical  and  other
scientific  knowledge  to  industry.  To  this  class  belong  the  main
economies  of  the  substitution  of  machinery  for  hand  labour,  as  well
as  the  substitution  of  new,  cheaper  forms  of  raw  materials  and
power.

{b)  Improvements  in  business  organisation,  either  on  its
productive  side,  through  better  division  of  labour  and  specialisation
of  productive  power,  or  on  its  commercial  side  through  better
modes  of  buying  and  of  selling,  or  on  its  financial  side  through
better  methods  of  cost-taking,  credit,  and  book-keeping.

(c) Improvements  in  the  quality  of  labour-power.

II.  Under  increase  of  supply  of  factors  of  production  we  may
distinguish —

{d)  New  discoveries  of  natural  sources  of  materials,  or  the
greater  development  of  sources  already  existing.  Enlarged,
improved  and  cheapened  transport  by  land  and  sea,  leading  to
increased  knowledge  and  availability  of  the  resources  of  the  earth
for  foods,  raw  materials  of  manufacture,  fuel  and  other  power,
has  been  the  chief  instrument  of  such  increase  of  supply.

{e)  More  capital  flowing  into  industry,  as  the  result  of  enlarged
productivity  and  saving  reduces  the  surplus  elements  of  '  interest,'
by  abating  the  '  scarcity  '  of  capital,  thus  diminishing  expenses
of  production.  The  fall  of  prices  of  cotton  in  Lancashire  after
the  '  fifties  '  was  due  primarily  to  a  reduction  of  rate  of  '  profit  '  on
capital.

(/)  Increased  supplies  of  labour,  by  immigration  or  by  planting
out  industries  in  new  areas  of  large  populations,  may  cheapen
expenses  by  removing  any  surplus  wage  in  a  protected  labour-
market,  or  even  by  introducing  a  sweating  economy,  as  for  instance
where  large  drafts  of  cheap  European  labour  have  been  drawn
into  the  anthracite  mines  of  Pennsylvania.

(g)  Extended  education,  increasing  the  available  supply  of
ability,  may  reduce  the  surplus  element  in  profit,  and  so  lower


THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND  167

expenses.  All  these  industrial  and  social  movements,  making
for  an  increase  of  supply  at  former  prices,  tend  to  reduce  prices.

Similarly,  a  reversal  of  any  of  these  movements,  reducing
supply,  will  tend  to  raise  prices.  Although,  under  modern  conditions
of  education  and  communication  of  knowledge,  it  will  be  rare  for
any  ])ositive  decline  in  the  arts  of  industry  to  occur,  a  shrinkage
in  supply  of  some  factor  of  production,  or  a  failure  to  respond  to
the  normal  requirements  of  growing  industries,  often  raises  the
expense  of  production  by  enabling  the  short  factor  to  take  a  surplus.
A  depletion  of  the  best  sources  of  raw  materials,  animal,  vegetable
or  mineral,  is,  of  course,  the  most  frequent  cause  of  such  a  rise  of
supply  price,  and  is  so  common  as  to  have  a  special  niche  accorded
to  it  in  the  temple  of  economic  science  as  the  '  law  of  diminishing
returns.'  To  this  so-called  law  we  shall  return  later  in  considering
the  size  of  maximum  efficiency  for  a  business.  At  present,  it  is
enough  to  mark  the  important  part  it  plays  in  creating  a  surplus
price  which,  entering  into  expenses  of  production,  diminishes
supply  at  existing  prices.

A  shortage  of  capital,  due  perhaps  to  destruction  of  property  by
war  or  some  natural  convulsion,  or  to  political  insecurity,  a  shortage
of  labour  due  to  migration,  plague,  famine  or  reduced  birth-rate,
will  operate  similarly  to  check  or  reduce  supply  by  raising  normal
expenses  of  production.

§  3. — Turning  to  the  demand  side  of  the  equation,  we  shall
recognise  that  an  increase  or  decrease  of  the  rate  of  demand  for
any  class  of  goods  at  existing  prices  is  attributable  to  one  of  two
sets  of  causes.

L  A  change  in  the  art  of  consumption.  Any  improvement  in
the  economy  of  consumption  of  commodities,  such  as  a  better
method  of  combustion,  more  temperance  in  the  use  of  food  or
alcohol,  or  any  other  change  in  the  standard  of  consumption  of  a
people  or  a  class  of  consumers,  reducing  the  importance  of  a  particular
commodity,  must  of  course  react  in  reduced  demand  at  a  given
price.  Conversely,  any  change  of  method  of  consumption  which
gives  increased  importance  to  some  commodity  in  a  standard  of
consumption,  as  for  instance  sugar  as  an  article  of  diet,  wool  for
clothing,  will  operate  in  enhanced  demand.

The  law  of  substitution  is  constantly  operating  on  the  side  of
consumption,  displacing  one  article  by  another.  Sometimes  the
stimulus  to  substitution  proceeds  directly  from  the  changed  taste,
or  convenience,  or  knowledge  of  the  consumer  ;  sometimes  it  is
suggested  to  him  or  imposed  upon  him  by  some  class  of  producers  ;
sometimes  it  is  permanent,  sometimes  temporary.  So  intimately
and  intricately  related,  both  physiologically  and  psychologically.


i68  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

are  various  elements  in  any  standard  of  consumption  that  any
change  in  taste  or  habit  directly  affecting  one  class  of  commodities
must  have  countless  reactions  upon  the  positive  or  relative  demand
for  other  classes.  So,  for  example,  the  abandonment  of  alcohol  may
operate  upon  other  food  factors  by  reducing  the  consumption  of
meats,  and  increasing  that  of  vegetable  and  dairy  products ;  while
the  change  of  companionship  it  causes  may  displace  expenditure
on  betting  and  on  music-halls  by  expenditure  on  literature  or  on
home  comforts  of  various  sorts.

II.  Apart  from  all  changes  in  the  art  of  consumption,  demand
at  a  given  price  may  be  increased  or  decreased  by  any  change  in  the
aggregate  money  income  of  the  former  body  of  consumers,  or  by
an  expansion  or  contraction  of  the  number  of  consumers.  Any
rise  in  the  money  income  of  a  body  of  consumers  tends,  apart  from
all  changes  in  the  nature  of  their  consumption,  to  induce  an  enlarge-
ment of  demand  of  all  those  elements  which  have  not  reached
satiety.  The  study  of  the  effects  of  rises  or  falls  of  income  in  the
various  classes  of  consumers  upon  the  class  standard  of  consumption
and  so  upon  the  demand,  is  one  of  the  most  delicately  complex  and
least  explored  provinces  of  political  economy.

The  relative  increase  or  decline  of  various  classes  of  population
by  natural  causes,  or  by  migration,  also  plays  an  important  part  in
their  influence  on  demand  for  various  sorts  of  commodities.

When  we  turn  to  what  is  often  called  '  productive  consumption,'
in  which  the  supply  and  demand  relate,  not  to  commodities  for
human  uses,  but  to  goods  used  up  in  processes  of  production,  we
perceive  that  any  economy  in  use  of  such  goods  operates  directly  as
a  reduction  of  demand  in  one  industry,  and  as  increase  of  supply  in
another.

A  discovery  of  a  furnace  which  shall  save  lo  per  cent,  of  the
waste  energy  from  burning  coal  will  act  as  a  reduction  of  demand
for  coal,  or  as  an  increase  of  supply  of  steel  at  former  prices.  More-
over, these  two  opposed  effects  will  go  on  propagating  themselves
throughout  the  whole  industrial  system,  altering  the  relative  and
positive  demands  and  supplies  of  all  the  different  markets.  This
necessarily  follows  from  the  organic  interaction  which  we  have
traced  throughout  the  industrial  system.

So,  any  change  which  takes  place  in  any  of  the  arts  of  production
or  consumption,  or  in  any  mere  expansion  in  the  quantity  of  pro-
duction in  some  class  of  industry,  or  of  consumption  in  some  class  of
consumer,  alters  the  whole  system.  An  Eight  Hours  Act  for  Miners,
raising  by  5  per  cent,  the  price  of  coal  in  England,  a  Hudson's  Bay
railway  for  carrying  Canadian  wheat  more  cheaply  to  the  European
market,  a  new  storage  economy  for  electric  motor  traffic,  the  growing


THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND  169

use  of  cereals  or  of  cocoa  as  articles  of  diet,  a  thousand  great  or  little
economic  incidents,  affecting  directly  some  specific  industry,  are
seen  to  produce  innumerable  and  sometimes  immense  changes  of
industry  at  points  in  the  industrial  system  very  distant  from  the
initial  change.

To  the  modern  business  man  nothing  that  affects  any  other
business  in  the  world  can  be  a  matter  of  indifference.

But  with  the  important  social  implications  of  such  a  doctrine
we  are  not  here  concerned.  Our  object  here  is  simply  to  establish
a  firm  recognition  of  the  modus  operandi  of  price-change  through
the  agency  of  demand  and  of  supply,  and  to  distinguish  the  general
nature  and  mode  of  the  forces  which  act  respectively  upon  the  two
sides  of  the  equation  of  price.

§  4. — Recognising  that  the  sole  efficient  cause  of  every  change  of
market  price  is  a  prior  change  in  the  relation  between  the  rate  of
supply  and  the  rate  of  demand,  and  that  every  change  in  supply  or
demand  prices,  affecting  the  rate  of  one  of  these  processes,  affects
the  other,  we  have  to  inquire  a  little  closer  into  the  interaction  of
changes  of  supply  prices  and  changes  of  demand  prices.  If  the
introduction  of  clicking  machines  into  a  branch  of  the  shoe  trade
reduces  the  expenses  of  producing  a  los.  pair  of  boots  by  10  per  cent.,
the  supply  of  this  class  of  shoes  selling  at  los.  will  be  increased,
manufacturers  and  dealers  lowering  their  price  to  dispose  of  this
increasing  supply  at  the  same  rate  as  they  disposed  of  their  earlier
supply.  How  much  must  they  lower  the  price  to  reach  a  new  level  at
which  supply  keeps  pace  with  demand,  and  what  will  be  the  increase
in  the  aggregate  of  sales  ?

If  any  number  of  los.  shoes  can  now  be  produced  at  9s.,  it  is
evident  that  the  new  selling  price  must  fall  to  9s.,  for,  until  that
point  in  the  drop  of  prices  is  reached,  the  profits  upon  the  trade  will
be  such  as  to  turn  out  more  shoes  than  can  find  a  market,  and  the
keener  competition  of  sellers,  thus  stimulated,  will  cause  them  to
undersell  one  another.  But  when  this  struggle  to  sell  the  largest
quantity  of  shoes  at  a  profitable  rate  has  brought  the  price  down  to
9s.,  it  will  not  bring  it  lower,  for  a  lower  price  would  make  the  margin
of  profit  less  than  it  was  before,  and  would  check  any  further  increase
of  supply.

The  quantity  of  increased  sales  of  shoes  effected  by  this  fall  of
price  will  depend  on  what  is  called  '  elasticity  of  demand.'  This
will  differ  in  different  markets  and  different  parts  of  the  same
market.  If  everybody  has  already  reached  a  standard  of  comfort
which  involves  the  wearing  of  sound  shoes,  the  reduction  of  price
from  los.  to  9s.  will  not  be  attended  by  any  large  increase  of  sales  :
a  few  consumers  will  discard  old  shoes  earlier  than  before,  but  the


170  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

larger  effect  may  be  an  increased  sale  of  a  higher  grade  of  shoe,  if
the  economy  applies  to  higher  grades  as  well.  If,  however,  there
are  unshod  or  ill-shod  people,  or  if  some  new  outside  market  can  be
tapped,  the  fall  of  price  to  gs.  may  be  followed  by  a  large  extension
of  sales.  More  complicated  w^ill  be  the  problem  if,  as  is  more  usual,
the  reduction  of  supply  prices  is  not  the  same  for  all  qualities
supplied.  If  the  new  machinery  is  worked  more  economically  by
turning  out  a  larger  supply  of  shoes  than  could  be  sold  before,  the
determination  of  the  new  price  level  and  of  the  quantity  of  sales  at
this  level  will  not  be  so  simple.

Formerly  looo  pairs  of  shoes  per  week  were  sold  at  los.  a  pair.
Now  the  normal  rate  of  profits  can  be  earned  in  this  trade  by  any
one  of  the  following  conditions  of  the  market  :

1000  pairs  selling  at  9s.  0^.
1500 ,,  ,, 8s.  6d.

1800 ,,  ,, 8s.  od.

2500 ,,  ,, 7s.  6d.

We  may  suppose  that  the  full  economy  of  the  new  machinery
is  exhausted  when  the  output  has  risen  to  2500  per  week,  and  that
a  larger  number  could  not  be  turned  out  at  less  than  7s.  6d.

If  everybody  has  as  many  shoes  as  he  wants,  the  new  condi-
tion of  the  market  would  be  one  which  sold  1000  pairs  at  gs.  But
this  absolute  rigidity  never  exists.  A  fall  of  price  always  stimulates
demand  :  the  only  question  is  '  how  much  ?  '  If  the  elasticity  of
demand  for  shoes  is  such  that  1500  pairs  can  be  sold  for  8s.  6d.,
whereas  another  di'op  of  6d.  will  not  lead  to  an  increased  sale  of
300  more  pairs,  the  new  price  level  will  stand  at  8s.  6d.  But  if,
on  the  other  hand,  though  8s.  is  not  a  possible  price,  a  still  further
reduction  to  7s.  6d.  might  bring  into  the  market  a  new  class  of
hitherto  shoeless  persons,  or  induce  a  poor  stratum  of  consumers  to
buy  a  reserve  pair,  or  open  up  some  foreign  market,  the  new  price
level  might  fall  to  7s.  6d.,  with  a  sale  of  2500.  It  is  also  clear  that,
though  only  one  new  price  level  can  be  reached,  it  may  consist  in  a
choice  between  two  possible  and  equally  profitable  new  conditions
of  the  market.  It  might  be  that,  either  1500  pairs  could  be  sold  at
8s.  6d.,  or  2500  at  7s.  6d.,  with  the  same  net  aggregate  profit.

If  so,  no  theoretical  reasoning  can  determine  which  of  the  two
equally  desirable  alternatives  would  be  selected.  Practically,  the
former  would  probably  at  first  be  chosen,  for  following  the  gradual
fall  of  price  and  increase  of  sales  from  the  former  level,  manufac-
turers would  find  that,  after  a  market  of  1500  at  8s.  6d.  had  been
reached,  a  further  lowering  of  price  to  8s.  was  followed  by  dimin-
ished profits  with  no  stability  of  demand,  and  they  would  not


THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND  171

further  increase  their  output  so  as  to  reach  the  figure  2500,  which,
at  7s.  6d.,  would  liberate  a  fresh  volume  of  demand  and  so  secure
an  aggregate  profit  equal  to  that  obtainable  at  8s.  6d.

It  is,  of  course,  unlikely  that  an  exact  equilibrium  between  rate
of  supply  and  rate  of  demand  would  be  reached  at  any  of  the  new
prices  here  named.  The  actual  new  market  would,  in  its  preliminary
state,  stand  somewhat  as  follows  : —


1000  pairs  supply  at  9s.
1500 ,, ,, 8s.
1800 ,, ,, 8s.

od.
6d.
od.

1150  pairs  demand

1470 >'
1650 ,,

2500 ,, ,, ys.

6d.

2300 „

A  curve  treatment  of  the  problem,  based  on  an  ideal  divisibility
of  supply  and  of  prices,  would  yield  a  new  market  price  of  equili-
brium between  supply  and  demand  at  a  precise  point,  say  1483
pairs  at  8s.  4j^^d.

But  though  makers  and  dealers,  in  quotations  of  prices  and  in
bidding,  would  make  a  nicer  discrimination  of  quantities  and  prices
than  we  have  here  represented,  the  treatment  indicated  above  is
much  nearer  to  the  actual  facts  of  industry  than  a  curve  treatment
implying  infinite  divisibility.  In  cost-taking,  actual  makers  always
proceed  by  round  numbers  at  fairly  large  intervals,  so  that  the
probability  of  an  exact  price  being  reached  by  pure  bargaining  is
very  slight.

§  5.- — Though,  therefore,  it  may  be  said  that  a  reduction  in
expenses  of  production,  through  its  effect  in  increasing  supply  at
former  prices,  always  lowers  selling  prices,  it  has  no  tendency  to  cause
a  fall  proportionate  to  the  fall  in  expenses.  The  frequent  assumption
in  popular  economics  that  the  displacement  of  labour  by  the  intro-
duction of  some  machine  which  reduces  the  expenses  of  production
for  a  commodity  will  tend  to  be  compensated  by  the  increased
demand  for  the  commodity,  following  a  fall  of  prices,  has  no  validity
whatever.  A  reduction  of  10  per  cent,  in  price,  thus  caused  in
one  trade,  may  stimulate  so  large  an  increase  of  demand  as  to  lead
to  20  per  cent,  more  workers  being  employed  than  before  the
labour-saving  machinery  was  introduced.  In  another  trade  a
similar  reduction  of  price  may  be  followed  by  a  very  slight  increase
of  sales,  and  a  considerable  net  displacement  of  labour.  A  com-
parison of  the  recent  history  of  employment  in  the  cotton  and
the  printing  trades  will  serve  to  illustrate  this  truth.  Recent
improvements  in  cotton  spinning  and  weaving  processes  have
been  accompanied,  during  the  last  three  decades,  by  a  reduction
in  the  aggregate  employment  in  the  trade,  in  spite  of  increased
supply  at  lowered  prices  :  on  the  other  hand,  the  introduction  of


172  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

type-setting  and  other  mechanical  improvements  in  printing  has
so  stimulated  demand  through  reduction  of  supply  prices  as  to
lead  to  a  large  increase  of  employment  in  the  trade.

The  elasticity  of  demand  for  a  commodity,  i.e.  the  effects  of  a
fall  in  supply  prices  upon  the  rate  of  sales,  depends  upon  a  variety
of  conditions,  the  principal  of  which  are  as  follows  : —

First.  The  degree  of  necessity  or  actual  desirability  attached
to  a  commodity.  An  absolute  necessary  of  life,  such  as  bread,  will
have  very  little  elasticity  for  the  well-to-do  classes,  who  will  not
buy  any  more  however  much  the  price  fell,  or  any  less  however
much  it  rose.  Even  for  the  regular  skilled  working  classes  in  this
country  a  moderate  rise  or  fall  of  prices  will  have  little  effect  if  the
former  price  is  a  moderate  one.  Only  among  the  positively  poor
will  a  rise  in  bread  appreciably  reduce  demand,  or  a  fall  in  bread
appreciably  enlarge  it.i  Much,  even  in  the  case  of  bread,  will
depend  upon  the  possibility  of  substituting  other  foods,  i.e.  upon
the  degree  of  absolute  necessity  attaching  to  this  single  article.

In  the  case  of  what  may  be  called  necessaries  of  the  second
degree,  such  as  fuel  in  an  ordinary  English  winter,  the  elasticity
will  be  tolerably  great,  both  among  the  poor  and  among  the  thrifty
portion  of  the  ordinary  working  classes,  but  very  little  for  the  well-
to-do  classes.

As  we  rise  through  the  various  grades  of  conveniences,  comforts
and  luxuries  which  satisfy  a  diminishing  urgency  of  need,  the
elasticity  of  demand  becomes  greater  over  a  larger  proportion  of
the  entire  market.

A  moderate  fall  in  price  of  expensive  luxuries,  such  as  furs  or
diamonds,  will  often,  by  the  imitative  force  of  fashion,  cause  a  large
extension  of  the  market,  though  it  will  have  little  or  no  effect  in
increasing  the  demand  among  the  rich  former  customers.  When
such  an  extension  has  once  fastened  a  new  commodity  in  the
standard  of  consumption  of  a  class,  the  elasticity  of  its  demand  in
such  a  class  is  greatly  diminished,  but  while  it  is  fresh  a  rise  in
price  may  easily  expel  it.  So  strong,  however,  are  pride  and
custom,  that  there  is  much  more  elasticity  in  the  direction  of
the  extension  of  demand  than  in  the  direction  of  abandonment  or
even  of  reduction  :  caeteris  paribus,  the  effect  of  a  lo  per  cent,  fall
of  price  in  increasing  demand  is  larger  than  the  effect  of  a  lo  per
cent,  rise  in  diminishing  demand.  The  amount  of  this  difference
will,  however,  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  consumption  : where

'  Even  there  the  law  of  substitution  must  be  taken  into  account.  There
is  some  reason  to  hold  that  a  rise  in  price  of  bread  has  very  little  effect  upon
the  purchase  of  bread  even  by  the  workers,  but  will  act  rather  to  reduce
their  demand  for  other  forms  of  food,  &c.


THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND  173

consumption  belongs  to  display,  and  touches  pride,  a  rise  of  price
but  slightly  checks  consumption,  whereas  a  fall  of  price  may  greatly
extend  it.  In  such  luxuries,  however,  a  fall  of  price,  so  large  as  to
admit  new  social  strata  to  a  common  use  of  what  were  formerly
exclusive  goods,  may  lead  to  a  diminished  use  or  even  a  disuse
among  the  rich,  for  their  utility  as  instruments  of  display  may  be
greatly  damaged  by  their  spread.  Where,  however,  a  luxury
appeals  primarily  to  some  special  physical  taste,  it  will  not  be  easily
discarded.

There  is  only  one  class  of  goods  of  which  it  can  be  said  that  the
normal  action  of  elasticity  of  demand  is  reversed,  i.e.  those  goods
the  main  attraction  of  which  consists  in  their  rarity.  The  elasticity
of  demand  for  a  rare  edition  de  luxe  will,  as  a  rule,  be  very  slight,
and  may  be  less  than  zero  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  might  be  possible  to
sell  100  copies  at  five  guineas  each,  but  only  fifty  if  500  were
offered  at  two  guineas.

Articles  which  are  put  to  several  uses  have  generally  more
elasticity  of  demand  than  others,  unless,  indeed,  an  equal  degree  of
necessity  happens  to  attend  to  each  use.  Water  is  the  commonest
instance  where  it  is  an  article  of  sale.  Drinking,  cooking,  washing
the  person  and  clothing,  cleaning  in  general,  watering  the  garden  :
these  uses  lie  in  a  descending  scale  of  urgency,  so  that  a  compara-
tively small  rise  in  the  water  rate  may  cause  a  large  disuse  for
irrigation,  and  a  more  economical  use  for  general  purposes  of  clean-
ing, though  no  reduction  of  its  use  for  drinking  or  for  cooking.

There  will  be  considerable  differences  in  the  time  taken  for  a
given  rise  or  fall  of  price  to  work  out  its  full  effect  upon  demand.
Much  will  depend  upon  the  inherent  conservatism  of  classes  so
far  as  an  extension  of  demand  is  operative,  and  here  again  the
question  how  far  the  new  commodity  conforms  to  or  harmonises
with  accepted  habits  of  consumption  is  of  importance.  It  took  a
very  long  time  for  cocoa,  oatmeal  and  bananas  to  secure  the  place
their  cheapness  and  intrinsic  attractions  have  enabled  them  to  win
in  the  ordinary  English  standard  of  consumption.  There  have
been,  on  the  other  hand,  two  or  three  epochs  in  the  short  history
of  bicycles  when  a  moderate  fall  of  price  has  brought  a  rapid,
large  extension  of  demand.

The  primary  habits  of  consumption  are  the  most  conservative  :
the  later  and  less  firmly  established  items  of  expenditure  are
naturally  more  subject  to  change.  Food  consumption  stands  at  one
end  of  the  scale  ;  amusements  at  the  other.

Secondly.  The  effect  of  any  given  rise  or  fall  of  price  must
also  depend  upon  the  price  changes  that  are  going  on  in  every
other  class  of  commodities,  as  well  as  upon  the  growth  or  decrease


174  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  the  aggregate  income  and  its  distribution  among  the  various
classes  of  consumers.

Every  rise  of  price,  not  attended  by  an  exactly  corresponding
shrinkage  of  demand,  affects  the  demand  for  various  other  classes
of  commodities  which  have  not  changed  price,  and  the  effect  upon
the  demand  and  the  selling  prices  of  these  other  commodities  is
communicated  to  others  more  remote,  so  that  a  rise  or  fall  of
prices  in  any  market  commonly  affects  prices  in  every  other  market.
Some  of  the  largest  and  most  direct  effects  may  be  produced  at  a
long  distance  from  the  original  seat  of  disturbance.  When  a  fall
in  the  selling  prices  of  bicycles  first  brought  them  within  the  reach
of  the  lower-middle  and  upper  working  classes,  one  of  the  most
direct  and  large  effects  was  a  reduction  in  demand  for  cheap  pianos
and  for  certain  classes  of  books.

Every  growth  of  the  income  of  the  community  or  of  any  class
will  evidently  affect  the  elasticity  of  demand  attaching  respectively
to  each  element  in  the  standard  of  consumption,  and  also  to  each
organic  group  of  commodities.  For  anything  which  causes  an
increase  or  decrease  of  demand  for  a  certain  class  of  goods  may
closely  affect  other  goods  which  '  go  with  it '  either  in  final  con-
sumption or  in  some  process  of  production,  or  which,  competing
with  it  either  in  production  or  consumption,  rise  with  its  fall  and
fall  with  its  rise.  So  the  growth  of  motor  cars  not  merely  brought
a  stimulus  to  the  oil  trade,  but  affected  beneficially  or  detrimentally
the  market  for  several  sorts  of  house  property,  improved  certain
branches  of  upholstering,  damaged  the  harness  trade  and  the
higher  grades  of  the  cycle  trade,  altered  the  market  for  male  and
female  head-gear,  and  exerted  an  enormous  variety  of  considerable
influences  upon  the  entire  expenditure  of  large  groups  of  the  well-
to-do,  creating  almost  a  revolution  in  many  of  the  luxury  trades.

Corresponding  to  these  subtleties  of  the  influence  of  changes
of  supply  price  through  the  varying  elasticity  of  demand  for
different  articles,  at  different  times,  in  different  places,  among
different  sorts  of  consumers,  will  be  the  reactions  which  changes  of
demand  price  exert  upon  the  various  expenses  of  production  and
so  upon  supply  prices.

Every  rise  or  fall  in  the  scale  of  demand  prices,  i.e.  in  the
amount  of  money  consumers  are  willing  and  able  to  pay  for  a  supply
of  goods  at  the  current  price,  will,  through  causing  a  larger  or  a
smaller  supply  to  be  produced,  alter  the  methods  of  production,
the  positive  and  relative  amounts  of  the  various  factors  of  pro-
duction, and  the  prices  that  are  paid  per  unit  for  their  use,  so  raising
and  lowering  the  margins  of  employment,  extensive  and  intensive^
of  each  factor.


THE  LAW  OF  SUPPLY  AND  DEMAND  175

.Still  more  important  are  the  influences  which  the  rise  or  fall  of
demand  prices  for  staple  materials  of  manufacture  exert  upon  the
structure  of  whole  groups  of  trades,  and  so  upon  the  supply  prices
of  the  goods  they  make.  The  rise  of  demand  prices  for  such
articles  as  copper,  rubber,  oil,  paper,  leather,  due  to  new  or  increased
demands  for  electric  apparatus,  motors,  cheap  literature,  &c.,
have  altered  the  economic  and  even  the  political  administration
of  whole  provinces.

§  6. — The  elasticity  of  supply,  i.e.  the  response  which  expenses  of
production  make  to  a  rise  or  a  fall  of  demand  at  previous  prices,
is  much  less  calculable  than  the  elasticity  of  demand.  For,
whereas  the  latter  commonly  depends  upon  the  gradual  action  of
large  bodies  of  consumers  altering  their  habits  of  consumption,  the
former  is  usually  achieved  by  quick  changes  in  methods  of
production  spreading  rapidly  over  whole  trades  of  producers.
Production  is  normally  less  conservative  than  consumption,  and  is
more  alert  to  seize  and  adopt  new  economies.  For  though  habits
of  industry  make  for  themselves  deep  grooves,  and  labour,  capital,
and  ability,  being  specialised  in  certain  methods,  resist  innovations
which,  however  beneficial  in  the  long  run,  involve  present  trouble
and  loss,  competition  forces  reforms.  Whereas  a  new  habit  of
consumption  propagates  itself  among  consumers  by  voluntary
imitation  which  may  be  very  slow  where  it  takes  place,  like  most
consumption,  within  the  privacy  of  the  home,  a  new  method  of
production  proceeds  by  forced  imitation,  for,  if  a  manufacturer
refuses  to  adapt  himself  to  new  and  better  methods,  he  goes  under.
But  though  a  rise  or  fall  of  demand  at  previous  prices  must  always
produce  some  effect  upon  methods  of  production,  the  size  of  the
effect  will  have  even  less  direct  relation  to  the  size  of  the  price-
change  than  in  the  case  of  demand.  A  rise  of  20  per  cent,  in
the  demand  for  wheat  at  current  prices,  due  to  increasing  European
population  with  rising  wages,  may  cause  poorer  wheat-land  to  be
brought  under  cultivation,  so  that  the  normal  supply  price  of  wheat
per  quarter  for  the  enlarged  demand  is  raised  by  30  per  cent.„
or  it  may  stimulate  new  railway  enterprise  which  shall  open  up
some  vast  new  granary  like  Assiniboia,  or  bring  some  new  method
of  fertilisation  into  vogue  which  may  in  a  short  time  equate  the
enlarged  supply  to  the  enlarged  demand  at  a  price  even  lower  than
that  which  formerly  obtained.

The  normal  influence  of  rising  prices  due  to  enhanced  demand
is  twofold  ;  first,  a  considerable  rise  in  supply  prices  takes  place,
due  to  the  necessity  of  recourse  to  less  efficient  factors  of  production
and  higher  prices  for  factors  previously  in  use  ;  next,  stringency
of  supply  at  these  higher  expenses  furnishes  a  strong  incentive  to


176  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

economies  of  invention  and  administration,  with  the  subsequent
result  that  the  increased  supply  can  be  turned  out  at  a  rate  as  low
or  lower  than  before.  The  nature  and  the  magnitude  of  these
economies,  which  form  the  real  measure  of  elasticity  of  supply,
belong,  however,  to  those  wider  considerations  related  to  the
economic  size  of  a  business.


CHAPTER XI

THE SIZE OF BUSINESSES

§  I.  There  is  no  universal  tendency  for  businesses  to  grow  in  size.  The  extrac-
tive industries  show  large  numbers  of  small  business  forms. — §  2.  Trans-
port in  all  advanced  countries  tends  towards  large  capitalistic  forms.
So  does  manufacture  in  its  chief  staple  branches. — §  3.  "Wholesale  trade
is  in  big  and  growing  forms  :  retail  trade  shows  opposite  tendencies,
though  the  small  surviving  businesses  have  only  a  semi-independence.
Finance  is  a  domain  of  large  businesses  :  the  arts  and  professions  of  small
businesses.

§  I. — The  question  of  the  size  to  which  different  sorts  of  businesses
tend  to  grow  is  of  great  importance  in  considering  both  the  produc-
tion and  the  distribution  of  wealth.  Modern  conditions  of  capitaHst
industry  have  in  many  prominent  trades  led  to  so  large  and  so
continuous  an  increase  in  size  of  successful  businesses  as  to  have
given  rise  to  a  loose  popular  notion  that  a  general,  if  not  universal,
tendency  exists  for  successful  businesses  to  grow  bigger  and  bigger
without  assignable  limit  and  for  small  businesses  to  disappear.

So  far  as  present-day  tendencies  are  concerned,  our  brief  prelimi-
nary survey  of  the  industrial  system  will  have  served  to  indicate
that,  in  many  fields  of  industry,  small  and  middling  businesses
appear  to  hold  their  own,  and  that,  even  in  trades  where  monster
businesses  occupy  a  prominent  position,  businesses  of  moderate  or
small  size  sometimes  survive.

A  general  survey  of  the  facts  does  not  support  any  sweeping
generalisation  about  the  economy  of  concentration  of  capital  and
the  general  movement  towards  great  trusts  or  monopolies  by  the
progressive  elimination  of  smaller  businesses.

The  question,  to  what  size  does  a  business  under  favourable  or
under  normal  conditions  tend  to  grow,  can  only  be  answered  by  a
separate  scrutiny  of  each  branch  of  industry.

Agriculture. — Turning  first  to  agriculture,  we  find  the  most
diverse  types  prevailing  in  different  countries  and  for  different
purposes.  Most  of  the  staple  work  of  agriculture  for  growth  of
grain  and  fruits,  and  even  for  stock-raising  and  dairy  produce,  is
done  by  small  holders  conducting  more  or  less  independent  busi-
nesses. Save,  perhaps,  for  stock-raising,  and  in  certain  countries
for  some  sorts  of  fruit-growing,  there  is  no  admitted  economy  in

177  N


178  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

large  farming  and  no  widespread  tendency  towards  the  substitution
of  large  for  small  holdings.

The  typical  business  or  economic  unit  for  agriculture  in  its  main
branches  shows  no  general  tendency  to  grow,  so  far,  at  any  rate,  as
the  land  and  labour  factors  are  concerned.  But  in  every  civilised
country  the  capital  factor  in  a  farm  tends  to  grow :  tools  and
machinery,  artificial  manures,  &c.,  play  a  larger  part  than  formerly.
Improved  scientific  agriculture,  indeed,  often  makes  in  favour  of
small  land  units  by  substituting  intensive  for  extensive  cultivation.
There  is  a  type  of  agricultural  business  where  land  becomes  a  factor
of  diminishing  importance,  the  cultivation  being  conducted  in  glass
houses  with  imported  and  manufactured  soils,  and  with  artificial
power.  Even  in  such  businesses,  however,  so  important  are  the
elements  of  personal  care,  local  knowledge,  and  in  some  instances
purely  local  markets,  that  the  small  local  business  is  able  to  hold
its  own  and  survive,  even  in  this  the  most  capitalised  sort  of
agriculture.

The  stock-breeding,  grazing,  lumber,  and  certain  fruit-growing
businesses  in  new  countries  show  the  greatest  tendency  towards
large  units.  But  even  in  such  countries  as  the  United  States  and
Canada,  the  normal  limit  of  a  farm  does  not  often  exceed  what  can
be  worked  by  a  single  family,  with  a  little  regular  or  seasonal  help.

Special  climatic  and  geographical  conditions  sometimes  favour
large  farms  devoted  to  some  single  crop,  but  even  the  bonanza
farm  does  not  exceed  a  certain  size.

Where  great  modern  capitalism  presses  upon  agriculture  is
through  the  use  of  hired  machinery  and  through  control  of  transport
and  of  markets.  These  powers,  exercised  by  railroads  and  elevator
companies,  and  sometimes  by  companies  owning  threshing  and  other
machinery,  may  be  regarded  in  some  instances  as  serious  infringe-
ments upon  the  independence  of  farmers  as  the  owners  or  controllers
of  a  business.

The  mere  survival  of  large  numbers  of  small  tenants  or  even
freeholders  cannot  be  understood  to  imply  a  survival  of  small
businesses  in  agriculture,  if  an  increasing  share  in  the  ownership  of
the  factors  of  production,  and  an  increasing  share  in  the  product,
are  possessed  by  large  businesses  related  to  finance,  machinery,
transport,  or  markets.  The  question  of  the  relative  independence
of  the  farmer  must  enter  as  a  factor  into  the  interpretation  of  the
size  of  the  agricultural  business.

In  outward  form,  however,  it  is  clear  that  the  greater  part  of
agriculture  does  not  tend  towards  large  business  units.

Mining. — So  far  as  more  valuable  metals  are  concerned,  the
tendency  towards  large  capitalistic  businesses  is  strong  and  rapid,


THE  SIZE  OF  BUSINESSES  179

though  each  new  discovery  of  such  metals  is  hable  to  pass  through
an  experimental  era  of  small  businesses.  The  application  of  scientific
methods,  involving  expensive  machinery  and  treatment,  as  in
modern  gold  or  diamond  mines,  has  been  a  principal  cause  of  this
concentration,  assisted  in  some  instances  by  advantages  of  market
control.  Deep-level  mining  involves  such  large  preliminary  outlay,
such  large  organisation,  and  so  heavy  a  speculative  character,  as  to
necessitate  a  great  joint  stock  enterprise.

Small  businesses  may  survive  where  cheap  products  are  got  out
for  local  markets,  as  in  the  case  of  brick  and  stone.

Fishing. — This,  the  third  branch  of  the  '  extractive  '  industries,
is  difficult  to  assess.  In  developed  industrial  countries  steam
trawlers  owned  by  large  companies  displace  the  small  businesses
worked  by  individual  fishermen  or  small  co-operative  groups,  over
a  large  and  growing  portion  of  the  trade.  But  in  certain  branches
the  small  fisher  holds  his  own,  partly  because  fishing  is  a  seasonal
trade  and  so  irregular  as  to  require  great  detailed  care  and  an
adaptability  to  time  and  place,  conditions  which  are  better  suited
to  the  simple  fishing  business.

§  2. — Transport. — The  businesses  which  carry  raw  materials
from  the  farm,  the  mine,  the  seaport,  to  the  factory,  the  commercial
centre,  or  the  consumer,  and  convey  the  goods  from  one  centre  of
production  to  another,  tend  strongly  towards  large  capitalist  struc-
ture. This  holds,  indeed,  of  every  sort  of  carriage,  of  goods,  persons,
or  information,  or  for  the  direct  distribution  from  a  centre  of  such
utilities  as  gas  or  water.  Not  merely  the  great  bulk  of  the  business
on  the  main  highways  of  land  and  water  is  conducted  by  huge
companies,  but  local  carriage  and  communications  are  passing  more
and  more  into  large  public  or  private  businesses.

The  private  cab  driver  or  small  livery  stable  is  disappearing,
and  with  the  growing  elimination  of  the  horse  such  transport  busi-
ness as  survives  will  yield  to  the  competition  of  mechanical  traction.

Manufactures. — If  we  use  this  term  to  •cover  all  the  processes
by  which  raw  materials  are  transformed  into  finished  commodities,
we  shall  perceive  that  most  of  the  manufactures  engaged  in  the
main  processes  of  making  food,  clothing,  houses,  and  other  material
necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life,  have  passed  or  are  passing  into
large  businesses.  The  railroad,  economies  of  machinery  and  of
division  of  labour  are  chiefly  responsible  for  this  growth  of  the
business  unit,  and  the  largest  businesses  are  generally  in  those  pro-
ductive processes  which  best  lend  themselves  to  these  economies.
Wherever  the  raw  materials  are  sufficiently  uniform  to  admit  of
purely  mechanical  treatment  without  damage  and  waste,  where
this  treatment  can  conveniently  be  broken  up  into  a  number  of

N 2


i8o  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

separate  processes,  where  there  exists  a  widespread  regular  and
accessible  market  for  the  product,  the  large  capitalist  business  form
prevails.  Such  businesses  as  milling,  and  the  principal  textile  and
metal  manufactures,  conforming  closely  to  these  conditions,  tend
towards  a  large  size.  Even  industries  dealing  wdth  less  tractable
material,  such  as  leather,  or  involving  some  processes  where
individual  human  skill  or  care  is  required,  as  in  watch-making  or
clothes-making,  pass  into  large  businesses,  provided  some  one  or
more  necessary  process  requires  expensive  machinery,  or  minute
organisation,  supported  by  a  large  regular  demand.

But  while  a  large  number  of  the  staple  trades  settle  down  into
big  businesses  of  various  sizes  under  the  pressure  of  these  concen-
trative  forces,  other  trades  tend  to  remain  in  small  businesses.
A  small,  fluctuating,  and  incalculable  market  does  not  permit  the
use  of  expensive  plant  or  large  business  organisation :  hence
many  luxury  or  fashion  trades  remain  in  small  businesses.  Even
in  the  principal  textile  and  metal  trades  small  factories  and  work-
shops survive  for  special  orders.  Every  staple  trade  contains
several  subsidiary  trades  engaged  in  supplying  minor  needs,  or  in
executing  some  special  i)rocess  which  cannot  conveniently  be
done  in  the  factory,  or  some  work  of  repair.  Such  a  town  as
Birmingham  is  still  full  of  such  small  subsidiary  businesses  in  the
metal  trades.

Attached  more  or  less  closely  to  large  manufacturing  or  distribu-
tive trades  arc  quantities  of  small  workshops  or  home  industries,
receiving  their  materials  from  a  large  firm,  but  executing  the  work
upon  their  own  premises,  sometimes  with  their  own  machines  and
power,  under  a  variety  of  conditions  of  semi-independence.

How  far  the  Sheffield  grinder,  the  jewel  cutter,  the  matchbox
maker,  the  shirtmaker,  is  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  a  genuine
business  unit  is  a  difficult  question.  There  is  any  number  of  degrees
of  dependence  in  modern  industry.  The  number  of  manufacturing
businesses  where  a  genuinely  independent  craftsman  or  other  maker
buvs  his  materials  where  he  likes,  makes  what  he  likes,  and  sells
either  directly  to  consumers  or  to  competing  firms,  is  probabl}'
small.  There  still  survive,  however,  in  country  and  even  in  towns,
considerable  numbers  of  small  builders  or  independent  craftsmen
in  some  building  trade,  smiths,  shoemakers,  and  other  small '  trades-
men,' executing  special  jobs  for  local  customers,  though  most  of  the
work,  especially  such  as  is  connected  with  clothing,  furniture,  and
foods,  has  been  taken  over  by  large  organised  firms.  The  small
businesses  which  survive  belong  for  the  most  part  to  two  classes.
First  come  those  connected  with  the  execution  of  small  irregular
orders  for  consumers  or  for  large  firms,  businesses  for  local  supply  of


THE  SIZE  OF  BUSINESSES  i8i

perishable  goods,  e.g.  bakers,  confectioners,  &c.,  or,  in  rare  cases,
small  businesses  making  skilled  high-grade  commodities  for  rich
persons  of  taste  or  caprice,  as  in  the  dressmaking  trades,  cabinet-
making  and  other  trades  of  an  artistic  character.  To  these  must  be
added  a  great  number  of  small  businesses  engaged  in  supplying  new
articles  not  yet  so  firmly  planted  in  class  standards  of  comfort  as  to
furnish  large  regular  markets.  All  these  may  be  considered  genuine
survivals  of  small  businesses.  From  them  we  may  distinguish  the
small  sweating  business,  the  servile  workshop  of  the  middleman,  or
the  small  tied  workshop  whose  survival  is  due  to  low  wages,  long
hours,  saving  of  business  rent,  and  to  other  well  known  economies
of  the  sweating  system.

Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  the  typical  size  of  a  business
in  the  manufacturing  processes  varies  with  the  relative  importance
of  the  factor  of  capital  and  with  the  proportion  of  capital  laid  down
in  machinery.

§  3. — Commerce  and  Retail  Trade. — Wholesale  commerce  is
essentially  a  province  of  large  businesses.  The  big  capitalist  business
has  its  chief  origin  in  commerce,  and  until  recent  times  was  virtually
confined  to  commerce  and  finance.  But  the  older  mercantile  firm
was  often  engaged  in  transport  or  in  some  process  of  manufacture
which  has  now  usually  passed  into  a  separate  business.  The  work
of  buyingandof  selling,  sorting,  grading,  and  storing,  which  belongs
to  the  wholesale  merchant,  is  work  which,  to  be  done  effectively,
economically,  and  securely,  requires  a  large  capital.  For  the  mer-
chant is  constantly  confronted  with  changes  of  markets,  he  must  be
prepared  to  buy  and  sell  large  quantities  of  goods  and  to  hold  them
when  necessary,  and  at  certain  times  he  must  be  prepared  to  under-
go heavy  losses.  Though  there  will  be  in  some  wholesale  businesses
a  large  element  of  regular  routine,  and  care  and  foresight  may
greatly  mitigate  the  risks,  such  businesses  are  essentially  specula-
tive in  their  single  transactions,  and  for  success  require  a  large
capital.

The  growth  of  large  departmental  stores,  of  company  enter-
prise in  drapery,  grocery,  tobacco,  jewellery,  &c.,  and  the
establishment  of  large  numbers  of  local  distributing  centres  by  great
manufacturing  firms,  especially  in  the  clothing  trades,  sufficiently
illustrate  the  tendency  of  retail  trade  to  take  on  large  capitalist
shapes.  At  the  same  time  many  small  shops  survive.  Highly
specialised  luxury  goods,  sometimes  involving  skilled  selection  on
the  vendor's  part,  are  still  sold  in  Bond  Street  and  other  fashionable
shopping  quarters  :  perishable  foods  such  as  fish,  fruit,  vegetables,
are  often  bought,  by  preference  or  by  necessity,  in  neighbouring
shops,  and  though  improved  facilities  of  communication  and  of


i82  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

distribution  in  large  towns  have  taken  much  of  this  custom  away
from  the  small  local  shop,  or  have  converted  the  latter  into  a  mere
branch  store,  the  old  condition  of  independence  still  survives  for
many  purposes,  especially  in  new  suburbs  and  in  slum  districts.
Though  the  spread  of  packet  and  patent  goods,  and  in  general
of  sales  on  commission,  has  eaten  largely  into  the  economic
independence  of  the  small  shop,  the  full  economy  of  capitalistic
concentration  is  not  applicable  to  retail  trade.

Arts  and  Professions. — Where  production  is  required  to
furnish  goods  or  services  not  of  standard  sorts,  but  adjusted  to  the
particular  needs  or  tastes  of  the  individual  consumer,  machine
methods  and  minute  division  of  labour  are  not  available.  Even  in
the  ordinary  course  of  manufactures  we  see  that  small  businesses
survive  where  special  orders  are  in  question.  Wherever  a  high
degree  of  individual  skill  is  imposed  on  the  product  by  the  demand
of  the  consumer,  an  '  art  '  economy  is  substituted  for  a  mechanical
or  '  routine  '  economy.  This  makes  for  the  independence  of  the
producer,  involves  study  of  individual  needs  and  of  the  modes  of
satisfying  them,  inhibits  the  profitable  use  of  machines  whose
economy  consists  of  exact  multiplication  of  the  same  productive
action,  involves  the  confinement  of  the  worker  to  a  small  number
of  orders,  and  commonly  compels  him  to  do  the  whole  of  the  pro-
ductive process  himself,  or  in  case  he  co-operates  with  others,  to
supervise  the  whole  and  secure  its  unity  of  effect.  These  are  the
main  differences  between  art  and  manufacture,  and  the  skilful
handling  of  any  material  for  the  satisfaction  of  a  particular  indivi-
dual taste  makes  a  fine  art.  Though  the  term  *  artist '  is  perhaps
usually  confined  to  those  arts  where  the  producer  consults  directly
his  own  taste  rather  than  that  of  the  customer,  or  buyer,  this
condition  is  not  essential  to  the  distinction  here  made.  The
artist  who  works  to  earn  a  livelihood,  thus  falling  under  our
broader  meaning  of  industry,  must  with  more  or  less  of  conscious
purpose  aim  to  satisfy  the  need  or  taste  of  a  known  or  hypothetical
buyer.

An  artist,  or  in  some  arts  a  small  voluntary  group,  always  tends
to  be  a  complete  business  unit :  the  economies  of  large  capitalism
have  very  little  direct  hold  upon  his  industry.  Where  the  market
is  tolerably  large  and  some  considerable  elements  of  routine  are
conveniently  attached  to  the  definitely  artistic  work,  as,  for  instance,
in  artistic  bookbinding,  or  lace  making,  or  other  trades  where  the
designer  requires  sympathetic  intelligence  and  manual  skill  of  a
tolerably  common  order  to  '  execute  '  his  creative  plan,  a  fairly
large  business  unit  is  feasible.  But,  the  finer  the  art,  the  greater
the  tendency  to  a  one-man  business.


THE  SIZE  OF  BUSINESSES  183

The  organisation  of  certain  branches  of  the  dramatic,  musical,
and  literary  arts  into  large  profit-making  businesses,  sometimes  of
a  highly  monopolistic  order,  appears  to  infringe  this  law.  But
though  a  theatrical  syndicate  or  a  publishing  house  may  be  a  large
capitalistic  operation,  with  subdivided  labour  and  more  or  less
'  tied  '  artists,  the  latter  generally  retain  some  degree  of  economic
liberty,  their  name,  reputation,  or  talent  constituting  each  of  them
a  more  or  less  separate  '  business.'  Though  a  newspaper  belongs  to
capitalism,  many  of  the  contributors  are  business  units,  making
separate  sales  of  their  output  to  several  firms,  and  the  same  holds
of  painters,  musicians,  &c.  So  in  the  learned  professions,  though
large  capitalism  or  co-operative  business  sometimes  arise,  especially
in  the  teaching  and  medical  professions,  they  do  not  cover  any  large
proportion  of  the  whole,  and  such  businesses  seldom  attain  large
proportions.

Finance. — Banking,  broking  and  the  whole  machinery  of
credit,  investment,  and  insurance,  constituting  the  financial  side
of  industry,  has  generally  assumed  very  large  business  forms.
The  earliest  forms  of  co-operative  capitalism  are  found  in  these
departments,  and  though  for  money  lending,  and  even  for  insurance,
small  local  businesses  still  widely  survive,  there  is  no  other  economic
field  which  has  fallen  so  largely  under  the  control  of  the  great
capitalistic  business  as  banking,  insurance,  and  general  finance.
The  rapid  consolidation  of  banking  business  in  Great  Britain
during  the  last  two  decades  is  a  most  striking  exhibition  of  the
centralising  tendency  in  finance.  Probably,  for  reasons  which
are  very  obvious,  the  staple  branches  of  the  insurance  industry,
life,  fire,  and  marine,  have  reached  the  highest  measure  of  centralised
control,  being  vested  in  a  small  number  of  great  businesses  closely
related  by  binding  agreements  regulating  competition.

Summarising,  then,  the  extent  and  the  force  of  the  several
tendencies  making  respectively  for  large  and  small  businesses,
we  perceive  that  in  finance,  transport,  mining,  the  major  branches
of  staple  manufactures  (especially  those  connected  with  textiles,
metals,  and  buildings),  and  in  the  distribution  of  necessary  goods
and  services  in  large  towns,  the  economy  of  large  businesses  pre-
vails, and  the  general  drift  has  been  towards  an  ever-increasing
size.  On  the  other  hand,  in  agriculture,  the  more  irregular  and
subsidiary  branches  of  manufacture,  over  a  large  part  of  retail
trade,  and  especially  in  the  arts,  professions,  and  other  personal
services,  small  business  forms  tend  to  survive  in  varying  degrees
of  independence,  by  reason  of  the  personal  factors  of  individual
skill,  care,  judgment,  and  character,  which  the  nature  of  their
material  or  their  processes  involve. But  in  a  large  proportion  of


i84  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

the  small  surviving  businesses,  especially  in  those  engaged  in  the
making  or  the  distribution  of  material  goods,  dependence  upon
some  large,  and  often  non-competing,  business  for  some  necessary
material,  for  carriage  or  marketing  of  goods,  or  for  financial  assist-
ance, tends  to  encroach  upon  the  real  autonomy  of  the  small
producer  or  employer.


CHAPTER  XII

TRUSTS AND MONOPOLIES

§  I .  The  size  of  '  the  cheapest  unit  of  production  '  is  determined  by  the  rela-
tive importance  of  (i)  cost  of  raw  materials,  (2)  wages,  (3)  standing
expenses,  in  the  several  sorts  of  industry. — §  2.  The  cheapest  business  unit
may  exceed  the  cheapest  establishment  unit.  Businesses  may  grow  be-
yond the  unit  of  cheap  production,  seeking  the  largest  aggregate  profit.
— §  3.  Trusts  or  combinations,  largely  exceeding  the  '  cheapest  unit,'
may  arise,  provided  they  have  superior  access  to  materials  or  power  or
transport,  tariff  supports  or  other  legal  privileges. — §  4.  The  United
States  Steel  Corporation  illustrates  the  growth  of  a  trust  by  lateral  and
vertical  expansion.  But  the  chief  experiments  of  capitalism  are  in
forms  of  federal  business  structure. — §5.  The  power  of  a  trust  or  other
monopoly  over  prices  is  always  limited,  by  elasticity  of  demand  and
by  substitution.  Its  control  over  lalDour,  though  great,  is  seldom
absolute.

§  I. — The  analysis  of  the  industrial  system  into  industries  and
trades,  and  of  these  into  businesses,  involves,  as  we  recognise,  a
good  many  arbitrary  and  somewhat  artificial  lines  of  distinction.
In  reality  one  trade  often  shades  off  gradually  into  another,
as  furnishing  into  building,  engineering  into  ship  building  and
machine-making ;  or  trades  overlap  at  certain  places,  especially  those
contributing  to  produce  a  single  class  of  commodities  by  different
processes,  as  in  man}^  branches  of  the  wood  and  metal  trades  ;  or
a  number  of  trades  are  separate  in  some  places  and  grouped  together
in  other  places,  as  in  the  case  of  spinning,  weaving,  dyeing,  and  other
textile  processes.  In  looking  at  the  business  unit  we  see  that  the
criterion  of  independent  single  control  is  very  difficult  of  application.
The  tenant-farmer  on  a  large  estate,  the  *  tied  '  shopkeeper,  the
insurance  agent,  the  workshop  taking  orders  for  repair,  or  making
up  materials  given  out,  the  Sheffield  grinder  hiring  a  room  with
power,  the  artist  working  for  an  illustrated  paper,  enjoy  as  business
units  varying  degrees  of  independence.  Then  again,  for  certain
purposes,  a  factory,  a  local  gas  or  tram  service,  a  mine  or  group
of  mines,  will  rank  as  separate  businesses  so  far  as  actual  industrial
operations  are  concerned  ;  but  from  the  standpoint  of  financial
and  wider  business  control  they  may  form  parts  of  a  bigger  capitalist
unit. The  investors  in  a  financial  company  are  owners  of  shares

185


i86  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

in  several  railways,  mining  and  land  development  companies ;
these  again  may  not  only  work  other  businesses  subsidiary  to  their
main  employment,  but  they  may  invest  their  reserves  in  various
outside  industries.  Even  where  the  whole  of  the  factors  directly
employed  in  the  processes  of  a  business  are  owned  and  controlled
by  the  persons  co-operating  in  that  business,  the  actual  or  con-
tractual dependence  of  the  '  firm  '  upon  some  producer  of  raw
material,  or  some  merchant,  or  some  machine-makers  exacting
royalties,  or  upon  other  firms  with  which  it  has  made  agreements
regarding  output  and  prices,  may  restrict  to  an  indefinite  extent
its  real  economic  independence  as  a  separate  industrial  unit.  This
reticulation  of  business  interests  and  overlapping  ownership  of
one  or  other  of  the  factors  of  production  in  a  business  render  it
impossible  to  mark  out  a  clear  logical  distinction  of  the  term
'  business,'  though  it  is  impossible  to  dispense  with  the  term  in  any
industrial  analysis.  This  caution  is  particularly  needed  in  the
task  to  which  I  now  address  myself,  viz.  the  consideration  of  the
factors  which  determine  the  normal  size  of  business  tending  to
prevail  in  various  industries.

Let  us  approach  the  problem  first  in  relation  to  the  ex-
penses of  production  in  an  ordinary  manufacturing  business,  i.e.
a  business  comprising  a  single  plant  and  competing  freely  with
others  to  turn  out  some  standard  order  of  commodities  for
common  use.

The  factors  in  '  expenses  '  or  '  costs  '  ^  of  production  may  be
placed  under  three  heads  : —

(i)  Cost  of  raw  materials.

(2)  Productive  w'ages,  i.e.  wages  of  persons  directly  employed
by  the  business  firm  in  handling  the  materials  used  in  the  manu-
facture.

(3)  Standing  expenses,  virtually  inclusive  of  all  other  expenses
incidental  to  manufacture  and  to  buying  and  selling.  This  will
usually  include  rent  of  premises,  upkeep  of  machinery  and  other
plant,  motor  power,  lighting  and  heating,  general  care  of  premises,
superintendence,  office  expenses,  travellers,  advertisement,  in  a
word  all  expenses  which  are  not  appreciably  affected  by  the  gain
or  loss  of  any  particular  order,  but  are  involved  in  the  general
process  of  keeping  the  business  going. -'

'  Here  once  more  business  usage  requires  us,  for  immediate  analysis,  to
identify  '  costs  '•  and  '  expenses.'

'^  (i)  and  (2)  are  commonly  taken  as  '  prime  cost.'  As  regards  individual
orders,  the  manufacturer  looks  to  the  difference  between  '  prime  cost '  and
selling  price  to  see  whether  the  order  is  worth  acceptance,  and  not  to  the
'  net  profit,'  which  would  require  him  to  take  into  account  standing  expenses,
though  of  course  some  dim  reference  to  the  latter  will  be  present. In  other


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES  187

With  regard  to  (i)  cost  of  raw  materials,  though  a  small  business
may  often  be  at  a  disadvantage,  both  in  knowledge  of  markets
and  in  the  financial  ability  to  use  it,  a  medium-sized  business  can
usually  buy  as  cheaply  and  as  well  as  a  large  one.

'  If  a  manufacturer  is  purchasing  raw  material,  there  is  general^
a  market  price  for  it  which  all  must  pay,  and  which  any  one  can
obtain  it  for,  so  long  as  he  buys  the  customary  minimum  quantity  ;
while,  if  what  he  requires  is  a  partly  manufactured  article,  purchases
amounting  in  value  to  hundreds  of  pounds  per  annum,  accompanied
by  prompt  payment,  can  generally  be  made  at  the  cheapest  possible
rate.  The  sole  advantage  enjoyed  by  the  largest  concerns  in  the
purchase  of  raw  materials  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the  possibility  of
occasionally  clearing  the  market  of  raw  materials  or  of  a  surplus
output  of  partly  manufactured  stuff,  by  some  purchase  quite  out
of  the  power  of  a  smaller  concern  to  compass.  Such  an  operation,
however,  partakes  of  the  nature  of  a  speculation,  and  the  profit,
when  gained,  is  hardly  to  be  called  a  cheapening  of  the  cost  of  pro-
duction, if  only  for  the  reason  that  the  opportunity  for  such  a
special  purchase  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  occur  very  often,  and
when  it  does  occur  is  perhaps  as  likely  to  result  in  a  loss  as  in  a
gain.'  ^

(2)  In  regard  to  productive  wages  as  an  expense  of  production
the  question  is,  of  course,  of  the  limits  of  economy  of  division  of
labour.  In  most  manufacturing  industries  there  is  a  size  of  factory
large  enough  to  admit  full  differentiation,  and  so  to  enable  every
worker  to  confine  himself  to  the  work  he  can  do  best.  In  cotton
spinning  or  weaving  this  may  be  attained  in  a  factory  employing
some  200  or  300  persons.  In  a  great  engineering  firm  1000  men  or
more  may  be  required  to  secure  the  full  economy  of  sub-divided
labour  in  a  more  or  less  elastic  business.

Every  sort  of  business  will  have  its  own  special  limit  :  any
increase  in  number  of  employees  beyond  that  limit  will  not  be
advantageous,  for,  although  some  further  gains  may  accrue  from
finer  division  of  labour,  they  will  be  relatively  small  and  progres-
sively smaller,  and  will  be  more  than  balanced  by  waste  in
supervision  and  management,  and  in  enforced  idleness  during  slack
times.

words,  while  net  profit  is  his  general  motive  in  business,  his  specific  calcula-
tion for  each  job  is  upon  a  basis  of  gross  profit,  i.e.  margin  between  prime
cost  and  selling  price.  (The  analysis  of  manufacturing  economy  here  adopted
is  largely  taken  from  or  founded  on  the  able  pamphlets  and  articles  of  JNIr.
W.  R.  Hamilton,  F.C.A.,  to  whom  I  am  also  indebted  for  valuable  private
information.)

'  W.  R.  Hamilton,  The  Cost  of  Production  in  Relation  to  an  Increasing
Output  (p.  3).


i88  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

(3)  The  chief  economy  of  large-scale  production  is  often  found
in  '  standing  expenses.'  Many  elements  in  this  outlay,  superinten-
dence, office  expenses,  advertising,  travelling,  expenses  of  plant,  seem
nearly  as  great  for  a  small  as  for  a  large  business,  and  a  further
enlargement  does  not  appear  to  involve  a  proportionate  addition  to
those  charges.

But  this  notion  is  largely  false,  attributable  to  the  customary
point  of  view  from  which  the  manager  regards  a  single  new  order
or  contract.  This  he  commonly  considers  can  be  carried  out  without
any  appreciable  addition  to  his  '  standing  expenses,'  and  he  will
undertake  it,  if  it  leaves  a  margin  over  '  prime  cost '  in  materials
and  wages.  But  this  disregard  of  '  standing  expenses,'  legitimate
in  a  single  concrete  instance,  is  quite  inapplicable  to  a  general
business  economy.  If  one  new  order  after  another  be  added  to
the  output  of  any  plant,  the  time  will  come  when  new,  sudden,  large
alterations  or  additions  to  plant,  buildings,  staff  and  other  standing
expenses  must  be  made.

'  If  the  items  which  make  up  the  standing  expenses  be  looked
at  in  detail,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  each  case  there  comes  a  point  at
which  the  utmost  efficiency  is  gained,  and  that  this  point  often
comes  at  a  very  early  stage.  A  certain  size  is  necessary  that  there
may  be  due  sub-division  compatible  with  superintendence,  and  that
the  general  factory  staff — engine  drivers,  time-keepers,  store-keepers,
and  the  like — may  be  fully  employed.

'  As  for  the  plant,  the  essential  point  is  that  the  number  of
machines  of  each  description  be  such  that  each  is  fully  employed.
When  this  is  achieved,  no  further  reduction  in  that  item  is  possible.
As  for  the  factory  building — or  shops  or  sheds,  whichever  it  may
be — there  is  a  size  which  is  convenient  and  workable,  and  to  increase
this  size  is  only  to  build  another  factory.  Capital  invested  in  stock
and  book  debts  bears  a  fixed  relation  to  his  turnover,  and  a  large
business,  contrasted  with  a  small  one,  neither  gains  nor  loses.'  ^

In  regarding  the  economy  of  production  in  a  single  factory  or
other  plant,  it  appears  that  each  of  the  three  elements  in  '  cost '
favours  a  different  maximum  size.  A  business  with  an  output  of
twenty  units  may  have  virtually  attained  the  full  economy  in  prices
of  raw  materials  ;  but  it  may  require  an  output  of  thirty  to  reach
the  full  economy  of  division  of  productive  labour,  an  output  of
forty  for  best  economy  of  superintendence,  of  fifty  for  the  cheapest
advertising  and  marketing.

If  this  is  so,  a  pooling  of  these  several  economies,  in  accordance
with  the  relative  importance  attaching  to  them  in  each  particular

'  The  Cost  of  Production  (pp.  S  and  9).


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES  189

sort  of  business,  will  determine  the  most  economical  size  of  business
— the  '  Unit  of  Cheap  Production  ' — where  '  operatives,  foremen,
management,  office  staff,  selling  agents,  all  co-operate  to  the  best
of  their  ability  with  each  other,  and  with  capital  in  the  shape  of
factory,  plant  and  credit  to  one  end.'

§  2. — In  thus  recognising,  however,  the  natural  limits  of  this
economy  of  the  '  cheapest  unit  of  production,'  we  have  not  found
the  maximum  size  to  which  a  business  tends  to  grow.

For  a  single  plant  or  establishment  is  not  necessarily  co-extensive
with  a  business.  A  capital  of  ;^30,ooo  with  a  staff  of  300  operatives
may  be  the  '  cheapest  unit  '  in  a  textile  trade.  This  may  limit  the
size  of  a  single  plant,  but  certain  special  economies  may  make  for
the  growth  of  joint-stock  businesses  possessing  and  operating  a
number  of  such  plants.  The  business  unit  may  be  indefinitely
larger  than  the  establishment  unit.

In  trades  where  large  changes  of  business  policy  are  essential  to
success,  where  the  rapid  execution  of  large  sudden  orders,  the  supply
of  a  great  variety  of  goods  produced  by  different  processes,  large
credit,  great  proportionate  expenditure  on  advertising  and  on
marketing  are  necessary,  the  most  economical  size  of  a  business
may  enormously  exceed  that  of  a  single  productive  plant.  It  is,
in  fact,  these  and  similar  considerations  which  make  for  the  growth
and  survival  of  gigantic  businesses  in  many  staple  manufacturing
industries.  Wherever  credit  and  other  financial  operations  become
of  the  first  importance  in  business  success,  the  economical  business
unit  tends  to  great  magnitude.

It  is  the  economy  of  finance,  and  of  industrial  policy  closely
a<;sociated  with  finance,  that  makes  for  those  largest  modern
busmesses  which  express  the  full  tendency  to  concentration  of
capital.

But  before  considering  more  fully  this  tendency,  we  must  carry
a  step  further  our  analysis  of  the  maximum  unit  of  business  efficiency.
As  there  is  in  a  trade  some  fairly  fixed  limit  to  the  size  of  a  plant,
say  £30,000,  so  it  would  seem  there  must  be  some  limit  to  the  i^ize
of  a  business  operating  a  number  of  such  plants.  Beyond  a  certain
point,  say  ten  plants,  no  further  large  economy  of  credit,  adver-
tising, marketing,  &c.,  is  available,  while  central  management  would
grow  weaker  and  the  essential  irregularity  of  demand  would  cause
a  larger  waste  from  slackness  of  employment  :  £300,000  would  in
such  cases  appear  to  constitute  the  busmess  unit  of  maximum
efficiency.  This  would  be  the  size  that  would  yield  the  largest
margin  or  rate  of  profit  on  its  invested  capital.

But  does  it  follow  that  a  business  which  has  grown  to  this  size
will  not  tend  to  grow  any  further,  and  that  in  this  industry  the


igo  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

evolution  of  the  business  is  towards  a  number  of  competing  units
of  £300,000  each  ?  Given  full  freedom  of  competition,  it  would
appear  that  no  bjsiness  either  smaller  or  larger  than  this  size  could
survive,  and  that  all  the  productive-power  in  the  industry  must
come  to  group  itself  in  businesses  of  /30o,ooo.

But  no  such  freedom  of  competition  is  anywhere  operative,  and
both  larger  and  smaller  business  units  can  survive.  The  case  of
survivors  of  smaller  businesses  need  not  detain  us  long  :  it  is  due
to  the  fact  that  they  do  not  come  into  really  close  competition  with
the  large  business,  but  make  use  of  special  advantages  of  a  more
or  less  adventitious  kind.  A  small  high-grade  business,  in  a  trade
mainly  occupied  by  large  businesses,  may  hold  its  own  by  some
speciality,  or  by  looking  out  for  small  profitable  jobs  and  '  picking
its  market.'  Some  buyers  prefer  to  deal  with  a  small  concern  over
which  they  can  exercise  special  influence,  getting  extra  quick
delivery  and  particular  variations  in  design  or  make-up,  or  some-
thing else  which  it  would  not  be  possible  to  procure  from  a  large
house.  In  this  way  a  good  deal  of  the  verj^  best  and  most  profitable
work  may  remain  in  the  hands  of  small  businesses  competently
managed.

So  in  a  fairly  conservative  industry  a  few  small  businesses  may
survive,  their  owners  preferring  a  safe,  good  business  of  moderate
size  with  a  high  rate  of  profit  to  a  larger,  more  speculative  business
with  a  bigger  aggregate  profit  earned  on  a  narrower  margin  between
'  costs  '  and  selling  prices.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  it  is  rare  and
difficult  for  any  sound  business  in  a  progressive  industry  to  refuse
ordets,  and  to  resist  the  temptation  to  expand  and  to  extend,  even
though  such  increase  means  more  risk  and  a  lower  average  rate  of
profit  on  the  larger  business.

In  strict  economic  theory  it  is  no  doubt  impossible  to  extend  the
size  of  a  business  beyond  the  unit  of  cheap  production,  the  £300,000
of  our  manufacturing  company  ;  for  a  number  of  businesses  which
have  reached  that  size  will,  by  competing,  bring  prices  down  so  that
the  profits  are  at  a  minimum.  But  in  point  of  fact  this  theoretic
condition  is  seldom  attained  in  a  progressive  industry.  Where
modern  mechanical  and  business  improvements  are  continually
occurring,  the  best-equipped  businesses,  which  have  reached  the
unit,  will  not  be  cutting  prices  so  as  to  earn  a  mere  minimum  of
profits :  each  of  them  will,  for  a  time  at  any  rate,  be  earning  a
surplus  rate  of  gain,  and  will  be  driven  into  expanding  and  under-
taking further  orders,  even  though  this  course  involves  enlargement
beyond  the  unit  of  cheap  production.  Nor,  in  point  of  fact,  is  such
enlargement  necessarily  foolish  from  the  profit-making  standpoint.
For  we  must  distinguish  the  unit  of  cheap  production  where  the


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES  191

highest  rate  of  profit  is  got  from  the  unit  which,  with  a  lower  rate,
yields  a  larger  aggregate  profit.

A  business  which  has  been  earning  12  per  cent,  on  its  invested
capital  of  £300,000  may  grow  to  £500,000,  if  it  can  earn  9  per  cent,
on  this  large  capital.

Since  it  is  aggregate  profit,  at  any  rate  above  the  minimum,
rather  than  the  highest  rate  of  profit  in  itself,  that  furnishes  the
business  motive  to  business  men,  it  is  evident  that  economic  forces
may  thus  drive  businesses  into  sizes  larger  than  the  cheapest  unit
of  production.

This  growth  of  uneconomically  large  businesses  will  normally
occur  in  an  industry  where  such  growth  may  itself  become  an
instrument  for  repressing  competition,  and  so  for  preventing  such
a  fall  of  prices  as  will  lower  profits  to  a  minimum.  In  other  words,
if  a  manufacturing  business,  which  in  its  '  cheapest  unit  of  produc-
tion' size,  at  £300,000,  is  subject  to  keen  competition  (because  at
such  a  size  it  cannot  command  the  market),  finds  that,  by  doubling
its  size,  or  by  combining  with  a  competitor  of  the  same  size,  it  can
absolutely  or  partially  control  the  market,  it  will  be  profitable  to
make  this  enlargement,  because,  by  holding  up  prices,  it  can  thus
secure  a  larger  aggregate  profit  than  by  remaining  at  the  '  cheapest
unit  of  production  '  size.

If  it  were  impossible  for  a  business  to  grow  beyond  the  '  cheapest
unit  of  production  '  without  suffering  loss,  our  industrial  system
would  possess  an  automatic  check  against  monopolies,  at  any  rate
in  most  industries  in  large  states.  For  unless  this  '  cheapest  unit '
was  so  large  as  to  enable  one  such  business  to  supply  the  whole
market,  competition  must  occur.  If,  for  instance,  the  '  cheapest  unit '
in  all  the  textile  industries  did  not  exceed  £300,000,  or  in  the  metal
indastries  £500,000,  the  competition  of  businesses  endowed  with
this  maximum  efficiency  would  prevent  the  growth  of  any  '  trust  '
or  unified  business  which  could  monopolise  any  market  in  these
industries.  There  might  be  trades  of  secondary  or  tertiary  rank
where  the  '  cheapest  unit '  was  large  enough  to  secure  a  monopoly,
at  any  rate  in  a  '  protected  '  country,  though  the  tenure  even  of
such  monopolies  would  be  precarious.  But  in  the  markets  for  staple
commodities  it  would  be  very  unlikely  that  the  '  cheapest  unit  '
would  be  large  enough  to  hold  the  market.

§  3. — How  then,  it  may  be  asked,  does  it  arise  that  large  national,
or  in  a  few  instances,  world  markets  fall  under  the  control  of  a  single
business  corporation  ?  How  is  the  actual  size  and  power  of  the  great
manufacturing  '  trust  '  consistent  with  the  doctrine  of  '  cheapest
unit  of  production  '  ?  The  answer  is  twofold.  In  the  first  place,  by
confining  our  analysis  hitherto  to  units  of  manufacturing  production


192  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

we  have  ignored  certain  factors  which,  combined  with  manufacturing
economies,  tend  often  to  enlarge  the  '  cheapest  unit  of  production.'

Everyone  knows  that  it  is  not  the  economy  of  large  production
in  manufacture  that  accounts  for  the  power  and  magnitude  of  the
Standard  Oil  Company,  or  the  Sugar  Trust,  or  the  United  States
Steel  Corporation.  Inquiry  into  the  history  of  these  or  any  other
'  monopolies  '  indicates  that  their  profitable  growth,  extending  far
beyond  the  '  cheapest  unit '  for  manufacture,  rests  upon  superior
access  to  raw  materials,  or  power,  superior  facilities  of  transport,
tariffs,  bounties  or  other  legal  privileges,  patents  or  special  secret
processes.

Of  these  supports  the  transport  industry  is  the  most  important.
It  is  in  this  branch  of  industry  that  the  economic  conditions  favour
so  large  a  type  of  business  as  to  make  normally  for  monopoly.  There
is  only  one  shortest  road  between  any  two  points.  From  this
indisputable  fact  proceeds  the  chief  economy  of  the  large  over  the
small  transport  business  by  land.  The  railroad,  or  the  pipe  line,
which  is  best  laid,  has  a  natural  advantage,  enabling  it  to  undersell
would-be  competitors  and  to  increase  its  size  of  business  until  it  has
a  monopoly.  Even  sea-transport  is  in  part  subjected  to  similar
restrictions,  favouring  the  growth  of  shipping  companies  which  have
secured  the  best  terminal  connexions  with  railroads,  preferential
dock  and  coal  accommodation,  dec.

These  advantages  are,  in  the  case  of  railroads  and  sometimes  of
shipping  companies,  secured  and  enhanced  by  charters  or  govern-
mental subsidies,  which,  assisting  them  to  keep  out  competitors,
enable  them  to  grow  until  they  have  more  or  less  absorbed  entire
markets  for  carriage  of  goods  and  passengers.  When  it  is  con-
sidered that  in  these  great  transport  industries  the  genuine
economies  of  large  capitalist  enterprise  would  in  themselves  tend
towards  a  very  big  type  of  profitable  business,  we  perceive  how
the  natural  and  legal  supports  enable  great  transport  companies
to  wield  large  monopoly  powers  over  great  areas  of  land  and  sea.

Whenever,  then,  a  manufacturing  business  can  either  procure
such  transport-power  as  an  appendage  to  its  productive  processes,
or  can  make  agreements  with  carrying  companies  which  give  it  an
advantage,  the  profitable  size  of  such  a  business  may  be  raised  so  as
to  enable  it  to  control  the  market  for  its  products.  Most  very  large
manufacturing  businesses,  which  transcend  the  mere  economy  of
large-scale  production,  derive  part,  if  not  most,  of  their  strength
from  their  superior  control  of  transport  facilities,  either  for  raw
materials  and  fuel,  or  for  their  product.

Most  of  the  greatest  manufacturing  businesses  are  seen  stretching
out  to  strengthen  themselves  by  owning  their  own  railway  cars  and


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES  193

other  transport  facilities,  sometimes  their  own  coal  mines  and
natural  supplies  of  other  raw  materials,  or  securing  contracts  for
the  carriage  of  their  goods  which  give  them  an  advantage  over  actuaJ
or  possible  competitors.

But  while  some  classes  of  business  in  the  transport  industries,
in  mining,  manufacture,  and  finance,  which  are  enabled  in  some
measure  to  control  a  market,  may  thus  largely  outgrow  the  '  unit  of
cheapest  production,' -the  main  tendency  at  the  present  time  is
towards  a  federal  type  of  business  organisation  which,  without
departing  widely  from  the  '  economic  unit,'  so  far  as  its  individual
members  are  concerned,  shall  by  regulation  of  output  and  of  selling
l)rices,  and  by  such  control  of  the  market  for  materials,  labour,
and  transport  as  its  new  condition  enables  it  to  secure,  maintain
monopoly  rates  of  profit  for  large  masses  of  capital  grouped  in
businesses  of  an  economical  size.

In  a  few  instances,  relying  upon  one  or  more  of  the  external
supports  I  have  named,  a  single  business  will  bloat  itself  out,
absorbing  other  businesses,  until  it  controls  a  market,  and  main-
taining a  size,  as  a  single  unit,  which,  so  far  as  efficiency  of  production
goes,  is  excessive.  But  in  most  branches  of  industry,  especially
in  staple  manufactures,  where  no  business  enjoys  any  marked
superiority  of  external  support,  businesses  tend  towards  federal
union  rather  than  towards  a  single  centralised  government.  The
typical  product  of  modern  capitalism  is  a  '  combine  '  between
businesses  of  efficient  size,  which  retain  a  large  measure  of  inde-
pendence in  management  and  methods  of  production,  but  present
a  common  front  to  the  consumer  and  to  sellers  of  materials  and
labour-power,  as  well  as  to  the  political  government.

This  is  no  proper  place  to  enter  on  a  close  investigation  into  the
various  forms  of  '  combine,'  from  the  strong  federation  or  '  trust '
to  the  cartel,  ring,  pool,  alliance,  conference,  association,  and
agreement,  which  are  operative  in  so  many  of  the  great  manu-
facturing, transport,  mercantile,  and  financial  industries  in  every
advanced  nation.  All  these  may  be  regarded  as  experiments  in  a
federal  type  of  business,  based  on  a  desire  to  combine  the  efficiency
of  the  '  cheapest  unit  of  production  '  with  certain  managerial,
financial,  and  political  advantages  accruing  from  federal  unity,
so  securing  regulation  of  competition  and  a  corresponding  control
of  markets.  In  different  trades,  in  different  countries,  and  at
different  times,  different  types  of  federal  union  emerge  ;  in  some
there  is  no  stability  of  structure,  and  they  soon  disappear,  as  in
the  case  of  the  Birmingham  alhance  ;  in  others,  weak  agreements
on  price  lists  give  place  to  closer  and  more  enduring  associations,
such as the steel rail association and  the conferences in the

o


1^4  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

railroad,  shipping,  and  insurance  trades.  The  coal  and  iron
cartels  of  Germany  and  Austria,  with  their  selHng  syndicates,
their  elaborate  regulations  of  output  and  prices,  accompanied  by
regular  inspection  of  accounts,  and  fines  for  breaches  of  agreements,
are  important  experiments  in  a  new  business  structure,  especially
accommodated  to  trades  whose  local  conditions  differ  very  widely.
In  manufactures  of  standard  articles  by  routine  methods  the
tendency  is  towards  closer  union  ;  and  bodies  like  the  United
States  Steel  Corporation  are  seeking  after  new  methods  of  com-
bining local  independence  and  stimulus,  for  individual  establish-
ments in  a  variety  of  related  trades,  with  a  general  trade  policy
and  a  strong  central  finance.

§  4. — If,  then,  we  so  modify  the  popular  conception  of  a  business
as  to  make  it  cover  every  arrangement  of  economic  forces  which
operates  as  a  single  unit  in  a  market,  we  perceive  that  the  limits
which  appeared  to  be  set  by  economy  of  production  on  a  single
factory,  farm,  mine,  shop,  or  other  plant  may  be  enormously
exceeded  by  various  S3^stems  of  federating  such  productive  units
under  a  single  commercial  and  financial  control.

The  growing  size  and  complexity  of  the  business  structure
thus  evolving  is  based  upon  the  following  considerations : —

(i)  The  unit  of  cheapest  production  in  a  single  productive
process  ;

(2)  The  group  of  units  of  cheapest  production  under  a  single
'  company  '  ;

(3)  The  linkage  of  several  such  groups  or  companies  in  a  single
trade  or  process,  either  by  amalgamation  or  by  agreements  of
various  degrees  of  stringency  ;

(4)  The  inclusion  in  a  single  commercial  and  financial  control
of  groups  of  productive  units  in  the  related  processes  of  production
and  of  distribution  of  a  class  of  commodities.

The  double  process  of  expansion  here  indicated  may  be  illus-
trated best  in  actual  industry  by  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation,
in  the  class  of  strong  '  federal '  business.  Here  are  groupings  of
(i)  plants  in  the  extractive  processes  engaged  in  producing  raw
materials  and  power ;  (2)  plants  in  the  several  transport  industries
with  subsidiary  processes;  (3)  plants  in  the  several  processes  of
manufacture,  showing  widening  diversity  as  they  approach  the
final  stage  of  manufacture.


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES


195


UNITED STATES STEEL CORPORATION


Iron  Ore
Coal  Mines
Coke
Natural  Gas


'I Railroads
t  Ships
j Docks,


Blast
Furnaces


&c.


Rolling
Mills

Furnaces,
&c.


Steel


/"Hoops
I  Rails


Wire
iTubes
Tinplate
Bridges
Cars

Elevators
Electric  works,
&c.


The  properties  owned  were  described  (1905)  officially  as  follows  :
'  seventy-eight  blast  furnaces,  with  a  capacity  of  upwards  of
6.500,000  tons  of  pig  iron  yearly,  or  half  that  of  the  United  States
in  1900  ;  149  steel  works  and  6  finishing  plants,  including  bar  mills,
standard  steel  and  plate  mills,  with  an  annual  capacity  of  about
9,000,000  tons  of  finished  material ;  18,300  coke  ovens  ;  about  70
per  cent,  of  the  ore  mines  of  the  Lake  Superior  region,  producing,
in  1900,  12,724,900  tons  ;  70,830  acres  of  coal  land,  about  30,000
acres  of  surface  lands  in  the  coke  region,  and  125  lake  vessels,  &c.'

In  Great  Britain  and  in  Germany  there  are  several  instances
of  great  engineering  companies  which  upon  a  smaller  scale  have
attained  a  similar  structure  ;  and  such  railroad  companies  as
the  L.  &  N.  W.  and  the  Midland  have  absorbed  a  long  continuous
series  of  productive  processes,  which  furnish  the  greater  part  of
their  larger  material  requirements.

It  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  limits  of  the  centrahsing
tendency,  how  far  in  the  several  departments  of  large  capitalist
industry  it  is  driving  towards  such  complete  financial  and  com-
mercial unity  of  control  as  is  illustrated  in  the  United  States  Steel
Corporation,  or  in  any  of  the  genuine  trusts,  or  how  far  it  will
reach  its  limits  of  economy  in  some  such  looser  form  of  federation
as  is  represented  in  a  *  cartel,'  a  '  conference,'  or  other  agreement,
with  some  machinery  for  securing  community  of  interest  and
unity  of  policy  in  markets.

In  Great  Britain  the  present  stage  is  one  of  experimentation
in  trade  agreements  allowing  a  maximum  of  independence  in  the
businesses.  But  in  most  cases  the  need  of  a  stronger  federal  control
to  prevent  under-cutting,  secret  rebates,  and  other  breaches  of  the
spirit,  or  even  the  letter  of  the  agreement,  is  becoming  evident.  The
regulation  of  output  and  of  selling  prices  is,  of  course,  the  direct  aim
of  all  such  agreements  ;  though  the  federal  machinery  may  also
be  used  for  controlling  markets  for  raw  materials,  for  bargaining
with  labour  and  with  carrying  companies,  and  for  securing  legal
and  other  governmental  assistance.

o  2


196  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

It  is  difficult  to  say  what,  if  any,  economic  limit  can  be  assigned
to  the  size  of  such  '  federal  businesses.'  Yet  from  the  standpoint
of  the  practical  problem  of  distribution  this  is  a  most  momentous
question.  For  if,  when  there  is  a  natural  limit  to  the  size  of  a
single  productive  plant,  or  even  of  a  single  business  in  the  old  sense
of  that  term,  there  is  no  such  practical  limit  to  the  growth  of  a
federation  of  businesses,  it  seems  more  and  more  certain  that  this
large  federal  structure  of  capitalist  forces  will  be  utilised  to  secure
control  of  markets  and  that  possession  of  the  '  surplus  product  '
which  such  control  entails.  The  survivals  of  the  competitive
system  will  be  more  and  more  devoted  to  a  struggle  for  the  evolu-
tion, in  the  several  departments  of  industry,  of  that  special  type
of  federation  which  is  best  adapted  to  the  conditions  of  the  trade
and  country.  In  some  trades  a  close  amalgamation  of  capital
and  business  control  may  prevail,  in  others  a  simple  federal  instru-
ment for  enforcing  a  profitable  scale  of  selling  prices.

The  general  law  will  be  that  the  processes,  where  mechanical
routine  methods  can  be  best  applied  to  the  supply  of  standard
articles  for  large  regular  consumption,  will  fall  under  a  closer  federal
unity,  while  those  processes  where  irregularity  of  materials  or  of
working  interfere  with  '  standardisation,'  and  require  more  elasticity
of  local  management,  will  remain  under  a  looser  federal  government.

But  while  an  important  limit  seems  thus  set  upon  the  federal
tendency,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  when  any  instrument  has
been  evolved  for  a  particular  use,  there  is  a  disposition  to  apply  it
to  other  uses,  and  to  strengthen  it  so  as  to  make  it  thus  available.
So  here,  though  the  raison  d'etre  of  a  business  federation  is  control
of  selling  prices,  the  advantages  of  common  action  in  dealing  with
markets  for  raw  materials,  for  power,  for  machiner}^  and  above  all
for  resisting  the  demands  of  organised  labour  using  trade  unionism
and  politics  to  gain  their  ends,  will  certainly  dispose  the  federal
businesses  to  assume  larger  functions  and  to  require  larger  powers
for  exercising  them.

Tlie  naive  economic  theory,  therefore,  which,  based  upon  the
operation  of  a  so-called  law  of  diminishing  returns,  adduced  the
limits  to  the  profitable  growth  of  a  single  business  as  a  sufficient
preventive  of  monopolies,  at  any  rate  in  a  nation  allowing  free
imports,  must  be  set  aside.  We  cannot,  of  course,  assert  that
there  is  no  limit  whatever  to  the  economic  size  even  of  a  federal
business.  It  might  be  the  case  that  the  growing  size  of  a  federation
of  diverse  businesses  in  a  long  and  complicated  series  of  related
processes  would  reach  a  point  when  federal  control  became  so
difficult  and  so  inefficient  as  to  invite  the  competition  of  some
smaller  and  more  efficient  capitalist  structure. At  any  given  time


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES  197

it  cannot  be  denied  that  tli^cre  must  be  some  theoretic  Hmit  to  the
economy  of  such  federal  control.  But  from  the  standpoint  of
protection  against  monopoly,  the  question  is  whether  this  theoretic
limit  stands  upon  one  side  of  '  monopoly  '  or  upon  the  other.

Now  upon  this  point  the  weight  of  evidence  afforded  by  recent
experience  in  the  most  developed  industrial  countries  of  Europe  and
America  seems  to  support  the  following  judgment.  Where  a  large
amalgamation  or  federation  of  businesses  attempts  to  secure  so
strong  a  control  of  markets  as  to  raise  or  maintain  a  rate  of  profits
higher  than  commonly  obtains,  without  the  support  of  any  monopoly
of  natural  resources,  or  preferential  facilities  of  transport  or  protec-
tion or  other  State  aid  in  its  markets,  it  generally  fails.  There  are,
indeed,  a  few  instances  of  trades  of  secondary  and  tertiary  import-
ance where  a  control  of  the  market  appears  to  have  been  maintained
by  pure  force  of  business  organisation  in  manufacturing  processes,
without  any  large  assistance  from  any  of  the  above-named  sources.
Perhaps  the  International  Sewing  Thread  Trust  is  the  most  con-
spicuous instance  of  a  '  monopoly  '  which  appears  to  rest  upon  the
economy  of  concentrated  capital  and  centralised  control.  But  all
the  great  American  trusts  or  '  combines  '  which  have  shown  a
marked  ability  to  retain  a  control  of  markets  and  prices  are  known
to  owe  their  origin  or  their  maintenance  of  power  to  superiority  of
natural  resources,  railroad  aid,  or  tariffs,  bounties  or  other  govern-
mental assistance.  Most  of  them  enjoy  more  than  one  of  these
external  aids.  When  a  number  of  related  processes  of  manufacture
or  of  transport  are  involved,  the  control  of,  or  preference  in,  any
single  indispensable  process  is,  of  course,  sufficient  to  yield  a  power
of  monopoly.  It  is  this  consideration  which  plays  so  prominent  a
part  in  building  up  the  strength  of  such  a  powerful  trust  as  the
Standard  Oil  Company  and  of  the  Carnegie  Steel  and  Iron  Company,
out  of  which  the  later  Steel  Trust  grew.  Preferential  rates  and
facilities  of  railroad  transport  were  the  instruments  by  which  these
trusts  gained  a  position  which  afterwards  they  were  enabled  to
secure  and  strengthen  by  tariff  supports  and  control  of  raw
materials.

A  tariff  is  more  rightly  regarded  as  the  foster-mother  than  the
mother  of  trusts,  unless,  indeed,  as  in  the  Steel  Trade  of  Canada,  a
bounty  accompanies  the  tariff.  But  in  not  a  few  instances  it  is
likely  that,  growing  by  normal  processes  up  to  its  limit  of  efficiency
in  size,  it  is  enabled  by  a  tariff  which  excludes  foreign  competition
to  obtain  so  effective  a  control  of  the  home  market  that  it  can
profitably  exceed  the  unit  of  efficiency  which  would  be  its  limit
imder  the  pressure  of  competition.  The  high  prices  secured
by a sufficient  control  of the home market  raise the  unit  of


198  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

maximum  aggregate  profits  above  the  unit  of  maximum  profits
under  competition.

§  5. — Tliis  brief  sketch  of  the  natural  history  of  trusts,  combines,
and  federal  businesses  suffices  to  explain  the  origin  and  nature  of
those  great  business  units  or  combinations  which,  in  many  fields  of
manufacture,  transport,  commerce,  and  finance  are  seen  exercising
a  control  over  prices  that  enables  them  to  take  large  surplus  gains
over  and  above  the  normal  interest  and  profit.

The  so-called  law  of  diminishing  returns,  which  simply  means
the  fact  that  there  is  some  limit  to  the  economical  development  of
every  business  structure,  is  not  in  effect  operative  in  this  class
of  businesses,  which  by  skilled  decentralisation  of  administration
on  the  one  hand,  and  by  monopoly  of  market  on  the  other,  can
continue  to  grow,  earning  an  increasing  aggregate  of  profits.

So  far  as  monopoly  of  market  and  consequent  enhancement  of
prices  is  concerned,  there  are,  of  course,  limits  to  the  use  of  such
a  power.

There  is  no  such  thing  as  complete  monopoly,  and  if  there  were,
except  in  the  case  of  an  absolute  necessary  of  life,  such  monopoly
M'ould  not  mean  an  unlimited  power  over  selling  prices.

For  a  substantial  control  of  market  and  of  prices  it  is  often
sufficient  for  a  business  to  be  by  far  the  largest  single  seller.  In
England  it  has  commonly  been  held  that  a  minimum  of  70  per  cent,
of  the  trade  is  indispensable  to  the  success  of  a  combination  or
amalgamation  ;  but  this  is  evidently  a  question  of  the  sort  of  trade,
the  relative  strength  of  the  remaining  outside  firms,  and  the  distri-
bution of  the  control  over  the  several  local  or  industrial  sections  of
the  market.  It  would  probably  be  unsafe  for  a  trust  commanding
even  three-quarters  of  the  entire  market  to  leave  another  free
business  in  undisputed  control  of  a  local  market  covering  20  per
cent,  of  the  whole  and  able  to  make  encroachments  beyond  its
borders.  But  even  the  strongest  trusts  have  their  market  limits.
The  Standard  Oil  Company,  for  instance,  upon  its  reconstruction
in  1899  claimed  only  to  produce  about  65  per  cent,  of  the  country's
total  output  of  refined  oil,  though  its  proportionate  hold  over
the  Eastern  and  middle  Western  States  was  far  larger  than  this
percentage.

But  apart  from  the  check  through  the  survival  of  free  businesses
(which  is  often  weakened  by  the  fact  that  the  latter  may,  and  often
do,  prefer  to  let  the  trust  fix  profitable  prices,  which  they  adopt,
and  upon  which  they  thrive),  there  are  two  other  checks  on  the
power  of  a  '  monopoly  '  over  prices.  One  is  contained  in  the  elas-
ticity of  demand,  which  in  every  case  affords  a  natural  limitation
on  the  power  of  raising  prices. A  monopolist  must  be  careful  not


TRUSTS  AND  MONOPOLIES  199

to  spoil  his  market  by  excessive  prices,  and  to  calculate  carefully
what  price  will  give  him  the  largest  aggregate  profits.

The  other  check  is  afforded  by  the  possibilities  of  substitution.
In  each  of  its  main  uses  as  illuminant,  motor,  lubricant,  &c.,  oil
competes  with  other  articles,  and  the  possibility  of  recourse  to  some
alternative  article  qualifies  every  monopoly.

The  profitable  nature  of  a  monopoly,  however,  depends  not
merely  on  the  strength  of  its  control  over  selling  prices,  but  upon
its  power  to  keep  down  expenses  of  production.  If  it  is  strong
enough,  or  sufficiently  well  placed,  to  control  the  market  for  raw
materials  and  fuel,  to  get  cheap  freight,  to  dispense  with  competi-
tive expenses,  and  to  dictate  its  own  terms  for  the  hire  of  labour,
the  margin  between  expenses  and  selling  prices  will  be  larger  and
aggregate  profits  will  rise  correspondingly.  The  power  of  a  trust
or  other  '  combine  '  over  the  market  for  raw  materials  and  for
labour  will  correspond  in  general  with  its  control  of  selling  prices,
though  the  existence  of  alternative  uses  will  qualify  this  power.

The  history  of  the  dealings  of  the  Standard  Oil  Company  with
the  owners  of  oil  lands  in  Ohio  and  elsewhere,  of  the  Sugar  Trust
with  the  sugar  growers,  and  the  acquisition  of  ore  mines  by  the
Steel  Trust,  illustrate  the  economy  of  trust  administration  through
control  of  raw  materials.

The  power  over  the  labour  market  possessed  by  a  trust  will,
of  course,  depend,  not  merely  upon  the  degree  of  the  monopoly  it
wields,  but  upon  the  amount  of  specialised  skill  and  other  particular
conditions  which  are  attached  to  the  labour.

In  a  skilled  trade  where  there  is  only  one  employer,  a  trust  or  com-
bination, the  workman  must  accept  any  terms  of  labour  which  are
preferable  to  seeking  employment  in  the  unskilled  labour  market.
The  ordinary  routine  worker  in  a  highly  elaborated  modern  works
is  vipon  the  whole  less  competent  than  any  other  class  to  transfer
his  labour-power  without  loss  to  another  trade.  Now  it  is  in  such
trades  that  trusts  and  combinations  most  flourish,  and  the  fact  gives
them  a  power  in  bargaining  with  labour  far  greater  than  is  possessed
in  a  competitive  trade,  where  rival  firms  are  apt  to  be  confronted
by  a  single  trade  union  or  federation  of  trade  unions.

Various  considerations,  however,  may  temper  the  use  of  the
superior  power  of  bargaining  with  labour.  Trusts  and  combines
have  in  some  instances  recognised  the  advantage  of  a  liberal  treat-
ment of  employees  by  introducing  an  element  of  '  profit-sharing,'
or  other  preferential  payment,  which  shall  have  the  effect  of  de-
taching their  employees  from  the  general  labour  market  and  of
securing  industrial  peace.  It  is  also  claimed,  apparently  with  good
reasons,  that  some  trusts,  notoriously  the  Standard  Oil  Company


200  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

and  the  Steel  Trust,  recognise  more  fully  than  other  firms  the
economy  of  high  wages  for  their  more  skilled  and  responsible
employees.  But  the  conditions  recently  prevailing  among  large
bodies  of  less  skilled  employees,  in  so  strong  a  monopoly  as  the
anthracite  coal  trade,  indicate  that  the  workers  in  general  have
no  security  of  any  share  in  the  economy  of  industrial  monopoly.

In  rare  instances,  where  the  specialised  skill  in  a  monopolised
trade  is  powerfully  organised,  it  may  pay  the  employer  to  purchase
industrial  peace  by  giving  the  employees  a  share  of  the  monopoly
profits,  or  even  to  organise  a  joint-trust  of  capital  and  labour,  as
was  tried  in  the  Birmingham  alliances,  and  as  has  been  more  than
once  proposed  in  the  South  Wales  coal  trade.  The  recent  develop-
ment of  a  policy  of  fiscal  protection  in  Australia  and  elsewhere,
designed  to  secure  preferential  conditions  for  the  workers  in  pro-
tected trades,  points  to  the  possibility  of  substituting  inter-trade
antagonisms  for  the  conflict  between  capital  and  labour  in  the
several  trades.  This  consideration  belongs,  however,  to  the  future
rather  than  the  present.


CHAPTER XIII

THE LABOUR MOVEMENT

§  I.  Inadequate  defences  for  trade  unionism  are  found  in  '  the  economy
of  high  wages  '  and  the  alleged  power  to  give  labour  a  share  in  '  booms.'
— §  2.  So  far  as  minimum  costs  are  concerned,  there  is  harmony  of  capital
and  labour,  though  labour  is  not  necessarily  precluded  from  pressing  for
rises  of  wages. — §  3.  The  surplus  forms  the  economic  objective  of  the
labour  movement.  Where  it  arises  labour  can  get  some  of  it,  if  strongly
organised.  Such  surplus,  got  by  labour,  will  usually  be  productive  of
efficiency. — §  4.  The  endeavour  to  get  surplus  is  the  main  motive  of
labour-politics,  and  social  reforms  are  chiefly  valued  as  strengthening
the  power  of  collective  bargaining.

§  I. — The  commonly  accepted  interpretation  of  the  working  of  the
industrial  system  under  competition  furnishes  no  adequate  or  even
intelligible  theory  of  the  labour  movement.  If  the  normal  working
of  the  system  is  such  as  to  keep  interest,  profits,  and  all  payments
for  ability  at  a  minimum,  any  temporary  rise  acting  as  a  bare
incentive  to  evoke  an  increased  application  of  ability  and  capital
so  as  to  secure  industrial  progress,  while  rent  consists  entirely  of
differential  payments  which  do  not  affect  price,  then  the  labour
movement,  so  far  as  it  aims  at  the  improvement  of  the  economic
condition  of  labour  as  a  whole,  has  no  real  validity.  If  no  general
fund  exists  which  can  be  diverted  from  some  other  form  of  surplus
income  into  wages,  trade  unionism  becomes  a  mere  device  for  adding
to  certain  well-organised  groups  of  workers  a  scarcity  wage  paid  by
less  favourably  placed  workers.  For  if  the  higher  wages  which
organisation  seems  able  to  secure  do  not  come  out  of  rents  or  other
'  surplus  '  otherwise  taken  by  other  factors  than  labour,  they  must
come  out  of  enhanced  prices  for  the  goods  which  they  assist  to
produce,  and  these  higher  prices  will  hit  hardest  the  weakest  and
worst-paid  workers.  Again,  effective  organisation  implies  a  policy
of  exclusiveness  achieved  by  apprentice  rules,  entrance  fees,  and
other  regulations,  all  of  which  help  to  keep  the  labour  markets  for
less  organised  trades  in  a  chronic  state  of  over  supply  and  so  keep
wages  at  a  bare  subsistence  point.  If,  then,  no  surplus  exists  which
labour  can  secure  by  organisation,  trade  unionism  inflicts  a  twofold
damage  on  the  unorganised  workers,  keeping  down  their  wages  and


202  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

raising  the  prices  they  must  pay  for  goods  produced  under  trade
union  conditions.

There  are  two  ways  by  which  advocates  of  trade  unionism  have
sometimes  sought  to  extricate  themselves  from  this  dilemma.  One
is  the  assertion  that  trade  unionism  and  the  higher  wages  and  other
more  expensive  conditions  it  extorts  so  increase  the  efficiency  of
labour  as  to  furnish  an  extra-product.  In  other  words,  the  trade
union  helps  to  induce  employers  to  adopt  the  enlightened  economy
of  high  wages.  But  we  have  already  seen  that  this  doctrine  cannot
be  promiscuously  applied,  so  as  to  support  the  view  that  every
improvement  in  pay  and  other  conditions  of  labour  will  be  attended
by  a  corresponding  rise  in  efficiency  and  output.  Even  in  public
employments,  where  the  full  efficiency  of  the  worker  and  his  family
falls  within  the  business  outlook,  some  limits  are  prescribed  by
considerations  of  the  public  purse  and  the  class  standard  of  com-
fort. In  private  competitive  industry  closer  limits  must  be  assigned
to  the  practice  of  the  economy  of  high  wages.  It  is  not  to  be  argued
seriously  that  trade  unionism  is  merely  engaged  in  levelling  up  the
efficiency  of  labour,  and  in  taking,  by  higher  wages,  shorter  hours
and  other  improvements  of  working  life,  the  product  of  this  higher
level  of  efficiency.  The  enemies  of  trade  unionism  indeed  contend
that  by  restricting  employers  in  selection  of  operatives,  number  of
apprentices,  the  introduction  and  working  of  machinery,  and  in
particular  by  agreements  to  limit  the  output  of  labour-power,
the  trade  union  makes  not  for  enhanced  but  for  reduced
efficiency.  But  while  the  exact  measure  of  truth  contained  in  this
view  need  not  be  discussed  here,  it  may,  I  think,  be  confidently
asserted  that  neither  the  theory  nor  the  practice  of  trade  unionism
can  be  or  is  in  fact  defensible  as  a  policy  merely  based  on  the
application  of  the  economy  of  high  wages,  or  any  other  doctrine
which  im.plies  that  the  gain  a  trade  union  can  secure  for  its
members  is  measured  by  and  is  contingent  upon  the  increased
productivity  of  the  labour-power  which  they  give  out.

The  other  widely  prevalent  '  compromise '  view  limits  the
efficacy  of  trade  unionism  to  its  ability  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  a
natural  economic  movement  which  would  secure  to  labour  its  share
in  a  spell  of  prosperous  trade.  A  new  invention  or  other  industrial
improvement,  coming  into  general  use  and  lowering  the  expenses  of
production,  may  for  a  time  increase  the  margin  between  '  costs  '
and  '  selling  prices  ' ;  or  a  large  expansion  of  demand,  raising  market
prices,  may  create  a  highly  profitable  state  of  trade.  Though  com-
petition of  employers,  stimulated  by  the  rise  of  profits,  would  in  the
ordinary  course  of  things  cause  wages  to  rise  in  such  a  trade,  each
employer  seeking  to  increase  his  business  and  his  output,  and  new


THE  LABOUR  MOVEMENT  203

capital  flowing  in  to  share  the  abnormal  gains,  this  rise  of  wages
may  be  delayed  if  no  organisation  of  the  workers  exists  to  take
advantage  of  the  situation.  Where  a  strong  union  exists,  it  will  be
harder  to  resist  a  demand  for  higher  wages  when  the  profitable
condition  of  the  trade  enables  them  to  be  paid,  and  the  higher  wages
will  become  operative  at  once  over  the  entire  trade  instead  of
being  secured  in  driblets.  To  this  it  is  sometimes  added  that
trade  unionism  can  delay  a  reduction  of  wages  when  a  trade
becomes  depressed,  by  deterring  firms  from  accepting  contracts
at  prices  which  can  only  pay  on  condition  that  wages  are  already
lowered.

This  defence  of  the  use  of  trade  unionism,  so  far  as  it  is  valid,
imphes  the  existence  of  short-time  surpluses  which,  passing  in  the
first  instance  to  '  capital,'  can  be  secured  by  labour  where  it  is
strong  enough.  But  it  can  hardly  be  put  forward  as  a  sufficient
economic  basis  of  trade  unionism  that  it  exists  to  enable  certain
groups  of  workers  to  get  their  share  of  a  boom  a  little  earlier  than
they  would  otherwise  have  done.  It  does  not,  moreover,  enable
them  to  hold  it,  for,  according  to  this  theory  of  distribution,  com-
petition of  employers  will  soon  bring  about  a  fall  of  selling  prices
which  will  hand  over  the  'surplus'  to  the  consumer.  In  this
event,  though  the  worker  may  continue  to  get  some  gain  in  his
capacity  of  consumer,  since  it  is  spread  over  the  whole  consuming
public,  it  will  be  much  smaller  than  when  it  was  held  in  higher
money  wages,  and,  moreover,  his  trade  unionism  is  in  no  sense
the  instrument  which  has  secured  for  him  this  permanent  benefit.

Finally,  if  the  only  effective  function  of  trade  unionism  is  to
force  the  pace  by  which  the  gains  of  industrial  improvements  thus
pass  to  the  consumer,  or  to  interpose  a  period  during  which  they
are  held  by  the  employees  as  high  wages,  there  is  some  weight  in
the  objection  that  trade  unionism,  by  cartaihng  the  time  during
which  progressive  employers  reap  the  reward  of  their  superior
efficiency,  may  damage  industrial  progress.  If  the  high  rates  of
profit  which  accrue  to  ably-conducted  businesses,  either  through
the  adoption  of  improved  methods  of  production,  or  through
occasional  '  booms  '  of  trade,  are  in  reaHty  necessary  inducements
to  evoke  the  output  of  ability  and  enterprise,  considerable  danger
may  attach  to  a  labour  movement  which  seeks  continually  to  raid
this  fund  of  progress,  in  the  interests  of  a  particular  body  of
labourers,  who  cannot  claim  it  on  the  ground  that  they  have
created  it,  or  that  they  need  it  more  than  the  labourers  in  other
trades.

§  2. — Our  fundamental  distinction  between  necessary  costs  and
unproductive  surplus  affords  to  the  labour  movement  an  economic


204  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

basis  which  it  otherwise  lacks,  furnishing  an  intelHgible  and  con-
sistent theory  alike  of  the  harmony  and  the  antagonism  of  capital
and  labour.

We  have  recognised  that  in  any  trade  at  any  time  there  is  a
minimum  rate  of  interest  and  of  profit  necessary  to  maintain  its
capital  and  managing  ability,  and  that  similarly  there  is  a  wage
of  minimum  efficiency  which  any  intelligent  employer  will  pa}^  to
the  various  grades  of  labour  he  requires.  If,  in  a  trade,  the  com-
petition between  businesses  is  such  as  to  enable  them  to  pay  these
minimum  expenses  of  capital  and  labour,  leaving  no  surplus,  it
would  appear  as  if  the  harmony  between  employer  and  emplo^-ee
were  complete.  Any  attempt  of  a  trade  union  in  such  a  trade
to  extort  a  higher  rate  of  wages,  involving  a  reduction  of  interest
or  profit  below  the  necessary  margin  of  subsistence,  would  react
detrimentally  upon  wages  by  starving  the  trade  in  capital  and
ability.  Similarly  an  attempt  of  the  employers  to  reduce  wages
would,  by  impairing  efficiency  of  labour,  prove  suicidal.  So  far
as  these  minimum  costs  are  concerned,  the  interests  of  employer
and  employed  are  identical.

Those  to  whom  this  condition  appears  the  normal  one  conclude
that  the  conflicts  between  capital  and  labour  are  due,  either  to
ignorance,  or  to  perversity  of  temper  on  the  part  of  one  or  both
of  the  combatants.  But  this  is  not  necessarily  true.  Even  in
the  case  of  a  trade  where  prices  only  suffice  to  pay  a  minimum
wage  and  a  minimum  interest  and  profit,  .a  forward  labour  policy
may  be  economically  justifiable.  For  it  may  be  feasible  and
advantageous  to  labour,  by  securing  a  rise  of  wages,  to  force  a  rise
of  selling  prices.  The  power  of  organised  labour  to  prevent  a  fall
of  wages,  contemplated  as  a  result  of  acceptance  of  contracts  to
deliver  goods  at  lower  prices,  has  often  been  tested,  and  is  admitted.
It  is  evident  that,  where  a  labour  organisation  is  strong  enough,  it
can  in  a  particular  trade  exercise  a  similar  power  to  compel  a  rise
of  prices  adequate  to  allow  a  higher  rate  of  wages,  provided  that
its  power  extends  to  all  or  '  nearly  all  '  businesses  contributing  to
the  supply.  A  trade  union  of  local  bakers  can  often  enforce  their
demand  for  higher  wages  through  a  rise  of  prices.  The  South
Wales  miners  exercise  a  similar  though  a  more  restricted  power.
An  important  check  upon  the  use  of  such  a  power,  of  course,  exists
in  the  effect  of  the  rise  of  prices  upon  demand.  Where  demand  is
so  elastic  that  even  a  small  rise  of  price  diminishes  appreciably
the  sale,  this  economic  weapon  of  trade  unionism  may  be  of  very
slight  avail.  In  any  event  its  use  mast  be  sparing,  and  it  cannot
apply  where  foreign  or  other  non-union  competition  enters  in.

But  there  remains  another  mode  of  pressure. A  trade  paying


THE  LABOUR  MOVEMENT  205

a  minimum  rate  of  profit  and  interest  may  be  paying  a  scarcity
price  for  one  of  its  factors  of  production,  some  raw  materials,  or
patent,  fuel,  transport,  or  other  service,  the  sellers  of  which  are
monopolists  in  the  sense  in  which  we  use  that  term.  In  other  words,
there  may  be  some  expense  of  production  which  contains,  in  the
price  paid  for  it  by  the  trade  in  question,  an  element  of  unproductive
*  surplus.'  Mining  rents  and  royalties  form  such  surplus  elements
in  the  expenses  of  collieries  ;  a  rise  of  miners'  wages,  obtained  at  a
time  when  mining  profits  could  not  bear  the  advance,  and  when  it
would  not  be  advantageous  to  raise  the  price  of  coal,  would  tend
to  bring  about  a  reduction  of  such  rents  and  royalties  and  would
actually  do  so  whenever  renewals  of  mining  leases  occurred.  In
manufactures,  where  power  was  bought  from  a  company  or  a
public  body  at  monopoly  prices,  or  where  expensive  machinery
was  subject  to  royalties,  or  where  some  trust  or  combination  made
high  profits  by  controlling  the  supply  of  raw  materials,  the  surplus
element  in  any  of  these  '  expenses  of  production  '  would  be  exposed
to  attack  where  labour  was  strong  enough  to  extort  a  rise  of  wages
in  the  trade  into  which  they  entered  as  factors.  The  force  would
operate  in  this  wise.  A  railroad  company  having  a  monopoly  of
the  carriage  of  goods  in  a  manufacturing  trade,  or  the  machine
company  which  rents  to  the  trade  some  necessary  machines,  has
been  charging  rates  calculated  on  '  what  the  trade  will  bear.'
Now  a  strong  trade  union  has  raised  wages  so  that  the  trade  can
no  longer  bear  the  former  rates  or  royalties.  Unless  concessions
are  made  by  the  railroad  or  the  machine-makers,  the  manufacturers
cannot  pay  a  living  profit  and  must  decline  and  gradually  perish.
Such  concessions  can  and  will  be  made,  for  it  will  not  pay  to  charge
the  manufacture  '  more  than  it  can  bear.'  Hence  it  is  sometimes
possible  for  a  labour  movement  to  force  a  rise  of  wages,  or  to  resist
a  fall,  even  though  the  existing  rate  of  profits  in  the  trade  is  standing
at  a  minimum,  provided  that  there  is  some  factor  in  the  expenses
of  ])roduction  of  the  trade  that  is  weighted  with  an  unproductive
surplus.

But,  of  course,  the  main  economic  justification  of  the  labour
movement,  in  its  efforts  to  secure  higher  wages,  shorter  hours,
improved  hygienic  and  other  conditions,  all  of  which  raise  the
wages  bill,  consists  in  the  fact  that,  in  many  trades  at  all  times  and
in  most  trades  at  certain  times,  the  margin  between  necessary
expenses  of  production  and  selling  prices  affords  a  net  interest  or
profit  higher  than  is  needed  to  remunerate  capital  and  management.
Our  analysis  of  the  industrial  system  has  led  us  to  the  conclusion
that  the  employing  and  organising  classes,  by  command  of  natural
resources  or  by  contrivance,  are  normally  in  a  state  of  scarcity  or


2o6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

restricted  comuetition  over  large  sections  of  the  field  of  industry,
and  that  thJ.s  position  of  vantage  enables  them  to  buy  the  labour,
frequently  the  capital,  and  sometimes  the  natural  agents  they
require  so  cheaply,  and  to  regulate  the  prices  of  the  goods  they
make  and  sell  so  successfully,  that  they  can  maintain  a  margin  of
profit  containing  a  considerable  unproductive  surplus.

This  surplus  element  is  frequently  concealed  in  watered  capital
or  in  high  directors'  or  managers'  fees  or  bonuses,  and  sometimes  it
is  frittered  away  by  the  loose  management  which  is  liable  to  occur
in  protected  businesses  :  much  of  it  may  not  be  represented  in  the
actual  interest  received  annually  by  shareholders,  but  may  have
been  extracted  beforehand  by  the  promoters  of  a  business,  or
by  sales  at  a  premium  by  original  shareholders.  In  these  and  other
ways  '  surplus  '  is  concealed.  But  wherever  such  surpluses  exist
they  form  an  object  of  attack  for  the  labour  movement,  for,  since
they  are  ex  hypothesi  unnecessary  or  excessive  payments,  taken  by
capital  because  they  can  be  got,  they  can  be  secured  by  labour  in
higher  wages  or  other  improvements  of  conditions,  if  labour  is
strong  enough.  Wherever  a  trade  is,  by  its  possession  of  some
permanent  source  of  strength,  such  as  monopoly  of  natural  resources,
legal  monopoly,  transport  preference,  in  a  position  to  earn  continu-
ously a  surplus  rate  of  profit,  this  surplus  is  a  standing  challenge  to
labour.

Whenever  a  trade,  normally  subject  to  such  competition  as
keeps  down  profits  near  the  minimum,  is  lifted  for  a  while  into
the  possession  of  such  a  surplus  by  a  temporary  boom,  labour  is
often  able  to  share  the  gain  by  organised  pressure.  Here,  however,
an  objection  is  raised  which  deserves  recognition.  In  an  essentially
speculative  or  a  fluctuating  trade,  where  periods  of  boom  and
depression  are  normal  features  of  the  trade,  it  might  be  an  unsound
policy  for  a  trade  union  to  endeavour  to  secure  in  high  wages  a
surplus  which  was  economically  needed  to  set  off  a  previous  or  a
subsequent  deficit.  For,  unless  the  average  earnings  of  capital  and
ability  exceed  the  required  minimum,  the  temporary  surplus  is  no
real  surplus  and  cannot  be  taken  without  discouraging  the  applica-
tion of  capital  and  ability  to  the  trade.

So  large  a  proportion  of  industry  is  subject  to  considerable
fluctuations  of  profit  that  it  is  frequently  suggested  that  the  apparent
surplus  is  entirely  of  this  spurious  order.  But  this  suggestion  needs
no  refutation  for  those  who  have  followed  our  analysis  of  normal
prices,  and  accept  the  general  judgment  upon  the  relative  strength
of  the  organisers  of  industry  as  buyers  of  the  factors  of  production
and  as  sellers  of  the  product.

The  economics  of  the  labour  movement  hinge  mainly  upon  the


THE  LABOUR  MOVEMENT  207

existence  of  this  '  surplus  '  held  by  the  employing  class  and  dis-
tributed as  rent,  extra  profits,  or  interest,  fees  or  salaries.  The
whole  or  any  part  of  it  can  theoretically  and  in  practice  be  diverted
into  real  wages,  if  labour  is  strong  enough  to  take  it.

§  3. — If  no  such  surplus  exists,  the  validity  of  the  labour
movement,  both  in  its  trade  union  and  its  political  policy,  as  an
instrument  for  the  general  economic  improvement  of  the  wage-
earners,  is  limited  to  the  economy  of  high  wages ;  that  is  to  say,  no
rise  of  wages,  reduction  of  hours,  or  other  advantage,  can  be  got,  un-
less it  is  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  efficiency
of  labour.  Particular  groups  of  workers  may  evade  this  limit,  by
forcing  up  prices  in  trades  exempt  from  outside  competition  ;  but
such  gains  are  acquired  mainly  at  the  expense  of  other  workers
who  pay  the  higher  prices,  and  moreover  have  no  permanency.

The  proposals  to  put  down  sweating  by  using  the  state  to
improve  standard  wages  and  other  elements  of  '  a  common  rule '
must,  on  the  supposition  that  there  is  no  unproductive  surplus,  be
subject  to  great  perils.  For  in  mostsweatingtrades,  especially  among
women,  there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  a  rise  of  piece-wages,
imposed  by  a  wage-board,  will  be  attended  by  any  correspond-
ing improvement  in  the  pace  or  quality  of  the  work.  If,  as  is
often  admitted,  the  first  effect  of  such  regulation  of  sweating  work-
shops is  to  drive  the  work  into  factories,  the  normal  immediate
result  must  be  an  increased  cost  of  production  there,  for  it  is  foolish
to  contend  that  the  givers  out  of  work  are  so  unintelligent  that  they
give  out  material  which  they  could  make  up  just  as  cheaply  on
their  own  premises.

In  the  absence  of  a  surplus,  sweating  can  only  be  overcome  by
measures  which  destroy  some  trades  and  dislocate  others,  forcing
increases  in  expenses  of  production  and  in  selling  prices  which  must,
by  reaction  on  demand,  reduce  the  size  of  many  trades  and  re-
organise the  scale  of  exchange-values.  This  course  would  involve
large  shifts  of  employment  for  labour  and  capital,  and  much  waste
and  loss  while  the  readjustment  was  taking  place.

Finally,  since  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  general
efficiency  of  labour  would  respond  at  once  to  the  new  wage  policy
imposed  on  industry,  the  higher  wages  of  the  sweated  trades  would
be  paid  at  the  expense  of  the  better-paid  grades  of  labour,  tending
to  diminish  their  efficiency.

In  other  words,  unless  a  surplus  exists  which  can  be  diverted
into  wages,  the  labour  movement,  alike  on  its  economic  and  its
political  side,  is  restricted  to  such  improvements  of  the  conditions
of  labour  as  are  immediately  reflected  in  improved  productivity.
But,  since  employers,  as  a  class,  would  undoubtedly  prefer  to  employ


2o8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

more  efficient  workers  at  high  wages  than  less  efficient  ones  at  low
wages,  the  only  defence  of  the  labour  movement  would  be  that  it  was
necessary  in  order  by  compulsion  to  induce  employers  to  recognise
their  own  true  interest.  In  such  a  case  the  efforts  and  sacrifices
involved  in  the  labour  movement  would  seem  to  be  a  very
extravagant  price  to  pay  for  this  educational  work.

If,  however,  we  admit  the  existence  of  a  large  and  varied  surplus
widely  diffused  over  the  field  of  industry,  an  intelligible  basis  is
given  to  the  labour  movement.  Trade  unionism  will  rank  as  an
organised  attempt  to  divert  rents,  excessive  interests  and  profit,  and
other  *  unearned  '  income,  into  wages.  In  thus  interpreting  the
main  function  of  trade  unionism,  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that
the  miners,  who  by  collective  power  of  bargaining  extort  a  share  of
what  would  otherwise  be  surplus  mining  dividends,  have  any  natural
or  inherent  right  to  this  surplus,  on  the  ground  that  they  made  it,
or  that  they  need  it  more  than  other  workers.  This  would  be  trade-
individualism  based  on  a  defective  grasp  of  the  organic  character
of  industry.  The  miners  have  no  special  claim  in  nature  or  in  social
justice  upon  the  surplus  that  emerges  in  the  mining  industry,  nor
have  the  cotton  spinners  upon  the  high  profits  of  a  cotton  boom.
This  sectional  action  of  trade  unions  ranks  as  a  make-shift  method
of  redressing  the  balance  of  power  between  the  factors  of  production
which  we  see  everywhere  struggling  each  to  get  for  itself  as  much
as  possible  of  the  surplus  product.  In  certain  industrial  conditions
the  landowner,  in  others  the  capitalist,  is  the  strongest,  and  takes
most  of  the  available  surplus  in  rent  or  high  dividends  :  normally
in  developed  industrial  nations  the  owners  of  organising  and
managing  ability  hold  the  balance  of  power.  The  history  of  suc-
cessful trade  unions,  in  such  trades  as  the  cotton,  iron,  mining,
printing  trades  of  Great  Britain,  has  consisted  in  raids  upon  surpluses
which  from  time  to  time  swell  up  in  these  trades,  followed  by  pro-
longed struggles  to  retain  the  whole  or  part  of  the  proceeds  of  such
raids.

This  interpretation,  however,  does  not  imply  that  it  is  a  matter
of  social  indifference  whether  the  employers  or  the  workers  in  a  trade
get  such  surplus.  On  the  contrary,  if  our  general  analysis  of  the
situation  is  correct,  the  normal  working  of  distribution  by  '  pulls  '
is  to  deprive  labour  of  its  fair  share  of  wages  of  progressive  efficiency,
allotting  an  excessive  amount  to  other  factors.  Where  this  is  the
case,  trade  union  action,  which  secures  for  the  workers  in  a  trade  a
portion  of  the  surplus  emerging  in  that  trade,  has  some  justifica-
tion in  social  utility.  For  though  the  workers  in  a  particular  trade
have  no  absolute  or  separate  claim  upon  the  surplus  in  that  trade,
this  piece-meal  method  of  redress  has  not  been  wholly  ineffective.


THE  LABOUR  MOVEMENT  209

and  the  larger  use  of  federated  action  among  trade  unions  may  go
far  towards  enhancing  its  efficiency.

Reverting  to  our  earher  analysis,  which  identified  the  surplus
with  the  fund  of  economic  progress,  we  see  in  trade  unionism,  as
in  the  larger  labour  movement  of  which  it  forms  a  part,  an
endeavour  to  secure  a  better  and  more  fruitful  distribution  of  the
surplus  by  getting  a  larger  share  for  labour  at  the  expense  of  the
other  factors.  Industrial  progress  in  any  given  state  of  civilisation
requires,  as  a  first  charge  upon  the  surplus  product,  that  it  shall
be  so  used  as  to  evoke  and  nourish  increased  and  improved  powers
m  the  several  factors  of  production.  If  land  takes  too  much,
capital  and  labour  are  both  starved,  and  progress  is  correspondingly
retarded.  If  capital  or  ability  takes  too  much  and  labour  not
enough,  industrial  progress  continues  to  lag,  for  the  healthy  march
of  industry  requires  a  proportionate  advance  of  all  the  factors.

§  4. — If,  as  we  have  shown,  labour  is  normally  the  weakest
claimant  for  the  surplus,  the  labour  movement  in  its  largest  aspect
must  be  regarded  as  an  attempt  to  equalise  opportunities  among  the
factors,  so  as  to  produce  a  more  socially  profitable  circulation  of
wealth.

It  is  an  endeavour  on  the  part  of  workers  by  group  action  to
obtain  for  themselves  as  individuals  an  increased  share  of  wealth
and  leisure,  by  seizing  and  utilising  such  portion  of  the  surplus  as
emerges  in  their  trade  or  business.  Collective  bargaining  is  the
chief  instrument  they  employ,  and  the  history  of  trade  unionism
has  been  mainly  a  series  of  experiments  in  the  methods  of  using  it.
The  general  result  of  these  experiments  has  been  to  show  that
modern  organisation  of  capital,  by  its  abler  direction  and  its
longer  purse,  is  able  to  offer  successful  resistance  in  most  industrial
fields  to  the  more  important  demands  of  labour.  This  discovery
has  driven  the  labour  movement  into  politics,  workmen  seeking  to
use  legislative  instruments  to  strengthen  their  power  of  bargaining.

This  change  does  not,  so  far  at  any  rate  as  Great  Britain  and
America  are  concerned,  consist  in  the  substitution  of  political  for
private  co-operative  methods.  The  attitude  of  steadfast  opposition
maintained  by  working  men  towards  compulsory  arbitration
shows  a  firm  resolve  to  make  their  own  bargains  with  employers,
at  any  rate  so  far  as  wages  are  concerned.  But  there  is  a  growing
disposition  to  use  the  state  as  an  adjunct  to  trade  union  effort.

This  labour  politics  is  not  socialism,  in  the  sense  of  an  attempt
to  substitute  social  for  individual  or  free  co-operative  effort  in
industry.  Though  state  machinery  is  employed,  in  the  shape  of
Employers'  Liabihty,  Factory  and  Eight  Hours  Day  Acts,  such
provisions  are  regarded  primarily  as  strengthening  the  power  of

?


310  THE  INDliSllxl Al SYSTEM

I  111-  workers  tlnou-h  tluii  iiiiitJiis  to  liaij^aiii  tor  vvuges.  by  relieving
them  from  certain  irictiuus  and  vveaknesises  which  experience  has
shown  to  be  detrimental  to  the  main  purpose.  The  growing
(hsy)osition  ot  trade  ujiions  to  favour  drastic  land  legislation.
tniemi»loyed  relief  works,  old  age  pensions,  wage-boards  in  sweat  int.;
trades,  as  well  as  to  promote  large  schemes  ot  public  education  anil
public  credit,  is  not  attributable  to  any  distinct  theory  ot  state  func-
tions or  any  preference  of  public  to  private  enterprise.  These
projects  are  primarily  viewed  in  their  bearing  upon  the  bargaining
power  of  the  workers,  band  reform  will  lu-lp  to  relieve  congestion
of  the  labour  market  ;  unemployed  relief  and  old  age  pensions  will
econonoise  the  fmancial  resources  of  the  workers  and  their  unions  :
education.  i)oor  law  reforms,  the  repression  of  sweating  c(m-
ditions.  will  help  to  build  up  a  rniM'e  solid  basis  of  working-class
organisation.  The  entire  body  of  what  has  been  called  anti-
destitutionalism  falls  in  this  category.  Adequate  public  provision
against  destitution  will  eiiabie  trade  unionists  to  struggle  for  the
'  surplus  '  with  better  chances  of  success  than  they  would  otherwise
jjossess.  For  the  ultimate  weapon  of  capitalism  has  always  been
and  still  is  starvation.  J  ust  in  proportion  as  economic  security  of
life  and  of  efficiency  is  secured  by  means  of  public  support,  the
liberty  of  bargaining  with  employers  for  the  sale  of  labour-power
is  enhanced.

The  labour  nu)vcment  doubtless  nutans  nuiclx  mori-  than  this
mere  concentration  on  the  sale  of  labour-power.  It  takes  other
forms  besides  trade  unionism  and  serves  many  other  pnijioses
—economic,  educative,  recreative.  lint  it  is  engaged  primarily  and
fundamentally  in  endeavouring  to  secure  for  labour  an  increased
shaie  of  the  surplus  product  of  industry,  which  remains  after  all
minimum  costs  are  defrayed,  and  which  is  disti  ibutetlaccoriling  to  the
res|)ective  powers  of  bargain  possessed  by  the  owners  of  the  several
factors  of  production.  Normally  weaker  because  he  sells  a  perish-
able article  under  conditions  of  a  forced  sale,  the  labourer  seeks  to
strengthen  his  [losition  by  combining  with  his  fellows.  The  strength
thus  gainetl  is  measured  by  the  mati-rial  and  moral  damage  sustained
by  an  employer  in  dismissing  all  his  men  at  once  and  replacing
them  by  others  instead  of  dismissing  and  replacing  them  one  by
one.  For  though  this  does  not  appear  upon  the  surface  as  the
distinctive  featme  ol  the  collective  biUgain,  it  furnishes  the  ultimate
test,  and  the  knowledge  of  employers  that,  in  tin-  e\'ent  of  a  strike
or  lock-out.  they  must  deal  with  the  men  collectively,  and  not
as  units,  is  the  main  force  of  trade  unionism.  This  force,  however,
is  relative  to  the  force  of  the  employer,  and  the  growth  of  organisa-
tion among employers weakens the ethcacy ol trade unionism


THE  LABOUR  MOVTMEKT  211

wb^n  a  Gtkksd  ksas  sokes, Tf:<^r •'cx-  ■'''  - 'f  v'^  v..>v-*!es
ex{4ai0s  the  gtmna^  tet3dem:y  ol  ^  .  «$

by  pn^k  fttpp^rts,  the  m^ai  acd:;  ;;;^:!;;,ii.  .  vr-

g»tmed  pak^,  »od  the  iiKwe  re^nbr  aisd  .  9f

^r^^anised  state  aid&

The  labour  iiKyvenieat  uses  ifaese  pitblk  ss^ijpcivts  to  eisaMe  tt
tilers  efiecttvdy  to  j^ress  tbe  datoas  lof  lab^mr  upon  the  forplns
prodoet,  ajsd  these  f^aaas  motimie  t&  he  presssed  m  z  tepsradkst
spirit  hy  the  special  grmtp  aetkm  ol  wKxkegs  ia  a  trade  seddxif  t«>
obtain  the  paitktiJsir  fragBaeats  Gf  snipins  wMsh  etoet^  ia  the
indnstml  pmce^es  dL  that  trade.

The  ied&ratioa  gI  trade  ttmrnts,  axsd  the  ammmmty  Gi  spirit
and  ol  pmpme  which  inspires  ia  sta  is3cresma$  de^gres  their  jmat
^perati^os  in  msmy  fidd^  of  indiBstiy  and  pofibtks,  imrx  -^^-^
tbotog^  they  may  he  as  edacative  iaSsmaces,  mmt  isot  be  .
U)  obscure  this  central  i^ct  which  distinfiois^bes  trade  nxiiyz2£:zi
frvm  sodaHsm^  the  stra^te  of  separate  ^o«ips  1^  woclsers  to
obtain  for  their  separate  advantage  portions  ot  what  soctalisai
rt^l^ards  as  the  social  inconse.


CHAPTER XIV

SOCIALISM AND THE SOCIAL INCOME

I

§  I.  State  'interference'  with  industry  takes  three  chief  forms:  (i)  State
regulation,  (2)  State  operation,  (3)  Taxation.  The  main  object  and
result  of  (i)  and  (2)  are  the  diversion  of  some '  unearned  '  income,  actual
or  potential,  to  social  use,  either  for  the  workers  in  a  trade,  the  consumers,
or  the  general  public. — §  2.  The  doctrine  of  a  surplus  affords  a  new  inter-
pretation to  '  ability  to  bear  '  as  a  canon  of  taxation.  For  surplus  alone
has  such  ability. — §3.  The  .single-tax  interpretation  of  'surplus'  has
barred  the  acceptance  of  this  theory  of  taxation.  Marxian  Socialism
fails  to  distinguish  costs  from  surplus  by  its  exclusive  stress  upon
labour  as  basis  of  value. — §  4.  The  supreme  issue  of  public  finance  is  the
determination  of  the  proportion  of  the  surplus  which  can  be  profitably
applied  to  public  work.  The  solution  depends  upon  the  relative  power
of  individuals  and  states  to  apply  incomes  for  progress.

II

§  I.  Taxing  policy  demands  close  consideration  of  incidence.  Every  tax  on
a  cost  tends  to  be  shifted  on  to  a  surplus.  All  taxes  are  borne  by  pro-
ducers.— §  2.  But  taxes  on  costs  tend  also  to  remain  where  they  are  put,
and  their  shifting  is  a  slow  and  wasteful  process.  This  applies  especially
to  taxes  on  wages  or  working-class  expenditure. -^§  3.  Some  surpluses
can  be  measured  and  taxed  separately,  but  most  cannot.  Hence  a
graduated  income  tax,  based  on  the  hypothesis  that  surplus  varies
directly  with  income,  is  the  best  instrument. — §  4.  It  may,  however,  be
supplemented  by  indirect  taxes  imposed  in  the  interest  of  social  order,  or
falling  upon  specific  luxuries. — §  5.  Our  industrial  treatment  of  the  u.se  of
wealth  requires  correction  when  a  wider  view  of  individual  and  social
life  is  taken.

I

§  I. — So  far  we  have  treated  the  distribution  of  wealtli  throughout
the  industrial  system  entirely  from  the  standpoint  of  individual  in-
comes, the  whole  of  the  product  of  industry  passing  to  the  several
owners  of  the  factors  of  production  in  payment  for  the  use  of  their
factors.  The  actual  methods  of  distribution,  according  to  our
analysis,  apportion  that  part  of  the  product  which  remains  over
after  provision  has  been  made  for  the  maintenance  of  the  factors,
according  to  economic  force  operating  through  natural  or  contrived
scarcity  ;  the  result  being  that  a  large  part  of  this  surplus,  instead
of  serving  to  stimulate  and  feed  increased  industrial  efficiency,
becomes  unproductive  unearned  income. The  labour  movement

212


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  213

wc  have  interpreted  as  an  endeavour  to  adjust  the  balance  of  eco-
nomic forces  in  the  factors  pulling  upon  the  surplus  so  as  to  procure
a  better  distribution,  by  enabling  labour  to  get  a  larger  share  which
would  serve  to  raise  the  general  efficiency  of  this  factor  of  production
without  reducing  the  efficiency  of  the  others.

But  historically  the  labour  movement  has  been  at  best  a  clumsy
and  an  unreliable  instrument  of  such  redress ;  the  force  it  applies
is  irregular,  and  the  re-distribution  of  wealth  it  procures  is  both
inadequate  in  amount  and  ill-proportioned  in  its  application  to  the
various  grades  of  workers.  Those  whose  low  condition  is  most  detri-
mental to  efficiency,  and  who,  therefore,  need  most  their  '  fair  '
share  of  the  surplus,  are  least  able  to  obtain  it,  while  the  aristocracy
of  labour  who  need  least  get  most.  Moreover,  the  friction  of  such
a  method  of  redressing  the  balance  is  fraught  with  enormous
industrial  waste.

Is  it  possible  that  some  method  of  assigning  the  surplus  product
more  equitable,  regular,  and  conducive  to  industrial  progress  than
the  method  of  force  can  be  devised  ?

Modern  states  are  coming  more  and  more  in  various  ways  to
interfere  with  industrial  operations  or  their  products,  with  the
result,  and  sometimes  the  intention,  of  effecting  a  more  equitable
and  more  socially  advantageous  distribution  of  wealth.

We  may  distinguish  three  chief  modes  of  such  public  interven-
tion : —

(i)  State  regulation  of  industry.

(2)  State  operation  of  industry.

(3)  Taxation  in  order  to  raise  revenue  for  public  consumption.
Each  of  these  public  activities  has  other  aims  besides  that  of

affecting  the  course  of  distribution  ;  but  here  it  is  this  aspect  and
effect  that  engage  our  attention.

(i)  Under  state  regulation  we  include  all  legal  powers  wielded
by  public  bodies,  in  control  of  the  conditions  of  private  industry,
which  have  the  effect  of  diverting  what  would  otherwise  figure  as
interest,  profit,  or  other  emoluments  of  the  stronger  factors  of  pro-
duction, into  wages  or  other  expenses  connected  with  improved
conditions  of  the  workers.

The  simplest  illustration  of  such  method  is  the  State  Wage
Board  or  State  Arbitration  Board  with  powers  to  determine  wages,
hours,  or  other  conditions  of  labour.  When  wage  boards  are
empowered  to  deal  with  sweated  trades,  securing  a  minimum  time  or
piece-wage,  part,  at  any  rate,  of  the  rise  of  wage,  or  other  increased
cost  of  working  over  the  purely  competitive  rate,  must  be  regarded
as  a  diversion  of  '  surplus  '  profit  into  wages,  leisure,  or  other  benefit
of  the  employees. Even  if  the  condition  of  the  trade  from  the


214  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

employers'  point  of  view  obliges  or  enables  them  to  throw  the
increased  cost  upon  the  consumer  in  a  rise  of  prices,  or  upon  some
other  productive  process,  analysis  of  the  incidence  of  such  a  '  tax  '
will  lead  us  to  conclude  that  it  settles  mostly  upon  elements  of
income  which  can  bear  it,  and  implies  some  conversion  of  unearned
income  into  efficiency  wages.  But  whether  this  be  provable  or  not,
it  seems  certain  that  the  net  effect  of  such  public  intervention  on
behalf  of  a  minimum  wage  tends  to  increase  the  proportion  of  the
aggregate  product  which  is  taken  by  the  workers  in  pay  or  other
advantages.

The  same  general  conclusion  is  applicable  to  other  industrial
legislation,  such  as  Employers'  Liability  Acts,  public  limitation  of
hours  of  labour,  improved  sanitation,  and  other  measures  imposed
by  law  upon  trades  for  the  benefit  of  employees.  All  such  public
regulation,  except  so  far  as  it  is  directly  productive  of  improved
efficiency  of  labour  commensurate  with  the  expense,  must  be  re-
garded as  having  the  result,  though  not  usually  the  direct  intention,
of  shifting  the  balance  of  distribution  in  favour  of  labour.  The
chief  conscious  motive  in  the  adoption  of  such  regulative  measures
is  sometimes  humanitarian  sentiment,  concerned  with  the  health  or
general  well-being  of  v/orkers,  sometimes  considerations  of  public
order,  sometimes  protection  of  the  consumer  as  regards  quantity,
quality,  or  price  of  goods.  But  the  general  effect  of  such  inter-
ference is  to  convert  certain  elements  of  otherwise  possible  profits
into  wages,  leisure,  safety,  sanitation,  or  other  ingredients  of  well-
being  in  the  workers,  the  consumers,  or  the  public  at  large.

(2)  The  object  of  the  operation  of  an  industry  by  the  state  or
the  municipality  is  generally  to  divert  to  public  use  monopoly
profits  which  were  left  in  private  hands.  Public  industry,  it  is
true,  is  not  confined  to  such  cases  :  public  order,  safety,  or  other
convenience  induces  states  to  participate  in  or  to  monopolise
various  industries,  such  as  the  manufacture  and  trade  in  weapons
and  explosives,  alcohol,  and  processes  connected  with  the  prepara-
tion of  meat,  milk,  and  other  foods.  Part  of  the  motive  of  the
public  ownership  of  roads,  railroads,  and  local  means  of  transport,
of  postal  and  other  communications,  and  of  many  other  public
services,  must  be  imputed  to  considerations  of  public  order  rather
than  of  public  income.  In  certain  other  cases  a  state  monopoly  is
established  not  as  a  substitute  for  private  monopol}^  but  as  an
instrument  for  raising  revenue,  as  in  the  state  assumption  of  the
tobacco  and  match  trades  in  several  continental  countries.

But  the  great  majority  of  business  operations  undertaken  by
states  and  municipalities  are  such  as,  left  to  private  enterprise,
would  not  be  carried  on  under  conditions  of  free  competition  and


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  215

would  enable  profit-making  firms  to  make  surplus  profits  from
monopoly  prices.  Where  such  industries  are  engaged  in  supplying
goods  or  services  the  use  of  which  forms  part  of  the  standard  of
consumption  of  a  people,  the  power  vested  in  a  private  monopoly  is
recognised  as  intolerable.  Hence  in  civilised  nations  there  is  a
growing  tendency'  for  the  public  to  assume  ownership  and  control
of  services  of  transport  and  communication  affecting  the  mobility
of  persons,  goods,  and  information,  city  lands  and  houses,  mining
resources  and  sources  of  industrial  power,  banking  and  insurance,
water,  gas,  and  other  routine  local  services,  and  such  other  indus-
tries connected  with  necessaries  or  conveniences  as,  owing  to
dependence  on  land  or  other  natural  factors,  or  through  artificial
restriction  of  competition,  tend  to  become  monopolies.

These,  as  we  have  seen,  are  the  types  of  industry  in  which  large
surplus  profits  are  obtainable.  The  chief  economic  motive  of  state
or  municipal  socialism  is  to  socialise  these  profits.  This  may  be
done  in  any  or  all  of  three  ways.  The  state  may  continue  to
charge  monopoly  prices  and  may  use  part  of  the  surplus  to  pay
high  wages  of  efficiency,  or  otherwise  to  improve  the  conditions  of
the  employees  in  the  industry.  Or  it  may  lower  prices,  and  so  let
the  '  surplus '  pass  to  the  consumers.  Or  it  may  retain  the
surplus  as  a  public  income  for  general  public  purposes.  All  these
methods  of  dealing  with  the  surplus  may  be  regarded  as  making
for  a  better  distribution  of  wealth.  To  divert  surplus  profit  into
wages  of  efficiency  for  the  workers  in  the  trade,  though  a  sectional
benefit,  may  be  regarded  as  a  sound  social  policy,  inasmuch  as  a
reasonable  wage  of  efficiency,  in  making  for  the  progress  of  a  trade,
reacts  advantageously  upon  the  whole  industrial  system  through
processes  of  ordinary  exchange.  But  there  must  be  a  clear  limit
to  this  policy  of  using  the  '  surplus  '  :  to  divert  the  entire  extra
profits  of  a  strong  monopoly  into  the  wages  of  the  workers  in  that
trade,  so  as  to  raise  their  wages  above  the  ordinary  level  of  efficiency
for  the  class  of  work,  would  not  be  a  social  policy  but  one  of  trade
preference.

Where  the  goods  or  services  produced  by  the  industry  are
generally  consumed,  and  in  tolerably  equal  quantities,  by  the  wider
public,  the  '  surplus  '  may  be  disposed  of  by  lowering  prices  or  by
improving  the  quality  of  the  goods  or  services.  This  also  may  be
regarded  as  a  socially  beneficial  distribution.  Part  of  the  large
potential  surplus  profits  of  state  postal  or  railway  systems  is
frequently  applied  in  thus  lowering  prices  or  improving  facilities
of  carriage.

Or,  finally,  the  state  or  municipality  may  charge  monopoly
prices,  and  after  paying  the  standard  wages  to  its  employees,  may


2i6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

retain  the  ordinary  and  the  surplus  profits  as  pubhc  revenue  to  be
applied  to  general  public  purposes.

No  general  theory  regarding  the  disposal  of  the  actual  or  poten-
tial '  profits  '  of  a  state  monopoly  as  between  these  several  methods
can  be  laid  down.  Many  i)oliticians  and  economists  will  hold  that,
after  standard  wages  are  provided,  the  rest  of  the  '  surplus  '  profits
should  be  remitted  in  prices  to  the  consumers,  the  ordinary  profits,
if  any,  which  remain,  ranking  as  ]5ublic  income.  But  few  would  be
prepared  to  apply  this  principle  to  the  case  of  a  state  trade  in
alcohol,  and  it  cannot  be  accorded  any  general  validity.

When  public  ownership  enables  a  state  or  a  city  to  take  economic
rent  or  other  '  unearned  '  income  by  retaining  such  prices  as  a
private  business  would  charge,  there  is  no  prima  facie  presumption
against  this  policy.  It  cannot  be  said  that  individual  consumers
have  any  inherent  right  to  obtain  the  goods  or  services  at  a  bare
cost  of  production.  Sometimes  it  may  be  a  sound  public  policy  to
charge  a  price  which  shall  contain  a  '  surplus  '  element ;  sometimes,
upon  the  contrar}^  it  may  be  wise  to  subsidise  from  other  public
sources  a  particular  public  service  so  as  to  sell  its  product  below
'  cost  '  price,  or  even  to  supply  it  free.  So  state-owned  alcohol  may
reasonably  be  sold  at  a  price  which  contains  a  '  surplus  '  ;  w-ork-
men's  fares  may  be  subsidised  out  of  the  other  fares  on  trams  and
trains  ;  a  telegraph  service  as  a  whole  may  be  subsidised  from  other
proceeds  of  the  Post  Office  ;  public  baths  may  be  supplied  below
cost  price,  and  public  libraries  and  music  in  the  parks  may  be  '  free.'

Now  in  many  of  these  public  enterprises  it  is  not  held  that  the
state  or  the  city  can  or  does  conduct  the  business  upon  the  whole
more  economically  or  more  efficiently  than  private  enterprises.
Bat  it  is  held  to  be  a  public  duty  to  intercept  and  to  divert  into
public  income  what  would  otherwise  be  the  surplus  profits  of  a
private  monopoly.  If  the  public  administration  of  the  industry
is  so  much  inferior  to  private  administration  that  the  whole
surplus  profits  of  the  latter  are  likely  to  be  absorbed  in  the  increased
expenses  of  the  former  (apart  from  provision  for  efficiency  wages),
the  socialisation  of  such  an  industry  is  prima  facie  inadvisable.  But
if  the  public  administration  can  be  conducted  so  as  to  yield  some
surplus  profit,  it  is  prima  facie  a  sound  step  in  socialism.

For  the  underlying  assumption,  upon  which  depends  the
political  economy  of  the  whole  process,  is  that  this  *  surplus,'
representing  a  product  beyond  what  is  needed  to  remunerate
adequately  the  owners  of  the  factors  of  production  in  the  industry,
belongs  to  society,  forming  part  of  a  social  income,  and  that  the
state  takes  this  income,  as  representing  the  rights  and  interests  of
society.


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  217

Whenever  private  enterprise  tends  to  evade  competition  and  to
set  up  monopolies  or  trade  restrictions  in  the  supply  of  primary
necessaries  or  conveniences  of  life,  society  through  its  public  institu-
tions defends  itself  against  this  dangerous  power,  and  working  the
monopoly  itself  uses  the  surplus  profits  as  a  social  income.  Some
portions  of  the  rents  of  land  and  other  natural  resources,  and  of  the
gains  arising  from  concentrated  capitalism  apphed  to  routine
industries,  thus  pass  into  the  public  purse.

§  2. — (3)  But  the  essential  nature  and  significance  of  social
income  are  best  recognised  in  dealing  with  the  third  mode  of  state
interference  by  taxation.  To  regard  taxation  as  a  process  by  which
society  acting  through  the  state  takes  income  which  it  has  earned
by  social  work,  and  which  it  needs  for  social  life,  is  not  an  entirely
novel  conception,  though  widely  divergent  from  the  commonly
accepted  view. This  latter  view  may  be  stated  thus  :

All  property  is  due  to  the  efforts  of  individuals,  and  belongs  by
right  to  them.  But  the  state,  organised  by  individuals  for  their
joint  protection,  must  have  such  income  as  is  required  to  perform
this  service.  For  this  purpose,  and  this  alone,  it  must  be  empowered
to  invade  the  property  and  incomes  of  individuals,  and  take  by
taxation  what  is  necessary.

Such  taxation,  it  is  held,  inflicts  an  injury  on  the  rights  of
individual  property,  involving  a  '  sacrifice  '  on  the  part  of  those
who  pay.

Two  chief  principles  for  the  apportionment  of  taxation  have
been  laid  down,  one  that  taxation  should  be  imposed  in  proportion
to  '  abihty  '  to  bear  it,  the  other  that  it  should  be  imposed  in
proportion  to  '  benefits  received  '  by  its  expenditure.  According  to
the  latter  doctrine  the  state  produces  and  sells  protection  of  army,
police,  &c.,  to  those  who  need  it  :  the  price  of  this  ])rotection  is
paid  in  taxes,  and  those  who,  having  most  to  lose,  gain  most  by  such
protection,  pay  most  in  taxation.

Historically,  the  origin  of  many  taxes  is  directly  traceable  to  this
view  of  the  state  as  a  purveyor  of  special  sorts  of  services  :  stamps,
tolls  and  other  contributions  to  our  national  revenue  still  rank  as
specific  payments  proportioned  to  specific  benefits,  while  our  system
of  rating  for  local  taxation  carries  many  signs  of  the  same  interpre-
tation. But  the  enlarged  modern  conception  of  the  duties  of  the
state  and  the  com]:ilexity  of  its  functions  have  involved  of  necessity
a  growing  disuse  of  the  measurement  of  specific  benefits  as  a  taxing
principle  :  to  collect  a  number  of  separately  estimated  and  ear-
marked taxes  is  no  longer  feasible.  The  tendency,  therefore,  has
been  to  substitute,  as  a  substantially  equitable  principle  of  taxation,
'  ability  to  bear,'  as  indicated  by  rental,  income,  property  or  other


2i8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

measure  of  financial  strength.^  Though  the  idea  of  a  tax  as  an
interference  with  private  property  only  justified  by  pul)lic  necessity,
a  burden  or  sacrifice  imposed  upon  the  individual,  with  its  implica-
tion that  sound  public  finance  requires  that  taxation  be  kept  down
to  the  minimum  requisite  to  carry  on  the  barely  necessary  work  of
government,  is  still  generally  prevalent,  certain  speculations  and
theories  regarding  '  ability  to  bear  '  have  long  begun  to  sap  the  old
conception.

The  first  and  most  fruitful  of  these  speculations  relates  to  the
doctrine  of  economic  rent  of  land.  It  has  long  been  recognised  that
the  differential  rents  of  land,  and  the  scarcity  rents  attaching  to
lands  limited  in  quantity  for  certain  uses,  are  incomes  which  have
a  special  ability  to  bear  a  tax.  This  '  ability  '  to  bear  is  of  a  two-
fold nature.  In  the  first  place  it  is  recognised  that  a  tax  either
directly  placed  or  settling  upon  such  land  values  lies  there  and
cannot  be  transferred.  In  the  second  place  it  is  recognised  that,
since  these  rents  are  not '  earned  '  by  efforts  or  skill  of  the  landowner
who  receives  them,  the  tax  is  borne  without  disturbing  his  incentive
to  apply  his  land  as  a  factor  in  production.

Out  of  this  attention  to  the  nature  and  taxable  capacity  of
economic  rents  of  land  has  grown  the  doctrine  that  such  income
'  unearned  '  by  the  individual  landowner  is  '  earned  '  by  society,  and
that,  in  taking  rents  by  process  of  taxation,  society,  through  its
instrument  the  state,  is  taking  an  income  which  belongs  to  it  in
the  same  sense  as  wages  belong  to  the  labourer,  interest  to  the
capitalist,  and  profit  to  the  employer,  viz.  because  its  efforts
have  made  the  income.

In  what  sense  is  it  true  that  these  rents  are  made  by  society
and  therefore  belong  to  society  as  social  income  ?  So  far  as  the
productive  powers  of  Nature  are  concerned,  they  arc  evidently
not  made  by  man,  individual  or  social,  and  the  '  scarcity  '  of  these
powers,  which  is  a  condition  of  their  value,  is  a  natural  scarcity.
But  society  operates  in  two  waj's,  so  as  to  give  positive  value  to
this  scarcity  of  natural  powers.  In  the  first  place,  the  work  and
wants  of  the  multitude  of  men,  constituting  society,  make  as  a
necessary  incident  of  their  economic  life  the  demand  for  the  various
uses  of  land  which,  acting  on  its  scarcity,  make  it  valuable.  The
growth  of  a  population  on  a  piece  of  land,  discovering  and  developing
various  arts  for  dealing  with  land  as  a  fund  of  raw  materials  and
of  power,  or  as  surface,  gi\'es  values  to  various  sorts  of  natural
properties.  The  creation  of  this  value  can  seldom  be  traced  to
individuals ; it is distinctively social. Again, in all civilised

'  J.  S.  Mill's  substitution  of  '  equality  of  sacrifice  '  for  '  ability  to  bear  '  is
an  unfoi^tunatc  instance  of  '  obsciirum  per  obscurius.'


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  219

communities  the  state,  as  the  direct  instrument  of  society,  expends
pubhc  effort  in  making  roads  and  other  means  of  communication,
in  preserving  peace  and  order,  in  furnishing  important  and  expensive
services  for  the  protection  and  advancement  of  industrial  and
other  operations  which  develop  the  uses  of  surface,  soil  and  position,
and  is  thus  directty  instrumental  in  creating  land  values.

Thus,  though  the  physical  properties  of  the  land  which  become
valuable  are  not  socially  created,  the  value  which  attaches  to
them  is  so  created.  Individuals,  it  is  true,  by  putting  their  energy
and  skill  into  land,  improve  it,  but  in  any  close  consideration  of
the  matter,  theoretical  or  practical,  the  value  of  such  individual
improvements  must  be  separated  from  land  values  and  rank  as
capital.  Land  values  proper,  whether  attaching  to  land  in  virtue
of  fertility  and  other  contents  or  of  site,  are  directly  due  to  social
action  operating  in  one  of  the  two  ways  above  described.  The
annual  yield  of  these  land  values,  thus  socially  earned,  is  claimed
as  a  social  income.

§  3. — If  this  important  implication  of  the  doctrine  of  taxation  of
'  unearned  increm.ents  '  is  not  yet  adequately  realised,  the  lack  is
due  to  two  causes.  One  is  that  to  no  appreciable  extent  has  the
taxing  doctrine  yet  been  applied  to  land  values.  The  other  is
that  the  defective  analysis  of  distribution  adopted  by  single  taxers
on  the  one  hand,  and  of  vaguely  extravagant  socialists  upon  the
other,  has  prevented  a  clear  recognition  of  the  nature  and  dimensions
of  the  social  income  thus  available  for  the  enlargement  of  public
life.

Those  who  persist  in  confining  the  productive  efficacy  of  social
forces  to  the  creation  of  land  values  are  defeated  in  their  efforts  to
convince  and  to  apply  their  policy  of  taxation  by  the  patent  fact
that,  in  this  countr}^  at  any  rate,  most  large  and  evidently  unearned
incomes  are  not  derived  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  monopoly
of  land  but  from  other  economic  advantages.  Moreover,  the
logic  of  the  single  taxer  is  bent  before  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing
land  values  from  capital  values  in  many  instances,  while  the
feasibility  of  the  single  tax  policy  is  damaged  by  the  obvious
injustice  of  imposing  special  taxes  upon  what  has  been  regarded
so  long  and  so  generally  as  'one  form  of  investment.'  The
mere  fact  that  taxation  placed  upon  existing  economic  rent  cannot
be  resisted,  and  will  cause  no  shrinkage  in  supply  of  land,  does  not
seem  an  equitable  ground  for  distinguishing  for  purposes  of  taxation
such  an  element  of  income  from  the  '  interest  '  with  which  it  has
become  merged  in  the  ordinary  processes  of  exchange  by  which
the  ownership  of  land,  along  with  that  of  various  forms  of  capital,
has  continuall}'  been  changing  hands. If  I  have  recently  invested


220  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

/looo  in  a  trust  company  which  paj^s  me  ^^50  per  annum  in  dividends
based  upon  rents,  while  you  receive  the  same  sum  in  dividends
upon  bank  shares  in  which  3'-ou  have  invested  £1000,  the  fact
that  rent  is  an  '  unearned  increment '  does  not  seem  a  sufficient
reason  for  ])lacing  upon  my  /50  a  tax  from  \\-hich  3'ours  is  exempt.
So  far  as  you  and  I  are  concerned,  our  incomes  from  the  two  sources
are  *  earned  '  or  '  unearned  '  precisely  to  the  same  extent  ]  when
I  invested  in  a  trust  company's  shares,  I  was  not  even  aware
that  rents  would  be  the  real  source  of  the  dividends,  nor  were  you
aware,  when  investing  in  bank  shares,  that  the  dividends  would
not  be  derived  from  mortgages  on  land  or  other  rental  sources.

The  fact  that  common  modes  of  reckoning  and  general  industrial
practice  have  inextricably  and  immeasurably  confused  land  values
with  capital  values,  not  merely  in  agriculture,  housing,  mines,
railroads,  and  all  forms  of  organised  businesses  in  which  land  is
'  capitahsed  '  along  with  buildings,  machinery,  stock,  goodwill,  &c.,
but  especially  in  the  general  investments  of  banks,  insurance,
development  and  trust  companies,  which  play  so  large  a  part  in
the  financial  direction  of  modern  businesses,  renders  it  as  impracti-
cable as  it  would  be  inequitable  to  make  existing  land  values  the
single  separate  basis  of  taxation.  This  view,  however,  need  not
preclude  the  special  or  separate  taxation  of  future  increments
of  land  values  or  rents.  For  if  it  be  contended  that  part  or  the
whole  of  such  future  rises  of  value  has  already  been  anticipated
in  the  past  contracts  for  the  sale  or  rental  of  land,  and  that  it
would  be  unjust  to  take  from  existing  owners  or  lessees  any  part
of  the  prospective  values  they  have  paid  for  in  the  terms  of  their
contract,  we  can  only  reply  that  this  cannot  be  held  to  be  a  proper
interpretation  of  the  conditions  under  which  reasonable  men
have  recently  made  contracts  for  the  sale  or  annual  leasing  of  land.
The  proposal  in  this  and  other  countries  to  raise  an  increasing
})roportion  of  the  public  revenue  from  increments  of  land  value
has  figured  so  prominently  in  the  practical  politics  of  all  progressive
parties  that  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  the  probability  of  such
special  taxation  has  been  taken  into  account  in  recent  negotiations
for  sale  or  leasing.  This  being  so,  the  objection  to  such  a  tax  on
the  ground  of  inequitable  discrimination  against  a  special  form
of  income  collapses.  If  I  have  really  paid  £900  for  a  piece  of  land
for  which  I  must  have  paid  /looo  but  for  the  probability  that
special  taxation  would  shortly  be  i)Iaced  upon  it,  I  can  have  no
ground  for  complahit  if  this  probability  is  converted  into  actuality.

If,  therefore,  it  be  admitted  that,  on  grounds  of  equity,  existing
incomes  from  land  values  cannot  be  subjected  to  special  taxation
from  which  other  incomes  from  investments  are  immune, it  is


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  221

quite  legitimate  for  the  state  to  take  by  taxation  as  much  of  the
future  increments  of  land  values  as  she  can  detect  and  separate
from  other  values  and  can  apply  to  the  ])erformance  of  public
services.

Moreover,  a  special  case  for  taxing  existing  values  may  be
urged,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  such  taxation  will  promote  a  more
socially  productive  use  of  land.

But  while  the  difficulty  of  the  single  tax  policy  of  public  finance
is  due  to  a  too  narrow  interpretation  of  the  unproductive  '  surplus  *
available  for  public  income,  socialism  has  done  as  much  to  blur  a
clear  conception  by  a  doctrine  of  surplus  value  which  includes  not
merely  all  rent  but  all  interest  and  profit  as  well.  Confusing  the
economies  of  a  hypothetical  society,  in  which  the  state,  owning  all
the  instruments  of  industry,  need  no  longer  take  into  account  the
categories  of  rent,  interest,  or  profit,  with  the  economic  analysis  of
current  industry,  Karl  Marx  regarded  payments  for  mental  and
manual  labour  as  the  only  legitimate  expenses,  pooling  rent,  interest,
profit  and  a  large  part  of  salaries  as  surplus  wrung  by  the  exploiting
classes  from  the  workers  who  were  the  sole  producers  of  income.
The  rejection  of  this  interpretation  of  distribution  by  most  reason-
able persons,  and  the  resentment  felt  at  the  refusal  of  socialists  to
recognise  the  actual  industrial  services  rendered  by  saving  and  the
direction  of  industry,  and  the  validity  of  some  interest  and  profit
in  payment  for  these  services,  has  discredited  the  conception  of  a
'  surplus  '  as  much  in  one  way  as  the  narrow  single  tax  doctrine  in
another.

For  purposes  of  a  taxing  policy,  the  surplus  value  of  '  orthodox  '
socialism  is  invalid,  because  it  refuses  to  recognise  a  minimum  rate
of  interest  and  of  profit  as  economically  necessary  payments  in  a
society  which  needs  to  evoke  the  voluntary  individual  efforts  of
saving  and  of  direction  of  industry.  It  would  defy  the  facts  of
existing  society  in  the  name  of  its  vision  of  a  future  society.  When
society  does  all  the  saving,  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  designate  as
'  interest  '  any  separate  part  of  the  increased  social  income  of  the
future  :  in  similar  fashion,  both  rent  and  profit  will  disappear  when
the  practical  utility  of  these  distinctions  is  gone.  But  for  our
existing  society  these  distinctions  remain  valid  in  the  theory  and
the  practice  of  the  distribution  of  wealth.  What  we  have  to  do  is
to  distinguish,  as  completely  as  we  can,  the  portion  of  these  pay-
ments that  is  socially  necessary  under  existing  industry  from  that
which  is  socially  unnecessary.

The  doctrine  of  unproductive  '  surplus  '  or  '  unearned  incre-
ment,' in  the  meaning  here  given  to  it,  including  all  sorts  of  scarcity
gains,  is  of  supreme significance  in public fmance. For this


222  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

'surplus,'  as  we  have  already  asserted,  is  the  sole  source  of  public
revenue  :  it  alone  can  '  bear  '  a  tax,  and  its  ability  to  bear  it  is
absolute.  Just  as  economic  rent  cannot  shift  a  tax  once  placed  or
settled  on  it,  so  with  every  other  unearned  element  of  income.  The
tax  cannot  be  shifted,  because  the  existence  of  the  unearned  income
not  being  an  incentive  to  the  application  of  the  land,  capital,  or
ability  from  which  it  is  derived,  the  imposition  of  the  tax  will  cause
no  withdrawal  of  the  supply,  and  therefore  no  raising  of  the  price.
A  tax  placed  on  economic  rent  cannot  be  shifted  because,  so  long
as  it  leaves  any  rent  untaken,  it  will  still  pay  the  landowner  to  keep
his  land  in  use,  and  so  long  as  he  does  so,  the  total  supply  of  avail-
able land  remaining  as  before,  the  landowners  cannot  by  raising
rents  shift  the  tax  on  the  lessee.  Similarly  with  a  tax  placed  upon
high  interest  or  profits.  A  tax  upon  banking  dividends  in  this
country  would  not  cause  any  shrinkage  of  banking  business,  for  the
paid-up  capital  in  the  industry  is  remunerated  at  a  far  higher  rate
than  is  needed  to  evoke  its  use.  Mr.  Rockefeller  could  not  advan-
tageously resist  a  tax  upon  his  income  by  raising  the  price  of  oil,
nor  can  De  Beers  raise  the  price  of  diamonds  as  a  means  of  meeting
the  new  taxation  put  upon  the  profits  of  their  monopoly.

In  tracing  the  elaborate  and  multifarious  ways  in  which  such
'  surplus  '  is  super-imposed  upon  necessary  expenses,  wherever  a
factor  of  production  is  in  a  position  of  natural  or  contrived  scarcity,
we  have  indicated  a  '  fund  '  of  a  complex  nature  which  is,  in  prin-
ciple at  any  rate,  amenable  to  the  taxing  process  on  the  same
terms  as  economic  rent.

§  4. — In  this  assertion  of  the  doctrine  that  the  surplus,  or
complex  of  '  unearned  incomes,'  is  the  sole  legitimate  source  of
public  revenue,  it  is  not  implied  that  the  state  is  entitled  to  absorb
by  taxation,  or  otherwise,  the  whole  of  this  surplus,  on  the  ground
that  society  has  created  it,  needs  it,  and  intends  to  utilise  it  for
social  expenditure.

We  recognised  distinctly,  in  dealing  with  the  claims  of  individual
owners  of  the  factors  of  production,  that  whereas  their  wear  and
tear  or  sustenance  funds  were,  in  theory  at  any  rate,  a  fixed  ascer-
tainable first  charge  upon  the  product,  their  further  claims  for  an
income  of  progressive  efficiency  were  more  elastic.  With  rising
wages  is  usually  associated  an  increased  quantity  or  improved
quality,  or  both,  of  labour-power  ;  higher  interest  and  profits,
though  with  less  certainty,  evoke  a  larger  application  of  capital  and
ability.  If,  then,  the  term  '  surplus  '  be  applied,  as  we  do  apply  it,
to  the  whole  of  the  product  over  and  above  the  wear  and  tear  fund,
regarded  as  the  progress  fund,  it  is  evident  that  we  are  called  upon
to  adjust  the  respective  claims  of  the  progress  in  efficiency  of  the


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  223

individual  producers  and  of  society.  To  this  same  surplus  the
individual  must  look  for  his  wage  of  progress,  and  the  state  for  its
entire  income,  including  both  its  wear  and  tear  fund  and  its  wage
of  progress.

This  way  of  setting  the  problem  makes  it  evident  that  the  wear
and  tear  or  sustenance  fund  for  the  state  should  form  a  first  charge
upon  the  general  surplus.  In  fact,  if  we  had  been  able  to  begin
with  a  clear  assertion  of  the  co-operation  of  society  with  the  indi-
vidual in  all  productive  work,  we  should  in  the  first  analysis  have
put  the  public  wear  and  tear  fund  on  the  same  level  with  that  of
the  individual  producer,  and  have  reduced  the  surplus  accordingly.
This,  however,  would  have  imposed  undue  complexity  upon  our
earlier  analysis.  But  now  that  we  are  confronted  with  the  task  of
harmonising  the  individual  and  social  claims  upon  the  surplus,  we
must  make  the  necessary  preliminary  readjustment,  admitting  that
the  working  expenses  or  upkeep  of  the  existing  fabric  of  the  state
must  rank,  like  those  of  the  individual  producers,  as  claims  on  the
product  prior  to  the  emergence  of  a  surplus.

Thus  the  surplus  is  reduced  to  its  true  dimensions  as  a  fund  of
economic  progress  whose  proper  disposition  is  determined  by  the
respective  powers  of  individual  and  social  factors  of  production  to
utilise  surplus  for  purposes  of  improved  efficiency.  In  our  earlier
survey  we  admitted  that  there  were  natural  limits  imposed  upon
the  capacity  of  individual  producers  to  assimilate  and  utilise  for
progress  surplus  income.  The  economy  of  high  wages,  however
liberally  interpreted,  has  limits.  Though  the  wholesome  wants  of
man  may  be  considered  infinite,  the  pace  of  their  evolution,  and
of  their  assimilation  in  his  standard  of  life,  depends  on  a  great  variety
of  physical,  psychical  and  social  considerations.  The  same  applies
to  the  stimulation  of  the  increased  growth  and  efficiency  of  capital
and  ability  in  our  industrial  system.  There  are,  in  the  case  of  all
the  factors,  limits  to  the  assimilation  of  surplus  for  the  promotion
of  economic  efficiency.

Then  arises  the  question :  '  Must  we  not  apply  to  society,  and
in  particular  to  its  instrument  the  state,  a  similar  restrictive
principle  ?  '  The  answer  must  clearly  be  in  the  affirmative.  Just
as  an  evident  waste  of  surplus  is  occasioned  when  a  Connemara
agricultural  labourer  arriving  at  Liverpool  is  put  suddenly  in
possession  of  a  weekly  income  four  times  larger  than  he  has  ever
had  before  ;  just  as  every  other  sort  of  notweau  riche  is  apt  to
consume  his  excessive  income  in  ways  which,  so  far  from  advancing,
degrade  his  personal  efficiency,  so  with  a  city  or  a  state.  The
organic  conception  of  these  social  institutions  obliges  us  to  admit
that  their  laws  of  growth  impose  certain  limits  upon  their  rate  of


224  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

taking  on  new  functions  and  enlarging  the  activities  of  old  functions,
and  therefore  of  applying  public  income  in  serviceable  progress.
A  city  or  a  state  might  easily  become  a  reckless  spendthrift  if  it
took  more  '  surplus  '  than  it  could  digest,  as  many  a  parasitic
instance  testifies  in  history.

The  claims  of  the  individual  producers  and  of  society,  in  the
form  of  the  state,  upon  the  true  surplus,  must  then  be  set  upon
a  level,  to  be  adjusted  in  accordance  with  a  wise  interpretation
of  their  respective  capacities  of  growth,  and  of  the  needs  implied
in  these  capacities.

Here  is  exposed  what  is,  from  the  economic  standpoint,  the
most  important  duty  of  statecraft — that,  on  the  one  hand,  of  creat-
ing the  conditions  most  favourable  to  the  absorption  of  '  surplus '
by  individual  producers  in  proportion  to  their  capacity  to  use
it ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  application  of  the  remainder  of  the
surplus  to  the  direct  use  of  the  state  for  public  services.

These  tasks,  as  we  have  already  recognised,  are  by  no  means
mutually  exclusive.  For  the  modern  state  uses  its  power  and  its
financial  resources  largely  to  secure  what  is  termed  '  equality  of
economic  opportunity '  for  its  individual  members,  which  really
means  that  it  assists  them  to  absorb  from  the  '  surplus  '  increments
of  income  what  they  can  apply  to  the  promotion  of  personal
efficiency.

But  the  performance  of  this  work,  as  well  as  the  expenditure
upon  directly  public  services,  involves  on  the  part  of  the  state  a
careful  calculus  of  the  respective  requirements  of  the  state  and
of  the  individual  for  purposes  of  progressive  efficiency.

This  is  the  supreme  issue  of  public  finance,  to  determine  what
proportion  of  the  surplus  can  be  advantageously  taken  as  public
income  to  be  applied  to  the  growth  of  state  functions.  This  pro-
portion will  evidently  vary,  not  merely  with  the  nature  of  the
political  economic  civilisation,  but  with  the  actual  conditions  of  the
distribution  of  the  surplus.  Where  the  '  surplus  '  is  small,  and
upon  the  whole  is  apportioned  in  accordance  with  the  '  needs  '  of
the  several  factors  of  production,  the  state  would  make  a  moderate
use  of  its  taxing  power,  having  in  mind  the  nice  adjustment  of
the  use  of  surplus  for  individual  and  social  growth.  But  where  a
large  surplus  was  quite  evidently  absorbed  by  the  economic  force
of  some  factor  whose  efficiency  it  hindered  rather  than  helped,
the  state  would  apply  its  taxing  powers  rigorously  so  as  to  absorb
this  wasted  surplus.

Our  analysis  of  the  actual  working  of  the  industrial  system
has  shown  the  emergence  of  large  quantities  of  waste  surplus.
It  is  to  the  social  utilisation  of  this  waste  surplus  that  the  taxing


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  225

power  of  the  state  is  rightly  directed.  For  the  economic  rents,
the  extra  profits,  interest,  salaries,  &c.,  which  are  got  by  the  use
of  economic  force  in  creating  monopolies  or  artificial  scarcities,
are  not  merely  failing  to  perform  the  true  functions  of  a  surplus,
as  the  fund  of  progress,  in  stimulating  the  efficiency  of  factors
of  production,  they  are  damaging  efficiency,  by  enabling  whole
classes  of  persons  to  be  consumers  without  producing.  Such
injurious  consumption  of  the  surplus  in  destroying  efficiency
it  is  the  evident  duty  of  the  state  to  stop ;  and  a  taxing  policy
which  transfers  such  private  destruction  of  efficiency  into  the
means  of  a  public  increase  of  efficiency  is  doubly  productive.

Thus  the  true  policy  of  public  revenue  is  based  upon  the  duty
of  the  state  to  take  as  public  income  whatever  portion  of  the  surplus
is  not  already  allocated  to  the  stimulation  of  efficiency  of  the
individual  factors  of  production,  but  is  taken  in  rents,  extra  profits,
or  other  '  unearned  '  income.

The  two  methods  by  which  the  state  endeavours  to  secure  its
income  are,  as  we  have  seen,  public  operation  of  industry  and  taxa-
tion. The  former  is  usually  confined  to  the  case  of  large  industries,
engaged  in  the  supply  of  goods  or  services  for  the  satisfaction  of
urgent  common  needs,  which,  left  to  private  enterprise,  become
strong  monopolies.  The  state,  assuming  these  monopolies,  either
takes  the  monopoly  profit  for  general  purposes  of  revenue,  or  assigns
portions  of  it  to  the  employees  in  higher  wages  and  improved  con-
ditions of  employment,  or  to  the  consumers  in  lower  prices  or  better
services.  If  the  state  decides  to  raise  the  wages  of  public  employees
or  to  lower  prices,  thus  foregoing  the  actual  collection  of  the
monopoly  profit,  it  must  nevertheless  be  considered  to  have  dis-
posed of  this  '  surplus  '  by  a  socially  advantageous  expenditure.
How  much  of  the  profits  of  public  monopolies  shall  be  utilised  in
such  specific  subsidies  and  how  much  gathered  into  general  revenue,
is  a  question  to  be  answered  from  detailed  consideration  of  each  case.
Where  the  state  or  municipality  takes  over  a  private  monopoly  on
terms  enabling  it  to  secure  the  surplus  profit,  it  will  commonly
dispose  of  a  portion  of  this  surplus  in  converting  subsistence  wages
into  wages  of  progressive  efficiency  ;  another  portion  it  may  apply  to
such  lowering  of  rates  or  extension  of  services  as  may  be  socially
remunerative  from  the  standpoint  of  net  profits  :  the  remainder  of
the  surplus,  if  any,  or  of  the  ordinary  profit,  may  be  applied  to
general  purposes  of  public  revenue.  Some  states,  however,  using
public  monopolies  primarily  as  a  means  of  general  revenue,  concern
themselves  little  with  the  progressive  efficiency  of  employees,  and
charge  the  highest  prices  or  rates  which  they  can  profitably  extract
from  the  consumers. Such  use  of  public  monopolies  as  an  indirect


226  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

method  of  general  taxation  will,  however,  be  less  likely  to  occur  in
states  which  have  developed  an  enlightened  system  of  direct
taxation.  While  public  operation  of  industry  will  generally  be
applied  to  intercept  the  large  regular  surpluses  which  accrue  from
monopolies  in  the  prime  necessaries  or  conveniences  of  life,  taxation
will  be  applied  to  secure  as  much  as  possible  of  the  surplus  which  is
taken  in  the  operation  of  industry  by  the  owners  of  strongly  placed
factors  of  production,  but  which  does  not  issue  through  the  forms
of  definite  monopoly  in  routine  industry.

Surplus  obtained  by  one  of  these  two  methods  is  the  sole  legiti-
mate source  of  public  revenue,  it  is  the  only  sort  of  income  available
for  public  use.  States  dominated  by  shortsighted  avarice  may
sometimes  attempt  to  encroach  by  taxes  upon  the  subsistence  fund
of  labour  or  capital,  or  at  least  to  annex  that  additional  payment
required  to  evoke  and  to  support  progressive  efficiency  in  the
industrial  system.  This  '  sweating  '  policy  has  frequently  been
practised  by  despotic  rulers  or  classes,  utilising  the  powers  of  the
state  to  make  forced  levies  on  the  resources  of  the  people.

Such  an  abuse  of  taxing  power  in  its  operation  upon  agriculture
has  probably  been  the  greatest  single  influence  throughout  history
in  the  retardation  of  industry  ;  and  manj^  modern  civilised  states,
by  mistaken  methods  of  taxation  which  assail  costs  of  produc-
tion and  divert  the  factors  of  production  from  more  productive  into
less  productive  channels,  inflict  upon  single  trades  or  upon  the
national  industry  injuries  which  weaken  its  present  and  its  future
yield  of  surplus,  so  diminishing  the  fund  of  public  revenue.


II

§  I. — Accepting  as  our  basisof  taxation  the  principle  that  all  taxes
should  be  so  laid  as  to  lie  upon  unproductive  surplus,  we  have  to
consider  what  taxing  policy  is  best  adapted  in  a  modern  industrial
state  to  secure  this  result,  and  to  obtain  for  the  public  revenue  the
largest  quantity  of  this  fund  without  undue  risk  of  encroaching
anywhere  upon  expenses  of  production.

If  unproductive  surplus  alone  has  ability  to  bear  a  tax,  it  might
seem  at  first  sight  a  matter  of  indifference  where  a  tax  was  laid,
because,  if  laid  upon  any  necessary  expense  of  production,  it  would
be  shifted  until  its  ultimate  incidence  was  upon  some  portion  of  the
surplus.  Reasoning  along  this  line  we  might  hold,  with  Ricardo,
that  no  tax  could  lie  on  ordinary  wages  of  labour,  because  a  tax
thereupon  imposed  would,  by  reducing  real  wages  below  the  neces-
sary minimum,  diminish  the  supply  of  labour  and  so  raise  its  price


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  227

until  the  tax  fell  upon  the  profits  of  the  employer.  Similarly,  it
might  well  appear  that  any  tax  imposed  on  interest  or  profit  must,
so  far  as  minimum  interest  and  profit  are  affected,  be  shifted  either
upon  rent,  in  the  case  of  agriculture  and  other  industries  into  which
land  enters  as  a  considerable  factor,  or  upon  the  consumer  through
a  rise  in  prices.

It  is  so  important  to  realise  clearly  both  the  validity  of  this
reasoning  and  its  limitations  that  it  will  be  well  to  test  it  by  a
concrete  instance.  Advocates  of  state  pensions  upon  a  basis  of
compulsory  contribution  have  sometimes  urged  that  employers
should  be  required  to  stop  a  certain  sum  from  the  wages  of  their
employees  for  this  purpose,  in  other  words,  to  levy  a  direct  tax  on
money  wages  to  furnish  a  state  revenue  for  pensions.  Let  us
suppose  that  6d.  per  week  were  stopped  by  every  emplo5^er  of
unskilled  town  labour  out  of  the  i8s.  which  may  be  taken  as  the
normal  weekly  wage.

If,  as  we  may  assume  for  the  purpose  of  this  argument,  i8s.  is  a
minimum  wage  of  efficiency  for  the  average  unskilled  workman  and
his  family,  the  stoppage  of  the  6d.  will  have  a  first  effect  in  reducing
the  efficiency  of  labour,  which  in  unskilled  labour  is  equivalent  to  a
reduction  in  the  supply  of  labour.  To  this  effect,  which  may  at
first  be  small,  will  be  added  the  withdrawal  from  the  regular  labour
market  of  what  we  may  term  the  '  marginal  labour  '  at  the  earlier
wage,  that  is  to  say,  those  who  were  just  induced  to  keep  in  regular
work  for  the  food,  housing,  and  beer  which  i8s.  would  buy  but
which  17s.  6d.  will  not.  In  these  two  ways  the  tax  of  6d.  per  week
will  reduce  the  supply  of  unskilled  labour.  As  the  demand  may  be
assumed  to  remain  as  before,  the  price  must  rise  until  part  or  the
whole  of  the  6d.  is  paid  out  of  the  pocket  of  the  employers.  So  far
as  our  assumption  that  the  wage  is  a  bare  subsistence  wage  is  correct,
the  effect  would  be  to  throw  the  whole  tax  on  the  employer,  even  if
somewhat  less  labour  was  employed  than  before.  The  first  shift
of  the  tax  thus  seems  to  be  from  wages  on  to  profits.  But  will  it
necessarily  settle  there  ?  In  prosperous  trades,  where  profits  are
higher  than  they  need  be  to  remunerate  employers,  the  tax  will  lie
upon  these  surplus-profits,  for  employers,  though  they  might  like
to  shift  them  on  to  the  buyers  of  the  goods  they  have  to  sell,  will  not
be  able  to  do  so.  Why  not  }  Because,  if  they  are  competing,  one
employer  dare  not  raise  his  price  for  fear  of  being  undersold  by
another,  who  can  afford  to  do  so  because  he  would  still  be  earning
a  sufficient  profit  by  keeping  to  his  former  price.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  the  surplus  profit  of  the  trade  was  due  to  combination  in
holding  up  prices  above  the  competitive  level,  the  imposition  of
this  pension's  tax  would  confer  upon  them  no  new  power  to  raise  still

Q2


228  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

higher  their  monopoly  price.  It  is  therefore  clear  that,  if  the  tax
falls  upon  surplus-profit,  it  stays  there.  But  the  case  of  emplo3^ers
in  trades  where  keen  competition  keeps  profits  at  a  minimum  is
different.  Minimum  profits  and  interest  have  the  same  power  to
throw  off  a  tax  as  minimum  wages,  for  even  if  the  existing  material
capital  will  continue  functioning  at  a  rate  below  the  minimum,  no
fresh  capital  or  ability  will  enter  such  a  trade,  and  this  starvation
will  issue  in  dwindling  output,  and,  demand  remaining  as  before,  in
rising  prices.  Rising  prices  seem,  then,  to  throw  the  tax  on  to  the
consumer.  But  prices  cannot  always  be  raised.  Where  home
producers  are  in  close  competition  with  foreigners  whose  '  expenses  '
have  not  been  burdened  with  the  tax,  there  is  no  power  to  raise
prices.  The  effect  of  a  tax  on  such  a  trade  would  be  to  destroy  a
large  part  of  it,  knocking  out  all  the  weaker  businesses  until  the
reduction  of  output  was  such  as  to  raise  the  price  for  the  reduced
supply  (the  aggregate  foreign  and  domestic  supply)  to  a  point  which
would  enable  the  tax  to  be  borne  by  the  surviving  businesses.  If
all  the  businesses  in  such  a  trade  were  equally  equipped,  and  all
earning  minimum  profits,  the  logically  necessary  effect  of  such  a
tax  would  be  to  kill  the  trade.

Where,  as  in  the  case  of  many  large  industries,  e.g.  transport,
building,  shopkeeping,  no  direct  effective  foreign  competition  is
practicable,  the  pension  would,  it  appears,  be  successfully  shifted
on  to  the  consumer.  This  to  some  appears  the  end.  There  is,  how-
ever, a  false  air  of  finality  about  the  statement  '  the  consumer  pays  '
which  is  most  injurious  to  an  understanding  of  the  incidence  of  taxa-
tion. It  is  clear  that  the  tax  cannot  lie  on  all  classes  of  consumers
alike.  For  instance,  our  unskilled  labourers  who  first  began  to
shift  the  pension's  tax  imposed  on  them  by  law  are  consumers,  and
wll  be  called  upon  to  pay  the  higher  prices.  But  they  can  no  more
pay  the  tax  in  this  shape  of  higher  prices  than  in  that  of  lower
money  wages.  If  the  shifting  of  the  tax  has  caused  a  rise  in  the
price  of  any  elements  of  food,  shelter,  &c.,  which  enter  their  standard
of  life,  the  same  economic  necessity  which  enabled  them  before  to
shift  the  tax  on  to  their  employer  will  operate  again.  And  what
applies  to  them  will  apply  to  every  other  class  of  consumer  whose
real  income  only  covers  expenses  and  leaves  no  surplus.  If  his
income  at  previous  prices  only  just  suffices  to  induce  him  to  give
out  his  labour-power  or  his  ability,  or  to  apply  his  capital,  he  cannot
and  will  not  bear  the  tax  which  seems  to  fall  upon  him  as  consumer
through  rise  of  prices,  but  will  shift  it  as  before.  If  any  class  of
consumers  possess  an  income  which  is  not  a  wage  of  bare  efficiency
or  a  minimum  interest  or  profit,  but  which  is  composed  wholly
or  in  part  of  rents,  extra  profits,  or  other  surplus,  such  consumers


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  229

can  and  will  pay  the  higher  prices,  without  power  to  shift  the  tax
contained  in  them.  But  it  is  clear  by  this  instance  that  such
consumers  bear  the  tax,  not  as  consumers,  but  as  owners  of
incomes  which  contain  a  '  surplus  '  element.

From  this  reasoning,  if  it  be  correct,  there  issue  two  conclusions.
First,  that  a  tax  imposed  in  the  first  instance  upon  an  income  which
is  a  subsistence  wage,  or  any  minimum  cost  of  production,  tends  to
be  moved  on  until  it  finds,  in  the  course  of  its  shifting,  elements
of  '  surplus  '  income  on  which  to  settle.  Second,  that  no  consumer,
as  consumer,  can  be  considered  to  have  any  ability  to  bear  a  tax  :
taxes  must  ultimately  be  held  to  be  paid  out  of  such  incomes  as
can  bear  them.

In  any  scientific  analysis  of  incidence  of  taxes  we  must  trace
the  incidence  to  incomes  derived  from  ownership  of  some  factor  of
production,  that  is  to  say,  all  taxes  are  ultimately  borne  by  certain
classes  of  producers.

§  2. — So  important  is  this  doctrine  of  the  implied  inability  of
minimum  wages  of  efficiency  to  bear  a  tax,  that  some  closer
discussion  of  it  is  advisable.  For  simplicity  we  have  stated  it  in  a
hard  dogmatic  form  which  requires  some  qualification.  If  it  were  true
that  all  taxes  imposed  upon  any  element  of  income  which  was  a  cost
of  production  were  instantly,  automatically,  and  easily  shifted  on
to  the  unearned  surplus,  methods  of  taxation  might  appear  to  be  a
matter  of  no  great  importance.  But,  in  fact,  the  shifting  is  often
a  slow  and  wasteful  process,  accompanied  by  much  disturbance  to
industrial  processes.  For  there  is  also  a  tendency  for  a  tax  to  lie
where  it  is  put,  even  when  it  is  put  upon  a  person  or  an  income
which  has  no  real  ability  to  bear  it.  Our  example  of  the  pension
tax  correctly  assumed  that  the  first  effect  would  be  to  break  down
a  wage  of  minimum  efficiency.  Our  imj)lication  that  this  eftect
would  be  avoided  by  shifting  the  tax  in  the  first  instance  on  to  the
employer,  though  substantially  correct,  evidently  needs  quahfica-
tion.  If  the  unskilled  wage  were  an  absolutely  fixed  sum,  expended
entirely  in  ways  which  made  for  efficiency,  no  portion  of  the  tax
could  lie  for  any  time  at  all.  But  even  the  fixed  standard  of  con-
sumption of  unskilled  labour  usually  contains  some  elements  which
are  not  contributory  to  efficiency.  It  is  suggested  that  the  6d.  per
week  might  easily  be  paid  by  reducing  expenditure  on  beer.  Here  is
a  way  in  which  the  tax  might  be  borne  without  causing  any  diminu-
tion of  efficiency  of  labour.  Would  it  so  be  borne  ?  Probably
to  some  small  extent  it  would.  For  though  the  drink  habit  will  be
too  firmly  fixed  in  habits  of  consumption  to  bear  the  whole  or  even
the  chief  brunt  of  the  attack  upon  the  workers'  budget,  it  would
bear  some  of  it : to  some  slight  extent  the  tax  might  nibble  at  the


230  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

standard  of  comfort,  and  to  that  extent  it  would  lie  where  it  was
first  put.  Again,  where  unskilled  wages  were  for  other  reasons
rising,  and  new  unsettled  elements  were  emerging  in  the  class
standard  of  consumption,  the  tax  might  lie,  though  at  the  expense
of  checking  a  rise  of  efficiency  accompanying  the  rise  of  wages.  In
other  words,  the  state,  by  imposing  the  weekly  tax,  might  earmark
6d.  in  the  rising  wages  for  its  pension  scheme,  diverting  it  from
some  other  more  or  less  desirable  object  of  expenditure  to  which  it
would  have  been  put.

The  issue  is  obviously  a  delicate  one.  The  general  effect  would
be  to  resist  the  tax,  in  so  far  as  it  implies  an  attack  on  the  established
class  standard  of  comfort,  even  though  that  standard  contains  some
elements  that  could  be  abandoned  without  loss  of  efficiency,  and
to  shift  it  on  to  the  employer.  But  where  the  tax  was  put  upon
rising  wages,  some  of  it  would  probably  stay,  though  the  social
effect,  in  preventing  a  rise  of  current  consumption,  and  so  current
efficiency,  might  be  injurious.

The  same  reasoning  will  apply  to  the  class  wages  of  higher
grades  of  labour.  If  these  wages  are  strictly  wages  of  the  higher
efficiency  involved  in  skilled  labour,  they  have  no  real  ability  to
bear  a  tax  which,  if  imposed,  must  either  break  down  efficiency  or
be  shifted  on  to  the  employer.  But  so  far  as  they  contain  elements
capable  of  being  abandoned  without  reducing  efficiency  they  can
bear  some  portion  of  the  tax,  if  the  w^orkers  consent  to  take  it  out
of  their  unnecessaries.  The  issue  becomes  largely  one  of  class
psychology.  If  the  unnecessaries  are  firmly  fixed  in  the  class
standard  of  comfort,  there  will  be  no  willingness  to  reduce  their
consumption  in  order  to  pay  the  tax,  but  a  strong  disposition  to
shift  the  tax  by  a  refusal  to  work  for  wages  involving  a  reduced
standard  of  comfort.

But  though  the  physical  and  moral  necessities  that  underlie
subsistence  and  efficiency  wages  for  the  various  grades  of  labour
have  a  great  power  of  resistance  to  taxation,  this  resistance  is  often
a  process  entailing  great  misery  to  the  working  classes  and  great
waste  to  the  industrial  system.  A  tax  on  the  food  or  other  neces-
saries of  unskilled  labourers  may  drive  large  numbers  of  the  weaker
members  of  this  class  into  casual  employment,  a  tramp  life,  or
the  workhouse,  while  its  effect  upon  the  nurture  of  the  rising
generation  may  inflict  grave  injury  upon  its  industrial  efficiency.
Similarly,  the  operation  of  taxation  upon  skilled  workers  and  their
families  may  be  such  as  to  drive  them  or  their  children  to  a  lower
level  of  work  and  life.  In  other  words,  the  state,  by  an  unwise
and  oppressive  measure  of  taxation,  may  injure  the  workers  in
the  same  way  as  a  sweating  employer  or  a  grasping  landlord. The


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  231

actual  condition  even  of  the  unskilled  labourers  in  such  a  country
as  England  or  America  is  not  one  of  such  close  subjection  to
'  an  iron  law  of  wages  '  as  to  cause  every  encroachment  on  a
standard  of  living  to  be  at  once  reflected  in  a  corresponding  shrink-
age of  supply  of  labour.  The  injurious  effects  of  a  tax  imposed
on  a  standard  wage  may  often  be  slow  in  their  operation,  and
so  the  food  taxes,  by  which  the  efficiency  of  labour  is  crippled,
may  be  permitted  to  remain  even  in  nations  where  a  democratic
franchise  exists.  But  the  grave  injury  done  by  taxation  of  the
labouring  classes  consists  in  the  direct  absorption  by  the  state
of  new  increments  of  real  wages  which,  though  on  their  way  to
build  up  a  higher  standard  of  life  for  the  workers,  with  a  corre-
sponding rise  of  industrial  efficiency,  have  not  yet  been  firmly
embedded  in  that  higher  standard.

What  applies  to  wages  clearly  applies  to  any  tax  imposed
directly  or  indirectly  on  minimum  interest  or  profit  or  payment
of  ability  ;  the  process  by  which  such  a  tax  is  shifted  involves
not  only  unmerited  injury  to  the  owner  of  some  capital  or  ability
who  is  deprived  of  his  normal  anticipated  income,  but  a  temporary
check  upon  the  activity  of  the  industries  in  which  these  factors
are  employed,  with  a  consequent  waste  of  productivity  and  a
disturbance  to  other  businesses  related  to  them.

In  fine,  any  tax  imposed  upon  elements  of  income  which  are
economically  necessary  costs  of  production  is  directly  evil,  endanger-
ing the  efficienc}^  of  the  owners  of  the  incomes,  and  involving
industrial  waste  by  the  process  of  shifting  which  commonly  ensues.
This  applies  with  peculiar  force  to  taxes  placed,  either  on  the
money  wages  of  the  working  classes,  or  on  the  prices  of  commodities
consumed  by  them.

§  3. — Since  all  taxes  ultimately  settle  and  are  borne  by  the  income
of  producers,  and  since  unearned  and  unproductive  surplus  incomes
are  the  only  sound  source  of  taxation,  it  might  appear  that  the  only
sound  method  of  taxation  would  be  to  measure  the  various  forms
of  unearned  income  and  take  them  by  direct  taxation.  This  would
be  both  simple  and  expedient  if  such  surpluses  were  always  ascer-
tainable and  measurable.  If  it  were  possible  to  secure  returns
of  all  incomes  in  which  expenses  of  production  were  separated
from  unearned  income,  the  whole  of  the  latter  or  such  portion  as
seemed  desirable  could  be  taken  by  direct  taxation.  In  so  far  as
it  is  possible,  or  can  become  possible,  by  accurate  valuation,  to
distinguish  such  unearned  incomes  as  rents,  values  of  liquor  licences,
or  even  the  surplus  profits  of  such  highly  organised  and  generally
profitable  industries  as  banking  and  insurance,  it  might  be  advisable
to  place  specific  taxes  on  such  forms  of  surplus,  either  taxing  them


232  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

as  they  emerge  in  the  net  profits  of  some  company  or  other  business
form,  or  in  the  incomes  or  inheritances  of  the  personal  recipients.

But  it  is  evident  that  the  greater  part  of  the  surplus  is  not
thus  clearly  traceable  and  mecisurable,  emerging  as  it  does  in  a
large  and  changing  variety  of  forms  amid  the  intricacies  of  industrial
life.  Wherever  there  accrues  a  permanent  or  temporary  scarcity
.of  some  factor  of  production,  a  corresponding  surplus  income  is
created  which  passes  to  owners  of  this  factor.  But  no  particular
register  of  these  elements  of  surplus  is  possible  ;  though  most
large  incomes  contain  many  of  them,  they  are  often  indistinguish-
able even  by  their  owners  from  the  elements  which  are  earned.

It  is  tolerably  clear  that  no  taxing  instrument  for  measuring
directly  these  fluctuating  '  surpluses  '  can  be  devised.  Indeed,
even  the  rough  distinction  at  present  drawn  in  the  income  tax  of
Great  Britain  between  earned  and  unearned  incomes,  from  £700
to  £2000  per  annum,  is  open  to  serious  criticism  on  the  ground
that  it  implies  all  '  interest '  to  be  unearned  without  distinguishing
between  minimum  and  surplus  rates.  To  some  extent  it  thus
certainly  operates  as  a  deterrent  of  saving  and  investment.  There
is  no  reason  to  assume  that  high  salaries  or  profits  of  business
or  professional  men  do  not  contain  '  unearned  '  elements,  and  no
reason  to  treat  low  dividends  upon  invested  capital  as  '  unearned  '
by  their  recipients.  The  main  instrument  of  rational  taxation  is
a  graduated  income  tax  and  graduated  estate  and  inheritance
duties,  without  any  further  discrimination  of  sources  than  is
conveyed  in  such  specific  taxes  on  rents,  &c. ,  as  may  seem  expedient
and  feasible.  The  validity  of  this  method  is  based  on  the  assump-
tion that  unproductive  *  surplus  '  varies  directly  with  the  size  of
incomes.  All  modern  states  to  some  extent  have  accepted  this
assumption  as  a  basis  for  their  taxing  policy.  It  remains  to  apply
it  more  logically  and  more  adequately,  in  pursuance  of  the  principle
which  assigns  the  whole  of  surplus  income  to  the  state  as  legitimate
revenue.  No  one  will  dispute  the  fact  that  an  increasing  propor-
tion of  high  incomes  can  be  taken  by  taxation,  without  impairing
the  incentives  of  the  owners  of  the  land,  capital,  or  ability,  from
which  these  incomes  are  derived,  from  applying  them  as  they
apply  them  now  to  production.  When  it  is  clearly  and  generally
recognised  that  this  is  equivalent  to  an  admission  that  these  elements
of  income,  thus  taken  in  taxation,  are  not  earned  b}^  their  recipients,
but  are  attributable  to  social  causes  of  scarcity  value,  it  will  be
understood  that  no  injurious  burden  or  sacrifice  is  imposed,  no
confiscatory  policy  pursued,  but  that  the  state  is  simply  seeking
to  collect  a  portion  of  the  social  income.  A  portion  only,  evidently
not  the  whole  ! No  policy  of  graduated  taxation,  applied  to  general


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  233

aggregates  of  income  or  property,  can  collect  more  than  a  certain
proportion  of  the  social  income.  For  the  hypothesis  that  unearned
surplus  varies  directly  and  closely  with  the  size  of  income  is
probably  not  accurate,  and  is  certainly  incapable  of  verification.
Considerable  caution  must  therefore  be  practised  in  graduating
the  tax  so  as  to  avoid  any  risk  of  trenching  upon  earned  elements
of  income.  Especially  in  its  earlier  years,  such  taxation  must  be
largely  experimental,  so  as  to  find  the  curve  of  graduation  which
is  most  productive  of  revenue.  Even  were  it  possible  to  measure
experimentally  the  proportion  of  each  size  of  income  which  is
'  unearned  '  and  therefore  taxable,  it  would  not  be  feasible  to  take
more  than  a  proportion  by  process  of  national  or  local  taxation.
In  the  United  States  high  local  taxation  is  frequently  evaded  by
a  change  of  legal  settlement,  and  even  in  such  a  nation  as  England
no  small  proportion  of  the  largest  incomes  belong  to  financiers
and  other  persons  who  would  escape  the  excessive  rigour  of
taxation  by  change  of  domicile  or  by  concealment  of  investments.

But  when  due  account  is  taken  of  theoretical  and  practical
difficulties,  it  remains  true  that  a  careful  system  of  direct  graduation
could  secure  a  large  increase  of  public  revenue.  Income  tax  and
inheritance  duties  scientifically  treated  are  supplementary  instru-
ments for  this  purpose.  But  for  their  proper  working  two  reforms
in  fiscal  procedure  are  urgently  required.  The  first  is  a  compulsory
return  of  income  from  all  sources  imposed  on  all  persons  liable  to
income  tax  and  enforced  by  adequate  penalties.  This  return  must
be  checked  by  empowering  the  Inland  Revenue  to  demand  a
return  from  all  companies,  giving  particulars  of  all  dividends,
bonuses,  and  salaries.  If,  as  may  be  convenient,  incomes
derived  from  companies  are  taxed  '  at  the  source,'  such  tax
should  be  graduated,  not,  as  at  present,  on  the  sum  of  the  net
profits,  but  on  the  rate  of  interest  earned  on  the  paid-up  capital.
The  present  method  would  be  indefensible,  because,  by  taxing  large
businesses  at  a  higher  rate  than  small  ones,  it  would  interfere  in-
juriously with  the  grouping  of  productive  power  in  its  most  efficient
forms.  The  other  reform  consists  in  the  substitution  of  true  gradua-
tion for  graduation  by  sudden  leaps  at  arbitrarily  determined  points
in  the  scale  of  incomes  and  properties.  .These  sudden  advances
are  inequitable  and  obviously  wasteful.  The  taxing  system  should
be  measured  in  percentages,  carefully  considered  curves  taking
the  place  of  the  awkward  irregular  stairs  which  constitute  the
present  rude  notion  of  graduation.

But  probably  a  government  bent  upon  a  scientific  and  produc-
tive application  of  the  graduation  policy  would  decide,  in  spite  of
authoritative  warnings  of  conservative  officials,  to  abandon '  collection


234  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

at  the  source  '  and  to  substitute  throughout  a  personal  collection
enforced  by  compulsory  declaration  of  all  incomes,  and  adequate
penalties  for  failure  to  comply.  Until  compulsory  declaration  is
enacted  it  is  impossible  for  the  state  to  possess  the  knowledge  which
will  enable  it  to  estimate  the  incidence  and  yield  of  any  graduated
income  tax  which  shall  aim  to  obtain  for  the  revenue  a  considerable
share  of  the  unearned  surplus  in  the  higher  grades  of  income.

§  4. — When  a  state  recognises  as  its  first  duty  that  of  collecting
from  the  industrial  system  the  social  income  which  at  present
passes  wastefully  to  individuals  who  have  not  earned  it,  it  will  apply
experimental  science  to  the  ascertainment  and  the  taking  of  the
income.  With  this  end  in  view  it  will  discard  all  forms  of  indirect
taxation  except  such  as  may  be  defended  on  other  than  purely
fiscal  grounds.

There  are,  however,  two  not  unimportant  grounds  for  main-
taining certain  forms  of  indirect  taxation.  Duties  and  excise  upon
such  articles  as  alcohol,  and  perhaps  tobacco,  are  defensible,  not
merely  on  the  ground  that  their  contribution  to  the  revenue  of  most
modem  states  is  so  considerable  as  to  render  their  withdrawal
obviously  impracticable,  but  because  the  regulation  of  the  consump-
tion of  alcohol  (and  possibly  of  certain  other  articles)  may  be  deemed
expedient  in  the  interests  of  social  order,  and  taxation  may  legiti-
mately be  utilised  in  such  cases  as  a  means  of  maintaining  social
order.

The  other  use  to  which  indirect  taxation  may  be  applied  is  to
redress  a  certain  inequality  of  incidence  in  the  application  of  our
main  instrument  of  taxing  policy,  the  graduated  income  tax.  Our
broad  taxing  principle  rested  on  the  assumption  that  '  unearned  '
elements  varied  directly  and  proportionately  with  the  size  of
income,  and  that  these  unearned  elements  could  equitably  be  taken
because  they  represent  income  which  would  not  be  expended  in
ways  conducing  to  the  increased  efficiency  and  productivity  of
their  owners.  But,  since  in  most  cases  direct  evidence  of  the  un-
earned character  of  such  elements  of  income  is  not  forthcoming,  we
have  seen  that  the  taxing  policy  based  upon  this  assumption  of  the
origin  of  income  may  be  usefully  qualified  by  taking  into  account
considerations  relating  to  the  actual  use  of  individual  incomes.
Mere  size  of  income  is  not  in  itself  conclusive  as  to  the  amount  or  the
proportion  of  unproductive  surplus  it  contains.  If  of  two  incomes
of  ;^iooo  a  year  one  is  owned  by  a  man  with  no  dependants,  while
the  other  goes  to  support  a  wife  and  six  children,  it  is  evident  that
the  amount  of  '  unproductive  surplus  '  differs  widely  in  the  two
cases.  But  the  size  of  a  family  is  only  one  factor  in  the  problem,  so
far  as  utilisation  of  income  for  purposes  of  efficiency  is  concerned.


SOCIALISM  AND  THE  SOCIAL  INCOME  235

The  age,  sex,  and  health  of  the  family,  the  nature  of  the  career  of  its
rising  members,  the  question  whether  the  mother  is  alive  or  her
place  taken  by  a  paid  housekeeper :  these  and  other  relevant
matters  might  be  taken  into  account.  Again,  the  nature  of  the
income  has  an  important  influence  upon  its  use  :  a  large  proportion
of  a  precarious  income  can  be  invested  so  as  to  maintain  in  the
future  the  efficiency  of  the  family,  while  a  safe  income  drawn
from  gilt-edged  securities  admits  no  such  '  productive  '  use  of  its
surplus.

If  the  taxable  '  surplus  '  inferred  from  size  of  income  were  to  be
subjected  to  such  direct  tests  of  use,  a  close  impartial  scrutiny  of
the  special  circumstances  of  each  family  would  be  necessary.  This
method  is  applied  in  Prussia,  where  the  local  assessors  take  into
consideration  for  purposes  of  abatement  not  only  the  size  and  age
of  the  family,  but  various  illnesses  or  other  accidents  affecting  the
expenditure  of  the  family.

If  the  difficulties  of  entrusting  to  local  assessors  a  task  of  so
much  delicacy  and  discretion  seemed  to  render  this  method  inapplic-
able in  Great  Britain,  the  same  end  might  be  attained  by  a  lower
scale  of  graduation  in  the  income  tax  fortified  by  duties  upon
luxuries.  In  other  words,  '  unproductive  surplus  '  might  be  partly
taxed  through  its  expenditure.  Motor  cars,  carriages,  yachts,  and
other  pleasure  vehicles,  race  horses  and  other  gambling  implements,
sporting  and  park  lands,  jewellery  and  other  articles  of  personal
display  might  be  subjected  to  special  taxes  as  indications  of  super-
fluity of  income.  In  one  or  other  of  these  two  methods,  by  abate-
ments based  on  evidence  of  productive  expenditure  or  by  taxes
upon  luxuries,  the  graduated  income  tax  should  be  supported  in
order  to  give  adequate  validity  to  its  main  assumption  that  unearned
surplus  varies  directly  with  the  size  of  incomes.

§  5. — One  question  relating  to  the  principles  and  policy  of  public
expenditure,  the  utilisation  of  the  social  income,  demands  recognition
here.  How  far  can  public  expenditure  be  rightly  dominated  by  con-
siderations of  mere  industrial  efficiency  ?  In  our  treatment  of  the
industrial  system  we  have  regarded  it  as  engaged  in  producing  goods
and  services  which,  rightly  distributed,  might  be  entirely  devoted
to  promoting  industrial  advancement.  Our  discussion  of  the  part
played  by  the  state  in  determining  distribution  has  also  assumed
a  distinctively  industrial  end,  the  state,  by  regulation  of  industry,
by  public  operation,  and  by  taxation,  intervening  to  secure  a  distri-
bution favourable  to  industrial  prosperity.  Whether  state  activity
was  directed  to  protect  labour  or  the  consumer,  to  work  certain
public  industries,  or  to  utilise  the  income  obtainable  from  these
latter  and  from  taxation,  the  assumption  has  been  that  this  state


236  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

activity  was  devoted  to  securing  such  improvements  in  society  as
would  be  reflected  in  enhanced  industrial  productiveness.

It  is,  however,  evident  that  this  assumption,  arising  naturally
enough  in  a  treatment  of  society  entirely  as  producer  and  distributor
of  economic  goods,  is  quite  unwarrantable.  An  individual  in  making
a  good  use  of  his  income  is  clearly  entitled  to  promote  other  ends
than  that  of  mere  industrial  efficiency.  A  portion  of  his  income
earned  by  industry  is  rightly  devoted  to  non-industrial  purposes,
to  satisfaction  of  tastes  and  desires  which,  though  contributing
indirectly  to  his  economic  efficiency  by  promoting  his  wider  personal
development  and  well-being,  cannot  be  valued  upon  this  economic
basis.  An  individual  is  entitled  to  spend  some  of  his  income  for
purposes  which  have  no  direct  or  measured  reference  to  his  present
or  future  economic  productivity.  The  same  truth  evidently  applies
to  the  state's  use  of  the  public  income.  Industrial  efficiency  and
progress  must  be  regarded  as  only  one  factor  in  that  social  efficiency
and  progress  for  the  furtherance  of  which  the  state  must  use  its
financial  as  its  other  resources.  In  our  final  chapter,  where  we
endeavour  to  indicate  the  place  of  industry  in  social  life  and  the
principles  of  the  relation  between  industrial  and  social  values,  we
shall  perceive  more  clearly  the  need  of  rectifying  the  dislocation
in  the  social  system  involved  in  any  sort  of  treatment  of  industry
separately  from  other  human  activities.  Such  dislocation  and
readjustment  are,  however,  essential  to  the  separatist  treatment
which  science  for  purposes  of  economy  must  adopt.  Attention  is
here  directed  to  them  in  order  to  provide  against  a  grave  misappre-
hension of  the  principles  and  policy  of  public  expenditure  which
might  arise  from  the  special  attention  devoted  here  to  the  industrial
functions  of  a  state.  The  question  of  the  right  adjustment  of
economic  and  non-economic  claims  upon  the  individual  and  the
social  income  is  one  of  great  delicacy  and  moment,  as  also  is  the
nature  of  the  reactions  between  these  economic  and  non-economic
uses  of  income.  But  the  solution  of  these  problems  clearly  belongs
to  a  wider  economy,  individual  and  political,  than  lies  within  the
compass  of  our  study  of  the  industrial  system.


CHAPTER  XV

TAXATION OF IMPORTS

§  I .  There  is  no  ground  for  a  separate  law  of  exchange  for  international  trade,
or  for  a  special  law  of  incidence  of  taxes  upon  imports.  Political  areas
are  not  economic  areas. — §  2.  Even  were  two  nations  isolated  so  far  as
direct  flow  of  capital  and  labour  is  concerned,  an  import  tax  will  lie  upon
surplus  incomes  in  the  exporting  or  the  importing  nations,  irrespective
of  political  area.  It  cannot  normally  be  used  merely  to  tax  the  foreigner.
— §  3.  Only  where  rent  of  land  or  other  surplus  is  a  normal  expense  of
production  can  any  part  of  an  import  duty  faU  on  the  foreigner.  The
proportion  of  a  wheat  tax  borne  by  the  producer  will  be  very  small.
— §  4.  Such  slight  contribution  by  the  foreigner  is  more  than  offset,
where  the  duty  is  protective,  by  the  injury  done  to  the  taxing  country
by  protection.  It  can  only  take  foreign  surplus  which  foreign  govern-
ments have  failed  to  take. — §  5.  Protective  duties  reduce  the  aggregate
wealth  not  merely  of  the  world  but  of  the  protecting  country.  They
also  reduce  the  share  of  this  reduced  aggregate  taken  by  the  workers
in  wages,  enhancing  the  proportion  of  '  surplus."

§  I. — The  widespread  belief  that  a  government  can  profitably  supple-
ment the  income  derived  from  imposing  taxes  on  the  unproductive
surplus  of  its  citizens  b}^  import  duties,  which  foreigners  shall  bear,
requires  some  separate  consideration.  Such  taxes  are  believed  to
produce  two  separate  gains  to  the  nation  imposing  them :  an  addition
to  the  national  income  by  making  the  foreigner  contribute,  and  a
protection  and  encouragement  to  home  industries  competing  with
foreigners,  which  makes  them  more  productive.

Now  since  we  have  not  directly  discussed  the  effect  of  putting
taxes  on  commodities,  we  will  approach  the  issue  first  by  asking
what,  in  conformity  with  our  general  distinction  between  costs
and  unproductive  surplus,  must  be  the  operation  of  such  a  tax
imposed  within  this  country,  and  then  proceed  to  inquire  what
difference,  if  any,  occurs  when  the  tax  is  an  import  duty  instead
of  a  domestic  tax.

If  you  put  an  ad  valorem  tax  upon  every  article  in  a  given  supply
the  tendency  of  that  tax  will  be  to  settle  on  the  '  surplus  '  profit  or
interest  of  the  normal  business,  if  the  latter  is  in  the  possession  of
any  such  surplus  ;  if  there  is  no  such  surplus  profit  or  interest,  but
the  normal  expense  of  production  includes  some  economic  rent  of
land  or  some  surplus  in  the  price  paid  for  any  other  factor  of

237


238  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

production,  the  tax,  in  part  at  any  rate,  will  fall  and  lie  on  that.  If,
for  instance,  a  tax  were  put  on  each  ton  of  coal  produced  in  this
country,  at  a  time  when  profits  of  the  mining  industry  were  at  a
minimum  necessary  to  remunerate  capital  invested  in  it,  the  tax
would  fall  in  large  part  on  royalties,  for  it  would  no  longer  pay  to
work  the  thinner  or  more  difficult  seams  unless  the  royalties  were
reduced,  and  the  actual  or  threatened  stoppage  of  such  working
would  bring  about  a  reduction  of  royalties  whenever  new  contracts
with  coal  owners  were  being  made.

Similarly,  if  a  small  tax  were  put  on  shoes  or  newspapers,  some
of  it  would  probably  be  shifted  on  to  royalties  paid  to  patentees  of
machinery  used  in  making  shoes  or  in  printing  newspapers.

But  if  a  tax  were  put  on  articles  produced  under  conditions
yielding  no  one  any  '  surplus,'  the  tax  must  cause  a  corresponding
rise  of  price  and  so  fall  on  the  '  consumer.'  As  we  saw,  however,
the  '  consumer  '  as  such  is  not  a  taxable  person,  and  a  tax  on  him
shifts  restlessly  until  it  settles  upon  the  incomes  of  those  classes  of
consumers  which  contain  some  elements  of  surplus  upon  which  the
tax  ultimately  rests.  This  process,  as  we  perceived,  was  slow,
wasteful,  and  imperfect  in  its  working,  but  it  followed  this  general
law.

It  is  sometimes  supposed  that  a  tax  will  operate  differently  if  it
is  imposed  on  goods  produced  abroad  and  imported  into  a  country,
and  an  elaborate  theory  of  incidence  of  taxation  is  built  upon  this
view.  It  is  urged  that  whereas  capital  and  labour  flow  pretty
freely  between  trades  within  the  same  country,  keeping  values  of
different  goods  produced  by  these  trades  fairly  proportionate  to
their  normal  expenses  of  production,  there  is  very  little  free  flow  of
capital  and  labour  between  different  countries,  so  that  goods
exchanging  between  these  countries  do  not  necessarily  tend  to
exchange  according  to  what  would  be  their  normal  expenses  if
they  were  produced  in  the  same  country.  Exchange  between  two
sorts  of  goods  produced  by  isolated  economic  groups  will,  it  is  said,
be  different  from  exchange  where  groups  are  not  so  isolated.

But  this  argument  for  a  special  law  of  taxation  as  applied  to
imports  is  doubly  defective.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true  that  there  is  such  free  fluidity
of  capital  and  labour  as  between  trade  and  trade  within  any
country  on  the  one  hand,  or  such  lack  of  fluidity  as  between  one
country  and  another  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  justify  setting  up  a
different  law  of  exchange  and  of  incidence  of  taxation  in  dealing
with  foreign  trade.

There  are  plenty  of  trades  and  professions  in  this  country  into
which  the  flow  of  capital,  ability,  and  labour  is  so  greatly  restricted


TAXATION  OF  IMPORTS  239

as  to  make  them  almost  isolated  economic  groups.  But  this  fact
only  affects  the  rates  of  exchange  between  the  goods  of  such  trades
and  those  of  other  less  restricted  trades,  in  so  far  as  the  isolation
precludes  effective  competition  among  the  members  of  such  groups
and  so  gives  a  monopoly  or  surplus  element  to  the  price  of  the  goods.

If  the  same  degree  of  effective  internal  competition  exists  in  two
trades,  the  fact  that  no  direct  transfer  of  capital  and  labour  is
possible  from  one  of  these  trades  to  the  other  does  not  affect  the
operation  of  the  ordinary  law  of  exchange.

Apply  this  reasoning  to  the  exchange  of  goods  between  groups  of '
producers  living  in  two  different  countries.  Why  should  the
existence  of  political  barriers  be  assumed  to  make  the  ordinary  law
of  exchange  inapplicable  ?  In  the  first  place  we  are  not  entitled  to
regard  political  areas  as  isolated  economic  areas.  The  modern
internationalisation  of  capital,  and  to  a  less  degree  of  labour  and
ability,  has  gone  far  to  break  down  the  isolation  between  most
civilised  political  areas.  A  common  world  investment  market  has
been  set  up  which  distributes  capital  for  many  productive  purposes
all  over  the  world,  making  for  a  common  level  of  real  interest,
while  whole  races  like  the  Jews,  Italians,  Swiss,  Chinese,  Malays,
form  an  international  fund  of  labour  with  a  similar  levelling  influence.
It  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  close  direct  connexions
between  all  or  even  most  countries  and  trades,  in  order  to  secure
such  a  degree  of  equilibrium  as  to  destroy  the  validity  of  the  argument
for  isolated  groups.  A  small  constantly  open  conduit  between  two
pools  of  water  suffices  to  keep  them  at  one  level,  and  a  small  con-
stant flow  of  capital  and  labour  as  between  the  industry  of  one
country  and  another  operates  similarly.

§  2. — But  even  were  this  not  the  case — were  we  justified  in
regarding  England,  France,  Germany,  and  America  as  isolated
self-sufficing  units,  in  a  sense  in  which  the  several  trades  within  each
country  are  not — there  would  still  be  no  justification  for  applying
a  different  law  of  exchange  in  the  two  cases  and  basing  on  it
a  different  law  of  incidence  of  taxation.

If  England  and  Germany  are  exchanging  with  one  another  two
sorts  of  articles,  A  and  B,  A  produced  in  Germany  only,  B  in  England,
under  terms  of  such  free  competition  as  prevail  in  the  respective
countries,  we  may  fairly  assume  that  their  selling  prices  correspond
to  normal  necessary  expenses  of  production  in  the  two  countries,
though  these  may  differ,  for  instance,  as  regard  rates  of  wages  or
of  interest.  If  they  do  so  correspond,  the  mere  fact  that  normal
wages  or  interest  differ  in  the  two  countries  does  not  warrant  the
application  of  a  theory  of  exchange  different  from  that  applied  to
commodities  exchanging  within  one of  the  countries,  in  trades,


240  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

where  wages  and  interest  are  the  same ;  still  less  does  it  warrant  the
supposition  that  a  tax  will  operate  differently  in  the  two  cases.

If  there  is  absolutely  free  competition  in  the  production  alike  of
A  and  B  in  their  respective  countries,  the  expenses  and  the  normal
selling  price  of  each  will  be  at  a  minimum,  and  if  England  put  a  tax
on  A  entering  England,  or  Germany  on  B  entering  Germany,  no
portion  of  such  tax  could  lie  upon  the  foreigner  :  if  no  portion  of
the  foreign  producers  were  making  more  than  a  minimum  profit,
the  importation  could  only  continue  at  a  price  which  virtually
made  the  importing  nation  bear  the  tax.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  foreign  goods  were  produced  under
conditions  of  monopoly  or  restricted  competition,  so  yielding  a
surplus  profit,  to  that  extent  an  import  tax  would  tend  to  settle  on
the  foreigner  and  to  be  paid  out  of  his  surplus.  We  could  possibly
make  the  Standard  Oil  Trust  pay  an  import  duty,  or  the  bulk  of  it,
on  oil,  or  De  Beers  an  import  duty  upon  diamonds  (were  it  not  for
facility  of  smuggling).

But  in  neither  event,  whether  the  industry  producing  the  articles
taxed  is  earning  a  surplus  or  not,  does  the  incidence  depend  on
whether  it  is  an  import  duty  on  foreign  goods  or  an  excise  on  home
produce. If  there  is  a  surplus  it  bears  it,  if  not,  the  tax  is  shifted.

Let  us,  however,  suppose  that  the  foreign  industry,  upon  whose
imports  a  tax  was  levied,  was  partly  subject  to  free  competition,
partly  not,  some  better  placed  or  equipped  businesses  earning
surplus,  others  only  covering  expenses — a  common  case.

The  foreigner  here  may  seem  to  pay  some  part  of  the  tax.  But
even  here  it  can  only  be  borne  by  such  businesses  as  were  earning
some  surplus,  or  only  for  a  short  period,  for  no  trade  can  long  survive
at  below  a  living  profit.  In  any  case  the  foreign  industry  would  be
damaged,  and  the  new  capital  and  labour  which  had  hitherto  flowed
into  it  would  go  into  other  trades  C  and  D,  which  must  be  considered
slightly  less  productive.  These  latter  trades  would  seem  to  grow
and  to  turn  out  an  increased  output,  while  the  trade  hit  by  our
import  duty  would  decline  in  size  and  output.  It  seems  at  first
sight  that,  if  these  other  German  trades  can  also  export  their  surplus
to  England,  they  would  now  have  a  larger  surplus  to  dispose  of  and
would  sell  it  to  us,  if  we  did  not  tax  it  also,  at  a  lower  price  than
formerly.  So  the  result  of  our  taxing  one  German  commodity  A
would  be  that,  though  we  took  a  smaller  quantity  of  it  at  a  higher
price,  we  made  it  up  by  getting  a  larger  quantity  of  C  and  D  at  a
lower  price.  If  we  take  account  also  of  the  contribution  made  to
our  national  exchequer  by  the  import  duties  paid  in  some  part  by
Germany  on  A  still  entering  our  country,  it  seems  to  some  that  we
may  have  shifted  the  balance  of  exchange  in  our  favour,  and  may


TAXATION  OF  IMPORTS  241

get  a  larger  aggregate  of  goods  from  Germany  in  proportion  to  what
we  send  her  than  before.  If  this  were  so,  it  might  justify  a  poHcy
of  import  duties.  But  if  we  look  closer  at  the  effect  upon  C  and  D
of  the  flow  of  capital  and  laboiij  liberated  from  A,  we  shall  see  that  the
reasoning  just  stated  is  fallacious.  In  the  first  case,  unless  C  and  D
were  previously  earning  surplus  profits  by  holding  up  prices  above
the  competitive  level,  or  were  so  inadequately  supplied  with  capital
and  labour  that  their  businesses  were  not  properly  equipped,  it  is
not  possible  to  admit  that  any  new  influx  of  capital  and  labour
could  enable  them  to  lower  prices  either  for  domestic  or  for  foreign
markets,  except  as  a  temporary  expedient.  If  C  and  D,  or  any  con-
siderable section  of  these  trades,  are  working  at  a  minimum  profit,
we  are  not  entitled  to  assume  that  more  capital  can  advantageously
flow  into  them,  so  as  to  lower  prices  in  the  Enghsh  market.

But  even  if  capital  and  labour,  expelled  from  A  by  the  English
import  duty,  could  flow  into  C  and  D,  stimulating  these  trades,  and
causing  them  to  put  larger  quantities  at  lower  prices  in  the  English
markets,  we  cannot  deduce  from  this  proceeding  any  net  gain  for
England.

For  the  capital  and  labour  now  flowing  into  C  and  D,  instead  of
into  A  as  formerly,  is  less  productively  employed,  and  the  new
product  in  goods  of  C  and  D  available  for  exportation  is  a  smaller
one  than  that  formerly  produced  in  A.  Though,  therefore,  there
will  be  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  C  and  D  entering  England  as
imports,  which  will  bring  down  the  price,  that  increase  will  be
smaller  than  the  decrease  in  the  importation  of  A,  and  the  rise  in
price  of  A  will  be  greater  than  the  fall  of  price  in  C  and  D.  By
forcing  some  German  capital  and  labour  from  a  naturally  more
productive  to  a  less  productive  employment,  we  cannot  bring  about
a  change  in  exchange,  as  between  England  and  Germany,  which
will  benefit  the  former  by  getting  a  larger  quantity  of  German
produce  than  before  for  the  same  quantity  of  English  produce.  On
the  contrary,  a  unit  of  our  export  B  which  formerly  went  out  to
Germany  in  exchange  for  A  will  now  buy  a  smaller  unit  of  C  and  D
than  formerly  of  A,  for  C  and  D  are  more  expensive  to  produce  than
A,  and  there  will  be  less  of  them  available  for  exchange.

Even  if  we  added  to  the  English  account  the  proceeds  of  the
tax  paid  on  the  portion  of  A,  if  any,  which  still  came  in,  setting
it  off  against  the  rise  of  price,  there  would  still  be  a  net  loss  to
England,  as  also  to  Germany  ;  for  instead  of  the  portion  of  A,
which  has  been  prevented  from  being  produced  and  exported  by
the  tax,  a  smaller  product  of  C  and  D  is  produced  and  exported.
There  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  a  policy  which  should  thus  lower
the  average  efficiency  of  capital  and  labour  in  Germany  could


242  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

produce  a  balance  of  trade  favourable  to  us  in  the  sense  that  it
enabled  a  unit  of  British  produce  to  buy  a  larger  German  product
than  before.  It  is  evident,  upon  the  contrary,  that  the  purchasing-
power  of  a  unit  of  British  product  over  German  goods  must  be
reduced.

So  far,  we  have  taken  the  case  of  a  tax  on  German  products
not  produced  in  this  country,  the  tax  being  imposed  primarily
for  revenue,  not  for  protection.

If  the  effect  of  putting  an  import  duty  on  A,  w^hen  A  is  only  pro-
duced in  Germany,  is  to  divert  some  German  capital  and  labour  into
less  productive  industries,  and  so  to  reduce  the  average  and  aggre-
gate productivity  of  German  industry,  what  will  be  the  effect
when  A  is  also  produced  in  England  ?  The  same  tax  which  drives
capital  and  labour  out  of  A  in  Germany  will  operate,  reversely,
in  England  to  call  in  capital  and  labour  from  other  trades  into  A.
Since  it  must  have  been  more  productively  employed  in  these
other  trades  before  it  was  artificially  diverted  into  A,  there  is
evidently  caused  a  damage  to  the  average  and  aggregate  pro-
ductivity of  English  capital  and  labour  corresponding  to  that  caused
in  Germany,  the  injury  being  shared  by  the  two  countries.  The
only  way  by  which  supporters  of  protective  tariff  can  evade  this
conclusion  is  by  questioning  one  of  the  premises,  viz.  the  assump-
tion that  there  is  a  natural  tendency  for  all  the  capital  and  labour
in  a  country  to  flow  into  its  most  productive  employment.  Pro-
tectionism lives  as  a  creed  by  the  implicit  or  explicit  denial  of  the
validity  of  this  assumption.  If  the  effect  of  England  taxing
imports  of  A  from  Germany  were  to  drive  some  German  capital
and  labour  from  A  into  equally  productive  emplo3^ment  in  C
and  D,  then  England,  by  substituting  cheaper  imports  of  C  and
D  for  dearer  imports  of  A,  would  sustain  no  loss  in  exchange,
while  our  national  exchequer  would  gain  the  import  duties  paid
on  A.

If,  again,  the  effect  of  protecting  by  tariff  an  English  production
of  A  were  to  draw  into  this  trade  some  capital  and  labour  from
trades  where  it  was  no  more  productively  employed,  or  even  to
give  emplo3^ment  to  capital  and  labour  which  otherwise  could
find  no  employment,  then  there  could  be  no  damage  to  our  national
productivity  and  might  be  some  gain.

Indeed,  so  far  as  the  beneficial  influence  of  a  tariff  is  concerned,
the  entire  claim  of  the  protectionist  is  seen  to  rest  on  one  of  two
contentions.

The  first  is  that,  for  some  reason  which  is  not  explained,  there
tends  to  exist  a  superfluous  amount  of  capital  and  labour  which
can  by  protection  be  brought  into  employment  in  protected  trades


TAXATION  OF  IMPORTS  243

without  diversion  irom  any  other  occupation.  The  second  is  that
the  natural  distribution  of  capital  and  labour,  directed  purely
by  considerations  of  immediate  individual  profit,  affords  no  sufficient
guarantee  for  the  proportionate  development  of  a  far-sighted
national  industry,  which  should  be  prepared  to  undergo  certain
immediate  sacrifices  for  distant  gains,  and  to  substitute  some  fuller
and  more  balanced  standard  of  public  welfare  for  the  presetit
profits  of  individual  traders.

The  '  infant  industry '  is  one  case  of  this  second  conten-
tion, which  is  at  once  a  criticism  of  the  laissez  /aire  assumption
that  it  is  socially  serviceable  for  the  course  of  trade  to  be  deter-
mined by  the  enlightened  self-interest  of  tradesmen,  and  an
assertion  that  the  state  can  and  will  make  a  better  disposition
of  the  productive  resources  of  the  nation  by  using  the  tariff  as  an
instrument.

§  3. — The  only  valid  case  for  import  duties  designed  to  tax  the
foreigner  is  where  the  duty  is  imposed  on  goods  produced  under
conditions  of  monopoly  or  restricted  competition  and  therefore
carrying  in  their  price  a  surplus  element  upon  which  the  tax  will
lie.  In  other  words,  it  is  a  method  by  which  the  national  exchequer
of  one  nation  can  tax  indirectly  certain  unearned  income  made
in  foreign  industries  and  enjoyed  by  foreigners.  If  the  British
Government  chose  to  put  a  moderate  tax  upon  paraffin  oil  coming
from  America,  it  is  likely  that  the  Standard  Oil  Company  would
not  find  it  profitable  to  restrict  its  importation  of  oil  into  this
country,  so  as  to  enable  it  to  shift  the  tax  on  to  the  British  consumer
by  means  of  an  enhanced  price.  ^

When,  as  is  the  case  in  agricultural  produce  and  in  certain
kinds  of  manufactured  goods,  rent  of  land  or  other  payment  for
natural  advantages  enters  into  normal  expenses  of  production,
and  thence  into  price,  an  ad  valorem  duty  imposed  upon  such
goods  when  imported  will  fall  in  some  degree  upon  the  producer.
This  is  the  slight  element  of  truth  in  the  contention  that  a  tax
upon  foreign  wheat  will  be  borne  by  the  foreigner.

First  take  the  hypothesis  that  a  country  entirely  dependent
upon  foreign  wheat  imposed  an  import  duty.  The  shifting
of  the  import  duty  which  the  importer  would  be  called  upon
to  pay  would  be  in  this  wise.  Suppose  the  price  of  wheat
paid  by  the  importer  prior  to the imposition  of the  tax  were

'  It  is  not  strictly  true  that  the  imposition  of  an  import  duty  could  have
no  effect  on  the  seUing  prices  of  a  monopoly.  Operating,  as  it  would,  directly
to  reduce  the  margin  of  net  profit  on  a  certain  part  of  the  sales,  it  might
cause  the  producer  either  to  increase  his  output  and  so  to  reduce  his  prices,  or
to  diminish  his  output  and  raise  his  prices.  But  there  will  be  no  normal
tendency  to  increase  selling  prices  and  so  to  shift  the  tax.

R  2


244  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

25s.  per  quarter,  the  miller  buying  this  same  wheat  at  27s.  6d.
and  leaving  to  the  importer  2s.  6d.  margin,  which  we  will  suppose
to  be  the  minimum  necessary  to  pay  him  his  wage  of  ability  and
interest  on  his  capital.  A  5s.  import  duty  is  now  imposed  on
wheat  which  the  importer  is  called  upon  to  pay.  He  cannot,  on
our  hypothesis,  bear  any  of  this  tax  himself,  and  must  either  throw
it  forward  on  to  the  miller,  who,  if  he  has  no  surplus  profit,  must
pass  it  on  to  the  consumer  in  raised  prices,  or  he  must  throw  it
back  upon  the  foreign  farmer  in  the  reduced  prices  he  pays  for
this  imported  wheat.  So  long  as  the  wheat  continues  to  come
in  as  fast  as  before  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  raise  the  price  to
the  miller.  The  first  effect,  therefore,  must  be  to  cause  importers
to  stop  buying  wheat  from  foreign  producers  at  the  pace  they
bought  before  ;  indeed,  they  will  obviously  refuse  to  enter  any
new  contract  to  pay  25s.  for  more  foreign  wheat.  The  demand
for  foreign  wheat  at  25s.  stopping,  while  the  supply  at  that  price
remains  as  before,  the  buying  price  must  fall.  But  must  the  price
fall  from  25s.  to  20s.,  so  that  the  price  to  the  miller  is  27s.  6d.  as
before,  and  the  same  margin,  2s.  6d.,  remains  to  the  importer  ?  Not
so,  for  as  soon  as  the  price  paid  by  the  importer  to  the  foreign
producer  begins  to  fall  below  25s.  some  foreign  wheat  will  seek
other  markets,  some  foreign  wheat  lands  will  be  diverted  into  other
uses,  and  some  poor  wheat  land  will  cease  to  be  used  at  all ;  thus
the  supply  of  foreign  wheat  for  the  importers  to  buy  will  begin  to
shrink.  As  the  supply  of  foreign  wheat  shrinks,  owing  to  importers
offering  lower  prices,  importers  will  find  themselves  able  to  raise
their  prices  to  the  miller,  who  will  have  to  replenish  his  stock  from
a  reduced  supply  ;  the  miller  having  to  pay  a  higher  price  must
buy  less,  unless  he  can  get  bakers  and  consumers  to  pay  a  higher
price  and  buy  the  same  amount  as  before.  This  he  cannot  do,
for  if  he  raises  his  prices  to  consumers  they  will  buy  somewhat
less.  So  he,  the  miller,  must  buy  a  smaller  quantity  at  a  higher
price  from  the  importer.  Our  importer  thus  recoups  himself  for
his  5s.  duty,  partly  out  of  higher  prices  paid  on  a  smaller  quantity
of  sales  by  the  miller,  partly  by  a  lower  price  he  pays  for  a  smaller
quantity  of  wheat  to  the  foreign  farmer.  It  is  quite  evident
that  some  of  the  tax  must  be  shifted  each  way,  for  to  suppose
that  the  foreigner  pays  nothing  implies  that  the  same  amount  of
foreign  wheat  flows  in  as  before,  and  this  implies  that  the  con-
sumer will  buy  the  same  quantity  as  before,  though  he  has  to
pay  the  extra  price  of  5s.,  a  denial  that  there  is  any  elasticity  in
the  demand  for  wheat.  It  is  equally  evident  that  the  foreigner
cannot  be  made  to  bear  all  the  tax,  for  this  would  imply  that  all
the foreign  producers  were  growing  wheat on such favourable


TAXATION  OF  IMPORTS  245

terms  as  to  obtain  a  surplus  of  not  less  than  5s.  per  quarter  on
which  a  tax  would  lie.

The  apportionment  of  the  5s.  tax  between  consumer  and
producer  would  evidently  depend  upon  the  relative  elasticity  of
demand  in  the  consumer  and  of  supply  in  the  producer.  The
fact  that  bread  is  the  prime  essential  in  the  standard  of  consump-
tion of  all  classes  in  the  nation  will  mean  that  the  elasticity  of
demand  is  very  slight,  while  the  existence  of  a  world  market  for
wheat  and  the  adaptability  of  most  wheat  land  for  other  agricul-
tural purposes  will  mean  that  the  elasticity  of  supply  is  very  great.
In  such  circumstances,  nearly  all  the  tax  will  be  forced  on  to  the
consumer,  the  producer  paying  comparatively  little.

Of  course,  the  distribution  of  such  a  tax  would  be  affected  by
the  question  whether  the  taxing  nation  were  entirely  dependent
upon  the  foreign  supply.  If  it  were  not  so  dependent,  and  home-
grown and  colonial  wheat  were  left  untaxed,  the  5s.  duty  being
confined  to  foreign  wheat,  the  effect  would  be  slightly  to  increase
the  proportion  of  the  tax  borne  by  the  foreigner.  For  while  the
fall  in  price  paid  by  importers  of  foreign  wheat  as  the  first  effect
of  the  duty  was  operating  in  driving  foreign  wheat  into  other
markets,  and  foreign  wheat  land  into  other  uses,  some  compensation
for  this  result  would  be  obtained  from  the  effect  of  higher  selling
prices  in  this  country  in  putting  more  home  and  colonial  land  into
wheat  growing.  This  increase  of  the  proportion  of  the  aggregate
supply  of  wheat  exempt  from  the  tax  must  evidently  moderate  the
influence  of  the  tax  to  raise  prices  to  the  consumer,  and  to  that
extent  increase  the  proportion  borne  by  the  foreigner.

But  just  in  proportion  as  this  substitute  of  non-taxed  home  and
colonial  for  taxed  foreign  wheat  actually  took  place;  the  yield  of
the  tax  would  be  diminished,  so  that,  though  the  foreigner  might
have  to  bear  a  slightly  larger  proportion  of  the  tax  than  if  he  were
the  sole  source  of  supply,  the  actual  amount  of  taxation  got  from
him  will  be  even  less.

The  possibility  of  getting  anything  out  of  the  foreign  producer
by  import  duties  is  thus  seen  to  be  confined  to  cases  where  an  import
duty  finds  some  monopoly  or  other  surplus  in  the  foreign  price
which  it  can  tax  as  such  without  appreciably  affecting  the  supply.
If  there  were  foreign  wheat  lands  which  had  no  other  positive  use
except  to  supply  wheat  for  the  English  market,  a  special  duty  on
this  wheat  might  be  made  to  some  considerable  extent  to  be  paid
by  the  foreign  farmers.  For  some  of  the  tax  would  settle  upon  rent
and  lie  there.  But  the  existence  of  a  world  market  for  wheat
precludes  this  operation.

In  the  case  of  foreign  manufactured  goods  imported  into  a


246  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

country,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  appreciable  part  of
an  import  duty  can  be  shifted  on  to  the  foreign  producers,  except
in  the  case  of  goods  made  by  trusts  or  other  monopolies,  earning
an  excessive  rate  of  profit  by  charging  non-competitive  prices.
Under  normal  competitive  conditions  of  manufacturing  industry,
the  capital  and  labour  in  the  trade  will  be  disposed  in  businesses
which  are  earning  minimum  rates  of  interest  and  profit :  they
cannot  bear  a  tax,  and  they  cannot  raise  their  prices,  for  higher
prices  w'ould  mean  reduced  output,  and  they  cannot  reduce  their
output  without  increasing  their  normal  expenses  of  production
and  so  probably  reducing  their  margin  of  profit  or,  if  not  the  margin,
their  aggregate  net  profit.

§  4. — This  somewhat  elaborate  argument  has  been  necessary  in
order  to  enforce  the  simple  lesson  that  the  power  to  tax  the
foreigner  is  strictly  limited  by  the  ability  to  shift  a  duty,  first  paid
at  our  ports  by  our  importers,  on  to  surplus  elements  in  foreign
incomes.

Where  an  import  duty  can  be  got  on  to  such  foreign  surpluses
it  will  lie.  But,  of  course,  a  tax  on  the  price  of  commodities  is  a  far
clumsier  and  less  effective  way  of  taking  a  surplus  than  the  direct
income  tax  imposed  on  surpluses  within  our  national  area,  and
always  involves  some  repercussion  that  is  damaging  to  the  people
of  the  taxing  country.

Moreover,  it  can  only  be  got  at  all  upon  the  supposition  that
foreign  governments  do  not  understand,  or  at  any  rate  do  not
exercise,  their  own  taxing  powers  in  their  own  interests.

If  Germany,  America,  or  any  other  nation  from  which  we  receive
imports,  leaves  untaxed  surplus  incomes  derived  from  industries
engaged  in  producing  those  goods,  it  is  possible  for  our  government
by  means  of  import  duties  to  attach  some  small  portion  of  this
foreign  surplus.  But  if  we  suppose,  as  is  in  fact  the  case,  that  most
foreign  governments  are  moving  in  the  same  direction  as  ourselves,
and  are  trying,  either  by  public  operation  of  monopolies,  or  by
taxation,  to  secure  for  their  use  the  unearned  elements  of  income
within  their  nation,  the  futility  of  using  import  duties  as  a  source  of
revenue  becomes  apparent.  For  direct  taxation  of  net  unearned
income  by  the  government  of  the  country  within  which  these
incomes  emerge  is  of  necessity  a  far  more  potent  method  of  attaining
its  end  than  import  duties  laid  by  a  foreign  government  upon  a
portion  of  the  goods  which  yield  this  income.

But  though  it  is  thus  in  theory,  and  sometimes  in  practice,
possible  for  a  nation  by  means  of  import  duties  to  get  hold  of  some
elements  of  surplus  income  in  a  foreign  nation,  it  would  be  profit-
able to  use  this  power  only  in  cases  where  the  import  duties  were


TAXATION  OF  IMPORTS  247

not  protective.  For  if,  as  in  the  case  of  a  tax  on  foreign  wheat,
the  tax  were  designed  chiefly  to  stimulate  the  production  of  domestic
or  colonial  wheat,  whatever  income  could  be  got  by  taxing  the
foreigner  must  be  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  damage
inflicted  on  the  aggregate  real  income  of  the  taxing  nation.  For
this  damage  is  not,  as  seems  at  first,  confined  to  the  rise  of  wheat
prices  paid  by  the  consumer  upon  the  whole  of  his  wheat  supply,
a  rise  which  it  is  the  first  object  of  a  protective  or  a  preferential  tax
to  bring  about.  The  damage  inflicted  through  the  effect  of  this
protection  upon  other  trades  may  be  even  more  serious.  For  if
a  tax  on  foreign  wheat,  raising  prices,  makes  wheat  growing  more
profitable  in  the  taxing  country,  capital  and  labour  will  be  diverted
from  other  industries  into  agriculture,  the  output  of  these  other
industries  will  be  diminished,  prices  of  their  products  will  rise  in
the  home  market,  and  their  export  trade  will  also  suffer.  All  these
consequences  are  necessarily  involved  in  a  fiscal  interference  with
the  course  of  industry  which  has  the  effect  of  causing  capital  and
labour  to  be  engaged  in  intrinsically  less  productive  channels
than  they  would  naturally  have  taken.  These  injuries  would  be
ill  compensated  by  any  precarious  income  obtained  by  a  protective
duty  from  such  foreign  producers  as  were  in  enjoyment  of  a  '  surplus '
income  which  their  own  government  had  failed  to  tax.

The  broader  injuries  inflicted  by  import  duties  are  measured  by
their  effect  in  impairing  division  of  labour  and  local  specialisation
of  industry  throughout  the  industrial  system  of  the  world.  Except
in  the  rare  case  when  an  import  duty  falls  upon  a  producer's  surplus
produced  under  monopoly,  it  must  always  damage  the  aggregate
productivity  of  the  nation  imposing  it,  by  diverting  productive
power  from  a  naturally  more  productive  into  a  naturally  less  pro-
ductive industry,  an  effect  which  again  reacts  detrimentally,  through
exchange,  upon  the  aggregate  wealth  of  the  foreign  country,  as
indeed  of  all  other  foreign  countries  with  which  the  taxing  country
is  in  commercial  intercourse.

It  is  thus  manifest  that  not  merely  do  protective  duties  act  so
as  to  reduce  the  aggregate  of  world  wealth,  by  impairing  the  co-
operative action  of  the  whole  industrial  system,  but  they  operate
so  as  to  reduce  the  aggregate  real  income  of  the  taxing  country.
For  the  reasoning  which  is  adduced  to  show  that,  though  the  aggre-
gate of  world  wealth  is  lessened  by  a  protective  tariff,  the  protective
country  itself  may  be  a  gainer,  is  quite  invalid.  The  protecting
country  must  always  suffer  in  two  ways  ;  first,  by  impairing  the
aggregate  productivity  of  its  internal  resources  through  employing
some  of  them  less  productively  than  it  would  otherwise  have  done  ;
secondly,  by  reducing  the  amount  of  foreign  goods  it  will  get  by


248  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

process  of  exchange.  The  nearest  the  protectionist  ever  comes  to
making  a  case  is  where  he  can  show,  as  he  sometimes  can,  that  the
injury  his  tariff  inflicts  upon  some  foreign  nation  is  greater  than
that  which  it  inflicts  upon  his  own.

But  there  remains  another  way  in  which  a  protective  tariff
affects  injuriously  the  industrial  system.  Not  merely  does  it  cause
a  reduction  in  the  aggregate  product,  both  of  the  system  as  a  whole
and  of  the  nation  imposing  the  tariff,  it  damages  the  distribution
of  wealth  within  the  nation,  and  so  the  efficiency  of  national  pro-
duction, by  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  reduced  total  product
which  goes  as  '  surplus  '  to  the  owners  of  scarce  factors  of  produc-
tion. The  practical  politician  surmises  this  to  be  the  case  by  the
energy  and  persistence  with  which  rent  and  profit  receivers  advo-
cate protection  :  though  the  nation  loses,  they  may  stand  to  gain.
Import  duties  upon  foreign  agricultural  produce  raising  the  price  of
domestic  produce,  raise  rent,  the  price  of  the  scarce  factor  of
production,  land.

Similarly,  manufacturers  who,  by  a  tariff  upon  imports  which
compete  with  their  goods  in  the  home  market,  can  secure  the
market  for  themselves,  and  by  means  of  syndicates  or  trade
agreements  can  muzzle  competition,  will  be  able  to  sell  their  goods
at  prices  which  give  them  an  excessive  margin  of  profit.

The  prime  object  of  protection  is  to  raise  prices,  and  the  benefit
of  the  rise  of  prices  is  distributed  among  the  owners  of  the  factors
of  production  in  proportion  to  their  economic  strength,  which
normally  means  that  it  passes  as  '  surplus  '  to  the  owners  of  land,  or
capital,  or  ability.  Labour  is  certainly  the  loser,  obtaining  a  smaller
proportion  of  a  reduced  national  product.  If  in  some  instances
the  workers  in  highly  protected  trades  appear  to  benefit  in  higher
money  wages,  most  or  all  of  this  benefit  is  lost  in  higher  prices  paid
on  other  goods  in  a  protected  country,  while  the  workers  in  un-
protected or  less  protected  trades  are  unqualified  sufferers  from  the
tariff.  This  damage  to  the  real  wages  of  the  workers,  by  reducing
the  proportion  of  the  reduced  national  dividend  which  goes  as  pay-
ment for  labour,  is  probably  the  most  serious  single  injury  wrought
by  a  protective  system,  because  it  reacts  by  impairing  the
progressive  efficiency  of  labour,  and  thus  retards  the  growth  of  the
productive  power  of  the  industrial  system.


CHAPTER XVI

MONEY AND FINANCE


§  I.  All  other  uses  of  money  are  subsidiary  to  its  use  as  medium  of  exchange.
Everything  with  currency  is  money.  Government  usually  maintains  a
standard  unit  of  money. — §  2.  Most  currency  is  paper,  made  by  Govern-
ment, as  notes,  or  by  private  enterprise,  as  cheques  and  bills.  A  cheque
is  the  joint  product  of  an  individual  and  a  bank. — §  3.  Credit  in  the  shape
of  bill-discounts  and  bank  loans  is  based  upon  vendible  property  of  all
sorts  with  a  gold  guarantee  against  undue  shrinkage  or  collapse  of  the
property  basis — §  4.  The  tendency  of  modern  industry  is  to  use  all
assets,  material  and  immaterial,  as  a  basis  of  credit-money.  Money
based  on  fictitious  capital  thus  becomes  a  dangerous  element  of  currency.

II

§  I.  Governments,  banks,  and  money-lenders  are  the  only  considerable
'  owners  '  of  money  :  others  '  hire  '  its  use  from  them,  paying  interest
or  discount,  directly  or  indirectly. — §  2.  An  increase  or  decrease  of  gold
supply  has  no  regular  or  proportionate  effect  on  volume  of  currency  or
on  prices.  Such  effect  as  gold  exercises  is  confined  to  the  stimulation  of
demand  for  commodities. — §  3.  Quantity  of  currency  varies  with  the
work  of  conveyance  of  property  to  be  done.  Currency  rests  ulti-
mately not  on  gold  but  on  general  wealth  realisable  by  taxation,  though
some  gold  is,  under  existing  circumstances,  essential  to  maintain  confi-
dence.


§  I. — In  tracing  the  operation  of  the  industrial  system  we  saw  how
money  circulated  through  this  system  as  a  common  universal  fluid,
acting  at  each  point  in  the  processes  of  production  as  a  measured
stimulus  to  the  owner  of  each  factor  of  production  to  apply  his  labour,
capital,  ability,  or  land  in  special  productive  arts.  All  income,  as
we  saw,  consisted  of  these  payments,  and  by  their  means  the  dis-
tribution of  the  industrial  product  is  effected.  Attendant  upon  each
industrial  act  is  a  financial  or  monetary  act,  payment  which  is  at  once
a  register  and  a  motive  to  the  industrial  act.  So  we  find  in  finance,
or  monetary  activity,  a  complete  replica  of  the  productive  industry
which  shapes  and  moves  all  forms  of  saleable  commodities.

Whereas  each  industrial  action  differs  in  some  regard  from  every
other,  being  applied  to  different  materials,  in  a  different  way,  or  in
different  circumstances  by  different  persons,  the  action  of  money  is

249


250  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

almost  absolutely  uniform,  it  is  the  same  sort  of  oil  flowing  to
lubricate  and  stimulate  all  parts  of  the  machine.

This  fluid  is,  however,  itself  a  part  of  the  industrial  system  ;  it
is  produced  by  various  business  processes  which  employ  capital,
labour,  and  ability,  and  it  is  bought  and  sold  like  other  goods  and
services.  But  its  nature,  the  methods  of  its  production,  and  the
terms  for  the  sale  of  its  use  are  unique,  and  require  separate
consideration.

What  property  or  quality  is  it  that  enables  money  to  evoke
industrial  energy  wherever  it  is  applied,  constituting  it  a  universal
motive  ?  Industrial  man  is  willing  to  give  out  industrial  energy  for
money,  because  money  is  the  most  convenient  instrument  by  which
he  can  convert  this  energy,  or  the  single  sort  of  product  that  it
yields,  into  the  various  other  sorts  of  products  that  he  wants.

Money  acts  primarily  as  a  medium  of  exchange.

Money  is  not  essential  to  all  industry.  In  a  self-sufficing
communist  family  or  group  there  would  be  no  machinery  of  exchange
required.  Even  where  there  is  exchange,  it  can  be  carried  on  by
barter,  for  after  all  every  man  who  has  superfluous  goods  of  some
particular  kind  desires  to  exchange  them  eventually  for  other
particular  goods  of  other  kinds,  and  if  he  can  find  a  man  who  has
these  spare  goods  and  who  wants  the  sort  of  spare  goods  he  possesses
at  the  same  time,  they  can  do  business.

It  is  consideration  of  the  defects  of  barter  that  brings  out  the
virtues  of  money.  In  barter  you  may  have  to  go  far  to  seek  your
man  who  has  what  you  want  and  wants  what  you  have  :  you  may
want  nothing  now  but  something  in  the  future,  in  which  case  simple
barter  fails  ;  if  you  meet  your  man  there  is  no  easy,  peaceful  way  of
settling  how  much  of  your  superfluous  goods  should  go  against  a
given  quantity  of  his.

If,  therefore,  anything  can  be  found  which  everybody  wants  for
his  personal  use  all  the  time,  or  which  many  people  want,  which  will
keep,  and  which  is  fairly  uniform  and  divisible,  it  will  evidently  save
trouble  for  any  one  who  has  superfluous  goods  of  any  sort  to  let
them  go  in  exchange  for  this,  and  to  use  this  to  get  the  several  sorts
of  other  goods  he  wants.  So  in  tea,  tobacco,  corn,  or  iron  bars  he
can  find  a  money  which  acts  as  an  effective  medium  of  exchange.
If  it  satisfies  a  general  want  of  an  equable  and  lasting  character,  and
is  enduring,  portable,  divisible,  and  easily  recognisable,  it  will  serve
for  money,  and  the  best  money  is  that  which  has  the  best  assemblage
of  these  qualities.  All  of  what  are  called  the  other  uses  of  money
(i)  as  a  standard  of  value,  (2)  as  a  store  of  value,  (3)  as  a  security
for  future  payment,  are  subsidiary  and  supplementary  to  the  service
of  money  as  a  medium  of  exchange. The  owner  of  superfluous  goods


MONEY  AND  FINANCE  251

will  take  money  for  them  because  he  is  convinced  that  he  can  get,
now  or  in  the  future,  an  approximately  known  quantity  of  any  other
sort  of  goods  he  wants.  Anything  that  will  give  him  this  assurance
or  faith  will  act  as  currency,  and  is  rightly  classed  as  money.

Though  intrinsic  utility,  widely  recognised,  is  in  most  primitive
societies  an  indispensable  property  of  money,  this  is  by  no  means
always  the  case,  and  in  modern  civilised  communities  a  large  part  of
the  medium  often  consists  of  inconvertible  notes  or  tokens,  or  of
coins  whose  intrinsic  utility  is  below  their  purchasing  power.

The  part  which  government  pla5's  in  creating,  regulating,  and
maintaining  currency  is  peculiar.  The  practice  of  taxation  and  of
tribute  by  rulers  of  large  domains  first  gave  vogue  to  coined  money.
Coinage  was  designed  as  a  certificate  of  weight  and  fineness  of  the
metals  to  which  it  was  applied  :  the  stamp  operated  '  to  save  every
man  the  trouble  of  carrying  about  with  him  a  bottle  of  acid  and  a
pair  of  scales.'  Government  has  now  come  in  most  countries  to
claim  a  monopoly  of  the  issue  of  coinage,  fixing  a  standard  unit  of
value — a  certain  quantity  of  gold  or  silver  or  other  substance — and
issuing  coins  which  are  a  fixed  fraction  or  multiple  of  the  standard.
In  England  the  sovereign,  containing  123 '27447  grains  of  gold,  is
the  standard.  A  shilling  gives  the  right  (up  to  40s.)  to  demand  gold
to  the  extent  of  one-twentieth  of  the  gold  in  a  sovereign,  though
the  actual  exchange  value  of  the  silver  in  a  shilling,  as  against  the
gold  in  a  sovereign,  is  about  30  per  cent,  below  one-twentieth.  A
shilling  is  thus,  to  the  extent  of  30  per  cent.,  a  token  coin  :  a  penny
is  the  same  to  the  extent  of  about  75  per  cent.  Tokens  hold  value
and  operate  in  currency  because  law  or  custom,  or  both,  enable  them
to  exchange  freely  for  standard  coins.  Government  not  only  stan-
dardises and  issues  these  forms  of  money,  but  compels  individual
sellers  to  accept  them,  gold  without  limit,  silver  up  to  40s.,  copper
up  to  I2d.  So  it  creates  and  puts  in  currency  money  which  is  legal
tender.  This  legality  or  government  authority  has  power  to  support
the  token  value  of  the  shilling  and  the  penny.  But  if  silver  were
made  legal  tender  up  to  any  sum  equally  with  gold  this  inflated  value
of  silver  could  not  be  retained.  One  of  two  things  must  happen.  If
any  holder  of  silver  can  demand  that  it  be  coined  into  shillings  and
that  shillings  be  legal  tender  to  an  unlimited  extent  at  the  ratio  of
20  to  I  in  sovereigns,  a  boom  in  silver  mining  would  occur,  and  silver
miners  would  bring  great  quantities  of  silver  to  be  minted  ;  a
corresponding  slump  would  take  place  in  gold  mining.  Every
bullion  dealer,  money  changer,  &c.,  would  cause  gold  coins  to  be
melted  down  and  to  be  exchanged  as  a  commodity  against  silver
which  he  would  take  to  the  mint  and  get  coined,  for  he  could  get
more  shillings  for  his  sovereigns  in  this  indirect  manner  than  by


252  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

passing  sovereigns  directly  against  shillings.  No  one,  in  fact,  would
pay  gold  for  any  debt  when,  by  exchanging  his  gold  into  silver,  he
could  pay  more  easily.  So  it  would  appear  that  gold  would  pass
out  of  circulation,  the  cheaper  driving  out  the  dearer  sort  of  money
in  accordance  with  what  is  known  as  Gresham's  Law.

Whether  this  would  actually  happen  would  depend  upon  the
condition  of  the  art  of  mining  in  gold  and  silver  respectively.  If  the
government  said  that  a  sovereign  should  exchange  against  twenty
shillings,  though  the  cost  of  producing  the  gold  of  one  sovereign  was
equal  to  that  of  producing  twenty-seven  shillings,  it  is  evident  that
the  process  of  expulsion  of  gold  from  use  would  begin.  Supposing
that  the  increasing  output  of  silver  which  now  took  place  involved
no  increased  expense  of  production,  improved  machinery  and  treat-
ment compensating  the  cost  of  recourse  to  worse  mines  or  worse
seams,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  net  expense  of  producing  the
smaller  output  of  gold  by  using  only  richer  mines  was  not  smaller
than  before,  the  full,  continued  operation  of  Gresham's  Law  would
take  place.  But  if  the  so-called  law  of  diminishing  returns  were
operative  in  the  mining  industry  in  such  wise  that  the  increased
output  of  silver  brought  into  use  mines  or  seams  which  were  more
expensive  to  work,  while  the  reduced  output  of  gold  correspondingly
diminished  the  normal  expense  of  producing  gold,  the  expulsion  of
gold  by  silver  for  money  might  be  checked  by  altering  the  ratio  of
industrial  production  so  as  to  coincide  with  the  legal  ratio,  at  which
point  no  further  disturbance  would  take  place.  Gold  mining  would
shrink,  silver  mining  expand,  until  the  expense  of  producing  a  gold
sovereign  was  equal  to  that  of  producing  twenty-seven  shillings
instead  of  twenty  as  before.

§  2. — But  most  of  the  buying  and  selling  is  done  by  money  which
is  not  itself  legal  tender,  and  is  not  even  issued  or  authorised  by
government.

Among  the  various  forms  of  paper  or  representative  money
in  this  country  only  Bank  of  England  notes  are  legal  tender  ;  but
all  alike  purport  to  entitle  their  holders  to  demand  payment  in
some  legal  tender.  The  great  majority  of  the  payments  made
in  the  operation  of  the  industrial  system  are  made  in  paper  not
in  coin.  Only  two  large  departments  of  payments  are  made
chiefly  by  coin,  the  payment  of  wages  of  labour  and  retail  purchases,
though  an  increasing  proportion  of  the  latter  are  now  paid  by
cheques  or  money  orders.  Probably  80  per  cent,  of  the  work  of
money  in  this  country  is  done  by  paper  ;  in  the  greater  part
of  the  United  States  none  but  small  coins  are  used  at  all.

When  Bank  of  England  notes,  however,  are  used,  or  other
notes  against  which  an  equivalent  amount  of  standard  money  must


MONEY AND  FINANCE  253

be  kept,  the  work  of  currency  done  by  this  paper  may  be  attributed
to  the  metal  money.

The  total  work  of  finance,  however,  done  by  all  sorts  of  govern-
mental or  publicly  made  money  is  much  smaller  than  that  done
by  the  different  forms  of  private-adventure  currency.  Though
all  cheques,  bills,  and  other  paper  with  w^hich  most  of  our  buying
and  selling  is  conducted  purport  to  enable  the  holder  to  get  legal
tender,  the  difference  between  the  two  is  vital.  For  in  the  one
case  the  guarantee  is  that  of  government,  in  the  other  case  that
of  some  private  person  or  company  of  persons.

The  difference  in  the  degree  of  certainty,  confidence,  or  credit
attaching  respectively  to  public  and  private  forms  of  money,
and  to  various  forms  of  private  money,  is  reflected  in  the  area
and  duration  of  their  currency.  Whereas  public  money,  whether
coins  or  notes,  in  civilised  countries  under  normal  conditions,  is
current  throughout  the  whole  political  area  at  its  legal  value  and
remains  in  currency  until  its  material  form  is  seriously  impaired
by  use,  private  money  is  more  restricted  in  its  circulation.

Though  the  cheques  and  bills  by  which  most  large  purchases
are  made  are  often  called  money  substitutes,  as  distinct  from
money,  no  advantage  is  derived  from  this  distinction.  The  essence
of  money  is  that  it  forms  a  medium  of  exchange,  and  anything
that  does  this  work  should  rank  as  money.  The  relation  of  cheques
and  bills  to  the  legal  tender  money  which  is  held  to  support  them
and  to  enable  them  to  circulate  is  an  important  question,  but  it
does  not  affect  the  fact  that  these  instruments  perform  the  function
of  money.  They  differ  in  efficacy  from  legal  tender  money  in  the
fact  that  they  have  a  shorter  and  a  more  restricted  currency  ;  after
serving  as  a  medium  of  exchange  once  or  a  small  number  of  times
they  are  withdrawn  and  disappear.  This  restricted  currency  is  a
register  of  the  fact  that  such  money  conveys  no  general  confidence
that  its  holder  will  be  able  to  convert  it  into  legal  tender  when  he
wants,  or  to  use  it  freely  for  acts  of  purchase.  Public  money  has
free  currency,  because  law  makes  its  acceptance  obligatory  in  all
purchases  or  payments  of  debts  where  no  special  mode  of  payment
is  contracted  for,  and  usage  has  made  unquestioned  acceptance
universal.  Private  money  carries  no  guarantee  of  continued
purchasing  power  other  than  the  promise  of  some  private  person
or  company  of  unknown  solvency  to  convert  it,  on  demand  or  at
some  stated  time,  into  legal  tender.  This  is  made  clear  by
consideration  of  the  origin  of  all  forms  of  private  money.

A  cheque  is  a  form  of  money  made  by  a  private  individual
who  has  deposited  gold  (or  an  order  on  gold)  in  a  bank,  or  who
has  been  granted  by  the  bank  a  right  to  demand  a  certain  quantity


254  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  gold  on  account  of  a  deposit  of  securities.  The  bank  has  under-
taken to  pay  gold  up  to  the  amount  of  the  individual  deposit  to
any  one  to  whom  the  depositor  gives  an  order.  Now,  if  everybody
knew  three  things  for  certain,  first,  that  the  person  whose  name
signed  or  endorsed  a  cheque  had  an  account  at  the  bank  on  which
the  cheque  was  drawn,  secondly,  that  the  account  would  not  be
overdrawn  when  the  cheque  was  presented,  thirdly,  that  the  bank
itself  would  be  able  and  willing  to  pay  legal  tender,  sach  a  cheque
would  command  the  same  confidence  as  legal  tender  itself,  and  if
drawn  for  a  round  sum  would  circulate  with  the  same  freedom.
But  none  of  these  conditions  attaches  to  a  cheque  ;  the  person
whose  signature  appears  on  the  cheque  may  not  in  fact  have  any
account  at  the  bank ;  if  he  has,  that  account  may  be  overdrawn,
and  there  remains  the  chance  that  the  bank  itself  may  not  have
the  money  wherewith  to  pay.  It  is  evident  that  no  one  will  take
such  '  money  '  for  goods  unless  he  thinks  he  has  some  special  know-
ledge of  the  character  and  financial  circumstances  of  the  drawer
and  of  the  bank,  or  that  he  can  recover  the  goods  or  compel  valid
payment  in  case  the  cheque  is  not  cashed.

The  cheque,  then,  as  an  instrument  of  currency,  is  the  joint
production  of  an  individual  and  a  bank.  Though  the  drawer  is
formally  the  person  who  brings  into  existence  the  particular  cheque,
the  cheque  system  must  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  the  banking
industry.  In  effect,  a  cheque  is  an  undertaking  of  a  bank  to  pay
gold  on  demand  up  to  the  amount  of  a  deposit.  Since  no  bank
keeps  more  than  a  small  proportion  of  the  legal  tender  deposited
with  it,  to  pay  cheques  presented  at  the  counter  or  to  meet  its
balance  at  the  Clearing  House,  it  is  evident  that  if  all  persons
entitled  to  demand  repayments  presented  their  claims  simul-
taneously, they  could  not  get  gold.  Banks  do  not  keep  this
money  in  safes  to  meet  cheques  that  might  be  drawn  upon  it.

The  depositors  who  own  this  money  do  not  want  to  draw  any
of  it  out  in  gold  except  for  smaller  domestic  and  personal  uses.
They  want  to  draw  cheques  to  make  trade  payments,  but  the
business  men  who  sell  them  goods  and  receive  those  cheques  do
not  want  to  draw  in  gold,  they  want  in  their  turn  to  make  business
payments  and  so  on.  For  the  larger  movements  along  the
industrial  system  little  gold  is  used.  What  becomes  then  of
cheques  ?

From  branch  banks  they  pass  to  the  head  office,  thence  to
London  agents,  thence  to  Clearing  House  to  be  sorted,  set-off,
and  cancelled  with  small  differences  paid  by  cheque.

Very  little  gold  or  notes  need  be  kept  to  meet  the  vast  sum  of
indebtedness  which  at  any  given  time  the  banks  have  incurred.


MONEY  AND  FINANCE  255

Most  banks  only  keep  gold  sufficient  for  the  till  ;  this  reserve
(some  25  per  cent.)  is  deposited  with  a  London  bank,  probably  the
bank  of  which  they  are  branches,  and  the  London  bank  deposits  a
similar  proportion  of  reserve  with  the  Bank  of  England.  Thus
the  only  gold  kept  by  the  banking  system  (apart  from  till  money)
to  meet  its  obligations  to  depositors  is  the  ten  or  fifteen  millions
reserve  in  the  Bank  of  England.  Certain  other  money  of  depositors
is  put  out  in  such  ways  as  to  be  easily  recalled.  About  30  per
cent,  of  deposits  is  thus  kept  in  hand  or  at  call.  The  other  70
per  cent,  the  banks  can  lend  on  bills  or  loans  at  interest.

§  3. — The  origin  and  nature  of  the  bank  money  which  goes  into
currency  through  loans  on  securities  or  discounting  bills  are  not
mysterious.

A  person  holding  shares  in  a  substantial  business  or  any  other
claims  upon  realisable  property  may  be  able,  by  depositing  such
securities  with  a  bank,  to  get  bank  money  as  a  loan.  Here  a  bank
enables  an  individual  who  has  some  special  sort  of  property  to
exchange  it  for  a  time  for  money  or  general  purchasing  power.
This  money  must  be  held  to  be  the  joint  product  of  the  borrower
and  the  bank  ;  the  former  by  his  security  furnishes  a  basis  or
natural  support,  the  bank  undertakes  the  risk  of  transforming
the  security  into  bank  money  on  which  it  undertakes  to  pay  legal
tender,  holding  a  certain  sum  derived  from  its  paid-up  capital
and  its  deposits  to  guard  against  this  risk.

In  essence,  bill  discounting,  whether  undertaken  by  bankers  or
brokers,  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  except  that  here  the  sub-
stantial basis  of  the  credit  or  bank  money  is  not  '  securities  '  but
goods.  A  manufacturer  supphes  goods  to  a  merchant  who  is  not
able  or  does  not  choose  to  pay  cash  for  them.  The  seller  draws
a  bill  at  three  months,  the  buyer  accepts  by  appending  his  signature,
undertaking  to  '  meet '  the  bill  with  cash  when  it  matures.  The
seller  endorses  the  bill.  If  the  seller  wants  money  for  his  goods
which  the  buyer  could  not  give,  he  takes  the  bill  to  a  bill  discounter
accustomed  to  deal  with  this  class  of  paper,  who  discounts  it,  giving
him  the  discounted  value  in  money  which  he  generally  borrows
from  a  bank  on  his  own  security  ;  in  other  cases  the  bank  discounts
the  bills.  So  the  manufacturer  gets  during  the  three  months  a
sum  of  ready  money  which  he  would  not  otherwise  possess,  and
which  is  created  by  bankers  and  brokers  undertaking  to  provide
out  of  their  resources  against  the  risk  of  the  goods  not  being  sold
by  the  merchant  before  three  months  elapse  at  a  profitable  price,
and  the  further  risk  of  dishonesty  or  misfortune  disabUng  the
merchant  from  applying  the  proceeds  of  their  sale  to  meet  the  bill
when  it  is  due. When,  then,  it is  said  that  some  70 per  cent.


256  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  the  money  deposited  with  banks  is  used  for  loan  or  discount
purposes,  this  does  not  mean  that  it  is  used  to  create  advances  to
an  extent  merely  equivalent  to  the  amount  of  the  deposits  so  used.
It  means  that  on  the  strength  of  these  deposits  the  bank  creates  a
much  larger  volume  of  '  credit  '  which  it  uses  for  loan  and  discount
purposes,  the  deposits  helping  to  sustain  the  larger  fund  of  '  money  '
which  it  has  set  afloat  in  the  commercial  world.

The  essence  of  this  credit  system  is  that  it  enables  purchasing
power  or  medium  of  exchange  to  be  created  on  the  basis  of  a  claim
to  any  sort  of  saleable  property,  by  any  substantial  person  or
group  of  persons  able  to  furnish  an  adequate  guarantee  to  safe-
guard the  holder  of  the  claim  against  the  risk  of  being  unable  to
convert  his  claim  into  ready  money  when  he  wants  it.

A  bill  discount  means  a  bet  on  the  part  of  banker  or  broker  that
the  goods  in  respect  of  which  a  bill  is  drawn  and  discounted  will
sell,  and  the  bill  be  met  at  maturity.  He  creates  money  on  this
belief,  keeping  a  small  reserve  to  meet  the  contingency  of  a  failure
of  this  expectation.

Since  by  far  the  greater  part  of  buying  and  selling  is  transacted
by  means  of  these  forms  of  credit  or  bank  money,  based  on  claims
to  vendible  property,  it  is  evident  that  the  sense  in  which  the  whole
money  system  is  said  to  stand  on  the  basis  of  the  gold  held  by  the
Bank  of  England  and  other  banks  and  private  persons  is  a  very
restricted  one.  The  gold  reserve  is  a  safeguard  against  the  possible
collapse  of  credit  money  based  on  specific  forms  of  property  which
may  shrink  in  value  or  prove  non-vendible  when  it  is  required  to
realise  on  them.  The  fact  that  every  form  of  privately  created
money  purports  to  be,  and  legally  is,  a  claim  on  gold  or  legal  tender,
tends  to  over-emphasise  and  even  to  falsify  the  part  played  by  gold
in  the  money  system.  In  the  working  of  the  private  monetary
system  of  banking  a  margin  of  gold  is  essential,  but  no  definite
relation  exists  between  this  quantity  of  gold  and  the  quantity  of
money  and  monetary  work  said  to  be  based  upon  it.

It  is  far  sounder  to  say  that  the  quantity  of  money  and  monetary
work  is  based  upon  the  quantity  of  valid  claims  to  vendible  property
that  exist,  and  upon  the  conditions  of  commerce  which  afford  security
to  these  claims.  For  by  means  of  the  joint  action  of  owners  of
property  and  bankers  we  perceive  that  all  sorts  of  property  can
become  the  basis  of  credit,  performing  within  a  limited  range  of
currency  the  function  of  money  as  a  medium  of  exchange.

This  capacity  of  all  vendible  property  to  become  a  basis  of  credit
currency  is  a  fact  of  immense  significance  in  modern  industry.  For,
since  there  is  a  business  advantage  in  a  firm  using  to  the  full  its
credit,  there  will  be  a  tendency  for  every  business  to  secure  for  its


MONEY  AND FINANCE  257

use  bank  credit  corresponding  to  its  full  assets  which  can  form
collateral  security.  There  will  also  be  a  tendency  driving  business
into  joint  stock  forms  in  which  such  use  of  assets  to  form  security  for
credit  is  most  available.  This  superior  facility  for  utilising  credit
is  one  of  the  admitted  advantages  of  large  corporations.  As  more
and  more  industry  takes  these  forms  the  quantity  of  such  credit
currency  is  enlarged.  The  movement  is  towards  a  state  of  industry
in  which  there  will  be  credit  currency  corresponding  to  every  sort  of
asset.

§  4. — Thus  we  are  brought  to  approach  the  question  :  '  How
much  money  does  there  tend  to  exist?'  with  the  answer  that
every  piece  of  vendible  wealth  has  potentially,  and  tends  to  have
actually,  its  monetary  or  credit  shadow,  for  any  owner  of  such
wealth  can,  under  a  fully  developed  system  of  banking  and
broking,  get  a  constant  use  of  bank  money  corresponding  to  that
wealth.

Such  a  system  does  not  indeed  to-day  exist,  even  in  the  most
highly  evolved  financial  communities.  But  if  we  include  pawn-
broking  and  other  money-lending  agencies,  we  shall  find  that  there
are  comparatively  few  sorts  of  vendible  goods  of  a  material  order
which  cannot,  under  stress,  be  converted  into  money,  and  that  in
larger  organised  businesses  it  is  a  point  of  ordinary  financial  economy
to  use  the  whole  available  assets  when  required  as  means  of  credit.
The  amount  of  credit  money  raised  thus,  and  acting  as  purchasing-
power  at  any  given  time,  will  of  course  vary  very  widely  with  the
requirements  of  particular  businesses  and  the  general  condition  of
trade,  and  advances  upon  any  given  piece  of  vendible  property  will
not  intentionally  be  made  to  cover  more  than  such  percentage  of  the
whole  value  as  leaves  a  sufficient  margin  for  market  fluctuations.
For  such  loans  and  discounts  and  other  forms  of  short  currency
must  normallv  be  cancelled  by  the  sale  of  the  goods  upon  whose
value  they  are  based,  the  money  to  cancel  them  coming  from  the
proceeds  of  the  sale.

Now,  if  all  property  upon  which  credit  could  be  based  were
tangible  assets,  the  quantity  of  such  '  money '  which  would  be  avail-
able would  fluctuate  with  the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  production
of  such  tangible  goods  and  with  their  market  price.  But  a  more
complex  consideration  enters  here.  When,  as  is  common,  the  whole
capital  value  of  a  business  becomes  '  security  '  for  credit  or  bank
money,  this  capital  value  includes  not  only  tangible  but  intangible
assets,  under  which  come  '  goodwill  '  and  other  values  expressed  in
share  capital.  Now  the  valuation  of  these  intangible  assets  is  very
delicate  ;  the  usually  accepted  basis  of  the  valuation  is  the  calculated
or  imputed  earning  capacity  of  the  business,  i.e.  the  rate  and  amount

s


258  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

of  future  dividends.  That  the  goodwill  of  a  business  is  a
genuine  asset,  and  that,  as  such,  when  properly  valued,  it  may
form  as  sound  a  basis  of  loan  credit  as  the  material  assets  themselves,
is  true.  But  the  valuation  of  such  a  property  is  essentially  pre-
carious and  lends  itself  to  the  creation  of  excessive  speculative
values,  i.e.  to  over-capitalisation.  When  the  goodwill  is  estimated
not  upon  the  actual  earning-power  of  the  business  in  the  past  but
upon  the  speculative  or  imputed  earning  capacity  in  the  future,  we
perceive  that  credit  based  on  such  values  may  be  entirel}'  illusory
or  gravely  excessive.  For  such  a  calculation  deals  with  several  '  un-
knowns.' the  amount  of  future  demand  operative  at  various  prices,
the  amount  of  future  supply  operative  at  these  same  prices,  and  the
proportion  of  the  total  demand  that  will  be  supplied  by  this  par-
ticular business.  It  is  clear  that  in  the  fluctuations  of  modern
industry  credit  founded  on  such  calculations  must  be  exceedingly
precarious.  Yet  skilled  company  promoters  and  dealers  in
shares  are  largely  engaged  in  capitalising  businesses  upon  this
basis,  creating  as  much  fictitious  share  value  or  *  water  '  as  they
can.

This  fictitious  capital,  so  long  as  confidence  supports  it,  can  be
utilised  along  with  tangible  assets  and  genuine  '  goodwill  '  as  a
means  of  loan  credit.  Thus  at  certain  seasons  large  quantities  of
this  bubble  money  may  be  endowed  with  an  actual  purchasing-
power,  though  it  must  eventually  collapse ;  meanwhile  it  helps  to
swell  the  total  mass  of  purchasing-power,  and  to  operate  upon  prices
of  actual  commodities.

Even  honestly  computed  assets  based  on  estimated  earning
capacity  are  subject  to  rapid  changes  from  fluctuations  of  demand
and  changes  of  the  margin  of  p)rofit.  That  the  monetary  system
should  become  more  and  more  dependent  upon  the  values  imputed
to  these  intangible  assets  is  one  of  the  great  dangers  of  our  time,
illustrated  most  dramatically  in  the  recent  American  crisis,  due
primarily  to  a  rapid  shrinkage  in  value  of  collateral  securities  based
on  over-estimated  earning-power.  With  this  disturbing  effect  of  the
wide  and  ill-controlled  use  of  credit  money  we  are  not  at  present
concerned.  This  brief  exposition  of  credit  is  designed  to  show  that
the  greater  part  of  the  actual  purchasing  instruments  to-day  is
formed  by  converting  all  sorts  of  property  into  currency  of  limited
but  real  circulation.

Money,  or  purchasing-power,  we  now  perceive  to  be  of  two
orders,  differing  in  origin  and  nature.  First,  there  is  legal  tender,
consisting  in  this  country  of  gold  and  other  coins  and  notes  con-
vertible into  gold  on  the  guarantee  of  the  government  which  issues
such  legal  tender. Secondly,  there  is  a  variety  of  different  sorts  of


MONEY  AND  FINANCE  259

so-called  representative  money,  created  by  bankers,  brokers,  and
other  financiers,  based  primarily  upon  different  species  of  valuable
properties,  tangible  and  intangible,  the  value  of  which  they  trans-
mute from  fixed  to  fluid  assets,  and  the  fluidity  of  which  they
purport  to  guarantee  by  keeping  a  reserve  of  legal  tender.

Side  by  side  in  the  actual  operations  of  transferring  property
these  two  mediums  of  exchange  work,  the  small  mass  of  solid  coins
and  notes  constituting  legal  tender,  and  the  large  mass  of  privatel}'
issued  paper  resting  on  present  and  anticipated  goods,  and  requiring
the  withdrawal  from  actual  currenc}'  of  a  certain  portion  of  legal
tender  held  as  bank  reserves.


II

§  I. — We  have  seen  what  money  is  and  what  it  does.  It  is  now
important  to  ask  how  far  the  ordinary  law  of  regulation  of  prices  of
commodities  is  applicable  to  the  use  of  money.  Does  the  supply
and  the  demand  for  '  money  '  differ  from  the  supply  and  demand
of  commodities  ?

We  have  first  to  distinguish  the  part  played  by  government
and  banks  from  that  played  by  the  rest  of  the  community  regarding
money.

The  only  persons  who  require  to  own  and  to  hold  permanently
any  quantity  of  money  are  governments,  banks,  and  other
money-lending  businesses.  To  these  certain  coins  and  other  forms
of  money  are  capital,  and  they  require  to  own  them  as  instruments
enabling  them  to  produce  certain  financial  services.  This  arises
from  the  fact  that  governments  and  banks  are  engaged  in  the
currency  business.  Governments  manufacture  the  portion  of
currency  called  legal  tender,  using  expensive  materials  and  making
comparatively  little  out  of  it  in  the  shape  of  margin  of  profit
between  expenses  of  production  and  the  payment  in  terms  of  goods
and  services  for  which  they  supply  the  currency  for  general  use.
.  Persons  who  supply  goods  or  services  to  government  buy  these  forms
of  government  money  which  are  thus  put  into  circulation,  and  having
bought  them  own  them  for  the  time  being.  Being  their  owners
they  could  consume  them  by  boring  holes  in  them  and  wearing  them
as  necklaces,  or  melting  down  the  gold  into  ornaments  or  otherwise.
But  they  do  not  want  to  consume  them  in  these  or  any  other  ways.
Neither  do  they  want  to  retain  the  ownership  of  any  large  amount
for  capital  in  their  business  or  profession.  Some  small  amount
of  legal  tender  we  should  be  disposed  to  count  as  part  of  the  '  fixed '
capital  of  most  business  firms,  required  as  petty  cash  and  for  certain

s  2


26o  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

other  ready  money  purposes.  Though  most  even  of  this  small
amount  is  kept  for  them  by  banks,  it  may  be  regarded  as  con-
tinuously owned  by  the  businesses,  and  as  forming  a  small  fraction
of  their  fixed  capital.  Apart  from  these  purposes  no  one  wants  to
have  the  continued  ownership  of  any  quantity  of  legal  tender,  or
indeed  of  any  other  currency,  except  banks  and  money  lenders.
What  the  ordinary  person  wants  of  money  is  not  to  own  it  but  to
get  the  temporary  use  of  it  as  purchasing-power.  When  he
receives  legal  tender  from  the  government  or  from  some  person
who  got  it  from  the  government,  he  does  not  want  to  keep  it,
but  to  get  out  of  it  a  single  use  in  an  act  of  exchange,  a  single
pull  upon  its  power  as  a  medium.  In  order  to  get  this  use  he
must  straightway  part  with  his  ownership,  passing  it  on  to  some-
one else.  His  attitude  towards  a  coin,  which  for  the  time  being  is
his  property,  is  thus  seen  to  be  different  from  that  adopted  by  him
towards  any  other  sort  of  property ;  he  neither  wants  to  consume
it  nor  to  keep  it  to  assist  him  in  his  business.  He  wants  not  the
coin  or  bank  note  but  the  single  use  of  it  as  a  conveyance  or  com-
mercial cart,  but  instead  of  hiring  the  use  of  this  conveyance  for
the  single  act  he  buys  it  and  sells  it  again  when  he  has  done  with  it.
Just  so  in  certain  countries,  where  horses  are  plentiful  and  cheap,
and  commerce  simple,  travellers  will  do  with  horses,  buying  a  horse
for  a  single  journey  and  selling  him  at  the  journey's  end.  This  is
evidently  only  a  mode  of  hiring,  the  difference  between  what  they
give  for  the  horse  and  what  they  get  constituting  the  price  of  hire.
In  substance,  that  is  what  is  done  in  the  case  of  legal  tender  ;
although,  as  it  does  its  work  in  currency,  it  is  always  the  legal  property
of  its  temporary  owner,  it  really  passes  along  on  a  hire  system,  each
person  who  gets  it  paying  a  trifle  towards  the  hire  to  the  person
who  parts  with  it,  i.e.  contributing  a  trifle  towards  the  expense  of
the  government  in  producing  and  keeping  in  currency  the  legal
tender.

If  we  prefer,  we  may  regard  the  first  recipient  of  this  legal  tender
from  government  as  paying  the  whole  hire  for  a  long  series  of  its
uses  in  currency  before  it  is  called  in,  and  getting  back  all  but  a
fraction  of  this  hire  from  the  next  person  to  whom  he  passes  it,
the  latter  passing  it  on  once  more  on  the  same  terms,  and  so  on
throughout  its  currency.  Though  no  such  fractional  payments
for  hire  can  be  traced,  it  is  difficult  to  deny,  first,  that  government
is  paid  by  the  users  of  legal  tender  for  its  use,  secondly,  that  each
user  getting  an  equal  use  with  every  other  must  pay  the  same  price,
thirdly,  that  there  is  no  other  way  in  which  these  little  payments
for  the  use  of  legal  tender  can  be  made  except  in  the  way  above
described.


MONEY  AND  FINANCE  261

That  this  is  the  real  nature  of  the  part  played  by  money  and  of
the  relation  of  the  ordinary  individual  towards  money  becomes
quite  evident  when  we  turn  from  legal  tender  money  to  the  non-
governmental sort  which,  as  we  see,  plays  so  much  the  larger  part
in  the  industry.  This  sort  of  money,  with  limited  currency,  is  quite
evidently  hired,  and  though  the  full  price  of  its  hire,  the  discount,  is
paid  at  the  beginning  of  its  currency  by  the  person  who  gets  it  from
the  banker  or  broker  or  other  money-lender,  if  it  is  used  by  other
persons  as  purchasing-power  before  it  returns  to  the  bank  or  other-
wise is  cancelled,  it  will  hardly  be  denied  that  each  such  user  pays
something  in  kind  for  the  use  he  gets  of  it.

But  though  this  seems  to  us  the  most  reasonable  way  of  repre-
senting the  method  in  which  the  services  of  money  as  a  medium  of
exchange  are  remunerated  in  the  course  of  currency,  the  essential
thing  is  to  recognise  that  governments  and  banks  are  the  true
owners  of  the  vast  bulk  of  money,  and  that  other  persons  only  hire
and  pay  for  the  use  of  it.  Exactly  how  they  pay  is  a  matter  of
quite  secondary  importance.

For  until  we  recognise  the  fundamental  difference  in  the
relation  of  governments  and  banks  on  the  one  hand,  and  ordinary
business  persons  on  the  other,  towards  currency,  we  can  have  no
clear  grasp  upon  the  relation  between  gold,  general  currency,  and
prices  of  commodities.

If  this  fundamental  position  is  correct,  the  only  persons  who  can
be  rightly  said  to  buy  gold  apart  from  its  use  in  the  arts  are  govern-
ments and  banks.  These  persons  want  to  convert  it  into  currency
or  into  guarantees  of  currency  which  it  is  their  business  to  produce
and  to  put  into  circulation  ;  ordinary  persons  cannot  be  regarded
as  buying  gold,  but  only  as  buying  its  use  from  the  real  buyers  of
gold,  governments,  and  banks — its  direct  use  from  governments,  as
issuers  of  coins  or  gold  covered  notes,  its  indirect  and  subsidiary
use  from  banks  as  issuers  of  bank  money  partly  supported  by  a  gold
reserve.

§2. — The  acceptance  of  this  distinction  enables  us  easily  to
dispose  of  the  crude  theory  that  every  increase  in  the  quantity  of
gold  available  for  currency  must  necessarily  be  attended  by  a
proportionate  rise  of  prices,  other  things  equal.  No  such  result
occurs  or  tends  to  occur,  either  directly  or  indirectly.

Even  if  all  the  increased  output  of  gold  was  conceived  to  pass
into  the  possession  of  individuals  who  used  it  to  buy  increased
quantities  of  goods,  its  direct  effect  on  prices  would  be  far  smaller
than  is  commonly  supposed.  For  it  would  increase  demand  for
goods,  not  by  the  percentage  it  added  to  the  amount  of  gold  in
actual  circulation,  but  by  the  percentage  it  added  to  the  total


262  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

currency,  the  vast  bulk  of  which,  as  we  saw,  was  credit  money,
but  which,  within  the  Hmits  of  its  currency,  has  just  the  same
effect  upon  prices  through  demand  as  gold  itself.  Its  indirect
effect  in  stimulating  output  of  credit  money  we  will  consider  shortly,
but  its  direct  effect  is  not  proportionate  to  its  increase  of  the  supply
of  gold,  but  to  its  increase  of  the  supply  of  currency  in  general.

Even  in  admitting  this  quantitative  effect  some  caution  is  needed.
If  capital  and  labour,  employed  last  year  in  producing  ;^io, 000,000
worth  of  cotton,  iron,  or  other  goods,  were  directed  into  gold  mining
and  produced  £10,000,000  more  gold  instead  of  other  wealth  of
the  same  value,  it  is  untrue  that  any  considerable  addition  would
have  been  made  to  the  purchasing  power  of  the  community  or  any
considerable  effect  produced  on  aggregate  prices.  For,  as  we  have
seen,  the  cotton  and  iron  capitals,  cancelled  by  this  change,  were
able  to  support  credit  currency,  if  not  to  their  full  value,  to  a  large
proportion  of  it ;  and  the  loss  of  this  currency  must  be  set  against
the  gain  from  increased  gold.

If,  however,  the  increased  productivity  of  gold  mining  without
•  any  such  diversion  from  other  industries  produced  the  extra
£10,000,000,  and  its  owners  were  to  apply  it  directly  as  additional
purchasing-powder  in  increased  demand  for  commodities,  there
would  be  produced  a  rise  in  general  prices  equivalent  to  the  ratio
which  this  £10,000,000  bears,  not  to  the  amount  of  gold  in  currency,
but  to  the  total  purchasing-power  of  the  community  including  all
forms  of  credit  money.  Now  the  total  purchasing-power  of  the
community  during  the  year  is  equivalent  to  its  total  income  during
that  period.  If,  therefore,  £10,000,000  were  added  to  the  dividends
of  gold  mines  paid  to  British  subjects  in  income,  and  the  whole  of
it  were  expended  so  as  to  produce  its  full  effect  on  prices,  the  latter
would  not  amount  to  more  than  a  rise  of  j^^jj,  assuming  that  the
income  of  this  country  be  estimated,  as  it  is  approximately,  at
£2,000,000,000.  This  will  suffice  to  exhibit  the  absurdity  of
imputing  any  large  fluctuation  of  modern  general  prices  to  the
direct  influence  of  an  increase  or  decrease  in  output  of  gold,  due  to
some  new  discovery  of  mines,  or  to  some  special  drain  upon  the
output  in  order  to  put  some  country  on  a  gold  basis.

For  the  whole  amount  of  gold  in  the  bank  reserve  and  in  currency
in  Great  Britain  does  not  exceed  some  £50,000,000.

If  the  increase  of  £10,000,000  entering  our  national  income
were  all  expended  directly  in  demand  for  commodities,  it  is  manifest
that  its  effect  on  prices  would  not  exceed  our  estimate.  The  very
common  notion  that  it  would  is  based  upon  a  quite  illicit  line  of
reasoning  to  the  effect  that  the  trades  producing  the  goods  first
bought  with  the  £10,000,000  would  use  this  increased  income  in


MONEY  AND  FINANCE  263

demanding  a  corresponding  increase  of  commodities  on  their  part,
and  so  on  with  other  trades  supplying  these  commodities,  until
the  original  increased  demand  and  its  effect  on  prices  are  multiplied
many  times  over.  This  argument  is  utterly  fallacious  ;  the  effect
of  the  £10,000,000  upon  the  aggregate  demand  and  so  on  prices  is
completely  exhausted  on  the  first  application,  all  that  is  added
to  the  total  income  and  so  to  the  total  purchasing -power  of  the
community  for  the  year  is  £10,000,000.

But  it  is  also  true  that  there  is  another  indirect  effect  on  prices
in  the  event  of  the  £10,000,000  passing,  as  most  of  it  would,  into
the  gold  reserve  of  government  and  banks.  It  would  there  go  to
increase  the  supports  and  guarantees  of  credit  currency,  the  banks
would  be  enabled  and  disposed  to  give  discounts  and  loans  on
easier  terms;  'money'  (i.e.  the  hire  of  money)  would  be  cheap.
Now  when  '  money  '  is  cheap  more  of  it  is  likely  to  be  taken  by
business  men  who  use  credit  currency  ;  it  will  be  a  favourable
opportunity  to  set  on  foot  new  productive  enterprises  and  to  extend
existing  ones.  Business  men  will,  therefore,  be  disposed  to  take
bank  money  more  freely  at  the  low  price  which  the  influx  of  gold
has  occasioned.  The  really  large  and  important  first  effect  of  the
£10,000.000  on  prices  would  be  not  upon  prices  of  commodities  but
upon  the  price  of  money,  i.e.  the  rate  of  discount.  It  is  through
this  latter  that  we  may  trace  the  larger  effect  the  new  gold  may
exercise  on  general  prices.  For  if  business  men  take  from  the  banks
a  largely  increased  supply  of  cheap  money,  they  apply  it,  as  all
money  is  applied,  in  demand  for  goods,  mostly  for  plant  and  raw
materials  in  order  to  create  or  enlarge  a  business.  This  demand  of
theirs  may  far  exceed  the  amount  of  new  gold  that  has  come  into  the
banks,  because  the  money  thus  taken  out  is  only  floated  on  this  gold  as
a  guarantee.  In  this  way  the  gold  coming  into  the  banking  system
may  stimulate  a  far  larger  demand  than  is  represented  by  its
amount,  and  so  produce  a  far  larger  rise  of  general  prices  than  it
would  if  it  were  directly  applied  in  demand  for  commodities  instead
of  passing  into  the  control  of  banks.

Those,  however,  who  insist  that  in  this  way,  at  any  rate,  the
quantity  theory  of  the  influence  of  gold  on  prices  is  justified,
because  it  must  produce  its  full  natural  effect  through  stimulating
bank  credit,  are  quite  mistaken.

For  no  constant  power  can  be  attributed  to  a  given  flow  of
gold,  or  to  a  given  fall  in  rate  of  discount,  to  induce  the  creation
of  new  credit.  The  effect  of  a  given  increase  of  gold  and  of  a  given
fall  in  discount  will  differ  widely  in  different  conditions  of  trade.
Sometimes  it  will  stimulate  a  large,  at  other  times  a  small,  increase
in  actual  credit  money. For,  though  money  may  be  cheap,  business


264  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

men  will  not  set  on  foot  new  businesses  or  extend  old  ones  unless
they  see  a  reasonable  chance  of  selling  the  increased  output  of
goods  at  a  profit.  Now,  though  cheap  money  is  an  obvious  economy
and  keeps  down  expenses  of  production,  this  economy  may  be  no
sufficient  offset  against  other  rises  of  expense  or  against  a  depression
of  price  due  to  slackness  of  demand.  This  is  only  to  say  that  the
elasticity  of  credit  varies  enormously  with  other  industrial  conditions
and  the  calculations  and  expectations  based  upon  them.

For  we  have  seen  that  the  primary  basis  of  credit  is  property
of  various  kinds  reckoned  at  its  probable  vendible  value,  based,
where  it  is  business  capital,  upon  its  estimated  earnings.  The
mere  fact  that  the  gold  guarantee  of  such  credit  is  strengthened
will  not  in  itself  suffice  to  produce  a  great  enlargement  of  credit
money  and  so  of  actual  demand  for  capital  goods,  unless  there
is  a  healthy  state  of  production  of  commodities  which  are  bought
by  consumers  at  profitable  prices.  An  increased  influx  of  gold
at  a  time  when,  from  bad  crops  or  from  some  slackness  of  demand
following  some  national  extravagance  of  war,  a  bad  condition  of
industry  existed,  would  not  have  much  effect  in  stimulating  credit
or  in  raising  prices.  Before  traders  or  manufacturers  take  advan-
tage of  cheap  money  they  must  see  their  way  to  selling  at  a  profitable
price  the  increased  output,  which  cheap  money  would  assist  them
to  supply.

For  when  trade  is  bad  and  prices  both  of  goods  and  of  securities
low,  it  does  not  follow  that  an  influx  of  gold,  lowering  further  a
rate  of  discount  probably  already  low,  will  have  any  appreciable
effect  in  stimulating  business  enterprise  and  raising  prices.  On
the  other  hand,  when  trade  is  sound  and  prices  of  goods  and
securities  are  firm  or  rising,  a  small  influx  of  gold  and  a  slight  fall
of  rate  of  discount  may  have  a  greatly  disproportionate  effect  in
stimulating  the  creation  of  credit  money  and  in  raising  general  prices.

§3. — The  quantity  of  valid  currency  depends  primarily  not  upon
the  quantity  of  gold  but  upon  the  rate  of  production  and  con-
sumption of  concrete  wealth,  i.e.  upon  the  amount  of  conveyance
to  be  done  by  the  medium  of  exchange.

If  it  is  true  that  most  forms  of  vendible  property  can  be  made
to  support  credit  money  in  some  fairly  constant  ratio  to  their  value,
then  the  quantity  of  '  money '  in  a  country  will  evidently  depend
upon  the  quantity  of  such  forms  of  property  and  the  scale  of  its
values.

When  production  is  large  and,  owing  to  healthy  consumption,
demand  is  also  high,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  '  conveyance  '  to  be
done,  and  the  amount  of  valid  credit  currency  to  do  it  is  correspond-
ingly large. The  business  to  be  done  by  means  of  money  makes  its


MONEY  AND  FINANCE  265

own  medium  of  exchange,  so  to  speak.  Gold  bars  are  needed  to
shore  up  falhng  confidence,  they  do  not  constitute  the  real  basis  of
the  monetary  system,  which  is  wealth  of  every  kind,  nor  do  they
determine  how  much  valid  credit  shall  exist.

There  is  no  inherent  or  eternal  necessity  that  gold  or  any  other
expensively  produced  commodity  should  be  required  as  a  guarantee
of  currency.  If  government  could  be  trusted  not  to  abuse  the  right
of  issue,  uncovered  inconvertible  notes  might  form  the  sole  legal
tender,  and  bank  reserves  might  be  kept  in  terms  of  this  tender.  Or,
if  the  state  were  competent  to  do  the  banking  and  the  money-lending
business,  resuming  the  sole  function  of  issuing  all  forms  of  money
which  it  once  possessed,  there  would  be  no  necessity,  perhaps  no
utility,  served  in  keeping  a  store  of  gold,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  internal
trade  was  concerned.  What  people  want  in  the  '  money  '  for  which
they  part  with  their  superfluous  commodities  is,  as  we  have  seen,
the  full  assurance  of  being  able  to  get,  now  or  when  they  want,  a  fair
equivalent  in  any  other  sort  of  commodities  they  wish.  This
assurance  a  strong  government  could  give  without  the  trouble  and
cost  of  keeping  a  store  of  gold  to  back  its  word.  If  our  present
banking  system  can  support  upon  its  very  narrow  gold  basis  so
large  a  credit  currency,  possessing  as  it  does  no  power  to  make  good
its  failure  to  redeem  its  pledges  by  drawing  on  the  general  wealth  of
the  nation,  it  is  tolerably  clear  that  the  state,  possessing  full  power
by  taxation  to  draw  to  an  unlimited  extent  upon  the  national  wealth,
could  support  as  large  a  credit  currency  without  the  need  of  keeping
any  gold  reserve.  Under  a  private  banking  system,  such  as  we
have,  a  gold  reserve  is  necessary  in  order  to  provide  against  the
collapse  of  excessive  or  improper  credit.  Under  a  state  banking
system  the  whole  national  resources  of  the  nation  would  furnish
that  reserve.  In  point  of  fact,  this  reserve  does  already  stand
behind  our  gold  reserve  whenever,  as  has  several  times  occurred,  it
shows  signs  of  inadequacy.  The  legal  right  to  demand  gold,  and
the  reserve  of  gold,  are  not  the  real  final  supports  of  our  currency.
For,  not  to  speak  of  the  Bank  of  England  notes  to  the  amount  of
some  £15,000,000  covered  not  by  gold  but  by  government  securi-
ties, there  is  the  power  to  suspend  the  Bank  Charter  Act,  thus
enabling  a  further  unlimited  issue  of  uncovered  notes  to  be  authorised
by  government  in  order  to  relieve  a  banking  crisis.  The  authorisa-
tion of  this  suspension  has  several  times  sufficed  to  stop  a  run  upon
the  banks,  i.e.  a  demand  for  gold,  for  though  this  suspension,  followed
by  an  uncovered  issue,  would  give  no  increased  stock  of  gold  and  no
increased  power  to  get  gold,  it  would  give  power  to  get  a  form  of
legal  tender  which  for  practical  purposes,  within  this  realm  and
even  elsewhere,  is  '  as  good  as  gold.'


266  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

It  is  '  confidence  '  in  the  government,  not  gold,  which  is  clearly
the  support  of  this  issue,  and  '  confidence  '  means  a  belief  in  the  will
and  the  ability  to  secure  for  the  uncovered  legal  tender  a  stable
purchasing-power  equal  to  that  possessed  by  gold.  This  '  con-
fidence '  is  so  much  greater  than  that  of  even  the  strongest  banking
business,  inasmuch  as  it  rests  not  on  a  reserve  of  gold  limited  to  a
small  proportion  of  its  assets,  but  upon  the  whole  financial  resources
of  the  state,  including  its  full  power  of  taxation.  The  mere  know-
ledge that  the  state  possesses  this  power  to  support  the  credit
system,  and  the  belief  that  it  would  in  an  emergency  use  this  power,
stands  to-day  behind  the  credit  of  the  banking  system  of  this
country,  relieving  it  to  some  extent  of  the  necessity  of  careful
banking  and  of  keeping  a  fully  adequate  reserve.

The  case  of  the  banking  system,  worked  for  private  profit,  and
earning  extraordinary  high  dividends  by  a  highly  restricted  com-
petition, is  peculiar  in  its  relation  to  the  state.  The  obligation
of  the  state  to  preserve  the  public  from  the  disastrous  effects
of  a  financial  collapse  actually  operates  as  an  obligation  to
preserve  the  banks  from  the  natural  consequences  of  bad  banking,
thereby  assisting  them  to  economise  their  resources,  to  keep  a
smaller  reserve  than  they  must  otherwise,  and  so  to  earn  higher
profits  on  their  capital  than  they  could  if  they  had  not  this  potential
state  support.  However  defensible  on  grounds  of  social  necessity,
this  actual  or  potential  reliance  of  a  profit-making  industry  upon
state  aid  is  the  most  illicit  form  of  socialism  imaginable  ;  it  is  a
public  premium  upon  carelessness  and  extravagance.  Nor  is  that
all.  Ne  Deus  intersit  nisi  nodus  vindice  digniis.  A  small  bank  may
suffer  the  natural  consequences  of  its  indiscretion  and  be  allowed  to
bear  the  full  penalty,  but  a  great  bank,  hkely  in  its  fall  to  bring
about  a  collapse  of  general  credit,  must  be  sustained,  if  the  support
of  its  fellow  banks  does  not  suffice,  by  government.  The  knowledge
of  this  discriminative  support  tends  to  give  an  advantage  to  large
banks  as  compared  with  small,  and  driving  a  larger  and  larger
proportion  of  banking  into  a  few  huge  businesses,  in  great  measure
non-competing,  helps  to  build  up  the  strongest  and  most  lucrative
of  limited  monopolies  in  this  and  other  countries.

The  worst  results  of  this  illogical  union  and  equally  illogical
division  of  the  currency  business  between  governments  and  profit-
making  companies  have  not  been  realised  in  this  country,  but  in  the
United  States,  where  during  the  recent  financial  crisis  the  national
treasury  was  compelled  in  the  public  interest  to  relieve  the  great
financial  corporations  from  the  natural  penalties  of  their  sins,  they
furnish  a  striking  example  of  the  instability  of  the  present  system.
It  is  hardly  possible  that  the  present  anomalous  position  of  our


MONEY AND FINANCE  267

credit  money  system  can  continue  long.  Either  governments  must
tend  more  and  more  to  take  over  from  private  industry  the
banking  and  money-lending  industries  :  or  if  the  inherent  delicacy
of  these  financial  acts  be  such  that  the  more  mechanical  methods  of
bureaucratic  management  are  incompetent  to  cope  with  them,  the
informal  state  support  or  guarantee  which  exists  now  must  be
regularised,  accompanied  by  measures  of  public  supervision  and  by
adequate  taxation  of  the  monopoly  profits  of  a  valuable  publicly
created  business.  If  money-lending,  hke  Hquor  deahng,  is  left  in
private  hands,  it  should  be  licensed,  supervised,  and  made  to  yield
its  proper  special  quota  to  the  public  revenue.

If  a  universal  provider  in  whose  present  and  future  stability  I
had  complete  confidence  gave  me  orders  payable  in  goods,  these
orders  would  be  to  me  as  good  as  gold.  But  if  I  had  not  com-
plete confidence  I  should  prefer  gold.  If  a  state  such  as  ours  either
undertook  the  issue  of  all  credit  money  or  guaranteed  it,  the  degree
of  confidence  within  the  nation  would  doubtless  be  adequate  to
support  an  uncovered  and  inconvertible  paper  currency.  It  might,
however,  still  be  necessary  to  keep  a  gold  reserve  for  purposes  of
foreign  exchange,  though  even  here  it  is  at  least  arguable  that,  if
England  were  known  to  keep  no  gold,  her  notes  would  possess
sufficient  confidence,  at  any  rate  in  all  civilised  countries,  to
perform  the  functions  in  international  balance  which  her  gold  now
performs,  i.e.  that  they  would  be  generally  accepted  on  a  par  with
gold  at  their  face  value.

Gold  is  only  necessary  '  because  of  their  unbelief  '  :  just  as  the
ground  and  the  reahty  of  that  unbelief  diminish  the  gold  guarantee
of  credit  money  grows  smaller.  So  long  as  most  money  is  issued  by
private  enterprise  some  gold  must  help  to  make  it  pass.  Even  if
governments  were  sole  issuers  or  gave  full  guarantees,  many  govern-
ments do  not  command  such  confidence  even  among  their  own
subjects,  much  less  among  foreigners,  as  to  secure  their  paper  a  free
currency  at  par.  Not  until,  if  ever,  such  a  political  society  of
nations  is  formed  as  can  provide  an  international  guarantee  of
national  credits  does  it  seem  feasible  to  dispense  entirely  with  a
gold  or  other  intrinsically  valuable  support  for  international
currency.  But  it  remains  true  that  as  our  industrial  and  commercial
civilisation  advances  gold  has  a  constantly  diminishing  influence  in
the  determination  either  of  aggregate  quantity  of  currency  or  of
prices.


CHAPTER  XVII

INSURANCE

§  I.  Insurance  produces  four  utilities — (i)  reducing  the  pain  or  subjective
injury  of  an  accident,  (2)  producing  a  sense  of  security,  (3)  evoking
productive  energy,  (4)  preventing  objective  waste. — §  2.  Economy  of
provision  against  risks  drives  insurance  into  very  large  business  forms.
The  state  tends  to  displace  private  enterprise  so  far  as  the  chief  working-
class  risks  are  concerned.  The  investment  side  of  the  insurance  business
constitutes  a  formidable  barrier  against  full  nationalisation.

§  I. — No  description  of  the  outlines  of  modern  industry  would  be
complete  without  reference  to  the  business  of  Insurance,  which  is  so
intimately  associated  with  finance.  It  is  not,  however,  from  the
standpoint  of  its  place  in  general  finance  that  we  must  first  approach
it.  We  have  first  to  ascertain  what  part,  if  any,  insurance  ipla.ys>
in  the  industrial  system  so  far  as  the  latter  is  regarded  as  an  instru-
ment for  producing  and  distributing  goods  and  services.  What
does  insurance  produce  ?  We  can  best  formulate  our  answer  by
first  putting  another  question,  viz.  What  damage  would  be  done
if  there  were  no  insurance  ?  The  life  of  a  producer  often  comes
to  a  sudden  end  ;  if  no  provision  were  made  for  securing  to  those
dependent  on  him  a  continuance  of  at  least  a  part  of  the  income
he  earned  when  alive,  they  must  sink  suddenly  into  a  lower  standard
of  living,  perhaps  into  penury,  and  both  their  happiness  and  their
present  or  future  efficiency  as  producers  might  be  greatly  impaired.
By  paying  a  comparatively  small  sum  over  a  long  term  of  years,
which  involves  the  habitual  deprivation  of  what,  if  expended  other-
wise, would  constitute  the  least  useful  and  pleasurable  part  of  his
whole  expenditure,  he  is  enabled  to  avert  a  certain  damage  of  a
serious  kind  affecting  the  comforts,  conveniences,  or  even  the  neces-
saries in  the  standard  of  life  of  his  family.  What  insurance  here
produces  is  evidently  the  difference  in  disutility  between  the  sum  of
the  small  losses  involved  in  the  payment  of  the  yearly  premiums  and
the  great  loss  involved  in  the  sudden  total  withdrawal  of  the  whole
or  a  large  part  of  a  family  income.  The  substitution  of  the  former
small  disutility  or  cost  for  the  latter  large  one  is  in  effect  the  pro-
duction of  so  much  utility,  not  merely  from  the  standpoint  of  the

268


INSURANCE  269

individual  but  from  that  of  the  society  to  which  he  belongs.  It
causes,  directly,  no  increase  of  concrete  goods  or  services,  but  by
assisting  a  more  equable  distribution  over  time  of  the  aggregate
of  such  objective  wealth,  it  causes  more  to  be  got  out  of  it  in
satisfaction  and  in  subjective  utility.  In  averting  a  damage  to
the  productive  power  of  industry  by  a  sudden  loss  of  family  income
insurance  may  also  be  considered  as  directly  productive  of  industrial
energy.

Insurance  against  fire,  shipwreck,  nnd  other  risks  of  destruction
to  property  fulfils  a  similar  purpose  in  the  industrial  economy.
Except  in  a  quite  secondary  way  it  does  not  aim  at  preventing
the  destruction  of  such  property,  but  it  prevents  the  loss  from  falling
suddenly  in  its  full  force  on  any  owner,  by  distributing  it  over  a
large  number  of  owners  and  over  a  large  period  of  time.  If  I  live
long  enough,  the  chances  are  that  my  house  will  be  burnt  down.
If  I  have  not  insured,  I  shall  suddenly  find  myself  without  a  roof
over  my  head  and  with  no  ability  to  get  one.  If  I  insure,  I  must
content  myself  with  a  very  slightly  inferior  house,  but  I  have
absolute  security  against  the  former  terrible  predicament.  So
it  is  with  every  sort  of  business  insurance  :  the  sudden  total  destruc-
tion of  some  important  part  of  my  material  capital  may  destroy
the  whole  efficiency  of  what  remains  and  may  suddenly  cancel  the
value  of  my  business  ability.

We  may  then  clearly  distinguish  four  utilities  produced  by
insurance,  two  subjective,  two  objective.  In  the  actual  working
of  the  industrial  system  a  number  of  separate  sudden  accidents
occur,  involving  damage  to  the  individuals  whose  lives  or  property
are  concerned ;  insurance  spreads  the  loss  over  a  large  number  of
persons  and  makes  it  continuous  instead  of  irregularly  recurrent.
This  '  socialisation  '  and  equalisation  in  time  greatly  reduce  the
net  amount  of  pain  or  subjective  injury  caused  by  any  single
accident. This  is  the  first  subjective  utility.

Again,  the  higher  nervous  organisation  which  human  life
under  modern  conditions  of  civilisation  evolves,  makes  men  more
anxious  about  the  future,  while  at  the  same  time  the  complexity
of  modern  industry  and  life  makes  it  more  difficult  to  foresee  and
make  special  adequate  provision  against  the  various  accidents.
Without  insurance  the  worrj^  caused  by  conscious  inability  to  pro-
vide against  an  increasing  number  of  more  highly-appreciated
risks  would  become  an  almost  intolerable  strain,  enhancing  the
subjective  or  human  cost  of  production  throughout  the  business
world.  As  the  spread  of  education  and  the  stir  of  modern  city
life  cause  larger  and  larger  numbers  of  the  workers  to  have  more
feeling  for  the  future  of  themselves  and  their  families,  this  extensive


270  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

and  intensive  growth  of  anxiety  is  exhibited  in  an  immense  expan-
sion of  private  and  public  insurance.  The  main  direct  object  of
such  insurance  is  the  production  of  a  sense  of  security.

With  these  two  subjective  goods  two  objective  goods  are  associ-
ated. Anxiety  or  fear  depresses  the  spirit,  weakens  the  intellect
and  will  of  man,  thus  damaging  the  faculties  which  are  most  impor-
tant in  the  best  processes  of  production.  A  reasonable  measure
of  security  is  essential  to  evoke  the  best  productive  powers ;  without
such  security  man  cannot,  and  will  not,  do  his  best.  The  production
of  security  is  therefore  a  direct  enhancement  of  productive  energy.

Finally,  as  we  have  seen,  a  sudden  damage  to  the  standard  of
living  of  a  family  by  loss  of  life  or  injury  to  the  m.eans  of  livelihood
may  cause  a  further  loss  of  productive  power.  The  death  of  the
uninsured  father  may  cause  a  physically  injurious  or  a  demoralising
reduction  of  income,  a  removal  to  a  less  healthy  neighbourhood,
or  the  withdrawal  from  school  of  the  children  at  a  too  early  age
to  put  them  to  work.  The  destruction  of  an  uninsured  mill  or
workshop  may  involve  much  further  loss  by  waste  of  other  capital
and  prolonged  unemployment  of  labour,  through  financial  inabilitj^
to  replace  the  property  destroyed.

§  2. — Thus  objectively  regarded,  the  industrial  function  of
insurance  is  to  supplement  the  ordinary  provision  for  wear  and
tear  of  the  industrial  fabric,  which  we  saw  was  the  first  charge  upon
the  product,  by  an  extraordinary  wear-and-tear  fund  to  meet  the
irregular  and  unforeseen  injuries  to  the  human  or  non-human
factors  of  production.

To  this  end  a  great  and  elaborate  system  of  insurance  finance
springs  up,  adjusted  to  meet  the  different  sorts  of  risks  involved  in
various  industrial  processes.  Although  the  chances  of  death  may
not  be  precisely  equal  in  any  two  cases,  though  the  risks  of  fire
may  not  be  precisely  equal  for  any  two  houses,  the  law  of  averages
enables  trifling  and  often  incalculable  differences  to  be  safely  dis-
regarded, the  innumerable  little  pluses  in  some  cases  being  balanced
by  corresponding  minuses  in  others.  This  system  of  provision
against  risks,  of  course,  works  out  more  accurately  the  larger  the
number  of  cases  involved.  If  ten  persons  formed  a  company
paying  yearly  premiums  for  mutual  life  insurance,  the  death  of
one  of  them  in  the  first  year  would  wreck  the  company  ;  if  a  thou-
sand formed  a  similar  company  the  policies  paid  would  still  vary
considerably,  taking  one  year  with  another,  and  a  grave  epidemic
might  cause  financial  difficulties  ;  but  if  ten  milhon  lives  were  so
insured,  the  fluctuations  in  the  yearly  liabilities  would  be  very  small,
especially  if  the  insured  persons  were  drawn  from  a  wide  local  area
with  great  varieties  of  occupations. It  is  this  consideration  which


INSURANCE  271

drives  all  insurance  business  into  larger  and  larger  companies  for
safety  and  economy,  and  impels  even  large  companies,  though
competing  for  business,  to  pool  their  risks  by  re-insurance  or  by
systematic  distribution.  The  recognition  of  the  dangers  involved
in  the  private  monopoly  of  insurance,  together  with  a  perception
of  the  fact  that  for  certain  common  risks  the  entire  nation  consti-
tutes a  better  business  basis  for  insurance  than  any  smaller  group
within  the  nation,  is  driving  a  larger  and  larger  quantity  of  insurance
business  into  the  hands  of  the  state.  This  is  particularly  the  case
with  regard  to  the  graver  accidents  or  other  injuries  to  the  lives  of
the  workers, whose  narrow  means,  ignorance,  or  insufficient  apprecia-
tion of  the  future  preclude  them  from  making  adequate  provision.
Old  age,  poverty,  accidents,  sickness,  burials,  maternity,  unemploy-
ment, are  coming  more  and  more  to  be  recognised  as  a  proper  sphere
of  state  insurance.  The  normal  wage-system  does  not  enable  indi-
vidual wage-earners  by  private  combination  to  make  any  sufficient
or  secure  provision  against  any  or  most  of  these  contingencies.  If,
as  is  acknowledged,  it  is  not  merely  the  interest  of  the  individuals
concerned,  but  of  society,  that  proper  provision  shall  be  made,  the
state  will  be  the  instrument  employed.  Germany  among  the
older  states,  New  Zealand  among  the  new,  have  gone  far  in  their
experimental  legislation  along  this  road  ;  other  nations  follow.

The  question  of  the  mode  of  raising  this  public  insurance  fund,
whether  by  special  contributions  from  workers  and  employers,
supplemented  by  state  subsidies,  or  by  payments  from  the  general
national  revenue  raised  by  ordinary  processes  of  taxation,  will
mainly  depend  for  its  answer  upon  the  view  of  the  incidence  of
taxation  taken  by  statesmen.  Those  who  hold  that  a  contribution
can  be  stopped  out  of  wages  without  impairing  the  supply  or  the
efficiency  of  labour,  and  that  it  is  socially  desirable  to  employ  the
intricate  and  expensive  method  of  retail  collection,  so  as  to  enable
each  man  to  realise  his  public  duties  and  rights,  will  prefer  the
German  method,  or  some  modification  of  it.  Those  who  hold  that
a  compulsory  contribution,  however  small,  out  of  wages,  must
either  injure  the  efficiency  of  labour,  or  else  be  transferred  on  to
employers'  profits  or  other  '  surplus,'  will  tend  to  reject  the  retail
method  of  contribution  as  wasteful  and  clumsy,  and  to  prefer  the
simpler  method  of  providing  these  funds  of  social  insurance  out  of
the  general  revenue  of  society.

How  far  or  how  fast  the  state  socialisation  of  the  insurance
business  will  go  it  is  difficult  to  prognosticate.  At  present  the
manifest  interest  of  society  in  the  hfe,  health,  and  physical  well-
being  of  the  working  classes,  and  the  equally  manifest  inability  of
these  classes  to  provide  for  these  essentials  on  their  own  account,


272  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

are  the  driving  forces  towards  state  insurance,  which  at  present
does  not  transcend  these  limits.  Insurance  against  mere  losses  of
property  and  life  insurance  of  the  richer  classes  are  generally  left
to  private  enterprise,  partly  because  such  losses  are  considered  to  be
of  individual  rather  than  of  social  consequence,  partly  because
private  enterprise  still  seems  better  adapted  to  cope  with  their
special  requirements.

It  appears,  however,  unlikely  that  this  somewhat  arbitrary
distinction  between  the  public  and  the  private  spheres  of  insurance
wiU  be  permanently  maintained.  If,  as  is  admitted,  the  larger  the
area  of  insurance  the  better  the  security,  this  fact  would  seem  of
necessity  to  turn  the  scale  in  favour  of  state  as  compared  with
private  insurance,  not  merely  for  the  working  classes,  but  for  the
rest  of  the  community.

There  is,  however,  an  important  qualifying  circumstance  which
needs  here  to  be  taken  into  account.  All  insurance  companies,
especially  life  companies,  combine  with  the  function  of  insurance
that  of  investment.  The  productive  disposal  of  the  premiums
which  they  receive  implies  the  direction  and  application  to  indus-
trial purposes  of  a  large  quantity  of  '  savings.'  But  the  chief  life
companies  not  merely  thus  invest  their  insurance  premiums  but  are
a  general  medium  for  investments  which  are  combined  almost
inextricably  with  insurance.  For  this  purpose  a  great  variety  of
policies  are  devised,  some  with  annual  dividends,  others  with  rever-
sionary additions  which  go  to  swell  the  amount  of  the  insurance,
others  again  wdth  deferred  dividends  to  be  paid  at  certain  intervals,
or  to  go  as  reductions  of  the  insurance  premium.  An  almost  endless
variety  of  methods  exists  of  paying  the  premium  and  of  receiving
the  bonus  and  the  sum  insured,  most  of  them  combining  in  some
degree  participatory  profits  with  insurance.

A  continually  increasing  quantity  of  investment  is  thus  placed
in  the  hands  of  insurance  companies,  which  have  become  in  most
developed  industrial  nations  main  conduits  of  finance,  dividing  with
the  great  joint-stock  banks  the  function  of  directing  the  flow  of
available  new  capital  into  the  different  channels  of  productive
employment.

Though  governmental  regulation  tends  to  tighten  round  the
administration  of  these  companies,  regarded  either  as  general
repositories  of  the  people's  savings  or  as  insurance  instruments,
with  the  especial  object  of  insisting  upon  adequate  reserves  and  of
checking  misapplication  of  funds,  no  government  has  yet  felt  strong
enough  to  contemplate  the  nationalisation  of  this  great  department
of  finance.  Indeed,  it  seems  difficult  to  conceive  a  government
department  entering  the  general  business  of  investment. If,  as  is


INSURANCE  273

quite  conceivable,  a  state  should  extend  its  insurance  business  so  as
to  cover  the  whole  range  of  life  policies,  it  might  probably  decide
to  invest  the  premiums  in  purchasing  consols  or  in  financing  public
works,  rather  than  by  employing  them  as  capital  in  outside  trade,
paying  the  policies  as  they  fell  due  out  of  the  general  current
revenue,  even  as  the  Post  Office  insurance  is  in  effect  administered
to-day.

Indeed,  the  future  attitude  of  the  modern  state  towards  the  new
structure  of  finance,  whose  control  over  industry  and  politics  is
rapidly  being  concentrated  in  a  few  virtually  non-competing  groups,
opens  some  of  the  most  momentous  issues  of  the  new  state-craft.


CHAPTER XVIII


UNEMPLOYMENT


§  I ,  Cyclical  unemployment  cannot  be  attributed  to  failure  of  wheat  harvests,
for  (i)  statistics  show  no  correspondence  between  changes  in  world
production  of  wheat  and  fluctuation  of  employment,  (2)  the  effect  of  a
shortage  of  wheat  upon  the  aggregate  employment  could  not  be  large.
A  simultaneous  shortage  of  several  important  raw  materials  may  appreci-
ably affect  employment,  but  statistical  evidence  does  not  indicate  such
shortage  as  a  chief  cause  of  cyclical  unemployment. — §  2.  Machinery  or
other  improvements  in  an  industry  may  cause  an  increase  or  decrease  of
employment  in  that  trade  or  related  trades,  according  to  '  elasticity  of
demand,'  but  cannot  account  at  any  given  time  for  any  large  proportion
of  displacement. — §  3.  For  the  main  cause  of  unemployment  we  must
look  to  the  action  of  the  '  unproductive  surplus  '  in  stimulating  auto-
matic saving  at  a  higher  rate  than  is  needed  and  can  be  used  to  assist  in
making  provision  against  future  consumption.  Economic  checks  on
over-saving  only  operate  where  much  mischief  is  done.  The  unemployed
problem  is  that  of  the  existence  of  a  simultaneous  excess  of  all  factors  of
production. — §  4.  Analysis  of  the  course  of  actual  depressions  confirms
this  interpretation.  The  psychological  or  '  credit  '  explanation  turns
ultimately  on  the  known  inability  of  business  men  to  dispose  of  goods
at  profitable  prices,  i.e.  the  failure  of  consumption  to  keep  pace  with
power  of  production. — §  5.  The  existence  and  amount  of  over-saving
is  concealed  by  the  mechanism  of  investment.  In  depressed  trade
over-savings  need  not  stand  in  a  growing  pool  of  idle  capital :  their
owners  may  invest  them,  not  in  setting  up  new  capital  forms,  but  in
acquiring  property  from  impoverished  owners. — §  6.  This  analysis  fur-
nishes a  test  of  the  efficacy  of  all  remedies  or  palliatives  of  unemploy-
ment. The  validity  of  remedies  depends  upon  their  power  to  stimulate
consumption  by  increasing  the  proportion  of  spending  power  vested  in
the  workers  or  in  pubhc  bodies.

§  I. — Some  waste  of  productive  energy  in  the  working  of  an
industrial  system  is  inevitable.  Even  in  an  industrial  society  where
all  the  arts  of  production  and  all  the  standards  of  consumption  were
either  stationary  or  else  changed  with  slow  and  calculable  regularity,
climatic  and  other  natural  influences  affecting  crops  and  other
raw  materials  must  have  some  considerable  effect  in  determining
the  volume  and  the  regularity  of  the  employment  of  the  factors  of
production  engaged  in  working  up  such  raw  material  into  vendible
commodities.

Where  each  little  locality  is  for  most  ordinary  purposes  self-
dependent,  using  its  own  agricultural  and  other  natural  resources  to
supply  the  needs  of  its  own  inhabitants  by  its  own  industry,  such

274


UNEMPLOYMENT  275

natural  happenings  as  droughts,  storms,  floods,  diseases  of  crops  and
cattle,  must  involve  great  irregularity  of  employment.  Where
millers  only  grind  the  wheat  grown  within  a  few  miles  of  the
mill,  where  spinners  and  weavers  are  entirely  dependent  for  their
wool  upon  a  single  country-side,  employment  even  in  the  staple
manufactures  must  remain  very  uneven  and  precarious.  Every
expansion  in  the  area  of  the  market  for  raw  materials  and  for  products
evidently  diminishes  the  aggregate  waste  of  industrial  energy  from
these  natural  causes.  For  it  is  less  likely  that  crops  will  fail  over
an  entire  county  than  in  a  single  parish,  in  the  whole  country  than
in  a  single  county  :  and  when  there  is  a  world-market  for  wheat  the
aggregate  waste  will  be  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Every  improve-
ment in  transport,  in  storage,  and  in  markets,  equalises  both  in  space
and  time  the  uses  of  raw  materials  for  production  and  for  consump-
tion, and  tends  correspondingly  to  regularise  the  working  of  the
whole  industrial  system.

Now  that  a  relatively  free  exchange  enables  each  country  to  make
up  any  natural  failure  in  its  own  resources  from  a  larger  number  of
other  countries  in  most  important  sorts  of  perishable  materials,  the
irregularity  of  national  employment  due  to  such  causes  has  greatly
diminished.

The  notion,  therefore,  widely  prevalent  in  earlier  economic
interpretations,  and  still  entertained  in  some  quarters,  that  the
great  periodic  depressions  of  industry  and  employment  in  such  a
country  as  England  are  even  now  directly  attributable  to  failures
of  harvests,  will  not  stand  investigation.

The  statistics  of  wheat  production  and  of  unemployment  show
no  such  coincidence  of  fluctuation,  either  in  duration  or  in  intensity,
as  to  support  the  view  that  a  failure  of  harvests  is  the  main  cause
of  cyclical  unemployment.

The  statistical  bureau  of  the  Agricultural  Department  at  Wash-
ington has  published  since  1890  an  annual  computation  of  the  wheat
harvests  of  the  world,  which,  though  not  possessing  any  high  degree  of
exactitude,  is  the  best  available  evidence.  Since  Great  Britain  draws
more  freely  than  any  other  country  on  the  world  supply  of  wheat,
it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  extent  of  the  causation  of
unemployment  due  to  short  harvests  will  be  indicated  clearly,  if  not
closely,  in  the  relation  between  the  fluctuations  of  the  Washington
figure  for  wheat  and  the  average  percentage  of  trade-union  members
out  of  employment  in  Great  Britain.  The  following  table  presents
the  material  of  the  comparison  : —


T  2


276


THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM


Wheat  Harvest

Percentage

Year.

in  Bushels.

Unemployed

1891

2,432,322,000

300

1892

2,481,805,000

6'20

1893

2,562,913,000

770

1894

2,672,341,000

770

1895

2.552,677,000

6*05

1896

2,506,320,000

3'50

1897

2,333,637,000

3-65

1898

2,921,005,000

315

1899

2,725,407,000

2*40

1900

2,627,971,000

2-85

1901

2,929,333.000

3-80

1902

3.103,710,000

4-60

1903

3,189,813,000

5"30

1904

3,152,127,000

6-85

1905

3,200,959,000

5-60

1906

3.435,401,000

410

1907

3,108,526,000

4"20

Now,  making  due  allowance  for  the  gradual  increase  in  the  wheat
supply  required  to  meet  the  needs  of  a  growing  world  population  of
wheat  consumers,  and  bearing  in  mind  that  the  effect  on  the  wheat
supply  should  be  related  rather  to  the  unemployment  of  the  follow-
ing year  than  to  that  of  the  same  year,  this  table  clearly  shows  that
no  considerable  causal  influence  is  exerted  by  the  wheat  harvest
upon  the  state  of  employment  in  this  country.

This  inductive  testimony  accords  with  a  sound  theoretic  inter-
pretation. Important  as  is  the  wheat  harvest  in  its  bearing  upon
human  welfare,  its  direct  effect  on  volume  of  employment  is  com-
monly misunderstood.  The  statistics  indicate  that  a  shortage  of
the  wheat  harvest,  making  allowance  for  the  normal  increase,
seldom  exceeds  one-tenth.  Now,  the  direct  result  of  such  a  shortage
would  be  upon  the  employment  in  the  set  of  industries  engaged  in
preparing,  carrying,  and  distributing  this  important  article  of  food  :
robbed  of  one-tenth  of  their  usual  supply  of  raw  material,  these
industries  would  find  that  one-tenth  of  their  plant  and  labour  was
superfluous.  Now,  even  if  we  place  so  high  an  estimate  on  the
proportion  of  employment  engaged  in  handling  wheat  as  to  impute
to  them  one-eighth  of  the  whole  volume  of  industry,  a  shortage  of
one-tenth  in  the  wheat  harvest  would  seem  only  to  imply  as  a  direct
effect  a  reduction  of  one-eightieth  in  aggregate  employment.

A  shortage  of  wheat,  however,  it  is  urged,  will  reduce  the  general
value  of  employment  by  diminishing  the  demand  for  other  sorts
of  commodities.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  this  argument  is
worked.  Though  the  price  of  wheat  will  rise,  some  argue,  it  will
not  rise  enough  to  give  the  cultivators  and  the  handlers  of  wheat
for  transport,  manufacture,  or  distribution,  as  large  an  income
as  they  normally  possess.  They  must,  therefore,  reduce  their
demand  for  the  various  commodities  upon  which  they  expend


UNEMPLOYMENT  277

their  income,  and  unemployment  in  the  trades  producing  these
commodities  must  ensue.  Others  argue,  on  the  contrary,  that
the  shorter  supply  of  wheat  will  cause  a  rise  of  price  so  great  that
a  larger  aggregate  amount  of  money  will  be  paid  for  the  short
supply  than  for  a  fuller  harvest.  For  the  elasticity  in  demand  for
wheat,  it  is  contended,  is  very  slight.  The  well-to-do  will  not
consume  less  bread  because  the  price  is  high,  while  the  effect  of
dear  bread  upon  the  workers  is  to  make  them  curtail  their  expendi-
ture in  meat  and  other  foods  so  that  they  tend  even  to  increase
their  consumption  of  wheat.  1  Thus  a  larger  share  than  usual  of
the  general  income  will  go  in  buying  wheat,  and  a  smaller  share
will  be  available  for  buying  other  goods.  Unemployment,  there-
fore, ensues  in  all  these  other  trades.

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  evident  that  these  two  arguments
cut  one  another's  throat,  one  implying  that  a  larger  spending
power  is  given  to  the  producers  and  handlers  of  wheat,  the  other
a  smaller  spending  power.  It  is  evident  that  each  of  the  contentions
can  be  reversed.  If  the  spending  power  of  the  wheat  producers
and  handlers  is  reduced  because  a  smaller  aggregate  sum  is  paid
for  a  short  harvest,  the  spending  power  of  the  rest  of  the  community
upon  other  articles  is  pro  ianto  increased.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
a  larger  aggregate  of  money  were  paid  for  the  short  harvest,  its
recipients  have  their  spending  power  increased  by  just  as  much
as  the  general  consuming  public  find  theirs  reduced.  There  is  a
change  in  the  distribution  of  spending  power  and  of  consequent
demand  for  employment,  but  no  net  diminution.  Some  dislocation
of  trade  may  be  fairly  attributed  to  the  change  of  distribution  of
income,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  assume  that  the  aggregate  of
spending  or  of  employment  will  be  less.

There  is,  however,  another  way  in  which  it  can  be  urged  that
a  short  harvest  will  cause  general  unemployment.  The  producers
of  metal,  textile  or  other  goods  produce  them  in  order  to  exchange
them  for  all  other  commodities,  including  wheat.  The  shortage
of  wheat,  with  a  rise  in  its  value  per  bushel,  will  signify  that  the
value  of  a  unit  of  steel,  cotton,  or  other  goods,  in  terms  of  general
commodities  (inclusive  of  wheat),  has  somewhat  shrunk.  So  far.
then,  as  the  quantity  of  wheat  obtainable  in  exchange  is  in  part  a
motive  to  all  other  producers  to  employ  their  capital  and  labour,
this  motive  is  now  weakened.  Some  capital  and  labour  in  other
trades  will,  therefore,  pass  out  of  emploj^ment  because  the  potential
owners  of  what  they  could  produce  find  the  real  wealth  they  can

'  The  validity  of  this  assumption,  however,  cannot  be  maintained.  Since
there  is  an  actual  shortage  of  wheat  the  well-to-do  or  the  workers,  or  both,
must  consent  to  consume  less,


278  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

get  for  them  reduced  in  quantity.  There  will  be  in  various  industries
employers  who  will  find  that  their  '  real  '  profits  will  be  reduced,
first,  by  the  fact  that  they  must  raise  wages  in  order  to  enable
their  employees  to  pay  the  higher  food-prices  without  which
they  cannot  consume  enough  to  maintain  their  working  efficiency ;
secondly,  by  the  fact  that  their  profits  expressed  in  money  are
diminished  in  purchasing-power  so  far  as  their  own  consumption
is  concerned.

Now  this  contention  is  valid.  So  far  as  the  competition  of
employers  for  profits  governs  production  and  employment,  a  fall
in  real  profits,  due  to  a  reduction  in  the  exchange  rate  of  other
goods  against  wheat,  must  be  considered  to  have  some  influence
in  reducing  employment.  If  a  number  of  other  foods  and  raw
materials  besides  wheat  suffered  simultaneously  from  a  shortage,
which  was  continued  over  a  series  of  years,  it  is  undeniable  that
the  shrinkage  in  the  amount  and  the  purchasing-power  of  interest
and  profit  would  have  a  considerable  effect  in  reducing  the  employ-
ment of  capital  and  labour  in  all  sorts  of  industry.  Though  the
failure  of  even  so  important  a  supply  as  that  of  the  wheat
harvest,  mitigated  as  it  is  by  the  unconsumed  part  of  last  year's
supply,  could  not  of  itself  suffice  so  to  affect  prospective  profits
as  materially  to  influence  employment,  it  may  reasonably  be  held
that  a  simultaneous  reduction  of  output  of  several  important
foods  and  materials,  lasting  for  one  or  several  years,  might  have
a  considerable  joint  effect,  operating  in  two  ways  :  first,  by  direct
effect  on  the  trades  handhng  the  '  short  '  supplies  ,  secondly,  by
the  indirect  influence  through  exchange  upon  the  real  interest  and
profit  of  entrepreneurs  and  investors.  Entrepreneurs  and  investors
are  essentially  speculators  producing  goods  in  the  expectation
that  they  will  sell  at  prices  which  will  yield  as  good  profits  as  they
did  formerly.  If  they  come  to  recognise  that  as  the  result  of  failures
of  important  supplies  their  goods  can  only  effect  sales  on  terms
which  will  reduce  their  real  profits,  they  will  slacken  production
in  their  trades,  and  this  conduct,  reacting  upon  other  trades,
will  get  a  cumulative  effect.

This,  I  think,  must  be  recognised  as  one  important  contributory
cause  of  cyclical  employment.  A  simultaneous  shortage  in  two
such  important  commodities  for  England  as  wheat  and  cotton,
accompanied  by  other  minor  shortages,  may  have  exercised  an
appreciable  influence  in  precipitating  the  depression  of  1908.

But  such  evidence  as  is  available  does  not  justify  the  view  that
the  only  or  the  chief  industrial  cause  of  cyclical  employment  lies
here.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  size  of  the  wheat  harvest,  so  far


UNEMPLOYMENT


279


as  it  is  measurable,  does  not  appear  by  itself  to  exercise  any
appreciable  effect  upon  employment.  No  sufficient  or  reliable
computation  of  the  world  supply  of  foods  and  materials  in  general
exists  to  enable  us  to  ascertain  by  direct  comparison  how  far  their
fluctuations  agree  with  the  fluctuations  of  employment.  But  so
far  as  rise  in  price  is  indicative  of  shortness  of  supply  1  the  statistical
evidence  does  not  afford  much  support  to  those  who  would  explain
general  trade  depression  by  failures  of  harvests  or  of  other  supplies
of  materials.  The  following  Table,  which  compares  our  trade
union  emplojonent  with  Sauerbeck's  Index  Numbers  recording
price  changes  in  foods  and  materials  during  the  last  twenty  years,
discloses  no  appreciable  effect  of  changing  prices  either  of  foods  or
material  upon  employment.

Sauerbeck  Index  Numbers.


Percentage

Food

Material

Total

Year.

Unemployed.

Prices.

Prices.

Prices

1888

415

72

69

70

1889

2-05

75

70

72

1890

210

73

71

72

1891

340

77

68

72

1892

6-20

73

65

68

1893

7-70

72

65

68

1894

7-70

66

60

63

1895

6-05

64

60

62

1896

350

62

60

61

1897

3-65

65

59

62

1898

315

68

61

64

1899

2'40

65

70

68

1900

2-85

69

80

75

1901

380

67

72

70

1902

4"6o

67

71

69

1903

530

66

72

69

1904

6-85

68

72

70

1905

560

69

75

72

1906

4-10

69

77

77

1907

4'20

72

80

80

While,  then,  the  irregularities  of  world  harvests  and  other
supplies  must  be  considered  likely  to  exercise  some  influence  upon
the  aggregate  volume  of  employment  of  industrial  energy,  even  in
a  country  which,  like  Great  Britain,  utilises  most  fully  the  world
market,  these  irregularities  furnish  no  adequate  explanation  of
cyclical  trade  depressions.

§  2. — Nor  can  we  trace  these  major  wastes  of  employment
to  the  changes  either  of  methods  of  production  or  of  consumption
which are continually  taking place  in progressive  communities.


'  Of  course  it  must  be  remembered  that  a  rise  of  prices  may  be  directly
due  to  increase  of  demand  as  well  as  to  decrease  of  supply,  a  consideration
that  must  greatly  weaken  such  statistics  as  evidence  of  causality.


28o  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

The  introduction  of  new  machines  and  other  labour-saving  pro-
cesses, the  substitution  of  one  material  for  another,  steel  for  timber,
electricity  for  gas,  cotton  for  wool,  &c.,  is  constantly  throwing  out
of  employment  specialised  capital  and  labour  in  particular  trades  ;
changes  in  the  locale  of  industries,  the  decline  and  eclipse  of  local
or  even  national  industries  by  changes  of  taste  or  fashion  among
consumers,  are  constantly  taking  place.

Where  such  changes  are  gradual  and  foreseen  no  considerable
amount  of  waste  either  of  capital  or  labour  need  be  involved  :  a
suspension  of  the  flow  of  new  forms  of  capital  and  labour  into  a
trade  will  enable  it  to  die  a  natural  death  without  any  appreciable
quantity  of  positive  unemployment  ;  a  labour-saving  economy
may  be  adopted  in  an  expanding  trade  so  as  to  cause  no  absolute
displacement  of  labour.  Except  in  the  rare  cases  of  a  rapid  applica-
tion of  new  industrial  power  to  large  industrial  industries,  such
as  took  place  in  the  early  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century  in
England,  changes  arising  from  new  industrial  processes  are  seldom
so  rapid  and  simultaneous  as  to  cause  great  displacement  of  labour.

Where  it  is  not  a  case  of  displacing  hand  labour  by  machinery,
but  of  displacing  inferior  by  superior  machinery,  it  usually  pays  the
employer  to  make  the  change  slowly,  and  though  there  have  been
some  recent  exceptions  to  this  rule,  this  law  tends  to  secure  a  more
gradual  movement  in  the  further  development  of  machine  economy.

That  the  introduction  of  labour-saving  machinery  is  directly
responsible  for  a  certain  not  inconsiderable  amount  of  unemploy-
ment of  labour  is,  however,  undeniable.  It  is  true  that,  on  the
whole  and  in  the  long  run,  machinery  does  not  of  itself  tend  to
reduce  the  quantity  of  employment.  Indeed,  it  is  urged  with  some
reason  that  machinery  ought  to  make  for  increased  employment,
inasmuch  as  by  increasing  the  absolute  productivity  of  labour,  it  en-
ables a  less  efficient  worker  to  work  and  earn  a  livelihood  than  could
do  so  when  hand  labour  called  for  greater  physical  capacity.  In
any  case,  there  is  no  reason  in  the  nature  of  things  why  improve-
ments in  other  instruments  of  production  should  cause  less  labour
to  be  employed.  The  first  obvious  effect  of  machinery  is  to  cheapen
expenses  of  production  and  lower  selling  prices.  This  will  stimu-
late demand  for  the  product,  and  that  stimulation  may  be  so  great
as  to  afford  employment  in  the  trade  for  as  large  or  even  a  larger
number  of  workers  than  before.  The  assumption,  however,  that
machinery  must  increase  the  aggregate  employment,  either  in  this
particular  trade  itself,  or  in  that  trade  plus  the  machine-making
and  subsidiary  trades,  is,  of  course,  unwarranted.  All  depends
upon  the  effect  of  the  machine  in  lowering  the  selling  price,  and
the  effect  of  the  lower  selling  price  upon  effective  demand. In  no


UNEMPLOYMENT  281

two  cases  will  these  effects  be  quite  the  same.  There  will  always
be  some  effect  in  stimulating  demand,  but  the  effect  may  be  so  great
as  to  cause  an  increase  of  employment,  or  so  slight  as  to  mitigate
to  a  trifling  extent  the  displacement  of  labour  which  it  is  the  first
object  of  machinery  to  compass.  The  introduction  of  spinning  and
weaving  machinery  into  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  afforded  a
considerable  increase  of  employment,  and  a  number  of  successive
inventions  and  improvements  during  the  second  and  third  quarters
of  the  last  century  had  a  similar  result,  but  later  increments  of
machinery  have  not  been  attended  by  similar  results ;  on  the  con-
trary there  has  been  a  decline  in  the  number  of  persons  employed
in  some  of  the  staple  textile  processes.  The  introduction  of
type-setting  machines  into  printing  works  has  been  followed  by
a  large  increase  of  employment ;  the  introduction  of  clicking
machinery  into  the  shoe  trade  has  been  followed  by  a  net  reduction
of  employment.

These  instances  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  truth,  obvious  from
general  reflexion,  that  the  net  effect  of  machinery  upon  employ-
ment in  a  trade  will  vary  with  the  '  elasticity  of  demand  '  for  the
particular  product  of  that  trade.

When  the  fall  of  prices  due  to  introduction  of  machinery  has
not  caused  such  an  increase  of  demand  for  the  product  as  to  give
employment  to  as  large  a  number  of  workers  as  before  in  this  trade
and  the  trades  making  the  machinery,  there  is  still  no  reason  to
impute  a  net  reduction  of  employment  to  the  machine.  For  the
consumers  of  this  lower-priced  product  will  now  have  to  spend  a
smaller  portion  of  their  income  in  buying  it,  and  will  have  a  larger
portion  free  to  demand  increased  quantities  of  other  sorts  of
commodities  ;  the  effect  of  their  increased  purchases  of  these  latter
will  be  to  stimulate  the  industries  and  the  employment  of  labour
engaged  in  making  these  commodities,  and  the  labour  saved  in  the
first  industry  will  be  absorbed  in  the  latter.

This  theory  of  the  effect  of  machinery  on  volume  of  employ-
ment, is,  with  a  certain  qualification  which  will  appear  later,  quite
correct.

But  while  there  is  no  reason  to  regard  machinery  as  responsible
for  any  large  proportion  of  the  unemployment  which  shows  itself
during  periods  of  depressed  trade,  it  is  idle  to  ignore  the  fact  that
the  progress  of  machine  economy  implies  a  contimial  displacement
of  bodies  of  workers  in  trades  where  such  changes  are  rapid  or
unforeseen,  and  that  these  displaced  workers  may  undergo  a  con-
siderable ])eriod  of  unemployment  before  they  are  absorbed  in
other  trades.  Many  of  them,  especially  those  no  longer  young,
are  not  able  to  find  other  work  which  they  can  get  and  keep,  or


282  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

if  they  can  it  is  lower  grade,  lower  paid  and  less  reliable  employment
than  that  from  which  they  were  displaced.

A  large  number  of  little  wastes  of  labour-power,  amounting
to  a  small  percentage  of  the  total  labour-power  in  a  progres-
sive nation,  is  constantly  in  evidence,  constituting  an  amount
of  unemployment,  which,  though  essential  to  the  present
working  of  the  industrial  system,  is  directly  attributable  to
machinery.,  and  is  naturally  resented  by  the  workers  called  upon
to  bear  it.

Sach  displacement,  however,  together  with  other  detailed
unemployment  due  to  special  trade  causes,  is  always  occurring,
and  the  multiplicity  of  its  causes  makes  it  likely  that  it  forms  a
fairly  constant  factor  in  the  unemployed  problem.

It  is  no  more  possible  to  explain  the  deep  depressions  of  employ-
ment marked  in  Great  Britain  by  the  years  1868,  1879,  1886,
1893,  1904,  as  due  to  the  introduction  of  machinery,  than  to  regard
them  as  the  products  of  bad  harvests.  In  one  or  two  of  these
depressions,  one  or  other  or  both  of  these  causes  played  some
appreciable,  though  a  minor,  part.

§  3. — Neither  is  it  possible  to  explain  the  large  depressions
of  employment  by  misapplication  of  capital  and  labour  as  between
trade  and  trade,  too  much  being  put  into  some  trades,  too  little
into  others — the  miscalculation  of  investors.  For  the  characteristic
feature  of  a  full  trade  depression  is  its  general  character  ;  all  the
staple  industries  are  seen  to  be  congested  with  productive-power
either  simultaneously  or  in  close  causal  order,  a  general  fall  of
selling  prices  being  accompanied  by  a  slackening  of  all  the  main
processes  of  production  in  the  manufacturing,  transport  and
distributive  trades  ;  abundance  of  '  free  '  capital  exists,  seeking,
but  unable  to  find,  any  profitable  investment,  while  mines,  mills,
foundries,  factories,  warehouses,  shipping  and  railways  are  all
working  short  time.

These  are  the  periods  when  the  engineering,  shipbuilding,
and  metal  trades  show  unemployment  in  their  trade  union  members
reaching  as  high  as  fifteen  per  cent,  and  when  many  other  trades
better  able  to  distribute  the  slackness  reach  ten  per  cent,  of
unemployment.

The  actual  drop  of  the  rate  of  production  in  such  periods,  as
compared  with  years  of  active  trade,  is  far  larger  than  even  such
percentages  would  indicate.  For  the  slowing  down  of  the  whole
industrial  system  is  not  at  all  adequately  represented  in  the  actual
closing  of  works  or  the  reduction  in  number  of  hands.  Though
no  even  approximate  measure  of  the  reduction  in  the  pace  of  the
output  of  production  during  depressed  years  is  yet  attainable,  it


UNEMPLOYMENT  283

will  probably  be  found  largely  to  exceed  the  trade  union  figure
for  unemployment.

It  is  not  unnatural  that,  for  the  chief  underlying  cause  of  those
trade  depressions  which  exhibit  large  under-employment  of  the
several  factors  of  production  over  the  whole  field  of  industry,  we
should  look  to  the  operation  of  that  '  surplus  '  of  rents  and  other
'  unearned  '  income  which  lies  heavy  upon  the  economic  system.
In  order,  however,  to  understand  how  the  existence  and  size  of  the
'  surplus  '  affect  the  magnitude  and  regularity  of  production  and
employment,  it  is  necessary  to  revert  to  the  preliminary  analysis
of  the  quantitative  relations  between  production  and  consumption
in  Chapter  III.

In  our  investigation  of  the  processes  of  spending  and  saving  we
pointed  out  that  for  any  industrial  society  the  proportion  of  its
income  which  in  any  given  year  could  be  saved  for  conversion  into
new  forms  of  capital  must  depend  upon  the  state  of  the  industrial
arts  upon  the  one  hand,  and  the  standards  of  consumption  upon
the  other,  and  that,  though  these  arts  of  production  and  consump-
tion were  not  fixed,  their  changes  were  comparatively  slow  and
regular,  and  could  not  be  forced  to  respond  to  any  increase  in  the
proportion  of  spending  or  of  saving.  In  other  words,  if  the  aggre-
gate income  of  Great  Britain  were  taken  as  £2,000,000,000  per
annum,  this  representing  the  payments  made  to  all  the  owners
of  factors  of  production,  it  could  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference
for  the  future  volume  of  production  whether  £300,000,000  or
£400,000,000,  were  saved.  For  if  £300,000,000,  saved  and  invested
in  new  forms  of  capital,  provided  adequately  for  the  increased
demand  for  final  commodities  which  the  rising  consumption  of
the  growing  population  will  create  in  the  calculable  future,  main-
taining full  employment  for  the  factors  of  production,  an  attempt
to  save  and  apply  to  productive  purposes  £400,000,000  out  of  the
same  aggregate  income  would  be  an  excess  of  saving  that  would
defeat  its  purpose,  creating  more  forms  of  capital  than  were  wanted
and  than  would  actually  be  used.

The  test  of  an  extreme  hypothesis  will  make  this  evident.  If
some  great  spiritual  or  hygienic  preacher  could  impose  the  gospel
of  a  '  simple  life  '  so  effectively  upon  an  entire  industrial  community
as  to  induce  an  abandonment  of  the  consumption  of  all  luxuries
and  comforts,  leaving  only  the  use  of  bare  physical  necessaries  of
life,  it  is  obvious  that  these  could  be  supplied  by  about  one-half
of  the  existing  capital  and  labour  of  the  community,  and  that  the
other  half  would  remain  unemployed.  The  appearance  of  unem-
ployment might  be  averted,  either  by  reverting  to  more  primitive
methods  of  production,  or  by  putting  all  forms  of  capital  and  labour


284  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

on  half  time,  but  the  waste  would  be  inevitable.  A  community
capable  of  turning  out  £2,000,000,000  worth  of  commodities  which
sought  to  consume  only  half  this  quantity  and  to  put  the  other
half  of  its  income  into  new  forms  of  capital,  would  be  evidently
guilty  of  insane  conduct.  The  impracticability  of  such  an  economy
would  be  obvious.

But  if  in  a  community  where  the  right  present  adjustment
between  spending  and  saving  were  17  to  3,  there  operated
forces  tending  to  shift  the  proportion  to  16  to  4,  i.e.  to  save
;f400,ooo,ooo  instead  of  £300,000,000  out  of  a  general  income
of  £2,000,000,000,  the  social  waste  might  not  be  so  easily  detected
or  so  quickly  checked.

Now  my  proposition  is  that  the  existence  of  a  '  surplus  '  income,
not  earned  by  its  recipients  and  not  applying  any  normal  stimulus
to  industry,  has  the  effect  of  disturbing  the  economical  adjustment
between  spending  and  saving,  and  of  bringing  about  those  periodical
congestions  and  stoppages  of  industry  with  which  we  are  familiar.
In  a  single-man,  or  '  Crusoe  '  economy,  the  proportion  between
consumption  and  saving,  i.e.  between  the  amount  of  energy  given
to  making  consumables  and  that  given  to  making  new  tools  and
breaking  new  ground,  would  be  determined  by  a  close  comparison
between  present  and  future  pleasures  and  pains.  Crusoe  would
find  himself  willing  to  give  so  much  extra  energy  to  making
provision  for  increased  consumption  next  year,  but  no  more.
So  with  a  completely  communistic  society,  if  it  could  be  got
into  proper  working  order  ;  it  would  regulate  the  proportion  of
its  saving  to  its  spending  by  a  careful  calculus  of  present  and
future  human  satisfaction.  The  rightness  of  such  calculations
would  be  based  upon  the  fact  that  all  saving  required  a
proportionate  effort  on  the  part  of  the  individual  or  the  community
that  made  it.  If  in  a  society  that  was  not  communistic  but
individualistic  this  prime  condition  were  present,  and  all  saving
involved  a  corresponding  effort  or  sacrifice,  the  right  adjustment
between  saving  and  spending  would  be  equally  secure.  But  if,
as  regards  any  large  proportion  of  the  saving,  this  condition  is  not
present,  there  is  no  automatic  guarantee  for  the  maintenance  of
the  right  proportion  between  spending  and  saving.  Now  that
'  saving  '  which  is  made  out  of  unproductive  surplus  income  is  not
amenable  to  this  calculus  ;  unearned  in  origin,  such  '  surplus  '  is
not  allocated  to  the  supply  of  any  particular  human  needs,  as  is
the  case  with  that  income  required  to  maintain  or  stimulate  human
efficiency  of  production.  It  may,  indeed,  be  said  that  human
craving  for  expenditure  upon  luxuries  is  insatiable,  and  that  wealthy
owners  of  '  surplus  '  income  must  be  conceived  as  balancing  present


UNEMPLOYMENT  285

against  future  satisfactions,  and  so  making  painful  sacrifices  when
they  save.  But  such  balancing  will  be  far  looser  and  will  yield
very  different  results  from  the  balancing  of  working  men  who  are
called  upon  to  save.  Even  if  the  cases  are  rare  where  complete
satiety  of  satisfaction  for  present  expenditure  is  attained,  there
are  many  cases  where  this  condition  is  approached,  and  where
all  further  '  surplus  '  accumulates  automatically.  There  is  reason
also  to  believe  that  even  among  the  merely  well-to-do  a  large
proportion  of  the  more  fortuitous  '  surplus  '  which  comes  from
successful  investments,  not  being  wanted  to  support  the  current
standard  of  consumption,  is  reinvested.  This  phenomenon  naturally
arises  from  the  fact  that  the  arts  of  individual  consumption  are
more  conservative  than  the  arts  of  organised  industry.  The
standards  of  life  are  for  most  people  more  conventional  and  more
stable  than  the  standards  of  work.  The  result  is  that  where  the
command  of  the  new  wealth  due  to  industrial  progress  passes
largely  into  the  hands  of  a  small  class,  much  of  it  is  accumulated
and  reapplied  to  industry  from  sheer  inability  to  make  consumption
keep  pace  with  rising  income.  The  visible  and  considerable  rise
in  the  luxurious  expenditure  of  all  the  rich  and  well-to-do  classes
is  only  an  inadequate  attempt  to  keep  pace  with  the  modern
increased  power  of  production.

Though  we  fear  inductive  evidence  upon  such  a  point  is  not
available,  it  will  hardly  be  disputed  that  the  proportion  of  saving  is
generally  in  direct  ratio  to  the  sizes  of  incomes,  the  richest  saving
the  largest  percentage  of  their  income,  the  poorest  the  smallest.  If
this  be  so,  any  tendency  towards  greater  equalisation  of  incomes,
either  by  the  successful  pressure  of  the  workers  for  a  larger  share  of
wealth  or  by  the  taxation  of  '  surplus  '  for  purposes  of  public
expenditure,  will  involve  a  reduction  in  the  proportion  of  saving  to
spending  in  the  aggregate  income.

Now,  is  it  seriously  maintained  by  anyone  that  a  readjustment
of  incomes  so  equitable  and  so  socially  expedient  would  check
industrial  progress  by  unduly  restricting  the  quantity  of  saving  and
investment  ?  Would  the  endeavour  of  the  workers  to  raise  their
standard  of  consumption  and  of  the  state  to  raise  the  public  stan-
dard be  checked  and  thwarted  by  the  lack  of  the  requisite  capital
and  labour  to  meet  the  new  demand  for  commodities  ?

Is  it  not  rather  obvious  that  this  increased  demand,  due  to  a
readjustment  of  income,  providing  and  requiring,  as  it  would,  in-
creased employment  alike  of  capital  and  labour,  would  so  stimulate
the  operation  of  industry  as  to  validate  at  least  as  large  an  absolute
quantity  of  saving  as  before,  though  a  smaller  proportion  of  saving
to  spending  has  been  effected  ?


286  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

If  there  were  two  communities  upon  the  same  industrial  level,
each  with  an  aggregate  income  of  ;^2, 000,000,000,  but  one  of
these  distributed  this  income  so  that  the  wage-earners  took  only
;^6oo,ooo,ooo,  while  in  the  other  they  took  £1,000,000,000,  is  it  con-
tended that  the  general  volume  of  consumption  would  not  be  larger
in  the  latter  or  that  there  would  not  be  enough  capital  and  labour
to  maintain  the  larger  volume  ?  Not  merely  would  the  volume  of
consumption  be  enlarged  by  diverting  '  surplus  '  into  wages  of
efficiency,  but  the  character  of  the  consumption  would  be  steadier,
depending,  as  it  would,  upon  the  rising  standard  of  consumption  of
the  workers,  than  the  same  amount  of  consumption  expended  upon
the  luxuries  of  the  rich.  Indeed,  one  of  the  most  important  results
of  this  reform  would  be  that  the  more  stable  character  of  national
consumption  would  react  upon  industry,  making  the  employment
of  capital  and  labour  more  regular  and  calculable,  and  reducing  the
relative  importance  of  the  fluctuating  trades  engaged  in  satisfying
shallow  tastes  and  trivial  needs.

If  this  ci  -priori  reasoning  be  sound,  it  establishes  at  least  a  prima
facie  case  for  regarding  '  surplus  '  income  as  an  important  cause  of
restricted  and  irregular  employment.  There  is  no  natural  limit
set  upon  the  proportion  of  '  saving  '  out  of  surplus  income.  The
two  normal  economical  checks  usually  adduced  as  preventives  of
excessive  saving  are  thrown  out  of  gear.  The  first,  the  falling  rate
of  interest,  though  not  wholly  inoperative,  will  be  less  effective  in
its  action  upon  this  sort  of  saving  than  upon  any  other.  Indeed,
the  inadequacy  of  changes  in  the  rate  of  interest  as  regulator  of  the
amount  of  saving  is  very  generally  admitted  by  economists.  The
second  check,  the  effect  of  falling  prices,  due  to  increased  production,
in  stimulating  spending  and  so  checking  saving,  has  no  true  efficiency.
For  the  first  direct  effect  of  falling  prices  is  a  corresponding  fall  of
money  incomes,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  derived  from  retail
prices  by  distribution  at  the  various  stages  of  production  :  and  if
money  incomes  fall  pari  passu  with  prices,  there  is  no  reason  to
expect  that  a  fall  of  prices  will  stimulate  demand  for  commodities.
If  it  be  alleged  that,  though  prices  fall,  incomes  will  not  fall  corres-
pondingly, because  a  larger  number  of  purchases  will  be  made  at  the
lower  prices,  we  can  only  reply  that  this  begs  the  very  question  at
issue.  The  play  of  elasticity  of  demand  is  here  inhibited  by  faUing
incomes.

In  point  of  fact,  trade  depressions,  with  falls  in  profits,  interest
and  prices,  are  not  thus  easily  or  automatically  checked.

It  is  not,  of  course,  denied  that  the  industrial  system  does  apply
checks  for  the  adjustment  of  the  relations  between  production  and
consumption. What  is  here  contended  is  that  these  checks  are


UNEMPLOYMENT  287

made  less  effective  by  the  existence  of  an  improperly  digested
surplus  in  the  economic  system,  and  only  operate  after  much  waste
of  productive  power  has  taken  place.

The  natural  effect  of  such  a  surplus  will  be  to  put  into  the
industrial  system  a  larger  quantity  of  new  forms  of  capital  than  are
economically  needed  to  maintain  the  future  supply  of  commodities
at  the  pace  at  which  they  will  be  withdrawn  for  consumption.
The  endeavour  to  use  this  excessive  capital  to  produce  commodities
results  in  that  congestion  of  the  system  which  is  the  immediate
cause  of  trade  depression  and  of  unemployment.  It  is  not  merely
a  case  of  unequal  production,  an  excess  followed  by  a  deficiency.
If  in  an  industrial  community,  where  the  right  adjustment  of
spending  to  saving  is  15  to  3,  there  should  be  a  disturbing  force
tending  to  force  the  proportion  to  14  to  4,  the  aggregate  of  produc-
tion over  the  whole  period  of  boom  and  depression  will  be  less  than
if  the  right  proportion  had  been  maintained  throughout.

The  '  unemployed  '  question  is  not  distinctively  or  peculiarly  a
labour  question  :  it  is  the  problem  of  the  simultaneous  excess  of  all
the  factors  of  production.  In  a  full  depression  all  the  forms  of
capital  and  of  labour  requisite  to  produce  wealth  are  there,  but
they  cannot  produce.  This  is  sometimes  denied.  It  is  admitted
that  plant  and  fixed  capital  exist  in  superfluity  and  are  unemployed
along  with  labour,  but  it  is  maintained  that  the  circulating  capital
required  to  pay  wages  and  so  employ  labour  is  wanting.  So  there  is
a  reversion  to  an  exploded  wage-fund  doctrine  to  explain  depression.
A  formal  refutation  of  this  doctrine  fortunately  is  not  necessary
here.  For  the  fact  of  a  deficiency  of  the  means  to  employ  labour
is  denied.  Whether  wages  be  taken  as  the  money  which  must
be  advanced  to  labour  before  its  product  is  sold,  or  as  the  food
and  other  commodities  which  are  needed  to  support  labour,  there  is
no  necessary  deficiency  of  either.  So  far  as  the  money  is  concerned,
when  a  depression  is  set  in  money  is  usually  cheap,  and  any  employer
can  get  credit  on  easier  terms  than  usual,  provided  he  can  give
security,  i.e.  can  show  that  there  is  a  probability  of  his  selling  at
profitable  prices  the  goods  he  could  produce  by  setting  at  work  his
idle  plant  and  labour.  So  far  as  the  real  wages  or  commodities
are  concerned,  it  is  manifest  that,  if  the  capital  and  labour  which
stand  idle  at  all  the  different  points  in  the  processes  of  industry
used  their  actual  producing  power,  the  required  commodities  would
be  produced  as  fast  as  they  were  needed  for  consumption  by
the  wage-earners  who  now  had  money  to  spend  in  buying
them.

So  far  we  have  set  our  argument  to  show  that  there  is  an
a  priori  necessity  for  an  unproductive '  surplus  ' to  disturb  the


288  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

quantitative  relation  between  production  and  consumption,  and  so
to  lead  to  periods  of  depression.

Let  us,  however,  now  approach  the  problem  from  the  other  end,
examining  the  nature  of  a  periodic  trade  depression.  The  simplest
diagnosis  of  a  depression  is  that  it  shows  all  the  factors  of  production
simultaneously  existing  in  excess  of  the  actual  industrial  require-
ments. Not  in  this  trade  or  in  that,  but  throughout  the  whole
industrial  field  are  found  mines,  mills,  foundries,  railways,  factories,
warehouses,  shops,  with  the  labour  that  belongs  to  them,  working
short  time  or  lying  idle.  There  is  more  productive  power  of  every
sort  than  is  wanted  for  actual  production.  Why  cannot  these  pro-
ductive factors  co-operate  to  produce  commodities  as  heretofore
when  trade  was  active  ?  Because  the  organisers  of  production  have
reason  to  believe  that,  if  they  set  the  available  productive  power
fully  to  work,  they  could  not  sell  the  product  at,a  price  which  would
cover  the  expenses  of  production.

There  is  only  one  rational  explanation  of  why  they  cannot  do
this  year  what  they  did  last  year.  If  there  is  operative  in  the
system  any  force  tending  to  increase  the  producing  power  faster
than  the  rate  of  consumption,  as  we  see  there  is  in  the  over-saving
of  the  surplus,  it  will  produce  just  the  result  which  we  see.  A  trade
depression  is  a  condition  of  general  under-production  directly
connected  with  a  condition  of  under-consumption.  This  is  an
undeniable  statement  of  the  facts.  We  think  it  will  also  be  generally
admitted  that  under-production,  or  unemployment,  is  directly  due
to  inability  to  sell  all  that  could  be  produced  at  profitable  prices.

§  4. — It  is,  however,  often  urged  that  the  direct  cause  of  the  slack-
ening or  stoppage  of  production  is  the  refusal  of  bankers  and  other
credit  makers  to  furnish  credit  to  would-be  producers  at  a  reasonable
or  at  any  price,  and  it  is  quite  evident  that  this  phenomenon  must  be
taken  into  account  in  explaining  a  depression.  But  why  do  bankers
at  the  beginning  of  a  depression  refuse  producers  or  would-be  pro-
ducers credit  upon  the  terms  they  furnished  it  formerly  ?  It  is
not  because  they  have  not  the  '  money  '  to  advance  ;  on  the  con-
trary, at  such  times  loanable  capital  lies  in  their  hands  in  larger
quantities  than  usual.  They  do  not  furnish  money  as  formerly,
because  they  have  lost  '  confidence  '  in  the  ability  of  customers  to
repay  the  loans,  and  because  the  collateral  security  that  is  offered
has  shrunk  in  value.  But  why  have  they  lost  '  confidence '  ?  and
why  have  securities  (usually  '  shares  ')  sunk  in  value  ?  Their
'  confidence '  and  the  value  of  securities  have  shrunk  for  the  same
reason,  because  of  a  belief  that  the  products  which  the  borrowers
design  to  produce  will  not  find  a  profitable  market.  Now  this
belief,  this  lack  of  confidence,  this  shrinkage  of  securities,  are  not


UNEMPLOYMENT  289

mere  psychological  phenomena :  they  have  their  ground  in  actual
facts  relating  to  the  sale  of  goods.  The  lack  of  confidence  which
leads  bankers  to  refuse  credit  is  attributable  to  their  knowledge
that  sales  of  commodities  have  already  been  effected  at  a  shrinking
margin,  that  the  actual  markets  are  becoming  congested  with  un-
saleable commodities,  and  that  the  bottom  is  not  yet  reached.  In
other  words,  the  psychological  explanation  of  depressions  is  an
interpretation  through  finance  of  the  actual  maladjustment  of
productive  power  and  rate  of  consumption  in  the  industrial  system.

The  financial  system,  with  its  instruments  of  credit,  has  the  effect
of  postponing  and  concealing  for  a  time  the  effects  of  this  mal-
adjustment and  of  making  the  crises  more  violent  when  they  actually
occur. It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  this  must  be.

Let  us  start  from  a  period  of  prosperous  trade  with  high,  firm
prices.  Every  manufacturer  and  merchant  at  such  a  time  wants  to
do  as  much  business  as  possible  :  he  wants  to  extend  his  premises,
put  in  new  plant,  buy  larger  stocks  of  materials  and  employ  more
labour,  so  as  to  earn  a  higher  margin  of  profit  on  the  largest  possible
output.  He  therefore  seeks  to  use  his  credit  to  the  full :  he  can
get  a  large  supply  of  money,  comparatively  cheap,  because  bankers
and  other  furnishers  of  money  believe  that  the  investment  will
fructify  in  profitable  sales  affording  a  certainty  of  repayment,  and
the  '  collateral '  for  the  same  reason  ranks  high  in  value,  for  the
value  of  stocks  and  shares  is  directly  dependent  upon  profitable
sales  of  the  product  of  the  company.  In  prosperous  trade,  then,
bankers  create  the  maximum  of  '  money,'  supporting  the  *  boom/
and  helping  the  business  men  to  increase  to  the  utmost  the  actual
productive  power  and  the  actual  rate  of  output.  Now,  if  this  rate
of  actual  output  never  became  excessive,  i.e.  if  there  were  an
adequate  provision  that  the  rate  of  consumption  should  rise  pari
passu  with  every  increase  in  rate  of  production,  there  is  no  reason
why  any  lack  of  '  confidence  '  should  enter  the  mind  of  bankers
and  financiers.

But  suppose  that  from  the  cause  we  here  adduce,  some
comparatively  slight  deficiency  of  spending  and  corresponding
excess  of  saving,  there  has  been  put  into  productive  operations  a
little  more  capital  and  labour  than  is  wanted  to  maintain  the  supply
of  commodities  at  former  prices,  what  will  happen  ?  A  weakening
of  prices  will  be  the  first  symptom,  and  as  prices  begin  to  fall  the
margin  of  profit  diminishes,  and  with  this  diminution  of  the  earning
power  of  capital  the  repayment  of  loans,  the  meeting  of  bills,
become  less  certain,  while  the  collateral  securities  also  shrink.
At  the  first  signs  of  a  weakening  of  markets  the  banks,  not
believing  the check  to  trade  is  serious,  may  probably  buttress

u


290  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

with  further  credit  firms  in  whose  success  they  are  akeady  strongly
interested,  enabhng  the  firms  to  tide  over  difficulties  for  a  time,
and  to  go  on  producing  full  blast.  But  if  there  exists  some  real
excess  of  producing  power,  this  further  use  of  credit  can  only
make  things  worse,  helping  to  continue  loading  the  markets
with  unsaleable  goods,  bringing  down  selling  prices,  converting
former  profits  into  losses,  and  causing  a  shrinkage  of  values  of
securities.

As  soon  as  this  state  of  things  becomes  pretty  evident,  the  so-
called  '  want  of  confidence,'  which  seems  to  many  economists  the
fons  et  origo  malorwn,  comes  into  operation.  Banks  begin  suddenly
to  raise  the  price  of  money,  and  to  refuse  advances  to  businesses
which  they  had  fed  up  with  credit  j  the  money  which  passes  into
their  control  from  the  saving  and  investing  public  is  no  longer
invested  productively.

Weak  businesses,  now  dependent  on  credit,  not  in  order  to  earn
profits  but  to  prevent  collapse,  find  greater  and  greater  difficulty
in  getting  it  on  any  terms,  and  they  begin  to  break.  For  a  time
*  money  '  may  be  procurable  for  stronger  firms,  though  at  such
high  price  as  diminishes  their  profits  already  hit  by  low  prices,  and
so  lowers  the  value  of  their  stock,  reacting  once  more  upon  their
credit.  Businesses  which  can  conceal  their  real  condition  in  the
earlier  stages  of  depression  may  still  utilise  the  credit  system  to
enable  them  to  continue  producing  in  a  falling  market,  which  they
thus  help  further  to  congest.  Every  art  is  used  to  procure  credit
to  tide  them  over  what  is  believed  to  be,  and  actually  may  be,  only
a  temporary  crisis.  But  if  a  real  prolonged  depression  is  on  its  way,
it  is  easy  to  see  that  such  abuse  of  credit  must  aggravate  its  effect.
When  want  of  confidence  is  fully  set  in,  and  it  is  practically
impossible  to  obtain  '  money  '  from  bankers,  while  no  one  will
look  at  any  new  investment,  the  '  stoppage  '  of  production  and
the  consequent  unemployment  of  capital  and  labour  assume  large
dimensions.

Sometimes  the  '  want  of  confidence  '  is  precipitated  by  a  dra-
matic collapse,  which  suddenly  exhibits  the  growing  rottenness  of
trade.  Some  bank  or  investment  company,  whose  securities  have
run  down  or  have  become  unsaleable,  is  unable  to  avert  suspicion,
or  to  tide  over  a  depression,  or  to  meet  its  obligations,  and  is  obliged
to  close  its  doors.  Suspicion  is  directed,  rightly  or  wrongly,  on
other  financial  houses  believed  to  be  directly  involved  in  the  failure
or  to  have  been  engaging  in  similar  bad  trading  ;  depositors  and
investors,  seeking  to  clear  out,  convert  suspicion  into  panic,  and
the  panic  may  spread  until  otherwise  substantial  and  conservative
houses  are  involved,  unless  the  rotten  businesses  are  cut  adrift  and


UNEMPLOYMENT  291

a  solid  organised  stand  is  made  by  corporate  action  of  the  strong
financial  houses.

So  absorbing  is  the  distinctively  financial  aspect  of  these  crises
which  often  herald  a  widespread  depression,  and  so  clearly  traceable
is  the  financial  collapse  to  psychological  conditions,  that  not  only
financiers  but  commercial  men  and  manufacturers  are  often  led  to
treat  booms  and  depressions  of  trade  primarily  as  tidal  movements
in  the  minds  of  men.  Out  of  a  normal  state  of  quiet  confidence
somehow  men  grow  sanguine,  and  a  state  of  excessive  confidence
supervenes  which  breeds  speculation  and  risk-taking ;  this  over-
confidence  is  maintained,  and  grows  until  some  incident,  small  in
itself,  calls  a  halt,  the  tide  begins  to  turn,  and  the  irrational  excess
of  confidence  becomes  an  irrational  defect,  causing  a  contraction  of
the  springs  of  credit  corresponding  to  the  former  expansion,  and
so  bringing  to  a  stoppage  the  wheels  of  industry  !

Now,  our  analysis  of  the  relations  between  finance  and  industry
leads  us  to  focus  our  attention  upon  price-changes  as  the  index  and
the  governor  of  industrial  operations. Booms and  depressions
are  traced  to  those  actual  movements  in  the  relations  between
supply  and  demand  for  commodities  which  are  admittedly  the  sole
immediate  causes  of  rises  and  falls  of  prices  of  commodities. A
general  fall  of  prices  is  simply  a  failure  of  demand  to  keep  pace  with
rate  of  supply,  implying  a  condition  of  over-supply  and,  until  further
production  is  checked,  of  over-production. Such  fall  of  prices,
with  growing  over-supply,  low^ers  present  and  prospective  profits,
thus  bringing  down  the  price  of  shares,  and  thereby  causing  the  high
rate  of  discount  and  the  stringency  of  credit,  which  are  the  direct
agents  in  checking  production  and  in  bringing  about  unemploy-
ment of  real  capital  and  labour. The  whole  financial  system  is
based  upon  actual  industry  :  reflects,  anticii)ates,  and  frequently
exaggerates  its  forces and  tendencies. Depressions, with their
accompanying  unemployment,  must  therefore  be  traced  through
their  operations  in  the  delicate  mechanism  of  finance  to  the  failure
of  consumption  to  keep  full  pace  with  the  increase  of  productive
power  so  as  to  furnish  a  full  and  equable  employment  for  this  power.
§  5- — Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  any  actual  tendency
towards  under-consumption  or  over-saving,  commonly  adduce  the
fact  that  even  in  a  deep  depression  no  very  large  amount  of  money-
savings  remain  idle,  as  loanable  capital,  in  the  hands  of  bankers
and  other  investment  agencies. This  fact  is  not  denied,  but  fur-
nishes no  refutation  of the  hypothesis  of  over-saving. For  there
is  no  need  to  suppose  that  excessive  saving  is  accumulated  to  an
indefinite  extent  in  idle  loanable  capital. There  is  another  outlet
which  serves  to  conceal  the  extent  of  the  excess. Though  the

u  2


292  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

amount  of  new  saving  which  can  take  shape  in  new  forms  of  capital
is  Hmited,  a  further  amount  may  find  employment  in  acquiring
for  its  owners  possession  of  properties  already  in  existence,  the
possessors  of  which  are  compelled  by  the  very  pressure  of  a  trade
depression  to  part  with  them.  The  importance  of  this  aspect  of
investment  during  trade  depressions  is  generally  overlooked  and
deserves  special  attention. i

Take  the  case  of  an  economic  community  of  a  progressive  type
with  an  income  of  twenty  units,  spending  seventeen,  and  saving
three  for  regular  investment  in  new  productive  capital,  which
finds  full,  regular  employment  in  meeting  the  growing  demand  for
commodities.  Now  suppose,  owing  to  some  change  in  distribution
of  incomes,  some  return  to  simplicity  of  living  or  some  increased
appreciation  of  future  as  compared  with  present  satisfactions,
spending  is  reduced  to  sixteen,  saving  raised  to  four,  what  must
happen  ?  The  increased  savings  cannot  take  shape  in  productive
capital,  for,  as  the  increase  of  current  and  prospective  consumption
of  commodities  is  reduced,  a  smaller  amount  of  new  productive
capital  can  be  put  into  operation,  and  any  attempt  to  put  into
operation  as  much  as  before  must  speedily  be  checked  by  the
obvious  glut.  Instead  of  three  units  of  saving  taking  shape  in
productive  capital,  there  is  now  only  room  for  two  and  a  half.
But  owing  to  increased  saving  four  are  available.  What  happens
to  the  extra  one  and  a  half  ?  There  will  be  some  hoarding,  i.e.
some  lingering  of  loanable  funds  in  hands  of  financiers,  from  slowness
in  finding  any  sort  of  investment.

Let  us  say  that  this  disposes  of  half  a  unit — an  excessive  esti-
mate. What  becomes  of  the  remaining  one  ?

In  order  to  answer  this  question,  we  must  look  to  the  effect  of
the  diminished  spending  of  the  saving  classes  upon  the  general
income  from  industry.  Since  there  is  a  reduced  demand  both  for
commodities  and  for  new  capital  goods,  there  will  be  a  shrinkage
of  money  income  and  real  income  among  all  industrial  classes.
Those  among  these  classes  whose  income  is  reduced  very  low  will
be  disposed  to  part  with  any  property,  land,  houses,  factories,  etc.,
they  may  possess,  in  order  to  keep  living  and  to  pay  their  way.
This  means  that  a  large  amount  of  such  properties  will  at  such  a
time  become  a  new  field  of  investment  for  the  savings  which  cannot
take  shape  in  new  productive  capital.  The  surplus  unit  of  saving
will  find  this  form  of  investment,  consisting  in  the  acquisition
of  productive capital  already  existing  and  belonging to classes

'  The  first  clear  exposition  of  this  process  of  investment  in  trade  depres-
sions is  contained  in  a  recently  published  American  work,  A  Neglected  Point
in  connexion  with  Crises,  by  N.  Johannsen.


UNEMPLOYMENT  293

impoverished  by  the  very  increase  of  saving  vvliich  has  glutted  the
investment  market.  Saved  by  the  saving  class,  it  will  be  spent  by
the  non-saving  class.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  community  it
represents  no  saving  at  all,  but  simply  a  transfer  of  spending  from
one  class  to  another.  But  the  class  which  gets  it  only  maintains
its  former  spending,  while  the  class  which  parts  with  it  has  reduced
its  total  spending.  So  there  remains  as  a  net  effect  of  the  operation
a  reduction  of  total  demand  for  commodities  and  new  forms  of
capital.  This  means  reduced  employment  for  capital  and  labour,
diminished  rate  of  production,  and  shrinkage  of  the  general  real
income.  This  is  the  condition  known  as  depression.  Why  does
it  not  continue  indefinitely  and  grow  ever  worse  ?  Because  from
the  very  beginning  of  the  maladjustment  between  spending  and
saving  a  process  of  readjustment  gradually  comes  into  play.
Directly  a  shrinkage  in  demand  for  commodities  and  new  pro-
ductive capital  occurs,  the  lessened  rate  of  production  begins  to
reduce  all  incomes,  including  those  of  the  saving  class.  Aggregate
income  no  longer  stands  at  twenty,  but  falls  to  eighteen,  or  even
seventeen.  The  saving  class  who  were  trying  to  save  four  out  of
a  total  twenty,  leaving  sixteen  for  spending,  are  not  willing  to
save  four  or  even  three  out  of  an  aggregate  income  reduced  to
eighteen  or  seventeen.  Their  permanent  standard  of  comfort
stands  in  the  way.  When  the  shrinkage  of  production  and  of
income  has  gone  far  enough,  not  merely  is  the  actual  amount  of
saving  reduced,  but  the  proportion  of  saving  to  spending  is  brought
back  towards  the  normal  rate  which  preceded  the  attempt  to  over-
save,  or  even  below  that  rate.  When  the  depression  has  reached
its  lowest,  there  is  for  a  time  a  state  of  actual  under-saving,  i.e.
an  insufficient  provision  of  new  productive  capital  to  meet  the
reasonable  calculations  of  future  demand  for  commodities.  This
condition  even  checks  the  recovery  of  trade.  But  it  is  only  transi-
tory. Another  automatic  check  on  over-saving  is  associated
with  this.  When  the  investment  of  surplus  saving  in  the  acquisition
of  existing  properties  has  gone  a  certain  way,  all  the  safer  invest-
ments of  this  order  will  have  been  made,  and  the  prevailing  depres-
sion will  have  brought  down  the  less  safe  ones  to  so  low  a  value
that  they  will  no  longer  find  buyers.  So  far,  then,  as  saving  is
motived  by  a  desire  of  the  savers  to  make  profitable  investments,
the  depression  must  weaken  this  motive,  imparting  precariousness
to  all  new  productive  capital,  and  reducing  the  quantity  of  sound
investment  in  the  acquisition  of  existing  productive  capital.

These  checks  prevent  the  maladjustment  from  going  beyond
a  certain  point.  But  they  do  not  become  operative  until  there  is
actual  waste  of  productive  resources,  and  an  actual  condition  of


294  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

unemployment  and  under-employmcnt  of  capital  and  labour,  due
to  the  attempt  to  save  a  larger  proportion  of  the  general  income
than  the  present  state  and  prospects  of  the  industrial  arts  render
feasible.

The  operation  of  these  checks,  then,  requires  a  correction  of  our
original  hypothesis,  which  was  that  a  community,  when  the  right
proportion  of  spending  to  saving  was  seventeen  to  three,  might  alter
that  proportion  to  sixteen  to  four.  The  latter  proportion,  as  we
now  see,  will  not  be  actually  attained,  for  with  the  attempt  to  move
towards  it,  the  total  income  twenty  will  at  once  begin  to  shrink,
and,  as  we  see,  this  shrinkage  will  prevent  the  establishment  of
sixteen  to  four.  In  a  word,  any  attempt  at  over-saving  wiU  be
checked  when  it  has  gone  a  certain  way,  by  means  of  the  under-
production and  shrinkage  of  income  it  inevitably  produces.

Thus  far  we  have  treated  employment  as  issuing  from  a  demand
operative  through  the  application  of  money.  But  the  argument  is
fortified  if,  ignoring  for  the  moment  the  use  of  money,  we  reduce
commerce  to  its  simplest  terms,  that  of  production  and  exchange
of  goods.  Let  A,  producing  a  goods,  which  are  necessaries,  for
exchange  against  b  goods,  luxuries  produced  by  B,  represent  the
increased  saving  class.  Formerly  each  a  as  it  was  produced  went
to  B,  causing  a  6  to  come  to  A  for  A's  consumption.  Now  A
wishes  to  save  more  instead  of  consuming  b.  He  therefore  refuses
to  make  the  former  exchange  of  a  against  b.  But  B  wants  a  just
as  before.  In  order  to  get  it  he  has  to  offer  to  A  not  b,  but  some-
thing A  will  consent  to  take  in  exchange  for  a.  This  something  is
a  house  or  some  other  '  property  '  he  owns.  A  in  this  case  can  go
on  producing  a  and  exchanging  it  with  B  as  before,  except  that,
instead  of  receiving  bits  of  b,  he  receives  bits  of  house  or  other
property  that  belonged  to  B.  B  consumes  as  before,  but  he  stops
producing  b,  having  lost  the  market  for  it,  and  the  aggregate  employ-
ment of  labour  and  capital  for  the  community  is  thus  reduced.

If,  however,  as  is  likely,  the  whole  supply  of  a  which  B  formerly
consumed  is  not  '  necessary  '  to  him,  he  will  economise  his  use  of  a
when  he  finds  that  his  market  for  b  is  reduced  by  the  new  saving
policy  of  A.  He  will  take  bits  of  a  at  a  slower  rate  than  before,
exchanging  his  house  or  other  property  against  them.  This  will
force  A  to  produce  a  at  a  slower  rate,  and  will  saddle  his  trade  with
some  unemployment,  i.e.  A  will  be  partially  frustrated  in  his
attempt  at  increased  saving  by  an  inability  to  exchange  his  product
as  freely  as  before,  an  inability  directly  due  to  his  attempt  to  over-
save,  or,  in  other  words,  to  his  refusal  to  consume  b  as  formerly.
In  this  event  there  will  be  more  unemployment  than  if  B  had  insisted
on  consuming  a  at  the  former  rate,  for  to  the  unemployment  in  B's


UNEMPLOYMENT  295

trade,  due  to  a  complete  stoppage  in  producing  h,  is  added  some
unemployment  in  A's  trade  due  to  a  smaller  production  of  a  in  a
given  time.

If  A  be  taken  as  representative  of  all  the  '  over-saving  '  class,
and  B  of  the  rest  of  the  community,  the  validity  of  this  argument
cannot  be  impaired  by  suggesting  that  B  can  find  any  other  market
for  the  b  he  formerly  exchanged  against  a  by  lowering  the  price
and  exchanging  it  against  c  ov  d  made  by  other  parties  C  and  D.
The  first  act  of  the  '  over-saving  '  group,  in  refusing  to  exchange
their  products  as  formerly  against  products  simultaneously  produced
by  the  non-saving  group,  will  inhibit  the  latter  from  demanding
more  goods  than  before,  however  much  the  price  were  lowered.

An  increased  rate  of  saving  on  the  part  of  a  community  must
either  take  shape  in  the  continuous  increase  of  new  forms  of  capital
produced  in  expectation  of  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  growth  of  future
consumption,  or  in  a  compulsory  substitution  of  present  for  past
saving,  effected  by  enabling  present  over-savers  to  get  possession
of  properties  already  in  existence  which  represent  past  savings.
In  the  latter  case,  since  the  acts  of  saving  stimulate  no  new  pro-
duction of  capital-forms,  they  involve  a  corresponding  volume  of
unemployment.

The  following  brief  summary  of  the  argument  attributing
cyclical  unemployment  mainly  to  under-consumption  may  here
be  conveniently  appended  : —

1.  The  '  demand  '  for  labour  is  directly  measured  by  the  amount
of  money  which  employers  offer  for  the  purchase  of  labour-power,
or  by  the  amount  of  commodities  available  for  purcha-se  by  this
amount  of  money.

2.  This  amount  of  direct  monetary  demand  for  labour  is  not,
however,  fixed,  but  varies  with,  depends  upon,  and  is  derived  from
the  purchases  of  actual  goods  (productive  or  consumptive)  at  current
prices.  The  money  paid  in  weekly  wages  in  the  normal  condition
of  trade  is  derived  from  the  money  paid  for  actual  goods,  which  flows
back  through  the  several  processes  of  production,  stimulating  the
factors  to  replace  in  supply  the  goods  w^hich  have  been  purchased.^

3.  The  immediate  effect  upon  demand  for  labour  of  demanding
capital  goods  (the  application  of  savings)  is  the  same  as  that  of
demanding  consumptive  goods.

4.  But  if  any  economic  force  incites  saving  to  rise  above  a  certain
definite  proportion  to  spending,  the  futility  of  applying  such  saving

'  Only  in  the  case  of  an  increase  of  demand  for  labour  in  order  to  work  an
increase  of  plant  for  new  industry,  it  is  requisite  to  assume  that  some  stock
of  food,  &c.,  some  wage-fund  the  result  of  previous  saving,  has  been  provided.
The  continuance  of  current  production,  all  that  is  requisite  to  stop  depression,
requires  no  such  provision.


296  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

to  demand  more  capital  goods  is  made  apparent  by  the  fact  that
some  existing  capital  goods  cannot  function  in  production.

5.  While,  then,  the  first  effect  of  such  over-saving  (under-
consumption) is  to  employ  labour  to  produce  more  forms  of  capital
than  are  economically  requisite  to  supply  consumptive  goods  at  the
rate  at  which  they  are  demanded,  the  secondary  effects  are  {a)  a  con-
gestion of  the  industrial  system  with  goods,  productive  and  con-
sumptive, which  are  not  bought  as  fast  as  they  are  produced  ;  {b)  a
diversion  of  new  individual  savings  from  investment  in  new  forms
of  capital  to  investment  in  the  acquisition  of  previously  existing
properties  forced  into  the  market  by  the  shrinking  incomes  of  their
owners.

6.  When  both  spending  and  real  saving  (creation  of  new  forms
of  capital)  are  reduced,  the  aggregate  rate  of  demand  for  labour  and
capital  is  reduced  and  production  runs  at  low  pressure.

7.  This  means  a  general  fall  in  income,  for  income  is  nothing
else  than  the  annual  product  of  industry.  When  the  rate  of
reduction  has  reached  a  certain  point,  the  proportion  of  saving  to
spending  is  cut  down  below  the  normal  rate,  and  a  process  of  recuper-
ation begins,  no  large  further  increase  of  capital  taking  place  while
the  consumption  of  a  growing  population  increases,  though  at  a
slower  pace  than  usual.

8.  The  cancellment  of  large  quantities  of  existing  capital,
representing  over-saving,  and  the  retardation  of  new  saving  for
investment,  restore  for  a  time  the  right  adjustment  between  real
capital  and  rate  of  consumption,  and  a  spell  of  good  trade  with  full
employment  for  capital  and  labour  ensues.  This  continues  until
the  chronic  impulse  towards  over-saving  due  to  surplus  income
again  becomes  fully  operative,  preparing  a  new  period  of  depression.

If  this  analysis  be  accepted,  it  explains  not  merely  the  necessity
of  trade  depressions  but  their  periodicity,  and  the  tidal  movements
in  volume  of  production  and  employment  which  occasion  so  much
perplexity  and  so  much  distress.  For  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume
that  some  sudden  change  in  the  proportion  of  saving  to  spending
leads  to  a  trade  depression  and  its  unemployment.  If  there  exists
a  normal  tendency  towards  over-saving  or  under-consumption,
such  as  appears  to  be  involved  in  the  existence  of  an  unproductive
surplus  of  unearned  income,  the  regular  pressure  of  that  excess  will
express  itself  in  some  such  rhythmic  order  as  that  of  the  booms  and
depressions  which  actually  occur.

§  6. — No  remedies  for  '  unemployment '  can  be  effective,  so  far  as
the  whole  industrial  system  is  concerned,  which  do  not  correct  the
normal  tendency  of  production  to  outrun  consumption,  evidenced
to  the  ordinary  business  man  by  the  greater  difficulty  in  selling  than


UNEMrLOYMENT  297

in  buying.  Local  or  even  national  remedies  such  as  technical
instruction,  improved  machinery  of  manufacture  or  of  transport,
enabling  a  particular  district,  trade,  or  nation,  to  out-compete
others,  by  better  or  cheaper  production,  may  secure  a  larger  share
of  the  volume  of  employment,  shifting  more  unemployment  on
to  less  efficient  trades,  localities  or  nations.  But,  treating  the
industrial  system  as  a  whole,  it  is  evident  that  improvements  of
productive  power  cannot  remedy  a  generally  prevalent  unemploy-
ment which  attests  an  existing  excess  of  productive  power.

Indeed,  we  may  go  further  and  affirm  that  the  most  real  and
injurious  check  upon  the  progressive  efficiency  of  industry,  whether
in  the  shape  of  inventions,  investment,  and  the  education  of  labour,
is  furnished  by  the  recurrence  of  long  periods  of  trade  in  which
ability,  capital  and  labour-power  stand  idle  or  half  employed.

Though  in  a  progressive  system  of  industry  a  certain  margin  of
waste,  tolerably  constant,  must  be  incurred  through  misapplication
of  industrial  power  and  miscalculations  of  future  demand,  there  is
no  reason  in  the  nature  of  industry  why  these  great  oscillations  of
the  volume  of  production  and  employment  should  recur.  To  say
that  the  modern  system  of  industry  will  not  work  without  a  margin
is  merely  to  assert  that  whatever  is  is  inevitable.  No  other  adequate
explanation  is  given  than  that  of  a  normal  failure  of  consumption
to  keep  pace  with  productive  power,  and  a  consequent  periodic
accumulation  of  materials  and  goods  in  the  productive  system
which  congest  that  system  and  cause  injurious  stoppages.  The
financial  machinery  of  adjustment  thrown  out  of  gear  fails  to  act
with  rapidity  and  precision,  and  the  equilibrium  between  the  rate
of  production  and  of  consumption  which  is  eventually  brought
about  is  always  effected  upon  an  unstable  basis  which  under-
estimates the  increasing  power  of  production  shortly  disclosed  when
business  has  resumed  a  normal  course.

No  remedy  for  unemployment  is  valid  unless  it  is  seen  to  stimu-
late the  current  of  consumption  by  converting  surplus  income,
either  into  wages  spent  in  raising  the  standard  of  comfort  of  the
workers,  or  into  public  revenue  spent  in  raising  the  standard  of
public  life.  Surplus  income,  by  its  excessive  saving  and  by  its
irregular  spending,  impairs  the  volume  and  the  regularity  of  employ-
ment :  its  diversion  cither  directly  into  wages  or  into  public  expen-
diture for  steady  purposes  of  popular  support  and  progress  is  the
only  method  of  securing  full  and  regular  employment.

It  is  only  by  the  application  of  this  principle  that  we  can  test  the
utility  of  concrete  palliatives  for  unemployment  which  modern
governments  devise.  Proposals  which,  for  educational  or  other
purposes,  aim  at  removing  from  the  labour  market  certain  classes  of


298  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

superabundant  labourers  are  genuine  correctives  of  the  over-supply
of  current  productive  power.  If  the  large  employment  of  young
boys  and  girls  can  be  curtailed  by  the  abolition  of  half-time  and
compulsory  attendance  at  continuation  and  technical  schools,
their  removal  from  the  labour  market  will  furnish  some  increased
employment  of  adults  at  higher  wages,  and  will  generall}^  strengthen
the  power  of  low-skilled  adult  labour  to  organise  and  to  obtain  higher
pay.  The  same  result  will  attend  any  removal  from  the  competi-
tive labour  market  of  inefticients  and  weaklings,  and  semi-invalids
incapable  of  any  sort  of  hard,  regular  work.  If  they  can  be  placed
in  hospitals  or  training  colonies,  fuller  and  more  regular  employment
and  some  rise  of  wages  will  ensue  in  the  trades  in  w-hich  they  were
casual  hangers-on.  Not  onl}^  would  the  labour  market  by  such
measures  be  relieved  of  the  less  effective  portion  of  its  own  supply,
but  the  increased  cost  of  keeping  and  educating  these  classes
devolving  on  the  public  purse  would,  following  the  line  of  our
analysis,  cause  some  net  increase  of  consumption  and  thus  involve
increased  employment  for  capital  and  labour.

Since  large  numbers  of  efficient  and  skilled  workers  suffer  both
from  seasonal  and  cyclical  unemployment,  it  is  not  obvious  that
improved  teaching,  general  or  technical,  will  increase  the  volume  of
employment.  Though  individuals,  by  training,  will  get  a  better
chance  of  obtaining  w^ork,  they  will  do  so  at  the  expense  of  other
individuals,  unless  at  times  when,  and  in  trades  where,  the  demand
for  trained  labour  exceeds  the  current  supply.  During  periods  of
general  depression  there  are  no  considerable  trades  prepared  to  take
on  more  trained  workers,  so  that  the  training  of  unemployed  persons
cannot  at  such  times  be  deemed  an  efficacious  ^emed5^  Taking  a
more  general  view  of  the  effects  of  improved  general  and  technical
education  upon  the  volume  of  emploj^ment,  I  should  be  disposed  to
distinguish  the  direct  from  the  indirect  consequences.  So  far  as
such  education  enables  workers  to  increase  the  quantity,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  skill  or  quality,  of  their  output  it  cannot
contribute  to  alleviate  unemployment :  on  the  contrary,  it  would
appear  to  increase  the  sum  of  the  excess  of  the  supply  of  labour  at
such  times.  Any  improvement  in  the  skill  of  individual  workers,
or  even  of  the  nation  as  a  whole,  resulting  from  better  training,
would  enable  these  individuals  or  this  nation  to  keep  a  better  hold
upon  employment  than  other  individuals  or  other  nations  in  world
industry  at  times  of  general  trade  depression.  But  since  large
numbers  of  workers  whose  efficiency  is  adequate  to  secure  them
regular  employment  in  good  times  are  unemployed  when  times
are  bad,  it  cannot  be  argued  that  any  raising  of  the  general  level  of
efficiency,  or  any  increase  of  the  numbers  of  efficient  workers  would


UNEMPLOYMENT  299

ill  itself  secure  an  increase  in  the  aggregate  demand  for  skilled  labour.
As  a  local,  or  even  as  a  national  policy,  such  technical  training  might
of  course  be  efficacious  in  procuring  for  one  town  or  one  nation  a
larger  share  of  employment  at  the  expense  of  another  town  or
another  nation.  But  when  a  cyclical  depression  in  the  industrial
world  exhibits  an  excess  of  competent  workers  in  the  various  trades,
to  furnish  a  larger  supply  of  equally  or  more  competent  workers  is
no  remedy.  This  rigorous  application  of  a  quantitative  doctrine  of
supply  requires,  however,  this  not  unimportant  qualification.  A
general  rise  in  education  and  technical  training  among  the  workers
will  stimulate  among  them  an  increased  desire  and  capacity  for
organisation,  economic  and  political,  and  may  thus  incidentally
produce  a  considerable  effect  upon  wages  and  the  standard  of  con-
sumption. Just  in  proportion  as  it  conduces  thus  to  increase
the  share  of  the  product  which  comes  to  labour,  and  to  reduce
the  unproductive  surplus,  does  it  enlarge  the  total  volume  of
employment.

By  no  other  economic  reasoning  is  it  possible  to  defend  the
policy  of  public  expenditure  upon  unemployed  relief  works  or
unemployed  insurance,  to  which  most  modern  states  have  com-
mitted themselves.  If  the  hypothesis  of  under-consumption  or
over-saving  as  the  chief  cause  of  cycUcal  unemployment  be  rejected,
how  can  it  be  contended  that  to  take  money  from  taxpayers  in
order  to  furnish  materials,  tools,  and  wages  for  unemployed  work-
men has  any  other  effect  than  merely  to  shift  the  personnel  of
unemployment  ?  If  the  money  taken  in  taxation  must  either
have  been  spent  upon  commodities  or  have  been  saved  and  invested,
i.e.  spent  upon  new  forms  of  capital,  the  labour  that  would  have
been  expended  in  making  these  commodities  or  these  forms  of
capital  will  now  be  unemployed.  There  will  be  no  addition
whatever  to  the  volume  of  employment  as  a  whole.  Instead  of  a
number  of  men  being  employed  in  the  ordinary  course  of  trade
to  make  goods  for  consumption,  or  to  make  more  mills  and  machines,
a  number  of  other  men  will  be  employed  by  public  departments
to  make  a  road  or  an  artificial  lake ;  the  aggregate  amount  of  employ-
ment will  be  just  the  same,  though  the  product  will  be  a  good
deal  smaller.

The  plausibility  of  this  argument,  however,  disappears  before
closer  inspection,  in  the  light  afforded  by  our  analysis  of  income.
The  money  income  of  a  man  represents,  as  we  have  recognised,
some  product  actually  made  by  the  factor  of  production  which
he  owns,  it  is  nothing  else  than  a  demand  note  enabling  him  to
obtain  possession  of  consumptive  goods  or  capital  goods  already
in  existence,  equivalent  to  the  product  which  procured  for  him


300  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

his  money  income.  He  can,  without  doing  an}^  other  productive
act,  withdraw  some  food  or  clothing  from  the  existing  stock  for
his  own  consumption,  pa3dng  this  money  for  them,  or  he  can
withdraw  from  the  existing  stock  some  machine  or  some  materials
and  apply  them  to  his  business.  By  this  act  of  purchase,  whether
of  consumptive  goods  or  capital  goods,  he  stimulates  a  large
number  of  producers  engaged  in  various  processes  to  make  another
product  similar  to  that  which  he  has  bought  and  withdrawn.

But  his  own  act  of  spending,  whether  upon  consumptive  or
on  capital  goods,  is  not  conditioned  by  any  act  of  employment  or
production  on  his  part ;  he  has  already  performed  this  act  before
he  has  got  possession  of  the  money  he  expends.  Now  suppose,
instead  of  allowing  him  to  spend  this  '  income  '  in  buying  consump-
tive or  capital  goods,  the  state  seizes  some  of  it  and  applies  it  to
unemployed  relief  works,  is  the  state  spending  it  under  the  same
conditions  as  regards  employment  as  if  the  man  had  spent  it  himself  ?

The  real  issue  depends  upon  the  pace  of  the  application  of
spending-power.  If  the  taxpayer  would  have  paid  away  his  money
in  *  demand  '  as  quickly  as  the  state  would  have  paid  it  in  relief
works,  no  increase  in  volume  of  employment  is  produced  by  taxing
him.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  effect  of  taxing  him  is  to  apply
the  money  in  demand  for  labour  more  quickly  than  it  would  have
been  applied,  the  aggregate  of  employment  within  a  given  period
is  increased  by  this  acceleration  of  demand.  The  entire  economic
case  for  state  relief  insurance  seems  to  turn  upon  the  question  of
the  acceleration  or  retardation  of  demand.  Now,  assuming  that
my  hypothesis,  that  the  largest  proportion  of  saving  proceeds
from  the  upper  portions  of  high  incomes  not  required  to  satisfy
any  keen  or  constant  pressure  of  need,  be  correct,  the  normal  effect
of  taxing  or  rating  such  incomes  for  unemployed  relief  will  be  to
accelerate  the  application  of  such  income  in  demand  for  labour.
For,  during  a  time  of  depressed  trade,  saved  income  cannot  be  applied
in  furnishing  new  forms  of  capital  as  easily  or  quickly  as  during
good  trade  ;  large  quantities  of  savings  will  be  kept  waiting  for
investment  or  will  be  applied  in  acquiring  the  existing  properties  of
weak  owners.  While,  therefore,  saving  which  is  immediately  applied
as  a  demand  for  labour  to  produce  new  plant  and  other  concrete
capital  employs  as  much  labour  as  the  same  income  if  it  were  spent
in  buying  commodities,  this  is  not  the  case  when  the  condition  of
trade  retards  the  rate  of  effective  investment.  Taxation,  therefore,
properly  directed  to  fall  upon  the  unearned  incomes  of  the  wealthier
classes,  will  have  the  effect  of  accelerating  the  use  of  such  income
in  demand  for  labour.

This  argument  of  the  effects  of  transferring  private  income  by


UNEMPLOYMENT  301

means  of  taxation  into  expenditure  on  public  relief  cannot  be
dismissed  as  a  vague  hypothesis.  Every  financier  and  business  man
is  aware  that,  during  a  prolonged  depression,  quantities  of  loanable
capital  stand  out  of  all  new  industrial  uses  awaiting  an  opportunity
to  operate  productively.  It  is  hardly  disputable  that  a  process
of  taxation  which  should  arrest  some  of  these  stagnant  savings,  and
apply  them  to  production  through  public  expenditure,  would  secure
an  earlier  demand  for  labour  than  would  otherwise  have  occurred.
Workers  would  have  in  their  hands  wages  which  they  would  apply
in  consumption  at  an  earlier  date  than  if  they  had  to  wait  until
some  bank  felt  justified  in  making  an  investment  in  a  loan  which
some  business  man  should  employ  for  paying  wages.  During  a
depression  there  is  no  motive  to  apply  savings  in  demand  for
labour  because  such  application  implies  the  further  congestion
of  a  market  already  congested.  Therefore,  there  is  a  reasonable
presumption  that  a  taxing  process  which  intercepts  such  savings
and  converts  them  into  immediate  employment  of  unemployed
labour  will  have  the  effect  of  increasing  the  aggregate  volume  of
employment  within  a  given  time,  and  not  merely  of  changing  the
personnel  of  the  unemployed.^

^  The  Jlinority  Report  of  the  Poor  Law  Commission  points  out  that  with-
out any  considerable  amount  of  taxation  the  Government  can,  in  times  of
trade  depression,  borrow  at  low  rates  large  quantities  of  unemployed  floating
capital  and  idle  plant,  operating  it  by  unemployed  labour  so  as  to  produce
wealth  (p.  1 198).  The  only  new  taxation  involved  in  this  process  would  be
that  required  to  pay  the  interest  on  the  borrowed  capital,  and  to  meet  any
deficit  due  to  the  inferior  quality  of  the  plant  and  labour  got  into  employ-
ment by  governmental  action.


CHAPTER XIX

THE HUMAN INTERPRETATION OF INDUSTRY

§  I.  The  industrial  system,  here  treated  objectively,  can  be  interpreted  in
terms  of  human  will  and  satisfaction.  The  operation  of  each  factor  of
labour,  capital,  ability,  involves  expenditure  of  human  energy  con-
sciously directed  to  some  definite  end.  The  thought  and  will  comprised
in  these  activities  differ  widely  in  quality,  some  acts  being  more  creative,
others  more  imitative. — §  2.  Industrial  progress  consists  largely  in  the
better  economy  of  will  and  intellect  throughout  the  industrial  system.
Criticism  of  the  competitive  system  rests  ultimately  on  the  waste  of
social  or  co-operative  energy  involved  in  a  clash  of  wills  and  a  crossing
of  purposes.  This  waste  differs  widely  according  as  the  technique  of  a
profession  or  trade  gives  prominence  to  direct  self-seeking.  The  growth
of  combination  brings  a  fuller  consciousness  of  common  purpose,  thougJi
this  is  offset  by  diminished  regard  for  the  consumer's  interests.  The
diminishing  sense  of  social  utility  of  labour  due  to  the  complexity  of
modern  industry  is  its  greatest  injury. — §  3.  From  a  subjective  economy
the  land  factor  must  be  eliminated,  nature  being  given.  A  '  Crusoe  '  or
a  socialistic  system  is  easily  realised  as  a  calculus  of  human  '  costs  '  and
'  utilities.'  In  order  to  apply  such  a  calculus  to  our  system,  so  as  to
make  commercial  values  correspond  with  human  values,  it  will  be
necessary  to  consider  (i)  the  technical  conditions  of  the  work,  (2)  the
nature  of  the  workers,  (3)  the  distribution  of  the  labour-cost,  upon
the  cost  side  ;  and  similarly  (i)  the  technique  of  the  consumption,  (2)
the  sort  of  consumers,  (3)  the  distribution  of  the  commodities,  upon
the  utility  side. — §  4.  An  art  of  social  progress  will  further  require  the
calculus  of  current  hedonism  to  be  reduced  to  terms  of  social  good  as
tested  by  some  ideal  standard.  The  conscious  control  of  industry  will
thus  be  realised  as  a  contribution  towards  the  wider  art  of  politics.
Social  economy  in  industry  aims  at  securing  a  natural  relation  between
production  and  consumption  among  classes  and  individuals  in  accordance
with  the  maxim,  '  from  each  according  to  his  powers  :  to  each  according
to  his  needs.'  This  is  a  general  law  of  distribution  in  the  organic  world
admitted  by  Individualism  as  by  Socialism. — §  5.  A  subjective  interpre-
tation of  the  '  surplus  '  would  express  it  in  waste  of  life  and  of  work.
An  economical  use  of  the  surplus  for  health,  education,  and  security
would  develop  and  enrich  individual  personality,  substituting  a  more
qualitative  for  a  quantitative  economy.  Individuation  of  needs  will
react  on  the  character  of  work,  imparting  new  elements  of  skill  and  art  ;
each  gain  is  twofold,  reducing  some  vital  cost  while  raising  some  vital
utility  of  consumption.  Thus  reformed  distribution  would  issue  in
(i)  enlarged  production  of  objective  wealth,  (2)  diminished  vital  cost
and  increased  vital  utility  per  unit  of  production.

§  I. — Our  treatment  of  the  industrial  system  has  been  essentially
objective.  Its  structure  we  have  regarded  as  consisting  of  concrete
factors  of production,  men,  land,  plant,  machinery,  &c.,  giving

302


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 303

forth  physical  and  mental  powers  which  make  products,  partly
commodities,  material  or  non-material,  for  consumption,  partly
capital  goods,  these  products  being  continuously  distributed  to
the  owners  of  the  various  factors  of  production  in  payment  for  the
use  of  these  factors.  Although,  in  our  description  of  the  working
of  this  system,  we  were  compelled  to  take  account  of  certain  motives
which  directed  human  conduct  in  giving  out  productive  energy  in
the  shape  of  labour,  ability,  and  saving,  and  in  dividing  the  product
among  the  owners  of  the  factors  of  production,  these  motives  were
treated  not  as  possessing  any  interest  of  themselves  but  merely
as  affecting  the  working  of  the  industrial  system.

Even  in  our  analysis  of  the  part  played  by  the  '  surplus,'  we
concerned  ourselves  exclusively  with  its  reactions  upon  the  pro-
ductive efficiency  of  the  industrial  system.  We  saw  that  it  im-
paired this  efficiency  in  three  ways  :  first,  by  depriving  some  factor
of  production,  usually  labour,  of  a  payment  necessary  as  a  physical
and  moral  stimulus  of  increasing  efficiency  ;  secondly,  by  relieving
the  recipients  of  '  surplus  '  of  the  necessity  of  productive  exertion
and  thus  atrophjdng  their  productive  powers  ;  thirdly,  by  weaken-
ing the  life  and  growth  of  the  state  in  denying  it  the  public  income
it  requires.  In  a  brief  consideration  of  the  labour  movement,
state  socialism,  and  taxation,  as  methods  of  diverting  surplus
from  injurious  waste  into  economic  energy,  as  well  as  in  the  discus-
sion of  the  malady  of  unemployment  due  to  the  unhealthy  operation
of  the  surplus  in  the  system,  we  were  concerned  exclusively  with
the  bearing  of  these  policies  upon  the  working  of  the  system  objec-
tively regarded.  In  considering  the  forces  or  tendencies  to  displace
competition  by  combination  in  various  industries,  to  strengthen
the  position  of  skilled  labour  by  collective  bargaining,  to  erect  a
new  power  of  finance,  or  to  evoke  legislative  interference  with
private  enterprises,  we  have  confined  ourselves  to  a  narrowly
economic  interpretation  of  these  movements,  making  no  attempt
at  tracing  their  bearing  upon  social  progress  conceived  in  any
broader  sense.

But  while  the  treatment  of  production,  consumption,  and  wealth
taken  here  has  been  directed  to  secure  a  comprehensive  view  of  the
objective  system  of  industry,  it  is  evident  that  a  subjective  inter-
pretation of  this  system,  in  which  human  energies  of  production
and  consumption  are  reduced  to  terms  of  human  satisfaction  or
weU-being,  is  essential  to  an  art  of  political  economy,  regarded
as  a  part  of  the  wider  art  of  politics.

For  a  system  of  industry  which  we  have  regarded  objectively
as  an  operation  of  productive  forces  is  also  an  operation  of  human
wills,  and  the  product  which  we  have  regarded  as  material  goods


304  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

or  services  is  also  a  complex  of  various  modes  and  amounts  of
human  satisfaction.  At  every  point  in  the  elaborate  structure  of
industry  each  business  cell  is  a  complex  psychical  structure  in  which
the  intelligent  will  of  the  employer  or  manager  applies  stimulus
and  direction  to  the  wills  of  workmen  and  owners  of  capital,  plan-
ning their  co-operative  activity  so  as  to  meet  the  anticipated  demands
of  groups  of  consumers,  which  demands  themselves  are  acts  of  will
responding  to  the  pressure  of  conscious  wants.  Each  regular
detailed  application  of  labour-power  in  the  manipulation  of  material
or  the  guidance  of  tools,  or  the  tending  of  machinery,  involves
some  conscious  effort  of  mind,  often  very  complex  in  the  elements
of  pleasure  and  of  pain  which  it  contains,  varying  infinitely  in  the
nature  and  the  amount  of  these  subjective  contents,  from  the
almost  pure  and  elevated  pleasure  of  the  artist,  working  freely  at
his  best,  to  the  almost  unmixed  and  degrading  pain  of  the  manual
or  mental  routine  worker  in  the  last  hour  of  his  daily  toil.  Equally
line  and  diverse,  could  we  distinguish  them,  are  the  sorts  and  degrees
of  moral  and  intellectual  energy  represented  in  the  '  saving  '  which
places,  sustains  and  enlarges  the  fabric  of  capital  throughout  the
industrial  system.  Take  for  example  the  road  beds,  rails,  rolling
stock  and  stations  constituting  most  of  the  real  capital  of  the
Canadian  Pacific  Railroad,  and  resolve  it,  by  imagination,  into  the
innumerable  acts  of  saving  done  by  the  thousands  of  men  and
women  who  caused  these  quantities  of  unconsumable  productive
goods  to  be  made  and  kept  where  they  stand  as  organic  parts  of
this  great  road,  the  faith  and  far-sighted  intelligence  of  those  who
found  the  first  capital  for  an  investment  which  seemed  to  most
men  so  unpromising,  qualities  of  will  and  intellect  which,  in  lessening
degrees,  must  be  accredited  to  those  who  later  took  up  shares  or
purchased  them.  In  all  these  myriad  acts  of  saving,  the  play  of
will  and  intelligence,  the  moral  significance,  the  subjective  cost,
will  be  different.  No  two  rails  represent  precisely  the  same  amount
or  sort  of  abstinence.  The  subjective  import  of  this  organisation
of  capital  will  vary  as  regards  each  unit,  from  '  saving  '  that  involves
no  pain  at  all  but  a  pleasure  from  the  realisation  of  a  growing  fund
of  abiding  wealth  and  the  power  and  personal  glory  attached  to  its
possession,  to  a  '  saving  '  that  implies  painful  denial  of  some  much-
desired  convenience  or  comfort  in  order  to  make  provision  against
a  dreaded  breakdown  or  a  destitute  old  age.  When  it  is  borne  in
mind  how  that  the  actual  fabric  of  capital  implies  not  merely  that
a  number  of  persons  have  been  willing  to  forgo  an  amount  of
present  satisfaction  for  a  larger  anticipated  amount  of  future  satis-
faction, but  that  this  '  willingness  '  breaks  up  into  an  infinite  number
of  separate  acts  of  will,  each  different  from  the  other  in  its  psychical


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 305

composition,  and  that  each  of  these  acts,  lightly  and  fully  inter-
preted, would  be  seen  to  be  causally  related  to  a  special  bit  of
concrete  capital,  some  idea  of  the  subjective  complexity  of  capital
begins  to  dawn  upon  the  mind.  It  is,  of  course,  true  that  each
person  who  has  saved  a  sum  of  money  and  bought  a  share  in  the
C.P.R.  has  not  personally  willed  and  caused  to  be  made  any  par-
ticular rail  or  engine,  but  it  is  owing  to  his  act  of  saving  that  some
particular  rail  or  engine  is  there,  his  energy  of  mind  co-operating
with  the  directive  will  of  some  engineer  who  converted  it  from  a
general  into  a  specific  act  of  investment.  The  factor  of  abiUty,
whether  in  the  inventor  or  the  organiser  and  director  of  industry,
is  of  course  more  easily  recognised  in  its  subjective  character.  In
fact,  there  has  sometimes  been  manifested  a  tendency  to  concentrate
the  psychical  interpretation  of  industry  on  the  functions  of  the
entrepreneur,  treating  him  as  the  sole  repository  of  a  will  and
intellect  which  uses  labour  and  capital,  as  it  uses  natural  resources,
as  mere  instruments  for  its  creative  energy  to  work  with.  It  is
necessarj^  to  protest  against  the  exaggeration  of  this  '  heroic '  view
of  industry  by  insisting  that  the  entire  fabric  of  industry  is  alive
with  a  power  of  will  and  intelligence  which  does  not  emanate  merely
from  a  few  directive  centres,  but  proceeds  with  various  degrees  of
freedom  and  initiative  from  every  cell  in  the  system.  But  while
the  abrupt  distinction  sometimes  made  between  the  '  creative'  energy
of  '  ability  '  and  the  '  imitative  '  energy  of  ordinary  labour  has  no
validity,  since  no  work  in  which  the  will  of  man  functions  is  purely
imitative  or  repetitive,  there  are  wide  differences  of  degree  between
the  sorts  of  productive  energy  classed  as  ability  and  those  classed
as  labour  which  require  full  recognition.  The  elaborate  operation  of
thought  and  will  involved  in  a  delicate  act  of  invention,  or  in  some
fine  calculation  of  the  play  of  forces  in  a  market,  or  in  a  single
critical  act  of  organising  judgment,  carries  us  into  the  most  intricate
region  of  psychology,  for  we  have  to  trace  the  consequences  of  this
determinant  act  of  '  ability  '  in  innumerable  changes  which  it
brings  about  in  the  wills  and  minds  of  the  multitudes  of  owners
of  labour-power  and  capital  that  co-operate  with  its  owner.

§  2. — In  the  structural  changes  of  modern  industry  and  in
the  social  changes  which  accompany  them  an  ever-growing  import-
ance attaches  to  the  discovery,  selection,  training  and  economical
application  of  these  finer  sorts  of  psychical  forces  which  are  the  chief
direct  instruments  of  progress  in  the  arts  of  industry.  Such  equalisa-
tion of  intellectual  and  other  opportunities  as  enables  an  industrial
society  to  select  those  individual  forces  from  the  entire  population,
instead  of  from  a  small  class,  and  so  to  apply  them  as  most  fully  to
utilise  their  creative  qualities,  is  the  prime  condition  of  industrial

X


3o6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

progress.  When  any  radical  alteration  in  the  structure  of  a  business
is  contemplated,  such  as  the  change  from  a  private  business  into  a
joint-stock  company,  or  theadoption  of  some  co-operative  or  profit-
sharing  basis  ;  when  it  is  proposed  to  organise  into  a  single  trust  or
cartel  the  competing  businesses  in  a  trade,  or  to  transfer  some  trade
from  company  control  to  municipal  or  state  enterprise,  or  when  the
substitution  of  some  general  scheme  of  socialism  for  the  existing
business  system  is  under  consideration,  the  most  crucial  issue  will
be  the  effect  which  the  proposed  change  is  likely  to  exercise  in
stimulating  or  depressing,  in  economising  or  in  wasting,  the  use  of
these  liner  creative  and  directive  capacities  of  the  human  mind.
But  in  estimating  properly  the  socially  productive  worth  of  these
superior  qualities  of  mind,  it  will  also  be  remembered  that  they  do
not  operate  in  the  void,  that  their  productive  efficacy,  however
great,  is  strictly  dependent  on  and  limited  by  the  psychical  quality
of  the  entire  co-operative  business  structure  through  which  they
play,  and  that  an  improvement  in  the  intelligence  or  goodwill  of
this  human  structure  may  be  as  large  a  source  of  progress  as  any
heightening  of  the  capacity  of  inventors  or  of  entrepreneurs.  This
larger  interpretation  of  the  spiritual  structure  of  the  business  is
sometimes  ignored  by  a  shallow  analysis  which  treats  the  ordinary
labour  and  capital  in  the  business  as  a  merely  inert  mass  vitalised
entirely  by  the  intellect  and  will  of  the  directing  and  organising
person.

Not  merely  is  each  business  thus  to  be  regarded  as  an  organic
co-operation  of  intelligent  wills  functioning  more  or  less  harmoni-
ously towards  a  common  purpose,  but  the  relations  of  businesses  in
a  common  trade,  and  the  relations  between  the  general  trades  in
the  industrial  system,  must  also  be  similarly  expressible  in  terms  of
purpose.  The  identity  and  diversity  of  interests  which  cause  the
businesses  in  a  trade  to  compete  with  one  another  for  some  objects,
to  combine  for  others,  involve  active  and  complex  plays  of  intelligent
will.  Though,  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  the  individual
business,  the  structure  of  the  trade  seems  rather  an  equilibrium
of  opposed  forces  than  a  harmonious  co-operation,  a  higher
industrial  standpoint  may  recognise  the  detailed  warfare  of  busi-
nesses in  a  trade  as  a  truly  co-operative  econom3'^  which  enables  the
industrial  energy  of  the  whole  trade  to  function  most  productively.
Such,  at  any  rate,  has  been  the  consistent  interpretation  of  the
individualist  defender  of  the  competitive  system,  to  whom  the  so-
called  waste  of  competition  is  only  the  friction  involved  in  an
essentially  co-operative  system  driven  by  an  enlightened  self-
interest  operating  from  a  number  of  individual  business  centres.
The  play  of  this  self-interest  from  many  opposing  intelligent  wills


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 307

is  subjected  to  a  regulative  and  compensative  treatment  which  brings
them  into  co-operative  harmony  for  tlic  good  of  the  consumer,  who
represents  the  goal  of  industry.

On  the  other  hand,  the  criticism  of  the  competitive  system,  though
sometimes  directed  to  the  objective  wastefulness  involved  and  to
denial  of  the  net  utility  to  the  consumer,  really  rests  for  its  validity
upon  a  psychological  interpretation  of  the  business  struggle.
Enlightened  self-interest  does  not,  it  is  contended,  evoke  those
individual  energies  which  are  most  socially  productive  so  well  as
those  which  are  competitively  successful,  v/hile  it  tends,  by  throwing
the  control  of  businesses  into  the  hands  of  hard,  pushful  men,  to
keep  out  quieter  and  more  essentially  creative  minds  :  moreover,  by
keeping  each  improvement  of  industrial  method  in  the  hands  of  a
single  firm  which  has  just  discovered  or  adopted  it,  it  retards  the
advance  of  the  general  trade.  But  the  real  gravamen  of  the  charge
rests  on  a  distinctively  moral  assumption.  If,  as  the  defenders  of
the  competitive  trade  system  assert,  the  system  is  in  essence  and  in
result  co-operative,  and  designed  to  serve  industrial  society  as  a
whole,  can  that  end  be  satisfactorily  attained  by  a  procedure  which
concentrates  the  will  of  each  human  unit  not  upon  that  end,  not
even  upon  a  clearly  recognised  means  to  that  end,  but  upon  a  purely
selfish  consideration  which  entirely  eliminates  the  social  service  ?

The  moral  economy  of  the  business  consists  in  the  more  or  less
conscious  co-operation  of  all  the  wills  engaged  in  it  towards  a  com-
mon end ;  the  moral  economy  of  the  trade  is  supposed  to  consist
in  the  conscious  opposition  of  the  wills  engaged  in  it.  Surely  there
must  here  be  involved  a  huge  waste  of  moral  fprce,  involving  some
corresponding  waste  of  objective  productive  energy.

But  this,  it  will  rightly  be  urged,  is  not  a  full  or  general  interpre-
tation of  the  competitive  system.  It  is  primarily  a  question  of
conscious  motive  in  individual  production.  Now  the  consciousness
of  social  service  as  a  stimulus  to  work  is  not  inconsistent  with  com-
petition. The  artist  who  labours  to  express  himself  to  others  can
only  succeed  on  condition  that  he  keeps  before  his  mind  these  others  :
mere  self-expression  is  not  art  at  all.  Though,  therefore,  the  artist
may  be  working  for  gain,  and  may  be  conscious  of  his  competitors,
the  interest  in  his  work  and  his  capacity  to  do  it  involve  some  regard
for  the  public.  The  same  applies  also  to  the  artisan  so  far  as  his
manipulation  of  material  involves  conscious  regard  for  its  utility,
and  therefore  consideration  of  the  needs  of  the  consumers.  So,  too,
with  the  professions;  however  keen  the  rivalry  of  professional  men
to  get  employment  may  be,  the  nature  of  the  work  they  do  involves
the  detailed  operation  of  disinterested  motives  leading  them  to  value
their  work  for  its  real  social  utility  rather  than  for  the  gain  it  brings

X2


3o8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

them.  This  is  the  well-recognised  difference  between  a  profession
and  a  trade,  which  has  always  underlain  the  lower  esteem  in  which
tradesmen  and  the  trading  spirit  have  been  held.  It  is,  indeed,  in
commerce,  and  primarily  in  retail  trade,  rather  than  in  manufacture
or  any  branch  of  production,  that  the  ethics  of  competition  appears
to  do  most  damage,  the  reason,  of  course,  being  that  in  the  dealing
processes  antagonism  of  human  interests  is  sharpest,  and  the  con-
scious energy  of  dealers  is  most  confined  to  the  pursuit  of  personal
profit.  In  most  manufactures,  though  the  employer  is  not  in
business  '  for  his  health,'  but  primarily  to  make  profits,  the  skill
and  intricacy  of  the  practical  operations  which  he  conducts  absorb
much  of  his  attention,  and  pride  in  the  character  of  his  business  and
the  quality  of  its  products  dignifies  his  conduct.  Just  in  proportion
as  he  is  not  forced  to  concentrate  his  thought  and  feeling  upon  the
art  of  getting  business  away  from  other  firms  and  pushing  his  claims
against  theirs  in  the  market  does  his  work  take  conscious  shape
in  his  mind  as  the  social  function  which  it  really  is.  Just  in  propor-
tion as  the  competitive  activities  assume  prominence  is  he  compelled
to  sink  this  social  feeling,  to  push  his  goods  in  conscious  rivalry  with
those  of  other  firms,  and  to  cultivate  those  arts  of  sweating,  adultera-
tion and  deceit  which  seem  necessary  to  enable  him  to  sell  goods
at  a  profit.

Such  considerations  indicate  that  the  moral  economy  of  com-
petition is  not  simple  or  uniform  :  where  it  takes  shape  in  the  rivalry
of  Euripides,  ^Eschylus  and  Sophocles  to  win  the  favour  of  an
Athenian  public  for  their  respective  dramas  it  may  act  as  a  direct
incentive  of  the  highest  form  of  social  wealth  :  where  it  operates
among  struggling  grocers  in  the  same  street  it  may  mean  starved
assistants,  short  weights  and  doctored  goods.  So  far  as  our  system
of  industry  has  recently  been  more  competitive,  it  is  likely  that  the
worse  influences  of  competition  have  gained  ground  ;  for  the  growth
of  great  sub-divided  businesses  with  mechanical  methods  of  pro-
duction have  tended  to  weaken  for  the  great  mass  of  workers  engaged
in  them  all  adequate  realisation  of  the  social  utility  of  the  work  they
do,  while  the  development  of  modern  markets  has  tended  on  the
whole  to  sharpen  the  rivalry  between  competing  firms,  by  loosening
their  old  relations  to  '  customers  '  and  bringing  them  into  more
detailed  rivalry  at  a  larger  number  of  points.  On  the  other  hand,  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  analysis  has  shown  that  it  is  not
generally  true  of  the  industrial  system  to  say  that  it  is  becoming
more  competitive  :  on  the  contrary,  combination  is  displacing,  or
at  any  rate  is  modifying,  competition  in  many  departments.  Here
it  must  be  recognised  that  an  improved  moral  harmony  is  established
in  the  trade,  by  removing  or  abating  the  hostility  of  businesses  and


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 309

substituting  unity  of  operation  and  solidarity  of  interest.  Viewed  in
this  aspect,  a  trust  or  other  close  trade  combination  is  a  higher  moral
structure  than  the  cluster  of  competing  businesses  it  has  displaced  ;
even  if  some  loss  of  incentive  to  efficiency  has  been  sustained  by
stopping  the  struggle  for  orders,  the  saving  of  competitive  skill  and
effort  may  bring  more  concentration  upon  improvements  of  pro-
ductive processes,  and  a  single  large  trade,  working  with  conscious
co-operation  of  all  its  parts,  is  an  advance  in  social  organisation
upon  the  conditions  of  a  competitive  trade.  So,  likewise,  the
lateral  and  horizontal  extensions  by  which  a  trust  or  trade  com-
bination may  spread  its  control  over  other  processes,  earlier  or  later,
in  the  line  of  industry  to  which  it  belongs,  getting  control  of  raw
materials,  transport  or  distribution,  or  attaching  to  itself  other
related  and  subsidiary  trades,  make  for  a  superior  solidarity  of
industrial  activity  which  implies  a  more  harmonious  co-operation  of
individual  wills  and  a  direct  stoppage  of  conscious  antagonisms.

Since,  however,  the  dominant  motive  in  all  such  combinations
is  considerations  of  personal  profit  on  the  part  of  their  organisers,
there  is  no  security  that  any  public  utility  in  the  wider  sense  is
served.  Indeed,  while  enlightened  self-interest  under  competition
does  seem  to  impose  on  rival  producers  some  direct  consideration
of  the  public  good,  a  trust  or  other  monopoly  may  come  consciously
to  regard  the  consuming  public  as  a  prey,  merely  calculating  what
is  the  highest  price  it  can  extort  without  checking  its  sales.

It  is  thus  conceivable  and  not  improbable  that  an  industrial
system  where  internal  co-operation  had  been  advanced  in  many
trades  by  the  substitution  of  combination  for  competition  might
present  a  definitely  more  anti-social  character  in  its  wider  aspect,
numerous  trusts  and  combines  tyrannising  over  the  consumer  and
engaging  in  a  rival  policy  of  plundering  his  purse.  But  wherever
the  danger  clearly  presents  itself,  as  for  instance  in  certain  trans-
port industries,  in  banking  and  insurance,  and  in  undertakings
which  from  their  dependence  upon  land  or  other  limitation  of
supply  tend  to  become  strong  monopolies,  measures  of  industrial
control  tend  to  be  evolved  by  the  state  or  municipality  to  secure
some  consistency  between  the  interests  of  the  public  and  those  of
the  monopoly.  Where  such  reconcilement  seems  too  difficult,  the
tendency  is  for  public  bodies  to  take  over  the  industry,  securing
that  direct  and  complete  harmony  of  interests  between  a  trade
and  the  social  good  which,  theoretically  at  any  rate,  attends
socialisation  of  industries.

The  moral  and  ultimately  the  economic  case  for  complete  state
socialism  is  sometimes  based  upon  the  argument  that  until  the
true  and  full  social  significance  of  every  industrial  act  is  enforced


310  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

upon  the  intelligent  will  of  all  participants,  by  stamping  upon
every  productive  operation  the  hall-mark  of  direct  social  service,
there  must  necessarily  be  a  waste  of  human  incentive  and  a  deficiency
of  co-operative  will.  But,  if  we  may  apply  an  analogy,  this  would
be  equivalent  to  insisting  that  full  health  and  orderly  co-operation
was  not  attainable  for  the  bodily  organism  unless  every  cell  and
every  organ  of  the  body  were  functioning  directly  and  consciously
for  the  good  of  the  whole  organism  instead  of  for  the  good  of  itself
or  of  some  small  local  nucleus  of  corporate  action,  as  is  commonly
the  case.  Decentralisation  of  ends  and  motives  must  be  a  psychical
equivalent  and  implication  of  that  growing  specialisation  of  parts
which  belongs  to  advancing  complexity  of  organisation.  When
each  village  was  a  virtually  self-sufficing  economic  unit,  some
sense  that  he  was  helping  to  feed  his  neighbour  must  have  accom-
panied the  work  of  the  husbandman  who  tilled  the  soil ;  but  the
Dakota  farmer,  whose  wheat  will  pass  into  an  elevator  in  Chicago
and  after  long  travel  will  go  to  feed  some  unknown  family  in
Glasgow  or  in  Hamburg,  can  hardly  be  expected  to  have  the  same
feeling  for  the  social  end  which  his  tilling  serves.  Education  and
a  more  vivid  imagination  may  do  something  to  extend  the  range
of  his  sympathetic  vision,  but  the  intricacies  of  a  world-wide
system  will  preclude  a  grasp  of  the  full  social  meaning  of  his  indus-
trial operations.  This  seems  to  involve  a  certain  dehumanising
influence  in  the  great  staple  industries  so  far  as  direct  appreciation
of  the  social  utility  or  human  purpose  of  the  work  is  concerned,
though  some  compensation  should  be  found  in  the  enlarged  sense
of  comradeship  provided  by  the  larger  co-operation  in  which  each
worker  feels  himself  engaged.  Moreover,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  not
true  that  great  businesses  are  absorbing  the  workers  and  that
small  businesses  with  a  closer  and  more  direct  utility  in  their  work
are  disappearing.

Indeed,  it  is  not  certain  that  the  gravest  of  indictments  directed
against  modern  industry,  that  it  tends  to  make  the  work  of  most
men  more  uninteresting  and  unattractive  in  itself,  is  valid.

But  it  is  deplorably  true  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  industrial
work  is  in  itself  distasteful  to  those  who  do  it,  and  that  this  distaste
is  not  to  any  appreciable  degree  mitigated  by  any  sense  that  the
toil  of  performing  it  conduces  to  the  happiness  of  mankind.  The
bulk  of  the  hard  routine  manual  and  mental  labour  probably  falls
in  this  category;  it  carries  with  it  no  interest  or  goodwill,  nor
does  any  glimmer  of  its  social  value  brighten  the  vision  of  the
toilers  who  perform  it.  Such  toil,  destitute  of  noble  purpose,
demoralises  and  derationalises  the  workers,  and,  through  its
reactions  upon  individual  and  social  character,  constitutes the


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 311

heaviest  drag  upon  the  car  of  human  progress.  If  we  seek  to
interpret  the  industrial  system  as  a  system  of  human  wills  in
co-operation  for  the  social  good,  this  forced  consent  of  so  many  of
the  human  units  to  perform  their  part  is  its  worst  defect.

§  3. — So  far  we  have  conlined  ourselves  to  an  endeavour  to
translate  the  operation  of  actual  industry  into  its  simplest  psychical
terms.  In  doing  so  we  are  of  course  obliged  to  omit  one  set  of
industrial  forces,  viz.  those  which  proceed  from  Nature  as  a  factor  of
production.  In  the  objective  treatment  this  factor  was  put  on  an
equal  footing  with  the  human  factors,  labour,  capital,  ability,  for
in  this  way  was  it  best  possible  to  set  the  problems  of  production
and  of  the  distribution  of  the  product.  But,  when  we  take  the
subjective  or  psychical  view  of  industry,  we  find  no  facts  to  corre-
spond with  the  productive  powers  of  nature  or  with  the  rent  paid
for  them,  save  the  reaction  of  rent  as  an  element  of  surplus  in  its
operation  on  human  incentive,  a  point  to  which  we  shall  revert
presently.

If,  now,  our  industrial  system,  expressed  in  terms  of  human
feeling,  is  to  be  brought  into  relation  to  any  art  of  social  progress
for  criticism  or  judgment,  this  can  only  be  accomplished  by  a
closer  method  of  psychical  calculus  than  is  usually  applied.  It
would  be  necessary  to  resolve  the  productive  energy  which
constitutes  the  life  of  the  industrial  system  into  the  human
'costs'  which  it  involves,  the  amount  of  painful  or  injurious
human  effort,  upon  the  one  hand,  and  into  the  human  utilities
attending  its  consumption  in  the  commodities  it  vitalised,  the
amount  of  pleasurable  or  beneficial  satisfaction,  on  the  other  hand  ;
a  comparison  or  balance  of  these  psychical  quantities  would  express
the  net  subjective  '  value  '  of  the  industrial  operations,  and  indus-
trial progress  would  receive  its  human  interpretation  in  the  art  of
minimising  '  costs  '  and  maximising  utilities.  Although  it  would
be  beyond  the  possible  scope  of  this  book  to  carry  out  this  sub-
jective interpretation  of  industry  and  of  industrial  progress,  it  is
possible  to  indicate  the  method  of  such  analysis  and  some  of  the
fruitful  results  it  might  be  expected  to  yield.

Where  an  individual  was  a  self-sufficing  economic  system,
as  Robinson  Crusoe  on  his  island,  the  psychical  determination
of  industry  would  be  evident.  Experience  would  work  out
a  very  accurate  calculus  of  the  disabilities  of  production
and  the  utilities  of  consumption  for  different  sorts  of  products.
Given  on  the  one  hand  the  known  material  resources  of
the  island,  tools  saved  from  the  wreck  and  the  kinds  and
degrees  of  productive  skill  possessed  by  Crusoe,  and  on  the  other
hand  the  needs  of  different sorts of articles for  food,  clothing


312  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

and  shelter,  protection  against  enemies,  physical  enjoyment  and
mental  entertainment,  he  would  plan  a  disposal  of  his  time  and
energy  so  as  to  yield  a  maximum  surplus  of  satisfaction  over  cost.
Each  new  proposed  undertaking  would  be  subjected  to  a  careful
estimate  in  order  to  find  out  whether  it  was  '  worth  while.'  This
estimate  would  not  merely  balance  the  time  and  trouble  involved
in  producing  a  given  amount  of  some  particular  supply,  say  a  crop
of  corn,  against  the  utility  or  the  separate  satisfaction  of  consuming
it :  on  each  side  of  the  equation,  the  cost  and  the  satisfaction  would
have  to  be  regarded  as  items  in  a  general  economy  of  effort  and  of
satisfaction  affecting  in  various  subtle  and  important  ways  the
value  of  the  other  items  and  so  of  the  entire  standard  of  work  on  the
one  hand  and  of  life  upon  the  other.  The  proposal  to  cultivate  a
new  piece  of  land  so  as  to  raise  a  new  crop,  adding  a  new  burden  of
physical  effort,  or  displacing  some  other  form  of  work  already  under-
taken, would  alter  the  disposal  of  Crusoe's  working  time,  and  much
would  depend  on  how  the  new  work  involved  could  be  distributed
so  as  to  fit  in  vidth  or  relieve  other  sorts  of  work ;  whether  it  involved
stretches  of  long  continuous  toil,  or  whether  it  incapacitated  him
from  doing  any  other  necessary  work  as  efficiently  as  heretofore,  or
from  enjoying  any  leisure  which  he  now  enjoyed.  Again,  the
'  worth  '  of  the  crop  would  be  considered,  not  merely  with  reference
to  its  amount  and  the  satisfaction  of  its  consumption,  but  as  to
whether  it  would  displace  some  other  article  of  food  got  on  easier
terms,  whether  it  supplied  some  important  defect  of  his  existing
diet,  and  so  enhanced  the  worth  of  the  other  constituents,  or  was
merely  supplementary.  Every  new  piece  of  productive  work,  it
will  be  seen,  must  have  many  and  subtle  effects  on  Crusoe's  standard
of  work,  the  disutilit}'  of  his  production,  and  his  standard  of  life,  the
utility  of  his  consumption.  The  problems  of  industrial  progress  in
such  an  economy  will  be  very  elaborate.  '  Shall  he  give  thirty  days
to  cutting  and  hollowing  a  tree  to  make  a  boat  which  enables  him  to
procure  an  easier  and  larger  supply  of  fish  ? '  becomes  a  question  of
great  delicacy,  depending  for  its  answer  on  minute  calculations  of
chances,  and  of  physical  and  psychical  reactions.

But,  assuming  a  clear  knowledge  of  all  the  conditions  involved,
Crusoe  would  solve  each  practical  problem  by  application  of
a  subjective  calculus  of  costs  and  satisfactions.  Progress  would
be  measured  by  him  in  a  reduction  of  costs  and  an  increase  of
satisfactions.

A  communistic  or  socialistic  society,  so  far  as  it  was  capable  of
operating  effectively,  would  evidently  be  a  mere  enlargement  of
this  Crusoe  economy,  the  close  economy  of  the  powers  and  needs  of
a  collective  person. Energies  of  each  individual  and  each  group


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 313

would  be  so  utilised  that  the  aggregate  product  would  represent,  in
the  distribution  of  the  various  sorts  of  effort  it  involved,  a  minimum
'  cost  '  of  production,  and,  in  the  distribution  of  the  utility  it  con-
tained, a  maximum  satisfaction  of  consumption.  The  current
criticism  of  communism  and  a  completely  socialistic  state  is  directed,
not  against  the  ideal  of  such  an  economy,  but  against  the  feasibilit}^
of  realising  it  by  the  application  of  effective  stimuli  to  the  individual
wills  of  its  members.  The  defence  either  of  a  completely  indi-
viduahstic  economic  system  or  of  the  existing  mixed  economic
system  is  based  on  the  claim  that  the  play  of  enlightened  self-interest
does,  in  fact,  procure  a  nearer  approximation  to  the  economy  of
minimal  costs  and  maximal  utilities,  as  subjectively  interpreted,
than  any  other  presently  possible  system.

Though  we  are  not  here  concerned  to  discuss  the  feasibility  or
desirability  of  '  abolishing  the  competitive  system  '  and  of  substi-
tuting a  non-competitive  or  socialistic  system  of  industry,  we  are
bound  to  indicate  the  ways  in  which  and  the  extent  to  which  the
present  analysis  of  expenses  and  surplus  invalidates  the  claim  of
laissez  faire  economists  that  the  existing  system  is  an  economical
one  for  the  production  of  subjective  wealth  or  human  satisfaction.

If  it  were  accurately  economical,  commercial  values  would
correspond  with  human  or  subjective  values,  that  is  to  say,  a  stock
of  one  sort  of  goods  worth  ;i^iooo  would  contain  the  same  net  balance
of  satisfaction  of  consumption  over  pains  of  production  as  £1000
worth  of  any  other  sort  of  goods.  If  investigation  of  all  relevant
facts  convinced  us  that  ;^iooo  worth  of  bread,  of  coal,  and  of  motor
cars,  and  of  any  other  assortment  of  goods,  contained  the  same
balance  of  human  satisfaction  over  human  cost,  each  estimated  by
the  existing  valuations  of  the  average  member  of  society,  this
equality  would  furnish  a  very  strong  presumption  in  favour  of  the
existing  economy  as  making  for  the  minimisation  of  human  costs
and  the  maximisation  of  human  utilities.  But  actual  comparison
of  the  '  natural  history  '  of  £1000  worth  of  different  classes  of  goods
will  soon  expel  any  such  notion,  by  showing  that  this  same  monetary
value  may  represent  the  widest  divergence  of  human  disutility  of
production  and  human  utility  of  consumption,  and  that  in  many
instances  the  greater  cost  is  accompanied  by  the  smaller  utility.
So  far  as  pleasure  and  pain  are  comparable  and  measurable  (and  an
industrial  system  rests  on  the  assumption  that  they  are) ,  can  it  be
pretended  that  ;;fiooo  worth  of  four  such  diverse  articles  as  wheat,
diamonds,  surgical  operations,  and  pictures  express  or  even  tend  to
express  the  same  net  balance  of  satisfaction  over  cost  ?  The  human
cost  of  producing  £1000  worth  of  diamonds  is  probably  greater  than
that  of  producing  £1000  worth  of  wheat,  its  utility  in  human


314  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

satisfaction  is  certainly  much  less ;  ;^iooo  worth  of  pictures  will  repre-
sent a  smaller  sum  alike  of  cost  and  of  utiHty  than  the  same  value  of
wheat,  while  the  high  utility  of  the  surgical  operations,  attended  by  a
relatively  low  cost,  will  immensely  outweigh  the  picture  value.  Be
it  remembered  that  we  are  not  immediately  concerned  with  the
'  real '  human  values  as  determined  by  the  good  of  humanity  or  any
other  ideal  standard,  but  with  the  actual  valuations  of  the  existing
average  man.  Why  these  variations  in  the  human  or  subjective
value  of  the  same  quantities  of  commercial  value  should  exist
becomes  evident  when  we  remember  the  differences  in  the  bargaining
power  of  the  owners  of  factors  of  production  at  different  points  in  the
processes  of  production,  and  the  consequent  emergence  of  pieces  of
'  surplus  '  which  accumulate  and  are  represented  in  price.  It  is  this
inequality  of  bargain  and  the  rents,  surplus  profits,  &c.,  based  on  it,
that  are  seen  to  be  responsible  for  the  unequal  distribution  of  work
and  of  income  which  exists  in  industrial  society.  With  the  amount
of  surplus  or  loaded  cost  contained  in  the  £1000  the  amount  of
human  value  will  vary  inversely,  the  smaller  the  surplus  the  greater
the  human  value,  either  in  ease  of  production  or  pleasure  of
consumption.

In  our  analysis  of  the  objective  structure  of  industry  we  have
regarded  the  process  of  production  as  the  operation  of  units  of
productive  energy  whose  embodiment  in  goods  as  expenses  of  pro-
duction, measures  their  value.  A  steam-engine  or  a  bale  of  cotton,
regarded  from  this  standpoint,  is  worth  so  many  pounds,  because
the  prices  of  the  various  units  of  productive  energy  in  the  different
processes  mount  up  to  this  sum.

If  we  preferred  to  take  the  standpoint  of  the  consumer,  as  do
many  economists,  and  to  measure  the  value  of  goods  according  to
the  number  of  units  of  various  sorts  of  utility  which  they  can
furnish  in  the  processes  of  consumption,  still  measuring  the  utility
objectively,  the  logic  of  this  method  is  impregnable.  A  steam-
engine  worth  ;£iooo  is  thus  resolved  into  a  number  of  units  of
traction,  reckoned  in  horse-power  or  car  miles  or  otherwise,  the
price  of  which  mounts  up  to  the  -f  1000  ;  similarly  the  bale  of  cotton
goods  is  resolved  into  the  utility  for  wear  or  ornament  furnished  by
the  articles  of  clothing  which  are  made  out  of  it,  this  utility  being
reckoned  objectively  and  without  direct  reference  to  the  satisfaction
of  the  feelings  of  consumers.  So  far  as  the  distinction  between  the
objective  and  subjective  utility  of  goods  can  be  maintained,  the
consumer's  standpoint  is  equally  valid  with  the  producer's  in  the
interpretation  of  the  industrial  system.  It  was  the  greater  facility
of  measurement  from  the  cost  side  which  the  structure  of
industry  affords  that  made  us  prefer  to  interpret  the  industrial


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 315

system  as  a  stream  of  productive  energy  rather  than  a  stream  of
consumptive  utihty.

But  now  that  we  come  to  an  endeavour  to  express  goods  in
terms  of  social  or  psychical  value  it  becomes  evident  that  equal,
simultaneous  and  related  attention  must  be  given  to  the  productive
and  consumptive  aspects.

If  we  are  shown  a  stock  of  goods  valued  at  £1000,  this  price
index  throws  no  light  whatever  upon  the  amount  of  painful  effort
which  went  to  its  production  or  upon  the  amount  of  pleasurable
satisfaction  which  will  attend  its  consumption.  Nor  will  any
objective  analysis  of  expense  or  utility  give  the  knowledge  which
we  require  for  the  human  interpretation  of  the  phenomenon.

It  is  of  supreme  importance  to  make  this  clear.  Let  us  suppose
we  have  a  supply  of  1000  tons  of  coal,  worth  ;fiooo,  or  £1  per  ton.
Our  objective  analysis  of  productive  energy  resolves  this  supply
into  so  many  units  of  mining  energy,  say  1500  hours'  hewing,  &c.
But  this  analysis  gives  no  knowledge  of  the  amount  of  subjective
cost,  or  painful  effort,  involved.  In  order  to  get  that  knowledge,
we  must  know  exactly  (i)  the  technical  conditions  under  which
the  work  is  done;  (2)  the  physical  and  other  conditions  of
the  workers  actually  engaged  ;  (3)  the  distribution  of  the  1500
hours  among  the  workers,  (i)  will  include  such  matters  as  the
thickness,  hardness,  &c.,  of  the  seam,  the  atmospheric  and  other
conditions  of  the  mine  affecting  the  ease  or  safety  of  the  work.

(2)  will  refer  to  the  age,  race,  strength,  diet,  skill  and  experience
of  the  particular  w^orkers,  as  for  instance,  the  employment  of  im-
mature youths  or  old  men,  or  the  food  habits  of  the  workers.

(3)  will  refer  to  the  length  of  shifts,  night  work,  overtime,  the
relative  length  of  shifts  for  men  and  boys,  the  number  of  days  per
week,  or  other  factors  in  the  continuity  or  condensation  of  the
labour.  As  regards  the  distribution  of  the  units  of  productive
energy,  considerations  of  economic  stimulus  by  bonuses  and  other
modes  of  premium  wages,  individual  or  gang  labour,  &c.,  will  enter
in.  A  detailed  knowledge  of  all  these  conditions  of  working,
involving  an  investigation  of  the  physical  and  technical  efficiency
of  each  individual  worker,  would  be  requisite  in  order  to  translate
with  any  accuracy  the  1500  units  of  mining  energy  into  units  of
subjective  effort.

So,  again,  turning  to  the  objective  utility  of  the  1000  tons  of
coal,  let  us  say  that  as  it  represented  1500  units  of  mining  energy
for  production,  so  it  represents  1500  units  of  heating  energy  for  con-
sumption, i.e.  if  used  with  normal  care  it  will  give  out  so  many
units  of  heat.  Does  this  afford  any  knowledge  of  the  subjective
utility,  the  human  satisfaction,  attending  its  consumption  ? No.


3i6  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

For  that  we  must  pursue  an  investigation  closely  analogous  to
that  indicated  on  the  side  of  production.  We  must  learn  (i)  the
technical  conditions  of  its  actual  consumption,  e.g.  whether  it
will  be  used  in  some  central  heating  furnace,  in  slow  combustion
stoves,  or  in  wasteful  open  fires,  whether  directly  for  furnishing
warmth  to  human  beings  or  conferring  some  indirect  benefit  by
forwarding  some  industrial  process  ;  (2)  the  sort  of  consumers
who  will  use  the  heat,  whether  children,  or  adults,  weak  or  strong,
active  or  sedentary  persons.  Here,  again,  exact  subjective
analysis  would  require  separate  investigation  of  each  user
analogous  to  that  demanded  in  the  case  of  workers ;  (3)  the
distribution  of  the  utility  among  a  large  or  small  number  of
consumers,  for  longer  or  shorter  times,  more  or  less  continuously,
will  evidently  affect  the  quantity  of  subjective  utility  afforded  by
its  consumption.

This  is,  of  course,  nothing  but  an  apphcation  of  certain  quite
obvious  criticisms  upon  the  formal  measurements  of  wealth.  The
human  worth  of  any  given  stock  of  material  or  immaterial  wealth
must  evidently  vary,  and  vary  indefinitely,  according  to  the  good
or  bad  conditions  of  its  production,  according  to  the  good  or  bad
conditions  of  its  consumption.  Where  it  is  made  by  vigorous
workers,  on  short  hours,  under  good  hj^gienic  and  technical  con-
ditions, it  will  involve  a  minimum  of  painful  or  distasteful  effort,
human  disutility  ;  where  it  is  made  by  feeble  women  and  children,
working  long  hours  in  some  insanitary  workshop  or  home,  it  will
involve  a  maximum  of  this  disutility.  Where  it  passes  into
the  consumption  of  consumers  who  need  it  most,  and  is  dis-
tributed among  them  according  to  the  urgency  of  their  needs,  as
measured  by  the  satisfaction  it  affords,  and  is  so  consumed  as
to  give  them  all  they  are  capable  of  getting  from  it,  it  affords
the  maximum  of  subjective  utility.  Where  it  goes  into  the  posses-
sion of  a  few  who  already  have  enough  to  satisfy  their  felt  wants,
and  so  is  applied  extravagantly  to  supply  some  routine  purpose
of  luxurious  order,  its  subjective  utility  may  be  reduced  to  zero.

The  development  of  this  subjective  analysis  is,  of  course,  essential
to  the  human  interpretation  of  the  wealth  of  nations.  It  opens
the  practical  problem  of  the  distribution  of  economic  work  and
economic  enjoyment  which  is  the  contribution  of  the  art  of  industry
to  the  wider  art  of  society.  The  crude  customary  method  of
assessing  the  industrial  well-being  of  a  nation  in  terms  of  the
quantity  or  the  value  of  its  marketable  products,  or  of  their  quantity
or  value  per  head  of  the  population,  is  seen  in  the  light  of  such
analysis  to  be  destitute  of  all  real  significance.  For  of  two  nations
possessing  the  same  average  wealth  per  head,  one  might,  by  a


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 317

more  human  and  equitable  apportionment  of  the  work  and  of  the
product,  get  out  of  this  product  double  or  treble  the  human  utility
or  satisfaction  which  the  other  got.

§  4. — Nor  have  we  thus  far  touched  the  most  important
hnk  between  industry  and  the  art  of  social  progress.  For  in  our
subjective  interpretation  of  cost  and  utility  we  have  taken  as
the  standard  of  our  estimate  the  actual  feelings  or  appreciations
of  workers  and  consumers,  thus  translating  production  and  product
into  terms  of  current  pleasure  and  pain.

Now,  an  art  of  social  progress  cannot  acknowledge  the  validity
or  sufficiency  of  such  a  calculus.  The  good  of  society  which  it
seeks  cannot  be  adequately  expressed  in  current  terms  of  hedonism.
The  order  and  progress  of  a  happy  and  prosperous  society  involve
a  constant  correction  of  current  individual  valuations  of  work,  and
of  enjoyment ;  some  work,  involving  painful  effort  and  '  disutility  '
from  the  present  standpoint  of  the  feelings  of  the  worker,  may  be
fraught  with  gain  to  himself  or  to  others  which  will  ultimately
rank  as  social  well-being  ;  some  consumption,  highly  esteemed
by  individual  consumers  for  the  pleasure  it  affords,  will  be  recog-
nised to  involve  individual  and  social  waste  and  injury.  Thus
the  objective  industrial  standard  of  wealth  requires  a  double  process
of  rectification  before  it  is  brought  into  accord  with  the  art  of
social  progress.  The  objective  product  of  industry  must  be  trans-
lated first  into  a  net  balance  of  pain  over  pleasure  in  the  processes
of  production  and  consumption,  taken  on  the  current  valuation  of
producers  and  consumers  ;  secondly,  into  a  balance  of  social
welfare  as  indicated  by  the  ideal  standard  which  every  society
must  set  before  itself.  The  rational  justification  of  any  such
social  ideal  belongs  to  philosophy  and  does  not  concern  us  here.
It  is  enough  for  our  purpose  that  every  nation  or  other  social  being
has  some  conception  of  its  good  and  of  social  progress  according
to  which  it  claims  to  assess  and  to  direct  social  conduct.  Industry
as  a  branch  of  social  conduct  will  be  amenable  to  this  rule.  Society
will,  therefore,  in  proportion  as  it  comes  to  realise  its  good,  insist
more  urgently  that  the  industrial  system  shall,  in  its  structure  and
working,  be  brought  into  conformity  with  the  wider  material  and
moral  conditions  of  social  growth.

Industrial  progress,  thus  socially  interpreted  and  directed,  will
consist  not  merely,  as  now,  in  the  technical  improvements  of  the
industrial  arts  so  as  to  increase  the  supply  of  products,  but  also  in
the  continuous  redistribution  of  the  burdens  of  production  and
the  benefits  of  consumption  of  products  so  as  to  minimise  the  social
cost  of  the  former,  and  to  maximise  the  social  gain  of  the  latter
process. In  this  process  of  adjustment  the  standard  of  current


3i8  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

individual  estimates  of  the  disutility  of  production  and  of  the
utihty  of  consumption  will  be  taken  as  important  indices  of  social
gain  or  waste,  but  will  have  no  final  authority  assigned  to  them,
for  these  indices  will  themselves  be  subject  to  adjustment  in
accordance  with  a  far-sighted  and  collective  instead  of  a
short-sighted  and  individual  standard  of  welfare.

Such  is  the  broad  rationale  of  the  social  interpretation  of  an
industrial  system.  Its  realisation  in  practice  is  through  a  social
economy  of  productive  powers  brouglit  into  organic  relation  to  a
social  economy  of  consumption.  The  social  art  of  production  will
aim  at  such  applications  of  productive  energy  as  form  the  required
products  with  the  minimum  of  human  pain  and  injury  or  vital  cost.
The  efficiency  of  this  economy  will  depend  upon  {a)  what  are  the
sorts  and  quantities  of  the  required  products ;  (b)  what  industrial
methods  are  employed  to  produce  them ;  (c)  how  the  '  vital  cost '
involved  is  distributed  among  the  different  producers.

The  social  art  of  consumption  will  aim  at  such  application  of
consuming  power  as  bestows  upon  the  commodities  the  maximum
of  human  pleasure  and  benefit,  or  vital  utility,  in  their  consumption.
The  efficiency  of  this  economy  will  also  depend  upon  (a)  what  are
the  sorts  and  quantities  of  the  commodities ;  (b)  what  are  the  methods
of  consuming  them ;  (c)  how  the  vital  utility  is  distributed  among
different  consumers.

The  organic  relation  between  the  arts  of  production  and  con-
sumption clearly  discernible  in  the  individual  may  be  extended  to
the  social  economy.  A  self-sufficing  individual,  if  such  may  be
conceived,  with  an  intelligent  comprehension  of  his  real  interests,
would  utilise  all  his  different  faculties  of  body  and  mind  in  propor-
tion to  their  strength  for  the  series  of  productive  processes  which
he  found  necessary  to  sustain  and  improve  these  faculties,  and  so
to  realise  himself  in  work  and  in  enjo3^ment.  This  proportionate
distribution  of  work  would  imply  the  minimum  of  strain  and  waste  ;
the  proportionate  variety  of  products  it  would  yield  would  in
amount  and  kind  be  naturally  fitted  to  yield  the  appropriate
economy  of  satisfaction  through  consumption.  A  large  portion
of  his  working  time  and  energy  must  be  devoted  to  manual  work,
partly  of  a  routine  sort,  partly  involving  various  sorts  of  manual
and  mental  skill ;  in  the  higher  portions  of  such  work  the  mental
and  moral  faculties  will  get  more  exercise,  and  various  definitely
intellectual  work  of  planning  and  invention  and  of  scientific  investi-
gation will  emerge.  The  material  or  immaterial  products  of  such
labours  would  be  in  kind  and  quality  such  as  to  sustain  and  stimu-
late the  faculties  employed  in  producing  them,  the  enjoyment
attending  their  consumption  being  a  reflection  of  the  harmony  in


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 319

consciousness.  Both  the  utility  got  by  such  a  man  out  of  tlie  food
he  grew,  and  the  enjoyment  of  it,  would  be  dependent  on  the  work
of  producing  it.  '  Whosoever  will  not  work  neither  shall  he  eat,'  is
not  merely  a  moral  but  a  physical  law  ;  some  corresponding  output
of  physical  energy  in  work  (or  some  work  substitute,  exercise  in
sport)  is  physically  necessary  to  the  digestion  of  food.  The  develop-
ment of  this  doctrine  to  the  larger  individual  economy  is  obvious  ;
there  is  a  natural  economy  of  efforts  and  satisfactions  which  every
intelHgent  man  works  out  for  himself.

In  an  individual  living  in  society  the  distinctively  individual
economy  must  be  qualified  by  recognition  of  the  social  aspect  of
each  person  which  imposes  a  special  contribution  of  energy
towards  the  maintenance  of  society,  a  contribution  which  comes
back  to  him  as  a  member  of  society  in  social  benefits.  Now
a  social  economy  does  not  differ  at  all  in  essence  from  the  indi-
vidual economy.  In  both  cases  the  art  consists  in  distributing
the  productive  energy  of  work  so  as  to  minimise  the  strain  or
waste,  and  in  a  corresponding  apportionment  of  the  product  so
as  to  sustain  and  stimulate  the  powers  of  work.  Incidentally,
though  not  accidentally,  the  maximum  of  enjoyment  is  afforded  by
this  harmonious  apportionment  of  products.  Where  the  existing
operation  of  industry  imposes  upon  large  classes  of  workers  a
continuous  monotony  of  narrow  manual  toil,  involving  a  constant
strain  upon  certain  muscular  functions  and  atrophying  all  other
productive  activities,  it  not  only  evokes  this  productive  energy
in  the  most  vitally  expensive  way,  but  it  imposes  upon  them  a
corresponding  narrowness  of  consumption  and  enjoyment,  thus
minimising  the  vital  value  of  their  wages.  Similarly  with  the
over-specialised  and  over-driven  mental  workers  in  our  competitive
machine,  the  excessive  narrow  cerebration  and  the  neuro-asthenic
condition  it  evokes  cause  a  corresponding  double  vital  loss  on  the
producing  and  consuming  side.  As  for  the  non-productive  classes
in  our  society,  the  idle  upper  class  who  need  not  work  because
others  are  legally  compelled  to  work  for  them,  the  idle  lower  class
who  either  cannot  get  work,  are  incapable  of  doing  it,  or  prefer  to
live  as  scavengers  upon  society,  the  vital  injury  and  loss  involved
in  their  existence  belong  to  the  natural  history  of  parasitism.

The  art  of  social  economy  in  industry  aims  at  the  thorough  appli-
cation to  the  industrial  system  of  this  natural  relation  between
production  and  consumption.  It  is,  perhaps,  most  compactly  and
accurately  expressed  in  the  formula,  '  From  each  according  to  bis
powers,  to  each  according  to  his  needs.'  This  is  the  organic  law
of  distribution  as  applicable  to  the  industrial  system  as  to  the
animal  organism. But  its  applicabihty  to  industry  is  less  obvious.


320  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

That  the  bodily  organs  must  be  fed  by  the  alimentary  sj^stem  with
close  relation  to  the  nature  and  amount  of  the  work  they  severally
do  and  the  waste  of  tissue  and  output  of  energy  involved,  is  self-
evident,  and  the  economy  must  be  carried  out  in  such  detail  that
each  cell  must  have  its  food  apportioned  to  its  waste.  In  the  bodily
organism  it  is  evident  that  under  normal  conditions  a  direct  and
proportionate  relation  exists  between  power  and  needs,  the  greater
output  of  energy  in  work  constituting  a  greater  need.  This,  how-
ever, must  be  qualified  in  the  case  of  injury  or  disease  to  any  organ  ;
there  a  wider  organic  economy  displaces  the  narrower  one  and
requires  that  the  disabled  part,  though  capable  of  doing  no  present
work,  shall  have  a  larger  supply  of  food  and  other  organic  defence
placed  at  its  disposal.

Wh}^  is  it  not  evident  that  this  same  organic  law  with  the  same
'  exception  '  is  applicable  strictly  to  the  industrial  system  regarded
as  part  of  a  social  organism  ?  The  chief  reason,  I  think,  consists
in  the  loose  thinking  which  has  been  brought  to  bear  on  the  applica-
tion of  the  formula,  '  From  each  according  to  his  powers,  to  each
according  to  his  needs.'  It  is  commonly  treated  not  as  the  natural
law  it  is,  not  even  as  a  mandate  of  economic  justice,  but  as  a  philan-
thropic counsel  of  perfection.  It  is  supposed  that  normally  some
contradiction  lies  between  powers  and  needs,  and  that  the  applica-
tion of  the  rule  would  involve  that  those  who  did  most  work  would
not  get  most  pay,  or  at  any  rate  that  equal  pay  would  be  given  for
unequal  work  on  the  ground  that  common  humanity  meant  equality
of  needs.  Yet  a  little  reflection  will  show  this  criticism  to  be  quite
unwarranted.  As  our  analysis  of  individual  economy  disclosed,
there  is  a  natural  harmony  between  output  of  work  and  intake  of
food  for  the  several  faculties  of  man.  The  social-economic  economy
is  the  same.  Normally  the  kind  of  work  which  takes  most  out  of
a  man  requires  that  most  shall  be  put  into  him  :  the  worker  who
does  most  work  usually  requires  most  food.  In  the  analysis  of
individual  and  class  wages  we  plainly  recognised  this  harmony  of
production  and  consumption.  Clearly  discerned  in  rough  muscular
work,  it  remains  applicable  to  all  the  higher  forms  of  work :  the
skilled  mechanic  has  a  more  complex  standard  of  needs  than  the
unskilled  labourer,  and  the  maintenance  of  his  economic  efliciency
requires  their  satisfaction.  Professional  men  and  other  brain-
workers  may  have  a  still  more  complex  standard  of  needs,  corre-
sponding to  the  greater  delicacy  of  their  work  :  their  income  must
furnish  more  seclusion  in  the  home,  books  and  other  private  appa-
ratus, opportunities  for  travel  and  wide  intercourse.  Though  no
defence  of  the  gulf  which  divides  the  incomes  of  most  members  of
the  professional  and  employing  classes  from  the  manual  workers  can


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 321

be  based  upon  this  natural  law,  it  furnishes  a  rational  justification
for  the  maintenance  both  of  class  and  individual  distinctions
of  income.  As  in  the  physical  so  in  the  industrial  organism  the
wider  application  of  this  natural  law  involves  a  suspension  of
immediate  reciprocity  between  work  and  sustentation  in  the  case
of  infirmity,  disease,  or  accident.  The  organic  economy  of  society  re-
quires a  special  provision  for  the  needs  of  weak  or  disabled  members,
children,  the  old,  the  sick,  the  mentally  or  morally  defective,  and
the  unemployed  ;  their  needs  are  to  be  met  not  with  reference  to
any  current  powers  they  exercise,  but  by  an  educative,  curative,  or
preventive  policy,  directed,  either  to  secure  for  society  the  use  of
their  future  powers,  or  to  enable  society  to  bear  more  easily  a  burden
which  it  cannot  shed.

Although  the  formula  is  usually  repudiated  as  either  a  revolu-
tionary or  a  perfectionist  humanitarian  doctrine,  it  is  worthy  of
observation  that  the  theory  of  individualistic  distribution  conforms
to  it.  The  operation  of  the  laissez  faire  competitive  economy
rests  on  the  assumption  that  economic  stimuli  are  applied  so  as  to
evoke  productive  energy  from  each  according  to  his  powers  ;  while
it  is  claimed  that  the  apportionment  of  the  product  which  ensues  is
'  according  to  needs,'  including  under  needs  the  economic  stimuli
to  production.  Moreover  the  laissez  faire  economy  usually  admits
the  legitimate  operation  of  '  charity  '  to  supply  exceptional  needs
which  are  either  temporarily  or  permanently  divorced  from  any
corresponding  powers.

§  5. — Our  criticism  of  the  operation  of  the  present  indus-
trial system  as  an  instrument  of  social  economy  is  that  it  works  too
wastefully :  it  does  not  evoke  productive  energy  '  according  to
powers,'  nor  does  it  distribute  the  product  '  according  to  needs.'  The
'  surplus  '  is  at  once  the  measure  and  the  instrument  of  this  waste.
Its  injury  is  three-fold.  First,  as  unearned  individual  income  not
merely  does  it  fail  to  support  or  stimulate  productive  effort,  but  it
diverts  individual  energies  into  non-productive  channels,  atrophies
socially  serviceable  activities,  and  substitutes  either  a  life  of  idleness
or  one  of  frivolous  and  socially  injurious  activity.  Surplus  acts
on  its  recipients  as  an  inhibition  upon  labour.

Secondly,  so  far  as  it  represents  the  result  of  sweating,  rack-
renting,  or  other  processes  of  oppressive  bargaining,  it  injures  the
productivity  of  labour  by  robbing  the  labouring  classes  of  their
natural  stimulus  to  progressive  efficiency.

Thirdly,  by  enabling  individuals  to  take  for  their  private  income
what  is  produced  by  society  and  is  required  to  satisfy  the  needs  of
social  hfe,  it  damages  the  efficiency  of  the  state  and  of  the  public
services  it  is  called  upon  to  render.

Y


322  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

The  subjective  interpretation  of  the  surplus  would  furnish  a
complete  analysis  of  the  waste  of  life  involved  in  the  defective
working  of  the  industrial  system,  both  in  respect  of  the  distribution
of  work  and  of  its  product.

For  wherever  an  inequality  of  bargaining-power  yielded  to  the
stronger  some  unearned  gain,  it  would  be  seen  that  this  involved
the  imposition  of  a  wasteful  or  excessive  vital  cost  upon  some  pro-
ducer, while  at  the  same  time  it  damaged  the  vital  efficiency  of  its
recipient  by  enabling  and  so  inducing  him  to  consume  without
producing,  thus  injuring  both  his  powers  of  work  and  of  enjoyment.

Through  the  injurious  operation  of  the  surplus,  again,  we  can
best  comprehend  the  degraded  and  degrading  character  of  so  large
a  proportion  of  the  work  and  of  the  enjoyment  in  modern  industrial
society.  Sweating  and  luxury,  the  opposed  aspects  of  the  surplus,
are  directly  responsible  for  lai'ge  masses  of  debased  demand  whose
evil  character  is  stamped  upon  the  processes  of  production.  From
the  under-pay  of  the  poorer  grades  of  workers  issues  the  demand
for  bad  materials,  clumsy  manual  or  cheap  machine  work,  which
evoke  and  sustain  many  of  the  worst  conditions  of  labour  both  in
factories  and  workshops,  while  the  capricious  nature,  the  foolish,
frivolous,  and  often  directly  noxious  character  of  the  luxuries,  to  the
demand  for  which  so  much  '  surplus  '  necessarily  goes,  are  reflected
in  the  industries  which  produce  them,  and  in  the  character  and
tastes  of  those  employed  in  these  industries.

The  significance  of  the  direct  interaction  of  production  and
consumption  in  determining  the  quality  and  so  the  vital  worth  of
work,  the  quality  and  so  the  vital  worth  of  wealth,  can  only  be
understood  by  watching  these  injurious  results  of  the  'surplus,'  and
by  considering  how  the  absorption  of  this  '  surplus  '  and  its  better
application  to  personal  efficiency  and  social  service  might  improve
the  character  of  work  and  of  enjoyment.  Health,  education,
security,  these  three  great  departments  of  the  '  public  good,*
adequately  administered  by  society,  would,  by  their  reaction  upon
the  standard  of  life  in  all  classes  of  the  community,  so  change  the
relative  valuations  of  wealth,  and  so  operate  through  changed
demands  upon  industry,  as  to  produce  an  incalculably  great  increase
of  subjective  or  real  wealth.

The  operation  would  be  through  human  interests  and  tastes
upon  the  arts  of  industry.  For  health,  education,  and  security
will  individualise  the  character,  develop  a  varied  personality  in
each,  and  give  free  play  to  all  the  faculties  to  seek  the  activities  and
enjoyments  which  belong  to  them.  This  individuation  and  variety
of  needs  will  create  a  corresponding  character  in  the  productive
work  required  for  their  satisfaction. Thus  a  coarse  quantitative


THE  HUMAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  INDUSTRY 323

economy,  favouring  the  excessive  dominion  of  monotony  and
mechanism,  yields  to  a  more  quahtative  economy  of  adaptive  variety
and  human  art.  As  the  surplus,  rightly  utihsed  in  improved
conditions  of  labour  and  in  improved  social  services,  expands  and
elevates  the  character  of  the  individual  citizen,  custom  and  routine
will  lose  force  as  regulative  influences  in  his  life,  personal  tastes  and
particularity  of  wants  will  find  expression  through  an  ampler  and
securer  income.  This  will  mean  an  increased  operation  of  art  in
industry,  for  every  satisfaction  of  an  individual  want  involves
some  conscious  skill  of  adaptation  in  the  productive  processes.
When  a  sense  of  personal  dignity  requires  well-fitting  clothes,
it  demands  a  skilled  fitter  and  cutter,  and  so  it  is  with  every  other
element,  material  or  non-material,  in  a  standard  of  comfort.  From
each  improvement  in  the  personal  standard  of  life  due  to  a  better
utilisation  of  the  surplus  will  come  some  related  improvement  in
the  standard  of  work.  Mechanical  routine  will  not  disappear  from
industry,  but  upon  the  several  mechanical  processes  a  superstruc-
ture of  skilled  work  wiU  be  imposed.  This  lightening  of  the
mechanical  burden  of  toil,  and  the  corresponding  increase  of
skilled  and  interesting  work,  means  a  reduction  in  the  vital  cost
of  production  as  well  as  an  increased  enjoyment  of  the  product.
Nor  is  that  all.  Every  improvement  of  industry  in  the  form  of
new  elements  of  skill  and  human  interest  reacts  again  upon  the
worker  in  his  capacity  of  consumer,  stimulating  his  intelligence  and
taste,  and  so  helping  once  more  to  improve  industry.  There  is  no
limit  to  this  interaction  in  the  arts  of  production  and  consumption  :
each  gain  is  a  double  gain,  reducing  some  vital  cost  of  work
while  it  increases  some  vital  utility  of  enjoyment.

The  ideal  of  this  progressive  economy  is  an  industrial  system
in  which  the  intrinsically  interesting  work  shall  be  at  a  maximum
and  the  burden  of  routine  toil  at  a  minimum.  The  improved
distribution  of  work  and  income  attendant  on  an  equitable  disposal
of  the  surplus  would,  as  we  see,  reduce  the  proportion  and  the
absolute  amount  of  purely  mechanical  or  unskilled  toil.  But  in
any  industrial  system  a  great  deal  of  monotonous  and  uninteresting
labour  must  remain.  The  notion  that  all  or  nearly  all  the  burden
of  toil  can  either  be  displaced  by  interesting  labour  or  can  be
shifted  on  to  the  shoulders  of  machinery  is  quite  chimerical.  Some
*  costs '  of  production  in  the  shape  of  hard,  uninteresting,  and  even
repulsive  work  cannot  be  evaded.  But  in  as  far  as  such  work  is
distributed  '  according  to  the  powers  '  of  the  workers,  not  falling
with  excessive  burden  upon  certain  individuals  and  classes,  the
pain  or  subjective  cost  will  be  minimised.  Translating  industry
into  terms  of  true  individual  and  social  welfare,  we  may  even  go

Y2


324  THE  INDUSTRIAL  SYSTEM

further  and  recognise  that  some  amount  of  dull  mechanical  labour,
both  of  hand  and  brain,  is  a  useful  discipline  and  exercise  for  man
and  plays  a  serviceable  part  in  the  progress  of  society.  But,  in
general,  every  rise  in  the  standard  of  consumption  and  production
will  signify  an  increasing  individuation,  personal  skill,  intelligence
and  interest  in  productive  work.  The  final  meaning  of  this  progress
is  a  transformation  not  merely  of  the  character  but  of  the  conception
of  the  industrial  system.  If  every  man  had  no  more  work  to  do
than  *  was  good  for  him,'  if  most  of  his  work  was  interesting  to  him
and  was  not  prolonged  unduly  or  performed  under  stress,  and  if
such  work  as  was  uninteresting  was  safe  and  served  as  exercise
or  discipline  to  muscles,  brain,  and  will,  the  product  of  industry
might  be  got  at  a  vital  cost  trifling  when  compared  with  that
actually  paid  even  in  the  best-ordered  industrial  society  of  to-day.

The  supreme  significance  of  such  a  reformed  economy  would
consist  in  the  practical  assimilation  or  identification  of  production
and  consumption,  work  and  enjoyment.  This  identification  is
actually  achieved  in  what  we  term  the  fine  arts,  where  the  satisfac-
tion and  interest  of  creative  achievement  is  at  its  maximum.  The
final  harmony  of  industry  is  reached  when  we  see  a  worker  who
lives  in  and  for  his  work,  who  expresses  himself  freely  and  joyfully
in  it,  and  who  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  producer  and  consumer.
Though  only  a  small  proportion  of  total  industry  can  be  raised
into  harmony  upon  this  level,  it  is  by  an  increasing  measure  of  this
transfusion  of  values  that  the  qualitative  as  distinct  from  the
quantitative  progress  of  industry  can  be  estimated.

There  is,  however,  no  reason  for  eliminating  quantitative
growth  from  our  conception  of  economic  progress.  The  proper
absorption  of  the  surplus  for  its  right  purpose  as  the  food  of  indus-
trial efficiency  would  not  only  bring  a  better  application,  but  an
enlarged  volume  of  productive  power.  Improved  distribution  of
income  with  enhanced  security  of  life  would  establish  a  full  and
regular  demand  for  the  employment  of  all  productive  powers,  so
that  the  quantity  of  the  product  of  industry  would  be  increased  as
well  as  the  quality  improved.  Expressed  in  economic  formula
the  social  progress  thus  achieved  would  mean  (i)  a  larger  pro-
duction of  objective  wealth,  (2)  a  smaller  vital  cost  per  unit  of  the
increased  product,  (3)  a  larger  vital  utility  per  unit.


INDEX


Ability,  ch.  vi.

price  of,  158
Agriculture,  7

businesses  in,  177-79
Artist,  meaning  of,  182
Arts,  size  of  business,  182
Australia,  protection  in,  200


Bank  of  England,  252
Banking,  ch.  xv.

consolidation  of,  183
Bargaining,  process  of,  150-55
Bills,  discounting  of,  255,  256
Birmingham  alliances,  200
Birth-rate,  65
Business,  as  industrial  unit,  ch.  i.

size  of,  4,  5,  ch.  xi.

constitution  of,  5,6

control  of,  6,  8

small,  6,  7,  190

federal,  196


Commodities,  42

market  for,  160
Competition,  among  trades,  29

'  free,' 131

morality  of,  308
Conferences,  194
Confidence,  collapse  of,  290
Consumption,  business  use  of,  164

changes  in,  167,  168

art  of,  318
Co-ordination  of  factors,  59,  75,  76

diagram  of,  99

law  of,  100,  &c.
Costs,  deiined,  xi

distinguished  from  surplus,  ch.  iv.

'  prime,'  186
Cost-taking,  60

Creation,  work  of  ability,  120,  121
Credit,  255-61
Crusoe,  53,  284

his  economy,  311,  312
Currency,  251


Capital,  circulating,  9

fixed,  9

costs  of,  68,  69

grades  of,  92,  93

marginal,  93

investment  of,  158

concentration  of,  ch.  xi.
Capitalism,  limits  of,  5,  6
Carnegie, 197
Cartels,  194

Census,  of  occupations,  37
Cheques,  254
Child-labour,  84
Chinese, 65

Clark,  J.  B. Essentials  of  Economic
Theory,  106,  107

Distribution  of  Wealth,  114
Combinations,  uses  of,  93

ethics  of,  308,  309
Combines,  193
Commerce,  size  of  business,  181

ends  of,  149


De  Beers,  222,  240
Demand,  defined,  xi

law  of,  ch.  X.

for  commodities,  51
Departmental  store,  181
Depreciation,  69
Depressions  of  trade,  282

diagnosis  of,  288-91
Differential  rents,  103
Diminishing  returns,  law  of,  198
Distribution,  how  effected,  56

by  pulls,  ch.  vii.

Elasticity,  of  demand,  169,  172-75
of  supply,  175

Employers'  liability,  210

Entrepreneur,  57,  58
his  functions, 117
takes  profit,  116
in  statical  industry,  117
competition  of,  iig,  126,  136
in  progressive  industry,  120


325


326


INDEX


Exchange,  uses  of,  149,  150
Expenses,  of  production,  defined,  xi

marginal,  140-44

mean,  146


Factors,  of  production,  ch.  i.

co-ordinated,  99-105
Finance,  183

public,  224,  225

and  industry,  291
Financier,  his  work,  122
Fishing,  size  of  business,  179


Gold,  reserve  of,  256

mining,  262

effect  on  prices,  262-65
Conner,  E.  C.  K.,  Interest  and  Saving,

73
Goods,  markets  for,  159
Goodwill,  as  asset,  258


Hamilton,  W.  R., The  Cost  of  Pro-
duction, &c.,  187,  188
Hoarding,  50


Imports,  taxation  of,  ch.  xv.
Income,  meaning  of,  42

flow  of,  43-45

distribution  of,  45

how  paid,  57

public,  235
Income  tax,  policy  of,  232

graduated,  233
Industries,  classification  of,  34-38
Industry, human interpretation of,
ch.  xix.

psychical  structure  of,  303-8

costs  and  utilities  of,  315-17
Insurance,  ch.  xvii.

four  uses  of,  269

and  investment,  272
Interest,  a  cost,  70,  71

real,  73
Investment,  markets  for,  158


Jevons,  classification of  industries;

37
Johannsen,  N.,  A  Neglected  Point  in
connexion  with  Crises,  292


Labour,  manual,  9

motives  for,  67

market,  90, 156,  157

exchanges,  158

movement,  ch.  xiii.

criticisms  of,  201

defence  of,  202,  203

economic  basis  of,  203-6
Land,  8

wear  and  tear,  74

rent  of,  93-98

marginal,  94,  95

supply  of,  96

grading  of,  96-98

ownership  of ,  133

prices  of  use,  156
Linotype  Company,  105
Luck,  as  factor  in  distribution,  127


Maintenance,  of  labour,  62

of  capital,  69

defined,  80-84
Malays,  65
Management,  10,  58
Manufactures,  size  of  business,  1 79-8 1
Margin,  of  employment,  66

extensive, intensive, 67,  73

rise  and  fall  of,  76

how  determined,  99

fallacious use of, 102, appendix,
p.  106,  &c.
Marginal,  labour,  88,  145
Market,  13

area  of,  14

mechanism  of,  ch.  ix.

'  free,'  154-55
Mill, J.  S.,  effect  of  saving,  51

on  taxation,  218
Mining,  size  of  business,  178

rents,  205
Money,  ch.  xvi.

quantity  of,  165,  256

uses  of,  250

forms  of,  251-53

bank,  255

basis  of,  256

credit  as,  257

demand  for,  259
Monopoly,  ch.  xii.

of  opportunity,  134

taxation  of,  243


Nature,  as  factor,  69-74
Newspapers,  businesses  of,  183


Kaffirs,  65


Organism,  industrial,  59
Over-capitalisation,  258


INDEX


327


Over-saving,  54

cause  of  unemployment,  283,  &c.

checks  upon,  293
Over-spending,  54


Piece-wages,  60
Poor  Law  Commission,  301
Population,  growth  of,  65
Price,  ch.  viii.

analysis  of,  137

determination  of,  146-47

selling,  148

market,  150-52
Price-change,  xi

law  of,  165
Productive  surplus,  xi
Productivity,  marginal,  106-14
Professions,  46

productivity  of,  47

businesses  in,  182

psychology  of,  308
Profit,  xi

payment  of  ability,  116

basis  of,  117

determination  of, 118-20

elements  in,  122-23

as  an  expense,  124

growth  of,  129
Profit-sharing, 199
Protection,  theory  of,  237-39
Prussia,  income  tax  in,  235


QuAsi-RENTs, 105 n.


Rent,  how  determined,  98

a  scarcity  price,  99

as  surplus,  132-33

differential, 137

specific,  137
Responsibility,  price  of,  85
Retail  prices,  136

of  bread,  161

trade,  7,  23,  181
Rockefeller,  127,  222
Rothschild,  127


Sauerbeck's  index  numbers,  279
Saving,  ch.  iii.

operation  of,  49

effort  of,  70

interest  of,  72,  73

limits  on,  283-86
Social  Progress,  art  of,  317
Socialism,  ch.  xiv.

moral  case  for,  309
Sociology,  standpoint  of,  148


Spending,  ch.  iii.

limits  of,  52-55
Spendthrift,  51
Standard  of  comfort,  30
Standard  Oil,  105,  197,  199,  240
State,  industrial  functions  of,  213

growing  interference  of,  215

ownership  by,  216

use  of  surplus,  216,  225
Substitution, 29,  199
Supply,  defined,  xi

law  of,  ch.  X.

rate  of,  166
Surplus,  defined,  xi

origin  of,  76

unearned,  78

productive  and  unproductive,  80

growth  of,  80

how  far  '  necessary,'  104

distribution  of,  ch.  vii

'  pulls  '  upon,  126

sorts  of,  132-36

as  public  revenue,  226

as  residual  claimant,  128
Sweating,  64

Tariff,  support  of  trust,  197
Taxation,  ch.  xiv.

principles  of,  217

incidence  of,  227-29

shifting  of,  229

indirect,  234

of  foreigners,  240

of  imports,  ch.  xv.
Tender,  legal,  253
Trade,  meaning  of,  ch.  ii.

extractive,  19

manufacturing,  20

distributive,  22.

complementary,  28

growth  of,  68
Trade  Unions,  ch.  xiii.

method  of,  91
Transport, 27

size  of  business,  179
Trusts,  ch.  xii.

American,  105

harvester,  161

economy  of, 192

sugar,  199

Unearned  increment,  218
Unemployment,  ch.  xviii.

cyclical,  275

percentages,  276

wheat  and,  276

index  numbers,  279

machinery  and,  280-82

summary  of  causation,  295,  296

remedies  for,  296-300


328


INDEX


Unit  of  cheap  production,  189
Unitary  standard,  60,  61

advantages  of ,  101-3
United States Steel Corporation,

194,  195,  197

Unproductive  surplus,  xi
cause  of  over-saving,  283-85
influence  on  efficiency,  303

Utility,  marginal  and  mean,  146,  147


Values,  148


Wage-Board,  207,  213


Wages,  subsistence,  63,  64

economy  of  high,  68,  135

family,  83

grade,  85-87

differential,  87

iron  law  of,  88

'  minimum,'  89

standard,  90

surplus,  90,  91
Wear  and  tear,  57

of  labour,  63

of  capital,  69
Wheat,  taxation  of,  243-45

world-harvest, 276

influence  on  employment,  276-78
Women,  wage  of,  84


THE END


