The Meaning of God in Human Experience: A Philosophic Study of Religion (William Ernest Hocking, 1912)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/meaninggodinhum00hockgoog). Hocking's idealist philosophy of religion: God as known in and through human experience.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful. Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/|


I


rRormTY or


Muries^


»8»7


A  K  T  e  S S  C  1  ENTIA VERITAS


^UUUm^ ^OA^ UxJyyju/


iiO/rJ
ij


iqA<


THE  MEANING  OF  GOD
IN  HUMAN  EXPERIENCE

A  PHILOSOPHIC  STUDY  OF  RELIGION

BY

WILUAM  ERNEST  HOCKING, Ph.D.

ALFORD PROmsOR OF  NATURAL  RKUOION

HOHAL  FHILMOFHY  AND  CIVIL  POLITY

IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY


NEW  HAVEN  ■  YALE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

LONDON  ■  HUUPHRBY  MILFORD  •  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

MDCCCCXXII


I. \


North  Compift


*  f


W


COPTKIOHT«  1912

^  BY  YALE  XJNIVERSITY  PRESS

First  publiahed  June,  1912
Second  printing  May,  1913
Third  printing  June,  1916
Fourth  prlntinsr  Auffust,  1922


NOTE  ON  CLASSIFICATION

{Accordinz  to  Dewey^s  Decimal  System)

Main  Topics
201  (Philosophy  and  Psychology  of  Religion)  +
121  (Theory  of  Knowled^re)  +  149.3  (Mysticism)
+  149.9  (Pragmatism).

Snb-topics
Creativity  (155):  Worship  (248,  264):  Philosophy
of  History  (901).


I  •


/o  -/v  -fe  7


TO
A.  B.  O'R.  H.

AN UNFAILING  SOURCE  OF  INSIGHT


PREFACE

THE  services  of  thought  to  religion  have  been  sub-
ject to  a  justified  distrust.  Of  uncertain  worthy
especially  of  uncertain  recoil^  are  the  labors  of  reason  in
behalf  of  any  of  our  weightier  human  interests.  By  right
instinct  has  religion  from  the  beginning  looked  elsewhere
for  the  brunt  of  support  and  defense —  say  to  revela-
tion, to  faith,  to  feeling.  A  bad  defense  is  a  betrayal ;
and  what  human  philosophy  of  religion  can  be  better
than  a  bad  defense  ?

Present-day  philosophy  seems  notably  inclined  to  take
this  view  of  itself.  Is  it  not  Bradley,  elder  metaphysician
to  our  time,  who  jots  down  that  metaphysics  is  the
finding  of  bad  reasons  for  what  we  beHeve  on  instinct?
Reason  is  not  incapable  of  recognizing  and  confessing
its  own  limits :  it  may  even  take  pride  in  expounding
them,  an  attitude  which  since  Hume  and  Kant  has  be-
come more  or  less  fashionable.  Our  current  science  of
religion  may  now  assume  without  too  much  discussion
that  the  grounds  of  religion  are  super-rational,  or  sub-
rational  :  and  we  find  philosophy  undertaking  to  define
what  these  other-than-rational  grounds  are  —  grounds
moral  perhaps,  or  psychological,  or  social,  or  historical ;
gprounds  pragmatic,  or  even  mystic.  Various  and  vari-
ously  combined  as  are  these  several  philosophic  trends,
they  agree  in  accepting  the  judgment  that  religion  lies
close  to  the  primitive  moving-forces  of  life :  deeper,  then,
than  reason  or  any  work  of  reason.


▼i  PREFACE

Bat  a  vagae  territory  still  is  this  Beyond-reason  or
Deeper-than-reason.  Once  singly-named  Faith,  now  it
has  many  names — instinct,  the  subconscious,  the  co-
conscioos,  feeling,  will,  value-judgpnent,  social  sense,  in-
tuition, mystic  reason,  perhaps  Velan  vital  —  as  its  bor-
der is  touched  in  various  scientific  excursions.  Some
uncleamess  has  come  with  the  abundance  of  our  learning,
some  confusion  of  categories,  no  doubt ;  we  can  hardly
yet  say  that  we  know  better  than  our  forefathers  what
religion  is,  though  perhaps  we  know  better  what  it  is
not.  The  one  impression  which  does  distinctly  emerge
from  the  multitude  of  contemporary  suggestions  is  a
negative  one :  a  general  disaffection  from  the  religion
of  reason,  and  from  its  philosophical  framework,  abso-
lute idealism.

Some  doubt  the  fundamental  proposition  of  this  ideal-
ism, namely,  that  all  reality  is  of  the  same  stuff  that
ideas  are  made  of,  that ''  whatever  is  is  rational."  Some
doubt  its  doctrine  that  everything  is  known  to  one  abso-
lute Knower,  whose  being  is  thought,  or  Idea.  And
some  there  are  who  do  not  doubt  these  propositions;
who  will  not  deny  logical  force,  even  finality,  to  ideal-
istic arguments  —  if  one  must  argue :  but  who  add  the
comment  that  whatever  is  vital  in  religion  is  missed  in
all  logic-work,  is  necessarily  and  forever  missed,  thought
and  religion  being  once  for  all  incommensurate.  They
do  not  find  the  Absolute  of  idealism  identical  with  the
God  of  religion :  they  cannot  worship  the  Absolute.  And
they  do  not  find  that  religion  consists  in  our  human
knowledge  of  this  absolute  Knower:  Denken^  they
think,  ist  nicht  Gottesdienst.

In  this  general  dissatisfaction  with  idealism,  and  in  our


PR£FAC£  Tii

unclear  efforts  to  win  ebewhere  a  positive  groundwork
for  religion,  I  find  the  sufficient  warrant  for  suck  a  study
as  tkis  book  undertakes.  It  enquires  what,  in  terms  of
experience,  its  God  means  and  has  meant  to  mankind  (for
surely  religion  rises  out  of  experience  and  pays  back
into  it  again) :  and  it  proposes,  by  aid  of  the  labors  of
all  co-workers,  critics  and  criticised  alike,  to  find  the
foundations  of  this  religion,  whether  within  reason  or
beyond.

This  purpose  is  not  over-bold ;  though  no  serious  treat-
ment of  religion  dare  be  over-modest.  It  is  not  over-
bold, first,  because  it  is  a  human  necessity.  We  must
reach  some  working  clarity  in  these  matters,  every  indi-
vidual soul  of  us :  the  problem  is  there ;  we  shall  work
it  through  well  or  ill,  get  our  solution  honorably  or  by
default.  Is  there  not  in  all  positive  living  a  similar  ne-
cessity for  what  we  may  call  presumption  ?  The  world
too  is  there,  with  work  to  be  done,  votes  to  be  cast,  a
new  generation  to  be  trained  and  harnessed,  and  other
like  requirements — all  equally  impossible.  All  such  un-
dertakings might  well  be  postponed  by  any  man  under
the  true  plea  of  unfitness  :  nevertheless  all  this  is  to  be
done,  and  all  will  get  itself  done  in  some  fashion,  cred-
itable or  discreditable.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  old  ruse  of  na-
ture's, this  of  clothing  the  necessary  in  the  guise  of  the
impossible,  making  a  dignified  way  of  escape  for  him
who  prefers  to  escape  from  complete  living,  calling  for
something  like  presumption  on  the  part  of  him  who  will
not  escape.  Let  us  rather  say,  calling  for  performance
simply,  categorical  performance.  Nature  creates  the  re-
quirement :  let  nature  supply  ways  and  means.


Tin


PREFACE


Our  purpose  is  not  over-bold^  secondly,  becaose,  after
all,  the  truth  about  religion  cannot  be  in  itself  obscure
or  intricate.  Subtle  religion  is  false  religion*  Our  diffi*
culties  are  indeed  made  by  our  laboring  philosophies
themselves.  The  quaint  words  of  Berkeley  still  hold
good :  ^'  We  hanefirft  raifed  a  duft  and  then  complain
we  cannot  fee.^*  The  truth  about  religion  is  to  be  had;
but  not  by  surpassing  others  in  more  mighty  flounder-
ing and  dust-raising :  this  truth  is  traditionally  for  '^  him
that  hath  eyes  to  see  and  ears  to  hear"  in  a  certain
quietude  of  mind.

Only — be  it  at  once  said  —  the  dust-raisins:  in  the
pn^saot  case  is  a  much  more  important  process  Ln  th.
words  of  Berkeley  imply.  In  the  new  philosophies  is  new
truth,  and  much  of  it — no  mere  new  misunderstanding.
Whatever  murkiness  there  is  marks,  I  believe,  a  genuine
deepening  of  spiritual  consciousness  in  our  Western
world :  a  new  appreciation  of  faith,  a  new  love  of  life
and  its  variety,  a  new  ability  to  be  both  bond  and  free —
speculatively,  spiritually,  free,  while  not  less  scientifically
bond,  historically  bond,  even  traditionaUy  bond.  It  is
a  symptom  of  any  such  valid  deepening  of  thought  that
men  know  less  clearly  what  they  want  than  what  they
do  not  want.  The  older  philosophy  has  failed  to  satisfy;
the  newer  philosophies  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  satisfy-
ing :  the  work  of  proposing  and  rejecting  must  continue
until  conscience  at  its  profounder  level  can  again  rest.

It  is  just  because  of  this  veritable  growth  that  clever-
ness and  erudition  poured  out  in  abundance  do  nowa-
days visibly  pall  and  fail  of  their  usual  effect :  for  clever-
ness and  erudition  operate  within  the  already  acquired
conceptions  of  mankind  —  they  stand  ineffective  before


PREFACE  iz

what  is  new-bom.  For  this  reason,  in  part,  the  weighty
scholarship  of  Grermany  loses  some  little  ground  in  these
fields.  If  we  know  the  kind  of  thing  that  a  given  type
of  scholarship  has  to  offer,  then  even  great  virtuosity,
though  it  be  prolific  of  the  Very  True,  must  sweat  to
provoke  an  interest,  still  more  to  arouse  our  faith.  The
thing  now  required  is  a  simple  thing,  a  common  word,
a  slight  increment  of  ultimate  sincerity  somewhere  that
can  reunite  our  roots  with  mother  earth.  We  are  as
well  off  above  ground  as  we  can  be  until  we  are  better
off  below  ground.  What  boots  it  though  a  man  can  pro-
duce out  of  his  inner  consciousness  a  veritable  banyan
forest  if  there  is,  in  all,  no  growth  downward  t  There  is,
I  say,  a  quiet  and  canny  maturity  of  conscience  abroad
which  knows  surely  what  it  does  not  want,  a  new-born
thing  in  the  world,  the  source  of  our  new  philosophies,
—  in  particular  of  our  pragmatisms,  our  realisms,  our
mysticisms,  —  the  doom  of  the  old,  the  doom  also  of  the
new  that  fail  to  arrive  at  reality :  the  lash  at  the  back
of  the  thinker,  and  the  hope  in  his  soul.

Meanwhile,  the  general  deepening  of  consciousness,
and  of  conscience,  is  a  deepening  of  religion  itself.  The
formulae  that  were  once  potent  here  too  beg^n  to  fail :
ideas  and  phrases,  gritty  a  generation  ago,  a  decade  ago,
are  already  worn  smooth  and  lend  no  more  friction  to
any  human  work.  A  new  calling  has  sprung  up :  that
of  creed-making,  or  of  creed  phrase-making ;  and  many
of  our  wise  men  take  part  in  it.  These  too  have  their
new  Reality  to  face,  merciless  as  a  child.  If  the  spirit
of  the  age  is  but  feebly  responsive  to  new  phrase  or  old,
hasten  not  to  judge  that  the  spirit  of  the  age  is  becom-
ing irreligious :  may  not  the  opposite  theory  as  well  ezr


z  PREFACE

plain  its  indifference  to  us  (though  with  less  salve  for
our  vanity)  ?  Potentially,  at  least,  men  are  becoming
more  religious.  This  development  of  religion  is  still  a
latent  fact,  mightier  than  any  yet-visible  shape  or  move-
ment, discernible  at  times  only  as  a  cloud  dim  and  vast,
strained  and  full  of  repressed  lightning.  The  release  of
these  forces  is  no  small  human  object.

In  what  respect,  then,  is  idealism  inadequate  to  these
new  demands  ?  And  what  is  the  truth  which  the  critics
of  idealism  have  to  offer  ?  It  may  be  well  to  state  at
once  (especially  for  the  satisfaction  of  fellow-students  in
these  fields)  the  substance  of  our  belief  on  these  points,
outlining  in  rough  summary  the  position  in  which  the
work  of  this  book  results.

The  weakness  in  the  armor  of  classical  idealism  has
been  made  apparent,  I  believe,  by  pragmatism  —  or
rather,  by  the  pragmatic  principle  of  judgment.  Ideal-
ism does  not  do  the  work  of  religious  truth  ;  ergoy  it
is  not  the  truth  of  religion.  This  judgment  may  be  ac-
cepted without  further  commitment  to  the  philosophy
that  pronounces  it  (for  is  it  not  also  Hegel's  principle
that  the  true  idea  is  known  by  its  work  in  this  concrete
world  ? )

Idealism  fails  to  work,  I  believe,  chiefly  because  it  is
unfinished.  Unfinishedness  is  not  in  itself  a  blemish ;
is  professed  even  as  a  special  excellence  by  that  remark-
able antisystemist,  Henri  Bergson.^  But  there  are  tol-
erable and  intolerable  kinds  of  unfinishedness.  A  thing
is  properly  unfinished  when  it  is  finishable ;  when  it  has
an  identity  that  finishing  will  not  change. Let  an  artist

^  L'^Tolution  ci^iriooy  p.  209.


PREFACE  zi

sketch  a  face  with  all  conceivable  haste  and  roughness :
the  unfinishedness  of  the  thing  is  wholly  justified  if
only  it  is  a  thing ;  if  only  it  has  a  character  and  a  sig-
nificance which  all  later  finishing  does  but  develop  with-
out displacement  or  substitution .  Our  philosophies  must
meet  the  same  test.  Idealism  can  entertain  much  of
what  pragmatism,  realism,  and  the  rest  have  brought
forward,  and  still  remain  idealism ;  whether  it  can  en-
tertain all,  is  doubtful.  It  is  not  incapable  of  admitting
into  its  world-picture  variety,  change,  growth,  person-
ality, freedom,  also  objectivity  of  a  sort.  The  question
is,  of  what  sort? — whether  the  variety  is  a  real  variety,
the  risk  a  real  risk,  the  objectivity  a  real  objectivity,
individuality  and  freedom  real  —  or  only  shows  of  re-
ality, infected  by  that  illusoriness  and  approximateness
which  idealism  tends  to  impose  upon  realistic  experi-
ence generally.  Can  idealism  entertain  the  Real,  and
still  remain  idealism  ?  What  pragmatism  has  specifically
required  of  idealism  in  religion  is  more  genuinely  real
opportunity,  real  freedom,  real  individual  creativity.
What  realism  desires  is  more  valid  objectivity,  substan-
tiality in  the  world  beyond  self.  It  is  the  latter  want,
I  venture  to  say,  which  chiefly  limits  the  effectiveness
of  idealism  in  religion :  to  satisfy  the  pragmatic  test,
idealism  must  become  more  realistic  :  for  idealism  in  reli-^
gion  does  not  give  sufficient  credence  to  the  authoritative
Object,  shows,  so  far,  no  adequate  comprehension  of
the  attitude  of  worship.  r

Idealism  is  unfinished,  then,  not  having  found  its
way  to  worship :  it  has  not  found  its  way  to  the  par-
ticular and  the  historical  in  religion  ;  to  the  authorita^
tive  and  the  wholly  super-personal. The  salvation  it


xii  PB£FAC£

offers  men  seems  still  to  be,  in  effect,  a  salvation  from
the  particular  in  the  general,  the  ideal:  even  though
it  names  the  concrete  as  its  goal,  it  has  not  yet  been
able  in  this  matter  of  religion  to  accomplish  union  with
the  concrete.  It  might  seem  that  the  idealist  more  than
any  other  should  appreciate  the  function  of  the  positive
and  authoritative  in  religion ;  should  know  (as  Hegel
knew)  that  only  the  concrete  can  breed  the  concrete ;
should  know  (as  Royce  knows)  that  only  the  individual
can  breed  the  individual ;  should  know,  then,  that  only
the  historic  can  bear  fruit  in  history,  so  that  when  the
pragmatic  test  comes,  a  religion  which  is  but  a  relig^on-
in-general,  a  religion  universal  but  not  particular,  a  reli-
gion of  idea,  not  organically  rooted  in  passion,  fact,  and
institutional  life,  must  fail.

Idealism  means,  in  name  and  in  truth,  the  freedom  in
this  universe  of  the  thinker,  the  unlimited  right  of  Idea
in  a  world  where  nothing  that  is  is  ultimately  irrational.
But  it  is  the  exercise  of  freedom  which  alone  discovers
the  rightful  place  of  authority.  Only  he  who  has  tried  (or
tried  to  imagine)  a  pure  adventure  knows  that  there  is  no
such  thing  a8  a  pure  adventure  ;  for  when  you  have  can-
celled path,  peak,  sky,  star,  all  distinguishable  points  in
space,  the  adventure  itself  is  abolished.  The  idealist
who  by  right  and  intention  is  the  pure  adventurer  in
the  regions  of  the  spirit  has  not  yet  experimented  his
freedom  if  he  remains  unappreciative  of  authority,  in
religion  as  in  knowledge.  It  is  he  who  in  the  end  must
be  called  upon  to  expound  the  worth  and  use  of  church,
dogma,  creed,  priest,  mediator,  the  whole  apparatus  of
God-worship  which  religious  evolution  has  produced,  and
God-worship  itself.


PREFACE  xiii

If  idealism  declines  this  responsibility,  as  being  be-
yond its  province,  beyond  recison  in  fact,  belonging  to
the  practical,  or  psychological,  or  anthropological,  or
historical  aspect  of  the  matter  only,  it  does  thereby  ac-
knowledge the  foundations  of  religion  to  be  beyond
reason ;  implies  that  to  comprehend  the  truth  o{  religion,
must  at  last  abandon  itself.


The  pragmatic  test  has  meant  much  in  our  time  as  a
principle  of  criticism,  in  awakening  the  philosophic  con-
science to  the  simple  need  of  fruiif ulness  and  moral  ef-
fect as  a  voucher  of  truth.  It  is  this  critical  pragmatism
which  first  and  widely  appeals  to  the  intellectual  con«
science  at  large.  Negative  pragmatism,  I  shall  call  it :
whose  principle  is,  ^'  TTiat  which  does  not  work  is  not
tme.^*  The  corresponding  positive  principle,  ^^  What-  |
ever  works  is  true,"  I  regard  as  neither  valid  nor  use-  *
ful.  But  invaluable  as  a  guide  do  I  find  this  negative
test:  if  a  theory  has  no  consequences,  or  bad  ones;  if  it
makes  no  difference  to  men,  or  else  undesirable  differ-
ences ;  if  it  lowers  the  capacity  of  men  to  meet  the  stress
of  existence,  or  diminishes  the  worth  to  them  of  what
existence  they  have ;  such  a  theory  is  somehow  false,  and  we
have  no  peace  until  it  is  remedied.  I  will  even  go  farther,
and  say  that  a  theory  is  false  if  it  is  not  interesting :  a  ^\  ^^>-<'^-f
proposition  that  &ills  on  the  mind  so  dully  as  to  excite  J

no  enthusiasm  has  not  attained  the  level  of  truth ;  though
the  words  be  accurate  the  import  has  leaked  away  from
them,  and  the  meaning  is  not  conveyed.  Any  such  cri-
terion of  truth  is  based  upon  a  conviction  or  thesis  other-
wise founded,  that  the  real  world  is  infinitely  charged
with  interest  and  value,  whereby  any  commonplaceness


s/


-Of  PREFACE

on  our  part  is  evidence  of  a  lack  of  grasp.  Upon  this
basis  (not  apart  from  it),  a  negative  pragmatism  must  be
an  effective  instrument  of  knowledge.

This  instrument  is  nowhere  so  significant  as  in  the
field  of  religious  knowledge.  What  difference  is  made
to  you  (and  necessarily  made  to  you)  by  your  equipment
of  religious  ideas  and  beliefs  ?  If  they  are  powerless,
they  are  false.  Whatever  doctrine  tends  to  draw  the
fang^  of  reality,  and  to  leave  men  unstung,  content,
complacent,  and  at  ease,  —  that  doctrine  is  a  treachery
and  a  deceit.  Note  well  that  it  is  not  pleasantness  but
force  that  sets  the  mark  for  truth :  we  have  to  require
of  our  faith  not  what  is  agreeable  to  the  indolent  spirit
but  what  is  at  once  a  spur  and  a  promise.  What  do  you
think  of  hell?  The  doctrine  of  hell  made  religion  at
one  time  a  matter  of  first-rate  importance :  getting  your
soul  saved  made  a  difference  in  your  empirical  destiny.
If  your  idealism  wipes  out  your  fear  of  hell,  and  with  it
all  sense  of  infinite  risk  in  the  conduct  of  life,  your
idealism  has  played  you  false.  Truth  must  be  transformed ;
but  the  transformation  of  truth  must  be  marked  by  a
conservation  of  power  ;  herewith  we  have  a  more  defi*
nite  expression  for  the  positive  basis  of  our  negative
pragmatism.  No  religion,  then,  is  a  true  religion  which
is  not  able  to  make  men  tingle,  yes,  even  to  their  phys-
ical nerve  tips,  with  the  sense  of  an  infinite  hazard,  a
wrath  to  come,  a  heavenly  city  to  be  gained  or  lost  in
the  process  of  time  and  by  the  use  of  our  freedom.  The
flesh  and  blood  of  historical  contingencies  cannot  be
sapped  up  in  the  timeless  issues  of  a  certain  type  of
idealism  without  loss  of  power,  hence  loss  of  truth.

What,  again,  do  you  think  of  God  ? The  God  of


PREFACE  XT

orthodoxy  is  thought  of  as  being  so  far  like  man  as  to
have  loves,  interests,  and  powers  which  make  themselves
temporally  felt:  this  God  does  thing^g  in  the  world
which,  if  we  like,  we  may  call  miracles  or,  if  we  like  bet-
ter, deeds  of  Providence.  Upon  this  differential  work
of  God,  as  contrasted  with  his  total  work,  was  based
much  of  the  urgency  of  former  religious  observance,
prayer,  and  piety.  Pragmatism  rightly  enquires  what
becomes  of  this  differential  work  when  God  becomes
the  All-One  of  idealism ;  and  what,  if  the  historical  will
of  God  and  the  acts  of  Providence  disappear  from  our
oreed,  is  to  replace  the  immediacy  and  pervasiveness  of
the  religious  interest  which  those  theories  encouraged,
and  which  in  themselves  (though  not  in  all  bearings)
were  good.  In  such  wise,  the  pragmatic  principle  tends
to  confront  idealism,  as  it  has  never  before  been  con-
fronted, with  the  substantial  values  of  orthodoxy ;  com-
pelling idealism  to  complete  itself  by  the  standard  of
these  values  (I  do  not  say,  of  these  propositions),  even
if  at  the  cost  of  its  philosophic  identity.

This  is  the  type  of  service  which  pragmatism  can  well
render.  As  a  positive  builder  it  has  little  to  recommend
it.  Founding  truth  ultimately  on  our  human  value  is
but  another  attempt,  more  radical  than  that  of  ideal-
ism, at  the  ^^  pure  adventure " :  it  is  an  idealism  become
more  subjective,  freedom  less  bound  by  authority.  It  is
the  function  of  the  pragmatic  test  (as  of  pain  and  dis-
comfort generally)  to  point  out  something  wrong ;  the
work  of  discovering  what  is  right  must  be  done  by  other
means.  Ejiowledge  may  be  obliged  to  wait  long  in  a
notch  well  known  to  be  tentative  and  unsatisfactory


'1  *


xn  PREFACE

because  the  satisfactory  thing  cannot  be  found  a«  truth
requires.  I  do  not  say  that  action  must  wait.  Decision
,  jiCr^^'^lias  its  hour;  and  if  knowledge  is  absent,  the  will-to-
.uT^^'  oelieye  must  come  into  play:  but  the  will-to-believe  is
^  ^  precisely  a  principle  for  action,  not  for  knowledge.  It
''^^.  Mf^'^"^  ^^  ^^  place  in  the  age-long  work  of  speculation.  The
i  ^  '  \  .  adoption  of  an  hypothesis  as  a  working-theory  or  postu-
late does  not  conceal  from  the  adopter  its  true  nature ;
does  not  obliterate  for  him  the  difference  between  postu-
kte  and  knowledge.

But  is  there,  then,  no  inaccessible  truth?  no  perma-
nent gap  in  knowledge  (such  as  reUgious  truth  might
hold),  to  be  filled  up  hy  choice?  There  is  no  inaccessible
J truth.  If  any  object  has  possible  bearing  on  human  in-
^■^^ ' I  terests,  such  as  to  make  it  matter  of  choice,  it  has  a
v^ ^v^'^ (bearing  on  human  fact  also — there  is  some  cognitive
.^  \ '  ^  way  to  it. Truth  is  indeed  variously  accessible:  there

are-  regions  of  the  world  unsounded,  long  to  be  unsound-
able,  ample  playground  for  imagination ;  but  in  truth-
getting  these  very  regions  are  to  be  approached  (and  are
approached)  with  a  more  delicate  chivalry  just  because
of  their  comparative  helplessness — with  more  care,  not
less,  to  restrain  the  impulses  of  subjectivity.

But,  at  last,  is  there  no  unfinished  truth  f  No  reality
yet  unmade,  or  in  the  making ;  no  chance  to  co-operate
with  God  in  the  work  of  creation,  in  determining  what
truth  shall  be  ?  Have  we  not  here  the  real  meaning  of
positive  pragmatism,  and  its  true  significance  in  reUgion  ?
The  world  is  infinitely  unfinished ;  here  lies  the  oppor-
tunity of  freedom,  the  only  excuse,  indeed,  for  time-
existence  at  all.  But  of  the  world,  too,  we  can  define  a
tolerable  and  an  intolerable  unfinishedness :  the  world


PREFACE  XTii

must  have  an  identity  which  the  work  of  finishing  does  II
not  destroy  or  from  moment  to  moment  displace.  Un-
limited co-operation  with  God  in  world-making  we  have ;
not,  however,  in  ultimate  God-making.  The  religious
object  offers  that  identity  without  which  creative  free-
dom itself  would  lack,  for  us,  all  meaning.  Does  it  seem
that  super-nature  is  the  plastic  part  of  reality,  nature
relatively  unplastic  ?  —  toward  nature  must  we  be
relatively  empirical,  passive ;  toward  super-nature  rel-
atively self-assertive,  creative?  I  venture  to  point  out
that  our  creativity  in  any  field  follows  faithfully  the
character  of  our  passivity  in  that  same  field,  varies  with  jl
it  not  inversely  but  directly.  Here,  where  our  subserv-
ience to  objective  fact  is  most  massive,  here  in  the
world  of  sense  and  nature,  our  practical  creations  are
most  massive  also.  And  there,  in  the  world  of  the  reli-
gious objects,  where  myth-making,  and  world-picturing,
even  God-character-building,  are  most  exuberant, —
there  the  firm  steadfastness  of  objective  reality  is  at  its
summit  also.  An  ultimate  empiricism,  a  deference  to
what  is  given,  not  makable,  just  in  these  regions  of
the  supersensible  and  the  supernatural,  is  an  attitude
wholly  necessary  to  human  dignity,  and  to  true  religion.
Far  less  than  absolute  idealism  is  positive  pragmatism
(radically  taken)  capable  of  worship.

If  we  are  right  in  this,  it  may  appear  that  pragma-
tism, taken  in  a  constructive  sense,  is  a  self-refuting  the-
ory. The  only  kind  of  truth  which  in  the  end  can  com-
ply with  the  pragmatic  requirement  that  power  shall  be
conserved  is  a  non-pragmatic  truth,  a  truth  which  has
an  absolute  aspect ;  which  proposition  we  shall  try  to
make  good  in  the  course  of  this  treatise.  Pragmatism  \


mii  PREFACE

is  a  philosophy  which  cannot  be  finished  without  d
troying  its  identity.

Whatever  may  be  the  deficiencies  of  idealism^  prag-
matism, if  we  are  right,  cannot  supply  them.  How  may
it  be  with  mysticism  ?  Mysticism  may  have  its  absolute :
but  mysticism  finds  its  metaphysics  in  experience ;  and
mysticism  is  no  stranger  to  worship.  I  believe,  in  fact,
that  the  requirements  both  of  reason  and  of  beyond-
reason  may  be  met  in  what  mysticism,  rightly  understood,
may  contribute  to  idealism.  Not  every  mysticism  will  do.
It  is  not  the  '-  speculative  mysticism ''  of  the  text-books
that  we  want ;  it  is  mysticism  as  a  practice  of  union  with
Grod,  together  with  the  theory  of  that  practice.  Mys-
ticism may  introduce  idealism  to  the  religious  deed,
ultimately  thereby  to  the  particular  and  authoritative
in  religion.

There  are  mysticisms  in  which  none  of  us  believe.
There  is  the  mysticism  of  mantic  and  theurgy—  mysti-
cism of  supernatural  exploit,  seeking  shortcut  to  personal
goods.  There  is  another  mysticism  equally  remote  from
our  affections:  world-avoiding,  illusion-casting,  zero-
worshipping  mysticism;  living  (in  self-contradiction)
upon  the  fruits  of  a  rejected  life.  This  mysticism  has
given  the  name  its  current  color :  making  it  necessary,
perhaps,  to  ask  that  we  be  understood  and  agreed  to-
gether in  rejecting  it.  From  the  standpoint  of  just  this
sound  disparagement  of  these  types  of  mysticism,  I  have
become  persuaded  that  there  is  another,  even  a  neces-
sary mysticism.  A  mysticism  as  important  as  dangerous ;
whose  historical  aberrations  are  but  tokens  of  its  power.
It  is  this  mysticism  which  lends  to  life  that  value  which


FR£FAC£  six

is  beyond  reach  of  fact^  and  that  creativity  which  is  be-
yond the  docility  of  reason ;  which  neither  denies  nor  is
denied  by  the  results  of  idealism  or  the  practical  works
of  life,  but  supplements  both,  and  constitutes  the  essen-
tial standpoint  of  religion.

The  mystic  finds  the  absolute  in  immediate  experience,  if
Whatever  is  mediated  is  for  him  not  yet  the  real  which
he  seeks.  This  means  to  some  that  the  mystic  rejects  all
mediators  :  the  implication  is  mistaken.  To  say  that  a
mediator  is  not  the  finality  is  not  to  say  that  a  mediator
is  nothing.  The  self-knowing  mystic,  so  far  from  reject-
ing mediators,  makes  all  things  mediators  in  their  own
measure.  To  all  particulars  he  denies  the  name  God,  —
to  endow  them  with  the  title  of  mediator  between  himself
and  God.  Thus  it  is  that  the  mystic,  representing  the
truth  of  religious  practice,  may  teach  idealism  the  way
to  worship,  and  give  it  connection  with  particular  and
historic  religion.

I  have  thus  sketched,  in  highly  crude  and  unmodified
manner,  the  general  philosophic  attitude  of  this  book.
The  philosophies  of  the  present  time,  when  they  attain
their  own  free  conclusion,  complete  themselves  in  the
same  point.  Pure  thought,  and  pure  voluntarism,  share
the  fate  of  the  *^  pure  adventure  '' :  they  must  find  rest
in  something  other,  limiting  their  freedom,  yet  required
by  it.  It  is  the  finished  pragmatist  who  best  knows  the
need  of  the  absolute.  It  is  the  finished  mystic  who  best
knows  the  need  of  active  life  and  its  mediation.  It  is  the
finished  idealist  who  best  knows  the  need  of  the  real-
istic elements  of  experience ;  the  mystical  and  author-
itative elements  of  faith. I  know  not  what  name  to


PREFACE


J


.yv


^  ^,. ^ g^ve  to  this  point  of  convergence,  nor  does  name  much

^\^ tp'  _ matter:  it  is  realism,  it  is  mysticism,  it  is  idealism  also,

h  '^  -y^^  ^^  identity,  I  believe,  not  broken. For  in  so  far  as  ideal-

,v .  '^  ^  A  ism  announces  the  liberty  of  thought,  the  spirituality  of

the  world,  idealism  is  but  another  name  for  philosophy
—  all  philosophy  is  idealism.  It  is  only  the  radical  ideal-
ist who  is  able  to  give  full  credit  to  the  realistic,  the
naturalistic,  even  the  materialistic  aspects  of  the  world
he  lives  in.

So  much  it  has  seemed  right  to  say,  by  way  of  gen-
eral philosophic  orientation  and  confession.  But  in  the
work  of  the  book  itself  no  interest  is  taken  in  the  criti-
cism of  thought-systems  for  their  own  sakes;  our  inter-
est there  is  in  the  substance  and  worth  of  religion,  to
be  found  by  whatever  instruments  of  thought  may  be
at  hand.

As  to  the  plan  to  be  followed,  I  shall  accept  the  prag*
matic  question.  What  does  religion  do?  as  a  way  of
leading  into  the  study  of  what  religion  is.  In  any  case,
religion  must  be  understood  and  judged  largely  by  what
it  accomplishes,  by  the  difference  it  makes  in  human  af-
fairs. If  we  can  at  the  beginning  catch  a  glimpse  of  the
sort  of  result  which  religion  naturally  achieves  in  history
and  in  personal  life,  though  only  by  way  of  a  working
hypothesis,  we  shall  have  a  valuable  g^de  for  further
enquiry  into  the  nature  of  religion.

In  taking  up  this  enquiry,  the  second  part  of  the  book
considers  with  some  thoroughness  the  motives  which
have  led  to  the  retirement  of  reason  in  religion,  and  at
the  same  time  to  a  growing  confidence  in  the  worth  of
feeling.  By  deepening  our  conception  of  feeling  we  find


PREFACE  xad

that  our  anti-intellectual  tendencies  can  be  funded  for
the  most  part  in  the  ^^ religion  of  feeling";  and  in  com-
ing to  terms  with  that  view  of  religion  we  solve  many
of  our  problems  at  once.  The  issue  of  this  enquiry  turns
largely  upon  reaching  a  new  understanding  (chapter  xi)
of  the  actual  working-connection  in  consciousness  be-
tween ideas  and  feelings.  It  will  appear  in  what  way  the
value  of  religion  depends  upon  the  religious  idea  and
its  truth.

Hereupon  it  would  be  in  order  to  pass  at  once  to  the
question  of  the  truth  of  religious  ideas,  and  especially
of  the  idea  of  God  as  the  central  idea  of  religion.  But
here,  too,  it  seems  permissible  first  to  build  up  our  idea
of  God  pragmatically,  by  considering  in  a  series  of  free
meditations  (part  three)  what  interest  we  may  have,  hu-
manly speaking,  in  the  unity  of  our  world,  in  the  pres-
ence there  of  anything  changeless  and  absolute,  and  in
the  existence  of  a  personal  deity.

It  is  the  work  of  the  following  part  to  deal  directly
with  the  question,  how  men  know  God;  to  show  how
God  is  found  in  human  experience  at  large,  and  how  this
knowledge  develops  in  the  specifically  religious  experi-
ence of  mankind.  It  is  maintained  (in  chapters  xix  to
xxi)  that  our  knowledge  of  fellow-men  depends  upon
an  original  knowledge  of  God ;  not  our  knowledge  of
God  upon  a  prior  knowledge  of  our  social  world.  But
these  two  aspects  of  our  spiritual  experience  do  develop
each  one  the  other,  according  to  a  principle  of  alterna-
tion which  is  expounded  in  the  ensuing  part  (part  five),
dealing  with  mysticism  and  worship.

It  now  becomes  possible  (part  six)  to  set  down  in  more
adequate  form  what  was  taken  as  the  beginning  of  our


^/


PREFACE

stody,  namely,  the  work  of  God  in  the  world,  the  way
in  which  religion  becomes  fruitful  in  history,  in  morals,
in  the  arts,  and  in  the  conquest  of  pain  and  evil.  There
is  no  creativity  in  human  life  without  the  Absolute  as
one  party  thereto.

If  I  have  taken  frequent  occasion  in  this  book  to
express  dissent  from  the  views  both  of  Professor  Royce
and  of  William  James,  it  is  but  a  sign  of  the  extent  to
which  I  owe  to  them,  my  honored  masters  in  these  mat-
ters, the  g^undwork  of  my  thinking.  I  have  differed
freely  from  both,  in  the  spirit  of  their  own  instruction,
but  not  without  the  result  of  finding  myself  at  one  with
both  in  greater  measure  than  I  would  once  have  thought
possible — or  logically  proper!

Most  of  the  work  of  criticizing  the  original  drafts  of
this  book,  and  many  an  idea  for  their  improvement,  I
owe  to  my  wife :  in  so  far  as  the  path  of  the  reader  has
been  made  plain,  this  is  due  chiefly  to  her.  The  manu-
script was  read  by  Professor  George  Herbert  Palmer,
whose  criticism  and  generous  interest  have  been  alike
invaluable ;  by  my  colleague,  Mr.  Charles  A.  Bennett,
who  has  given  substantial  aid  both  in  the  thought  and
in  the  work  of  indexing ;  also,  in  large  part,  by  Mr.
Clarence  Day,  Junior,  of  New  York,  for  whose  careful,
untechnical  comments  I  am  especially  grateful.

William  Ernest  Hockikg.

New  Havsk,  April  7, 1912.


A  seeond  printiiig  gives  opportunity  to  make  a  few  Terbsl  changes.
The  stractare  of  tiie  text  and  tiie  paging  are  not  altered.
Kbw  Hatbk,  liATofa  31, 1913.


Acknowledgment.  —  The  editor  of  Mind  has  kindly  allowed
me  to  make  use  (in  part  five  and  in  the  last  appendix)  of
parts  of  an  article  on  ^^  The  meaning  of  mysticism  "  published
in  January,  1912.  Two  other  appendices  are  due  to  courtesy
of  the  editors  of  The  Psychological  Bulletin  and  of  The  Philo-
sophical Beyiew.  These  are  acknowledged  in  place.  I  wish
also  here  to  express  thanks  to  the  publishers,  who  in  many
ways  and  without  stint  have  aided  my  plans  and  contributed
to  the  result.


CONTENTS


PART  L RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

CHAPTER  I

How  THB  NaTUBB  of  RELIGION  MAY  BB  KNOWN  •  . 3

Two  qaestions,  what  religion  ia  and  what  it  is  worth,  3.  The
^pragmatic  approach':  judging  what  religion  is  hy  what  it
doe«>  4.  Can  we  aMume  to  know  what  the  effects  of  religion
are?  5.  How  the  hearing  of  religion  on  another  world  is
to  he  dealt  with,  6.

CHAPTER  n

Trb  Work  of  Religion  in  History  . ... 11

Religion  rather  fertile  than  useful ;  '  mother  of  the  arts,'  12.
Emancipation  of  the  arts  from  religion,  13.  And  their  snhsti-
tution  for  religion,  15.  Whether  any  separate  place  for  reli-
gion is  left,  20.  The  perpetual  parentage  of  religion,  23.
Correctiye  of  liberty  and  of  culture :  the  world  of  '  owns,'  24.
Source  of  creativity  in  instinct  and  in  the  arts,  25.

CHAPTER  m

Thb  Traits  of  Religion  in  Persons . . . .27
Every  man  a  connoisseur  in  judging  religion,  27. Traits  of
the  religious  soul,  28. Religion  tentatively  defined  as  *  antici-
pated attainment,'  31. Paradox  of  this  definition,  and  pro-
blem that  emerges,  32.


PART  n.  RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS

THEORY

CHAPTER  IV

Thb  Rbtibemient  of  th«  Intbllbct 37

The  general  tendency  to  put  reason  into  the  background,
37. Special  interest  of  religion  in  this  change,  38. Varioos


CONTENTS

reasons  for  it :  comparison  of  religions^  40 ;  new  yiews  of  reli-
gioas  history,  41.  More  general  reasons :  our  acquired  scientific
instinct,  42.  The  psychological,  biological,  and  pragmatic  cur-
rents, 43 ;  the  critical  current, '  Dr.'  Locke's  view  of  ideas,  48.
Resulting  conception  of  a  religion  of  feeling,  49.  What  satis*
faction  can  such  reli^^on  ofFer  ?  61.  Altered  view  of  revelar
tion,  53.

CHAPTER  V

RBLIQION'S DiLBMMA  IK  BE8PBCT  TO  ThSOBY  .66

disadvantages  of  the  religion  of  feeling,  66.  Religion  has
never  regarded  itself  as  an  affair  of  feeling,  67.  The  genuine
dilemma,  the  'dialectical  illusion,'  69.  The  dilenmia  as  it
appears  in  history,  scholastic  versus  mystic,  60.  Proposed
soluticmsy  by  splitting  the  mind,  by  uniting  the  mind,  62.

CHAPTER  VI

Thb  Dbsxint  of  Fbblinq \ 64

Feeling  as  conscious  instability,  66.  Ending  in  present
knowledge  of  an  object,  66.  Equivalence  between  feeling  and
idea  in  doing  work,  69.  Friendship  as  feeling  and  as  creed,  70.
Religious  feeling  and  its  cognitive  intention,  72.  Need  reli-
gious ideas  be  true  ?  73 ;  or  literal  ?  76.

CHAPTER  VII

How  Idkas  of  Ideas  mibbbpresent  Thbm  .77

R^um^ ;  the  ethics  of  communicating  feeling,  77.  Problem
of  religious  knowledge  put  as  a  question  of  the  adequacy  of  ideas,
78.  What  an  idea  is,  79.  The  circle  as  symbol  of  the  idea,  80.
Can  the  idea  comprehend  change?  M.  Bergson's  position,
82. The  difference  between  knowing  and  reasoning,  87.

CHAPTER  Vin

The  Allbobd  Finitudb  of  Ideas 9P

The  infinite  as  an  impossible  task  for  knowledge,  90.
Httffding's  view  of  religious  knowledge,  91.  The  infinite  as
an  object  of  all  ideas,  93.  The  knowledge  of  totality,  94.
How  knowledge  grows,  beginning  with  the  whole,  96.  Why
knowledge  about  the  whole  is  precarious,  97.  Advantage  of
the  child,  98. Religion  and  science,  99.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER  IX

Thb  Retreat  into  SuBJBcnviTY 100

Denial  of  predicates  does  not  make  an  idea  negatire,  101.
Nor  redaee  it  to  a  feeling,  102.  The  growth  of  Arts  making
literal  truth  in  religion  possible,  103.  Necessary  simplic-
ity of  whole-knowledge,  104.  Mystical  methods  of  religious
insight,  appeals  to  subconsciousness  and  instinct,  inyolve  no
retreat  into  subjectivity,  105.

CHAPTER  X

Thb  Idea-world nr  its  Aim toward Freedom from
Feeling 109

Tendency  of  idea  to  lose  yital  connection  with  feeling,  109.
The  ideal  of  independence,  110.  The  permanent  idea-world,
111.  The  theoretical  attitude,  112.  Attempt  to  explain
away  the  theoretical  attitude  as  a  practical  development,
116.  Failure  of  the  action-theory  in  this  attempt,  117.
Ideas  lodge  their  meanings  in  a  '  region  of  indifference,'  118 ;
Nature  or  substance,  119.  Our  interest  in  substance  is  orig-
inal, 120 ;  not  derived  from  other  interest,  122.

CHAPTER  XI

Idea  nr  Oroanio  Union  with  Fselino ....  124

Interests  and  values  seem  ultimate  facts,  126.  Tet  require
to  be  explained,  126.  They  depend  in  part  upon  the  ^  apper-
ceptive mass,'  127 ;  the  idea-resource,  129.  Theory  of  the
dependence  of  values  upou  the  whole-idea,  130.  Illustrated
in  the  growth  of  values,  132 ;  in  the  value  of  personality,  134 ;
in  love,  136 ;  and  altruism,  136.  How  theory,  and  especially
religious  theory,  determines  the  valu»4evel  ol  consciousness,
and  thereby  aU  feeling,  136.

CHAPTER  Xn

The  Will  as  a  Maker  of  Truth 139

The  idea  that  religious  truth  may  belong  to  the  unfinished
parts  of  reality,  140 ;  and  so  be  a  function  of  the  will,  144.
The  poetry  of  the  Orient  versus  the  literality  of  the  West  in
religion,  149.  Loyalty  implies  necessity,  162.  Our  creativ-
ity is  derivative,  164.  Religious  truth  must  be  founded  on
ezparienee,  therefore  on  reason  also,  164.

Note  on  Pragmatic  Idsaubm 157


CONTENTS

PART  in. THE  NEED  OF  GOD
Phbliminabt  Note 165

CHAPTER  XllI

The  Need  of  Unitt:  Monism  as  bearing  ok  Oftimibm  .  166

No  optimism  without  some  unity,  167  ;  beneath  the  surface
of  experience,  168.  Unities  too  feeble  for  optimism,  169.
Unities  of  world  powers  and  problems,  172.  The  view  that
evil  is  less  real  than  good,  174.  The  scientific  reaction  to
erO ;  justice  versus  a  moral  monism,  175.  Monism  and  re-
sponsibility, 177.  Residual  pluralism  in  the  materials  of  his-
tory, 179.

CHAPTER  XIV
The  Need  of  an  Absolxtte  :  Reflections  on  its  Pbacti-

CAL  WOBTH .183

Indictment  of  the  Absolute,  184.  Not  an  object  of  worship,
185.  Use  of  the  changeless,  187.  The  two  premisses  of  action,
190.  Does  the  Absolute  answer  the  questions  that  lead  to  it  ?
—  the  epistemologist's  question,  191 ;  the  moralist's  question,
193 ;  the  metaphysician's  question,  194 ;  the  question  of  reli-
gion, 196.  How  form  may  matter,  197 ;  the  irrelevant  uni-
versal may  do  work,  199.  Consciousness  as  something  which
makes  differences,  201.  Its  absolute  object  a  necessary  con-
dition of  this  work,  203.

CHAPTER  XV

The  Need  of  a  God 207

McTaggart's  critical  estimate  of  the  probable  worth  of
what  God  does,  208 ;  of  what  God  is,  214.  The  futility  of
probabilities  here,  214.  The  worth  of  God  must  also  be  found
in  experience,  215.  Our  happiness  depends  on  openness  to
experience,  217 ;  and  this,  in  turn,  on  the  possibility  of  trans-
muting evil,  218.  Experiences  of  this  transmutation,  220.
The  logic  of  a  supreme  power,  221 ;  applied  to  the  idea  of  a
supreme  power  over  evil,  222.  How  religious  experience
seems  to  meet  these  conditions,  224.  But  a  finite  God  is  of  no
worth,  225.


CONTENTS


PAET  IV. HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

CHAPTER  XVI

Thb  Original  Soxtboes  of  the  Knowledge  of  God .  229

Experience  and  tradition,  229.  Nature  and  social  experi-
ence as  mediators  of  Grod,  230.  Not  ultimate  sources,  233.
The  knowledge  of  ignorance,  235 ;  of  mystery,  236 ;  of  the
presence  of  another  knower,  237.  Religion  the  source  of  alien-
ation from  the  world,  as  well  as  its  remedy,  238.

CHAPTER  XVII

The  Knowledge  of  Otheb  Minds  than  Oub  Own  - •  241

Three  classes  of  objects,  and  the  organs  for  knowing
them,  241.  Elusiveness  of  social  knowledge,  243.  Various
ways  of  accounting  for  our  knowledge  of  other  minds :  by
criteria,  246 ;  by  response,  248 ;  by  acknowledgment,  260.
Assumptions  common  to  all  these  ways,  250.  The  trilemma
of  knowledge,  251.

CHAPTER  XVm

Such  Knowledge  as  we  could  desire ....  255

We  have  no  desire  to  know  other  mind  except  as  eng^aged
in  nature,  255.  The  ideal  of  communicating  without  physi-
cal media,  telepathy,  256.  Why  this  ideal  is  plausible,  257.
Knowledge  of  other  mind  in  its  objects,  260 ;  in  its  body,  262.
How  would  the  immediate  presence  of  another  mind  differ
from  experience  as  it  is  ?  266.

CHAPTER  XIX

That  Knowledge  we  have 268

Theory  that  experience  of  nature  and  social  experience  are
inseparable,  269.  Implying  that  social  experienee  is  continu-
ous, 270.  And  without  independent  beginning,  271.  The
actuality  of  social  experience,  274.  Might  it  be  a  mere
ideal  ?  275.  Three  difficulties  in  recognizing  the  experience,
279. The  difficulty  of  social  verification,  279.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER  XX

OuB  Natural  Rbalibm  and  Realism  Absolute  .  282

Natural  realism  excludes  social  experience,  282.  Nature
is  objective,  bat  objectivity  requires  and  admits  explanation,
284.  Our  dependence  upon  nature  interpreted  in  terms  of
creation,  not  causation,  286 ;  and  creation  in  terms  of  com-
munication, 288. Realism  and  idealism,  290.

CHAPTER  XXI

The  God  of  Natuu  akd  the  Knowledge  of  Man .  291

Problem  of  identifying  the  fundamental  social  object,  291.
Is  it  a  collective  object  ?  292.  It  must  be  a  single  self,  self-
conscious  and  wholly  active,  293-^.  Proximate  shapes  taken
by  this  experience  in  consciousness,  295.  The  experience  of
Grod  making  human  social  experience  possible,  297.  The  re-
gion of  community  of  consciousness,  298 ;  solitary  selfhood
an  acquisition,  299.

CHAPTER  XXII

The  Ontolooical  Aboumsnt  fob  the  Existence  of  God  301

R^um^  of  results ;  the  literalness  of  religious  experience,
301.  What  is  a  proof,  in  case  of  an  object  of  experience  ?
303.  Ways  of  proving  Grod ;  their  starting-point,  the  reality
of  nature,  305.  Valid  proof  must  interpret  the  history  of
experience,  307.  The  dialectic  of  experience  which  leads  to
the  God-idea,  308.  The  reality  of  this  idea,  310.  Valid  and
invalid  forms  of  the  ontological  argument,  313.

CHAPTER  XXni

Development  of  the  Knowledge  of  God  . .  317

Merits  and  defects  of  animism,  317.  Advance  from  spirits
to  gods,  318.  Qualities  of  a  god,  319.  How  the  knowledge
of  God  grows,  321.  God  as  one  and  as  many,  324.  Prema-
ture monotheisms,  325.  God  as  near  and  as  remote,  326.
God  as  moral  and  as  amoral,  330.  Qod  as  personal  and  as
impersonal,  332.


CONTENTS


PAET  V.  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

CHAPTER  XXIV

Thought  and  Wobship 341

Worship  as  the  sphere  of  the  will,  341 ;  how  different  from
philosophic  contemplation,  342.  As  seen  in  history,  344.
What  is  the  essential  part  of  rite?  347.  Mystics  trae  and  false,
349.

Note  on  thx  Mranino  of  Mysticibm ....  360

CHAPTER  XXV

PliBLiMiNA&T  Doubts  of  thb  Worth  of  Wobship . .  366

Prejadices  against  the  worth  of  special  acts  of  worship,  366.
Presamptions  in  favor  of  the  worth  of  prayer,  368.  The  na-
ture of  spiritoal  ambition,  369.  A  quest  of  self  knowledge,
360 ;  of  knowledge  of  reality,  362 ;  of  the  new  and  untried,
363.  Worship  as  an  essay  in  detachment,  366.  The  love  of
God  explained  by  what  it  is  not,  366.

CHA.PTER  XXVI

Thx  Mthtio*8  Pbspabation:  thb  Nbgativb  Path  .  369

Prayer  as  exercise  of  a  special  faculty,  370.  Physical  pre-
paration, 372.  *  Purgation,'  373;  the  casuistry  of  self-sup-
pression, 374.  '  Meditation,'  376 ;  its  passing  objects,  379.
Passivity,  382;  its  paradoxical  character,  383.  Summary
▼iew  of  preparation,  887.

CHAPTER  XXVn

Thb  PbTCHOLOOT  of  Mysticism 389

Does  mystic  experience  come  within  the  scope  of  psychology,
390.  The  significance  of  its  transiency,  391.  Characteris-
tics of  mystic  psychology :  (1)  Rhythm^  392.  Not  identical
with  osciUation  of  lital  tone,  393 ;  nor  an  abnormal  alternation,
396.  Organic  analogies,  396.  (2)  Diaeanneetian,  397.  A
practical  principle  which  suspends  rationality,  399 ;  and  pre*
cedes  conyentionality,  401.  (3)  Solitude,  402.  Its  danger  and
its  importance,  403.  Mysticism  the  redemption  of  solitude,  404.


CONTENTS
CHAPTER  XXVIII

The  Fi9YCHOLOGY  of  Mysticlsm  :  the  Principle  of  Axtek-

NATION 405

The  principle  of  alternation  versas  the  parsait  of  concreted
good,  406.  Alternation  hetween  whole  and  part  in  the  tem-
poral work  of  thought  and  will,  407.  The  necessity  for  al-
ternation foand  in  the  nature  of  yoluntarj  attention,  412.
Symptoms  of  spiritual  fatigue,  415.  Reversal  from  work  to
pleasure  and  worship,  418.  Relation  of  worship  to  pleasure,
etc.,  419.  The  mystic's  motive,  422.  The  failure  of  perma-
nent worship,  425. Major  rhythm  of  life,  427.

CHAPTER  XXIX

Psayer  and  its  Answer 428

Mystic  experience  as  answer  to  prayer,  428.  The  com-
moner forms  of  mystic  experience,  428.  The  realization  of
the  uniqueness  of  time,  429.  The  discovery  of  oneself  as
individual,  430.  The  discovery  of  another  self  as  individ-
nal,  431.  Nature  of  love,  433.  Perception  of  the  whole  as
individual,  the  love  of  God,  433.  The  permanent  meaning
of  prayer,  436.  The  religions  right,  437.  The  sanctions  of
worship,  439.


CONTENTS  xxxiii

PART  VI. THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

PBXLUftlNABT  NOTB 445

CHAPTER  XXX

Peculiar  Knowledge  and  Certainty:  Reyslation  and

Dogma 447

The  mystic  is  first  an  original  knower  of  old  truth,  448.
Why  he  regards  this  trath  as  of  general  interest,  449.  The
Hhat'  as  prior  to  the  'what/  453.  Infallibility  versus  its
content,  455.  The  incidental  fruitf ulness  of  his  revelation,
457*  Origin  of  special  dogmas,  458.  The  errors  of  dogma,
459.

CHAPTER  XXXI

The  Creativitt  of  Religion:  Theory  of  Inspiration .  462

Creativity  has  its  logic,  462.  The  resistance  to  innovation,
the  group-form  of  conscious  systems,  463.  Examples  of  the
creative  event,  466.  Creation  dependent  upon  reflexion,  470.
How  is  reflexion  possible  ?  472.  Partial  reflexion  depend-
ent upon  total  reflexion,  which  is  contained  in  worship,  474.
Induction  akin  to  reflexion,  475.  Observation,  genius,  476.
Novelty  and  continuity  of  consciousness,  478.  Limitation
overcoming  itself,  481.

CHAPTER  XXXII

The  Prophetic  Consciousness 485

The  problem  of  particular  fortune,  485.  Happiness  de-
taching itself  from  particular  things,  486.  Doctrine  of  the
inner  control  of  happiness,  488.  Psychological  nature  of  un-
happiness,  491.  Conditions  of  happiness,  492.  Paradoxical
attitudes  towards  pain  and  defeat,  493.  Stoicism  ancient
and  modem,  495.  Altruism,  497.  Altruism  not  sufficient,
600.  Need  of  prophetic  consciousness,  503.  Anticipations
of  prophecy  in  common  experience,  505.  The  cost  of  pro-
phetic power,  509.  Prophecy  and  mystic  experience,  512.
Religion  and  the  historic  virtues,  512.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  XXXIII

Thb  UNiFYma  of  History 515

The  external  conditions  for  religions  confidence,  516.  The
prophetic  will  tends  to  create  the  conditions  for  its  own  sac-
cess,  517.  Bringing  into  history  a  stractare  like  that  of  nature,
518.  The  meanbg  of  the  religioos  institution,  519.  The
problem  of  positive  religion,  520.  Positive  religion  and  the
State,  520.  The  need  for  positive  religion ;  the  actoal  founda-
tions of  faith,  523.

EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  ESSAYS

1.  noib  on  thb  subookscious 527

2.  Thx Relations bbtwebk  Idba  and  Valub undbb^

stood  through  bloloot 539

3.  The  Enowledgb  of  Independent  Reality  .  .  558

4.  Note  on  Leuba*s Theory  of the Nature  of the

Mystic's  Love  of  God 574

INDEX 579


PART  I


BELI6I0N  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS


CHAPTER  I

HOW  THE  NATURE  OF  RELIGION  MAY  BE

KNOWN

WE  are  proposing  to  reach  some  definite  conclusion
about  the  nature  and  worth  of  religion  —  what
it  consists  of  in  the  way  of  experience,  belief,  and  action;
what  comes  of  it  in  the  way  of  support,  outlook,  and  actual
productiveness.  As  to  the  nature  of  religion,  we  are  pro-
posing especially  to  enquire  how  much  it  is  concerned
with  theoretical  propositions  to  be  believed,  metaphysical
assertions,  doctrines  about  unseen  things  and  things  past
and  to  come — in  short,  how  far  the  intellect  is  involved  ;
how  far,  on  the  other  hand,  religion  appeals  to  some-
thing in  us  deeper  than  intellect,  —  to  faith,  to  feeling,
to  the  subconscious,  to  the  instinctive,  to  the  essential
will.  Certainly,  in  our  own  time,  the  worth  of  intellect
in  religion  is  much  discredited ;  various  ways  are  sug^
gested  as  to  how  we  may  take  our  creeds  without  taking
them  literally  —  as  figurative  or  symbolic  expressions  of
truths  that  cannot  be  exactly  formulated,  as  postulates
whose  significance  is  primarily  moral,  as  declarations  of
value,  as  determinations  of  the  will.  And  yet  one  seems
to  require  literality  at  some  point  in  his  creed ;  we  wish
to  bring  our  religion  at  least  into  the  same  universe
with  our  science  (whose  propositions  are  all  ^  literal ')
and  to  have  them  speak  with  the  same  voice  when  they
verge,  as  at  their  limits  they  do  verge,  upon  the  same


4  RELIGION  AS  8EEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

gpreat  questions  of  human  destiny.  Further,  we  do  not
believe  that  either  science  or  religion  is  irrelevant  to  con-
duct,  and  when  they  bear  upon  the  same  fundamental
issues  of  practice  we  wish  to  see  a  fair  understanding
between  them*  We  are  open  to  the  opinion  that  reli-
gion does  in  some  way  take  us  beyond  reason,  and  that
religious  truth  must  in  some  measure  be  clothed  in  sym-
bols ;  but  we  are  not  open  to  believe  that  reason  and
our  beyond-reason  are  separate  and  independent  func-
tions. As  surely  as  any  one  person  rides  one  consecur
tive  route  of  experience  through  time,  so  surely  must
all  the  truth  that  belongs  to  one  person  come  to  the
same  court  and  enter  into  the  same  total  system  of  his
world.  We  are  proposing,  therefore,  to  interest  our-
selves especially  in  the  parts  that  reason  and  beyond-
reason  play  in  the  so-called  truths  of  religion*

And  we  think  that  we  shall  be  helped  in  determining
what  religion  is  by  first  fixing  our  attention  upon  what
religion  does,  as  if  religion  could  best  be  seen  not  by
direct  inspection,  but  in  its  effects.  Not  only  is  it  true
that  religion  is  itself  an  invisible  and  intangible  object,
best  discovered  as  wind  — ^  and  the  spirit  generally — are
discovered,  in  what  they  move ;  but  also,  our  interest  in
religion  is  due  to  an  opinion  of  its  value,  or  at  any  rate
of  its  actual  influence  in  the  world,  so  that  our  identifi-
cation of  it  and  understanding  of  it  are  guided  by  these
supposed  consequences.  This,  we  may  say,  is  a  pragmatic
approach  to  our  subject ;  and  it  will  have  the  advantage
of  leaving  open  the  question  what  importance  theoret-
ical propositions  may  have  in  religion ;  —  it  is  possible,
for  instance,  that  the  feelings  may  prove  to  be  the  work-
ing part  of  religion  and  the  ideas  a  matter  of  derivative


THE NATURE  OF  RELIGION  5

impoitanoe. But  there  are  serious  objections  to  this
way  of  learning  the  nature  of  religion.

The  first  is  that  we  shall  be  moving  in  a  circle.  The
value  of  religion  is  half  of  our  problem,  perhaps  the
larger  half ;  can  we  assume  that  we  already  know  the
value  and  works  of  religion  as  a  guide  to  the  knowledge
of  its  nature,  and  then  treat  its  nature  as  a  source  of  the
knowledge  of  its  works  ?  I  only  answer  this  objection
by  accepting  it.  In  any  living  subject  we  have  to  assume
that  we  already  know  something  as  a  capital  whereby
to  win  a  wider  and  more  exact  knowledge.  And  it  is  the
usual  procedure  of  science  to  use  the  phenomena  as  a
means  of  winning  a  formula  for  the  ^things',  and  the  for-
mula in  turn  as  a  means  of  discovering  further  phenom-
ena. This  circle,  or  as  I  prefer  to  put  it,  this  alterna-
tion between  inner  and  outer,  is  our  own  way  of  life,
and  the  way  of  all  knowledge.

The  second  objection  is  more  specific.  It  is  that  the
chief  works  of  religion  are  as  invisible  and  conjectural
as  religion  itself,  since  they  belong  to  another  world
than  this.  No  historic  religion  has  pretended  to  recom-
mend itself  to  men  solely  on  the  ground  of  its  value  for
the  present  life  and  social  order.  Most  developed  reli-
gions, on  the  contrary,  insist  on  the  comparative  worth-
lessness  of  these  goods,  make  it  a  point  to  draw  away
our  attention  and  affections  from  them,  and  assert  that
the  treasures  to  which  they  would  introduce  us  are  else-
where. If  such  religions  render  distinct  service  to  human
society,  it  is  an  incidental  service.  The  most  widely  in-
fluential of  religions,  Buddhism,  must  by  its  own  logic
regard  itself  a  failure  in  so  far  as  it  tends  in  any  way
to  make  this  present  existence,  whether  personal,  social^


6  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

or  political,  more  attractive.  And  Buddhism  is  not  alone
in  this  deprecation  of  things  present.^  Any  attempt,
therefore,  to  jndge  religion  pragmatically,  that  is,  by  its
effects  in  human  experience,  would  seem  to  promise  Httle
to  the  point:  at  best,  its  estimate  is  threatened  by
defective  proportion.

Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that  religion  has,  for  the  most
part,  regarded  itself  as  ministering  to  the  welfare  of  two
worlds,  and  not  of  one  only.  It  seems  to  have  gained  a
foothold  on  this  planet  originally  by  combining  its  in-
visible interests  (so  immensely  real  to  the  imaginative
animal)  with  other  interests  of  a  practical  and  immedi-
ate nature.  The  gods  were  Powers,  perceptible  in  fields
water-course,  and  fruit ;  in  cloud,  in  battle,  and  in  bodily
health  or  disease  — though  their  great  historical  exploits
may  have  belonged  to  regions  behind  the  sun.  Penal-
ties visited  upon  the  profane  were  physical  as  well  as
metaphysical;  to  be  '^cut  off  from  fire  and  water"
meant  pain,  probably  death,  to  the  body  as  well  as  to
the  social  nature  and  the  soul.  And  with  the  growing
belief  that  the  other  world,  whatever  it  be,  is  not  a
jealous  rival  of  this  present,  but  at  least  in  relations  of

^  Neither  Schopenhaaer's  nor  Rousseau's  interpretation  of  Chris-
tianity will  be  acceptable  to  everybodj.  But  these  words  from  The  Social
Contract  are  not  all  false;  and  may  remind  us  how  recently  it  has  be-
come absurd  to  take  their  view  as  full  truth.  **  Christianity  is  an  entirely
spiritual  religion,  concerned  solely  with  heaTenly  things  ;  the  Christian's
country  is  not  of  this  world.  He  does  his  duty,  it  is  true  ;  but  he  does  it
with  a  profound  indi£Perenoe  as  to  the  good  or  ill  success  of  his  endeavors.
Provided  that  he  has  nothing  to  reproach  himself  with,  it  matters  little
to  him  whether  all  goes  well  or  ill  here  below.  If  the  State  flourishes,  he
scarcely  dares  to  enjoy  the  public  felicity.  If  the  State  declines,  he
blesses  the  hand  of  God  which  lies  heavy  on  his  people."  —  Book  iv,
ch.  viii.


THE  NATURE  OF  RELIGION  7

friendliness  and  perhaps  of  organic  union  with  it,  the
impression  deepens  in  our  common  consciousness  that
the  fruits  by  which  true  religion  is  to  be  known  are
such  as  ripen  in  part  before  our  eyes.  By  virtue  of
some  harmony  of  nature  in  the  two  worlds,  nothing
which  is  profitable  in  the  one  can,  we  believe,  be  wholly
noxious  in  the  other.  And  by  virtue  of  some  actual
intercourse  between  heaven  and  earth,  the  effects  of
salvation  may  echo  back  and  be  noted  in  moral  advance-
ment, economic  welfare,  and  the  success  of  armies.  Our
increasing  confidence  that  what  we  bind  on  earth  is
likewise  bound  in  heaven,  and  that  what  we  regard  as
good  here  is  esteemed  there  in  the  same  sense,  makes
it  necessary  for  religion  to  submit  to  a  type  of  measure-
ment that  must  once  have  seemed  unspeakably  worldly
and  irrelevant.  In  proportion  as  any  form  of  religion
hinders,  or  fails  to  promote,  what  we  regard  as '  welfare'
—  that  form  is  judged  false :  in  no  religion  is  authority
now  so  far  prior  to  social  judgment  that  it  could  again
impose  upon  Europe  the  human  sacrifice  or  the  sacred
prostitution.  When  we  now  say  that  God  loves  men,
we  mean  in  part  that  God  loves  what  we  love;  and
when  we  refer  to  the  will  of  God,  we  think  we  know
that  will  chiefly  through  our  knowledge  of  the  condi-
tions of  social  soundness  and  progress.  We  have  all  but
lost  our  power  to  believe  in  the  great  reversal  with  which
religious  enthusiasm  would  once  unhesitatingly  confront
any  confessed  ambition.

To  be  more  definite,  a  certain  large  part  of  that
primitive  Other- world  has  been  reclaimed  as  an  integral
part  of  this  sphere  of  things.  I  do  not  mean  simply
that  human  ambitions  have become  capable  of  more


8  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

idealism ;  so  that  the  old  contrast  between  the  present
and  the  beyond  is  largely  reproduced  in  the  contrast
between  the  narrower  and  the  wider  interest,  the  self-
seeking  desires  and  the  love  of  mankind.  I  mean  that
we  have  learned  something  of  the  sources  of  the  older
ideas  about  the  Other-world ;  and  that  we  can  identify
at  least  some  of  that  Other-world  with  the  human  mind
itself.  For  the  human  mind  stands  in  direct  contrast
with  nature ;  is  somehow  superior  to  nature,  including
it  as  in  some  god-realm  remote  yet  intimate,  a  world
of  another  sort.  To  the  ancient  beginner  in  self-know-
ledge, unfurnished  with  psychological  ideas  and  unac-
quainted with  the  mysteries  of  introspection,  his  own
mind  appears  to  him  —  can  only  appear  to  him  —  as
a  part  of  supemature.  He  has  no  way  to  express  what
goes  on  within  him  save  in  objective  terms,  imaginatively
chosen  and  projected.  The  gods  who  in  ordeal  choked
the  liar,  showed  themselves  to  the  youth  at  initiation,
who  inspired  the  dance,  swung^up  the  rage  of  fighting
to  omnipotence  point,  answered  many  a  prayer,  were  in
some  part  functions  of  his  own  soul  —  or  of  his  sub-
soul.  Commands  of  the  deity  revealed  to  shaman  and
priest,  —  we  may  fairly  call  them  instinctive  forebod-
ings of  social  good  and  evil,  and  say  that  supemature
here  is  but  remoter  nature,  impressing  itself  upon  the
sense  of  the  keenei>8trung  members  of  the  race.  It  is
simply  the  higher  mental  process  that  is  read  as  a  voice
from  another  world.

So  also  with  every  new  idea,  with  every  product  of
^^  inspiration  "  :  those  to  whom  at  first,  and  rarely,  such
inbursts  of  reflexive  insight  came  with  definiteness  and
power  could  not  have  done  otherwise  than  refer  them


THE  NATURE  OF  EEUGION  9

to  a  supernatural  source.  Moments  of  deeper  thought
and  intenser  fancy  distinguished  above  the  common-
place of  existence,  moments  of  imagination  and  inven-
tion, —  these  moments  have  in  all  ages  struck  upon  the
mind  as  from  a  world  beyond  that  of  the  visible  career.
No  one  upon  whom  reflection,  the  awareness  of  his  own
solitary  self,  has  broken  as  an  epoch  in  experience  with
the  effect  at  once  of  revelation  and  command,  can  fail
to  understand  how  those  early  spokesmen  of  the  spirit
believed  themselves  both  passive  and  at  the  same  time
more  than  human  in  the  hours  of  their  elevation ;  and
how  in  declaring  themselves  media  for  the  utterance  of
sacred  oracles  they  were  but  recognizing  that  impera-
tive impulse  which  an  intense  conviction  always  imposes
upon  the  soul.  The  primitive  prophet  must  have  re-
garded the  mystery  of  his  insight  with  as  much  wonder
and  reverence  as  its  expression  would  excite  in  those
around  him.  Yet  here  also  we  are  now  able  to  recog-
nize in  large  measure  the  natural  operations  of  our  own
minds,  conscious  and  subconscious.

In  such  ways  as  this  much  of  the  language  of  classic
religion  can  be  interpreted,  and  so  much  of  the  su-
pernatural thereby  naturalized^  that 'we  may  question
whether  any  significant  part  of  the  Other-world  is  left
to  be  considered  in  a  theory  of  religion.

For  my  part,  I  do  not  accept  the  notion  that  the
Other-world  can  be  wholly  transferred  to  the  present
by  these  interpretations.  There  remains  to  me  some-
thing literal  in  the  supernature  of  the  most  material
and  credulous  savage.  I  stand  with  him  in  the  belief
that  religion  would  vanish  if  the  whole  tale  of  its  value
were  shifted  to  the  sphere  of  human  affairs,  however


10  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

psychically  or  spiritually  understood.  But  I  accept  the
interpretations,  as  far  as  they  can  go.  They  prove
enough  to  justify  our  method.  They  show  an  inter-
mixture, anastomosis,  and  analogy  between  the  Other-
world  and  this,  so  thorough  that  if  we  begin  our  study
of  religion  by  a  rough  survey  of  its  working  in  our  social
structure  and  history  we  shall  not  go  wide  of  the  mark.
Whatever  other  knowledge  we  might  gain  of  religion,
there  could  be  no  complete  understanding  unless  it  were
also  known  in  its  bearing  upon  those  interests  we  call
humanistic.


CHAPTER  n

THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION IN  HISTORY

IF  we  undertake  to  judge  what  religion  is  by  what
religion  has  done  in  history,  some  data  are  conspicu-
ous, others  obscure, — little  is  of  sure  purport.  Students
of  Kulturgeschichte  are  more  ready  than  they  were  to
credit  religion  with  certain  definite  achievements  and
services,  especially  at  the  beginning,  in  the  rude  busi-
ness of  nation-making,  law-making,  mind-making.^  But
as  religion  ceases  to  be  the  one  salient  social  force  its  re-
sults mingle  with  the  effects  of  other  factors ;  clear  trac-
ing of  the  causal  nerve  is  difficult.  From  the  record,  vast
and  igneous  as  it  is,  there  appears  also  a  certain  con-
tradictoriness  in  the  effects  of  religion.  It  is  credited
with  works  of  government,  charged  with  works  of  war,
—  it  sheds  blood  as  generously  as  it  promotes  brother-
hood. Religion  has  fostered  everything  valuable  to  man
and  has  obstructed  everything:  it  has  welded  states
and  disintegrated  them  ;  it  has  rescued  races  and  it  has
oppressed  them,  destroyed  them,  condemned  them  to
perpetual  wandering  and  outlawry.  It  has  raised  the
value  of  human  life,  and  it  has  depressed  the  esteem  of
that  life  almost  to  the  point  of  vanishing ;  it  has  hon-
ored womanhood,  it  has  slandered  marriage.  Here  is
an  energy  of  huge  potency  but  of  ambiguous  character.
From  such  a  survey  but  one  uncontradicted  impression

^  See  Lippeit,  Bagehot,  Fnstel  de  Coolanges,  Eidd,  Hobhouie,  etc


12  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

•

emerges :  the  thing  has  been  radical ;  it  has  had  some
grip  upon  the  orig^al  instincts  of  human  nature  ;  it  has
known  how  to  rule  and  to  swirl  into  its  own  vortex  all  the
currents  of  love,  of  hunger,  and  of  self-defense ;  and  it
has  been  able  to  put  these  severally  and  together  under
its  feet.  It  is  this  dynamic  aspect  of  religion,  an  in-
finite resource,  which  has  appealed  to  capable  political
intelligence  since  the  days  of  Roman,  perhaps  of  Per-
sian, imperial  policy ;  and  it  is  this  same  aspect  which
appeals  now  to  the  scientist  of  society,  whose  eye  is
quick  for  usable  elements  of  public  power.

But  religion,  though  a  social  force  of  unknown  mag-
I  nitude,  has  never  been  tamed  to  harness  by  statesman,
diplomat,  or  sociologue :  the  word  '  useful '  hardly  ap-
plies to  it.  Unlike  the  forces  of  nature,  it  is  not  now
better  known  and  more  manageable  for  having  been
long  dealt  with.  Statecraft  has  learned  to  fear  it  rather
than  to  tamper  with  it ;  and  having  once  hotly  sought
alliance  now  everywhere  seeks  separation.  A  thing  so
root-mighty  cannot  fail  to  excite  the  lust  for  power ;
but  the  exploiter  has  been  at  every  point  of  contact
stunned  back  by  a  touch  of  the  uncontrollable.  It  is  as
if  man's  reason  were  trying  to  make  bargains  with  man's
insanity.  As  a  social  force,  the  laws  of  religious  caus-
ality have  not  been  discovered.

And  in  fact,  from  the  side  of  its  deeds  in  history
religion  remains  a  mystery.  Its  career  is  the  swath  of
an  agency  immense,  invisible,  paradoxical.  If  its  works
are  patent,  they  no  more  reveal  its  character  than  they
becloud  it.  But  the  surface  of  historic  fact  which  yields
so  little  to  an  external  inspection  and  use  may  respond
more  quickly  to  a  simple  hypothesis. What  I  have  to


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORY  13

propose  is  indeed  something  less  than  a  theory  at  first,
a  rather  unpromising  tool,  a  figure  of  speech  hoth  com-
monplace and  faulty.  It  is  this.  The  effect  of  religion
in  history  appears  most  comprehensible  to  me  when  I
regard  it  not  primarily  as  an  actor  but  as  a  parent,
a  parent  whose  deeds  are  far  less  important  than  her
progeny,  and  whose  most  notable  activity  is  put  forth
only  in  course  of  her  dealings  with  them.  The  distinc-
tion between  utility  and  fertility  runs  throughout  na-
ture. It  is  a  distinction  which  amounts  to  an  incompat-
ibility at  some  points  in  vital  economy :  it  seems  necessary
that  at  these  points  life  must  choose  between  the  useful
and  the  fertile,  so  that  the  secret  of  the  survival  of  many
an  apparently  idle  organ  or  social  member  is  caught
only  in  the  rare  moments  of  its  creative  action.  It  is
vaguely,  the  distinction  between  worker  and  queen,
leaf  and  blossom,  male  and  female,  science  and  fine  art.
Utility  belongs  to  the  middle  things  in  creation,  fertility
to  the  extremes  —  the  ugly,  the  rejected,  the  consum-
mate, the  perfect —  to  those  things  whereunto  creation
runs  as  to  hopeless  failure  or  to  final  achievement ;  and
both  the  apparent  failure  and  the  apparent  finality  are
denied  in  the  moment  when  they  become  fertile.  If
the  function  of  religion  in  the  world  should  prove  to
be  of  the  fertile  rather  than  of  the  useful  sort,  the
curiously  paradoxical  character  of  its  overt  deeds  is  in
some  measure  accounted  for.

Allow  me  to  assert  without  detailed  evidence  that  all
the  arts  of  common  life  owe  their  present  status  and
vitality  to  some  sojourn  within  the  historic  body  of  reli-
gion ;  that  there  is  little  in  what  we  call  culture  which  has
not  at  some  time  been  a  purely  religious  function,  such  as


14  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

dancing,  leg^lation,  ceremony,  science,  music,  philos-
ophy, moral  control.  I  shall  not  enquire  whether  some  of
these  human  interests — which  for  the  sake  of  simplicity
I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  in  sum  as  ''  the  Arts ''  —  have
not  had  independent  beginnings,  as  for  example  ethical
and  legislative  ideas  may  have  had ;  for  whenever  this
has  been  the  case,  the  art  in  question  has  later  found
its  way  to  amalgamation  with  religion,  and  has  from
this  absorption  emerged  with  a  new  character  and  an-
imus. Religion,  I  shall  say,  according  to  this  vague  fig-
ure, is  the  mother  of  the  Arts:  this  is  its  pragmatic
place  in  the  history  of  mankind  and  of  culture.

If  this  figure  is  substantially  right,  the  inference  from
the  fruits  of  religion  to  the  nature  of  religion  itself  will
be  more  substantial  and  intimate  than  the  inference
from  various  effects  to  their  cause,  or  from  scattered
deeds  to  the  agent  of  them.  For  something  of  religion
itself  would  have  been  communicated  to  its  offspring,
and  might  in  all  likelihood  be  recognized  there.  In  at-
taining their  majority,  the  children  have  not  forgone
the  quality  of  the  parent :  they  are  still  of  her  stock  and
substance.

It  \A  true  that  in  their  successive  stru^les  for  eman-
cipation, as  in  all  adolescence,  they  were  less  conscious
of  their  likeness  to  their  parent  than  of  their  differ-
ence, and  of  the  smothering  necessity  for  independent
fare  and  fortune.  They  have  filled  the  air  of  Greek
and  modern  times  with  cries  to  which  we  have  become
accustomed :  ^'  Art  for  art's  sake,"  ^'  Science  for  science's
sake,"  "Right  for  right's  sake,"  "Humanity  for  hu-
manity's sake,"  and  the  rest  —  all  of  them  heartily  po^


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORY  16

lemic  against  the  notion  that  they  exist  for  any  god's
sake.  But  note  the  stages  of  their  growth  to  maturity.
Originally,  an  Art,  no  matter  which  one  —  architecture,
mensuration,  law-giving,  music  —  is  regarded  as  a  di-
rect manifestation  of  the  divine,  subject  to  divine  pur-
poses only ;  then  it  is  shown  to  be  amenable  to  human
control,  and  makes  good  its  claim,  as  we  have  said,  to
serve  as  an  independent  human  interest ;  later  on,  the
question  of  its  divinity  or  humanity  loses  venom,  and  it
is  acknowledged  a  free  art,  having  a  province  in  either
sacred  or  secular  subjects ;  finally,  when  all  the  causes
for  warfare  have  been  won,  the  old  spirit  of  kinship  re-
sumes sway,  and  someone  sets  up  the  cry  that  the  art  in
question  is  really  the  essence  of  religion !  No  recent
century  has  lacked  men  of  weight  who  are  prepared  to
discard  the  old  progenetrix,  and  to  assert  with  vigor
that  their  religion,  and  quite  possibly  all  religion,  is
now  and  hereafter  identified  with  the  cult  of  beauty,  or
of  truth,  or  of  righteousness,  or  of  human  good,  or  of
all  together.

Perhaps  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  these  several
ingredients  of  our  spiritual  life  constitute  now  for  the
world  the  bulk  of  what  religion  it  lives  by.  At  the  be-
ginning of  history,  religion  is  the  whole  of  culture  ;  at
its  end,  it  may  seem,  culture  is  the  whole  of  religion.
This  relationship  must  be  looked  at  somewhat  closely.


16  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

Progressive  historical  subtraction,  sach  as  religion
has  been  subject  to  in  the  maturing  of  the  arts,  looks
like  progressive  analysis;  and  as  this  analysb  continues
the  presumption  grows  that  it  approaches  completion.
Knowing  as  we  do  that  all  life  moves  toward  the  ex-
plicit from  the  hidden,  it  is  more  than  a  plausible  hy-
pothesis that  religion  has  been  simply  the  crude  int^;ral
and  germ  of  all  these  clearer  essences;  that  her  life
has  been  prophetic  and  preparatory,  her  fertility  is
exhausted,  her  separate  role  is  now  outplayed.  This  im*
pression  is  enforced  by  the  observation  that  each  of
these  arts  fulfills  in  a  substantial  way  the  traditional
functions  of  the  older  cult.  Each  one  —  poetry,  or
thought,  or  social  service  —  has  its  type  of  inynror
tion  upon  which  its  devotee  depends;  each  has  its
way  of  saving  men  from  sensuality  and  selfishness ;  in
each  of  them,  this  salvation  is  by  way  of  self-sacrifice
and  devotion ;  and  each  of  them  is  an  imperishable  cause,
greater  than  individual  aims,  invisible  and  calling  for  a
launch  of  faithy — yet  for  the  same  reasons  more  per-
manent than  personal  and  visible  things,  a  genuine
supernatural  order,  capable  of  conferring  a  valid  tm«
mortality  upon  the  good  and  faithful  servant.  If  there
is  anything  in  an  identity  of  predicates,  the  identi-
fication of  subjects  seems  irresistibl&  Religion  is  one
with  the  Arts;  it  is  her  immortality  to  continue  her
life  in  them.

If  we  ask  which  of  these  causes  contains  the  most  of
religion,  the  trend  of  the  times  furnishes  an  answer,  as
it  were  by  instinct.  It  has  frequently  been  observed  that
these  several  ideals  or  ^causes'  have  a  remarkable  power
(due  no  doubt  to  their  family  likeness)  to  include  and


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORY  17

involve  each  other:  the  worship  of  beauty,  for  instance,
carries  with  it  normally  a  regard  for  the  requirements
of  truth  and  sympathy,  and  conversely.  We  can  see  how
any  one  of  these,  thoroughly  worked  out,  might  be  suf-
ficient for  all :  while  still  any  one  of  them  taken  alone,
as  men  are,  would  be  likely  to  give  life  a  skewed  pro-
portion in  some  places,  since  the  supposed  workingH>ut
is  never  finished — the  artist  may  never  arrive  at  a  com-
plete amalgamation  of  the  moral  with  the  beautiful,  the
moralist  never  fully  unite  grace  and  harmony  with  his
ideal  of  right.  It  is  the  cult  of  social  service  that  seems
to  be  the  most  naturally  comprehensive,  and  to  engage
most  fully  the  whole  religious  nature  of  man.  It  tends
at  the  present  moment  somewhat  to  displace  the  rest,
and  to  suck  up  the  enthusiasm  of  the  new  youth.  It
gives  a  better  proportion :  it  can  unite  with  beauty,  but
at  a  rate  which  does  not  part  men  from  the  actual  dirt
and  disarray  of  social  facts ;  it  can  unite  with  truth,  but
if  it  is  a  matter  of  the  social  good,  or  the  religious  edu-
cation of  children,  or  the  like, — well,  truth  also  can  stand
in  its  due  order  and  degree,  it  may  seem.  But  no  matter
which  one  of  the  offspring  of  religion  is  most  appealing
at  any  time ;  religion  is  exhausted  into  no  one,  —  into
nothing  less  than  the  totality  of  her  children.  The  point
18,  that  this  totality,  however  found,  seems  an  equivalent
for  passing  religion.

A  corroboration  of  this  view  may  be  found  in  the  dis*
tribution  of  religion  in  the  world,  as  compared  with  the
distribution  of  the  Arts.  Where  the  Arts  thrive  as  sep-
arate interests,  religion  is  feeble.  The  zealous  religion
of  to-day  is  at  home  in  the  life  of  the  peasantry,  of  the
bourgeoisie, — wherever  life  is  still  simple  and  unified.


18  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

For  here  it  is  still  the  whole  of  men's  art,  the  whole  of
their  literature,  their  philosophy,  their  poetry  and  their
music :  it  is  still  the  crude  integral  of  their  higher  life,
and  should  they  lose  it  they  would  lose  all  that  distin-
guishes their  existence.^  In  so  far  and  fast  as  they  grow
into  possession  of  more  individual  forms  of  these  same
values  they  incline  to  let  the  separate  practice  of  reli-
gion lapse.^  Is  it  not  fair  to  say  that  there  are  few  of
the  developed  individuals  of  our  time  who  with  either
a  powerful  enthusiasm  for  a  single  hranch  of  art,  or  a
well-balanced  appreciation  of  what  we  call  our  culture,
retain  in  addition  a  vigorous  religious  life  as  a  special
direction  of  attention  ?

If  we  accept  this  theory  of  the  function  of  religion
in  history  and  of  its  destiny  to  merge  itself  with  the
Arts,  we  can  read  with  greater  understanding  the  curious
tale  of  religion's  antagonism  to  progress,  its  inertia,  ob-
struction, conservatism.  We  can  readily  put  ourselves
into  the  psychological  position  of  the  religious  partisan,
in  whose  consciousness  the  spirits  of  the  several  Arts
dwell  undistinguished,  and  all  of  whose  inspiration  has
been  indeed  inseparable  from  his  piety.  We  shall  see  it
as  inevitable  that  when  the  natural  processes  of  growth
and  division  have  threatened  to  take  away  one  by  one
architecture  and  sculpture,  science  and  political  control,
from  the  sacred  auspices  under  which  they  took  their
shape,  it  has  seemed  from  the  standpoint  of  the  priest

^  Hoffding  remarks,  though  with  a  different  theory  for  the  caie,
^  The  more  men  are  absorbed  in  the  bnaineas  of  self-maintenanoey  or  the
more  they  are  given  np  to  intalleotualy  esthetic,  and  ethical  interests,  the
more  the  strictly  religious  interest  falls  into  the  background  —  if  indeed
it  does  not  entirely  disappear." Philosophy  of  Religion,  p.  111.


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORY  19

that  these  Arts  were  being  cut  loose  from  the  source  not
only  of  their  inspiration  but  of  their  life ;  and  as  though
violence  were  being  done  not  more  to  the  priesthood  or
to  the  god  than  to  the  wayward  Art  itself  and  to  the
world  beyond  which  fostered  it.  However  much  of
^  priestcraft/  classrinterest^  and  the  like  has  mingled  with
these  motives  in  the  history  of  religious  obstruction,
there  is  a  residuum  of  the  genuine  tragedy  of  all  growth,
so  that  the  story  of  culture  must  henceforth  be  told  not
as  a  story  of  ^^  warfare  between  science  and  religion/'
but  as  an  infinitely  human  tale  of  growing  asunder,  with
all  the  rending  of  veritable  bonds  and  loyalties  on  both
sides  that  such  events  have  always  involved.

While,  then,  we  understand  the  historic  attitude  of
religion  to  these  changes,  as  dispassionate  observers  we
must  reg^d  the  process  of  taking  human  possession  of
any  art  as  an  advance;  and  hence  as  the  necessary  des-
tiny of  whatever  religpion  contains,  until  all  is  free.  The
change  is  precisely  analogous  to  the  well-known  psy-
chological process  of  getting  a  clear  concept  or  expres-
sion for  what  has  been  lurking  in  the  mind  as  a  feeling,
unsatisfactory,  haunting,  mysterious,  tantalizing.  Once
the  adequate  expression  is  hit  upon,  the  cloudy  fringes
of  the  experience  are  lifted ;  the  hovering  sense  of  the
infinite  and  ineffable  disappear  together  with  the  hu-
miliating consciousness  of  impotence :  an  ^  idea '  is  born,
and  the  human  self  is  in  possession.  Such  must  be  the
career  of  all  influxes  to  the  spirit.  And  once  the  various
possible  directions  of  mental  groping  have  been  differ-
entiated and  established  in  our  common  life,  the  sepa-
rate mission  of  religion  is  at  an  end.


20  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

Beligion  clothes  itself  to-day,  indeed,  in  all  the  Arts*
and  in  philosophy ;  but  beneath  these  gannents,  what
is  there  left  to  worship  —  unless,  perchanee,  history  it-
self ?  Instituted  religion  appears  among  us  as  a  surYival,
decked  out  in  relics  of  Arts  that  have  won  their  freedom.
Or,  let  us  rather  say,  it  is  the  spirit  of  the  sacred  past
which  organizes  and  sanctifies  these  relics,  providing  a
place  where  the  Zeitgeiat  may  worship  at  the  shrine  of
its  own  emancipation.  Beligion,  as  a  separate  object  of
attention,  is  an  exhausted  parent,  cherished  in  her  de-
cay through  some  sentiment  of  recognizance  by  the  Arts
she  has  nourished, —  the  receiver,  but  no  longer  the
giver  of  life.

The  view  of  religion  above  sketched  is  a  view  more
often  felt  than  professed.  It  represents  an  argument
more  often  found  in  men's  U ves  dian  on  their  Ups :  sug^
gested  more  by  the  tendencies  of  social  movement  than
by  any  theories  diat  are  acknowledged  among  us.  It  is
well  to  become  expressly  conscious  of  these  facts  of  the
progressive  substitution  of  Art  for  religion,  and  of  the
view  of  religion  which  they  imply.  We  have  now  to  say
what  we  think  of  this  view.

So  much  must  be  admitted :  that  at  every  point  of
progress  religion  is  a  sort  of  remainder,  —  the  residual
inspiration  of  human  life.  And  at  each  stage  of  sub-
traction, it  becomes  harder  to  see  that  there  is  any  fur-
ther residuum.  What  remains,  if  anything  remains,  is
relatively  formless,  as  compared  with  what  has  emerged.
It  is  at  a  disadvantage  for  recognition.  Especially  when
we  have  eliminated  morality  and  philosophy  from  the
special  province  of  religion,  does  that  province  appear


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORT  21

empty,  mystical,  barren  ;  and  the  position  of  those  who
ignore  it  may  be  made  correspondingly  solid,  spiritually
solid.  To-day  one  need  be  no  materialist,  no  manmionist,
no  foe  of  morality  and  order,  no  selfish  or  unspiritual
mind,  to  dispense  with  the  separate  practice  of  religion ;
it  is  precisely  the  humane  and  the  ideal  of  temper,  men
of  character  and  good-will,  who  by  common  consent  and
their  own  are  likely  to  excuse  themselves  from  the  form,
assuming  that  they  have  the  substance  —  this  is  the  most
ominous  fact  that  religion,  as  a  distinctive  thing  in  the
world,  has  now  to  face.  And  rather  than  face  it,  many
of  her  supporters  hasten  to  save  a  weakening  cause  by
accepting  the  identification  -  or  near-identification  -
of  religion  with  some  Art —  especially  with  morality  or
with  human  service.  It  is  necessary  at  the  outset  of  our
work,  in  the  interest  of  simple  clearness,  to  recognize
this  tendency  for  what  it  is  —  a  confusion  and  a  breach
of  faith.  Let  religion  vanish,  if  it  is  to  vanish :  but
know  that  it  is  impossible  —  in  any  sense  sanctioned
by  history,  or  faith,  or  clear  reason  — tiiat  religion  should
be  merged  with  any  Art,  or  with  all  Arts.  The  position
of  reUgion  in  the  world  is,  and  has  been,  unique ;  and
with  the  preservation  of  this  distinction  its  very  nature
is  bound  up.  The  very  work  done  by  religion  in  the
course  of  history  has  depended  —  despite  her  union
with  the  Arts  —  on  the  clear  eminence,  above  all  her
contact  with  affairs,  of  a  summit  which  is  No-art  and
touched  by  no  Art.

What  the  inner  nature  of  the  unique  element  in  religpion
maybe,  our  present  view  of  religion  does  not  and  need  not
show.  Since  it  is  No-art  (and  Art  as  we  mean  it  includes
everything  that  at  any  time  is  wholly  naturalized  and


22  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

humanly  possessed)  it  will  be  for  any  time  somehow  un-
possessed and  problematical,  and  may  for  the  present  be
so  to  us.  What  our  view  of  the  effectiveness  of  religion
in  history  does  at  once  make  evident  as  to  its  nature  is —
first,  its  necessary  distinction ;  second,  its  necessary  sti-
premacy.  These  characters  though  external  have  been
so  essential  to  its  f ruitf ulness,  as  to  justify  the  statement
that  without  them  religion  is  not  religion.  A  merged
religion  and  a  negligible  or  subordinate  religion  are  no  re-
ligion. If  the  importance  of  religion  diminishes  as  Art
progresses,  religion  must  disappear.  If  there  is  any  other
way  of  life,  if  any  other  cause  can  act  as  a  passable  substi-
tute, the  case  of  special  religion  is  lost.  It  is  lost  from  the
side  of  Art,  because  every  Art  is  better  off  free,  on  its
own  ground,  unencumbered  by  the  peculiar*  apparatus
and  terminology  of  religion.  It  is  lost  from  the  side  of
life,  because  religion  as  a  separate  thing  is  the  most  diffi-
cult and  expensive  of  all  means  to  an  end-  But  chiefly,  it
is  lost  from  the  ground  of  its  own  character,  and  the  qual-
ities which  alone  have  given  it  its  hold  upon  the  human
mind.  Religion  is  already  gone  when  it  is  weighed  with
or  subordinated  to  some  other  and  surer  value.  It  can
only  be  held  to  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  necessary.
Shorn  of  its  pride,  its  intolerance  of  rivals,  its  scorn  of
comparison,  it  is  shorn  of  its  honor  also,  and  there-
with of  all  that  defines  its  value.  Only  that  religion  can
hold  attention  which  is  always  younger  than  the  youngest
of  her  children,  more  fruitful  for  what  she  has  spent,  more
needful  for  the  continued  life  of  the  Arts  than  for  their
inception.


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORY  23

It  is  here  chiefly  that  our  figure  is  defective.  For  the
work  of  religion  is  a  perpetual  parentage ;  the  status  of
the  Arts  is  a  perpetual  dependence.  All  independence
is  conceptual,  approximate,  and  relative.  The  inspira-
tion, or  breathing,  of  all  the  Arts,  is,  in  the  final  trac-
ing of  their  ^^  compartments,"  a  breathing  of  the  outer
and  unlimited  air :  communication  of  this  sort  with  the
Whole,  is  religion.  Or  let  us  say,  religion  is  the  func-
tion of  in-letting,  or  osmosis,  between  the  human  spirit
and  the  living  tissue  of  the  universe  wherein  it  is  eter-
nally carried.  If  many  imagine  that  their  Art  is  their
religion,  it  is  doubtless  so  far  true,  that  their  religion  is
continuous  with  their  Art,  and  would  be  truncated  and
deformed  without  it.  But  their  Art,  in  so  far  as  it  is
still  capable  of  creation,  is  continuous  with  their  reli-
gion —  a  vital  union  which  depends  strangely  enough
on  the  consciously-held  distinction  between  them.

Is  our  present  age  an  age  of  originality,  or  is  it  rather
an  age  in  which  Art  gnaws  its  nails  for  sustenance  ?
this  age  —  in  which  every  Interest  has  its  own  head
and  its  own  way  as  never  before  !  Freedom  to  us  means
reasonableness ;  and  reasonableness  means  that  every-
thing is  referred  to  sources  of  its  own  kind.  Thus,  we
refer  public  effects  to  public  forces,  —  not  to  royal
fiat, — and  this  is  political  freedom.  We  refer  material
effects  to  material  causes,  not  to  divine  or  human  will,
—  and  this  is  scientific  freedom.  We  respect  the  family
privacy  of  the  different  parts  or  groups  of  the  cosmos,
— thereby  each  such  group  is  given  its  freedom.  None
but  fine-art-considerations  shall  have  an  entree  to  fine-
art^work-shops.  The  rights  of  individuals  to  their  own
spheres  and  provinces,  the  right  to  be  tried  by  one's  own


U  REUGION  AS  SEES  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

kind,  even  to  be  punished  by  nothing  but  the  log^c  of
one's  own  crime,  —  we  care  for  these  rights,  but  they
are  not  by  any  means  the  only  rights  we  care  for :  we
treasure  the  private  rights  of  Ideas,  of  Abstractions.
Every  Principle  has  its  own  belongings,  every  Concep-
tion has  its  own  circle  of  Relations  which  must  not  be
intruded  upon  by  the  unfit  and  extraneous.  It  is  the
technique  of  living  to  learn  and  feel  all  these  personal
and  abstract  Owns,  — all  the  proprieties  and  freedoms,
not  to  mingle  Business  with  Personalities,  not  to  lug  in
Politics  when  one  is  in  Society,  not  to  test  Humor  by
canons  of  Science,  still  less  bring  Humor  into  the  con-
templation of  Religpion.  One  word  is  equivalent  to  our
culture  — '  Discrimination.'  Yes,  there  was  never  so
much  freedom  in  the  world  as  now,  i.e.,  there  were
never  so  many  Owns  to  be  learned  and  respected.  But
this  world  of  Owns  is  a  noble  mesh  of  surfaces  that
would  be  closed,  but  cannot  be.  It  is  in  some  sense
a  failure,  a  necessary  and  mysterious  failure,  likely
to  die  of  its  tight-held  freedoms  and  independences,  its
clear^ut-nesses  and  non-intrusions.  Religion  it  is  that
knows  the  point  of  this  failure.  Religion  holds  self-
sufficiency  in  derision ;  religion  is  the  comprehensive
irony  of  the  world  toward  all  Owns.  In  opening  every
Art  toward  itself,  it  opens  each  toward  every  other :
through  No-art  all  Arts  become  one,  and  one  life
courses  through  all  of  them.

Our  arts  are  parcelled  out  much  as  we  sometimes
parcel  out  and  enumerate  human  instincts.  Every  in-
stinct naturally  has  an  art  —  i.e.,  a  way  of  finding  sat-
isfaction ;  on  the  other  hand,  every  primary  art,  broadly
speaking,  corresponds  to,  and  helps  to  define  '  an  in-


THE  WORK  OF  RELIGION  IN  HISTORY  26

stinct.'  But  no  one  can  make  a  satisfactory  list  o£  the
instincts,  or  of  the  primitive  impulses,  of  man :  for  in
the  human  being  they  have  so  far  mixed  and  braided
and  fused,  as  their  objects  have  developed,  that  listing
becomes  arbitrary.  The  truth  is,  they  belong  together ;
and  in  our  modes  of  living  find  their  way  together :
love  and  hunger  meet  in  the  family,  hunger  and  defense
in  the  civic  community,  love  and  defense  in  the  war-
gang.  (This  absurd  list  of  instincts  will  serve  as  well
as  another  to  show  the  point.)  Now  in  religion  all  in*
flftincts  meet.  Destined  as  they  are  to  come  to  terms
with  each  other  in  human  society,  religion  engages
them  all,  keeps  them  in  yoke  together  until  they  make
friends.  Just  as  we  found  in  all  Arts  the  outlines  of
religious  action,  so  every  instinct,  in  what  it  deeply
drives  toward^  shows  the  traits  of  religious  aspiration.
The  life  of  an  instinct  and  the  continuous  inspiration
of  the  corresponding  art  are  the  same  thing :  creativity
in  some  sort  is  what  satisfies  and  alone  satisfies  every
instinct,  and  creativity  is  precisely  what  religion  calls  out
in  them,  in  the  process  of  holding  them  to  their  own
unity.

Bergson  has  told  us  that  all  originality  is  derived
from  sensation :  this  is  but  part  of  the  truth.  Origi-
nality is  derived  from  the  primitive.  Religion,  ^^  the
crude  integral  of  the  Arts,"  is  primitive  as  sensation  is
primitive,  fundamental  to  knowledge  as  sensation  is
fundamental  to  knowledge  —  at  the  opposite  pole  :  and
creativity  comes  not  from  sensation  alone  (though  not
without  sensation),  but  from  sensation  warmed  and  wet
by  the  sky  of  religion.  And  back  to  mother-earth,
to  the  cruder  mind  which  knows  its  own  integrity,  shall


26  RELIGION  AS  S££N  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

we  go,  unless  in  holding  to  the  severalty  and  freedom
of  our  Arts  and  Owns,  we  are  able  to  hold  with  equal
strength  to  that  which  is  other  than  all  of  them,  the
source  of  their  creativity  and  the  channel  of  their  union.

Herewith,  then,  I  have  expressed  quite  dogmatically
a  conviction  regarding  the  function  of  religion  in  his-
tory and  society,  a  function  which  throws  some  light
upon  its  nature.  Only  the  completion  of  our  whole  task
can  bring  adequate  substance  into  these  wide  outlines.
What  the  process  of  religion  in  the  mind  of  man  may
be  through  which  these  creative  results  take  place,  we
have  not  begun  to  enquire.  We  shall  come  nearer  to
religion  itself  in  our  next  study  —  the  effects  of  religion
in  individual  life.


CHAPTER  III

THE  TRAITS  OF  RELIGION  IN  PERSONS

WE  know  religion  when  we  meet  it  in  persons.  We
are  in  no  need  of  definition  to  guide  our  eyes,  or
to  help  in  identifying  it.  We  are  perpetually  seeing  its
fruits,  or  missing  them,  in  our  neighbors.  We  are  sen-
sitive even  to  its  shades  and  degrees  ;  aware  of  its  more
or  less,  its  depth,  its  texture,  its  resistance.  Indeed,  we
are  instinctive  connoisseurs  on  this  subject,  every  son  of
Adam,  —  because  religion  is  a  human  property,  not  a
property  of  culture.  An  errand-boy  can  detect  as  well
as  any  psychologist  the  falsetto  in  an  assumed  devout-
ness ;  is  as  keen  to  mark  the  fatal  note  of  economy  in  an
accent  pious  from  habit ;  is  cut  as  quickly  by  the  leap
of  the  true  flame,  no  matter  from  what  covering.

And  this  holds  good  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  man's
religion  is  the  hiddenest  thing  in  him.  Hidden  in  large
part  from  himself.  Let  him  try  with  might  and  main  to
give  a  true  estimate  of  his  own, —  his  word  for  it  is  no
better  than  mine  :  the  thing  is  too  close  to  himself  to  be
well  seen  by  him.  But  for  that  very  reason  our  percep-
tion of  it  in  him  is  conveyed  immediately  with  our  sense
of  the  fiber  of  the  person.  It  is  as  if  a  man's  religion
and  his  personal  quality  were  in  large  measure  inter-
changeable terms.  We  take  our  impression  of  it  in-
voluntarily, and  this  impression  becomes  one  of  the
most  stubborn  of  human  opinions :  if  the  alternative  is


fi8  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

pressed  upon  us  of  doubting  a  man  in  whom  we  have
met  this  absolute  worth,  or  of  doubting  an  institution
or  tradition  which  damns  him  on  its  technicalities,  we
may  find  ourselves  loosing  our  feet  from  the  institution.
In  such  and  such  an  atheist  or  doubter  of  the  Trinity
or  happy-go-lucky  liver  we  may  have  caught  some  deep
flash  of  the  trait  we  call  religious,  and  we  sit  strangely
secure  in  the  prospect  of  his  future  destiny.  The  power
of  religious  dogpnas  is  limited,  and  their  edge  slowly
turned,  by  the  un waivable  weight  of  this  court  which  sits
in  permanent  judgment  upon  theur  judgments.

Our  perception  of  religion,  like  any  other  instinctive
perception,  can  doubtless  be  sophisticated  and  work  false.
It  holds  its  truth  with  difficulty  in  the  presence  of  pre-
judice, theological  interest,  and  passion.  Even  so,  it  is
possible  to  describe  in  the  large  the  kind  of  thing
which  in  persons  we  pronounce  the  traits  of  religion.
The  world  has  not  been  poor  in  characters  in  whom  the
quality  is  present  in  such  abundance  as  to  carry  our  af-
firmative beyond  a  doubt ;  with  these  in  mind  we  shall
be  able  to  characterize  at  least  its  outward  appearance.

That  which  chiefly  marks  the  religious  soul  is  a  fear-
less and  original  valuation  of  things.  Its  judgments
emerge  somehow  from  solitude,  as  if  it  had  resources
and  data  of  its  own  sufficient  to  determine  its  attitudes
without  appeal  to  the  bystander,  as  if  by  fresh  contact
with  truth  itself,  it  were  sure  of  its  own  justice.  It  may
treat  objects  which  we  pass  as  ordinary  as  if  they  were
not  ordinary  ;  distinguished  matters  may  seem  reduced
in  its  eyes  to  the  commonplace.  It  lives  as  if  seeing
reality  where  neither  physical  eye  nor  practical  judg-


THE  TRAITS  OF  RELIGION  IN  PERSONS  29

ment  see  anything;  and  it  makes  material  sacrifices  for
this  faith.  Its  original  valuation  is  seen  also  in  what
it  fails  to  do,  equally  with  what  it  does.  It  seems  not
to  display  the  common  need  to  escape  from  some  of  the
unpleasant  facts  of  experience  —  to  edge  away  from  cer-
tain passages,,  to  hurry  through  with  certain  inevitable
others.  It  behaves  as  if  no  present  experience  could
utterly  oppress  it,  as  if  indeed  all  circumstance  brought
by  history  to  its  share  might  be  received  with  respect,
almost  with  deference,  as  significant  and  right,  not  ac-
cidental. It  is  not  as  one  immune  from  suffering  that
the  religious  spirit  moves  in  the  severer  passes  of  its
career,  but  as  one  willing  to  accept  and  able  to  entertain
suffering  in  the  solemn  adequacy  of  its  own  peculiar
insight.

But  this  originality  and  this  freedom  are  strangely
united  with  an  opposite  quality,  necessity.  The  certi-
tude of  the  religious  spirit  is  so  poised  by  an  inward  bond
that  it  conveys  no  impression  of  personal  self-assertion.
Its  wisdom  does  not  emanate  from  itself  alone,  is  in  some
paradoxical  fashion  both  original  and  derivative :  it  has
the  air  of  being  less  a  product  of  individual  force  than
a  result  of  profound  partnership  with  some  invisible
source  of  wisdom.  The  anxiety  and  burden  of  a  self-
maintained  position  are  by  this  fact  removed ;  the  spirit
is  freed  from  itself  by  mooring  in  some  objective  reality
constantly  present  to  its  consciousness.

And  so  also  there  is  no  sign  of  the  strain  which  we
associate  with  moral  or  courageous  effort.  The  motive
of  religion  is  unlike  that  of  an  idea  or  principle  which
evokes  a  dominant  sense  of  exertion  and  sacrifice:  it  is
rather  like  that  of  a  deep  passion  which  possesses  and


30  RELIGION  AS  SEEK  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

supports  the  soul,  and  cancels  with  a  margin  of  its  own
strength  any  opposing  motion.  In  brief,  this  person  has
meat  to  eat  which  we  who  look  on  know  not  of;  and  here
lies  the  mystery  and  the  fascination  of  religion  as  it
moves  about  in  the  world.  It  is  the  fascination  not
only  of  assurance,  but  of  the  sufficiency,  the  simplicity,
the  natural  necessity,  with  which  it  utters  its  novelties,
moves  its  mountains,  and  ushers  in  its  revolutions.

If  its  relations  to  its  invisible  Object,  held  inviolate
with  anxious  care,  are  such  as  to  unbind  it  in  some  wise
from  men,  they  are  also  such  as  to  bind  powerfully  to  it-
self whoever  enters  the  sphere  of  its  action.  It  may  seem
that  this  Object  is  such  only  as  men  must  serve  if  they
will  best  serve  each  other.  It  endows  the  judgments  of
the  religious  soul,  original  as  they  are,  not  with  a  lower
but  with  a  higher  human  currency,  —  as  if  that  Object
were  but  reality  itself.  The  burden  of  eccentricity  is
thrown  upon  our  common  behavior,  not  on  that  of  re-
ligion. The  words  and  actions  of  the  religious  man  be-
come authoritative  for  the  world  of  men.  In  becoming
free,  he  has  also  become  obedient  to  some  necessity;
and  in  becoming  obedient  he  has  become  universal.

Surely  the  religious  spirit  is  living  as  if  immortality
were  its  share.  What  its  source  of  judgment  and  power
may  be  we  have  yet  to  discover,  but  in  its  valid  origi-
nality, and  in  its  emancipation  from  the  stress  and  haste
of  the  temporal  current,  we  may  see  a  present  possession
of  that  to  which  the  secular  spirit  presses  forward.  That
worth-of-lif e  which  is  commonly  held  as  imaginary,  pro-
spective, hypothetical,  has  become  to  it  a  matter  as  it  were
of  sensation,  immediate  and  inescapable. That  which


THE  TRAITS  OF  RELIGION  IN  PERSONS  31

to  men  otherwise  is  but  the  word  has  to  its  knowledge
become  flesh.  Such  present  possession  of  the  distant
sources  of  worth  and  certainty  has  been  called  ^^ faith";
it  is  the  characteristic  of  religion  in  all  ages.

Here  lies  the  essential  distinction  between  religion
and  the  Arts  on  the  ground  of  personal  experience.
Art  is  long;  religion  is  immediate.  The  attainment  in
every  Art  is  future,  infinitely  distant ;  the  attainment  of
religion  is  present.  Religion  indeed  involves  a  present
possession  in  some  sort  of  the  very  objects  which  the
Arts  infinitely  seek.  Knowledge,  for  example,  is  an  in-
finite quest  in  the  order  of  nature,  —  and  in  it  there  is
no  absolute  certainty  but  only  a  growing  probability
and  approximation  :  but  the  religious  soul  knows  now
— and  that  without  losing  interest  in  the  slow  movement
of  science.  Human  brotherhood  also  is  an  infinite
problem  —  men  have  to  be  made  brothers,  and  the
whole  of  history  is  requisite  to  tell  the  tale  of  achieving
that  end :  but  in  religion  men  are  already  brothers  and
experience  their  brotherhood  in  the  moment  of  common
worship.  So  with  morality :  in  time  my  moral  task  will
never  be  finished,  for  my  imperfection  is  infinite  and
my  progress  by  small  degrees ;  but  religion  calls  upon
me  to  be  perfect  at  once  even  as  God  is  perfect,  and  in
religion  somehow  I  am  perfect.  By  this  contrast  we  are
helped  to  describe,  still  problematically,  but  with  much
greater  nearness  than  before,  the  nature  of  religion.

Religion,  we  may  now  say,  is  the  present  attainment
in  a  single  experience  of  those  objects  which  in  the
course  of  nature  are  reached  only  at  the  end  of  infinite
progression. Religion  is  anticipated  attainment.


32  RELIGION  AS  SEEN  IN  ITS  EFFECTS

This  precursory  definition  of  religion  serves  the  pur-
pose of  such  definitions  —  not  to  solve  problems,  but
rather  to  open  them.  In  religion,  we  say,  men  live  (i8  if
in  presence  of  attainment,  of  knowledge,  of  immortality :
but  in  what  respect  is  the  attainment  present  when  in
the  order  of  nature  it  must  still  remain  at  an  infinite  dis-
tance? What  sort  of  present  satisfaction  is  that  which
can  still  leave  the  individual  involved  in  the  unending
struggle  ?  We  have  indeed  ceased  to  respect  as  reli-
gious any  state  of  mind  which  withdraws  the  subject  from
sympathy  or  alliance  with  the  age-long  human  labor.
Whatever  may  be  the  nature  of  that  anticipation  of  all
attainment,  genuine  religion  is  not  inclined  —  as  &r  as
hard  work  goes  —  to  take  advantage  of  its  advantage.
If  being  in  the  world  it  is  not  of  the  world,  it  is  none
the  less  with  the  world  and  for  it —  in  brief,  in  for  it,
and  with  no  loss  of  power.  That  is  an  extraordinary
attainment  which  one  must  still  labor  forever  to  possess :
but  just  this  paradox  is  inherent  in  the  religious  con-
sciousness, and  opens  the  way  to  a  fundamental  question
as  to  its  nature.

For  something  of  this  same  paradoxical  character  we
find  in  certain  kinds  of  knowledge :  there  are  insights
which  come  in  a  moment,  and  yet  have  to  be  kept  by
endless  vigilance — as  men  keep  their  liberty.  The
peculiar  possession  of  religion  is  often  spoken  of  in
terms  of  knowledge,  as  wisdom,  vision,  revelation,
truth.  But  there  are  reasons  for  doubting  whether
religion  is,  literally  speaking,  a  kind  of  knowledge.
Whatever  it  is,  it  cannot  readily  be  translated  into
valid  ideas  and  language.  Its  secret  is  one  which  the
religious  spirit  tries  not  to  keep  but  to  give  away  —  and


THE  TRAITS  OF  RELIGION  IN  PERSONS  33

cannot.  But  what  is  a  knowledge  that  cannot  be
expressed,  communicated,  or  thought?  And  further,
thought  is  but  one  of  those  same  Arts  which  (as  science
or  philosophy)  is  a  product  of  religion,  together  with
politics,  poetry,  and  all  other  forms  of  human  expres-
sion. How  then  can  religion  itself  be  a  matter  of  know-
ledge?

When  we  speak  of  religion  in  terms  of  thought,  is  it
not  according  to  that  loose  and  general  usage  which  ap-
plies the  word  thought  to  all  that  is  inward  and  free  in
men  ?  '  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he '  —
lliat  is  to  say,  as  a  man  orients  himself,  as  he  '  makes
up  his  mind,'  as  he  feels  his  way  in  the  practical  anti-
theses of  existence.  Is  it  not  more  probable,  in  terms
of  psychological  fact,  that  religion  consists  in  a  practical
attitude  of  mind,  or  a  mode  of  feeling  —  say  in  practi-
cal confidence,  optimism,  good-will,  enthusiasm  for  what
is  real,  the  power  to  penetrate  shams  that  goes  with
these  things  ?  A  disposition  of  this  sort,  an  inward  cer-
titude or  faith,  is  indeed  an  anticipated  attainment,  ^  the
substance  of  things  hoped  for '  —  but  in  more  primi-
tive form  than  knowledge,  in  the  form,  briefly  speaking,
oi  feeling.

We  have  now  to  deal  with  this  view  that  religion  is
a  matter  of  feeling.  We  may  agree  to  use  the  word
feeling  for  the  present  in  a  very  wide  sense  —  as  a
name  for  whatever  in  consciousness,  deeper  than  ex-
plicit thought,  is  able  to  give  a  bent  to  conduct.  Feel-
ing is  not,  as  we  sometimes  think  it,  a  wholly  vague  and
uncertain  principle :  it  is  capable  of  bearing  much  re-
sponsibility in  the  direction  of  practical  living.  In  the
form  of  moral  disposition,  it  may  be  the  highest,  as  well


34  RELIGION  AS  SEEK  IK  ITS  EFFECTS

as  the  most  individoal,  determinant  of  conduct  and  bear-
ing. The  question  whether  religion  belongs  to  this
reahn  of  practical  and  responsible  feeling  rather  than
to  the  realm  of  thought  is  an  issue  of  greater  practi-
cal interest  than  maj  appear  in  this  formal  statement ;
it  will  engage  us  for  some  time.


PART  n

RELIGIOUS  FEELING

AND
RELIGIOUS  THEORY


CHAPTER  IV

THE  BETIBEMEKT  OF  THE  INTELLECT

TIE  intellect  has  evidently  beeii  assuming  too  much
importance,  not  only  in  religion  but  in  life  at  large.
Hardly  otherwise  would  so  much  satisfaction  be  taken
in  showing  this  quite  human  organ  to  its  subordinate
place,  so  much  eagerness  in  putting  our  valuables  into
some  other  custody.  Wherever  our  likes  and  dislikes
are  concerned,  as  in  appreciations  of  beauty,  moral
rightness,  and  other  values,  logic  is  persona  non  grata
—  at  least  in  its  own  name.  Since  the  impressive  effort
of  Kant  to  mark  out  a  strictly  limited  province  for  the
valid  use  of  the  theoretical  reason  —  a  province  which
all  our  major  human  interests  lie  safely  outside  of  —
thinkers  of  the  first  rank  (with  exceptions,  but  with
singular  accord)  have  added  some  stroke  to  the  picture
of  reason's  retirement,  representing  it  as  servant  of  the
will,  or  as  tool  and  creature  of  some  darker  and  more
primal  reality  —  blind  impulse,  immediate  feeling,  the
unconscious.  In  religion  more  than  elsewhere  the  intel-
lectual disaffection  is  sweeping.  One  who  now  ventures
to  discuss  religion  from  the  side  of  cosmology  as  a  ^^  the-
ory of  original  causation  "  seems  to  be  strangely  remote
from  the  point ;  the  inoffensive  words,  creed,  dogma,
theology,  are  almost  words  of  reproach.  The  whole  ap-
paratus of  reason  in  religion  has  retreated  in  impor-


38 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

tance,  in  favor  of  a  more  substantial  basis  —  which  we
have  agreed  to  call  feeling.^

This  retirement  of  the  intellect  is  not  altogether  a  re-
sult of  free  research.  So  far  as  religion  is  concerned,  it
strongly  resembles  a  forced  conclusion.  It  comes  from
holding  tenaciously  to  the  immense  importance  of  re-
ligion, while  despairing  of  finding  for  it  any  intellectual
content  having  equal  importance,  or  equal  stability  or
accessibility.  The  xdea%  of  religion,  whether  in  the
form  of  metaphysics  or  of  revealed  truth,  have  not  been
able  to  command  that  respect  and  loyalty  which  is  readily
given  to  religion  itself.  We  are  driven  to  confess  that
we  actually  care  more  for  religion  than  we  do  for  reli-

^  The  following  may  be  taken  as  typical  expreisionB  of  the  tendenej
to  giye  feeling  the  primacy  in  religion :

Es  iflt  seit  Schleiermacher  ein  anerkannter  Grundsatz,  daaa  der
innerste  and  eigentliche  Kern  der  Religion  im  Greftthl  zu  luohen  tei.
E.  Ton  Hartmann. Religion  des  Geistes,  p.  2S.

Not  only  can  religione  knowledge  never  cast  off  its  subjectiye  char*
aoter ;  it  is  in  reality  nothing  bat  that  very  subjectiyity  of  piety  con-
sidered in  its  action  and  in  its  legitimate  development.  A.  Sabatier.
Outlines  of  a  Philosophy  of  Religion,  p.  310.

I  believe  that  the  logical  reason  of  man  operates  in  this  field  of  divin-
ity  exactly  as  it  has  always  operated  in  love,  or  in  patriotism,  or  in  any
other  of  the  wider  affairs  of  life  in  which  our  passions  or  our  mystical  in-
taitions  fix  our  beliefs  beforehand.  It  finds  arguments  for  our  convictions,
for  indeed  it  has  to  find  them.  It  amplifies  and  defines  our  faith,  and
dignifies  it,  and  lends  it  words  and  plausibility.  It  hardly  ever  engenders
it ;  it  cannot  now  secure  it.  William  James.  Varieties  of  Religious
Experience,  p.  436.

Religious  experience  is  essentially  religious  feeling.  H.  Hdffding.
The  Philosophy  of  Religion  (tr.  Meyer),  p.  106.

Wbat  the  future  of  religion  is  to  be  no  one  can  tell.  Of  this,  how-
ever, I  think  we  may  be  sure  :  religious  belief  will  stand  or  fall  with  what
I  have  called  the  Religion  of  Feeling.  J.  B.  Pratt.  Psychology  of  Re-
ligions Belief,  p.  302.


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  89

gious  theories  and  ideas  :  and  in  merely  making  that  dis-
tinction between  religion  and  its  doctrine-elements^  have
we  not  already  relegated  the  latter  to  an  external  and
subordinate  position  ?  Have  we  not  asserted  that  ^^  re-
ligion itself"  has  some  other  essence  or  constitution
than  mere  idea  or  thought  ?  We  are  in  need  of  some
other  foundation  for  our  faith.

The  proposal,  then,  that  religion  may  be  sufiiciently
founded  on  feeling  comes  with  too  great  promise  of  re-
lief to  be  lightly  dismissed.  Grant  it,  and  all  dogmatic
authority  loses  its  pressure  at  once.  We  are  set  free  to
be  religious  beings  without  the  infinite  argument  and
haggling  over  unreachable  and  untestable  propositions.
Creeds  we  wave  aside  ;  —  or  else,  we  carry  them  lightly,
knowing  that  they  are  at  one  stroke  dehorned,  put  out  of
conflict  with  truth  as  otherwise  established.  We  need
not  any  longer  take  their  clauses  to  task  seriatim  and
verbatim ;  we  are  free  to  utter  the  whole j  if  we  will,  as
a  single  expression  of  the  feeling  we  call  faith,  as  the
historic  voice  of  a  total  confidence  in  destiny.  Who  can
deny  that  we  do  thereby  come  nearer  to  the  intimate
sense  of  our  creeds  ?  Further,  if  the  essence  of  religion
is  feeling,  it  is  to  be  judged  by  feeling  and  not  by  ar-
gument, —  it  is  to  be  judged  as  beauty  and  right  are
judged :  we  are  not  only  at  liberty  to  bring  our  instincts
to  bear,  we  are  compelled  to  bring  them  to  bear,  —  a
responsibility  from  which  we  too  easily  escape  when  re-
ligion is  gained  by  accepting  a  creed.  Who  will  say
that  this  requirement  is  not  more  adapted  than  the  old
one  to  keep  alive  the  spirit  of  genuine  reUgion  ?  That
forced  conclusion  which  has  driven  religion  from  intel-
lect toward  feeling  may  thus  prove  a  literal  god-send  to


40 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

religion.  But  there  are  other  grounds  for  this  change ;
it  is,  in  fact,  the  outcome  of  converging  tendencies  so'
various  that  they  can  only  be  called  the  labor  of  an  age.
Some  of  these  we  shall  pass  in  review.

■

The  comparison  of  religions^  whenever  historical
movements  (whether  crusades,  or  conquests,  or  missions)
have  made  comparison  inevitable,  has  always  led  to  some
doubting  of  the  face- value  of  creeds :  for  the  alien  re-
ligion has  always  made  some  appeal  to  that  instinctive
knowledge  of  religion  which  we  have  said  is  a  possession
of  human  nature.  Especially  is  this  true  of  that  deliber-
ate scientific  comparison  of  religions  which  in  our  own
time  has  yielded  so  great  wealth  of  historical  knowledge.
For  this  wealth  has  required  of  us  a  penetrating  effort  to
conceive  the  essence  of  religion  in  its  world-wide  iden-
tity :  in  which  effort  we  have  been  steadily  drawn  back
of  religious  ideas  to  something  more  fundamental.
Men's  religions,  we  cannot  help  seeing,  are  much  more
alike  than  the  explanations  and  expressions  they  give
for  them.  Diverse  as  are  myths,  prophecies,  eschatolo-
gies,  angelologies,  and  the  rest,  religious  feeling  is  much
the  same  the  world  over.  When  identical  values  thus
attach  themselves  to  quite  different  ideas,  it  cannot  re-
main in  doubt  where  the  substance  of  the  matter  lies.
Theories  which  have  varied  so  much  might  vary  further
ad  libituniy  and  religion  still  do  its  common  human
work.  The  thing  is  indispensable ;  the  ideas  that  have
been  connected  with  it  are,  with  all  their  mystery  and
ambiguity,  perennial  causes  of  discord,  misunderstand-
ing, division  without  compensating  benefit.  It  is  a
pious  wish  to  be  rid  of  them  all,  if  it  were  possible,  and


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  41

let  mankind  flow  to  its  proper  unity  in  the  substance
of  religion,  in  the  feelings  which  all  men  share.

A  similar  impression  is  made  by  the  life-histories  of
religious  movements^  as  we  are  now  able  to  understand
them.  Religion  renews  its  life  in  great  bursts  of  impulse
which  emanate  not  from  new  thoughts,  but  from  rarely
impressive  personalities,  capable  of  inspiring  exalted
and  passionate  devotion  in  their  friends  and  followers.
Their  utterances  are  poetic,  oracular,  couched  in  figure
and  parable,  not  in  theses.  While  their  power  and
meaning  seems  to  be  propagating  itself  by  the  medium*-
ship  of  words  and  thoughts,  it  is  in  reality  propagating
itself  immediately,  by  infection,  by  contact,  by  the  laying
on  of  hands,  by  the  leaping-across  of  an  overmastering
fire.  In  the  presence  of  such  men,  leaders  and  carriers,
others  are  lifted,  not  to  high  knowledge,  but  indeed  to  a
high  degree  of  moral  potency  which  is  capable  of  exe-
cuting great  deeds,  sometimes  upon  the  most  visionary
basis.  With  the  rise  of  the  critical  business  of  thinking
and  philosophizing  the  decline  of  religious  vitality  keeps
even  step.  As  passion  cools,  theology  spreads ;  and  as
theology  spreads,  passion  cools  still  more.  Bemoteness
from  religious  leadership  can  infallibly  be  read  in  the
conditions  of  religious  life  in  a  given  place  or  age.
The  stream  which  at  its  source  is  impetuous,  fierce,
channel-plowing,  here  at  its  mouth  lies  lazy,  divided,
straggling  off  to  the  dead-level  of  religious  homogeneity,
through  the  arms  of  shallow,  reasoning  sects,  where  (by
the  very  multitude  of  distinctions  between  the  believers)
ihere  is  hardly  any  more  distinction  between  river  and
bank,  saint  and  sinner.

The  making  of  creeds,  it  is  true,  has  never  been  a


43 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

purely  theoretical  interest ;  creeds  have  had  important
social  functions :  but  these  functions,  we  think,  do  not
lead  us  to  love  them  more.  For  creed-making  belongs
to  the  eras  of  political-religious  propagandism  stage
through  which  especially  the  religions  of  Buddha,  Jesus,
and  Mohammed  have  passed  lingering.  Creeds  have
served  as  weapons  of  warfare  and  persecution  and  inner
partisan  rivalries.  Disfavor  towards  the  polemic  method
of  religious  promotion  thus  adds  itself  to  the  distrust
of  intellect,  in  the  rise  of  the  religion  of  feeling.

But  these  comparative  and  historical  judgments  upon
religion  are  themselves  results,  and  hard-won  results,  of
longer  circuits  of  human  labor ;  circuits  which  flow  wide
of  any  special  religious  interest,  impinging  upon  reli-
gion only  after  coursing  through  the  whole  range  of
scientific  experience.  It  is  not  our  religious  instinct
alone,  but  something  much  like  an  (icquired  scientific
instinct  which  sends  us  looking  to-day  among  the  feel-
ing-roots of  religion  for  its  ultimate  essence.^  Into  the
building  of  that  scientific  instinct  have  entered  many
strands,  of  which  it  will  be  sufficient  for  us  to  consider
four  —  the  psychological,  the  biological,  the  pragmatic,
the  critical.

^  Is  there  not  much  eloquence,  for  example,  in  the  high  Talae  which
is  accorded  to  simple  and  emotional  religions  experience  in  the  psycho-
logical workshop  ?  What  is  it  but  an  instinetiye  expression  of  the  defer-
ence which  intellect  pays  to  religion  cu  to  a  foreign  power,  that  the  investi-
gator looks  so  eagerly  into  the  hamblest  corners  to  bring  to  light  its
pearls  —  or  seeks  to  lure  it  into  his  presence  by  means  of  the  wily  ques-
tionnaire ?  Surely,  if  the  material  of  religious  life  must  be  thus  sought,
it  is  something  other,  in  essence,  than  the  thought  which  seeks  it.  This
humble,  empirical  attitude  of  the  scholar  toward  religion  is  indeed  the
most  convincing  acknowledgment  that  thought  finds  here  something  other
than  itself.


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  43

I  mast  speak  broadly  in  all  these  matters ;  dealing
with  general  tendencies,  not  with  the  work  of  individual
men ;  dealing  also  for  the  most  part  with  older  tendencies,
such  as  have  had  time  to  pass  into  our  mental  habits,
not  with  views  now  rising.

First,  then,  of  the  psychological  current  of  thought  :
our  world  is  thoroughly  leavened  by  the  conviction  that
nothing  is  real  unless  it  belongs  to  conscious  experience.
Philosophers  wonderfully  agree  in  accepting  the  term
'^  experience  "  as  a  comprehensive  name  for  whatever  is
feither  real  or  significant.  Facts  and  events  may  have
their  independent  external  existence ;  but  they  gain  liv-
ing certainty  and  importance  only  as  they  impinge  upon
consciousness.  Unless  a  fact  is  caught  in  the  circuit
of  a  self ;  unless  somewhere  it  reports  to  the  sensitive,
irritable,  responsive  thing  we  call  a  mind,  it  is  nothing.
It  is  the  inner  event  that  is  solid :  the  status  of  matter,
of  energy,  of  all  external  objects,  is  doubtful ;  the '  outer
world'  is  best  understood  by  relation  to  the  inner
world,  as  a  stimulus,  or  as  even  less  than  a  stimulus.

The  result  of  this  conviction  is  that  we  incline  to
unravel  every  science  from  its  inner  end,  from  its
psychological  insertion.  Where  have  we  to  look  for
the  sources  of  public  events,  the  making  of  states,  the
development  of  crafts,  the  making  and  managing  of
political  movements,  the  shaping  of  ideals?  To  human
instincts,  to  ^'  human  nature."  There  is  no  theory  of
politics,  of  economics,  of  law,  of  morals,  nor  of  religion
either,  that  can  now  dispense  with  its  psychological
groundwork.  Skill  in  self-knowledge,  in  tracing  the
psychical  factors  of  all  institutions  and  of  all  history  :
this  is  the  predominant  habit  and  technique  of  our


44 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

scientific  age. No  such  surefooted  exploring  of  the  inner
man  has  ever  before  been  known.

But  all  this  psychological  habit  (lineal  descendent  of  a
subjective  sort  of  idealism)  brings  with  it  the  depreciation
of  idea  in  favor  of  feeling.  For  ideas  and  thoughts  are
the  tools  of  our  intercourse  with  external  objects.  They
are  attempts  at  externality :  they  are  at  the  same  time
the  medium  of  outgo  from  the  mind  to  the  outer  world,
and  the  medium  through  which  that  outer  world  main-
tains the  posture  of  externality  to  the  mind.  If  it  is  only
the  subject  that  is  important,  an  end-in-itself ,  and  also  a
beginning  in  itself,  then  the  objects  of  thought  and  theory
— together  with  thought  and  theory  themselves  —  are
there  only  as  meanSy  factitious,  troublesome,  and  circuit-
ous, through  which  the  subject  must  win  its  satisfaction.
The  real  substance  of  that  subject  is  something  else  than
intellect  —  a  natural  self  with  spontaneous  affections
and  repulsions,  needs  and  desires,  beliefs  and  illusions,
consistencies  and  contradictions.  That  which  in  human
nature  is  fundamental,  intimate,  genuine,  private,  and
wholly  owned,  is  feeling:  in  feeling  we  substantially
exist.

Then  there  is  the  biological  current^  which  easily
abets  and  coalesces  with  the  psychological  trend  of
thought.  There  is  something  in  the  log^c  of  biology
(though  certainly  it  is  no  part  of  biology  itself)  which
has  helped  along  the  conviction  that  nothing  is  real  t^n-
less  it  is  aboriginal  and  germinal.  Biology  must  find
the  explanation  of  the  characters  of  living  things  in  some
interaction  between  these  things  and  their  environments :
but  what  is  the  ^^  thing  "  which  takes  part  in  this  inter-


TH£  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  45

action  ?  Naturally,  it  must  be  something  which  is  identi-
cal throughout  all  the  transformations  of  the  organism,
the  same  in  the  germ  and  in  the  mature  individual :  but
that  which  is  identical  in  the  greater  and  in  the  less  must
be  the  less,  one  might  fairly  suppose,  or  even  less  than  the
less.  Hence  in  identifying  the  living  thing,  we  naturally
look  toward  nucleus  and  germ,  behind  the  differentiated
and  explicit.

Now  if  it  is  true,  as  it  seems  to  be  true,  that  conscious
life  is  a  shape  which  has  been  taken  on  by  some  more
primitive  reality;  and  that  intellect  is  a  more  or  less
advanced  instrument  assumed  by  conscious  life  in  its  later
stages :  it  would  follow  that  this  conscious  life  itself  is
something  else  than  intellect,  —  something  presumably
of  the  nature  of  feeling.

It  is  true  that  inferences  of  this  sort  are  hazardous:
the  same  logic  would  lead  us  to  seek  the  explanation  of
consciousness  in  something  less  than  consciousness.  Psy-
chology is  always  attracted  by  biology,  in  the  search
for  its  own  unit,  into  a  twilight  region  where  physi-
cal and  psychical  incline  to  blend,  and  can  no  longer
for  lack  of  light  be  distinguished.  Mistaking  its  own
ground,  it  is  in  danger  of  lingering  and  groping  about
in  a  sort  of  half -world,  where  the  mind  never  knows  how
far  to  admit  itself  a  group  of  tropisms,  nor  the  brain  how
far  to  allow  its  chemistry  to  dally  with  the  influences  of
the  mind.  But  as  to  the  position  of  the  intellect  and  its
ideas  there  is  no  confusion.  They  are,  as  it  were,  feelers,
sparks,  signals,  thrown  out  by  the  deeper  reality,  and
subject  forever  to  its  own  ultimate  ends.  Ideas  crop  out
like  leaves ;  if  they  are  cropped  off,  the  root  lives  on —
and  produces  more  leaves. A  psychological  sociology


46 RELIGIOUS  F£ELIN6  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

accepts  this  instruction  from  biology^  and  forms  its  the-
ories upon  these  principles.  What  is  the  substance  of
the  family,  for  instance,  if  not  in  certain  heavy-loaded
human  instincts  which  survive  many  a  dynasty  of  cus-
toms and  custom-supporting  theories.  The  independent
variable,  in  its  slow  march  through  the  ages,  lies  far
deeper  than  the  idea.  The  real  is  the  permanent  and  the
ancient,  as  well  as  the  germinal  and  creative.  But  only
in  the  form  of  feeling  can  consciousness  accompany  the
organism,  as  it  is  traced  back  to  its  simplest  forms  or  to
its  beginnings.

The  pragmatic  current,  the  third  of  these  scientific
tendencies,  is  much  older  than  present-day  pragmatism,
which  is  but  ^'  a  new  name  for  some  old  ways  of  thinking."
Its  conviction  is  that  nothing  is  real  which  does  not  do
work.  And  in  proportion  as  it  appears  that  the  work-
ing element  of  human  nature  is  value-consciousness,
not  fact-consciousness,  pragmatic  tendencies  assign
feeling  a  higher  degree  of  reality  than  idea.  This  is
but  to  make  into  a  universal  principle  the  repeated
observation  that  'essences,'  when  we  get  close  to  them,
are  energies  —  and  nothing  else.  If  we  look  for  mental
substance,  what  do  we  find  except  the  energy-charge  of
action,  which  is  feeling.  Ideas  can  apparently  float  idle
in  the  mind ;  facts  and  truths  can  deserve  the  epithet
'  mere ' ;  and  if  they  do  not  deserve  it,  if  they  have  any
gritf  it  is  no  inherent  quality  of  their  own,  but  added  by
some  gift  from  our  own  will.  Especially  are  our  ideas
about  metaphysical  things  liable  to  become  thus  'mere'
and  dead.  All  available  information  about  heaven  and
hell,  and  more,  one  may  receive  unmoved. In  a  certain


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  47

military  establishment,  the  pious  are  called  ^^  hell  dodgers/'
implying  that  a  soldier  should.be  ready  to  take  hell  like
a  man.  If  any  stirring  of  concern  or  plan  of  action
comes  out  of  the  idea,  that  is  an  additional  fact,  not
bound  to  it  by  any  definition ;  and  religion  lies  in  the
stirring,  not  in  the  view.  Enlightened  religion  has  per-
ceived this  from  afar,  and  has  called  on  men  not  to
acknowledge  certain  truths,  but  to  love  certain  realities.
In  this  judgment  biology  strengthens  the  pragmatic
tendency,  just  as  it  abets  the  psychological  tendency.
For  an  idea  is  (biologically)  a  product  of  friction  and
hesitation  in  conduct :  a  token  of  failure  in  spontaneous
reaction.  Creatures  become  conceptually  conscious,  it
appears,  in  proportion  as  they  have  need  to  extract  an
identical  value  from  an  ambiguous  or  non-committal
environment.  Hence,  an  idea  stands  for  a  pause
between  perception  and  action.  It  is  an  eddy  into
which  the  mind  enters,  a  product  of  doubt  and  a  means
of  parley.  But  religious  impulse  has  no  need  thus  to
learn  its  line  of  outflow.  It  has  no  mission  to  special
plans  of  action,  but  rather  a  set  and  spirit  to  infuse  into
the  whole  active  being.  Religion  is  one  with  its  appli-
cation ;  it  exists  applied.  Hence,  it  does  not  pause  to
hang  up  in  the  exhibit  room  of  our  ideas  the  program  or
scheme  of  its  meaning,  as  if  it  were  something  to  be
deliberated — definite,  defensible,  and  so  debatable.  It
is  more  like  the  breath  of  life,  its  existence  its  own
defense.  Such  immediacy  and  centrality  belong  only  to
feeling.

All  of  these  currents  so  far  described  are  founded
upon  a  common  insight,  namely :  that  ideas  have  at  all


48 KEUGIOUS  FEELING  AND  REUGIOUS  THEORY

points  to  he  tested  by  a  higher  authority.  This  insight
is  itself  the  burden  of  yet  another  current  of  thought,
much  older  and  broader  than  the  others,  which  it  sustains
and  makes  possible  :  it  is  the  critical  currenty  coexten-
sive almost  with  modern  times.  To  John  Locke  we  owe
our  prompt  confidence  that  it  is  possible  to  set  up  limits
and  standards  for  thought ;  it  was  he  who  first  deliber-
ately made  bold  to  examine  our  ideas  from  the  outside
—  in  the  attitude  of  a  physician ;  it  is  ^'  Dr/'  Locke  who
first  accomplishes  an  idea  of  an  idea  —  a  more  or  less
physical  idea  of  an  idea — and  sets  the  fashion  of  as-
signing reasonable  limits  to  the  use  of  reason,  in  view
of  the  humble  origin  and  restricted  function  of  our  ideas.
That  we  may  and  must  look  thus  physicianly  upon  our
ideas  from  the  outside  is  no  longer  an  open  question  ;
it  is  only  to  be  questioned  what  that  greater  thing  is
which  surrounds  and  subordinates  the  ideas  to  itself.
That  higher  authority,  the  three  currents  above  considered
have  agreed  to  find  in  the  region  of  feeling.  And  so  far
at  least  we  must  follow  them  :  in  every  human  interest
the  rationale,  the  exposition,  is  weaker  than  the  vital
meaning  of  the  thing  as  retained  in  feeling  or  instinct.
And  all  observations  of  this  sort  are  more  conspicuously
true  of  religion  than  of  anything  else,  because  in  reli-
gion the  status  of  ideas  is  less  certain  than  elsewhere,
and  the  tap  root  of  human  instinct  more  deeply  involved.

It  seems  to  me  a  weighty  consensus, — this  group  of
tendencies  which  we  have  thus  hastily  reviewed.  It  is,
of  course,  no  new  discovery  that  religion  is  an  affair  of
the  heart  rather  than  of  the  head.  Among  the  axioms
of  that  instinctive  human  knowledge  about  religion  is


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  49

this  one:  that  religion  must  be  accessible  to  all  sorts  and
conditions  of  men,  to  the  unlearned  as  well  as  to  the
learned.  If  scripture  and  all  appearances  do  not  deceive,
babes  have  even  a  certain  advantage  in  this  matter  over
the  wise  and  prudent ;  which  could  hardly  be  the  case
if  religion  depends  upon  the  results  of  thinking.  Reli-
gion does  not  as  a  rule  show  itself  strongest  in  the  most
thoughtful;  nor  can  the  reasoner  develop  it  in  himself
by  his  reasoning.  All  these  are  observations  of  long
standing  in  the  history  of  the  spirit.  What  distinguishes
our  present  age  is  that  this  old  truth  now  appears  as  a
philosophical  conclusion,  as  a  result  hard-won  and  inde-
pendently won.  Our  sketch  of  some  of  the  factors  in  this
conclusion,  imperfect  as  it  is,  may  make  more  definite  to
us  the  meaning  of  the  claim  that  feeling  is  the  essence
of  religion.  A  general  conception  or  picture  of  religion
emerges,  something  as  follows :

Religion  is  to  be  understood  as  a  product  and  mani-
festo of  human  desire ;  and  that  of  no  secondary  and
acquired  desire,  such  as  curiosity,  but  of  deep-going
desire,  deep  as  the  will-to-live  itself.  Its  non-rational
character  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  in  satisfying  the
religious  craving,  an  individual  serves  the  race  more  than
he  serves  himself:  as  in  the  desires  of  sex  and  hunger,
nature  uses  a  well-centered  impulse  to  produce  a  far-
reaching  effect.  The  religious  motives  of  men  have  con-
tained the  secret  of  political  loyalty  as  of  other  costly,
death-involving  loyalties.  If  we  should  venture  to  name
this  deep-set  desire  which  we  call  religious  it  might  be
represented  as  an  ultimate  demand  for  conscious  self-
preservation  :  ^  it  is  man's  leap,  as  individual  and  as  spe-

*  Lippert  unites  many  strands  of  theory  in  deriving  religion  from  the
fundamental  need  of  "  LebensfUrsorge."  Kulturgeschichtey  chapter  i.


60 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

cies,  for  eternal  life  in  some  form,  in  presence  of  an
awakened  fear  of  fate.  Religion  is  a  reaction  to  '^  our
finite  situation/'  a  natural  reflex  of  small  and  highly
aspiring  beings  in  a  huge  —  perhaps  infinite  —  arena.
This  reaction  seems  to  be,  at  its  heart,  as  instinctive  as
a  start  or  a  shudder.  It  is  (in  its  first  shock)  an  imme-
diate and  penetrating,  even  appalling,  recognition  of
what  and  where  I  am  in  the  universe ;  it  may  issue  in
some  sense  of  footing,  and  of  the  direction  in  which
safety  lies :  in  any  case  it  is,  in  itself,  a  great  emotional
response  to  the  felt  perils  and  glories  of  the  weird  situa-
tion. The  unlighted  vagueness  of  outline  in  this  vast
setting,  the  necessity  of  moving  by  the  most  elemental
of  instincts  rather  than  by  vision,  the  almost  animal
panics  and  animal  assurances  of  the  adventure  (as  we
see  them  in  religious  history),  make  the  language  of
reason  inept — even  false.  If  we  resist  the  impulse  to
refer  the  whole  experience  to  a  special  faculty,  different
alike  from  thought,  from  feeling,  and  from  will,  in  short
to  a  '^  supernatural  sense,"  we  must  certainly  choose  the
realm  of  feeling  as  fittest  to  contain  so  unique  and  inti-
mate a  transaction.  The  history  of  religious  agony  and
despair,  of  hope,  attainment, exultation,  the  whole  gamut
of  the  intense  inner  drama,  shows  beyond  doubt  the
locus  and  the  eternal  spring  of  the  vitality  of  religion.

Such  feeling  is  peculiarly  able  to  retain  the  position
which  religion  must  hold  in  our  living,  —  the  position
which  reason  is  always  exposed  to  losing.  There  is  some-
thing unspoiled  and  original  about  human  feeling:  it
lies  beyond  the  reach  of  dispute,  refutation,  and  change.
Beligious  feeling  is  the  adequate  counterpart  of  those
metaphysical  first  principles  upon  which  so  much  used


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  51

to  be  hung,  in  everything  that  made  those  principles
attractive.  It  has  the  same  primordial  and  original  char-
acter, the  same  cosmic  scope  and  dignity ;  and  it  has  in
addition  what  these  principles  had  not, — the  energetic
property  which  fits  it  not  alone  to  guide  but  also  to
instigate  and  to  sustain  what  it  has  produced.  Men  have
always  been  more  or  less  clear  that  the  essence  of  reli-
gion cannot  be  far  from  the  brewing-place  of  action,  and
that  the  most  sensitive  test  of  genuine  religion  is  in
its  ethical  consequences.  Prophets  have  always  been
obliged  to  recall  idle  mankind  —  keen  to  evade  a  hard
requirement — from  the  extraneous  to  the  central  ele-
ments in  their  religion.  Of  such  extraneous  elements,
rite  and  ceremony  were  prominent  in  the  earlier  ages  of
prophetic  rebuke;  but  in  these  latter  days  it  is  the
seduction  of  the  religious  ideay  with  the  same  illusory
promise  of  security  formerly  offered  by  the  rite,  that  is
the  chief  antithesis  to  genuine  religion.  Practical  and
responsible  feeling  bids  fair  to  give  a  clear  and  suf-
ficient answer  to  the  various  demands  which  are  made
upon  religion.  But  perhaps  one  point  should  be  further
dwelt  upon*

For  surely  he  is  bold  who  asserts  that  religion,  which
we  may  grant  to  arise  out  of  feeling,  has  its  satisfaction
in  feeling  also?  In  a  former  chapter  we  defined  religion,
not  by  its  origin,  but  by  its  successful  completion, — as
a  form  of  attainment :  and  can  it  be  said  that  feeling
satisfies  feeling?  It  has  been  assumed  from  ancient
times  that  these  cosmic  hopes  and  fears  contain  within
themselves  as  necessary  ingredients  certain  theoretical
questions,  which  questions  can  only  be  satisfied  with


62 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

theoretical  answers.  It  was  supposed  that  men  wanted
to  know  whether  there  be,  in  very  fact,  a  god;  and
whether,  in  historic  literalness,  men's  soak  endore  after
the  death  of  the  body.  These  and  other  questions  are
categorical  enough,  it  might  seem ;  and  the  plain-speak-
ing man  will  not  be  put  off  with  other  than  categorical
answers.

But  we  are  pointedly  reminded  by  advocates  of  the
religion  of  feeling  that  if  we  have  indeed  such  wishes  as
these  for  express  knowledge,  these  wishes  have  never
been  fulfilled :  and  the  various  good  reasons  for  suppos-
ing such  questions  unanswerable  are  so  many  good  rea-
sons for  doubting  whether  we  have  any  such  theoretical
needs  and  wishes.  These  alleged  wishes  for  knowledge
have  in  all  times  been  quieted  by  answers  that  can  be
easily  shown  empty ;  which  would  imply  that  the  wish
itself  is  something  other  than  it  takes  itself  to  be,  is  only
one  more  case  of  a  common  thing  in  human  nature —
a  misunderstanding  of  our  own  wants.

For  example :  we  have  at  times  set  great  store  on  the
doctrine  that  God  exists  —  letting  pass  as  relatively
unimportant  the  further  question  about  the  nature  of
God:  but  clearly  unless  we  have  some  tangible  inkling
as  to  what  God  is  like,  it  profits  us  little  to  know  that
he  is.  May  it  not  be  that  the  real  meaning  of  that
desire  to  be  assured  of  a  God  is  absorbed  in  settling  our
own  good-will  toward  our  own  destiny,  satisfying  our-
selves that  in  acting  morally  we  are  not  playing  the  fool  ?
Similar  things  have  to  be  said  of  the  interest  in  a  future
life,  often  so  zealously  insisted  on  apart  from  any  enquiry
into  the  possible  nature  and  endurableness  of  a  permanent
existence. Perhaps  into  these  questions  themselves  we


THE  RETIBEMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  53

have  imported  more  of  the  earthy  with  its  own  person-
alities and  its  own  time-order  than  we  could  sapport.

There  is  such  a  thing  as  greed  of  the  spirit  —  so
we  are  told  by  those  who  find  religion  in  feeling—^
which  not  only  claims  more  than  it  can  use,  but  heaps
up  for  itself  trouble  by  overreaching  its  powers.  We
learn  in  time  to  be  content  with  the  ^^  revelation  "  we
have ;  and  to  read  that  revelation  more  modestly  than
we  used,  accepting  the  fact  that  in  all  questions  of
supernatural  physics  and  psychology  the  same  obscurity
is  Ae  lot  of  man  in  aU  ages.  For  revelation,  as  we  come
to  see,  is  reticent,  and  slow  to  clarify  in  these  matters.
If  there  are  any  coherent  messaged  to  be  read,  we  must
gaze  long  into  the  glass  to  make  them  out.  We  are  more
diffident  about  lump-communications  from  behind  the
veil  than  our  forefathers  were.  To  say  that  our  satisfac-
tion comes  in  the  form  of  feeling  rather  than  in  that  of
categorical  propositions  seems  more  simply  conformable
to  the  facts.  It  is  in  harmony  also  with  what  many  men
of  exalted  piety  have  reported  of  their  own  attainments :
namely,  that  the  contents  of  religious  insight  are  inde-
scribable; that  as  we  specify  them,  we  falsify  them ;  that
feeling  alone  is  right.  According  to  these  persons,  as
religion  becomes  more  true  and  self-knowing,  it  becomes
more  silent;  as  it  becomes  perfect,  it  becomes  dumb.
It  is  our  practical  and  responsible  feeling  which  alone
.can  give  body  and  substance  to  that  which  in  terms  of
idea  is  nothing.

Let  us  not  disguise  the  fact  that  only  a  much  altered
conception  of  revelation  can  comport  with  this  religion
of  feeling,  a  conception  somewhat  as  follows :  If  it
may  be  said  that  God  in  religious  attainment  touches


54 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

and  satisfies  the  spirit,  his  dealings  are  not  overt  and
visional,  nor  verbally  expressible  without  transformation
and  risk  of  error.  In  admitting  the  soul  to  new  certain-
ties, revelation  leads  by  the  path  of  premonition,  not  by
that  of  inserted  information.  The  transaction  of  God
with  the  soul  (if  there  be  any  such  transaction)  is  not  in
the  form  of  conversation,  in  which  could  be  imparted
(though  only  by  whisper)  statements,  and  inside  advice,
direction  to  the  way  of  life,  and  true  descriptions  of
destiny  to  come.  No :  any  such  dealings  must  occur
in  the  unlighted  chambers  of  consciousness,  whose  only
report  to  the  vocal  self  is  in  the  raw-material  of  feeling.
And  when  the  attempt  is  made  to  interpret  the  impres-
sion thus  received,  it  must  first  be  projected  from  us,
and  read  as  at  the  remote  end  of  an  unsteady  beam.
We  cannot  but  find  in  this  projection  a  flickering,
uncertain  record,  corrupt  with  imagery  taken  from  the
mind's  external  store,  or  tricked  out  in  dress  accepted
from  an  older  custom  and  tradition.  If  such  is,  and  has
been,  the  nature  of  revelation,  we  may  understand  the
sources  of  the  inveterate  variety  and  dissonance  of
religions  ideas.  We  see  that  it  is  well  when  men  are
beaten  back  from  the  idea,  as  from  a  vain  quest,  to
return  to  the  genuine  import  of  revelation  in  terms  of
feeling  with  its  definite  bearing  upon  action.

With  this  understanding  of  revelation,  it  may  reason-
ably be  held  that  religion,  which  has  its  origin  in  feeling,
(of  one  kind),  has  in  feeling  (of  another  kind)  its
satisfaction  also.

Thus,  I  have  stated  —  in  a  very  summary  fashion,  but
I  hope  with  rough  justice — the  more  general  grounds


THE  RETIREMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  55

for  the  retirement  of  the  intellect  in  religion.  I  am  not
wholly  in  accord  with  the  conclusion  to  which  these
tendencies  have  led;  I  have  been  the  more  desirous  of
presenting  them  in  their  cumulative  force.


CHAPTER  V

R£LI6I0N*S  DILEMMA  IN  RESPECT  TO  THEORY

CONSIDERATIONS  of  the  sort  ve  have  reviewed
flock  to  the  support  of  him  who  asserts  that  religion
is  a  way  of  feeling.  The  intangible  nature  of  religious
objects ;  the  obscurity  of  revelation ;  the  lack  of  propor-
tion between  religious  power  and  religious  theory ;  the
direct  and  personal  conditions  of  religious  growth ;  the
identity  of  religions  beneath  diversity  of  ideas;  and
finally,  the  large  consensus  of  scientific  judgment  in
subordinating  thought  to  some  more  ultimate  reality
as  its  authority.  If  anything  could  add  to  the  weight
of  all  this,  it  might  be  an  immediate  consciousness  of
what  we  mean  by  religion  in  ourselves ;  hardly  a  com-
pendium of  theology,  but  rather  a  governing  disposition
of  some  8ort|  which  may  do  its  work  as  a  state  of  feeling
whether  or  not  we  are  fluent  with  the  theory  that  could
justify  it.

But  I  doubt  if  we  find  substance  enough  in  a  religion
of  feeling.  It  has  advantages  of  a  positive  sort ;  it  makes
religion  a  matter  of  experience,  present  and  concrete.
But  it  also  has  advantages  of  a  negative  sort  which  are
highly  questionable;  it  solves  too  many  problems  by
avoiding  them ;  it  escapes  too  completely  the  labor  and
hazard  of  thinking.  There  seems  to  be  some  natural
necessity  whereby  religion  must  try  to  put  itself  into
terms  of  thought  and  to  put  its  thought  foremost. Reli-


RELIGION'S  DILEMMA  IN  RESPECT  TO  THEORY 67

gion  seems  to  begin  in  feeling ;  and  it  seems  everywhere
to  surrender  by  an  inner  requirement  the  advantage  of
this  simple  and  strong  position^  to  risk  itself  in  the
field  of  ideas  with  all  its  instability  and  wreckage.  If
only  as  students  of  history  we  must  come  to  terms  with
this  conspicuous  fact :  that  religion  has  never  as  yet  been
able  to  take  itself  as  a  matter  of  feeling.

Especially  in  its  prophets  and  originators  has  the  reli-
gious consciousness  been  stubbornly  objective :  it  has  con-
cerned itself  with  metaphysical  objects^  with  God  and
the  other  world  and  the  laws  thereof,  with  our  remot-
est and  most  external  objects :  and  it  has  intended  to
propagate  itself  by  fixing  the  eye  of  the  mind  on  these
things,  not  on  its  own  inner  states.  Doubtless  the
prophet  is  mistaken  if  he  thinks  that  he  moves  men  only
by  the  truth  he  offers  them :  it  may  be  that  the  actual
forces  of  religious  propagation  are  much  nearer  his  own
personality  than  he  imagines,  much  nearer,  certainly,
than  these  remote  objects.  Tes;  but  would  not  the
prophet  lose  at  once  in  power  if  he  should  deliberately
abandon  his  objects  and  begin  to  exploit  his  own  per-
sonality ?  Is  it  not  true  that  the  prophet  has  personal
power,  in  part  at  least,  because  personal  power  is  not
his  direct  concern?  The  strength  of  religion  in  the
world  (so  we  thought  in  an  earlier  chapter)  depends  upon
the  fact  that  the  religious  man  is  free  from  himself.
And  are  we  to  believe  that  the  work  of  religion  in  the
world  depends  on  a  self-deception,  a  permanent  dis-
crepancy between  what  such  men  suppose  themselves  to
be  doing,  and  what  in  fact  they  are  doing?

I  cannot  believe  that  this  is  the  case.  The  thread  of
history  is,  to  some  extent,  a  thread  continuous  within


58 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

the  intentions  of  the  actors  in  history.  However  rich  we
may  become  in  knowledge  of  the  deeper  causes  of  his-
torical results^  we  forgo  all  understanding  of  history  if
we  forget  this  inner  continuity,  —  i.e.,  the  conscious
intentions  of  the  participants  in  history-making  and  their
consciously  known  successes.  And  more  than  any  other
element  of  history,  religion  demands  to  be  understood
from  the  inside.  Granted  that  the  more  exalted  the
prophet,  the  more  his  work  will  be  mixed  with  passion  and
the  more  his  success  will  be  due  to  his  intensity  of  feeling:
yet  just  because  of  this  passion,  we  shall  be  less  at
liberty  rather  than  more  at  liberty  to  translate  his  fervid
assertions  about  God,  man,  and  destiny  into  terms  of
feeling.  We  shall  be  impelled,  in  spite  of  ourselves,  to
attach  importance  to  his  metaphysics,  if  only  because
he  himself  attaches  primary  importance  thereto.

I  will  go  so  far  as  to  say  this :  That  he  who  sees  in
the  output  of  theory  and  doctrine  in  religion  only  a
natural  blunder,  the  prophet's  misunderstanding  of  his
own  psychology,  does  quite  as  completely  renounce  all
insight  into  history  as  if  he  held  to  that  older  explana-
tion of  religion  by  intentional  priestly  deception  and
priestly  craft.  Unless  the  idea  in  religion  has  some
necessary  and  central  function,  we  are  wholly  without
explanation  for  this  lavish  and  persistent  yield  of
"  revealed  truth."  And  still  more  perverse  and  inex-
plicable must  seem  the  universal  insistence  on  these
intellectual  by-products  ;  the  persecution  and  slaughter
uttered  in  maintaining  them.  Slaughter  and  intoler-
ance are  aberrations,  sometimes ;  but  they  are  aberra-
tions founded  at  least  on  convictions.  They  may
belong  to  the  Dark  Ages,  but  they  do  not  belong  to


RELIGION'S  DILEMMA  IN  RESPECT  TO  THEORY 59

the  Dead  Ages,  of  religion.  Some  right  sense  there
must  he  heneath  all  this  over-violent  emphasis  on  doc-
trine. There  is  no  possible  psychology  of  history
which  can  escape  the  judgment  that  these  intellectual
ingredients  of  religion  are  in  some  way  vital.

And  when  we  say  that  it  is  a  declining  religion  which
prizes  the  subtleties  of  theology,  we  must  make  a  dis-
tinction between  one  kind  of  thinking  and  another.
There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  congestion  of  cleverness
consistent  with  a  great  dearth  of  profound  thought.
Clever  and  intricate  theology  does  usually  mean  trivial
religion;  but  mighty  religion  and  mighty  strokes  of
speculation  have  always  gone  together.  Something  like
a  religious  impulse  is  needed  to  sustain  the  flight  of  pow-
erful and  far-reaching  thought :  and  presumably  the
converse  is  also  true,  that  a  religious  impulse  must
exhibit  its  force  in  some  fundamental  cognitive  achieve-
ment, some  Sultan's  turret  caught  in  a  noose  of  light,
—  even  though  this  achievement  may  have  little  in  com-
mon with  the  noisier  conquests  made  by  the  logical
weapons  of  the  forum.  Deficit  of  mind  must  always,  I
venture  to  think,  be  a  weakness  in  religion,  and  must
rob  that  religion  at  last  of  all  mordant  power.  A  great
religion  will  produce,  and  demand  of  its  adherents  that
they  reproduce,  some  great  idea  or  system  of  ideas.
Such,  I  say,  is  the  evident  purport  of  history.

The  intellectual  elements  of  religion  must  be  vital ;
yet  the  embarrassments  which  religion  suffers  on  account
of  them  have  hardly  been  overstated.  Is  it  not  probable
that  in  this  matter  of  theory  religion  is  in  a  genuine
predicament,  unable  to  maintain  its  ideas  in  face  of  scien-


60 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

tific  criticism,  jet  unable  to  dispense  with  them?  Reli-
gion seems  to  labor  under  a  double  necessity  :  the  neces-
sity of  making  much  use  of  thought,  and  the  necessity
of  discounting  all  thought.  Kant's  theory  regarding
our  knowledge  of  God,  immortality,  and  other  reli-
gious objects,  does  fairly  describe  our  apparent  situation.
Our  human  mind,  thought  Kant,  is  forever  obliged  to
attempt  the  impossible  in  these  matters :  it  must  attempt
to  express  its  religion  in  theoretical  terms,  and  it  must
deny  the  resulting  ideas  all  scientific  validity.  Human-
ity must  give  conceptual  form  to  its  religious  ideals  and
governing  principles,  because  these  must  hold  their  own
with  all  other  experience  and  theory :  but  since  our  only
resources  for  framing  ideas  are  such  as  pertain  to  this^
world  of  natural  experience,  they  can  never  truly  repre-
sent to  us  any  object  which  is  beyond  such  experience.
Beligious  speculation  is  inevitable  ;  yet  it  always  falsi-
fies the  religious  object,  turns  it  into  something  human-
istic and  material,  something  which  interferes  with  the
clear  sweep  of  scientific  thought  and  at  the  same  time
brings  the  religious  object  into  the  world  with  which
it  should  stand  in  contrast.  We  are  thus  caught  in  what
Kant  calls  the  ^^  dialectical  illusion  " ;  and  religion  is  un-
able to  evade  either  of  the  two  opposing  requirements.
If  there  is  any  such  dilemma  as  this  in  the  nature  of
the  case,  religious  history  will  show  it :  for  every  such
difficulty  within  the  mind  is  bound  to  appear  in  history
as  a  division  between  parties.  Now  just  such  a  division
seems  to  break  out  in  mediaeval  Europe  when  scholastics
and  mystics  fall  apart.  On  one  side,  the  scholastics  hold
to  the  theoretical  validity  of  religious  doctrines.  On  the
other  side,  the  mystics  are  more  impressed  by  the  hope-


RELIGION'S  DILEMMA  IN  RESPECT  TO  THEORY 61

less  defects  of  the  idea  in  religion  and  call  for  its  renuncia-
tion. And  each  of  these  two  parties  has  a  characteris-
tic way  of  recognizing  the  grain  of  truth  in  the  position
of  the  other.  The  scholastics  are  unable  to  ignore  the
profound  difficulties  in  religious  truth;  they  incline
(with  their  genius  for  slippery  distinctions)  to  invent
a  third  status  between  truth  and  falsehood  wherein  cer-
tain parts  of  religious  dogma  must  consent  to  dwell.
Beligious  truth  has  standards  of  its  own,  somewhat  dif-
ferent from  those  of  other  truth :  a  statement  which  is
scientifically  false  (as  a  story  of  creation  or  of  virgin
birth)  may  yet  be  religiously  true  and  binding.  The
mystics,  for  their  part,  are  equally  unable  to  ignore  the
necessity  for  using  ideas,  even  while  the  ideas  are  de-
fective :  but  as  an  upright  and  downright  lot,  they  are
unable  to  reckon  with  shades  in  the  status  of  truth.
They  therefore  take  refuge  in  paradox^  which  is  but
another  way  of  confessing  the  same  dilemma.  God  is
real,  they  assert,  yet  he  is  nothing,  infinite  emptiness ;
he  is  at  once  all-being  and  no-being.  The  other  world
is  real  and  objective  ;  yet  at  the  same  time  it  is  within
myself — I  myself  am  heaven  and  hell.^  The  predicament
in  question  is  thus  fairly  attested  in  religious  history :
the  scholastic  and  the mystic  are  facing  a  genuine

^  As  in  the  lines  of  Silesins  :

Gott  ist  ein  Utnter  Nichts,  ihn  riihrt  kein  Nnn  nooh  Hier.

Je  mebr  dn  nach  ihn  grei&t  —  je  mehr  entwind  er  dir.

(God  is  a  perfect  Nanght ;  no  Now  nor  Here  attain  him.

The  more  then  ttriy'st  to  seize,  the  more  then  f ail^st  to  s^ein  him.)

Gherahinisoher  Wandezsmann,  i.  25.

leh  selfaet  hin  Ewigrkeit,  wann  ich  die  Zeit  verlaase,
Und  mich  in  Gott  nnd  Gott  in  mich  znsammenfasse.
(I  am  Eternity  when  I  hare  Time  forsaken,
And  self  comprised  in  God,  and  God  in  self  haye  taken.)

Same,  1. 13.


02 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY


dflemma.  And  a  problem  set  thus  deep  in  religiouB
conscioamess  cannot  be  met,  as  in  the  religion  of  feel-
^S9  ^7  ^  simple  retreat  from  the  cause  of  the  tronblcy
the  necessity  of  the  idea.

We  most  find  a  solution  which  will  give  the  idea  in
religion  positive  and  unambignons  standing.  The  sug-
gestions of  the  mystic  and  of  the  scholastic  are  all  ybUt
uablcy  but  so  far  as  we  have  noticed  them  they  still  leave
us  groping.  Is  there  perhaps  some  hope  in  a  point  of
view  which  is  both  older  and  newer  than  this  mediaeval
discussion  and  which  pervades  it  all :  namely,  in  holding
to  the  simple  validity  of  religious  knowledge  while  mak-
ing a  distinction  among  our  faculties  of  knowledge  ?
The  ancient  distinction  was  made  between  reason  and
faith.  In  Kantian  and  post-Kantian  times,  this  same
distinction  often  takes  the  form  of  a  contrast  between
intellect  and  insight,  thought  and  intuition,  Verstand
and  Vernunft.  May  it  be,  perhaps,  that  religious  truth
is  to  be  known  by  faith  or  Vernunft^  a  higher  sort  of
intelligence  than  common  undlerstanding  ?

To  my  mind,  all  such  distinctions  as  these  leave  us
precisely  as  we  are  left  by  the  scholastics  with  their  two-
fold truth  and  the  mystics  with  their  paradoxes.  A  dis-
tinction in  the  faculties  of  knowledge  only  substitutes
one  problem  for  another.  We  cannot  permanently  re-
lieve a  split  in  our  world  of  idea  by  making  a  split  in
the  soul  to  account  for  it.  AH  of  these  devices  are  but
various  ways  of  stating  and  perpetuating  the  problem  ;
and  though  this  is  itself  no  small  service,  it  is  but  a
tentative  one.

The  best  hope  lies  in  a  different  direction :  namely,


RELIGION'S  DILEMMA  IN  RESPECT  TO  THEORY 63

in  attacking  the  division  already  set  up  between  feeling
and  idea.  The  advocates  of  the  religion  of  feeling  are
not  mistaken  in  referring  our  various  religious  ideas  to
a  higher  authority,  which  they  call  feeling  :  the  mistake
is,  as  I  think,  in  not  observing  that  the  higher  authority
is  itself  still  idea.  Idea  can  only  be  judged  and  cor-
rected by  idea ;  but  these  most  authoritative  ideas  are
so  much  more  intimately  related  to  experience  and  to
feeling  than  other  ideas  as  to  justify  nearly  all  that  the
religion  of  feeling  asserts.  It  seems  probable  that  in
religion  idea  and  feeling  are  inseparable ;  and  that  what-
ever valid  ideas  religion  may  have  are  to  be  found  in
that  region  of  human  nature  where  the  cleavage  between
idea  and  feeling,  never  more  than  a  tendency  to  diverge,
no  longer  exists.

The  religion  of  feeling  depends  on  an  artificial  con-
ception of  this  cleavage.  It  depends  in  fact  on  three
assumptions  (to  summarize  its  various  motives  some-
what violently )  :  first,  that  feeling  may  be  happily  inde-
pendent of  theory  ;  second,  that  theory  may  be  drearily
independent  of  feeling ;  and  third,  that  valid  theory  in
religion  is  not  obtainable.  A  study  of  the  inner  nature
of  those  states  of  mind  which  we  call  feeling  and  idea
should  rectify  these  assumptions,  and  indicate  the  direc-
tion in  which  we  may  look  for  valid  religious  knowledge.
It  should  leave  us  not  so  much  with  a  refutation  as  with
a  better  interpretation  of  those  motives  which  have  led
to  the  retirement  of  the  intellect.  This  study  we  shall
now  undertake,  beginning  with  the  first  of  the  three
assumptions  mentioned,  and  then  (in  chapters  vii  to  xi)
dealing  with  the  third  and  the  second  assumptions  in
the  order  named.


CHAPTER  VI

THE  DESTINY  OP  FEELING

TF  these  ensuing  enquiries  into  human  nature  are
-J-  often  occupied  with  feeling  and  idea  as  if  for  their
own  sakes,  while  the  special  interests  of  religion  fall
momentarily  into  the  background,  it  is  because  we  are
obliged  here  to  some  extent  to  work  out  our  own  way
in  independence  of  the  usual  paths  of  psychological
theory.  I  must  bespeak  the  patience  of  the  reader  to
that  end.

Of  this  present  chapter,  the  thesis  is  a  simple  one,
namely  this  :  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  feeling  apart
from  idea ;  that  idea  is  an  integral  part  of  all  feeling ;  and
that  it  is  the  whole  meaning  and  destiny  of  feeling  to
terminate  in  knowledge  of  an  object.  If  these  things  are
true,  they  will  help  us  to  understand  why  a  religion  of
feeling  always  and  rightly  tends  to  transform  itself  into
a  religion  of  idea.

We  have  already  noticed  how  closely  feeling  is  con-
nected with  action.  This  is  one  of  the  great  advantages
of  interpreting  religion  in  terms  of  feeling.  Some  of  our
feelings  are  indeed  less  obviously  active  than  others.
The  feelings  of  absolute  dependence,  of  awe,  and  of
reverence,  which  Schleiermacher  regarded  as  the  essence
of  all  religion,  are  of  a  relatively  quiescent  and  contem-
plative sort. Yet  these  feelings  also  (though  they  are


THE  DESTINY  OF  FEELING  66

not  the  whole  of  religious  feeling)  do  powerfully  regu-
late action,  even  if  they  do  not  seem  at  once  to  excite
action.  In  all  feeling,  if  we  look  closely,  we  shall  find
activity  and  the  guidance  of  action.

But  to  say  that  feeling  is  the  immediate  cause  of  ac-
tivity is  still  to  put  it  too  far  away  from  action.  In  feel-
ing, action  is  already  begun :  feeling  is  itself  activity.
Feeling  is  always  in  transformation  —  as  if  it  had  need
to  escape  from  itself.  Its  very  existence  seems  to  con-
sist in  a  kind  of  instability  in  consciousness,  a  nascency
and  unfinishedness  of  mind  which  requires  continuous
change.  Emotion  is  a  name  usually  reserved  for  certain
of  our  more  complex  feelings ;  but  speaking  literally,
all  feeling  is  e-motion,  a  flight  from  what  is  to  some-
thing beyond.  And  thus  all  feelings,  I  venture  to  say,
are  forms  of  desire — not  forgetting  those  feelings  which
seem  to  terminate  desire,  as  joy,  triumph,  and  relief  —
and  all  have  at  their  center  a  sting  of  restlessness.

It  follows  that  that  which  can  satisfy  feeling  is  some-
thing which  will  destroy  it  as  feeling.  As  much  feeling  as
is  present  at  any  time  —  just  so  much  unrest  and  pushing
onward  elsewhere  for  satisfaction.  In  the  movement  of
life  feeling  is  always  present,  for  the  destruction  of  one
feeling  is  as  a  rule  the  inception  of  another  :  one  feeling
debouches  in  another,  or  the  appeasement  of  one  hunger
sets  in  motion  the  springs  of  another.  Thus  emotion
maintains  a  perpetual  circle  while  life  lasts.  But  it  re-
mains true  that  to  satisfy  any  given  feeling  is  to  bring
that  feeling  to  an  end.  And  if  the  attainment  which
religion  offers  is  indeed  a  satisfaction  of  all  desire,  and
not  of  some  fragment  of  our  nature,  it  must  intend  a
living  escape  from  this  perpetual  circle :  we  should


es RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

expect  to  find  in  religion  the  destmetion  of  all  feeling
08  such.

What  is  that  othei^than-feeling  in  which  feeling  may
end?  I  answer,  consciousness  of  an  object.  Feeling
is  instability  of  an  entire  conscious  self :  and  that  which
will  restore  the  stability  of  this  self  lies  not  within  its
own  border  but  beyond  it.  Feeling  is  outward-pushing,
as  idea  is  outward-reporting :  and  no  feeling  is  so  blind
as  to  have  no  idea  of  its  own  object.  As  a  feeling
possesses  the  mind,  there  also  possesses  the  mind  as  an
integral  part  of  that  feeling,  some  idea  of  the  kind  of
thing  which  will  bring  it  to  rest.  A  feeling  without  a
direction  is  as  impossible  as  an  activity  without  a  direc-
tion :  and  a  direction  implies  some  objective.  There  are
vague  states  of  consciousness  in  which  we  seem  to  be
wholly  without  direction  ;  but  in  such  cases  it  is  remark-
able that  feeling  is  likewise  in  abeyance.  For  example,
I  may  be  dazed  by  a  blow,  neither  realizing  what  has
happened  nor  suffering  any  pain,  and  yet  quite  con-
scious that  something  has  occurred :  the  experience  waits
an  instant  in  the  vestibule  of  consciousness,  not  as  feel-
ing but  purely  as  fact,  until  idea  has  touched  it  and
defined  a  course  of  response.  At  that  same  moment
it  is  felt  as  painful.  If  we  are  right,  feeling  is  quite  as
much  an  objective  consciousness  as  is  idea :  it  refers
always  to  something  beyond  the  present  self  and  has
no  existence  save  in  directing  the  self  toward  that
object  in  whose  presence  its  own  career  must  end.

These  statements  are  most  obviously  true  of  the  feel-
ings to  which  we  usually  apply  the  name  of  desire :  for
desire  is  clearly  desire  of  some  object  or  condition  not
now  present,  and  in  obtaining  the  presence  of  that


THE  DESTINY  OF  FEELING  67

object  desire  ceases.  But  how  can  these  statements  be
applied,  as  we  said,  to  the  feelings  of  satisfaction
themselves?  Are  joy  and  triumph  also  unsatisfied
states  ?  Is  pleasure,  dwelling  hard  on  its  present  object,
such  a  seeking^-process  as  we  have  here  pictured  ?

As  to  pleasure,  it  wants  Toore  of  the  same — more
than  it  now  has  :  that  is  what  defines  it  as  a  state  of
feeling.  It  is  an  old  and  well-worn  analysis  of  pleasure
which  identifies  it  with  a  tendency  to  approach  more
nearly  the  object  which  gives  the  pleasure.  When  pleas-
ure ceases  to  require  further  approach,  it  becomes  sim-
ply a  vehement  cognizance  of  its  object :  its  character
as  feeling  is  dissolved  into  a  state  of  knowledge.  As  to
the  feeling  of  triumph  —  triumph, ''  unable  to  contain
itself,"  has  certainly  much  to  do.  It  may  wear  itself  out
in  shout  and  song.  More  probably  it  becomes  aware  of
a  destination  which  is  common  to  most  of  our  positive
feelings  —  namely,  a  social  aim  of  some  sort.  The  rest-
lessness of  triumph  will  usher  the  subject  along  toward
his  friends  or  his  populace,  until  in  physical  contact  with
their  responses  (a  flood  height  within  balanced  by  an
answering  flood  height  without),  the  internal  tumult  is
appeased  and  feeling  disappears  —  into  what?  Into
clear,  animated  cognizance:  cognizance  genially  dis-
tributed over  the  new  situation  created  by  the  event  of
triumph,  and  the  common  knowledge  of  it.  All  the
'^feelings  of  satisfaction"  so  far  as  there  is  feeling  left
in  them,  in  the  same  way  move  on  to  cognizance.
Heightened  feeling  hastens  to  fund  itself  in  heightened
consciousness,  that  is,  in  a  keener  sensitiveness,  a  more
unshrinking  objectivity.

All  positive  feeling,  I  dare  now  say,  reaches  its  ter-


68 REU6IOU8  FEELING  AND  REU6IOUS  THEORY

minus  in  knowledge.  AH  feeling  means  to  instate  some
experience  which  is  essentially  cognitiTe :  it  is  idearapart-
from-its-object  tending  to  become  idea-in-presence-of
its-object^  which  is  ''  cognizance^**  or  experiential  know-
ledge.

And  thus  knowledge,  which  of  old  has  had  the  dieaiy
character  of  feeling-quencher,  must  also  be  accepted  as
feeling-goal,  the  natural  absorbent  and  destiny  of  feel-
ing. All  positive  feeling  is  at  heart  some  marriage  quest
which  ends  in  knowing.  And  such  knowledge,  so  far
from  being  less  a  ^  value-consciousness '  than  the  feeling
which  has  led  up  to  it,  is  but  the  more  excellent  condi-
tion of  that  very  value^consciousness  embodied  in  the
feeling.  Such  feeling  so  far  from  being  less  a  **  fact'
consciousness"  is,  in  its  gliding  idea,  throughout  a
prophecy  of  the  fact ;  as  if  the  object  itself  were  press-
ing to  be  known  in  presence.  In  the  satisfaction  of
feeling,  the  guiding  idea  coalesces  immediately  with  the
object  then  known  as  present :  to  the  including  mind
there  is  perfect  continuity  between  prophecy  and  fulfil-
ment—  the  feeling  is  unaware  of  death.  In  truth,  it  is
not  dead,  but  risen  (aufgehoben) :  cognizance  and  feel-
ing are  but  different  stages  of  the  same  thing.

These  observations  (superficial  as  they  still  are — and
over-general)  ^  must  modify  somewhat  our  impressions

*  I  haye  made  no  diBtinetioiiB  between  the  Beyeral  meaiiings  of  the
word  *  feeling/  though  few  terms  in  the  langnage  are  so  highly  ambiguous.
Nor  do  I  think  that  I  have  fallen  into  obscurity  on  that  account.  Hie
mind  (we  as  psychologists  should  admit)  is  as  intricate  as  we  choose  to
tske  it — and  as  simple.  The  truth  about  our  inner  states  does  not  wait
until  we  have  found  the  **  psychical  atom."  Some  truth  about  feeling
may  be  conTcyed,  even  without  definition.


THE  DESTINT  OF  FEELING  69

of  the  pragmatic  contrast  between  feeling  and  idea.  It
18  true  that  ideas  apart  from  feelings  do  no  work :  but
it  is  also  true  that  a  feeling  does  ho  work  apart  from
its  guiding  idea.  Though  feeling  is  close  to  action,  is
incipient  action,  it  is  not  without  incipient  idea :  and  as
this  idea  becomes  adequate,  the  working  effectiveness
of  the  feeling  is  not  diminished,  but  enhanced.  If  the
idea  is  vague  the  feeling  may  waste  itself  in  spluttering
activity  with  little  satisfaction ;  there  is  economy  of  con-
duct in  proportion  as  feeling  (so  to  speak)  learns  its  own
mind.  Thus,  whether  f  eai  leads  to  wild  flight  or  to  sim-
ply climbing  a  tree  may  depend  on  the  ^^  presence  of
mind  "  in  the  feeling.  We  cannot  properly  draw  a  con-
trast in  regard  to  working-power  between  idea  in  general
and  feeling  in  general;  because  the  working-forces  of
consciousness  are  neither  ideas  nor  feelings,  but  always
idea-feeling  couples.

Instead  of  contrast,  there  is  a  very  obvious  equivalence

It  may  be  aaked  whether  an  j  BQch  aoooont  as  this  does  not  omit  what-
eTer  makes  feeling  distinctiYe.  What  becomes  of  the  color  and  qnalit j  of
our  psychical  states  —  the  nuances  of  joj,  grief,  gaiety,  ease,  kindly  ez-
pansiveness,  and  infinite  others,  which  temper  the  mind's  atmosphere  from
moment  to  moment  ?  Whatever  ideas  and  transitions  toward  knowledge
may  be  inTolTcd  in  these,  is  it  not  the  quality  and  fiayor  which  we  lose,
jnst  as  the  qaalities  of  nature  are  lost  in  the  language  of  matter  and  mo-
tion? It  is  true  that  such  quality,  in  itself,  is  precisely  what  no  description
or  explanation  can  capture  —  or  need  to.  For  these  colors  of  the  mind  are
to  be  predicated  always  of  the  whole  mental  staie^  never  of  any  elements  of
it  Feeling-tones  of  thu  sort  do  not  float  about  in  the  mind-current  like
fish  in  a  stream,  nor  take  part  as  strands  in  a  total  movement :  they  are
best  placed,  I  believe,  as  the  interest  which  the  mind  at  any  time  is  taking
in  its  own  existence.  They  are  the  total  impression  which  living,  from  mo-
ment to  moment,  is  making  upon  the  ultimate  liver.  Our  own  discussion
It  eonoemed  with  what  goes  on  within  the  actual  mental  movement :  feel-
ings as  we  are  eoneemed  with  them  are  distinguishable  working-elements
in  that  movement.


70 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  BEUGIOUS  THEORY

between  feeling  and  idea  in  this  respect,  such  that  idea
may  gradually  substitute  itself  for  feeling  while  doing
the  same  work.  The  guiding  idea  of  any  repeated  feel-
ing becomes  by  degrees  more  adequate :  as  this  occurs,
the  feeling  itself  seems  to  diminish,  as  if  it  had  been,  in
part,  absorbed  or  transformed  into  the  idea.  Thus,  the
emotional  side  of  love  inclines  to  transform  itself  into
an  ^^understanding,"  in  which  the  meaning  of  the  feel-
ing is  carried  out  in  the  system  of  ideas  and  actions
which  constitute  permanent  friendship.  This  system  of
active  understanding  is  precisely  what  the  original  emo-
tion meant  and  prophesied ;  the  feeling  which  seems  lost
has  its  living  equivalent  in  what  we  may  call  the  creed
of  that  relationship.  And  it  will  reassert  itself  as  feeling
if  those  habits  of  friendly  action  are  interrupted.

Or  again,  a  feeling  of  distrust  toward  some  person,
at  first  without  tangible  grounds,  succeeds  —  we  will
suppose — in  defining  its  basis.  Thereafter,  conduct
toward  the  distrusted  person  need  be  no  wholesale  re-
jection or  avoidance :  I  may  make  definite  negations  on
definite  grounds ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  I  may  accept
with  confidence  other  relations  in  which  the  defined  trait
plays  no  part.  Such  definition  is  a  relief ;  a  degree  of
mental  friction  disappears ;  feeling  is  less  intense :  the
new  working-couple  (lowered  feeling,  heightened  idea)
does  the  same  kind  of  work  as  the  older  working^ouple,
but  with  more  efficiency.  Knowledge  of  human  nature
tends  to  place  men  instead  of  hating  them  or  blaming
them :  and  the  traditional  impassivity  of  this  kind  of
wisdom  ia  no  absence  of  feeling,  but  only  a  relatively
complete  translation  of  emotion  into  a  working  creed.

In  practice,  we  reckon  a  feeling  of  aversion  toward


THE  DESTINT  OF  FEELING  71

any  project  as  equivalent  to  some  reason  against  it :  and
a  feeling  of  attraction  counts  as  some  reason  in  its  favor.
In  any  public  arena,  feelings  and  thoughts  thus  mingle
upon  the  same  footing ;  they  are  added  and  subtracted
as  coin  of  the  same  mint  in  all  the  actual  transactions
of  persuasion.  But  in  any  such  arena,  to  become  explicit
is  a  gain.  One  often  yields  his  feeling  to  the  pressure
of  tangible  considerations  with  the  impression  that  the
feeling  must  have  been  victor  if  it  could  have  met  the
tangible  on  its  own  ground.  The  prejudice  which  can
get  itself  formulated  in  language  has  an  immense  ad-
vantage in  the  struggle  for  existence.  Or,  it  is  known
for  what  it  is,  and  done  away  with.  However  gpreat  one's
faith  in  the  un-idead  regions  of  existence,  that  faith  is
newly-born  when  through  some  stroke  of  conception,
outlines  of  a  felt  foundation  loom  for  the  first  time  out
of  obscurity  into  relief.  The  feeling  has  been  an  antici-
patory thought,  a  fact  throughout  of  the  same  nature.

A  large  part  of  what  we  call  thinking  is  nothing
other  than  the  effort  to  gain  this  kind  of  possession  of
our  more  helpless  meanings.  Poetry  (playground  of  ideas)
is  the  form  in  which  the  feeling  or  spirit  of  an  age  wins
its  first  breath ;  and  philosophy  (idea  hard-laboi>ground)
attempts  the  complete  transformation  of  the  feeling  into
literality,  which  means  connection  with  earth.  In  all
this,  we  have  continuity  and  equivalence  between  idea
and  feeling,  quite  as  significant  as  in  any  physical
^  equivalence  and  transformation  of  forces.'  To  make  an
aspiration  or  a  motive  visible  in  idea  is  not  to  render  it
more  abstract,  is  not  to  alter  its  identity  or  its  character
or  its  pragmatic  bearing ;  it  is  simply  to  give  it  status
among  other  expressed  tendencies.  This  pragmatic  equiv-


72 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

alence  is  a  confirmation  of  the  substantial  sameness  of
idea  and  feeling;  of  the  destiny  of  feeling  to  fund
itself  in  idea.

These  general  characteristics  of  feeling  hold  good  of
religious  feeling.  Feeling  is  known  as  religious,  rather
than  as  some  other  sort^  by  the  peculiarity  of  its  objects
and  ideas.  Fear  is  a  fundamental  element  in  religious
feeling ;  but  what  distinguishes  a  given  type  of  fear  as
religious  ?  Why  is  it  that  such  fear  appears  only  in  the
human  being,  not  in  the  animal  ?  Because  it  is  roused
by  a  situation  which  it  requires  human  imagination  to
grasp.  Some  conception  of  the  Whole  of  things^  some
super-stition  is  necessary  before  that  fear  can  take  hold
of  the  mind,  even  though  it  be  excited  by  purely  natu-
ral happenings.  The  same  of  religious  hope  and  wor-
ship. The  same  of  religious  attainment,  and  the  feeling
of  assurance  which  comes  of  it.  In  a  human  being,  to
^^  feel  sure  "  and  to  know  one's  ground  are  one  and
the  same  thing  —  perhaps  in  different  stages  of  distinct-
ness. If  religious  enthusiasm  comes  to  rest  in  a  state  of
^  peace,'  this  state  is  a  state  of  feeling  only  in  that
same  metamorphosis  by  which  all  feeling  in  its  satisfac-
tion vanishes  in  cognizance,  the  sting  of  restlessness
having  been  drawn.  The  Stoic's  summit  was  apathy  —
non-feeling :  religion  also  wins  a  non-feeling  —  but  a
positive  sort  —  let  us  say,  metapathy^  a  state  beyond
feeling,  not  beneath  it.  What  feeling  was  has  not
ceased  to  be;  but  it  exists  as  a  heightened  value
diffused  over  all  experience.  The  measure  of  life  is
increased;  and  that  measure  is  perhaps  well  enough
described  at  present  as  a  measure  of  cognitive  pene-


THE  DESTINY  OF  FEELING  73

tration.  Religious  success  becomes^  I  think,  precisely
this :  an  unshrinking  objectivity.

The  strains  of  religious  feeling  belong  especially  to
that  period  of  life  in  which  one  is  working  out  his
Weltanschauung.  Conversion  is  in  part  at  least  the
grasping  of  an  idea ;  such  an  idea  as  can  thereafter  in-
fuse itself  with  peaceful  dominance  through  the  system
of  conduct  and  belief.  Starbuck  calls  attention  to  the
value  of  intellectual  points  of  fixation  in  tiding  over  the
storms  and  stresses  of  adolescence  :  without  some  ideas
through  which  feeling  can  win  an  interpretation,  ^^  one
is  torn  by  he  knows  not  what."  And  the  storm  and
stress  itself  may  be  regarded  as  a  process  of  deep  think-
ing, carried  on  by  the  whole  organism.

Religious  feeling,  then,  like  other  feeling,  is  all  idea-
material,  idea-activity.  Dissolve  out  the  idea-tissue  of
religion,  and  no  feeling,  and  so  no  religion,  is  left.
Holding  our  pragmatic  test  to  religion,  requiring  of  it
that  it  do  its  work,  we  will  have  no  religion  without  a
theory ;  we  will  have  no  religion  without  a  creed.

Religion  as  feeling  must  aspire  to  complete  self-under-
standing and  ultimately  to  a  complete  transformation
of  all  its  emotion  into  a  present  knowledge  of  its  de-
sired object,  whatever  that  may  be.  This  truth  pre-
vents us  from  resting  satisfied  with  feeling :  but  it  is  fair
to  observe  that  it  does  not  provide  us,  as  yet,  with  any
substitute.  We  have  not  yet  enquired  what  the  essen-
tial meaning  of  religious  feeling  is ;  nor  have  we  at  all
shown  that  such  sure  self-understanding  and  ultimate
satisfaction  can  be  obtained.  It  remains  possible,  so  far
as  we  have  yet  shown,  that  our  religious  impulses  must


74 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORT

continue,  so  long  as  we  are  human,  to  g^pe  for  their
own  meaning :  and  it  may  still  be  held  that  the  ideas
which  religious  feeling  makes  use  of  must  always  be
partly  mistaken,  tentative,  and  mythical.

The  supposition  that  religion  must  put  up  with  im-
perfect equipment  of  theory  does  no  violence  to  human
nature  as  we  otherwise  know  it.  It  is  a  notorious  fact
that  feelings  may  frequently  find  their  satisfactions
through  misfit  ideas.  My  iU-temper,  in  search  for  its
own  theory,  is  more  than  likely  to  adopt  a  false  one  and
expend  itself  on  some  innocent  head.  If  a  nation  is
lusting  for  war,  no  one  can  foresee  on  what  pretext  the-
ories of  offended  national  honor  or  of  manifest  destiny
may  make  fatal  alliance  with  the  belligerent  impulse.
Such  mistaken  self-interpretation  is  not  always  the  fault
of  feeling,  but  often  its  fate :  for  it  can  only  press  into
service  such  ideas  as  are  at  hand.  The  deeper  and
obscurer  cravings  and  discomforts  of  body  and  soul
must  frequently  be  diagnosed  by  the  sufferer  almost  in
the  dark,  with  a  slender  gamut  of  hypotheses ;  it  is  not
surprising  if  many  a  self-made  invalid  results  from  a
faulty  theory  of  one's  own  feeling,  fit  to  be  cured  by  a
course  of  bread-pills  or  other  placebos.  And  who  will
say  that  the  various  religious  doctrines  of  mankind,  min-
istering as  they  do  to  the  obscure  spiritual  cravings  of
the  race,  have  not  acted  rather  as  placebos  than  as  lit-
eral interpretations  and  satisfactions  of  these  feelings?
Harmless  remedies  for  the  most  part,  because  very  likely
there  is  no  such  explicit  truth  here  to  be  had  —  none,
therefore,  to  be  conflicted  with :  they  serve  their  func-
tion in  setting  the  mind  at  peace,  and  harmonizing  the
active  impulses  of  the  empirical  self.


\

THE  DESTINY  OF  FEELING  76

Let  118  be  at  one  with  our  saints,  as  in  reality  we  are
one  with  them,  in  the  drama  of  their  moral  will.  And
let  us  be  free  of  the  allegory  in  which  they  depict  to
themselves  that  drama,  free  to  take  other  allegories  as
well,  or  to  put  forth  our  own.  I  read  Augustine  with
wonder  :  but  with  the  grater  nearness  when  I  see  (as
who  can  fail  to  see)  that  his  spiritual  crises  hang  upon,
and  swing  about,  intellectual  snags  irrelevant  to  the
real  issue  —  whether  God  is  extended  in  space,  whether
evil  is  a  substance,  whether  Paul  contradicts  Moses  and
himself :  why  dost  thou  halt  upon  these  matters,  friend
Augustine,  if  not  to  delay  the  course  of  that  dreaded
moral  requirement  so  great  in  thee  ?  The  settlement
of  thy  problem,  which  looks  so  much  like  a  theoretical
result,  —  is  it  not  in  truth  an  inevitable  moral  deci-
sion, governed  from  afar  by  thy  deep  religious  feeling,
playing  itself  out  in  terms  of  speculative  issues  which
only  symbolize  the  inner  meaning  of  the  process  ?

This  well-known  point  of  view  is  quite  compatible
with  what  we  have  said  about  the  destiny  of  feeling:
and  it  can  only  be  dealt  with  by  a  direct  enquiry  into
religious  knowledge.  But  one  or  two  remarks  may  be
made  before  beginning  that  enquiry.

It  is  obvious,  I  think,  that  no  one  would  adopt  such
a  position  as  this  if  he  believed  that  a  more  satisfactory
status  of  idea  were  possible.  And  further,  no  one  can  in
reality  make  use  of  religious  ideas  which  he  believes  to
be  thus  mythical.  It  is  quite  possible  to  adopt  a  mistaken
theory,  believing  it  to  be  true ;  but  it  is  not  possible  to
adopt  a  mistaken  theory  believing  it  to  be  mistaken,  or
even  aUegorical.  Our  real  theory  is  the  meaning  of  that
allegory  as  we  understand  it,  and  not  the  allegory  itself.


76 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

Feeling  is  a  thing  which  cannot,  in  its  own  nature,  re-
main in  the  dark.  Whatever  our  Most  Enlightened
View  about  the  nature  of  religious  truth  may  be,  that
Most  Enlightened  View  becomes,  willy  uilly,  the  rule  for
our  feeling.  The  more  vehement  the  feeling,  the  more
it  resents  darkness  (and  certainly  all  deliberate  parasol-
protection)  and  pushes  for  clarity.  In  their  demand  for
idea,  our  major  feelings  rather  possess  us  than  we  them.
More  especially  the  race-old  feelings  we  call  religious  will
hold  to  their  service  all  of  our  new  and  best  insights,  all
our  detections-of-general-religious-mistake,  all  our  suspi-
cions of  subjective-intention-in-objective-myth:  they  will
identify  themselves  with  these  insights,  partial  and  unsafe-
isfactoiy  as  ikej  are,  until  we  provide  an  idea-system
which  is  fit,  necessary,  and  adequate  to  our  present
stage  of  self-conscious  attainment.

Note.  In  the  four  following  chapters  (chapters  vii-x),
dealing  chiefly  with  the  competence  of  the  idea,  it  will  be
necessary  to  consider  certain  adverse  positions,  as  of  Bergson
and  HofiFding.  These  chapters  though  as  little  technical  as
possible  may  have  for  the  general  reader  a  difficulty  which  I
cannot  wholly  avoid.  If  any  such  reader  finds  that  these  prob-
lems are  not  his  own  problems,  I  may  advise  him  to  omit  these
chapters,  passing  at  once  to  chapter  xi,  which  resumes  the
argument  as  we  now  leave  it,  stating  a  proposition  regarding
the  organic  relation  of  idea  and  feeling  which  is  fundamental
to  our  whole  view  of  religion.  "Then  in  chapter  zii,  the  theory
that  religious  truth  depends  on  the  will  is  discussed  in  detail,
both  in  the  form  in  which  James  states  it  —  the  well-known
will-to-believe  —  and  in  the  form  in  which  Eoyoe  holds  it  —
namely,  that  reality  is  the  fulfilment  of  an  absolute  purpose.
This  chapter,  again  somewhat  refractory,  concludes  the  labo-
rious controversial  part  of  our  work.


CHAPTER  Vn

HOW  IDEAS  OF  IDEAS  MISREPRESENT  THEM

WE  have  said  that  feeling  has  need  of  idea ;  that  it
can  get  no  pragmatic  hold  on  us  without  idea ;  that
it  has  no  existence  except  as  it  were  a  suicidal  one — to
disappear  in  knowledge.  We  might  further  have  said
that  except  through  idea  feeling  cannot  consciously  com-
municate  itself.  Our  feelings  we  do,  for  the  most  part,
instinctively  seek  to  share :  few  feelings  are  not  improved
hy  social  reflection.  But  if  we  have  a  pleasure  or  a  grief
to  express  to  another,  we  do  so  (if  we  can)  by  telling
the  tahy  or  by  pointing  out  the  object,  on  which  the
feeling  depends;  not  by  simply  showing  the  feeling,  or
explaining  it.  If  we  must  give  the  clue  to  the  fun,  or  to
the  sorrow,  or  to  the  admiration,  by  our  own  prior  grimace
or  gesture  (not  to  say  word),  we  know  there  is  loss  in
passage :  if  we  are  so  far  overcome  that  we  have  nothing
but  emotion  to  give,  we  are  pitiable — or  ridiculous.

It  is  seldom,  indeed,  with  our  limited  control  of  idea,
that  an  emotion  passes  from  mind  to  mind  by  idea  alone,
or  can  so  pass :  but  the  communicator  is  bound  in  good
faith  to  bring  forward  what  idea  he  can,  with  all  prompt-
ness, and  to  rest  his  case  on  that.  There  is  an  ethics  in
the  communication  of  whatever  feeUng,  binding  the  com-
municator to  the  limit  of  his  powers  to  be  ohjective,  to
make  no  conscious  exploit  of  his  own  affectedness.  This
rule  of  first  intentions  must  hold,  I  fancy,  with  extreme


78 RELIGIOUS  FEELDTG  AND  REUGIOU8  THEORY

rigor  in  the  case  of  religioos  feeling.  It  would  be  no
crime  in  an  actor  if  he  should  try  to  make  me  weep  hj
himself  weeping  (though  he  would  do  better  to  show  a
great  effort  at  repressing  his  tears) :  but  what  outrage
when  the  like  occurs  in  religion!  The  spirit  of  the
prophet  who  has  communicated  his  religion,  and  his
feeling  therewith,  by  the  circuitous  way  of  idea  and
doctrine  is  right  —  is  alone  right.  Passion  in  history
retains  its  soundness  and  force  just  so  long  as  it  forgets
itself  and  holds  to  its  objects.  All  else  puffs  out,  or
putrefies.  The  taint  of  emotional  exploitation  on  the
part  of  the  more  sophisticated  trustees  of  religion  must
long  since  have  killed  the  church  had  it  not  been  for  the
sound  objectivity  of  the  people.  Their  exploitableness
is  their  moral  superiority.

Attempts  on  the  part  of  ^  the  enlightened '  to  take  with
the  same  objective  good-faith  the  words  of  the  prophets
must  meet  with  many  defeats;  to  find  the  tenable  ideas
of  religion  is  indeed  no  easy  matter:  but  it  is  the  temper
of  defeat  to  cry  too  early,  All  is  lost!  The  mutual
cancellations  of  our  divergent  religious  thoughts  and
theories  leave  no  idea  in  the  whole  field  unquestioned  :
but  it  has  yet  to  be  shown  that  all  idea  is  thereby
eliminated  and  impossible.  Idea  has  many  lives,  is
of  tougher  substance  than  we  think  ;  and  has  perhaps
greater  resources  for  grasping  the  remote  and  super-
sensible parts  of  reality.

We  need  to  enquire  into  the  capacity  of  our  instru-
ments of  knowledge.  Most  of  our  prevalent  doubts
regarding  our  ability  to  reach  knowledge  in  religion  are
based  on  false  conceptions  of  what  an  idea  is.  These
false  conceptions  are  natural  enough;  it  is  hard  to  make


HOW  IDEAS  OF  IDEAS  MISREPRESENT  THEM 79

an  idea  of  an  idea  that  will  not  misrepresent  it.  For  it
is  natural  to  think  of  ideas  as  we  think  of  things  — men,
bricks,  magnitudes,  events.  We  cannot  think  of  any
idea  that  is  not  an  idea  of  something :  and  in  thinking
of  the  idea,  that  something  shines  through  the  transpar^
ent  substance  of  the  idea  itself,  and  our  thought  of  the
idea  becomes  mixed  with  our  thought  of  the  idea's
object.  We  need  constantly  to  remind  ourselves  that
our  ideas  are  what  we  think  with^  not  what  we  think  ofy
in  the  order  of  nature.  When  we  try  to  think  of  an
idea,  we  are  proceeding  in  some  way  against  nature,
taking  nature  backward:  it  is  not  surprising  if  in  our
attempts  to  do  this  the  resulting  conception  of  the  idea
is  denatured  to  some  extent,  and  so  misjudged.

The  first  objects  which  are  taken  up  in  great  numbers
into  our  knowledge  are  objects  of  the  physical  world,
fixed  in  outline,  mechanical  for  the  most  part,  and  finite :
it  seems  to  us,  then,  that  our  ideas  of  these  objects  par-
ticipate in  these  qualities,  and  the  consequences  of  this
impression  are  far-reaching.  For  if  ideas  have  about
them  some  inherent  rigidity  and  finitude,  if  intellect  is
indeed  a  mechanical  affair,  they  can  do  no  justice  to
reality  in  its  infinitude  and  its  incessant  flux  and
change.  The  kind  of  knowledge  of  ultimate  things
which  religion  has  supposed  itself  to  need  —  nay,  the
very  conceptions  of  those  objects,  the  familiar  terms
of  religious  doctrines  —  are  scientifically  impossible.  I
wish,  then,  to  examine  our  ideas  of  ideas ;  and  to  con-
sider in  the  first  place  the  supposed  rigidity  of  ideas.

An  idea,  it  seems,  is  a  piece  of  one's  mind :  a  piece  so
delimited,  outlined  (d^coup^e),  that  it  can  be  individu-


80 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEOBT

ally  used,  handled,  referred  to.  One  cannot  handle  the
ocean :  but  water-buckets-full,  casks-full,  tanks-full,  taken
out  of  the  ocean  can  be  handled  well  enough.  Such
water-bucket,  or  other  vessel,  has  known  contents :  it  is
a  bit  of  the  ocean,  bound,  measured,  put  under  control,
lifted  into  relief  from  out  of  the  general  wash  of  waters,
and  set  to  work.  Such  is  '^  an  idea"  in  the  general  flux
of  consciousness:  a  vessel  of  known  contents,  manipu-
lable,  destined  to  some  work.  And  to  what  work  ?  In
part,  at  least,  to  such  work  as  is  performed  bj  coins,
vessels  of  value :  namely,  to  possess  me  of  my  valuables
in  convenient,  storable  form ;  to  measure  and  assess  the
worth  of  new  facts,  recognizing  them  in  their  bearing
upon  my  actions;  also  to  serve  as  unit  of  exchange,
whereby  such  pieces  of  my  mind  may  be  passed  on  to
others.  What  better  simplest  image  or  symbol  of  idea
could  be  devised  than  the  circle  —  an  enclosed  bit  of
space  of  known  contents  —  precisely  such  symbol  as  is
in  common  use  among  logicians  ?

This,  I  think,  fairly  describes  our  usual  conception  of
an  idea.  And  such  images  as  these  of  the  water-bucket,
the  coin,  the  circle,  contain  all  that  is  true  in  our  usual
conception,  together  with  all  that  is  false.  They  contain
enough  truth  to  be  exceedingly  useful,  enough  also  to  be
exceedingly  seductive.  So  far  does  the  correspondence
between  ideas  and  the  logician's  circle-diagrams  hold
good,  that  logic  itself  may  appear  to  be  nothing  more
than  a  sort  of  space-play  or  topology,  our  thinking  pro-
cesses a  sort  of  ^^  geometrizing."  ^ Our  conception  of  the

^  Bergson's  epithet.  It  is  indeed  saffioiently  remarkable  that  our
thoaght-relations  can  be  represented  at  all  in  terms  of  space-relations  —  not
to  say  10  completely  represented. It  has  often  excited  specolation  that


HOW  IDEAS  OF  IDEAS  MISREPRESENT  THEM 81

idea  begins  to  partake  of  the  rigidity,  the  lifelessness,
the  finitude  of  these  inevitable  images.  And  we  can
hardly  better  win  a  true  idea  of  idea  than  by  enquiring
how  far  these  spatial  symbols,  circles  and  the  rest,  are
appropriate  and  valid;  and  where  they  begin  to  work
false.

In  the  first  place,  our  spatial  symbols  represent  truly
the  definite  inclusions  and  exclusions  of  our  ideas.  One
is  said  to  have  an  idea  of  an  object  when  he  can  recog-
nize it,  and  tell  it  from  every  other  thing  in  the  world.
Ideas  do  not  always  accomplish  this  infalUble  identifica-
tion of  their  object.  Most  ideas  of  actual  things  have
doubtful  boundaries  —  as  of  animal  from  plant,  or  of
river  from  brook  —  their  lines  are  less  sharp  than  the
circle ;  but  the  ideal  idea  knows  its  own,  and  excludes
even  more  sharply  than  any  actual  circle-outline ;  more
sharply,  in  fact,  than  any  except  the  boundary  of  the
idea-circle.  The  power  of  perfect  definition  is  con*
f erred  on  the  circle  by  the  idea,  not  on  the  idea  by  the
circle.  In  this  matter  of  definite  inclusion  and  exclu-
sion, then,  the  circle  does  not  misrepresent  the  idea.

In  the  second  place,  each  idea  has  its  own  changeless

some  deep-going  vital  anity  muBt  obtain  between  the  stmctore  of  spaoe  and
the  stmotore  of  intellect.  It  baa  been  a  great  point  with  idealism  ;  support-
ing the  notion  that  space  is  but  the  mind  itself,  externalized,  and  readable
by  the  mind  as  a  foreign  object.  F.  A.  Lange,  in  particular,  was  much  im-
pressed by  this  correspondence.  And  most  recently  M.  Bergson  has  thrown
a  biological  light  on  the  matter  by  reminding  ns  that  intellect  and  phys-
ical world  haye  grown  up  together  in  the  course  of  cTolution  ;  that  they
hare  been  modeled  for  each  other,  to  some  extent  also,  by  each  other;  that
the  intellect  inevitably  ''geometrizes"  because  it  is  its  primary  naturci
not  to  know  self  or  reality,  but  to  guide  our  physical  conduct  to  its  phys-
icaUy  practical  ends.  The  correspondence,  then,  has  attained  a  certain
philoaophical  celebrity.


82 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  BELIGIOUS  THEORY

identity,  sl  character  fitly  represented  by  the  circle,  or  by
any  other  fixable  object.  To  suppose  an  idea  to  change
is  to  suppose  it  to  become  another  idea.  We  could  never
recognize  an  object  as  being  the  same  object  unless  we
infallibly  meant  the  same :  nay,  we  could  never  know
a  thing  as  not  the  same  unless  we  were  sure  of  a  same-
ness of  meaning.  Permanence  of  meaning,  taken  in
total,  is  but  our  own  mental  integrity,  our  personal  iden*
tity  itself.  The  permanence  and  sameness,  then,  of  any
poor  chalk-circle,  or  world-orbit  for  that  matter,  is
infinitely  unfit  to  symbolize  the  unwavering  sameness  of
idea,  save  for  a  short  span,  and  by  leave  of  the  idea
itself.  It  is  the  idea  again  that  confers  identity  on  the
circley  not  the  circle  that  confers  identity  upon  the  idea.
In  this  matter  of  changelessness,  then,  the  circle  cannot
misrepresent  the  idea,  for  it  has  no  other  changelessness
than  that  of  the  idea  itself.

If,  then,  we  admit  these  characters  of  the  idea  found
in  the  symbol  —  its  changeless  identity,  and  its  aim  to
be  perfectly  defined  and  exclusive  —  do  we  not  also  ad-
mit that  the  idea  is  rigid,  even  as  the  symbol  is ;  and
therefore  equally  unable  to  deal  with  this  living  world
as  it  is  ?

M.  Bergson  is  at  this  hour  most  impressively  insisting
upon  the  fatal  discrepancy  between  a  reality  which  is
fluent,  passing,  ever-growing,  and  an  idea-world  which
is  static,  rigid,  conservative,  mechanizing  what  it  touches.
There  is  something  about  change,  especially  about  life-
change,  which  never  gets  caught  in  our  ideas :  this  fact
the  history  of  thought  has  repeatedly  been  compelled
to  notice. The  idea  seems  not  only  to  fail,  but  somehow


HOW  IDEAS  OF  IDEAS  MISREPRESENT  THEM 83

to  falsify,  when  it  intends  to  grasp  a  Uying  thing  :  as
if  in  fixing  it,  it  had  also  transfixed  it,  and  could  carry
about  but  a  dead  image.

Now,  I  must  confess  that  in  all  such  criticisms  of  the
idea  I  seem  to  see  pointed  out  rather  defects  in  our  hu-
man industry  and  loyalty  than  any  inherent  defect  of
the  idea  itself :  for  if  an  unchanging  idea  is  sufficiently
true  to  its  object,  it  must  entertain  every  change  and
development  in  that  object.  It  must  change  just  because
it  is  constant ;  it  must  change  in  content  because  it  is
changeless  in  meaning.  I  can  see  that  there  is  much
human  idleness  to  be  overcome  in  keeping  our  ideas  fresh
while  their  objects  are  developing ;  I  can  also  see  that
a  satisfactory  life-theory,  mind-theory,  world-theory,  will
require  of  us  infinite  racial  labor.  But  I  know  not  how
to  describe  this  labor  except  as  the  labor  of  idea-making.
The  ^^  inherent  discrepancy  "  eludes  me  ;  seems,  to  speak
plainly,  a  demonstrable  confusion.  For  that  with  which
the  ^^  rigid  idea"  is  contrasted  is  the  ^^ fluent  reality"
held  up  to  contemplation  —  of  which  "fluent  reality"
then  we  have  some  idea :  and  can  it  be  that  this  idea  of
the  " fluent  reality"  is  itself  also  rigid?  Is  this  fixed-
ness, or  unbending  idea-quality,  idea-starch,  such  that  no
valid  meaning  is  contained  or  containable  in  those  con-
ceptions we  name '  change,'  'growth,'  or  even  '  wilting,'
'  deliquescing,' '  melting,' '  dissolving,'  and  the  like  ?  On
the  contrary,  no  ideas  are  more  useful  and  more  used
than  these  ideas  of  change  by  M.  Bergson  and  the  other
authors  in  question.  To  know  these  things,  it  is  said,
we  must  revert  to  immediate  experience.  But  whatever
can  interest  in  experience  is  already  caught  in  idea :  there
is  nothing  in  experience  which  cannot  become  content


8i BELI6I0US  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

of  idea,  for  what  else  is  the  (empirical)  idea  but  selected
experience,  in  shape  for  memory  and  communication?
Idea  is  a  universal  tool,  making  no  demands  upon  its
subjectrTnatter.  It  takes  the  contour  with  perfect  faith-
fulness, perfect  transparency,  perfect  non-interference,
of  whatever  can  hold  (through  whatever  movement  or
metamorphosis)  the  same  interest.  Give  me  an  interest
in  a  cloud,  or  in  a  revolution :  at  no  point  do  I  find  my
pursuit  of  that  shifting  object  barred  by  some  stiff-joint
of  my  idea.  Give  me  an  interest  in  the  thing  you  call
reality,  and  if  it  is  to  be  met  with  in  experience  at  all,
nothing  can  prevent  idea  from  holding  it,  in  all  its  flux
or  creativity.  Whatever  character  you  give  this  reality,
in  mentioning  that  character  you  have  already  confessed
an  idea  of  it  Indeed,  it  is  futile  to  define  any  region  of
the  world  as  the  exclusive  or  favorite  region  of  idea :
for  the  only  force  which  can  confine  idea  to  such
domain  is  the  force  of  idea  itself.

I  do  not  suppose  that  these  considerations  are  unfelt
by  such  a  thinker  as  M.  Bergson.  Not  only  is  he  aware
of  them ;  he  anticipates  them.  It  is  not  impossible  to
think  change,  he  says,  but  only  almost  impossible.  It
is  counter  to  our  mental  habit  (habitude  statique  de
notre  intelligence);  it  is  like  climbing  backward  the  slope
of  our  confirmed  intellectual  direction  (remonter  la  pente,
etc.).  While  ideas  of  qualities  (adjectives)  and  ideas  of
forms  (nouns)  clearly  choose  to  mean  only  states,  still-
states,  of  our  world,  ideas  of  action  and  change  (verbs)
have  a  tinge  of  the  non-static  in  them ;  yet  they  too  are
interested  not  in  the  process  per  se,  but  in  the  terminals
thereof;  they  present  chiefly  a  picture  of  the  ends  of
the  movement,  and  a  still-chart  of  its  course. '^  L'ide^


HOW  IDEAS  OF  ID£AS  MISREPRESENT  THEM 85

du  changement  est  1^,  je  le  veux  bien,  mais  elle  se  cache
dans  la  p^nombre.  En  pleine  lumi^re  il  j  a  le  dessin
immobile  de  Tacte  suppos^  accompli  .  •  •  Adjectifs  et
substantifs  symbolisent  done  des  ^tats.  Mais  le  verbe
lai*meme,  si  Ton  s'en  tient  h  la  partie  ^dair^e  de  la  re-
presentation qu'il  ^voque,  n'exprime  gu^re  autre  chose."  ^
Significant  ^^gu^e."  Significant  ^^  p^nombre."  Brings
ing  into  some  question  that  striking  definition  of  the
idea  (though  only  of  the  Greek  elSo?)  as  a  flash-view,
or  instant  (la  vue  stable  prise  sur  I'instabilit^  des  choses).
Bringing  into  some  question  also  that  famous  figure  of
the  inteUect  as  a  moving-picture  apparatus,  dealing  es-
sentially only  in  such  instantaneous  views,  mechanically
fused  together  (m^canisme  cin^matographique  de  k  pen-
s^e).  For  what  is  it  that  rejoins  these  separate  flashes
of  the  actual  moving^pictures  into  a  continuum  of  move-
ment ?  Not,  for  us,  the  mechanical  apparatus ;  for  that
emits  nothing  but  discontinuous  flashes  (with  due  inter-
val, to  be  sure,  and  regularity.)  What  rejoins  them
if  not  our  own  way  of  interpreting,  perhaps  of  sensing,
the  succession  ?  But  hardly  of  sensing,  nor  yet  of  per-
ceiving, if  M.  Bergson  is  right :  for  perception,  accord-
ing  to  him,  rather  turns  motions  into  states,  than  states
into  motions  (notre  perception  ne  doit  gu^re  retenir  dn
mdnde  materiel,  h  tout  instant,  qu'un  itat  ou  provisoire-
ment  elle  sepose.)^  One  knows  not  where  to  look,  if  this
is  so,  except  to  our  own  ideas.  At  all  events,  the  con-
tinuous-change character  is  something  not  here  found  in
the  data  of  immediate  experience,  is  something  added
hy  us  to  those  data  out  of  our  own  meanings.  Some
idealistic  path  seems  to  open  out  here —  ^'idea-creator-

1  L'^Tolntioii  ortetrioe,  p.  328,  3me  ed.  '  Ibid.  p.  325.


86 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

of-its-own-world/'  or  the  like :  into  this  path  we  shall
not  enter.  But  must  we  not  perforce  admit  change
and  rest,  static  and  non-static,  to  full  coordinacy,  so  far
as  our  idea-power  is  concerned?

Idea  does  no  doubt  enable  us  to  store  change  in  mem-
ory, as  hardly  it  is  storable  in  fact.  Thus  stored,  we
are  able  to  dwell  upon  it,  retrace  it,  in  such  retracing
to  alter  its  rate  as  we  will, — pass  from  beginning  to  end
with  indefinite  speed  (change  intense),  or  from  end  to
beginning,  or  pause  to  take  the  time  of  its  passage
through  this  point  and  through  that  —  but  in  all  these
liberties  taken,  we  are  under  no  deceit.  Unless  time
could  be  remembered  ds  it  is^  there  could  be  no  mind ;
if  keeping  the  past  in  present  view  denatured  time,  and
turned  it  into  a  sort  of  space  —  time  itself  would  drop
out  of  meaning,  and  out  of  reality,  for  us.  A  present
idea,  and  an  idea  of  a  present,  are  not  necessarily  the
same ;  a  changeless  idea  and  an  idea  of  only-the-change-
less  are  not  equivalent  phrases.  Has  not  M.  Bergson
fallen  into  the  error  from  which  he  himself  would  warn
us,  that  of  applying  to  the  idea  the  characters  of  its
(physical)  objects?

And  if  we  wish  to  know  the  real  source  of  such  diffi-
culties as  the  mind  falls  into  in  gaining  an  explication
of  reality,  shall  we  not  find  it  rather  in  the  exigencies
of  finishing  our  idea-systems  than  in  the  incompetence
of  the  individual  idea  ?  The  paradoxes  of  Zeno  are  due,
not  to  the  difficulty  of  grasping  motion  ip  idea,  but  to
the  difficulty  of  putting  the  idea  of  motion  into  terms  of
the  idea  of  rest. The  incommensurables  are  both  in  ths


HOW  IDEAS  OF  IDEAS  MISREPRESENT  THEM 87

region  of  ideas;  the  dilemmas  arise  from  the  necessity
of  clarifying  our  ideas  by  relating  them  to  other  ideas;
eyentaally,  of  explaining  a  thing  in  terms  of  what  it  is
not.  Thus  may  it  not  be  with  reality  also?  If  it
appears  in  experience^  then  also  in  idea:  but  whether
the  idea  can  make  connections  with  other  ideas  is  not
thereby  decided.  These  other  ideas  try  to  gain  rela-
tions to  the  idea  of  reality,  that  is,  to  set  up  predicates
for  our  idea :  but  the  predicates  may  not  fit.

It  is  chiefly  our  idea-connections  and  systems  that
threaten  to  stiffen  and  falsify  the  living  thing.  To  be
forewarned  that  any  such  idea-connection  is  liable  to
need  revision  is  to  escape  the  consequences  of  rational-
istic rigidity,  without  abandoning  the  needful  work  of
system-making.  We  cannot  cease  to  observe  that  S  is
P ;  but  we  can  enter  the  caveat  — ^'  with  reservations  and
conditions,  not  yet  wholly  known."  System-making
cannot  cease,  because  in  part  it  is  the  life  of  the  mind
itself  —  expressible  as  an  automatic  process  in  part.
Every  idea,  we  might  say  (again  with  justified  psychical
mechanics),  attracts  every  other  idea — tempts  it  into
some  union  or  other,  for  which  it  may  or  may  not  be  fit.
The  number  of  mechanical  ideas  we  possess  is  hereby  a
perpetual  menace  to  the  integrity  and  virtue  of  the  non-
mechanical.  Ideas  of  life  and  of  living  things  are  thus
constantly  exposed  to  misalliance^  need  continually  to
be  guarded  from  mechanization.  This,  as  it  seems  to
me,  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  complaint  that  our  ideas
are  rigid  and  cannot  do  justice  to  reality.  We  have
a  greater  population  of  mechanical  ideas  than  of  others
— they  are  ^'  the  masses  "  in  our  mental  State  —  whence
a  certain instability  of  the others  in their  rightful


m RELIGIOUS  FEELOIG  AND  EEU6IOU8  THEORY

phee.  The  remedy  is  first,  in  simply  knowing  the  dan-
ger; second,  in  holding  the  non-mechanical  ideas  to
their  own  character ;  third,  in  producing  more  of  the
non-mechanical  sort  This  is  in  every  way  the  result  of
such  work  as  Bergaon's,  except  for  his  too  physical  idea
of  idea.

The  general  name  for  this  process  of  making  connec-
tions among  ideas  is  reasoning.  We  woold  thoefore
agree  with  Bergen  and  others  that  it  is  not  by  reason-
ing, in  this  sense,  that  reality  is  first  known.  Reason-
ing, or  thinking,  is  a  process  which  insists  first  on  con-
nectedness of  ideas ;  is  willing  to  reach  new  territory
only  from  old,  and  by  approved  trossrwork,  in  cantilever
fashion :  '^  intuition,"  or  immediate  knowledge,  is  capa-
ble (relatively  speaking)  of  ignoring  connections,  of
seizing  a  bridge  span  in  mid  air  and  holding  to  it  while
truss  and  abutments  grow.  But  in  (he  one  case  as  in
the  other  it  is  ideorwork  that  we  witness,  —  nothing
different.  So  of  '^  instinct "  which  is  often  appealed  to
as  a  more  adequate  organ  than  idea  for  knowing  reality.
What  is  there  about  reality  which  instinct  can  divine
while  idea  must  remain  confined  to  its  clear«ut  and
barren  circles  ?  If  any  real  What,  significant  of  any-
thing, then  ipso  facto  idea,  though  the  work  of  wooing
that  idea  into  our  systems  and  reasonings  may  well  be
the  work  of  ages  and  of  races  of  men.

It  is  only  in  very  recent  years  that  religion  has  di-
rectly suffered  from  this  particular  aspect  of  the  distrust
of  ideas :  for  religion  has,  in  the  main,  been  content  to
conceive  its  God,  its  world,  its  various  objects  of  dogma,
as  unchanging — in  view  of  which,  idea  may  be  as  rigid
as  we  please,  without  detriment. It  is  only  as  the  ne-


HOW  IDEAS  OF  IDEAS  MISEEPBESENT  THEM 89

cessity  has  ariBeii  in  the  speculative  mind  tp  recognize
flux  and  growth  in  everything,  even  in  God  himself^  that
loyalty  of  idea  to  its  meaning  becomes  f elt,  in  religious
discussion  also,  as  the  idea's  rigidity  and  incompetence.
Modernism  feels  it ;  such  writers  as  William  James^  and
in  popular  vein  as  Mr.  H.  G.  Wells,  complain  of  it  in
religious  context.  But  a  deeper  and  older  gpround  of
distrust  —  perhaps  at  the  bottom  of  this  very  prejudice
regarding  rigidity  —  is  the  sense  that  the  idea  \%  finite^
fitted  to  cope  only  with  the  simpler,  poorer,  exhaustible
phases  of  reality.  To  this  more  fundamental  difficulty
we  must  now  turn*


CHAPTER  Vm

THE  ALLEGED  FINITUDE  OF  IDEAS

ALL  pictures  of  the  idea  which  we  are  likely  to  frame
to  ourselves — circles,  coins,  counters,  ocean  water-
buckets  —  would  agree  in  at  least  this  one  point :  die
finitude  of  the  idea.  The  essence  of  the  idea  is  knoion
contents^  marked  off  from  the  infinite  unknown.  An
idea  is  a  mental  achievement,  a  success  of  some  sort,  un
fait  accompliy  a  usable  possession :  whence  that  which
is  unconquerable  and  unpossessible,  the  infinite,  must
be  left  outside  the  idea.  Efforts,  indeed,  the  mind  is
continually  making  to  encompass  gulfs,  seas,  the  ocean
itself;  or  let  us  say,  to  decoy  limitless  genii  into  stop-
pered bottles:  and  in  these  enterprises  certain  partial
successes  seem  always  on  the  eve  of  happening  —  some
robe  corner  or  perchance  a  toe  of  the  genius  approach-
ing the  bottle,  actually  in  the  bottle  ;  just  enough  en-
couragement to  prevent  sanguine  mortals  from  forgoing
the  quest  of  the  infinite  altogether,  and  yet  no  authen-
tic triumph.  These  are,  to  speak  most  hopefully,  pro-
spective ideas ;  and  do  but  serve  to  show  what  finitude  is
implied  in  the  achieved  idea.  It  is  clear  enough  what
bearing  this  finitude  of  idea  may  have  upon  religious
thought,  which  must  needs  try  to  think  the  Infinite:
this  bearing  has  been  sufficiently  exhibited  by  all  those
philosophers  whose  point  of  pride  is  their  humiUty  and
candor,  since  Herbert  Spencer,  and  also  before  him.


THE  ALLEGED  FINITUDE  OF  IDEAS  91

How  the  religion  of  feeling  is  concerned  in  this  issue
none  has  shown  so  well  as  Professor  Hoffding.^  Reli-
gion cannot  reach  its  goal  in  the  form  of  thought,  he
reasons,  hecause  religion  must  aspire  to  he  conclusive ;
whereas  thought,  in  these  matters,  is  necessarily  incon-
clusive. The  religious  object,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  re-
quirements of  the  religious  life,  must  possess  finality
(no  complaint  here  of  the  ^rigidity'  of  ideas),  must
furnish  '^an  absolute  and  objective  conclusion  for  our
knowledge  "  :  but  no  ideas  in  the  field  of  religion  can
claim  these  qualities.  However  comprehensive  they
may  be,  reality  in  its  infinitude  breaks  away  from  them.
What  satisfaction  in  idea  can  there  be  for  religion  un-
less, for  example,  we  can  frame  valid  ideas  of  ^^  God,"
and  of  ^^  the  world  "  ?  But  this  we  cannot  do.  What
is  to  be  meant  by  ^^  the  world  "  but  a  symbol  for  a  com-
pleted work  of  fact-finding  and  law-finding  brought  to
perfect  unity  ?  —  which  work  shows  no  sign  of  being
finished  till  Doomsday,  and  can  by  no  right  be  treated
as  done  before  that  time.  Indeed,  the  finding  of  a  prin-
ciple which  could  unify  the  physical  world-laws  alone
seems  to  be  inherently  impossible,  involving  endless  re-
treat of  the  object,  endless  regress,  endless  rainbow
pursuit.  As  for  the  idea  of  God,  there  is  no  need  to
question  completion  when  so  much  question  besets  our
poor  beginnings.  And  were  we  able  to  think  both  God
and  the  world,  this  would  not  satisfy  the  requirement
of  religion,  which  (if  it  depends  on  ideas)  must  have
some  idea  of  the  relation  between  its  God  and  its  world :
whereas,  any  supposition  we  make,  or  perhaps  that  can
be  made,  only  plunges  us  into  further  infinities. Not

1  Philosopby  of  Religion,  chapter  n.


g2 RELIGIOUS  F££LING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORT

accidental  uofinishedness,  but  inherent  unfinishableness
of  this  6od-and-worId-problem,  is  what  we  face.  By
whatever  concept  we  try  to  compass  finality,  reality
opens  through  its  wall  an  alley  of  ^'  infinite  regress/'
andescapes  — mocking.  ^'  All  limiting  concepts  contain
a  certain  element  of  raillery."  Thus  instructed  by  the
self-invited  discomfiture  of  the  idea,  does  religion  pass
(through  analogy  and  symbol)  to  its  secure  seat  in  feel-
ing, with  its  postulate  of  faith,  —  ^^  the  conservation  of
value."

We  cannot  but  endorse  this  conception  of  religion's
demand  for  finality  in  its  objects.  Have  we  not  already
described  religion  as  ^^anticipated  attainment";  reach-
ing ends  (of  which  the  world-knowing  end  is  one)  for
which  men  must  otherwise  infinitely  wait.  But  because
we  accept  that  demand,  we  cannot  despair  of  it ;  nor
resort  to  feeling  for  a  finality  denied  to  the  idea.  I
shall  not  by  any  means  attempt  here  to  do  justice  to
Hoff ding's  thought  in  its  deeper  bearings;  I  can  deal
only  with  the  one  difficulty,  —  the  finitude  of  the  idea,
the  infinitude  of  the  task  of  knowledge.

Consider  first,  that  all  ideas  contain  an  infinity j  —
though  an  uncounted  infinity.  Within  the  contour  of
the  blank  circle-face  alone  is  there  not  an  infinitude  of
points  ? — which  infinitude  does  not  render  less  serene
our  finished  possession  of  the  circle's  meaning.  In  a  tree,
there  are  leaves  which  could  be  counted,  also  cells,  atoms,
infinite  infinitesimals ;  but  my  idea  of  that  tree  does  not
await  the  result  of  the  counting  and  studying.  Every
idea,  at  that  instant  in  which  it  is  distinguished  from
other  meanings  of  the  mind,  is  finished  at  once^  from
its  inner  end,  its  intention :  at  that  instant  the  universe


THE  ALLEGED  FINrrUDE  OF  IDEAS  98

is  dichotomized,  even  to  its  borders  (as  a  bill  may  be-
come law  throughout  a  natioD  at  the  stroke  of  the  clock)
—  though  the  work  of  its  application  be  never  finished,
or  so  much  as  entered  upon. ,  No  consideration  of  the
immensity  of  the  object,  nor  of  the  long  labor  or  im-
possible labor  of  finished  acquaintance,  can  balk  the  ease
and  timeless  facility  of  the  idea.  No  one  shall  tell  me
that  my  ideas  of  Russia,  or  of  physics,  or  of  walrus,  or
of  my  friend,  are  but  feelings  because  my  ignorance  of
them  is  measured  only  by  eternal  time :  if  at  the  name
I  know  to  what  object  that  name  refers,  I  have  a  valid
idea  of  that  infinite  object.  In  international  affairs,  a
State  may  be  recognized  and  dealt  with  if  it  has  but  a
determinate  place  and  foreign  office :  all  else  may  be
problematic  —  population,  extent,  resource,  even  gov-
ernment. An  idea  likewise  has  existence  and  standing
when  it  has  a  determinate  place  in  the  mind,  determin-
ate external  relations  (distinctions  from  other  ideas) :
internal  exploration,  development,  spinning  out  of
treaty  web-work,  may  pursue  its  own  slow  course.

One  sort  of  completion,  and  one  only,  an  idea  must
have  —  the  complete  distinction  and  identification  of
its  interest  (or  of  its  problem) :  it  must  be  an  individ-
ual interest  in  a  mind-full  of  interests.  One  sort  of  fini-
tude  it  must  have  and  one  only:  the  finitude  of  not
being  the  only  idea  in  the  mind,  of  having  a  genuine
exterior,  a  wholly  mental  exterior,  of  other  interests.
So  far  as  the  idea's  object  is  concerned,  it  seems  to  me
doubtful  whether  there  are  any  finite  ideas  at  all.
Choose  your  idea  of  the  minutest  possible  object,  an
object  defined  as  being  without  internal  detail,  atom-
atom  :  this  poorest  idea  in  the  mind  must,  like  other


M RELIGIOUS  F££LIN6  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

ideas^  be  on  duty  forever^  ready  for  infinite  recurrences
of  its  object  —  which  possible  infinitude  is  already  part
of  the  sense  of  the  idea.  So  with  our  ocean  water-bucket^
which,  though  it  would,  cannot  close  to  itself  the  prospect
of  endless  other  buckets-full ;  a  vista  involved  in  its  own
limited  cubic  contents.  So  with  all  other  ideas ;  they
must  contemplate  an  infinitude  of  application  having
a  rough  inverse  proportion  to  their  own  internal  poverty.
Indeed,  I  am  prepared  to  say  that  the  chief  function
of  an  idea  is  to  serve  as  a  vessel,  or  as  a  center  of
attachment,  for  infinite  growth  of  knowledge:  that
any  idea  not  infinitely  capacious,  infinitely  ambitious,  is
already  a  dead  idea.  To  the  question.  Can  we  think
the  Infinite?  let  me  propose  the  answer.  We  think
nothing  else.

Religious  ideas,  then,  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the
general  charge  of  infinite  ambition.  But  perhaps  the
real  occasion  for  the  diffidence  of  the  candid-humble
philosopher  is  not  so  much  infinite  contents  per  $e  as  it
is  the  special  case  of  infinity  involved  in  totality:  for
the  religious  idea  (of  God^  or  of  world,  or  of  eternity)
must  be  in  its  own  way  all-comprehensive.  Ideas  may
have  an  internal  infinitude,  and  beside  this  an  infinite
swath  of  application ;  but  all  this  is  as  nothing  to  the
infinitude  beyond  their  interest:  the  dark  stretching
expanses  of  reality  left  out  by  all  ideas — not-x  to  all
of  them.

In  meeting  this  objection,  it  is  fair  to  notice  that  in
describing  this  unlighted  region,  not-x  to  every  idea,
one  has  made  it  or  confessed  it  a  definable  interest,  al-
ready an  object  of  idea. Some  marginal  interest  always


TH£  ALLEGED  FINITUDE  OF  IDEAS  95

goes  to  the  notrx  of  whatever  idea,  —  which  marginal
interest,  heaping  up  from  all  ideas  ou  any  region  which
is  noirx  to  all  of  them,  must  acquire  much  positive  weight
in  time.  But  this  observation  hardly  satisfies  the  objector,
and  ought  not  to  satisfy  him, — nor  the  defendant  either :
for  the  religious  interest  in  the  Whole  is  no  marginal
interest ;  and  the  supposed  religious  attainment  of  whole-
knowledge  no  dim  reflected  luminosity.  The  religious
idea  will  be  as  positive  and  primordial  as  any ;  will  in-
sist that  it  is  possible  for  idea  to  begin  with  the  WhoUy
as  readily  as  with  any  fragment.  The  real  source  of
doubt  lies  in  some  unclearness  about  the  way  in  which
knowledge  grows. We  must  give  some  attention  to  that.

It  is  not  a  true  account  of  knowledge  to  say  that  it
proceeds  (always)  from  the  part  to  the  whole.  The  pro-
gress of  knowledge  has  rather  more  in  common  with  the
development  of  a  germ-cell  than  with  the  building  of  a
brick  wall ;  something  of  the  whole  present  and  active
in  that  cell  from  the  beginning.  But  we  must  always  re-
ject helpful  metaphors,  inimical  metaphors  unless  we  bun-
dle them  off  in  time,  and  refer  to  the  idea  itself :  we  may
draw  a  line  about  a  germ-cell  —  none  about  a  germ-
thonght;  an  idea  of  the  universe  can  never  have  been
wrapped  up  in  small  compass  for  gradual  unfolding ;  we
do  not  learn  to  see  apace  little  by  little.  The  child's  space
is  as  great  as  the  man's,  —  namely,  whole-space.  He  who
comes  into  the  world  at  all  comes  at  once  into  the  pres-
ence of  the  whole  world.  I  am  introduced  to  a  person,
not  by  piecemeal,  but  all  at  once,  with  a  positive  im-
pression and  judgment  contained  in  my  idea  :  not  deny-
ing that  there  is  much  to  learn  and  correct  through


96 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

long-growing  acquaintance.  So  of  my  introduction  to
reality :  in  its  full  infinity  and  wholenesd  it  is  now  be-
fore me  and  has  been  so  from  my  conscious  beginning,
the  same  from  birth  to  death  —  the  same  space,  the  same
time,  the  same  natural  order  and  particularity,  the  same
history  and  social  context,  the  same  God,  too,  if  there  be
a  god,  the  same  world-laws  or  law,  the  same  conditions
of  life  and  death,  success  and  failure.

What  grows  in  knowledge  is  the  under-standing  of
all  this,  the  internal  complexity  and  detail,  middle-world
experience  and  thereby  middle-world  ideas,  and  espe-
cially the  power  to  put  ideas  together.  That  fundamental
difference  already  noticed  between  having  an  idea  and
having  it  in  terms  of  other  ideas,  between  knowing  your
object  and  reasoning  about  it,  is  here  again  in  evidence :
for  the  great  volume  and  business  of  what  we  call  the
growth  of  knowledge  is  growth  of  connection,  growth
of  treaty-making  between  ideas.  (Each  such  new  treaty-
connection  is  doubtless  itself  a  new  idea  —  as  we  count
ideas  —  and  brings  with  it  internal  development  of  the
ideas  thus  newly  related,  but  without  altering  their
place  in  the  mind,  which  place  is  their  identity).  The
connecting  of  ideas  goes  on  apace :  for  our  loquacious,
marketable  knowledge  is  in  proportion,  not  immediately
to  our  ideas,  but  to  the  couplings  we  can  make  among
them,  unions  as  of  subject  and  predicate.  Every  new
bit  of  experience,  taken  in  idea,  makes  chance  and
demand  for  new  couplings,  —  couplings,  in  fact,  with
all  previously  present  ideas :  such  a  process  has  no  end
—  of  all  possible  couplings  only  a  relative  few  can  be
effected.  Meanwhile,  knowledge  keeps  getting  smaller
and  finer,  more  tangled,  more  systematic  all  the  time :


THE  ALLEGED  FINITUDE  OF  IDEAS  97

there  are  more  threads  and  pins  in  the  loom,  more  shut-
tles in  the  air.  Such  is  the  general  aspect  of  the  growth
of  knowledge — a  mid-world  growth  as  we  have  said.
But  with  what  does  all  the  growth  and  weaving  begin?
In  the  beginning  was  at  least  the  Loom  ;  and  always
remains,  the  simple-total  frame  of  things.  Huge,  inevit-
able, abiding  Loom,  loom-motion  and  loom-law :  these,
we  may  say,  are  given ;  stuff  also  to  weave  with,  and
withal  the  command  to  weave.  Such  total  world-fact,
always  present  in  idea,  contains  the  growth  of  know-
ledge —  is  not  in  its  wholeness  any  mere  final  achieve-
ment thereof.

The  whole,  then,  is  knowable :  is  the  one  thing  per-
manently known.  Any  first  idea  of  any  dawning  con-
sciousness, whatever  its  stimulus-object,  must  be  at  the
same  time  idea-of-the-whole,  never  to  forsake  that  con-
sciousness while  it  remains  such.  But  there  is  no  lack
of  growth  and  change  in  this  idea.  Once  given  a  whole-
idea  as  a  positive  possession,  every  addition  to  know-
ledge must  add  to  it  also  ;  every  change  in  the  intricate
structure  of  mid-world  knowledge  must  have  some
answering  effect  upon  it.  Suggestions  about  the  char-
acter of  the  world  as  a  whole  are  continually  steaming
up  from  the  general  intellectual  workshop ;  since  every
idea  that  man  gains  casts  some  reflection  or  other  upon
that  world.  Every  other  idea,  let  me  say,  is  a  possible
predicate  for  that  permanent  subject ;  that  is  to  say,  a
possible  commentary  upon  its  nature  and  character.

And  men  have  always  been  eager  to  bring  their  new
knowledges  in  all  fields  into  connection  with  their  whole-
idea,  framing  new  judgments  about  it. Thus  the  repu-


96 R£LI6I0US  FEELD^G  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

tation  of  the  whole  is  always  in  the  making  :  there  is  no
absolute  stability  in  the  qualities  or  predicates  which
have  been  attached  to  it  —  as  whether  it  is  just  or
unjust;  caring  about  men  or  not-caring;  unconscious
perhaps  or  super-conscious ;  unitary,  or  struggling  for
unity,  or  a  mere  scene  of  struggle.  In  so  far  as  our
knowledge  of  the  whole  comes  through  such  judgments
from  the  progress  of  our  dayVwork,  bringing  explicit
predicates  to  that  whole-idea,  that  knowledge  of  the
whole  might  well  be  subject  to  greater  contingency  than
any  other.  And  this  consideration,  I  think,  may  help
us  to  understand  the  historical  instability  of  religious
thought.  As  the  growth  of  other  knowledge  falls  into
tangle,  it  suggests  discordant  predicates  for  the  whole ;
and  judgments  once  secure  fall  into  doubt,  to  be  set
up  again  later  with  greater  assurance  and  added  mean-
ing, or  to  make  room  for  some  truer  judgment.  Intel-
lectual business  is,  as  we  have  seen,  an  eminently  dust-
raising  pursuit :  it  seems  at  times  as  if  our  whole-idea,
which  like  all  permanences  is  non-intrusive,  were  pas-
sively obliterated  in  the  general  murk;  as  though  we
might  lose  not  only  the  predicates,  but  the  subject
as  well.

Herein,  no  doubt,  lies  the  advantage  of  the  child  in
religion  :  not  greater  power,  but  a  freer  atmosphere.
To  some  extent,  intellectual  advance  must  always  involve
loss  to  religion :  readjustments  within  the  whole-idea
are  required ;  the  simplicity  and  firmness  of  our  former
predicates  are  disturbed ;  the  solid  proportions  of  the
whole-idea  of  childhood  can  with  difficulty,  or  never,
be  recovered.  One  sees  in  part  why  religion  and  ^  in-
tellect '  are  prone  to  fall  into  contrast. For  the  reli«


THE  ALLEGED  FINITUDE  OF  IDEAS  99

gious  idea  suffers  whatever  genuine  losses  are  involved
in  all  progress;  and  furthermore  cannot  be  clearly  dis-
cerned amid  the  bustle  of  scientific  labor  :  it  needs  in  a
measure  to  be  looked-awaj-to ;  it  is  best  found  in  the
pauses  of  the  weaving  process,  a  matter  for  the  most
part  of  holiday  survey.

The  whole-idea,  then,  while  ever  present,  has  its
vicissitudes,  its  fortune  to  make  and  ever  re-make,  its
frequent  seeming  life  and  death  struggles.  It  is  no
idle  spectator  of  mental  progress,  but  partaker  of  all
mind-growth,  mind-revolution.  And  all  this  is  consis-
tent with,  nay  implies,  the  truth  that  this  same  infinite
whole-idea  is  that  with  which  every  rational  existence
begins.


CHAPTER  IX

THE  RETREAT  INTO  SUBJECnVirY

IT  needs  still  to  be  explained  what  positive  character
this  whole-idea  can  have,  if  no  predicate  can  perma-
nently adhere  to  it.  The  instability  of  any  g^ven  predi-
cate must  often  appear  as  evidence  that  the  idea  in  ques-
tion is  impossible :  on  this  account  our  whole-idea  has
often  been  put  down  as  a  no-idea :  everything,  so  far  as
idea  can  grasp  it,  being  equivalent  to  nothing.  The
mystic  has  often  been  x^harged  with  this  conclusion,
even  while  he  maintains  as  the  true  mystic  must  that  his
whole-idea  is  the  most  positive  of  all.

In  spite  of  the  difficulty  of  fixing  predicates  for  the
whole,  circumstantial  evidence  does  strongly  discoun-
tenance the  notion  that  the  idea  is  a  negation,  or  a  pure
problem :  for  hardly  would  such  persistent  ferment  and
vicissitude  center  about  ity  if  there  were  no  positive
individual  interest  and  content  at  stake.  The  most
striking  circumstance  in  the  history  of  this  idea  is  not,  I
think,  that  all  predicates  have  been  beaten  back ;  but
that  in  spite  of  all  difficulties  the  assault  continues,
unremitting,  through  all  mental  eras.  And  if  it  were
true  ( as  it  is  not )  that  in  this  persistent  attempt  to  cap-
ture the  whole  in  predicate-idea  no  single  predicate  had
gained  permanent  hold  —  all  of  them  struck  down  by
Something — we  should  still  judge  this  fact  the  poorest
possible  evidence  of  Nothing  There ! When  we  reject


THE  RETREAT  INTO  SUBJECTIVITY  101

a  predicate,  it  is  because  we  know,  better  than  this  pred-
icate can  say,  what  the  character  of  our  world  is.

The  principle  here  chiefly  concerned  ia  this :  that  the
denial  of  any  predicate  does  not  leave  behind  no-predi-
cate; a  simple  enough  principle,  but  much  hindered  by
mechanical  ideas  of  ideas  —  for  the  erasure  of  a  circle
does  certainly  leave  behind  precisely  no-circle  in  its
place.  If  however  I  deny  an  idea,  I  leave  behind  end-
less possibilities)  or  even  responsibilities,  some  of  which
are  very  near  to  the  negated  idea  itself.  For  instance,
I  deny  that  potatoes  are  red  or  that  the  Earth  is  a
sphere :  yet  these  denials  leave  possible  much  redness  in
potatoes  and  much  roundness  in  the  Earth's  shape.  So
when  discordant  opinions  cancel  each  other,  what  is  left
is  no  mere  feeling,  but  some  very  real  idea,  if  we  can  but
name  it.  Neither  the  whole-idea  nor  any  other  is  at
first  guality-lesSy  getting  its  character  by  the  attach-
ment of  predicate  after  predicate  from  without :  a  new
predicate  does  no  more  than  express  what  was  and  has
been  true  of  the  subject,  not  hitherto  say-able,  but
needing  and  requiring  to  be  said.  The  retreat  into
subjectivity  (for  that  •  is  what  the  feeling-resort  is)
means  an  abandonment  of  the  effort  and  responsibility
of  naming  the  idea  that  is  tenable,  letting  subject  as
well  as  predicate  sink  beneath  the  threshold  waters  of
conscious  existence.

A  rough  parallel  may  show  this :  religious  opinions  dif-
fer from  age  to  age  and  from  people  to  people  hardly
more  than  do  the  foods  of  these  same  ages  and  peoples.
Have  we  then  any  positive,  objective,  food-idea  —  since
scarcely  anything  used  in  one  place  would  not  be  re-
jected in  some  other? — shall  we  not  say  that  the  real


102 REUGIOUS  FEELING  AND  SEUGIOUS  THEORY

meaning  of  food  is  a  feeling  of  some  sort,  sajr  of
hunger  and  the  relief  thereof  ?  Doubtless  this  feeling-
sequence  is  a  constant  amid  all  the  variations  of  menu,
and  enters  into  the  meaning  of  the  term ;  but  there  is
another  constant,  amid  all  the  varieties  of  foods,  —  and
that  v&food — physical,  eatable,  digestible  object-matter,
as  well  as  subject-matter.  Behind  every  such  diversity
of  idea,  there  is  an  identity  of  feeling  (which  it  is  well
to  note) ;  but  also  —  an  identity  of  Idea.  Men  may
lose  their  gods,  and  have  God  left.  Behind  Indra  and
his  drivers  is  Prajapati ;  and  behind  Prajapati,  there
is  Brahm.

It  is  fair  to  observe,  also,  that  the  displacement  of  old
predicates  by  new  (admittedly  an  infinite  process,  in  the
case  of  our  whole-idea,  or  of  our  God-idea)  doe9  not  im"
ply  the  essential  falsity  of  the  old.  There  are  among
predicates  no  precise  fittings  of  any  subject,  nor  yet
precise  mis-fittings  (if  a  predicate  wholly  coincides
with  its  subject,  it  ceases  to  be  a  garment  therefor) :
what  is  fit  depends  upon  what  is  required.  My  predi-
cates hurled  at  Deity  and  the  World  are  like  broad  mis-
siles that  hit  the  mark — and  more :  as  my  marksman-
ship becomes  finer  I  may  adopt  finer  weapons,  substitute
arrows  for  clubs  and  stones,  but  still  hit  only  the  same
mark.  I  cannot  accuse  my  stone-and-club-throwing
successes  of  substantial  error,  but  only  of  rudeness,  of
anachronism  if  persisted  in.  Arrows  too  must  be  dis-
placed— in  time  perhaps  by  light-rays:  yet  each,  in
its  own  way,  may  strike  true.  Nothing  in  all  this  diffi-
culty of  predicates  then  (even  if  it  were,  which  it  is
not,  a  pure  chaos),  need  justify  the  abandonment  of  the
whole-idea  as  a  no-idea,  at  most  a  feeling.


THE  RETREAT  INTO  SUBJECTIVITY  103

It  is  not  OUT  present  purpose  to  say  what  we  know
about  the  World  or  about  God ;  we  are  enquiring  only
whether  such  knowledge  is  possible,  and  how  it  is  possi-
ble. So  far  as  explicit  predicates  of  the  whole  are  con-
cemedy  our  answer  may  now  be  put  in  this  way :  If
there  are  any  permanent  achievements  of  knowledge  in
any  direction,  in  the  progress  of  science  and  the  Arts,
every  such  achievement  may  be  the  basis  of  an  equally
stable  judgment  about  the  whole.  At  one  time,  we  were
questioning  whether  the  emergence  of  the  Arts  were
not  the  silencing  of  religion  :  we  may  now  see  that  it  is
the  emergence  of  the  Arts  that  chiefly  aids,  and  even
compels,  religion  to  become  vocal.  When  the  Arts  had
no  language,  religion  herself  was  necessarily  helpless,
un-literal,  speaking  the  speech  of  myth  and  figure,  lack-
ing fixed  objective  moorings.  The  question  of  truth
in  religion  did  not  arise,  and  could  not  consciously  arise,
until  there  had  come  into  the  world  an  independent
science,  philosophy,  art,  and  artisanry.  Now  that  these
have  made  good  their  independent  faculties,  they  lend
to  reUgion  their  new-made  powers:  religion  becomes
articulate  in  the  same  measure  in  which  she  gives  artic-
ulateness  to  the  world.

We  have,  then,  a  growing  body  of  positive  know-
ledge about  the  whole,  as  well  as  a  permanent  whole-
idea  as  subject  of  these  judgments.  But  it  remains  true
that  all  knowledge  of  the  whole  is  of  the  simplest  order.
In  the  presence  of  the  ultimate  we  shall  always  remain
primitive :  we  can  never  become  civilized  in  respect  to
God.  All  our  accounts  of  the  larger  realities  fall  back
in  language  to  the  elements  of  speech,  the  rudiments  of


104 REUGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

numbers,  the  conceptions  of  infantile  mechanics/  Child-
hood lies  always  within  our  reach,  as  we  pass  outward
from  the  world  in  which  we  move  with  skill  (because
we  have  set  up  in  it  the  stage  and  reaction-board  suited
to  meet  our  powers)  into  the  field  of  the  larger  interests
of  the  cosmos.  It  is  because  of  this  necessary  simplicity,
and  not  because  the  type  of  hold  we  have  on  these  larger
interests  is  not  a  grip  of  ideay  that  we  bow  our  minds
in  well-considered  humility  as  we  approach  the  infinite,
that  religion  belies  itself  when  it  expands  in  verbiage.
For  speech,  at  its  best,  is  only  partial  wisdom ;  whereas
the  wisdom  of  religion  is  entire.

But  as  for  this  other  humility  —  that  of  the  candid,
humble  philosopher,  who  will  have  no  idea  of  the  infi-
nite, especially  of  the  Total-infinite — that  is,  in  truth,
the  poorest  virtue  in  the  catalogue.  A  labor-saving  vir-
tue, I  fear :  also  at  times,  sadly  enough,  a  guilty  virtue,
parting  too  readily  with  its  birthright.  Such  a  thing
there  is  as  impatience  in  knowledge,  also  presumption ;
not  to  be  cured  however  by  renouncing  courage,  effort,
and  withal  the  capital-possession  of  humanity — the  idea
which  with  simplicity  embraces  and  knows  the  infinite.
Every  living  infinite-total,  and  not  the  world  only,  has
for  knowledge  this  same  unitary-simplicity ;  the  Person,
Nature,  Society,  History,  the  State :  the  knowledge  of
these,  open  to  the  ^'poor  in  spirit,"  is  the  justification
of  democracy,  of  modem  life  at  large.  We  are  not
human  until  we  claim  and  use  these  ideas-infinite,  the
essential  organs  of  a  genuine  personal  life.

^  We  may  notice  a  similar  thing  in  all  the  maxima  of  life  —  say  in
world-polities,  whose  **  depths  and  intricacies  *'  are  chiefly  the  mysteries  of
closed  doors,  whose  **  complex  principles  "  chiefly  the  ahetmse  policies  of
hoys  and  savages.


THE  RETREAT  INTO  SUBJECTIVITY  105

It  remains  true  also  —  and  what  we  have  been  saying
will  help  to  explain  the  fact — that  religious  knowledge,
of  the  kind  with  which  revelation  and  prophecy  are  con-
cerned,  is  not  commonly  found  in  the  course  of  theoret-
ical reflection.  That  which  so  profoundly  stirs  feeling
has  been  in  its  psychological  origin  a  product  of  some-
thing very  like  feeling,  and  very  different  from  common
thought.  Abeyance  of  ingenuity,  a  fostered  passivity,
reliance  upon  the  primitive  in  the  mind,  the  coopera-
tion of  what  psychology  prefers  to  call  the  subconscious
and  instinctive :  all  such  nonrthinldng  has  been  requisite
for  winning  truth  about  super-nature.  To  retire  into
the  wilderness  for  forty  days,  to  make  yourself  pure  and
empty,  to  throw  off  your  skill  and  your  shrewdness,  to
forget  the  proportions  of  men  and  of  men's  outlooks :
these  have  been  found  fit  preparations  for  the  reception
of  prophecy.  But  let  us  be  clear  that  this  negation  of
common  thought-activity,  the  intense  passion  and  sub-
jectivity of  religion  thus  shown,  is  but  a  measure  of  the
immense  scope  of  its  intention.  The  most  inner  is  called
on  only  to  reach  the  most  outer.  The  bow-string  is
pulled  in  to  its  limit  only  that  the  shaft  may  also  reach
its  limit.

Religious  wisdom  impresses  us  as  an  affair  for  the
subconscious  subject  because  it  stirs  subconscious
depths :  an  impression  which  the  psychological  attitude
can  hardly  shake  off;  yet  the  inference  is  exactly
topsy-turvy.

Nothing  can  stir  the  '^  depths  "  of  mind,  but  total  out-
of-doors.  We  call  '^  depth,"  last  dregs,  etc.,  that  in  man
which  only  ultimate  facts  and  happenings  can  interest ;
that  which  the  near  and  usual  can  neither  rouse  nor


106 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

ruffle.  Somewhere  in  each  man,  we  imagine,  there  lies
an  uUimatuniy  to  be  backed  by  all  his  energies  from  all
reservoirs,  ordinary  and  extraordinary,  —  what  can  elicit
from  any  man  such  ultimatum  and  ultimatum-backing  ?
—  nothing  that  has  not  somewhere  in  it  the  word
All!  There  are  such  things,  we  think,  as  ruling  pas-
sions, '^  deepest  desires,''  in  any  man  some  nameable  or
unnameable  last  ambition  —  what  can  set  such  a  depth
on  fire? — nothing  but  some  total  opportunity  (real
or  believed  real),  discovered  in  the  wide  world
beyond  the  self.

Drama,  dreaming  likewise,  can  detach  itself  at  once
from  reality  and  power  of  excitement :  but  objectivity  is
the  very  food  of  passion.  Passion  necessarily  realizes  ;
apart  from  some  experience  of  passion  one  hardly  knows
what /act  is.

Religious  passion,  at  length,  is  the  best  illustration
of  all  this:  for  this  is  the  mark  of  religious  passion,
that  a  specific  view  of  the  whole  makes  conscious  con-
nection with  one's  practical  ultimata.  The  ^^  deepest
of  all  inborn  impulses,"  says  Professor  Pratt,^  ^^  is  the
'  instinct  for  self-preservation ' " :  and  what  is  to  set  that
impulse  trembling?  —  ^^a  belief  in  the  impossibility  of
real  annihilation."  Belief  founded  on  what? — founded
back  on  the  instinct  itself  ?  —  doomed  then  to  death
and  silence.  Founded  on  vision  perhaps  ?  If  ever  upon
the  stupid  day-length  time-span  of  any  self,  or  saint
either,  some  vision  breaks  to  roll  his  life  and  ours  into
new  channels,  it  can  only  be  because  that  vision  admits
into  his  soul  some  trooping  invasion  of  the  concrete
fulness  of  eternity. Such  vision  doubtless  means  sub-

^  Psjchologj  of  Religious  Belief,  p.  292.


THE  RETREAT  INTO  SUBJECTIVITY  107

conscious  readiness,  and  subconscious  resonance  too, —
but  tbe  expansion  of  unused  air-cells  does  not  argue
that  we  have  ceased  now  to  breathe  the  outer  air:  —
the  very  opposite !

No.  The  so-called  wisdom  of  feeling  is  of  the  same
stuff  and  substance  with  other  wisdom,  positive,  objective,
belonging  to  our  world  of  ideas.  The  religious  vista  is
large  and  open  :  in  integral  continuity  with  the  field-lines
of  our  overt  existence  (not  narrowly  caught  by  peering
up  back-chimney-flues  of  consciousness).  Whatever  is
thus  continuous  with  the  real  known  in  idea  is  itself
known  in  idea,  —  not  otherwise.  There  are  vague  ideas,
and  unfinished  ideas,  uncertain  predicates,  qualities  only
dimly  divined  —  known  most  certainly  by  their  differ-
ence from  others,  their  negative  bearing  —  but  none  of
this  haze  and  floating  outline  affects  the  intent  and  cate-
gory of  the  scene-contents.  Whatever  is,  or  can  be,
predicate  of  idea  is  itself  idea-stuff,  whether  or  not  yet
successfully  defined  and  connected.

We  have  dwelt  long  on  the  question  of  the  idea's  de-
fects, the  most  persuasive  of  the  supports  of  the  religion
of  feeling.  For  some  touch  of  finitude  must  cleave  to
all  things  human :  and  none  of  our  ideas,  religious  or
other,  can  be  more  than  the  idea  of  some  poor  mortal.
Yet,  we  do  here  claim  that  the  ideas  of  mortals  may  en-
tertain the  infinite  and  the  total  as  their  valid  objects,  and
do  always  entertain  them,  though  unawares.  Whoever
says  that  the  foundations  of  religion  lie  deeper  than  idea
speaks  true :  deeper,  indeed,  they  lie  than  the  current
idea-level;  deeper  than  most  of  our  predicates,  taken  as
these  are  chiefly  from  the  sphere  of  the  day's  work.


106 REUGIOUS  FEEUKG  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORT

The  result  we  have  reached  is  simply  that  deeper  than
idea  is  Idea.  There  is  nothing  of  reality,  whether  the
infinitude  of  its  livingness  and  change,  or  the  infinitude
of  its  extent,  to  which  we  must  he  related  through  feel-
ing because  of  the  incapacity  of  idea.  Betreat  to  the
inner  man  (retreat  for  which  idealism  has  itself  set  the
example)  is  not  imposed  upon  us  by  any  yet-mentioned
defects  of  our  organs  of  knowledge  or,  let  me  say,  is  not
permitted  to  us :  driven  back  from  any  stated  idea,  we
must  still  remain  in  the  idea-world.


CHAPTER  X

THE  IDEA-WORLD  IN  ITS  AIM  TOWARD  FREEDOM

FROM  FEELING

ASSUME,  then,  that  we  have  overcome  the  most  seri-
ous and  actual  of  the  obstacles  to  our  confidence
in  the  possibility  of  knowledge  in  religion.  Let  us  agree
that  religious  feeling,  in  its  necessary  effort  to  win  a
theory  of  its  own  meaning,  is  not  inevitably  balked  by  the
incompetence  of  our  organs  of  knowledge,  the  ideas.  If
we  can  accept  this  as  a  definite  result,  though  wholly  gen*
eral  and  preliminary,  we  have  dealt  with  one  half  of  the
problem  which  the  religion  of  feeling  puts  before  us.  An-
other half  remains :  for  while  we  must  try  to  work  out  a
religious  theory  and  have  good  hope  of  success,  it  may
still  be  true  that  the  vitality  of  religion  lies  in  the  feel-
ing and  not  in  the  idea.  As  long  as  our  ideas  retain
their  living  connection  with  the  feelings  which  they  are
naturally  meant  to  guide,  they  are  sound :  but  idea  has
a  way  of  severing  that  connection  and  setting  up  as  a
thing  separate  and  sufficient  in  itself.  We  have  ourselves
asserted  that  feeling  tends  to  vanish  as  idea  becomes
more  adequate :  and  yet  it  is  certain  that  religion  with-
out feeling  is  nothing.  All  feeling  needs  idea;  but  it
does  not  follow  that  all  idea  needs  feeling  or  can  win  it :
in  fixing  attention  upon  the  idea,  we  are  in  danger  of
detaching  ourselves  from  the  sources  of  life.

It  is  idle  to  deny  that  he  impoverishes  himself  who


110 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  BELIGIOUS  THEORY

tries  to  live  by  idea  alone.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to
study  this  evident  tendency  of  idea  to  separate  from
feeling  and  become  external.  We  cannot  doubt  the
tendency,  though  we  may  doubt  whether  it  is  the  last
word  in  regard  to  their  relations.  The  union  between
idea  and  feeling  seems  to  me  to  be  organic,  not  acci-
dental or  external,  so  that  idea  in  the  last  resort  can  no
more  free  itself  from  feeling  than  feeling  can  free  itself
from  idea.  But  whatever  may  be  the  nature  of  this
union,  it  is  not  to  be  found  by  minimizing  the  fact  that
the  world  of  ideas  does  aspire  to  be  independent  of  the
current  flux  of  feelings.  We  must  rather  give  full  scope
and  credit  to  this  aim,  and  think  it  through  to  its  con-
clusions. What,  then,  we  first  ask,  seems  to  be  the
nature  of  that  ideal  of  independence?

In  the  first  place  an  idea  must  be  permanent,  whereas
feeling  is  essentially  transient.  An  idea  may  guide  a
feeling  to  its  goal  and  its  cessation ;  but  as  the  experi-
ence passes,  the  idea  does  not  cease  to  exist,  —  as  for
example  the  idea  of  food  when  I  am  not  hungry.  On
the  contrary,  it  seems  now  to  begin  its  most  character-
istic existence  as  idea.

For  the  more  common  uses  of  the  idea,  in  memory,
in  reflection,  in  communication,  are  best  fulfilled  when
the  idea  can  be  referred  to  without  unnecessary  stirring
of  subjective  interests  and  emotions.  We  want  our  ideas
to  be  so  held  in  the  mind  that  any  vital  connection  with
feeling  must  come  as  an  additional  fact.  We  want  them
so  far  insulated  from  ourselves  that  whatever  their  mo-
mentary importance  may  be  or  become,  we  must  first
make  an  application  to  our  own  case  by  a  separate  act


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING 111

of  inference.  Picture  me  a  destroyed  San  Francisco  :
this  is  a  fact  distantly  regrettable,  but  still  a  mere  fact :
but  remind  me  now  that  I  have  friends  there^  or  investr
ments,  and  immediately  the  bond  with  feeling  is  accom-
plished. Apart  from  such  separate  act  of  application  the
idea  exists  in  its  normal  freedom,  fit  to  be  dealt  with  in
what  we  call  the  purely  theoretical  manner,  the  charac-
teristic life  of  the  idea.

In  this  theoretical  condition  any  idea  of  mine  finds
itself  in  a  permanent  and  fairly  complete  world  of  ideas.
This  idea-world  at  any  moment  must  contain  the  idea-
concerns  for  all  possible  feelings,  past  and  future  — not
merely  for  those  accidentally  present ;  and  even  to  some
extent  for  all  mankind,  not  for  myself  alone,  in  so  far
as  I  undertake  to  understand  the  feelings  of  all  man-
kind through  my  own  magazine  of  ideas.  Only  a  few  of
these  ideas  can  be  in  use  at  any  time;  for  feeling  is
nothing  unless  present  feeling ;  hence  for  the  most  part
one's  idea-world  stands  undisturbed  by  feeling,  a  liberal
and  adequate  field  for  free  conscious  existence.  Were
it  not  possible  to  lift  the  eyes  from  the  movement  of
affairs  in  course  to  other  idea-regions  without  at  once
experiencing  the  full  feeling^ffect  of  these  ideas,  human
life  could  scarcely  move  in  any  such  roomy  spiritual
place  as  it  now  possesses.  The  permanent  and  instant
command  of  our  whole-view  is  perhaps  the  distinguish-
ing mark  of  our  species.  Whatever  independence  of
feeling  is  implied  in  this  undisturbed  access  to  every
idea-meaning  is  the  clear  tendency  and  purpose  of  the
idea-world,  and  to  a  great  extent  an  already  accom-
plished fact.

And  further,  whatever  we  can  call  a  spiritual  posses-


112 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

sion  has  its  place  here.  For  surely  we  should  give  relir
gion^  or  any  other  human  interest,  both  ampler  and
firmer  terrain  by  establishing  it  in  this  permanent  idea-
world  than  if  we  could  find  for  it,  so  to  speak,  only  a
sea-faring  life  on  the  incessantly  shifting  surface  of
feeling.  Whatever  is  to  be  established  in  this  world
must  be  established  in  idea,  for  only  the  idea  admits
of  establishment.

And  now,  in  the  second  place,  this  free  theoretical
status  of  the  idea  in  memory  and  reflection  becomes  an
ideal  even  for  the  use  of  the  idea  in  concrete  cognitive
experience,  in  so  far  as  this  too  has  a  theoretical  aim.
We  are  sufficiently  familiar  with  the  way  in  which  feel-
ing interferes  with  this  work,  mars  the  equanimity  of  its
operation,  and  warps  its  results.  This  work  must  be
done  in  a  certain  equilibrium  of  mind,  an  equilibrium
whose  difficulty  is  itself  a  testimony  to  the  strong  natu-
ral bond  between  idea  and  feeling.  But  this  equilibrium
is  possible,  at  least  as  an  ideal,  and  it  is  this  ideal  that
now  concerns  us.  Through  the  need  to  be  anti-emotional,
the  attitude  which  we  call  the  empirical  attitude  takes
on  a  definite  moral  aspect.  What  we  will  to  know  is
reality,  and  reality  is  a  word  having  the  force  of  feel-
ing-rebuke—  "  stern  reality  "  is  its  name.

Thus,  in  sum,  our  ideas  have  many  other  uses  than
those  of  the  immediate  guidance  of  present  feelings ;
and  for  all  these  other  uses  a  freedom  from  feelings
entanglements  is  as  desirable  as  in  its  own  place  a  ready
union  with  feeling  is  desirable.  There  is  a  liberaliiy
about  idea  which  does  not  comport  with  its  being  always
in  harness  to  feeling ;  and  the  idea  cannot  be  identified
with  a  relation  which  now  appears  to  be  but  a  special


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING 113

and  occasional  relation.  The  idea  is  normally  independ-
ent of  the  flux  of  feelings.  But  has  not  this  independ-
ence some  further  and  more  general  relation  to  feeling  ?

There  is  no  doubt  that  it  has  a  further  account  to
give.  This  power  to  hold  our  ideas  in  theoretical  equi-
librium is  no  mechanical  matter;  it  is  a  hard-won
accomplishment,  and  it  becomes  marked  only  in  the
higher  stages  of  evolution  and  of  culture.  It  is  an  ac-
quisition of  much  importance,  having  a  decided  biologi-
cal value  as  well  as  the  general  spiritual  interest  which
we  have  suggested.  This  status  of  the  idea  is  thus  itself
a  matter  in  which  our  feelings  must  be  in  some  way
deeply  involved.  Very  likely  the  apparently  independent
idea  is  but  a  pseudo-independent  idea ;  a  highly  explic-
able, and  even  copiously  explained,  product  of  evolution.

There  is  certainly  little  agreement  at  present  as  to
the  exact  sequence  and  description  of  the  stages  of  men-
tal evolution ;  but  there  is  some  approach  to  agreement
in  the  opinion  that  the  theoretical  use  of  idea  is  a  com-
paratively late  invention  of  nature's  and  a  thoroughly
practical  and  instrumental  affair.  Primitive  idea-making
is  seemingly  most  un-theoretical ;  and  developed  idea-
making  is  at  bottom  the  same,  though  under  high  dis-
guise. There  is  a  well-known  theory  to  the  effect  that
all  ideas,  in  the  last  resort,  mean  some  action  or  plan
of  action;  so  that  in  their  very  meanings  they  are  bound
up  with  the  feelings  which  normally  announce  and  ac-
company those  actions.  Through  whatever  remote  and
devious  paths  the  idea  in  question  finds  its  way  into
practice,  its  whole  significance  can  be  reduced  to  the
difference  in  conduct  which  belief  in  its  object  tends  to


114 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  REUGIOUS  THEORY

provoke.  Idea  meaDs  action  or  purpose.  This  we  may
call  the  action-theory  of  idea.  In  this  theory  I  do  not
find  any  complete  satisfaction ;  yet  it  moves  so  far  in  the
right  direction,  in  bringing  the  theoretical  idea  into
relation  with  feeling,  that  it  wiU  be  well  to  follow  its  path
and  define  our  own  belief  with  reference  to  it.  Let  me
then  bring  to  mind  a  typical  sketch  of  the  evolution  of
the  apparently  feeling-free  idea,  as  interpreted  by  this
action-theory.

When  the  world  may  be  simply  classified  for  any  or-
ganism into  the  eatable  and  the  non-eatable,  the  terri-
ble and  the  non-terrible,  idea  directly  means  action,  and
idea-difference  means  action-difference.  Development,
which  means  at  each  stage  dealing  with  a  bigger  world,
must  bring  into  view  objects  whose  bearing  on  action
is  more  and  more  indirect  and  distant,  as  follows :

First,  we  must  acquire  ideas  of  ways  and  means j  not
of  ends  only.  Before  we  can  eat  we  must  chase,  and
long  series  of  signs  and  way-marks  must  be  added  to
our  idea-stock  —  all  practical  enough,  but  without  orig^
inal  interest  in  themselves.

Then  it  appears  that  some  things  are  means  to  more
than  one  end.  The  same  path  leads  home,  and  also  leads
to  water ;  the  same  water  may  be  source  of  food  supply
and  drink  supply.  In  such  ideas  the  various  suggestions
of  action  tend  to  cancel  or  inhibit  each  other.  Many-
purposes  may  seem  to  the  mind  much  the  same  as  no-
purpose:  here  begins  the  apparently  action-free  idea.
Of  this  sort  are  most  of  our  present  stock  of  substan-
tive ideas,  because  nothing  concrete  has  its  value  all  in
one  direction.  And  further,  in  all  real  objects,  as  in  all
real  men,  there  is  a  mixture  of  benefit  and  injury. The


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING 115

action-value  of  any  concrete  object  taken  by  itself  is
nearly  neutral,  a  g^ey  in  which  all  colors  mix.

My  world  extends  in  time  and  not  in  space  only :  and
as  memory  and  prudence  accompany  the  widening  of
my  world  in  its  time-extent,  I  interest  myself  in  possi-
ble values  J  and  not  alone  in  actual  values.  Every  con-
crete thing,  under  such  a  broadened  area  of  purpose,
has  a  speculative  importance.  Thus  arises  the  idea  of  a
thing  J  the  most  finished  achievement  of  our  assumed
attitude  of  indifference.  The  thing  has  no  defined  sug-
gestions of  action  ;  its  reputation  is  all  to  be  made ;  our
value-judgment  is  perfectly  reserved;  we  have  become,
to  all  appearances,  purely  theoretical.

Two  new  emotions,  caution  and  curiosity,  mark  the
upper  reaches  of  this  development;  indeed,  they  are
probably  provided  by  nature  fairly  early,  but  come  to
flower  late  in  that  feeling  which  is  sometimes  called  the
love  of  knowledge,  which  interests  itself  in  things  osten-
sibly for  no  other  reason  than  that  they  exist.  But  this
love  of  knowledge,  like  all  preceding  stages  of  recession
from  the  immediately  useful,  is  still  practical ;  it  is  best
regarded,  perhaps,  as  a  form  of  the  love  of  power,  which
in  acquiring  new  data  feels  a  diffused  delight  hailing
remotely  from  the  sense  of  possible  action.

'^  Dispassionate  investigation  "  is  an  office  created  by
this  practical  curiosity.  It  is  the  best  value-policy  to
treat  our  world  as  if  we  were  interested  in  it  for  its  own
sake.  But  dramatic  self-sacrifice  like  this  does  not  con-
ceal the  fundamental  relation  of  all  meanings  to  feel-
ings. Is  it  not  a  commonplace  of  experimental  psychol-
ogy that  action-shadows  and  fringes  attend  all  ideas  at
all  times; are  there  not  incipient,  tell-tale  muscular


116 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORT

movements  always  to  be  discovered  accompanying  all
thinking-movements,  inhibited,  but  none  the  less  verifi-
able? Supporting  the  proposal  that  some  motor-outray-
ing  is  the  essential  meaning  of  every  idea.

Theoretic  use  of  idea,  then,  is  a  use  in  which  we  say
to  the  idea,  in  effect,  ^^Action-meaning — yes,  but  not
now.**  And  in  this  power  of  restraint  or  inhibition  we
are  mightily  aided  by  a  growing  social  experience,  which
lends  much  practical  significance  to  the  attitude,  ^'Ae-
tion-meaning — yes,  but  not  mine.**  Society  imposes
upon  me  the  habit  of  regarding  actions  through  the  eyes
and  muscles  of  others :  I  learn  to  regard  objects  irre-
sponsibly, as  one  reads  the  newspaper.  There  is  much
that  excites  action-impulse,  —  but  it  is  not  my  affair,  and
I  check  myself.  The  unmoving  idea,  the  idea  regarded
theoretically,  is  simply  in  a  socialized  condition :  it  is  set
over  into  the  world  of  an  actor  who  is,  in  thought,  some
one  else,  any  one  else  than  myself.

Thus  we  understand  how,  on  purely  practical  consid-
erations, it  comes  about  that  we  have  a  pseudo-independ-
ent world  of  ideas.  Feeling  does  not  markedly  accom-
pany a  thought  except  in  so  far  as  that  thought  touches
the  springs  of  my  own  musculature :  feeling  is  the  idea
doing  work  in  me.  By  whatever  policy  I  can  prevent
this  motor-connection  from  being  made,  I  add  to  my
power  over  the  theoretic  idea.  But  in  all  such  theoretic
status,  we  have  to  recognize  at  bottom  the  fundamental
action-meaning  held  in  abeyance,  and  for  a  limited  dura-
tion. All  theory  is  sustained  throughout  by  a  powerful
current  of  feeling,  the  interest  in  possible  action :  and  any
one  active  impulse  is  prevented  from  displaying  itself
only  by  other  impulses  which  for  the  time  rule  my  assent-


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING 117

This  is  a  crude  and  ovei^simple  account  of  the  action-
theory  of  idea-meaning,  such  as  I  will  attribute  to  no
one  thinker.  For  our  purposes  it  sufficiently  represents
the  view  in  question.

Suggestive  of  much  truth  is  this  evolutionary  pic-
ture ;  showing  the  existence  of  some  close  bond  between
all  idea  and  all  action :  yet  not  on  the  whole  a  just  picture.
It  seems  to  reduce  the  idea  everywhere  to  the  service
of  action :  but  in  all  justice  it  only  shows  the  idea  in
its  struggle  for  independence  hampered  at  the  edges
by  the  persistent  fringes  of  action.  The  rightful  infer-
ence, I  venture  to  say,  from  such  evolution-tracing  must
show  idea  connected  with  feeling  universally  indeed  —
but  still  externally y  as  to  something  intrinsically  di£Fer-
ent.  Idea,  we  find,  is  always  accompanied  by  feeling:
will  have  various  feeling^promptings,  hints  of  valuable
action,  associated  with  it  —  by  way  of  annex ;  but  still
always  as  additional  and  extraneous  fact.  Every  idea-
object  must  indeed  have  some  appeal  to  the  imagina-
tion, its  vividness  depending  largely  on  these  communi-
cating rills  of  value-fancy,  more  or  less  overt.  But  the
idea-meaning  remains  that-uponrwhich  these  value-fan-
cies turn,  that-from-which  these  action-vistas  open  out:
is  itself  something  else  than  these  fringe-leadings ;  can-
not by  any  evidence  so  far  brought  forward  be  identi-
fied with  them,  as  value-meaning  or  action-meaning.

From  the  beginning,  our  ideas  give  cues  to  action,  but
they  give,  it  seems,  always  somewhat  more  than  the  cue :
and  in  this  somewhat-more  they  seek  to  lodg^  their
meaning — not  in  the  accompanying  cue  to  action.  Thus
the  idea  of  wine  carries  with  it  very  definite  suggestion


118 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

of  action  —  wine  is  something  to  be  drunk  :  yet  wine
cannot  be  so  defined  and  identified.  Wine  must  be  de-
fined, officially  and  otherwise,  by  its  relation  to  the  grape,
ultimately  by  its  root  in  nature :  apart  from  this  particu-
lar source  in  nature  wine  is  not  wine,  though  perfectly
imitating  all  possible  wine-feelings  and  wine-reactions.
To  lodge  meanings  somewhere  in  Nature  seems  to  g^r^
antee  their  genuineness ;  as  if  all  meanings  must  be
made  to  touch  base  in  a  region  of  indifference  before
they  may  spin  lawful  alliances  with  feeling  and  action.

Nature  is  the  typical  region  for  the  feeling-free
anchorage  of  the  meanings  of  ideas.  But  this  region  of
indifference  can  be  more  generally  described.  If  we
have  to  make  a  distinction  between  ideas  (as  of  wine  from
vinegar,  friend  from  foe)  we  can  do  this  only  by  mak-
ing, or  having,  an  idea  of  the  common  ground  which
these  objects  occupy:  which  common  basis  (common
man-shape  of  friend  and  foe,  common  white  granule  mass
of  salt  and  sugar),  precisely  not  to  be  acted  upon,
becomes  the  refuge  of  hesitation.  Refuge  of  hesitation,
however,  just  because  common  ground,  will  constitute
the  stem  from  which  the  divergent  idea-meanings  must
spring.  Whatever  the  impulsive  foreground  of  idea,
there  will  thus  necessarily  be  a  non-impulsive  back-
ground, and  in  this  our  idea-meanings  will  rest.^

This  non-impulsive  background  gives  its  character
to  the  foreground  also  :  our  action-cues  are  but  features
belonging  to  it,  only  fortunately  and  accidentally  avail-

^  In  symbol :  we  distinguish  between  zHSonduct  and  y-conduct,  not  bj
means  simply  of  or-idea  and  y-idea  ;  but  by  means  first  of  a  non-motor  idea,
A,  capable  of  the  yarieties  Ax  and  Ay.  The  ^-idea  is,  in  practice,  only
relatively  non-motor  ;  bat  since  the  formula  is  entirely  general,  it  indicates
an  ultimate  purely  non-motor  basis  of  meanings.


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING 119

able  for  our  discriminations.  Through  serving  all  idea-
differencesy  this  background  looms  large ;  background
and  all  foregrounds  merge  into  one  vast  non-impulsive
Worldrohjecty  infinite  complex  magazine  of  object-fields
and  field-contents: — space-field,  cosmic  force-field,  spec-
trum-series, tone-scale,  efEort-scale ;  human-desire-gamut,
too,  taken  as  objective  fact;  social  scale,  moral-value
field,  and  many  others,  together  with  all  their  contents
and  the  motions  thereof ;  all  motions  and  changes  of
contents  against  one  ultimate  background-field  of
infinite  time ;  all  contents  rooted  in  one  ultimate  back-
ground-stuff, which  we  may  call  —  problematically —
Substance.  Infinite  complex  magazine,  capable  of  serv-
ing all  action -differences  actual  and  possible,  yet  with
infinite  unused  resource,  superior  to  and  apart  from  all
such  use,  —  essentially  unused  by  it.  Such  World-
object,  in  its  complexity,  is  partially  summarized  in  our
idea  of  Nature ;  more  completely,  as  objective  Reality,
whose  problematic  Substance  sets  the  last  goal  for  all
idea-meanings.

In  such  external  World-fact  do  our  idea-meanings  seek
lodgment ;  as  if,  I  repeat,  it  were  necessary  to  touch  the
passionless  ground  of  things,  before  affiliating  with  any
particular  actions  and  feelings.  The  structure  of  the
whole  system  of  ideas  and  actions  becomes  indirect,
triangular:  there  may  be  no  direct  passage  from  per-
ception to  action,  but  perception  must  first  be  related
to  substance,  and  from  substance  pass  on  to  action  —
with  freedom  of  will.

Now  this  idea  of  a  non-impulsive  background,  which
at  last  gets the  mysterious  name  of Substance,  the


12D RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  REUGIOUS  THEORY

external  goal  of  all  idea-meanings,  is  tn  no  wise  a  re-
sult  of  development.  It  is  rather  the  aboriginal  fact  of
oonscioiisness.  Environment,  and  environment  complex-
ity, have  extended  immeasurably ;  but  externality  has
become  no  whit  more  external  From  the  beginning,
our  idea-making  must  have  held  itself  in  independence
of  impulse.  For  without  such  prior  independence,  action
development  could  not  so  much  as  begin.  We  are  able
to  find  cues  for  divergent  lines  of  action,  because  we
have  already  been  interested  in  something  else  than
the  actively  important  features  of  our  world.  *

Nature  has  early  separated  the  organs  of  perception
from  the  organs  of  action  ;  and  in  the  freedom  of  per-
ception, with  its  liberality  of  interest,  care-free  play  and
exploration,  idea-making  has  freedom  also.  Idea-outlin-
ing follows  shapes,  perceptive  unities  and  uses,  not  the
unities  and  uses  of  our  own  action.  Perception  shows
us,  we  think,  the  immediate  clothing  of  Substance ;  and
shares  in  that  externality  which  idea-meaning  requires.
Perception  is  no  doubt  to  be  regarded  biologically  as  a
means  of  adaptation  :  but  as  such  alone  it  must  be  judged
immeasurably  wasteful,  supplying  us  with  entire  fields,
infinite  manifolds  of  objects,  in  order  that  a  few  dis-
criminations may  be  made  (supplying  also  that  whole
super-useful  region  of  perceptive  beauty,  whose  extraor-

1  Espeoially  U  tbe  idea  of  the  thing-with-yarions-iiteB  yisibly  depend-
ent on  eooh  liberality  of  interest.  For  if  idea  meant  to  ni  just  so  macb  ao-
tion-plan  and  nothing  morei  action  routes  might  cross  ad  libitum  without
oyer  exciting  any  knowledge  of  the  fact  of  their  crossing.  The  notion  of  an
intersection  presupposes  an  interest  in  the  lines  for  their  own  sake,  in  some
independence  of  the  ends  reached  by  those  lines.  Thus  we  know  toater  as
the  same  thing  in  this  use  and  in  that  only  because  in  any  use  of  it  char-
acters other  than  those  used  have  freely  engaged  our  attention  ;  qualities
appealing  to  eye,  touch,  and  the  like.


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING 121

dinary  art-deyelopment  escapes  so  far  from  biological
explanation).

In  spite  of  all  important  evidence  showing  to  what
extent  perception-interest  is  governed  by  active-interest,
it  remains  true  that  in  idea-outlining  perception  has  a
prior  and  independent  head.  So  much  so,  that  when  we
make  to  ourselves  ideas  of  activities  themselves,  we  in-
cline to  make  them  in  terms  of  '' external"  perceptions,
rather  than  in  their  own  proper  coin  (for  instance,  our
idea  of  walkingy  which  represents  to  us  commonly  walk-
ing-as-seen, attribute  of  outer  Substance,  rather  than
walking^-inwardly-known  in  terms  of  feeling  and
impulsiveness,  attribute  of  Self).  Feeling  and  action
find  in  the  perception-substance-world  some  requisite
mise-en-sc^ne ;  varieties  of  feeling  and  action  find  here
a  unity,  coherence,  relatedness,  intelligibility,  which  on
their  own  ground  they  lack ;  especially,  they  find  here
unlimited  ro<ym  to  grow  in,  the  dome  of  perception  never
narrowed  down  to  the  scope,  or  even  the  prospective
scope,  of  conduct.

It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  ideas  we  make
as  ideas  of  single  objects  should  show  no  close  corresr
pondence  to  action-need;  should  share  in  the  super-
abundance of  the  perceptive  fields  themselves.  From  a
given  desire  can  never  be  inferred  the  idea  of  the
object  which  does,  in  concrete  fact,  satisfy  that  desire
(from  thirst  alone,  what  actual  beverage  can  be  deduced).
Ideas,  we  say,  do  by  aboriginal  instinct  fix  their  mean-
ing in  the  ultimate  non-impulsive  Substance  of  the  world ;
and  idea-outlining  tends  to  follow  the  hints  which  per-
ception gives  of  the  unities  belonging  to  that  reality-not^
ourselves.


122 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

But  here  we  encounter  a  type  of  demurrer^  leading
direct  to  the  heart  of  the  matter.  Idea-outlining  accord*
ing  to  perception-unities  is  not,  we  are  told,  so  independ-
ent of  action-reference  as  we  suppose.  Ideas  are  made
not  indeed  in  the  interest  of  specific  actions,  but  still
in  the  interest  of  types  of  action  of  very  general  sort.
Spatially  closed  figures  are  regarded  as  single  things,
because  solid  outlines  form,  in  general,  the  limiting  lines
of  our  own  physical  movements  (consideration  finely
employed  by  Berg^on).  Detachable  and  movable  ob-
jects, especially  moving  objects,  have  evident  biological
importance ;  are  indefinitely  liable  to  concern  one's  own
vital  status :  must  naturally  become  practical  idea-units.

Significant  here  is  not  so  much  the  interest  alleged
(which  is  real  enough,  but  still  demonstrably  after  the
fact,  still  external)  as  the  immense  generality/  of  the
interest.  Why  may  I  not  say,  on  the  same  basis,  that
objects  interest  me,  because  forsooth  objectivity-in-gen-
eral is  practically  portentous  ?  What  is  to  give  into  the
hands  of  biological  induction  terms  of  just  such  high
generality  ("spatially  detachable  objects,''  "moving
objects,"  "  physical  bodies,"  "  forces,"  etc.)  as  expressive
of  that  in  which  momentous  issues  reside ;  what  if  not
some  prior  idea?  May  we  not  say  just  this :  that  per-
ception generalizes  the  conditions  of  conduct;  provides
generalization  in  advance ;  and  is  able  to  do  this  because
of  its  relation  to  our  original  idea  of  Substance  ?  What
fundamentally  interests  men  is,  in  truth,  just  reality
— nothing  more  special,  nothing  less.  Around  this  orig-
inal meaning  gather  all  practical  concerns ;  in  this  all
importances  are  funded.  Interest  in  reality  is  the  idea-
making,  idea-outlining  function  of  the  human  mind.


IDEA  SEEKING  FREEDOM  FROM  FEELING  123

Interest  in  What  Exists,  not  more  because  it  is  mine
than  because  it  is  not-mine.  Doubtless  all  practical
motives  lend  their  weight  to  this  peculiar  limiting  inter-
est ;  but  it  is  not  constituted  by  them.  Some  passion  for
objectivity,  for  reality,  for  Substance,  quite  prior  to
other  passions,  there  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  idea ;  a
passion  not  wholly  of  an  unreligious  nature,  not  whoUy
un-akin  to  the  love  of  God.

The  nature  of  that  passion,  if  we  could  know  it,  would
afford  the  answer  to  our  question  regarding  the  organic
union  between  idea  and  feeling.  It  is  an  inability  to
believe  in  the  possibility  of  such  a  passion,  a  passion
for  what  is  merely  because  it  is,  that  closes  the  way  to
that  solution.  It  is  by  accepting  the  apparent  paradox
that  we  shall  now  come  to  our  understanding  of  that
union.


CHAPTER  XI

IDEA  IN  ORGANIC  UNION  WITH  FEELING

FSW  ideas  we  have  that  do  not  freely  mix  and
entangle  themselves  with  feeling,  and  lend  them*
selves  variously  to  the  service  of  action.  But  all  ideas,
so  we  have  now  concluded,  have  a  natural  and  original
independence  of  those  stirrings  of  emotion  which
accompany  our  current  activities.  The  child,  the  savage,
and  no  doubt  also  the  crayfish,  the  sponge,  the  polyp,
if  they  are  idea-builders  at  all,  have  an  interest  in  their
world  which  we  must  call  'purely  theoretical.'  No
creature  can  construct  ideas  except  through  a  genuine
non-practical  interest  in  what  is  around  him  simply
'  because  it  is  there.'  Every  idea,  however  rich  in  prac-
tical association,  is  attached  in  its  ultimate  'external
meaning '  to  the  idea  of  reality,  the  center  of  all  this
free,  dispassionate  interest.^

^  Whftteyer  release  any  mind  can  win  from  its  own  present  interests
and  passions,  for  memory  or  reflection  or  scientific  effort,  is  accomplished
through  holding  instinctively  or  consciously  to  its  own  idea  of  reality,  or
of  suhstance,  in  whatever  form  this  idea  presents  itself  to  him.  It  is  in
its  religious  form  that  the  idea  of  reality  has  been  the  chief  culprit  in  all
abstraction  of  the  mind  from  the  current  of  feeling  and  action.  From
the  beginning,  religious  ideas  have  exhibited  a  certain  aloofness.  The
seers  have  had  their  practical  and  moral  recommendations  to  make  ;  but
in  their  cosmologies  and  theologies,  in  their  myth-spinning  generally,
they  have  been  curiously  free  from  relation  to  human  values.  All  such
ideas  have  appealed  to  no  other  visible  interest  than  this  ancient  interest
in  reality,  interest  of  a  purely  theoretical  nature.  I  cannot  defend  the
religious  idea  against  this  charge,  nor  the  metaphysical  idea  either. I


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC UNION  WITH  F££LIN6 125

And  DOW,  it  is  here  if  at  all,  in  this  center  of  the
idea's  independence,  that  we  shall  find  the  essential
union  between  idea  and  feeling.  For  that  same  idea  of
reality  which  has  so  little  to  do  with  the  beginnings  of
our  actions,  and  the  stirrings  of  feeling  that  accompany
those  beginnings,  has  as  I  believe  everything  to  do  with
the  building  of  their  ends.  The  values  which  our  ac-
tions aim  at. seem  to  me  to  be  the  direct  and  continuous
creation  of  that  idea.  How  this  is  the  case  is  a  simple
matter  if  we  can  win  the  right  view  of  it ;  but  the  win-
ning of  that  view  has  its  own  di£Biculty.

Our  actions  drive  on  incessantly  to  their  ends,  and
these  ends  we  call  values.  We  take  these  values,  our
various  human  interests  and  concerns,  for  the  most  part
as  self -justifying  and  self-explanatory :  that  this  thing  is
a  source  of  pleasure,  and  that  a  source  of  pain,  we
accept  as  ultimate  facts,  our  practical  first  premises.
We  understand,  in  general,  that  in  the  pursuit  of  these
various  satisfactions,  nature  is  luring  us  on  to  live,  and  to
increase  life.  But  we  seldom  enquire  why  our  living
itself  is  of  interest  to  nature ;  as  apart  from  these  same
values  we  think  it  would  hardly  be  of  interest  to  our-
selves. Our  values,  then,  remain  essentially  unexplained.
They  remain  too  without  clear  relation  to  each  other.
We  like  beauty,  and  we  like  company ;  we  enjoy  music,
and  care  for  children,  and  appreciate  a  courtesy.  These
are  facts  of  instinct  and  human  nature,  and  we  adopt
them  as  our  several  ends.  It  was  for  the  sake  of  winning

see  and  acknowledge  the  futility  of  much,  perhaps  most,  of  this  curiosity-
work.  But  I  see  also  in  that  power  of  detachment  the  worst  in  close
eonjunction  with  the  best.


126 RELIGIOUS  F££LING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

these  scattered  values  that  we  were  supposed,  by  the
action-theory,  to  be  concerned  in  making  ideas.

But  if  we  can  so  readily  accept  these  ends  as  final  facts,
there  is  no  need  of  explaining  the  interest  in  reality.
We  may  simply  say  that  this  also  is  a  value,  and  is  its  own
justification  ;  and  this  is  often  said,  as  if  it  were  enough
to  say.  If  in  our  theories  of  human  nature  we  no  longer
think  it  necessary  to  reduce  altruism  to  a  transformed
egoism ;  if  we  have  long  since  learned  that  care  for  an-
other is  quite  as  native  and  original  as  care  for  oneself,
that  love  is  one  of  the  instincts ;  it  can  do  no  violence  to
our  scientific  principles  to  accept  the  love  of  reality  as
another  instinctf  an  ultimate  fact  of  value  like  the  rest.
But  it  ought  to  do  violence  to  our  scientific  principles
to  fall  so  readily  into  finalities.  Our  values  need  to
be  explained ;  our  interest  in  reality  not  more  than  our
interest  in  food  or  in  society  or  in  imitation.  And
it  is  probable  that  if  any  value  could  be  explained,  they
would  all  fall  into  some  sort  of  system.  The  key  to  that
system  may  well  be  furnished  by  this  same  interest  in
reality.  For  in  separating  that  interest  from  all  others,
we  have  by  a  sort  of  distillation  separated  out  as  it  were
an  instance  of  pure  value.  We  cannot  explain  this
interest  by  any  other ;  but  we  may  be  able  to  explain  all
other  interests  by  this  one.

For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  interest  we  have
in  reality  is  somehow  substantially  bound  up  with  the
interest  we  have  in  all  other  ends :  there  is  a  discernible
relation  between  the  quantity  of  these  two  types  of
interest.  The  passion  poured  into  the  construction  of  an
independent  idea-world  is  in  some  close  connection  with
the  sum  of  passion  poured  into  the  practical  pursuit  of  all


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC  UNION  WITH  FEELING 127

other  things.  The  more  interest  there  is  in  life  generally^
the  more  devotion  is  spent  upon  knowing  reality  for
itself  and  vice  versa.  Let  the  Renaissance  serve  as  an
illustration.  If,  then,  the  interest  in  reality  is  not  derived
from  the  interest  in  other  things,  there  is  a  strong  sug^
gestion  that  the  interest  in  other  things  may  be  derived
from  the  interest  in  reality.  I  have  no  doubt  that  in
actual  working  order  dependence  is  mutual ;  that  passion
spent  in  either  pursuit  becomes  a  cause  of  the  zeal-
level  of  the  other :  but  interest  in  reality  has  the  priority.
Whatever  energy  is  spent  in  understanding  experience,
in  attaching  its  meanings  to  the  reality-idea,  is  so  much
recoverable  energy  for  all  other  valuing.  If  this  is  the
case,  then  work  done  by  us  on  the  idea  is  no  work  on
action-cues  perhaps;  but  it  is  work  done  on  the  worth
of  living  itself,  it  is  the  creation  of  the  very  fabric  of
value. Now  let  us  consider  how  this  may  be.

It  will  be  generally  admitted  that  the  value  of  any
object  depends  as  well  upon  the  thinker  as  upon  the
thing.  Values  vary  with  the  man ;  and  within  the  man's
Ufe,  they  vary  with  his  powers  of  attention,  and  what
he  can  bring  to  the  subject.  They  vary  with  what  psy-
chology has  called  his  ^  apperceptive  mass ';  if  you  enjoy
Widor's  music  and  I  do  not,  it  has  something  to  do
with  your  greater  knowledge  and  experience  in  the
world  of  music.  A  state  of  keen  enjoyment  is  a  state
of  high  mental  activity :  the  resources  of  memory  and
invention  are  loosened,  the  mind  becomes  a  free  field
for  quick  and  accurate  connections  powerfully  f ocussed.*

'  The  iame  may  be  said  of  anger  and  of  certain  other  negatiye  enio«
tions. In  so  far  at  these  are  states  of  enthusiasm  they  are  also  percep-


128 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

Pleasure  is  evidently  a  mode  of  being  aware  of  the
world ;  a  way  of  taking  and  attending  to  things,  trans-
ferable from  one  object  to  another,  tending  to  propa*
gate  itself  and  continue  itself.  Delight  develops  atten-
tion ;  and  attention  develops  more  delight.  That  same
object  which  under  a  cold  gaze  reveals  no  interest  may
under  an  eye  already  kindled  with  pleasure  develop
unlimited  value.  Hence  wit  and  fun  once  started  can
sustain  themselves  with  little  fuel  from  outside ;  any  trifle
becomes  a  matter  of  extraordinary  feeling.  Any  object
or  task  strenuously  attended  to  begins  to  glow  with
some  heat  of  value  after  a  while ;  there  is  something
like  spontaneous  generation  of  values  under  the  focus
of  attention.  And  everything  we  enjoy  for  a  moment
prepares  us  to  like  something  different  in  the  next;
because  it  brings  under  way  in  us  that  mode  of  regard-
ing things  wherein  the  secret  of  value  lies.

In  some  way,  then,  value  is  conferred  upon  the  object
by  that  with  which  we  can  meet  it.  But  what  is  it  that
a  man  brings  with  him  which  can  determine  the  f  eeUng-
worth  of  his  world  ?  His  ^  apperceptive  mass,'  indeed ;
and  this  consists  of  what  ?  Of  instincts  in  part,  organic
capacities  for  enjoyment?  Experiences  also,  and  all
sorts  of  associated  fancies  and  memories  and  ideas?
But  all  of  this  is  nothing  other  than  idea;  idea  being
but  experience  itself  in  all  its  life  and  infinitude  pre-
pared for  this  very  work  of  meeting  new  experience
with  justice.  What  any  conscious  organism  can  bring
to  a  new  experience  is  but  its  prior  experience  referred

tioDB  of  Tftlne  and  need  not  here  be  separately  analyzed.  The  problem
of  pain,  and  negative  feeling  in  general,  is  considered  in  chapter  xzxiL


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC  UNION  WITH  FEELING 129

to  reality y  held,  that  is,  in  idea;  whether  ancestral
experience,  embodied  in  structure  (instinct-idea)  to  be
made  the  individual's  own  by  re-thinking;  or  his  own
experience  taken  up  into  his  own  thought :  in  one  case
as  in  the  other  —  idea.  It  is  this  thought^over  experi-
ence, experience  already  organized  into  idea,  which
measures  the  power  of  any  mind  to  appreciate  new
experience,  to  find  in  the  world  objects  of  value.
Value  varies  with  idea-resource.^

These  considerations  all  but  compel  the  simple  hy-
pothesis which  I  have  here  to  offer.  It  is  that  all  valuing
(and  so  all  feeling)  is  a  way  of  knowing  objects  with
one's  whole-idea.  In  some  way,  in  valuing,  appreciat-
ing, enjoying,  we  are  using  this  idea-mass ;  yet  not  in
the  effortful  way  of  deliberate  thinking :  an  object  of
value  is  an  object  in  which  my  whole-idea  finds  some
peculiar  ease  and  sufficiency  of  application.  The  worth
which  any  object  or  end  can  have  for  me  depends  on
mutual  fitness  between  my  idea-mass  and  that  object  —
the  fitness  of  my  idea  to  comprehend  the  object;  the
fitness  of  the  object  to  engage  the  idea.'  Let  me  state
this  theory  more  fully,  and  then  illustrate  it  at  length.

Let  us  summon  up  such  true  conception  of  idea  as  we

'  To  pnt  the  matter  roughly  :  to  be  more  alive  is  both  to  see  more
and  to  feel  more  —  and  these  are  not  two  separate  things,  bat  at  bottom
one.

'  In  a  former  chapter  (chapter  yi)  we  suggested  that  feeling  might  be
explained  as  a  transition  from  one  state  of  knowledge  to  another.  Now
we  haye  to  complete  this  yiew  by  explaining  the  original  instability  in
oar  knowledge-field  at  any  time.  This  instability,  I  think,  is  due  in  part
to  the  varying  capacity  of  objects  for  the  total  idea-mass,  and  partly  to
the  varying  potential  of  this  idea-mass  itself,  dae  to  work  done  upon  it.
See  for  more  detail  than  this  chapter  can  give  the  explanatory  essay  on
Idea  and  Value  in  Biological  Context.


130 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

can  now  muster;  idea,  as  the  living  and  infinite  thing
with  which  we  meet  and  know  onr  experience.  Note
what  can  be  easily  noted :  that  any  successful  working
of  the  idea  in  knowing  its  object  is  a  pleasure — espe*
cially  the  finding  of  an  idea,  and  the  use  of  a  new-found
idea  (as  a  child  repeats  the  new-learned  word  with
recurrent  satisfaction).  Note  that  of  all  ideas,  the  idea
of  reality  is  most  of  all  thought  with  ;  as  all  ideas  seek
their  meaning-terminus  in  reality,  so  all  idea-use  is  at
the  same  time  use  of  the  idea  of  reality.  With  our
reality-idea  we  think,  not  only  reality  itself,  but  also,  so
far  as  we  are  able,  every  particular  object  of  experience.
Spontaneously,  not  deliberately,  we  endeavor  to  see  in
each  object  of  attention  a  case^  more  or  less  complete,  of
what  reality  means  to  us.  Now  suppose  that  the  value
of  any  object  of  attention  is  nothing  other  than  the
entering  of  that  reality-idea  into  the  thought  of  the
object  Suppose  that  the  degree  and  sign  (positive  or
negative)  of  that  value  is  a  measure  of  the  success  or
unsuccess  of  this  idea-use  ;  the  fulness  with  which  that
object-vessel  can  contain  that  wealth  of  background
meaning,  always  pressing  to  know  —  not  to  be  known.
Would  it  not  at  once  become  clear  that  our  reality-
idea,  our  whole-idea,  must  determine  the  level  ^  at  which
all  our  values  will  stand,  must  be,  in  a  definite  sense,
the  reservoir  of  all  value  for  us?

All  idea  at  work  upon  its  object  is  a  source  of  feel-
ing. As  for  the  idea  not  at  work  upon  its  object — let
us  here  once  for  all  note  that  there  is  no  such  thing.
The  unused  idea,  lying  latent  and  un-feeling  in  the

^  Strictly  speaking,  must  oonBtitute  one  determinant  of  that  level.
What  the  objective  determiiiantB  may  be,  we  need  not  here  consider.


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC  UNION  WITH  FEELING 131

mind,  is  the  most  obstructive,  yet  emptiest  of  all  psy-
chological superstitions.  The  Ufe  of  the  idea  is  in  its
use,  not  as  being  thought  of  (one  must  repeat)  but  as
thinking;  and  not  alone  in  thinking  its  own-named
object;  but  also  in  thinking  every  other  object  upon
which  it  may  even  remotely  bear  —  in  the  end,  every
other  object;  in  the  process  of  thinking  any  object  before
consciousness  no  idea  can  be  wholly  inactive.  With
what  idea,  pray,  do  I  think  hat  f  With  the  hat-idea,  to
be  sure.  Yes,  but  is  the  clothing-idea  unconcerned? —
or  the  city-street-idea  ?  or  the  civilized-society-extraor-
dinary-requirements-ideas? or  the  man -and- woman -
ideas?  or  the  whole  mass  of  aesthetic  notions,  and
political,  historical,  even  religious  opinions  ?  With  all
these,  and  with  all  other  ideas  summing  themselves  up
currently  in  my  whole-idea,  hat  is  thought.  If  hat  has
a  practical  meaning  as  something  to-be-put-on,  or  to-be-
taken-off,  or  to  be  otherwise  dealt  with,  it  is  because
hat  through  these  other  ideas  has  already  acquired  a
more  intimate  significance  and  value  than  these  extrane-
ous action-hints  can  suggest.  A  value  measured  by  the
degree,  proportion,  and  facility  with  which  my  whole
idea-equipment  can  find  itself  in  hat.  Probably  this
direct  feeling-value  of  hat  is  not  large ;  probably  a  prim-
rose, a  bit  of  music,  a  single  human  being,  would  involve
my  idea-world  more  adequately  and  immediately :  if  so,
the  feeling-value  of  these  objects  is  higher.  But  in  one
case  as  in  the  other,  whatever  may  occupy  attention,
occupies  the  man ;  it  is  he  as  a  total  self,  mind-total,
who  for  the  moment  gives  himself  to  that  object,  dis-
covering in  it  what  value  it  may  have  for  him.

The  meaning  of  these  proposals  may  best  be  seen


132 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEOET

where  value  varies  visibly  with  idea.  As  where  ghost-
terror  is  created  by  idea-anticipation;  or  where  with
the  growth  of  knowledge  an  interest  seems  to  develop
out  of  no-interest,  value  created  from  nothing  by  the
rise  of  idea  and  idea-application.^  To  become  a  connois^
seur,  an  amateur y  in  any  field  is  a  self-furthering  process
after  the  first  few  conceptions  have  been  won,  the  first
elements  of  a  collection  made,  and  the  idea,  now  fairly
alive,  becomes  hung^  for  its  own  food.  Acquiring
some  bit  of  skill,  and  delighting  in  the  use  of  it,  is  a
value  creation  of  the  same  type,  though  the  units  here
are  idea-action  couples,  not  ideas  alone ;  the  delight  is  in
the  meeting  of  situations,  the  union  of  confidence  with
challenge  and  novelty,  the  instantaneous  judgment  that
my  idea  is  meeting  the  various  phases  of  the  new  case
as  they  arise,  even  while  my  hand  is  carrying  out  the
part  assigned  by  the  idea.  What  one  does  well,  one
likes ;  what  one  does  not  like,  dancing,  speaking  French,
public  ceremony,  is  in  all  likelihood  something  one  does
less  than  well,  feeling  therein  an  inadequacy,  shall  we
not  say  of  "  habit,"  modestly  suggesting  "  lack  of  prac-
tice"?— shall  we  not  rather  say  (tracing  our  feeling  to
its  lair)  primarily  an  infacility  of  ideals,  ie\t  inferiority
not  of  the  animal  but  of  the  spirit. In  all  such  matters

^  The  whole  history  of  value  we  cannot  here  follow.  In  the  more
momentary  spot-valnea  of  pleasure  and  pain,  or  of  direct  satisfaction  of
instinct,  the  work  of  idea  is  not  quickly  seen.  Such  values  seem  fixed  by
Nature  in  the  physical  frame  ;  a  certain  value-capital,  one  might  think,
sufficiently  free  from  idea.  Yet  not  meaning-less ;  rather,  spots  of  instan-
taneous meaning,  whose  idea^lements  are  separated  with  difficulty,
becoming  slowly  interpretable  as  the  idea-world  thickens  about  them,  as
poetry  in  time,  then  philosophy  begin  to  voice  the  meaning  of  sex-love.
In  greater  detail  this  theory  of  value  is  presented  in  the  final  essay  on
« Idea  and  Value.''


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC  UNION  WITH  FEELING 133

rapid  subsomption  is  the  inner  kernel  of  delight.  The
pleasure  found  in  a  generalization,  even  in  mildly  lifting
the  conception  of  ordinary  things  into  a  wider  sphere
of  relation  (flowers  as  modified  leaves,  or  neuron-idea
embracing  all  nerve-forms) ;  the  discovery  of  genial  re-
semblances wherein  so  much  of  the  pleasure  of  litera-
ture consists ;  that  noting  of  more  hidden  likenesses
which  has  been  said  to  mark  genius  —  all  this  value-
making  is  but  the  idea-making  process  in  its  own  natural
freedom.

Note  also  how  values  change  as  life  matures.  The
ends  which  men  pursue  are  less  tangible  than  those
spo^splashes  of  pleasure-color  hypnotic  to  the  eye  of
childhood,  though  not  excluding  them.  Family,  and
status,  and  power,  and  the  doing  of  human  work,  and
whatever  else,  are  ends  whose  appeal  can  be  seen  to
vary  visibly  from  man  to  man,  not  so  much  with  instinct
as  with  eierience,  and  not  so  much  with  experience
alone  as  with  digested  experience,  Weltanschauung y
whole-idea.  The  significance  of  any  given  event  will
be  estimated  variously,  a  given  circumstance  will  give
pleasure  or  pain,  chiefly  according  to  the  ^  way  of  think-
ing,' the  ^  point  of  view '  of  the  subject.  The  critical
question  put  to  me  by  any  happening  is,  ^^  Can  my  con-
ception of  reality  accept  and  place  that  happening,  or
can  it  not  ? "  That  alone  will  please  me  in  the  end
which  is  according  to  Nature  as  I  conceive  Nature;
that  alone  can  hold  me  prisoner  wherein  Nature  itself,
or  reality,  or  Deity,  becomes  visible  or  vocal.  Experi-
ence is  a  course  of  perpetual  conflict  between  my  Idea
and  my  circumstance,  each  modifying  the  other  until  my
idea  of  reality  can  cope  with  circumstance  and  all  its


134 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  REUGIOUS  THEORY

issues.  No  man  can  be  content  to  accept  evil  as  finality :
each  must  have  his  theory  of  evil,  as  a  means  of  bring-
ing that  evil  under  the  conception  of  the  whole,  and  so
—  of  disposing  of  it.  To  win  such  idea,  and  to  use  it
effectively,  constitutes  certainly  not  the  whole,  but  a
large  part  of  the  achievable  satisfaction  of  any  mature
human  life.

Consciousness  is  essentially  cumulative;  experience
becomes  memory,  becomes  idea,  whereby  as  Bergson
justly  insists,  no  new  event  can  have  the  same  meaning
with  any  previous  event  —  for  none  can  be  received
into  the  same  soul.  All  such  cumulation,  however,  builds
itself  into  the  fabric  of  the  permanent  whole-idea,  there-
by contributing,  in  any  person,  to  a  quality  of  character,
a  general  value-tone,  or  flavor,  which  becomes  relatively
stable.  That  which  we  first  sense  in  any  person  is  the
operation  of  this  whole-idea;  that  which  we  value  is
some  excellence  in  its  operation.  Burke  elevates  what-
ever subject  he  touches ;  his  place  is  secure  among  the
minds  of  earth  because  the  vigor  of  that  whole-presence
casts  a  nobility  over  all  valuation,  makes  human  exist-
ence another  and  better  thing  than  at  our  common  ease
it  inclines  to  be.  To  see  the  significance  of  things  triv-
ial is  the  prerogative  of  greatness,  to  see  everything  as
bearing  upon  the  whole  is  both  genius  and  happiness,
to  see  all  things  siih  specie  cBternitatis  is  the  joy  of
religion  itself.  To  conceive  a  thing  largely,  to  throw
over  it  a  generous  dome  —  this  is  the  very  physiology  of
human  worth.  It  is  not  necessarily  the  express  logical
reflection  upon  things  that  endows  a  life  richly  with
this  human  quality.  It  is  not  even  the  clear-held  mem-
ory of  special  circumstances. It  is  rather  the  spontanea


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC  UNION  WITH  FEELING 185

0U8  after-working  of  experience  once  well-met  —  which
is  Idea,  holding  idea  and  event  together  until  they
answer  ^'  Done  "  :  this  experience-well-met  it  is,  which
entering  into  the  bone  and  blood  of  the  Idea  (for  the
most  part  unreachable  in  speech)  builds  human  quality
and  human  worth.

Love  itself,  then,  if  we  are  right,  is  not  a  thing  apart
from  knowledge.  That  which  we  love  is  not  indeed
learning,  or  logic-skill,  but  some  reality-thought  at
work  upon  an  actual  experience,  creating  there  the  very
material  of  beauty  and  value*  No  one  will  be  loved
blindly ;  no  one  will  be  loved  as  other  than  an  intel-
ligence, human  and  universal,  sharing  in  that  same
reality  which  all  men  share.  Love  and  sympathy  we  often
think  of  as  feeling,  in  direct  contrast  to  idea.  It  is  clear
however  that  they  both  are  cognizances  of  another ^  do
in  some  way  make  the  leap  between  my  own  soul  and
the  soul  of  some  one  not-myself,  intend  to  put  me  in
veritable  rapport  with  what  thought  is  passing  there,
the  very  tour  deforce  ofobjectimty.  We  note  further
that  that  sympathy  which  is  not  exact  knowledge  of
the  other,  is  of  feeble  and  ineffective  quality;  that  we
incline  to  measure  the  worth  of  sympathy  by  the  extent
of  its  gp^tuitous  and  extraordinary  perception  of  the
other's  situation.  Sympathy  notes  what  the  casual  eye
ignores :  for  sympathy  is  objectivity  of  mind,  and  objec-
tivity of  mind  is  knowing.  Interest  in  objectivity,  which
we  have  found  at  the  root  of  all  idea-making,  is  love
itself  directed  to  reality ;  and  conversely,  the  interest  in
reality  is  the  measure  of  all  possible  love  and  apprecia-
tion, toward  humanity,  or  in  the  Arts.

Love  and  sympathy  are  the  activity  of  the  idea.  And


136 REUGIOUS  FEELING  AND  REU6I0US  THEORY

in  their  exercise,  the  idea  is  enlarged.  The  lover  widens
his  experience  as  the  non-lover  cannot.  He  adds  to  the
mass  of  his  idea-world,  and  acquires  thereby  enhanced
power  to  appreciate  all  things.  Is  not  this  the  suffi-
cient solution  of  that  longstanding  difficulty  between
^  egoism  and  altruism  ? '  The  altruist  alone  can  accu-
mulate that  treasure  of  idea  through  which  all  things
must  be  enjoyed  that  are  enjoyed.  No  one  has,  or  can
have,  any  ^egoistic'  satisfaction  except  as  a  conse-
quence of  so  much  effective  love  of  reality  as  there  is
in  him  by  birth  or  acquisition.

If  what  is  here  said  does  truly  represent  the  organic
bond  between  idea  and  feeling,  we  may  now  confirm —
but  with  better  understanding— the  extraordinary  inti-
macy between  the  ideas  of  religion  and  human  feeling  at
large.  It  is  not  alone  the  specifically  religious  feeling
with  which  the  religious  idea  is  bound  up  :  it  is  —  as  an
interpretation  of  our  whole-idea  —  a  factor  in  all  human
feeling  and  value.  And  that,  immediately — not  by  way
of  any  external  arrangements  in  which  the  work  of  God
may  meet  and  supplement  the  work  of  men :  not  exclud-
ing these — not  waiting  for  them.  The  use  of  the  God-
idea  (which  if  one  have  cannot  but  be  the  most-used  of
all  ideas — not  as  thought-of  but  as  thinking),  the  use
of  this  idea  will  be  the  chief  determinant  of  the  value-
level  in  any  consciousness.  Whether  or  not  the  termi-
nal-object of  one's  faith  be  called  God,  whatever  object
comes  before  the  mind  of  any  man  must  inevitably  be
judged  at  last  by  that  man's  sense  of  the  nature  of  the
reality  with  which  he  has,  in  the  end,  to  do;  and  thereby
must  the  current-worth  of  his  experience  be  continuously


IDEA  IN  ORGANIC UNION  WITH  FEELING 137

determined.  And  very  probably  the  religious  feelings
themselves,  religious  fear,  religious  hope,  religious  wor-
ship, are  in  part  instinctive  recognitions  of  the  imme-
diate vital  bearing  of  such  idea-possession  upon  every
conceivable  human  value :  not  only  as  conserving  those
values  (from  internal  decay)  but  also  as  presiding  over
their  perpetual  increase.  The  meaning  of  the  religious
idea  is  so  far  inseparable  from  this  fateful  value  bearing
as  almost  to  justify  the  statement  that  religion  is  the
region  where  fact  and  value  coincide :  where  there  is
no  idea  apart  from  feeling,  as  there  is  no  feeling  apart
from  idea.

We  have  then  no  cause  to  fear  that  labor  and  inter-
est spent  on  religious  truth  will  be  lost  from  the  side  of
feeling.  It  is  only  by  a  recovery  of  ^^  theoretical "  con-
viction that  religion  can  either  maintain  its  own  vitality
or  contribute  anything  specific  to  human  happiness.  In
the  attainment  of  knowledge,  feeling  —  in  so  far  as  it
is  connected  with  agitation  and  active-impulse —  is  silent :
but  the  end  of  feeling  is  at  the  same  time  the  beginning
of  a  new  world  of  value,  wherein  all  feelings  are  reborn
through  renewal  of  their  source.  Through  losing  its
life,  and  only  thus,  can  feeling  save  its  life.^

^  This  18  trae  whether  religions  knowledge  is  won  in  the  course  of
metaphysical  reflection,  or  as  the  mystics  have  often  won  their  insight
through  a  process  which  looks  very  different,  through  worship.  In  worship
also,  feeling  as  a  spur  to  particular  action  comes  momentarily  to  rest.
Sehleiermaoher's  interpretation  of  religious  experience  in  terms  of  depend-
ence, awe,  reverence  —  relatively  quiescent  and  contemplative  feelings
we  called  them  — is  not  far  from  the  truth;  but  above  these  feelings  and
including  them  stands  the  impulse  of  worship,  in  which  all  these  other
feelings  unite  and  finally  vanish  into  a  present  sense  of  reality  and  worth.
Worship  conducts  religious  feeling  to  its  terminus  in  cognizance:  and  thus
worship  stands  at  the  node  of  a  rhythm  or  alternation  through  which  the


138 RELIGIOUS  FEELIKO  AKD  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

We  may  now  perceive,  in  bare  outline,  the  more  lit-
eral sense  of  our  former  figure  which  represented  reli-
gion as  a  parent  rather  than  an  agent  in  history.  For  the
religious  idea  bears  upon  the  Arts,  not  so  much  through
particular  instigations  of  thought  and  action  as  through
a  more  internal  fruitf ulness,  watering  and  sustaining  aU
those  perceptions  of  value,  in  which  the  work  of  the
Arts  must  terminate.  It  is  through  devotion  to  the  Idea,
to  the  reality  of  the  world — a  devotion  which,  what^
ever  else  it  may  be,  is  also  a  theoretical  devotion  —  that
religious  feeling  and  all  human  feeling  must  be  kept  alive.

Taluea  of  our  lives  pass — diMppemring  and  reappearing. The  principle  of
thii  alternation  ii  farther  deteloped  in  Pt^t  Y.


CHAPTER  Xn

THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH

WHATEVER  value  religion  has  for  man  will  be
funded,  we  now  judge,  in  the  religious  ideas,
especially  in  the  religious  world-idea  or  reality-idea  or
substance-idea — the  idea  of  God.  Judging  religion
solely  by  its  effectiveness  in  human  affairs  we  will  have
no  religion  without  metaphysics,  which  is  but  a  knowl-
edge of  reality.  Religion  does  its  work  by  way  of  its
truth.  Creed  and  theology  become  again  important  to
us ;  become  the  essential  treasures  of  religion :  for  in
them  the  race  preserves  from  age  to  age  the  determin-
ing factors  of  all  human  worth.

Such  is,  in  fact,  my  own  belief.  But  there  is  one  f or^
midable  question  to  be  met  before  we  can  either  rest  in
this  conclusion,  or  wholly  understand  its  meaning.  We
have  been  assuming  that  reality  is  a  finished  total  which
it  is  our  place  to  recognize  and  adjust  ourselves  to,  with-
out presuming  to  alter  its  general  aspect.  We  have  been
assuming  that  if  there  is  a  God  at  all,  God  is  a  fixity  in
the  universe ;  a  being  whom  we  must  accept  and  not  un-
dertake to  change.  We  have  been  assuming  that  the  ob-
jects of  our  religious  interestare  all  made  up  in  advance,
and  that  our  own  wills  have  no  part  to  play  in  deter-
mining what  is  ;  in  short  that  as  knowers  of  reality  we
must  be  passive,  receptive  toward  the  truth  as  it  is,  tak-
ing it  as  we  find  it,  in  experience  and  in  idea.  But
this  general  assumption  of  ours,  that  reality  such  as


140 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

religion  deals  with  is  what  it  is  in  independence  of  our
own  wills,  not  to  be  created  or  destroyed  by  anything
we  may  resolve  or  do  about  it,  —  this  general  assump-
tion is  open  to  doubt.

There  are  certainly  some  regions  of  reality  which  are
unfinished.  We  are  endowed  with  wills  only  because
there  are  such  regions,  to  which  it  is  our  whole  occupa*
tion  to  give  shape  and  character.  In  such  regions  the
will-to-believe  is  justified,  because  it  is  no  will- to-make-
believe,  but  a  veritable  will  to  create  the  truth  in  which
we  believe.  What  I  believe  of  my  fellow  men  goes  far
to  determine  what  my  fellow  men  actually  are.  Believe
men  liars — they  show  themselves  such ;  determine  your-
self upon  their  essential  goodness,  and  they  do  not  disap-
point your  resolve :  your  belief  is  not  one  which  can  ever
be  refuted,  for  the  characters  of  men  are  not  finished
parts  of  reality ;  they  are  still  being  built,  and  your  will
is  a  factor  in  the  building.  Where  truth  is  thus  waiting
to  be  finished  or  determined,  the  will  may  hold  the
deciding  play.

Every  social  need,  such  as  the  need  for  friendship,
must  be  a  party  to  its  own  satisfaction :  I  cannot  pas-
sively find  my  friend  as  a  ready-made  friend ;  a  ready-
made  human  being  he  may  be,  but  his  friendship  for
me  I  must  help  to  create  by  my  own  active  resolve.
So  of  the  great  political  reality,  the  State.  This  also  is
nothing  which  man  has  found  ready-made.  The  State
is  a  reality  which  is  what  it  is  by  dint  of  the  combined
resolves  of  many  human  wills,  through  time :  we  individ-
uals find  the  State  as  something  apparently  finished,
standing  there  as  something  to  be  empirically  accepted ;
but  at  no  time  does  the  existence  of  this  object  become


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH  141

80  independent  tliat  it  can  continue  to  hold  its  reality
apart  from  the  good -will  which  from  moment  to  mo-
ment recreates  it.  May  it  be  that  the  objects  in  which
religion  is  concerned  are  in  some  ways  like  these,  belong-
ing to  the  unfinished  regions  of  reality  ?

We  find  our  religion  much  as  we  find  our  State^  an
inherited  possession  fixed  in  its  main  outlines  by  no
will  of  our  own;  yet  an  expression,  perhaps,  of  the
racial  good-will  of  men,  depending  like  the  State  on  the
continued  good-will  of  all  individuals  for  its  validity,
even  for  its  truth.  Religion  throws  over  human  life
a  unity  like  that  of  the  State,  but  vaster :  it  provides
a  canopy  under  which  all  men  may  recognize  their
brotherhood :  in  the  good-will  of  religion  a  totality  of
spirit  is  brought  about  which  apart  from  that  good-
will has  no  independent  existence.  In  holding  to  this
qualification  of  my  whole-idea  —  by  the  idea  of  a
spiritual  totality  which  I  must  cooperate  with  othei
men  to  make  real — I  find  an  immeasurable  and  sub-
stantial enlargement  of  my  field  of  vision  and  so  of
my  whole  level  of  values.  Is  not  this  spiritual  unity,
though  a  function  of  the  will  of  man,  a  large  part  of
what  I  mean  by  the  name  God  ?  Through  religion,  too,
a  still  greater  totality  is  accomplished :  a  world  beyond
is  brought  into  conjunction  with  our  present  interest,
and  our  mortal  lives  are  endowed  with  prospects  of
immortality.  Yet  I  strongly  doubt  whether  immortality
is  any  such  predetermined  reality  that  it  exists  for  any
person  apart  from  that  person's  will  to  make  it  real.  The
future  life  may  well  be  such  an  object  as  my  decision
can  make  real  or  unreal,  so  far  as  my  own  experience  is


1«S REUGIOUS  FEELING  AND  REUGIOUS  THEORY

concerned.  And  in  general,  when  we  consider  closely
the  kind  of  object  which  religion  presents  for  onr  faith
we  find  it  such  as  might  well  be  plastic  to  the  determi-
nations of  the  will,  more  plastic  even  than  friendship  or
the  State.  For  these  objects  are  not  to  be  found  on
earth  like  the  friend ;  nor  are  they  to  be  set  np  in  visi-
ble form  like  the  State :  they  exist  wholly  in  that  region
of  the  spirit,  whose  coming  and  going  is  immediately
sensitive  to  every  variation  of  loyalty  and  disloyalty  on
the  part  of  the  souls  in  which  alone  it  has  its  life.

Further,  the  difference  between  a  religious  view  of
the  world  and  a  non-religious  view  lies  chiefly  in  the
quality  or  character  which  is  attributed  to  the  world
as  a  whole.  It  does  not  lie  in  the  circumstance  that  the
religious  mind  has  a  whole-idea,  while  the  non-religious
mind  has  none:  every  man  must  have  his  whole-idea,  and
such  as  it  is,  it  will  determine  what  value  existence  may
have  for  him.  But  the  critical  difference  appears  in  the
judgments  about  the  whole  ;  whether  this  reality  of  ours
is  divine,  or  infernal,  or  an  indifferent  universal  grave-
pit.  These  diffeiences,  we  may  say,  are  differences  in
predicates^  rather  than  in  the  subject ;  and  it  is  precisely
in  the  matter  of  the  predicates  which  can  be  applied  to
the  world  as  a  whole  that  we  found  the  primary  diffi-
culty of  religious  knowledge  to  lie.^  Every  one  begins
with  his  whole-idea ;  but  it  is  the  function  of  religion  to
interpret  this  whole  as  divine ;  in  brief,  to  make  the
tran  sition  from  the  whole-idea  to  the  idea  of  God.  These
other  words  of  ours,  non-committal  in  regard  to  quality
—  "  the  whole,"  "  substance,"  "  reality  "  —  do  they
fairly  name  that  with  which  religion  has  to  do  ? Is  not

^  Pp.  100  ff.  aboTe.


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH  143

the  problem  of  religious  knowledge  a  problem  of  the
attributes  of  reality;^  and  are  not  these  attributes
indeterminate,  apart  from  the  will  ?

For  it  is  not  simply  the  ease  that  these  attributes
which  religion  ascribes  to  reality  (divinity,  beneficence,
soul-preserving  or  value-conserving  properties)  are
invisible,  spiritual,  inaccessible  to  observation:  it  is  the
case  that  these  ideas,  so  far  as  reasons  go,  are  in  apparent
equilibrium  —  neither  provable  nor  disprovable.  The
world  would  be  consistent  without  God ;  it  would  also
be  consistent  with  God :  whichever  hypothesis  a  man
adopts  will  fit  experience  equally  well ;  neither  one,  so
far  as  accounting  for  visible  facts  is  concerned,  works
better  than  the  other.  I  have  often  wondered  whether
in  these  supermundane  matters  the  universe  may  not  be
so  nicely  adjusted  (and  withal  so  justly)  that  each  man
finds  true  the  things  he  believes  in  and  wills  for ;  why
should  not  every  man  find  his  religion  true,  in  so  far
as  he  has  indeed  set  his  heart  upon  it  and  made  sacri-
fices for  it  ?  However  this  may  be,  the  religious  objects
(the  predicates  g^ven  by  religion  to  reality)  stand  at  a
pass  of  intellectual  equipoise:  it  may  well  seem  that
some  other  faculty  must  enter  in  to  give  determination
to  reason  at  the  point  where  reason  halts,  without  decid-
ing voice  of  its  own.  The  birth  of  the  idea  of  God  in
the  mind  —  the  judgment  "  Reality  is  living,  divine,  a
God  exists"  — is  so  subtle,  like  the  faintest  breath  of
the  spirit  upon  the  face  of  the  waters,  that  no  look

^  The  earliest  ideas  and  names  for  the  Deity  seem  to  haye  been  rather
adjectiyes  than  nouns.  Among  the  Aryans,  the  diyiiie  was  expressed  as
*'  the  shining/'  **  the  iUnstrioas"  ;  among  Malays  and  Indians  and  yery
generally  elsewhere, "  the  wonderful,"  **  the  powerful,'*  **  the  immense."


144 RELIGIOUS  FEEUN6  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

within  can  tell  whether  God  is  here  revealing  himself  to
man,  or  man  creating  God.

It  is  because  of  this  position  of  subtle  equilibrium
that  the  religious  consciousness  is  evanescent ;  faith  is
unstable  as  empirical  knowledge  is  not.  Though  at  any
time  I  find  my  world  sacred,  it  only  needs  a  touch  of
passivity  on  my  part  and  it  will  again  become  secular :
I  cannot  recover  nor  understand  its  former  worth.  My
faith  in  God  is  subject  to  fluctuation  as  my  faith  in
other  objects  is  not,  even  though  these  other  objects  are
equally  inaccessible  (as  my  faith  in  China  or  in  the  con-
servation of  energy).  And  noteworthy  about  this  fluc-
tuation is  that  it  passes  from  extreme  to  extreme,  not
pausing  in  the  intermediate  stages  of  probability :  the
existence  of  God  is  to  me  either  wholly  certain  or  wholly
absurd.  Likewise  of  immortality:  it  seems  to  me  at
times  that  a  man  is  a  fool  to  believe  it,  at  other  times
that  a  man  is  a  fool  not  to  believe  it.  I  have  no  power
of  weighing  shades  of  probability  in  these  matters.  It
must  be  so,  it  can't  be  so :  these  are  the  only  degrees  of
which  my  own  religious  faith  is  capable.  But  alterna-
tives like  these  belong  rather  to  the  will  or  disposition
of  the  spirit  than  to  the  estimating  mind.  And  further,
the  one  thing  which  is  most  sure  to  dispel  faith  and
substitute  the  secular  world-picture  is  precisely  intellec-
tual scrutiny.  Faith  is  not  only  difficult  for  reason ;  it  is
distinctly  diffident  toward  reason.  Its  origin,  then,  and
its  firmness  must  be  due  to  some  other  power,  presum-
ably to  will.

It  would  help  our  thought  on  this  point  if  we  could
trace  the  mental  processes  in  which  the  idea  of  Gt>d  first


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH  145

arises  in  human  consciousness.  It  is  more  than  doubt-
ful whether  any  such  tracing  is  possible;  and  largely
because  of  the  circumstances  which  we  have  pointed  out :
the  thought  of  God  comes  and  goes ;  is  often  lost  and  often
recovered^  both  in  racial  and  in  individual  experience ;  it
appears  also  in  various  ways  to  various  minds.  No
historical  nor  typical  origin  of  the  belief  in  God  can  be
shown.  Nevertheless,  taking  as  a  beginning  a  mood  of
secularity  which  often  recurs  in  human  experience,  there
may  be  some  measure  of  typical  psychological  truth  in
such  a  picture  as  this  which  follows :

There  is  a  grim  and  menacing  aspect  of  reality  which
remains  commonly  unemphatic  as  our  lives  go  but  which
events  may  at  any  time  uncover.  We  are  obliged  to
witness  this  vast  Whole,  of  which  we  speak  so  easily,
threatening  existence  or  destroying  the  things  that  make
our  existence  valuable.  Against  such  threats  our  usual
methods  of  protection  avail  exactly  nothing.  The  mer-
ciless processes  of  nature,  of  disease  and  death,  of  fate
generally,  are  not  impressed  by  entreaty  or  by  effort,
are  not  to  be  beaten  off  with  clubs  nor  frightened  away
by  shrieks  and  gestures  of  defiance.  All  these  weapons
will  be  tried ;  and  trial  best  convinces  of  futility.  Fear
and  hope  normally  inspire  action ;  fear  and  hope  show
themselvesalikeemptyinthissituation.  Thatwithwhich
one  has  to  do  is  reality  itself ;  and  toward  this  only  some
less  external  attitude  can  be  significant.  But  in  the
human  creature  at  bay  there  are  other  depths ;  the  recog-
nition of  futility  is  the  beginning  of  human  adequacy.
For  despair  ends  by  calling  out  a  certain  touch  of  resent-
mentj  —  resentment  having  a  tinge  of  self-assertion  in
it,  even  of  moral  requirement  directed  against  reality.


146 BEUGIOnS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

Sach  a  being  as  I,  by  virtue  of  this  verj  power  of  real-
izing my  situation,  by  virtue  of  my  whole-idea  and
my  self-consciousness,  has  some  claim  to  urge  upon  the
reality  that  surrounds  me,  threatening;  the  reality  which,
after  all,  has  brought  me  forth.  Though  by  the  slight-
est movement  of  this  deep-lying  sense  of  right,  one  does,
in  effect,  demand  j  ustice  of  his  creator :  and  thereby,  with-
out premeditation,  finds  himself  with  the  idea  of  Deity
already  constituted  and  possessed.  For  toward  what  can
moral  resentment  and  demand  be  addressed  but  to  a  liv-
ing and  moral  Being  ?  In  that  deep  impulse  of  self-
assertion  there  was  involved,  though  I  knew  it  not,  the
will  that  my  reality  should  be  a  living  and  responsible
reality.  And  in  time  I  shall  find  that  in  imputing  this
quality  to  my  world,  I  have  already  lifted  the  burden  of
those  anxieties,  so  helpless  upon  their  own  plane.  The
God-idea  thus  appears  as  a  postulate  of  our  moral  con-
sciousness :  an  original  object  of  resolve  which  tends  to
make  itself  good  in  experience.

For  the  proof  of  this  new-found  or  new-made  relation
to  reality,  expressed  in  my  6od-idea,  is  this :  that  in  meet-
ing my  world  divinely  it  shows  itself  divine.  It  supports
my  postulate.  And  without  such  act  of  will,  no  discov-
ery of  divinity  could  take  place.  Men  cannot  be  worthy
of  reverence,  until  I  meet  them  with  reverence :  for  my
reverence  is  the  dome  under  which  alone  their  possible
greatness  can  stand  and  live.  Of  the  world  likewise,  -
it  can  have  no  divinity  but  only  materiality  or  menac-
ing insensibility,  unless  I  throw  over  it  the  category
under  whose  dome  its  holiness  can  rise  visible  and
actual.  God  cannot  live,  as  divine  and  beneficent,  ex-
cept in  the  opportunity  created  by  our  good-will :  but


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH  147

given the good-will,  reality  is such  as  will  become
indeed  divine.

In  accord  with  this  conjecture  as  to  the  position  of
religious  truth,  namely  that  it  is  determined  by  the
movement  of  will-to-believe,  is  an  old  observation  of  reli-
gious experience.  It  is  written  that  he  who  seeks  finds :
the  connection  between  seeking  and  finding  is  infalUble.
Such  infallible  connection  may  be  many-wise  under-
stood, but  it  may  be  thus  understood,  that  the  seeking
brings  the  finding  with  it.  "  Thou  wouldst  not  seekme
hadst  thou  not  already  found  me,"  said  Pascal :  and  to
Sabatier  this  thought  came  ^'  like  a  flash  of  light ,  .  •
the  solution  of  a  problem  that  had  long  appeared  insol-
uble." ^  The  religiousness  of  man's  nature  is  the  whole
substance  of  his  revelation.  Whatever  we  impute  to
the  world  comes  back  to  us  as  a  quality  pre-resident
there  —  is  not  this  the  whole  illusion  of  reality  ?
Impute  then  to  the  world  a  living  beneficence :  the  world
will  not  reject  this  imputation,  will  he  even  as  you  have
willed  it.^  Your  belief  becomes  (as  Fichte  held)  an
evidence  of  your  character  —  not  of  your  learning.  He
who  waits  his  assent  till  God  is  proved  to  him,  will
never  find  Him.  But  he  who  seeks  finds  —  has  already
found.

In  all  these  respects  there  is  the  strongest  resemblance
between  the  religious  idea  and  human  value. The  world

1  Outlines  of  a  Philosophy  of  Religion,  p.  32.

'  The  Chinese  have  long  had  a  saying  "  If  you  believe  in  the  gods,  the
gods  exist :  if  you  do  not  belieye  in  them  they  do  not  exist."  Whence  prag«
matism  as  a  theory  of  metaphysics  may  be  said  to  be  of  Chinese  origiii<
See  A.  H.  Smith,  Chinese  Characteristios,  p.  301.


148 JEIELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

is  consistent  without  Deity  (so  it  is  said) ;  the  world  is
consistent  also  without  beauty^  or  other  charm.  Before
reason,  religious  assurance  is  evanescent:  so  also  with
any  pleasure  or  other  worth  when  by  introspection,  or
analysis,  we  determine  to  seize  its  secret.  The  world-
body  to  the  eye  of  Fact  is  grey,  even  dead  with  all  its
working ;  if  it  is  to  be  reanimated  with  worth,  it  must
be  by  that  miracle  which  continually  repeats  itself  in
our  experience  —  the  Spirit  breathes  upon  it  from  its
own  resources  the  breath  of  life.  Thus  the  birth  of
value  and  the  birth  of  God-faith  are  alike ;  as  indeed
we  have  every  reason  to  believe,  if  the  conclusions  of
the  last  chapter  are  valid :  is  it  not  possible  that  they
are  the  same  thing ^ — in  both  cases  the  work  of  an
ultimate  goodrwill  toward  our  world?  If  the  union
which  we  have  proposed  between  idea  and  feeling
is  indeed  so  intimate  and  equal  that  '^  without  feel-
ing the  ideas  are  false ;  even  as  without  the  idea  the
feelings  are  meaningless,"  it  is  at  least  possible  that
some  deeper  faculty  fundamental  to  both  idea  and
feeling  is  here  giving  laws  to  reality  itself:  deciding
what  the  truth,  and  therewith  the  value,  of  my  world
shall  be.

A  new  conception  of  faith  appears  here :  faith  is  more
than  passive  feeling,  more  also  than  the  sight  which
seizes  upon  the  reality  of  the  world  as  it  is  —  faith  is
the  loyal  determination  and  resolve  which  sees  the  world
as  it  is  capable  of  becoming,  and  commits  its  fortunes  to
the  effort  to  make  real  what  it  thus  sees.  The  religious
creed  or  world-view  becomes  a  postulate  rather  than
either  an  empirical  discovery  or  a  revelation  to  be
obediently  received.


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAK£B  OF  TRUTH  149

I  know  not  whether  this  presentation  of  a  voluntaristic
foundation  for  religious  truth  has  been  able  to  provoke
any  acceptance  on  the  part  of  the  reader :  it  is  a  para-
doxical doctrine,  yet  it  has  in  it  great  power,  and
especially  great  relief  for  the  difficult  situation  of  the
religious  idea.  To  my  mind,  I  must  admit,  nothing
more  illuminating  has  ever  been  put  forward  than
just  such  interpretation  of  many  a  religious  doctrine ;
nothing  truer  to  the  way  in  which  religious  picturing
and  myth-building  does  actually  take  place  in  the
human  consciousness.

Taking  religious  ideas  literally  and  fixedly  is,  in  fact,
a  modem  and  Western  peculiarity.  The  Oriental  mind
realizes  that  the  spiritual  atmosphere  in  which  either
men  or  gods  may  breathe,  must  be  created  ;  it  knows
nothing  of  empirical  truth  in  matters  of  religion,  truth
passively  taken ;  and  postulate  joins  hands  with  poetry
in  constituting  the  medium  in  which  all  spirituality  may
live.  (The  freedom  of  the  religious  poem  or  myth  or
parable  may  be  regarded  as  the  will-to-believe  at  play.)
The  Oriental  mind  speaks  understandingly  of  miracles
and  virgin  births,  because  it  sees  in  them  poetic  means
of  lifting  what  it  will  pronounce  divine  above  the  com-
monplace of  profane  event  and  indolent  human  charac-
ter. We  also,  of  the  West,  have  our  own  style  of  poetry
and  imagination  ;  of  which  we  see  well  enough  that  it
must  be  understood  with  imagination  and  humor  also
after  its  kind.  But  we  approach,  in  religious  matters,
the  poetry  of  the  Orient  often  with  a  literal-minded
savagery,  which  must  accuse  us  of  some  deeper  defect
than  simple  lack  of  humor  —  a  lack,  namely,  of  spir-
ituality itself,  which  knows  that  the  lang^ge  of  the


150 RELIGIOUS  F££LIN6  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

spirit  must  be  read  by  the  spirit  also,  and  is  not  to  be
rudely  transferred  into  empirical  text-books  of  physics
and  of  medicine.  I  do  not  doubt  that  in  religion  as  in
human  experience  generally,  each  will  sets  the  level  of
its  own  life,  determines  in  large  measure  its  own  destiny,
and  helps  to  create  spiritual  reality  for  aU  other  human
life.  A  faith  without  a  large  ingredient  of  will,  is  no
faith  at  all.

Nevertheless,  I  must  believe  that  the  great  heave  of
the  West  to  get  a  literal  and  objective  g^p  upon  its
major  religious  objects  is  an  advance,  and  not  a  retro-
gression. We  only  drive  men  to  make  their  religion  all
prose,  when  we  threaten  to  make  it  all  poetry  and  postu-
late. For  poetry  and  postulate  are  pioneer  stages  of
truth,  and  live  by  the  ounce  of  literality  and  truth-
independent  that  is  at  their  heart.  The  large  scope  for
our  own  will  and  creation  is  not  denied :  the  world  is
such  as  to  make  this  creativity  possible.  But  then  our
religion  attaches  itself  to  the  literal  truth  that  the
world  is  suchy  already  such,  as  to  allow  these  develop-
merits  and  to  respond  thus  sensitively  to  our  acts  of
will.  This  prior  element  becomes  our  religious  creed  ;
the  region  of  our  wills  to  create  becomes  the  province
of  art  and  of  morals.

The  destiny  of  religious  truth  to  become  universal
and  imperative  must  detach  it  at  last  from  all  salient
subjectivity;  must  state  and  define  the  scope  of  our
creative  possibilities  within  the  frame  of  that  which
independently  Is.  Literality  is  an  accomplishment  of
deepening  self-consciousness  ;  it  marks  an  achievement
of  personal  equilibrium  and  stability,  which  is  able  to
recognize  corresponding  stability  and  identity  in  the


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH  151

world  with  which  it  deals,  —  not  as  limiting  its  own
freedom,  but  as  upholding  it.  It  has  required  a  Western
integrity  and  self-respect  to  submit  in  obedience  to  the
observation  of  Nature ;  it  is  this  same  integrity  which
requires  in  its  religious  objects  that  to  which  it  must
be  obedient,  as  the  basis  of  whatever  creativity  and
command  it  will  claim.

Early  religious  objects  are  like  play-objects  of  chil-
dren, whose  character  is  partly  real, and  partly  conferred
by  the  player.  This,  says  the  child,  shall  be  a  soldier, —
this  a  good  soldier,  and  this  a  bad  one  —  and  behold
they  are  such.  To  hold  interest,  playthings  must  become
more  autonomous  as  the  child  grows,  more  locomotive,
more  realistic  and  difficult  to  manage.  In  time  they  are
all  to  be  displaced  by  objects  of  the  same  name,  —  but
real.  As  for  these  real  objects,  they  are  more  danger-
ous, more  refractory  ;  they  have  independent  inner  pur-
poses of  their  own ;  our  success  in  dealing  with  them  is
uncertain,  whereas  with  the  play-objects,  whose  inner
thoughts  were  such  only  as  we  imputed  to  them,  our
success  was  a  forgone  conclusion.  Play  is  the  necessary
prologue  to  life,  because,  chiefly,  it  is  necessary  to  meet
life  with  the  habit  of  success.  Not  wholly  different  may
it  have  been  with  the  maturation  of  the  religious  life  in
human  history.  Let  the  religious  instinct  have  its  full
swing  and  success  in  its  traffic  with  divinities  and  world-
auspices  which  are  in  large  part  the  work  of  its  own
will,  if  not  of  its  own  hand.  Thereby  may  it  be  prepared
to  meet  with  the  temper  of  success  the  ear  of  a  Deity
wholly  himself  J  wholly  identical  in  his  own  counsel.
Christianity  marks  the  first  great  inburst  of  the  Orient
into  consciousness  of  the  literal  world,  with  its  literal


162 REU6I0U8  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

human  problem  and  world  sorrow,  the  first  worship  of
the  literal  God  of  that  world.  The  work  of  literalizing
our  creed  is  never  to  be  finished  ;  for  imagination  and
postulate  move  more  rapidly  than  the  leaven  of  objec-
tivity can  spread ;  but  they  move  under  the  protection
of  the  major  literalities.  Upon  these  major  literalities
religion  must  henceforth  and  forever  be  built.  For  ma-
turity is  marked  by  the  preference  to  be  defeated  rather
than  have  a  subjective  success.  We  as  mature  persons
can  worship  only  that  which  we  are  compelled  to  wor-
ship. If  we  are  offered  a  man-made  God  and  a  self-
answering  prayer,  we  will  rather  have  no  God  and  no
prayer.  There  can  be  no  valid  worship  except  that  in
which  man  is  involuntarily  bent  by  the  presence  of  the
Most  Real,  beyond  his  will.

The  problem  of  loyalty  in  religion  is  not  different
from  the  problem  of  loyalty  elsewhere.  It  is  true  that
we  cannot  be  loyal  to  any  tie  that  has  been  imposed
upon  us  without  our  own  consent — this  is  the  first  prem-
ise alike  of  love  and  of  government.  On  the  other
hand,  we  cannot  be  loyal  to  any  tie  that  has  been  fabri-
cated by  a  needless  stroke  of  our  own  will.  Any  object
which  can  hold  our  allegiance  must  therefore  be  at  the
same  time  an  object  of  free  choice,  and  an  object  of
necessary  choice.  In  the  expressions  of  romantic  love
it  is  hard  to  tell  which  is  uppermost :  that  this  bond
between  the  lovers  is  wholly  their  own,  their  exclusive
knowledge  and  will,  the  highest  work  of  their  own  free-
dom ;  or  that  this  bond  is  the  work  of  Fate,  such  as  the
stars  of  heaven  from  all  time  have  destined  to  effect.
Unless  God  is  that  being  for  whom  the  soul  is  likewise
inescapably  destined  by  the  eternal  nature  of  things,


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKER  OF  TRUTH  163

the  worship  of  God  will  get  no  sufficient  hold  on  the
human  heart.  Religion  is  indeed  a  manifestation  of  the
generous  and  creative  side  of  human  nature;  but  its
generosity  is  not  that  of  creation  out  of  whole  cloth^  —
it  is  the  generosity  of  the  spirit  ready  to  acknowledge
the  full  otherness  of  its  objects^  and  to  live  divinely  in
a  world  which  is  divine.

It  is  still  possible  that  reality  in  its  whole  constitution
is  a  matter  of  choice,  though  not  of  our  choice.  The
results  of  your  choice  become  data  to  me;  your  will  is
my  fact:  it  may  be  similarly  that  everything  which  is
fact  to  our  human  consciousness  is  the  creative  choice
of  a  supreme  Will.  On  such  a  supposition,  voluntaristic
views  of  reality  would  be  true  for  God,  but  for  no  other.
It  is  true  that  creativity  is  the  essential  quality  of  the
will ;  and  in  the  constitution  of  reality,  man's  will  is  to
cooperate  with  whatever  other  creative  vnW  there  may
be  in  the  universe.  But  man  has  religion  because  he  is
not  wholly  identical  with  God ;  and  liis  religion  will  be
founded  upon  that  relation  to  reality  in  which  he  is  less
creative  than  dependent, —  or  more  exactly,  in  which
his  creatorship  is  a  result  of  his  dependence.^

For  in  truth,  our  human  life  is  only  an  apprenticeship
in  creativity.  The  small  launches  of  postulation  which
we  make  depend  on  being  quickly  caught  up  and  floated
by  a  tide  of  corroboration  hailing  from  beyond  ourselves.

^  There  are  two  nses  of  the  word  independent  which  need  to  be  dis-
tinguished. One  kind  of  independence  is  mutual,  a  symmetrical  relation:
A  is  independent  of  B,  B  is  independent  of  A.  The  other  kind  is  not
symmetrical:  A  is  independent  of  B,  B  is  dependent  upon  A.  It  is  in  this
latter  sense  that  we  refer  to  *the  independent  Tariable,'  in  mathematical
and  physical  systems.  Reality  has  an  element  of  the  latter  kind  of  inde*
pendenoe  of  finite  purposes,  not  of  the  former.


154 R£LIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

We  leap ;  but  unless  we  are  soon  borne  up  from  beyond
we  make  but  a  sorry  flight.  And  however  far  my  crea-
tivity extends,  my  own  creations  never  become  truth  for
me,  until  seen  through  the  eye  of  another  than  myself
they  are  recognized  by  him  as  fact,  and  so  made  valid
for  me  also.  My  best  creativity  must  win  the  consent
of  the  independent  before  it  can  take  the  status  of  truth,
even  in  my  own  eyes.  The  word  truth  has  in  it  some
reference  not  to  be  suppressed  to  a  wholly  other  than
myself,  to  a  will  wholly  other  than  mine,  as  a  condition
of  the  reality  of  anything  created.  Thus,  all  finite  crea-
tivity contemplates  this  other,  which  by  implication  is
not  a  product  of  its  will ;  it  is  this  radically  independent
reality  which  religion  seeks  to  know,  and  which  alone  it
can  worship.

How,  then,  is  religious  truth  to  be  known  ?  Are  the
realities  of  which  religion  speaks  to  be  discovered  in
experience?  Or  are  they  matters  of  hypothesis,  or  of
inference,  that  is  to  say,  of  reason?  Our  answer  has  been
implied  in  what  has  gone  before:  religious  truth  is
founded  upon  experience.  In  that  imaginary  picture  of
ours  of  the  psychological  birth  of  the  idea  of  God  —
in  which  it  seemed  to  us  as  if  our  resentment,  a  stroke
of  moral  will,  had  spontaneously  made  or  recognized
our  world  a  living  and  responsible  being — we  may  dis-
cern beside  the  stroke  of  will  an  experience  of  discovery.*
If  there  is  any  knowledge  of  God,  it  must  be  in  some

1  Of  some  such  subtle  but  veritable  experience  I  believe  that  all
"  revelation"  is  built.  Revelation  is  knowledge  real  and  empirical  (i.e.,
received  in  relative  passivity),  which  is  more  certain  in  itself  than  in  its
assignable  connections  with  the  main  body  of  ezperienoe  The  logic  of
the  matter  is  worked  out  in  Parts  IV  and  VI.


THE  WILL  AS  A  MAKEB  OF  TRUTH  166

Buch  way  a  matter  of  experience.  This  implies  that  our
experience  of  reality  is  not  confined  to  sensation.  Sen-
sation itself  also  brings  us  into  contact  with  a  reality
which  is  independent  of  our  will ;  sensation  is  a  meta-
physical experience.  And  religious  faith  must  be  built
upon  an  experience  not  wholly  difiPerent  from  sensation ;
but  a  super-sensible  experience^  like  our  experience  of
our  human  fellows ;  an  experience  which  recognizes  the
reality  given  in  sensation  for  what,  in  its  true  nature,
it  is.

And  whatever  is  matter  of  experience  must  also
become,  in  time,  matter  of  reason ;  for  reason  is  but  the
process  of  finding,  by  some  secure  path  of  connection,
a  gpven  experience  from  the  standpoint  of  other  expe-
rience assumed  as  better  known.  The  proof  of  God's
existence  is  (as  Hegel  put  it)  but  the  lifting  of  the  mind
to  God  from  out  of  the  affairs  of  secular  business.  Such
proof,  or  mental  direction,  is  called  for,  not  because
the  religious  objects  are  inaccessible  to  experience,  but
rather  because  they  are  accessible ;  and  being  found  in
experience,  it  is  necessary  to  establish  their  systematic
relations  with  the  rest.  It  is  through  reason  that  the
original  and  evanescent  experience  of  God  becomes
established  as  veritable  truth.

This,  then,  is  the  result  to  which  our  labors  so  far
have  led.  We  cannot  find  a  footing  for  religion  in  feel-
ing: we  must  look  for  valid  religious  ideas.  And  these
ideas  are  not  to  be  taken  at  liberty,  nor  deduced  from
the  conception  of  any  necessary  purpose :  we  are  to  seek
the  truth  of  religion  obediently  in  experience  as  some-
thing which  is  established  in  independence  of  our  finite
wills. So  far  we  have  done  no  more  than  orient  our


156 B£LIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

search. The  task  itself  we  shaU  take  up  in  a  later  part
of  this  book.

In  the  meantime,  while  voluntansm  cannot  define  truth
for  us,  rehgious  truth  least  of  all,  it  remains  the  most  im-
portant and  valuable  of  all  tests  of  truth  and  ballasts  of
judgment  about  truth.  The  question,  ^^  What  kind  of
world  would  best  satisfy  the  requirements  of  our  wills  ?  "
can  never  finally  determine  what  kind  of  world  we,  in
reality,  have.  But  such  questions  may  go  far  toward
clearing  our  mind  about  those  requirements  themselves ;
they  may  give  some  not-unimportant  hints  of  what  we
have  to  expect  of  reality.  To  this  pragmatic  type  of
inference  we  shall  devote  the  next  few  studies.


NOTE  ON  PRAGMATIC  IDEALISM

IN  the  foregoing  chapter  we  have  appealed  from  that  which
we  can  voluntarily  determine  to  that  which  independently
Is,  as  the  necessary  basis  of  religious  truth.  And  this  appeal
is  on  the  whole  valid  and  intelligible.  But  voluntarism  may
recur  to  its  most  searching  and  general  question — a  question
which  we  have  already  dealt  with  by  implication  ^  but  which
may  now  with  advantage  be  considered  by  itself.  It  may
require  of  us  an  account  of  that  independence  which  we  expect
to  discover,  doubting  whether  anything  in  this  universe  can
be  essentially  independent  of  any  other,  doubting  whether  any
real  object  of  ours  is  independent  of  ourselves,  doubting
whether  in  the  last  resort  those  most  real  objects  of  our  best
maturity  are  not  also  there,  in  all  their  inner  freedom  and
autonomy,  by  dint  of  some  deeper  will  of  ours,  some  necessary
or  absolute  will.  Have  we  not  even  now  said  that  we  must
desire  that  our  religious  objects  have  such  independence,  that
we  need  it  as  a  support  for  our  loyalty  ?  and  in  confessing
these  needs  have  we  not  admitted  that  this  independence  may
still  be  regarded  as  the  free  deed  of  our  own  deepest  will,
and  so  no  absolute  independence  ?

It  is  in  eseperience  that  we  meet  with  the  supposedly  inde-
pendent realities  of  nature  and  society  with  that  total  volume
of  Fact  which  is  there  whether  we  will  or  not.  But  experience
has  long  been  known  to  be  no  such  passive  affair  as  it  seems.
Idealism  has  made  clear  to  us  how  much  the  mind  must  con-
tribute to  make  its  experience  what  it  is  :  how  little  is  actually
given^  how  much  is  made  on  the  basis  of  this  little  —  or  noth*
ing  —  from  outside.  We  think  we  find  our  fellow  men,  for
example,  as  independent  metaphysical  entities ;  we  treat  them

^  Both  in  the  above  chapter  and  in  chapter  x,  in  diicuasing  the
meaning  of  ideas.


158 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORT

as  if  they  were  such.  But  even  as  we  obsenred  how  far  the
qualities  and  characters  of  men  are  determined  by  our  own
resolve,  so  we  may  now  see,  striking  deeper,  that  their  very
metaphysical  selfhood,  their  individuality,  is  real  by  consent
rather  than  by  given  fact.  Neither  they  nor  we  find  given
any  substantial  soul  or  individual  in  this  world,  whether  theirs
or  our  own ;  but  our  purpose  is  to  live  in  a  world  of  real
persons,  and  so  &r  as  possible  to  be  real  persons  ourselves.
According  to  this  necessary  aspiration  we  act,  and  cannot  help
acting.  But  in  its  nature  our  whole  environment  of  ^  meta-
physical reality  "  is  no  independent  fact,  passively  received,
but  a  determination  of  our  own  absolute  will.

Such,  in  brief,  are  the  considerations  pressed  upon  us  by
volitional  idealism,  especially  in  the  form  in  which  that  ideal-
ism is  presented  by  Fichte,  and  in  our  own  time  by  Boyoe,
by  Miinsterberg,  by  Rickert,  and  others.  ^  There  is  nothing
true  for  any  subject  in  which  it  is  not  possible  to  trace  the  sign
of  the  subject  and  of  the  deepest  will  of  the  subject.  Reality
itself  can  have  no  other  independence  of  the  thinker  than  that
which  he  wills  it  to  have.

But  valuable  and  morally  important  as  all  this  is,  to  know
how  much  of  what  we  passingly  regard  as  independent  Fact
is  in  the  making  of  our  own  wills,  the  case  of  the  (pragmatic)
idealist  is  not  —  I  must  think  —  complete  ;  nor  can  it  be  com-
pleted. There  may  be  no  assignable  feature  of  my  world  in
which  I  cannot  trace  the  work  of  my  own  will :  it  still  remains
possible  that  there  may  be  no  assignable  feature  of  my  world
in  which  I  cannot  trace  also  the  work  of  something  not-my-
will. Let  me  illustrate  this  situation :

Independence  may  be  symbolized  by  discontinuity  in  geom-
etry, —  let  us  say,  by  a  point  that  stands  off  by  itself. There

1  For  our  present  argument  the  differenoes  between  these  thinkers,
important  as  they  are,  need  not  be  discussed.  A  summary  statement  of
the  position  in  question  may  be  found  in  Royce,  The  World  and  the  Individ-
ual, vol.  I,  pp.  320-342.  The  position  itself  may  be  labelled  voluntaristio
idealism,  or  pragmatic  idealism,  or,  as  Royce  calls  it  in  his  last  book,
absolute  pragmatism. (William  James  and  Other  Essays,  p.  254.)


ON  PRAGMATIC  IDEALISM  159

are  no  independent  points  in  a  circle :  every  one  is  perfectly
bound  and  held  by  the  central  role.  In  ellipses,  there  is  a
struggle  apart  of  centers,  so  to  speak,  —  a  certain  mutual
independence  in  the  two  focal  points,  which  loosens  the  attach-
ment of  the  curve  to  either.  The  central  government  of  other
curves  as  defined  by  their  ^equations,*  is  variously  strong:
in  some  of  them,  single  points  become  detached ;  in  others,
whole  regions  break  out  in  double  boundaries.  Wherever  a
hump  or  projection  or  departure  from  the  perfect  round  is
visible,  there  is  the  sign  of  rebellion,  of  incipient  independence.
In  the  angle^  we  have  a  complete  rupture  of  central  control ;
two  independent  equations  describe  the  two  independent  lines.
With  this  picture  of  dependence  and  independence  in  mind,
we  might  undertake  with  idealistic  eyes  to  examine  the
shapes  of  natural  objects.  In  nature,  our  supposed  ideal-

ist might  report,  we  find  no  straight  lines  and  no  angles:
everywhere,  if  you  examine  closely  enough  you  find  the  round,
the  mark  of  subjection  to  some  center.  In  any  given  organism
you  find  repeated  everywhere  the  same  curve  —  in  eye,  in
nostril,  in  spinal  and  muscular  wave  —  the  same  reference  of
every  element  to  the  type-cell  and  its  central  forces.  This  is
the  report  of  the  idealistic  eye,  which  is  always  on  the  lookout
for  signs  of  centrality  ;  and  which  may  truly  say  that  there
is  nothing  real  and  concrete  which  does  not  betray  these  signs
in  every nameable feature.  But now,  look  at  the

same  shapes  with  other  eyes,  with  those  of  an  imagined  real-
ist, believer  in  the  independent  reality.  Perhaps  there  are  no
straight  lines  in  nature,  he  might  report,  but  on  the  other
hand  there  are  no  circles ;  and  the  higher  the  effort  of  nature,
the  less  is  the  circle  apparent.  Nature,  in  fact,  progresses  out
of  roundness  toward  angularity.  Primitive  animals,  and  sim-
ple orbits,  may  be  nearly  round ;  but  no  developed  animal  is
round.  In  elliptical  and  elongated  shapes  we  see  signs  of
rebellion,  a  new  center  struggling  apart  from  the  original  one.
Humps,  horns,  heads,  tails,  autonomous  internal  organs,  are
BO  many  evidences  of  promising  home-rule. In  animals  which


160 RELIGIOUS  FEELING  AND  RELIGIOUS  THEORY

we  regard  as  highly  deyeloped  we  find  actual  comers  and
discontinuities  of  line :  —  see  the  square-blocked  blooded  bull;
compare  the  man  with  the  infant ;  note  the  loose  play  of  limb
in  quadrupeds  as  compared  with  the  tighter  bound  organs  of
bird  and  fish.  So  in  the  works  of  art  that  follow  nature ;  con-
trast  the  moon-faced  people  drawn  by  a  school-boy  with  the
cross-hatched  sketches  of  any  master  hand.  Or  observe  the
line  of  progress  from  the  round  huts  of  the  ancient  Saxon,
the  igloos  of  the  Eskimo,  the  charcoal-burner's  huts  of  Scot-
land, the  Indian  wigwam,  and  the  like,  —  from  these  to  the
square  walls  of  the  romanized  English  dwelling  and  our
modem  house.  Roundness  is,  in  fact,  the  hopeless  thing  in
nature.  So  far  as  the  organism  is  round  and  continuous
within  itself,  in  so  far  it  must  live  upon  its  own  resources  and
inertia,  and  has  the  promise  of  death.  But  wherever  it  crosses
reality,  even  the  most  primitive  of  organisms,  wherever  it
touches  the  sources  of  its  continued  life  —  in  eating,  in  know-
ing, in  giving  birth  —  there  is  a  breach  in  its  body-wall ;  there
it  confesses  discontinuity  and  dependence  upon  the  independ-
ent. So  the  report  of  the  realistic  eye,  on  the  lookout  for
marks  of  independence,  might  answer  and  supplement  the
report  of  idealism.  To  every  sign  of  dependence  which  the
idealist  can  show,  the  realist  can  show  a  corresponding  sign  of
independence.  We  can  decide,  on  such  showing,  neither  for
one  nor  for  the  other.

To  come  now  from  our  illustration  to  the  matter  itself :  It
is  not  enough  for  the  idealist  to  show  that  the  mark  of  the
ego  and  its  purposes  is  on  every  object  of  knowledge,  and  on
every  phase  of  the  object ;  he  must  also  consider  whether  the
mark  of  the  non-ego  is  not  equally  pervasive.  In  so  far  as  he
fails  to  do  this,  he  leaves  us  dissatisfied.  His  argument  savors
much  of  the  logic  by  which  Thomas  Hobbes  proved  that  by
virtue  of  the  social  contract,  all  acts  of  the  Leviathan  are  in
reality  my  own  acts,  expressions  of  my  own  will  —  no  matter
what  the  Leviathan  may  do,  short  of  threatening  my  own  safety
or  existence. There  is  a  Leviathan  of  our  living  universe  also,


ON  PRAGMATIC ID£ALISM  161

to  whom  we  are  bound  perhaps  by  some  cosmic  ^  contract/
i.e.f  by  some  necessary  consent  of  our  absolute  wills  —  pre-
sumably further  a  wholly  benevolent  Leviathan :  still  his  en*
actments  strike  upon  my  consciousness  with  the  novelty  of
independence  —  fruits  of  a  purpose  which  may  include  mine,
but  is  not  included  in  mine.

It  is  in  vain  also  that  pragmatic  idealism  shows  that  the
universe  is  everywhere  what  I  would  will  it  to  be  if  my  will
were  wholly  self-knowing ;  or  that  when  the  scientific  mind
submits  itself  empirically  to  the  independent  fact,  it  expresses
not  alone  its  own  purpose  but  its  harmony  with  a  great  spiritual
fabric  of  conspiring  purposes :  these  things  may  be  true,  but
they  do  not  answer  our  question.  There  is  nothing  in  reality
but  that  my  will  helps  to  make  it  what  in  my  experience  it
becomes :  but  is  there  anything  in  reality  that  I  could  wholly
have  created  ?  is  there  anything  that  my  purposes  can  wholly
define?  The  universe  fulfills  my  will ;  but  it  is  not  definable
as  the  fulfilment  of  my  will :  it  is  That  Which  fulfills  my  will
—  and  much  more  besides  ;  first  fulfilling  its  own  independent
will.  The  universe  has  its  own  soul,  and  its  own  counsel  which
is  not  mine. This  is  its  independence.^

We  admit  the  positive  side  of  the  idealistic  argument ;  what-
ever is  real  for  us  is  real  with  our  consent  and  cooperation.
As  for  its  negative  part,  that  nothing  in  reality  is  independent
of  our  will,  we  would  turn  tables  on  the  idealistic  argument
In  denying  the  reality  of  this  independence,  does  the  idealist
not  implicitly  acknowledge  that  very  independence  ?  For  he
means  to  make  a  statement  to  which  we  must  assent,  consult-
ing not  first  our  wills  and  purposes,  but  solely  the  truth  as  it
is.  By  reality,  idealist  and  realist  alike  mean  that  which  first
is,  and  afterward  is  in  accord  with  our  purposes.

He  who  says  that  individuality  is  a  postulate,  not  a  fact ;

^  This  point  ii  further  diiciissed  and  illastrated  in  the  explanatory
essay  *'The  knowledge  of  independent  reality."  The  geometrical
illnatration  aboTe  used  was  originally  a  part  of  the  article  from  which
this  essay  was  taken.


162 REUGIOUS  FEELING  AND  BELI6I0US  THEORY

he  who  dechires  that  metaphysical  being  is  an  aspiration  ot
purpose,  not  a  matter  of  experience ;  is  bound  to  accoont  to  us
for  the  source  of  these  ideak  and  purposes.  Ideals  do  not  come
out  of  the  void :  postuhites  and  moral  principles  are  not  whis-
pered to  us  in  the  form  of  *'*'  innate  ideas "' :  it  is  on  the  spur
of  experience  that  our  wills  adopt  their  aims  and  their  deep-
est meanings.  Whatever  is  present  in  ideal,  is  first  present
in  independent  reality.  In  the  order  of  existence  we  are  first
passive  and  then  active :  though  no  analysis  can  separate  our
passivity  from  our  activity.


PART  in

THE  NEED  OF  GOD
A  SERIES  OF  FREE  MEDITATIONS


PART  III


PRELIMINARY


WE  do  not  know,  in  detail,  what  kind  of  world  we
would  desire  to  live  in.  Wisdom  to  devise  such
a  world  we  slowly  acquire,  and  in  infinite  time  may
possess;  meantime  we  tend  to  assume  that  our  per-
fectly enlightened  wish  would  correspond  not  too  re-
motely with  the  general  description  of  the  world  as
we  find  it  —  at  least  that  it  would  more  nearly  ap-
proach these  curious  and  mysterious  arrangements  than
we  now  fathom.  Further,  there  are  certain  major  fea-
tures of  our  world  whose  value,  or  part  of  whose  value,
can  he  made  out.  In  adorning  the  figure  of  God  the
wishes  of  men  have  certainly  had  large  play :  it  is  not
unimportant  to  enquire  how  much  of  this  wish  and  will
is  permanently  valid,  how  much  is  the  passing  work  of
a  fancy  too  little  self-conscious.  We  have  been  told  in
these  latter  days  that  a  pluralistic  world  would  be  better
than  a  world  of  One  Being ;  that  a  world  without  an
Absolute  would  be  wholly  as  good  as  with  one;  and
we  have  often  been  assured  that  God  is  no  certain  addi-
tion to  human  happiness,  most  lately  by  Mr.  McTaggart.
Emboldened  by  these  representations  we  may  make  a
few  tentative  excursions  into  this  pleasant  field  of
world-willing  before  girding  ourselves  to  the  more  stren-
uous labor  of  truth-finding  —  not  forgetting,  however,
that  the  question  what  we  need  is  also  a  question  having
a  true  answer.


CHAPTER  Xm

THE  NEED  OF  UNITY:  MONISM  AS  BEARING

ON  OPTIMISM.

MONISM  may  be  optimistic  or  pessimistic,  as  we
conceive  the  One  Being  to  be  good,  bad,  or  indif-
ferent. Schopenhauer's  One  was  blind,  and  its  products
fit  only  to  be  swallowed  up  again.  But  monism  at  least
permits  optimism,  since  a  world  that  is  One  has  a  chance
of  being  safe.  It  may  even  be  too  safe.  To  the  minds
of  pluralistic  writers  monism  offers  too  little  scope  for
freedom  and  adventure;  there  is  not  enough  leeway
for  risk  and  radical  disaster ;  not  opportunity  enough  for
ultimate  enterprise  and  knightly  peril ;  not  enough  sum-
mons to  courage,  to  world-winning  or  world-losing  wa-
gers and  commitments.  Because  of  all  the  surplus  pro-
tection of  monism,  men  are  made  flabby ;  their  skins  are
safe,  but  their  morals  are  in  danger ;  hence,  the  world
of  monism  proves  no  such  safe  world  after  all,  when
you  consider  the  whole  man.  A  true  optimism  must  take
the  side  of  pluralism.  This  seems  to  me  a  fair  and  fruit-
promising  issue ;  for  surely  we  will  have  no  world  in
which  it  is  not  possible  to  be  optimistic,  and  without
danger  to  our  moral  fiber.  Let  us  then  attack  our  sub-
ject in  this  way :  considering  different  brands  of  mon-
ism (for  there  are  different  brands),  and  enquiring  what
brand  of  optimism  (for  there  are  different  brands  of  this
also)  is  compatible  with  each  brand  of  monism.


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  167


A  few  elementary  observations  may  be  made  at  the
outset,  and  got  out  of  the  way.

First,  no  optimism  is  possible  without  some  kind  of
monism.  For  in  order  to  think  well  of  your  world,  and
expect  good  from  it,  your  world  must  at  least  have  a
character.  It  must  afford  a  basis  for  expectations  or
probabilities.  If  the  world  were  simply  random,  there
would  be  no  such  thing  as  probability  in  it,  nothing
to  build  a  reasonable  hope  or  prospect  on.  There  is  no
pluralist  who  does  not  limit,  and  very  profoundly  limit,
the  sort  of  chance  and  accident  which  he  admits  into
his  world-picture.  Change  occurs,  new  things  are  born,
forces  of  many  kinds  drive  at  large,  free  individuals
assert  themselves  freely :  but  all  this  variety  and  novelty
takes  place  in  digestible  quantities.  New  creations  are
to  be  noted;  but  they  begin  small,  in  a  more  or  less
considerate  manner,  appearing  in  homes  and  other
places  where  they  can  be  taken  care  of.  The  pluralistic
universe  does  not  blurt  and  burst  out  in  erratic  and
unmeasurable  Facts,  of  unheard-of  Kinds.  The  most
revolutionary  things  that  happen  there  are  revolutions :
each  quietly  contained  for  a  time,  in  the  form  of  a  new
idea,  within  the  compass  of  some  man's  head.  The  Mind
is  in  fact  the  hearth  and  brooding^place  of  such  wild
Force  and  Novelty  and  Freedom  as  the  pluralist  most
wishes  to  make  way  for.  And  the  fortunate  circumstance
that  these  things  have  any  brooding-place  at  all  shows
how  important  it  is,  even  in  pluralistic  eyes,  that  the
new  should  come  with  some  reference  to  the  old ;  the
Many  be  not  too  fatally  disruptive  of  the  One. The


168  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

world  that  any  of  us  want  to  live  in  has,  then,  some
character  of  its  own,  innate  or  acquired,  and  hence
some  unity  upon  which  any  man  must  build  his
hopes.

Second,  no  optimism  is  possible  without  some  kind  of
doubt  whether  things  are  what  they  seem ;  without  look-
ing behind  appearances.  If  the  character  of  the  world  is
Good,  or  has  good  possibilities,  this  does  not  appear  upon
the  surface  of  experience.  No  justification  for  either
optimism  or  monism  can  be  found  there.  The  surface
of  experience  is  pluralistic  enough,  tossing,  various,  dis-
tracted, challenging  sanity  if  one  lets  himself  go.  And
this  surface,  if  it  has  any  general  character,  is  not  more
good  than  bad.  The  idea  of  evil  did  not  arise  in  the
mind  without  illustration  in  experience :  it  is  from  this
surface  that  good  and  bad  get  their  flavor  and  burden
of  contrast.  No  man  can  be  an  optimist,  then,  without
going  behind  the  superficial  returns.  The  character
of  the  world  upon  which  he  bases  his  judgment  must
be  a  real  character,  as  opposed  to  apparent  character :
your  optimist  must  be  something  of  a  metaphysician,
something  of  a  seer.  He  is  an  optimist  only  because  he
has  caught  or  achieved  some  glimpse  of  the  Whole,  and
some  Idea  therewith,  which  permits  him  a  confident  judg^
ment  about  the  ultimate  forces  and  grounds  of  sensible
experience:  the  facts  he  has  about  world-character
must  be  bottom  factSy  or  they  are  worthless  as  a  basis
for  expectations.

Every  optimism,  then,  involves  a  judgment  about  a
Reality,  which  has  a  character,  and  is  therefore  One.  It
may  appear  to  the  judger  that  the  unity  of  the  world
is  only  achievable,  not  an accomplished  fact :  but  if


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  169

the  world  is  even  acbievably  One,  then  it  is  already  One
in  a  real,  though  more  attenuated  sense ;  it  has  a  char-
acter which  makes  it  capable  of  being  pulled  together.

n

Optimism,  we  have  said,  must  come  from  getting  our
world  into  so  much  of  a  real  unity  that  we  can  pass
judgment  upon  it  as  a  whole.  We  may  now  observe  that
this  unity  must  be  of  a  fairly  substantial  sort.  There
are  types  of  monism  too  attenuated  to  justify  any  gen*
nine  optimism. Let  us  describe  one  or  two  such.

Our  world  has,  for  example,  a  certain  formal  unity.
This  unity  is  to  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  all  objects  of
experience,  however  various,  are  all  alike  objects  of  ex-
perience :  must  have  so  much  in  common  as  is  implied
in  their  being  thinkable  by  the  same  subject,  all  contain-
able within  his  comprehensive  background  of  objectivity
and  time.  No  one  can  mention  any  possible  degree  of
frantic  chaos,  but  that  in  mentioning  it  as  an  idea  of  his,
he  has  made  a  unity  of  it ;  has  even  presented  it  to  us
in  a  frame.  Beat  the  bush  of  self-contradiction  with
sufficient  skill  and  persistency ;  always  some  such  unity
can  be  corralled  in  the  liveliest  pluralism  statable.  But
any  pluralism  may  grant  you  these  bonds,  without  sub-
stantial menace  to  liberty :  aU  fish  of  the  sea  are  also
already  caught  in  the  fisherman's  ideaj  and  if  not  fur-
ther caught  need  not  resent  their  captivity.  But  our
world  must  be  further  caught,  if  we  are  to  be  optimistic
pluralists;  this  degree  of  unity  if  it  goes  no  farther  can
support  no  concrete  expectations.  For  anything,  how-
ever disastrous,  that  could  be  fancied,  would  by  the  same
reasoning  fit  into  the  same  frame  of  unity. Our  opti-


170  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

mism  must  affect  the  contents  of  our  picture ;  the  unity
must  obtain  in  the  designs  of  the  object,  as  well  as  in  its
external  relations  to  the  subject/

But  there  are  also  objective  and  concrete  unities
which  are  still  too  attenuated.  Idealism  knows  of  such
unities,  discoverable  by  applying  this  same  method
of  self-contradiction  but  more  thoroughly.  It  may  be
shown  that  this  world  of  ours  has  a  one-ness  of  Life,
or  even  of  Purpose.  If  the  real  world  has  a  conscious
selfhood,  there  is  very  substantial  basis  here  for  expec-
tations. But  hardly  enough  for  expectations  of  any
definite  human  color.  For  would  we  not  have  to
enquire  what  reference  such  world-purpose  might  have
to  our  own  special  situation;  further,  what  fixes  the
course  of  such  purpose,  spreading  its  career  out  in  time
as  if  by  some  resistance ;  whether,  then,  in  any  finite
time  the  purpose  reaches  fulfilment ;  and  whether  any
segment  of  history,  such  as  may  concern  humanity,  is  to
move  toward  or  away  from  the  goal  of  our  (rood,  in  the
immeasurable  rhythms  of  cosmic  history?  The  fact  of
the  simple  existence  of  a  sympathetic  purpose  at  the
bottom  of  Reality  may  have  some  positive  value,  quite
apart  from  any  practical  expectations ;  a  question  which
we  may  later  on  enquire  into.^  But  considered  from
our  present  standpoint  of  expectation,  any  such  unity
might  consistently  admit  into  its  outline  a  retrogression,
damnation,  or  even  extinction  of  human  experience,  if
there  is  nothing  more  known  of  it.  Has  not  the  good
God  existed  for  long  ages  in  the  same  world  with  hell

^  And  Buoh  like  external  relations  between  its  own  parts  as  are
inTolved  in  that  common  relation  to  the  sabject,  external  to  aU  of  them.
»  Chapter  XV.


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  171

and  all  devils,  hell  getting  steadily  fuller? — and  may  not
your  One-purpose  do  as  much,  or  even  more  ?  There
would  seem  to  be  still  plenty  of  risk  in  such  a  world
for  the  most  reckless  pluralist.  The  Great  Hunter
crashes  through  the  World-forest  in  pursuit  of  Hi8
quarry  —  not  spoiling  nor  heeding  our  small  chase,  add-
ing if  anything  one  more  and  chief  excitement  thereto,
that  He  do  not  tread  on  us  !

In  fact,  must  it  not  be  said  of  any  purely  meta-phy sical
monism  that  it  leaves  our  human  situation  and  prob-
lems much  the  same  as  before  ?  It  is  astonishing,  when
we  stop  to  consider,  how  much  monism  we  can  define
without  affording  any  substantial  footing  for  optimism
— hence  without  cancelling  any  of  the  undesirable  risks
of  existence,  to  say  nothing  of  encroaching  on  those  de-
sirable  risks  which  pluralism  wishes  to  preserve.  We
see  how  it  is  that  pragmatic  objections  to  monism  have
been  of  two  opposite  tenors :  one,  that  the  world  of
monism  is  a  '^  block-universe  "  closing  up  all  avenues
of  chance;  the  other,  that  Unity  is  a  wholly  ineffective
and  meaningless  bond,  making  no  difference  whatever
in  our  outlook  upon  experience.  It  is  worth  while,  as
against  the  first  objection,  to  bring  forward  the  second:
a  single  organism  certainly  does  not  ohne  weiteres  im-
ply a  petrified  organism.  It  is  open  to  doubt  whether
the  fact  of  unity,  by  itself,  implies  anything  significant
about  the  working-character  of  the  thing  unified.  Let
us  put  the  matter  thus :  if  our  monism  is  such  as  to  pinch
the  universe  together  only  at  that  point  from  which  it
emanates-  whether  in  one cosmii andtemporal  point
of  beginning,  or  in  one  permanent  basis  and  ;>re^uppo-
sition— such  monism  gets  no  control  oyer  the  wild


172  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

horses  of  Becoming ^  whether  in  our  favor  or  against  us.
Enough  of  this  kind  of  monism.

Ill

If  monism  is  to  be  of  service  to  our  expectations,  it
must  affect  the  apparent  as  well  as  the  Real ;  we  must
indeed  go  beneath  the  surface  of  experience,  where
good  and  bad  meet  on  equal  terms,  but  only  for  the
sake  of  prophetic  control  over  that  same  sur&ce  in  its
further  developments.  Monism  begpins  to  offer  signifi-
cant basis  for  our  prospects  when  it  seizes  upon  the
actual  processes  of  the  world,  and  declares  that  they  are
all  cases  of  One  Process.  In  the  nature  of  that  One
Process  can  be  read  something  of  the  presumable
outcome.

All  the  processes  that  we  know  are  operations  carried
out  against  resistance ;  the  unification  of  the  processes
may  well  begin  by  a  unification  of  the  resistances,  bring-
ing all  practical  problems  together  into  one  practical
world-problem.  Unifications  which  thus  begin  with
unifying  the  resistances  seem  to  set  up  dualisms  instead
of  monisms — as  of  light  against  darkness,  Persian  God
against  Persian  Devil,  spirit  against  matter,  and  the  like.
But  such  dualisms  are  not  far  from  monism.  For  clearly
there  can  be  no  well-founded  hope  for  good  unless  there
is  some  estimate  of  the  resistance  thereto ;  and  there  can
be  no  estimate  of  the  resistance  unless  such  resistance
has  its  own  unity.

Any  theory  of  the  world  which  represents  all  the
forces  of  the  world  as  cases  of  one  Force ;  all  laws  as
cases  of  one  Law ;  is  thus  unifying  our  problem,  and
helping  man  to  see  his  task  as  the  task  of  spirit  every-


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  173

where  in  a  world  of  Nature.  Such  is  the  monism  of
natural  science :  and  indeed  might  not  science  be  fairly
described  as  the  effort  to  reduce  the  practical  problems
of  man  to  one  problem  ?  Our  apparently  hundred-headed
problem  is  One,  and  this  one  problem  is  the  only  prob-
lem there  is  in  the  cosmos.  Whatever  the  ^  trend  of
evolution/  whatever  impulse  there  is  in  the  life  of  the
world,  all  becomes  merged  in,  and  subordinated  to,  the
human  undertaking:  the  world-problem  is  our  prob-
lem. Whence  it  appears  that  human  preferences  and
aversions  as  they  become  self-knowing  are  absolutely
valid —  there  being  no  Great  Hunter  with  object  other
than  our  own.

Such  monism  as  this  of  effort  and  resistance  is  the
necessary  beginning  of  any  concretely  significant  mon-
ism. So  long  as  resistances  are  plural,  we  are  slaves  to
each  one  severally ;  the  mastery  of  one  gives  no  aid  in
the  mastery  of  another.  There  can  be  valid  hope  only  in
a  world  in  which  the  conquest  of  one  difficulty  is  already
a  partial  conquest  of  another.  Monism  of  this  sort  does
actually  wipe  out  certain  conceivable  chances  for  hero-
ism, if  heroism  consists  in  infinite  willingness  to  begin
as:ain  at  Zero.  But  it  does  not  eliminate  the  freedom  and
variety  of  life  —  it  alone  makes  such  freedom  and  variety
possible.  For  the  Many,  in  such  case,  are  more  tyran-
nous than  the  One  ;  in  winning  subjection  to  one  master
we  gain  foot-looseness  from  indefinite  tyranny  of  the
mob.  In  cosmic  as  in  political  affairs,  man  has  many
powers  over  him ;  and  unless  he  find  some  one  power
in  which  the  powers  of  capital,  of  custom,  of  church,  of
the  mandarinate,  of  social  pretence  have  their  match
and  solvent  he  is  slave  indeed,  though  he  live  under  a


1Y4  THE  N££D  OF  GOD

"  free  "  constitution.  Freedom  from  the  powers  is  found
in  subjection  to  Power;  as  freedom  from  the  ten  com-
mandments is  found  in  subjection  to  the  one  and  great
commandment.  Hence  monism  is  at  once  fixity  and  free-
dom from  fixity ;  the  only  possible  condition  under  which
freedom  in  the  world  of  concrete  enterprise  can  be  won.

It  is  necessary^  then,  to  any  optimism,  that  there
should  be  unity  in  the  conscious  processes  of  the  world;
and  especially  a  unity  of  the  resistances  or  evils,  which
such  processes  have  to  meet.  But  this  is  not  a  sufficient
foundation  for  optimism.  Optimism  requires  a  further
judgment,  namely,  that  the  Real  is  the  good,  and  not
the  evil:  i.e.,  that  evil  is  an  essentially  conquerable
thing,  not  a  reality  co-ordinate  with  the  purpose  that  is
against  it.  And  herewith,  as  monism  begins  to  be  sig-
nificant, it. begins  also  to  justify  the  pluralistic  criticism:
by  reading  the  outcome  into  the  prior  constitution  or
nature  of  the  case,  the  world  is  made  too  safe,  —  and
the  nerve  of  our  responsibility,  as  well  as  the  zest  of
our  personal  importance  is  relaxed.

It  is  obvious  that  this  judgment,  that  the  Real  is  the
good  and  not  the  evil,  stands  at  a  critical  pass  in  this
problem  of  monism.  It  is  a  judgment  of  many  shades,
and  some  conclusion  as  to  its  worth  may  be  gained  by
considering  how  it  is  actually  used  in  human  affairs.

IV

The  implicit  assumption  of  the  scientific  view  of  things
is  that  every  evil  is  to  be  remedied  in  time  by  our  own
efforts.  Conversely,  there  is  a  type  of  reaction  to  every
definable  ill  of  our  human  condition  which  we  might
well  describe  as  the  scientific  reaction  ;  that  is,  the  effort


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  176

to  refer  the  ill  in  question  to  causeSy  to  conceive  it  as
a  form  assumed  under  definite  conditions  by  the  one
world-energy,  and  by  mastering  the  conditions  to  mas-
ter  the  ill.  The  evil^  in  short,  must  be  thoroughly
examined  and  known ;  to  overcome  it,  we  must  first
become  fully  conscious  of  it.

But  our  world  seems  to  be  so  constituted  that  many
a  bad  condition  is  not  best  cured  that  way.  It  happens
at  times  that  an  invalid  may  make  a  better  bid  for  health
by  ignoring  his  disease  than  by  enquiring  into  it.  As
for  our  moral  faults,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  reach  a
cure  by  the  scientific  reaction  alone.  If  we  tend  to
ignore  our  own  sins  and  win  our  moral  salvation  in  large
part  through  determined  self-respect —  there  is  in  this
instinctive  attitude  much  moral  lethargy,  no  doubt,  but
some  modicum  of  natural  health  of  spirit.  Willingness
to  confront  every  evil,  in  ourselves  and  outside  ourselves,
with  the  blunt,  factual  conscience  of  science;  willing-
ness to  pay  the  full  causal  price  for  the  removal  of  the
blemish :  this  kind  of  inte&frity  can  never  be  dispensed
with  in  any  optimistic  program.  And  yet  we  Lnot
radically  cure  evil  that  way :  the  method  oi  justice  works
perfectly  only  in  the  world  of  scientific  objects  them-
selves, world  of  unconscious  things.  Wherever  conscious-
ness enters  we  have  to  combine  the  scientific  reaction
with  another,  one  which  involves  turning  away  from  the
defect  and  asserting  in  effect  that  the  evil  is  less-than-
real,  that  the  real  is  the  good.  There  is  a  self-righting
tendency  in  conscious  beings  which  has  only  analogies
more  or  less  distant  in  nature.  The  system  of  movements
in  such  a  group  as  the  solar  system  has  a  certain  self-
righting  tendency ;  a  gyroscope  will  resume  its  own  plane


176  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

after  disturbance  not  too  gpreat ;  any  living  organism  has
still  more  remarkable  self-restoring  properties:  but  when
we  are  dealing  with  consciousness  on  its  own  ground,
or  with  any  product  of  consciousness,  with  systems  per-
sonal or  social  or  political,  self-righting  becomes  the
essential  thing  in  aU  righting.  This  is  the  grain  of  truth
in  the  former  laiasezfaire  theories.  This  is  the  impor-
tant truth  in  the  instinctive  dislike  of  attacking  the
social  evil  and  its  affiliations  with  the  hammer  and  tongs
of  scientific  procedure  and  publicity.  In  these  regions,
our  world  upholds  a  policy  of  working  out  the  good  by
over-attention  to  it  and  under^ttention  to  its  opposite.
The  world  behaves  as  if  the  good  were  the  real.

I  venture  to  say  that  there  can  be  no  real  optimism
on  the  scientific  basis  with  its  type  of  monism.  For  not
alone  are  evils  too  numerous  to  be  disposed  of  in  this  way.
It  is  also  true  that  progress,  with  its  income  of  new
pains  and  troubles,  would  involve  continually  greater
and  not  lesser  suffering.  If  it  were  the  destiny  of
human  life  to  pursue  all  evil  by  proportionate  attention,
becoming  first  fully  conscious  of  it  and  of  its  conditions,
a  just  consideration  of  the  way  in  which  life  deepens
both  in  sensitivity  and  in  demand  must  open  the  pros-
pect of  our  knowing  pain  and  evil  not  less  intensely,
but  more  intensely  forever.  Men  differ  much  in  their
disposition  to  yield  the  scientific  method  to  the  more
monistic  method  of  ignoring  evil.  Some  are  unable  to
enjoy  a  good  until  they  think  they  have  earned  it,  which
earning  is  another  name  for  knowing  the  conditions  and
complying  with  them,  conditions  fixed  in  the  unity  of
nature.  Others  demand  without  earning,  and  receive
much  of  what  they  demand. But  even  the  most  earn-


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  177

ing  natures  earn  less  than  they  think.  For  on  the  level
of  experience-surface  there  is  an  overcrowding  of  possi-
bilities, too  many  features  of  the  world  to  be  attended
to ;  every  man  must  choose  which  aspects  of  his  world
he  will  look  upon,  forgetting  the  overwhelming  major-
ity; and  every  man  is  led  (even  though  he  like  to  be
a  pessimist)  to  select  those  aspects  which  best  suit  his
habit  of  thought  and  make  a  world-harmony  for  him.
Every  one  must  fall  back  at  last  on  vis  medicatrix
naturcB  when  working  out  his  destiny^  making  mute
appeal  to  the  proposition  that  the  real  is  the  good^  and
the  good  the  real  par  excellence.


Optimism,  I  say,  requires  this  degree  of  monism; —
belief  in  an  individual  Reality  not-ourselves  which  makes
for  rightness,  and  which  actually  accomplishes  right-
ness  when  left  to  its  own  working.  Does  this,  then,
eliminate  moral  courage  from  the  universe?  making
things,  on  the  whole,  too  secure?  It  must  be  answered
that  there  are  right  and  wrong  ways  of  taking  this  prin-
ciple, which  in  itself  permits  moral  laxity  and  also
admits  moral  enterprise,  as  in  a  world  of  free  men  we
should  desire  —  for  what  moral  worth  can  there  be  in  a
strenuosity  which  is  a  necessary  condition  of  existence
itself,  as  in  a  pluralistic  universe  it  must  be  ?

If  ignoring  evil  becomes  a  conscious  principle  for
saving  personal  effort,  it  is  bad — and  also  defeats  itself.
Evil  self -savingly  ignored  is  not  cured :  the  monism  in
question  is  not  mechanical  in  its  operation.  When  seek-
ing forgiveness  and  getting  it  becomes  routine,  it  ceases
to  minister  to  moral  progress. The  ship  of  state  has


178  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

large  inherent  tendencies  to  go  right,  even  if  the  hehnsr
man  is  tipsy  and  negligent  —  else  what  state  could  last :
hut  when  the  helmsman  begins  to  exploit  this  qual-
ity, adopting  laissez  faire  policies  for  his  own  holiday,
the  way  to  shipwreck  is  not  long.  Selective  emphasis
becomes  insolence  when  the  goodness  of  Reality  is  made
a  personal  perquisite.

The  true  use  of  the  principle  seems  to  lie  in  this
direction :  that  the  evil  is  not  merely  forgotten,  but  genr
uinely  disposed  of  by  that  to  which  the  attention  is
turned.  If  I  assume  of  my  neighbor  that  the  reality  of
him  is  good,  and  that  his  faults  are  relatively  non-real,
this  assumption  is  justified  only  as  I  actually  grasp  his
faults  as  the  seamy  sides  of  his  virtues,  having  their
reality  and  tbeir  ultimate  relief  in  the  heightened  life
of  those  same  positive  qualities,  —  his  wrath  as  part  of  his
spirity  his  hesitation  as  a  phase  of  his  self-consciousness —
to  be  relieved  by  more  self-consciousness,  his  shiftlessness
an  incident  of  his  ideality  —  to  be  remedied  by  a  more
vigorous  ideality,  not  by  mere  battle  against  shiftless-
ness. Of  ourselves,  we  know  that  when  life  is  at  low  tide
our  very  strength  stands  against  us  and  becomes  our
fault  and  our  vicionsness ;  whereas,  when  life  is  full,  our
sin  becomes  our  character,  and  fights  for  the  good  we
seek.  Ignoring,  then,  is  justified  when  the  ill  is  known;
known  as  an  alterable  aspect  of  a  reality  which  is  good.
The  whole  necessary  policy  of  efficient  living,  that  of
concentrating  upon  a  few  positive  aims,  to  the  neglect
of  much  detail,  is  morally  and  practically  justified  (where
it  is  justified)  only  by  a  conscious  monism  of  the  sort
we  have  been  describing.  In  fine,  any  and  every  radical
commitment  to  a  single  aim,  heroic  adoption  of  a  cause


THE  NEED  OF  UNITY  179

as  one's  own  fate,  ultimate  risk  and  wager  against  des-
tiny, can  be  justified  whether  before  morals  or  even  good
sense,  only  if  the  meaning  of  the  commitment  in  ques-
tion is  this :  that  this  thing  to  which  I  g^ve  myself  is  a
character  of  the  One  which  is  real  and  good,  destined
to  endure,  held  in  place  when  established  by  all  the  self-
righting  forces  of  the  universe.  The  moral  good  which
pluralism  demands  can  only  be  had,  I  say,  on  the  basis
of  the  kind  of  monism  here  defined.

Justice  and  science  pit  wrong  against  wrong  to  make
right ;  thereby  making  good  commensurate  and  homo-
geneous with  evil.  Justice  and  science  must  smell  full
deep  of  every  ill-odor  in  order  to  discard  it.  If  we  doubt
the  universal  worth  of  this  method,  it  is  because  we
judge  evil  to  be  a  shade  less  real  than  the  good,  some-
thing that  can  be  displaced  to  some  extent  by  simply
finding  its  place  in  a  positive  view  of  things — reduc-
ing its  evil-ness  to  an  error  of  position.  This  gives  us
our  responsible  right  to  discontinuity.  Such  a  view,  we
may  note,  also  involves  a  judgment  that  Reality  is  akin
to  consciousness;  for  in  terms  of  the  causal  network,
there  is  no  other  than  the  scientific  method  possible.

VI

It  remains  to  be  noticed  that  the  monism  here
described  leaves  a  degree  of  pluralism  in  the  universe.
Any  principle  of  selection,  which  admits  certain  ele-
ments of  experience  into  the  Real  and  excludes  others,  is
incompletely  monistic.  The  mind  is  a  unity  in  process
of  being  made  up ;  in  which  process  much  that  presents
itself  is  bundled  out,  discarded,  as  not  to  be  knitted  in
with  the  unity  here  being  constituted :  and  whatever  is


180  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

true  of  the  single  mind,  if  the  mind  is  an  integral  part
of  the  universe^  is  true  also  of  the  universe.  If  any
materials  of  consciousness  appear  to  the  mind  as  loosely
attached^  detachable,  actually  detached  and  excluded  —
then  in  Reality  they  are  thus  detached  and  excluded.
Any  experience  dropped  by  us  is  dropped  absolutely.
Even  though  the  One  may  attend  to  what  we  let  go,
our  letting  go  is  one  of  the  absolute  facts;  a  stitch
dropped  by  ourselves  is  dropped  by  the  World,  irrevo-
cably dropped.  The  scientific  method  of  disposing  of
evil  is  more  completely  preservative  of  the  outcast  ele-
ments, hence  in  this  respect  more  monistic :  science
regards  well  what  it  will  exclude,  whereby  the  thing  to
be  excluded  gains  a  kind  of  immortality  in  memory,  at
least  in  the  records  and  working  of  the  mind  —  sci-
entific exclusion  is  thus  no  wholesale  exclusion.  But
otherwise  the  mind  deals  more  ruthlessly  with  its  con-
tents. Forgetting  drops  much  experience-stufiE  out  of
sight  that  has  not  been  refused  in  the  movements  of
attention.  Discontinuities  abound  in  our  inner  history,
snapping  off  of  thought-threads,  wanderings,  unfinished
business  —  never  to  be  finished ;  moral  discontinuities
also,  in  forgiveness  and  self-forgivenesses.  Sleepings
and  wakings,  the  fresh  starts  without  which  every
finite  will  would  speedily  be  brought  to  despair, —
through  all  such  our  mental  and  moral  world,  so  far
as  its  contents  are  concerned,  takes  on  the  aspect  of
a  series  of  geologic  faults  —  departs  from  a  scrupu-
lous monism  in  which  every  item  is  an  equally  valid
member  of  the  Whole,  by  quite  unmeasurable  amount.
There  is  no  monism  on  the  level  of  events.  History
falls  by quantities  into  the  abyss, and  this  is  the


THE  NEED  OF  UNITT  181

unstinted  opportunity  for  our  sifting  —  even  yet  all
too  un-radical.

The  only  hope  of  finding  the  Real  to  be  one  and
good  is  in  such  sif  ting-right,  in  the  circumstance  that
the  universe  is  not  utterly  organic,  and  that  we  are  not
compelled  to  absorb  into  our  structure  all  the  false
scaffolding  we  have  raised.  Unless  our  monism  were  thus
saturated  with  pluralism  and  absolute  death,  we  should
have  no  power  to  move  under  the  burden  of  our  past.
As  old  men,  dying,  free  the  race  from  their  f ormuke,
so  our  deeds  and  memories  die,  and  leave  us  new  from
point  to  point ;  links  drop  out  of  sight  in  evolution  and
in  history;  whole  vistas  of  character  evaporate  into  the
night,  unpreserved,  unpreservable  by  diary  and  mem-
oir. Whatever  the  ultimate  goal  of  Reality  there  is
leisure  for  working  it  out;  the  creator  has  been  gen-
erous with  time,  with  the  material  of  existence,  the
cloth  of  history,  and  most  of  it  is  wasted.  It  looks  at
times  as  if  he  had  been  equally  prodigal  of  men.  Only
the  Nature  of  things  is  One  and  Good ;  all  the  ^^  empiri-
cal stuff"  is  as  yet  unmeasured  and  un judged.

There  is,  if  this  view  be  valid,  no  fixed  quantity  of
evil  fortune  mapped  out  in  advance  for  every  one ;  no
fated  ^^peck  of  dirt"  for  each  one  to  eat:  there  is  room
for  just  such  hastening  or  retarding  the  One  process  as
there  seems,  in  our  consciousness  of  freedom,  to  be.  The
One  stands  there,  as  our  opportunity,  not  as  mechanical
necessity.  The  monism  of  the  world  is  such  only  as  to
give  meaning  to  its  pluralism;  our  belonging  to  God
such  only  as  g^ves  us  greater  hold  upon  ourselves.  True,
the  heights  of  monism  and  of  necessity  we  have  not
scaled ;  nor  shall  we  here  attempt  them. Suffice  it  to


182  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

have  shown  that  for  the  good  of  meD,  for  their  good-
hope  as  also  for  their  rightful  darings  and  commit-
ments, some  concrete  conscious  monism  is  a  necessary
condition.


CHAPTER  XIV

THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE: REFLECTIONS
ON  ITS  PRACTICAL  WORTH

HAS  the  Absolute,  or  the  thought  of  an  Absolute,
any  human  value  of  practical  sort  ?  What  interest
has  that  which  is  changeless  to  a  world  of  movement  and
change?  what  function  in  a  world  which  deals  every-
where with  contingent  realities  could  be  performed  by
a  reality  (if  there  were  such)  which  is  subject  to  no  con-
tingencies, final,  resting  in  itself  —  having  no  outsidey
nor  beyond,  and  so  nothing  to  fear  or  to  expect  from
any  external  possibilities?

We  know  of  no  absolute  stability  in  our  physical  uni-
verse, and  yet  we  get  on  very  well  with  our  relative
stabilities ;  build  on  the  spinning  surface  of  the  earth,
walk  on  ship's  decks,  having  mastered  the  art  of  treat-
ing any  relative  foothold  as  if  it  were,  for  the  time  being,
absolute,  and  yet  without  being  deceived.  Even  the  fall-
ing aviator  feels  that  the  earth  is  moving  upward  to
him.  It  is  not  otherwise  with  our  truths  in  every  depart-
ment of  practice;  we  learn  to  use  them  vnthin  their
range  of  validity,  treating  them  as  if  they  were  abso-
lute, but  not  misled  by  the  practical  worth  of  that  assump-
tion, always  ready  (or  almost  always)  to  subordinate  them
to  another  truth  when  their  limit  is  reached.  We  can
treat  our  atomic  weights  as  permanent,  without  needing
to  deny  conditions  under  which  the  dogma  fails  to  hold


184  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

good.  May  it  not  be  the  same  with  Beality  also,  —
that  a  floating  reality,  a  slowly  changing  and  growing
world,  a  developing  God,  even  —  with  finite  and  revis-
able  thoughts  and  purposes,  —  may  it  not  be  that  such
a  universe  would  serve  as  well  as  one  that  is  based  on
an  Ultimatum,  an  Eternal  and  Necessary  Fact?  Nay
rather,  may  not  such  conditional  reality  be  the  only  sort
we  ever  do  or  can  make  reference  to  ?

No  better  summary  of  the  failure  of  the  alleged
Absolute  to  make  connections  with  human  needs  can  be
given  than  these  words  of  William  James  :  '^  The  abso-
lute is  useless  for  deductive  purposes.  It  gives  us  ab-
solute safety  if  you  will,  but  it  is  compatible  with  every
relative  danger.  Whatever  the  details  of  experience
may  prove  to  be,  after  the  fact  of  them  the  absolute
will  adopt  them.  It  is  an  hypothesis  which  functions
retrospectively  only,  not  prospectively."  *

Like  those  too  formal  unities  which  we  were  recently
considering,  the  Absolute  seems  to  be  tolerant  of  any
kind  of  world-contents  and  experience-contents  what-
ever :  and  therefore  the  idea  of  the  Absolute  seems  to
throw  no  light  on  the  kind  of  destiny  one  may  expect,
suggests  not  one  course  of  action  rather  than  another,
in  short  ^^  is  useless  for  deductive  purposes."  ^'  I  have
noticed,"  once  said  an  artist  to  me,  '^  that  perfection  is
nearly  always  barren :  a  touch  of  ugliness  is  needed  to
give  life,  action,  instability." When  one  speaks  of  the

1  A  Plnraliitio  UnWene,  page  111.  This  is  not  William  James'  only
word  on  the  worth  of  an  Absolute.  I  quote  these  words  as  the  best  state-
ment I  can  find  of  a  typical  opinion,  not  as  a  oomplete  statement  of  his
opinion.  In  Pragmatism  and  later  books,  James  became,  consistently  or
not,  more  or  less  tolerant  of  the  Absolute,  fiuding  it  useful  as  providing
*  moral  holidays,*  etc.


THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  186

Absolate,  we  are  reminded  of  some  such  well-closed  per-
fection^ all  too  successfully  placed  beyond  the  exigen-
cies of  all  living  and  striving;  we  doubt  whether  it
corresponds  with  any  significant  reality ;  whether  it  is
not  a  name  for  some  sort  of  logical  problem,  a  name
handed  back  to  us  as  an  answer.

I  cannot  imagine  any  issue  more  vital  to  us  than  this.
Under  various  names  we  have  been  dealing  with  Abso-
lute Reality.  Under  the  name  of  Substance,  it  appeared
as  the  anchorage  which  all  idea-meanings  seek ;  it  was
credited  with  internal  relations  to  value  of  utmost  import-
ance. Whether  it  had  any  bearing  upon  action  (such
as  ^^  deductive  purposes"  imply)  we  did  not  expressly
enquire,  though  the  name  ^^  non-impulsive  background ''
so  far  corroborates  the  comments  of  William  James.  I
am  inclined  to  agree  with  the  requirement  that  our  First
Principle  must  be  useful  for  practice  also,  that  it  must
mean  something  in  particular  to  the  exclusion  of  some-
thing^lse-in-particular,  that  it  must  be  a  principle  from
which  deductions  can  be  made.  I  wish  therefore  to
enquire  whether  the  Absolute  is  an  object  or  concept
that  we  could  do  without.  Let  me  put  down  certain
scattered  reflections  on  this  subject.


Something  like  the  Absolute  appears  from  time  to
time  in  the  history  of  religion ;  but  it  is  noteworthy
that  it  is  not  worshipped.  There  is  no  temple  to
Brahman.  The  Algonquins  did  not  pray  to  Manitou.
Unkulunkulu,  as  most  primitive  near- Absolutes,  is  too
far  off  and  has  no  interest  in  the  affairs  of  men;
whence  petitions  must  be  addressed  to  the  nearer  and


186  THE  KEED  OF  GOD

more  finite  spirits.  The  same  judgment  occurs  a  hun-
dred times  in  the  various  religious  of  the  world.  In
all  religions  have  mediators  of  some  kind  corrected
the  tendency  of  the  g^eat  God-father  to  fall  in  with  the
Absolute^  giving  the  Deity  effective  human  sympathies
and  fighting  interests.  Ahura  Mazda  must  have  his
group  of  nature-gods  and  his  retinue  of  Amesha  Spentas.
Even  Jahweh  as  he  tends  to  be  thought  of  as  Abso-
lute ceases  to  deal  with  men  in  person  and  works  only
through  messengers  or  through  the  Logos.  What  we
need  to  worship  is  the  seminal,  disturbing,  creating,
and  destroying  principle  of  Reality :  for  which  purpose
would  not  Siva  be  a  better  Deity  than  Brahm,  the
ineffable  and  indifferent  ?

Must  not  Reality  be  a  Real  Force,  a  Real  Mover,  and
no  Eternal  Fact  of  changeless  order?  Whether  for
worship,  or  for  theory,  or  for  common  practice,  we
need  to  reach  an  Ultimate  which  is  no  ultimate  indif-
ference: something,  rather,  like  an  ultimate  grity  a
principle  that  lends  friction  between  wheel  and  belt,
which  gives  bite  to  the  tool,  plunge  to  the  earth-dive
of  the  plow.


Still,  we  cannot  dispense  with  a  Changeless  Ultimate
in  our  world.  For  practical  life  is  not  interested  solely
in  making  differences.  Indeed,  action  is  never  interested
in  simply  producing  something  different :  it  is  always
interested  in  making  improvement^  which  is  to  say,
change  in  a  situation  which  itself  is  permanent.  The
permanence  of  the  frame  of  change  has  a  value  of  its
own,  if  only  this  —  that  we  find  ourselves  at  home  in  it.


THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  187

In  the  altered  place  we  recognize  ourselves  because  we
recognize  our  environment :  these  two  things^  self-iden-
tity and  world-identity,  go  inseparably  together.  And
the  degree  of  alteration  which  we  can  endure,  even  for
the  better  or  best,  is  not  indefinitely  great.  Any  perma-
nent feature  of  the  world  will  always  have  at  least  this
value  for  action  :  it  is  a  part  of  that  which  we  are  for-
ever moving  toward— there  will  be  something  at  the
last  day  which  was  also  there  at  the  first.

It  may  be  well  for  us  that  the  only  changeless  Being
in  the  universe  is  the  Absolute,  if  there  be  an  Absolute.
For  no  more  definite  shape  could  be  so  attractive  but
that  in  time  we  should  lose  zest  in  moving  toward  it.
The  Absolute  binds  us  to  no  particular  conservatism ;
impedes  no  possible  rate  of  progress  in  terms  of  con-
crete experience.  Here  the  unlimited  hospitality  and
indifference  of  the  Absolute  to  contents  of  experience  is
an  advantiige :  '*  compatible  with  every  relative  danger  "
—  compatible,  then,  with  every  relative  improvement.
Offering  all  the  advantages  of  changelessness,  with  none
of  the  disadvantages  of  conserving  the  undesirable.

It  is  the  presence  of  a  Changeless  Absolute  that  alone
could  set  us  wholly  free  to  grow.  For  otherwise  we  would
fix  upon  some  concrete  thing  as  a  Changeless,  something
which  ought  to  be  forever  revisable,  and  then  we  must
either  stagnate,  or  break.

Not  only  my  own  identity,  but  the  identity  of  the
human  mind  as  a  species,  is  bound  up  with  that  changeless
identity  of  the  ultimate  object.  We  pass  judgment  upon
the  intellects,  and  estimate  the  world-guesses,  of  Newton,
and  Paracelsus,  and  Thales,  and  Lao  Tze,  and  Moses:
we  are  able  to  do  this  only  in  so  far  as  they,  and  we  all,


188  THE  N££D  OF  GOD

have  been  aiming  at  the  same  marky  thinking  the  same
world  (not  even,  at  bottom,  a  slowly  changing  world),
testing  character  upon  the  same  nature.  If  a  man's
philosophy  is  to  be  a  faithful  expression  of  his  '^  tem-
perament/' he  must  in  that  philosophy  single-mindedly
seek  —  the  Absolute :  for  individual  differences  can  be
individually  significant,  or  even  measurable,  only  as
they  accept  the  same  aim  and  standard.

Identity  of  mind  in  the  species  is  a  consideration  of
the  same  moment  with  sanity  in  general.  We  cannot
dispense  with  a  Changeless  Ultimate.


As  a  First  Principle,  the  Changeless  is  of  course
insufficient.  Our  Ultimate  Reality  must  have  qualities
of  both  changelessness  and  change.  Or,  may  it  be  that
the  principle  of  change  is  furnished  hy  ourselves  f  Let
us  consider  this.

No  Eternal  Fact  can  of  itself  foster  any  practical
conclusions  or  deductions ;  what  one  will  do  about  it
depends  on  how  one  is  disposed  to  take  it.  There  is  no
conclusion  from  one  premise  alone ;  and  in  these  prac-
tical affairs  conclusions  are  drawn  by  concentrating  the
changeless  Facts  in  one  major  premise,  while  we  carry
with  us  the  minor  premises  which  determine  how  we
shall  respond  to  them. Let  me  illustrate :

Among  the  relatively  stable  features  of  our  existence,
there  is  this  one,  that  "  Life  is  short."  Well,  —  what  is
to  be  done  about  it  ?  That  depends  upon  the  imagina-
tion of  the  individual ;  but  in  every  case  something  is  done
about  it.  One  man  pulls  a  long  face ;  becomes  a  pious
miser,  begrudging  every  minute  not  spent  in  profitable


TH£  NE£D  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  189

meditation  —  and  when  he  says  to  a  neighbor  that  life
is  short,  he  expects  to  see  the  same  practical  consequences.
But  hear  old  Omar  announce  to  us  this  same  eternal
truth,  and  notice  his  conclusion:  parsimonious  also,
toward  the  finite  number  of  moments,  but  for  fear  he  may
not  live  to  drink  his  fill.  His  originality  lies  in  his  minor
premise.  But  indeed  the  shortness  of  life  need  mean
neither  one  conclusion  nor  the  other;  need  mean  no  time-
parsimony  of  any  kind.  Why,  for  example,  might  it  not
suggest  leisureliness  —  since  all  fever-haste  makes  time
run  the  faster :  only  the  typical  Oriental  knows  how  to
prize  time  —  namely  by  taking  time  about  everything.
If  we  rebel  against  the  announcement  of  eternal  facts,
it  may  be  in  part  because  those  who  have  brandished
them  have  not  allowed  enough  for  these  differences  of
imagination,  for  the  need  of  a  minor  premise :  our  proper
retort  being  that  the  eternal  fact,  by  itself,  has  |io  con-
sequences at  all.  Not,  indeed,  unless  there  are  some
necessary  minor  premises.

The  Absolute,  whatever  else  it  may  be,  is  the  quint-
essence of  Eternal  Fact.  May  it  be  that  the  minor  prem-
ise which  makes  that  object  significant  for  action  is  —
the  Self? We  must  develop  this  consideration  further.


Every  circumstance,  however  trivial,  which  becomes
a  spur  to  action,  has  something  of  the  Absolute  in  it.
Is  my  com  ripe?  —  then  I  move,  because  my  Real
World  is  unchangeably  a  world  which  presents  to  me
on  this  date  ripe  corn,  an  absolute  and  relentless  fact  of
history,  never  to  be  undone  while  reality  is  itself.  But
beside  the  Absolute,  my  Self  is  necessary  to  account


190  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

for  my  motion  —  all  namely,  that  imagination  presents
to  me  on  the  advent  of  ripe  corn.  The  minor  premise
lies  in  my  Self.  The  world  has  its  nature ;  die  Self
has  its  character:  when  nature  and  character  come
together,  action  results.

But  nature  and  character  are  not  two  separable  facts.
There  is  no  such  thing  as  character  in  men  apart  from
nature  in  objects.  For  character  forms  itself  on  the
reliabilities  of  the  world ;  is  nothing  else  than  my  way
of  response  to  the  world's  way  of  approach.  My  char^
acter  is  only  seen  and  known  in  my  actual  dealings  with
the  habitual  straits  evolved  by  the  nature  of  my  world.
Since  every  deed  is  an  exhibition  both  of  nature  and  of
character,  all  behavior  is  symbolic,  if  we  know  how  to
read  the  symbol.  As  one  handles  his  bat,  or  his  fork,
so  will  he  treat  his  friends,  his  pecuniary  obligations,
his  holidays.  Among  other  things,  character  is  well
shown,  perhaps  chiefly  shown,  in  one's  grasp  of  nature
itself:  given  a  congeries  of  facts,  how  much  nature
(that  is,  absolute  objective  character)  can  you  extract
from  it — is  not  this  a  test  of  the  man?  Hence  it  may
be  said  that  there  is  for  us  no  such  thing  as  nature  in
things  apart  from  character  in  men ;  and  my  descriptions
of  nature  betray  its  reference  to  my  approaches.  Things
are  described  as  hard,  heavy,  stubborn,  yielding,  impos-
ing, difiBcult,  and  the  like :  which  of  these  qualities  of
things  (not  to  mention  the  primary  and  secondary  qual-
ities of  the  classics)  would  have  existed  apart  from  the
conscious  character  that  has  to  do  with  them?  Nature
and  character  are  fitted  to  each  other,  evoked  by  each
other,  relative  to  each  other  throughout;  and  this  by
virtue  of  the  steadfast  identity  and  absolute  relation


THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  191

between  them.  Given  the  Self  and  the  Changeless,  is  it
somehow  conceivable  that  all  the  rest  should  spin  itself
oat  between?  Is  it  not  at  least  possible  that  in  this
situation,  character  confronting  nature,  some  principle
of  differentiation  may  be  found  which  will  take  away
the  reproach  of  the  Absolute  ?
We  shall  come  to  this  point  again.


The  Absolute  ought  not  to  be  barren,  for  it  is  sup-
posed to  be  reached  in  answer  to  significant  questions ;
as  a  last  reply  to  enquiry.  To  say  that  it  is  useless  for
deductive  purposes  is  to  say  that  it  doee  not  answer  the
questions  put.  It  will  be  enlightening  to  compare  a
number  of  lines  of  enquiry  which  end  in  an  Absolute,  to
observe,  if  we  can,  why  the  questions  are  not  answered ;
or  why  they  are  thought  not  to  be  answered.


Consider,  first,  the  epistemologist's  enquiry:  What
can  I  surely  know  ?

The  meaning  of  the  question  is  practical :  nothing  is
more  costly  than  error,  and  who  can  understand  his
errors? —  only  he  who  knows  what  he  may  be  sure  of.
But  error  seems  to  be  incident  to  all  judgments  made
about  external  things,  things  physical,  things  social,
even  things  scientific  and  rational.  The  world  waits  for
a  Descartes,  who  pursues  these  uncertainties  to  the  end
and  exhausts  them :  who  finds  his  absolute  assurance
at  last.  In  doubting  all  things,  I  cannot  doubt  that
I  doubt;  and  doubting,  (that  is,  thinking),  I  exist.
Surely  here  is  an  Absolute. But  is  it  useful  for  deduc-


192  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

tive  purposes?  Descartes  does  not  find  it  sufficient :  it
is  a  great  truth,  but  he  uses  it —  not  at  all.

What  is  the  trouble  with  Descartes'  Absolute  ?  Is  it
not  this :  that  this  ezistence-of-self  is  certain,  whether  mj
knowledge  of  external  objects  succeeds  or  fails  ?  But  the
task  set  before  me,  the  task  that  stimulates  my  original
question,  is  that  of  knowing  objects.  It  does  not
answer  my  question  to  know  that  I  can  be  sure  of  the
Subject.  Hence  it  is  that  Descartes  has  to  appeal  to
the  knowledge  of  God,  through  the  "  ontological  proof  **
—  a  way  of  leaping  from  the  subject  to  the  object,  from
the  idea  to  the  objective  fact.

What  we  want  is  absolute  objective  certainty ;  and
this,  Descartes'  I-am  fails  to  give  us.


Descartes'  mode  of  argument  reappears  in  manifold
interesting  forms  in  modern  thought.  As  in  reply  to
the  skeptic  or  agnostic,  who  asserts  in  despair  that
there  is  no  absolute  truth.  The  dialectician  retorts:
Then  at  least  your  own  assertion  must  be  absolutely  true.
There  must  be  some  absolute  truth,  for  you  cannot
assert  that  there  is  none  without  self-contradiction.  As
in  Descartes'  case,  the  doubter  is  reminded  of  himself.
There,  in  his  own  assertion,  is  a  certainty  from  which
he  cannot  escape.

This  turn  of  thought  which  reminds  the  enquirer  of
himself  we  shall  call  the  reflexive  turn.  It  reappears
in  all  discoveries  of  the  Absolute.  It  is  clinching — but
is  likely  to  disappoint,  even  as  Descartes'  result  disap-
points. For  the  skeptic  finds  that  he  also  was  in  search
of  objective  truth :  and  that  the  absolute  truth  of  his


THE  N£ED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  193

statement  is  irrelevant  to  his  quest. Whence  his  skep-
ticism toward  objective  truth  remains  unanswered.


Consider  the  question  of  the  moralist,  who  likewise
has  an  Absolute  to  seek — an  absolute  rule  of  conduct.

Rules  against  killing,  appropriating  property,  and  the
like,  have  their  exceptions.  Moral  principles  vary  with
social  conditions  and  times.  Everything  is  relative:
is  there  not  some  underlying  principle  that  will  stand-
ardize all  this  relativity,  and  give  a  substance  to  moral
certainty?  The  world  waits  for  its  Kant ;  who  provides
the  reflexive  turn  in  morals.  No  empirical  rule  is  abso-
lute ;  but  one  fixed  rule  there  is,  —  observe  Rule.  It
is,  as  Professor  Palmer  puts  it,  the  ^Haw  that  there
shall  be  law."  Let  your  conduct  be  law-abiding,  law-
recognizing,  law-constituting;  if  you  have  exceptions
to  make  from  any  rule,  let  them  be  made  ^^on  prin-
ciple," principle  in  general.  For  the  absolute  rightness
lies  not  out  there  among  deeds,  but  in  the  self,  in  its
fixed  principle  of  duty.

Shall  we  not  herald  Kant  as  the  savior  of  an  absolute
morality?  Yes; — but  what  exception  to  rule  is  not
made  on  some  principle  or  other?  Kantian  morality  is
regarded  as  rigoristie,  but  does  its  rigor  come  from  its
first  principles,  —  or  from  its  second  principles,  aUeged
deductions  from  the  first,  but  of  doubtful  parentage?
Kant,  like  Descartes,  must  emerge  into  the  world  of
objective  situations,  must  appear  with  a  principle  that
has  somewhat  to  say  about  dealing  with  objects,  with
beings  beyond  oneself.  Treat  persons  as  ends  in  them-
selves, says  Kant;  and  herewith,  in  setting  up  an  objec-


IM  THE  KEED  OF  GOD

tire  ptineqple,  he  coofeaes  that  his  reflexive  torn  does
not  afford  tnffieient  answer  to  our  ethical  enqnirj.


Consider  the  metaphysieian's  question :  what  is  the
ahsolatelj  real  ?  That,  namely,  which  exists  hy  itadf,
not  depending  on  any  other  being  for  existoiee;  hot
conferring  being  on  every  other.

Here  again,  trial  of  various  wonld-be  realities,  like
matter,  or  force,  or  energy,  shows  that  they  cannot  be
what  we  seek.  Matter  disappears,  on  analysis,  into  ac-
tivity of  energies ;  and  energy  seems  to  disappear  into
a  definition,  or  formula,  regarding  what  we  may  expect
from  experience.  No  nameable  thing  can  answer  the
demand  for  an  objective  Substance.  The  world  waits
for  its  Berkeley:  who  hits  upon  the  re/lexive  turn —
eveiything  is  dependent  on  consciousness  except  conr
sciausness  itself.  To  be,  says  Berkeley  trium|Jiantly,
means  to  be  perceived,  or  to  be  a  perceiver;  reality  is
consciousness  and  its  world.

Such  discovery,  following  much  despair  about  finding
Substance,  cannot  fail  to  excite  much  joy.  The  reflexive
turn  is  wonderful,  unanswerable :  yet  strangely  paradox-
ical, is  it  not? — as  if  for  bread  one  were  given  a  stone,
one  can  hardly  say  how.  At  last  it  appears  that  what
one  sought  was  an  absolute  reality  heyond  oneself;  for
one's  ontological  interests  come  from  questions  about
Fate,  questions  about  what  I  may  expect  from  the  action
upon  me  of  that  which  extraneous  to  me  is  real.  I  start
from  the  fact  that  /  do  not  determine  the  contents  of  my
own  experience  ;  and  no  matter  how  much  you  assure
me  that  the  Absolute  is  Self,  it  must  still  be  beyond


TH£  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  106

this  self  which  knows  its  own  ignorance  and  so  its
dependence.  What  you  have  offered  me  for  reality  is
but  another  Cartesian  I-think^  which  must  indeed  (as
Kant  puts  it)  accompany  all  experience  (or  be  able  to) :
but  just  because  it  is  a  coefficient  of  all  experience,  it  is
a  determinant  of  none — ^^  compatible  with  every  relative
danger/'  Useless  for  deductive  purposes.  No  genuine
answer  to  our  question.


There  are  not  a  few  other  such  enquiries  and  absolute
solutions  that  do  not  solve.  There  is  the  quest  for  an
absolute  good,  or  happiness,  which  brought  out  perhaps
the  first  pure  case  of  the  reflexive  turn  in  history  —  the
Stoic  answer,  namely,  that  I  myself  am  my  own  absolute
good.  Then  there  is  the  religious  quest  itself,  the  quest
for  ^^  salvation,''  which  is  a  search  for  an  absolute  secu-
rity against  death :  and  which  at  times,  especially  in
these  latter  times,  has  received  the  answer  ^^  I  myself
am  heaven  and  hell " :  or  in  more  adequate  Spinozistic
reflexion,  my  knowledge  of  the  Eternal  is  my  own  eter-
nity. Compatible,  all  such  answers,  with  too  much.

The  same  principle  is  involved  in  all  of  them.  It  is
the  reflexive  turn  that  makes  the  trouble  and  creates
the  disappointing  illusion  of  finality.  We  have  reached
in  each  case  a  universally  valid  answer — but  it  is  not
an  answer  to  our  question :  it  is  an  irrelevant  universal.
It  has  the  fault  of  retreat  into  the  subject;  a  well-
exposed  fault  in  the  case  of  Stoicism,  and  of  Berkeleian
idealism,  and  of  Kantian  morality  (as  criticised,  some-
what unfairly,  by  Hegel),  a  fault  still  mightily  influential,
however,  wherever  dialectic  and  idealism  flourish. It  is


196  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

this  reflexive  turn  and  its  products  which  rouses  the
pragmatic  ire.  If  I  forsake  matter  for  form,  one  may
say,  I  surrender  my  right  to  regain  any  touch  with
matter.  If  I  slip  from  the  object  into  the  subject,  let
me  candidly  forgo  any  power  over  the  object.  If  I
leave  the  world  of  physics  to  consort  with  pure  spirit,
let  me  not  claim  any  other  than  a  Platonic  relation  to
empirical  reality — relation  without  fruit  or  progeny.
That  too  safe  thing  which  in  denying  I  affirm  is,  after
all,  something  that  I  have  not  denied  nor  ever  doubted.
I  sought  an  Absolute  in  the  field  of  man's  work.


Of  all  these  irrelevant  universals,  found  by  the
reflexive  turn,  one  surmises  that  they  have  a  certain
significance,  if  not  that  which  is  claimed  for  them.  It
cannot  be  worthless  to  have  pointed  out  that  while  our
world  of  objects  is  refractory,  baffling,  and  offering  no
point  of  fixity  or  perfect  assurance,  there  is  a  world
within  where  abiding  satisfaction  obtains:  we  object
only  to  the  substitution  of  this  latter  world  for  the
former,  as  a  co-ordinate  and  difference-making  affair.
Reflexive  turns  are  backward  glances;  and  all  these
considerations  have  a  worth  looking  backward  which
they  do  not  possess  looking  forward.  They  ^^  function
retrospectively  only,  not  prospectively."  In  the  same
way,  the  pious  soul  thanks  God,  looking  backward,  for
everything  that  has  happened :  everything  that  has  hap-
pened is  good,  —  not  so  everything  that  may  happen.
When  next  I  have  to  thank  God,  let  it  be  for  something
different ;  and  in  the  meantime  the  guide  to  my  conduct
will  not  be  that  God-idea  which  has  proved  ^^  compatible


THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  197

with  every  relative  danger."  Some  principle  we  must
have  which  charges  those  forward-looking  paths  with
contrast,  which  acts  like  the  physiologist's  stain,  distin-
guishing tissue  from  tissue.  That  which  is  thus  to  func-
tion prospectively  cannot  be  this  Absolute.


Yet  there  are  situations  in  experience  in  which  form
becomes  matter,  and  the  reflexive  turn  does  acquire  prac-
tical significance.

In  the  work  of  science,  for  example,  a  formal  arrange-
ment of  the  materials  of  a  problem  is  the  beginning  of
an  explanation.  To  classify  data,  to  establish  external
connections  among  them,  is  the  beginning  of  mastery;
is  a  very  substantial  practical  mastery.  The  assemblage
and  comparison  of  unknowns  generates  known-ness,  as
friction  of  cold  and  dark  objects  may  produce  heat  and
light.  Science  has  begun  to  question  whether  any  other
conquest  of  Nature  is  either  possible,  or  desirable,  than
just  this  of  establishing  order  and  law  among  phenom-
ena —  not  trying  to  penetrate  their  objective  interiors,
doubting  at  last  whether  there  be  any  such  interiors,
external  to  ourselves  ;  doubting  whether  we  are  not  the
interior  of  Nature.  Here  the  product  of  the  reflexive
turn  is  accepted  by  nearly  everybody  as  the  only  prac-
tical thing  in  sight.

In  moral  affairs,  also,  we  recognize  the  substantiality
of  the  form  in  certain  limiting  cases.  A  person  who
wills  to  have  a  good  will,  already  has  a  good  will  —  in
its  rudiments.  There  is  solid  satisfaction  in  knowing
that  the  mere  desire  to  get  out  of  an  old  habit  is  a
material  advance  upon  the  condition  of  submergence  in


198  THE  N££D  OF  GOD

that  habit.  The  longest  step  toward  cleanliness  is  made
when  one  gains  —  nothing  but  dissatisfaction  with  dirt.
Surely  the  work  is  not  finished — but  the  obstacles  that
remain  are  material  only ;  the  fateful  question  was  whether
one  could  get  the  idea  of  cleanliness^  or  of  truthfulness^
or  of  the  good-will  generally.  In  that  idea  is  the  reality
of  the  condition ;  the  practical  questions  are  all  resolv-
able into  this  one,— the  maintenance  and  development
of  that  idea.

There  is,  then,  in  these  matters  some  absolute  find-
ing in  the  seeking :  salvation  is,  to  seek  salvation,  for
in  seekin&f  it  one  has  already  abandoned  his  mortal-
ity  and  his  sin.  In  religion  or  in  morals  the  question
can  never  be,  How  much  is  empiricaUy  finished?  but
rather,  What  beginning  is  made?  for  any  beginning  is
the  birth  of  an  idea,  and  the  anticipation  of  attainment.
To  cast  off  an  old  type  of  conception  and  forge  a  new
one  is  the  greatest  of  all  practical  moral  achievements.
Compatible  with  every  relative  vice,  is  this  Absolute  ?
Compatible  with  everything  it  rises  upon,  and  there  is
presumably  nothing  so  vicious  that  the  absolute  cannot
rise  upon  it  in  the  form  of  idea :  yet  not  compatible
with  remaining  therein.  This  merely  formal  conceiving
of  the  facts  of  one's  own  wretchedness  is  at  the  same
time  a  departure  from  them  —  placing  them  in  the
object  It  is  not  idle,  therefore,  to  observe  reflexively
that  in  that  very  Thought,  one  has  separated  himself
from  them,  and  is  no  longer  that  which  empirically  he
still  sees  himself  to  be.

In  many  other  connections  do  we  find  ^'  mere ''  forms
making  practical  differences.  Nothing  is  more  indiffer-
ent to  all  its  contents  than  time;  yet  time  is  one  of


TH£  N££D  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  199

the  greatest  agents  in  the  social  world.  Long-standing,
whether  of  customs,  of  offices,  of  friends,  of  peoples,  is
no  merit,  one  might  say :  yet  it  is  everywhere  operative
as  such  to  some  degree  (uot  preventing  French  revolu-
tions but  delaying  them).  Age  of  service,  quite  apart
from  brilliancy  of  service,  claims  gratitude  and  honor*
able  discharge :  old  age,  of  itself,  apart  from  its  contents
receives  respect ;  and  antiquity  is  all  but  equivalent  to

space  and  time  may  introduce  the  spirit  into  the  pres-
ence of  Deity ;  and  to  survey  the  Whole,  in  any  capac-
ity, will  work  differences  in  the  judgment  of  details.

In  all  such  cases,  that  which  is  found  in  reflexion,  —
retrospectively, — functions  prospectively  also.


In  truth,  the  reflexive  thing  is  the  easiest  in  the  world
to  ignore ;  because  it  does  require  this  almost  un-natural
reversive  glance  of  thought  to  discover:  and  ignoring
it  leaves  out  an  essential  in  all  ultimate  solutions.  I  do
not  say  that  it  is  a  sufficient  solution  of  any  problem ;
I  point  out  that  it  is  a  necessary  ingredient  of  the  solu-
tion.

Offered  as  a  sufficient  answer,  the  reflexive  turn  is
indeed  the  essence  of  sentimentality :  hunger  is  not
relieved  by  Stoical  reflexion  on  the  inward  conditions  of
happiness  (mentally  inward).  But  to  offer  the  hungry
a  meal  without  any  of  that  spaciousness  of  idea  which
the  sentimental  soul  too  f ulsomely  invokes ;  to  omit,  I
^Jf  youf  reference  to  the  Absolute,  somehow  spoils
the  value  of  your  practical  charity.  I  agree  that  it  is
well  to  be  meager  of  sentiment :  but  I  merely  indicate


200  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

a  fact  of  human  nature  when  I  saj  that  the  thing  done
^^  in  the  name  of  Christ/'  or  by  one  who  wears  the  cowl,
or  in  the  simple  presence  of  humanity  to  Idea,  leaves  a
tinge  of  worth  behind  it  which  no  amount  of  practi-
cal Aid,  apart  from  the  ^^  irrelevant  universal "  could
accomplish.


It  is  no  sufficient  solution  of  grief  to  say  that  grief
must  have  a  solution ;  but  the  only  hopeless  grief  is  that
which  abandons  the  postulate  that  grief  has  any  mean-
ing. Point  out  that  in  holding  to  that  postulate  there
is  already  a  superiority  to  the  condition  that  depresses
one ;  and  you  reveal  a  situation  which  caught  in  idea
does  materially  lighten  the  grief.  To  know  that  suffer-
ing is  a  common  human  lot  may  not  empirically  change
the  contents  of  pain ;  yet  there  is  no  reflexion  which
more  substantially  relieves  the  pressure  of  actual  dis-
tress. Let  me  take  my  bereavement,  said  Epictetus,  as
I  take  the  bereavement  of  my  neighbor :  yes,  but  not
because  you  look  coldly  on  his  trouble  —  rather,  because
you  are  free  to  reflect  in  his  case  what  must  enter  as
idea  into  your  own,  that  this  is  the  lot  of  man,  —
through  which  irrelevant  universal  fact,  see  mankind
actually  held  in  closer  unity.  To  see  in  the  man  before
me  my  brother  does  not  help  me  to  deal  with  him ;  does
not  substitute  for  judgment,  discretion,  antagonism  in
its  place ;  does  the  idea  then  do  no  work  ?  Let  him
answer  who  is  able  to  hold  the  fact  of  brotherhood
before  his  mind,  in  the  midst  of  his  antagonism.


THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  201

So  long  as  the  mind  is  admitted  a  part  of  reality  at
all,  it  must  be  a  material  part.  Differences  which  are
made  to  mind  must  tend  to  become  differences  to  mat-
ter. The  presence  of  reason^  though  it  does  no  more
than  throw  its  noose  of  idea  over  the  contents  of  experi-
ence, makes  different  every  experience.  Reason  has  the
function  of  leading  to  pleasure  and  avoiding  pain  ;  but
the  default  of  reason  which  exposes  to  pain  adds  still
another  pain  —  the  pain  of  the  defect  of  reason.  Self-
consciousnesSy  like  other  psychoses,  leaves  tracks  in  the
brain ;  our  physical  groundwork  takes  notes  of  our
reflexive  doings  as  of  other  doings,  and  transmits  the
habits  of  our  ideal  attitudes.  The  irrelevant  universal
to  all  our  experiences  is  collectively  named,  the  Self ;
the  Subject,  present  to  all  experience,  inclusive  of  all,
compatible  with  all ;  yet  if  this  self  were  indeed  indiffer-
ent to  all,  useless  for  deductive  purposes,  Self  could
never  have  become  its  own  object,  self-consciousness
would  be  impossible.  In  being  thought  of,  the  self
is  made  a  member  of  the  world  of  experience,  and
acknowledged  as  active  there.  It  is  thought  q/*,  be-
cause in  being  thought  vnth,  it  has  had  differences
to  make.

And  here  may  we  not  observe  how  the  internal  rela-
tion of  idea  to  value  becomes  also  an  external  relation,
determining  differences  of  conduct  ?  The  maintenance
of  the  idea  of  the  Absolute  in  any  subject-matter  is  a
matter  of  effort  and  of  will ;  the  degree  of  value  which
any  situation  or  prospect  may  have  is  dependent  upon
the  actual  operation  of  an  irrelevant  universal  which  a
reflexive  turn  of  thought  might  discover.  But  an  altera-
tion of  value  is  an  alteration  of  conduct. This  is  the


902  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

substance  of  our  answer  to  the  question  regarding  the
worth  of  the  Absolute.^


The  absolutes  which  are  found  in  the  reflexive  turn  of
thought  are  not  useless,  even  prospectively.  But  their
functioning  has  seldom  or  never  been  understood,  even
by  those  who  have  hit  upon  them :  and  this  is,  in  part,
because  they  have  often  failed  to  observe  that  the  reflex-
ive turn  reveals  never  alone  the  Absolute  within,  but
always  the  Absolute  within  in  conjunction  voith  the
Absolute  without.

The  whole  tale  of  Descartes'  discovery  is  not  told  in  the
proposition,  I  exist,  knowing.  It  is  rather  told  in  the
proposition,  I  exists  knowing  the  Absolute;  or,  I  exist,
knowing  God.  The  self,  taken  alone,  or  in  presence  of
contents  of  experience  as  they  come,  is  a  fairly  irrele-
vant universal.  But  set  before  that  self  in  its  dealings
with  experience  an  Absolute  Object ;  and  its  own  exist-
ence becomes  fruitful  of  differences. For  note  :

The  self  might  conceivably  be  a  passive  spectator  of
the  contents  of  experience,  accepting  ^'  the  colours  of
good  and  evil "  as  unalterable  fact.  That  which  starts
the  search  for  the  Absolute  is  an  unwillingness  to  take
things  in  this  way.  Beside  the  love  for  the  satisfactory
contents  of  life,  there  is  a  most  remarkable  love  of  life
itself —  in  distinction  from  its  contents,  even  if  the  con-
tents are  generally  bad;  some  in  whom  this  love  of
existence  is  strong  have  said  that  they  would  prefer  to
endure  hell  rather  than  to  be  extinguished  —  a  most
inexplicable  attachment,  this,  to  the  bare  fact  of  exist-

'  See  further,  Part  VI,  The  Fraits  of  Religion,  chs.  xzxi  and


THE  NEED  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  203

ing,  being  conscious,  without  reference  to  the  contents
of  consciousness.  Surely,  if  ever  there  were  a  blind
valuation  of  an  empty  husk  of  irrelevant  universal,
it  is  here.  Yet,  with  our  interpretation  of  value,^  is  not
this  same  celebrated  and  mysterious  ^^  instinct  of  self-
preservation,"  the  most  fundamentally  rational  of  all
practicalities  ?  For  life  is  but  a  certain  consciousness  of
the  Absolute,  in  process  of  application  ;  and  the  applica-
tion of  this  Idea  is  the  substance  of  all  positive  worth,
conferring  upon  ^^ contents''  what  quality  they  have.
Attachment  to  life  is  simply  attachment  to  the  source
of  value ;  and  that  which  appears  evil  does  so  appear
because  the  Real  cannot  be  recognized  in  it,  creates  a
problem  of  which  the  living  thing  already  holds  the  key.
Evil  becomes  a  problem,  only  because  the  consciousness
of  the  Absolute  is  there :  apart  from  this  fact,  the  ^^  col-
our of  evil "  would  be  mere  contents  of  experience.


It  is  true,  then,  that  What  Is  makes  no  difference ;
that  which  produces  difference  is  Consciousness  of  What
Is.

This  pair  of  Absolutes,  or  Absolute-pair,  which  we
above  described  as  Character  in  presence  of  Nature,  is
well  capable  of  producing  practical  difference ;  might
well  be  described  as  the  original  source  of  all  difference,
perhaps.  For  if  we  begin  with  simply  a  consciousness,
and  its  object-absolute  (not  Sein  and  Nicht-sein,  but
Sein  and  Bewusstsein)  we  have  all  that  is  necessary  to
develop  change  (Werden).  It  is  notorious  that  what
endures  before  consciousness  does  not  endure  the  same ;

^  Chapter  xi,  above.


204  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

this  fact  has  its  psycho-physical  explanation,  its  Weber's
law,  and  the  like :  its  essential  explanation  may  be  this,
that  any  object  of  consciousness,  simply  as  object,  i.e.,
as  case  of  Reality,  is  so  far  goody  and  therefore  —  to  be
approached,  or  increased  in  vividness.  Whereas  what
simply  stays  as  blind  datum  is  in  its  mere  persistence  had^
to  be  withdrawn  from,  diminished  in  vividness  to  zero.
Briefly,  Sein  and  Bewusstsein  together  give  Werden.


The  Absolute,  after  all,  is  not  an  escapable  practical
problem;  and  no  showing  that  wrong  solutions  have
been  forthcoming  will  destroy  the  practical  worth  of
the  right  solution.  Knowledge  of  the  Absolute  re-
mains as  practically  significant  as  the  question  which
perennially  gives  rise  to  the  search  for  it.

And  this  question  always  calls  for  just  such  an  indif-
ferent object  as  the  absolutes,  in  each  of  our  various
cases,  turned  out  to  be.  If  we  could  accept  the  differ-
ences of  experience  as  they  stand,  there  would  be  no
problem  of  unity ;  but  if  we  cannot  accept  them,  there
is  nothing  to  look  for  but  an  in-different.  Either  we
are  content  with  conditional  certainties,  or  we  seek  a
certainty  that  holds  everywhere,  —  and  is  thus  com-
patible with  everything.  If  the  absolute  good  were  not
compatible  with  every  relative  evil,  it  would  not  be  the
absolute  good.  If  the  Absolute  were  not  compatible
with  every  relative  danger,  it  would  not  be  the  Abso-
lute. That  which  holds  good,  no  matter  what  occurs,
—  that  is  precisely  the  object  of  our  search.


THE  N££D  OF  AN  ABSOLUTE  205

Sach  an  object  is  no  modern  discovery.  From  the
beginning  of  religious  thought,  in  the  very  conception
of  a  creator,  there  has  been  present  to  the  mind  of  man
a  Being  who  is  present  alike  in  good  and  evil.  In
quite  ancient  times,  as  times  go,  we  may  find  a  wholly
explicit  definition  of  such  a  Being  as  the  desire  of  all
mankind.  The  founder  of  a  popular  religion  held  up
to  the  minds  of  a  spell-bound  multitude,  as  his  own
original  revelation,  a  God  who  ^'  maketh  his  sun  to  rise
on  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just
and  the  unjust."  Upon  this  basis  he  defined  the  ^'per-
fection "  of  God,  and  summoned  men  to  the  same  per-
fection, the  same  absolute  bearing.  Thereby  he  defined
an  attitude  of  mind  which  was  indeed  new  in  that
world,  an  attitude  of  equal  treatment  toward  friend
and  enemy,  toward  good  and  bad,  —  an  attitude  much
garbled  and  misunderstood,  but  an  attitude  wholly  intel-
ligible in  the  light  of  that  unmistakable  description  of
the  Absolute  God.  For  how  could  the  new  attitude  be
better  defined  than  as  an  attitude  of  absolute  justice^
a  thing  quite  alien  to  the  proportionate  justice  of  the
Greeks,  wonderfully  similar  to  absolute  in-difference  and
in-justice  ?  Is  this  attitude  then  actually  in-different,
and  useless  for  deductive  purposes  ?  On  the  contrary,
it  is  the  only  radically  creative  attitude  yet  known  to
humanity.  Its  operation  was  dimly  announced  some
six  hundred  years  earlier  by  a  solitary  Chinese  sage,
who  said :  '^  I  meet  good  with  good,  that  good  may  be
maintained ;  I  meet  evil  with  good  that  good  may  be
created."  Do  we  not  here  discover  the  Absolute  func-
tioning prospectively  ?

The  secret  of  this  creativeness  we  shall  in  time  pursue


206  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

in  some  detail,  ^  at  present  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  our
own  doctrine  of  the  sabstance  of  Value.  There  is  we
may  presume,  something  in  the  mere  fact  of  divine  at-
tention to  objects  which  confers  value  upon  them ;  or  to
put  it  in  the  language  of  Professor  Boyce,  it  may  be
that  divine  attention  is  the  same  thing  as  divine  love,
and  that  love  of  this  sort  is  the  one  thing  in  the  world
that  is  creative.


We  could  not  live  without  the  Absolute,  nor  without
our  idea  of  the  Absolute.  I  do  not  say  that  the  Abso-
lute is  equivalent  to  God ;  I  say  that  God,  whatever  else
he  may  be,  must  needs  also  be  the  Absolute.  Thus,
accepting  fully  the  pragmatic  guide  to  truth,  we  con-
clude that  the  only  satisfying  truth  must  be  absolute,
—  that  is,  non-pragmatic.  Wherewith,  pragmatism  ends
in  consuming  itself ;  appears  as  a  self-refuting  theory.

^  See  especially  chapter


CHAPTER  XV


THE  NEED  OF  A  GOD*


IN  our  usual  conceptions  of  God,  the  One  and  Abso-
lute is  raised  to  the  level  of  personality  and  moral
quality.  These  latter  characters  are  indeed  more  con-
spicuous, both  in  current  meaning  and  in  history,  than
either  unity  or  absoluteness.  They  may  well  be  regarded
as  the  most  humanly  valuable  attributes  of  the  divine
nature.  Yet  they  are  the  oftenest  subject  to  criticism
and  doubt.  More  in  their  case,  perhaps,  than  in  that
of  the  others  will  it  be  important  to  enquire  whether
they  are  needful  features  of  our  Whole-idea.

In  a  recent  book  by  Mr.  McTaggart,  called  ^'  Some
Dogmas  of  Religion  "  this  question  is  discussed  ^  in  so
clear,  frank,  and  radical  fashion  that  we  shall  gain  much
by  stating  our  view  in  relation  to  his.


If  the  thought  of  God  is  of  any  worth  to  us,  says
McTaggart,  it  must  be  either  because  of  what  God  is,
or  because  of  what  God  does.  It  is  conceivable  that  to
believe  in  the  simple  existence  of  a  being  having  such
character  and  powers  as  we  suppose  God  to  have  would
make  life  better  worth  living  for  us. It  is  also  con-

^  In  somewhat  diileient  form,  thu  obaptor  was  read  as  a  critical  paper
before  the  Philosophical  Union  of  the  UniTersity  of  California  in  1907.
*  In  the  eoaelnding  chapter,  entitled  **  Theism  and  Happiness."


208  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

ceivable  that  apart  from  his  character  and  attribntes,
we  should  set  store  on  the  thought  of  what  God  does
or  can  do  for  us  and  for  the  world  at  large.  Let  us
estimate  each  of  these  two  conceivable  values  of  the
God-idea,  beginning  with  the  supposed  works  of  God.

God's  presence  in  the  universe  means  to  most  believers
the  presence  of  a  very  powerful  champion  of  certain
righteous  causes  of  immense  historic  range.  We  think
of  God  as  a  vindicator,  working  out  that  deeper  jus-
tice which  shall  bring  together  at  last  the  innermost
merit  and  its  external  recognition.  We  think  of  him
perhaps  as  causing  happiness  and  brotherhood  to  pre-
vail among  men  at  some  future  time.  Or  we  think  of
him  simply  as  security  to  our  souls  that  in  some  hidden
way  all  is  well,  or  will  be  well,  with  the  world.

But  every  legitimate  hope  or  confidence  must  have
some  foundation  in  experience  or  reason:  the  sort  of
thing  we  are  pleased  to  believe  must  be  at  least  not-
inconsistent  with  what  the  world  as  it  is  shows  us.  If
God  exists,  there  are  certain  conditions  existing  in  the
same  world  with  him  which  throw  light  on  his  char-
acter and  powers.  Unmerited,  random,  and  general
suffering  are  conditions,  not  theories.  Iniquity  and
degradation  are  conditions.  Nowhere  do  we  have  to
search  for  evil  amid  the  good :  we  have  to  search  for
the  good  amid  the  evil.  Further,  what  good  we  have
is  unstable  in  its  whole  fabric,  as  if  it  were  upheld
against  the  nature  of  things :  life  is  a  constant  fight
against  decay ;  civilization  a  perpetual  struggle  against
dissolution ;  and  virtue  itself  incessant  strain  against
the  clamor  of  flesh  and  the  devil.  Now  God  —  if  he
exists — has  either  permitted  this,  or  else  it  exists  in


THE  NEED  OF  A  GOD  209

spite  of  him:  in  either  case  what  can  we  reasonably
depend  upon  for  the  future?

It  is  the  same  dilemma  on  which  McTaggart  has
often  insisted.  If  there  were  an  all-powerful  God,  the
defects  in  his  world  would  show  defects  in  his  charac-
ter. Whereas,  if  God  is  wholly  good,  and  therefore
not  all-powerful,  it  is  at  least  possible  that  the  mass  of
evil  in  the  world  may  prove  greater  that  he  can  cope
with.  In  either  case,  the  works  of  God  are  of  no  very
tangible  value.

In  truth,  these  supposable  works  of  God  would  be  of
no  value  at  all  for  human  happiness  until  we  had  some
further  knowledge  about  them.  We  should  have  to
enquire,  as  best  we  can,  how  this  world  is  constituted  ;
and  what  are  the  actual  forces  at  work ;  we  should
have  to  estimate  from  the  basis  of  our  own  experience
what  the  likelihood  is  of  any  conquest  of  evil  whatever.
We  must  carry  our  science  to  the  point  of  metaphysics
by  our  own  unaided  efforts  before  we  are  warranted  in
taking  any  satisfaction  in  the  contemplation  of  what
God  may  do  for  us.  And  in  the  progress  of  this  meta-
physical work,  we  are  likely  to  discover — so  McTag-
gart intimates  — that  good  can  gain  the  upper  hand  of
evil  without  the  assistance  of  a  God.  Idealism,  which
resolves  matter  into  spirit,  and  shows  that  against  spirit
matter  must  be  ultimately  powerless;  especially  per-
sonal idealism,  which  puts  the  power  of  spirit  into  the
joint  possession  of  a  co-operating  society  of  persons
such  as  this  world  of  ours  in  some  measure  already  is,
and  may  in  larger  measure  become,  without  limit,  —
especially  personal  idealism  may  give  us  all  that  God
has  been  supposed  to  offer,  and  without  the moral


'■


210  THE  N££D  OF  GOD

detriments  involved  in  relying  upon  a  supernatural
ally  for  doing  the  work  of  men.  Happiness  depends
(so  far  as  events  are  concerned)  on  grasping  that  total
law  and  tendency  of  things,  wherein  we  can  read  the
ultimate  doom  of  all  existing  defects  in  our  condition  ;
and  it  is  more  than  possible  that  this  law  may  be  found
in  our  own  personal  and  social  nature,  if  we  but  pene-
trate to  its  foundations.

So  much  for  the  appearance  of  God  in  the  sweep  of
human  history.  But  how  about  that  part  of  individual
destiny  that  lies  beyond  human  sight?  It  has  been
believed  that  men  cannot  be  wholly  happy  without  the
expectation  of  immortality,  and  the  supernatural  com-
pensations that  have  become  associated  with  that  belief.
In  reply,  McTaggart  points  out  two  things.  First,  that
immortality  is  no  more  an  unquestionable  benefit  than
are  the  visible  works  of  God.  Certain  great  religions
of  the  East,  as  well  as  certain  philosophies  of  the  West,
have  led  men  to  find  their  highest  good  in  personal
extinction.  And  secondly,  hope  of  immortality  does
not  depend  on  belief  in  God.  It  is  possible  that  the
soul  is  intrinsically  superior  to  the  crises  of  material
bodies,  even  if  it  were  a  solitary  being  in  the  cosmos.
The  prospect  of  individual  immortality  must  be  gained
if  at  all  by  the  same  painstaking  scientific  and  metaphys-
ical enquiries  as  justify  our  confidence  in  human  wel-
fare :  we  must  learn  of  what  stuff  we  are  made,  and  what
sort  of  contingency  that  stuff  is  intrinsically  subject  to.
An  immortality  thus  established  would  be  much  more
satisfactory  to  our  thought  than  one  dependent  upon
the  good  will  of  a  finite  Grod :  for  it  would  be  founded
upon  the  nature  of  things. Grod  and  immortality  are


THE  NEED  OF  A  GOD  211

wholly  separable  articles  of  faith,  and  no  interest  which
we  may  have  in  the  one  can  lend  any  interest  to  the
other.

The  works  of  God,  then,  do  not  at  once  recommend
him  to  our  needs.  Bat  we  may  still  have  an  interest
in  his  existence,  for  the  sake  of  the  guidance,  or  the
encouragement,  or  the  love  and  worship  which  his
presence  in  the  universe  would  provide.  Let  us  again
look  closely  and  consider  what  these  things  are  worth.

As  far  as  guidance  is  concerned,  the  moral  ideal  is
one  which  we  can  never  discover  unless  we  already  bear
it  in  ourselves.  Given  a  God,  we  should  first  needs
pass  judgment  upon  him,  on  the  basis  of  our  own  knowl-
edge of  good  and  evU,  before  adopting  him  as  our
standard.  It  is  true  that  we  need  the  suggestion  of  a
quality,  oftentimes,  in  something  beyond  us,  before  that
germ  which  is  in  us  can  awaken  to  life.  But  this  type
of  suggestion  is  much  more  available  in  our  fellow  men
than  in  the  mere  thought  of  a  God  whom  we  do  not
see,  and  whose  acts  we  can  only  infer.  Guidance  must
stand  very  close  to  us  to  be  of  any  value.  The  circum-
stance that  Grod  is  god  and  not  man  makes  any  applica-
tion of  his  character  to  our  own  case  difficult,  even  if
we  perfectly  knew  his  character.  Hence  men  have  been
fascinated  by  the  conception  of  the  God-incarnate,  vis-
ible in  the  flesh,  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are.
But  just  in  so  far  as  even  the  divine  man  fights  evil
with  the  weapons  of  God,  and  not  with  those  of  men,
his  case  fails  to  be  applicable  to  mine ;  and  the  guidance
fails.  What  is  done  by  man  we  can  call  upon  men  to
reach ;  what  is  done  by  the  god-man  stands  just  beyond


812  THE  K££D  OF  GOD

the  region  of  my  responsibility.  What  g^oodness,  in
the  end,  can  effectively  guide  and  inspire  ns  but  the
goodness  which  we  observe  and  recognize  in  those  whom
we  most  jndge  to  be  in  all  essentials  snch  as  we  our-
selves are?

But  there  are  still  other  interests  than  this  one  of
moral  guidance  to  which  the  existence  of  a  Grod  might
minister.  There  is  the  encouragement  which  some
minds  find  in  considering  that  there  is  in  the  world  one
morally  sublime  person.  There  is  the  comfort  which
others  find  in  the  thought  of  a  moral  leader  whose  sur-
vey is  g^reat  enough  to  include  the  whole  field :  if  I  am
too  weak  to  fathom  the  total  meaning  and  drift  of
things,  it  is  good  to  think  that  there  is  one  who  does.
Loss  of  such  value  as  this  encouragement  and  comfort
might  bring  would  not  be  wholly  made  g^d  by  human
substitutes :  yet  the  gap  that  would  appear  in  the  world
would,  in  all  probability,  not  be  irreparable.  Remem-
ber that  God,  if  he  exists,  is  at  best  an  imperfect  Being.
God  cannot  escape  his  share  of  the  imperfection  which,
in  this  universal  society  of  imperfect  spirits,  is  a  run-
ning stain.  What  men  can  lose  in  the  loss  of  a  GU>d
like  this,  is  only  such  value  as  they  may  regain,  in  some
degree  i£  not  in  full,  in  their  fellows.  When  men
believed  in  the  divine  right  of  kings,  they  could  not  but
apprehend  that  the  spirit  of  loyalty  must  vanish  in  the
spread  of  democracy.  But  loyalty  lives,  not  less  but
possibly  more,  in  the  government  of  society  by  itself
than  in  the  alleged  divine  kingdoms.  So  with  the  loss
of  the  conceived  God,  something  of  spiritual  shelter  and
canopy  is  removed,  without  which  the  soul  may  well  for
a  time  feel  naked  and  alone :  ^'  There  will  be  no  one


TH£  NEED  OF  A  GOD  213

to  worship,  and  there  will  be  one  person  less  to  love."
But  reverence  and  love  are  not  left  without  objects:
and  who  knows  but  that  the  necessity  of  confining
the  range  of  these  highest  of  human  sentiments  to  the
members  and  causes  of  visible  society  will  in  time
exalt  human  relations,  and  accelerate  the  attainment
of  perfection  ?

^'  Whether  the  friends  whom  all  men  may  find  could
compensate  for  the  friend  whom  some  men  thought  they
had  found  is  a  question  for  each  man  to  answer.  It  is
a  question  which  can  never  be  answered  permanently
in  the  negative  while  there  is  still  a  future  before  us."
Thus  McTaggart  closes  his  argument.

II

This  argument  makes  remarkably  vivid  to  what
degree  the  values  commonly  centered  in  God  are  repro-
duced in  kind  in  other  relationships,  to  nature,  to  friend,
and  to  society.  Mr.  McTaggart  has  mentioned  no  value
of  Ood  unique  in  kind  except  the  value  of  worship,  and
even  this  seems  to  him  fairly  well  recovered  in  human
reverence.  One  might  question  whether  all  possible
values  of  a  personal  God  had  been  considered ;  whether
the  primary  worth  of  such  a  being  is  not  unique  in
kind,  such  as  the  worth  of  these  other  relationships
would  not  substitute  for.  But  without  pressing  this
point,  I  wish  first  to  call  attention  to  certain  logical
peculiarities  of  the  argument.

One  is  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  argument  is  highly
tentative  and  hypothetical,  calling  for  further  meta-
physical investigation,  and  depending  for  its  proposed
substitutes  for  the  worth  of  God  on  what  metaphysical


214  THE  N££D  OF  GOD

inveftigatioii  mig^t  probably  show,  if  we  once  vigor*
onsly  put  ourselves  to  it.

I  cannot  but  assent  to  this  call  for  metaphysical
enquiry.  I  believe  with  McTaggart  that  men  have  no
right  to  the  satisfactions  which  their  religion  affords
them  except  as  they  earn  that  right  by  successful  meta-
physical thought.  We  cannot  pass  at  once  from  our
needs  to  the  satisfaction  thereof,  without  considering
what  that  reality  is  from  which  we  must  obtain  satisfac-
tion. ''What  people  want/'  says  McTaggart,  ''is  a  re-
ligion they  can  believe  to  be  true";  than  which  nothing
could  be  better  said.  Tet  right  as  McTaggart  is  in
referring  us  to  metaphysical  thought  to  find  the  objects
on  which  we  shall  hang  our  major  values,  just  so  wrong
is  he  in  basing  conclusions  on  what  such  enquiry  may
probably  show.  For  in  advance  of  the  actual  enquiry,
there  can  be  no  probabilities  in  the  case:  metaphysical
thought  will  show  one  thing,  or  it  will  show  another;
but  forecastings  of  what  it  may  show  signify  simply
nothing.  In  order  that  there  may  be  any  probability
in  a  given  field  of  enquiry,  something  in  that  field
must  be  certain.  Probabilities  support  themselves  inva-
riably on  known  laws.  Hence  any  enquiry  which
attempts  to  find  the  basis  of  all  certainty,  the  ultimate
thing,  is  in  advance  of  all  possible  use  of  probabilities;
it  is  trying  to  pave  the  way  for  them — they  cannot  pave
the  way  for  it.  Hence  no  metaphysical  hypothesis  is
antecedently  more  probable  than  any  other.

It  follows  that  as  long  as  we  have  only  probabilities
and  hypotheses  to  refer  to  in  these  matters  we  have
nothing  at  all.  If  the  belief  in  Ood  is  simply  an  hypoth-
esis, as  for  McTaggart  it  seems  to  be,  we  should  be  more


THE  NEED  OF  A  GOD  215

radical  than  he ;  we  should  say  outright  that  it  is  worth
nothing  at  all.  Ideas  have  certain  sustaining  powers^
even  though  they  are  wholly  our  own  fabrications ;  but
no  idea  that  is  such  a  pure  launch  of  our  own  imagina-
tion into  the  unknown— and  nothing  more— has  any
permanent  sustaining  power.  We  m  ust  take  McTaggart
strictly,  therefore,  at  his  own  word,  and  demand  that
all  attempts  at  circumstantial  evidence  on  questions  of
dogma  be  excluded  as  irrelevant;  that  religion  shall
at  all  points  be  built  on  metaphysical  knowledge  and
nothing  else.  God  can  be  of  any  worth  to  man  only
in  so  far  as  he  is  a  knoion  God.

Happily,  metaphysical  knowledge  is  the  most  univer-
sal kind  of  knowledge;  the  infant's  first  thoughts  are
metaphysical,  that  is  to  say,  thoughts  of  Reality — though
not  by  name  and  title.  The  chance  for  finding  God  of
general  human  value  is  built  on  the  prospect  that  God
may  be  found  in  experiencey  ^experience'  being  the
region  of  our  continuous  contact  with  metaphysical
reality.

Now  God  can  appear  in  experience  only  through  some
working  of  his.  If  no  effect  of  God  were  visible  in  the
world,  his  existence  must  be  always  a  matter  of  conjec-
ture. Or  if  God  works  in  the  world,  but  in  such  man-
ner that  we  can  never  identify  any  work  as  his,  his
existence  must  be  a  matter  of  conjecture.  If  God's
whole  office  in  our  behalf  is  that  of  touching  only  the
august  and  inaccessible  points  of  destiny, — to  decide
our  birth,  to  sit  in  remote  judgment  upon  our  deeds,  to
record  the  secret  fact  of  our  salvation,  or  otherwise  to
carry  into  effect  our  fortunes  in  the  other  world — his


216  TH£  K££D  OF  GOD

existence  must  be  a  matter  of  conjecture.  It  is  because
McTaggart  thinks  of  the  ^'  works  of  God  "  in  some  such
way  as  this  that  it  seems  to  him  necessary  to  reason
around  and  away  to  them ;  that  he  can  bahince  so  spec*
nlatively  the  chances  that  such  a  Being  exists.  It  does
not  occur  to  him  that  the  metaphysical  knowledge  of
God  might  be  empirical,  Le.,  based  on  his  manifestation
in  human  concerns.  Yet  I  venture  to  say  that  unless
God  does  operate  within  experience  in  an  identifiable
manner,  speculation  will  not  find  him,  and  may  be  aban-
doned. The  need  for  metaphysical  thought  arises
(I  venture  the  paradox)  just  because  God  is  matter  of
experience,  because  he  works  there  and  is  known  there
in  his  works.  I  must  enlarge  upon  this  assertion  to
some  extent.

If  we  consider  the  first  out^roppings  of  the  God-idea
in  history,  we  do  not  find  that  men  begin  by  connect-
ing God  with  unseen  effects.  He  is  the  invisible  cause
of  very  evident  effects.  Were  it  not  for  these  effects,  it
is  difKcult  to  think  that  the  idea  of  an  invisible  cause
would  have  arisen.  Men  do  not  first  imagine  a  Grod  in
abstractOj  then  speculate  about  his  possible  powers,  and
then  at  last  enquire  whether  such  a  Being  exists.  They
begin  at  the  other  end.  They  find  their  God  (as  James
puts  it)  in  rehu8.  They  are  impressed  by  powers
which  actually  operate  in  Nature  and  society ;  they  attrib-
ute to  these  powers  substantial,  that  is  metaphysical,
being.  They  learn  in  time  that  various  powers  can  be
manifestations  of  a  single  power.  They  come  to  see  that
in  the  struggle  of  powers  among  themselves,  one  power
must  be  supreme,  and  only  one  can  be  supreme. If  they


THE  N£ED  OF  A  GOD  217

have  called  the  several  powers  gods,  they  call  the  supreme
power  God;  and  God  is  thereby  defined  in  terms  of  the
interest  which  the  human  mind  cannot  but  have  in  what-
ever power  is  supreme  in  man's  own  world.  In  such
a  development  of  thought,  there  can  be  no  place  for  an
enquiry  whether  God  exists,  or  whether  belief  in  him
has  any  importance :  for  the  existence  and  importance
are  the  fixed  points  in  the  problem, — the  uncertain  ele-
ments being  the  fancies  as  to  the  nature  of  God's  inner
being,  his  private  life.  Doubts  must  attach  themselves
not  to  the  question  whether  God  is  and  works ;  but  to
the  question  what  his  works  in  reality  are ;  what  we  shall
think  of  their  tendency  and  quality ;  what  we  can  know
about  the  inner  nature  of  that  Being  which  we  have  iden-
tified simply  as  The  Supreme  Power.

Am  I  willing  to  accept  the  full  consequences  of  the
position  here  taken,  —  namely,  that  if  the  personal  and
moral  aspect  of  supreme  power  has  any  worth,  that  as-
pect will  be  found  in  experience  also  ?  I  am  willing.
But  we  shall  have  to  search  well  in  order  to  identify
such  an  experience.

Ill

The  essential  value  of  the  personal  attributes  of  the
Supreme  Power  is  not  to  be  found  by  those  who  simply
look  forward.  It  is  important  to  know  what  we  may
expect ;  it  is  important,  as  we  were  saying,  to  be  able  to
be  hopeful.  But  for  human  nature  much  more  than
good  prospects  are  necessary  to  happiness.  One  must
be  able  to  approve  the  world  as  it  is ;  one  must  even
be  able  to  look  backward  without  a  shudder.  We
must  provide  for  the  safe-conduct  of  the  excursions  of


218  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

the  human  mind,  not  alone  for  those  of  the  actual
human  being — such  is  the  universality,  or  shall  I  say
generosity,  of  that  side  of  our  nature  to  which  religion
appeals.  We  must  find  some  worth  in  God  that  we
cannot  find  in  the  forward  look  of  evolution.

Let  me  put  the  matter  thus :  we  must  be  free  to  open
ourselves,  wholly,  in  imagination  and  in  fact  if  need  be,
to  the  wliole  of  human  experience.  If  there  is  anything
which  destiny  may  thrust  upon  us,  or  has  thrust  upon
others,  and  which  we  have  to  hide  from  or  banish  from
thought,  we  are  not  happy.  If  beasts  must  suffer  to
supply  my  table,  and  I  cannot  open  my  mind  to  the
fact  of  their  suffering,  I  cannot  be  unqualifiedly  happy
at  my  table.  If  men  have  been  tortured  to  establish
the  civilization  I  enjoy,  and  I  cannot  face  the  reality  of
their  torture,  I  am  not  happy  in  my  historical  position.
If  I  can  reconcile  myself  to  the  certainty  of  death  only
by  forgetting  it,  I  am  not  happy.  And  if  I  can  dis-
pose of  the  fact  of  human  misery  about  me  only  by
shutting  my  thoughts  as  well  as  myself  within  my  com-
fortable garden,  I  may  assure  myself  that  I  am  happy,
but  I  am  not.  There  is  a  skeleton  in  the  closet  of  the
universe ;  and  I  may  at  any  moment  be  in  face  of  it.
Happiness  is  inseparable  from  confidence  in  action ;  and
confidence  of  action  is  inseparable  from  what  the  school-
men called  J96ac6  —  that  is,  poise  of  mind  with  reference
to  everything  I  may  possibly  encounter  in  the  chances
of  fortune.

Now  this  perfect  openness  to  experience  is  not  possi-
ble if  pain  is  the  last  word  of  pain.  Unless  there  is
something  behind  the  fact  of  pain,  some  kind  of  mys-
tery or  problem  in  it  whose  solution  shows  the  pain  to


TH£  NEED  OF  A  GOD  219

be  other  than  it  pretends,  there  is  no  happiness  for  man
in  this  world  or  the  next ;  for  no  matter  how  fair  the
world  might  in  time  hecomey  the  fact  that  it  had  been
as  bad  as  it  is  would  remain  an  unbanishable  misery,
unbanishable  by  God  or  any  other  power.  If  we  are
bound  to  be  as  fixedly  final  in  our  valuation  of  evil  in
general  as  Mr.  McTaggart  is,  taking  it  at  its  face  value,
as  pure  bad  and  nothing  more,  then  we  must  not  only
accept  his  conclusion  that  the  supreme  power  in  this
world  is  of  very  mixed  worth,  such  as  only  the  continued
perpetration  of  mixed  products  can  be  expected  from :
we  must  also  accept  such  an  imprisonment  of  thought
in  its  contemplation  of  the  world  and  of  destiny  as  must
ruin  the  peace  of  any  out-living  soul.  The  fact  is,  that
men  have  never  taken  their  troubles  that  way :  they
have  always  assumed  that  pain  is  to  be  explained.  And
if  this  attitude  is  in  any  degree  justified,  important  con*
sequences  follow  —  namely,  that  no  degree  of  evil  what-
ever can  constitute  an  absolute  condemnation  of  life ;
for  it  would  be  always  possible  that  further  application
of  the  same  solvent  would  transmute  that  evil  also.
Whether  a  given  evil  can  be  understood  '^  is  a  question
(to  borrow  McTaggart's  language)  which  can  never  be
answered  permanently  in  the  negative  while  there  is
still  a  future  before  us.''  If  this  attitude  is  in  any
degree  justified,  the  whole  groundwork  of  McTaggart's
argument  is  undone ;  built  as  it  is  upon  the  dogma  that
pain  is  incurably  the  last  word  of  pain.

Now  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  the  attitude  in
question  is  in  some  degree  justified.  For  it  does  not
occur  to  us  that  pain  is  not  the  last  word  of  pain,  apart
from  experiences  in  which  we  acttiaUy  discover  pain


220  THE  N££D  OF  GOJD

changing  its  character*  Do  we  not  find  simple  past-
ness  or  remembrance  changing  the  quality  of  ill  for  the
better?  do  we  not  find  excitement  doing  it,  love  doing
it,  wrath  doing  it?  Early  man  probably  knew  these
strange  transmuting  experiences  better  than  we  do.  He
knew  how  wounds  in  battle  are  scarcely  felt.  He  knew
how  rage  could  carry  him  gladly  into  certain  injury.
He  knew  how  pride  could  stop  the  sting  of  very  torture.
And  he  knew  how  the  frenzy  of  religious  ecstasy  made
mutilation  not  only  endurable,  but  even  necessary^
to  give  grist  to  the  great  exhilaration  that  stormed
within  him.  James  notes  '^the  remarkable  fact  that
sufferings  and  hardships  do  not  as  a  rule  abate  the  love
of  life ;  they  seem  on  the  contrary  to  give  it  a  keener
zest."  Inhabitants  of  Greenland  and  Labrador  do  not
leave  their  difficult  countries,  though  they  might ;  and
seamen  return  to  the  hardships  of  the  sea  with  an
unbreakable  attachment  which  is  no  mere  habit.  There
exists  then  even  widespread  in  human  experience  a  justi-
fication for  the  assumption  that  pain  has  in  some  d^ree
a  further  account  to  meet ;  and  if  in  some  degree,  then
possibly  in  all  degrees.  That  complete  openness  to
experience,  necessary  for  happiness,  cannot  be  shown
impossible.

IV

Consider,  now,  by  what  means  this  occasional  trans-
mutation of  evil  could  become  a  certain  command  of  all
possible  evil  —  whereby  an  openness  to  all  experience
might  be  possible.  '^  All  possible  evil "  is  a  large,  unde-
fined, even  growing  and  rapidly  metamorphosing  object.
What  we  should  much  like  to  find  is  a  power  which  is,


TH£  NEED  OF  A  GOD  221

not  simply  as  a  fact  but  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  neces-
sarily efficacious  in  this  work  of  pain-transmuting,  which
anticipates  the  nature  of  possible  obstacles  without
knowing  them  in  detail.  Where  can  such  a  principle
be  looked  for?

If  a  given  power  stays  in  the  same  field  with  other
powers  and  competes  with  them,  its  chances  of  subor-
dinating them  are  precarious;  its  supremacy  at  any  time
is  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  which  may  g^ve  place  to  another
matter  of  fact.  But  one  power  can  obtain  certain
supremacy  in  a  field  of  power  if  it  can  in  some  way
get  outside  that  field  and  survey  it  from  above.  Thus
man,  as  a  physical  force  among  forces  animal  and  nat-
ural, has  little  chance  with  them;  but  as  intelligence
he  has  some  possibility  of  coping  with  the  best  that
nature  can  bring  against  him.  There  is  competition  also
among  intelligences,  among  ideas;  is  there  any  possible
supreme  power  here?  No  intelligence  can  be  sure  of
success  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the  existing  field,  striving
simply  for  a  more  effective  arrangement  of  old  ideas;
but  if  it  is  able  to  reflect  upon  the  whole  idea-situation,
and  from  that  reflection  derive  a  new  idea,  all  other
intelligences  must  become  its  dependents.  It  is  the
same  with  competing  passions.  Anger  pitted  against
anger  can  never  be  sure  of  conquest :  but  a  ^'  soft  an-
swer"  enters  the  situation  as  a  new  idea.  If  it  conquers,
it  is  because,  refusing  to  compete,  it  includes  and  itself
stands  outside  the  arena.  Without  further  illustration,
may  I  suggest  the  principle  that  the  supreme  power  in
every  case  is  a  non-competing  power,  one  which  may
seem  at  first  glance  even  irrelevant  to  the  point  at
issue.  Not  otherwise  will  it  be  with  any  principle  which


222  TU£  N££D  OF  GOD

can  give  us  assured  mastery  of  those  obstacles  collect-
ively named  ''evil."

In  the  cases  above  mentioned^  in  which  we  can  see  a
transmuting  principle  at  work,  let  me  call  to  mind  the
prominence  of  association.  That  pain  which  is  taken
in  common,  like  effort  which  is  carried  on  in  common,  is
found  through  the  association  to  lose  its  harshness.^
One  does  not  quite  see  why  misery  loves  company,  per^
haps;  but  no  doubt  the  fact  of  association  does  some-
thing to  change  the  color  of  the  experience.  There  is
only  one  situation  in  savage  life  when  pain  seems  wholly
unendurable:  namely,  when  vanquished,  dishonored, and
abandoned,  the  wretch  must  gasp  out  his  life  in  utter  sol-
itude. Hardship  gives  zest,  but  under  what  conditions
in  particular?  Chiefly,  under  conditions  of  significant
association.  The  general  condition  for  the  transmut-
ing of  hardship  seems  to  be  this:  that  the  sense  of  union
with  something  not-myselfy  which  I  judge  worthy  of
this  very  hardship,  and  which  somehow  demands  it  for
adequate  expression,  shall  be  dense  and  compacted  in  the
moments  of  suffering.  This  is  naturally  the  case  in  the
moments  of  war  and  excitement,  and  it  must  have  gone
far  to  make  history  less  painful  than  the  reading  of  its
literal  pages  in  cold  blood  makes  manifest.  The  laws
of  the  multiplication  of  human  power  by  association
have  never  been  worked  out;  but  no  one  has  failed  to
measure  in  frequent  experiences  what  incredible  enhance-
ment of  the  value  of  any  experience  may  occur  in  a
single  touch  of  endorsement  from  without.  Worth  of  all
sorts  begins  to  acquire  another  dimension  as  it  enters  a

^  ETen  remembranoe  is  a  kind  of  social  relation  between  my  present
and  xnj  former  self.


THE  NEED  OF  A  GOD  228

career  of  actual  universality,  such  as  the  merest  nod  of
assent  from  an  Other  may  convey.  Association  is  a  prin-
ciple which  stands  outside  of  and  includes  whatever  may
become  content  of  individual  experience ;  there  is  some
possibility  that  in  association  a  sufficient  mastery  of  evil
may  be  found.

But  unfortunately,  association  has  its  own  evils.
Human  companionship  can,  in  the  way  we  have  noted,  do
much  to  transmute  every  other  kind  of  pain  into  some-
thing else;  it  cannot  transmute  its  own  kind  of  pain,
that  which  comes  from  its  own  defects.  As  imperfect
knowers  of  themselves  and  of  each  other,  f eUow-men  are
the  source  of  the  severest  evils  we  men  have  to  endure ;
and  by  virtue  of  our  precarious  hold  on  human  existence
the  closest  association  may  cause  the  bitterest  pang,
because  its  loss  removes  also  that  by  which  any  loss  is
made  less  grievous.  Far,  indeed,  must  we  be  from  per-
fect openness  to  experience  if  there  is  not  some  power
over  these  evils  also.


From  what  we  have  judged  of  supreme  power,  it
would  follow  that  only  something  outside  the  field  of
human  association,  not  competing  there,  could  afford
sufficient  armoring  against  these  greatest  evils.  It
must  be  another  than  any  finite  self,  something  which
reflects  upon  and  in  its  reflection  includes  all  finite
selves  and  their  circumstances,  something,  nevertheless,
with  which  any  finite  self  may  become  associated  in
some  infallible  manner.  This  seems  to  me  the  point
in  which  a  God  becomes  necessary.  In  God  we  have
the  notion of  an Other-than-all-men,  and  an Other


224  THE  NEED  OF  GOD

vhose  relation  to  me  is  not  subject  to  evil  through  its
own  defect ;  one  from  whom  therefore  I  can  anticipate
no  pain  that  must  refer  me  to  still  another  for  its  trans-
muting. It  is  not  the  power  of  Grod,  as  mighty  in
comparison  with  other  forces  in  their  own  fields,  that
is  of  value  to  us;  it  is  not  Grod  as  miracle-worker,
tumbling  Nature-masses  about  through  Herculean  or
Jovian  command  of  energy ;  it  is  not  even  God  as  vin-
dicator, doer  of  particular  justice,  meeting  and  over-
coming the  inequities  of  men's  judgments  by  a  more
penetrating  judgment;  it  is  rather  God  as  intimate,
infallible  associate,  present  in  all  experience  as  That
by  Which  I  too  may  firmly  conceive  that  experience
from  the  outside.  It  is  God  in  this  personal  relation
(not  exclusive  of  the  others)  that  alone  is  capable  of
establishing  human  peace  of  mind,  and  thereby  human
happiness.  Something  paradoxical  about  the  Supreme
Power  there  is ;  something  in  this  non-competitive  char-
acter which  thinkers  early  seized  upon: — as  Lao  Tze
glorifies  the  Tao  that  never  asserts  itself,  as  Christianity
presents  for  adoration  its  God  in  the  guise  of  an  in-
fant, and  infant  of  the  humblest.  The  authentic  voice
of  God,  if  it  is  to  come  to  man  with  a  wholly  irresist-
ible might  of  meaning,  must  be  a  still,  small  voice.

It  is  scarcely  open  to  question  that  the  deepest  asser-
tion of  the  religious  consciousness  is  of  its  experience
of  precisely  such  relation  to  its  supreme  Other.  Just
such  companionship  we  seemed  to  see  the  human  will
spontaneously  creating  for  itself,  in  its  early  resentful
outcry  against  destiny;  to  find  later,  perhaps,  that
here  was  rather  a  discovery  than  a  creation,  strangely
relieving  the  pressure  of  its  initial  burden. Just  such


THE  N££D  OF  A  GOD  226

companionship  we  find  the  developed  religions  con-
sciousness celebrating  as  the  source  of  its  ^Wictorj
over  the  world/'  Further  than  this  it  is  not  my  func-
tion here  to  demonstrate  the  validity  of  these  alleged
experiences.  The  problem  of  God's  reality,  in  its
metaphysical  setting,  will  occupy  us  in  the  pages  imme-
diately following.  We  have  shown  that  such  God  as
theism  presents  to  men  is  necessary  to  their  happiness,
and  we  have  shown  that  such  a  (jod  must  be  found  in
experience,  if  at  all.

It  will  not  be  amiss  to  emphasize  in  conclusion  the
entire  justice  of  McTaggart's  contention  that  the  finite
God  is  of  no  worth.  When  we  talk  of  experience  of
Grod  and  companionship  with  God,  we  run  a  danger
hardly  less  seductive  than  the  danger  from  atheism.
Indeed,  atheism  may  be  said  to  live  on  the  perils  and
failures  of  theism.  The  experience  and  companionship
of  God  are  not  a  substitute  for  relations  with  humanity.
The  guidance  and  encouragement  of  God,  devotion
and  love  toward  him,  are  false  when  they  appear  as
competitors  in  the  field  of  human  alliances.  If  we
have  been  near  the  truth  in  our  description  of  the
immediate  work  of  God,  it  can  only  be  to  render  the
individual  more  perfectly  open  to  experience^  human
and  other.  If  the  experience  of  God  does  not,  on  the
whole,  enhance  the  attachments  of  human  life,  one
must  judge  on  these  principles  that  the  experience  is
not  of  God.  What  these  terms  of  human  association
can  mean  when  applied  to  God  is  the  most  difficult  of
practical  as  well  as  of  theoretical  problems ;  tending,  pre-
sumably, to  a  mystical  interpretation  of  worship. The


296  TH£  NEED  OF  GOD

personality  of  God  must  be,  we  think,  personality  whose
bonds  are  broken  in  ^*  passing  through  infinity  " ;  deny-
ing this  infinity,  McTaggart  finds  rightly  that  he  must
reject  the  rest  as  comparatively  useless ;  finds  that  his
finite  God  becomes  an  intruder,  and  an  obstacle  to  the
loyalties  of  the  spirit.  The  balance  between  the  denial
of  God  and  the  right  perception  of  God  is  most  deli-
cate, and  diflBicult  to  maintain.  We  shall  not  find  it
until  we  have  realized  what  Kant  meant  by  the  '^  regu-
lative idea."  But  the  positive  appreciation  of  what  GxmI
means  to  men  is  the  first  step  toward  finding  that  bal-
ance ;  and  further,  '^  all  things  good  are  as  difficult  as
they  are  rare/'


PART  IV


HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD


CHAPTER  XVI

THE  ORIGINAL  SOURCES  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE

OF  GOD

GOD  is  to  be  known  in  experience  if  at  all :  to  this
result  both  of  the  preceding  parts  of  our  study
have  led.  And  now  we  have  to  interrogate  experience,
in  the  hope  of  a  categorical  answer  whether  the  reality
which  here  we  encounter  in  expeiience  is  in  any  literal
sense  a  living  and  divine  reality,  directly  knowable  as
such.

The  habit  of  receiving  our  ideas  about  God  through
tradition  is  likely  to  grow  at  the  expense  of  any  orig^al
sources  of  this  knowledge  which  we  may  possess.  We
more  readily  believe  that  ^'  God  spake  in  times  past  unto
the  fathers  by  the  prophets ''  than  that  we  have  any
natural  human  organ  for  recognizing  that  presence.
But  it  must  be  a  postulate  of  our  own  study  that  in
whatever  way  God  has  been  known  and  heard  by  any
of  the  prophets,  or  by  seers  of  more  ancient  date,  or  by
the  first  remote  God-discerning  mind  in  this  planet's
unrecorded  history,  in  fundamentally  that  same  manner
is  God  known  by  all  God-knowing  men  at  all  times.
The  habit  of  looking  backward  to  older  origins,  for
revelation  authoritatively  transmitted,  is  just  and  right :
because  the  knowledge  of  God  is  capable  of  develop-
ment, and  no  man  could  wish  to  begin  again  at  zero.
But  that  by  which  he  is  able  to  recognize  and  accept


230  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

his  authorities  is  his  own  knowledge  of  God,  especially
that  more  elementary  sense  of  his  that  a  God  exists,  and
has  left  his  word  in  the  world.  It  is  of  this  universal
and  primordial  knowledge  that  we  wish  to  take  posses-
sion ;  far  simpler  and  less  wealthy  than  the  contents  of
''  revelation,''  but  for  that  reason  the  more  apt  to  be
neglected,  and  thereby  the  means  lost  by  which  alone
revelation  and  tradition  can  be  either  appreciated  or
criticised.  We  shall  be  satisfied  at  present  if  we  can
find  and  verify  those  original  sources  of  the  knowledge
of  God  which  we  have  in  common  with  aU  men  at  all
times,  the  universal  revektion.  And  it  is  fair  to  sur-
mise that  these  original  sources,  advanced  in  God-knowl-
edge as  we  may  be,  remain  sources  of  new  knowledge
also,  inexhaustible,  neglected  at  peril.

To  judge  from  the  history  of  religions,  God  has  been
known  for  the  most  part  in  connection  with  other
objects ;  not  so  much  separately,  if  ever  separately,  as  in
relation  to  things  and  events  which  have  served  as  media
or  as  mediators  for  the  divine  presence.  We  find  the
early  knowers  of  God  worshipping  him  under  the  guise
of  sun,  moon,  and  stars ;  of  earth  and  heaven ;  of  spirits
and  ancestors ;  of  totems,  of  heroes,  of  priest-kings ;  and
of  the  prophets  themselves.  Speaking  broadly,  there
are  two  distinct  phases  of  experience  wherein  God  is
apt  to  appear :  in  the  experience  of  Nature  and  in  social
experience.  Not  everywhere  in  Nature,  but  at  special
points,  well-known  and  numerous  enough,  the  aware-
ness of  God  seems,  as  it  were,  to  have  broken  through,
or  to  have  supervened  upon  our  ordinary  physical
experience  of  those  objects.  When  man  has  acquired  so
much  imagination  that  he  is  capable  of  being  stirred


THE  OBIGINAL  SOURCES  231

by  Nature,  he  seems  capable  at  the  same  time  of  some-
thing more  than  imaginative  stirring — namely,  of
superstition,  of  religion.  If  that  element  of  the  man
is  present  which  we  call  the  sense  of  mysteryy  then  the
apparitions  of  heaven  begin  to  work  upon  it,  and  to
co-operate  with  it ;  the  infinitudes  of  space  and  time
are  teeming  with  presentiment  and  omen ;  and  man's
nature-world  is  on  its  way  to  be  judged  divine.

So  of  social  experience  :  it  is  not  everywhere,  but  at
special  junctures  and  crises,  that  the  awareness  of  God
has  come  to  men ;  at  the  events  of  death  and  birth,  of
war  and  wedlock,  of  dream  and  disease  and  apparition.
Given  the  imagination^  the  sense  of  mystery,  and  withal
so  much  self-consciousness  as  is  required  to  make  the
idea  of  soul,  or  double,  or  shadowy  spiritual  counter-
part; and  these  crises  of  social  experience  become  clothed
with  a  significance  not  limited  to  this  visible  context :
the  unseen  world  becomes  peopled  with  spirits,  and  in
time,  with  gods.  Spirit-worship  and  ancestoi-worship
develop  side  by  side  with  the  g^reater  and  lesser  nature-
worship,  as  if  here  also  man  had  found  access  to  a
knowledge  of  God.

But  although  we  have  here  two  different  regions  of
religious  suggestion,  destined  to  great  historic  careers
in  relative  independence,  it  is  evident  that  in  looking
for  original  sources  we  cannot  keep  them  apart  nor
assign  to  either  a  priority  over  the  other.  For  the  reli-
gious experience  of  Nature  means  nothing  if  not  finding
Nature  living,  even  personal,  thereby  socializing  that
experience.  Whereas  the  religious  meaning  of  social
experience  arises  in  the  first  place  only  as  birth,  death,
and  the  like  are  regarded  as  the  work  of  that  same


232  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

inexorable  power  displayed  in  Nature ;  and  Burvival
theories  become  religious  only  in  so  far  as  the  surviving
spirit  becomes  a  power  in  Nature.  What  is  the  Fung
Shui  of  Chinese  family  religion  but  the  collective  ances-
tral Force,  bearing  on  family  fortune  through  the  nature-
powers  of  wind  and  rain — in  effect  a  family  Yang
and  Yin,  even  Tien  and  Tao.  What  would  the  Hindu
Sraddha  be  without  its  nature  myth  ?  In  all  early  reli-
gions the  dead  are  thought  to  pass  into  Nature,  and
in  that  passage  to  change  their  character,  taking  on  the
menacing  aspect  of  nature-powers,  requiring  therefore
to  be  propitiated  no  matter  how  nearly  allied  in  life.
Further  the  unity  that  belongs  in  kind  to  the  religious
objects,  and  must  become  theirs  in  form  also,  is  chiefly
conferred  upon  them  by  the  god  of  Nature.  Spirits
are  essentially  pluralistic  and  swarming:  at  death,  losing
much  in  individuality,  souls  were  thought  to  mix  with
nature  and  the  winds  in  floating  multitudes,  or  to  hud-
dle in  dismal  nether-world  societies,  without  hierarchy
of  form  or  purpose.  But  heaven  and  earth  and  sun
have  a  natural  universality  and  unity  ;  are  fitted  to  give
shape  and  character  to  the  plastic  spirit-mass;  and  at
last  to  lift  that  mass  into  their  own  singleness  of  order
and  power .^  Social  experience,  then,  becomes  religious
experience  only  when  it  is  at  the  same  time  an  experi-
ence of  Nature power. And  nature  experience  like-

^  Thu  the  oonqnest  of  Egypt  nnder  the  hanner  of  Homs,  god  of  the
risiDg  Bull,  piepared  the  way  for  such  monotheism  as  Egypt  approaehed,
and  even  for  a  moment  attained.  The  focnssing  and  defining  influenoe
of  nature  in  the  religions  of  Persia,  Greece,  India  needs  hardly  be  pointed
out.  In  the  Hebrew  religion,  indeed,  the  progress  to  monotheism  was
of  another  sort ;  but  in  this  religion  the  imaginative  elements  are  little  m
CTidenee,  whether  on  the  side  of  nature  or  of  social  experience.


THE  ORIGINAL  SOURCES  233

wise  is  religious  only  when  Nature  becomes  an  object
of  social  apprehension.  Spiritism  and  Animism  are  at
bottom  the  same.

Such  experience  of  Nature  as  arouses  a  fear  with
supersensible  reverberations,  suggestions  of  unseen  pres-
ences;^ such  social  experience  of  human  crises  as
arouses  an  awe,  likewise  reaching  into  the  supersensiblei
an  awe  having  close  kinship  with  that  Nature-fear :  it  is
such  experience  as  this  (not  wholly  unknown  to  any  age
or  to  any  man)  that  is  called  religious ^  and  that  brings
us  close  to  the  original  source  of  religious  knowledge.
But  it  is  clear  to  us  that  this  experience  is  not  the
original  source  itself.  In  these  distinctive  religious
feelings  of  fear  and  awe  we  have  already  recognized  the
operation  of  idea-masses  prepared  beforehand  in  some
more  elemental  experience ;  some  vast  and  intangible
idea-mass  probably,  which  man  tries  to  give  shape  to,  but
most  miserably  fails  to  express,  in  his  language  about  the
^^  spirits."  As  small  sounds  in  the  night  convey  mighty
meanings,  and  feelings  therewith,  to  minds  wellrstocked
with  images  of  the  weird  and  sinister;  so  if  the  phe-
nomena of  experience,  trifling  as  well  as  majestic,  call
forth  startled  reactions,  it  is  because  man  has  already
begun  to  consider  and  judge  the  Whole.  Neither  men
nor  children  are  able  to  fear  the  dark  until  they  have
made  much  progress  in  intelligence  and  imagination.
In  that  ^^  sense  of  mystery,"  which  we  thought  must
first  be  present,  we  may  see  the  idea  of  God  already  at

1  For  a  moat  skilfQl  differentiation  of  this  peenliar  fear  from  other
types  of  fear,  see  F.  B.  Jevons,  Introdaotion  to  the  History  of  Religion,
eh.  TiiL


234  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

work.  The  original  source  is  here,  if  we  can  discern  it.
God  has  come  upon  man's  world-scene  in  quiet ;  and
man's  terror  results  when  in  some  use  of  his  whole*idea
he  suddenly  notes  God  standing  there.  Through  no
historical  re-tracings  shall  we  discover  the  silent  entrance
into  Nature  of  that  presence.  But  what  external  evi-
dence may  refuse,  some  analysis  may  yet  afford  us  a
glimpse  of.

In  all  experience  of  the  type  considered,  we  have
found  man  vividly  conscious  of  his  own  Umitations.
And  all  man's  limitations,  whether  of  knowledge  or  of
power  or  of  worth,  are  brought  home  to  him  by  his  con-
tact with  Nature  in  some  form  or  other.  Nature  con-
centrates within  itself  all  that  is  menacing  and  hostile
to  man  ;  and  also  all  that  reminds  him  of  his  pettiness
and  weakness.  Primary  religious  experience  is  so  bur-
dened  with  this  consciousness  of  limitation  that  we  may
almost  say :  What  man  fears,  that  he  worships.

But  we  may  notice  that  what  he  both  fears  and  wor-
ships is  always  something  more  than  the  World  which
limits  him.  His  religion  has  added  to  the  natural  ter-
rors of  existence  new  terrors  of  its  own.  Whatever  his
fundamental  religions  experience  is,  it  has  brought  him
little  consolation.  He  goes  about  in  a  subjection  to  his
world  which  he  had  not  before  known ;  a  breach  has
opened  between  him  and  his  reality,  —  as  if  now  it
belongs  to  a  stranger,  whereas  before  it  was,  if  brute
fact,  still  his  fact.  The  redskin,  says  Brinton,  is
oppressed  by  the  sense  of  something  invisible  at  work
everywhere  about  him ;  a  sense  which  leaves  him  anx-
ious, full  of  alarms.  And  further,  every  touch  of  super-
nature  is  at  the  same  time  in  some  degree  a  sudden


THE  ORIGINAL  SOURCES  235

stroke  of  accusing  self-consciousness.  Among  the
Bechuana  people,  when  it  thunders  they  exclaim,  '^  I
have  not  stolen,  I  have  not  stolen ;  who  among  us  has
devoured  the  goods  of  another?''  In  first  judging  his
world,  man  seems  to  find  his  world  judging  him  ;  and
every  experience  of  the  divine  is  a  day  of  judgment,
a  moment  summoning  to  instant,  summary  review  of
self  —  which  review  seems  from  the  first  to  have  yielded
little  of  reassuring  nature.

Now  the  epitome  of  all  man's  limitations  is  his  igno-
rance ;  and  it  is  fair  to  presume  that  man's  speculative
troubles  are  the  secret  of  all  these  more  practical  troubles.
For  the  idea  is  (biologically)  the  scout  of  experience,
and  doubtless  a  knowledge  of  dependence  has  touched
the  soul  in  advance  of  any  full  appreciation  of  what
that  dependence  implies.  The  knowledge  of  ignorance
may  well  be  the  first  warning  note,  sending  its  premoni*
tory  shudder  through  the  frame  of  human  values.  The
sense  of  a  limitation  of  knowledge,  even  in  Paradise,
might  tempt  man  to  explore  his  boundaries ;  might  make
him  desire  '^  to  be  as  the  gods,  knowing  good  and
evil/'  He  realizes  that  his  knowledge  is  his  great
weapon  and  defence,  standing  between  him  and  fate ;
he  soon  chafes  at  the  persistence  of  any  region  of  igno-
rance ;  early  proceeds  to  fill  any  .such  void  of  knowledge
with  creatures  of  assumed-knowledge — even  long  before
he  sees  definitely  how  his  ignorance  is  to  hurt  him.
Nothing  could  have  been  better  timed  than  the  appeal
of  the  serpent  in  the  Garden.

But  the  knowledge  of  ignorance  is  of  itself  no  reli-
gious experience.  Religion  is  bound  up  in  the  differ-
ence between  the  sense  of  ignorance  and  the  sense  of


236  HOW  M£N  KNOW  GOD

mystery :  the  former  means,  ^^  I  know  not  '^ ;  the  latter
means  ^'  I  know  not ;  but  it  is  knoion"  And  I  dare
say  that  man  first  realizes  his  ignorance  only  in  so  far
as  he  becomes  conscious  of  mystery ;  the  negative  side
of  his  experience  is  made  possible  by  some  prior  recog*
nition  of  a  positive  being^  on  the  other  side  of  his
limitation.

It  seems  to  me  then,  that  the  original  source  of
the  knowledge  of  God  is  an  experience  which  might
be  described  as  an  experience  of  not  being  alone
in  knowing  the  world,  and  especially  the  world  of
Nature.  In  such  an  experience,  if  there  be  such,  would
be  contained  all  the  possibilities  for  harm  and  for  good
which  religion  has  exhibited.

So  long  as  the  unknown  of  the  world  is  simple  mys-
teryy  a  mere  ^'  It  is  known/'  man  is  made  more  a
servant  than  before  by  his  religious  experience.  SKs
worship  will  take  on  depressing  and  violent  aspects;
his  consciousness  will  become  a  perpetual  celebration
of  his  own  inferiority.  He  will  become  a  devotee  of
the  fearful  and  the  immense,  which  have  always  for
their  own  sake  an  inherent  fascination  for  man  ;  a  fas-
cination which  we  understand  when  we  consider  how
the  operation  of  any  whole-idea  is  a  creation  of  value.
It  is  psychologically  impossible  for  man  to  face  the
infinite  in  any  shape  without  exultation.  Any  posi-
tive view  of  the  universe  beyond  my  ignorance  has
power  to  excite  infinite  devotion  ;  not  failing  to  tempt
the  spirit  to  an  infinite  disloyalty  to  itself.  Hence  in
all  ages  of  the  world,  the  mere  sense  of  mystery,  as  the
discerning  of  something  beyond  the  bounds  of  ignorance^


THE  ORIGINAL  SOURCES  237

has  claimed  its  victims ;  there  are  always  those  who
are  capable  of  throwing  themselves  beneath  the  wheels
of  a  cosmic  Juggernaut,  finding  in  pure  abandonment
to  the  infinite  if  not  a  cure  for  human  trouble,  at
least  an  anaesthesia  for  all  ills.  And  indeed,  no  man
has  found  his  religion  until  he  has  found  that  for
which  he  must  sell  his  goods  and  his  life;  the  enthu-
siasm for  martyrdom,  for  radical  self-sacrifice,  is  the
work  of  the  idea  in  all  of  us :  and  a  universe  of  mys-
tery, though  it  can  afford  no  more,  can  at  least  afford
opportunity  for  this.

But  if  that  original  experience  of  the  presence  of
God  in  the  world  can  reach  to  some  permanent  hold  on
its  object,  so  that  it  might  be  expressed,  ^^  /  know  not ;
hut  He  haowSj^  the  entire  aspect  of  religion  is  altered.
The  reconciliation  of  men  with  such  a  world  is  no
longer  degrading  nor  disloyal ;  for  the  breach  which  is
opened  up  between  man  and  his  world  by  the  entrance
of  the  unseen  Claimant,  may  be  through  that  same
presence  completely  closed.

From  the  knowledge  that  ^^  He  knows "  will  be  in-
ferred the  thesis  that  the  unknown  of  Nature  is
knowable :  and  the  endless  task  of  science  will  receive
its  necessary  and  sufficient  warrant  and  encouragement.
Religion  offers  science  the  power  and  the  stimulus  to
proceed  ad  infinitum  without  fear  of  ultimate  obstacle.
That  this  proud  liberty  has  been  no  meaningless  gift,
the  beginnings  of  science  may  clearly  show.  For  man's
first  science  is  magic  —  his  first  systematic  assertion
that  nature  is  subordinate  to  the  spirit;  man's  first
inductions  are  the  magical  inductions  of  the  Name,  the
Symbol,  the  Imitation. By  his  knowledge  of  God  he


238  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

knows  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  will
prove  wholly  refractory  to  the  work  of  idearmaking;
his  knowledge  of  the  absolute  Knower  is  an  attain-
ment^ though  a  vicarious  attamment,  of  the  end  of
scientific  effort.

And  so  with  whatever  other  and  more  concrete
consciousness  of  limitation  may  be  incident  to  natural
or  social  experience:  if  that  by  which  one  knows
his  limit  is  a  positive  knowledge  of  the  Spirit,  then
it  is  a  success  of  incalculable  importance.  ^^I  can--
noty  but  He  carij^*  lifts  man  over  his  first  formidable
obstacles,  and  sets  him  on  his  feet  as  man,  endowed  as
a  race  with  infinite  faith  and  with  infinite  patience,
because  already  tasting  the  cup  of  ultimate  achievement.
Such  knowledge  of  ignorance,  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord
therewith,  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom ;  such  knowledge
of  impotence,  the  beginning  of  concrete  mastery ;  such
knowledge  of  unholiness  is  already  a  touch  of  the
untouchable  and  a  beginning  of  holiness.

Religion  is  often  described  as  the  healing  of  an
alienation  which  has  opened  between  man  and  his
world:  this  is  true;  but  we  may  not  forget  that  it
is  religion  which  has  brought  about  that  alienation.
Religion  is  the  healing  of  a  breach  which  religion
itself  has  made:  and  if  we  would  reach  the  original
sources,  we  must  find  them  in  man's  awareness  of  an
Other  than  himself  y  an  Other  who  may  be  a  companion,
but  also  an  enemy  more  deadly  than  death,  more  dread-
ful than  Nature  in  herself  has  any  image  of.  It  is
religion  that  reveals  to  man  the  disparity  between  him-
self and  his  world,  sets  him  at  odds  with  that  from


THE  ORIGINAL  SOURCES  289

which  he  came,  brings  him  to  that  pass  to  which  the
animal  cannot  come  —  an  unwillingness  to  take  his
world  as  he  finds  it,  a  consciousness  of  the  everlasting
No,  and  a  defiance  of  it  or  perhaps  a  subservience  to  it,
— as  if  this  were  his  god.  And  what  man  has  to  learn
by  difficult  degrees  is,  that  it  is  his  orig^al  knowledge
of  God  that  has  made  this  alienation  possible.  '^  Thou
couldst  not  seek  me  (nor  fear  me,  nor  be  resentful
toward  me)  hadst  thou  not  already  found  me  " :  this
is  what  religion  always  knows,  yet  has  forever  to  re-
learn.'

This  primordial  knowledge  of  God  has  never  been
wholly  obscured ;  some  sign  of  that  known  compan-
ionship has  never  been  absent  from  religion.  Man
records  this  consciousness  not  only  in  tradition,  but
also  in  act  and  token ;  he  sets  up  his  holy  places  and
their  strange  appurtenances  as  memorials  that  the  Spirit
has  here  been  met  on  friendly  footing,  and  may  prob-
ably be  met  again.  He  carries  with  him,  inseparable
from  his  person,  his  fetichy  material  medium  for  his
spiritual  attendant  and  confidante,  loss  of  which  may  be
loss  of  all  that  makes  life  worth  living.

At  the  source  of  all  religion,  so  far  as  our  analysis
can  discover,  we  find  an  experience  of  God  as  an  Other
Knower  of  our  World,  already  in  close  relation  to  self,

1  It  is  reserved  for  fally  developed  religion  to  read  tmlj  the  para-
doxical history  of  man's  religious  experience,  both  in  the  race  and  in  the
indiTidaal.  Are  not  these  lines  of  George  Herbert  true  of  these  earlj
racial  gropings  also  ?

Lord,  Thon  didst  make  me,  yet  Thon  wonndest  me  ;
Lord,  Thon  dost  wound  me,  yet  Thou  dost  relieve  me  ;
Lord,  Thou  relieveet,  yet  I  die  by  Thee  ;
Lord,  Thou  dost  kill  me,  yet  Thon  dost  reprieve  me.
I  eannot  skill  of  these  Thy  wayes.


210  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

and  also  in  some  natural  bond  with  oar  social  and  phys-
ical experience.  Sach  is  the  report  of  the  elementary
religions  consciousness;  it  is  this  report  that  we  haye
now  to  pass  judgment  upon.


CHAPTER  XVII

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  THAN  OXJR

OWN

OUR  enquiry  into  the  knowledge  of  God  has  led  to
this  as  the  central  issue :  whether  in  the  midst  of
experiences  of  Nature  and  of  human  extremity,  using
these  in  some  way  as  mediators,  there  can  be  a  veritable
experience  of  infinite  Spirit  other  than  myself.  We  do
not  mitigate  the  difficulty  of  this  question  by  pointing
out  that  the  knowledge  of  any  other  minds  than  our
own,  even  in  plain  human  intercourse,  has  its  difficulties
also.  But  in  so  far  as  the  difficulties  are  similar,  it  will
be  an  advantage  to  bring  them  together, — the  more  so
since,  in  spite  of  any  difficulties  of  theory,  we  believe
our  experiences  of  our  fellow's  minds  to  be  real, —
neither  illusory  nor  simply  working-hypotheses.

All  the  (substantive)  objects  of  human  attention  and
experience  may  be  put  into  three  fundamental  classes :
the  physical  objects,  which  with  their  relations  we  sum
up  as  Nature ;  the  psychical  objects,  which  with  their
relations  we  sum  up  as  Self ;  and  the  social  objects,  or
other  minds,  which  with  their  relations  we  sum  up  as
Society,  or  still  more  comprehensively,  as  our  Spiritual
World,  ourselves  being  included.  These  classes  of
objects  seem  clearly  distinguishable;  not  mixing  nor
blending  at  their  borders  —  when  I  mean  another  mind


\


2i2  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

I  distinctly  do  not  mean  either  my  own  mind  or  a  phy^
ical  thing.  Each  has  its  own  science  —  physics^  etc.,
psychology,  sociology.  And  each  has  its  own  organ  of
perception.

But  no.  We  have  an  outer  senaey  says  Locke,  for
things  of  nature ;  we  have  an  inner  sense  for  things  of
our  own  minds,  our  thoughts  and  feelings ;  but  Locke
mentions  no  sense  by  which  we  can  discern  another
mind.  And  neither,  be  it  said,  does  any  later  philos-
opher. Sociologists  speak  of  ''  the  social  sense/'  social
instincts,  ^^  consciousness  of  kind,"  and  the  like ;  but
these  practical  designations  are  not  intended  to  name
an  actual  organ  of  knowledge  differentiated  for  percep-
tion of  other  minds.  We  have  no  such  organ.  Soci*
ology  is  an  extended  psychology,  made  possible  by  the
fact  that  Society,  as  we  noted,  includes  Self,  —  is  built
up  really  of  psychical  objects,  and  from  the  center  out-
ward, by  help  of  ideas  which  work  well  in  practice:
other  theory  than  this  of  social  experience  we  shall  not
find  in  the  Books.  This  third  class  of  objects  is,  by
some  strange  device,  made  knowable  without  a  special
perceptive  organ:  —  or,  perhaps  we  are  mistaken  in
assuming  it  literally  knowable.

This  absence  of  a  perceptive  organ  makes  it  probable
that  we  are  mistaken :  it  suggests  that  our  social  knowl-
edge is  built  on  hypothesis,  and  not  at  all  on  experi-
ence. It  compels  us  to  examine  our  so-called  social
experience  directly,  to  see  whether  we  can  find  any  point
of  actually  present  and  certain  knowledge  of  another
mind.  Such  an  examination  yields  little  that  is  satisfy-
ing. What  I  do  directly  experience  is  the  physical
presence  of  the  other  person ;  and  his  expressive  signs


KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  213

and  language,  which  are  also  physical.  From  these  I
infer  his  reaUty,  and  nothing  in  experience  tends  to
shake  that  hypothesis ;  everything  confirms  it.  What  I
have,  then,  is  a  perfect  hypothesis. For  all  practical

IZt  n.y  phyriol  «.,i™„„i.:  indeed,  the  «dH,  ot
this  social  world  of  mine  is  the  last  thing  I  should
doubt.  The  practical  certainties  here  are  unshakable.
But  if  you  ask  for  more  than  practical  certainty ;  if  you
require  a  genuine  social  experience,  in  the  literal  sense
of  the  word  experience,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  discover  it.  I
am  inclined  to  think  there  is  no  such  thing.

And  I  must  acknowledge  that  even  this  sense  of
practical  certainty  does  sometimes  desert  me.  My  social
consciousness  is  subject  to  extraordinary  fluctuations ;
my  sense  of  the  presence  of  other  souls  comes  and  goes
in  an  unaccountable  way;  it  flits  in  its  substantiality
from  one  extreme  to  the  other,  much  as  does  my  belief
in  God. When  I  seek  to  grasp  it,  it  eludes  me.

There  are  tunes  ..hen  my  consciousness  is  burden-
somely  public,  and  not  my  own ;  when  the  social  world
is  all  too  real  and  immediate;  when  I  can  find  no
seclusion  in  my  thoughts,  no  privacy  even  behind
barred  doors.  At  such  times,  I  can  get  no  hold  on
myself,  because  of  the  incessant  pressure  of  the  other
men  in  me,  voices,  postures,  beliefs  that  pursue  me  and
harry  away  all  risings  of  individuality  on  the  part  of
my  self.  I  escape  into  the  wilderness,  and  Nature
becomes  a  chorus  —  there  is  no  shape  which  may  not
take  on  animation  —  even  the  stones  may  sermonize.
And  yet  at  other  times,  if  I  deliberately  8eek  contact
with  that  world  of  other  mind,  an  oppressive  solitude


Mi  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

cloaks  me  in.  I  bury  myself  in  the  rush  of  men  ;  but
am  no  better  able  to  bridge  chasms,  or  reach  vitality  of
give-and-take  with  them.  I  make  designs  against  my
neighbor,  I  hunt  him  to  his  secret  castle,  I  hold  him  at
the  point  of  my  sword,  I  seize  him  bodily  — he  vanishes,
and  I  have  nothing.  I  cannot  make  him  open  himself
to  me ;  I  cannot  so  much  as  open  myself  to  him :  I  am  a
prisoner,  and  without  ability  to  find  where  I  am  bound.
I  see  that  the  doctrine  of  monads  is  no  futile  myth.

Such  is  my  current  social  experience  so-called,  and
it  seems  clear  to  me  that  if  there  were  any  absolute
certainty  in  it,  these  variations  would  not  occur.  That
which  at  times  may  so  escape  me  can  hardly  be  an
empirically  given  presence.

Then  I  reflect  that  in  the  nature  of  the  case  it  could
hardly  be  otherwise :  the  other  mind  must  be  beyond
my  powers  of  direct  experience.  It  can  be  no  object  of
sensation,  because  it  is  not  a  physical  thing.  It  must
be  such  as  I  am,  a  thinker  of  its  objects,  not  an  object
among  objects ;  and  as  such  thinker,  or  suhjectj  it  can
only  be  thought^  not  sensed.  That  which  makes  him
himself,  and  other-than-me,  is  (by  definition)  the  fact
that  his  thoughts  are  not  my  thoughts ;  so  long  as  he
remains  other*than-me,  his  thoughts  can  never  become
identically  mine,  though  I  may  conjecture  them  and
approximately  think  them  after  him.  Of  myself,  I
find,  and  desire,  an  infinite  thought-fund  inaccessible
to  others,  and  inaccessible  through  all  finite  times  to
myself ;  it  cannot  be  otherwise  with  him  —  he  has  in
him  an  infinitude  of  character,  only  gradually  devel-
oped and  7nade  general — infinitude  at  which  I  may


KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  245

only  guess.  Souls,  by  their  own  nature,  cannot  touch
each  other ;  cannot  experience  each  other :  their  rela-
tions do  not  rise  to  the  point  of  knowledge,  —  they
remain  excursions,  adventures,  hypotheses,  wonderfully
sustained  by  their  results,  but  none  the  less,  launches
from  solitude  in  the  direction  of  an  assumed  reality ;
which  reality,  if  it  exists,  is  no  less  solitary.

I  look  down  from  a  cliff  upon  a  beach  below ;  the
black  fleck  wandering  there  excites  in  me  the  con-
sciousness of  fellow-being:  I  turn  away  with  the
impression  that  there  has  been  in  my  life  a  social  event,
an  experience  of  another  mind.  But  I  have  verified
nothing.  And  if  I  climb  down  and  discover  that
object  to  be  in  fact  a  human  shape,  what  have  I  now
verified  ?  A  physical  object,  —  nothing  more.  What
made  that  glance  from  above  more  than  physically  sig-
nificant was  clearly  a  contribution  from  within.  In
Kantian  phrase,  I  had  imposed  this  concept  upon  the
appearance ;  I  had  hegriffen  it  that  way,  and  my  own
Begriff  gave  me  the  only  sociality  I  experienced,  —  all
that  in  fact  I  ever  can  experience.

There  are  more  intimate  relations,  and  less  intimate
relations :  more  work,  or  less,  for  my  Begriff-social  to
do  —  but  what  my  Begriff  is  given  to  T^ork  upon,  as
actual  stuff  of  experience,  is  the  body.  Body  of  man
and  Nature  —  nothing  more.  When  that  body  disap-
pears, even  though  the  other  spirit  persists,  all  that  /
have  of  him  is  gone.  I  have  no  organ  for  the  experi-
ence of  other  mind;  by  the  nature  of  other-mind,  I
could  have  none.

I  would  press  the  logic  of  this  situation,  if  I  were
able,  until  we  should  cry  out  that  it  is  a  lie,  whether  or


246  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

not  we  see  how  it  is  false;  and  that  any  philosophy
which  ends  in  such  a  situation  is  impossible.  Human
communications  must  be  at  bottom  as  real  as  we  think
them  to  be  —  no  intricate,  successful,  solitary  panto-
mime  of  each  with  himself  and  Body.

And  then  I  would  urge  that  we  are  not  quit  of  this
logic  by  crying  out  against  it ;  and  resolving  for  our
part  to  treat  our  world  as  if  we  were  in  direct  conscious
relations  with  our  fellows.  For  that  attitude  of  common-
sense-resolve  is  precisely  the  subjective,  solipsistic  sort  of
philosophy  which  we  have  just  denounced.  Logic  here
is  the  sole  remaming  bond  of  genuine  mutuaUty  among
men;  and  if  we  will  not  patiently  earn  our  conscious
right  to  our  fellows,  we  must  likewise  forgo  our  con-
scious right  to  God. We  cannot  dispense  with  either.

The  problem  of  our  social  consciousness  is  as  old  as
Berkeley's  idealism  (old  in  fact  as  Leibniz  or  Descartes,
but  not  felt  before  Berkeley  as  a  primary  demand  on
thinking) ;  and  since  his  time  thinkers  have  not  been
allowed  to  forget  it.  It  has  become  a  stock  spectre,
especially  for  idealistic  theories,  to  show  that  their  logic
must  end  in  solipsism.  Several  ways  to  escape  the  logic
of  separate  personality  have  been  devised.  We  shall
examine  the  most  important  of  them.

One  may  seek  to  discover  and  formulate  infallible
criteria  or  signs,  by  which  we  may  certainly  know  that
we  have  before  us  another  conscious  being.  This  way
out  has  its  plausibility ;  for  is  it  not  the  sight  of  other
bodies  and  expressive  movements  like  or  analogous  to
our  own  which  actually  compels  our  judgment  that
another  mind  is  here  ? Or,  if  we  learn  (as  from  Royce


KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  247

and  Baldwin)  that  we  rather  interpret  our  own  bodies
by  those  of  others,  than  the  reverse  ;  and  if  we  find  (by
first  steps  in  comparative  psychology)  that  analogies
soon  fail  as  we  try  to  test  the  consciousness  of  animals
and  plants ;  if  we  abandon,  as  we  must,  the  wHole  argu-
ment from  analogy  as  hopeless,  certainly  the  psychology
of  our  impulsive  social  rectctiona  will  reveal  some  reliable
stimulij  whose  presence  infallibly  indicates  other  mind.
Are  there  not  as  Wundt  suggests  ^^  manifestations  of
animal  life  which  cannot  be  explained  without  the  intro-
duction of  the  mental  factor?''  Unfortunately  there
are  none  such;  every  physical  change  must  and  may
be  referred  to  a  physical  cause.  There  is  no  reason
why  '^  educability "  itself  may  not  be  a  property  of
matter.^  Are  there  not  in  certain  groupings  of  actions
unmistakable  ^^  signs  of  choice  " ;  or  as  James  better
states  it,  can  we  not  recognize  ^^  the  pursuit  of  ends
with  the  choice  of  means  ? ''  Certainly  all  such  signs
as  these  do  g^de  our  social  judgments.  Even  more
than  by  strict  planfulness  (^'  pursuit  of  ends  with
choice  of  means  ")  are  we  guided  by  a  certain  playfaU
ness  or  superabundance  in  the  apparent  government  of
movements:  signs  of  fluidity,  eagerness,  emotionality
are  more  immediately  compelling  than  signs  of  intelli-
gent end-seeking.  But  after  all,  these  are  nothing  but
signs,  physical  signs ;  and  explicit  language  which  rises
out  of  this  aboriginal  expressiveness,  is  but  a  further
set  of  physical  signs,  which  nowhere  rests  on  a  verit-
able experience  of  other  mind.  If  somewhere  we  could
begin  with  an  actual  consciousness  of  the  social  object,

^  And  herewith  we  exclude  Binet,  Bunge,  Moebias,  etc.,  m  well  u
Sehneider  who  appeals  to  **  irregalar  miuciilar  aetion."


948  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

all  these  criteria  would  help  us  amaringly  to  continue
and  subdivide  our  intercourse:  it  is  always  easier  to
determine  what  state  of  mind  belongs  with  what  set  of
actions  than  to  determine  whether  there  be  any  state  of
mind  there  or  no.  (Writhings  of  earthworm  on  fish-
hook express  discomfort,  if  they  express  any  conscious-
ness at  all,  which  may  be  doubted.)  Even  if  infallible
criteria  could  be  got  —  which  is  impossible  —  they
would  still  do  nothing  to  bring  us  nearer  the  other  mind
itself :  for  all  such  criteria  are  themselves  physical.

A  much  more  adequate  way  is  that  proposed  by
Professor  Royce  ;  his  criteria  are  not  physical,  and  do
undoubtedly  bring  us  near  to  an  original  experience  of
the  other  mind.  '^  Our  fellows  are  known  to  be  real "
says  Royce,  ''  because  they  are  for  each  of  us  the  end-
less treasury  of  more  ideas.  .  .  .  (They)  furnish  us  with
the  constantly  needed  supplement  to  our  own  fragpnent-
ary  meanings."  ^  To  anything  that  appears  in  our  life
with  the  character  of  a  response^  we  instinctively  attrib-
ute outer  personality.  Not  thunder  in  general,  but
thunder  at  a  critical  moment  in  our  thinking,  means
that  Jove  has  spoken.  If  a  distant  signal  moves  in
direct  answer  to  our  own  signalings,  we  need  see  no
human  form  to  infer  the  presence  of  an  outer  conscious-
ness. What  infallibly  convinces  us  is  the  experience
that  our  own  thought  is  carried  on  to  further  develop-
ment (and  without  our  own  equivalent  e£Port).  The
more  completely  and  deeply  the  answering  and  supple-
menting idea  caps  and  enters  into  our  own  train  of
development,  the  more  inevitable  the  acknowledgment.
And  so  we  may  build  a  series  all  the  way  from  the

>  The  World  and  the  IndiWdaal,  ii,  16S~174.


KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  249

opportune  clap  of  thunder  to  the  continuous  successful
intercourse  with  our  fellow  men,  a  series  of  increasing
conviction  of  the  reality  of  our  social  experience.  When
we  have  reached  the  stage  of  voluntarily  putting  ques-
tions to  our  environment,  and  expecting  and  receiv-
ing conceptual  answers,  our  faith  is  complete.  God  is
doubtless  most  real  to  that  person  who  finds  his  prayers
somehow  responded  to;  for,  to  paraphrase  Royce's  cri-
terion, response  is  our  best  ground  for  believing  the
social  object  real.

Upon  this  way  of  reaching  the  Other  Mind,  we  must
make  the  following  comment.  That  we  are  still  left
with  only  an  inference  of  that  Other;  a  faith  and  not  a
knowledge  in  experience.  Even  though  we  say,  with
Royce,  that  reality  is  nothing  else  than  response  (or  ful-
filling of  meaning),  we  have  not  so  far  as  this  criterion
goes,  found  that  reality  personal  save  by  probability  of
high  order.  We  can  still  speak  only  of  ^^  the  source
of  our  belief  in  the  reality  of  our  fellow  men,"  ^  not  of
an  experience  of  that  reality  itself.  The  relative  pas-
sivity of  our  reception  of  idea  from  without  is  no  invin-
cible proof  that  it  does  come  from  another  mind :  men
have  been  known  to  dream  conversations  which  add  to
their  knowledge ;  thinking  itself  often  takes  conversa-
tional shape,  ourself  being  recipient ;  in  all  thinking  the
new  comes  to  one  as  if  from  another.  We  shall  have
a  difficult  distinction  to  make  between  such  inner
development  of  our  own  meanings,  and  that  development
which  we  shall  regard  as  hailing  from  a  veritable  Other
Mind.  But  no  type  of  inference,  however  direct  and
simple,  can  quite  meet  our  requirement ;  for  that  which

^  P.  169  of  work  cited  ;  italics  mine.


250  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

we  must  first  infer  is  one  step  away  from  immediate
experience.

Are  we  not  driven,  then,  to  a  view  which  closely
resembles  that  first  supposition  of  ours  that  social  expe-
rience is  a  practical  certainty :  that  view  namely  which
interprets  the  social  experience  as  a  moral  affirmation,  an
acknowledgment  which  we  ought  to  make,  something  of
which  no  scientific  or  empirical  knowledge  is  either  pos-
sible or  conceivable.  As  Professor  Miinsterberg  puts
it  in  his  powerful  chapter  on  ^^Die  reine  Erfahrung,"^
—  we  do  experience  our  fellow  men,  but  even  so  as  we
immediately  experience  all  reality,  by  acknowledging
them  real.  I  cannot  doubt  that  the  last  mystery  of
mutual  contact  is  contained  in  the  will,  rather  than  in
the  intellect ;  a  thesis  which  we  shall  have  later  to  con-
sider.' But  all  will  makes  use  of  knowledge,  prior  or
simultaneous.  There  is  no  human  will  that  does  not
contain  a  nucleus  of  knowledge  which  is  not  our  own
act ;  and  it  is  this  that  we  wish  to  separate  out.

All  of  these  ways — by  physical  criterion,  by  response,
and  by  acknowledgment  —  have  a  common  presup-
position. They  all  suppose  the  mind  to  be  furnished
in  advance  with  an  idea  of  an  Other  Mind.  We  are
able  to  read  our  signs  as  we  do,  because  we  already  ex-
pect them  to  mean  something,  we  have  already  framed
somehow  the  conception  of  another  mind.  Our  world
responds  only  in  so  far  as  we  have  our  net  hung  out,
confident  that  Other  Mind  will  fill  it  with  usable  fur-
therings  of  our  own  thought:  apart  from  this  Other-
Mind-meaning  of  ours,  no  event could take  on the

'  GnindzUge  der  Psychologie,  pp.  44-55.

*  Under  the  general  topic  of  **  Myetioism/'  Part  V.


KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  251

character  of  response.  So  also^  if  we  are  to  will,  or
postulate,  or  acknowledge,  the  fellow-man,  it  is  to  be
asked  how,  apart  from  previous  idea,  we  know  what
to  acknowledge.  The  conception  of  the  fellow-man,
somehow  obtained,  is  necessary  before  my  duty  of
acknowledging  him  can  be  performed,  or  understood.
Beside  which,  there  remains  an  ulterior  question, — to
Whom  or  to  What  do  I  owe  this  duty  ?  I  am  inclined
to  think  that  obligation  implies  a  known  Other :  and
that  while  duty  and  social  experience  are  doubtless  in-
separable, it  is  duty  that  depends  on  social  experience,
not  social  experience  on  duty.

It  is  because  all  of  these  theories  really  accept  the
doubt  of  an  immediate  experience  of  Other  Mind,  that
they  must  thus  assume  the  idea  of  Other  Mind  to  be
there, —  innate  or  unaccounted-for.  It  is  for  this  rea-
son that  we  cannot  adopt  aiiy  of  them  as  final ;  though
none  of  them  fails  to  throw  much  important  light  on
the  actual  working  of  our  social  consciousness.

The  ultimate  difficulty  in  this  matter  is  due,  as  I  have
come  to  think,  to  our  over-dogmatic  ideals  of  knowl-
edge, and  to  the  explanations  we  adopt  of  the  knowing
process.  We  take  our  knowledge  of  physical  things  as
the  type  and  ideal  of  all  satisfactory  knowledge,  —  and
we  find  naturally  enough  that  we  have  no  such  physical
knowledge  of  fellow  minds.  We  explain  our  knowing
of  any  object  by  a  relation  between  object  and  subject,
in  which  the  object  presumably  produces  some  effect  on
the  subject,  —  and  we  find  naturaUy  enough  that  any-
thing which  is  intrinsically  subject  cannot  become  such
an  object.


252  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

But  if  such  were  the  true  ideal  and  explanation  of
knowledge,  we  could  not,  of  course,  know  ourselves
any  more  than  we  could  know  others.  For  we  can  have
no  physical  knowledge  of  our  own  mind,  nor  can  our
own  mind  cease  to  be  subject  in  order  to  become  an
object.  And  conversely,  by  whatever  understanding  of
the  matter  we  can  account  for  self-knowledge,  by  that
same  understanding  we  may  probably  account  for  knowl-
edge of  other  subjects.^  When  Locke  suggested  his
inner  sense,  after  the  analogy  of  outer  sense,  he  prob-
ably used  a  misleading  figure ;  intending  doubtless  only
to  outline  the  fact  of  self-knowledge  as  a  thing  distinct
from  knowledge  of  physical  sense :  of  special  organ
there  seems  to  be  none  for  self-knowledge,  any  more
than  for  knowledge  of  other  minds.  In  truth,  all
three  classes  of  objects  of  experience  stand  on  the  same
precarious  footing :  and  of  these  three  classes,  the  knowl-
edge of  other  mind  is  the  latest  to  be  declared  impos-
sible. Each  of  the  other  types  of  knowledge,  knowl-
edge of  nature  or  of  self,  had  been  shown  impossible,
by  one  theory  of  knowledge  or  another,  before  social
knowledge  had  been  drawn  into  technical  question.
We  have  only  to  adopt  the  proper  axiom,  and  any  group
of  objects  we  please  becomes  subject  to  skepticism,  thus:

I.  Knowledge  of  self  is  impossible.  Because  the
thing  known  is  always  other  than  the  self  that  knows  it.

^  More  technically  stated  :  we  err  in  assuming  to  explain  knowing
by  a  dyadic  relation  between  subject  and  object  (say  S :  O).  This  explan-
ation bears  its  own  condemnation  on  its  face  ;  for  if  knowing  were  of  the
form  S  :  O,  S  (in  every  act  of  knowing)  wonld  remain  unknown,  and  the
relation  S :  O  must  be  unknown  likewise.  If  knowledge  is  to  be  explainedf
that  is,  put  in  terms  of  something  else  than  knowledge,  our  dyad  must
broaden  out,  —  as  I  think  and  shall  try  to  show,  —  into  a  triad.


KNOWLEDGE  OF  OTHER  MINDS  268

On  this  axiom  it  might  be  possible  to  know  Nature,  or  to
know  Other  Selves, —  only  not  the  Self.  The  epistemo-
logical  subject  is  unknown  (Rickert).  Psychological
introspection  is  understood  to  reveal|  not  the  self,  but
quasi-physical  objects ;  we  find  never  the  genuine  self.

n.  Knowledge  of  physical  objects  is  impossible.
Because  consciousness  can  contain  nothing  but  experi-
ence-stuff. When  I  say  of  any  object  ^^I  know  it";  I
have  already  made  it  a  part  of  my  experience :  when  I
think  of  it,  I  think  of  it  always  as  contained  in  experi-
ence,— if  not  my  own,  then  another's.  On  this  axiom,  it
might  be  possible  to  know  Self,  or  even  Other  Selves, —
only  not  physical  things  as  independent  substances  •  A
quasi-physical  world  of  orderly  experience  we  of  course
have ;  we  never  find  the  genuine  physical  world.

in.  Knowledge  of  social  objects  is  impossible.  This
is  proved  by  sharpening  either  axiom  above.  We  may
say  that  the  object  of  knowledge  is  always  other  than
any  subject.  Or  we  may  say  that  the  object  of  knowl-
edge is  always  my  object,  belonging  to  my  experience,
known  as  such,  thought  of  as  such.  In  either  case
social  experience  is  impossible.  Quasi-social  experience
one  does  not  question ;  it  is  only  the  genuine  Other  that
we  fail  to  find.

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  three  cases  are  alike.
We  have  a  trilemma,  each  horn  of  which  is  as  valid  as
the  rest.  We  could  set  up  another  triad,  if  we  chose,
beginning  thus :  Self  is  the  one  object  perfectly  know-
able  ;  Nature  is  the  one  object  perfectly  knowable ;  the
Other  Mind  is  the  one  object  perfectly  and  ideally  know-
able.  The  last  of  these  propositions  would  be  as  ten-
able as  the  first,  and  as  little  tenable.


254  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

It  is  not  useless,  I  think,  thus  to  point  out  that  all
types  of  knowledge  are  liable  to  the  same  type  of  predica-
ment; and  that  all  such  predicaments  may  be  traced  to
axioms  expressing  some  ideal  of  knowledge  too  hastily
assumed  as  exclusive.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  can
know  ourselves  better  than  we  can  know  any  other  thing,
whether  of  nature  or  of  mind  beyond  ourselves.  There
is  a  sense  in  which  the  physical  world  is  more  thor-
oughly knowable  and  satisfactorily  holdable  in  knowl-
edge than  any  other  type  of  object.  There  is  also  a
sense  in  which  the  primary  object  of  acquaintance  for
any  finite  knower  is  his  environment  of  Other  Mind.

The  alienness  and  inaccessibility  which  we  are  com-
pelled to  ascertain  from  time  to  time,  not  more  in  the
Other  Mind  than  in  Nature  or  in  Self,  may  well  be  only
such  alienness  as  we  must  intend  them  to  have,  meaning
what  they  do,  if  we  were  to  picture  to  ourselves  their
most  ideal  knowableness.  May  it  not  be,  for  example,
that  if  we  should  become  clear  what  kind  of  knowledge
of  Other  Mind  we  should  desire,  as  the  most  perfect  pos-
sible  knowledge  of  Other  Mind,  this  ideal  knowledge
would  not  differ  in  principle  from  the  knowledge  which
we  actually  have.  I  propose  to  try  this  as  the  next  stage
in  our  search  for  the  actual  social  experience ;  enquiring
particularly  whether  we  could  desire  to  know  Other  Mind
apart  from  just  such  physical  mesh  as  has  in  this  present
chapter  seemed  the  chief  barrier  to  that  knowledge.


CHAPTER  XVra

SUCH  KNOWLEDGE  AS  WE  COULD  DESIRE

WHAT  is  the  object  which  we  desire  to  know?
Ad  other  mind :  but  certainly  in  no  case  an
empty  mind.  It  is  a  mind  which  has  its  own  objects,
and  is  at  work  upon  them.  There  is  no  principle  of
attraction  between  empty  minds,  i.e.,  between  minds,
pure  and  simple :  there  is  no  gravitation  between  minds
as  between  bodies.

Regarded  as  pure  spirits,  minds  are  very  much  alike;
individuality  begins  to  appear,  and  our  interest  there-
with, only  in  so  far  as  the  mind  engages  in  struggle
with  its  experience.  In  truth,  minds  must  be  occupied
with  matter  in  order  to  be  of  interest  to  one  another ;
whence  it  may  appear  that  matter  suppUes  the  principle
of  attraction  between  spirits,  as  well  as  between  bodies
—  the  principle  at  once  of  attraction  and  separation.
Character  comes  out  chiefly  in  dealing  with  Nature^
and  what  engages  us  in  any  person  is  an  individual
quality  which  must  be  described  in  terms  of  his
encounter  with  physical  conditions,  and  the  encounter  of
the  race  with  those  same  conditions.  Every  character
is  some  epitome  of  the  economic  and  artisan  labors  of
the  race.  Power  over  nature,  clearly  seen  or  dimly
divined  in  another,  is  what  compels  us  to  him.  This
power  is  first  seen  in  the  body  itself,  wherein  wayward

1  See  aboYe,  p.  IdO.


266  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

materials  and  energies  are  subdued  under  an  immediate
capital  command,  prophetical  of  much  further  mastery  i
and  beauty  of  body  signifies  to  us  an  ease  of  mastery,
which  finishing  its  task  returns  with  abundance  to  con-
trol itself.  Apart,  then,  from  a  world  of  things  which
resists  desire  and  so  forms  the  text  and  context  of  a
temporal  career,  there  is  nothing  in  mind  personal  and
distinctive,  exciting  to  knowledge.  These  elementary
strains  and  stresses  make  up  our  simplest  thought  of
the  man.  It  is  the  other  mind  as  knowing  and  mastei^
ing  Nature  that  we  first  care  about.

The  mind  to  be  known  is,  we  say,  a  concrete  being ;
worthless  even  to  itself  apart  from  the  material  in
which  it  operates.  It  is  the  Miud-in-union-with-Nature
that  we  want  to  know.  But  the  mind  is  still  that
which  deals  with  this  material;  and  we  concern  our-
selves with  the  material  only  for  the  sake  of  that  which
it  manifests.  I  make  boots ;  but  still,  it  is  no  part  of
my  self  that  I  make  just  boots — I  could  have  found
my  character  as  well  in  making  books  or  laws  or  music.
Would  it  not  be  possible,  if  knowing  were  ideal,  to
take  the  burden  of  nature-stuff  for  granted  and  see
that  character  in  itself,  becoming  conscious  of  its  thi7ik^
ing  apart  from  the  irrelevant  stimuli  of  its  thought  ?

The  notion  of  telepathic  communication  seems  to
propose  some  such  ideal ;  that  of  reading  thoughts
without  taking  cognizance  of  sensations.  Since  we  are
speaking  of  ideals  not  of  facts,  and  telepathy  has
usually  been  regarded,  whether  by  believers  or  by  non-
believers,  as  an  ideal  improvement  in  mutual  knowl-
edge, we  must  look  into  the  meaning  of  its  proposal.


KNOWLEDGE  WE  DESIRE  257

Telepathy  would  save,  presumably,  the  trouble  of  expres-
sion ;  it  would  save  the  detour  of  thought,  by  which
it  must  journey  down  into  language  and  back  into
thought  again.  It  would  connect  the  two  termini
directly,  without  the  complex  series  of  irrelevant  means.

Examine  this  proposal  of  telepathy.  Consider  our-
selves in  the  act  of  knowing  the  thought  of  another
mind  in  the  direct  manner  suggested.  This  must  mean
one  of  two  things.  Either  we  find  ourselves  imagin-
ing the  other  person,  and  in  imagination  hearing  him
speak,  or  seeing  him  make  well-known  signs,  or  other-
wise  reinvesting  himself  in  fancy  with  his  usual  physi-
cal  media  of  communication.  Or  else,  we  find  our  own
thoughts  moving  under  some  ^'  strong  impression  "  that
this  development  hails  from  a  given  absent  person.  In
either  case,  the  value  of  the  experience  would  lie  in  the
possibmty  of  verifying  it,  by  communicating  with  the
person  '^  face  to  face."  If  such  possibility  of  verifying
were  cut  off,  we  should  speedily  be  disabused  of  our
preference  for  this  sort  of  relation  with  our  friends;
what  more  unsatisfactory  intercourse  could  be  imagined
than  a  series  of ''strong  impressions"  which  had  no
prior  nor  further  history?  Even  to  the  telepathic
fancy,  the  physical  presence  and  vocal  evidence  of  the
other's  thought  remains  the  standard  experience,  to
which  all  other  points  as  its  ideal,  however  useful
(telephone-wise  or  wireless-wise)  in  exceptional  circum-
stances. Telepathy,  I  think,  has  little  to  offer  toward
defining  a  better  way  of  knowing  Other  Mind.

The  plausibility  of  the  thought-reading  ideal  comes
in  part  from  the  very  perfection  of  our  ordinary  modes
of  intercourse ;  through  their  silent  efficiency  the  phys-


26B  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

ical  bearen  of  our  meaning  drop  oat  of  sight,  and  it
is  to  us  as  if  we  were  dealing  with  meanings  purely,
without  any  need  of  sights  and  sounds.  Our  social
experience  is  the  pre-eminentiy  developable  side  of
human  experience:  as  we  have  perfected  it,  it  is  of
peculiar  richness,  elasticity,  and  depth.  It  is  with  some
effort  of  abstraction  that  we  look  away  from  those
regions  where,  with  amazing  technique,  the  play  of  our
passing  thought-exchange  takes  place,  to  the  simple
physical  groundwork  of  it  all.  We  think  we  might
dispense  with  t?i€Uy  only  because  it  serves  us  so
perfectly.

There  is  another  reason  for  the  appeal  of  the  pro-
posal that  thoughts  may  be  known  without  reference
to  Nature.  It  is  the  assumption  that  men  first  have
thoughts  and  then  later  express  them.  This  is  less
than  a  half-truth ;  for  the  expression  of  a  thought  is
an  integ^l  part  of  taking  possession  of  that  thought.
The  one  quickest  way  to  put  stupidity  on  a  par  with
genius  would  be  to  make  stupidity  owner  of  all  these
ideas  which  it  haSf  but  is  not  yet  able  to  express.  In
truth,  it  is  no  hardship  that  friends  must  ^'descend
to  meet "  —  as  Emerson  has  it :  for  such  descent  into
physical  expression  is  a  progress  into  valid  and  active
existence.

An  idea  shares  the  history  of  the  body  ;  it  needs  to
ripen  and  mature ;  it  must  find  its  way  by  gradual  pro-
cesses to  the  surface,  where  it  will  show  itself  in  lan-
guage and  in  action.  Hastening  this  birth  involves
loss  of  stamina  and  quality  in  the  product.  The
resistance  of  Nature  to  the  expression  of  a  thought  is
not  the  resistance  of  a  wholly  hostile  medium ;  deten-


KNOWLEDGE  WE  DESIRE  269

tion  is  a  spiritual  condition  for  health  and  viability,  not
a  physical  condition  solely.  It  seems  fair  to  say  that
the  more  significant  the  idea,  the  more  it  needs  to  be
lived  with  before  it  is  uttered.  Idea  as  well  as  Matter
must  be  ^^ mixed  with  labor"  before  it  can  become
property.  And  perhaps  also  there  are  no  ideas  which
are  mature  at  birth ;  but  they,  like  the  young  of  higher
species,  must  pass  a  certain  time  in  the  open  under
friendly  protection,  before  they  can  pass  current  among
other  ideas,  the  tools  and  properties  of  all  men.

It  thus  requires  time  and  Nature  in  order  that  a  mind
shall  exist ;  must  it  not  also  require  time  and  Nature  in
order  that  a  mind  shall  be  knovm  f  We  do  not  wish  to
know  the  mind  other  than  as  it  is ;  we  cannot  wish  to
know  it,  then,  except  in  terms  of  its  own  traffic  with
Nature,  both  in  acting  and  in  thinking;  in  possessing
its  own  character,  and  in  possessing  its  own  ideas*

It  is  no  accident,  therefore,  that  we  begin  our
acquaintances  with  fellow-men  at  their  periphery  —  at
the  point  of  their  visible  encounter  with  Nature,  with
weather  and  the  common  physical  conditions  of  exist-
ence. It  is  indeed  an  accident  (relatively  speaking)
whether  a  man  work  out  his  special  career  in  shoe-
leather  or  in  medicine  or  in  ink:  it  is  no  accident
whether  he  meet  the  four  elements  and  make  up
accounts  with  them.  And  however  far  acquaintance
progresses,  we  cannot  omit  from  our  concept  of  the  man
those  items,  even  trivial,  of  physical  behavior  into  which
we  learn  to  condense  the  significance  of  large  vistas
of  his  spiritual  quality,  —  the  shrug,  the  still  glance^
the  nervous  step,  the  grasp  of  the  hand. And  there  is


260  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

some  ground  for  thinking  that  we  know  no  man  com-
pletely until  we  have  been  with  him  in  the  wild,  and
have  shared  with  him  some  first  hand  measurement  of
idea  against  the  old  elemental  human  obstacles.

But  Nature  has  other  properties  beside  obstinacy
that  belong  inseparably  to  the  knowledge  of  souls.
What  we  wish  to  know  of  a  man  is  doubtless  his  Idea
(or,  as  Chesterton  says,  his  philosophy),  and  therewith
himself:  but  we  can  know  an  idea  only  by  knowing
whatever  that  idea  contains  and  aims  at.  Contents,
we  have  considered  :  an  idea  is  always  an  idea  of  some-
thing, and  the  all-available  first  something  is  physical
stuff,  whatever  else  it  may  be.  As  for  the  aim  of  ideas,
we  thought  that  all  ideas  aim  at  a  lodgment  in  Sub-
stance,^ doubtless  first  seen  behind  Nature  ;  if  so,  no
man  can  be  known  without  knowing  that  object.  The
identity  of  personality,  we  thought,  was  bound  up  with
some  changelessness  in  its  ultimate  object;  and  the
unity  of  personality  in  some  unity  to  be  found  there  in
the  world  beyond :  ^  but  I  venture  to  say  that  unless
changelessness  and  unity  were  discoverable  in  some
character  of  physical  experience,  any  other  object  would
work  against  great  odds  to  maintain  them.  For  reality
cannot  detach  itself  from  the  experience  of  Nature:
sensation  has  some  of  the  characters  and  dimensions  of
reality  not  elsewhere  found.  Sensation  lends  to  expe-
rience its  pungency y  its  vividness^  i\»  particularity .
The  definite  separation  of  parts  in  Nature,  the  clear
difference  between  position  and  position  in  space — no
point  confused  with  any  other — make  the  world  of
sense  the  place  where  all  definiteness  is  set  up,  where

^  See  above,  p.  119.  '  See  aboTe,  pp.  1S7.


KNOWLEDGE  WE  DESIRE  261

all  desire  for  clarity  and  differentiation  seeks  its  home.
If  it  is  true,  then,  that  we  cannot  know  a  definite  idea
or  being  save  as  that  being  has  a  definite  object ;  that
we  cannot  know  a  vivid  being,  save  as  having  a  vivid
object;  that  we  cannot  individualize  that  being,  save  as
that  being  has  objects  with  definite  differences;  that
we  cannot  measure  or  estimate  any  being,  save  as  that
being  has  objects  themselves  measurable,  quantitative :
—  if  this  is  true,  we  see  that  in  ways  affecting  the  very
foundations  of  personality,  the  knowledge  of  Nature,
of  Nature  pungent  and  intense  with  sensation,  is  an
integpral  part  of  the  knowledge  of  another  mind.  These
values  (vividness,  etc.)  of  physical  experience  are  not
like  the  corresponding  values  of  social  experience,  —
they  are,  so  far  as  they  go,  identical  with  social
values :  tfiey  are  properties  of  mind  and  matter  at  the
same  time.

I  do  not  say  that  knowing  thus  the  objects  of  another
mind  is  equivalent  to  knowing  that  mind ;  I  say  that
such  knowledge  of  the  objects  is  a  necessary,  an  inte-
gral part  of  social  consciousness,  even  of  ideal  social
consciousness.

It  is  not  indeed  sufficient  to  know  the  objects ;  we
should  have  further  to  know  those  objects  as  being
known  by  the  Other  Mind ;  we  must  find  the  idea  at
work ;  we  n.u8t  verify  in  experience  our  simplest  defini-
tion  of  the  Other  Mind — an  Other-knower-of-physical-
Nature.  We  want  the  center  as  well  as  the  periphery ;
and  Nature  certainly  cannot  give  the  center  of  person-
ality, the  idea  itself.  But  Nature  can  give  a  symbol
of  the  center.


HOW  ICEH  KNOW  GOD

We  have  so  far  had  little  to  say  of  the  body  with
which  we  so  closely  identify  the  Other  Mind ;  for  this
identification  is  all-too-absorbing  —  we  forget  that  oar
knowledge  of  men  comes  as  much  from  observing  their
environment  as  from  observing  their  bodies.  But  the
body  is  after  aU  that  with  which  Nature  is  handled ;  as
the  idea  is  that  with  which  Nature  is  thought.  The
body  is  a  symbol  of  the  idea :  it  stands  as  subject  to
the  environment  as  object.  In  its  relation  to  its  physi-
cal surroundings,  it  presents  a  physical  picture  of  the
knowiug^process.* But  the  body  is  more  than  a  symbol.

The  body  is  an  incredibly  intricate  and  exact  metor
phor  of  every  inner  movement  of  that  Other  Mind.  To
every  shade  of  thought  and  motive,  there  corresponds
some  change  in  the  body,  reflecting  in  its  own  different
sphere  each  type  of  variation  to  which  the  inner  state
is  subject.  Man  still  *^  looketh  on  the  outward  appear-
ance "  only,  even  though  he  were  able  to  examine  the
living  brain ;  but  remarkable  it  is  that  there  is  nothing
in  ''  the  heart "  not  faithfully  displayed  in  this  appear-
ance, and  at  the  moment  of  its  occurrence.

With  all  our  inability  to  gain  the  exact  key  to  the
cipher ;  ^  and  with  all  our  inadequacy  in  observing  these

^  And  thia  piotnre  if  to  ngnifioant  that  in  oar  theories  of  knowledge^
we  can  haidly  eioape  it.  It  is  the  inyetentte  soaroe  of  that  dualistic  tbeoiy
of  knowledge  whioh  we  hare  condemned.  We  forget  that  We  who  thus
see  the  Other's  knowing,  in  piotnre,  from  the  outside,  shonld  be  included
in  the  pictore  to  give  the  whole  troth,  even  in  symbol.

*  It  is  not  inconceirable  that  the  kej  might  be  accurately  defined,
to  some  degree.  Such  a  reading  of  the  metaphor  as  that  proposed  by
Munsterberg,  may  offer  a  conception  of  a  solution.  Quality  of  sensation,
says  M&nsterberg,  is  represented  in  the  brain  by  the  place  of  excitation  ;
intensity  by  energy  of  excitation;  vividness  by  energy  of  discharge  ;  value^one
by  place  of  discharge, A  somewhat  different  suggestion,  differing  espe-


KNOWL£DG£  WE  DESIRE  263

subtle  physical  changes ;  it  remains  true  that  the  body ,
if  we  will  take  it  so,  is  little  else  than  the  soul  made
visible.  If  we  should  say  that  the  body  has  no  inde-
pendent reality,  but  only  exists  as  a  bulletin  of  an  inner
process ;  being  but  that  process  itself,  reporting  itself  to
us  in  such  terms  as  we  can  physically  apprehend  :  —  if
we  should  conceive  of  the  body  in  this  way,  we  should
hardly  over-state  the  immediacy  with  which  it  presents
externally  what  the  mind  internally  is,  and  not  in  its
passing  phases  alone,  but  in  its  most  rooted  habits,  its
oldest  memories,  its  most  permanent  wills  and  purposes.
The  body  ia  a  complete  metaphor  of  the  idea.^

But,  further,  the  body  is  more  than  a  metaphor.  In
some  phases,  it  shows  what  that  Other's  experience  liter-
ally is.  Thus  time  is  the  same  for  both  body  and
mind ;  the  time  of  the  brain  process  is  identical  with  the
time  of  the  psychosis  it  represents.  For  us  who  look
on,  the  date  of  those  processes — if  we  know  what  they
are — may  be  said  to  be  a  matter  of  direct  experience, —
through  the  body.  Also,  from  the  position  which  the
body  occupies  in  space,  a  particular  and  exclusive  per-
spective view  of  the  visible  world  is  determined;  and  we

eiallj  with  regard  to  value-tone^  will  be  found  in  an  fippended  essay,  page
646:  but  it  will  be  seen  from  either  that  the  work  of  kej-finding  is  the  main
ooooem  of  psycho-physics,  —  a  science  of  definite  standing,  with  legitimate
and  infinite,  problem.

^  The  body  is  the  manifestation  in  spatial  metaphor  of  the  will-to-live
as  inborn  and  as  modified  by  experience  and  choice.  I  do  not  mean  that  this
metaphor  can  be  read  by  simple  inspection  ;  for  in  the  body  other  records
are  composed  witli  the  record  of  the  will :  the  will  of  the  world  beyond,
as  it  attacks  the  inner  wiU  and  impinges  on  it,  leaves  its  trace  here  alsa
The  surface  of  the  body  is  the  shore-line  where  outgoing  and  incoming
purposes  meet,  conflict  and  cross  ;  and  one  tale  confuses  the  clarity  of  the
other,  — yet  adds  the  data  without  which  the  other  were  less  than  true.


d64  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

who  look  on,  can  through  oar  own  physical  experience
know  something  of  the  spatial  experience  of  that  Other.
Moreover,  as  the  place  of  that  body  alters  from  point
to  point  continuously,  a  like  con^nuous  change  takes
place  in  the  physical  experience  of  that  other ;  the  two
continuities  are  identical,  and  we  observe  that  con-
inuity.  And  this  continuous  history,  which  cannot  be
duplicated  by  any  other  mind,  is  taken  together  with  its
new  of  the  Changeless,  to  form  the  ground-work  of
its  individual  identity y — of  which,  thus,  through  our
experience  of  that  body,  we  get  some  literal  glimpse.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  our  conceptions  of  dis-
embodied spirit,  or  of  an  Other  whose  body  we  can-
not locate  or  imagine,  tend  to  lose  just  these  qualities
of  individuality  and  particularity  (as  early  survival  theo-
ries and  spiritism  sufficiently  show) ;  we  find  ourselves
impelled  to  assign  them  deliberately  a  place  or  seat  in
Nature,  or  else  in  some  other  nature  accessible  to  us  in
imagination,  in  order  to  save  their  personality  from
obliteration  before  our  minds.  How  little,  then,  from
our  ideal  of  social  experience  can  we  dismiss  the  expe-
rience of  body.

I  trust  I  may  be  pardoned  for  dwelling  thus  long  on
considerations  that  are  familiar.  I  confess  that  this
extraordinary  device  by  which  the  Other  Mind  presents
itself  in  the  guise  of  a  body  in  the  midst  of  Nature
seems  to  me  each  time  I  think  of  it  more  wonderful
than  before.  The  inseparable  union  of  two  things  so
disparate  as  social  experience  and  experience  of  Nature
seem  to  be:  is  there  not  a  perpetual  amazement  in
this? It  would  be  less  amazing,  perhaps,  if  it  were  all


KNOWLEDGE  WE  DESI&E  266

pure  metaphor,  or  symbol,  or  the  mere  outside  of  what
is  within ;  but  we  have  noted  points  at  which  the  mate-
rial world,  as  we  eaU  it,  ceases  to  be  a  metaphor  and
shows  us,  as  it  were,  a  literal  edge  of  the  Other  Spirit
shimmering  through  its  physical  encasements.  Surely
there  can  be  no  accident,  or  superfluous  illusion,  or
arbitrary  unnecessary  sundering  of  mind  from  mind
in  such  a  union.  Nature  and  the  natural  body  must
belong  with  the  experience  of  Other  Mind,  even  in  its
ideal  condition.  Of  myself,  I  seem  to  have  only  mind ;
of  the  Other,  only  body :  and  yet,  as  I  think  it  through,
there  seems  to  be  nothing  about  that  body  which  con-
ceals the  spirit — body  seems  to  do  no  more  in  separating
than  to  fix  and  define  the  simple  other-ness  of  that  Other
from  myself;  in  all  other  respects  it  does  but  give  me
that  Other  Mind  in  more  tangible  form  than  by  expe-
rience of  its  inner  life  on  its  own  g^unds  alone,  I
could  have  it.

Let  me  pursue  my  reflection  a  step  further.  I  have
sometimes  sat  looking  at  a  comrade,  speculating  on
this  mysterious  isolation  of  self  from  self.  Why  are
we  so  made  that  I  gaze  and  see  of  thee  only  thy  Wall,
and  never  Thee?  This  Wall  of  thee  is  but  a  movable
part  of  the  Wall  of  my  world ;  and  I  also  am  a  Wall  to
thee :  we  look  out  at  one  another  from  behind  masks.
How  would  it  seem  if  my  mind  could  but  once  be  within
thine;  and  we  could  meet  and  without  barrier  be  with
each  other?  And  then  it  ha8  fallen  upon  me  like  a
shock — as  when  one  thinking  himself  alone  has  felt  a
presence — But  I  am  in  thy  soul.  These  things  around
me  are  in  thy  experience.  They  are  thy  own ;  when  I
touch  them  and  move  them  I  change  thee. When


906  HOW  MEN  KKOW  GOD

I  look  on  them  I  see  what  thou  aeest;  whtn  I  Usfeen,  I
hear  what  thou  heareet.  I  am  in  the  great  Room  of
thy  8onI;  and  I  experience  thy  very  experience.  For
where  art  thout  Not  diere,  behind  those  eyes,  within
that  head,  in  darkness,  fraternizing  with  chemical  pro-
cesses. Of  these,  in  my  own  case,  I  know  nothing,
ind  win  know  nothing;  for  my  existence  is  spent  not
behind  my  Wall,  bat  in  front  of  it.  I  am  there,  where
I  have  treasures.  And  there  art  thou,  also*  This
world  in  which  I  Uyc,  is  the  world  of  thy  soul:  and
being  within  that,  I  am  within  thee.  I  can  imagine
no  contact  more  real  and  thrilling  than  this;  that  we
should  meet  and  share  identity,  not  through  ineffable
inner  depths  (alone),  but  here  through  the  for^rounds
of  common  experience;  and  that  thou  shouldst  be — not
behind  that  mask — but  here^  pressing  with  all  thy  con-
sciousness upon  me,  containing  me,  and  these  things  of
mine.  This  is  reality :  and  having  seen  it  thus,  I  can
never  again  be  frightened  into  monadism  by  reflections
which  have  strayed  from  their  guiding  insight.

Any  connecting  medium  is  apt  to  appear  as  an  obstacle
to  direct  relationship ;  on  the  other  hand  any  obstacle
may  discover  itself  to  be  a  mediator,  sign  of  unbroken
continuity.  The  sea  separates, — or  the  sea  connects;
it  cannot  do  one  without  doing  the  other  also.  So
Nature  may  he  interpreted  in  its  relation  to  social  con-
sciousness, as  the  visible  pledge  and  immediate  evidence
of  our  living  contact.  If  there  be  any  social  conscious-
ness, it  must  include  within  itself  just  such  physical
appearances  as  we  have  been  reviewing,  even  in  its  ideal
perfection.


KNOWLEDGE  WE  DESIRE  267

We  have  pictured  such  ideal  knowledge  of  the  Other;
we  have  faith  in  it — bat  we  have  not  verified  it.  We
have  still  to  seek  experience  of  the  center,  the  knowledge
of  that  which  knows


CHAPTER  XIX


THAT  KNOWLEDGE  WE  HAVE


A  NT  experience  of  an  Other  Mind  which  I  could
-^^  either  wish  or  fancy  must  contain  in  it,  we  have
thought,  a  Worldy  full  of  sense  and  variety,  full  of
ohstinaey,  and  with  substance  at  the  back  of  it  — like
this  present  world.  In  a  truly  social  experience,  such
a  world  would  be  known  as  being  the  world  of  the
Other  Mind.  That  world  would  be  known  by  me;  but
as  it  were  through  the  eyes  of  the  Other  Mind*  It
would  be  in  some  sense  a  world  common  to  both  of  us ;
known  by  both  at  once.

And  though  it  would  be  perhaps  conceivable  that  we
might  carry  on  mutual  relations,  each  of  us  having  his
own  separate  world  (as,  for  example,  I  might  imagine
myself  in  dream  conversing  with  some  resident  of
heaven  or  hell,  having  at  the  same  time  a  vision  of  that
spirit's  world  and  reaching  some  understanding  of  him
thereby) :  yet  all  real  understanding  and  mutual  meas-
urement, mutual  judgment,  appreciation  of  character  and
so  even  of  self-knowledge,  must  come  through  having
the  same  world  with  him  throughout.  A  perfect  social
experience  would  require  that  this  present  world  of
Nature  should  be  known  as  being  the  World  of  the  Other,
precisely  as  it  is  my  World.

And  here  begins  our  final  enquiry.  For  as  it  seems
to  me,  this  present  World  of  Nature  is  known  by  me  as


THAT  KNOWLEDGE WE  HAVE  289

being,  in  just  this  sense,  a  common  World:  it  seems
to  me,  indeed,  that  it  is  not  otherwise  knoion  —  that  is,
that  a  knowledge  of  Other  Knower  is  an  integral  part
of  the  simplest  knowledge  of  Nature  itself.

It  is  more  readily  g^ranted  that  social  consciousness
involves  nature-consciousness,  than  that  nature-con-
sciousness involves  social  consciousness.  If  for  no
other  reason,  at  least  for  this :  that  our  experience  of
Nature  is  constant;  whereas  our  social  experience  is,  at
best,  intermittent  —  we  can  and  often  do  experience
Nature  by  itself.  It  is  enough  if  we  can  find  a  genuine
social  experience  now  and  then — we  have  not  yet  done
so  much  as  this  —  but  to  make  such  experience  an
organic  part  of  nature-experience  would  be  to  make  it
perpetual.

Yet  I  confess  that  I  cannot  find  a  genuine  social
experience  at  all,  except  as  a  continuous  experience.  It
appears  to  me  that  all  three  types  of  object  are  inter-
mittent in  the  same  sense,  and  continuous  in  the  same
sense.  Intermittent  enough  is  self-consciousness;  yet
self-consciousness  is  always  with  us.  Intermittent  is
also  the  consciousness  of  Nature,  as  an  object  of  direct
attention ;  yet  the  undertone  of  Nature's  presence  never
desertB  me.  even  in  deep  sleep.  In  a  way  closely  simi-
lar  to  that  persistent  awareness  of  my  Self,  which  is
compatible  with  the  most  fitful  movements  of  attention
to  Self,  is  the  awareness  of  Other  Mind  persistently
present  in  experience,  though  doubtless  less  readily  dis-
coverable than  any  other.  Inseparably  bound  up  as  I
think  with  the  continuous  experience  of  Nature.  And
such  continuous  experience  is  the  foundation  of  all  the


270  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

rest.  I  shall  attempt,  first  of  all,  to  make  clear  that
there  must  be  such  continuity^  if  there  is  to  be  any
social  experience  at  all.

The  chief  elements  of  intennittency  in  social  experi-
ence are  removed  when  we  look  away  from  the  body  of
the  Other  and  r^^rd  his  environing  world  of  objects.
It  is  in  these,  we  have  said,  that  we  know  him,  quite
as  much  as  in  his  body.  His  body  appears  and  disap-
pears to  our  sight ;  but  his  environment  does  not  dis-
appear. It  is  true  that  these  immediate  objects  of  mine
do  cease,  when  he  is  gone,  to  occupy  his  consciousness,
and  can  no  longer  be  counted  in  his  environment.  But
his  experience  of  Nature  was  not  limited  to  immediate
objects,  and  never  is  so  limited.  Any  idea  of  a  thing,
is  an  idea  of  that  thing  placed  in  a  world  of  space  and
energy  which  remains  a  constant  object.  Our  Space
does  not  move  as  we  move  about  in  it,  nor  does  our
idea  of  it  alter ;  our  placings  are  successful,  coherent,
unconf  used,  and  for  any  moment  absolute,  only  because
our  ideas  reach  an  unvarying  field  for  these  varying
locations.  If,  therefore,  at  any  time  I  have  known  an
Other ;  and  in  knowing  him  have  known  Nature  as  his
object;  then  this  same  Nature, — with  its  Space-field,
Force-field,  and  the  like  —  does  not  cease  to  be  his
Object  when  he  disappears.

As  my  own  physical  world  is  not  bounded,  at  any
time,  by  the  partition  or  forest  or  hill  that  happens
to  limit  my  vision,  but  extends  with  my  Space  in  all
directions  indefinitely, — so  does  his  physical  world  indef-
initely extend,  wherever  he  may  be  —  reaches  through-
out my  Space,  reaches  me  and  my  place,  reaches  Sub-
stance —  that  same  Substance  which  I  also  reach  as  my


THAT  KNOWLEDGE  WE  HAVE  271

ultimate  object.  If  I  have  once  got  into  his  worlds  I
cannot  get  out  of  it  while  he  endures^ — any  more  than
he  can  get  out  of  my  world,  so  long  as  I  can  mean  him;
and  these  fundamental  objects  of  mine,  which  I  sum  up
in  the  word  Nature,  if  they  have  ever  been  common
objects,  common  to  him  and  me,  can  never  thereafter
cease  to  be  common  objects.  If  my  own  continuous
experience  of  Nature  has  ever  been  a  social  experience
it  can  never  thereafter  lose  its  social  reference.

But  I  seem  to  imply  that  there  can  be  a  beginning
of  social  experience,  and  so  a  time  when  it  was  not  —
a  time  when  my  experience  of  Nature  was  mine  alone.
What  I  am  required  to  show  is  that  social  experience
has  no  heginningy  except  with  physical  experience
itself:  that  my  knowledge  of  Nature  and  of  Other
Mind  are  in  their  whole  history  interlocked,  and
inseparable.  If  Nature  is  ever  common  object,  it  has
always  been  common  object.

Let  us  consider  how  a  social  experience  might  be
supposed  to  begin,  as  at  times  it  does  appear  to  begin,
even  abruptly.  I  think  myself  alone,  for  example,  and
with  uncomfortable  surprise  find  myself  observed.  It
seems  to  me  that  I  experience  a  jarring  change  of
scene :  my  various  objects  have  now  to  be  connected
up,  in  swift  series,  with  the  intruder's  eyes.  They
have  been  exclusive  objects ;  they  have  suddenly  and
perforce  become  common.  They  are  all  seared  with
this  new  relationship,  as  with  a  running  breath  of
flame,  and  delivered  over  to  joint  ownership.  Such
readjustments  often  take  perceptible  time  to  effect.
Have  we  not  here  a  sufficient  contrast  between  solitude


272  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

and  society,  showing  that  social  experience  may  begin
—  being  imposed  as  an  addition  upon  an  experience
not  social  ?

What  such  a  transition  does  unmistakably  show  ia
tiiat  exclugive  property  in  the  contente  of  experience  i.
possible  and  may  have  distinct  value  attached  to  it.
Such  exclusive  property  is  made  possible  by  sensible
barriers,  such  as  opaqueness  and  distance.  When  I
say,  ^^  I  am  entirely  alone  and  unobserved,"  I  am  put-
ting my  trust  in  these  barriers.  But  when  I  resort  to
a  barrier,  I  confess  that  the  objects  which  I  thereby  seek
to  monopolize  or  conceal  are  in  some  danger  of  being
known  by  Others.  They  are  already  thought  of  by
me  as  being  sharable.  And  if  they  are  sharable,  it
is  because  they  are  already  in  the  World  of  an  Other
Mind;  there  are  continuous  lines  through  space
between  him  and  me ;  our  world  of  Nature  is  already
common.  Is  it  not  clear  that  when  I  suppose  myself
alone,  and  regard  my  solitude  as  an  achievement,  I  am
in  that  very  thought  acknowledging  my  world  of  Space
and  Nature  to  be  a  world  common  to  me  and  Others  ?
My  negative  sociability  has  a  very  positive  social  con-
sciousness at  its  basis.

What  such  experiences  imply  and  illustrate  may  be
more  compactly  stated  in  terms  of  the  logic  of  com-
munication, as  follows :  In  order  that  any  two  beings
should  establish  communication^  they  must  already
have  something  in  common.  For  when  I  consider  the
two  beings,  prior  to  their  communication,  as  apart
from  one  another,  I  must  consider  at  the  same  time  the
field  through  which  they  must  pass  to  approach  each
other :  and  this  field  is  already  a  common  field. Two


THAT  KNOWLEDGE  WE  HAVE  273

beings  wholly  independent,  having  no  common  region
to  measure  their  distance  from  one  another,  having
between  them  no  continuity  through  which  to  travel
toward  each  other,  are  lacking  in  any  *^  toward  "  —
are  unable  therefore  to  approach  each  other,  cannot
come  together.  All  actual  approach  implies  a  deeper-
going  presence  as  an  accomplished  fact.

Given  a  minimal  core  of  communication,  and  further
communication  may  spin  itself  out  upon  that  core,  may
g^ow  intense  and  varied,  develop  its  ups  and  downs,  its
relative  presences  and  absences.  But  given  nothing  at
all  —  nothing  at  all  can  happen.  If  then,  experience
ever  becomes  actually  social,  it  has,  in  more  rarefied
condition,  always  been  so;  and  hence  is,  in  the  same
fundamental  sense,  continuously  so.^

There  is  some  satisfaction  in  reducing  our  ques-
tion to  this  alternative :  that  social  experience  is  either
always  present  or  never  present.  If  now  we  can  show
that  we  have  at  any  time  a  veritable experience  of

^  There  is  indeed  no  sufficient  reason  for  supposing  that  the  sociality
of  m J  nature-experience  continues  to  exist  after  my  fellow  has  gone  in
any  different  sense  than  before  he  appeared.  The  episode  of  his  coming
and  going  does  not  change  the  physical  aspect  of  my  world  ;  those  objects
of  Nature  seem  intrinsically  ready  to  be  observed  by  an  Otber  Mind,  to  be
essentially  public  in  their  constitution.  If  I  were  actually  alone  in  this
same  cosmos,  it  is  difficult  to  think  that  I  should  be  without  the  idea  of
possible  Others,  conceived  of  as  sharing  it  with  me  ;  it  is  difficult  to  believe
that  Nature  could  be  experienced  as  simply  meine  VorstdLung  —  for  the
physical  object  itself,  the  common  thing^  seems  to  present  itself  as  numer-
ously knowable,  having  many  unused  knowable  aspects  or  valencies  which
I  with  my  single  point  of  view  can  never  exhaust.  Nature  seems  struc'
turally  common,  or  let  us  say  commune  ;  made  up  with  reference  to  many
co-experiencing  minds.  My  thought  of  Nature  suffers  no  jar  as  men
oome  and  go,  for  soci-ability  is  its  element.  In  experiencing  it,  I  am
potentially  experiencing  the  Other,  and  continuously.


274  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

Other  Mind,  we  show  that  we  have  such  experience
continually. I  believe  that  this  can  be  shown.

For  suppose  that  experience  is  never  social.  In
making  this  supposition,  we  mean  to  contrast  the  sup-
posed non-social  experience  with  a  supposed  social
experience.  In  imagining  my  experience  to  be  con-
fined to  myself  and  my  objects,  I  admit  or  assume  that
I  have  an  Idea  of  my  experience  not-so-confined ;  that
I  know  what  a  social  experience  would  be  like.  Now  I
submit  that  this  Idea  of  a  social  experience  would
not  he  possible^  unless  such  an  experience  were  actuaL
Otherwise  stated, — In  any  sense  in  which  I  can  imagine,
or  thinky  or  conceive  an  experience  of  Other  mind,  in
that  same  sense  I  fiave  an  experience  of  Other  Mind,
apart  from  which  I  should  have  no  such  Idea.

For  every  supposition  we  may  make  to  the  effect
that  our  idea  of  Other  Mind  is  a  '^  mere  idea  "  to  which
no  real  experience  corresponds,  —  that  our  supposed
social  experience  is,  in  reality,  subjective, — implies
that  we  have  in  mind  a  type  of  experience  in  com-
parison with  which  we  can  condemn  our  supposed
social  experience  as  merely  subjective.  But  the  only
type  of  experience  in  comparison  with  which  any  ex-
perience can  be  judged  as  merely  subjective,  is  a  non-
subjective  experience.  7%e  only  point  of  view  from
which  our  supposed  social  experience  can  be  criticized
as  incomplete  is  the  point  of  view  of  social  experience
itself  The  only  ground  upon  which  this  idea  can  be
judged  a  '^  mere  idea  "  is  the  ground  of  this  same  idea
as  not  mere,  namely,  as  actually  bringing  me  into  pres-
ence of  Mind  which  is  not  my  own.

Leibniz,  for  example,  judges  that  all  experience  is


THAT  KNOWLEDGE  WE  HAVE  275

monadici  and  that  monads  do  not  in  actuality  experi-
ence each  other,  though  to  themselves  they  seem  to  do
so.  In  making  this  hypothesis,  Leibniz  presents  to
himself  the  world  of  monads,  and  he  knows  their  rela-
tions to  be  other  than  they  seem :  he  at  any  rate  occupies
a  non-monadic  position,  is  for  the  time  being  an  inter-
monadic  Mind.  And  any  one  who  judges  that  he  —
and  God —  know  the  actual  reach  of  ideas  to  fall  short
of  their  apparent  reach,  does  thereby  assert  that  his
idea  has  not  thus  fallen  short.  There  is  no  degpree  of
outwardness  of  which  we  can  think ;  no  degree  of  real-
ity which  we  incline  to  deny  to  idea ;  but  in  that  thought
we  have  claimed  it  for  our  idea.  Let  me  represent  to
myself  the  Other  Subject,  his  living  center,  as  inac-
cessible to  my  experience ;  then  either  I  deny  myself
nothing  conceivable,  or  else  I  have  that  which  I  deny.

An  objection  (or,  let  me  say,  <A6  objection):  may  not
this  idea  of  a  genuine  social  experience,  which  you  say
gruarantees  the  experience,  be  an  ideal,  i.e.,  a  conception
of  something  we  may  desire  and  think  of,  which  we  may
well  use  to  criticize  what  we  have,  admitting  that  we
have  it  not  f  Surely,  not  every  ideal  implies  the  expe-
rience, but  rather  the  contrary.

Answer :  An  ideal  is  either  an  extension  of  experience
as  given,  or  an  innate  standard.

The  idea  of  a  genuine  experience  of  Other  Mind  is
not  an  extension  of  other  types  of  experience.  Imag-
ination has  its  ways  of  building  improvements  on
experience  by  combining,  enlarging,  extending  what  is
given^  according  to  known  types  of  relation.  But  if
the  idea  of  Other  Mind  were  not  already  given,  it  could


276  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

not  be  built  up  in  this  way.  Certainly  not  by  any
arrangement  of  physical  ideas  in  physical  relations ;  nor
yet  by  any  arrangement  of  psychical  ideas  in  psychical
relations ;  nor  by  any  union  of  physical  and  psychical.
To  reach  the  idea  from  these,  we  must  use  the  special
relation  of  Other-self-hood,  which  is  the  idea  itself.
Since  my  idea  of  social  experience  is  uniquely  different
from  all  such  constructions  within  the  physical  and
psychical  worlds,  it  is  not  an  ideal  based  on  them.  It
is  not  an  ideal  by  construction  at  all ;  what  we  seek  is
simply  the  thing,  social  experience,  in  its  unique  differ-
ence from  all  immanent  variations  of  other  fields  of  expe^
rience.  If  this  unique  difference  is  an  ideal  merely,  it
is  not  an  ideal  by  imaginative  construction,  —  it  must
be  innate.

To  say  that  an  idea  is  innate,  in  Cartesian  fashion,
may  mean  simply  that  it  is  once  for  all  there,  and  there
is  nothing  more  to  be  said  about  it.  Or  it  may  mean
that  the  idea  is  due  ultimately  to  some  outer  source
(ancestral  or  divine) ;  whereby  we  only  reinvest  in  that
Outer  Source  the  difficulty  of  the  idea  in  question  —
namely,  how  my  id^as  can  reach  that  which  is  not-myself .
Or,  it  may  mean,  in  Kantian  fashion,  that  the  idea  is  a
native  and  necessary  form  by  which  the  Self  orders  the
material  of  its  experience,  as  otherwise  given.  Of  these,
the  Kantian  form  is  doubtless  the  strongest:  and  our
social  experience  does  most  closely  resemble,  as  we  have
noticed,  a  form  of  interpretation,  a  successful  hypoth-
esis clothing  our  manifold  experience-stuff  —  ultimately
sensation — with  social  meaning.

As  an  hypothesis  our  idea  of  Other  Mind  has  certain
interesting  peculiarities. That  it  is  not  framed  imagina-


THAT  KNOWLEDGE  WE  HAVE  277

tively  of  materials  taken  elsewhere  from  experience^  we
have  observed.  But  further^  there  is  no  way  in  which
it  could  be  proved  false,  or  even  brought  to  other  test
than  its  use.  There  are  various  ways  in  which  my
social  judgments  may  err,  and  suffer  correction  in  expe-
rience. Thus  I  may  impute  to  a  friend  a  false  motive,
accepting  his  statement  that  I  am  in  error.  This  judg^
ment  clearly  relies  on  the  more  authentic  social  expe-
rience for  correction.  So  with  other  errors,  as  by  mis-
taking the  identity  of  a  person,  or  by  mistaking  a  post
for  a  man ;  these  are  Corrected  with  reference  to  a  bet-
ter social  experience.  There  is  no  type  of  error  to  which
social  experience  is  subject  which  can  refer  me  away
from  social  experience  for  correction,  —  none  which  can
send  me  back  into  myself  for  final  court  of  appeal.  As
an  hypothesis,  the  idea  of  Other  Mind  cannot  be  tested,
—  nor  can  it  be  withdrawn.

But  now,  when  we  suppose  that  this  idea  of  ours  is
an  hypothesis  only^  what  more  than  hypothesis  do  we
think  it  might  be  ?  We  think,  do  we  not,  that  it  might
be  a  genuine  social  experience,  and  no  mere  hypothe-
sis ?  But  ^^  genuine  social  experience  "  is  the  hypothe-
sis itself,  if  it  is  such.  And  the  contrast  between  real
and  apparent  in  social  experience  is  only  such  contrast
as  social  experience  has  already  furnished  us  with.  My
idea  of  social  experience  is  then,  of  social  experience  as
it  18 :  my  ideal  and  my  idea  are  the  same,  —  they  refer
me  to  what  I  have.

But  let  me  make  clear  that  in  referring  our  idea  of
Other  Mind  to  experience,  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is
derived,  in  Humian  fashion,  as  a  copy  from  a  preoims
impression. It  would  be  as  little  to  the  point  to  suggest


278  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

that  my  idea  of  myself  is  deriyed  from  a  preyioof
impression  of  myself.  My  idea  of  myself  is  cU  the  same
time  an  experience  of  myself  (onless  my  idea  flies  wild).
So,  unless  as  frequently  happens  I  use  some  paper  cur-
rency in  referring  to  Other  Mind,  my  idea  of  Other
Mind  is  at  the  same  time  an  experience  of  Other  Mind.
Let  me  but  think  what  I  mean  by  the  Other  Mind,  and
there,  as  I  find  my  Self,  I  find  the  Other  also.  As  an
idea  of  a  fundamental  and  constant  experience,  bound
up  with  my  equally  permanent  experiences  of  Self  and
Nature,  this  idea  is  not  j^rtor  to  experience;  but  is  indeed
prior  to  all  further  social  experience,  to  all  such  as  is
intermittent  and  subject  to  error.  This  fundamental
experience,  and  its  idea,  deserve,  from  their  position  in
knowledge,  to  be  called  a  concrete  a  priori  knowledge.

Of  the  log^c  of  this  proof  that  we  have  actual  expe-
rience of  Other  Mind  I  shall  have  more  to  say  in  a  later
chapter.  It  stands  before  us  now  somewhat  barely.
Unconvincingly,  too,  unless  we  can  clothe  with  some  liv-
ing sense  that  strange  assertion  that  Nature  is  always
present  to  experience  as  known  by  an  Other.  That  we
cannot  genuinely  conceive  ourselves  as  mentally  alone  in
this  cosmos,  though  we  can  well  imagine  ourselves  bod-
ily alone.  That  the  inherent  publicity  of  Nature,  the
fitness  of  all  its  objects  to  be  communally  experienced,  is
no  empty  potentiality,  but  a  potentiality,  founded  (like
other  potentialities)  on  some  actuality.  We  must  now
try  to  bring  that  experience  more  vividly  before  us ;  for
we  can  hardly  believe  in  an  experience  which  we  are  yet
unable  to  disentangle,  or  verify  in  ourselves.  But  let
this  conviction  stand  as  a  firm  ground  in  our  further


THAT  KNOWLEDGE  WE  HAVE  279

search  :  that  we  should  have  no  idea  of  an  Other  Mind
or  of  a  social  experience  unless  we  had  the  experience
itself.  That  in  whatever  sense  we  can  think,  or  imagine,
or  even  denyy  the  reality  of  that  experience,  —  in  that
same  sense  it  must  be  and  is  real  to  us.

There  are,  I  think,  three  natural  dif&culties  in  the
way  of  distinguishing  the  undertone  of  social  experience
amid  the  general  rumble  of  the  ground-levels  of  expe-
rience. First,  that  we  cannot  identify  that  constant
Other  with  any  particular  individual,  yet  an  Other
must  be  an  individual.  Second,  we  cannot  help  regard-
ing the  experience  of  Nature  as  sufficient  in  itself,  the
presence  of  Others  in  the  world  being  additional  and
wholly  separable  fact —  that  the  experience  of  Nature
may  be  at  the  same  time  a  social  experience  we  can
more  readily  believe  than  that  it  must  be.  Third,  that
we  cannot  verify  the  social  experience  socially ^  in  the
same  way  that  we  verify  the  facts  of  Nature.  I  shall
consider  these  three,  beginning  with  the  last  named,  —
reserving  the  others  to  the  following  chapter.

An  object  of  knowledge  or  experience  is,  for  the  most
part,  a  thing  which  you  and  I  can  verify  together.  I
assert  that  something  is  true,  in  history,  in  physics,  in
mathematics ;  and  when  I  make  such  statements  to  yoUj
I  mean  that  you  also  can  go  to  the  same  facts  and
experiences  and  find  the  same  thing  that  I  have  found.
The  truth  of  my  assertion  means  that  it  is  valid  for  you
and  other  real  persons  in  the  same  way  that  it  is  valid
for  me.  This  association  of  minds  which  we  call ''  we,"
accustomed  as  it  is  to  sit  in  united  judgment  upon  facts
external  to  itself,  cannot  in  like  fashion  sit  in  judgment


280  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

npon  itself.  If  we  donbt  '^  we/'  we  know  not  to  whom
to  appeal.  We  can  hardly  find  our  f  ondamental  social-
itj,  because  we  can  hardly  get  so  far  away  from  it  as
to  doubt  it.

Nature  is  preeminently  the  world  of  socially  verifiable
things,  the  world  of  scientific  research  —  which  is  gen-
eral human  collaboration  on  a  common  object.  We
look  at  Nature  through  the  eyes  of  a  social  world.  As
we  look  at  physical  things  through  two  eyes  at  once,
and  our  prospect  thereby  acquires  something  in  soUdity
and  depth ;  so  in  quite  similar  fashion  we  see  objects
and  truths  in  general  through  two  pairs  of  eyes,  through
indefinite  multitudes  of  eyes,  and  thereby  acquire  that
deepest  solidity  of  judgment  which  we  call  ^'  universal-
ity." Universality  is  a  social  habit ;  the  necessary  habit
of  looking  at  any  truth  as  if  not  I  alone  but  the  whole
conscious  universe  were  looking  at  it  with  me.  The
simplest  judgment  of  physical  things  is  universal  in  this
sense  ;  the  most  particular  matter  of  fact,  as  I  place  it
in  my  world  of  Nature,  is  so  placed  by  help  of  this  deep
sense  of  the  ^'  cloud  of  witnesses "  to  whom  this  fact
belongs,  as  well  as  to  myself.  Without  this  habitual
democracy  of  judgment,  this  habitual  loss  of  my  life  in
the  universal  judgment,  I  can  have  no  life  at  all  in  Nature
or  in  the  world  of  truth.

And  just  because  my  social  consciousness  is  that  with
which  I  am  thinking  my  world,  I  am  not  at  the  same
time  and  in  the  same  way  thinking  q/"  it,  —  as  one  does
not  see  his  own  eyes  in  the  usual  processes  of  seeing
thingps.  When  we  speak  of  experience^  what  is  called
to  mind  is  usually  experience  with  the  experiencers  left
out ;  experience  just  so  far  as  it  can  easily  be  common


. THAT  KNOWLEDGE WE  HAVE  281

object  and  no  farther.  Hume,  in  his  examination  of
experience,  found  no  Self ;  he  had  gone  out  of  his  house,
as  one  noted  rejoinder  had  it,  and  looking  in  at  the
window  was  unable  to  find  himself  at  home.  In  truth
it  is  not  I  alone,  but  we  who  go  out,  and  cannot  be  dis-
covered by  ourselves  in  that  house.  And  that  same
reflexive  turn  of  consciousness  which  takes  notice  of
Self,  as  of  something  always  present,  must,  if  we  are
right,  discover  the  Other  also,  my  other  I,  perpetual
sustainer  of  universality  in  my  judgments  of  experience.
When,  then,  we  think  of  ^'  experience  "  as  something
solitary  and  subjective,  we  are  cutting  it  off  from  our-
selves, and  calling  upon  the  Other  Mind  to  view  it  so,
together  with  us.  Holding  it  thus,  at  arm's  length,  we
criticize  it,  and  as  we  thought,  by  means  of  an  idea  of
something  better :  we  criticize  our  solitary  experience
by  the  standard  of  a  conceived  social  experience  which
would  be  more  comprehensive.  And  this  idea  of  a
better,  we  thought,  confessed  the  reality  of  that  better.
In  truth,  we  should  read  the  situation  the  other  way.
That  experience,  thus  held  off  at  arm's  length  and  crit-
icized, is  not  the  Real  Experience,  judged  by  standard
of  an  Idea  of  a  better.  That  criticized  experience  is
but  a  conceptual  part  of  reality,  abstracted  from  its  con-
text, and  criticized  not  by  idea  (alone)  but  by  the  reality
itself.  The  real  and  the  conceptual  have  changed  places.
It  is  through  my  present  inseparable  community  with
The  Other  that  I  know  that  abstracted  ^^  experience "
to  be  incomplete.


CHAPTER  XX

OUR  NATURAL  REALISM  AND  REALISM  ABSOLUTE

OUR  second  diifficulty  in  finding  social  experience  is
that  the  experience  of  NaturCi  though  admitting
social  experience  as  an  appendage,  still  seems  to  be
something  else  than  social  experience,  separable  from
it,  sufficient  in  itself.  Any  particular  person  may  come
and  go,  making  no  difference  to  my  experience  of
Nature.  Come  and  go,  not  only  from  my  eyesight,  but
from  this  World  of  Time  itself.  Any  particular  per-
son, Nature  is  independent  of;  and  if  of  any,  then,  we
reason,  of  all.  The  soci-ability  of  Nature  is  an  extra-
neous circumstance.  Nature  first  id,  and  then  is  expe-
rienced by  us ;  Nature  first  is,  and  then  is  mine  —  and
yours — and  theirs.  This  is  our  besetting  natural
Realism ;  and  it  is  the  most  persistent  difficulty  in  the
way  of  finding  social  experience.

It  is  fair  to  recall,  at  first,  that  if  this  natural  Real-
ism is  right,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  social  experience.
If  every  mind  may  come  and  take  its  own  view  of
Nature  without  making  any  difference  to  Nature,  hence
without  weaving  into  the  nature-experience  of  an  Other
any  necessary  reference  to  itself,  then  a  solitary  experi-
ence of  Nature  is  possible.  But  if  a  pure  solitude  is
possible,  it  is  perpetual.  Experience  is  always  and  nec-
essarily social,  or  never, — these  are  our  alternatives.

But  we  wish,  if  possible,  to  meet  our  natural  Realism


OUR  NATURAL  REALISM  283

on  its  own  ground^  rather  than  on  our  own,  and  satisfy
it.  Its  own  ground  is,  that  Nature  becomes  a  medium
for  social  intercourse  as  it  were  accidentally  and  exter-
nally, as  one  picks  up  a  stone  which  chance  has  shaped
to  the  hand.  Nature-experience  becomes  associated  with
social  consciousness ;  but  is  itself  to  be  defined  independ-
ently, or  as  That  Which  serves  social  consciousness.
In  knowing  Nature  I  am  indeed  always  dimly  conscious
of  its  fortunate  publicity.  I  know  myself  as  merging,  on
this  side  of  my  experience,  with  whatever  Other  Minds
may  happen  to  be  extant.  But  all  this  social  reference
is  indeterminate,  and  adventitious ;  it  rides  on  the  out-
side of  Nature.  Nature  is  hospitable ;  offers  infinite  and
permanent  possibilities  of  sociality;  caring  not,  how-
ever, whether  many  points  of  view  are  occupied,  or  all,
or  none.  Nature-drama  goes  on,  careless  of  the  seat-
ing of  the  house,  or  of  the  gossip  there.  This  is  our
natural  Realism,  so  far  as  it  has  bearing  on  social
experience.

Now  all  this  is  report  of  truth.  I  find  Nature  ready  (
made,  and  so  do  you.  This  world,  in  its  constitution,  is
not  my  doing ;  nor  is  it  the  doing  of  any  one  else  situ-
ated as  I  am,  nor  of  any  assemblage  of  such.  Nature  is
object  of  our  knowledge ;  tod  knowledge  is  co-extensive
with  empiricism,  — that  is,  with  the  attitude  of  tak-
ing what  is  given,  in  obedience  (not,  of  course,  without
activity,  nor  without  hope).  Have  we  not  contended,
at  some  length,  that  the  ultimate  object  of  knowl-
edge has  its  independence  of  us;  its  perfect  priority,  to
which  we  who  wish  to  live  submit  ?  It  is  true  that  any
Mind  depends  on  Nature  as  Nature  does  not  depend  on
that  Mind. I  would  not  seek  to  minimize  this  independ-


284  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

ent  priority,  even  obsiaDacy,  of  Nature.  For  it  is  just
io  this  character  of  ultimate  opposition  to  me  and  my
wishes,  of  high  superiority  to  any  doings  or  thinkings
of  mine,  that  Nature  begins  to  assume  for  me  the
unmistakable  aspect  of  Other  Mind.  We  must  dwell
for  a  time  on  this  point.

So  long  as  our  attention  is  given  to  a  physical  object
for  its  own  sake,  or  for  the  sake  of  further  physical  ends,
the  independence  of  the  object  seems  exhausted  in  that
mysterious  obstinacy  which  demands  our  submissive
attention,  our,  empirical  attitude.  But  that  obstinacy
does  not  fail  to  call  forth  enquiry ;  it  does  appear  as  a
'^mystery."  We  cannot  accept  the  simple  There-ness
of  Nature  as  final  truth  (any  more  than  we  could  acc^t
pain  as  the  last  word  of  pain).  We  require  to  know
why  it  is  there,  and  by  what  principle  we  are  made
dependent  upon  it.

The  ^^  objectivity  "  of  Nature  requires  to  be  explained :
it  admits  explanation.  This  is  the  critical  feature  of
the  case.  For  in  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  conceive  the
obstinacy  of  Nature  as  explained  by,  or  dependent  upon,
some  further  source  of  strength,  we  approach  the  dis-
covery of  a  more  fundamental  object.  We  shall  find,
I  think,  that  physical  experience,  taken  as  a  solitary
experience,  has  no  very  perfect  independence  of  my  Self;
is  not  so  external  but  that  it  can  at  any  moment  be
conceived  internal  to  me — and  does  actually  roll  away
from  sensation  into  memory  (which  exists  only  in  me)
instantaneously  (as  in  a  rolling  wheel  the  point  of  con-
tact instantly  leaves  the  ground)  and  without  substan-
tial change :  —  on  all  these  things  idealism  has  suffi-
ciently enlarged  (and  the  force  of  this  idealistic  motive


OUR  NATURAL  REALISM  286

comes  from  conceiving  Nature-experience  as  solitary).
We  shall  find  that  that  which  is  most  completely  inde-
pendent of  me,  external  to  me,  is  not  physical  experi-
ence per  sCy  but  Other  Self.  The  independence  of  Na-
ture hangs  from  this  more  fundamental  independence,
and  not  vice  versa.  The  objectivity  of  the  physical
object  is  derivative :  it  shines  by  reflected  light,  not  by
its  own.

Let  us  present  experience  to  ourselves  in  simple  terms,
as  an  interplay  between  an  active  Self  and  an  active
External  Reality.  Grant,  tentatively,  a  degree  of  inde-
pendent activity  to  each.  My  own  independent  activ-
ity in  making  experience  what  it  is  may  be  fairly  esti-
mated by  that  force  of  expectant  imagination  with
which  I  meet  and  place  the  materials  that  sensation
offers  me.  The  mass  of  idea  which  I  call  my  Self,
my  ^^apperceptive  mass,"  carries  on  a  spontaneous  self-
projection,  runnings-ahead  in  anticipation  of  experience :
and  no  experience  can  come  to  me  which  is  not  an
answer  to  certain  organic  questionings  set  out  to  receive
events.  Though  I  do  not  determine  what  the  detail
and  particularity  of  experience  may  be,  yet  I  do  e7y>ect
detail  and  particularity.  This  scouting^wave  of  my
idea-system  thus  defines  a  complete  physical  world,  —
in  all  but  the  last  touch  of  answer-to-question.  My
present  moment  expects  the  next,  in  all  but  the  last
touch  of  change  which  sensation  must  give.  Large
world-making  powers  must,  on  such  showing,  be  cred-
ited to  the  Self.  Cut  off  suddenly  that  relation  to
External  Reality  in  sensation  ;  and  this  world-expecting,
world-forecasting,  world-spinning  activity  does  not  cease


286  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

— physical  worlds  still  exist  for  me  in  imaginatioD^  or
in  dream.  Here  is  a  complete  dream-Space,  dream*
Nature  and  nature-processes,  dream-soc]al'<x>ndition8  too,
and  all  filled  in  with  sufficient  dream-detail  and  partic-
ularity, on  whose  development  I  expectantly  wait  with
all  appearance  of  passiye,  empirical  attitude  —  though
it  is  my  own  world.

There  is  large  creative  power  here ;  yet  such,  we  think,
as  a  touch  of  sensation  would  shatter  like  a  house  of
cards.  That  same  own-made-world  is  doubtless  per-
manently present  to  me ;  but  as  the  stars  in  daylight,
quantitatively  annihilated.  What  vividness  and  defi-
niteness  I  now  seem  to  possess  comes,  we  must  still  think,
chiefly  through  this  flood  of  sense  which  irrupts  upon
my  anticipative  out-going^  Cut  me  off  in  earnest  from
my  experience  of  Nature,  and  I  tend  to  become  vague,
indefinite,  uncertain  of  myself.  Let  me  lose  a  little  in
sight  or  hearing ;  and  I  find  how  much  not  only  self
but  sense  has  been  concerned  in  that  influx.  However
vigorous  the  impetus  of  advance-weaving  on  the  part
of  my  ideas — vigorous  enough  at  times  to  falsify
experience,  displacing  feebler  sensation  —  my  own  activ-
ity always  accepts  the  irruptive  material  as  its  own
authority  and  completion.  Toward  that  Outer  Reality
I  hold  myself  as  toward  that  which  sustains  me  from
moment  to  moment  in  my  present  being.

Is  not  that  outer  activity  then  essentially  creative  in  its
constant  action  (as  probably  also  in  its  original  action)
— creative  of  me?  My  dependence  upon  Nature,  my
momentary  submission  to  its  independent,  obstinate,
objective  decision  of  what  Fact  and  Truth  shall  be,  both
in  principle  and  in  detail :  —  is  not  this  a  finding  of  my


OUR  NATURAL  REALISM  287

own  mind?  It  is  here,  in  this  momentary  (as  well  as
permanent)  creation  of  my  Self  that  I  beg^^  I  say,  to
find  Nature  taking  on  the  aspect  of  an  Other  Mind.

For  if  the  full-fledged  otherness  of  that  which  is
thus  over  against  me  cannot  be  doubted,  neither  can
it  be  doubted  that  this  which  so  immediately  becomes
Self,  makes  Self,  is  already  a  Self  even  in  its  other-
ness, —  namely,  an  Other  Self.  We  find  the  weakness
of  natural  Realism  when  we  consider  whether  a  physi-
cal experience  so  organically  and  actively  concerned  in
mind-existence  and  mind-process  could  exist  also,  and
fully  itself,  apart  from  such  active  relations.  If  only
I  were  independent  of  Nature,  I  might  think  Nature
independent  of  Self.  But  since  Nature  obstinate  is
Nature  creativey  and  creative  of  mind ;  since  my  deep-
est roots  and  those  of  all  co-experiencing  mind  are  in
her  deepest  objectivity,  I  cannot  clear  Nature  of  self-
hoodf  though  I  can  well  clear  her  of  my  own  self  or  of
any  other  particular  self.

Space,  here,  is  my  space,  —  also  everybody's  space ;
and  is  known  as  such.  Energy  is  everybody's  energy :
Nature  as  a  whole  is  everybody's  Nature.  Even  now,
space,  and  the  rest,  are  integral  parts  of  everybody's
mind —  are  idea  and  experience  at  the  same  time;  are
the  activity  of  each  finite  thinker,  —  but  an  activity
held  empirically  in  place  by  the  active  decisiveness  of
Outer  Reality.  You  and  I  vanish,  and  leave  space
behind  —  leave  thereby  so  much  of  our  mind  behind,
and  more.  Leave  behind  necessary  elements  in  our  con-
tinuity, individuality,  unity,  even  character.  Leave  them
behind  in  what  condition  ?  In  the  same  condition  in
which  we  have  always  known  them :  as  something  com-


288  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

municated  by  an  Other  Mind,  and  meant  by  an  Other
Mind.  For  in  immediately  experiencing  my  Self  as
limited  and  determined  (in  the  ways  described)  by  an
Absolute  Other,  I  am  experiencing  that  Other  as  Other
Mind.  As  space  is  found  limited  by  no  other  than
more  space,  so  Self  is  found  limited  and  individualized
by  no  other  than  Other  Selfhood.

This  is  our  fundamental  social  experience.  And  I
wish  to  make  it  clear,  that  this  experience  is  not  an
inference,  but  an  immediate  experience.  As  simply  as
Nature  presents  itself  as  objective,  just  so  simply  and
directly  is  the  Other  Mind  present  to  me  in  that  objec-
tivity, as  its  actual  meaning.  I  do  not  first  know  my
physical  world  as  a  world  of  objects  and  then  as  a  world
of  shared  objects :  it  is  through  a  prior  recognition  of
the  presence  of  Other  Mind  that  my  physical  experience
acquires  objectivity  at  all.^ The  objectivity  of  Nature

^  Nothing  is  gmined  in  differentiating  physical  objects  from  psjchieal
objects  bj  pointing  out  (as  is  commonly  attempted)  that  the  psychical  objects
are  for  one  only,  whereas  the  physical  objects  are  dUo  objects  for  another.
This  simply  doubles  the  mystery.  I  have  now  to  understand  how  these
physical  things  can  be  objects  for  both  of  ns  at  once,  obstinate  to  both  of
ns,  and  not  to  one  only:  the  nature  of  objectivity  itself  with  its  capacity
of  being  equally  objectiye  to  two  souls,  or  even  to  an  infinite  number,  is
not  in  the  least  illumined.  There  is  rather  the  additional  mystery  how  I
know  (as  it  seems  I  do  immediately  know  by  considering  the  physical
object  alone)  that  it  can  be  objective  to  others  as  well  as  to  myself.  Are
these  objects,  then,  labelled  ^<  common,"  while  tbe  others  are  without  such
labels  ?  have  they  about  them  some  physical  mark  which  points  the  mind
to  an  other  knower?  Hardly  this.  The  only  way  in  which  I  can  know  an
object  to  be  common  is  by  catching  it  in  the  act  of  being  common,  that
is,  by  knowing  it  as  known  by  other  mind.  The  social  experience  must
have  a  prior  and  original  recognisableness.  And  this  recognition  of  other
mind  than  my  own  is  a  simultaneous  recognition  of  those  aspects  of  expe-
rience which  such  mind  needs  for  the  maintenance  of  its  intercourse  with
me,  without  loss  of  its  own  separateness  of  career.


OUR  NATURAL  REALISM  289

18  its  communitj,  not  two  facts  but  one :  but  the  whole
truth  of  this  one  fact  (which  whole  I  do  not  see  unless
I  note  what  I  am  thinking  toith)  —  the  whole  of  this
fact  is  community.

Here  then  is  the  point  in  which  natural  Realism  is  both
right  and  wrong.  That  which  limits  and  opposes  the
Self,  setting  bounds  to  our  expectations,  offering  instead
of  our  desire  its  /  am,  is  indeed  Not-self.  That  outer
individuality  is  first  —  our  own  follows.  That  outer
world  asserts  itself  upon  me,  and  creates  me;  even  my
^^  forms  of  apperception/'  my  space,  my  time,  I  accept
from  it  and  reissue  —  even  here  I  am  empirical  first  and
creative  afterward.  In  so  far  natural  Realism  is  right.
But  it  is  just  because  the  empirical  factors  of  expe-
rience extend  thus  through  my  whole  selfhood  that  this
Not-myself  is  known  in  positive  terms  as  Other-self.

In  failing  to  penetrate  through  the  blank  otherness
of  Nature  to  the  spirit  that  is  its  support,  natural  Real-
ism falls  short  of  the  truth.^ Idealism  corrects  this


^  Li  the  physieal  experience  of  outer  reality  Kant  deaeried  the  point  st
which  Bubjectiye  idealism  is  broken  :  in  Wahmehmnng  (physical  percep-
tion) he  found  the  active  effect  of  the  unknown  Thing-in-itself.  At  this
point  be  thought  that  experience  reaches  an  unusual  pitch  of  outwardness
—  reaching,  indeed,  beyond  the  Self,  achieving  the  impossible.  What  is
the  evidence  of  this  feat  ?  It  is  that  the  self  here  discovers  itself  in
process  of  being  made  ;  finds  the  source  of  those  individual  characters  of
itself,  which  since  they  define  itself  cannot  be  Jrom  itself.  But  Kant  did
not  note  that  in  thus  viewing  itself  as  a  particular  Self,  the  Ego  is  accom-
plishing the  standpoint  of  another  (and  universal)  Self ;  and  that  this
standpoint  ia  a  permanent  part  of  its  own  being.  Hence  he  misread  the
relation  between  the  active  non-ego  and  the  ego  in  the  process  of  physical
experience.  For  causality  (on  his  own  showing)  it  is  not ;  but  communication
it  may  well  be,  —  and  self -communication,  which  is  creation.

For  more  explicit  discussion  of  this  matter,  see  the  explanatory  essay,
«The  Knowledge  of  Independent  Reality."


290  HOW  M£N  KNOW  GOD

error ;  and  in  oorrecting  this  error,  falls  as  a  rale  into
another — it  refers  the  experience  of  nature  to  a  spirit^
which  tarns  oat  to  be  only  the  solitary  finite  self.  The
logic  eyen  of  ^  absolute  idealism '  usoally  fails  here,  as
Professor  Howison  has  well  shown.^  The  corrective  of
both  this  natural  realism  and  this  solitary  idealism  must
be  found,  not  by  changing  the  venue  of  the  question  to
the  moral  consciousness,  but  by  an  appeal  from  natural
realism  to  a  realism  of  social  experience.

If,  then,  I  wish  in  simplest  fashion  to  find  my  f unda*
mental  social  experience,  let  me  consider  that  feature
of  experience  which  I  call  the  independence,  or  objec-
tivity, of  the  physical  world  about  me.  Let  me  consider
that  until  it  is  disabused  of  its  finality,  and  seen  to  be
open  to  challenge ;  let  me  consider  it  until  I  see  that  in
this  knowledge  (that  the  objectivity  there  has  a  further
account  to  give)  I  am  already  in  present  experience  of
that  Other  Mind  which  in  Nature  communicates  itself
to  me.  The  only  way  to  a  realism  of  social  experience
is  through  a  Non-realism  in  regard  to  the  surface  of
Nature.  What  we  reach  is  a  super-natural  Realism,  or
a  Social  Realism,  or  more  truly  a  Realism  of  the  Abso-
lute —  not  far  removed  from  Absolute  Idealism.

1  The  Coneeptaon  of  God,  Royoe,  La  Conle,  fiowiaoiiy  MeMf,  pmge
104,  ete.


CHAPTER  XXI

THE  GOD  OF  NATURE  AND  THE  KNOWLEDGE

OF  MAN

BUT  finally^  who  and  what  is  this  Subject,  to  which
we  have  been  referring  in  such  vague  terms  as  the
Other,  the  fundamental  social  object  ?

It  cannot  be  identified  with  any  particular  other  per-
sonality such  as  these  with  whom  I  enter  into  conver-
sation and  reach  various  stages  of  acquaintance  and
concrete  intercourse.  For  I  recog^nize  them  as  being
co-dependent  with  me  upon  this  same  Other  Mind
revealed  in  Nature.  In  this  intercourse  with  them  there
are  beginnings  and  endings ;  and  the  entrance  of  any
one  of  them  into  my  life  is  relatively  speaking  an  acci-
dent, making  unquestionable  historical  difference  in
that  general  fund  of  idea  with  which  I  regard  Nature,
but  not  determining  the  character  of  any  fact  of  Nature
such  as  he  and  I  might  be  called  upon  to  g^ve  common
witness  to.

Further,  my  knowledge  of  any  such  individual  per-
son is  uncertain,  with  varying  grades  of  uncertainty.
I  am  liable  to  mistake  at  many  points  in  interpreting
his  thoughts  and  experiences ;  I  may  be  mistaken  in  his
identity ;  I  may  even  be  mistaken  in  judgment  whether
a  conscious  subject  is  there  —  whether  any  given  phys-
ical object  is  a  body  to  an  Other  Mind.  I  never  know
how  much  of  my  physical  world  is  at  any  time  officiat-


292  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

ing  as  hodyy  and  how  much  is  only  environment.  I
have  no  absolute  assurance  of  these  minds  severally.
It  is  true  that  on  occasion  I  may  be  surer  of  the  reality
of  a  given  fellow  man  than  I  am  of  my  own :  I  may
call  upon  my  friend  to  assure  me  of  my  own  sanity,  by
acknowledging  as  real  for  him  also  an  object  of  mine
which  I  fear  may  be  an  hallucination.  But  I  am  more
likely  to  judge  his  sanity  by  his  assent  to  the  reality  of
objects  which  apart  from  him  I  regard  as  unquestionably
real. I  am  not  sure  of  these  fellow  minds  severally.

But  the  doubts  to  which  my  experience  of  individual
persons  is  liable  must  diminish  when  I  consider  them  not
separately  but  together.  The  reality  which  I  can  ques-
tion in  the  detached  person  becomes  substantial  in  groups
of  persons,  in  my  total  historical  context,  in  collective
humanity.  The  uncertainty  which  holds  against  any
one,  can  hardly  hold  against  the  whole.  May  not  this
fundamental  Other  Mind  of  which  we  are  in  search  be
simply  my  total  world  of  Others  in  its  collective  bearing
upon  me?

Such  a  world  of  other  spirits  does  not  come  and  go  ;
it  was  before  me,  and  shall  be  after  me.  Out  of  such
fellow  beings  and  the  world  which  they  have  built  up,
I  come ;  my  creation  is  theirs ;  and  to  such,  having
myself  shared  in  creation,  I  hand  on  the  same  world  to
be  perpetuated  as  humanity's  world.  Might  not  Nature
itself  be  conceived  as  an  expression  of  the  common
will  of  such  an  over-individual  or  composite  entity?
Through  this  physical  community  our  developing  inter-
course is  built  up  ;  through  it,  humanity  persists  in  its
own  being,  and  communicates  being,  from  generation  to
generation. Is  it  not  this  common  will  of  mankind,  or


KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  AND  OF  MAN 293

of  collective  spirit  generally^  of  which  in  Nature  I
become  aware  ?

There  are  not  wanting  observable  facts  of  our  social
consciousness  which  support  such  a  conjecture.  Fre-
quent intercourse  with  fellow  men  does  much  to  deter-
mine the  stability  of  physical  experience  in  comparison
with  the  world  of  imagination.  The  hermit,  the  lonely
sheep-driver,  is  likely  to  succumb  to  his  illusions,  living
with  them  in  preference  to  the  world  which  we  of  the
niajoriiy  caU  real.

The  explorer,  the  polar  traveller,  the  man  in  solitary
confinement,  find  the  feeling  of  unreality  a  more  com-
mon visitor  than  we  do  and  threatening  to  become  a
permanent  companion.  The  ^^established  character"
of  Nature  is  sharpest  where  men  are  thickest,  is  clearly
some  function  of  the  volume  of  our  empirical  conyer-
sation:  it  gives  the  impression  of  being  a  consensus
effect.

But  there  are  several  reasons  why  we  cannot  accept
this  theory  of  the  Other.  One  is  that  any  such  consen-
sus implies  a  prior  unity  ;  we  communicate  because  we
are  already  one,  —  a  proposition  which  is  as  valid  for  an
indefinite  number  of  communicators  as  it  is  for  any  two,
and  as  valid  for  present  humanity  and  past  humanity
as  for  any  two  contemporaries.  The  entire  individual-
ity and  permanence  of  Nature  implies  a  corresponding
individual  permanence  in  the  Subject  whose  commun-
icated being  this  Nature  is.  Upon  such  ultimate  unity
of  substance  the  unity  of  each  finite  self  is  based.

Further,  that  is  no  genuine  social  experience  which
is  not  known  as  such  by  the  participants. Two  beings,


294  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

we  have  said,  can  come  into  communication  only  if  thej
already  have  some  point  in  common :  but  if  the  beings
are  conscious  beings^  and  their  communication  is  to  be
conscious  communication,  we  may  specify  our  proposi-
tion thus,  That  two  conscious  beings  can  communicate
only  if  they  already  have  some  known  point  in  common,
some  object  known  by  each  as  object  to  both.  If  I
have  any  genuine  social  experience  at  all,  then  at  some
point  I  do  actually  know  the  Other  Mind  in  its  know-
ing  —  beyond  any  doubt  or  shifting  of  identity ;  beyond
any  possibility  of  error  in  the  intentional  character  of
the  experience — that  is,  in  the  address  of  the  communi-
cation to  me.  This  seems  a  great  deal  to  claim  of  the
experience  of  Other  Mind  in  Nature;  but  I  cannot
escape  these  conclusions.  And  I  see  clearly  that  there
is  in  no  assembly  of  fellow  minds  any  conscious  reference
of  Nature  to  me ;  as  I  see  that  I  have  no  conscious  part
in  presenting  my  world  of  objects  to  them.  It  is  use-
less to  appeal  to  subconscious  activity,  for  an  activity
that  is  unintended  is  not  my  own.

In  short,  we  are  all,  whether  singly  or  collectively,
empirical  knowers  of  Nature.  But  if  there  are  none
but  empirical  knowers  in  the  world  there  is  no  social
experience.  I  am  only  in  presence  of  an  Other  Mind
when  I  have  pressed  through  the  region  of  my  passiv-
ity, and  turning  its  comer,  have  come  upon  that  which
is  there  actively  and  intentionally  creating  me.

Even  were  there,  in  addition  to  all  visible  passive
knowers  in  the  world,  one  all-comprehensive  passive
knower,  we  should  be  no  nearer  a  conscious  unity.  For
unless  he  too  could  pierce  the  obstinacy  and  self-asser-
tiveness  of  the  world  confronting  him,  he  would  still  be,


KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  AND  OF  MAN 2d5

80  far  as  his  consciousness  is  concerned,  a  self-enclosed
being,  and  would  be  obliged  as  we  are  to  work  through
the  problem  of  that  dependence  to  a  knowledge  of  that
Other  on  which  he  depends.  There  is  no  sociality  for
any  knower,  so  we  now  discover,  until  the  objectivity  of
Nature  wins  its  further  meaning,  and  is  found  as  an
intentional  communication  of  a  Self  wholly  active.

It  may  be  that  the  more  we  press  the  conclusions  of
our  position,  the  less  we  shall  be  able  to  recognize  in
any  concrete  characters  of  our  own  experience,  the  ex*
perience  here  described.  We  have  made  all  social  experi-
ence depend  upon  a  conscious  knowledge  in  experience
of  a  being,  who  in  scope  and  power  might  well  be  identi-
fied with  God.  We  have  been  led  by  the  successive  re-
quirements of  our  logic  to  the  position  that  our  first  and
fundamental  social  experience  is  an  experience  of  God.
Where  in  our  continuous  current  consciousness  do  we
recognize  any  such  element  as  this  ?

Conspicuous  in  experience  such  knowledge  certainly
is  not;  and  as  permanent  knowledge,  with  which  we
forever  beg^n,  and  with  which  we  forever  think  our
world,  we  shall  not  expect  it  to  be  conspicuous.  It  will
be  present  for  the  most  part  in  no  other  form  than  as
the  abiding  sense  of  what  stability  and  certainty  we
have,  as  we  move  about  among  men  and  things ;  it  will
be  present  for  the  most  part  just  as  our  own  force  of
self-assertion  and  self-confidence  is  present,  that  force
by  which  we  individually  will  ^^  to  maintain  ourselves
in  being  "  in  a  world  known,  by  what  assurance  we  do
not  ordinarily  enquire,  to  be  no  hostile,  nor  ultimately
alien,  thing. It  will  be  present  chiefly  in  my  persistent


296  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

867186  of  recUity  in  that  with  which  I  am  dealing,  and
in  those  fellow  minds  with  whom  I  converse.  It  will
be  present  in  that  sense  of  reality  also  in  its  active
aspect ;  in  my  own  degree  of  what  we  have  called
'^  objectivity  of  mind/'  my  disposition  to  take  experi-
ence with  full  empirical  openne88,  breast-f orwardly,  ori-
ented by  the  universal  or  common  eye  which  the  fun-
damental God-consciousness  gives  me.  In  whatever  rigid
scientific  acceptance  of  fact  I  may  accomplish,  I  detect
the  degree  of  this  experience.  And  whatever  conscious^
ness  I  may  have  of  responsibility  and  dependence  are
workings  of  the  same  thing :  if  I  am  conscious  of  obliga-
tion closely  conjoined  with  the  simple  fact  of  my  exist-
ence ;  if  I  know  that  what  creativity  I  have  and  must
have  is  built  upon  a  continuous  docility;  in  thus  know-
ing I  am  conscious  though  but  indistinctly  of  my
Absolute  Other.

Inseparable  from  self-consciousness  is  this  experience,
and  discernible  in  all  the  dimensions  and  assertions  of
self-consciousness.  Grod  is  known  as  that  of  which  I
am  primarily  certain ;  and  being  certain,  am  certain  of
self  and  of  my  world  of  men  and  men's  objects.  I
shall  always  be  more  certain  that  God  is,  than  what
he  is :  it  is  the  age-long  problem  of  religion  to  bring  to
light  the  deeper  characters  of  this  fundamental  expe-
rience. But  the  starting  point  of  this  development
(which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  trace  in  some  rough
way)  is  no  mere  That  Which,  without  predicates.  Sub-
stance is  known  as  Subject :  reality  from  the  beginning
is  known  as  God.  The  idea  of  God  is  not  an  attribute
which  in  the  course  of  experience  I  come  to  attach  to
my  original  whole-idea :  the  unity  of  my  world  which


KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  AND  OP  MAN  297

makes  it  from  the  beginning  a  whole,  knowable  in  sim-
plicity, is  the  unity  of  other  Selfhood.

God  then  is  immediately  known,  and  permanently
known,  as  the  Other  Mind  which  in  creating  Nature
is  also  creating  me.  Of  this  knowledge  nothing  can
despoil  us ;  this  knowledge  has  never  been  wanting  to
the  self-knowing  mind  of  man.

Given  this  original  certainty  in  social  experience,  the
uncertainty  and  experimentation  in  the  knowledge  of
Other  Minds  generally  can  be  faced  with  some  confi-
dence ;  no  failures  here  can  require  a  ^'  retreat  into  the
subject " ;  I  can  never  whether  by  the  logic  of  my  own
defective  social  practice  or  reflection  be  shut  in  to  myself
alone,  a  monad  without  windows.  But  how  do  I  find
my  fellow  men  at  all  ? I  have  God ;  them  I  have  not.

I  answer  that  here  those  criteria  of  the  presence  of
other  minds  which  at  first  we  thought  could  not  give
us  what  we  required,  because  they  presupposed  the  idea
of  an  Other  Mind,  now  have  conferred  on  them  the
breath  of  life.  The  idea  is  in  our  possession ;  with  this
key  all  metaphors  of  mind  and  mind-relations  in
Nature  become  a  living  language.  I  am  in  possession  of
the  net  which  being  hung  out  in  experience  will  gather
in  what  ^^supplementation  of  my  own  fragmentary
meanings,"  what  response  to  my  questions,  may  be  dis-
coverable  there.  I  have  what  Fichte  calls  the  concept
of  a  concept  in  its  outward  appearance.  My  current
social  experience,  the  finding  of  any  fellow  finite  mind,
is  an  application  of  my  prior  idea  of  an  Other;  in  a
sense,  an  application  of  my  idea  of  God.  It  is  through
the  knowledge  of  God  that  I  am  able  to  know  men ;


HOW  KES  KKOW  GOO

notjirst  through  the  knowledge  of  men  that  I  am  able
to  know  or  imagine  God.

And  farther,  in  them  I  find  eomething  which  I
require  in  order  to  make  that  eongcionmeae  of  eompanion-
ship  wholly  actual  to  me.  I  have  some  need  to  i^ro-
duce  the  relation  to  God  in  a  visible  relationship  within
(jod^s  world.  Why  I  must  try  to  make  that  central
companionship  more  tangible  and  physical  I  do  not  here
enqnire ;  but  in  that  need,  whatever  it  is,  I  may  find  an
inkling  of  Grod's  own  motive  in  creating  just  sneh  a
sphere  of  things  as  this  visible  Natare-field,  in  which
spirits  wander  as  shapes  embedded.

Nor  is  this  applying  of  the  Grod-idea  to  these  shapes
wholly  onliteral.  For  Grod  is  not  apart  from  what  he
has  created.  We  have  found  God  only  in  the  relation
of  otherness  and  objectivity.  Grod  is  othei^ihan-me ;
also  other-than-my-f  ellow-Others.  We  have  deliberately
dwelt  upon  the  absolute  objectivity  of  God ;  or  rather,
have  chosen  to  come  to  the  recognition  of  Grod  in  the
absolute  object  of  knowledge.  But  we  have  not  been
unmindful  of  the  truth  that  Self  includes,  and  is  with,
its  objects,  in  so  far  as  it  comprehends  them,  or  is  cre-
ating them.  God,  then,  does  actually  include  me,  in  so
far  as  I  am  dependent  upon  him ;  does  likewise  include
those  fellow  Others,  in  so  far  as  they  also  are  his
created  work.

Nature  is  not,  as  I  experience  it,  a  consensus  effect,
due  to  the  wills  of  my  fellow  finite  spirits,  conscious  or
sulhconscious:  but  I  dare  not  say  that  their  presence
has  no  part  in  making  Nature  what  it  is,  even  to  my
experience.  For  Nature,  we  may  say,  is  the  region
where  this  system  of  minds  does  actually  coalesce.


KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  AND  OF  MAN  299

Space  does  not  reside  in  me,  nor  in  any  mind ;  but  in
all  minds  at  once.  In  space  and  time  and  their  contents
we  have  not  merely  common  objects y  we  have  a  region
of  literal  common  Mind.  It  is  not  that  we  are  each
so  constructed  after  a  common  pattern  called  Human
Nature,  with  certain  a  priori  ideas  or  forms  of  arrang-
ing experience,  that  given  certain  stimuli  at  our  nerve
ends  we  aU  do,  as  a  fact,  turn  out  the  same  world,  each
in  his  own  private  copy.  I  do  not  in  my  growth  make
up  a  new  space  and  a  new  causal  system  for  myself.
I  ddopt  them.  Space  and  Nature  are  numerically  one,
and  I  by  my  community  with  Other  Mind,  am  bom
inheritor  of  that  one  identical  object.  In  my  experience
of  Space  and  Nature  I  am  experiencing  identically  all
that  Other  Mind  which  is  contemplating  that  same
object ;  in  so  far,  I  have  an  infallible  element  in  my
knowledge  of  my  finite  comrades,  as  well  as  in  my
knowledge  of  God.

Existence  of  conscious  beings  begins,  then,  if  we  are
right,  with  intimate  sociality  and  dependence ;  growth
g^ves  to  each  conscious  being  powers  of  independent
world-building  and  creativity  generally.  This  present
existence,  we  say,  is  an  apprenticeship  in  creativity.
At  the  same  time  (and  as  part  of  the  same  fact)  we
acquire  the  power  of  solitude,  jutting  out  into  the  alone
—  alone  perhaps  even  with  reference  to  God.  Such  a
monism  as  this  of  ours  is  rather  more  favorable  to  per-
sonal freedom  and  enterprise  than  such  pluralisms  as
have  usually  been  defined.  For  we  do  not  begin  as  sol-
itary beings  and  then  acquire  community  :  we  begin
as  social  products,  and  acquire  the  arts  of  solitude  —


300  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

a  direction  of  prog^ress  more  hopeful  for  variety  and
origination  than  a  progress  in  the  reverse  direction.

In  applying  the  name  of  Grod  to  the  Other  Mind  which
in  sustaining  physical  experience  does  continually  create
and  communicate  itself  to  us,  we  have  gone  indeed
heyond  our  warrant.  We  have  not  here  the  concep-
tion of  God  in  its  fulness.  But  we  have  its  g^und-
work.  We  have  what  must  justify  the  animism  of  our
ancestors, — the  inevitable  animism  of  all  mankind ;
for  the  finding  of  spirit  in  Nature  is  but  the  finding
of  the  truth  as  continuously  experienced.

If  the  difficult  problem,  what  parts  of  Nature  are  to
be  regarded  as  body  of  Spirit,  and  what  only  as  envi-
ronment, is  not  early  solved ;  if  the  idea  of  Other  Mind
at  first  is  applied  too  indiscriminately ;  that  is  all  such
work  as  experience  may  well  take  time  to  perfect.
Nature,  we  find,  is  the  mediator  of  God,  par  excellence.
As  for  our  fellow  beings,  they  are  first  vessels,  recipi-
ent of  the  meaning  already  established  ;  and  then  sec-
ondarily mediators,  as  through  them  the  idea  of  God
receives  further  definition  and  content.  Meager  as  the
glimpse  of  Deity  may  be  which  is  opened  through  the
humble  channel  of  the  experience  of  physical  Nature,
even  through  sensation,  it  is  sufficient  to  initiate  that
long  course  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  which  mankind
has  found  its  highest  ambition.  But  before  glancing  at
the  outline  of  that  growing  knowledge  I  shall  ask  in
the  next  chapter  to  dwell  still  longer  among. these  severe
questions  of  truth  and  experience,  enquiring  by  what
other  ways  men  have  tried  to  secure  conscious  certainty
of  the  existence  (if  not  of  the  presence)  of  their  God.


CHAPTER  XXn

THE ONTOLOGICAL  AB6UMENT  FOR  THE

EXISTENCE OF  GOD

IN  our  search  for  other  Mind  we  came  upon  the
experience  of  God,  as  by  surprise.  We  were  looking
for  man,  and  we  found  God.  We  discovered  that  our
fellow  Mind  can  not  be  touched,  except  through  first
touching  God ;  that  the  one  point  in  which  we  do  break
through  to  unmistakable  knowledge  of  spirit  not  our-
self  is  here,  in  the  presence  to  experience  of  the  Abso-
lute as  Other  Mind.  Which  one  point  being  given,
all  the  rest  of  social  experience  with  its  endless  experi-
mentation, trial,  error,  and  infinite  acquired  skill,  can
follow.

We  have  first  found  God  as  a  God  of  physical  Nature,
a  God  through  Nature  creating  ourselves.  And  herein
lies  that  Uteralnesa  of  the  God-idea  which  we  have
thought  necessary  for  religion.  For  Nature  is  the
home  of  literalness.  To  be  literal  means  to  be  real
in  the  same  definite  and  particular  fashion  that  we  sur-
mise in  sensation,  and  realize  in  the  precise  work  of
physical  science.  Sensation  embodies  for  us  much  of
what  we  conceive  all  reality  ought  to  be  in  definiteness
and  vivid  individuality.  Nature  has  its  decisive  yea
or  nay  for  every  question  that  can  be  put  to  it.  We
would  not  lose  these  qualities  from  our  religious  con-
sciousness. And  we  do  not  lose  them  if  we  can  inter-


902  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

pret  the  whole  individaality  of  Nataie  as  one  with  the
iodividuality  of  Grod  in  its  commonicated  form.

Donbtless  we  feel  in  this  conception  at  once  the  de-
fects of  literalness  also,  —  a  certain  obnoxious  and  hum-
dram  levelling  of  religion  to  the  status  of  fact.  This
is  a  fault  of  emphasis :  it  is  the  literal  that  has  been
by  necessity  uppermost  in  our  discussion,  but  literalness,
of  course,  does  not  tell  the  whole  story  of  any  spirit's
existence.  It  is  merely  an  attribute  which,  among  the
rest,  we  should  sorely  miss  if  it  were  absent.  It  is  not
customary,  I  know,  to  seek  for  Grod  at  the  level  of  sen-
sation :  that  is  one  reason  why  it  has  seemed  to  me
important  to  have  found  him  there.  Sen»tion  may
supply,  as  it  were,  a  missing  dimension  to  our  thought
of  Grod.  Grod  must  now  be  to  us  not  less  real  and
present  than  Nature,  not  less  definitively  here  and
now  than  these  impressive  objective  Facts.

We  have  no  reason  to  think  slightingly  of  sensation,
or  to  refer  to  it  as  the  lowest  level  of  our  being.  It
marks,  in  many  ways,  the  line  of  our  limitation;
line  of  our  passivity  and  dependence;  line  oftentimes
of  intellectual  and  moral  defeat;  a  region  which  self
and  idea  fail  to  penetrate;  but  by  that  same  sign
containing  the  soil  and  air  of  the  future.  The  line
of  our  limitation  may  be,  if  we  will,  the  line  where
we  meet  GU>d.  Where  should  we  more  expect  to  meet
him?

We  have  not  been  expressly  undertaking  a  proof  of
the  existence  of  Grod.  But  in  finding  God  as  a  neces-
sary object  of  experience,  have  we  not,  in  a  way  suffi-
eient  and  decisive,  proved  his  existence  ? What  other


THE  0NT0L06ICAL  AB6UMENT  303

final  proof  can  we  have  that  any  being  exists  than  to
find,  or  demonstrate^  that  Being  in  experience?  For
my  power  of  recognizing  existence  is  summed  up  in
the  word  experience.

Stilly  this  again  has  not  been  the  usual  procedure  of
those  who  have  tried  to  reach  conscious  assurance  that
there  is  a  God.  Proving  God  has  usually  meant  rea-
soning away  to  God,  by  making  speculative  connections
between  the  world  that  now  is  and  its  unseen  author  or
destiny.  And  if  we  believe  with  Kant,  and  with  many
another,  that  God  is  not  to  be  found  in  experience,  there
are  none  but  such  speculative  connections  to  be  made.
We  have  thought,  however,  that  experience  is  essen-
tiaUy  metaphysical,  —  the  place  in  which  we  meet  Real-
ity; in  experience  we  are  ^'taught,"  our  errors  are
corrected,  our  true  ideas  confirmed,  by  what  else  than
by  Reality  ?  In  common  action  we  are  dealing  with  the
passing,  —  and  with  the  Absolute:  and  it  is  for  us
to  recognize  that  Absolute  as  Spirit.  The  course  of
discovery  which  leads  to  that  recognition — this  will  be
our  interpretation  of  the  process  of  ^' proof  ''  of  Grod's
existence.

Such  proof  is  but  a  clearing  of  the  mind,  so  that
experience  may  be  recognized  for  what  it  is :  it  is  a
banishing  of  illusions,  a  consideration  of  what  we  may
expect  to  find,  and  could  wish  to  find ;  and  a  noting
that  this  wish  of  ours  corresponds  to  experience  as  we
have  it.  Proof,  in  this  sense,  does  but  follow  the  route
of  prayer,  —  which  also  is  a  ^'  lifting  of  the  mind  to
God  " ;  not  in  any  sense  equivalent  to  prayer,  but  mak-
ing evident  that  filament  of  wholly  objective  relatedness
between  man  and  God  which  (as  a  minimal  core  of  com-


904  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

munity)  must  lie  at  the  center  of  all  ventures  toward
further  and  moral  relationship.

What  such  proof  assumes  is  simply  that  God  and
the  world  do  stand  in  permanent  organic  relationship,
and  that  the  traces  of  this  relationship  cannot  be  lack-
ing in  experience.  Proof,  in  this  sense,  is  a  necessary
concern  of  religion ;  whose  function  is  to  make  the  way
to  God  plain  to  all  men,  to  escape  from  the  accidental
and  the  fortuitous,  to  establish  universal  and  conscious
intercourse  between  the  human  and  the  divine.  Proof
in  set  terms  has  never  been  the  work  of  religion ;  for
religion  knows  how  to  convey  proof,  or  demonstration,  in
the  form  of  deeds.  Religion  practically  and  personally
points  men  to  God ;  let  philosophy  g^ive  men  the  con-
scious possession  and  certainty  of  this  which  religion
has  in  deed  established.  The  proof  of  God,  we  may
say,  is  the  good  faith  of  man  with  regard  to  religion.
It  is  not  a  thing  with  which  religion  can  dispense ;  nor
has  religion  ever  been  willing  to  forgo  it.

If  proof,  then,  is  the  finding  of  the  way  to  God  from
where  one  at  any  time  consciously  stands,  the  proofs
may  be  as  many  as  the  standpoints  are  many.  But  in
so  far  as  we  can  describe  in  general  terms  the  conscious
situation  of  all  men,  there  is  but  one  way  to  Grod,  and
one  proof.  We  shall  attempt  to  make  clear  in  this
chapter  the  nature  of  that  proof  in  the  barest  possible
sketch,  — and  after  all  is  there  not  some  keen  and  pro-
per satisfaction  in  the  utmost  bareness  of  statement,
when  a  truth  has  once  been  grasped  as  truth  ?

Nature  appears  to  men  as  their  most  general  bond
of  community. Nature  also  appears  as  existence  par


THE  ONTOLOGICAL  ARGUMENT  "^ 305

excellence.  When  we  lose  sight  of  God,  Nature  becomes
our  standard  of  reality.  If  we  have  a  God  we  should
like  to  make  his  existence  as  sure  as  that !  Hence  it  is
that  most  attempts  at  proof  of  God  have  begun  with
Nature,  and  have  tried  to  make  his  existence  secure  by
showing  him  in  some  valid  connection  with  this  world,
such  as  that  of  cause  to  the  world  as  effect.  God  as
cause  of  the  world  would  be  real  even  as  the  world  is
real.  The  so-called  cosmological  argument  follows  this
line  of  connection,  and  finds  that  the  world  has  a  single
conscious  cause,  itself  uncaused,  who  is  God.

If  we  wish  to  be  assured  that  this  cause  is  not  only  a
voluntary  cause  but  a  benevolent  one  as  well,  we  make
a  premise  of  the  good  which  as  experienced  in  the
world  is  our  natural  type  of  goodness;  and  we  find  that
the  intender  of  this  is  good  even  as  the  result  is  good.

But  by  these  means  we  do  not  find  God.  If  we
could  prove  a  first  and  conscious  cause,  still  we  could
prove  only  such  cause  as  is  equivalent  to  his  effect ;  we
could  prove  only  such  goodness  as  is  eqtiivalent  to  this
mixture  of  goodness  and  evil  that  we  here  find.  A  very
limited  Being  would  this  be,  a  God  who  is  only  as  great
as  his  world,  only  as  good,  and  finally  only  as  real.

By  such  ways  we  can  only  reach  a  being  in  whom  the
qualities  of  experience  are  refunded,  without  change  or
heightening.  But  in  such  case,  we  may  as  well  believe
in  the  world  as  we  find  it ;  and  proceed  with  our  work
of  mastering  it,  without  reference  to  God.

Such  proofs  are  not  wholly  true  to  the  spirit  of  reli-
gion ;  for  historically  men  have  lifted  their  minds  to  God
rather  because  the  world  is  unsatisfactory,  than  because
it  satisfies. We  wish  a  God  who  is  greater  than  the


a06  flow  MEN  KNOW  GOD

worlds  also  better  tluui  the  world  as  found,  and  also
more  reaL

And  such  more  perfect  being  is  what  these  proofs  have
in  spirit  sought :  for  in  referring  the  world  to  a  conscious
Will,  they  have  meant  to  imply  that  Will  is  greater  than
Nature ;  and  in  making  the  world  dependent  upon  a  di-
vine Purpose  they  have  intended  to  show  that  the  Good
is  more  real  than  the  evil,  and  will  vindicate  itself.  But
clearly  no  such  results  can  be  gained  by  taking  Nature
as  a  standard  and  moving  toward  God  by  relations  of
causality  or  purpose :  these  relations  can  rise  no  higher
than  their  source.  It  is  the  denial  of  that  assumed
starting^int  that  is  the  intellectual  heart  of  religion.

On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  dispense  with  the  world
as  a  point  of  beginning  for  the  reasons  given.  What
other  way,  then,  can  be  found  of  relating  this  world  to
God  ?  Follow  the  history  of  religion.  Observe  the
Mind  dissatisfied  with  its  world.  Note  the  criticism
which  it  makes  of  Nature,  as  less  than  self-sufficient,
less  than  all-good,  less  than  real.  And  note  that  of
a  sudden  it  has  claimed  to  possess  the  self-sufficient,
the  good,  the  real.  What  has  occurred  to  the  mind
of  man  ?

It  may  seem  as  though  that  with  which  man  had  been
criticizing  his  experience,  namely,  his  idea  of  a  better
and  more  real,  had  in  a  moment  taken  on  obiective  shape
to  him.  His  dissatisfaction  with  his  world  has  i»pli^
a  conception  of  a  world  not  thus  defective,  and  this  con-
ception has  been  set  up  as  substantial  fact,  in  his  idea  of
God.  He  has  turned  his  idea  into  a  reality ;  or  he  has
instinctively  assigned  a  reality  to  his  idea,  yet  without
blurring  the  features  of  his  actual  world. It  is  some


THE  ONTOLOGICAL  ARGUMENT  307

leap  from  idea  to  reality  that  constitutes  the  essential
historic  movement  of  the  mind  to  God.

Now  it  is  jast  this  leap  from  idea  to  reality  that  dis-
tinguishes an  ancient  proof  of  God's  existence ;  a  proof
which  has  become  known  as  the  ^'  ontological  arg^ument/'
the  argument  which  assigns  a  real  or  ontological  value  to
an  idea. I  have  an  idea  of  God :  therefore  God  exists.

In  general,  the  circumstance  that  I  have  an  idea  of  an
object  is  the  emptiest  of  reasons  for  supposing  that  object
to  exist.  Whatever  force  such  reasoning  can  have  must
depend  on  some  peculiarities  of  the  idea  of  God,  not  found
in  ideas  or  ideals  generally.  It  must  be  shown,  as
we  tried  to  show  of  the  idea  of  Other  Mind,  that  this
idea  has  something  unique  about  it  which  forbids  the
supposition  that  it  is  a  ^'  mere  idea/'  This,  with  various
degrees  of  success,  have  the  thinkers  who  resort  to  the
ontological  argument  —  from  Augustine  and  Anselm
to  Hegel  and  Royce — tried  to  do.  It  is  always  with
some  incredulity  that  we  meet  the  assertion  that  any
idea  of  ours  carries  with  it  its  own  guarantee  of  reality.
Yet  this  same  ontological  argument  is  the  only  one  which
is  wholly  faithful  to  the  history,  the  anthropology,  of
religion. It  is  the  only  proof  of  God.

Although  an  idea  which  should  carry  on  its  face  an
assurance  of  reality  must  have  something  unique  about
it,  we  are  not  without  analogies  which  may  help  to
interpret  this  extraordinary  type  of  argument.  The  idea
of  God  is  not  the  only  one  of  our  ideas  which  seems  to
convey  an  assurance  of  objectivity.  My  idea  of  space,
for  example,  I  incline  to  regard  as  real.  Of  my  idea  of
causality,  I  can  hardly  think  that  it  is  an  idea  only,  a


806  HOW  M£N  KNOW  GOD

form  of  relating  events  without  an  objective  counterpart.
So  also  with  the  beauty  of  things,  or  their  goodness ;
I  know  that  these  are  ideas  of  mine,  and  yet  as  I  regard
these  qualities  valid  for  other  viewers  of  the  same  objects,
I  attribute  these  qualities  to  the  objects.  Instinctively
also  we  project  beyond  ourselves,  or  repudiate  in  some
way  as  not  our  own,  whatever  in  idea  is  new,  whatever
is  sublime  and  holy,  whatever  is  obligatory,  whatever
strikes  me  with  a  consciousness  of  my  self  as  a  lesser
thing.  Even  self -consciousness  seems  to  come,  at  times,
as  a  revelation  from  beyond  myself.  It  is  not  without
precedent,  then,  that  an  idea  should  convey  with  itself
some  apparent  title  to  reality  :  it  is  not  impossible  that
some  idea,  as  perchance  the  idea  of  God,  should  be  able
to  make  this  title  good.

Let  us  examine  this  movement  of  thought  more
nearly.  Nature  must  early  have  appeared  to  man  as
somewhat  less  than  real  —  else  those  early  speculations
with  regard  to  a  creator  or  maker  would  hardly  have
occurred  to  him.  At  the  root  of  all  these  awkward
conceptions  regarding  clay-shaping  or  egg-laying  or
spewing  or  magic-word-pronouncing  deities  lies  an
uneasy  persuasion  that  the  things  of  physical  existence
are  subject  to  something;  and  to  something  of  the
quality  of  human  spirit.  If  Nature  ever  wore  to  early
man  that  aspect  which  seems  primary  to  us  —  the
aspect  of  self-sufficiency  f  it  must  have  gone  hand  in  hand
with  a  quite  contrary  aspect — that  of  being  illusory ,
also  possible  to  us,  though  with  some  effort.

We  may  find  that  illusory  aspect  by  such  consid-
erations as  these :  The  appearance  of  self-suflBiciency
belongs  not  more  to  Nature  as  a  whole  than  to  each  thing


THE  ONTOLOGICAL  ARGUMENT  909

in  Nature.  By  that  same  view  which  shows  us  Nature
as  there  in  its  own  rights  is  also  each  thing  there  in
ite  own  right.  But  with  regard  to  the  several  things
in  Nature  we  know  that  this  appearance  is  not  true.
The  apparent  self-sufficiency  of  single  things  if  real
would  make  the  World  an  agg^*egate  in  which  every
thing  went  its  own  way  without  regard  to  another :  self-
sufficiency  of  the  parts  is  equivalent  to  acddentality .
Each  thing  is  in  reality  infinitely  dependent  on  all
the  rest.  But  with  the  banishment  of  self-sufficiency
in  the  parts^  there  is  no  retaining  of  it  in  the  Whole :
there  is  nothing  in  which  this  infinite  dependence  of
part  on  part  comes  to  rest,  unless  I  conceive  the  whole
thing  as  dependent  on  my  Selfy  dream-fashion, —  deriv-
ing its  reality,  so  to  speak,  from  the  center  outward,
rather  than  from  inaccessible  infinitely  distant  world-
borders  and  beginnings  inward.  The  world  is  real  I
now  say  simply  as  my  experience  —  a  not-unheard-of
point  of  view.  The  self-sufficient  world  of  Nature
has  suddenly  become  an  illusion.

Yet  I  cannot  rest  here ;  because  I  know  that  I  am
not  the  source  of  the  reality  of  Nature.  True,  if  I  am
not  real,  nothing  is  real :  something  in  my  conception
of  reality  starts  from  me;  and  all  my  objects  become
real,  as  by  infection  from  that.  But  true  it  is,  likewise,
that  unless  Nature  is  real,  nothing  is  real :  something
in  my  conception  of  reality  is  borne  in  upon  me  from
beyond.  I  am  real,  in  part,  by  virtue  of  what  is  not-
myself.  The  real  must  partake  of  the  qualities  of
myself  and  of  Nature ;  and  must  be  other  than  either.  0^  ?

Through  this  experience  of  cognitive  restlessness  (or ^
^  dialectic ")  early  man,  to  whom  the  illusory  side  of


310  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

Nature  was  more  familiar  probably  than  to  us,  may  have
passed  in  his  own  readier  way ;  he  finds  as  his  resting
place  the  real  as  Creative  Spirit.  Nature  settles  into
its  third  stage  of  regard :  it  is  neither  self-sufficient  nor
illusory ;  it  has  derivative  reality.  As  over  against  me,
it  is  real ;  as  over  against  the  Creative  Spirit,  it  is  not
real.  But  how  is  this  conception  hit  upon  ?  May  it
be  that  this  thought  of  Nature  as  dependent  on  Spirit
is  some  quick  embodiment  of  an  elusive  but  genuine
experience  ?  This  idea  of  a  creator  does  indeed  quickly
float  away  from  any  experience  it  may  have  sprung  from;
becoming  promptly  materialized  and  set  in  the  sky  as
part  of  the  world-created  —  removed  from  that  World,
yet  all  too  much  involved  in  it.  Yet  may  it  be  that  tkis
idea  is  one  which  must  have  reality  ?

Must  it  not  be  so?  For  one  thing  I  cannot  by  any
means  escape :  namely,  that  reality  itself  is  present  to
me  in  experience ;  and  all  of  this  process  of  judging
this  and  that  thing  to  be  unreal  or  less  than  real  is  made
possible  simply  by  the  g^rasp  of  that  reality  which  at
any  moment  I  have.  My  negations  are  made  possible
by  my  one  secure  position;  and  as  my  hold  on  reality
is  variable,  so  my  ability  to  see  through  the  various
pretenders-to-reality  to  reality  itself  will  vary.  Nature
can  only  appear  to  me  as  illusory  in  some  moment  of
unusual  clearness  of  perception ;  for  ordinarily  the  pre-
tence of  nature  to  be  self-sufficient  is  a  harmless  and
even  useful  simplification  of  my  view.  So  if  my  own
existence  is  recognized  by  me  in  some  moment  as  a
partial  and  dependent  existence,  that  recognition  is  a
moment  of  ^^  illumination,"  in  which  the  relation  of  my
self  to  what  is  beyond  my  self  becomes  presently  dis-


THE  ONTOLOGICAL  ARGUMENT  311

tinot :  and  in  grasping  this  relation,  I  am  catching  some
fleeting  glimpse  of  the  terms  between  which  the  rela-
tion exists.  I  am  experiencing  that  which  is  beyond
myself  in  no  wise  differently  than  in  that  moment  I  am
experiencing  myself:  and  my  judgment  of  dependence
is  made  possible  by  a  positive  and  present  knowledge  of
that  upon  which  I  depend.

If,  then,  I  discover  that  my  world  of  nature  and  self,
taken  severally  or  together,  falls  short;  of  reality,  this  dis-
covery is  due  to  what  I  know  of  reality — not  abstractly,
but  in  experience.  If  I  judge  this  system  of  nature-and-
self  to  be  non-self-sufficient,  it  is  by  a  knowledge  of  the
self-sufficient ;  if  I  condemn,  it  is  by  virtue  of  something
in  my  possession  not  subject  to  condemnation ;  if  I  crit-
icize and  correct,  it  is  by  comparison  with  or  reference
to  some  present  object  not  subject  to  criticism  and  cor*
rection.  When  I  perceive  myself  in  this  curious  rela-
tion to  the  world  of  physical  facts  —  superior  and  not
superior,  creative  and  unable  to  create  —  that  play  of
unrest  is  due  to,  and  is  defining,  a  simultaneous  percep-
tion of  the  object  to  which  this  unrest  does  not  apply.
The  positive  content  which  I  g^ve  to  that  absolute  object
is  a  report  of  experience ;  whatever  idea  I  make  of  it  is
an  idea  derived  nowhere  but  from  that  experience.  If
I  am  able  to  frame  a  tenable  conception  of  nature  in
dependence  upon  a  creative  spirit  not  myself,  that  con-
ception is  true ;  for  my  idea  can  set  me  outside  of  nature
only  as  in  experience  I  have  already  broken  away  from
the  spell  of  the  natural  world.  In  whatever  sense,  then^
I  am  able  to  conceive  nature  as  dependent  upon  spirit,
in  that  sense  nature  is  dependent  upon  spirit.  This  idea
earries  its  reality  with  it.


812  HOW  M£N  KNOW  GOD

It  is  impossible  that  my  idea  should  be  a  ^'mere**
idea,  for  it  is  only  possible  for  me  to  take  this  stand-
pointy  external  to  nature  and  myself ,  in  idea  in  so  far  as
I  do  at  the  same  time  take  it  in  experience  also.  And
that  this  experience  of  a  more  valid  reality  than  that  of
nature  is  truly  described  as  an  experience  of  other  mind,
we  have  in  our  previous  chapter  su£Biciently  dwelt  upon.
The  ontological  argument  may  be  regarded  as  a  logi-
cal epitome  of  what  we  there,  in  our  own  independent
research,  came  upon/  The  ontological  argument,  in  its
true  form,  is  a  report  of  experience.

If  we  wished,  in  briefest  compass,  to  state  the  antith-
esis between  the  ontological  argument  and  other  argu-
ments for  the  existence  of  a  God,  we  might  put  the
situation  thus :

These  other  arguments  reason  that  because  the  world
is-  Ood  is.  The  ontological  argument  reasons  that
became  the  world  is  noty  God  is.  It  is  not  from  the
world  as  a  stable  premise  that  we  can  proceed  to  God
as  a  conclusion  :  it  is  rather  when  the  world  ceases  to
satisfy  us  as  a  prembe,  and  appears  as  a  conclusion  from
something  more  substantial,  that  we  find  God  —  pro-
ceeding then  from  the  world  as  a  conclusion  to  God  as
a  premise.  We  have  no  other  premise  to  begin  with :  no
proof  of  God  can  be  deductive.  It  is  because  neither  my
world  nor  myself  can  serve  as  a  foundation  for  thought
and  action  that  I  must  grope  for  a  deeper  foundation.

^  Here  the  abstract  argument  of  a  former  part  of  the  book  (ch.  zli)
maintainiDg  the  need  of  religion  for  basis  in  an  independent  realit j,  begins
to  reoeire  its  concrete  filling.  I  may  again  refer  the  reader  for  farther
illustration  of  this  logical  situation  to  the  appended  essay  on  "  The  Knowl*
edge  of  Independent  Reality."


THE  ONTOLOGICAL  ARGUMENT  813

And  what  I  learn  in  this  groping  is,  that  my  conscious-
ness of  those  defects  will  reveal,  though  in  faintest  de-
gree, the  positive  object  which  is  free  therefrom.  It  is
because  we  cannot  infer  from  nature  to  God  along  causal
or  other  natural  lines,  and  only  because  of  this,  that  the
idea  of  God  implies  existence.

It  is  not  every  historical  form  of  the  ontological  argu-
ment that  has  expressed  this  experience :  and  not
every  form  of  it  appears  to  me  valid.  It  does  not  seem
to  me  that  any  abstract  idea  of  an  ^^  all-perfect  being  "
must  necessarily  be  real.  Nor  does  it  seem  to  me  that
we  are  justified  in  inferring  from  any  idea  to  its  reality
unless  that  reality  can  be  present  to  the  idea  in  experi-
ence. No  form  of  the  argument  can  be  valid  which  finds
God  at  the  level  of  thought  only,  and  not  at  the  level  of
sensation.  We  are  only  justified  in  attributing  reality
to  an  idea  if  reality  is  already  present  in  the  discovery  of
the  idea.  When  in  our  search  for  reality  we  fix  atten-
tion upon  Nature,  it  is  because  we  already  know  that
whatever  reality  is,  it  cannot  be  out  of  connection  with
that  world  of  Nature-experience :  and  when  we  judge
Nature  unreal,  it  is  only  as  we  discover  at  the  same  time
in  concrete  way  how  Nature  is  related  to  the  Real.  I
can  infer  from  that  idea  by  which  I  criticize  Nature  to
the  reality  of  that  idea  only  because  I  know  Nature  (and
Self)  to  contain  some  characters  of  reality  that  cannot
be  omitted,  or  left  behind.  My  real  must  already  be
given,  in  order  that  my  idea  may  be  found  real.  The
true  idea  of  God  is  not  one  which  can  leave  out  either
Nature  or  myself ;  if  my  idea  of  God  is  real,  it  is  real
in  experience. Hence  I  have  preferred  to  state  the


314  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

argument  not  thus :  I  have  an  idea  of  God^  therefore
God  exists.  But  rather  thus :  I  have  an  idea  of  Grod,
therefore  I  have  an  experience  of  GtMl.

Reality  can  only  be  proved  by  the  ontological  argu-
ment ;  and  conversely,  the  ontological  argument  can  only
be  applied  to  reality.  But  in  so  far  as  reality  dwells  in
Self,  or  Other  Mind,  or  Nature,  an  ontological  argu-
ment may  be  stated  in  proof  of  their  existence.  Thus,
the  Cartesian  certitude  may  with  greater  validity  be  put
into  this  form :

I  think  myself,  therefore  I  ^st;  or

I  have  an  idea  of  Self,  Self  exists.
For  in  thinking  myself  I  find  myself  in  experience  and
thus  in  living  relation  to  that  reality  which  experience
presents. So  may  it  be  with  Nature :

I  have  an  idea  of  physical  Nature,  Nature  exists.
That  is,  in  whatever  sense  I  conceive  Nature,  in  that
sense  physical  nature  is  real.  Idealism  has  wavered
much  in  its  judgement  regarding  the  reality  of  Nature,
and  of  '^material  substance.''  It  has  said  that  we  have
no  idea  of  matter ;  and  again  it  has  said  that  matter
does  not  exist,  which  implies  that  we  have  an  idea  of  it.
Some  meaning,  however,  we  do  attribute  to  the  word
matter ;  and  without  enquiring  what  that  definable  mean-
ing may  be,  we  may  say  in  advance  that  whatever  idea
is  framable  corresponds  to  reality  as  experienced.  We
need  not  fear  that  this  realism  of  Nature  will  detach
Nature  from  God;  though  if  we  could  think  it  so
detached  it  would  doubtless  so  exist.  For  of  independ-
ence also,  in  whatever  sense  I  can  think  the  independ-
ence of  beings,  in  that  sense  independence  obtains
between  them. That  which  is  most  independent  of  me.


THE  ONTOLOGICAL  ARGUMENT  316

namely  the  Other  Mindy  has  been  the  first  object  of  our
ontological  findings.  The  object  of  certain  knowledge
has  this  threefold  structure^  Self,  Nature,  and  Other
Mind;  and  God,  the  appropriate  object  of  ontological
proof,  includes  these  three.

And  is  not,  after  all,  this  same  ancient  ontological
argument  the  great  and  timely  necessity  for  man  in
all  his  thinking?  That  which  permanently  threatens
all  our  thinking  is  the  damning  commentary,  ^^mere
thought "  —  our  own  commentary  on  our  own  work,
especially  upon  our  own  religion.  Escape  from  illu-
sion is  what  we  require,  whether  in  dealing  with  God  or
man  or  nature ;  escape  from  phantasmal  intercourse,  from
subjective  prisons  from  whose  walls  words  and  prayers
rebound  without  outer  effect.  Idea  we  must  have  if  we
think;  but  an  adequate  realism  for  our  idea  we  must
also  have.  We  shall  never  be  too  fully  assured  that
our  idea  has  reached  beyond  ourself ,  and  has  its  ground
in  that  which  is  not  ourself.

Any  reflection  that  can  infallibly  break  the  walls  of
the  Self,  opens  up  at  once  an  infinite  World-field.  Set
a  second  to  my  One,  and  I  have  given  all  the  numbers.
A  single  point  outside  the  circle  of  ^^  BewuBstsems-
imrnanenZy*  and  I  am  free  to  open  myself  to  all  reality
and  to  all  men.  It  is  this  point  that  the  ontological
argument  aims  to  put  into  our  possession  ;  the  reflection
which  this  argument  embodies  is  the  only,  and  wholly
simple,  defence  against  our  besetting  subjectivity.  '^  Be-
think thyself  of  the  gpround  whereon  thou  standest.  By
what  idea  hast  thou  judged  thy  thought  to  be  illusion,
and  mere  subjectivity  ? Is  it  not  by  an  idea  of  some-


316  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

thing  wholly  actual  and  immediate  ?  Is  not  that  Real-
ity thy  own  present  possession?''

This  present  actuality  of  experience,  ^^  pure  experi-
ence/' finds  me  in  living  relation  with  that  which  is
most  utterly  not-myself .  Here,  in  the  immediate,  is  my
absolute  escape  from  immediacy.  Here  in  the  given
present  is  my  escape  from  myself,  my  window  opening
upon  infinity,  my  exit  into  God.  Religion  thus  becomes
the  concrete  bond  between  men ;  for  he  who  has  con-
sciously found  his  way  to  God,  has  found  his  way  to
man  also.

Thus  it  is  that  idea  may  give  back  the  reality  of
which  idea  is  forever  robbing  us ;  for  while  idea  is  the
greatest  enemy  of  the  actual,  it  is  only  through  idea
that  idea  can  be  held  firmly  to  its  compelling  and  con-
trolling object,  the  real  as  found  in  experience.


CHAPTER  XXm

DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD

MAN  knows  well  that  he  is  not  alone :  he  does  not
so  well  know  in  what  companionship  he  is.  The
knowledge  of  the  presence  of  spirit  beyond  self  is  no
conjecture ;  nor  does  this  social  experience  ever  arise.
Man's  world  is  from  the  first  a  living  worlds  even  a
divine  world;  and  primitive  animism  is  in  so  far  no
mere  theory^  but  a  report  of  certain  and  intimate  expe-
rience. There  are  no  dead  things  in  that  early  world
of  swarming  spirits.

But  this,  we  think,  is  at  once  its  glory  and  its  chief
defect.  The  idea  of  Other  Mind  is  applied  too  indis-
criminately, and  in  too  petty  a  fashion.  The  conception
of  the  inanimate  is  one  we  have  had  to  work  for.  The
growth  of  social  intelligence  is  in  the  direction  of  clear"
ing  away  the  exuberance  of  animtBj  of  charting  certain
large  tracts  of  Nature  which  we  may  regard  as  uninhabited,
and  hence  subject  to  unlimited  remorseless  exploitation.
We  require — not  so  much  for  free  movement  as  for
free-hearted  movement — a  belief  in  the  dead:  we  need
to  know  Nature  as  very  largely  environment^  and  very
little  body-of-Mind ;  we  need  to  regard  the  phenomena
of  physical  fact  for  the  most  part  as  essentially  the
world  of  objects,  of  things  intended  rather  than  of
intentions,  mine  of  meanings  to  be  dug  out,  veil  of
osmosis  between  humanity  and  Creative  Spirit  gener-


318  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

ally — haying  no  intrinsic  claim  on  deference  for  its
own  sake.

We  find  it  even  now  hard  enongh  to  decide,  as  we
pass  down  the  scale  of  organisms  and  therefrom  into
the  inorganic  world,  where  animation  ceases — or  whether
it  ceases.  Even  of  such  conquests  as  we  have  made,
our  sense  of  continuity — and  doctrines  of  panpsychism
— are  willing  to  deprive  us.  It  is  hard  to  conceive  that
the  living^ess  of  micro-organisms  is  to  be  traced  back-
ward, not  to  the  atoms  and  molecules  which  have  been
synthesized  in  their  protoplasm,^  but  to  the  whole  liv-
ing  world  itself.  Tet  this  way  lies  prog^ss.  Not  all
the  world  is  body ;  not  every  unit  our  fancy  outlines  as
One  Thing  is  the  metaphor  of  an  individual  spirit.  Our
animistic  world  must  be  clarified,  and  its  life  concen-
trated in  more  definite  foci ;  gaining  at  once  in  meaning
and  in  character.

This  is,  I  suppose,  the  sense  of  the  advance  by  which
man  gets  himself  gods  in  place  of  spirits  only.  Spirits
are  mere  flashes  of  divine  life  breaking  out  here  and
there,  spot-wise,  in  Nature  and  in  human  event,  as  we
have  seen.  They  float  with  the  stream  of  event,  pass
with  the  event,  are  numerous  as  the  events  are  numerous,
have  no  persistent  individuality,  are  remembered  only
as  a  shock  or  an  excitement  is  remembered,  take  alto-
gether the  character  of  the  historic  medium  in  which
they  are  found.  There  are  no  gods  here.  Nor  can  there
be  gods  until  man  in  some  way  begins  to  think.  He
must  get  his  world  into  more  general  unities  by  clas-
sifying and  speculating :  he  must  see  similarities  in  the
forces  of  light  and  storm  and  sea,  in  the  life-producing

1  See  for  example  Verwonit  Proftitefuf iMftm.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 319

agencies  of  plant  and  animal  and  man;  and^  perhaps
with  the  division  of  labor  in  his  own  societies,  he  must
conceive  the  functions  of  the  spirits,  and  assign  a  recur-
ring though  intermittent  function  (healing,  or  luck
of  chase,  or  boundary-protection,  or  sending  of  sons)
to  a  special,  or  at  least  continuous,  spiritual  agency.
Thus  arise  functional  deities,  and  causal  deities,  and
deities  presiding  over  the  three  or  four  great  spheres
of  Nature,  heaven,  earth,  sky,  water;  and  even  deities
of  species — as  of  tree-life  in  general  or  of  fox-life  or  of
eagle-life,  deities  which  pass  from  one  fox  or  eagle  to
another  on.  the  death  or  sacrifice  of  the  one,  from  the
whole  of  a  field  to  its  last  sheaf  as  the  harvesting
progresses,  and  then — reappear  next  year  in  the  next
crop.  All  these  take  the  place  of  the  fitful  spirits  of  par-
ticular objects  and  events,  not  without  aid  from  all  the
agencies  of  man's  gp'owing  culture  which  are  fostering
this  thinking  process;  and  man  finds  himself  supplied
with  gods.

But  there  is  one  other  character  of  a  god,  lacking
to  spirits,  beside  these  of  continuous  individuality,  wide
scope,  and  definite  function  or  group  of  functions.  The
god  is  addressed:  men  use  toward  the  god  the  vocative
case;  use  "Thou"  and  not  only  "It"  or  "He."  The
god  having  a  continuous  character  may  also  support  a
definite  relationship,  even  an.  institution  of  intercourse
In  gaining  a  more  general  scope,  the  god  has  loosened
his  attachment  to  particular  physical  objects;  but  he
never  completely  detaches  himself  from  the  tangible:
he  resides,  perhaps  voluntarily,  in  some  special  place  or
thing — and  this  relic  and  clue  to  the  god,  seems  to
serve  as  the  means  of  approach,  physical  and  mental.


920  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

Through  his  holy  place,  his  temple,  his  pillar,  his  image^
his  altar,  his  ark,  the  spirit  becomes  an  historic  god^
worshipable  by  an  historic  people  in  definite  institu-
tional ways.

Herewith  the  way  is  opened  for  a  new  method  of
progress  in  divine  knowledge, — the  method  of  experi-
ment: the  god's  dealings  with  his  worshippers  become
matter  of  record  in  tradition :  and  slow  as  men  are  to
learn  new  things  about  deity,  or  to  give  up  old  ones,  there
is  a  whoUy  verifiable  process  of  elimination  and  survival
of  ideas  about  God,  predicates  of  God,  in  religions  which
have  attained  the  historic  stage.  With  the  acquisition
of  a  god  in  place  of  a  spirit,  the  knowledge  of  (rod
becomes  a  matter  of  tribal,  national,  racial  experience.

It  is  not  my  intention  here  to  follow  the  history  of
the  growth  of  the  idea  of  God,  even  if  that  were  possi-
ble. I  wish  to  consider  only  some  of  the  principles
involved  in  this  growth  and  a  few  of  its  directions.

It  is  a  curious  paradox  that  this  most  original  and
constant  knowledge  should  be  the  one  most  and  longest
subject  to  change,  the  most  ancient  subject  of  human
experimentation,  the  most  encumbered  with  rubbish
and  error.  We  understand  in  part  the  reasons  for  these
errors.  We  understand  that  it  is  not  natural  for  man
to  reflect,  becoming  fully  aware  of  that  with  which  he
is  thinking.  We  understand  that  we  have  little  or  no
native  power  of  recognizing  either  self  or  Grod  apart
from  mediators :  so  that  in  the  conceptions  we  make
of  God  there  must  always  be  an  overburden  and  over-
influence  of  the  medium,  physical  or  personal,  wherein
God  is  thought.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 321

Still,  we  have  not  to  read  the  development  of  religious
thought  as  a  progress  from  error  to  truth.  We  must
read  it  as  a  progress  of  growing  acquaintance,  adding
to  ideas  which  from  the  first  have  been  true  within  their
own  intention.  Early  man  thinks  of  God,  no  doubt,
more  truly  than  he  is  able  to  say  or  hand  down  in  lan-
guage ;  and  we  cannot  forget  that  it  is  his  infallible
identification  of  God  in  experience  which  enables  him
from  time  to  time  to  correct  his  straying  conceptions.
After  all,  there  is  no  other  essential  error  in  thinking
of  God  than  this :  that  God  becomes  an  object  among
other  objects,  natural  or  psychical.  And  this  is  not  all
error.  For  not  only  do  these  ove^  materialized  concep-
tions hold  fast  the  genuine  objectivity  of  God  (which
all-important  character  is  usually  weakened  by  attempts
to  think  of  God  as  pure  spirit) ;  but  further,  there  is
indispensable  truth  in  the  tendency  to  incarnate  God  in
his  works,  and  to  think  of  him  as  there  where  his  activ-
ity is,  and  where  his  objects  are.  I  would  rather  have
a  worshipper  of  a  thousand  idols  than  a  worshipper  of  a
subjective  deity  or  of  an  abstraction.

What  a  man  begins  with  in  knowing  God  is  truth.
He  adds  to  this,  further  truth  and  an  admixture  of
error  and  earth.  The  elimination  of  this  error  by  fur-
ther experience  does  at  the  same  time  develop  the  truth
still  farther.  The  growth  in  the  knowledge  of  God  is
a  growth  of  predicates.  Every  mediator  gives  some
quality  or  predicate  to  the  experience  of  God.  The
early  mediation  of  God-knowledge  is  fragmentary  and
occasional,  albeit  cumulative :  but  with  progress  further
aspects  of  experience,  social,  political,  moral,  concerns
of  theory  and  art,  acquire  reference  to  the  conscious^


322  HOW  MEK  KNOW  GOD

nesB  of  Grod,  untfl  it  becomes  a  postulate  of  religion
that  God  is  to  be  seen  in  everjthingy  even  in  evil.  As
many  mediators^  so  many  predicates ;  and  doubtless  so
many  problems  also.  For  a  predicate  is,  in  general,
nearly  as  false  as  it  is  tme ;  and  the  accumulation  of
religious  knowledge  is  no  simple  sum  of  positive  con-
tributions. Yet  given  the  infallible  identity  of  the
subject-matter,  the  growth  of  this  knowledge  is  not  in
principle  unlike  that  of  all  knowledge.

There  is  one  peculiarity,  however,  that  deserves  men-
tion. I  have  said  that  these  predicates  of  God  are,
each  one  of  them,  nearly  as  false  as  true ;  always  in
need  of  being  balanced  by  a  predicate  of  opposite  or
contrasting  name.^ God  is  person  and  no-person  ;  lev*


1  Among  tlie  ptjeliologioal  reaacMis  for  the  inadaqwmcy  of  any  giren
pndioate  is  thia  :  that  aa  aneh  pxedioatea  ariae  in  ezperianoa  their  moat
emphatio  elementa  are  their  negationa.  They  are  anrer  of  what  thej
deny  than  of  what  they  affirm;  and  ahoald  he  read  in  the  light  of  these
deniali.  Thoae  ooeaaiona  which  early  eieite  the  speeifieaUy  religiooa
tarn  of  reflection  are  ooeaaione,  aa  we  can  now  aee,  when  some  mccngruity
ia  felt  in  applying  the  nanal  hahits  of  thooght.  Thus  in  the  event  of  a
birth.  The  insiatent  natoraliam  of  the  birth  process  clashes  hard  againat
man's  pride  and  spiritaal  self-eonacionanesa.  There  is  unfailingly  roused
some  donbt  of  Natnre,  some  wonder  ending  in  a  denial  in  which  flesh  ia
reduced  from  a  finality  to  a  symbol.  The  reality  of  the  birth,  so  we  asaert,
ia  something  other  and  more  than  its  physiology;  and  this  something
other  is  able  to  confer  dignity  and  awe  on  that  CTent.  All  this,  which
here  takes  the  form  of  an  inference,  is  in  fact  a  direct  report  of  the  feel-
ings that  here,  though  with  greater  struggle  than  naual,  the  spirit  alone
\  ia  real  and  essential,  not  deserting  nor  despising  but  interpreting  the
material.  So  with  other  propitious  and  nnpropitions  aspects  of  eiperience,
with  diseaae,  and  death,  and  marriage,  and  whereyer  the  course  of  events
moat  surely  and  elementally  strikes  religious  fire :  the  same  sense  of
incongruity  and  conflict  will  be  found.  And  in  all  this  man  is  naturally
more  aware  of  the  checkage,  the  emotion,  the  disturbance  in  self-oon«
scionsness,  than  he  can  be  of  that  hy  u^dck  the  habits  of  his  thought  are
being  checked  (on  the  one  hand)  and  maintained  (on  the  other),  —  his


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD d23

ing  and  non-loving ;  fighter  and  no  fighter;  just  and
yet  alike  to  all ;  merciful  and  unbending.  The  positive
and  tenable  value  of  any  predicate,  subject  to  such  sub-
tractions,  is  problematic.  God  appears  as  a  being  in
whom  opposite  traits  are  strangely  united:  but  the
nature  of  the  center  in  which  such  oppositions  agree,
or  are  neutralized,  is  not  picturable  —  is  known,  if  at
all,  only  to  immediate  experience.  As  an  object  in  the
world  of  objects,  God  is  next  to  nothing  ;  so  the  mys-
tics have  always  truly  said.  Hence  atheism  is  truer
than  many  a  florid  religiosity  whose  God  is  but  a  sur-
feited agglomerate  of  laudatory  epithets.  Atheism  is
the  proper  purgative  for  this  kind  of  religion ;  and  has
been  historically  an  indispensable  agency  in  deepening!
and  keeping  sound  the  knowledge  of  God.

But  atheism  discards  the  one  hopeful  element  in  the
situation,  —  namely,  that  God  may  actually  furnish  the
solution  of  these  dilemmas;  which  are  never  problems
about  God  alone,  but  are  at  the  same  time  threatened  split-
tings in  the  world  of  human  idea  and  ideal.  For  man,
as  a  thing  of  Nature,  is  a  being  of  opposing  instincts,
whose  balance  becomes  increasingly  fine ;  and  only  in  the
increasing  security  of  hold  upon  some  Absolute,  such
as  sanctions  both  the  one  and  the  other  of  the  divert
gent  ideals,  can  his  tottering  balance  be  kept.  With
his  God,  as  a  god  of  opposing  predicates,  this  growing
instability  of  human  nature  becomes  a  condition  of

ultimate  consoiousneBS  of  God.  He  is  moyed,  but  he  does  not  see  clearly
of  what  idea  his  feeling  is  the  work.  He  reports  his  experience,  there-
fore, in  the  form  of  dogma ;  adopting  such  positiTe  objects  as  he  can
distinguish  and  judge  appropriate  to  his  feeling.  Hence  his  dogma  is
permanentlj  subject  to  the  elimination  of  whatoTer  if  extraneous  in  tha
assumed  objects.


^r<


2(2/k  HOW  MEN  KHOW  GOD

^eed  in  his  forward  movement.  Thna^  in  more  aenaei
tlian  one,  is  Grod  the  pledge  of  the  unity  of  human
natore.  It  is  by  holding  yigoroosly  to  the  identity  of
the  altimate  Object  of  experience  that  the  antitheses  in
the  judgments  about  God  (and  about  man)  do  in  time
get  their  positive  solution.  But  let  us  consider  some
of  these  antithi


One  elementary  antithesis  in  the  thought  of  Grod  is
that  between  theone  and  the  manx;  between  polytheism
and  monotheism.  This  is  a  primitive  antithesis,  but
also  a  permanent  one :  for  eveiy  other  antithesis  has
some  bearing  on  this  one, — as,  for  example,  that  be^
tween  the  personal  and  the  impersonal.  GU>d  as  per*
sonal  inclines  to  be  manyy  since  the  personal  being
seems  to  have  outline,  and  to  need  external  relations
to  other  persons :  even  in  Christianity  the  persons  of
God  are  three,  whereas  the  Godhead  which  is  one  is
relatively  neuter.

The  development  of  religion  has  been,  in  the  main,
in  the  direction  of  unifying  the  heavens,  a  continuation
of  the  movement  from  spirit  to  the  god.  But  there
is  a  current  in  the  opposite  direction  ako.  The  god-
meaning  has  always  been  single ;  that  is,  spirits  have
always  been  known  as  belonging  to  the  genus  dirme,
supernatural.  And  this  belonging  to  the  one  genua
has  frequently  meant,  even  for  very  primitive  thinkers,
a  participation  in  one  pervasive  world-emrgy}  Behind
the  numerous  gods  we  can  usually  discover  a  more
general  divinity,  vaguer but  also  more  exalted,  and

^  See  Arthur  O.  Lovejoy. The  FondameDtal  Concept  of  the  Primir
tiTe  PhiloBophy.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 325

often  more  ancient  than  the  rest.  Man  has  never  been
in  doubt  that  the  qualities  of  God  are  such  as  can
belong  only  to  one ;  and  even  when  he  has  many  deities^
they  are  addressed  in  turn  (for  the  most  part)  as  the
all-powerfuly  the  Lord  of  lords.  A  polytheism  that  is
not  in  some  sense  a  henotheism  is  yet  to  be  discovered.
The  many  gods  have  had  their  birth  one  by  one,  each
one  in  turn  a  god,  —  or  rather  an  attempt  at  God.  The
gods  must  grow  in  number  because  the  first  god-shapes
are  too  poor.  Each  god  satisfies  within  the  region  of
his  own  group  of  events;  seems  hero  and  superlative
enough  in  his  own  province.  But  another  province
requires  another  figure  of  God.  Hence  we  may  say
that  polytheisms  are  gaUeries  of  aborted  monotheisms ;
collections  of  god-figures  each  of  which  well  intends  to
be  all,  but  is  incompetent.  There  is  no  such  thing  in
history  as  a  primitive  monotheism ;  but  there  is  a  per-
manent singleness  in  the  thought  of  deity  which  man
forever  departs  from,  through  loyalty  to  the  variety  of
deity's  manifestations.  t

Polytheism  then  has  its  right;  its  richness;  its
acknowledgment  of  the  omnipresence  of  deity.  It  is
truer  than  many  a  monotheism.  Premature  monothe-
isms have  invariably  been  too  poor.  Witness  the  sad-
fated  monotheistic  moment  of  Egypt ;  the  sun-disk  god
of  Amenophis  IV.  Witness  those  other  royal  mono-
theisms in  Peru  and  Mexico.  There  was  memorable
reasoning  in  that  speech  of  the  Inca  in  religious  con-
clave, worthy  of  being  transmitted  from  times  long
prior  to  the  Spanish  discovery :  '^  We  are  told,  he  said,
that  the  Sun  has  made  all  things.  But  this  cannot  be ;
for  many  things  happen  when  he  is  absent. He  behaves


I-


aw  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

neither  like  a  living  thing,  —  for  he  never  tires;  nor
like  a  free  thing,  —  for  he  never  varies  his  path.  There-
fore the  son  must  have  his  master,  gpreater  than  he;
which  greater  god  we  ought  to  worship/'  Tet  it  was
not  the  destiny  of  this  greater  god,  nor  of  the  g^reater
gods  of  Persia  nor  of  India  to  attain  sway  over  the
religious  sense  of  man.  Pantheism  goes  farther,  is
able  to  dissolve  and  absorb  the  many  partial  deities ;  but
pantheism  also  is  a  unity  still  too  poor  and  quantitative,
breaking  out  everywhere  in  assertions  wholly  polytheis-
tic, *^  This  thing  is  god,  —  and  that,  and  that.''  It  is
long  before  monotheism  can  be  true  for  man's  concep-
tion. It  cannot  be  true  until  after  much  free  growth  of
the  God-idea  (in  which  each  new  element  in  the  concep-
tion of  God  may  appear  as  the  birth  of  a  new  deity),  God
I  can  be  known  in  experience  as  the  one  ofsXL  these  many.

Another  antithesis  is  that  between  God  as  near  and
God  as  remote,;  an  antithesis  which  has  taken  technical
shape  as  that  between  the  transcendence  and  the  imma-
nence of  God.  This  also  is  associated  with  the  contrast
/between  the  personal  and  the  impersonal.  For  the  god
who  is  near  is  apt  to  be  thought  of  as  sympathetic,  and
so  far  like  mankind ;  the  remote  god  is  thought  of  for
the  most  part  as  unlike  and  impersonal.  In  the  logic
of  the  Inca  reformer  above  quoted,  the  deity  in  becom-
ing one  became  at  the  same  time  more  remote  and  less
personal :  his  temple  near  Callao  held  no  images,  and
witnessed  no  sacrifices.

Here  again  the  direction  of  religious  progress  is  not
single,  but  twofold.  We  have  heard  much  in  recent
years  of  the  advantages  of  the  immanent  God ;  and  I


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 327

have  nothing  to  say  in  doubt  of  these  advantages  —

they  are  the  modern  form  of  the  more  omnipresent  and

polytheistic  aspects  of  religion. But  they  are  fatal

advantages  if  they  lose  from  sight  that  other  direction

of  progress,  notable  from  the  earliest,  the  retreat  of  God.

Religion  may  be  too  romantic,  too  much  interested  in

what  is  not  here  but  beyond  somewhere  in  the  ineffable;

yet  religion  if  it  l^v^  chiefly  in  the  next  things  will RihLbk  li^vJJL

turn  out  to  be  no  religion  at  all, Tn  proportion  as  the  <^Uit#  ?

religious  horiTQn  ia  drawn  cloafiy  the  gamut  of  religious

experience  becom^a  Hvifil

Early  gods  are  like  man  and  near  him.  But  still,
they  were  as  unlike  and  as  remote  as  he  covld  imagine
them.  The  differences  between  spirits  and  men,  the  gulf
fixed  between  the  natural  and  the  supernatural  —  gulf
leaped  in  death— the  exaggerations  and  superlatives,
these  are  as  important  parts  of  the  conception  as  are
the  likenesses  and  the  simplicities  of  intercourse.  When
man  can  think  beyond  the  sun,  and  beyond  the  sky,  —
there  God  goes,  and  probably  first  goes.  For  the  God-
idea,  as  the  limiting  idea  of  man,  is  also  his  explorative
idea :  by  dwelling  in  speculative  fancy  on  that  which
is  beyond  what  he  has  yet  thought,  man  prepares  the
next  conceptual  conquests  —  wins  at  length  one  more
idea  of  which  he  must  say,  God  is  not  that.  We  need
not  fear  that  God  will  be  thrust  out  of  consciousness
by  this  effort  to  assign  him  ultimate  otherness;  for
God-thinking  can  not  well  expel  God  from  thought.  On
the  contrary  the  work  done,  and  the  potential  acquired,
by  dint  of  such  endless  series  of  negations,  is  a  most
practical  measure  of  the  worth  of  that  conception  for
the  lives  of  the  thinkers.


328


HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD


For  we  do  not  find  that  the  g^reatness  of  man  and
the  importance  of  human  business  are  in  proportion  to
the  restriction  of  man's  outlook,  but  the  reverse.  The
present  day  has  its  supreme  worth^eveiy  present  moment
,  is  the  measure  of  all  the  rest :  but  this  is  so,  in  the
main,  because  eveiy  present  day  is  '^  the  conflux  of  two
eternities/'  which  eternities  being  eliminated  the  worth
disappears  also.  We  have  outgrown  the  days  when
we  make  the  citizen  great  by  making  the  government
small ;  we  shall  outgrow  the  days  when  we  make  man
great  by  making  God  small  and  useful.

The  apostle  of  the  present  moment  depends  for  his
persuasiveness  upon  his  skilful  use  of  the  remote.  The
charm  of  Omar  ib  wholly  dependent  upon  his  vision  of
the  long  reaches  of  destiny  in  which  that  moment  is
framed,  and  which  none  knows  how  to  invoke  more
finely  than  Omar  himself.  It  is  the  thought  of  the
Seven  Seas  which  makes  the  plash  of  the  pebble  a  mel-
ancholy marvel :  and  it  is  the  vista  of  the  long  human
caravan,  with  a  delicate  loyalty  to  its  shadowy  figures
as  they  vanish,  which  lifts  Omar's  own  moment  from
the  level  of  the  sensual  into  the  atmosphere  of  alluring
poetic  worth.  It  is  that  remote  thing  toith  which  we
think  the  present  that  gives  value  to  the  present.  And
in  this  same  way,  and  quite  unconsciously  for  the  most
part,  the  remote  God-thought  of  the  Orient  (where  the
sublimity  and  romance  of  religion  are  native^air)  has
served  through  centuries  to  preserve  from  utter  desola-
tion the  value-element  in  millions  of  careers  which  to
our  eyes  are  inconceivably  monotonous  and  intolerable.

The  near-by  deity  of  a  religion  that  betones  imma-
nence proves  in  experience  to  be  a  baffling  object  of


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 329

worship.  Paradoxically  enough  he  is  not  so  accessible  ||
as  the  anreachable  God.  If  we  look  through  the  history"
of  religion  for  instances  of  genuine  intimacy  between  the
worshipper  and  his  god,  we  do  not  light  upon  sorcerers
generally  and  their  '^  familiar "  spirits,  nor  upon  the
relation  between  the  human  Greek  and  his  human  Zeus.
There  could  be  no  intimacy  here,  simply  because  this
Zeus  was  all  too  near  and  all  too  human.  Such  deities
have  descended  too  far  into  the  current  of  the  world  in
which  all  things  and  all  spirits  are  insulated  one  from
another.  We  might  more  probably  think  of  the  Persian
Mazdeans,  between  whom  and  their  Ahura  there  was  a
tie  of  remarkable  intensity :  and  yet  Ahura  Mazda  even
more  than  the  god  of  the  Jews  was  a  being  of  remote
and  transcendent  nature.  The  explanation  of  the
paradox  seems  to  be  this :  that  the  effort  to  think  God
must  first  differentiate  God  from  our  other  objects.
But  we  also  are  in  a  different  world  from  that  of  any
of  our  World-objects :  something  in  us  is  foreign  and
transcendent  to  all  that  we  view.  There  could  be  no  |
absolute  rapprochement  between  the  heart  of  this  alien-
within-the-world  which  we  call  Self  and  its  God,  unless
that  God  were  also  in  some  way  alien  to  that  same
realm.  Worship  must  be  always  in  some  measure,  as
Plotinus  puts  it,  a  flight  of  the  Alone  to  the  Alone.

The  religion  of  Brahm  is  the  historic  demonstration
of  this  truth,  in  the  abstract.  For  these  Brahman
pietists  who  most  clearly  recognized  and  defined  the
otherness  of  God  from  all  things  phenomenal  and  even
conceivable  were  the  ones  who  first  asserted  (so  far
as  history  knows)  the  immediate  unity  between  the
ineffable  without  and  the  ineffable  within.


830  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

Upon  this  point  of  the  remoteness  of  God  as  object
we  have  much  to  relearn  that  the  Orient  has  never
forgotten.  We  have  God  the  Son,  as  they  had  not :
there  is  little  danger  that  we  shall  lose  the  perception
of  the  divinity  of  the  Life  within  Nature  and  Man  and
Present  Affairs.  But  while  God  the  Son  may  now  have
become  our  necessary  way  to  practical  union  with  the
Father,  yet  the  Father  must  first  be  known  before  ihe
Son  is  recognized  as  God.  Without  the  Father,  the
Son  is  a  mere  man :  for  the  incarnate  is  always  bound
and  infected  by  the  finite  thing  it  touches.  Until  the
human  spirit  knows  the  self  that  is  more  at  home  in  the
infinite  than  here  among  Things,  it  has  not  yet  found
its  Self  nor  its  God.  Only  the  transcendent  God  can
be  truly  immanent.  This  also  is  a  matter  of  experience-
One  of  the  most  striking  stages  in  the  development
of  religion  is  the  epoch  when  religion  adopts  morak  as
its  own  province,  and  when  the  gods  of  religion  take  on
ethical  character.  This  is  so  distinctive  an  advance
from  earlier  amoral  thoughts  of  God,  which  present
him  simply  in  terms  of  nature-powers,  quite  as  likely  to
be  evil  as  good,  that  most  classifications  of  historic
religions  (Tiele's  especially)  mark  off  in  some  way  the
''ethical  religions"  from  the  earlier  as  merely  ''natural-
istic" or  "objective."  How  do  the  judgments  arise
that  God  is  good,  or  that  he  is  moral  ?  Is  it  not  rather
that  he  is  found  favoring  the  good  of  men  and  the
right  of  men,  than  that  he  is  himself  good  or  moral  in
any  sense  in  which  we  attribute  these  terms  to  each
other  ?  Immoral  or  malevolent,  God  cannot  be ;  but
there  is  a  struggle  in  our  thought  of  God  between  the


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 831

God  that  is  described  by  our  ideal  predicates,  and  that
God  who  rejects  all  these  as  something  less  and  other
than  the  truth.  And  here  again,  we  can  see  at  once
that  the  problem  of  personality  and  impersonality  is
involved.

It  is  pertinent  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
God  who  merely  is,  as  our  Absolute  Other,  is  by  that
fact  both  promotive  of  our  weal  and  of  our  morality.
This  has  been  one  of  our  cardinal  doctrines.  In  our
discussion  of  the  need  of  God  we  showed  in  some  detail
how  the  mere  presence  of  a  companion  Mind,  standing
outside  the  arena  of  human  effort  with  its  contrasts  of
good  and  evil,  may  be  found,  in  experiencie,  to  transmute
evil  into  good ;  that  while,  by  this  very  experience,  the
companion  would  deserve  the  attribute  of  goodness,  yet
this  standing  outside  the  arena  itself  is  a  necessary  con-
dition of  his  being  found  all-powerful  in  this  trans-
muting work.  It  is  not  otherwise  with  the  morality
of  God.  Did  not  Jesus  of  Nazareth  preach  that  new
conception  of  God's  justice  which  so  strongly  resembles
an  indifferent  treatment  of  the  righteous  and  the
unrighteous  ?  If  God  merely  is,  that  existence  of  God
is  a  promotive  of  human  morality.  For  what  is  the
essential  morality  of  roan  if  not  this,  that  he  make
himself  universal,  escaping  in  thought  and  act  from  his
self-enclosedness  ?  If  God  were  but  a  point  external
to  man's  consciousness,  and  if  man  could  reach  that
point,  his  feat  in  doing  so  would  be  at  least  the  begin-
ning of  morality.  The  moral  importance  of  God  in
history  has  been  chiefly  dependent  on  the  relations
which  man  has  sustained  to  his  gods  :  loyalty  to  a  god
is  a  moral  relation ;  and  when  through  loyal  obedience


'hinpujU  ?


"i  J


332  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

j^  u  ^^^ J I  to  a  common  god  men  become  loyal  to  fellow-tribesmen

/A«KUfhM4crw  V I  and  their  customs,  that  god  is  favoring  morality  among

If^tJUL^  Uhu I  men,  quite  apart  from  any  mythical  reputation  he  may

have. In  finding  God  as  simply  existent  we  find  him,
I  say,  both  good  and  righteous  in  his  activity ;  and  the
\^  condition  for  so  finding  him  is  that  he  himself  remain
above  the  contrasts  of  good  and  evil.

There  are  then,  we  believe,  no  pre-ethical  stages  of
religion,  though  there  are  indeed  pre-legalistic  stages ;
there  is  no  moment  at  which  God  in  his  totalily  begins
to  be  thought  of  as  good,  though  there  are  great
moments  in  religious  development  when  specific  charac-
ters of  God's  goodness  become  clear,  as  of  ''  mercy  "
and  ^^  loving-kindness  "  ;  and  finally,  there  are  no  such
specific  predicates  of  good  that  do  not  stand  in  need,
as  we  think  of  them,  of  being  tempered  with  contrast-
ing qualities,  such  as  justice  and  universality.  The
God-idea  must  advance  at  times  from  the  moral  to
the  amoral^  as  well  as  in  the  reverse  direction.  But
herewith  the  question  of  the  moral  attributes  of  God
debouches  wholly  into  the  question  of  Gtid's  personality.
This  question  we  have  variously  encountered,  and  shall
now  briefly  touch  upon  for  itself.

We  have  found  God  in  the  first  place  as  an  (Hher
Mind,  an  individual  Subject,  wholly  active:  and  no
war  of  predicates  can  invade  this  certainty.  But  so
large  are  the  differences  between  this  Other  Mind  and
those  with  whom  we  commonly  converse,  that  we  do
continually  recur  to  the  query,  How  shall  we  think  of
Him  ?  We  are  baffled  and  not  foolishly  by  the  absence
of  a  body  that  we  can  attribute  to  God ;  for  here  the


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 333

perfect  metaphor  of  Nature  seems  to  break  —  there
is  no  point  of  view  which  is  God's  in  particular,  and
the  being  that  has  eoery  point  of  view  loses  to  us  all
semblance  of  individuality.  ^^  0  that  I  knew  where  I
might  find  Him."

It  is  something  to  note  that  our  body  is  the  sign  of
our  limitation,  and  of  our  dependence.  Our  body  is
that  through  which  we  are  acted  upon  as  well  as  that
through  which  we  act.  But  our  body  is  also  that
through  which  we  are  found  and  become  personally
present  to  other  persons.  The  abolition  of  body  is  the
abolition  of  the  recognizable  and  the  understandable  in
all  personal  relations.

And  we  see,  too,  that  the  advance  of  religion  has
been  very  largely  from  personality  to  impersonality.
For  most  like  ourselves  are  those  early  aoulsy  doubles,
shadows,  which  people  the  other  world.  Religion  must
lose  that  literally  human  heaven,  and  its  human  gods,
and  therewith  vanish  from  grasp  and  from  interest.
The  alternative  to  the.  thought  of  God  as  person  is  the
thought  of  him  as  Substance,  as  Energy,  and  chiefly  as
Law.  Brahmanism,  we  may  say,  finds  God  as  Substance,
the  great  TJiat  Which.  Buddhism,  often  accused  of
having  no  supreme  god,  sometimes  described  as  the
godless  religion,  has  also  its  Absolute :  but  its  god  is
the  Law,  the  law  of  Karma,  the  fixed  principle  of  justice
in  the  heart  of  all  change.  Karma  is,  as  nearly  as
possible,  a  "  Moral  Order  of  the  Universe,"  in  which
terms  —  though  with  quite  other  meaning  —  Fichte  de-
scribed hi8  deity.  Emerson's  ^'  Spiritual  Laws  "  which
are  alive  and  which  execute  themselves,  which  are  an-
other name  for  his  Over-soul,  are  a  deity  of  not  unlike


834  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

character.  The  Greek  Fate  and  Chaos^  the  Stoic  mate-
rial  Beason,  the  Ohinese  Tao :  all  such  conceptions  of
God,  are  they  not  the  enlightened  thoughts  of  men
about  deity  ?  Have  we  not  said  but  lately  that  the  re-
mote God  is  the  primary  necessity  of  reUgion?

We  have  said  this ;  and  noted  at  that  time  that  man
is  not  made  great  by  diminishing  the  majesty  of  hi.
world.  In  the  same  spirit  we  may  now  say  that  man
is  not  aggprandized  nor  freed  by  weakening  the  type  of
his  world's  unity.  Just  as  we  could  not  enhance  our
own  definiteness  by  blurring  the  definiteness  of  Nature,
but  the  contrary  :  so  we  should  detract  from  our  own
concreteness  in  any  detraction  from  the  concreteness  of
our  world-unity,  and  in  our  thought  of  it.  There  is
neither  merit  nor  truth  in  rarefying  the  thought  of  God;
nor  in  presenting  him  to  our  conceptions  in  terms  of
some  thinner  and  weaker  sort  of  world-unity  easier  to
image  and  believe  in  than  a  personal  world-unity.

It  is  God  in  external  relation  to  me,  as  my  Other,
that  seems  the  personal  God ;  it  is  God  as  the  Whole,
including  me  within  himself,  that  seems  impersonal:
and  the  true  God  is  the  Whole,  as  in  Christian  doctrine
Gk>d  is  the  One  of  the  three  persons.  But  we  may  dis-
cern in  the  world  generally  a  principle  to  the  effect  that
inner  relations  assimilate  themselves  to  outer  reZa-
tionsy  and  conversely.  Thus,  of  organisms,  the  whole
cares  for  the  parts  in  the  same  sense  that  the  parts  may
be  said  to  care  for  each  other :  and  the  several  organs  of
an  organism  do  tend  to  reproduce  in  themselves  the  fea-
tures of  that  whole,  becoming  in  themselves  organisms
with  internal  relations  resembling  their  own  outward
relations. Of  State  and  citizen  the  same  holds:  and


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 335


whatever  the  character  of  the  State  in  its  international  I^a^  jJtL.
relations,  that  same  character  (be  it  of  Athenian  greed,  9  j^uIlJ  J^
or  of  Machiavellian  expediency,  or  of  better  sorts)  will
reproduce  itself  in  the  character  of  the  members  of  the
State.  Now  the  State  is  in  some  measure  an  artificial
body,  and  its  moral  quality  lags  behind  the  qualities  of
its  members.  But  the  World  is  not  artificial:  the  char-
acter of  the  World  is  first,  —  that  of  its  members  de-
rivative. We  may  find  our  thought  of  God  following
in  arrear  of  the  best  conception  we  have  of  ourselves;
but  it  is  only  because  we  know  that  whatever  selfhood
we  have  is  an  involution  of  the  selfhood  of  the  Whole,
and  that  our  external  relations  to  our  fellows  do  but
follow  and  reproduce  in  their  own  more  distant  fashion
the  relation  of  God  to  us  which  from  his  view  is  inter-
nal. Hence  the  remark  that  ^'  Man  is  never  long  con-
tent to  worship  gods  of  moral  character  greatly  inferior
to  his  own  "  ^  may  be  accepted,  with  its  sting  drawn,
because  of  what  we  know  of  our  relation  to  the  Whole
of  which  we  are  natural  parts.

The  conception  of  God  as  Law  has  its  right  in
destroying  the  poverty  of  my  thought  of  personality.
I  confess  that  this  word  ^^ person"  has  for  me  a  harsh
and  rigid  sound,  smacking  of  the  Roman  Code.  I  do
not  love  the  word  personality.  I  want  whatever  is
accidental  and  arbitrary  and  atomic  and  limited  and
ease-hardened  about  that  conception  to  be  persistently
beaten  and  broken  by  whatever  of  God  I  can  see  in  the
living  law  and  order  of  this  Universe  until  it  also  has
all  such  totality  and  warmth.

But  I  see  that  personality  is  a  stronger  idea  than  law ;

I'MeDongaU. Social  Piyohologj,  p.  311. 2d  edition.


I


886  HOW  MEN  KNOW  GOD

and  has  promise  of  mutuality  and  intercourse  that  laws,
even  if  living,  cannot  afford.  I  see  further  that  person-
ality can  include  law^  as  law  cannot  include  personality.
And  I  see,  finally,  that  this  deepening  conception  of
personality  is  not  more  an  ideal  than  an  experience.
For  God  is  not  falsely  judg^  in  experience  to  be  both
the  one  and  the  other.  The  negation  of  any  one  such
attribute  by  the  other  is  only  for  the  enlargement  of
the  first,  not  for  its  destruction.  Until  I  can  perfectly
conceive  personality,  God  must  be  for  me  alternately
person  and  law;  with  the  knowledge  that  these  two
attributes  of  one  being  are  not,  in  truth,  inconsistent,
and  that  their  mode  of  union  is  also  something  that  I
shall  verify  in  some  moment  of  present  knowledge,  as  by
anticipation  of  an  ultimate  attainment.  Not  only  is  Grod
to  be  found  in  experience,  but  whatever  attributes  are
genuinely  predicated  of  him  are  to  be  found  there  also.
€rod  is  the  Eternal  Substance,  and  is  known  as  such;
God  is  also  the  Eternal  Order  of  things :  but  God  is
That  Which  does  whatever  Substance  is  found  to  do.
If  it  is  the  knowledge  of  Grod  that  first  gives  us  our
human  comradeship  and  its  varied  and  satisfying  respon-
piveness,  the  Grod  who  is  the  bearer  of  that  responsiveness
IS  not  himself  without  response.  These  comrades  are  in
a  measure  God's  organs  of  response,  even  as  Nature  is
God's  announcement  of  his  presence  and  individuality :
but  God  has  also  a  responsiveness  of  his  own,  and  herein
lies  the  immediate  experience  of  the  personality  of  God.
The  relations  between  man  and  God  have,  in  the  course
of  religious  history,  become  more  deeply  personal  and
passionate,  with  the  deepening  sense  of  evil  and  spiritual
distress. The  soul  finds  at  length  its  divine  companion.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD 337

But  as  religion  enters  into  these  deeper  and  more  fertile
strata  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  it  becomes  evident
that  the  development  of  religion  falls  increasingly  upon
the  shoulders  of  individual  men,  whose  experience  of
God  and  its  cognitive  content  becomes  authoritative  for
others.  We  find  that  religion  becomes  universal  at
the  same  time  that  it  becomes  most  peculiarly  personal,
and  takes  its  impetus  and  name  from  individual  founders
and  prophets.  Buddhism  and  Christianity  and  Islam
are  religions  of  redemption  and  of  universal  propagan-
dism ;  and  it  is  they,  chiefly,  that  willingly  refer  their
character  and  revelation  of  God  to  one  person.  Our
understanding  of  the  higher  stages  of  the  knowledge
of  Grod,  so  far  as  man  has  yet  progressed  in  this  knowl-
edge, will  best  be  pursued  in  a  closer  study  of  mysticism
and  worship.


PART  V


WORSHIP  AND  THE MYSTICS


CHAPTER  XXIV

THOUGHT AND  WORSHIP

WORSHIP,  or  prayer,  is  the  especial  sphere  of  the
will  in  religion.  It  is  an  act  of  approach  to
God:  and  while  this  act  involves  a  lifting  of  thought
to  God,  it  is  more  than  an  act  of  thought — it  intends  to
institute  some  communication  or  transaction  with  God
wherein  will  answers  will.

What  this  transaction  may  signify  it  is  not  easy  to
understand.  Prayer  is  instinctive;  and  as  with  all
instinctive  actions  its  motive  lies  deeper  than  any  obvious
utility :  our  attempts  at  explanation  are  likely  to  leave
its  ultimate  meankgancaoght.  The  motive  of  worship
may  seem  to  be  moral — an  impulse  of  deference  to  the
great  and  holy  and  a  desire  to  share  in  that  holiness ;  or
we  may  think  to  discern  an  end  more  deliberatelyjpracfioaZ,
as  when  prayer  takes  the  form  of  propitiation  or  petition :
yet  all  such  moral  and  practical  motives  are  but  appur-
Lances  of  the  pnmar^  motive,  which  as  yet  we  mnst
simply  call  religious — allowing  its  rightful  uniqueness
and  problematic  character.  Worship,  we  may  say,  is
governed  by  the  "love  of  God"  —  whatever  this  mys-
terious phrase  may  mean.  In  so  far  as  love  seeks
knowledge  of  its  object,  worship  resembles  thinking :  yet
love  seeks  its  knowledge  by  its  own  way  and  method,
characteristically  different  from  the  way  of  reflection:
it  IS  these  differences  which  are  now  important  to  us.


342  WOBSmP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

For  phflosophy,  in  its  rightful  and  necessary  effort  to
do  justice  to  the  religious  idea  in  contrast  to  a  religion
of  feeling,  is  inclined  to  halt  in  the  world  of  thought,
unable  to  see  what  more  than  thinking  may  he  involved
in  the  act  of  prayer.  Recognizing  that  idea  is  necesr
sary,  it  assumes  that  deliberate  reflection  is  sufficient.
It  identifies  Gottesdienst  with  Denken,  and  thereby
impoverishes  the  meaning  of  worship.

Worship  is  indeed  a  reasonable  act,  even  when
instinctive  and  momentary  :  it  is  informed  of  God ;  it
uses  and  contains  all  available  knowledge  of  the  being
whom  it  addresses.  But  in  worship  the  universality  of
thought  is  overcome ;  and  God  is  appropriated  uniquely
to  the  individual  self.  Worship  brings  the  experience
of  €rod  to  pass  in  self-<M>nsciousness  with  a  searching
valency  not  obligatory  upon  the  pure  thinker :  in  some
way  it  enacts  the  presence  of  God,  sets  God  into  the
will  to  work  there.  In  the  nature  of  the  case,  the
aspect  of  deity  which  reason  discovers  is  an  uncondi-
tional, inevitable,  universal  presence:  from  such  a
presence  there  can  be  no  escape — and  so  no  drawing
near — save  by  the  movements  of  deliberate  attention.
But  the  drawing-near  of  worship  is  more  than  a
movement  of  attention.

Our  philosophical  thought  finds  God  as  an  object  —
in  the  third  person,  not  in  the  second.  Thinking  comes
upon  God  in  a  contemplation  which  the  sound  of  the
word  ^^  Thou ''  would  break  and  startle.  There  is  here
some  speU  of  distance,  some  veU  of  insulation,  from
which  natural  religion  does  not  suffer.  In  worship,  not
alone  the  universality,  but  also  the  objectivity  proper  to
deliberate  thought  must  be  accepted — and  overcome.


THOUGHT  AND  WORSHIP  343

Our  moral  freedom  consists  in  this,  that  in  knowing
God  we  maintain  a  moment  of  reserve;  the  further
relation  requires  a  further  consent.  And  in  the  consent
which  distinguishes  the  act  of  worship,  objectivitji  the
otherness  of  God  and  man,  ceases  to  be  the  whole  truth
of  that  relationship.

What  this  farther  element  may  be,  we  shall  for  the
present  simply  illustrate.  We  are  well  acquainted  with
the  difference  between  the  observer  of  life  and  the
sharer  of  it.  We  know  the  man  to  whom  nature,  for
instance,  is  a  foreign  and  independent  spectacle,  and
the  man  who  in  the  presence  of  nature  readily  becomes
a  part  of  all  that  is  around  him.  We  know  the  man  who
in  all  social  situations  maintains  some  fine  insulation,
some  predominance  of  the  self-preserving  instinct ;  and
we  know  the  man  whose  self  spontaneously  diffuses  and
mingles  with  each  situation  by  some  natural  osmosis
between  him  and  his  object.  And  we  know  further
that  while  the  former  temper  has  a  certain  advantage
in  discoursing  about  its  world,  the  latter  temper  though
less  fluent  in  speech  does  win  a  kind  of  knowledge  of
its  world  which  the  less  adventurous  and  more  objective
temper  may  wholly  fail  to  understand.  We  experience
these  varieties  of  temper  in  ourselves,  and  know  well
that  while  this  consent  is  sometimes  in  our  power,  at
other  times  even  this  touch  of  freedom  which  makes  us
one  with  our  object  seems  to  have  drifted  beyond  our
present  grasp.  And  though  this  difference  has  cogni-
tive consequences,  we  are  inclined  to  refer  it  at  last  to
an  attitude  of  will,  to  a  moral  difference  which  in  its
b^nnings  is  under  voluntary  control.  In  any  case  we
recognize  here  an  other-than-theoretical  relation  to  our


I


344  WOBSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

object,  a  relation  which  surmounts  objectivity  without
destroying  it,  and  which  is  seen  quite  simply  in  that
transition  in  consciousness  from  "  he  "  to  '^  thou/'  and
from  "  thou  "  to  "  we."

These  two  aspects  of  our  living  belong  together.  As
we  have  just  now  compared  the  two  tempers —  of  isola-
tion from  our  objects  and  of  fusion  with  them  —  we
recognize  that  neither  would  be  significant  without  the
other.  Distance  without  fusion  becomes  individualistic
and  sterile;  fusion  without  distance  is  formless,  senti-
mental, and  oppressive.  We  want  our  living  to  add  to
its  objectivity  this  unifying  consent ;  but  we  want  no
consent  save  of  one  who  in  thought  has  made  himself
free.  Consent,  and  that  union  with  the  object  so
curiously  uncommandable  by  direct  effort,  flows  through
and  around  all  our  deliberate  thought-work,  lifting  and
floating  it  on  the  tide  of  a  more  central  relationship
with  our  world.  Reflective  thought,  it  appears,  is  too
purposive,  active,  self-distinguishing,  self-preserving,
and  at  the  same  time  too  unindividual  and  unf  ree  in
its  result,  to  do  justice  to  the  meaning  of  worship.

The  discrepancy  between  these  two  processes  appears
most  vividly  when  we  consider  their  historical  aspect.
If  we  identify  the  essence  of  worship  with  thinking,
then  whatever  else  has  been  historically  associated  with
worship  by  way  of  external  action,  ceremonial  form,
and  the  like,  is  set  aside  as  accidental,  as  something
with  which  the  man  of  thought  may  dispense,  as  some-
thing with  which  civilization  itself  will  dispense  in  time.
From  this  point  of  view,  historical  worship  has  two  ele-
ments :  reflection  (which  is  important)  and  rite  (which


THOUGHT  AND  WORSHIP  345

is  relatively  unimportant),  the  merely  practical  aspect
of  religion,  making  use  of  the  knowledge  of  God  but
adding  nothing  to  it.  These  practices,  as  we  now  see,
are  not  only  untheoretical — they  are  even  peculiarly
unpractical :  here  is  a  great  accretion  of  activities,  not
turned  outward  into  the  world,  but  directed  upward
and  disappearing  in  their  energies,  like  the  fire  of  sacri-
fice, in  an  unanswered  gesture  of  aspiration  —  unan-
swered, unexplained,  though  seemingly  undiscouraged.
This  external  part  of  worship  is  the  exclamatory  or
demonstrative  side  of  religion ;  it  is  religion  vaunting
itself,  celebrating  itself,  decorating  itself,  —  and  in  the
process  of  time  these  externalities,  once  pedagogically
or  sociaUy  useful,  become  unnecessary.

But  our  historic  conscience  has  been  making  us  aware
that  this  line  of  cleavage  between  the  important  and  the
unimportant  in  religion  is  badly  drawn.  Jt  produces  a
conception  of  religion  which  is  in  much  danger  of  omit-
ting religion  itself.  For  religion  has  always  assumed
that  there  is  something  in  particular  to  be  done  about
God ;  and  has  identified  itself  with  the  work  of  doing
it  It  has  assembled  religious  practices  into  institu-
tions— systems  of  just  such  special  activities;  it  has
spent  itself  in  perfecting  and  establishing  them;  and
what  a  spectacle  do  these  structures  constitute  as  they
heap  themselves  in  history.  What  will  our  philosophies
make  of  this  rank  growth  of  deed,  ceremony,  orgy,
assembly,  ritual,  sacrifice,  sacrament,  observances  pub-
lic and  private  of  a  thousand  sorts  ?  Is  all  this  to  be
left  as  an  alien  mass?  are  these  performances  and
experiences  to  be  turned  over  chiefly  to  the  student  of
abnormal  psychology? If  in  the  presence  of  these


846  WOBSHIP  AND  THE  liTSTICS

pheDomeoa  of  religions  practice  our  most  lively  sense
is  a  sense  of  the  erratic,  do  we  not  thereby  measure
the  inadequacy  of  our  understanding  ?  Must  not  the
mere  bulk  and  persistence  of  this  aspect  of  religion
convey  some  impression  of  importance  ;  and  still  more
so,  the  intensity  of  spirit  with  which  it  has  been  carried
on  ?  Our  eliminations  of  the  unimportant  in  rdigion
must  mightily  reduce  this  mass,  no  doubt ;  but  it  will
not  all  be  cut  away  from  religion.  Something  which  is
other  than  reflective  thought  will  appear  as  an  essential
ingredient  of  worship.  And  perhaps  a  rapid  survey  of
these  historic  phenomena  may  suggest  what  this  essen-
tial ingredient  is.  We  shall  find  religion,  periiaps,
making  its  own  selection.

There  is  no  moment  in  the  early  history  of  religion
when  this  active,  vocative  side  of  worship  is  without  its
own  distinct  importance,  real  or  supposed.  If  man's
religion  is  first  embodied  in  his  exclamations,  these
exclamations  were  at  once  cognitions  and  prayers,  incip-
ient transactions.  6od-friendly  and  God-unfriendly
are  distinguishable  even  here;  and  God-unfriendly  can
be  made  God-friendly.  What  consequences  may  hang
from  this  practical  issue  of  the  friendliness  of  God  is
not  clear  —  early  theories  are  no  better  than  our  own :
the  imagination  exhausts  itself  in  picturing  the  divine
rewards  and  punishments ;  but  behind  all  these  pictures
there  is,  even  from  the  beginning,  a  residual  import-
ance in  being  right  with  deity  which  we  might  call  an
ontological  importance^  i.e.,  affecting  somehow  the
substance  of  one's  self,  the  soul  and  its  destiny,  open-
ing  up  some  bottomless  depths  of  being  such  as  the  eye
is  hardly  fitted  to  gaze  into. The  amount  of  power


THOUGHT  AND  WORSHIP  347

that  can  be  released  when  the  religious  nerve  is  pressed
is  quite  out  of  proportion  to  the  belief  in  the  more
definable  pleasures  and  pains.  Let  political  and  legal
needs  make  the  most  of  this  superstitious  potency  while
it  lasts.  To  keep  God  friendly  there  are  few  efforts
that  men  will  not  make,  few  privations  that  they  will
not  undergo.  It  is  but  a  trifling  symbol  of  such  efforts
and  privations  that  the  god  requires  a  deliberate  and
methodical  approach  in  sacrifices  and  prayer ;  i^hatever
importance  religion  has  begins  to  concentrate  in  the
special  act  of  worship.

But  these  necessary  moments  of  approach  have  their
own  terrors,  when  some  one  must  take  it  upon  him-
self to  break  through  the  habitual  taboo  of  Holiness ;
a  cloud  of  oppressive  gravity  deepens  over  the  event,
supportable  only  by  fierce  resolution,  wrapped  probably
in  mutilation  and  blood.  And  when  the  act  is  accom-
plished in  safety,  an  exultancy  equally  fierce  floods  the
brain ;  exhibitions  of  savage  gaiety,  the  license  of  super-
men, can  alone  satisfy  the  spirit.  We  are  strangers
now  to  this  vehemence,  whether  for  better  or  for  worse ;
but  we  can  still  catch  from  a&r  the  pulse  of  this  ancient
ocean,  its  terrors  and  its  glorious  liberations.  We  can
understand  how  this  strange  sense  of  ontological  im-
portance  must  condense  in  any  phase  of  huinan  experi-
ence  in  which  the  actual  remoteness  of  deity  seemed
overcome.  We  shall  expect  it  to  set  excessive  value
upon  those  states  of  enthusiasm,  ecstasy,  intoxication,
in  which  heaven  and  earth  were  felt  to  flow  together ;
and  to  raise  into  prominence  persons  specially  apt
in  the  arts  of  worship,  quite  apart  from  any  other
human  capacity  that  these  persons  might  have  or  lack.


ai8  WORSHIP  AND  TH£  MYSTICS

Thus  the  system  of  worship  develops  its  adepts, —
its  mystics.

Judging  extemaUy,  from  the  qualities  of  dervishdom,
yoginism,  devoteeship  and  sainthood  generally^  all  these
special  achievements  of  approach  to  God  might  he
regarded  as  the  luxury  or  extravagance  of  the  religious
consciousness,  were  it  not  that  they  have  been  regarded
by  religion  as  in  some  form  and  degree  its  chief  neces-
sity. Religion  (which  in  any  g^ven  people  lives  more  or
less  as  a  single  body)  seems  to  breathe  chiefly  through
the  experience  of  individuals  who  carry  to  its  highest
the  art  of  personal  worship :  the  Brahmin  becomes  holy
because  the  act  of  prayer  (Brahman)  is  holy.  The  value
of  the  saint,  to  all  appearances,  must  lie  in  the  simple
fact  that  he  knows  how  to  communicate  with  God ;  this
simple  fact  gives  to  his  look,  his  gait,  his  way  of  judg^
ing  events,  the  sentences  that  fall  from  his  lips,  an
unaccountable  weight.  Of  substantial  result  not  much
more  can  be  extracted  from  these  persons;  not  much
more  has  been  demanded  of  them.  Their  art  of  dealing
with  the  god  has  been  a  matter  of  wonder  not  to  the
people  only,  but  to  themselves  as  well ;  they  have  diffi-
culty in  communicating  either  that  art  or  its  significant
fruits  to  the  religious  public.  They  do  not  mix  well,
these  mystics :  they  must  live  as  objects  to  the  crowd,
solitary  often,  often  in  exclusive  gproups  of  like-minded
spirits,  willing  and  able  to  accept  from  each  other  large
meanings  on  small  suggestions,  leaping  to  some  substance
through  a  swirl  of  dizzy  symbol.  It  is  this  difficulty  of
communication,  this  separation  from  the  mass  in  thought
and  habit,  this  embarrassment  of  speech,  which  has
embodied  itself  in  the  word  mysticism.


THOUGHT  AND  WORSHIP  349

The  suspicion  of  unreality  and  of  pious  distemper
which  this  name  must  always  bear  is  a  monument,  not
all  unjust,  to  the  vanity  of  those  who  first  adopted  it,
as  if  theur.  esoteric  knowledge  and  privilege  with  deity,
this  circumstance  of  separation  from  the  rest  of  men,
were  the  essence  of  their  art,  and  whoUy  a  matter  for
congratulation.  But  it  matters  not  to  us  if  some  or
even  most  prophets  have  been  vain  or  false,  if  there
are  any  true  prophets.  In  this,  as  in  other  g^eat  mat-
ters, nature  makes  a  thousand  failures  to  bring  forth
one  consummate  product.  The  existence  of  the  gen-
uine mystic  —  Bernard,  Mohammed,  Lao  Tze,  Plotinus,
Eckhart,  John  of  the  Gross  —  however  seldom  he  is
found,  is  the  momentous  thing ;  sufficient  to  command
respect  for  the  tradition  of  mysticism,  sufficient  to  jus-
tify the  attention  which  through  religious  history  has
been  f ocussed  upon  these  individuals.

For  the  mysteries  and  the  mystics  have  in  the  course
of  time  distilled  into  their  own  tradition  ihe  essence  of
religious  practice.  They  know,  if  any  know,  how  it  is
that  the  knowledge  of  God  can  be  the  most  universal
of  perceptions,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  rare  and
difficult.  They  know  wherein  the  act  of  prayer  differs
from  an  act  of  reflective  thought.  A  philosophy  of
mysticism  would  be  a  philosophy  of  worship.


NOTE  ON  THE  MEANING  OF  MYSTICISM »

WHEN  we  speak  of  mysticism  we  haTe  now  before  onr
mind  a  great  historic  phenomenon,  found  everywhere
that  religion  is  found:  for  as  there  is  no  religion  without
worship,  so  there  is  no  religion  without  its  specialists  in
worship.  And  a  surrey  of  the  modes  of  approach  to  God
practised  by  the  mystics  in  all  ages  seems  to  confirm  onr
distinction  between  worship  and  the  usual  processes  of
thought  In  these  strange  courtings  of  frenzy,  ecstasy,
intoxication;  in  tiiese  traps  set  for  the  inspiring  deity,
preparations  elaborate,  demonstrative,  fantastic,  inhuman  at
times,  we  see  littie  external  resemblance  to  the  quieter
processes  of  reflection.

Yet,  as  the  methods  of  devotion  clarify;  as  excitement
learns  ito  own  due  channels,  finding  assuagement  in  art  and
ceremonial  dignity ;  and  especially  as  worship  recovers  a  right
to  private  as  well  as  to  public  pursuit ;  worship  approximates
meditotion,  even  externally.  Worship  takes  on  the  aspect  of
a  more  deliberate,  intense,  and  thorough  thinking.  In  thought
as  in  worship,  I  must  to  some  extent  remove  myself  from  the
current  of  experience,  from  ^  appearances  '* ;  I  must  stop  the
intrusions  of  sense,  and  check  the  prepossessions  of  habitual
idea.  Further,  in  thought  as  in  worship,  I  must  yield  myself
to  my  object  and  identify  my  being  for  the  time  with  its  own.
Worship,  then,  is  but  the  completion,  is  it  not,  of  these  par-
tial works  of  common  thought?  and  true  worship  will  issue
in  true  knowledge,  as  ito  essential  result  and  aim. What

^  Baadeit  whose  sya  may  have  fallen  upon  an  artiole  in  Mind,  Jann-
arj  1912,  on  **  The  meaning  of  mjsticiem  as  leen  throogh  its  psyoholofXi"
will  perhaps  reeognixe  in  this  note  and  in  some  of  the  following  ehaptois
disfeeta  membra  of  that  artiole^  mnoh  revised.


ON  THE  MEANING  OF  MYSTICISM  361

this  knowledge  is,  the  mystics  will  report  as  their  peculiar
discovery.

Thas  some  of  the  greater  mystics  and  schools  of  mysticism
have  actually  reduced  worship  back  again  to  thinking,  con-
templation, reflection ;  and  have  represented  the  end  of  wor-
ship as  a  personal  knowledge  of  Grod,  or  even  as  a  doctrine
about  Grod.  To  the  Vedantist,  thought  becomes  the  true
sacrifice,  equivalent  to  and  replacing  all  other  sacrifices.  The
only  art  of  the  mystic  is  after  all  an  art  of  knowing,  difficult
perhaps,  but  not  different  in  character  from  other  thought*
Naturally,  then,  we  might  expect  the  doctrines  of  the  mystics
to  approach  a  conmion  type ;  and  we  might  better  identify
mysticism  with  its  cognitive  result  than  with  any  peculiar  act
of  will  deserving  the  special  name  of  worship.  Such  has
been,  in  fact,  the  fortune  of  mysticism :  in  so  far  as  the
mystics  have  presented  their  results  systematically  they  have
tended  to  a  common  type  of  metaphysical  theory;  and  the
name  mysticism  has  become  attached  to  a  well-known  and
well-refuted  doctrine  about  the  nature  of  God,  or  of  Reality.
In  the  refutation  of  that  doctrine  the  excuse  for  worship  as
a  peculiar  esoteric  art  of  thinking  disappears,  and  practical
religion  merges  itself  with  philosophical  thought.

Thus,  when  Royce  writes  of  mysticism  he  treats  it  as  one
of  the  four  leading  types  of  metaphysical  system,  identified
with  the  doctrine  that  reality  is  pure  unity,  the  negation  of  all
appearances  and  pluralities,  immediate  therefore  and  ineffable.
Of  this  doctrine  Royce  exhibits  the  emptiness  in  wholly  con-
clusive argument :  speculative  mysticism  needs  no  more  refu-
tation, and  shall  have  none  here.  And  we  may  the  more
willingly  refrain  from  further  criticism  since  our  own  view  of
reality  which  excludes  that  one  is  already  before  us.

But  unquestionably  we  restrict  our  view  of  historical  mysti-
cism in  identifying  it  with  this  result :  mysticism  has  been  a
much  broader  thing  than  this  type  of  metaphysics.  Not  all
mystics  have  been  independent  speculators ;  and  not  all  spec-
ulators among  the  mystics  have  conformed  to  this  type. If


aB2  WORSHIP  AKD  THE  MYSTICS

mysticism  ia  found  in  all  religions,  it  mnst  be  foond  avowing
every  conceivable  variety  of  metaphysics ;  every  variety,  that
is,  consistent  with  its  one  necessary  postulate,  that  reality  may
be,  and  ought  to  be,  approached  in  worship.  Christianity,
for  instance,  is  the  home  of  much  mysticism,  even  of  the  best;
yet  Christianity  does  not  profess  the  ^  negative  metaphysics  *' ;
it  is  the  express  foe  of  the  ^  abstract  universal,"  for  its  God
has  once  for  all  sanctioned  the  world  of  appearances  by  becom-
ing flesh  and  dwelling  among  us.  Nor  have  the  Christian
mystics  as  a  body  been  at  war  with  their  creed.  It  is  to  be
presumed  that  tiie  meaning  of  the  mystics  is  compatible  with
truths  whatever  that  may  be ;  and  is  itself  therefore  independ-
ent of  any  passing  theory  of  it.  We  cannot  then  predeter*
mine  the  meaning  and  fate  of  mysticism  by  identifying  it  with
a  doomed  metaphysics*  We  shall  judge  mysticism  first  by
the  mystics,  not  by  the  theories  of  a  few:  and  the  agreement
of  the  mystics  lies  in  that  fact,  prior  to  doctrine,  and  whoUy
coextensive  with  religion,  the  practice  of  union  with  God  in
a  special  act  of  worship.

While  we  cannot  attach  the  meaning  of  historic  mysticism
to  any  one  result  of  thought,  it  remains  true  that  the  art  of
the  mystic  is  closely  allied  with  the  art  of  thinking.  We  can-
not fairly  explain  worship  as  a  developed  and  extended  process
of  reflection  ;  but  we  may  yet  find  that  tiiinking  is  definable
as  a  partial  worship.  Worship  has  its  own  way  of  reaching
wisdom,  and  must  certainly  make  for  truth  rather  than  for
error.  But  if  this  is  the  case,  how  can  we  account  for  the
undoubted  tendency  of  various  important  schools  of  mysticism
to  converge  upon  that  falsely  abstract  metaphysics  ?

This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  explanation  :  that  the  mystic  in
reporting  what  he  has  experienced  has  attributed  to  the  objects
of  his  experience  some  qualities  which  belong  rather  to  his
/  own  inner  state.  To  distinguish  between  what  is  subjective
and  what  is  objective  about  our  experience  is  frequentiy
difficult,  even  in  physical  observation ;  but  especially  in  tiie


ON  THE  MEANING  OF  MYSTICISM  863

ezperienoe  of  the  mystic,  the  objeots  are  diffioult  to  g^rasp,
while  the  inner  event  is  oomparatiyely  tangible.  It  would  be
strange  if  there  were  not  a  general  tendenoy  to  mistake  one
for  the  other. Let  me  enlarge  a  little  upon  this  point.

The  mystic  prays ;  and  wins,  if  he  is  right,  some  answer  to
his  prayer  which  is  significant  to  him.  He  has  won  knowl-
edge, and  such  knowledge  as  he  thinks  reflection  could  hardly
have  brought  him;  but  he  cannot  say  exactly  what  it  is.
Nothing  is  more  notorious  about  the  mystic's  knowledge  than
its  inarticulateness.  The  mystic  himself  knows  that  his  insight
is  unfinished  and  unsatisfactory,  even  while  he  declares  his
experience  to  be  one  of  perfect  satisfaction.  **  The  soul  knows
not  what  that  Ood  is  die  feels,"  says  Corderius.  Curiously
helpless  and  plastic  is  this  knowledge:  able  to  live  under
various  theological  systems  just  because  it  needs  some  help
from  the  environment  to  determine  what  it  is.^  It  is  not
without  an  independent  force  of  reaction  upon  the  conceptions
it  uses ;  but  without  these  conceptions  to  give  it  voice,  it  could
scarcely  win  strength  to  react  on  them.  And  as  the  mystic
has  been  hard  put  to  it  to  tell  what  it  is  that  he  knows,  he  has
in  our  later  and  Western  world  had  increasing  recourse  to
reporting  the  psychology  of  his  experience,  in  Uen  of  its  cog-
nitive contents.  Indeed,  he  has  not  only  used  psychology,  but
has  made  it  for  his  own  purposes.

And  unquestionably  the  reputation  of  mysticism  in  this
world  would  have  suffered  less  if  our  mystics  could  earlier  and
more  completely  have  commanded  this  psychological  mode  of
expression.  Objective-mindedness  is  the  great  merit  of  all
original  religion ;  but  the  long-standing  inability  to  distinguish
between  the  characters  of  an  experience  as  a  temporal  inner
state  and  the  characters  of  its  object  has  cost  religion  much.
Is  it  not  more  than  probable  that  those  words  ^  one,  immediate,
ineffitble  *'  which  describe  the  Reality  of  the  **  negative  meta-
physics,'* are  in  their  first  intention  descriptions  of  the  mystic's
inner  experience? May  it  not  be  that  those  negations  which

1  See  Hdffding. PhilcMophj  of  Religion,  p.  178  ff.


364  WOBSmP  AND  THE  MTSTICS

haye  paned  for  metaphysical  definitioiu  are  in  their  original
meaning  rather  confessiom  of  mental  obetmction  and  diflSeolty
than  aesertions  about  the  Abeolate  ?  There  is  a  wide  differ-
enoe  between  saying,  ^  My  ezperienoe  of  Beality  is  ineffable  '*
(passing  my  present  powers  of  expression)  and  saying
**  Beality  is  ineffable  **  (without  predicates).  As  a  report  of
prooednre  and  experienoe  Beality  may  be  that  which  one
realiaes  when  he  cats  himulfciS  brom  **  appearances,**  closes
as  far  as  may  be  the  ayennes  of  sense,  silences  the  cataract  of
ideas,  and  withdraws  his  mind  into  its  deepest  caye :  in  such
manner  it  may  be  that  the  central  onity  of  the  soul  meets
the  central  unity  of  the  world,  and  knows  it  to  be  one  with
itself.  And  yet,  this  report  of  experience  is  not  to  be  f ortb*
with  translated  as  a  complete  account  of  Beality.  I  must
abstract  myself  also  to  think ;  but  what  I  think  is  not  therefore
an  abstraction.

Something  of  the  character  of  that  experience  must  indeed
belong  to  its  object.  If  there  were  no  contrast  in  reality
between  the  one  and  the  many,  between  the  substance  and  its
appearances,  between  its  indescribable  and  its  describable
aspects,  then  an  experience  which  was  ^  one,  immediate,  and
ineffable  '*  would  find  simply  nothing  in  the  world  to  light
upon.  But  he  who  would  deny  that  such  an  experience  can
discoyer  anything  real  must  be  prepared  to  abolish  the  reality
of  substance.  The  mystic  cannot  find  the  whole  of  reality,
but  be  may  find  its  center ;  he  may  find  the  only  handle  by
which  the  whole  can  be  held  as  a  unity.

And  this  is  the  adyantage  of  psychology  in  dealing  with
mysticism,  that  it  is  non-committal  in  regard  to  the  cognitiye
or  other  possible  importance  of  an  experienoe,  and  may  yet
furnish  the  clue  to  such  meaning.  For  where  self-expression
falters  the  signs  of  meaning  may  still  be  read  in  causes  and
effects.  The  immediacy  of  any  experience  must  submit  to
interpretation  by  what  is  outside  it  and  related  to  it.  The
logic  and  tiie  psychology  of  our  experiences  are  so  adjusted
that  what  becomes  inyisible  to  one  becomes  yisible  to  the  other.


ON  THE  MEANING  OF  MYSTICISM  855

It  is  possible  that  the  thread  of  meaning,  lost  though  it  may
be  to  the  mystio  himself  in  his  ecstatic  moment,  may  at  that
very  moment  appear,  so  to  speak,  on  the  reverse  of  the  cloth,
as  something  then  and  there  happening  to  the  substance  of
the  mystic  himself;  justifying  his  sense  of  the  ^' ontological
importance ''  of  that  event.

This  implies,  of  course,  that  the  ^^  immediacy '*  of  the
mystic  experience  has  its  external  relations ;  and  this  impli*
cation  I  fully  accept  and  shall  try  to  justify.  Some  part  of
the  meaning  of  this  experience  is  to  be  discovered  in  its
external  career.  For  which  reason,  not  only  the  psycholo-
gist, but  such  other  scientists  as  like  him  see  mysticism  in  its
outer  bearings,  the  historian,  the  sociologist,  have  been  quicker
than  the  metaphysician  to  recognize  its  vital  importance  in
religion.

Mysticism,  then,  we  shall  define  not  by  its  doctrine  but
by  its  deed,  the  deed  of  worship  in  its  fully  developed  form.
Nothing  concerns  us  more  than  to  know  what  that  experience
means,  and  what  it  may  add  to  our  knowledge  of  God  :  but
we  shall  not  foreclose  these  questions  by  taking  a  finished
speculative  system  into  our  definition  of  mysticism.  Mysticism  I
is  a  way  of  dealing  with  Grod,  having  cognitive  and  other  fruit,
affecting  first  the  mystic's  being  and  then  his  thinking,  afford-
ing him  thereby  answers  to  prayer  which  he  can  distinguish
from  the  results  of  his  own  reflection.  Since  the  Pseudo-
Dionysius,  ^* mystical  theology"  has  not  meant  a  rival
theology,  but  rather  an  **  experimental  wisdom,"  having  its
own  methods  and  its  own  audacious  intention  of  meeting
deity  face  to  face.


CHAPTER  XXV

PBELIMINABT  DOUBTS  OP  THE  WOBTH  OF

WORSHIP

BUT  can  we  find  anything  in  onnelves  to  corroborate
that  sense  of  ^'ontological  importance"  which
formerly  attended  the  processes  of  worship  ?  To  attain
union  with  God  in  a  mystical  experience,  other  than  in
thoughtful  attention  to  the  mysteries  of  self««onscious-
ness  and  existence  :  we  can  no  longer  take  it  for  granted
that  there  is  any  superior  worth  in  this,  or  indeed  any
worth  at  all.  To  our  present  ethical  and  immanental
mind,  it  is  necessary  to  show  cause  why  any  distinctive
practices  for  religion  should  exist.  To  find  €rod  in
personal  intercourse  and  business  is  enough,  is  it  not  ?
—  the  religion  of  daily  life  and  duty  is  the  importent
thing.  Let  us  approach  Grod  through  these  many
mediators  —  convenient  mediators,  requiring  no  devia*
tion  from  our  reasonable  plans.  Further,  is  there  not
something  displeasing  not  alone  about  the  historic
forms  of  mysticism  but  even  about  the  notion  of  direct
unmediated  union  with  deity  ?  If  we  avoid  the  vocative
case  oftentime  in  dealing  with  our  own  g^reat;  how
much  more  in  thinking  of  Grod.  The  pretence  of  the
mystic  stands  on  no  secure  footing  in  this  modest  and
third-personal  generation.

Only,  let  us  be  thoroughgoing. Let  us  be  clear  that
mysticism  and  common  worship  do  stend  or  fall  together.


THE  WORTH  OF  WORSHIP  367

Are  we  prepared  to  make  away  with  all  religious  observ-
ance^  with  ^^  church/'  and  all  that  goes  with  church?
If  not,  then  recognize  here  some  muffled  remonstrance
against  the  total  vanishing  of  the  art  of  the  mystics.
Is  any  religious  practice  or  institution,  prayer  or  prayer-
posturing,  solemnity,  sacrament,  or  consecration,  or
priestly-office  in  any  form,  of  lingering  significance  to
us,  even  instinctive  and  irrational  ?  Then,  in  heaven's
name,  let  us  do  what  we  can  to  isolate  this  element,
valued  by  many  in  dumbness  and  dilution,  and  make
an  issue  of  its  intrinsic  worth.

Further,  let  us  be  clear  that  wherever  mediated  and
indirect  relations  are  possible  and  valuable,  there  pre-
sumably immediate  relations  are  possible  and  valuable
as  well.  Greenbacks  and  reflected  light  are  on  the
whole  more  widely  useful  than  gold  and  direct  sunshine ;
men  have  tried  to  get  on  without  the  originals  here
also,  but  not  so  far  successf uUy.  And  when  we  con-
sider, is  not  our  doubt  of  worship  even  now  directed
rather  against  the  special  mediators  which  worship  has
been  using  than  against  the  thing  itself  ?  We  do  not
quite  know  what  to  do  with  our  Holy  Writ,  our  Christ,
our  Priests  and  Saints,  and  our  church  institution.  We
are  trying  to  shift  our  mediators  from  these  special  ones
to  some  of  more  universal  character.  But  just  because
of  this  uncertainty  of  mediation,  the  element  of  unme-
diated  dealing  with  God  which  is  at  the  heart  of  all
mediated  dealing  must  assume  greater  importance.
Could  we  regain  the  secret  of  the  worth  of  worship,  it
might  well  become  clear  to  us  what  place  in  God's  world
and  humanity's  world  is  to  be  taken  by  bibles,  priests,
and  redeemers. A  true  understanding  of  mysticism,  I


868  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

▼entore  to  say,  must  either  cleanly  emancipate  as  from
the  whole  of  special  religious  trapping  and  performance,
or  else  reanimate  in  some  vital  fashion  our  historic
system  of  mediation.

Thus,  though  the  art  of  worshq[>  as  interpreted  by  the
mystic  is  foreign  to  many  of  our  prejudices,  a  definite
self-understanding  may  still  show  that  a  clear  rejection
is  too  indiscriminate :  it  may  be  one  of  those  things
which  we  can  hardly  live  with,  nor  yet  live  without.
The  effort  to  dispense  with  it  is  the  best  way  to  realize
its  vitality/  And  it  may  be  possible,  as  a  preliminary
to  our  detailed  study  of  mysticism,  to  verify  —  even  in
a  superficial  review  of  our  own  current  consciousness —
certain  of  those  motives  which  have  led  men  in  the  past
to  approach  their  god  thus  directly  and  individually.
I  doubt  much  whether  that  ancient  sense  of  ^^onto-
logical  importance  "  is  yet  dead*  The  instinctive  nature
[/.  of  prayer  is  some  guarantee  of  its  survival ;  and  it  is
fair  to  assume  that  every  fundamental  instinct  can
present  intelligible  gprounds  for  its  existence.  The
expressions  of  prayer  are  sensitive  to  all  the  advances
of  self-^consciousness ;  hence  there  is  little  outward
resemblance  between  our  own  reserved  devotions  and
those  enthusiastic  orgies,  incantations,  and  slaughter-
feasts  —  we  can  put  ourselves  to  worship  more  handily
than  did  our  forefathers  and  with  less  noise. But  in

^  Worship  is  an  art  which  is  perhaps  being  lost  rather  from  over-
praotioe  and  dilution  of  its  proper  instinct  than  from  actual  loss  of  the
secret.  We  think  that  we  know  what  it  is  all  aboat;  we  find  that  we  get
on  perfectly  well  without  it;  we  learn  with  some  surprise  that  we  ean
give  no  tenable  reason  for  pursuing  it;  we  end  bj  judging  that  it  is  not
for  us,  who  are  now  able  to  follow  our  religion  by  the  perrasiye  and  o&ob-
trusive  processes  of  thought  and  moral  action.


THE  WORTH  OF  WOESHIP  359

some  way,  if  I  mistake  not,  we  can  still  recognize  in
ourselves  traces  of  that  impulse  which  in  the  religious
tongue  is  called  the  ^^  love  of  God/'  some  form  of  that
same  ancient  demand  for  more  direct  touch  with  our
Absolute  than  the  usual  processes  of  thought  afford.

In  the  first  place,  no  one  wholly  escapes  the  sway  of
a  certain  spiritual  ambition,  which  is  unwilling  —  if
there  be  in  the  universe  any  supreme  consciousness  —
to  remain  apart,  or  in  any  relation  to  that  consciousness
which  is  relatively  external  and  distant.  If  there  is  in
the  world  any  such  being  as  God  is  supposed  to  be,  a
career  is  set  for  every  soul :  there  is  an  inevitable  trend
of  all  finite  spirits  to  a  consciously  understood  footing
with  that  being.  In  structure  this  is  a  well-known
principle  of  human  action.  It  is  akin  to  the  necessity
whereby  every  Christopher  must  serve  his  Strongest :
because,  namely,  it  is  not  good,  and  in  the  long  run
insupportable,  that  two  great,  self-conscious,  self-appre-
ciating powers  should  exist  in  simple  pluralism  or
disunion,  unperceptive  of  each  other,  unmeasured
against  each  other.  The  strong  man  who  values  his
strength  is  restless  until  he  finds  that  situation  in  the
world  where  his  strength  is  placed.  There  is  a  neces-
sity imposed  upon  every  self-knowing  thing  to  seek  the
most  self-knowing  and  the  most  exceUent  as  that  in
whose  presence  it  finds  itself  finally  known  and  judged.^

^  Doubtless  I  am  attributing  to  the  lovers  of  God  a  greater  sense  of
their  own  merits  than  at  onoe  appears  to  their  own  overt  oonsoiousness.
fint  in  all  these  matters  we  are  seeking  an  interpretation  that  is  not  yet
found :  and  we  must  assume  the  privilege  of  knowing  the  soul  of  the
mystic,  if  not  better  than  it  knows  itself,  at  least  more  analytically,  appeal-
ing to  our  own  self-serutiny  above  all  traditional  descriptions  of  the
worshipful  temper.


t


960  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

There  is  an  impulge  here  like  that  by  which  men  flock
to  cities  and  to  great  occasions,  seeking  centers  where
there  is  adequate  knowledge,  measurement,  and  placing
of  men.  A  fundamental  and  holy  presumption  of  worth
there  is  in  this  love  of  Grod,  such  as  no  soul  can  dissem-
ble. However  retiring  the  spirit  may  be  with  r^ard  to
the  highly-conscious  regions  of  this  historic  world,  to  be
retiring  with  regard  to  God  is  unmeaning  and  impossible.
A  sheer  hunger  there  is  in  all  of  us  for  self-conscious-
ness more  nearly  absolute  than  we  yet  have :  in  some
form  and  degree  this  motive  is  felt  and  appreciated  by
all  men.

And  what  we  can  thus  appreciate  in  diffusion,  we
must  allow  to  come  to  legitimate  dominance  in  special-
ization (quite  another  thing  from  extravagance  or  ex-
aggeration). In  some  souls  this  ambition  may  still
become  a  ruling  passion,  and  in  them  we  may  best
see  the  meaning  of  what  is  vague  and  truncated  in
ourselves.  To  such  minds  the  simple  fact  of  the
existence  of  a  god  is  an  imperative  profound  and  practi-
cal :  prayer  with  them  becomes  a  clarified  and  persistent
purpose  which  strikes  out  at  once  upon  an  unrecalled
journey  of  devotion.  This  impulse  is  seen  at  its  height
in  those  precocious  mystics  who  even  in  childhood  (as
Teresa  and  Guyon)  could  not  hear  of  martyrdom  without
a  surge  of  envy,  and  resolves  to  become  martyrs  likewise.
Here  is  a  spiritual  exquisiteness  which  may  easily  become
a  spiritual  avarice :  but  it  is  obviously  in  this  sense  a
disinterested  love,  that  it  takes  precedence  of  all  other
interests,  and  requires  no  recompense  in  their  terms.
These  are  the  mystics  by  birth, — they  who  '^desire  to
leave  all  in  order  to  be  with  God."


THE  WORTH  OF  WORSHIP  361

But  note  well  that  while  the  mystic  of  genius  is  a
natural  product,  the  mystic  impulse  is  not  a  matter  of
special  temperament.  For  there  are  mystics  in  all  tem-
peraments.  This  incentive  is  deep  enough  in  human
nature  to  take  various  forms  according  to  the  disposition
of  the  mind.  There  are  fierce  mystics  as  well  as  tender
ones ;  men  who  scorn  to  live  in  a  world  where  they  are
uncertain  of  their  own  souls ;  who  storm  the  gates  of
the  heavenly  city  till  they  wrest  from  God  the  pledge
of  their  security — the  Jacobs,  Brunos,  Luthers.  Under
all  such  saintly  bluster  and  Teuf  elsdrockian  defiance  we
can  still  recognize  the  love  of  God,  the  ontological
ambition,  the  need  of  an  unyielding  origin  for  the
thrusts  of  the  will.  There  are  practical  and  world-mov-
ing mystics  as  well  as  dreamy  ones,  —  the  Mohammeds,
Bernards,  Loyolas,  Wesleys.^  The  love  of  God,  also,
will  be  coloured  by  every  defect  of  the  lover :  there  will
be  sentimental  mystics,  and  cowardly  mystics,  and  lazy
mystics,  and  many  another  sort.  It  is  the  property  of
mysticism  to  set  all  such  elements  of  personality  into
high  relief  —  not  a  disadvantage,  if  one  demands  self-
knowledge.  We  have  no  present  interest  in  these
peculiarities  save  to  show  that  the  spiritual  ambition  of
the  mystic  is  the  prerogative  of  no  one  peculiar  type  of
human  nature.

The  love  of  God,  I  have  said,  desires  the  assured
presence  of  God  and  the  drastic  self-knowledge  which
that  presence  brings,  as  an  immediate  insight. But

^  Wesley  and  Lather  were  mystics  within  onr  definition,  though  both
were  hostile  to  certain  types  of  mysticism  which  came  uncomfortably  near
to  their  own  positions,  so  that  verbally  they  are  known  rather  as  opponents
of  mysticism  than  as  mystics.


382  WOBSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

there  is  another  aspect  of  this  same  spiritual  ambition ;
for  worship  seems  to  contain  a  demand  for  knowledge
of  truth  about  the  world,  as  well  as  about  self.  The
mystic  reports  that  he  now  knows  something  about  the
meaning  of  life  and  death,  and  of  the  other  grave
things  that  concern  mankind.  This  is  such  knowl-
edge as  each  individual  soul  of  man  has  need  of,  and
such  as  one  can  hardly  accept  either  on  hearsay  or  on
inference,  if  it  can  be  obtained  in  one's  own  immediate
perception.

Fear  of  the  unknown,  the  primitive  human  fear,  though
it  has  become  much  socialized,  is  not  to  be  banished.
Our  own  personal  destiny  we  may  now,  in  the  midst  of
a  worthful  social  order,  more  readily  and  honorably
forget  than  could  our  ancestors:  and  to  affect  an
unconcern  regarding  death  and  the  future  has  become
in  some  eyes  a  stock  virtue.  But  these  things  cannot
always  be  forgotten,  nor  ever  rightfully  forgotten,  until
we  have  once  cleared  our  minds  with  regard  to  them.
The  need  to  make  immediately  sure  the  foundations  of
life  is  not  an  impulse  that  can  grow  antiquated  or
improper.  No  motive  to  prayer  is  more  fundamental
than  this,  which  in  presence  of  such  a  limit  of  insight
as  makes  the  soul  a  subordinate  in  the  universe  requires
of  existence  the  power  to  surmount  it.  And  on  no
point  are  the  mystics  more  agreed  than  on  this,  that
worship  brings  "  revelation."  The  **  noetic  "  character
of  mystic  experience  is  so  general  that  James  includes  it
in  his  definition  of  mysticism.  HoWy  in  the  presence  of
God  who  knows  these  things,  the  worshipper  also  gains
some  insight  into  them  I  do  not  here  enquire;  but  it
seems  evident  that  the  impulse  of  prayer  has  in  it  as  one


THE  WORTH  OF  WORSHIP  363

ingredient  a  desbe  for  such  insight  as  this ;  and  that
some  of  the  mystics  think  themselves  to  have  gained  it.
The  mystic's  remarkable  inability  to  speak  out  may
be  no  discredit  to  either  the  value  or  the  universality
of  what  he  so  mysteriously  knows.  It  is  a  principle
observable  elsewhere  that  the  more  heavily  we  are
impressed  by  a  truths  the  more  difficult  it  is  to  put  its
significance  at  once  into  words.  He  who  knows  in  any
intense  and  profound  fashion  may  labor,  as  poets  have
sometimes  done,  for  years  with  the  burden  of  his  mean-
ing. It  is  quitQ  possible  to  win  an  insight  suddenly,
and  to  know  that  one  has  it;  and  yet  to  find  that
knowledge  standing  forth  in  the  midst  of  the  soul  like
a  body  at  once  powerfully  charged  and  powerfully
insulated,  sputtering  with  sparks  and  fringes  and
penumbrsB,  but  accomplishing  no  relieving  strokes.
The  circumstance  which  gives  credit  to  the  mystic's
assertion  is  that  he  has  held  himself  responsible  for  his
alleged  revelation.  He  has  labored  to  make  it  public,
notwithstanding  its  difficulty.  Boehme  spends  twelve
years,  so  he  tells  us,  in  bringing  to  birth  the  truth  with
which  two  such  experiences  had  burdened  him.  In
spite  of  what  James  tells  us,  that  the  mystic's  knowledge
is  not  binding  on  any  but  himself,  it  is  obvious  that  the
mystic  is  under  some  radical  necessity  of  propagating
his  truth :  is  he  not  the  most  vehement  propagandist  of
history  ?  And  have  not  men,  on  the  whole,  benefitted
by  his  announcements  ?  Some  knowledge  of  universal
truth,  it  seems,  may  come  to  men  through  worship.

And  our  judgment  of  the  worth  of  worship  must
also  take  into  account,  as  I  surmise,  the  worth  of  novelty


364  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTICS

I  in  knowledge  and  in  life  generally.  In  the  worship  of
the  gods,  the  force  of  all  habits  is  for  the  moment
destroyed,  habits  of  mind  and  of  action.  In  tribal  life,
the  customary  taboos  are  suspended;  the  moment  of
worship  is  an  antinomian  moment,  and  what  is  deposited
out  of  it  may  be  different  from  what  was  dissolved  into
it.  From  their  mystics  the  people  are  ready  at  this
time  to  hear  things  and  to  receive  commands  which
would  previously  have  been  blasphemy.  Mystical  prac-
tices may  themselves  become  habitual,  and  have  their
acknowledged  place  in  the  system  of  thing^s;  oracles
and  prophecies  have  their  established  modes  and  places :
but  these  are  habitual  ways  of  receiving  the  destruction
of  habit ;  they  are  the  point  of  fixity  which  renders  all
other  fixities  relative  and  unnecessary.  Worship  is  the
provision  which  the  spiritual  constitution  has  made  for
its  own  perpetual  amendment.

In  the  increasing  solidification  of  tribal  life,  and  the
submergence  of  personality  in  the  *^  cake  of  custom,"
the  god-consulting  process  is  the  one  spot  which  remains
fluent  and  strange  to  the  tribe  itself.  Hence  doubtless
the  uncouth  forms  in  which  mystical  practices  have
clothed  themselves;  the  strange  spot  in  the  life  of  a
strange  people  may  well  seem  alien  to  our  own  habits
(unless,  indeed,  we  find  it  the  one  spot  in  which  that
weird  social  machinery  becomes  wholly  human  and  uni-
versal). But  however  tamed  worship  may  become,  it
has  always  this  same  function  in  the  life  of  people  or
of  individual :  it  involves  the  external  criticism  of  all
habit,  and  a  radical  openness  to  novelty.  Within  the
motive  of  worship  there  is  to  be  discerned,  I  believe,  a
weariness  of  the  old,  the  habitual,  the  established,  —  a


THE  WORTH  OF  WORSHIP  S65

hunger  for  what  is  radically  new  and  untried.  This  is,  I
in  part;  the  significance  of  that  deliberate  undoing  of  all
bonds  and  attachments,  of  all  received  knowledges  and
properties,  which  is  part  of  the  preparation  for  the  mys-
tical experience  in  all  ages.  If  it  were  possible  for  the
soul  to  become  aware  of  all  its  attachments  and  habits,
how  could  it  be  better  disposed  for  originality?  The
scientific  discipline  of  the  mind  is  of  the  same  effect
in  its  own  sphere:  to  disaffect  oneself  as  far  as  may
be  of  prepossessions,  to  recognize  and  allow  for  the
biases  of  the  person,  the  body,  and  the  age.  It  is  not
improbable,  then,  that  worship  may  include  this  value
of  preparing  the  soul  for  the  reception  of  novelty
with  its  primary  value  of  uniting  the  worshipper  with
his  God.

Worship  may  be  regarded  as  an  attempt  to  detach
oneself  from  everything  else  in  uniting  with  God.  It
seeks  God  first  as  an  object,  that  Other  of  all  worldly
objects;  and  it  seeks  to  join  itself  to  that  absolute
Other.  The  mystic  proceeds  by  negation ;  this  and
that,  he  says,  are  not  God :  it  is  not  these  that  I  seek.
The  effort  of  worship  measures  the  soul's  power  of
detachment.  And  my  power  of  detachment  measures
the  whole  of  my  freedom,  the  whole  of  my  possibility
of  happiness,  the  whole  of  my  possible  originality,  the
whole  depth  and  reach  of  my  morality  and  of  my  human
contribution.  What  the  mystic  reaches  is,  in  terms  of
his  world-conceptions,  a  zero :  not  indeed  the  Whole  of
reality,  but  Substance,  the  heart  of  God.  It  is  just
such  a  zero  as  one  encounters  when  he  seeks  his  own
soul  behind  the  shifting  content  of  his  experience,  or
when  he  seeks  the  soul  of  another,  in  distinction  from


a86  WOBSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTICS

that  other's  varioiis  external  expressions.  This  zero  is
not  a  phce  to  stay  in;  bat  it  may  be  pre-eminently  a
place  to  return  to,  and  to  depart  Jram.  In  worship
one  touches  the  bottom  of  that  bottomless  pit  of  Self
and  perceives  at  hand  the  real  Origin  of  things ;  gaining
not  the  whole  of  any  knowledge,  but  the  beginning
and  measure  of  all  knowledge.  May  not  worship  be
described  as  the  will  to  become,  for  a  moment  and
within  one's  own  measure,  what  existence  is ;  or  more
simply,  as  the  act  of  recalling  oneself  to  being  f

If  these  sug^^estions  have  truth  in  them,  the  act  of
worship  may  beg^  to  justify  itself,  even  from  the  stand-
point of  use  in  experience.  It  might  be  described  as
a  spontaneous  impulse  for  spiritual  self-preservation ;
for  self-placing,  for  the  ultimate  judgment  of  life,  and
for  the  perpetual  renewal  of  the  worth  of  life.  And  in
thus  returning  to  the  sources  of  being  we  may  still  more
dimly  discern,  it  may  be,  a  self-preservation  of  farther
scope,  such  as  immortality  may  hang  on ;  a  glint  of
ontological  bearing  of  unlimited  importance.

It  is  true  that  the  **  love  of  God  "  does  not  explicitly
seek  these  things :  it  is  the  wholly  simple  impulse  of
which  these  strands  are  but  artificially  severed  elements.
The  worth  of  God's  presence  to  the  genuine  mystic  in
a  sufficient  and  absolute  good ;  and  he  often  expresses
himself  as  if  the  ecstasy  of  his  moment  were  its  own
justification.  But  every  immediate  value  must  be  sanc-
tioned by  its  bearings  in  the  system  of  all  values,  must
have  a  meaning  which  can  give  account  of  itself  in
^the  form  of  knowledges  such  as  we  have  suggested.
H  Worship  must  not  be  an  intoxication  which  alienates


THE  WORTH  OF  WORSHIP  367

the  flool  from  the  duller  interests  of  experience ;  and  ||
hence,  as  mysticism  has  learned  its  own  meaning,  it
has  realized  that  subjective  delight  recommends  noth-
ing, and  that  the  supremacy  of  the  moment  of  its
experience  must  be  judged  by  the  staying  powers  of
its  insight.

We  must  not  hesitate,  therefore,  to  explain  the  love
of  God  by  what  it  is  not, — the  one  by  the  many,  the
disinterested  by  the  interested,  the  self-abandoning  by
the  self-seeking.  We  must  assert  that  there  is  no  love
of  God  which  is  not  at  the  same  time  an  unlimited  self-
valuation  ;  that  there  is  always  something  self-seeking
about  worship  and  mysticism  generally.  Something
forever  dissatisfied  with  what  mankind,  in  its  habit,
philosophy,  art,  and  formula  generally  have  to  offer
this  individual  soul  for  its  safety  and  comfort  and  occu-
pation and  enjoyment  and  loyalty.  Not  good  enough
is  all  this  for  my  personal  particular  spirit,  says  die
mystic ;  nothing  in  the  world  is  good  enough  for  me.
But  because  of  this  personal  dissatisfaction,  and  demand,
and  further  seeking  for  self,  something  creative  might
well  come  of  worship,  we  think.  And  something  not
un-social  in  its  result.  Perhaps  this  spark  of  ontological
ambition  which  creative  nature  has  deposited  in  the
single  self,  is  nature's  own  way  of  bringing  the  new  to
pass  for  the  good  of  all  creation.  It  is  indeed  the
noblest  and  truest  of  all  self-seeking  tempers,  the  utmost
measure  of  character  and  worth.  The  love  wherewith
God  loves  the  individual  may  reappear,  perchance,  in
that  love  wherewith  the  individual  loves  God,  —  and
himself,  —  and  all  men.

So  much,  then,  for  preliminary  conjectures  as  to  the


WORSHIP  ASD  THE  MYSTICS


poawm  pciHUUWiit  wortli  of  wouiupy  tint

the  mjrtical  love  of  God. We  Bay  now  jmt

I  tnU  with  gJMlgr  ftiff  i  ^  to  aa  csaadnitioB  of  tko

fuetimtiie


CHAPTER  XXVI

THE  MYSTIC'S  PREPARATION :  THE  NEGATIVE

PATH

WHAT  worship  is,  and  how  it  differs  from  think-
ingy  the  mystics  themselves  have  made  copious
efforts  to  explain.  Whatever  the  distinctive  nature  of
worship  may  be,  something  of  it  should  appear  in  a
study  of  the  ways  used  by  the  mystics  in  approaching
their  god,  and  in  the  directions  which  they  have  given
to  other  souls  who  would  win  the  same  certainty.

In  undertaking  such  a  study,  we  shall  not  do  well  to
impose  at  first  our  own  language  upon  the  mystics.  We
must  give  ourselves  over  for  the  time  to  their  g^dance,
to  their  own  modes  of  expression,  and  even  —  so  far  as
we  can -to  their  sentimente;  realizing  that  they  are
laboring  with  conceptions  not  wholly  literalized,  and
that  we  shall  be  able  in  due  course  to  win  our  own
freedom  and  our  own  interpretation.

But  as  the  mystics  have  been  pioneers  in  psycholog-
ical analysis  we  shall  not  be  at  any  moment  free  from
the  necessity  of  looking  behind  their  language.  In
trying  to  give  explicit  guidance,  our  spiritual  directors
have  been  only  too  careful,  too  profuse,  too  minute  in
their  distinctions ;  and  one  must  perforce  ride  over  these
distinctions  somewhat  roughly.  And  further,  we  must
expect  much  of  the  figurative  and  even  cryptic  in  their
speech. There  seems  to  be  some  intrinsic  difficulty


370  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS


about  explaining  worship  in  literal  terms,  or  without
presupposing  that  the  hearer  already  knows  what  is
meant.  The  Book  itself  nowhere  explains,  but  simply
assumes  that  we  understand  what  is  implied  in  '^  lifting
up  our  eyes  unto  the  hills,''  and  in  all  similar  figures.^

Indeed,  there  is  a  strong  disposition  in  the  mystic,
even  when  he  acts  as  guide,  to  g^ve  up  the  effort  of
describing  what  is  distinctive  of  worship  :  he  is  inclined
to  summarize  whatever  is  unique  about  the  process,  and
especially  whatever  distinguishes  it  from  thinking,  by
invoking  a  special  faculty  of  the  mind  —  this  we  have
already  noticed.  Nothing  could  more  strongly  express
his  conviction  that  worship  and  thought  are  diverse;
but  of  course  all  such  appeals  to  a  special  faculty  throw
the  burden  of  understanding  back  upon  the  hearer.
The  names  which  the  mystics  have  invented  for  this
special  faculty  are  curious  and  wonderful,  yet  not  with-
out power  of  suggestion. We  found  Tauler,  in  the

*  Ai  powar  of  ptyehologieal  aiudjsifl  growB,  oar  mystie  adnaers  uo
able  to  moot  the  Mml  more  nearl j  on  its  own  ground ;  yet  the  retolti  of
this  progroM  for  the  meet  pert  make  not  leta  demand,  bat  rather  more,
apon  oar  natire  andentanding.  This  paieage  from  Tanler  b  not  more
eryptie  than  many  another  :  '*  Only  to  thoee  it  thii  great  Good,  Light,  and
Comfort  roTealed  who  are  ontwardly  pore  and  inwardly  enlightened,  and
who  know  how  to  dwell  within  themeelTee.  .  .  .  When  the  Namelem  in
the  loal  tarns  itielf  wholly  inward  toward  God,  there  follows  and  tarns
with  it  OTerything  which  in  man  hath  a  name.  And  this  taming  attaehes
itself  always  to  that  in  Grod  which  is  likewise  Nameless.  .  .  .  Then  in
snob  a  man  God  announces  his  trne  peace."  Saoh  words  as  these  are
snrely  addressed  rather  to  those  who  already  know  than  to  those  who  from
the  standpoint  of  ignorance  enqnire,  and  Taaler  is  not  nnconscioas  of  this.
*'  Now  I  will  tell  yoa  something  farther  of  this  search  .  .  .  and  in  plain
German  words,  too ;  yet  I  fear  that  yoa  will  not  all  onderstand  them.
Bat  those  of  yon  who  hare  already  experienced  something  of  snch  saered
things,  and  in  whom  snob  light  has  onee  inwardly  shined,  may  well
nnderstand  somethiag  of  what  I  say." (Predigten,  ii.  907,  Ansg.  1S41.)


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  371

passage  quoted,  referring  to  this  faculty  as  ^^  the  Name-
less in  the  soul '' ;  and  Tauler  is  exceptionally  fertile  in
just  such  names  for  this  Nameless.  It  is  called  the
Spark  of  the  soul  (Fiinklein,  Eckhart;  Scintilla,  Bona-
ventura),  the  Apex  of  the  soul,  also  the  Ground  of  the
soul,  further,  its  Groundless  Nothing,  its  Bight  Eye,  its
Eternal  Eye,  its  Upward  Face,  its  Innermost,  and  the
like.  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  We
understand  these  expressions,  more  or  less  dimly,  just
as  we  understand  what  ^'  The  Subconscious  "is  —  our
modern  Great  Fetich  of  a  special  faculty :  we  under-
stand them  in  so  far  as  we  find  within  our  own  experi-
ence something  which  may  serve  as  key  to  the  riddle.
We  have,  indeed,  no  reason  to  reject  as  meaningless
these  appeals  to  a  special  faculty :  we  are  no  longer  in
danger  of  picturing  our  mind  in  insulated  compart-
ments: we  may  use  these  names  as  indicating  the
process  of  worship  in  its  totality y  and  vaguely  charac-
terizing its  difference  from  other  activities.^  They  are
summary  names  for  our  problem,  and  as  such  they  are
useful  and  true :  but  they  are  the  beginning  of  our
analysis,  not  the  end  of  it.


Various  as  the  ways  are  which  mystics  in  different
ages  have  used  in  approaching  their  god,  their  resem-

^  We  know  that  one  "  faculty  "  is  dbtingoiihed  from  another  only
(a)  by  difference  in  the  objects  with  which  it  deals,  and  (b)  by  a  differ-
ence in  the  procedure  by  which  these  objects  are  found.  The  faculty  of
religious  knowledge  is  thus  to  be  defined  (a)  by  the  fact  that  it  considers
€rod  as  its  object,  and  (b)  by  the  fact  that  we  have  distinctiTe  things  to
do  in  order  to  approach  God.  The  faculty  itself  is  but  a  name  for  these
actions  taken  as  one.


372  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

blances  run  deep.  In  all  of  them  there  are  efforts  of
the  mind  fairly  described  in  the  medieval  terms,  purga-
tion and  meditation.  And  in  all  of  them  these  active
efforts  are  brought  to  a  close  by  a  voluntary  passivity.

Let  me  note  in  passing  that  in  all  acts  of  will,  the
body  plays  its  part ;  and  it  is  the  physical  side  of  all
mental  acts,  whether  one  sets  himself  about  thinking,
or  enjoying,  or  praying,  which  is  most  directly  control-
lable. In  proportion  as  the  inner  process  is  subtle  and
evanescent,  the  physical  preliminaries  must  be  extensive.
The  most  delicate  instruments  of  precision  require  the
heaviest  of  foundations.  If  attention  is  preparing  for
some  especially  fine  discrimination,  as  in  listening  for  faint
sounds,  the  larger  muscles  will  be  called  into  play  as  a
frame  to  the  smaller  ones.  Thus  in  worship  also,  or
rather,  especially  in  worship,  the  physical  basis  must  be
cared  for :  the  first  preparation  of  the  mystic  has  always
been  a  physical  preparation,  more  or  less  elaborate — of
cleansing,  fasting,  continence,  ascetic  practices  generally,
solitude,  darkness,  kneeling  or  other  special  disposition
of  the  body.  We  have  no  need  to  go  into  the  details
of  these  performances,  which  are  at  bottom  quite  as
instinctive  as  are  the  physical  efforts  of  thought  and
emotion ;  we  have  simply  to  note  their  necessary  presence.
Worship  is  too  spiritual  a  process  to  dispense  with  the
material.  It  is  only  by  the  enlistment  of  the  body,  in
some  fashion,  that  the  body  can  be  held  in  leash  during
the  difficult  flight  of  the  soul.

Now  of  the  inner  preparation  itself  which  accompan-
ies this  external  activity,  it  is  predominantly  negative ;
and  we  may  begin  by  considering  the  mystic's  self-denial,
or  "purgation."


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  873

The  mystic's  effort  is  largely  given  to  suppressing  the
various  natural  momenta  both  of  the  mind  and  of  the
desires^ — an  essay,  as  we  have  said,  in  detachment.  It
is  a  summary  exercise  of  one*s  power  both  of  abstraction
and  of  renunciation.  ^*  Into  this  house  (of  his  innermost
self)  must  man  now  go,  and  completely  desist  from  and
abandon  his  sensations,  and  all  sensible  things,  such  as
are  brought  into  the  soul  and  perceived  by  the  senses
and  the  imagination.  And  he  must  also  put  away  all
ideas  and  forms,  even  the  conceptions  of  reason,  and  all
activity  of  his  own  reason."  ^  ^^  A  man  must  begin  by
denying  himself,  and  willingly  forsaking  all  things  for
Gk)d's  sake,  and  must  give  up  his  own  will,  and  all  his
natural  inclinations,  and  separate  and  cleanse  himself
thoroughly  from  all  sins  and  evil  ways  •  .  .  And  when
a  man  hath  thus  broken  loose  from  and  outleaped  all
temporal  things  and  creatures,  he  may  afterward  become
perfect, "  etc.  ^'No  one  can  be  enlightened  unless  he  be
first  cleansed  or  purified  and  stripped.  So  also,  no  one
can  be  united  with  God  unless  he  be  first  enlightened.
Thus  there  are  three  stages:  first,  the  purification  (or
purgation);  secondly,  the  enlightening;  thirdly,  the
union."  *

In  this  sort  of  mental  and  moral  self-suppression,
there  is  much  room  for  casuistry.  The  attempt  to
deny  self  completely  brings  Oriental  mystic  and  West-
em  mystic  into  the  same  familiar  paradoxes  of  self-
consciousness.  From  what  self,  and  from  what  desires
must  I  detach  myself?  or  from  all  ?  And  if  from  all,
for  what  motive?

1  Tanler.  3.  Predigt  anf  den  3.  Sonnt.  naeh  Trin.

'  Thaologia  Germanieai  tnuis.  Winkworth,  chi.  ziii  and  st.


374  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTICS

Here  the  philosophies  part  the  mystics.  The  more
roundly  God  is  divided  off  from  the  world,  the  more
unreleDting  is  the  antithesis  between  all  heavenly  and
all  earthly  affections.  If  we  can  draw  a  clear  line
between  the  eternal  and  the  temporal  the  task  of  repu-
diating the  temporal  becomes  a  deadly  affair.  If  it  is
once  fairly  accomplished,  the  mystic  has  destroyed  all
reason  for  return.  '^  If  our  inward  man  were  to  make
a  leap  and  spring  into  the  Perfect,  we  should  find  and
taste  how  that  the  Perfect  is  without  measure  .  .  .  better
and  nobler  than  all  which  is  imperfect  and  in  part,  and
the  Eternal  above  the  temporal  or  perishable,  and  the
fountain  and  source  above  all  that  floweth  or  can  ever
flow  from  it.  Thus  that  which  is  imperfect  and  in  part
would  become  tasteless  and  be  as  nothing  to  us."  ^  Such
a  soul  has  become  a  citizen  of  another  country;  it
resumes  its  loves,  if  at  all,  with  a  gleam  of  absence —
the  mystic  has  become  spofled  for  living.^

It  is  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  facts  about  human
nature  that  it  is  capable,  under  the  spell  of  religious
ambition,  of  such  superhuman  heart-steeling.  A  large
part  of  the  fame  of  mysticism  in  history  is  due  to  its
achievements  in  indifference.  And  though  the  giants
of  self-mutilation  may  have  been  the  victims  of  mis-
taken theories,  I  find  in  their  willingness  to  pay  the
extreme  price  something  heroic  to  which  I  cannot  but
do  reverence.  He  who  believes  that  ^'  if  God  is  to  come
in,  the  creatures  must  go  out ''  must  make  his  drastic
choice.

*  Theologia  Grmanica,  oh.  ri.

*  **  And  if  oar  Lord  did  not  now  and  than  toifer  thaae  Tinoos  to  be
forgotten,  though  thej  reonr  again  and  again  to  memorj,  I  know  net  how

oonld  be  borne." Tereia,  Life,  ch.  znnriii  (tr.  Lewia).


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  376

But  human  nature  has  also  its  own  quiet  refutations :
these  holy  ones  do  often  grow  less  zealous  when  sep-
arated from  their  influence  and  fame.  Can  it  be  that
all  this  violence  has  but  driven  worldly  interest  to  more
subtle  attachments?  For  the  most  part,  yes:  the  love
of  life  has  been  dispersed  and  transformed,  not  destroyed.
It  has  been,  in  part,  the  good-fortune  of  mysticism  that
self-scrutiny  has  its  limits;  that  many  a  wider  human
affection  may  exist  without  being  observed  and  hunted
to  death.  If  St.  Catherine  of  Siena  has  become  the
'^ bride  of  Christ"  she  cannot,  of  course,  be  the  bride  of
any  mortal :  but  she  is  set  free  to  love  many  a  mortal  as
no  other  woman  dare.  Fortunate  St.  Catherine,  whose
self-searching  has  its  limit.  Unfortunate  Meister  Eck-
hart  and  many  another  who  can  think  out  such  demands
as  this :  ^^  So  long  as  ye  desire  to  fulfil  the  will  of  God
and  have  any  desire,  even  after  eternity  and  God,  so
long  are  ye  not  truly  poor.  He  alone  hath  true  spiritual
poverty  who  wills  nothing,  knows  nothing,  desires  noth-
ing." ^  Here  mysticism  groans  on  the  rack  of  its  own
logic;  and  must  continue  to  do  so,  until  after  untold
spiritual  agony  it  discovers  the  meaning  of  its  negations.
This  radical  self-annihilation  must  g^ve  way :  the  negation
of  opposition  must  become  a  negation  of  priority.  For
the  sounder  mystics  the  love  of  God  remains  at  the  heart
of  their  plural  other  loves:  and  if  the  fires  of  these

^  In  justice  to  Eokhart  I  should  saj  that  he  is  not  always  so  nihilistic.
The  following  fragment  of  a  saying  (italics  mine)  may  more  fairly
express  what  he  means :  "  was  ist  luterkeit  ?  das  ist  das  sioh  der  mensohe
gekeret  habe  yon  alien  creatnren  vnt  sin  herce  so  gar  of  gerichtet  habe
gen  dem  Intern  gaot,  das  ime  kein  oreatnre  trcBstliohen  si,  rnt  ir  ooeh
nit  begere  denne  aUuU  al$  si  doi  luter  guot,  da$  gat  if/,  darinne  hegriffen
mag:* Waokemagel,  Altd.  Leseb.,  ool.  681.


376  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

become  invisible  during  the  moment  of  sacred  passion,
it  is  not  the  invisibility  of  death.  They  have  joined
their  tongues  in  one  upleaping  flame,  to  return  without
break  to  the  severalty  of  their  individual  altars.

Changing  conceptions  admit  some  union  of  the  infi-
nite with  the  finite;  nevertheless  the  active  part  of
worship  stiU  remains  a  path  of  negation.  For  the  god
whom  the  mystic  seeks  is  in  fact  something  other  than
any  given  natural  object  of  pursuit;  and  since  we  are
always  better  aware  of  what  our  absolute  is  not  than  of
what  it  is,  the  note  of  negation  must  remain  predomi-
nant. But  meanwhile,  worship  has  its  positive  side
also;  the  mystic  has  always  in  some  way  recognized  the
fact  that  passion  can  be  cast  out  only  by  some  greater
passion.  We  may  now  consider  what  these  positive
elements  are.

U

In  turning  away  from  the  world,  the  mystic  has
always  needed  something  to  turn  toward ;  in  all  of  his
purgation  there  has  been  an  element  of  ^'meditation."
He  has  done  what  he  can  to  find  his  own  positive  ulti-
mate will,  to  make  real  to  himself  what  it  is  that  he
most  deeply  cares  for.  He  has  tried  to  remind  himself
of  his  absolute  good.

A  great  part  of  what  we  commonly  know  as  prayer
is,  in  effect,  just  such  a  process  of  self-reminding.  The
simplest  rational  account  of  prayer  would  probably  be
this:  a  voluntary  recollection  of  those  deepest  prin-
ciples of  will,  or  preference,  which  the  activities  of  liv-
ing tend  to  obscure.  In  essence,  this  is  not  different
from  the  practice  developed chiefly  by  the  Roman


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  377

Stoics,  who  found  it  useful  as  a  matter  of  self-discipline
to  recall,  in  this  or  that  trying  situation,  what  is  truly
to  be  desired  and  valued,  and  what  is  a  mere  illusion  of
value.  ^^Straightway  practise  saying  to  every  harsh
appearance,  you  are  an  appearance,  and  in  no  wise
what  you  pretend  to  be.  •  .  .  Never  say  about  any-
thing, I  have  lost  it ;  but  say,  I  have  restored  it.  .  .  .  Is
the  oil  spilled  ?  Say,  on  the  occasion.  At  such  a  price
is  sold  freedom  from  perturbation.  ...  In  every  cir-
cumstance, hold  these  reflections  ready :

Lead  me,  O  Zens,  and  thoa,  O  Destinj,

The  way  I  am  bid  by  yon  to  go  :

To  f oUow  I  am  ready. If  I  choose  not,

I  make  myself  a  wietoh  —  and  still  must  foUow.**

Thus  the  practice  of  bethinking  oneself  of  one's  first
principles  of  value  shades  with  Epictetus  insensibly  into
prayer.

But  in  the  prayers  of  the  typical  mystics,  the  act  of
self-reminding  is  less  frequently  concerned  with  such
explicit  truths  or  principles:  it  is  more  often  a  medi-
tation upon  some  object  in  which  values  are  rather
embodied  than  expressed.  Objects  of  familiar  pious
reflection  are  chosen  as  means  of  recovering  the  mystic
strand  of  consciousness,  and  of  bringing  into  abstract
preference  the  quality  of  conviction.  A  concrete
object,  moreover,  is  less  confining  than  a  formula :  it
has  its  truth  as  the  formula  has,  but  in  infinite  con-
centration. Especially  if  this  object  is  a  person,  or  an
event  of  religious  history,  the  soul  may  find  in  it  an  all
but  adequate  embodiment  of  the  absolute  good,  bear-
ing at  once  on  all  circumstances  of  life,  and  not  on
some  only.


378  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

But  neither  the  fonnula  nor  the  concrete  object  is
wholly  satisfactory  as  an  object  of  meditation.^  As  the
mystic  becomes  proficient,  he  recognizes  that  all  such
objects  have  but  relative  worth.^  Teresa  used  at  one  time
to  begin  her  orisons  with  thoughts  of  episodes  of  the
Passion  :  but  she  writes,  ^'  There  are  many  souls  who
make  greater  progress  by  meditation  on  other  subjects ;
for  as  there  are  many  mansions  in  heaven,  so  there  are
many  roads  leading  thither.  Some  persons  advance  by
considering  themselves  in  hell — others  in  heaven;  and
these  latter  are  distressed  by  meditations  on  hell."
Clearly,  then,  there  is  no  necessity  in  any  of  these
objects.  And  further,  their  office  (as  objects  of  delib-
erate meditation)  is  transient:  they  must  go,  at  last,
the  way  of  all  other  objects  of  thought  and  desire.

For  to  all  the  mystics,  whether  of  East  or  West,  this


^  In  the  ohoioe  of  these  objects,  the  workiiig  of  ezperienee  is  eyi-
dent :  any  reli^oos  tradition  lights  upon  the  words  and  episodes  and
characters  and  phrases  and  hjmns  which  best  mediate  the  mystic  oon-
scioosness  of  its  own  epoch  ;  and  as  the  mental  attitude  to  be  reached  is
one  of  difficulty,  this  choice  must  be  sensitiTe  to  all  the  shades  of  human
temper.  It  is  here  that  questions  of  taste  intrude  to  dispel  religious  har^
mony :  acceptable  objects  for  such  reflection  must  yary  not  alone  from
age  to  age,  but  also  from  person  to  person,  and  from  social  group  to  social
group.  A  loss  of  sympathy  here  makes  the  greatest  of  difficulties  in  reli-
gions understanding,  quite  apart  from  questions  of  creed.  We  do  not  now
find  those  objects  edifying  upon  which  our  medisral  brethren  could  dweU
for  pious  hours  without  pall,  and  which  made  the  themes  of  their  religions
art.  What  we  haye  to  do  is  to  penetrate  to  what  is  necessary  and  uni-
versal in  these  objects,  fitting  to  humanity,  and  not  to  this  or  that  stage
of  religious  sentiment.

'  I  ignore  for  the  present  questions  which  naturally  gave  the  Chris-
tian mystics  much  trouble,  whether  in  the  higher  reaches  of  prayer  any
consciousness  remains  of  the  sacred  humanity,  the  Holy  Trinity,  etc.  See^
for  instance,  Ftfnelon,  Explication  des  Manmes  des  Saints,  Arts.  xzni|
xxriii.


TH£  NEGATIVE  PATH  379

stage  of  meditation  is  a  mere  preliminary;  and  the
function « of  these  objects  is  at  least  as  thoroughly
negative  as  positive.  They  have  rather  to  recall  the
mind  from  other  things  than  to  fix  it  upon  themselves.
Their  function  is  chiefly  one  of  neutralizing  and  sky-
clearing  :  in  so  far  as  they  leave  the  mind  occupied  with
particular  images,  they  too  must  be  put  away.  The
Yogi  must  meditate  upon  the  syllable  OM,  but  only
to  unify  his  mind  and  to  prepare  for  the  exclusion  of
that  syllable  together  with  all  other  objects  :  it  is  but
a  ladder  which  in  mounting  he  puts  beneath  him ;  it  is
the  sand  with  which  the  sweeper  covers  his  floor.

The  one  positive  admonition  which  is  most  persistent
is  the  vague  direction  to  turn  the  thoughts  inward.
And  even  the  meaning  of  this  ^'inward"  is  rather
not-outward  than  positively  introspective.^  ^^  Introrsum
ascendere ''  is  the  brief  formula  for  the  mystic's  self-
direction.  In  all  its  vagueness  this  direction  has  prob-
ably served  a  better  purpose  than  any  attempt  to  be
more  explicit  For  any  positive  and  literal  direction  is
apt  to  become  a  misdirection,  a  danger  clearly  recognized
by  many  a  keen  student  of  human  nature  among  the
mystics,  and  warned  against.  ^^  Let  him  not  presume
to  approach  that  exceUent  Darkness  which  is  beyond
all  Light,  but  rather  the  darkness  of  the  not-knowing  of
Ood'j  and  there  let  him  yield  himself  to  God  in  all
simplicity,  asking  nothing,  begging  and  desiring  nothing,
but  loving  and  intending  only  God,  and  verily  such  an

^  In  so  far  as  it  suggests  a  snbjectmty  of  interest,  we  shall  find  the
mystic  endearoring  to  correct  the  impression.  **  To  ascend  to  Grod/'  says
Hugo  of  Saint  Victor,  '*  is  to  enter  into  onrseWes  ;  and  not  only  so,  bnt
in  onr  inmost  selres  to  transoeud  oorselyes  "  (ineflabili  quodam  modo  in
intimis  se  ipsom  transire).


380  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

unknown  God.  Yea,  opon  His  unknown  will  let  him
throw  all  his  aSairs  and  concerns  as  well  as  his  gins  and
wickedness  as  they  there  oecor  to  him,  and  this  all  with
genuine  love."  ^

Thus  the  content  of  the  object  of  meditation  tends
to  reduce  to  a  nothing  —  so  far  as  pictnreHM>ntent  is  con-
cerned — but  not  quite  to  nothing,  unless  will  is  nothing.

ni

In  the  long  experimental  history  of  these  efforts  of
purgation  and  meditation,  three  things  have  become
clear. First,  that  the  mystic  cannot  complete  his  own

^  I  emnnol  refrmin  from  qaotiiig  hare  At  length  Tanler's  reoogoition
of  this  diffioultj.

**  In  dieser  seiner  Erneoemng  and  Einkehrang  ersefawinget  sieh  der
Geist  alsbnld  neber  sieh,  gegen  die  gttttliche  Flnstemiss,  Tiel  geeehwinder
and  h^tiber,  els  ein  Adler  gegen  die  Sonne.  .  .  .  Hierronstehet  imBoehe
Hiob  also  geschrieben  :  '  Dem  Menne  ist  der  Weg  yerborgen,  and  Gott
hat  ihn  amgeben  mit  Finstemiss/  nimliefa,  mit  Finstemiss  der  Unbegreif-
liohkeit  oder  Unerkennliehkeit  Gottes,  da  er  weit  i&ber  alles,  dass  ifam
zngesehrieben  werden  kann,  erhaben,  and  gans  namen-,  form-,  and  bildlos
ist,  ja  er  flbertrifft  darin  alle  Weise  and  alles  Wesen.  Und  dies  ist,  liebe
Christen,  die  wesentliche  £inkehrang,  sn  der  das  Stillsohweigen  der
Nabht,  samt  ihrer  Robe  and  Einsamkeit,  sehr  yiel  hilft  and  nfltset.  Daram
rathe  ieh  einem  jeden  treulich,  wenn  er  Tor  der  Mette  gat  gesehlaf  en  hat,
dass  er  sich  alien  seinen  Sinnen  and  sinnlichen  Kr&ften  gleiehsam  entxiehe,
and  nach  yerriohteter  Mette  mit  alien  seinen  Krftften  sieh  uberalle  Bilder
and  Formen  versenke,  ja,  ttber  alle  seine  Sinne  and  Krftf  te  sioh  ersehwinge.
Doch  solle  er  wegen  seiner  Kleinheit  and  Nichtigkeit  nieht  gedenken
nooh  sioh  Tornehmen  sich  der  vortreffliehen  Finstemiss  za  nahen,  Ton
welcher  ein  Lehrer  spricht:  'dass  Grott  sine  Finstemiss  sei  naoh  allem
Lioht,'  sondem  zu  der  Finstemiss  der  Nichterkennung
Gottes,  und  da  ergebe  er  sieh  Gott  gans  einfttltiglieh,  frage  niehts,  bitte
and  begehre  auch  niohts,  sondem  liebe  and  meine  nar  Gott,  and  zwar
einen  solchen  unbekannten  Gott;  ja,  in  seinen  nnbekannten  Willen
werfe  er  alle  seine  Saehen  and  Gesohl&fte,  aaoh  seine  Gebreohen  and
SUnden,  so  ihm  alsdann  einfallen,  and  dies  alles  mit  wirklisher  Idebe."
Predigten  ii,  663.


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  381

purification ;  second,  that  there  is  a  clear  self-contradic-
tion in  trying  to  expel  all  desire ;  third,  that  when  the
deepest  will  attempts  to  subordinate  all  partial  desires
by  setting  up  its  own  absolute  good  as  an  object  of
meditation,  this  effort  is  notably  liable  to  substitute
some  false  god  for  the  true  one.  Taken  together,  these
three  results  amount  to  a  practical  demonstration  that
the  attempt  of  worship,  in  so  far  as  it  depends  upon  the
mystic's  own  active  efforts,  is  impossible.

There  must  be  some  way  of  cutting  short  these  infi-
nite processes  of  self-preparation,  if  in  order  to  see  God
one  must  in  fact  accomplish  a  pure  heart.  The  mystics
have  not  failed  to  find  ways  of  summarizing  all  this
preparation  in  a  single  act.  Ruysbroeck,  for  example,
cuts  the  knot  by  a  stroke  of  will :  we  have  the  neces-
sary humility  and  love  if  we  will  to  have  them.  In  the
good-will  to  renounce  oneself,  the  renunciation  is,  for
the  purposes  of  worship,  completed.  Santa  Teresa  has
another  way  of  concluding  the  matter:  let  us  once
clearly  see  and  acknowledge  our  defects,  and  in  that
knowledge  be  free  from  them.  '^  This  matter  of  self-
knowledge,"  she  says,  ^^  must  never  be  put  aside.  .  •  •
The  knowledge  of  our  sins  and  of  our  own  selves  is  the
bread  which  we  have  to  eat  with  all  our  meats,  however
pleasant  they  may  be,  in  the  way  of  prayer ;  without
this  bread  life  cannot  be  sustained,  though  it  must  be
taken  with  measure.  •  •  .  (But)  when  a  soul  beholds
itself  resigned,  and  clearly  understands  that  there  is  no
goodness  in  it  .  .  •  why  should  it  be  necessary  for  it  to
waste  its  time  on  this  subject?  From  foolish  devo-
tions. Lord  deliver  us."  For  both  Teresa  and  Ruys-
broeck this  dismissal  of  the  processes  of  prolonged  self*


382  WOBSHIF  AND  THE  MYSTICS

discipline  is  made  possible  by  a  self-examination  which
has  reduced  all  their  sinful  desire  to  one  category,
namely,  pride :  and  it  is  the  summary  repudiation  of
this  pride,  in  the  one  by  a  magnificent  will  to  be  humr
ble,  in  the  other  by  a  clear  perception  of  its  nature,  that
effectually  closes  the  earlier  stages  of  preparation.

But  whether  in  one  way  or  another  these  efforts  are
brought  to  an  end,  the  mystic  finds  himself  at  last  not
trying,  but  waiting.  His  last  effort  is  to  destroy  all
effort,  and  to  make  himself  wholly  passive.  It  seems,
indeed,  as  if  the  attainment  of  passivity,  of  the  right
kind,  were  the  whole  aim  of  these  preparations;  the
act  of  worship  having  rather  to  clear  the  way  for  the
assertion  of  some  other  power,  inner  or  outer,  than  to
do  anything  of  its  own.  Just  how  this  passivity  is  to
be  brought  about,  and  what  it  consists  in,  is  not  easy
for  the  mystic  to  define.  He  uses  many  a  figure  to
describe  it :  emptiness  (Ledigkeit),  silence,  permissive-
ness (lidekeit,  Lidelicheit,  lydende  Vernunft, — Tauler),
poverty,  destruction  of  self,  inward  stillness  (innere
Glelassenheit,  —  Suso),  nothingness  (in  the  sense  of  the
^*  0,  to  be  nothing  **  hymn),  even  idleness,  or  dormancy
('^  Mussigkeit "),  ^  death,  extinction.  In  the  ideal  of
passivity,  indeed,  we  come  upon  one  of  those  far-
reaching  discoveries  of  religious  experience  which  take
a  thousand  shapes  and  names,  and  enter  in  various
degrees  into  all  phases  of  worship.  In  Quietism,  it
comes  to  an  especial  cultivation :  for  if  one  must  resort

1  **  Alles  das  Gott  Ton  ana  haben  will,  das  ist,  dass  wir  mttssig  seyea
und  ihn  Werkmeister  seyn  lassen  ;  wllren  wir  ganz  ond  gar  mOssig,  so
wllran  wir  Tollkommne  Menschen."  Tauler,  quoted  by  Karl  Schmidt,  in
<<Jobanne8Taaler,"p 120.


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  383

to  passivity  in  the  end,  why  not  from  the  first.  But  in
Luther's  appeal  to  grace,  rather  than  to  works,  his  reli-
ance on  the  forgiveness  of  sins;  in  the  self-abandon-
ment of  conversion  ;  and  in  many  another  assertion  of
the  ^'feeling  of  absolute  dependence";  we  see  other
forms  of  this  same  principle  of  passivity  which  com-
pletes the  preparation  of  the  mystic.

However,  it  is  obvious  that  there  can  be  no  question,
here,  of  pure  passivity.  The  state  is  the  precise  opposite
of  a  state  of  drifting,  or  of  psychical  indolence.  The
will  to  worship  remains  to  distinguish  this  nothingness
from  all  others.  The  mind  is  in  a  condition  of  power-
fully directed  attention.  Such  as  the  term  ^^contem-
plation" suggests.^  The  effect  of  all  these  various
self-suppressing  efforts  has  been  to  lop  off  interfering
and  distracting  movements  of  attention ;  whereby  all
the  strength  of  these  inhibited  tendencies  has  been  told
over  into  a  single  comprehensive  thrust  of  the  mental
energies.  It  is  a  suppression  of  body  by  body ;  of
desire  by  desire ;  of  activity  by  activity ;  in  sum,  a
suppression  of  self  by  Self.  The  loss  of  self  and  of
self-consciousness  of  which  the  mystics  often  speak,  a
loss  concomitant  vnth  the  cessation  of  traffic  with  things,
is  essentially  a  recalling  of  all  subordinate  and  partial
selfhoods  into  the  one  master-self  of  all,  a  simplification,
and  at  the  same  time  an  extreme  heightening  of  self-con-
sciousness in  its  now  exclusive  relation  to  its  Absolute.^

'  *'  ContemplAtion,"  as  used  by  the  medisTal  mystie,  implies  that  the
effort  of  '*  meditation,"  in  which  one  holds  the  object  before  the  mind  by
force  of  willy  gives  way  to  a  state  in  which  the  object  attracts  and  holds
attention  without  further  conscious  effort.

*  '*  This  slamber  of  the  mind  resembles  at  first  a  negation  of  ezist-
enee,  but  it  is  the  exaltation  thereof. Nothing  perishes  in  ns  but  the


384  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

Something  deeply  panuloxical  there  is  about  this  volun-
taiy  passivity  of  the  mystic^  like  the  motionleesness  of
a  rapid  wheel  or  the  ease  and  silence  of  light.  And
this  paradox  the  mystics  themselyes  have  not  failed  to
observe  and  study.  They  have  seen  that  there  is  an
idle  passivity  which  must  by  all  means  be  ruled  out ;
and  they  have  spared  no  effort  to  distinguish  between
the  true  passivity  and  the  false.  Let  me  quote  a  few
of  their  own  explanations.

These  from  Molinos :

^*  By  not  speaking,  not  desiring,  not  thinking,  one  arrives
at  the  tme  and  perfect  mystical  silence  wherein  God  speaks
with  the  soul,  commnnicatiDg  himself  to  it,  and  in  the  Abyss
of  its  own  Depth  teaches  it  the  most  perfect  and  exalted
Wisdom.  .  .  .  Strive  to  be  resigned  in  all  things  with  silence,
and  in  so  doing,  wWiout  saying  that  thou  lovest  Hiroy  thou
wilt  attain  to  the  most  perfect,  quiet,  effectual,  and  true  love."

^^  The  very  Virtues  which  have  been  acquired  and  not
purified  are  a  hindrance  to  this  great  gift  of  the  Peace  of  the
Soul,  and  the  more  so,  the  more  the  soul  is  dogged  by  an
inordinate  desire  for  sublime  gifts,  by  the  wish  for  spiritual
consolations,  by  sticking  to  infused  graces,  entertaining  her-
self with  them,  and  desiring  more  of  them  in  order  to  enjoy
them :  and  finally,  by  a  desire  of  being  great."

^^It  is  a  vulgar  error  of  those  who  say  that  in  Internal
Recollection  or  Prayer  of  Rest  the  faculties  operate  not,  and
the  soul  is  idle  and  inactive.  This  is  a  manifest  fallacy,  and
belongs  to  those  who  have  little  experience,  because  although
the  mind  operates  not  by  means  of  memory  nor  by  the  second

penon,  that  is  to  say,  the  limit  ...  To  return  to  the  nniTenMd  is  to
enlarge,  to  become  divine,  not  to  abolish  and  loee  oneself."  Simon,  EedU
d'Alexandrie,  pp.  156-7,  218.

^  The  Spiritual  Guide,  tr.  R.  Y.  Lynn  (with  liberties).


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  386

operation  of  the  intellect,  which  is  judgment,  nor  by  the  third
which  is  discoarse  or  reasoning,  yet  it  operates  by  the  first
and  chief  operation  of  the  understanding,  which  is  simple
apprehension  enlightened  by  holy  faith,  and  aided  by  the
divine  gifts  of  the  Spirit ;  and  the  mil  is  more  apt  to  continue
one  act  than  to  multiply  many^  so  that  the  act  of  the  under-
standing as  of  the  will  is  so  simple,  imperceptible,  and  spirit-
ual, that  hardly  the  soul  knows  it,  much  less  reflects  upon  it."

These  from  Teresa :

**  In  mystical  theology,  the  understanding  ceases  from  its
acts  because  Ghxl  suspends  it.  We  must  neither  imagine  nor
think  that  we  can  of  ourselves  bring  about  this  suspense."

**  To  have  the  powers  of  the  mind  occupied,  and  to  think
that  you  can  keep  them  at  the  same  time  quiet,  is  folly.
There  is  no  great  humility  in  this  (trying  to  be  passive),  and
though  it  be  blameless,  it  carries  a  sort  of  punishment  after
it,  in  that  it  is  labor  thrown  away,  and  the  soul  is  a  little
disgusted :  it  feels  like  a  man  who  preparing  to  take  a  leap  is
held  back — he  has  used  up  his  strength,  and  is  yet  unable  to
do  as  he  wished."

^  What  the  soul  has  to  do  at  those  seasons  is  nothing  more
than  to  be  gentle  and  without  noise.  By  noise  I  mean  going
about  with  the  understanding  in  search  of  words  and  reflec-
tions whereby  to  give  Ood  thanks  for  this  grace,  and  heaping
up  its  sins  and  imperfections  together  to  show  that  it  does  not
deserve  it.  Let  the  will  quietly  and  wisely  understand  that
it  is  not  by  dint  of  labor  on  our  part  that  it  can  converse  to
any  good  purpose  with  God,  and  that  our  efforts  are  only
great  logs  of  wood  laid  on  without  discretion  to  quench  this
little  spark."

And  these  from  F^nelon,  who  had  reason  to  feel  the
force  of  the  Quietistic  diseussion,  from  both  sides,  and  who
speaks,  if  not  as  mystic,  yet  as  a  sympathetic  arbiter :


386  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

*^A11  passive  contemplation  reduces  itself  to  something
▼erj  simple.  It  is  a  tissue  of  acts  of  faith  and  love,  so  simple,
so  direct,  so  peaceable,  and  so  uniform,  that  they  do  not  appear
to  constitute  any  action,  but  a  repose  of  pure  union.  This  is
why  St.  Francis  de  Sales  wished  to  reject  the  term  *•  union '
for  fear  of  expressing  some  uniting  act  on  the  part  of  the
soul:  he  would  have  it  called  a  simple  and  pure  Unity.
Hence  also  it  is  that  this  contemplation  has  been  called  orison
of  silence  or  of  quietude ;  hence  finally  that  it  has  been  called
passive.  God  forbid  that  it  should  ever  be  thus  described
for  sake  of  excluding  the  action  real,  positive,  and  meritori-
ous of  the  will,  nor  acts  real  and  successive  which  must  be
reiterated  every  moment.  It  is  called  passive  only  to  exclude
the  self-interested  activity  or  empresaemerU  of  the  mind,  when
it  is  inclined  to  continue  some  agitation  in  order  to  feel
and  see  its  own  operation,  which  if  it  were  more  simple  and
unified  would  be  less  noticed."

'^It  is  passive  as  a  feather  is  passive,  which  when  dry
responds  to  every  touch  of  the  breeze,  but  when  wet  with  the
dampness  of  its  own  heavy  desires  shows  an  inertia  which  is
felt  as  a  real  object.  It  is  passive  as  the  mirror  of  the  lake
is  passive,  which  when  its  own  motion  is  stilled,  is  able  to  re-
turn faithfully  the  objects  whose  light  falls  upon  it ;  but  when
agitated  by  the  breath  of  its  own  desires,  returns  these  same
rays  in  a  broken,  disordered,  and  so  unintelligible  condition.*'

IV

This,  then,  is  the  preparation  of  the  mystic:  on  the
whole,  a  negative  path  ;  an  activity  ending  in  a  volun-
tary passivity,  destined  to  give  way  in  turn  to  an  invol-
untary passivity  when  God  accepts  and  lifts  to  himself
the  prepared  soul.  Its  history  is  that  of  an  activity  of
self-suppression  which  must  itself  be  suppressed.  And
what,  in  the  end,  does  it  amount to?  Wherein  does


THE  NEGATIVE  PATH  387

it  differ  from  the  simple  act  of  thought^  the  ^^  lifting
of  the  mind  to  God ''  ?

Firsts  I  should  saj^  and  most  obviously^  in  the  moral
character  of  the  process,  in  the  ideal  of  the  '  pure  heart '
which  is  recognized  as  the  condition  of  finding  God
in  worship.

Second,  in  the  simplification  of  consciousness.  In-
stead of  spinning  connections,  the  mystic  strives  to  be
rid  of  connections,  and  to  reach  an  object  which  is
behind  and  prior  to  all  distinctions.  He  has  practised
recollection,  and  has  become  total.  He  wishes  to  be,
rather  than  to  think ;  assuming  that  there  is  a  distinc-
tion between  being  and  thinking.

Third,  in  the  repudiation  of  effort.  What  the  mystic
knows  will  be  empirically  known.  What  the  mystic
wills,  will  be  willed  by  necessity.  The  worshipper  has
exercised  his  freedom,  perhaps  the  first  and  last  absolute
freedom  possessed  by  the  human  spirit,  to  consent  to
an  empirical  apparition  of  the  real.^

The  mystic  is  prepared  :  what  will  happen  to  him  ?
Will  there  be  an  event  ?  Will  his  voluntary  passivity
give  place  to  an  involuntary  passivity ;  and  will  he
know  that  he  is  one  with  God  ?  The  mystic  has  been
knocking  at  the  door  of  his  world,  an  outsider,  prepar-
ing himself  inwardly  and  outwardly,  doubtless  with  a
certain  sense  of  magic  and  mummery  about  it  all ;  as

1  Royee's  often-quoted  phimse  which  describes  the  mystic  u  the
'*  thoroughgoing  empiricist "  is  strikingly  tme  of  the  mystic's  method  of
knowing.  Bot  the  mystic's  peculiarity  is  that  he  applies  this  method  to
objects  which  empiricists  generally  insist  cannot  be  given  in  any  such
immediate,  unreasoned  manner,  namely  to  totals  not  to  elements;  to  sonls,
not  to  sensations;  to  resultants  (like  history,  or  society)  not  to  factors;
and  finally,  to  God  himself.


888  WORSHIP  AHD  THE  MYSTICS

of  doing  things  whose  reason  he  does  not  see,  and
which  throogh  hidden  hiws  or  arhitraij  will  of  the  God
will  have  an  effect  if  they  are  well  done.  Tet  the  true
mystic  has  known  well  enough  that  his  experience  is  no
adventitious  effect,  but  wholly  a  response  to  his  own
meaning  and  within  his  own  unbroken  idea.  If  the
effect  were  magical  and  external,  the  mystic  would  be
thwarted,  —  he  would  not  consciously  have  been  with
€rod  at  all.  What  he  reports  is,  that  he  ha»  been
admitted;  that  from  being  an  outsider,  knocking  at
the  door  of  things,  he  has  ceased  to  be  an  outsider  and  a
subordinate.  He  uses  the  words  illumination,  union,
sometimes  deification,  to  express  what  has  come  to
him.  In  some  way  he  is  admitted  to  the  council  of  the
maker  of  this  world  of  things.  He  has  become  an
nnderstander  of  the  heart  of  it.  And  in  evidence  of
his  truth  he  is  able  to  walk  about  among  things  and
men,  — do  we  say  as  an  alien?  — on  the  contrary,  as  one
for  the  first  time  fully  present  and  at  home,  able  to
recognize  himself  and  God  in  whatever  declares  itself,
able  to  open  himself  to  the  whole  of  experience.

This  is  what  the  mystic  reports.  But  having  fol-
lowed the  course  of  the  mystic's  own  volition,  and
largely  in  the  mystic's  own  tongue,  we  must  now
seek  further  light,  external  light,  such  as  psychology
can  furnish,  upon  the  nature  of  this  experience,  and
its  interpretation.


CHAPTER  XXVn

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM

WHAT  is  the  experience  of  the  mystic?  And
what  meaning  has  that  negative  path  for  us  of
the  present  day  ?  To  the  mystic,  the  whole  meaning
and  logic  of  worship  is  personal ;  and  there  is  no  more
to  he  said  ahout  it  than  has  been  said.  He  has  come
consciously  into  the  presence  of  God,  and  what  is  more,
into  a  unity  of  will  with  him.  He  knows  nothing  of
any  psycho-physical  facts  which  could  make  clearer  the
significance  of  that  event.  On  the  contrary,  he  seems
to  find  himself  —  though  perhaps  only  for  a  brief
instant  —  free  from  the  body,  wholly  ^^  in  the  spirit,"
where  neither  mortal  thought  nor  mortal  psychology
can  follow  him.  We  must  allow  the  mystic  the  first
word  in  reporting,  and  also  in  interpreting,  his  experi-
ence. But  while  he  dwells  upon  its  unique,  superlative,
indescribable  aspects,  psychology  helps  our  understand-
ing of  that  experience  by  finding  what  is  not  unique
about  it,  what  analogies  it  has  in  more  commonplace
experiences,  undertaking  thereby  both  to  describe  and
to  explain  it.  ^

1  The  mystie  himaelf ,  as  we  have  noticed,  plays  the  psychologist  so
far  as  the  beginnings  of  description  are  concerned;  and  he  alone  can  prop-
erly inform  us  of  the  inner  nature  of  his  experience.  But  his  description
offers  the  due  to  concrete  analogy ;  and  this  in  turn  to  more  scientific
description  and  explanation.
Thcoe  is  danger,  no  donht,  in  pursuing  analogies  of  what  is  essen-


390  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

The  mystic  experience  is  unique  and  free,  but  not  in
the  sense  that  it  has  no  analogies  and  no  ties  in  the
world  of  common  experience.  The  fact  that  these  ties
exist  is  to  be  seen  in  the  simple  circumstance  that  the
experience  is  transient}  For  if  union  with  Grod  were
the  whole  story  of  mystical  experience,  there  could  be
no  reason  why  that  moment  should  pass.  The  mystic
himself  knows  very  well  that  his  vision  cannot  last,  so
long  as  he  remains  a  human  being.'  Many  a  mystic
has  expressed  regret  that  his  joy  could  not  endure,  but
none  (so  far  as  I  have  found)  has  expressed  surprise.
This  absence  of  surprise  may  show  that  the  immediacy
of  the  experience  is  never  so  great  as  to  be  wholly  free
from  outer  reference,  that  some  consciousness  of  the
worldly  self  and  of  its  ties  remains.  The  mystic  has
found  himself  in  a  region  where  the  gravitation  of  earth

tiall J  a  religioiis  ev^nt.  The  religiousness  of  it  lies,  as  tbe  myvtie  instine-
tiToly  knows,  in  what  is  nniqae  and  can  be  told  only  in  the  personal
langoage  of  religion.  The  religions  element  is  always  lost  among  its
many  copies,  and  degraded.  Nerertheless,  thu  is  the  only  way  in  which
the  unique  can  permanently  hold  ns.  We  mnst  run  the  risk  of  this  loss;
and  when  analysis  is  finished  try  again  to  recover  the  originaL

^  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  recall  the  familiar  description  which
William  James  has  given  to  the  class  of  experiences  he  proposes  to  call
mystical :  they  are  ineffable  and  noetic,  usually  also  transient  and  passive
(Varieties  of  religious  experience,  p.  380  f).  In  the  character  of  ineffa-
bility,  the  indescribable  quality  of  the  experience  becomes  a  point  of
psychological  description;  and  both  this  ineffsbility  and  the  transiency
are  to  be  explained,  as  I  shall  try  to  show,  on  psychological  grounds.

*  "This  sublime  condition  is  not  of  permanent  duration.  It  is  only
now  and  then  that  we  can  enjoy  this  elevation  (mercifully  made  possible
to  us)  above  the  limits  of  the  body  and  the  world.  I  myself  have  realized
it  but  three  times  as  yet,  and  Porphyry  not  once.  All  that  tends  to  purify
and  elevate  the  mind  will  assist  you  in  the  attainment,  and  facilitate  the
approach  and  recurrence  of  these  happy  intervals."  Vaughan,  Hours  with
the  mysticsi  voL  i,  p.  81. An  imaginary  letter  from  Flotinus  to  a  disciple.


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  391

operates  but  slowly ;  but  that  it  still  operates  and  will
claim  its  own,  he  seems  by  this  silent  confession  to  be
fully  aware.

Thus  mystic  experience  comes  within  the  range  of
law,  and  probably  also  within  some  law  of  rhythm.
That  is,  the  mystic's  elevation  is  transient  presumably
because  it  is  a  phase  in  some  natural  rise  and  fall,  some
organic  wave  perhaps,  in  experience.  If  so,  this  tran-
siency, external  character  though  it  is,  will  offer  the
most  favorable  angle  for  scientific  approach.  For  any
rhythmic  movement  in  experience  reveals  not  only  an
organic  bond,  but  a  law  of  connection  as  well,  through
which  the  special  phase  in  question  is  bound  in  with
the  before  and  the  afterward,  and  begins  to  be  in-
terpreted.^

^  The  idea  of  rhjfchm  with  its  organic  relatedness  (causal  or  other-
wise), need  not  be  whoUy  alien  to  the  mystic's  inner  meaning  —  not  more
in  regard  to  the  forces  that  bear  him  up  than  in  regard  to  those  that  hold
him  down.  The  logic  of  the  relation  between  the  worshipper  and  his
God  is  indeed  wholly  personal  and  particular  —  not  magical  —  but  the
worshipper  still  relies  upon  a  steadfastness  in  the  being  worshipped;  he
frequently  comes  to  look  upon  his  elevation  as  a  response  to  a  right
approach  on  his  part,  as  some  function  of  the  condition  of  his  own  heart.
He  holds  a  quasi-natural  adjustment  of  attitude  to  the  supernatural.
Meister  Eckhart  says,  *'  I  will  never  ask  Grod  to  give  himself  to  me :
I  will  ask  him  to  make  me  pure  of  heart.  For  if  I  am  pure,  God  must  of
his  own  nature  give  himself  to  me,  and  flow  into  me."  *'  Meister  eghart
sprach :  ich  wil  got  niemer  gebitten  das  er  sich  mir  gebe :  ich  wil  in  bitten
das  er  mich  Inter  mache  :  wan  were  ich  luter,  got  muest  sich  mir  geben
von  siner  eigener  nature  vnd  in  mich  fliessen"  (Wackemagel,  Sprttche
deutscher  Mystiker,  in  Altdeutsches  Lesebuch,  col.  681).  The  Spruch
continues :  **  Wo  mit  knmet  man  zuo  Interkeit  ?  mit  einem  steten  iamer
na  dem  einigen  guot,  das  got  ist.  Vnt  wo  mit  knmet  roan  in  ein  jamer  ?
mit  uemiohten  sich  selben  vnt  mit  missevalle  alien  creatnren."  Thus  the
mystic  himself  is  often  disposed  to  read  his  experience  as  a  course  of
interaction  between  a  higher  and  a  lower  law  —  with  an  element  of  hnman
freedom  in  the  circuit.


892  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

This,  at  any  rate,  is  what  has  impressed  me  in  mysti-
cism :  That  the  turning  away  from  the  world  in  the
negative  path  of  worship  (together  with  the  mystic
experience  itself  which  marks  the  limit  of  the  up-swing)
and  the  turning  back  again  constitute  a  normal  rhythm
or  alternation  which  has  many  analogies,  and  a  vital
function  in  the  human  mind  capable  of  psychological
expression.  The  marked  disconnection  between  the
mystic  experience  and  the  usual  level  of  life,  which
obscures  both  to  the  mystic  and  to  the  observer  the
presence  of  any  organic  bond  between  these  levels,  has
also  a  psychological  meaning.  In  the  present  chapter,
I  shall  do  no  more  than  bring  forward  some  of  tiie
analogies  which  help  to  interpret  (1)  the  rhythm,
(2)  the  disconnection,  and  (3)  the  unsociality  of  the
mystic's  life  circuit.  In  the  next  chapter,  I  shall  try
to  bring  its  law  to  definite  terms.

1.  Rhythm. — If  there  is  any  rhythm  in  life  which
religion,  in  the  observances  of  worship,  follows  and
cultivates,  it  is  something  more  than  the  simple  ebb
and  flow  of  our  ^'animal  spirits."  Excitement  and
depression,  high  spirits  and  low  spirits,  are  organic
fluctuations  which  leave  their  mark  on  the  religious
life  as  on  all  life.  Undoubtedly  there  is  a  kind  of
vision  connected  with  the  high  places  in  this  vital
rhythm,  which  resembles,  and  may  actually  develop
into,  mystical  experience.  Variations  of  this  kind  do
afiFect  most  markedly  our  capacity  for  fellowship,  and
the  promptness  of  that  '^  fusion ''  with  our  objects  which
we  thought  characteristic  of  the  mystic  consciousness.
I  can  conceive  it  possible  that  the  habit  of  worship


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  393

might  take  possession  of  some  such  subtle  wave  in  our
organic  life;  but  I  cannot  think,  as  do  certain  writers/
that  this  type  of  flux  brings  us  very  near  the  mystic's
experience,  and  for  the  following  reasons :

First,  quasi-mystical  moods  of  this  sort  are  as  likely,
perhaps  more  likely,  to  come  over  the  mind  when  the
physique  is  at  low  tide ;  as  in  fasting,  exhaustion,  weak-
ness from  loss  of  blood  or  insomnia,  or  in  the  early  stages
of  convalescence.

Second,  if  mystic  experience  has  its  rhythm,  it  shows
little  sign  of  regularity  — '  it  is  not  periodic.  The  wor-
shipper's will  and  conscience  take  part  in  the  affair,
and  not  the  organic  wave  alone:  voluntary  decision  is
interpolated,  as  in  the  circuit  of  nutrition.  It  is  not
true  that  mystic  experience  mechanically  follows  wor-
ship; there  is  a  certain  looseness  of  connection  between
prayer  and  its  answer,  which  the  passivity  of  the  mystic
implies.  But  the  preparation  of  mind  and  the  act  of
consent  must  enter  into  the  history  of  the  event  at  some
previous  time.

Third,  there  is  no  depression  which  corresponds  in
constancy  and  prominence  to  the  mystic's  elevation.
The  elevation  of  the  mystic  is  not  in  such  wise  above
normal  that  it  must  be  compensated  by  a  corresponding
below-normal.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems  to  be,  in  some
sense,  another  normal.  Something  of  its  content  and
quality  tends  to  become  a  permanent  possession  of  con-
sciousness; which  would  not  be  the  case  if  it  were  simply

^  See  etpeoiallj  Godfenuuiz, "  Cette  oseillation  eonitaDte  da  ton  yital
est  bien,  lemble  't  il,  I'aspeoi  phyiiologiqae  propre  da  lentiineiit  religienz
.  .  .  Qoieonqne  ^prooye  le  sentimeiit  religieoz  est  an  extatiqae  k  qnelque
degr^** Reyae  philoMphiqae,  toL  63  (1902),  pp.  164»  162.


39i  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

an  extreme,  or  *^  hyper-tension."  There  comes  a  time
in  the  life  of  some  of  the  mystics  when  the  vision  of
God  is,  as  they  assert,  a  continuous  experience,  and  the
semblance  of  rhythm  disappears.^

These  considerations  lead  me  to  judge  that  the  mystic's
ascent  and  return  are  not  to  be  understood  as  simply
an  unusually  pronounced  oscillation  of  vital  tone.  But
perhaps  they  also  imply  that  the  rhythm  itself  is  unnec-
essary. May  not  the  very  circumstance  that  the  meaning
of  the  mystic  experience  is  to  be  built  into  the  continuous
level  of  consciousness,  show  that  the  two  levels  of  expe-
rience belong  together;  that  the  alternation  is  accidental,
and  to  some  extent  pathological?  Delacroix,  whose
masterly  studies  of  the  mystics  put  us  all  in  his  debt,
inclines  to  regard  whatever  rhythm  there  is  as  something
to  be  overcome;  and  as  something  that  is  overcome
in  the  long  experience  of  the  g^reater  mystics.^  After
much  painful  experiment  and  mistake,  such  persons
as  Teresa,  Madame  Guyon,  and  Suso,  emerge  into  a
period  of  serene  and  powerful  activity,  from  which  the
fitfulness^  the  heights  and  depths,  the  interruptions
and  disturbances,  of  the  earlier  enthusiastic  devotions
have  disappeared.

But  I  must  doubt  whether  this  alternation  is  essentially
pathological  or  whether  it  is  ever  overcome :  I  must  doubt

1  «  My  loul  it,  as  it  wen»  io  a  fortress  with  anthoritj,  and  aooord-
iogly  does  not  lose  its  peace  .  .  .  The  imaginary  Tisions  have  oeaaed,  but
the  intellectual  Tision  of  the  Three  Persons  and  of  the  Sacred  Humanity
seems  ever  present."  Teresa  to  the  Bishop  of  Osma,  May  1681.  ^Cette
yie  diyine  deyient  toute  natnrelle  k  Tfime  .  .  .  Ici  I'oraison  est  I'action;  et
Taction  est  Toraison:  tout  est  ^gal»  tout  est  indifferent  k  cette  fime  .  .  .
loi  I'eztase  se  fait  pour  ton  jours  et  non  pour  des  heures.**  Madame
Guyon,  Torrents  232,  248. Quoted  by  Delacroix.  £tudes,  143, 148.

^  Etudes  d'histoire  et  de  psychologic  dn  mystioisme,  esp.  ch.  ii,  ti,  zL


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  3d5

it  if  only  from  the  fact  that  worship  and  mystic  experi-
ence involve  an  exclusive  occupation  of  attention  which
in  the  nature  of  the  case  is  incompatible  with  simulta-
neous attention  to  other  affairs,  and  vice  versa.  ^^  When
attention  is  turned  in  one  of  these  directions,  it  is  in
some  degree  withdrawn  from  the  other,  4  cannot  at
the  same  moment  be  conceiving  of  God  as  the  only
being  of  worth,  and  yet  of  my  life — this  fragmentary
life  —  as  itself  a  matter  of  worth.  I  alternate.  •  •  •
(One)  requires  a  certain  narrowing  of  his  vision,  a  certain
exclusion  of  the  infinite  aspects  of  his  task,  in  order  to
perform  that  task  well."  Thus  Professor  Palmer  states
the  situation.^  If  worship  has  any  vital  function  to
perform,  it  must  alternate  with  other  things,  the  necessity
of  rhythm  lies  somehow  in  the  nature  of  my  practical
attention.^

1  6.  H.  Palmer,  The  Field  of  Ethios,  pp.  181, 173.
*  The  mjsticfl  foand  rarioiu  ways  for  expreseiDg  a  belief  that  Bome
■ach  alternation  is  not  a  matter  of  choice,  bnt  a  result  of  the  stmeture  of
hnman  nature;  as  in  such  words  as  these:

**  Now  the  created  sonl  of  man  hath  also  two  eyes.  The  one  is  the
power  of  seeing  into  eternity,  the  other  of  seeing  into  time  and  the  crea-
tures, of  perceiving  how  they  differ  from  each  other  as  aforesaid,  of  giving
life  and  needful  things  to  the  body,  and  ordering  and  governing  it  for  the
best.  But  these  two  eyes  of  the  soul  of  man  cannot  both  perform  their
work  at  once;  bnt  if  the  soul  shall  see  with  the  right  eye  into  eternity,
then  the  left  eye  must  close  itself  and  refrain  from  working,  and  be  as
though  it  were  dead.  For  if  the  left  eye  be  fulfilling  its  office  toward
outward  things;  that  is,  holding  converse  with  time  and  the  creatures;
then  must  the  right  eye  be  hindered  in  its  working;  that  is,  in  its  contem-
plation. Therefore,  whosoever  will  have  the  one  must  let  the  other  go."
Theologia  Germanica,  Wink  worth,  ch.  vii.

To  Plotinus  and  Psendo-Dionysius,  the  two  alternate  directions  of  the
mind  had  a  metaphysical  meaning:  they  symbolized  the  emanation  and
reflux  which  were  supposed  to  make  up  the  cosmic  history;  and  more  than
this,  they  were  parts  of  that  cosmic  rhythm  itself.

F<$nelon  has  his  usual  judicious  comments  to  make  on  the  notion  of  pei^


396  WORSHIP  AND  TH£  MYSTICS

I  am  drivea  therefore  to  look  for  further  analogies
among  those  normal  alternations  such  as  sleeping  and
waking,  work  and  recreation,  conflict  and  co-operation,
society  and  solitude,  hungers  and  satisfactions  of  various
types.  The  fact  that  much  of  the  early  elevation  is
built  into  the  later  level  of  continuous  living  may  be
interpreted,  in  no  very  far-fetched  manner  perhaps,  as
akin  to  the  assimilation  of  a  meal.  The  experience
seems  in  fact  to  have  supplied  the  subject  with  a  certain
moral  fuel  as  well  as  with  cognitive  material.  His  ina-
bility to  bring  its  content  to  immediate  expression  is  to
be  understood  by  the  fact  that  this  supply  is  still  rela-
tively external  to  him  and  requires  a  normal  interval  to
be  made  his  own ;  as  in  time  it  is  made  his  own.  Rhythm
of  this  type  would  then  last  at  any  rate  as  long  as  the
subject  continues  to  grow.  Approximate  continuity  is
a  sign  of  old  age  in  mysticism ;  just  as  the  g^radual
obliteration  of  the  sharp  rhythm  of  sleep  and  waking  is  a
sign  of  physiological  old  age.  Alternation  lies  deep  in
the  nature  of  things  psychical  as  well  as  physiological :
it  is  the  fundamental  method  of  growth.  I  am  inclined,
therefore,  to  regard  the  mystic  experience  as  a  normal
incident  in  the  attainment  of  a  new  psychical  level;
and  no  exceptional  incident^  but  one  which  in  various

petual  orison,  or  "spiritiial  marriage."  "  There  !•  snoh  a  thing  in  this
life  as  a  state  hahitnal,  though  not  entirely  inTariahle,  in  which  the  most
perfect  spirits  perform  all  their  deliberate  action  in  the  presence  of  Grod,
and  for  lore  of  him  .  .  .  This  referring  of  all  Tolontarj  action  to  our
unique  end  is  the  perpetual  orison  enjoined  by  Christ,  and  by  Saint  Paul
when  he  said,  Pray  without  ceasing.  But  this  orison  should  nerer  be  con-
founded with  contemplation  pure  and  direct  (which)  has  not  the  same
species  of  perpetuity:  because  it  b  often  interrupted  by  acts  of  the
Tarious  virtues  necessary  to  all  Christians/'  Explieatioii  des  masdmes
des  saints.  Art  xxv.


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  307

forms  and  degrees  is  a  recurrent  event  in  every  per^
son's  life.

This  may  stand  as  a  rude  hypothesis  which  will  place
mystic  experience  in  an  organic  relation  to  the  rest  of
life.  We  may  sharpen  this  conception  by  considering
now  the  relative  discontinuity  which  seems  to  exist
between  mystic  experience  and  the  ordinary  level.

2.  Disconnection.  —  The  traditional  religious  mystic
reaches  a  point  of  ecstasy  in  which  he  is  as  thoroughly
detached  from  his  waking  world  as  is  the  sleeper.  And
as  in  the  case  of  sleep,  this  disconnection  follows  upon
a  voluntary  effort  to  be  effortless,  when  his  preparation
has  put  him  into  the  hands  of  some  agency  beyond
himself.  The  absorbed  thinker  is  also  detached  from
the  world,  and  the  absent-minded  man,  and  the  person
who  falls  into  a  ^^  brown  study " :  in  some  respects,  the
mystic's  abstraction  more  resembles  these  than  the  lax-
ity of  sleep.  But  again,  as  in  the  case  of  sleep  the  sac-
rifice of  time  and  of  complete  active  consciousness  is
regarded  as  a  natural  means  of  conserving  both  life
and  time,  so  the  mystic  may  be  justified  in  regarding,
as  he  does,  his  self-abandonment  as  a  paradoxical
necessity,  not  more  remarkable  than  sleep,  for  main-
taining  his  spiritual  integrity.

Disconnection  is  the  aspect  of  mysticism  which  the
observer  is  most  inclined  to  resent  and  condemn  as
abnormal.  The  mystic,  on  the  other  hand,  has  prized
it  most  highly  :  for  to  be  ^^  carried  away  "  is  the  chief
sign  that  supemature  has  taken  the  place  of  nature.
But  both  the  critical  observer  and  the  mystic  might
profit  by  considering  that  the  element  of  ^'  mystery  "  or


398  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

''  ineffablenefis ''  in  mystic  experience  is  largely  if  not
completely  due  to  the  fact  of  disconnection  alone,  not
to  any  inherent  mysteriousness  or  onnatnralness  in  the
content  of  the  experience.  Psychologically,  mystery  is
felt  whenever  there  are  two  bodies  of  experience  not  in
perfect  communication,  quite  apart  from  the  question
whether  the  one  or  the  other  is  inherently  wonderful  or
weird.  Mystery  does  not  lie  in  either  of  the  two  bodies
by  itself ;  it  expresses  the  effort  of  each  to  make  terms
with  the  other,  and  the  beginning  of  success.  It  is  the
state  of  mind  of  one  who  begins  to  see.  Mystery  is
thus  the  characteristic  quality  of  every  incipient  idea,
not  yet  wholly  seized  by  the  mind*  And  the  mystic
may  be  regarded,  I  think,  as  one  who  is  confronted
quite  empirically  with  a  body  of  new  experience  and
idea  in  such  wise  that  he  is  a  possessor  of  two  bodies
of  experience,  neither  of  which  he  can  doubt:  both
must  be  true,  and  he  does  not  understand  how  both
are  true.

This  is  no  uncommon  state  of  mind.  Such  an  expresr
sion  as  the  following  seems  to  me  quite  typically  mys-
tical :  ^^  How  came  this  creation  so  magically  woven  that
nothing  can  do  me  mischief  but  myself?  ...  If  I  will
stand  upright,  the  creation  cannot  bend  me."  Here
stands  Emerson  with  the  weight  of  appearances  against
him,  sure  of  ^^the  creation,"  yet  equally  sure  of  his
own  immunity ;  confessing  that  he  cannot  understand
how  both  assurances  can  be  woven  into  one  fabric,  —
using  therefore  the  word  ^^  magical."  The  mystic  might
be  broadly  described  as  the  man  who  is  willing  to  drop
one  world  of  assurance  while  he  seizes  another,  confident
that  reality  will  harmonize  them  both,  though  he  cannot


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  399

yet  grasp  the  idea  which  does  harmonize  them.  Inabil-
ity to  bring  the  two  experiences  together  tends,  it  is
true,  to  cast  doubt  for  a  time  upon  the  reality  of  the
one  not  present:  and  the  religious  mystic  is  one  for
whom  another  world  than  this,  or  another  stratum  of
experience,  has  gained  such  substantial  certainty  that
the  reality  of  everyday  experience  must  suffer  this  kind
of  passing  doubt.  But  the  true  mystic  is  he  who  holds
to  the  reality  of  both  worlds,  and  leaves  to  time  and
effort  the  understanding  of  their  union.  This  kind  of
discontinuity  in  experience  (such  in  part  as  Emerson
pleads  for  in  his  arraignment  of  anxious  consistency)
seems  to  me  a  condition  of  mental  soundness  and  healthy
as  well  as  of  mental  growth.

There  is  some  deep-going  practical  principle  here
concerned,  whose  existence  we  can  note  without  at
present  trying  to  determine  its  law.  It  is  a  principle
which  suspends  the  operation  of  the  ideals  of  reason,
from  time  to  time,  without  in  the  least  questioning  or
supplanting  those  ideals.  We  must  have  consistency
in  the  end;  we  must  have  connectedness;  we  must
have  unity :  but  for  the  sake  of  having  this  ultimate
unity  and  order,  anarchy  and  discontinuity  must  have
their  moment.  That  sort  of  self-possession  which  is
made  of  continuous  rationality  must  be  held  subject  to
self-abandonment,  when  the  hour  of  empirical  truth
arrives.  And  the  hour  of  truth  is  always  present.
Idolaters  of  self-possession,  as  we  are :  do  we  not  see
that  every  pulse  of  consciousness  is  full  of  the  tumult
and  wonder  of  these  plunges  into  the  ununified  and
returns  therefrom?  that  sensing,  listening,  accepting
the  hint  of  any  honest  emotion,  every  merest  decision


400  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

such  as  the  instants  of  living  are  made  up  of  —  all  of
these  involve  some  commitment  to  the  unknown,  some
such  wiUing  embrace  of  a  momentarily  broken  ration-
ality ?  The  emotion  itself  is  but  the  call  of  the  new
idea  which  has  its  overt  connections  yet  to  make  with
this  system  of  mine ;  passion  is  but  a  more  impetuous
commitment  to  an  insight  of  larger  scope  and  of  larger
destructive  (and  reconstructive)  implications.  All  enthu-
siasmsy  whether  of  devotion  or  anger  or  love  or  courage,
are  alike  in  this :  all  alike  spurn  continuity  and  seize
the  insight  which  the  moment  offers  as  a  new  world  of
truth,  whose  unity  with  the  old  may  be  cared  for  in
due  time.  And  has  not  passion  also  such  a  tide  as
the  mystic  knows,  which  after  the  critical  moment  of
consent  substitutes  its  own  motion  for  the  will,  now
apparently  passive,  of  the  worshipper?  Some  ctdt  of
discontinuity,  strongly  resembUng  the  mystic's  breach
with  the  world,  we  may  thus  see  everywhere  in  the  inti-
mate working  of  our  mental  life.  The  disconnection
which  the  mystic  practises  is  so  far  countenanced,  and
vaguely  explained.

The  mystic,  we  may  say,  simply  brings  his  discontin-
uity into  the  open  and  makes  an  avowed  principle  of  it
We  see  why  it  is  that  no  person  whose  god  is  conven-
tion and  self-rule  can  be  a  mystic.  In  the  typical
mystic  temperament  we  expect  to  find  a  certain  open-
ness of  spirit,  such  as  readily  accepts  a  present  inspira-
tion as  its  law.  The  encasements  of  mental  attitude  in
such  persons  are  never  fast-set :  the  limbemess  of  their
inner  substance  promises  well  for  continuance  of  growth.
At  his  worst,  the  mystic  is  impulsive  and  childish  ;  at
his  best  he  retains  something  of  childhood,  its  tender-


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  401

nes8|  its  freshness  of  impression,  its  unsatiated  wonder,
its  generosity :  he  has  that  simplicity  and  teachableness
which  are  found  in  the  very  young  and  the  very  great.
He  may,  for  this  reason,  be  a  demonstrative  person
(the  ^'  gift  of  tears ''  was  once  regarded  as  a  saintly
attribute) ;  or  he  may,  for  the  same  reason,  seem  to  live
in  perpetual  calm :  in  any  case,  he  is  one  whose  attach-
ment  in  the  Absolute  is  so  secure  that  he  has  no  fear  in
embracing  any  insight  which  can  gain  the  consent  of
that  side  of  his  consciousness,  though  for  the  present  it
can  claim  no  other*  (Here  perhaps  we  begin  to  break
through  into  the  theory  of  the  mystic  disconnectedness,
and  the  continuity  behind  it ;  but  we  shut  that  prospect
for  the  present,  and  return  to  our  psychology.)

Some  degree  of  openness  to  discontinuity  in  experi*
ence  is  evidently  a  part  of  deeper  practical  wisdom.
But  does  this  general  principle,  whatever  it  may  be,
valid  for  these  partial  ventures  in  experience,  —  does
this  principle  explain  or  justify  such  radical  and  total
disconnection  as  the  mystic  practises  ?  For  the  mystic,
strictly  speaking,  is  the  man  whose  disconnection  is
made  between  the  whole  system  of  things  and  ideas
temporal  on  the  one  side,  and  the  heart  of  the  eternal
on  the  other :  whereas  the  subdued  ^^  mysticism  "  of  our
ordinary  life  merely  flits  from  one  body  of  ideas  to
another  within  that  world-system.  Radical  mysticism,
religious  mysticism,  with  its  sweeping  negation  and
equally  sweeping  affirmation,  seems  to  sever  a  man  from
his  fellows  as  well  as  from  nature :  it  tends  to  make
him  solitary,  anti-social,  and  useless ;  to  give  him  over
to  subjectivity.  We  are  not  inclined  in  our  time  to
rate  highly  any  solitary  aspect  of  religious  thought  or


402  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTICS


practice.  And  yet  I  incline  to  think  that  just  this
radical  social  disconnection  is  also  an  essential  part
of  mysticism.

3.  Solitude.  —  AU  thorou^going  mysticism  is  soli-
tary, so  far  as  human  companionship  is  concerned :  we
must  first  be  clear  about  that*  There  are  phenomena
of  religious  history  that  look  much  like  mass-mysticism,
and  have  been  interpreted  as  such :  religious  dances,
dramas,  festivals,  revivals,  in  which  the  white-heat  of
social  consciousness  becomes  the  generator  of  mystical
enthusiasms*  But  even  in  these  somewhat  tumultuous
and  disorderly  variations  of  our  theme,  the  mass-con-
sciousness forms  the  level  from  which  the  individual
departs :  he  is  not  a  mystic  until  his  own  spirit  has
made  its  solitary  leap  to  Grod,  like  a  tongue  of  flame
out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire.

Much  of  what  we  caU  '^  social  life  "  moves  on  a  sim-
ilar principle  —  that  of  passing  from  hand  to  hand  a
function  which  in  any  one  hand  is  a  solitary  function :
each  one  in  turn  becomes  ^^it,"  takes  upon  himself  alone
the  difficulty  in  question,  learning  by  his  own  experi-
ence what  otherwise  he  sees  only  from  the  outside.
Whoever  helps  to  sustain  any  social  structure  is  alone
just  in  so  far  as  he  is  responsible :  and  he  comes,  for  the
most  part,  to  his  solitary  social  position  through  having
wrestled  with  some  angel  in  more  literal  isolation  from
other  human  ken.  The  initiate  must  go  down  alone
into  the  g^ave ;  though  initiation  is  on  the  whole  a
social  ceremony.  And  so,  whether  we  have  in  mind  an
orgy  of  Dionysus  or  a  meeting  of  the  society  of  Friends,
it  is  individual  seizure  by  the  spirit  which  marks  the


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MYSTICISM  403

moment  of  religious  success.^  We  do  not  understand
solitude  until  we  see  that  it  can  ride  on  the  back  of  any
whirl  of  sociality  however  furious ;  its  pang  may  be  the
more  poignant  because  the  utmost  limit  of  common
possession  has  been  tested  in  an  immediately  preceding
moment.  He  who  merely  imitates  is  but  a  false  mystic
—  for  the  thing  to  be  imitated  is  a  burst  of  original
impulse:  he  who  is  entranced  by  social  suggestion  is
but  a  false  mystic  —  for  the  inner  core  of  what  his
social  environment  requires  of  him  is  the  violent  subdual
of  the  social  bond  by  the  superior  energy  of  the  divine
rapport.  He  alone  is  utterly  unsocial  who  refuses
when  his  own  watch  comes  to  go  out  and  meet  the  abso-
lute in  the  darkness.  Solitude^  I  say,  is  the  essence  of
mysticism :  and,  I  add,  the  basis  of  its  supreme  social
importance.

For  it  is  the  most  dangerous  things  that  are  the  most
important.  We  of  this  age  have  come  to  fear  solitude
and  with  it  all  mysticism  because  solitude  is  the  home
of  stagnant  growths  and  morbid  consciousness,  because
it  is  the  crowning  curse  of  all  vices  and  itself  a  vice
even  in  religion.  We  see  in  it  only  the  danger  of  los-
ing objectivity,  which  is  indeed  its  essential  peril.  But
consider  the  mystic's  intention,  which  after  all  is  the
thing  to  be  judged  :  his  intention  is  that  his  absolute

^  Thoagh  the  early  aaoetios  of  Egypt  lived  in  oommonities,  their
dwellingi  appear  to  have  been  indiyidnal,  and  each  had  its  plaoe  for  entire
•olitude.  W.  M.  F.  Petrie,  Personal  Religion  in  Egypt,  p.  68.  The  same
is  true  of  the  early  monks  of  Ireland,  so  I  am  told  by  Mr.  C.  A.  Bennett,
who  supplies  me  with  the  following  note:  **  With  many  of  their  establish*
ments  were  oonneoted  *  diserts/  lonely  spots  in  woods  or  mountains,  to
which  from  time  to  time  the  individual  monk  might  retire  for  solitary
meditation,  fasting,  and  prayer.  The  oenobitio  never  wholly  replaced  tlM
eremitie  ideal  in  Ireland.** Cf.  Grongand.  Les  Chr^tienttfs  Celtiques.


404  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

Object  shall  gain  in  strength  pari  passu  with  his  entraoos
into  himself.  Mysticism  in  its  true  character  is  pre-
cisely the  redemption  of  solitude:  it  is  the  process
which  enters  one  step  farther  than  we  have  yet  explored
into  the  heart  of  our  own  infinite  subjectiyity,  and
reclaims  that  new  increment  for  the  general  use,  in  the
form  first  of  a  deepened  morality  and  art.  If  our  own
age  with  its  growing  sociality  and  immersion  in  the
manifold  is  little  mystical,  it  is  also  true  of  it  that  the
power  of  evaluating  solitude  and  therewith  the  depth  of
self-consciousness  is  little  developed :  in  so  far  as  this
age  of  ours  has  flattened  and  shallowed  out,  it  is  because
it  has  so  far  lost  its  mystical  instincts.

I  cannot  doubt  that  the  value  which  attaches  to  the
partial  discontinuities  of  living  in  our  spiritual  economy
attaches  also  to  the  complete  disconnection  which  the
typical  religious  mystic  practises :  the  latter  is  governed
by  the  same  law  as  the  former.  We  cannot  live  well,  I
judge,  unless  there  is  something  in  our  lives  which  offers
us  from  time  to  time  the  possibility  of  absolute  detach-
ment and  solitude :  that  which  is  necessary  and  useful
in  part  is  necessary  and  useful  also  in  whole.  The
mystic  is  simply  the  person  who  does  consciously  and
with  the  whole  man  that  which  we  are  all  doing  spon-
taneously and  in  fragmentary  fashion  in  every  moment
of  our  effective  living.  Doubtless,  then,  the  rhythm  of
mystic  experience  has  its  law,  such  as  will  place  it  with
the  other  normal  rhythms  of  experience.  But  as  the
mystic  rhythm  is  the  most  comprehensive  of  all,  I  shall
refer  to  this  law  simply  as  the  principle  of  alternation ;
and  shall  now  try  to  state  its  meaning.


CHAPTER  XXVm

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF MYSTICISM (continued) —TRE

PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION

rIE  principle  of  alteriiation,  so  far  as  the  program
of  daily  living  is  concerned,  is  neither  abstruse  nor
unknown.  Of  the  various  goods  which  go  to  make  up
a  balanced  existence,  we  naturally  treat  each  in  turn  as
if  it  were  a  sole  and  sufficient  object ;  we  do  not  under-
take to  pursue  them  all,  or  many,  at  once*  All  good
things  do  doubtless  belong  together;  but  each  good
thing,  we  recognize,  is  to  be  pursued  separately.  The
difficulty  lies  in  inferring  from  the  parts  to  the  whole :
that  is  to  say,  in  seeing  that  the  alternation  which  is
obviously  necessary  as  between  one  partial  object  and
another  is  also  necessary  as  between  all  partial  objects
and  the  whole.  But  just  this,  I  think,  is  what  worship
means :  that  the  whole  must  become  a  separate  object
of  pursuit,  taking  its  turn  as  if  it  also  were  a  part,  as  if
it  were  another  among  the  many  goods  of  practical
occupation.  Let  me  illustrate  this  principle  as  we  com-
monly recognize  it  among  these  many  partial  interests,
and  then  carry  it  on  to  the  total  alternation  of  religion.


We  may  best  appreciate  the  principle  of  alternation
by  what  it  is  contrasted  with,  the  principle,  namely,
that  all  things  belong  together  and  should  be  pursued


406  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTICS

together.  To  this  contrasting  principle  we  pay  much
respect :  old  dualisms  as  between  soul  and  body^  form
and  matter,  God  and  world,  have  become  tabooed  in
practice  as  they  have  become  obsolete  in  theory.  We
believe  in  the  concrete,  in  the  soul  that  is  one  witli  body,
the  God  that  is  immanent  in  the  world :  and  we  are
inclined  to  make  practical  programs  according  to  this
belief.  If  soul  and  body  belong  together,  we  must
cultivate  both  together.  If  man  and  woman  belong
together,  we  must  educate  both  together.  If  all  beauty
is  one  beauty,  then  the  highest  art  will  be  composite —
we  must  have  perfumed  music,  dramatic  music.  Wag*
nerian  opera,  or  in  German  fashion,  music  with  beer,
GemiitUchkeit,  and  a  fine  outlook.  But  for  the  most
part  some  sense  of  fitness  saves  us  from  turning  our
concrete  doctrine  too  thoroughly  into  a  prog^m.  Our
inferences  become  fantastic ;  and  without  abandoning
our  belief  in  the  concrete,  we  recognize  a  fundamen-
tal dualism  or  pluralism  in  the  necessities  of  conduct
Beflection  and  action  belong  together,  but  we  cannot
carry  on  both  at  once,  with  success :  each  best  finds  its
due  influence  on  the  other  if  each  has  its  time  of  whole-
hearted attention.  We  cannot  endure  form  without
substance,  whether  in  men  or  books  or  things,  nor  sub*
stance  without  form;  these  also  belong  together  and
perfection  in  either  will  bring  perfection  in  both :  but
not  waiting  for  perfection  in  either,  each  must  be
acquired  in  its  own  way  and  time,  by  some  degree  of
separate  attention.  In  larger  concerns,  liberty  and
authority  belong  together :  but  in  the  course  of  history
an  expansion  of  one  alternates  with  an  expansion  of  the
other,  each  developing  characteristic  abuses,  preparing


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  407

the  way  for  an  outburst  of  the  other  with  more  or  less
disturbance  and  passion.

The  whole  man^  in  short,  is  not  to  be  found  in  any
one  moment  —  nor  in  any  one  man.  The  dreamer  and
the  man  of  affairs  are  forever  finding  their  way  together;
the  spirit  of  peace  is  forever  breeding  with  the  spirit  of
war,  in  more  successful  syntheses  of  character :  ^  yet
specialization  has  its  infinite  work  to  do,  —  the  concrete
is  its  deposit,  not  its  occupation.

So  it  is  with  all  the  antithetical  goods  of  the  world ;
and  so  presumably  is  it  also  with  that  most  comprehen*
sive  antithesis  between  God  and  the  whole  world  of
visible  work.  I  believe  in  the  ^'  concrete  universal "  as
a  metaphysical  doctrine;  God  and  the  world  belong
together  —  neither  is  anything  without  the  other :  but
from  this  true  generality  it  no  more  follows  than  in  the
above  practical  matters  that  God  and  the  world  can  yet
be  best  known  or  won  together.  The  concrete  univer-
sal cannot  either  in  this  case  or  in  any  other  be  forthwith
made  into  a  maxim  for  historical  conduct.  God  and  the
world,  I  maintain,  must  be  worked  in  with  one  another
forever:  forever  they  must  be  pursued  in  alternation.
We  have  now  to  follow  out  this  theory.

II

In  every  art  we  recognize  a  distinction  between  tech-
nique and  spirit.  We  care  little  for  one  without  the
other ;  yet  we  know  that  technique  has  its  own  right,

^  In  olassio  times,  the  porsuits  of  oommeree  and  citj  life  actually
unfitted  men  for  fighting;  the  antiqne  contempt  for  the  merehant  was  based
in  part  upon  a  psychological  fact.  To-day,  oommeroe  has  its  good  quota
of  oombatiTeness ;  and  an  industrial  country  is  neyer  without  an  efficient
army.


408  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTIC8

and  must  be  cultivated,  as  if  for  technique's  sake  alone :
the  spirit  has  its  own  moment,  in  the  intervals  of  tech-
nical study, — and  the  spirit  represents  the  whole.  Here
the  whole  alternates  with  the  parts.

The  art  of  winning  knowledge  is  not  different  from
other  arts  in  this  respect.  We  know  what  the  tools  for
intellectual  discovery  are — facts  in  infinite  variety  and
extent,  measurements,  classifications,  knowledge  of  all
existing  theories:  he  who  would  win  truth  must  fill
himself  as  full  as  possible  of  science,  of  history,  of
social  motives,  of  the  immense  richness  of  the  cosmos.
But  we  know  too  that  there  comes  a  moment  when
these  very  things,  his  necessary  means,  become  his
poisons :  this  is  the  moment  at  which  they  become  himr
self.  The  man  becomes  identical  with  his  learning,  is
nothing  but  his  learning :  he  cannot  use  it  because  he
has  lost  sight  of  the  thing  it  is  noty  he  has  forgotten
what  it  is /or.  His  technique  cannot  serve  him  unless
he  can  see  beyond  it.  That  self  must  be  withdrawn
and  reoriented:  it  must  turn  its  back  upon  itself,  and
revert  to  the  whole.

This  practical  necessity  is  embedded  in  the  very  cat-
egories with  which  science  carries  on  its  work.  It  is  in
the  psychology  of  our  knowing  processes  that  we  find
the  barest  and  simplest  view  of  this  alternation  in  which
the  whole  is  one  member.  For  as  a  process  in  time,
knowing  has  to  ply  not  only  from  fact  to  fact,  from
part  to  part  of  experience,  but  also  between  all  such
parts  and  some  conception  of  the  whole.  Beside  all  the
work  of  observation  there  is  the  work  of  hypothesis,
the  alternation  between  induction  and  deduction,  laying
hold  on  a  whole  and  returning  from  the  whole  to  the


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  409

several  parts.^  The  scientist  is  occupied  with  phenom-
ena ;  but  beside  the  phenomena^  the  concept  of  siihstance
in  some  form  or  other  (whether  of  matter,  or  energy,
or  law,  or  soul)  most  take  a  place  as  one  other  object
of  necessary  attention.  Any  concrete  knowledge  of  a
society,  a  race,  an  age,  etc.,  must  be  reached  by  a
similar  interplay  of  categories:  beside  the  extending
of  knowledge,  there  must  be  a  deepening  of  knowl-
edge, an  attempt  to  grasp  the  ^spirit'  of  things,  their
principle,  formula,  essence, — in  brief,  their  one,  their
whole.  It  is  not  otherwise  with  our  knowledge  of
individual  men.  If  I  wish  to  know  a  person,  I  must
pursue  acquaintance  in  two  antithetical  directions:  I
must  learn  to  know  him  in  what  he  does,  at  his  periph-
ery, in  the  various  expressions  of  his  action  in  the
world  of  our  common  objects;  and  I  must  also  learn
to  know  him  by  the  pursuit  of  his  central  ^  substance,^
by  the  intuitive  seizure  in  intimacy  of  the  unity  from
which  all  these  plural  deeds  are  derived.

And  knowledge  of  the  greater  whole  evidently  follows
the  same  principle  as  the  knowledge  of  these  lesser

1  There  is  a  tendency  among  logicians  at  present  to  make  a  concrete
of  induction  and  dednotion  as  of  eyerjthing  else ;  and  to  assert  that
neither  process  exists  apart  from  the  other.  Ostwald  asserts  that  there
is  no  dedactiTC  science,  bat  there  is  ujohl  a  dednctive  procedure,  which
mnst  be  understood  in  connection  with  induction.  Well,  let  it  be  so:
there  is  an  inductiye  procedure  and  a  deductive  procedure,  and  these  are
two  different  procedures,  and  do  in  the  history  of  research  alternate  with
each  other.  That  is  all ;  whether  we  draw  the  lines  of  any  science  cleanly
about  one  or  the  other  procedure  is  of  no  consequence.  The  alterna-
tion itself  will  noTcr  be  wiped  out.  Analogically  speaking,  the  quest  of
induction  is  scientific  prayer  ;  and  the  discoyery  of  a  whole,  in  answer  to
such  prayer,  a  scientiflc  mystical  experience.  Inductions  are  not  to  be
taken  by  violence,  they  are  received  in  passivity.  The  question  of  indue*
tion  is  treated  further  in  chapter  xxxi  below.


410  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

wholes.  My  world  at  its  periphery  is  ^experience,'
^  life  *;  at  its  center  it  is  ^  substance/  '  realily,'  '  Grod*'
We  must  know  both  aspects  in  tarn,  and  conceive  them
as  we  can  together.  My  total  picture  of  this  world  is
drawn  like  an  artist's  sketch  —  not  by  a  line  continuous
and  adequate  in  the  field  of  vision,  but  by  a  series  of
lines  which  err,  and  which  are  broken  in  their  course  by
recurrence  to  the  (undravm)  idea.  God  is  in  the  world,
no  doubt :  the  plural  and  visible  aspect  of  things  is
divine  also  —  that  is^ifwe  are  able  to  see  it  so.  But
if  we  are  to  prosper  in  such  an  interpretation  of  the
world  (which  certainly  sets  upon  that  world  a  high
value)  we  need  from  time  to  time  to  have  caught  the
original  meaning  of '  divinity '  in  some  immediate  expert-
enee.^ We  must  recur  to  the  whole.

Herewith  we  come  upon  the  principle  of  alternation
in  its  full  meaning,  which  is  best  seen  in  the  history  of
the  will.  In  all  our  practical  living  we  human  beings
are  pursuing  some  total  good  under  shapes  and  by
means  which  are  inadequate  to  it,  and  so  partly  false  to
it We  are  obliged  from  time  to  time  to  reject  what

^  It  i«  not  ftocurate  to  saj  that  we  are  vnable  to  hold  in  a  angle  Tiew
the  manj  and  the  one,  the  appeaianees  and  the  reality,  the  periphery  and
the  oenter,  the  world  and  God.  To  some  extent  we  most  do  this:  in
attending  to  the  many,  we  may  not  loee  tight  of  the  one,  at  the  risk  of
losing  the  many  also;  and  in  attending  to  the  one  we  may  not  loee  sight
of  the  many,  at  the  riek  of  the  Tanishing  of  the  one.  The  one  most
always  be  known  as  the  one  ofthete  many.  The  situation  is  rather  this:
that  in  the  prooess  of  attending  to  and  dealing  with  the  many,  the  Tision
of  the  One  tends  to  vanish  and  must  be  renewed  by  empirieal  piesenee  of
its  object.  Likewise,  in  lifting  the  mind  to  the  One,  the  sense  of  the
many,  with  which  the  One  must  be  thought,  tends  to  fade,  and  €rod  loses
all  meaning  to  the  mind  that  regards  him. '  The  exclusive  direction  of  the
mind  whether  to  the  noany  or  to  the  One  is  a  self-destroying  process ;
whereas  the  alternating  of  attention  may  be  a  self-doTeloping  process.


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  411

we  have  done,  to  withdraw  our  forward-moving  efforts,
and  revert  to  the  whole :  not  because  of  the  fact  of
error  (for  there  are  errors  which  may  be  remedied  on
the  spot  without  change  of  direction),  but  because  of
the  type  of  error,  —  it  is  an  error  which  involves  not
only  our  tools,  but  our  selveSy  the  operators.  We  begin
to  get  into  our  own  way  and  so  to  defeat  our  own  work.
We  can  find  no  radical  remedy  except  in  getting  rid  of
that  self ;  and  no  radical  way  of  abandoning  that  self
except  by  reverting  to  the  whole.^

This  is,  in  outline,  the  meaning  of  the  principle  of
alternation.  There  is  something  about  our  practical
attention  to  any  part  or  parts  which  turns  self-defeating,
and  requires  such  complete  abandonment  of  the  parts,
and  reversion  to  the  whole  as  religion  has  demanded,
that  whole  which  is  different  from  all  parts.  And  there
is  also  something  about  practical  attention  to  the  whole

1  The  principle  of  alternation  is  the  supplement  of  the  principle  of
reUUipity  hoth  of  knowing  and  of  willing.  Both  principles,  of  alternation
and  of  relativity,  are  historical  principles :  they  apply,  that  is,  to  knowing^
not  to  knowledge.  It  is  not  knowledge  that  is  relative ;  it  is  the  temporal
act  of  knowing.  It  is  my  momentary  position  as  a  being  in  time  and
space  which  determines  that  at  any  moment  I  may  see  hot  one  side  of  a
shield  —  and  this  limitation  I  cannot  oTcroome.  But  such  knowledge  of
the  whole  as  I  hare  leads  me  by  alternating  my  position  to  repair  the
defect  of  my  historical  knowing.  Now  knowledge  of  the  whole,  such  as
gnides  this  alternation  between  relative  parts,  is  also  a  matter  of  degree.
And  in  so  far  as  I  fail  to  overcome  my  relativity  at  any  point,  or  find
myself  sinking  deeper  into  it,  I  am  forced  to  tnm  away  from  all  parts,
and  directly  seek  a  whole  that  will  place  them.  Thus  I  alternate  between
whole  and  parts,  and  thereby  transcend  relativities  as  they  make  them-
selves felt.  Every  detail  of  psychical  life  shows  this  method  of  action.
Attention  in  its  minnter  physiology  is  a  rapidly  alternating  process,  per-
petnally  withdrawn  from  its  object  and  instantaneously  replaced;  in  the
instant  of  its  withdrawal  having  recovered  a  better  poise  uid  a  steadier
termination,  having  wiped  away  the  film  of  relativity  with  which  self  and
object  had  begun  to  obscure  each  other.


412  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

which  turns  self-defeating,  and  can  only  be  recovered
by  occupation  with  the  parts.  Hence  the  movement
of  our  temporal  life  must  swing  between  them.  But
in  order  to  see  more  clearly  what  is  meant  by  this
'^  reverting  to  the  whole/'  we  must  look  deeper  into
that  self-defeating  tendency  which  makes  this  alterna-
tion necessary.

It  is  a  matter  of  common  observation  that  every
human  effort  produces  something  it  does  not  want;
and  this  by-product  sooner  or  later  checks  the  effort.
We  may  even  say  that  every  effort  produces  something
of  the  opposite  of  what  it  aims  at :  the  strain  to  see
brings  blindness ;  the  strain  to  think  brings  absence  of
mind;  strained  self-consciousness  brings  loss  of  self«
possession ;  careful  calculation  invites  failure ;  scrupu-
lous  morality  develops  the  immoral ;  high  aims  bring
specialization  and  deformity.  These  are  facts,  but  what
is  the  reason  for  them  ?

The  reason,  as  I  see  it,  lies  as  far  back  in  the  nature
of  things  as  the  fact  that  the  soul  of  man  has  a  body,
appears  in  space,  and  works  out  its  destiny  in  time.
Whatever  is  the  cause  and  meaning  of  our  physical
existence,  that  same  cause  makes  our  temporal  efforts
self-checking  and  that  same  cause  requires  us  to  recover
our  spiritual  integrity  by  bringing  the  whole  down
among  the  parts,  and  treating  it  as  a  thing  of  time  and
space  like  ourselves.

That  which  makes  existence  in  time  important  to
spirits  such  as  we  are  is  the  power  of  voluntary  attenr
Hon :  it  is  the  specific  mark  of  our  individual  selfhood,
and  it  is  also  the  place  of  our  freedom. All  the  work


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  413

of  life,  with  its  manifold  interests,  can  be  described  as
the  sphere  of  our  voluntary  attention  and  action.  This
characteristic  marks  off  all  our  occupation  with  the  parts
from  our  occupation  with  the  whole  in  worship,  which
in  the  mystic  experience  itself  becomes  passive,  that  is
to  say,  effortless.  The  contrast  between  mystic  experi-
ence and  ^  life '  is  at  the  same  time  a  contrast  between
effortless  attention  and  effortful  attention.  But  in  diis
effortful  attention  we  find  the  chief  mark  of  our  per-
sonal liberty ;  and  it  is  just  this  liberty  which  is  bought
with  the  great  price  of  artificiality,  and  separation
from  nature.

For  in  this  voluntary  business  of  life,  we  are  not
merely  pursuing  a  good  which  is  already  made ;  we  are
constructing  our  good,  we  are  making  good.  That
same  absolute  good  which  the  mystic  simply  finds,
appears  to  our  common  action  as  something  which  we
can  win  only  by  making  it  our  own,  reproducing  it,  or
realizing  it  by  our  own  labors.  All  practical  life  may
thus  further  be  described  as  a  transition  from  a  self
that  is  g^ven  to  us  (by  birth  or  otherwise)  to  a  made-
self.  And  it  is  here  that  we  inevitably  separate  our*
selves  from  nature.  For  all  such  practical  constructive
effort  must  have  its  plan,  its  aims,  its  standards ;  and
whatever  aims  and  standards  we  self-consciously  adopt
and  define  to  ourselves  as  ^our  good'  are  so  many
theories,  types,  generalities,  —  never  quite  the  whole
truth.  Since  we  must  model  our  conduct  on  some
definite  plan,  the  practical  will  is  necessarily  theo'
reticaly  and  so  far,  abstract,  incomplete.^ We  gain

^  The  wQl  worki  in  the  concrete  —  thai  ia  tnie. Bnt  what  it  con-
seioosly  sett  up  in  the  concrete  world  are  ita  own  ideasi  monldingi  and


414  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

firmness  in  the  saddle  of  practical  self-possession  only
by  condemning  to  death  a  certain  margin  of  our
consciousness.^

This  inherent  defect  in  the  operation  of  voluntary
attention  becomes  more  pronounced  and  radical  as  effort
continues ;  simply  because  every  voluntary  effort^  assum-
ing as  it  must  that  its  standards  are  adequate,  that  it
knows  what  it  wants,  strengthens  the  assumption  by
acting  upon  it,  and  so  deepens  the  breach  between  the
artificial  self  and  the  natural  self.  We  are  never  occu-
pied with  any  object  without  becoming  to  some  deg^ree
fascinated  by  that  object  and  assimilated  to  it ;  as  the
object  is  partial,  so  we  who  deal  with  it  become  partial.*
As  a  conscious,  self-making  agent,  ^^  the  individual  is
always  wrong  " ;  yet,  just  as  such  a  free,  effortful,  self-
making  agent,  the  individual  must  always  assume  that
he  is  right.

We  are  thus,  by  *^  our  finite  situation,"  bound  in  a
predicament  from  which  our  active  selves  cannot  shake
free,  though  the  ultimate  knower  in  us  is  not  involved
in  it.  Ambition  and  duty,  all  use  of  conscious  freedom,
all  worky  in  short,  develops  of  itself  an  inner  opposition,
or  spiritual  checkage.  For  this  loss  of  margin,  as  the
artificial  self  becomes  identified  with  its  own  assump-
tions and  objects,  is  a  progressive  impoverishment  of

improTemento  apon  a  giTen  reality,  peeodo-indiTidnal  objects,  imitationft
of  the  conorete.  Notot  jet  has  the  oonscions  will  of  man  oonstructed  bj
its  own  effort  alone  a  living  being.  Oar  ezplieit  praeticalitj,  I  repeat,  is
theoretical  and  abstract

1  Here  commenoes  the  building  of  "  saboonseioosness."  See  the
note  on  this  subject  at  the  end  of  the  book.

*  This  is  the  "  relativity "  to  which  the  hnman  will  is  snbject ;  we
cannot  act  in  the  world  of  matter  without  becoming  material ;  we  cannot
nse  our  freedom  without  becoming  to  some  degree  a  thing.


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  416

that  whol&idea,  whose  use,  as  we  thought,^  gives  all
objects  what  value  they  have.  In  order  that  my  various
practical  enterprises  should  go  on  well,  it  is  necessary
that  my  various  ends  should  maintain  their  worth;
and  in  order  that  they  may  hold  their  worth  and  inter-
est, my  whole-idea  must  be  active  in  all  my  occupa-
tions  —  I  must  be  thinking  loith  my  whole-idea,  and
efficiently.  But  the  incident  of  voluntary  activity
is  to  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  this  whole-idea.'
And  the  result  is  a  spiritual  fatigue,  analogous  to,  but
neither  identical  nor  contemporaneous  with,  physical
fatigue.'

The  symptoms  of  this  spiritual  checkage  are  not  hard
to  recognize.  They  are  simply  the  inevitable  assump-
tions of  action  become  hardened  into  fixed  illusions.
We  find  ourselves  in  the  first  place  regarding  the  several
objects  of  our  pursuit  as  though  they  were  absolute^
real  in  themselves  and  good  in  themselves ;  and  we
cannot  see  them  otherwise  than  with  this  exaggerated
importance.  We  cannot  bear  to  lose  any  of  them ;  for
every  loss  is  a  dead  loss.  And  if  we  win,  we  are  still
dissatisfied,  for  every  gain,  too,  is  a  dead  gain,  reaching
no  further  in  its  value  than  the  object  then  and  there

1  See  abovei  chapter  zL

*  Deliberate  Darrowing  of  the  range  of  idea,  in  one^s  ooeopation  with
the  party  is  the  essence  of  tin.  Freedom  may  thns  add  to  the  breach
between  natural  self  and  artificial  self  a  positive  barrier.  For  the  present
we  may  Ignore  this  further  element  in  the  **  separation  between  man  and
God."

'  No  donbt  this  fatigue  of  the  idea  is  also  physical  in  the  same  way
that  all  spiritual  limitation  is  physical :  that  is  to  say,  there  Is  a  physio-
logicsl  expression  for  it.  It  is  none  the  less  a  concern  primarily  of  ideas;
it  has  a  necessity  of  the  same  order  as  that  which  makes  us  temporal
beings  at  all.  In  the  end  it  is  a  matter  of  religion,  and  can  only  be  sno-
cessfnUy  approached  from  the  religions  quarter.


416  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

gained,  leaving  infinite  farther  gains  to  be  made.  No
gain  is  so  g^reat  as  to  seem  to  me  a  gain  of  the  whole.
My  world  of  wiU-objects  has  become  pluralistic;
and  my  practical  problem  has  become  essentially  h<^)e-
less.  Another  symptom  is  criticism.  For  aU  work
and  constmctioa  most  be  critical,  that  is,  selective.  All
voluntary  activity  takes  up  the  critical  attitude  toward
what  is,  and  resolves  to  4>ring  about  something  better,
by  first  conceiving  something  better.  The  practical
temper  has  to  separate  the  good  from  the  bad:  and
since  its  world  has  taken  on  this  pluralistic  and  abso-
lute appearance,  the  good  qualities  and  the  bad  qualities
of  things  and  of  men  seem  independent  of  each  other.
We  think  that  we  can  have  the  one  without  the  othw
and  we  insist  on  it.  We  have  no  interest  in  a  possible
union  of  the  good  and  the  bad ;  we  draw  a  dean  line
between  them ;  we  are  condemnatory  and  exacting,  for
the  sake  of  our  own  standards.  We  grow  mighty  in
discrimination,  and  terrible :  we  grow  puny  in  ^nthesis
and  creative  power.  A  further  consequence  and
symptom  is  that  our  responsible  temper  finds  nothing
in  the  present  that  satisfies  it.  It  is  alienated  from  its
present  moment:  it  is  romantic^  in  the  sense  that  it
seeks  its  good  elsewhere,  far  away,  in  a  place  very  dif-
ferent from  anything  it  finds  in  experience.  As  the
over-preparedy  ovei^uipped,  overstrained  person,  with
his  eye  habitually  fixed  on  some  future  moment  as  the
moment  of  his  action,  is  indeed  prepared  for  everything
except  for  the  judgment  ^^  Now  is  the  time '' ;  so  the
soul  over^teeped  in  actual  work  loses  capacity  to  believe
in  the  presence  of  the  good  worked  for.  Its  sympathy
flows  forth  with  difficulty ;  and  that  attitude  of  '^  fusion"


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  417

which  we  were  recently  describing  as  mystical  in  char-
acter^  finds  little  scope  for  exercise.  The  one  and  good
is  not  here  —  that  is  all.

All  of  these  common  symptoms  of  spiritual  fatigae,
I  repeat,  are  nothing  more  than  the  habitual  assump-
tions of  action  taken  as  whole  trutii.  They  picture
nothing  but  the  abstracted  soul  of  the  active  man ;  the
common  materialism  of  strenuosity,  deepened  into  a
belief  in  the  ^'  abstract  universal/'  All  these  symptoms
sum  themselves  up  in  this:  that  I  find  nothing  indi'
vidital  in  my  world.  I  find  no  present  particular  of
which  I  can  say  —  Here  is  the  standard  embodied:  I
find  no  object  in  which  my  whole-idea,  with  its  high
power  of  synthesis  of  good  and  bad,  can  find  end-
less occupation.  My  universals  have  parted  company
with  particulars.  I  find  illustrations  of  value ;  things
good  in  this  respect  and  bad  in  that ;  specimens  of
general  concepts ;  but  no  individual.

And  losing  contact  with  the  really  individual  aspect
of  the  world  beyond  me,  I  also  lose  contact  with  the
individual  in  myself.  My  artificial  self  becomes  the
only  self  I  am  acquainted  with.  This  self  is  built  up
according  to  self-conscious  standards  of  criticism,  uni-
versal in  character,  derived  largely  from  my  social  con-
sciousness, and  passing  current  in  the  world  just  because
I  have  thus  dutifully  universalized  myself.  It  is  a  well-
known  selfhood — known,  in  fact,  through  and  through,
empty  of  mystery — well-behaved  also,  conventionally
confirmed  in  its  own  successful  technique  of  self-hand-
ling, the  man  of  the  city  and  of  the  world ;  betraying  at
every  point  the  failure  of  privacy,  of  recourse  to  the  indi-
vidual I  am,  the  sealing  of  spontaneity,  the  formal  hard-


418  WORSHIP  AND  TH£  MTSTICS

ening  of  the  hearty  the  unhiimaDiziiig  of  men  by  oret-
contact  with  homanitj,  the  strain  of  general  attitades
not  wholly  natoralized  in  oneself.

To  live  thns  with  the  oniyersal^  the  abstract  aniver>
sal  of  action,  and  with  one's  own  artificial  and  dutifol
embodiments  thereof,  is  the  beginning  of  death.

IV

The  effort  of  work,  then,  provides  for  its  own  arrest
Work,  simply  as  a  voluntary  application  of  ideas,  does
gradually  disintegrate  those  values  for  which  alone  work
exists.  In  all  literalness  life  ceases  to  be  worth  living,
and  death  in  some  shape  will  be  sought.  Into  the
midst  of  all  effort,  dutiful  or  otherwise,  there  must  &11
soon  or  late  a  sense  of  the  aimlessness  of  work,  a  ques-
tioning and  denial  of  worth-whileness,  a  consciousness
of  moral  wear  and  tear  in  the  determined  pursuit  of
objects  whose  value  is  not  wholly  convincing,  a  need
for  recovering  sincerity  and  spiritual  poise.

And  this  new-bom  need,  still  of  the  same  moral  stuff
that  first  launched  the  work,  now  reverses  the  direction
of  action,  and  turns  naturally  toward  some  object  whose
value  is  convincing  without  any  effort,  toward  enjoyment
in  some  form  or  other.  Pleasure,  recreation,  friendship,
the  companionship  of  men  and  women,  beauty —  all
these  recall  the  outgoings  of  ambition  and  moral  effort,
and  reunite  a  man  with  his  natural  appreciation.  Some-
thing in  common  these  all  have  with  the  quest  of  the
mystic,  and  with  the  mystic  experience  itself.  And
worship  is  the  whole  which  includes  them  all.

It  is  not  primarily  external  failure  which  brings  man
to  worship. It  is  simply  the  internal  decay  of  the  incen*


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  419

tive  of  work,  the  drooping  of  the  sails  of  ambition,  the
falling  out  of  homor  with  one's  own  humor,  the  mys-
terious vanishing  of  the  raison  d'etre  of  life  as  a  sphere
for  the  theoretical  will.^  And  whatever  recovers  the
worth  of  living  by  recovering  the  natural  vigor  of  the
wholeddea  is  worship,  or  a  part  of  worship.

It  may  not  be  at  once  obvious  how  worship  is  related
to  all  these  other  means  for  recovering  our  values  ?  —
there  is  much  here  that  has  no  resemblance  to  worship,
nor  any  visible  need  of  it.  For  spiritual  as  well  as  for
bodily  fatigue,  physical  nature  has  its  simple  advice  to
give,  and  ancient  human  experience  its  rule  of  thumb.
As  the  Egyptian  proverb  has  it,  ^^  The  archer  hitteth
the  target,  partly  by  pulling,  partly  by  letting  go ;  the
boatsman  reacheth  the  landing,  partly  by  pulling,  partly
by  letting  go."  *  No  man  can  earn  the  good  by  con«
sciously  mastering  all  its  conditions ;  so  the  race  long
ago  found  out.  Critical  responsibility  must  be  limited ;
physiology  and  the  self-righting  mechanisms  of  the
world  must  do  what  self-consciousness  fails  and  will
always  fail  to  accomplish.  All  such  counsels  of  pas-
sivity, laissez  faire^  partial  death,  are  parts  of  practical
wisdom  and  have  no  apparent  necessary  connection  with
religion.

But  these  things  all  need  religion  to  finish  them  just
because  they  are  relatively  un-self-conscious.  Our  free
and  self-conscious  personality  ought  not  to  be  satisfied,
and  cannot  be  satisfied,  with  a  restoration  purely  by

1  All  these,  taken  together  with  the  sense  of  one's  own  responsibility
for  the  resalt,  L  e.,  that  it  is  doe  to  self-assertion.  Hie  sense  of  tin  re-reads
and  oomplieates,  bat  does  not  essentially  alter,  the  problem.

*  Instroetions  of  Ptah  Hotep  to  his  son.


420  WOBSmP  AND  TEDS  MYSTICS

mechanism  or  by  laissez  faire.  In  fact  there  can  be
no  such  thing  as  a  recovery  of  value  which  is  essentially
physiological  or  sabconscioos ;  the  idea  must  be  recov-
ered as  an  ideOy  that  is  to  say,  consciously  and  inten*
tionally.'  Worship,  we  may  say,  is  the  self-conscious
peart  of  the  natural  recovery  of  value  ;  it  is  that  part,
therefore,  which  assigns  all  other  parts  their  phu^e  and
meaning.

Sleep  wins  our  consent  without  offering  any  account
of  its  method  or  meaning — or  perhaps  a  minimum
account.  In  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  there  is  something
more  of  the  positive  and  intentional.  To  pleasure,
friendly  association,  and  art  we  turn  still  blindly  and
instinctively ;  but  with  some  dawning  grasp  of  the  idea
in  what  we  do.  There  is  a  free  and  deliberate  element
in  the  reversal  of  action.  In  all  of  these  we  perceive
the  play  of  the  universal  in  the  particular,  a  natural
union  of  the  two  given  without  effort,  and  rejoining  us
with  the  individual  element  in  our  experience.' But  in

^  This  implies  that  in  the  oompUte  alfeematioii  there  \b  somethiiig  of
the  Tolimtafy  self  which  is  not  abandoned  :  if  this  self  is  to  know  the
meaning  of  its  own  reooTerj,  it  cannot  be  whoUy  in  abeyanoe  while  the
process  of  reooTery  takes  place.  There  is  something  in  all  onr  artificial
efforts  which  is  absolntel j  right,  and  cannot  be  withdrawn  :  namely,  the
task  itself  of  being  self -goTeming,  world-boilding,  self-making  beings.  It
is  onr  nature  to  be  artificial,  and  onr  right  to  be  self-knowing  :  whatoTor
postulates  and  selfhoods  haye  to  be  negated  and  reyised,  they  are  not
iku€.  Freedom  has  the  peculiarity  that  it  can  recognise  its  own  relatiTe
failure,  and  define  more  or  less  clearly  what  it  lacks  ;  and  in  so  far  as  it
can  define  its  need,  it  can  consciously  pursue  it  Thus  the  preparatioa
of  the  mystic  nerer  surrenders  its  intontionaiity,  even  ^en  it  is  most
passive.

'  To  Kanf  s  mind,  it  is  the  communioability  of  the  Asthetic  judg-
ment, the  untTcrsal  vdidity  to  which  it  aspires,  that  stamps  it  at  once
as  an  affair  in  which  thought  is  engaged.  But  he  cannot  identify  it  with
objectiye  reason,  nor  with  explicit  reason ;  hence  he  explains  it  as  a  sub-


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  421

worship  the  idea  has  broken  through  and  become  explic-
itly an  object  of  search;  the  soul  deliberately  seeks
the  One,  the  individuality  of  the  world,  as  a  present
object  of  experience.

Everything  that  may  still  be  to  us  an  object  of
immediate  and  effortless  appreciation  will  take  part  in
this  search.  Hence  worship  naturally  allies  itself  out-
wardly,  aB  ..ell  as  inwardly,  with  recreation,  social  enjoy-
ment,  and  beauty.  Worship  uses  these,  and  goes
beyond  them  :  it  recognizes  in  them  the  absolute  which
is  its  own  and  discards  the  rest ;  puts  behind  its  back
all  but  the  One  which  is  in  all,  and  is  the  condition  of
them  all.  This  final,  sacrificial  aspect  of  worship  —
the  negation,  or  rather  subordination,  of  all  partial
loves  —  is  the  act  which  alone  can  make  these  loves
immortal :  it  is  the  conscious  possessing  of  their  neces-
sary condition.

Thus  worship  adds  the  touch  of  unity  and  self-con-

jectiye  play  of  the  faculties  of  knowledge  in  an  "  Erkenntnis  Uberhanpt."
**  Also  muss  der  Gremlitsznstand  der  eines  Geftthls  des  freien  Spiels  der
VontellimgBkrftfte  za  einem  Erkenntnisse  dberhaapt  sein."  And  of  what
Yorstellungskrftfte  ?  '*  Einbildnngskraft,  f ttr  die  Znsammensetzung  des
Mannichfaltigen  der  Ansohaunngy  and  Yerstand  fUr  die  Einheit  des  Be-
grifFs,  der  die  Vorstellungen  Tereinigt."  Kritik  der  Urteilskraft,  p.  62.
We  know,  in  general,  well  enough,  what  this  means :  the  sense  of  the
inner  enlivenment,  and  lightening  at  the  same  time,  of  the  action  of  our
"  powers  **  in  the  presence  of  beauty,  as  if  a  smooth  place  had  been  found
and  these  powers  were  not  more  in  harmony  with  each  other  than  with
the  reality  which  they  appreciate.  It  is  essentially  free  play,  and  reflec-
tive, but  not  subjective.

Kant  notes  the  relatively  effortless,  self-continuing  character  of  the
experience  of  beauty  thus  :  "  Sie  hat  (eine)  GausalitUt,  den  Zustand  der
VorsteUungen  selbst  und  die  Beschaftigung  der  Erkenntnisskrftfte  ohne
weitere  Absicht  zu  erhalten.  Wir  weilen  bei  die  Betrachtung  des
Schttnen,  weil  diese  Betrachtung  sich  selbst  stftrkt  und  reproducirt."
Ibid.,  p.  68.


422  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MTSTICS

scioosness  to  the  whole  body  of  our  natural  spiritual
recovery.  It  is,  I  repeat,  nothing  more  than  doing  with
the  whole  self,  and  consciously,  that  which  in  blinder
and  more  fragmentary  fashion  we  are  doing  at  every
moment  of  our  waking  lives,  and  especially  in  the
moments  of  partial  return,  such  as  we  have  mentioned.
The  mystic  is  he  who  knows  that  his  insight  must  be  an
event  in  time,  and  that  it  is  his  right  as  a  self-conscious
being  in  time  to  seek  for  it.  The  man  who  prefers  to
leave  his  religion  in  the  obscure,  in  its  diffused  and
partial  forms,  is  the  man  who  puts  the  prize  of  life  upon
vagueness  and  the  unexplicit.  The  mystic,  on  the
other  hand,  who  adds  worship  to  all  the  rest,  the  mystic
is  the  man  who  prizes  the  overt,  the  definite,  and  the
literal  in  religion.

The  motive  of  the  mystic,  then,  is  something  quite
different  from  moral  ambition.  In  the  active  part  of
the  mystic's  preparation  for  worship,  the  moral  motive
may  still  be  visible :  it  may  still  be  touched  by  a  sense
of  the  importance  of  work,  of  various  humane  interests,
as  if  it  were  for  the  sake  of  these  ends  that  one  now
turns  his  back  upon  them.  The  zeal  of  the  mystic  for
self-purification,  his  moral  scrupulousness,  may  be  in
part  derived  from  his  view  of  his  own  practical  duty  or
his  desire  for  success.  But  this  is  all  something  dis-
tinct from  the  love  of  God  in  its  psychological  meaning ;
and  this  meaning  does  not  appear  until  the  active  stage
of  worship,  which  is  ^^  prayer,''  gives  way  to  passivity  in
the  discovery  of  an  object  of  effortless  appreciation.
Unless  the  characteristic  of  pleasure,  that  is,  of  wholly
spontaneous  and  original  conviction  of  worth,  entera


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  423

into  worship,  the  prayer  has  no  answer  and  worship  is
to  that  extent  a  failure.

But  in  the  mystic  experience  that  is  what  happens.
The  object  upon  which  the  worshipper  has  bent  his
thought  becomes  actually  significant  of  the  whole.  The
mystic  has  found  a  present  object  which  is  able  to
gather  into  its  own  vortex  all  the  meanings  of  his
worldly  work,  and  therewith  to  abolish  the  independent
worth  of  that  work.  EUs  idea  of  the  world  in  its  unity
has,  simply,  become  adequate  to  its  synthetic  task ;  and
the  disunited  segments  find  their  way  together :  this  is
the  whole  secret  of  value.  It  would  be  just  to  say  that
the  worshipper  is  at  first  moved  rather  by  the  desire  to
love  God,  than  by  that  love  as  a  ruling  motive :  and
that  the  actual  love  of  God  is  itself  the  success  of
prayer,  simultaneous  with  the  insight  which  the  mystic
obtains,  identical  with  it.^  The  character  of  this  expe-
rience is  well  pictured  in  a  simple  note  in  the  diary  of
Tolstoy,  whose  mystical  traits  (though  he  would  hardly
be  called  a  mystic)  are  closely  allied  with  his  powers  of
penetrating  self-description :

^^  Yesterday/'  he  writes,  *^  I  hardly  slept  all  night.  Having
posted  up  my  diary,  I  prayed  to  God.  It  is  impossible  to
convey  the  sweetness  of  the  feeling  I  experienced  during  my
prayer.  I  said  the  prayers  I  usually  repeat  by  heart,  *  Our
Father,'  *  To  the  Virgin,'  etc.,  and  still  remained  in  prayer.
If  one  defines  prayer  as  a  petition  or  as  a  thanksgiving,  then
I  did  not  pray. I  desired  something  supremely  good ;  but

^  *<L'oraison  I'appelle  mutation  jasqa'a  ee  qu'elle  ait  produit  le
miel  de  la  d^Totion:  apres  oela  elle  se  eooTertit  en  coDtemplatioo.  Le
d^ir  d'obtenir  ramoor  dmn  noas  fait  inciter;  mail  I'amoar  obtena  nous
fait  contempler."  St.  Fran^ie  de  Sales,  Traits  de  I'amoar  de  Diea,  VI,
iii,  quoted  by  De  Montmoraiid,  Beviie  pbiloeophiqoey  to).  67,  p.  262.


424  WORSHIP  AND  TH£  MYSTICS

what,  I  cannot  express,  thongh  I  was  clearly  oonscions  of  wbat
I  wanted.  I  wished  to  merge  into  the  Universal  Being.  I
asked  him  to  pardon  my  crimes ;  yet,  no,  I  did  not  ask  for
that,  for  I  felt  that  if  he  had  given  me  this  blissful  moment,
he  had  pardoned  me.  I  asked,  and  at  the  same  time  felt  that
I  had  nothing  to  ask ;  and  that  I  cannot  and  do  not  know  how
to  ask :  I  thanked  him,  but  not  with  words  or  thought.  I  com-
bined in  one  feeling  both  petition  and  gratitude.  Fear  quite
▼anished.  I  could  not  have  separated  any  one  emotion, —
faith,  hope,  or  love,  —  from  the  general  feeling.  No,  this  was
what  I  experienced  yesterday :  it  was  love  of  God,  lofty  love,
aniting  in  itself  all  that  is  good,  excluding  all  that  is  bad."  ^

The  moving  principle  of  Tolstoy's  life  at  this  time
was  doubtless  a  large  human  ambition,  taking  impulsive
shape  as  a  desire  to  perfect  himself,  and  to  '^  test  him-
self ";  and  swinging  perhaps  only  in  this  solitary  in-
stance within  the  circle  of  mystic  worship. But  this
human  ambition  and  this  divine  love  are  closely  related
|to  each  other. We  may  say  that  beyond  the  limits  of
jthe  mystic  experience  itself,  the  love  of  Grod  takes  on
f  the  form  of  human  ambition ;  that  these  motives  are,  so
I  to  speak,  allotropic  forms  of  the  same. They  alternate
with  each  other,  as  the  hour  glass  is  turned,  —  each
one  in  turn  becoming  the  life  of  the  other. With  the
idea  of  God,  one  loves  the  world ;  and  then  with  the
idea  of  the  world,  one  loves  G^  ftgain,  —  and  the  two
loves,  or  ambitions,  are  of  one  substance,  thongh  they
involve  alternations  in  the  history  of  the  empirical  will.

VI

For  worship  cannot  last ;  it  also  has  its  type  of  self-
defeat  and  death. The  worshipper  who  persists  in  his

^  Life  of  Tolfltoj,  Ayhner  Mande,  voL  i,  pp.  63-64.


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  426

contemplation  of  the  whole,  thinking  to  establish  himself
permanently  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  becomes
an  automaton,  precisely  as  the  determined  worker
becomes  a  machine.

'  Automatism '  of  a  very  literal  character  is  not  only
admitted  but  even  boasted  of  by  certain  mystics  who
have  professed  to  enjoy  the  constant  vision  of  God.
Madame  Guyon  reaches  a  stage  of  perfection  whose
chief  marks  are  the  absence  of  personal  volition,  the
replacement  of  effortful  voluntary  action  by  spontaneous
obedience  to  the  suggestions  of  her  religious  sense,  or
fancy.  She  accepts  the  log^c  of  the  complete  with-
drawal of  individual  will  and  choice,  namely,  that  all
acts  become  indifferent :  there  is  a  will  in  the  world  and
she  has  become  the  instrument  of  it,  but  with  perfect
passivity,  without  sharing  in  it,  '^  laissant  k  Dieu  le  soin
de  faire  naitre  les  occasions  et  de  les  ex^cuter."  '^  But
why  do  you  do  this  rather  than  that  ?  I  do  not  know.
I  give  myself  over  to  that  which  carries  me  on."^  From
this  condition  of  mind  there  comes  the  ^*  apostolic  life,"
marked  by  an  extraordinary  facility  in  preaching  and
writing,  capacity  to  do  a  prodigious  amount  of  work,
and  to  undergo  gpreat  distress  without  protest  from  her
own  intelligence  and  will.  Her  life  during  this  time
has  traits  of  largeness ;  but  it  is  a  largeness  which  is
evidently  consuming  itself  and  lessens  to  a  small  end  :
it  exhibits  much  free  motion,  but  little  effect ;  it  produces
much  writing,  elaborate  commentaries  on  scripture,
'^  Torrents  "  of  various  sorts ;  but  how  much  of  perma-
nent worth  ?  ^ To  abandon  conscious  control  of  the

^  Cf.  Delaexoiz,  ^tndesy  etc.,  p.  155  ff.

*  Mme.  Gnyon's  (EaTres  computet  fill  forty  Tolumes. In  it  all,  there


426  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

trend  of  work,  to  resign  remembrance  of  what  has  been
done  and  written,  to  live  continually  in  the  present
moment  only  (in  so  far  as  these  things  actually  occur)
—  here  inspiration,  real  enough  in  itself,  begins  to
decline  into  irresponsibility.  The  sad  weakness  of  will
and  of  voluntary  thought  which  comes  of  it  is  sufficient
comment  on  its  general  failure  as  a  plan  of  life.  '^  I
find  in  myself  no  power  either  to  decide  or  to  execute ;
I  appear  to  myself  like  a  phantom."  ^  We  have  no  need
to  dwell  on  the  failure  of  unremitting  worship.  We
in  our  day  have  well  perceived  and  overcome  that  dan-
ger. We  need  only  note  the  fact.

Thus  each  aspect  of  life  apart  from  its  alternate
becomes  a  mechanism.  And  the  whole  of  human
existence  falls  into  two  phases,  work  and  worship ;  the
domain  of  duty  and  the  domain  of  love,  respectively.

We  have  now  outlined  the  relation  which  worship,  as
I  believe,  does  normally  bear  to  life  at  large:  it  is  a
necessary  alternative  to  all  our  effortful  willing  and
knowing,  so  far  as  these  are  living  processes  of  empir-
ical history. The  principle  of  alternation  tends  to  justify

b  some  genuine  inipiratioii.  Cowper  (in  a  letter  to  Unwin,  Aug.  3»
1782)  says,  *'  Mr.  Boll . .  hu  put  into  my  hendi  three  yolomes  of  FVench
poetry,  oompoeed  by  Madame  Guion  —  a  qnietiity  lay  yon,  and  a  fanatic,
I  will  haTe  nothing  to  do  with  her  —  T  is  rery  well, . .  bat  in  the  mean
time  her  Terse  is  the  only  French  verse  I  eyer  read  that  I  f  onnd  agreeaUe ;
there  is  a  neatness  in  it  equal  to  that  which  we  applaud,  with  so  mneh
reason,  in  the  compositions  of  Prior.  I  have  translated  seyeral  of  them,
and  shall  proceed  in  my  translations,''  etc.  The  preface  to  "  Poesies  et
cantiques  spiritaels  "  describes  (doubtless  with  exaggeration)  this  yeree
as  having  been  written  **  sans  aucune  r^exion. . .  Ce  lui  ^tait  an  gSne
insupportable  de  faire  la  moindre  reflexion." See  Delacroix,  p.  158.

^  "  Je  ne  trouve  en  moi  nulle  puissance  de  youloir  ni  d'  ex^nter,  et  je  me
trouve  comme  un  &nt6me." Liettres  V,  p.  458 ;  Delacroix,  £tades,  p.  214.


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  ALTERNATION  427

the  ^  negative  path '  of  the  mystic  by  placing  it  in  its
organic  context.  Neither  phase  of  the  rhythm  is  jnsr
tified  by  itself.  Duty  has  no  right  over  men  apart  from
their  religions  experience.  On  the  other  hand,  religion
has  no  right  apart  from  its  descent  into  the  world  of
effort.  In  reality,  in  the  logical  and  eternal  order  of
things,  these  two  phases  of  experience  belong  together,
and  in  time  also  are  always  finding  their  way  together :
but  in  psychological  order,  in  the  natural  history  of  the
mind,  diey  fall  apart,  and  must  be  pursued  separately.
Religion  belongs  with  morals — yet  the  deeds  of  religion
must  alternate  with  the  moral  life  and  for  a  time  displace
it.  Religion  belongs  with  all  the  works  of  art  and
science  and  human  betterment — yet  it  has  its  own
moment  which  takes  away  from  theirs.

Any  given  moment  of  life  must  choose  between  two
goods,  psychologically  incompatible.  On  the  one  hand,
the  peace  of  the  hermit,  the  silence  of  the  forest,  the
exaltation  of  sacrifice,  the  mightiness  of  simplification
and  unity,  the  joy  of  self-abandonment,  the  calm  of
absolute  contemplation,  the  vision  of  God.  On  the
other  hand,  the  variety  and  stress  of  life,  the  zest  of
common  ends,  the  mastery  of  means,  the  glory  of  infinite
enterprise,  the  pride  of  creativity  and  self-possession.
The  modem  world  as  a  whole  has  made  its  choice.  But
there  is  a  better  choice:  namely,  the  choice  of  both.
For  the  life  of  each  is  that  it  may  lose  itself,  from  time
to  time,  in  the  life  of  the  other.  And  this,  which  is
obvious  in  things  partial,  is  true — and  even  chiefly
true — in  things  total.


CHAPTER  XXIX

PRATER  AND  ITS  ANSWER

IN  what  has  gone  before,  we  have  been  so  much  en-
gaged with  the  psychological  bearings  and  analogies
of  worship,  that  the  central  purpose  of  the  mystic's
prayer  and  its  answer  have  been  obscured.  It  may  be
well,  therefore,  to  state  now  in  simpler  fashion  our  view
of  prayer,  and  of  the  attainment  which  prayer  reaches ;
not  attempting  to  carry  theory  &rther,  but  simply  to
relieve  and  clarify  this  central  point.

Let  us  first  consider  what  is  meant  by  the  answer  to
prayer,  that  is,  the  mystic  experience  itself,  and  then
the  nature  of  the  prayer  which  finds  such  answer.

Mystic  insight  has  been  compared  by  William  James
with  our  occasional  experiences  of  realizing^  more  or
less  suddenly,  the  meaning  of  words,  sayings,  points  of
view,  which  may  have  been  familiar  and  empty  posses-
«.n.  .or  .  lo./ttae.  Sch  r^^^  »  ^^j
observe,  is  never  simply  the  discovery  of  the  meaning
of  a  general  proposition.  It  is  a  flowing  together,  after
some  artificial  separation,  of  universal  and  particular.
I  wake  up  to  the  meaning  of  an  old  adage,  or  of  an
opinion  to  which  I  have  been  hostile  on  prejudice,  when
I  bring  such  a  generality  into  connection  with  a  con-
crete occasion.  And  the  commoner  mystical  experiences
begin,  I  believe,  with  the  concrete  occasion,  only  sug-


PRATER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  429

gesting  or  foreshadowing  the  universal  meanings  which
they  have.

Experiences  of  this  sort  are  not  uncommon.  They
are  but  moments  of  greater  mental  integprity  than  usual,
in  which  consciousness  is  more  concrete,  the  associations
and  resources  of  the  mind  more  instantly  collected  and
fused  into  a  total  grasp  of  the  meaning  of  its  present
object.  Such  a  moment  is  apt  to  be  disconnected  from
other  moments  just  on  account  of  its  unusual  synthesis :
it  is  disconnected  from  our  usual  condition  of  discon-
nectedness. What  surprises  us  in  such  a  moment  is
that  we  are  commonly  so  blind.  Hence  these  moments
are  remembered,  and  become  authoritative  over  other
moments,  as  occasions  when  we  have  seen  clearly,  whether
or  not  we  can  any  longer  recover  that  same  clearness
of  view.*

Such  an  experience  for  instance,  sporadic  yet  fairly
common,  is  a  sudden  realization  of  the  flux  of  time,  the
mystery  of  the  past  that  is  gone  as  if  it  had  never  been,
and  of  the  future  moment  that  is  sure  to  be,  yet  is  wholly
non-existent.  So  seductive  is  the  occupation  of  the  mind
with  generalities,  and  so  practically  useful  the  assump-
tion that  everything  recurs,  that  the  individual  quality
of  time-units  rarely  penetrates  to  us  —  we  act  as  if  one
moment  could  always  be  substituted  for  another. The

^  Sucb  experienoes  reach  aU  degrees  of  cleameM.  The  dominant
idea  which  defines  a  passing  'mood'  —  and  most  certainly  every  mood
has  its  idea,  or  vision  —  may  be  very  obsenre.  Onr  yarions  feelings,  onr
marked  experienoes  of  pleasure  and  pain  —  though  they  never  fail  to
become  authoritative  in  onr  total  consciousness  of  what  the  world  means

■

—  are,  singly  taken,  hard  to  read:  we  seldom  think  of  them  as  moments
of  insight.  We  hardly  recognize  an  experience  as  typically  mystical  until
the  idea  has  broken  through,  and  onr  sense  of  its  significance  outweighs  our
interest  in  its  present  quality.


430  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

uniqueness  of  the  present  moment  has  to  be  discovered
and  rediscovered ;  it  cannot  be  fairly  seen  without  some-
thing like  a  religious  reverberation ;  the  poetry  of  many
an  Omar  is  in  that  simple  fact.  It  is  perhaps  some  such
sense  of  infinite  significance  in  mere  present  existence
which  leads  Meister  Eckhart  to  say  that  '^  He  who  stands
continually  in  a  present  Now^  in  him  God  the  Father
begets  his  Son  without  ceasing/'  ^

Still  more  frequent  and  still  more  typically  mystical
is  the  discovery  of  oneself  as  an  individual ;  as  when
some  summons  drives  home  the  question,  Who  are  you?
What  are  y ou  ?  The  assumption  of  an  artificial  selfhood,
if  we  are  right,  is  not  an  accident  nor  a  pure  vice  —  it
is  a  necessary  incident  of  duty.  The  idealist  as  well  as
the  hypocrite  may  be  suddenly  confronted  with  a  new
vision  of  himself  upon  a  rude  demand  to  be  ^^  natural/*
or  serious,  or  sincere.  Such  demands  very  frequently
find  only  another  self —  not  the  real  one ;  may  substi-
tute for  the  social  self  a  more  primitive  and  uncouth
being,  equally  untrue,  the  self  of  my  bad  conscience  or
of  my  self -distrust — still,  then,  a  theoretical  self,  though
less  theoretical  than  the  made-self.  The  individual  self
is  indeed  hard  to  find,  the  self  which  ia,  deeper  than  all
epithets.  To  come  upon  this  individual  is  an  event
straightway  known  to  be  significant.*  Inge  quotes  the
following  from  Tennyson's  memoirs :

1  <«  Meister  eghart  sprioht:  wer  aUe  oit  allein  iat,  der  iit  gottei  wir-
dige;  Tnt  wer  allin  cit  do  heimenen  ist,  dem  ist  got  gegenwiirtig;  vnt  wer
alliu  oit  stat  in  einem  gegenwttrtigeii  no,  in  dem  gebirt  got  der  natter  sinen
8une  an  ynderlas/' Wackemageli  Altdentsches  Lesebnohy  eol.  679.

'  What  this  reyelation  of  aelf  may  signify  is  a  f nrther  question  and
doubtless  differs  at  different  times.  It  is  likely  to  be  an  egoistic  revelation^
ft  vision  of  tbe  infinite  risk  of  being  alive,  and  of  the  infinite  right  of  the


PRATER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  431

*^  A  kind  of  waking  trance  I  have  often  bad,  quite  from  boy-
kood,  when  I  have  been  all  alone.  This  has  generally  come
upon  me  through  repeating  my  own  name  two  or  three  times  to
myself  silently,  till  all  at  once,  out  of  the  intensity  of  the  con-
sciousness of  individuality,  the  individual  itself  seemed  to  dis-
solve and  fade  away  into  boundless  being :  and  this  is  not  a
confused  state,  but  the  clearest  of  the  clearest ''  etc.

But  the  best  known  of  all  experiences  of  the  mystic
type  is  that  of  discovering  the  individuality  of  another
person.

We  deal  with  men  for  the  most  part  through  their
qualities  and  properties,  that  is  to  say,  through  their
universal,  describable,  recommendable  or  condemnable
sides;  each  man  stands  to  us,  or  tends  to  stand,  for  a
certain  formula,  quality,  function,  in  semi-official  man-
ner. We  have  our  theory  of  him ;  he  plays  his  part  in
our  artificial  world,  as  one  of  many.  We  note  in  him
many  qualities,  good  and  bad,  interesting  and  perhaps
contradictory;  we  wonder  how  all  these  characters  are
united  in  one  being  who  feels  no  such  variety  in  him-
self. The  one  quality  that  combines  these  many  in  a
consistent  identity  we  can  neither  describe  nor  convey;
nor  can  we  surely  hold  the  memory  of  it  except  hy
return  from  time  to  time  to  his  presence. But  for

■olitaiy  self  to  be  aatiifted.  It  always  ineludeB  in  itself  that  more  abstract
vision  above  described,  the  uniqueness  of  the  time-morement.  Subjective
idealism,  and  such  practical  philosophy  as  that  of  Nietxaebe  or  Max  Stir-
ner,  are  unravelings  of  the  purport  of  just  such  mystical  experiences :  and
they  are  not  false  visions,  for  the  stake  of  existence  to  the  subject  cannot
be  overstated,  though  it  may  well  be  disproportionately  stated.  The  will
to  power  and  the  will  to  save  one's  soul  have  much  in  common:  and  one
as  the  other  has  immeasurable  religious  importance.  In  all  such  experi-
ences, and  the  self-recovery  that  goes  with  them,  it  is  the  vision  of  the
individual  which  marks  the  moment  of  mystic  iUnminatiop.


432  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

the  most  part  we  are  not  concerned  with  this;  the  man
is  a  function,  and  would  be  improved  by  the  excision  of
his  bad  qualities;  we  could  easily  re-make  him  to  his
advantage^  after  the  pattern  of  our  own  universal
standards.  Our  critical  judgment  of  him  is^  we  have
said,  pluralistic  and  general :  there  is  a  miracle  in  him
—  that  is,  his  individuality  —  but  we  remain  outside  the
mystery,  and  willingly.  For  it  is  the  business  of  men
to  fit  well  together  in  the  work  of  the  world,  to  be
officers  there,  reliable  working-universals.

But  at  times  we  are  granted  something  like  a  mystic
vision :  it  seems  to  us  that  we  have  come  into  the  pres-
ence of  the  individual  and  have  seen  the  miracle  as  such.
We  have  found  the  other  soul  in  its  seclusion  and  sim-
plicity —  so  we  think ;  and  we  begin  to  appreciate  the
place  even  of  its  apparent  defects  in  that  synthesis  which
is  itself.  The  critical  attitude  is  no  longer  able  to  hold
its  negation  against  this  interest  in  the  person  as  sub-
stance —  as  something  that  is,  and  is  one.  The  vision
in  fact  begins  to  work  upon  us;  we  cannot  forget  it:
we  no  longer  attend  to  it  with  voluntary  effort,  but  it
forms  a  part  of  our  consciousness  and  begins  to  make
us  over  after  its  own  pattern,  as  if  it  were  active  and
we  were  plastic  before  it.  This  perception  of  the  other
as  an  individual  being  is  love,  in  its  special  meaning.
Love  does  not  displace  criticism  :  it  contains  it.^  Love
accepts  the  individual  with  his  defects,  because  the  One

^  I  peieeiTe  faolto  in  my  soeial  MqnaintoBoes,  but  I  do  not  make  a
praetioa  of  teUing  them  their  faults,  because  m j  relations  with  them  axe
stiU  Bubjeot  to  the  abstract  assumptions  of  our  artificial  selfhoods.  But
whatCTer  fault  I  discoyer  in  one  whom  I  lore  I  make  known  to  him :  for
thereby  1  address  the  self  which  I  hare  disooyered,  simpler  and  greater
than  the  self  of  that  fault,  and  which  can  join  me  in  being  hostile  to  it


PRAYER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  433

which  it  has  seen  contains  the  inward  remedy  for  those
defects.  Nor  does  love  feel  the  need  of  concealing  its
own  faults^  for  love  of  another  involves  also  a  discov-
ery of  the  individual  in  oneself :  Mt  is  a  presence  of  the
individual  to  the  individual^  a  ^^ flight  of  the  alone  to
the  alone."

Love  is  a  revelation  like  that  of  the  mystic,  full  of
significance.  For  in  finding  the  individual,  one  has
indeed  found  the  individual's  idea.  That  which  explains
and  unites  and  largely  justifies  all  these  various  and
seeming-inconsistent  qualities  is  some  view  of  the  world
which  he  has,  some  hold  on  the  absolute,  some  whole-
idea.  He  is  an  individual  vision  of  reality;  and  in
knowing  him,  I  do  at  the  same  time  know  his  vision
and  make  his  vision  my  own.  This  is  the  central  fact
of  all  mysticism :  namely,  that  the  discovery  of  the  indi-
vidual is  always  a  discovery  of  truth,  of  a  powerfully
synthetic  idea,  and  yet  not  by  the  way  of  effortful
thinking.  That  interest  in  another  soul  which  we  call
love  is  not  an  interest  in  his  idea  as  a  matter  of  theory :
it  is  an  interest  in  him  as  an  individual  substance,  a
being  which  knows  and  is  more  than  its  knowledge.

All  these  common  experiences,  we  say,  are  analogous
to  the  mystic  insight.  And  there  can  now  be  little
doubt  about  the  nature  of  that  insight  itself  and  its
place  among  the  rest.  For  what  is  the  mystic  experi-
ence but  finding  the  idea  of  the  whole,  as  love  finds
the  idea  of  a  person  ?  Worship  seeks  the  self  of  the
world  as  an  individual  being ;  but  in  finding  this  self,  it

^  LoTe  thus  inolndes  in  itself  all  of  those  lesser  or  relatiTelj  abstrsiet
experienoes  whieh  we  hare  been  describing.


434  WORSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

gains,  or  regains,  a  tolerating  conception  of  this  world,
a  view  which  can  make  life  as  a  whole  once  more  accept-
able, inviting,  g^reat.  In  this  idea  it  is  able  not  to  sink
but  to  suspend  its  criticisms  of  existence :  it  is  not  recon-
ciled to  defects,  but  it  sees  something  more  than  dead
fact,  even  some  meaning,  in  their  presence.  The  total
sound  of  life  sends  up  to  it  some  echo  of  beauty ;  and  it
is  able,  without  blindness,  to  become  as  it  were  a  lover
of  the  whole.  For  the  idea  which  thus  of  itself  absorbs
our  hostilities,  binding  our  many  and  divergent  judg-
ments in  powerful  synthesis,  is  won  not  by  the  effort
of  the  theoretic  will,  but  by  coming  effortlessly  upon
the  spirit  of  the  world,  as  an  individual  being,  simple,
wonderful,  and  in  close  union  with  the  individual  in
oneself.

These  other  experiences  are  not  only  analogous  to  the
mystic  insight :  they  are,  as  we  have  said,  parts  of  it.
All  loss  of  value  in  the  world  is  at  the  same  time  a  loss
of  religious  insight.  All  the  artificialities  of  effortful
attention  strike  first  at  the  virility  of  the  whole-idea,
and  dim  the  consciousness  of  God.  All  absolute  criti-
cism condemns  the  whole;  all  pluralism  mutilates  first
the  unity  of  existence;  all  romanticism  adds  to  the  bur-
den of  heaven.  And  wherever  in  all  Ufe  the  individual
vanishes  from  my  g^rasp,  there  has  vanished  first  the
individual  Grod.  Where  men  and  self  become  abstrac-
tions, there  God  also  becomes  an  abstract  universal,
occupying  an  official  position  in  my  artificial  world,
reduced  to  be  dealt  with  in  polite  and  deadly  distance.
On  the  other  hand,  wherever  the  individual  is  recovered,
there  is  in  some  degree  also  a  vision  of  Grod.  God  is
the  One  of  all  these  plural  loves  and  pleasures ;  and  it


PRAYER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  435

is  the  love  of  God  which  naturallj  includes  and  places
all  the  rest.

But  of  all  these  objects,  God  is  the  only  one  always
accessible  to  direct  pursuit ;  the  only  one  admitting  such
a  conscious,  voluntary  cult  as  worship  is.  Our  pleasures
are  so  many  discoveries;  friendships,  appreciations,
loves  generally,  happen  to  men  as  by  good  chance :  once
they  have  dawned  upon  us,  we  may  pursue  them  as
vigorously  as  we  will,  but  the  appreciations  themselves
cannot  be  directly  sou^t.  It  is  only  such  vision  of
God  as  one  at  any  time  has  that  enables  him  to  recog-
nize the  pleasant,  the  beautiful,  in  things  and  persons :
the  only  net  that  can  be  spread  for  the  loving  of  men
and  things  is  the  consciousness  of  the  absolute.^  So
far  as  these  other  objects  retain  their  value,  that  is  to
say,  their  idea,  we  may  turn  to  them ;  but  their  salt  has
a  tendency  to  lose  its  savor,,  and  cannot  be  salted  again
by  its  own  kind.  This  is  the  root  of  our  trouble.  We
know  always  that  life  is  worth  living ;  we  know,  too,
that  we  have  in  us  somewhere  the  power  of  appreciat-
ing it;  we  know  that  nothing  is  common  or  unclean,
and  nothing  hopeless:  only — we  cannot  see  it  so.  We
have  lost  our  primitive  joy  in  primitive  things ;  we  have
lost  our  freshness  of  impression.  It  is  no  longer  ixue
that  ^'the  scent  of  a  flower,  the  flight  of  sea-gulls
round  a  cliff,  the  cornfield  in  the  sun,  stir  us  to  strange
and  cosmic  delights."  And  it  is  worse  than  useless,  so
we  find,  to  try  with  might  and  main  to  ftd  in  these

^  As  a  command,  the  injonetion  to  loTe  one's  neighbor  wonld  be
meaningless  unless  the  command  to  loye  God  went  before  it.  In  the
ease  of  all  other  affections,  I  Ioyc  what  I  must ;  in  the  case  of  this  one  I
love  as  I  will,  hence  it  is  sabject  to  command.


436  WORSHIP  AND  TH£  MYSTICS

things  what  we  have  once  felt.  Nothing  is  more  com-
mon than  this  trying,  and  nothing  more  fatal.  Yet  the
thing  is  there.  There  are  great  funds  of  enthusiasm
and  literal  love  of  men  and  things  in  us,  if  we  could
bat  reach  them.  There  is  a  love  of  life  in  as  which  we
never  let  go.  Bat  that  love  of  life,  if  we  can  discern
its  true  natare,  is  at  bottom  a  love  of  God :  it  is  that
mystic  thread  which  **  in  the  g^und  of  the  soal "  is
never  broken.  If  we  can  reg^ain  that,  aU  the  rest  will
follow.  And  only  by  regaining  that  can  we  surely
recover  the  rest.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  must  add
to  all  the  other  means  for  keeping  or  recovering  our
spiritual  integrity,  prayer.  And  what,  in  this  pr^ent
day  of  grace,  does  prayer  mean  ?

It  means,  in  the  first  place,  that  we  maintain  our  dis-
content, returning  again  and  again  to  the  demand  that
our  existence  shall  find  itself  justified  in  our  own  eyes.
The  first  practical  principle  of  religion  is  to  hold  with-
out weakening  the  right  of  every  individual  life  to  know
its  own  worth.  We  must  not  let  reality  go,  this  reality
which  has  produced  us,  until  it  satisfies  us:  it  must
yield  us  the  idea  which  unites  what  we  most  deeply
desire  with  what  is.  This  is  the  prayer  of  Jacob  ;  and
in  a  fundamental  sense  it  is  the  first  prayer  of  every
human  being.  We  are  right  in  wishing  to  see  first  and
be  loyal  afterward.

It  means,  in  the  second  place,  that  we  understand
clearly  to  what  self  this  right  belongs,  and  cultivate
that  self.  This  right  to  see  does  not  belong  to  our  com-
plex and  strident  personality  which  goes  about,  think-
ing by  omnipotent  effort  to  earn  its  happiness  and  its


PRAYER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  437

certainty.  It  belongs  only  to  that  in  us  which  is  simple
and  sincere.  The  sincere  is  that  which  is  moved  by
necessity  not  by  effort  (no  feeling  is  sincere  which  is
made  by  will) :  the  genuine  will  is  the  will  which  goes
forth  from  effortless  attention,  that  is  to  say,  from  love
—  and  that  is  to  say,  from  sight.  We  have  the  right
to  see  first  and  be  loyal  afterward  only  because  unless
we  see  we  cannot  be  loyal,  nor  in  any  sense  sincere
or  moral.  No  determination  to  be  a  lover  of  life,  no
resolve  to  fight  down  desire  or  grief  or  regret  or  aver-
sion, no  attempt  to  transform  one's  own  nature,  can  suc-
ceed by  dint  of  the  effortful  wiU  alone.  But  sight  does
its  own  transforming :  sight  turns  the  energy  of  our
own  desires  into  the  work  of  their  own  re-making.  It
is  thus  an  effortless  self,  and  therewith  a  necessary  will,
that  we  have  to  seek.  And  for  the  same  reason,  it
is  a  simple  self,  not  involved  in  our  artificial  distinc-
tions.*

To  be  able  to  command  this  simple  and  sincere  self
is  the  critical  condition  of  religious  insight.  Hence
(thirdly)  we  in  this  day  must  still  follow,  in  some  fash-
ion significant  for  ourselves,  the  negative  path  of  aU
the  mystics.  We  require  the  sight  which  cannot  come
through  trying  to  see ;  we  must  try,  then,  to  put  oui^
selves  consciously  where  sight  must  follow. We  must

^  This  world  is  so  made,  not  onlj  that  a  simple  Tiew  of  the  whole  is
possible,  bat  that  our  mastery  of  the  world  may  proceed,  and  must  pro*
eeed,  from  this  simple  yiew  ootward.  The  idealist  philosopher  has  been
inclined  to  conceive  the  snbject  as  mler  of  the  object :  in  this  ease,  to
*  retam  into  oneself '  is  to  retnm  to  the  seat  of  nltimate  power,  and  to  find
the  law-^ying  principle  of  things,  that  which  is  a  priori  in  both  thought
and  practice.  Bot  it  is  rather  the  simple  than  the  subjectiTe  that  we
must  learn  to  appeal  to,  the  simple  which  is  both  subjective  and  objeo-
tiTe,  and  whose  a  priori^  or  *  anticipated  attainment '  is  concrete.


438  W0B8HIP  AND  THE  MTSUCS

deliberately  review  and  reject^  from  time  to  time,  what-
ever is  falsely  artificial  and  aelf-anertiye  in  oar  oat-
going  purposes ;  we  mast  track,  as  far  as  we  can,  the
points  of  our  own  partiality.  We  must,  even  in  this
modem  world  of  ours,  know  how  to  shake  off  the  pre-
possessions of  our  theoretic  wills ;  to  r^;ard  all  ambi-
tions and  duties  for  the  time  as  non-existent ;  to  reduce
all  reality  to  the  primitive  terms  of  self,  universe,  and
the  present  moment  (wherein  everything  begins  from  the
beginning).  In  this  stark,  original  selfhood,  detached
from  action  and  from  the  warping  of  the  interests  of
action,  we  view  all  that  active  career  as  in  a  drama,  as
the  life  of  another,  in  the  light  of  what  we  can  then
and  there  muster  of  the  whole.  Its  loves  and  hates  rise
up  before  us  in  a  more  universal  frame.  We  must
recall  especially  whatever  is  still  to  us  of  effortless
value,  whatever  we  do  still  sincerely  enjoy  and  love,  and
we  must  pray  for  the  vision  of  the  whole  of  which  these
various  goods  are  fragments,  and  upon  which  they  depend
as  their  absolute.  I  use  the  word  ^pray,'  because,  in
the  end,  there  is  no  other  word  which  conveys  that  atti-
tude of  will  in  which  effort  is  so  combined  with  non-
effort,  and  self-assertion  with  consciousness  of  absolute
dependence.  Nor  do  I  know  why  this  word  should  be
translated  into  anything  more  scholastic.  The  insight
we  require  is  both  a  right  and  a  gift,  the  justest  gift
in  all  experience ;  we  dare  not  be  too  proud  to  comply
with  its  evident  conditions.  We  must  know  that  in
doing  these  things,  we  are  already  using  a  degree  of
mystic  insight :  we  are  relying  upon  an  attachment  to
the  whole  which  is  too  deep  in  us  to  be  lost  or  over-
come; we  are  striving  to  'enter  into  ourselves,' to


PRAYER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  439

Irecognize  this  attachment  for  what  it  is,  the  love  of
the  God  of  that  alienated  world. This  is  prayer.

And  the  answer  to  prayer  is  whatever  of  simplicity,
of  naturalness,  of  original  appreciation,  is  brought  into
our  view  of  things  by  this  act  of  obedience  of  the  mind
to  its  absolute  object.  In  proportion  as  our  prayer  is
honest,  we  shall  find  ourselves  less  thinking,  and  more
seeing ;  and  we  can  turn  again  to  meet  experience  with
so  much  better  poise  and  understanding.  How  full,
how  instantaneous,  how  overwhelming  may  be  the
vision  of  the  deity  of  the  world  and  the  worth  of  one's
own  part  in  it,  no  one  can  say :  certainly  it  is  beyond
the  province  of  philosophy  to  prescribe.  Neither  can  it
be  told  when  or  through  what  apparent  accidents  the
deeper  insights  of  our  experience  may  occur.  Philos-
ophy can  only  point  out  the  fundamental  law  of  reli-
gious life,  the  right  to  see  first  and  be  loyal  afterward ;
and  interpret  in  its  own  abstract  language  the  condi-
tions of  that  vision.

But  the  meaning  of  the  mystic  experience  is  pro-
phetic. It  anticipates  an  attainment  still  to  be  won ;  it
can  be  held  only  by  proceeding  to  that  winning.  Wor-
ship is  false  unless  it  is  sanctioned  in  turn  by  the  life
that  follows  it.  This  sanction  is  twofold.  First  that  it
does  not  undermine,  but  rather  supports,  the  world  of
other  aims.  The  mystic  must  return  not  less  a  lover  of
men,  but  rather  a  lover  in  more  intense  and  human
fashion,  because  it  is  only  the  true  worshipper  who  can
find  the  world  genuinely  lovable.  The  vision  of  God
must  give  the  reason  for  all  the  irrational  attachments
of  life,  all  the  sacrifices  of  self  to  brother,  state,  or


440  WOBSHIP  AND  THE  MYSTICS

cause*  It  furnishes  the  answer  to  the  last  Why  of
duty.  To  be  '  loyal  afterward '  is  the  first  sanction  of
true  worship :  and  also  the  condition  of  further  insight.
It  is  by  the  alternation  of  loyalty  and  worship  that
each  life  must  hold  and  increase  its  individual  level
of  value.

The  second  sanction  of  worship  is,  that  the  worship-
per does  not  merely  sustain,  but  creates.  All  beauty,
as  Plato  thought,  incites  to  reproduction.  It  incites
perhaps  to  something  more  than  reproduction  —  to
origination.  Some  8iq[>erabundance  there  is  in  the
vision  of  Grod  which  sends  the  seer  back  not  to  die
old  but  to  the  new ;  not  with  a  release  from  old  griev*
ances,  but  with  something  like  a  hunger  for  pain  and
difficulty.  The  edge  of  the  tool  of  will  is  restored,
and  it  is  eager  for  world-making.  The  man  is  able  to
fight,  to  oppose  and  suffer  ;^  he  is  endowed  with  grit,
with  faith. This  is  the  moral  result  of  true  worship.

And  this,  I  believe,  is  the  whole  inward  response  to
prayer.  The  mystic  has  reverted  to  the  One,  and  now
returns  to  the  many,  more  real  tiian  before,  more  po-
tent. That  which  can  happen  only  with  the  conscious-
ness of  Qod  is  an  act  of  God :  and  I  cannot  doubt  that
it  has  been  with  the  mystic  even  as  he  says  —  namely,
that  God  has  given  to  him  something  of  Himself.  By
just  so  much  as  the  ultimate  meaning  of  things  becomes
present  to  him,  by  just  so  much  is  he  capable  of  bring-
ing new  values  back  to  earth ;  not  in  explicit  form  at
first,  but  as  an  enhanced  quantity  of  being  in  himself,
as  a  renewed  grasp  of  the  quality  of  the  goal.  In  this
way  is  the  mystic  freighted  with  the  future ;  and  the
fruit  he  may  gather  in  his  own  person,  or  may  spread


PRAYER  AND  ITS  ANSWER  441

abroad  in  the  world  merely  in  the  form  of  his  own
quickened  hold  on  life  and  love  of  it,  in  the  form  of
the  ^^  Holy  Sjnrit/'  to  be  applied  and  gathered  by  others.
But  the  whole  meaning  of  the  answer  to  prayer,  and
so  of  prayer  itself,  cannot  appear  until  we  have  reviewed
those  fruits  of  which  the  mystic  experience  contains
the  prophecy.


PART  VI


THE  FBUITS  OF  RELIGION


PART  VI


PRELIMINARY


IN  times  gone  by,  the  more  remarkable  experiences  of
the  mystics  were  unhesitatingly  read  as  direct  com-
munications of  God  to  the  human  mind.  The  content
of  some  of  these  experiences  has  been  deposited  (to-
gether with  much  else)  in  the  various  sacred  writings
of  the  world,  as  revelation.  Other  such  experiences
seemed  to  signify  commands,  and  found  expression
chiefly  in  action :  their  record  is  to  be  found  in  history,
as  the  inspired  works  and  prophetic  deeds  of  men.  In
religion  as  we  know  it  to-day,  we  hear  little  of  either
revelation  or  prophecy :  answer  to  prayer,  such  as  it  is,
seems  to  have  taken  on  a  more  private  interest.  Tet  I
have  no  doubt  that  in  some  form  or  other  these  are
still  the  fruits  of  religion :  so  far  as  religious  experience
has  become  intelligible  to  us,  it  has  been  as  a  develop-
ment both  in  idea  and  in  wilL  And  further,  I  have  no
doubt  that  these  results  are  acts  of  God :  for  that  is  an
act  of  God  which  cannot  happen  without  turning  the
mind  to  God.  I  shall  therefore  discuss  the  fruits  of
religion  under  these  heads :  revelation,  inspiration  (re-
ligious creativity),  and  the  prophetic  consciousness.

These  are  the  results  of  religion  as  they  appear  first
in  the  life  of  the  individual,  and  through  the  individual
contribute  to  the  wealth  of  mankind.  It  is  through  the
individual  that  religion  achieves  those  results  in  history


446  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

which  first  drew  our  attention  (chapter  ii),  and  whose
theory  we  are  now  ready  to  develop.  But  there  are
further  fruits  of  religion,  more  distinctiyely  historical
in  character;  results  which  appear  in  the  structure  of
the  social  environment  wherein  the  religious  conscious-
ness must  live  and  breathe*  It  remains  for  the  con-
cluding chapter  to  outline  these  over-individual  fruits
of  religion,  and  their  effects  in  the  general  movement
of  history.  Thus  we  touch  upon  the  edge  of  another
aspect  of  the  work  of  Grod  in  the  world,  suggested  in
part  by  the  term  providence,  and  in  part  by  the  term
salvation  in  so  far  as  this  saving  must  come  to  the  in-
dividual from  the  outside,  through  the  medium  of  his
spiritual  environment.  Here  we  shall  find  a  necessary
supplement  to  the  inner  answer  to  prayer ;  and  also  a
view  of  the  function  of  those  historic  mediators  which
the  universal  spirit  of  religion  forever  inclines  to  trans-
cend, and  forever  returns  to  by  an  inward  necessity
hard  to  understand.


CHAPTER  XXX

PECULIAR  KNOWLEDGE  AND CERTAINTY:
REVELATION  AND  DOOMA

IN  speaking  of  revelation  we  have  in  mind  that
knowledge  which  is  the  especial  product  or  by-product
of  religion ;  we  have  to  ask  what  it  is  that  the  mystic
knows,  which  cannot  otherwise  be  known.  We  have
in  mind  also  those  sacred  books.  They  form  a  peculiar
body  of  literature :  unorganized,  obscure,  repetitious,
unscientific,  powerful,  immortal.  In  this  present  chapter
we  shall  have  in  view  both  this  ancient  literature  and
contemporary  religious  experience;  and  shall  undertake
to  interpret  the  one  by  the  other.

The  mystic  both  in  his  preparation  and  in  the  expe-
rience that  supplements  that  preparation,  is  a  world-
destroyer  as  we  have  seen :  and  his  return  must  be  a
re-creation  of  a  world.  The  mystic  is  always  original
in  the  sense  that  he  feels  obliged  to  make  his  world
consciously  his  own,  to  build  up  everything  for  him-
self from  the  beginning.  But  this  may  not  mean  that
he  has  any  novelty  to  offer  others ;  on  the  contrary,
being  much  occupied  with  first  principles  of  world-build-
ing he  may  never  come  so  far  as  the  world  otherwise
has  come.  Tolstoy  well  shows  this  quality  of  the  mys-
tic as  knower :  the  imperious  necessity  of  rejecting  all
previous  accomplishment  of  men ;  of  reducing  the  world


i48  THE  FRUITS  OF  REUGION

to  anarchy,  and  building  all  ap  again  from  chaos.  His
life  is  spent  among  the  rudiments,  not  without  great
result,  but  without  ever  perceiTing  the  worth  of  his  own
temporal  present :  a  huge,  fertile,  world-moving  anach-
ronism. Such  in  general  is  the  case  of  genius,  control-
ling the  future  not  by  any  complete  grasp  of  its  own
age,  but  by  a  recovered  hold  upon  the  ancient  and  eter-
nal. And  such,  in  general,  is  also  the  case  of  the  mystic ;
whose  chief  concern  is  not  to  find  things  new  to  men  at
large,  but  only  to  find  the  Ancient  of  Days  as  a  God
revealed  personally  to  him.  The  mystic  is,  in  the  first
place,  an  original  knower  of  old  truth.

What  the  mystic  knows  is,  first  of  all,  that  which  he
intends  to  know,  namely  Gh>d :  and  in  so  far  as  he  is  a
mystic  pure  and  simple  he  knows  nothing  else  than
Gk>d.  There  is  nothing  new  about  this  knowledge
except  its  relation  to  him :  what  he  knows  he  knows
certainly,  in  his  own  person,  and  for  himself.

Nevertheless,  he  seems  to  regard  his  old  truth  as  of
general  interest :  he  treats  it  as  if  it  were  a  veritable
mystery,  and  as  something  which  could  not  otherwise
be  known  to  men  than  through  his  announcing  it.  He
is  not  in  any  way  abashed  by  the  multitude  of  his  pred-
ecessors who  have  been  publishing  the  same  thing.
The  typical  mystic  seems  to  be  innocent  of  all  historical
comparison  in  this  respect :  history  always  beg^s  with
him,  and  flows  outward  in  all  directions.  He  speaks
his  mind  as  if  he  were  the  first  to  speak,  and  as  if  all
depended  upon  his  speaking.^ It  is  because  of  this

^  There  is,  of  ooane,  a  jwyehological  necessity  here  at  work.  No  nun
can  keep  a  trath  as  hu  own  without  trying  to  impose  it  npon  others.  If
it  is  a  tmthy  this  rerelation,  it  is  a  knowledge  of  mankind's  god,  not  of


CERTAINTY  AND  DOGMA  449

circumstance  that  the  systematic  truth-seeker,  who
measures  revelation  by  stages,  finds  the  literature  of
mysticism  and  of  all  religion  curiously  repetitious  and

any  priTftte  god  of  the  worshipper  ;  and  it  miut  show  itself  tme  in  their
confirmation  of  it.  A  certainty  which  cannot  be  reooTcred  in  the  certainty
of  other  moments  and  of  other  men  is  a  defeated  and  dying  certainty.
For  his  own  sake,  if  for  no  other,  the  mystic  has  been  driTcn  to  become  a
propagandist  of  his  old  discoTcries.

This  necessity  of  corroboration  casts  donbt  npon  the  absolute  eer>
tainty  of  the  reyelation  itself.  Hie  mystic  experience  seems  to  carry
with  it  a  great  surge  of  certainty :  the  mystic  knows  that  **  This  is  God  *';
there  is  a  sense  of  arrival,  of  having  touched  goal,  that  seems  to  banish
all  possibility  of  donbt.  This  moment  becomes  the  standard  of  all  cer-
tainty ;  it  11  an  ^  illumination."  Yet,  the  mystic  himself  frequently  falls
into  doubt,  in  later  moments,  about  the  authenticity  of  his  experience  ;
it  may  have  been  due  to  the  devil,  or  to  imagination.  If  he  thus  belies
his  own  original  assertion  of  immediate  certainty,  what  credit  can  it  have
on  strictly  non-partisan  grounds  ?

The  mystic  needs  to  judge  the  truth  of  his  experience  by  its  bearing
on  other  experience.  If  it  accords  with  life  generally,  he  will  in  the  long
run  regard  it  true  ;  if  it  cannot  be  made  to  harmonise  with  experience
otherwise  and  with  thought,  he  must  abandon  it.  Hence  there  can  be  no
immediate  oertaintyt  we  are  sometimes  told  ;  assurance  is  conferred  on  the
mystical  experience  by  its  external  relations,  by  the  entire  system  of  liv-
ing truth  into  which  it  falls.  The  truth  of  the  world  is  necessary  to  give
certainty  to  the  truth  of  Grod.  **  It  is  the  possibility  of  comprehending
these  experiences,"  says  Delacroix,  *'  of  living  them,  of  utilizing  them  in
action,  which  here  serves  as  a  touchstone  of  their  truth.  Intuition  is  of
no  value  save  in  an  ensemble  with  which  it  accords."  fitudes  de  psycho-
logic, etc.,  p.  380.

I  agree  with  Delacroix  that  without  a  system  of  experience  there
would  be  no  certainty  of  anything  ;  and  that  harmony  with  world-knowl-
edge is  needed  to  establish  the  certainty  of  God.  But  since  we  have
judged  that  the  certainty  of  this  world  is  derived  from  the  certainty  of
God  in  the  first  place,  the  world  can  hardly  withhold  its  consent.  The
world  b  not  otherwise  known  than  as  the  world  of  this  God  ;  God  is  not
otherwiBC  known  than  as  the  God  of  this  world :  the  two  knowledges  are
of  one  piece — the  mystic  cannot  be  mistaken.  The  intention  of  worship^
which  gives  the  whole  experience  its  identity,  has  its  continuous  object,
the  known  God  present  in  all  experience  :  this  is  the  absolute  constant  in
the  process,  and  hence  not  subject  to  doubt. Thus  it  is  possible  to  be


400  THE  FBUITB  OF  REUGION

empfy,  defying  serial  anangementy  reeomng  again  and
again  to  the  same  point.  But  there  are  reasons  for
this  pecoliarity  and  we  shall  do  well  to  look  into  them :
emptiness  and  antiquity  have  their  own  way  of  becom-
ing fertile.

In  the  first  place  his  repetitions  are  justified  by  fhe
character  of  the  tmth  which  he  has  to  announce.  For
his  truth  is  a  truth  which  has  to  be  verified  individuaUy
by  every  new  human  being.  The  aneient  truth  of  the
mystic  is  nothing  else  than  the  truth  about  originality ^
about  what  it  is  to  own  one's  own  soul.  The  knowl-
edge of  Grod  as  the  worshipper  has  it  is  the  opposite
of  everything  ihat  can  ever  become  merely  traditional
in  religion.  No  matter  how  true  an  idea  of  God  reli-
gion may  hand  on,  the  true  idea  may  constitute  a  waU
which  keeps  Crod  out,  if  it  is  adopted  as  an  idea  simply^
—  that  is  to  say^  as  a  repetition  of  other  men's  insights^

oertain  at  ike  tmoment^  withoat  wmitiiif  for  later  eorrobonitian  or  lator
doubt.  I  know  of  no  oertaintj  which  is  not  oortainiy  at  aomo  moment
or  aeriea  of  momenta ;  certainty  alao  most  have  ita  temporal  ezistenee.
We  moat  remember  that  in  theae  eiqperienoea,  to  whieh  we  giro  the  name
of  mjatie  rimply  beoaoae  in  them  the  indmdnal  finds  himself  ecmaeiooaly
at  one  with  the  whole  of  things,  the  world  is  not  abaent :  it  is  with  one's
world-knowledge  that  one  now  knows  his  world-nnity,  or  God.  Tlie
system  of  ideaa  it  in  no  sense  abandoned,  bat  rather  in  the  liveliest  nse,
thongh  not  thonght  of.  Hence  it  is  that  the  mystie  may  be  certain  in
his  moment,  immediately.

Bat  to  keep  this  oertainty  in  all  later  moments  is  a  problem  for  those
later  moments.  Systematio  agreement  and  alternation  are  neoeasary  to
hold  what  haa  in  a  moment  been  gained.  The  meaning  of  that  experi-
ence is  the  meaning  which  it  can  keep  threngfaont  all  soeh  oscillations  of
thonght ;  it  is  the  inTariant  whieh  surriTCS  and  becomes  defined  through
the  long  course  of  trial  and  error  which  all  this  systenHnaking  and  com-
parison inToWes.  Both  statements  are  trne — one  may  be  wholly  certain
of  the  presence  of  God  ;  and  yet  one  most  keep  this  certainty,  qoyel  or
not,  by  commanicating  it


CERTAINTY  AND  DOGfiiA  451

as  a  universal  idea.  God,  who  is  truly  said  to  explain
man  to  himself,  must  explain  me  to  myself.  What  I
require  to  find  in  a  god  is  that  ^'  This  is  what  I  have
wanted ;  this  is  what  I  have  heen  meaning  all  the  time ;
the  world  as  I  now  see  it  is  a  world  in  which  I  as  a
primitive,  various,  infinitely  discontented  will  can  com-
pletely Uve  and  breathe/'  This  is  what  the  mystic  is
trying  to  make  plain  —  that  the  idea,  as  a  universal,
is  not  sufficient  for  any  man  to  live  by.

Hence  the  chief  burden  of  his  revelation  (as  if  of
the  idea's  own  never-resting  conscience)  is  that  religion
must  exist  as  experience  and  not  as  idea  only.  There
is  nothing  in  sensation  which  physical  science  cannot
exhaust,  except  the  experience  of  having  sensations :  in
the  same  way,  there  is  nothing  in  the  mystic  experience
not  expressible  in  idea,  except  the  experiencing  itself.
This  is  the  chief  part  of  the  mystic  knowledge  which
cannot  be  otherwise  known,  namely  that  the  mystic
experience  is  possible.  Monotonously  and  age  after
age,  men  rediscover  and  reannounce  this  invariant  truth,
as  if  they  were  calling  on  men  to  exist,  to  live,  to  save
their  souls.  And  what  is  it  to  save  one's  soul,  if  not  to
be  original  in  this  sense  (and  in  what  follows  from  it)  ?
From  this  point  of  view  the  reiteration  of  the  mystic  is
justified.

But  there  is  a  further  reason  for  the  mystic's  persist*
ent  celebration  of  time-worn  axioms.  Repetition,  which
is  abomination  to  science,  is  not  necessarily  an  abomi-
nation to  the  sense  of  beauty,  nor  to  the  sense  of  gprati*
tude,  certainly  not  to  the  lover,  and  for  similar  reason
not  to  the  worshipper. Individual  interest  can  never


452  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

recur  often  enough  to  its  old  theme ;  and  ^  revelation/
though  it  is  a  contribution  to  truths  is  not,  in  its  first
intention,  a  contribution  to  science.

There  is  no  topic  so  much  discussed  among  friends,
and  none  so  inexhaustible,  as  that  inyariant  relation  of
which  they  have  the  fact  before  their  eyes,  —  friend-
ship. Friendship  doubtless  stimulates  the  mind,  but
chiefly  to  feed  upon  itself.  As  for  lovers,  the  world
knows  what  secret  topic  occupies  their  conversation,  and
upon  what  theme  they  bring  forth  endless  poetry.  Song
and  poetry  are  forms  which  infinitely  repeatable  truth
must  take :  they  thus  become  the  mystic's  specialty,
and  revelation  must  consist  largely  of  the  song  of
God.  ^'  He  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,''  says
the  Hebrew  mystic  —  a  song  whose  novelty  does  not
appear  in  its  name  —  '^  even  praise  unto  my  God."

Not  infrequently  it  appears  to  the  mystic  that  this
poetical  repetition  has  become  the  whole  purpose  of  his
existence.  ^^  Thou  hast  put  off  my  sackcloth  and  girded
me  with  gladness  to  the  end  that  my  glory  may  sing
praise  to  Thee  and  not  be  silent."  A  more  literal  con-
fession is  found  in  those  newly  unearthed  ^^  Odes  of
Solomon."  '^  As  the  work  of  the  husbandman  is  the
ploughshare;  and  the  work  of  the  steersman  is  the
guidance  of  the  ship ;  so  also  is  my  work  the  psalm  of
the  Lord :  my  craft  and  my  occupation  are  his  praises,
because  his  love  hath  nourished  my  heart."  ^  And  the
English  translator  of  these  Odes  refers  in  his  preface  to
the  similar  expression  of  Epictetus :  '^  Well,  then,  since
most  of  you  have  become  blind,  ought  there  not  to  be

^  Ode  16,  quotiDg  with  lome  freedom  the  rendering  of  Mr.
Cambridge,  1909.


CERTAINTY  AND  DOGMA  453

some  man  to  fill  this  office,  and  on  behalf  of  all  to  sing
the  hymn  to  God  ?  ...  If  then  I  were  a  nightingale,  I
would  do  the  part  of  a  nightingale ;  if  I  were  a  swan,
I  would  do  like  a  swan.  But  now  I  am  a  rational
creature,  and  I  ought  to  praise  God :  this  is  my  work ;
I  do  it,  nor  will  I  desert  this  post  so  long  as  I  am
allowed  to  keep  it ;  and  I  exhort  you  to  join  in  this
same  song/'  ^

The  mystic  consciousness  is  self-preoccupied  ;  and  the
knowledge  that  comes  from  it  is  very  largely  knowledge
of  itself.

This  self-absorbed  character  of  mystic  knowledge
may  explain  why  the  mystics  have  so  much  to  say  about
^'  the  truth ''  in  the  abstract,  without  suggesting  what
the  truth  is.  The  mystic  knows  the  Truth,  so  he  assures
us :  but  he  seems  to  spin  hopelessly  about  this  pointy
and  to  come  forward  very  slowly  with  any  statement
of  its  contents.^

May  it  be  that  the  mystic  is  more  sure  that  he  is
sure  than  of  what  he  is  sure,  —  except  that  he  is  sure

^  DiBcoarsei,  Book  I,  eh.  xri. Tr.  Greo.  Long.

*  The  Odes  of  Solomon  may  again  illnstrate  the  point:

**  He  hath  filled  me  with  words  of  troth,  that  I  may  speak  the  same.
Like  the  flow  of  waters  flows  truth  from  my  month,  and  my  lips  show
forth  his  frait.  And  he  has  caused  his  knowledge  to  ahonnd  in  me;  for
the  month  of  the  Lord  is  the  tme  Word,  and  the  door  of  his  light."
(Ode  12.)

**  He  glorified  me  hy  his  kindness,  and  raised  my  thought  to  the  height
of  his  truth.  Herein  he  gare  me  the  way  of  his  precepts;  and  I  opened
the  doors  that  were  doted;  and  the  hars  of  iron  which  I  was  ahont  to
hreak  in  pieces  melted  and  dissolved  hef ore  me  —  nothing  appeared  dosed
to  me,  heoause  I  was  the  door  of  everything." (Ode  17.)

With  how  much  show  of  suhstance,  and  yet  how  empty  of  defioahle
oontent  is  all  this  celehration  of  **  the  T^th."


464  TH£  FRUITS  OP  REU6I0K

of  God  and  of  his  own  relation  to  God?  In  these
matters,  the  that  actually  precedes  the  whaty  both  in
time  and  in  importance*

In  politics,  as  Walter  Bagehot  has  well  shown,  tiiere
is  a  moment  of  development  at  which  it  is  more  impor-
tant that  there  should  be  laWy  than  that  there  should  be
good  law :  any  law  at  all,  at  this  moment,  is  good  law,
because  law  is  better  than  disorder.  There  is  a  moment
in  religion,  also,  at  which  any  (rod  is  a  good  God;  any
absolute  is  a  good  absolute;  any  certainty  at  all  is  a
matter  of  supreme  importance.  This  moment  cannot
last,  either  in  experience  or  in  reason ;  but  it  is  enough
to  give  color  to  the  primary  religious  attitade.  Any
certainty  is  better  than  no  certainty ;  it  is  good  both
for  the  mystic  and  for  his  hearers  to  have  touched  abso-
lute assurance,  on  no  matter  what  subject.  To  be  cer-
tain has  a  pri^^matic  meaning  in  any  case ;  the  man  is
disposed  to  resolute  action  in  general,  and  his  resolute-
ness is  able  to  communicate  itself.  The  presence  of
the  form  of  assurance  in  the  world,  is  the  presence  of
some  emptiness  that  will  gather  to  itself  its  own  filling
in  time ;  as  many  an  unequipped  good-will  by  practis-
ing assurance  has  in  time  acquired  some  substance
of  efficiency,  in  medicine  and  elsewhere.  And  who
knows  but  that  the  various  pretences  through  which
boys  grow  into  youth  and  manhood  show  also  some
natural  precedence  of  the  form  over  the  matter :  any
form  at  all  is  some  matter  —  such  seems  to  be  the  rule,
a  germ  which  in  honest  soil  will  grow.  I  dare  say  that
this  preliminary  law  of  Bagehot's  is  a  child  of  this
same  religious  assuredness  which  alone  in  this  world  is
capable  of  absolute  command.


CERTAINTY  AND  DOGMA  456

Let  the  mystic^  then,  be  certain  of  his  '^  the  truth/'
his  '^  God's  truth,''  and  do  not  enviously  require  him
at  every  turn  to  say  what  the  truth  contains.  No  one
insists  more  than  I  that  it  must  contain  something,  and
can  be  no  pure  ineffable  zero,  but  in  human  lang^ge
we  must  be  willing  to  wait  for  its  deposit,  and  aven  to
put  up  with  much  error.  The  church,  let  me  say,  is
always  right  in  claiming  to  be  infallible.  Any  church
which  modestly  declines  such  pretension,  any  mystic
who  in  his  main  point  admits  that  he  may  be  mistaken,
does  thereby  stamp  itself  or  himself  as  fraudulent.  For
if  one  knows  God,  he  will  also  know  that  he  knows  (so
truly  testifies  Spinoza) ;  hence,  although  not  every  one
that  claims  certainty  is  true,  every  one  that  disclaims  it
is  false.  It  is  among  the  certain  ones  that  all  true
prophets  will  be  found."  It  is  among  the  infallible
churches  that  all  true  churches  will  be  found.  What
the  church  chiefly  has  to  learn  is  not  to  be  infallible  in
regard  to  too  much.

The  infallibility  of  the  religious  institution  proceeds
from  the  certainty  of  its  mystics ;  it  is  better  that  they
also  should  not  be  certain  of  too  much,  should  be  willing
to  abide  in  the  region  of  being  sure  chiefly  that  they
are  sure  of  ^Hhe  truth,"  of  the  absolute.  But  the
mystic  feels  the  clamor  of  the  crowd  for  bread ;  he  has,
besides,  his  own  internal  emptiness  which  must  be  filled;
he  trembles  on  the  verge  between  being  rightly  sure
of  his  residual  object,  and  being  wrongly  sure  of  some
more  visible  content.  As  a  matter  of  natural  history,
the  mystic,  in  practical  affairs,  is  apt  to  carry  his  assur-
ance too  far. The  defect  of  his  virtue  may  be,  that  he


406  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

becomes  absolute  on  too  slight  provocation.  He  is  the
sturdy  will,  which  in  decline  may  become  the  tempera-
mental dogmatist.  It  is  never  easy  to  deal  with  a  will
of  this  sort,  which  supposes  itself  to  be  founded  on  an
original  source  of  truth  at  once  immovable  and  inacces-
sible. One  can  only  watch  its  career  (once  its  certainty
invades  this  world  of  sense)  as  of  a  thing  of  Nature,
closed  in  general  to  common  instruction ;  and  be  grate-
ful for  any  tendency  which  it  may  show  to  coincide
with  reason.  But  the  indomitable  and  unreasonable
person  is  neither  a  result  of  mysticism  nor  a  cause;
he  is  a  well-known  natural  product,  widely  distributed:
and  while  his  natural  firmness  may  be  magnified  by
the  sanction  of  religion,  it  must  at  the  same  time  be
rendered  safer  and  truer  by  the  essential  tendency  of
worship  to  universalize  the  mind  and  bend  it  to  reason.
Indeed,  is  not  mysticism  the  natural  antidote  for  over-
mightiness  of  personal  will ;  and  perhaps  the  only  pro-
tection of  society,  in  the  end,  against  its  most  vehement
members?  For  if  the  Strong  Man  in  his  solitude  is
not  in  company  with  the  Absolute  Other,  his  solitude  is
indeed  absolute,  and  wholly  menacing.  The  worshipper
by  the  nature  of  his  profession,  must  first  humble  him-
self before  his  object,  and  with  all  his  strength  suppress
his  strength,  until  it  begins  its  assertions  at  the  zero  of
all  historical  content.  None  but  God  can  reach  the
all-mighty  will  in  its  solitary  origins.  It  is  the  destiny
of  religion  to  find  that  difficult  and  all-important  center
of  a  just  infallibility,  which  curbs  and  defines  all  abso-
lute assurance,  without  disastrously  abolishing  it

It  is  well  for  the  mystic  to  dwell  chiefly  upon  his


CERTAINTY  AND  DOGMA  457

absolute  certainty  of  the  absolute,  and  of  his  wholly
original  relation  to  ancient  reality.  But  his  revelation
cannot  stop  here,  because  his  experience  has  legitimate
bearings  on  other  experience,  and  he  is  obliged  to  trace
them  out.  The  mystic  will  become  a  knower  of  things
new  as  well  as  old.

Of  this  new  knowledge,  we  have  here  to  say  that  it
comes  to  the  mystic  in  the  course  of  his  return  to  the
world,  unsought  by  him.  He  has  known  God  from
the  standpoint  of  the  world ;  now  he  begins  to  know  his
world  from  the  standpoint  of  his  new  experience  of  God.
As  after  every  new  experience  the  familiar  experiences
to  which  one  returns  are  lit  up  with  unfamiliar  light,
shining  out  strange  and  reborn :  so  as  the  mystic  resumes
his  occupation  with  the  many  things,  he  finds  that  ^^  all
things  have  become  new,"  and  this  novelty  he  will
learn  how  to  distil  into  the  stock  of  human  wisdom  at
large.  ^

It  is  natural  that  these  new  impressions  should  be
read  first  in  their  religious  bearings,  and  so  contribute
first  to  the  dogmatic  enrichment  of  rel^on  itself.  From
such  impressions  arise  those  dogpnas  which  have  to  do
with  the  world  and  num.  If  all  things  do  contain
^memorials'  or  reminders  of  God,  the  mystic  will  see  in
that  fact  a  divine  origin  of  the  world ;  and  in  time  these
same  reminders  will  take  shape  as  a  doctrine  of  the
divine  Word  or  Logos.  And  as  he  finds  reminders,
he  finds  also ohstructions to the  reminding:  here

1  Sftjt  the  Ode-writar:  ''My  heart  was  cloyen,  and  iti  flower
appeared  ;  and  grace  sprang  np  in  it ;  and  it  brought  forth  fruit  to  the
Lord.  .  .  .  And  ererything  became  like  a  relie  of  thjself  and  a  memorial
forever  of  thy  faithful  works.  For  there  is  abundant  room  in  thj  Para-
dise,  and  nothing  is  useless  therein."


458  TH£  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION


begin  his  condemnationsy  his eootributions to  law
and  prophecy.^

This  way  of  making  judgments  is  a  very  common
one ;  it  is  what  we  might  call^  judgment  by  compatibil-
ity or  incompatibility  of  mood.  All  of  our  earlier
moral  judgments  are  of  this  sort.  A  dominant  per-
sonal relationship  (say  of  child  to  parent)  goyems  one's
attitude  to  all  sorts  of  things,  not  so  much  through  ver-
bal command,  as  through  a  perception  of  what  would
harmonize  or  jar  with  the  conscious  quality  of  that
relationship.  The  recurrence  of  the  presence  of  the
person  gradually  defines  the  judgment.  In  the  case  of
the  mystic,  the  various  approaches  which  he  makes  to
his  God  after  meeting  his  world  and  judging  it,  become
so  many  questions  to  which  he  finds  a  yes  or  nOj  accord-
ing as  his  consciousness  of  Gk>d  is  accessible  to  him  or
not.  God  shows  thereby  what  he  loves  and  what  he
hates ;  and  though  there  is  much  weary  guessing  as  to
the  reasons  for  the  presence  or  the  absence  of  divine
favor,  yet  in  the  course  of  time  inductions  emerge,
^^experimental  wisdom''  of  fairly  stable  sort.  These
resulting  judgments  are  thus  due  to  what  F.  B.  Jevons
has  happily  called  '^  supernatural  selection,"  in  contrast  to
the  natural  selection  of  survival  by  actual  utility.'  And
all  such  judgements,  social,  cosmolog^cal,  and  moral,  are
at  the  same  time  judgments  about  the  nature  of  Gh>d ;
are  so  many  developments  of  the  knowledge  of  Gt>d,
made  possible  by  this  continuous  alternation  in  ezperi-

^  This  prooesi  alio  we  see  in  the  Odes  of  Solomon  :  *'  And  I  fonook
T&nity,  and  tamed  to  the  Most  High  my  God,  and  I  was  enriched  by  his
bounty  ;  and  I  forsook  the  folly  which  was  diffused  over  the  earth  —
yea,  I  stripped  it  off,  and  oast  it  from  me."

'  Introdnotion  to  the  history  of  religion,  oh.  viiL


CEBTAINTT  AND  DOGMA  460

ence.  The  mystic's  preparation  is  an  epitome  of  such
empirical  judgments  about  God^  that  is  to  say,  of  the
kind  of  disposition  which  God  will  favor.  Thus  the
mystic  contributes  little  by  little  to  the  dogmatic  con-
tent of  religion;  and  these  dogmas  have  their  own
methods  of  trial  and  selection.

In  this  origination  of  new  judgments,  the  mystics  have
done  their  harm  in  the  world, — being  sure  of  things
that  are  only  partially  true.  We  thought  that  the  mys-
tic would  do  well  to  be  slow  in  concrete  creativeness.
But  taking  the  whole  bulk  of  dogpnatic  utterance
together,  we  must  still  judge  that  the  harm  done  is
infinitely  less  serious  than  would  have  been  the  harm
of  losing  that  same  material  and  the  assurance  with  it.
The  mystic's  blunders  have  their  indispensable  truth ;
and  partial  truth  may  be  pragmatically  truer  than  the
completely  guarded  statement.  Most  mystic  utterances
are  untrue ;  as,  for  example,  most  of  Emerson's  statements
are  untrue.  His  continual  volley  of  the  small  cartridges
of  dogma  is  a  symptom  of  mystical  habit ;  they  are  a
minor  rill  of  mystical  enlightenments.  And  doubtless
to  his  own  knowledge  and  intention  many  of  his  state-
ments are  partial.  He  writes  esoterically,  that  is,  for
the  reader  who  has  the  sense  and  good-wiU  to  supply
the  cautions  and  conditions  for  his  statements.  That
word  of  his  already  quoted,  '^  No  one  can  harm  me  but
myself"  is  esoterically  true,  empirically  untrue;  but
how  far  superior  to  all  such  guarded  and  accurate  state-
ments as  we  might  make  of  it.  The  valid  doctrines  of
the  church  are  in  the  same  case ;  their  truth  is  literal,
but  esoteric. It  is  capable  of  complete  translation  into


4n  THE  FRUITS  OP  RELIGION

philosophic  propositioos  about  the  worid  and  man  and
the  Al^lote, — in  the  coone  of  infinite  time.  Bat
meanwhile  it  oonyeys  troth  to  the  man  of  good-will  and
insist ;  indispeiiBable  truth ;  would  we  could  aleo  say,
^^  and  nothing  but  the  truth/'

The  mystic  g^Tes  us  the  thing  which  is  to  be  modified.
There  are  many  who  can  supply  the  modification  ;  but
who  else  could  have  pulled  down  from  heaven  that  sub-
stance? In  the  poeitiye  dogmas  of  the  mystic  we  find
absolute  truth  getting  its  Jirst  relations  to  facts :  its
second  and  third  and  subeequent  relations  will  be  found
in  time ;  but  meanwhile  we  have  the  thing,  and  men  can
live  by  it.  It  is  the  mystic's  function  to  set  theses  into
the  world,  crude  positive  theses ;  antitheses  will  come  of
their  own  accord :  but  the  thing  that  wins  immortality,
after  all  the  corrections  of  thought  and  experience,  will
have  personal  identity  with  that  original  thesis.

Of  the  mystic's  knowledge,  then,  in  summary  survey,
we  have  to  say  this.  That  the  contents  of  ^  revelation '
are  twofold.  There  is  first  the  certainty  and  praise  of
God,  and  of  the  mystic's  relation  to  God ;  this  knowl-
edge moves  within  its  own  circle,  and  has  no  apparent
fruit  nor  progpress,  being  to  an  external  view  self-
absorbed  and  empty,  not  much  else  than  certainty  of
certainty.  But  secondly,  there  is  the  positive  contribu-
tion of  the  mystic  and  prophet  to  the  concrete  spiritual
wealth  of  mankind,  a  creativity  to  which  we  can  discern
no  limit.

Thus  it  is  that  the  knowledge  of  Grod  which  is  in
intention  the  end  of  the  mystic's  knowledge  is  also  its
beginning. The  knowledge  of  the  oldest  becomes  the


CERTAINTY  AND  DOGMA  461

parent  of  the  newest  knowledge*  And  not  alone  in
the  domain  of  religious  truth.  For  in  the  light  of  this
experience  all  other  experience,  we  say,  has  become
changed  and  of  new  meaning.  Many  of  the  judgments
which  the  mystic  now  coins,  judgments  contributory  to
science  and  the  arts,  will  appear  to  him  unparented.
They  simply  arise  in  his  mind.  The  same,  I  think,  may
be  said  of  all  our  unparented  knowledge,  that  knowl-
edge which  we  attribute  vaguely  to  ^  inspi^tion,'  and
of  which  we  speak  dogmatically,  saying,  ^^  It  must  be
so " :  all  such  knowledge  has  as  one  parent  this  same
original  knowledge  of  the  eternal.  This  will  be  the
thesis  of  our  next  chapter.


CHAPTER  XXXI

THE  CREATIVITY  OF  RELIGION:  THEORT  OP

INSPIRATION

FEIOM  time  to  time  the  methods  of  religion  have
impreteed  os  as  being  methods  fit  for  the  origi-
nation of  new  thought  and  of  new  value,  if  any  such
thing  is  possible  on  this  planet.  And  I  believe  that
we  must  recognize  in  worship  the  very  process  through
which  religion  becomes  historically  fertile  in  the  sense
of  our  first  speculation  regarding  the  role  of  religion  in
history.^  It  is  our  purpose  now  to  enter  as  we  can  into
the  logic  and  meaning  of  the  creative  event,  and  to
sketch  its  re-echoings  in  life  generally.

For  creativity  has  its  method  and  logic  ;  not  such  as
binds  it  or  predetermines  it,  but  such  as  g^ives  it  root,
lodgment,  and  effect.  Any  valuable  creativity  is  far
removed  from  pure  chance  or  irresponsibility  in  things.
It  has  its  place  and  its  conditions,  just  as  in  the  world
of  organic  life,  creation  and  birth  have  their  own
assigned  organic  method  and  quota  of  energy  in  the
economy  of  the  life-cycle  :  whether  or  not  it  is  an  easy
matter  to  define  the  parentage  of  novelty,  some  parent-
age it  must  have.  The  world  that  shall  be  emerges
from  the  world  that  is  by  the  appearance  of  the  purely
new;  yet  that  emergence  is  subject  to  some  control
and  consent  of  the  world  that  is :  unless  the  present  in

^  Chapter  ii.


REU6I0N  CREATIVE  463

Bome  fashion  loves  and  desires  the  future,  the  future
will  bear  no  progeny.  In  so  far,  a  theory  of  origi-
nation is  possible ;  and  what  is  more  to  be  wished  for
than  insight  into  creativity  ?

It  is  an  old  observation  that  moral  and  cognitive
ideas  tend  to  form  self-perpetuating  systems;  they
grope  toward  equilibrium,  working-harmony  with  each
other  and  with  experience,  until  they  strike  an  arrange-
ment which  goes  on  reproducing  itself,  not  leading
beyond  itself  by  any  further  stroke  of  ^cperience*
This  is  the  settled  character,  of  men,  races,  states^
times.

The  structure  of  such  a  moral  system  was  hinted  at
in  several  places  by  Aristotle.  Thus  in  the  Nicoma-
chean  Ethics  (ii,  2),  ^'Strength  is  produced  by  eating
much  food  and  by  undergoing  much  severe  labor ;  and
no  one  can  do  this  so  well  as  he  who  is  strong  .  .  .
(similarly)  by  abstaining  from  pleasures  we  become
temperate,  and  when  temperate  are  best  able  to  abstain.
.  .  •  (In  general)  that  same  class  of  actions  which
develops  a  given  virtue  is  itself  furthered  and  energized
by  that  virtue."  Aristotle  is  observing  that  virtue  some-
how is  presupposed  in  acquiring  virtue ;  that  it  must
aid  in  its  own  acquisition ;  ^  conversely,  that  if  it  is
absent  we  are  shut  out  from  it,  as  he  who  has  no
strength  is  shut  out  from  that  working  and  eating  which
produces  strength.  These  systems,  circles,  groups,'
have  thus  an  apparently  fatalistic  character. Only  he

^  An  obserratioii  that  might  haye  reoonciled  him  with  FUto  if  he
had  punned  it  farther.

'  Gronpe  in  the  mathematical  sense,  defined  ehiefly  bj  the  mle  that


464  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

who  is  already  temperate  can  become  temperate ;  only
he  who  is  already  wise  can  gain  wisdom.  Aristotle
himself  will  admit  to  the  study  of  ethics  only  those  who
are  already  mature  and  well-trained,  prepared  to  admit
the  necessary  first-premises  for  his  reasonings.  The
good  he  defines  with  a  deliberate  circle  as  that  which
the  good  man  judges  to  be  good ;  the  good  man  being
defined,  in  turn,  as  he  who  values  what  is  really  good.
Thus  the  good  and  the  good  man  adjust  themselves
to  each  other,  and  recognize  themselves  each  by  the
other.  There  is  no  appeal  from  their  position;  nor,
on  these  principles  alone,  is  there  any  way  of  knowing
whether  what  the  ^'  good  men  "  of  any  time,  or  of  all
times,  regard  as  good  is  really  good.  For  our  blind-
spots  perpetuate  themselves  as  well  as  our  true  visions :
every  type  of  character  has  a  conception  of  the  good
which  it  sustains  and  is  in  turn  sustained  by.  Hence
every  type,  good  or  bad,  tends  to  lose  the  power  of
self-criticism;  the  ^best'  has  no  way  of  discovering
its  own  defects.  There  is  no  way  here  for  growth,
novelty,  creativity.^

The  ultimate  resistance  to  any  innovation  is  this
approximate  self-sufBciency  of  the  set  of  ideas,  moral
and  other,  which  we  already  have,  the  tendency  of


ft  oombination  of  anj  two  elements  of  the  gronp  Moording  to  the  eharao-
teristie  opentioa  of  the  group  prodnees  alwaTi  Miother  member  of  the
aame  groopi  never  an  object  falling  outside  that  gronp.

^  WhateTer  is,  in  the  world*  whether  defeotire  or  not,  tends  to  as-
sume the  form  of  organic  completeness,  mutual  self-support  of  parts,
self-propagation,  and  thus  to  justify  its  ezistenee  by  immanental  struo-
tare :  whatOTcr  is  pniendi  to  h€  right.  On  the  other  hand,  whatCTev
pretends  to  be  self-sufficient,  and  to  justify  itself  only  by  its  group  form
and  self -propagating  powers,  is  to  be  suspected  of  defect :  whatever
merdy  it,  is  wrong.


RELIGION  CREATIVE  465

that  set  of  ideas  to  reprodace  within  its  own  kind^
exclusively.  In  so  far  as  we  are  stupid,  we  can  only
stupidly  try  to  overcome  stupidity ;  in  so  far  as  we  are
selfish,  we  make  selfish  efforts  to  escape  the  rewards
of  selfishness — as  by  giving  to  charity  for  the  sake  of
treasure  in  heaven ;  in  remorse  for  falsity,  we  try  to
right  ourselves,  yet  anxiously  preserving  our  face :  and
we  observe,  in  others  if  not  in  ourselves,  that  defects
are  not  overcome  by  this  kind  of  trying.  In  just  such
futile  endeavors  is  not  our  total  humanity  bound,  in
so  far  as  it  hopes  for  any  genuine  originality  in  what-
ever direction  ?

But  group-enclosedness  can  in  some  cases  be
destroyed,  as  vortex-rings  are  destroyed,  by  a  touch
from  outside  the  group  —  a  touch  positive  enough
to  be  disorganizing.  And  in  so  far  as  we  can  trace
the  inner  process  of  creative  thought,  such  as  history
has  80  far  known,  we  find  just  such  group-burstings
taking  place ;  and  we  can  discern,  I  believe,  something
of  the  conditions  under  which  such  burstings  and  origi-
nations occur.

It  is  iudeed  only  in  recent  times  that  invention  has
been  conjoined  with  the  power  of  self-description  ;  and
with  the  willingness  to  be  autobiographical:  but  we
need  few  instances  to  put  us  in  possession  of  the  prin-
ciples at  work.  For  invention  is,  in  essence,  no  rare
event ;  every  soul  of  man  tha.t  lives  and  works  in  the
world  is  creating  at  every  moment  of  his  life  some
infinitesimal  rill  of  novelty.  We  need  then  only  such
examples  of  creativity  as  may  bring  us  to  consciousness
of  what  goes  on  in  ourselves. We  shall  find  that  the


406  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

moments  of  creation  are  moments  in  which  the  old  is
not  less,  but  more,  intensely  present  to  consciousness ;
it  is  grasped  as  a  whole,  and  recUizedy  as  for  the  first
time ;  and  in  that  realization  we  shaU  see  emerging  a
dogma  of  rejection, ''  This  (old  position)  cannot  be  the
truth/'  '^  This  cannot  be  so/'  Which  negative  dogma
will  make  way  for  a  positive  dogma — equally  unpar-
ented so  far  as  that  moment  discerns — ^^  This  contrast-
ing thing  must  be  so/'  and  herewith  the  new  idea  has
its  footing  in  the  world,  bom  as  something  necessary
— having  tiierefore  a  parentage  though  as  yet  unname-
able,  a  parentage  which  we  may  be  able  to  make  evident.
We  may  take  a  few  instances  from  Tolstoy,  —  a  mind
richly  creative,  dogmatic,  artistic  and  withal  trench-
antly autobiographical  in  all  his  works,  making  it  pos-
sible to  follow  with  advantage  the  beginnings  of  new
ideas.  Here  is  an  extract  from  his  diary,  written  after
seeing  an  execution  in  Paris,  long  before  his  political
opinions  had  begun  to  take  shape, — an  early  and  nega-
tive item  in  the  creation  of  those  opinions :

**  When  I  saw  the  head  separate  from  the  body,  and  how
they  both  thumped  into  the  box  at  the  same  moment,  I  under-
stood, not  with  my  mind,  but  with  my  whole  being,  that  no
theory  of  the  reasonableness  of  any  present  progress  can  jus-
tify this  deed ;  and  that  though  everybody  from  the  creation
of  the  world  on  whatever  theory  had  held  it  to  be  necessary,
I  knew  it  to  be  unnecessary  and  bad.'*  ^

Another  instance  from  his  educational  journal,  on  pun-
ishing a  boy  in his  experimental peasant-school  for
stealing,  by  hanging  a  placard  on  his  back:

^  This  and  the  following  extracts  from  Tolstoy  are  taken  from  Ayl-
mer  Maude's  Life  of  Tolstoy.


RELIGION  CREATIVE  467

**  I  glanced  at  the  face  of  the  punished  boy  which  had
become  yet  paler,  more  suffering,  and  harder  than  before,  and
I  thought  of  convicts ;  and  suddenly  I  felt  so  ashamed  and
disgusted  that  I  tore  the  stupid  card  off  him,  told  him  to  go
where  he  liked,  and  became  convinced  —  and  convinced  not
by  reason,  but  by  my  whole  nature — that  I  had  no  right  to
torment  that  unfortunate  boy ;  and  that  it  was  not  in  my  power
to  make  of  him  what  I  and  the  inn-keeper's  son  wanted  to
make  of  him.  I  became  convinced  that  there  are  secrets  of
the  soul  hidden  from  us  on  which  life  may  act,  but  which
precepts  and  punishments  do  not  reach."

In  Tolstoy's  religious  development,  his  new  ideas  emerge
with  the  same  unparented  certainty,  as  he  has  recorded
his  experience  in  '^My  Confession."  Let  me  quote
instances  along  the  way  of  that  remarkable  progress.

«'  One  can  only  go  on  living  when  one  is  intoxicated  with
life ;  as  soon  as  one  is  sober,  it  is  impossible  not  to  see  tkat  it
is  cUl  a  merejrattd.  •  .  •  Sooner  or  later  my  deeds  will  be  for-
gotten, and  I  shall  not  exist.  Then  why  go  on  making  any
effort.  .  .  .  How  can  men  fail  to  see  this  ?

**'  I  now  see  that  if  I  did  not  kill  myself,  it  was  due  to  some
dim  consciousness  of  the  invalidity  of  my  thoughts.  I,  my
reason,  has  acknowledged  life  to  be  unreasonable.  But  how
can  reason,  which  (for  me)  is  the  creator  of  life,  and  (in
reality)  the  child  of  life,  deny  life?  There  is  something
vyrong  here.

^^  Then  I  turned  my  gaze  upon  myself,  on  what  went  on
within  me,  and  I  remembered  that  I  only  lived  at  those  times
when  I  believed  in  God.  As  it  was  before,  so  it  was  now :  I
need  only  be  aware  of  Grod  to  live ;  I  need  only  forget  him  or
disbelieve  in  him,  and  I  die. ...  *  What  more  do  you  seek  ? '
exclaimed  a  voice  within  me.  ^  Hiis  is  he.  He  is  that  with-
out which  one  cannot  live.  To  know  God  and  to  live  is  one
and  the  same  thing ! '  •  .  •  and  the  light  did  not  again  aban«
don  me."


468  THE  FRUITS  OF  REUGIOH

And  now,  having  won  for  himself  this  ancient  trath,  he
finds  insights  arising  in  him  of  a  more  novel  character,
but  with  the  same  dog^matic  abruptness.  It  cannot  be,
he  thinks,  that  believers  of  other  confessions  than  that
of  the  Greek  Church  are  without  true  religion ;  whence
it  follows  that  the  church  must  be  wrong  in  condemn-
ing them. And  with  regard  to  war,  and  executions,

^  It  was  impossible  not  to  see  that  killing  is  an  evil,  repug-
nant to  the  first  principles  of  any  faith.  Yet  they  prayed  in
the  churches  for  the  success  of  our  arms ;  and  the  teachers  of
the  faith  acknowledged  killing  to  be  an  act  resulting  from  the
faith,"

The  whole  spiritual  history  of  this  man  is  a  series  of
like  unparented  inspirations.  And  it  is  not  otherwise
with  minds  of  g^reater  psychological  sophistication  crea-
tive in  other  fields.  Psychologists  are  seldom  autobio-
graphical, by  some  strange  contrariety ;  but  Fechner,
who  is  of  their  greatest,  does  often  write  in  confessional
vein,  and  here  is  a  passage  much  to  our  present  pur-
pose.^ Sitting  on  a  bench  in  the  Rosenthal  at  Leipzig
on  a  warm  sunny  morning  with  plenty  to  occupy  his
senses,  he  falls  to  musing  as  follows :

^  A  strange  illusion  is  this.  At  bottom,  all  before  me  and
about  me  is  night  and  silence :  the  sun  which  so  dazzles  me  is
in  truth  but  a  dark  ball,  seeking  its  way  in  darkness.  ...  In
this  universal  darkness  and  desolation  and  silence  which
embraces  heaven  and  earth  there  hover  certain  beings  who  but
singly  and  inwardly  possess  brightness  and  color  and  sound,
—  mere  points  probably,  which  emerge  oat  of  the  night  and
sink  back  into  it,  without  leaving  behind  them  any  vestige  of
their  light  and  sound ;  who  see  one  another,  though  nothing

1  From  the  opening  of  his  book,  Die  Tagesansieht  gegenfiber  der
Nsfflhtaniicht


RELIGION  CREATIVE  469

between  them  is  lighted;  speak  with  one  another,  though
nothing  between  them  resounds.  So  it  is  to-day,  so  it  was
from  the  beginning,  so  will  it  be  to  all  eternity."

Now  comes  to  Fechner  the  view  of  the  natural  man  in
all  its  vehement  contrast  to  this  world-picture,  which  to
Fechner  is  but  the  Weltanschauung  of  his  age  by  general
consent. This  natural  man

^  believes  that  he  sees  objects  about  him  because  it  is  actually
light  about  him ;  he  does  not  believe  that  the  sun  begins  to
brighten  the  world  first  behind  his  eyes.  .  .  .  His  illusion,
furthermore*  will  certainly  never  yield,  no  matter  how  firmly
established  (by  consensus  of  science  and  philosophy)  may  be
the  knowledge  that  it  is  illusion.  May  it  not  be  that  this
knowledge  is  itself  an  illusion?  Is  it  not  the  truth  that
endures  longest,  —  and  is  not  that  which  longest  endures  the
truth?

*^  Must  not  that  Night- view  shrink  in  fright  from  itself  if
with  a  faithful  mirror  before  it,  it  could  know  that  it  is  itself
which  it  sees  therein  ?  Nay,  had  the  world  at  first  seen  the
entire  hopelessness  and  footlessness  and  vanity  of  that  view
with  the  clarity  which  came  to  me  in  that  hour,  it  had  never
been  able  to  win  its  place  as  a  World-view.  And  though
clarity  is  the  last  thing  in  these  matters,  the  last  thing  will  be
clarity.  As  surely  as  day  follows  night,  so  surely  upon  that
Night-view  of  the  world  a  Day-view  must  follow,  which  will
give  foundation  to  the  view  of  the  natural  man  —  not  contra-
dict it  And  the  world  will  appear  in  a  new  connection,  in  a
new  light,  and  under  new  and  positive  points  of  view.''

Here  is  the  beginning  of  Fechner's  new  idea,  which
with  true  prophecy  he  indicates  as  the  idea  of  the  gen-
eration succeeding  him,  the  view  which  in  our  own  way
we  have  tried  to  take  possession  of.  This  idea  also
comes  to  its  originator  as  a  dogma,  an  ^'  It  must  be


470  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

so/'  namely,  that  the  yiew  of  the  natural  man,  this  per-
sistent view,  is  the  true  one.

We  need  look  no  farther  for  instances  of  the  creative
event:  these  may  be  typical  of  all,  whether  in  art  or
morals  or  science  or  religion.

In  all  these  experiences  of  dawning  novelty,  we  may
observe  the  same  sharpened  consciousness  of  the  old  or
usual  idea,  the  idea  with  reference  to  which  the  new  is
defined  as  new  and  different.  This  old  idea  is,  as  we
say,  freshly  realized;  which  means,  freshly  connected
with  reality,  especially  with  the  reality  which  the  thinker
is  conscious  of  in  himself — that  which  is  realized  is
^^  brought  home, "  made  a  conscious  part  of  his  own  vivid
and  literal  present  world.  And  this  old  idea,  in  being
realized,  is  at  the  same  time  repudiated ;  repudiated,  not
with  any  pure  and  blank  negation,  but  in  favor  of  some
positive  thing  which  in  time  will  make  itself  known.  In
this  realizing  and  repudiating,  the  new  thing  is  already
asserting  itself,  and  doing  conscious  work.  These  are
the  psychological  phenomena  which  in  various  propor-
tions always  surround  the  birth  of  novelty.

And  the  event  of  this  birth  itself  is  to  be  traced,  as
I  think,  to  this  touching  to  the  quick  of  sdf-oonscioiiS'
nesa:  the  old  idea  has  penetrated  to  the  self;  the  self
has  been  stung  by  it;  and  in  the  reflexion  thereby
occasioned,  the  new  thing  is  engendered.  It  is  when
Tolstoy  finds  himself  '^ashamed  and  disgusted" — judg-
ing himself;  it  is  when  Fechner  lets  the  ^^ natural  man"
in  him  spill  his  scorn  on  the  futile  theorist  of  his  habit-
ual selfhood ;  it  is  when  some  deep-set  love  of  life  and
reality  reaches  a  point  of  wrath  and  habit-breaking,  or


RELIGION  CREATIVE  471

in  other  moods^  of  wholly  joyful  inertia-killing;  it  is
in  such  moments  that  creation  takes  place.  I  wish,
then^  in  the  first  place^  to  connect  the  event  of  creation
with  the  event  of  reflexion, — that  is,  with  the  emergence
of  a  ^eZ/^-consciousness  out  of  a  consciousness  that  is
pursuing  in  all  smoothness  the  lines  of  the  empirical
ohject-world.

In  reflexion,  the  focus  of  consciousness  shifts  in  such
a  way  that  without  losing  wholly  from  sight  the  ohject
with  which  one  has  been  engaged,  the  interest  now
attaches,  not  primarily  to  that  object,  but  to  the  self  in
its  relations  with  that  object.  These  reflexive  move-
ments of  consciousness  are,  in  general,  occasioned  by  some
defeat  in  the  ordinary  inertias  of  the  mind.  As  when,
in  speaking,  one  becomes  aware  of  throat,  or  difficulty
of  words,  or  clothing.  As  when  the  hunter  returns
empty  from  the  day's  chase,  reflecting  that,  after  all,
what  he  wanted  was  not  so  much  the  game  as  the  pur-
suit. Or,  as  when  in  success  one  comes  to  the  end  of  an
absorbing  task,  and  finds  himself  at  a  loss  what  next  to
do:  he  is  for  the  moment  'Hhrown  back  upon  himself''
as  upon  a  being  who  during  the  absorption  has  been
forgotten — his  reflexion  is  occasioned  by  the  defeat  of
his  usual  habits  of  occupation  and  attention.

And  in  all  such  occasions  the  organic  function  of
reflexion  seems  to  be  precisely  the  demand  of  the  situa-
tion for  something  new.  The  continuous  thread  of  my
empirical  self-consciousness  is  no  doubt  due  to  some  per-
manent friction  in  applying  my  existing  stock  of  ideas
to  experience,  and  the  persistent  demand  for  creative-
ness  thereby  occasioned.  We  should  expect  reflexion  to
have  something  to  do  with  creation. And  for  the  further


472  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

reason,  that  the  Self  stands  permanently  outside  all  those
closed  or  closing  groups  of  mental  and  moral  habit;  the
more  perfectly  self-sufficient  and  self-propagating  these
groups  become,  the  more  they  fuse  with  the  object-world
— becoming  object  of  self  hence  different  from  self —
though  in  their  perfect  working  not  reminding  the  self
of  itself.  He  who  can  revert  to  himself  is  free  from  all
gproups,  and  has  in  himself  that  which  can  disorganiase
them  and  see  beyond  them.  The  only  question  is,  how
one  is  able  to  revert  to  himself,  that  is,  how  reflexion  is
possible.  For  if  defeat  is  the  only  occasion  for  reflexion,
and  a  self-sufficient  mental  group  does  not  meet  with
any  defeat,  we  are  still  unable  to  free  ourselves  from
its  bondage,  through  our  inability  to  reflect.  How  is
refleodon  possible  f  Is  not  this  the  question  to  which
every  critique  of  creativity  must  come?

Now  my  proposition  is  that  the  power  to  reflect
depends  upon  the  power  to  find  your  Absolute^  in  the
last  resort  upon  practical  religion.  It  is  through  alli-
ance with  the  Absolute  that  man  is  able  to  reflect:  it
is  through  his  reflexion  that  he  becomes  creative  of
novelty,  system-destroying  novelty.

Of  reflexion  generally,  we  know  that  it  is  not  under
direct  and  complete  control  of  the  will.  Self-conscious-
ness is  subtle  and  elusive ;  self-knowledge,  or  significant
self-consciousness,  is  the  most  difficult  of  knowledges.
Success  in  seizing  that  in  self  upon  which  one  would  turn,
in  self-analysis,  self-expression,  discerning  of  one's
actual  motive  or  actual  state  of  feeling,  depends  upon  a
certain  gift,  a  genius  of  self-capture,  a  skill  in  fixing
the  retreating  shadow ;  and  for  this  there  seem  Jx>  be  no


RELIGION  CREATIVE  473

rules  of  technical  procedure.  We  only  know  that  the
Other  Mind  is  the  chief  aid  to  self-knowledge,  the  only
environment  in  which  it  can  attain  high  development.
Socially-fostered  reflexions  may  bring  the  individual  to
the  general  level  of  social-self-knowledge :  they  cannot,
however,  lift  him  above  that  level,  and  it  is  precisely
this  social  closed-group  which  it  is  most  important  to
break  through.  Here  we  revert  to  a  principle  already
appealed  to  in  another  context :  that  there  is  no  criti-
cism of  any  self  or  system  except  in  present  view  of  a
positive  content  beyond  them.  And  that  which  is  out-
side every  finite  system,  ^^  the  Not  of  all  that  man  can
think  or  say,'*  is  precisely  the  absolute  with  which  reli-
gion seeks  and  gains  vital  alliance.  If  God  has  once
been  known,  the  world  and  the  self  must  thereafter  be
seen  under  the  survey  of  this  experience.  I  am  able  to
reflect  upon  any  world-self  system  because  and  only
because  I  have  already  experienced  something  beyond
it.  It  is  Tolstoy's  certainty  of  God  that  gives  him
power  to  criticize  the  Church.  It  is  Fechner's  sense
of  the  validity  of  some  more  primitive  world-view  that
separates  him  from  the  accepted  '^  Night-view."  In
brief,  all  of  my  partial  reflexions  are  parented  by  some
previous  total  reflexion.  But  total  reflexion,  that  is,
reflexion  upon  the  whole  of  things  temporal,  is  precisely
a  definition  of  the  cognitive  side  of  mystic  experience.
And  conversely,  reflexion  might  be  defined  as  a  par-
tial mystic  experience.  For  reflexion,  like  worship,
abandons  the  forward  and  outward  direction  of  atten-
tion, and  reverts  inward,  seeking  by  denial  to  separate
itself  from  immersion  in  the  object  which  occasions  that
reflexion,  and  succeeding  only  in  so  far  as  its  denial  is


474  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

supplemented  by  a  positive  vision  of  the  reality  which
that  object  does  not  contain.  Reflexion  also  illustrates
the  principle  of  alternation  ;  self-knowledge  and  object-
knowledge  growing  by  intervals  of  self-abandonment
each  in  the  other.  And  the  motive  of  worship^  so  far
as  it  is  a  rejection  of  the  world,  we  thought  to  find^
even  as  the  occasion  for  reflexion  is  found,  in  some
friction  in  the  usual  objective  processes  of  the  mind.
Reflexion  is  the  generalized  form  which  worship  takes
in  our  experience :  it  is,  so  to  speak,  the  agent  for  the
dissemination  of  religious  attainment  throughout  the  body
of  experience.  It  has  no  necessary  religious  character ;
for  this  belongs  only  to  the  total  reflexion.  But  all
such  partial  mystical  movements  are  dependent  for  their
vigor  and  sense  upon  the  total  alternation  of  conscious-
ness, and  what  it  can  grasp  of  the  Absolute  and  its
quality.  Our  "scent  for  reality,"  our  "grip'*  upon
fact  and  value,  are  our  experience  of  God  as  being
thought  with.  At  any  given  time  this  sense  of  reality
is  as  a  possession  of  the  individual,  inalienable  from  his
personality,  his  own  definition  and  character,  the  most
intimate  fact  about  him,  wholly  independent  of  his
piety  or  intentional  relation  to  God.  But  the  conditions
for  the  maintenance  of  this  "  instinct,"  for  its  perpetual
regeneration,  and  withal  for  its  growth,  require  as  in  the
case  of  every  instinct  that  we  take  self-conscious  posses-
sion of  that  which  is  by  nature  present ;  that  this  which
is  thought  with  shall  be  renewed  also  by  being  from  time
to  time  thought  of  and  made  an  immediate  experience.^

^  In  simpler,  but  more  barren  fatbion,  the  logic  of  novelty  may  be
exbibited  tbns  :

Assume  a  point,  A,  which  shall  be  ontside  erery  partionlar  system  of
thought  or  character,  outside  eyery  group  ;  and  adopt  the  general  prin-


RELIGION  CREATIVE  475

The  scope  of  our  principle  will  be  extended  when  we
observe  that  induction  is  a  mental  process  akin  to  reflex-
ion. It  has  been  regarded  as  typical  of  all  invention,  —
this  process  of  induction,  whereby  the  mind  arrives  at
a  new  law,  a  new  synthesis,  a  new  apergu  of  essential
likeness,  a  new  simile  or  metaphor,  a  new  hypothesis,  a
new  speculative  order  among  the  facts  of  experience.
Induction  is  sometimes  described  as  a  movement  from
parts  to  whole  or  to  universal:  worship  and  reflexion
may  be  described  in  the  same  terms.  Induction  is  not
compellable  by  rule ;  this  also  it  has  in  common  with
mystic  experience  and  reflexion.  No  fixed  method  can
be  laid  down  in  log^c  whereby  the  law  of  a  g^ven  set
of  phenomena  can  be  determined.  There  are  good
ways  of  preparing  yourself  to  discover  such  laws  and
likenesses:  but  when  you  have  followed  all  the  'induc-
tive methods,'  you  must  wait  for  your  gift.  The  prob-
lem '  To  find  the  common  element  in  a  given  group  of
objects  *  has  no  solution ;  there  is  no  general  formula
for  discovering  integrals.  Even  simple  observation  is
a  g^t,  simple  observation  being  the  elementary  opera-
tion in  induction ;  and  simple  observation  may  serve  to
show  the  kinship  we  are  asserting :

eiple  that  any  tiioh  sjttem,  B,  whan  teen  from  the  stendpoint  of  A,  ehsngei
its  eharaoter,  beeoming  for  ezperionqe,  mj  B'.  With  these  two  aaiamp-
tiom  we  have  defined  at  onee  the  eonditiona  for  an  infinite  progreit  in  B.
For  as  B  by  reflexion  from  A  becomes  B',  so  B'  by  reflexion  from  the
same  A  becomes  B'^  and  so  on.  Thus  endless  norelty  springs  from  recuiw
rent  contact  with  that  which  is  eternally  the  same.  The  second  of  these
assumptions  is  equiTalent  to  the  principle  formally  touched  upon,  in  chap-
ter xiy  (The  Need  of  an  Absolnte)  :  namely  that  Sein  with  Bewusstsein
glTCS  Werden.  This  logical  scheme  is  aoeorate  so  far  as  it  goes,  bat  has
nothing  to  say  of  the  qnantitatiye  or  qnalitatiTC  Talnes  of  the  changes  in
qnestion,  nor  of  the  psychological  conditions  under  which  B  is  Tiewed
from  the  standpoint  of  A,  nor  of  the  growth  of  A  within  its  own  identity.


476  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

I  observe  Dothing  unless  I  question ;  and  I  question
nothing  unless  I  conceive  a  thing  as  being  other  than
it  turns  out  to  be.  What  I  see  at  the  theater  and  what
you  see  there  are  different  things ;  because  you  are  con-
scious of  more  Ways  in  which  the  play  might  have  been
better  or  other  than  it  is.  You  note  a  trick  of  carriage
or  voice  which  you  trace  to  a  certain  training  or  racial
origin;  I  observe  nothing  but  a  carriage  and  a  voice —
it  does  not  occur  to  me  that  they  have  any  peculiarity,
that  they  could  have  been  different.  I  have  no  questions
ready 9 — I  do  not  see  outside  of  them.  Simple  observa-
tion is  a  gift:  and  is  great  hypothesis-making  a  gift
of  any  radically  different  sort  than  this  of  conceiving  the
thing  otherwise,  —  that  the  apple  should  not  fall,  or
the  earth  not  be  a  plane,  or  the  center  of  things  else-
where than  where  we  are?  In  one  case  as  in  the  other,
one  is  helped  by  all  manner  of  acquaintance  with  facts,
experience,  imagination,  training,  ^*  spreading  the  divine
net '' ;  but  making  thereby  no  fore-fated  capture  of  the
divine  idea.  We  will  ascribe  the  successful  result
neither  to  chance  nor  to  industry ;  shall  we  say  to  genius^
thereby  asserting  that  our  induction  has  some  parentage,
we  know  not  what?  Precisely  so ;  and  what  is  genius
again,  but  that  same  ^^  scent  for  reality ''  wherein  reflex-
ion has  its  source  also?

As  reflexion  is  a  judgment  upon  my  self  as  a  whole,
so  induction  is  a  judgment  upon  some  external  self  or
class  as  a  whole.  Induction  is  external  reflexion ;  and
reflexion  is  internal  induction.  And  for  the  most  part
these  operations  are  simultaneous,  parts  of  the  same
mental  movement.  It  is  one  and  the  same  thing  to
become  aware  that  ^^  All  the  objects  about  me  are  inani-


REUGION  CREATIVE  477

mate"  as  to  become  aware  that  ^'I  am  alone'';  the
former  is  an  induction^  the  latter  a  reflexion.  To
observe  that  '^  All  these  books  have  fine  print/'  and  to
locate  in  my  eyes  a  subtle  discomfort,  are  probably  not
two  mental  operations,  but  one.  It  does  not  flash  upon
my  mind  in  any  case  that  ^^  All  A's  are  B "  without  a
simultaneous  exposition  of  self-consciousness,  like  the
recovery  of  a  lost  name.  Ability  to  invent,  to  induct,
to  discern  likenesses,  depends  on  a  degree  of  conscious^
ness, which  is  at  the  same  time  power  to  reflect,  to  detect
what  it  is  in  me  that  is  restless  and  groping  for  further
predicate-giving.  The  inventive  artist,  poet,  musician,
has  his  moments  of  prelude  to  idea-making  in  which
musing  he  can  hardly  tell  whether  he  is  scrutinizing
his  objects  or  the  stirrings  in  himself.  Reflexion  and
induction  are  of  the-  same  fabric,  and  have  the  same
conditions  for  success.  Every  induction  is  induced  by
a  prior  induction,  ultimately  by  a  total  induction^  or
judgment  about  the  whole  of  things, —  none  other  than
my  whole-idea,  derived  from  whatever  knowledge  of  the
whole  and  of  God  my  experience  has  built  up  for  me.
Every  induction  is  at  the  same  time  a  deduction,  then,
— an  '^It  must  be  so,"  parented,  though  from  the
backgpround  of  consciousness,  by  an  insight  which  in
its  origins  is  religious.

Worship  then  in  its  most  generalized  meaning  is  the
genus  of  which  reflexion  and  induction,  including
simple  observation,  are  species;  and  mystical  movements
of  the  mind,  reversions  to  that  which  is  relatively  total,
in  infinite  replication  and  variety,  make  up  one  half  of
the  whole  of  mental  life. Herewith  I  think  we  have


478  THE  FRUITS  OF  REUGION

taken  into  view  in  principle  all  phaict  of  creativity
and  invention.  Invention  can  never  be  the  result  of  a
direct  effort  to  invent,  if  only  becaoae  the  thing  to  be
invented  la  not  yet  seen.  No  one  by  taking  thought
can  increase  his  stature ;  he  must  apply  himself  to  that
through  which  the  increase  of  stature  may  come :  and
he  who  would  invent  would  best  put  himself  about
invention  by  strengthening  his  hold  on  reality.  He
who  would  be  creative  in  any  direction  would  do  best
to  pursue  that  from  which  alone  creativity  can  result,
a  personal  knowledge  of  the  Absolute.  This  is  that
^'guidance  of  Crod"  for  which  men  may  Intimately
pray,  and  expect  answer.  When  the  holy  spirit  is
come,  he  shall  lead  you  into  all  truth ;  and  not  other-
wise is  new  truth,  or  new  value  accessible  to  man-
kind. Thus  religion  is  fruitful  through  worship:  and
may  we  not  also  say,  it  is  the  one  fruitful  thing  in
the  world?

Whatever  religion  adds  to  human  wealth  is  not
poured  in,  as  an  extraneous  g^:  it  comes  in  continuity
with  what  that  individual  has  known  before.  No  man
by  means  of  his  religious  insights  can  be  transformed
from  ignorance  to  leamedness.  The  fruits  of  inspi-
ration are  not  such  as  labor  could  secure :  hence  they
neither  displace  labor,  nor  produce  '^  unearned  incre-
ments "  in  the  field  of  human  exertion.

It  is  true  that  certain  of  the  mystics  have  claimed
much  imparted  knowledge,  even  of  the  informatory
order.  Teresa  claims  to  have  received,  through  her
devotions,  the  powers  of  description  and  literary  expres-
sion, and  of  penetrating  the  meaning  of  the  Mass,  though


RELIGION  CREATIVE  479

Latin  was  to  her  an  unknown  tongue.  The  friends  of
Boehme^  it  is  said,  would  bring  to  him  words  from  for-
eign tongues  whose  meaning  he  would  divine  from  their
sounds.  But  g^nting  to  the  full  the  historic  accuracy
of  stories  like  these,  we  have  not  made  these  individuals
learned.  A  type  of  education  they  do  accomplish,  quite
germane  to  the  type  of  their  mighty  efforts  in  self-
discipline, — an  education,  namely,  in  self-knowledge
and  in  human  nature  generally,  such  as  any  person
with  similar  original  effort  might  hardly  fail  to  win.
But  whatever  self-development  the  mystic  receives,
he  receives  not  without  his  own  activity;  and  hence
there  will  be  no  complete  breach  of  continuity  in  his
knowledge.

So  evident  has  it  become  to  us  that  the  inspirations
of  religion  bear  the  marks  of  all  existing  limitations,  —
of  character,  of  times,  of  opinions,  —  that  products  of
such  alleged  inspiration  have  been  interpreted  as  the
deification  of  one's  own  thoughts  otherwise  established.
The  mystic,  it  is  said,  is  governed  by  his  expectations.
The  God  he  sees  is  the  God  he  has  been  led  to  define
to  himself,  by  tradition  and  reflection.  The  ideal  he
reaches  is  his  own  ideal,  that  is,  the  ideal  of  his  time,
modified  by  his  own  individual  quality,  and  elaborated
by  his  own  thinking.  The  practice  of  prayer  is  a  means,
we  might  think,  of  selecting  from  one's  stock  of  ideas
certain  ideas  to  which  we  wish  to  give  a  special  potency
and  control ;  and  through  some  process  of  auto-sugges^
tion,  fixing  these  ideas  in  the  seat  of  power.  We  cannot
doubt,  as  we  review  the  history  of  sainthood,  that  each
saint  in  turn  has  reinforced  in  himself  by  his  devotion
his  own  clarified  personal  equation,  and  the  sentiment


480  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

of  tradition.  In  mediseval  saintdom  what  do  we  find
in  saintly  character  but  the  reproduced  pictures  of  still
older  saints,  the  types  of  perfection  embodied  in  older
eulogies  ?  —  a  certain  corporate  flavor  which  gives  us,
indeed,  the  mid-age  fragprance  and  romance ;  but  also
the  mid-age  mustiness,  softness,  impure  purity,  and
flabbiness  of  soul,  —  all  that  type  of  mind  which  in
these  latter  days  Nietzsche  has  so  effectively  condemned,
to  the  great  surgical  benefit  of  Christendom.  Where
else  in  history  can  we  find  so  distinctive  a  spiritual
mannerism  fastened  upon  a  thousand  turbulent  years
with  successful  solidarity  ?  Religion,  on  this  showing,
might  well  qualify  as  an  apt  instrument  of  spiritual
conservatism,  perhaps  even  of  tyranny,  little  fitted  to
encourage  originality  of  mind.  In  no  case  does  the
good  of  which  the  mystic  catches  sight  seem  to  depart
by  any  great  gulf  from  the  best  good  of  his  time.

Herewith  the  mystic  finds  himself  accused,  and  not
for  the  first  time,  of  opposite  faults :  of  turning  in  a
fast  circle,  and  of  detached  individual  caprice.  The
truth  of  which  seems  to  me  to  be  this :  that  before  he
can  be  original  he  must  first  be  as  unoriginal  as  possible,
must  first  make  fast  whatever  he  can  fix  upon  as  tenable
in  his  spiritual  environment.  All  of  his  negations  are
in  the  interest  solely  of  the  best  he  yet  knows ;  and  so
far  as  his  preparation  remains  primarily  his  own  activity,
he  gets  no  step  beyond  the  best  he  knows.  Of  himself
he  can  accomplish  nothing  but  continuity,  even  of  the
most  binding  type :  no  one  can  be  more  conscious  than
he  of  his  inability  to  ^'  pass  beyond  himself."  His  best
efforts  do  but  tighten  about  him  the  net  of  his  own
limitations. Hence the mystic's  vision  of  the  good


RELIGION  CREATIVE  481

will  change  slowly,  for  the  most  part :  but  the  important
matter  for  us,  at  present,  is  that  it  changes  at  all.

In  antagonism  to  rash  claims  to  supernatural  enlight-
enment, free  from  human  limitations,  it  is  well  enough
to  point  out  the  abundant  presence  of  these  ties.  When
X  boasts  of  complete  novelty,  it  is  proper  for  T  to  exult
over  every  sign  of  antiquity  he  can  discover  in  it :  but,
on  the  whole,  this  is  not  the  most  genial  and  profitable
of  occupations.  ^'  Giye  me  a  differencey  a  new  depar-
ture," says  the  dialectician,  ''and  I  will  show  you  a
likeness  in  the  midst  of  that  difference."  Good :  that
is  clever,  and  sometimes  important — but  does  it  banish

»

the  miracle  of  difference  ?  Since  for  some  reason  (not
wholly  good)  continuity  seems  the  self-explanatory  and
obvious  aspect  of  our  living,  and  the  miracle  of  the
world  to  lie  in  its  production  of  novelty,  it  is  an  obli-
gation to  make  our  scientific  most  of  any  spark  of
novelty  that  may  be  emitted  by  any  process  whatever.
In  worship  and  its  results  we  see  everywhere  limitation,
limitation  even  exaggerated ;  but  limitation  in  the  pro-
cess of  overcoming  itself.  The  right  and  wrong  of  the
traditional  moral  quality  will  infect  the  act  of  worship ;
but  ask  how  this  traditional  error  is  to  be  put  off,  how
historically  it  has  at  last  been  put  off — and  we  shall  find
that  it  is  this  very  act  of  worship  which  (in  some  form
or  other)  is  the  appointed  way  of  escape  from  it.  Wor-
ship is  undoubtedly  a  bad  thing,  when  bad  men  worship
—  and  all  men  are  bad :  but  he  who  would  therefore
abolish  it  abolishes  his  only  hope  of  better  men.

The  worshipper's  God  will  contain  a  magnified  image
of  himself — that  is  inevitable.  But  the  act  of  bringing
one's  view  of  self  into  conjunction  with  an  actual  con-


482  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

■ciousneBS  of  the  Absolute  is  an  act  which  must  do
something  to  disrupt  the  limitations  of  that  idea.  The
worship  of  God  in  human  form  is  never  identical  with
the  worship  of  man.  The  known  God-function  tends  to
disjoint  the  humanity  of  the  thing  worshipped.  What
the  worshipper  has  before  him  is  not  man,  but  man
denied;  man  at  war  with  all  that  is  false  in  his  own
humanity;  man  overcoming  himself;  man  in  Unter-
gang  J  as  Nietzsche  would  have  it,  giving  way  to  Super-
man. This  process  depicted  in  the  heavens  takes
place  in  the  minds  of  the  worshippers ;  and  their  own
humanity  exposed  to  the  blast  of  their  own  experi-
enced absolute  becomes  newborn,  a  thing  different  by
some  slight  increment  from  what  it  was  before.  Every
man  knows  the  true  God,  that  is  our  first  premise ;  let
his  Grod-pictures  be  what  they  may,  they  are  all  doomed
and  dying  pictures,  pictures  of  the  man  that  is  being
put  behind,  on  the  way  to  the  man  that  is  to  be.

Would  I  persuade  my  neighbor  to  put  off  his  defects,
his  faults  of  vision,  his  hereditary  quirks  and  hateful-
nesses,  I  can  accomplish  nothing  effective  and  central
but  this  —  to  show  him  himself  in  the  light  of  his  own
absolute.  For  to  find  this  absolute,  as  the  mystic  finds
it,  he  has  been  obliged  to  reject  what  he  can  of  his
empirical  trappings,  and  most  of  what  I  despise  in  him
has  been  detected  by  himself,  if  not  in  his  own  prepara-
tory introspection  and  katharsis  of  the  passions,  yet  in
his  return  from  the  contemplation  of  Deity.  How  shall
he  detect  the  rest  f  How  shall  he  overcome  what  is  so
abominably  rooted  in  him  that  he  carries  it  to  heaven
with  him  and  spoils  my  prospects  of  enjoying  life  there  ?
He  may  never  see  it ;  in  which  case  I  must  either  wish


RELIGION  CREATIVE  483

him  dead,  and  well  out  of  this  fair  universe  with  all  his
f oulnessy  or  else  I  must  wish  him  once  well  in  the  fresh
air  and  sun,  with  a  more  complete  negation  of  himself,
through  a  better  hold  upon  his  own  absolute  — I  must
wish  him  a  better  mystic.  The  only  ultimate  appeal  of
man  to  man  is  built  on  man's  grasp  of  Gh>d.  And  what
I  can  see  to  be  true  of  my  neighbor  is  not  less  true
of  myself.

In  whatever  field  the  originator  may  act,  or  the
reformer,  or  the  creator,  his  procedure  will  be  the  same.
It  is  as  he  re^takes  his  world,  having  for  the  love  of
God  turned  his  back  upon  it,  that  his  world  appears  to
him  new  with  a  novelty  which  he  is  himself  giving  to
it  or  eliciting  from  it.  He  is  the  bearer  of  a  treasure
of  ^^  recollection  "  not  essentially  different  from  that  of
which  Plato  speaks;  and  under  these  rays  whatever
object  he  turns  upon  becomes  cognitively  and  morally
fruitful,  full  also  of  value  and  life.  This  is  not  the
work  of  the  impersonal  idea ;  it  is  the  work  of  a  per-
sonal experience ;  and  in  so  far  as  this  vision  of  the
absolute  is  his  own  vision,  colored  by  his  own  individual
quality  and  resonance,  his  new  endowment  is  but  a
deeper  spring  of  that  factor  which  we  sometimes  call
temperament,'  sometimes  ^  instinct,'  sometimes  'genius.'
His  creation  is  still  his  own,  and  bears  the  stamp  of
his  individuality.  His  relation  to  his  absolute  has  not
obliterated  him,  nor  overmastered  him :  enabling  him  to
reflect,  it  has  g^ven  to  him  himself ;  enabling  him  to
create,  it  has  given  to  him  a  freedom  which  might  well
be  called  freedom  in  the  concrete.

Nor  does  the  creator  create  without  the  aid  of  that


484  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

world  to  which  he  is  contributing.  Creating  means
nothing  but  bringing  to  birth  in  particular  historic  fact
and  context.  Though  the  creator  begins  by  destroj-
ing,  that  which  he  can  never  destroy  nor  wish  to  destroy
is  the  definite  sensible  existence  upon  which  he  must
knit  his  novelty.  The  true  element  in  everytiiing  false
is  the  fact  that  it  has  existed,  and  has  occupied  a  place
in  the  world  of  particular  things ;  it  seems  just  to  say
that  it  is  the  false  thing  (as  thing,  not  as  false)  that  is
the  other  parent  of  the  new,  in  parentage  giving  up  its
life  to  that  which  replaces  it.  Of  all  fields  of  human
creation  that  of  the  historic  deed  exhibits  at  its  best  this
continuous  descent  of  the  idea  into  the  particular ;  and
creative  historic  action  is  the  supreme  moral  achieve-
ment. The  mystic  in  historic  action  is  termed  the
prophet :  in  a  study  of  the  prophet  we  may  span  the
final  term  of  religion's  work  in  the  world.


CHAPTER  XXXII

THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS

WE  have  seen  through  what  channels  religion  con-
tributes to  the  wealth  of  human  lif  e^  not  creating
anything  for  men,  but  creating  men,  conferring  on
them  power  and  freedom  to  create.  We  have  now  to
take  the  one  important  step  which  remains  to  complete
our  view  of  the  effective  insertion  of  religion  in  the
world :  namely,  to  enquire  how  human  happiness  and
misery  are  affected  by  religion  and  worship.  It  is  the
ultimate  problem  of  practical  religion,  and  indeed  of  all
practical  thought,  to  make  reckoning,  not  with  the
general  principles  on  which  this  world  is  framed  and
furthered,  but  with  the  actual  data  of  fortune^  the  par-
ticular shapes  and  configurations  of  happening,  as  fate
or  providence  pile  them  up  about  us  and  with  appar-
ently random  distribution.  It  is  a  matter  of  the  last
importance  for  any  view  of  life  whether  it  leads  men  to
find  their  welfare  within  the  stream  of  historic  circum-
stance, risk,  accident,  or  outside  of  it  —  even  though
just  outside.  Our  philosophy  and  our  religion  take  one
hue  or  another  according  as  we  regard  our  particular
fortunes  as  matters  of  chance,  whose  evils  we  must
know  how  to  transmute  and  be  superior  to ;  or  as  them-
selves necessary  elements  and  ingredients  of  our  welfare.

I
Mankind  very  early  overcomes  the  illusion  that  his
happiness  is  dependent  upon  the  possession  of  particu-


486  THE  FRUITS  OF  R£U6ION

Ur  objectiye  things  wherein  valaes  lie.^  The  first  use
life  makes  of  reason  is  to  distinguish  between  the  thing
and  the  yalue :  we  are  not  bound  to  honey  in  order  to
get  sweetness ;  nor  are  we  bound  to  sweetness  to  get
savor  for  our  food ;  nor  to  savor  for  satisfaction.  By
a  long  course  of  experience  in  which  our  desires  are  greatly
generalized  and  provided  with  an  immense  gamut  of
substitution,  the  world  of  values  begins  to  float  apart,
like  a  world  of  ghosts,  between  self  and  the  world  of
things,  gaining  embodiment  in  this  object  or  in  that
only  by  a  stroke  of  will.  No  man's  happiness  is  bound
to  the  possession  of  any  particular  thing  unless  he
himself  freely  binds  it  thereto.

And  if  personal  choice  rather  than  necessity  must
determine  the  objects  of  my  pursuit,  it  is  personal  choice
that  must  hold  me  to  any  adopted  pursuit ;  my  whole
relation  to  particular  things,  persons,  objects  beyond
myself,  becomes  arbitrary,  tentative,  liable  to  repudia-
tion. It  is  only  my  will,  not  my  view  of  objective  neces-
sity, that  holds  me  to  any  given  historic  course.  No
particular  thing  or  definable  object  is  necessary  to  my
happiness.  And,  alas,  no  particular  thing  or  definable
object  is  sufficient  for  it.  There  is  a  thorough  absence
of  correspondence  between  values  and  historic  objects.
A  certain  alienation  from  history  results  in  this  way
simply  from  universal  experience.

And,  in  the  main,  this  freedom  from  things  has  been
an  advantage.  So  great  is  the  contingency  in  the
matter  of  historic  success  in  controlling  any  particular

1  The  ontlina  of  the  following  argoment  waa  fint  etated  in  an  addzeei
before  the  Fhi  Beta  Kappa  Society  of  Leland  Stanford  UniTersity,
entitled  ^  The  Neoeaaarj  and  SnfSeient  Conditiona  for  Hnman  Happineaa."
Parte  of  that  addreas  I  haTO  need  in  this  ehapter.


THE  PBOPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  487

object,  80  difficult  the  acquisition  of  assured  power,  so
elusive  these  visible  vessels  of  our  values,  especially
those  more  precious  living  objects  of  love  and  social
pride,  that  no  degree  of  independence  has  been  thought
too  great.  Religion  for  the  most  part  has  found  it  well
not  to  diminish  but  to  emphasize  and  enlarge  this  natural
separation  of  ours  from  the  material  and  particular
prisons  of  our  happiness.

Philosophy,  too,  has  worked  in  the  same  direction ;
reminding  men  to  what  extent  each  one  is  the  maker
of  his  own  happiness,  to  what  extent  all  the  necessary
conditions  for  happiness  lie  within  the  self,  and  not  at
all  out  there  in  history  and  circumstance.  To  be  ^^  phil-
osophical "  is  nothing  other  than  to  practise  this  belief.
Every  age  has  its  seer  who  renews  this  ancient  doctrine. .
We  listen  to  him  and  believe  him:  it  seems  that  aU
assurance  of  happiness  depends  on  finding  it  a  wholly
inward  affair,  and  even  that  all  justice  requires  it.  For
in  so  far  as  welfare  depends  on  external  things,  some  of
its  conditions  will  be  beyond  control :  those  who  succeed
will  succeed  in  part  by  leave  of  circumstance ;  and  there
will  be  those  that  fail  without  fault  of  their  own,  and
without  recovery.  Hence  men  have  always  demanded
of  the  sage,  ^'  Teach  us  to  be  happy,'*  as  if  this  were
indeed  an  art  open  to  every  one  who  can  possess  himself,
let  fortune  be  what  it  may,  an  art  of  the  inner  man,  not
of  external  mastery.

Hear  the  words  of  Maeterlinck,  who  with  inimitable
union  of  power  and  art  has  made  this  doctrine  a  liv-
ing force  in  our  own  time :  ^'  It  is  true,"  he  writes,
''that  on  certain  external  events  our  influence  is  of  the
feeblest ;  but  we  have  all-powerful  action  on  that  which


488  THE  FRUITS  OF  REUGION

these  events  shall  become  in  ourselTes.  Nothing  befalls
OS  that  is  not  of  the  natore  of  ooraelyes.  The  event
in  itself  is  pure  water  that  flows  from  the  pitcher  of
fate,  and  seldom  has  it  either  sayonr,  or  perfume,  or
colour.  But  even  as  the  soul  may  be  wh^ein  it  seeks
shelter,  so  will  the  event  become,  joyous  or  sad,  tender
or  hateful,  deadly  or  quick  with  life.  I  do  not  pretoid
that  destiny  is  just.  (But)  there  is  nothing  in  the  world
more  just  than  happinessi  nothing  that  will  more  faith-
fully adopt  the  form  of  our  soul,  or  so  carefully  fill  the
space  that  our  wisdom  flings  open.*'^  The  controlling
conditions  of  wel&re  lie  within,  and  not  in  that  current
of  outer  event,  the  current  of  history,  or  as  Maeterlinck
calls  it,  of  destiny.

And  have  we  not  in  our  own  analysis  of  value  con-
cluded that  worth  is  conferred  on  things,  not  by  their
intrinsic  qualities,  but  by  that  with  which  we  think  them?
It  is  the  idea  that  creates  what  beauty,  what  desirability
of  any  kind,  things  seem  to  possess ;  it  is  not  in  their
power  to  rob  us  of  this,  —  it  is  not  in  their  power  to
make  or  mar  our  happiness.  Happiness,  may  we  say,
is  the  idea  of  the  Whole  in  unhindered  operation  upon
experience.  He  who  knows  God  knows  how  to  be
happy  in  this  world,  having  in  himself  both  the  source
of  positive  value  and  that  by  which  all  pain  can  be
transmuted.

We  tend,  I  say,  to  believe  such  doctrines  as  these ;
it  seems  that  we  must  believe  them,  or  condemn  the
world.  On  the  other  hand,  we  feel  uneasy  under  them.
They  seem  to  leave  us  without  a  full  and  sufficient

1  Wisdom  and  Detiiny,  tr.  A.  Satro,  pp.  28, 29,  etc.


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  489

warrant  for  historic  action  and  effort.  These  are,  after
all,  stoical  doctrines  at  heart;  the  stoic  would  have
us  sufficient  in  ourselves :  and  yet,  if  we  examine  the
sources  of  his  strength  we  shall  find  that  the  stoic  sage
is  depending  upon  a  sense  of  intimate  kinship  with  that
very  destiny  to  which  he  professes  himself  superior.
'^  Nothing  for  me  is  too  early  or  too  late,  0  Universe,
which  is  in  time  for  Thee."  That  which  makes  it
possible  for  such  a  thinker  to  open  himself  to  affection
and  to  experience  is  a  magnificent  faith  in  something
outside  himself.  Such  a  shut-in-ness  as  can  encounter
no  solidity  of  value  in  the  world  beyond,  and  is  without
assurance  of  any  other  victory  than  that  of  its  own
poise  or  of  its  own  value-creations  is  necessarily  without
power  of  self-abandonment.  The  pride  of  creatorship
in  this  realm  of  values,  which  is  indeed  the  highest
prerogative  of  our  individual  selfhood,  may  turn  to  the
veriest  curse  at  the  moment  when  the  goods  in  our
hands  appear  to  us  as  nothing  hut  our  own  creations.
Creation  is  a  solitary  business;  we  are  therefore  not
surprised  to  find  here  and  there  a  soul,  lofty  in  this
citadel  of  inner  values,  smitten  with  the  horror  of
imprisonment  in  its  own  freedom,  ready  to  accept  any
touch  of  fate,  ready  to  cry  out,  ^^  Strike,  sacred  Reality,"
if  it  may  but  regain  the  sense  of  validity  outside.

Self-sufficient  we  cannot  be.  And  this  truth  our
theory  of  value  has  taken  into  account.  For  that
whole-idea  cannot  be  had  by  any  but  the  completest
exposure  to  the  world  of  objects;  nor  can  the  vigor
and  integrity  of  that  idea  be  maintained  by  any  self-
enclosed  determination  of  the  will,  but  only  by  resort-
ing to  its  source  in  experience. Nevertheless,  the  con-


490  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

ditions  for  happiness  do  still  lie  outside  histoiy,  do  they
not  ?  The  current  of  particular  event  has  no  deeisive
importance  for  our  welfare.  We  love  life ;  but  we  love
it  as  second-best,  as  a  region  wherein  the  idea  meets
resistance.  The  mystic  has  found  his  absolute  object
by  help  of  negation  after  negation ;  he  is  free  not  indeed
from  reality,  but  from  all  particulars ;  he  waits  as  one
whose  chief  good  is  delayed  —  as  one  reconciled  widi
Qod,  and  also  as  a  fruitful  and  useful  citizen,  but  as
one  who  has  no  absolute  treasures  laid  up  here  where
moth  and  rust  corrupt,  and  where  the  thieves  of  cir-
cumstance break  through  and  steal.  What  has  our
mystic,  then,  to  do  with  fortune  ?

II

In  order  to  answer  this  question,  we  shall  have  to
develop  a  stage  further  our  account  of  the  inner  nature
of  happiness.  Happiness  we  know  has  its  quantitative
variation :  it  increases  with  the  body  of  idea  we  can
bring  to  bear  on  any  subject ;  it  is  in  large  part  a  mat-
ter of  horizon.  The  happy  man  in  any  situation  is  the
man  to  whom  that  situation  is  no  cave,  who  in  the  midst
of  it  can  hold  his  broader  bearings,  bringing  to  it  the
quiet  sense  of  affairs  and,  in  the  end,  of  eternity.  The
institution  in  which  I  am  a  conscious  factor ;  the  state,
which  flings  over  a  petty  personal  existence  a  large
dome,  a  dome  of  concrete  inclusiveness  and  eternity,
any  totality  of  which  I  form  an  actual  part,  the  crowd
in  which  I  am  able  to  lose  myself,  even  the  sense  of  my
own  insignificance  as  a  forgotten  cog  in  the  wheels
of  universal  event  —  all  of  these  add  to  the  quantity  of
my  happiness. But  while  happiness  may  be  much  or


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  491

little,  there  is  here  no  account  of  unhappiness,  which
is  a  matter  of  quality  not  of  quantity  of  experience.  It
is  the  question  of  unhappiness  that  we  have  now  to
face.

On  its  inner  side,  I  think  we  must  say  of  unhappiness
that  it  is  in  all  cases  a  matter  of  conscious  conflict,  that
is,  of  divided  attention  or  distraction.  I  am  unhappy
whenever  my  idea  is  torn  between  two  or  more  objects
that  claim  it.  For  instance,  he  who  is  unable  to  bury
himself  in  anything  because  of  the  simultaneous
demands  of  everything  else,  is  clearly  in  so  far  simply
unhappy.  If  guilt  causes  unhappiness,  it  is  through  the
disruption  of  selfhood  caused  by  the  unbanishable  call
of  ignored  obligations.  If  sorrow  is  unhappy  sorrow,
it  is  because  of  some  persistent  conflict,  as  between  a
beloved  past  and  the  insistent  present  objects  of  atten-
tion, the  unwelcome  necessity  perhaps  of  living  on  and
away  from  that  past.  And  even  of  physical  pain ;  if  it
is  able  to  suspend  happiness  for  a  moment,  it  is  because
it  half  succeeds  in  pinning  consciousness  within  the
focus  of  its  own  event.  More  than  half  the  pain  of
pain  is  the  imprisonment  of  personality,  and  the  unequal
struggle  of  the  spirit  to  get  free  and  be  itself.  Unhap-
piness is  dividedness  of  mind.

And  this  notion  of  unhappiness  is  corroborated  by
the  fact  that  whatever  wipes  out  our  fragmentation  and
induces  in  us  a  wholeness  of  attack  gives  back  the
happiness  which  is  continually  slipping  from  our  grasp.
Such,  in  general,  is  the  function  of  recreation  and  art,
of  worship  and  all  its  partial  analogues,  so  far  as  they
bear  directly  on  happiness,  not  merely  to  enhance  our
idea,  but  to  reunite  its  fragments. Art  instils  into  us


482  THE  FRUITS  OF  REU6I0N

its  own  unity;  and  especially  music,  which  combines
the  movement  of  a  restless  will  with  the  peace  of  a
completed  totality.  It  matters  not  how  we  regain  our
singleness  of  thrust  —  whether  by  the  ascent  of  a  hill,
or  in  prayer,  or  through  a  book  or  a  human  being :  the
ground  of  the  blessedness  of  such  a  moment,  and  of
the  moments  of  action  that  issue  from  its  canopy,  Ues
in  its  power  to  recall  the  divergent  channels  of  our
attention  into  unity,  to  ^^  make  us  whole ''  from  center
to  limit  of  our  mental  range,  for  the  purposes  of  the
next  undertaking.  Psychologically  speaking,  happiness
may  now  be  described  as  the  continuous  undivided
consent  of  my  whole-idea  to  the  experience  or  activity
at  hand ;  and  the  empirical  mark  of  happiness  is  concen-
tration, or  enthusiasm  of  action.  To  the  happy  man,
things  and  deeds  appear  worth  while ;  his  actions  meet
the  mark,  and  rebound  to  enhance  his  energy  for  the
next  stroke ;  whereas  those  of  the  unhappy  man  strike,
if  at  all,  like  spent  bullets,  or  shatter,  and  contribute
nothing  to  his  self-continuance.  Whatever  restores
wholeness  in  action  restores  happiness.

Happiness,  on  this  showing,  does  certainly  not  depend
immediately  on  external  things  at  all,  but  upon  our  own
iuward  mode  of  dealing  with  them.  If  it  were  within
our  power  to  throw  the  whole  force  of  our  idea,  at  will,
upon  any  object :  there  could  be  no  content  of  experi-
ence however  hideous,  or  painful,  or  spiritually  grievous,
which  could  make  us  unhappy.  But  is  it  possible,  or
even  conceivable,  that  attention  could  be  so  brought
within  the  will?  There  is  something  paradoxical  even
in  such  a  supposition. For  if  it  were  true,  then  no


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  403

event  of  failure  could  dethrone  any  one's  happiness;
we  should  be  unable  to  attach  unlimited  importance  to
the  outcome  of  any  finite  enterprise;  that  is^  we  should
be  unable  to  g^ve  whole-hearted  attention  to  the  enter-
prise ;  and  hence,  by  hypothesis,  we  should  be  unhappy.
For  we  can  give  ourselves  with  but  half  a  will  to  under-
takings whose  failure  can  alter  no  real  value.  It  seems
a  condition  of  happiness  that  happiness  should  be
destroyable  by  failure ;  otherwise  we  could  hardly  treat
any  present  task  as  worth  the  effort  of  our  whole  will.
The  type  of  attention  requisite  for  happiness  seems  to
depend  on  a  belief  during  the  course  of  any  effort  that
the  object  thereof  is  worth  my  whole  devotion  :  and  I
cannot  at  the  end  of  such  effort,  if  I  fail,  thereupon
repent  my  belief  or  change  it.  There  is  some  sophistry
well  known  to  proverb  and  fable  in  allowing  defeat  to
contradict  the  theory  of  the  endeavor — namely,  that  the
grapes  were  really  worth  having.  Defeat,  then,  must
necessarily  split  attention,  leave  me  divided  between
this  fact  to  which  I  must  attend  because  it  is  the  pres-
ent reality,  and  that  not-present  object  to  which  my
whole  effort  and  belief  had  prepared  me  to  attend.
Defeat  must  necessarily  split  attention  and  create  unhap-
piness,  unless  in  some  way  it  is  possible,  in  the  pursuit
of  definite  ends,  to  combine  an  unlimited  attachment
with  an  unlimited  detachment.

Ill

That  such  paradoxical  attitude  is  possible  is  indeed
suggested  to  us  by  certain  familiar  facts  of  experience.
Something  like  a  union  of  perfect  attachment  with
perfect  detachment  does  exist  in  the  consciousness  of  the


4M  THE  FRUnS  OF  RELIGION

good  sportsnuuiy  or  of  the  good  ezperimentalist.  To
the  good  sportannaUf  defeat  in  any  contest  must  not
leave  bittemeas  bdiind,  nor  either  diminiah  the  entire
enthoaiasm  for  the  next  attempt.  As  for  the  good
experimentalist,  his  failures  become  sources  of  satisfac-
tion to  him  just  in  proportion  as  he  has  spent  eveiy
effort  to  make  them  succeed :  for  the  withholding  of
any  effort  leayes  it  uncertain  whether  or  not  the  fiulure
is  a  genuine  failure,  and  need  not  be  tried  again ;  here,
perfection  of  attachment  is  evidently  a  condition  for
completeness  of  detachment.  And  we  can  see,  also,
that  these  attitudes  are  largely  applicable  to  fortune
generally.  To  some  measure,  the  happiness  of  life
depends  upon  a  perfection  of  the  game  spirit :  to  ^^  get
into  the  game*'  accepting  its  rules  and  its  risks,  has
been  g^ven  as  the  best  available  rule  for  human  hap-
piness. Something  hypothetical  or  even  histrionic
seems  to  enter  into  our  conduct  with  this  temper ;  we
assure  ourselves  that  we  are  staking  our  whole  souls
on  this  issue  or  that,  but  we  know  in  our  hearts  that
we  are  not;  we  know  that  defeat,  if  it  comes  as  it
always  may,  will  not  destroy  our  integrity  of  spirit,
and  therewith  our  happiness.

So  much  the  wisdom  of  life  suggests;  and  it  leaves
us  indeed  external  to  history,  superior  to  it,  even  in  a
relation  of  moral  irony  toward  it.  We  play  as  if  our
treasure  were  there,  knowing  that  it  is  not;  and  we
must  so  play,  or  lose  even  that  happiness  which,  in
striving,  we  have.  Is  this  a  satisfactory  attitude  toward
history  ?  Is  drama,  play,  a  certain  inward  duplicity  in
our  enthusiasms,  tolerable  on  the  wfiole,  as  perhaps  it
may  be  tolerable  in  tentative  fragments  of  living? Is


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  4d5

^Hhe  game''  our  last  adjustment  to  destiny?  Is  it
not  rather  itself  a  division  of  mind,  and  a  fundamental
unhappiness ;  an  alienation,  even  though  a  subtle  one,
from  the  world  in  which  we  must  perforce  act,  from  the
particular  to  which  we  must  perforce  attend  ?

The  modern  forms  of  stoical  doctrine  exhaust  all
ingenuity  to  overcome  this  breach  and  to  reunite  with
active  history  the  soul  which  they  have  fundamentally
detached  therefrom.  They  assure  us  that  welfare  lies
in  the  pursuit,  not  in  the  winning ;  from  which  it  follows
that  we  must  mightily  pursue  and  act  even  though
nothing  is  to  be  captured.  Or  we  are  shown  that  the
world  of  particulars  and  accidents  is  here  to  produce  in
us  the  moral  temper,  to  develop  the  soul :  it  is,  as  Fichte
would  have  it,  the  externalized  material  of  our  duty  —
whence  we  must  strenuously  open  ourselves  to  experi-
ence for  the  love  of  our  character,  regardless  of  empirical
outcome.  Or,  after  all,  the  great  interest  is  just  knowl-
edge and  consciousness  itself,  which  can  never  be  sub*
served  by  any  withdrawal  from  facts  nor  injured  in
their  untowardness.  This  is  Maeterlinck's  point  of
view,  and  it  seems  to  me  the  best  possible  statement  of
the  case :  '^  To  the  sage,  truth  can  never  be  bitter.  He
finds  more  pleasure  in  the  attempt  to  understand  that
which  is,  than  in  the  attempt  to  believe  that  which  he
desires.  There  is  no  gain  in  shutting  out  the  world,
though  it  be  with  walls  of  righteousness."  Conscious-
ness, self-knowledge,  knowledge  of  man  and  of  reality,
—  this  is  the  great  result  of  our  insertion  in  history —
nothing  else  matters.  '^  Destiny  has  only  the  weapons
we  give  her. She  is  neither  just  nor  unjust,  nor  does


496  THE  FRUITS  OF  BELI6I0N

it  lie  in  her  province  to  deliver  sentence  on  man.  She
vhom  we  taJce  to  be  goddess  is  a  disguised  messenger
onlj,  come  very  simply  to  warn  us,  on  certain  days  of
our  life  that  the  hour  has  sounded  at  last  when  we
needs  must  judge  ourselves/'  In  all  the  literature  of
Stoicism  there  is  no  finer  conception  than  this  of  the
way  in  which  the  disenfranchised  soul  is  yet  held  in
whole-hearted  attachment  to  the  detail  of  fortune.

But  the  ruses  are  not  successful ;  the  will  cannot  thua
be  decoyed  into  unreserved  espousal  of  the  pursuits  of
life.  The  world  of  common  action  having  no  part  in
the  absolute  end,  being  there  as  a  means  only,  becomes
touched  with  a  sense  of  incomplete  reality  or  illusoriness,
such  ^fi  we  discern  in  the  atmosphere  of  Maeterlinck's
earlier  writings.  It  fails  to  hold  that  concentrated
allegiance  of  the  idea  which  is  necessary  to  happiness.
The  inadequacy  of  the  stoical  principle  even  in  its  best
forms  has  impressed  itself  on  our  racial  instinct,  and
the  world  generally  has  taken  refuge  in  another  prin-
ciple, that  of  altruism^  or  mcarioua  happiness.  Success
there  must  be,  but  it  need  not  be  my  success :  mastery
of  fortune  there  must  be,  but  it  need  not  be  my  mastery.
Let  me  but  know  or  believe  in  some  power  that  is  con-
trolling or  shall  control  physical  event  and  history ;  then
the  event  begins  to  have  a  meaning :  and  I  can  find  my
happiness  in  the  assured  victory  of  that  power,  though
free  as  any  stoic  from  the  need  of  victory  in  my  own
person.  History  has  entered  into  the  absolute  goal  of
things  as  a  member ;  and  all  history  thereby  becomes
contributory  and  important.


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  497

IV

The  language  of  the  altruistic  principle  is  familiar  to
us.  It  is  the  language  at  once  of  resignation  and  hope.
It  is  the  language  of  the  patriot :  ^^  I  may  f ail^  but  the
idea  of  liberty  must  conquer '' ;  '^  This  measure  of  mine
may  be  defeated,  but  the  policy  or  cause  must  triumph."
It  is  often  the  language  of  the  scientist;  or  again  of
the  parent  who  regains  in  his  sons  the  hope  for  all  that
he  has  not  himself  accomplished.  Such  vicarious  hap-
piness must  be,  in  fact,  the  greater  part  of  the  actual
joy  of  any  living  man ;  for  no  one  can  reach  maturity
without  identifying  his  happiness  to  some  extent  with
the  welfare  of  his  friend,  the  success  of  his  party,  or
the  establishment  of  his  opinion,  quite  apart  from  any
prosperity  of  his  own.  The  scope  of  this  principle  is
universal ;  and  taken  together  with  the  prevalent  belief
that  all  cosmic  affairs  are  so  connected  that  they  form
a  single  history  in  which  all  can  participate,  it  offers  a
plausible  solution  of  our  dilemma — to  many  minds,  the
only  possible  solution.  For  in  such  an  interconnected
world  as  this,  every  being  must  lie  open  to  every  other :
vicarious  joy  can  be  no  more  actual  than  vicarious  suf-
fering, so  long  as  we  take  into  our  survey  anything  less
than  the  whole  movement  of  life.  The  same  knowledge
or  sympathy  that  brings  in  upon  me  the  joy  of  remote
triumph  brings  in  also  the  more  pungent  distress  of  the
many  near  defeats.  In  the  race  there  can  be  no  per*
f ection  till  all  are  perfect,  no  complete  happiness  till  all
are  happy.  What  sure  triumph,  therefore,  can  there
be  for  any  except  in  the  common  end,  indefinitely  dis-
tant, the  end  wherein  all  triumph ;  and  what  present


48B  THE  FRUITS  OF  REU6IOK

happiness  can  there  be  save  in  that  consummate  vica*
riousness  of  interest  which  makes  the  goal  of  all  history
the  justification  for  aU  that  now  is  ?

This  principle  has  its  religions  heightening ;  it  is  even
the  sum  total  of  what  many  understand  by  religion.
Thy  will  be  done :  is  not  this  the  act  wherein  die  indi-
Tidual  definitely  identifies  his  own  success  with  the
success  of  the  Highest,  rising  thereby  superior  to  his
own  fortunes  without  being  dissevered  from  whole-
hearted historic  action?

And  it  has  also  its  philosophical  expression.  It  seems
to  me  that  Royce  has  brought  this  principle  of  altruism
to  its  philosophic  fulfilment.  It  is  indeed  impossible
to  seize  fragments  from  a  thought  so  vast  and  organic
as  his  without  danger  of  misrepresenting  it;  but  I
must  venture  to  quote  from  a  chapter  wherein,  dealing
with  our  interminable  struggle  against  the  evils  of  our
finite  existence,  Royce  summarizes  the  conditions  which
may  secure  to  us  such  happiness  as  we  can  certainly
command.

'^  In  all  this  my  own  struggle  with  evil,  wherein  lies
my  comfort?  I  answer,  my  true  comfort  can  never  lie
in  my  temporal  attainment  of  my  goal.  For  it  is  my
first  business,  as  a  moral  agent,  and  as  a  servant  of  Grod,
to  set  before  myself  a  goal  that,  in  time,  simply  cannot
be  attained.  .  .  .  Wherein,  then,  can  comfort  truly  be
found  ?  I  reply.  In  the  consciousness,  first,  that  the  ideal
sorrows  of  our  finitude  are  identically  God's  own  sor-
rows .  .  •  and  in  the  assurance,  secondly,  that  God's
fulfilment  in  the  eternal  order  is  to  be  won  through  the
very  bitterness  of  tribulation  .  .  .  through  this,  my
tribulation.'' And  as  for  the  less  noble  ills  that  ^'seem


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  490

not  to  have^  for  our  present  consciousness,  any  ideal
meaning  •  •  •  Our  comfort  here  lies  in  knowing  that
in  all  this  life  ideals  are  sought,  with  incompleteness
and  with  sorrow,  but  with  the  assurance  of  the  divine
triumph  in  Eternity  lighting  up  the  whole."  ^

Thus  to  conceive  my  finite  experience  sub  specie
ceternitatis  is  not  merely  an  emancipation  from  evil,  it
is  our  essential  and  positive  achievement  of  happiness.
It  is  the  experience  in  which  ^^  our  temporal  life  is  even
now  the  expression  of  the  eternal  triumph  " ;  and  through
this  act  of  knowing  I  become  an  actual  partaker  in  that
triumph.  It  is  this  conception  of  the  eternal  which
makes  a  vicarious  happiness  possible :  and  it  is  vicarious,
in  so  far  as  my  present  relation  to  that  will  is  one  of
loyalty  primarily,  not  of  comprehension;  my  present
attitude  to  fortune,  one  of  resignation,  not  of  control.
What  this  eternal  triumph  is,  I  do  not  know;  I  only
know  that  it  is  real:  and  this,  for  Boyce,  is  enough.
*^  Strengthened  by  that  knowledge,  we  can  win  the  most
enduring  of  temporal  joys,  the  consciousness  that  makes
us  delight  to  share  the  world's  grave  glories  and  to  take
part  in  its  divine  sorrows.''


These  truths  do  deeply  touch  the  original  springs  of
human  happiness.  Such  knowledge  of  the  eternal  Pur-
pose and  loyalty  to  it  must  be  a  great  part  of  any  real
welfare.  Yicariousness  of  mind  is  wholly  necessary  to
happiness ;  ensuring  the  widest  scope  of  that  idea-world
whereby  all  things  must  be  appreciated  that  are  appre-
ciated. Have  we  not  already  found  in  altruism  the

1  The  World  Aod  the  IndiTidnal,  toL  ii,  pp.  407  ff.


600  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

largest  possible  contribution  to  personal  welfare ;  ^  and
in  companionship  the  experience  which  can  transmute
all  pain  V  Vicariousness  is  wholly  necessary ;  and  were
it  not  for  that  fatal  separation  from  one's  own  immedi-
ate concerns,  might  be  regarded  as  sufficient.  But  the
vicarious  principle  cannot  heal  this  division  ;  hence  it  is
not  final.

For  vicarious  happiness  is,  by  its  nature,  independent
(or  relatively  independent)  of  my  personal  success  in
any  present  undertaking.  So  far  from  supplying  an
adequate  motive  for  treating  this  present  business  as  of
infinite  importance,  it  is  essentially  a  refuge  from  the
contingencies  of  that  business.  It  does  not  remove  nor
evade  misfortune ;  but  when  misfortune  comes,  it  relieves
it  by  distributing  the  shock  through  the  whole  range  of
my  vicarious  interests.  He  who  loves  the  whole  has
resources  beyond  himself  in  his  own  evil  hour.  But
the  question  of  that  particular  evil  is  not  met ;  one  is
simply  lifted  above  it  or  borne  through  it  by  his  attach-
ment in  the  absolute.  One  is  consoled,  but  not  restored
to  confidence  in  the  worth  of  his  own  action.  Our  prin-
ciple has  no  launching  powers ;  its  attitude  toward  evil
and  misfortune  is  essentially  passive :  it  is  always  one  of
comfort  after  the  fact,  never  of  adoption  before  the  fact.

But  surely  we  have  not  attained  human  manhood
with  reference  to  the  ills  of  our  destiny  until  we  can  go
to  meet  them,  instead  of  waiting  in  philosophic  discom-
fort for  them  to  surprise  us.  He  whose  deed  is  dragged
from  him  is  not  owner  of  that  deed ;  and  he  who  must
pass  out  of  his  own  conscious  will  for  comfort,  cannot
wholly  return  to  this  same  conscious  will  for  the  coun-

1  Chapter  xi,  p.  136.  '  Chapter  xv,  p.  222  ff.


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  601

sels  of  positive  action.  No  man^  I  venture  to  say,  can
be  wholly  happy  in  defeat  unless  he  foreknows  and
goes  to  it^  not  as  Napoleon  to  his  island^  but  as  Socrates
to  his  death.  Not  resignation,  but  renunciatiorif  is
the  greatest  and  last  of  the  virtues  in  presence  of  the
ultimate  enemies  of  our  fortunes.  And  not  blank  renun-
ciation, but  renunciation  made  significant  by  some
consciously  known  purpose  which  in  the  midst  of  defeat
is  not  defeated.  Only  thus  can  the  will  return  whole-
heartedly to  the  charge.  No  vicarious  or  indirect
mediation  can  supply  me  with  the  necessary  integrity
of  interest  in  this  present  undertaking.  In  short,  no
man  can  be  happy,  nor  ought  to  be,  without  a  conscious
control  of  his  own  fortune ;  without  a  fundamental  and
necessary  success  of  his  own  in  dealing  with  the  world
of  objects  beyond  him.

This  is  a  hard  saying:  for  it  demands  what  both
altruism  and  stoicism  have  assumed  to  be  impossible,  a
power  over  facts  even  in  the  midst  of  our  finite  circum-
stances. Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  we  must  either
make  this  requirement,  or  abandon  the  attempt  to  find
happiness  in  the  world.  This  latter  course  is  always
open  to  us,  and  is  virtually  adopted  by  most ;  but  at  a
gpreater  cost  than  they  think,  that  of  relinquishing  the
hold  of  religion  upon  human  history.

Altruism,  not  less  than  stoicism,  leaves  me  unsure  of
the  worth  of  my  present  act  and  purpose :  that  present
act  is  liable  to  be  defeated  by  an  event,  which  even
though  it  reveal  to  me  the  will  of  God  or  my  own
deeper  will,  must  hold  over  my  undertaking  a  shadow
of  invalidity.  I  can  never  taste  the  quality  of  genuine
happiness,  namely,  perfect  belief  in  and  devotion  to


602  THE  FRUITS  OF  REUGION

my  own  undertaking.  I  am  a  necessaiilj  diminished
and  divided  being :  I  am  to  act,  but  another  than  I  is
to  succeed.  And  not  less  than  in  the  case  of  stoicism
does  such  an  attitude  impose  upon  myself  and  upon  my
world,  in  time,  an  air  of  unreality.  For  while  God  and
Nature  first  become  real  to  me  because  they  determine
me ;  they  can  only  remain  real,  in  so  far  as  I  also  can
successfully  determine  them,  and  as  I  intend.  Men's
mental  horizons  always  tend  to  shrink  beneath  what
their  passive  experience  shows  them  as  real ;  they
tend  to  coincidence  with  the  sphere  of  their  conscious
efficiency.  Religions  of  nature  and  of  humanity  appeal
to  men  chiefly  because  here  are  purposes  whose  mean-
ing we  think  we  can  share,  and  effectively  promote,
even  as  we  intend.  The  earth  is  real  to  me  in  part
because  it  resists  me ;  in  part  because  it  yields  to  me
and  I  can  recognize  my  own  works  in  solid  rock.  Were
there  no  sure  succeeding  there,  earth  and  I  would  speed-
ily become  unreal  to  each  other.  Reality  must  be
[defined  as  the  region  wherein  I  can  identify  my  happi-
[ness  with  my  own  success  ;  not  alone  with  the  success
of  another.

Indeed,  I  can  only  know  and  understand  an  Other  in
so  far  as  our  object-worlds,  and  our  objective  goods  like-
wise, are  the  same :  hence,  in  whatever  sense  God  is  to
triumph  in  history,  in  that  same  sense  must  I  triumph
also.  In  some  degree,  as  we  have  seen,  every  soul  of
us  knows  the  whole,  and  feels  in  his  own  limbs  the  thud
and  the  impulse  of  the  engines  of  reality :  it  must  be
possible,  then,  for  our  wills,  to  the  same  degree,  to  con-
tain the  will  of  the  universe.  We  must  be  able  to  reach
a  kind  of  maturity  in  respect  to  God  himself,  in  which


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  503

we  are  ready  to  assume  the  burden  not  only  of  omnis-
cience—  as  we  continually  do  —  but  also  of  omnipo-
tence, with  regard  to  some  fragment,  however  minute,  of
the  historical  work  of  the  universe.  In  such  a  moment
the  act  which  we  should  utter  would  be  known  as  a  com-
pletely real  act;  and  since  we  cannot  separate  our  own
reality  from  the  reality  either  of  our  objects,  or  of  our
deeds  —  we  too  become  for  the  first  time  completely
real.

To  require  this  of  the  world  is  to  require  what  we
may  call  the  prophetic  consciousness.  By  the  pro-
phetic consciousness  I  do  not  mean  a  knowledge  that
something  is  to  happen  in  the  future,  accomplished  by
forces  beyond  myself:  I  mean  a  knowledge  that  this
act  of  mine  which  I  now  utter  is  to  succeed  and  hold
its  place  in  history.  It  is  an  assurance  of  the  future
and  of  all  time  as  determined  by  my  own  individual
will,  embodied  in  my  present  action.  It  is  a  power
which  knows  itself  to  be  such,  and  justly  measures  its
own  scope.  I  do  not  say  as  yet  that  an  assurance  like
this  is  possible ;  still  less  that  it  has  ever  been  attained :
I  say  only  that  it  is  necessary  for  happiness  —  that  with-
out it  this  region  of  historical  fact  must  stand  condemned
as  outside  the  sphere  of  either  justice  or  reality.  Apart
from  the  possibility  of  prophetic  consciousness,  this
region  must  be  to  our  wills  a  '^  realm  of  chance "  —
just  such  a  realm  as  Hegel  and  Boyce  and  Howison
agree  with  James  in  accepting  —  impenetrable  to  the
Spirit,  and  ultimately  repellent  to  the  Spirit ;  wherein,
therefore,  the  Spirit  can  never  be  whoUy  naturalized
and  at  one  with  its  own  existence.


504  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

VI

If  this  demand  for  prophetic  consciousness  seems
preposterous,  it  is  chiefly,  I  must  think,  because  our
various  philosophies  of  life  have  persuaded  us  of  its
impossibility ;  and  we  will  be  reconciled,  even  though
half-heartedly,  with  what  is  attainable — a  bowing-
down  which  is  the  modern  form  of  devil  worship.
Further,  the  love  of  power,  of  which  this  prophetic
consciousness  is  but  a  sublimation,  is  associated  in
theory  with  the  ruthless,  the  violent,  the  competitive,
the  relentlessly  self-assertive,  as  in  the  philosophies
of  Hobbes  and  Nietzsche.  Only  a  few  can  command
success  of  this  sort ;  and  that  at  such  moral  cost  that
we  repudiate  the  ideal,  and  seek  our  happiness  in  some
other  faculty.  But  may  it  not  be  that  this  instinctive
love  of  power  which  is  in  every  human  creature  needs
only  to  be  raised  to  the  dignity  of  prophecy  to  lose
both  its  cruelty  and  its  incredibility  ?  May  it  not  be
that  these  philosophers  of  the  Wille  zur  Macht  have
but  labored  to  preserve  to  us  our  confidence  in  the  chief
moral  element  of  our  nature  ?

For  when  we  consider  the  facts  of  life,  such  an  expe-
rience as  this,  a  knowledge  of  necessary  historic  com-
mand of  fortune,  is  neither  hypothetical  nor  unknown,
nor  yet  confined  to  the  careers  of  violence.  Moments
of  world-shaping  prophecy  are  indeed  rare  enough  in  the
records,  even  if  the  records  are  to  be  believed.  And
yet  it  is  not  meaningless  that  men  whom  we  otherwise
respect  have,  in  certain  critical  passes  of  their  experi-
ence, claimed  this  for  themselves  ;  they  have  left  it  at
least  ideally  open  to  our  attainment. Do  we  not  recall


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  606

utterances  of  Ptah  Hotep,  of  Socrates,  of  Alexander,
of  Dante,  Spinoza,  Montesquieu,  Hugo,  Froebel,  Pitt^
Browning,  Disraeli,  sent  out  in  the  teeth  of  hostile  cir-
cumstances, asserting  a  sense  of  invincibleness  in  their
historic  position  ?  There  are  false  prophets  also ;  but
we  ask  only  whether  there  be  any  true  ones.  And  we
have  not  to  depend  on  the  reports,  perhaps  the  boasts,
of  others'  experiences.  We  may  assume  that  whenever
a  supreme  type  of  experience  is  possible  to  human
nature,  it  will  have  numerous  analogues  and  anticipa-
tions scattered  throughout  our  common  experiences.
If  the  prophetic  consciousness  is  possible,  it  will  not  be
left  without  a  witness  here.

I  am  inclined  to  think,  as  I  examine  our  ordinary
commerce  with  physical  &cts  and  with  social  partic-
ulars  such  as  history  is  made  of,  that  our  consciousness
of  command  is  the  rule,  while  tentativeness  and  defeat
are  the  exceptions.  Skill  is  possible  in  a  thousand
ways ;  and  skill  is  an  experimental  dealing  with  facts
which  has  reached  the  point  of  assurance.  Active  life,
like  the  life  of  thought,  is  built  on  the  basis  of  concrete
certainty.  Our  conscious  enterprise  is  three-fourths
experiment ;  but  it  steps  out  from  a  vast  substratum  of
the  indubitable.  If  our  bodily  existence  is  itself  a
kind  of  instantaneous  and  perfect  command  over  a
limited  range  of  physical  nature,  our  active  existence
has  a  like  range  of  primitive  certainty  which  defines  the
level  of  the  species.  A  man  is  he  who  can  infallibly
exercise  or  acquire  a  certain  minimum  of  assured  power
over  facts,  in  work  and  speecH  and  habit;  man  is
defined  by  a  certain  high  level  of  assumable  power.
The  child  must  be  taught  to  doubt,  not  to  be  confident


506  THE  FRUITS  OF  R£UGION


of  success ;  the  proud  prophetic  attitude  is  the  native
air  of  our  existence,  and  can  no  more  be  wholly  can-
celled by  our  numerous  defeats  than  can  our  consdou^-
ness  of  deity.

But  our  more  significant  prophetic  experiences  lie  on
the  other  side  of  experiment ;  they  come  to  us  as  skill
assimilates  itself  to  nature,  and  imitates  the  fundamen-
tal certainty  with  which  it  fuses.  A  well-defined  and
limited  consciousness  of  power  seems  to  me  to  be  the
essential  fruit  of  mature  self-knowledge.  May  not  an
orator  command  his  audience,  and  know  that  he  must
do  so,  as  simply  as  a  child  conmiands  the  ear  of  a  parent?
In  such  powers  we^all  share.  For  all  language,  and  all
expression  of  every  kind,  is  just  such  a  process  of  mak-
ing historic  and  actual  certain  experiences  which  at  first
are  but  private  meanings  of  my  own :  and  in  so  far  as
I  can  be  sure  that  these  private  meaningrs  are  indeed
universally  valid,  I  may  undertake  with  certainty  to
utter  them.  If  I  know,  as  I  do,  that  my  own  experi-
ence of  physical  nature  is  an  experience  universal  and
sharable^  it  may  be  that  beliefs,  emotions,  reasonings,
principles,  should  appear  to  me  with  a  like  universality.
And  it  is  not  uncommon  to  see  men  so  convinced  of  this
necessary  acceptance  of  their  idea  that  they  are  willing
to  persist  in  uttering  it  in  face  of  universal  repudiation,
sure  at  the  same  time  that  they  know  their  fellows
better  than  they  know  themselves.  Often  we  find  our
poets  dealing  in  just  such  generous  prophetic  insistence
with  our  common  lives,  knowing  that  what  they  express
ia  no  private  sentiment,  but  the  typical  and  universal
sense  of  man.  We  remember,  among  others,  the
^^  Non  omnis  moriar ''  of  Horace ;  and  of  Shakespeare,


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  607

*^  Tet  do  thy  worst,  old  Time." And  this  of  Francis
Thompson,

'*  I  hang  *mid  men  my  needless  head,
And  my  fruit  is  dreams,  as  theirs  is  bread  :
The  goodly  men  and  the  san-haxed  sleeper
Time  shall  reap;  but  after  the  reaper
The  world  shall  glean  of  me,  me  the  sleeper  1 "

The  more  visible  modes  of  prophecy,  however,  appear
in  those  regions  of  experience  where  human  happiness
reaches  its  common  height,  namely  in  the  more  intimate
personal  relationships.  No  one  is  lover  who  does  not
prophesy:  and  this  prophecy  reaches  its  summit  in
the  most  presumptuous  of  all  commands,  ^'  Follow  me/'
In  all  friendship  we  say  we  have  the  debt  of  loyalty,
and  find  our  happiness  in  loyalty :  yet  loyalty  is  that
one  element  of  mutual  living  which  nothing  but  a
prophetic  consciousness  can  explain.  Nothing  but  a
prophetic  consciousness,  a  foreknowledge  of  the  power
of  success  in  this  difficult  relationship,  can  justify  the
vows  of  marriage  as  they  have  been  made :  and  any  less
binding  vow  is  so  much  less  than  moral.  Love  itself
seems  to  have  such  prophetic  bearings,  whether  truly
or  falsely;  it  summarizes  and  discounts  all  obstacles
in  advance,  and  instates  itself  in  unquestioning  com-
mand of  life  and  body.  Love  at  least  must  postulate
prophecy.

Our  prophetic  experiences  beg^n  in  our  immediate
personal  context.  Our  first  acquired  and  conscious
historical  powers  are  powers  over  the  free  agents  of
history  —  our  fellow  persons.  From  this  focus  our
prophetic  range  spreads  itself  outward,  largely  through
the  conductive  medium  of  men  and  institutions,  until  it
reaches  and  claims  the  services  of  all  matter. Prophecy


fi08  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

accepts  and  stands  upon  all  these  acquired  and  distrib-
uted powers,  such  as  they  are,  and  fuses  them  into  single
deeds,  addressed  to  particular  situations,  deeds  which
know  their  place  and  their  meaning,  and  which  shake
themselves  free  from  the  contingencies  of  the  progres-
sive experiments  of  mankind,  for  the  purposes  of  their
own  moment.

Moreover,  the  consciousness  of  historic  validity  is  not
limited  to  such  single  deeds  as  these.  The  form  of
command,  as  power  perfects  itself,  tends  to  become
non-assertive,  silent,  and  immediate,  conveyed  with  the
temper  of  attitude  and  action :  and  as  personality
acquires  this  more  perfect  poise,  the  exercise  of  pro-
phetic power  may  become  continuous,  not  simply  con-
centrated in  climactic  performances.  The  effect  of  such
silent  and  continuous  command  may  be  nothing  more
than  this,  that  things  grow  in  its  presence.  But  this^
if  we  have  not  been  mistaken,  is  what  chiefly  happens
in  the  presence  of  God. This  also  is  historical  action.

VII

These  are  the  common  foundations  of  our  action.
And  if  there  be  any  such  thing  as  a  more  total  and
significant  prophecy  than  these,  it  will  have  the  same
structure  as  they :  it  will  be  the  whole  of  which  our
various  experiments  are  parts.  Happiness  may  be  iden-
tified with  success  in  the  utterance,  not  of  fragmentary
meanings  here  and  there,  but  of  some  total  meaning ;
the  indelible  historic  expression  of  a  self.  It  cannot
fail  to  be  at  some  high  cost  that  a  man  may  come  to
recognize  his  own  total  and  universal  meaning,  and
impose  that  upon  the  course  of  things. Some  complete


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  509

commitment  to  that  aim  might  well  be  necessary.  And
such  commitment  will  not  leave  him  to  suffer  that  pain
alone  which  may  reach  him  by  diffusion;  it  will  put
upon  him  the  necessity  of  courting  pain,  eyen  of  creat-
ing pain  for  others  where  none  now  exists,  rousing
them  from  their  ease  and  exciting  their  wrath.  It  is
well  for  us  that  every  man  has  his  quantum  of  the
belligerent  spirit ;  for  it  is  as  necessary  to  our  happiness
to  have  found  and  defined  our  proper  antagonism  as  to
have  found  and  defined  our  proper  love.  Enthusiasm
can  exist  on  no  other  terms ;  for  enthusiasm  is  not  energy
merely,  but  energy  conscious  of  a  potential  difference.
When  we  have  caught  the  spirit  of  this  kind  of  detach-
ment we  discover  that  the  outer  dimension  of  ourself
varies  with  the  gpreatness  of  the  thing  we  are  over
against  quite  as  truly  as  with  the  greatness  of  the  thing
allied  to  us.  We  take  a  fierce  joy  in  the  power  to  per-
fect that  detachment  by  simplification,  by  renunciation,
demonstrating  to  ourselves  that  we  have  the  power  to
renounce,  to  deny,  to  oppose  —  to  send  our  plowshare
deep,  so  that  when  it  moves,  as  it  must,  a  huge  segment
of  sluggish,  inert  earth  will  be  disgruntled  and  dis-
placed. We  find  re-entering  into  our  souls  those  lost
virtues  of  war  and  asceticism  —  virtues  which  can
never  be  artificially  fostered  or  reclaimed.

In  such  a  temper  as  this  are  strangely  combined  the
self-sufficiency  of  the  stoic,  the  universality  of  the
altruist,  and  that  righteous  love  of  power  which  our
own  age  at  once  celebrates,  fears,  and  decries.  The
prophet  is  the  realization  of  aU  these  human  motives ;
and  it  is  he  whom  all  these  have  in  mind  as  the  super-
man, who  is  also  the  sage,  and  the  man  wholly  happy


510  THE  FRUITS  OF  REU6ION

in  his  historic  context.  Is  it  not  he  whom  MaeterUnck
has  in  mind,  even  while  he  praises  the  stoic  virtues?
'^  To  those  roand  about  us  there  happen  incessant  and
countless  adventures,  whereof  every  one,  it  would  seem,
contains  a  germ  of  heroism ;  but  the  adventure  passes
away,  and  heroic  deed  is  there  none.  But  when  Jesus
Christ  met  the  Samaritan,  met  a  few  children,  an  adul-
terous woman,  then  did  humanity  rise  three  times  in
succession  to  the  level  of  €rod/'  This  is  that  '^con-
sciousness of  self"  which  ''  with  the  greatest  of  men
implies  consciousness  up  to  a  point  of  their  star  or  their
destiny  " ;  and  not  alone  because  '^  they  know  in  advance
how  events  will  be  received  in  their  soul,"  but  because
in  addition  to  this  they  also  know  what  they  will  do
with  these  events,  and  what  stamp  history  will  carry  as
it  falls  back  from  that  encounter.

Shall  we  not  acknowledge,  then,  that  the  prophetic
consciousness  is  a  wholly  credible  experience,  abun-
dantly indicated  in  the  ideals  as  well  as  in  the  instincts
of  men  as  the  concrete  conception  of  happiness  ?  And
if  we  regard  it  as  necessary  for  happiness,  we  do  not
thereby  wholly  condemn  our  experience  even  as  we  find
it.  It  is  certainly  not  necessary  for  happiness  that
every  undertaking  should  succeed,  that  there  should  be
no  failures :  it  is  only  necessary  that  as  our  buffeted  lives
labor  for  the  most  part  between  our  two  g^reat  refuges
— stoicism  and  vicarious  satisfaction  —  it  should  still
remain  open  to  us  to  believe  that  these  lives  may  have
some  total  historic  meaning,  and  that  this  meaning  can,
through  whatever  discipline  or  observance,  be  brought
to  consciousness  and  valid  expression.  If  we  can  believe
this,  history  can  never  become  wholly  alien  to  us.


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  611

But  how  and  when  does  the  hour  of  such  total
prophecy  arrive  ?  Is  there  to  be  a  moment  when  not
alone  the  hero,  the  patriot,  the  sage,  but  the  simple
man  of  quiet  life  and  plain  speech,  may  lay  aside  the
attitude  of  humility,  cease  to  admit  his  possible  failure,
and  take  control  of  the  history  which  at  that  moment
is  enacting  itself  in  his  presence  ?  Must  there  come  to
every  one  an  hour  when  the  connection  between  the  sue*
cess  of  his  cause  in  the  world  and  the  success  of  his  own
deed  lies  clear  before  him,  turning  vicariousness  into
cowardice ;  when  he  knows  beyond  doubt  that  the  arc
of  the  destiny  of  that  idea  must  now  coincide  with  the
swing  of  his  own  arm  ?  In  what  form  does  prophecy  ar-
rive ? And  how  is  the  prophetic  consciousness  possible  ?

vni

My  answer  is  that  the  prophetic  consciousness  is
possible  in  the  same  way  that  reflexion  is  possible,  in  the
same  way  that  a  total  present  judgment  upon  the  world
is  possible.  The  prophet  must  know  himself;  and  he
must  know  his  world,  not  in  detail  but  in  so  far  as  it  is
relevant  to  his  purpose :  such  knowledge  as  this  must
come  to  him  through  bis  relation  to  the  absolute.  The
prophet  is  but  the  mystic  in  control  of  the  forces  of
history,  declaring  their  necessary  outcome:  the  mystic
in  action  is  the  prophet.  In  the  prophet,  the  cognitive
certainty  of  the  mystic  becomes  historic  and  particular ;
and  this  is  the  necessary  destiny  of  that  certainty :  mystic
experience  must  complete  itself  in  the  prophetic  con-
sciousness. The  lightning  of  Zeus  is  not  released  until
already  it  is  f orefated  to  strike  the  earth ;  in  this  trans-
action heaven  and  earth  must  break  away  together. So


512  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

whatever  certainty  the  mystic  acquires  means  and  fore-
tells a  positive  overcoming  of  the  world :  he  can  only  keep
his  certainty  by  making  it  visible  to  himself  in  historic
accomplishment.  Prophetic  power  is  the  final  evidence
to  each  individual  that  he  is  right  and  real ;  it  is  his
assurance  of  salvation ;  it  is  his  share  of  divinity ;  it  is
his  anticipation  of  all  attainment.  Hence  it  is  that  the
greater  mystics  have  been  great  founders,  g^reat  agita-
tors,  and  have  if  not  a  heavenly  immortality  yet  unques-
tionably a  mundane  immortality.  There  are  no  deeds
more  permanent  than  those  of  Buddha,  of  Mohammed,
of  Jesus.  And  innumerable  lesser  deeds  of  equal
validity  have  completed  the  substance  of  these  mighty
frames.  The  deeds  of  the  mystics  constitute  the  hard
parts  of  history ;  the  rest  has  its  day  and  passes.

The  love  of  history  has  not  usually  been  reckoned
among  the  virtues  of  the  mystic.  The  mystic  is  pre-
cisely the  timeless  and  unhistorical  being,  even  in  the
midst  of  his  creations.  It  is  no  concern  of  the  artist
that  he  produces  to-day  or  to-morrow,  for  this  company
or  for  that.  I  admit  the  paradox.  The  carelessness
of  time  is  the  chief  evidence  of  the  artist's  historic
security.  If  he  is  a  true  creator  he  addresses  history
itselfy  with  all  its  accidents.  Socrates  does  not  write,
nor  does  Spinoza  publish  his  chief  work ;  but  each  in
his  own  way  cares  sacredly  for  the  viability  of  the  link
between  himself  and  the  concrete  future.

Retreat  from  history  is  the  mystic's  temptation.
And  he  who  dwells  in  the  universal  alone  becomes
false ;  the  unhistorical  mystic  is  a  liar :  he  has  hidden
himself  from  the  truth  which  is  only  in  the  fact.  But
the  falsity  of  mysticism  is  the  begmnbg  of  its  end.


THE  PROPHETIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  613

The  next  swing  of  the  alternation  of  mind  brings  the
scientist,  who  is  the  mystic  confronting  the  fact  with
his  absolute.  Objectivity  of  mind  is  the  most  germane
fruit  of  religion;  and  science  becomes  possible  only
through  long  discipline  of  worship.  Man  cannot  at
first  bear  a  perfect  contact  with  nature,  nor  conceive  a
wholly  physical  causality ;  none  of  his  early  hardships
give  him  the  sense  of  foxit;  his  fancies  stand  between
him  and  the  possibility  of  a  fully  physical  experience.
It  is  only  the  developed  spirit  that  can  bear  the  fact  in
its  nakedness.  It  is  only  the  modem  mind  that  can
define  causality.  Truthfulness  is  a  wholly  modem
virtue,  born  with  the  Renaissance  and  its  respect  for
the  objective  event.  And  the  Renaissance  is  the  medi-
eval mind  turned  upon  nature ;  it  is  worship  turning  to
discover  the  sacredness  of  history.  The  historical
virtues,  truthfulness  and  economic  integrity,  are  the
latest  moral  products  of  spiritual  advance,  the  especial
deposits  of  the  Christian  temper  in  religion.

And  indeed  it  is  only  the  mystic  who  ought  to  be
historically  moral ;  for  to  him  alone  can  the  world  as
it  is,  in  its  very  particulars,  be  sacred.  The  unfriendly
shapes  of  fortune  are  the  chief  occasions  for  faith;  only
faith  is  right  in  exposing  itself  to  them  without  reserve :
and  faith  is  but  the  love  of  God,  the  prophetic  conscious-
ness, confronted  by  the  particulars  of  history.  It  is
only  the  mystic,  I  say,  who  is  wholly  bound  to  history,
and  therewith  to  truth  and  honor.

There  is  such  a  thing  as  losing  one's  soul :  and  that
is,  rejecting  one's  call  to  prophesy.  For  if  there  be
any  immortality  beyond  this  present  scheme  of  things,
it  is  not  in  abstraction  therefrom :  the  destiny  of  our


514  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

own  deecby  great  and  gmall,  is  an  integral  part  of  irfiat-
ever  f  atore  there  may  be  for  ns.  To  deserve  to  endme
is  the  only  gpmrantee  of  endnring.  I  have  no  faith
in  an  intrinsic  indestmctibility  ci  the  sobstanoe  of
conseioasness.  One  life  is  given  ns ;  another  may  be
acquired.^  Immortality,  I  ventore  to  think,  may  be  the
chief  and  total  object  of  the  prophetic  conseioasness.
Bat  if  so,  it  must  be  a  consciousness  of  sach  command
of  natore  as  he  only  has  who  can  wholly  accept  nataie
as  it  is;  of  such  saperiority  to  the  catastrophes  of  lustoiy
as  he  only  has  who  can  nnreservedly  live  oat  into  this
present  history,  knowing  it,  even  to  its  last  hard  fact,  as
his  sphere  of  divine  control.

1  See  on  thb  point  Fkedeiie  FahuUf  Tbe  WinniDg  of  Lnmortnlify.


CHAPTER  XXXm

THE  UNIFYING  OF  HISTORY

OUB  historic  existence  with  its  immense  contingen*
cies  we  take  for  the  most  part  with  a  certain  poetic
remoteness :  we  only  half  believe  in  it ;  we  hope  well  of
it  —  that  is  to  say^  we  hope  well  of  the  luck  that  seems
to  prevail  there.  We  live  still  in  a  semi-savage  dreami-
ness, incredulous  of  the  distant  contingency,  incredulous
therefore  of  the  present  moment,  veiled  from  the  actual
conditions  of  action,  circling  at  planetary  distances  about
our  own  practical  center.  The  fanciful  is  too  real  to  us,
the  real  too  fanciful.  The  evil  that  is  in  this  world,  and
especially  in  this  spirit  of  meaningless  accident  —  the
luck  which  we  hope  will  be  for  u%  good  luck  —  this  evil
does  not  rouse  us :  it  benumbs  us,  rather,  and  confirms
our  somnambulism.  This  is  our  ingramed  irresponsi-
bility, our  original  sin.

It  is  the  last  fruit  of  religion  to  produce,  or  approxi-
mate, a  prophetic  consciousness,  that  is  to  say,  a  natural
historic  consciousness,  wholly  wakened,  literal,  and  real,
capable  of  seeing  the  divinity  of  its  own  present  fact
and  acting  upon  it.  It  is  the  work  of  faith  to  face  the
bulk  and  detailed  circumstance  of  nature,  banish  its
luck,  remove  its  mountains.  Religion  must  labor  long,
but  aims  at  last  to  bring  about  such  a  faith,  literal,
prophetic,  responsible.

But  we  are  right  in  our  incredulity,  so  long  as


516  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGIOIT

religion  comes  to  us  only  as  a  psychological  necessity.
The  conditions  for  prophetic  control  of  fortune  lie
without  as  well  as  within,  &r  out  on  the  borders  of  the
universe.  Science  and  the  State,  under  the  encourage-
ment of  faith,  may  banish  luck  gradually  to  these
borders :  but  from  them,  luck  streams  back  upon  human
life  —  distributed,  perhaps,  in  its  incidence,  yet  none  the
less  menacing  and  vast.  Unless  the  original  sources  of
history,  the  ultimate  arrangements  of  natural  facts,  the
configurations  of  physical  things  which  set  the  last  limits
to  the  hopes  of  all  living  beings,  are  already  subject  to
some  other  control  than  our  own,  there  is  no  such  thing
as  absolute  certainty  of  historic  action.  I  cannot  hasten
the  missile  that  has  once  left  my  hand ;  every  workman
must  leave  his  work  at  last  to  a  world  that  he  can  no
longer  govern ;  the  whole  race  of  prophets  and  world-
builders  stands  helpless  in  the  presence  of  a  wider  agency
whose  name  is  either  Fate  or  Providence.  Without  the
cooperation  of  an  environment  not  less  than  infinite,
the  best  prophet  comes  at  last  to  zero — the  worse  because
of  his  concrete  hopes.  The  mystic  must  give  reason
for  his  dogma  that  there  is  no  '^  realm  of  chance  " ;  that
beside  the  work  of  God  which  we  have  been  tracing  in
the  individual  mind,  there  is  a  supplementary  work  of
God  in  the  world  beyond  the  human  will, — there  at  the
origins  of  the  plot  which  all  events  work  out.  Thus
the  theory  of  religion  rests  back  upon  cosmology  and
the  philosophy  of  a  wider  history  for  its  final  justification.

I  cannot  here  follow  out  into  this  wider  world  the
question  of  the  right  of  the  religious  consciousness  in  its
immediate  practical  assurance. But  at  least  one  principle


THE  UNIFYING  OF  HISTORY  617

prevailing  in  that  world  is  already  in  our  hand,  and  I  will
touch  upon  it  in  closing.  So  far  as  our  own  human
history  is  concerned — a  small  part,  no  doubt,  of  our  total
environment  —  we  can  see  that  the  religious  will  tends
to  create  the  conditions  for  its  own  success.  Note  what
these  conditions  are.

It  is  in  our  human  environment,  as  we  said,  that  our
natural  will-to-command  finds  its  first  successes:  our
power  extends  from  this  center  outward.  Yet  taking
the  human  world  as  a  whole,  it  presents  a  problem  to
prophetic  ambition  not  less  baffling  than  that  of  the
control  of  nature :  in  fact,  these  two  problems  are  precise
counterparts  of  one  another.  Dealing  with  the  social
environment  has  always  the  guidance  and  encouragement
of  response,  pro  and  con,  which  nature  lacks.  On  the
other  hand,  dealing  with  nature  has  always  this  element
of  satisfaction,  that  nature  is  a  single  order,  persistent,
invariably  faithful  to  its  own  principles  whether  against
us  or  for  us.  The  obstacles  to  prophetic  confidence  in
dealing  with  the  human  world  consist  in  the  absence  of
just  these  qualities.  He  who  intends  to  accomplish
something  permanent  must  appeal  to  an  environment
that  treasures  and  faithfully  conserves  values.  The
fluid  mass  of  free  wills  conserves  nothing,  holds  itself
bound  to  nothing.  A  world  which  can  promise  to
conserve  must  itself  be  unitary  and  eternal:  it  must
have  a  principle  of  persistent  identity  and  reliability
like  that  of  nature.  To  introduce  into  this  mass  of  free
individuals  an  order,  unity,  and  inflexibility  of  purpose
like  that  of  nature  would  indeed  be  something  of  a
miracle.  Yet  without  this,  the  prophetic  attitude  is  not
justified :  this,  as  I  see  it,  is  precisely  what  the  prophet


518  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

must  require.  He  must  find  in  the  current  of  history
a  unity  corresponding  to  the  unity  of  the  physical
universe,  or  else  fie  must  create  it.  And  what  I  want
to  point  out  is  that  it  is  just  such  a  conscious  unification
of  history  that  the  religious  will  spontaneously  tends
to  bring  about.

We  can  see  that  the  type  of  power  which  we  have  called
prophetic,  unlike  that  power  which  Nietzsche  celebrates,
tends  not  to  compete  with  and  destroy  the  like  power  in
its  neighbors,  but  rather  to  develop  and  to  propagate  it
As  laughter  begets  laughter,  and  courage  courage,
passing  from  mind  to  mind  and  crystallizing  a  social
group  or  a  social  world  upon  its  own  principle,  so  does
the  world-conquering  temper  of  religion  beget  its  like.
No  human  attitude  is  more  socially  contagious  than  that
of  worship,  except  the  practical  attitude  toward  facts
which  comes  out  of  worship :  namely,  entiiusiasm  for
suffering,  conscious  superiority  to  hostile  facts  of  what-
eyer  sort  or  magnitude,  knowledge  of  their  absolute
illusoriness,  so  far  as  they  pretend  finality,  —  in  a  word
the  practical  certitude  of  the  prophet.  When  religion
has  thus  acquired  a  clear-sighted  and  thorough  contemp-
tus  mundij  religion  begins  to  be  potent  within  this  same
world  of  facts :  it  was  within  the  scope  of  the  stoic  to
become  impregnable,  but  the  religious  spirit  finds  itself
more  than  impregnable,  —  irresistible.  The  prophetic
attitude  begins  at  once  to  change  facts,  to  make  dif-
ferences, to  do  work ;  and  its  first  work  is,  as  I  say,
its  social  contagion :  it  begins  to  crystallize  its  environ-
ment, that  is,  to  organize  the  social  world  upon  its  aum
principle.

And  if  this  temper  is  actually  spread  through  die


THE  UNIFYING  OF  HISTORY  619

social  world  (not  rising  and  dying  out  like  lihe  wave  of
laughter,  but  reaching  the  threshold  of  self-perpetuation),
something  more  has  happened  than  the  dissemination
of  a  type  of  will  by  ^  social  imitation'  —  namely,  that
environment  is  created  which  this  same  type  of  will
requires.  The  human  world  has  taken  on  a  certain
unity  of  mind  and  purpose ;  for  whatever  may  be  the
special  field  of  action  of  any  religious  will,  every  such
will  must  desire  that  unification  of  the  conscious  world
as  a  necessary  part  of  its  own  purpose.  So  far,  all  have
common  cause.  Every  prophetic  will  is  something  of
an  environment  for  every  other ;  as  the  group  widens,
and  pervades  human  life  with  its  principle,  it  becomes,
as  an  environment,  more  adequate  to  its  task,  and  may
reach  complete  adequacy.

We  may  conceive  some  such  group  as  becoming  fully
conscious  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  this  task ;  and
adopting  as  its  own  special  responsibility  the  extension
of  its  own  unity,  for  the  sake  of  making  this  same  will
accessible  to  all  men.  It  would  thus  make  it,  so  to  speak,
its  own  prophecy  that  prophetic  will  shall  be  possible ;
that  no  human  being  shall  be  obliged  to  let  his  prophetic
impulses  die  for  lack  of  that  unity  in  the  human  world
which  must  justify  them.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  essen-
tial purpose  of  the  religious  institution.  It  is  this
purpose,  as  I  conceive  it,  which  brings  religion  to  earth
in  the  form  not  simply  of  a  system  of  truth,  not  simply
as  a  type  of  personal  experience,  but  in  the  form  which
religion  everywhere  takes,  that  of  the  positive  historic
body  with  work  to  perform.

Positive  religion  in  its  primitive  phases  makes  history
possible^  cultivating  what  we  might  call  the  tribal  and


620  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

national  memory.  In  its  more  developed  phases,  it
tries  to  achieve  a  more  general,  non-political,  but  none
the  less  historic  solidarity  among  men.  It  undertakes,
we  may  say,  to  do  for  the  sporadic  projdiietic  impulses
of  men  what  the  State  does  for  their  sporadic  impulses
of  justice  and  public  power.  Let  me  develop  this  idea
a  little.

As  I  look  over  the  circumstances  of  religious  develop-
ment, I  observe  that  there  are  four  striking  changes  in
the  religious  consciousness  which  usually  occur  together:
as  religion  becomes  ^redemptive'  (that  is,  world-over-
coming in  one  way  or  another),  it  detaches  itself  from
the  national  life,  it  begins  a  universal  propaganda,  and
it  refers  itself  and  its  adherents  to  some  distinctive
historic  object  or  person  as  the  beginning  of  its  temporal
undertaking  (and  so,  as  a  special  point  of  irruption  of
the  divine  into  history).  Thus  Islam  points  to  its  shrine
and  its  sacred  book ;  the  Buddhist  convert  must  take
refuge  in  the  Buddha,  as  well  as  in  the  doctrine  and  the
order ;  Christianity  asks  men  to  regard  its  founder  as
the  unique  way  to  God.  How  are  we  to  understand
this  remarkable  concurrence  of  characteristics  at  this
stage  of  development  ?

It  is  the  analogy  of  the  State  which  best  helps  me  to
understand  what  these  things  mean.  The  political
organization  affords  to  the  individuals  under  it  what
Bagehot  well  describes  as  a  '^  calculable  future."  In
the  State  I  have  some  prospect  of  a  tangible  immortality.
I  acquire  property  that  may  affect  in  one  way  or  another
my  children's  children.  I  promote  laws,  perhaps,  that
influence  more  or  less  all  lives  to  come  within  the  scope


THE  UNIFYING  OF  HISTORY  621

of  that  government.  I  can  do  my  small  part  anywhere
in  art  or  industry  or  science  with  a  sense  of  worth ;
because  the  State  is  there  to  give  permanence  to
the  growing  treasures  of  one  generation  after  another.
The  State  lends  to  my  deeds  its  own  permanence^
so  far  as  these  deeds  are  legitimate  and  within  its  own
province.

In  the  same  way  the  religious  institution  (I  am
speaking  now  of  the  ideal,  as  reflection  shows  it  to  me,
certainly  not  of  the  entire  body  of  instituted  religion
as  it  now  is)  —  the  religious  institution  seems  to  exist
to  lend  its  own  permanence  and  immortality  to  the  deeper
and  wider  prophetic  purposes  of  men.  In  severing  its
fortunes  from  those  of  the  State,  it  assures  to  the
individual  his  right  to  live  and  take  part  in  an  infinite
history,  though  outside  all  States,  and  in  spite  of  the
defects  of  all  earthly  States.  It  stands  between  the
creative  individual  will  and  that  unordered,  or  unstably
ordered,  human  social  mass,  before  whose  free  mobility
and  passion  that  will  is  indeed  in  a  hopeless  plight.

Religion  defies  the  clash  and  decay  of  the  political
attempts  of  men,  whose  mission  in  their  own  sphere  is
similar ;  but  it  is  historic  religion  which  chiefly  renders
those  political  attempts  hopeful.  Religion  from  primi-
tive times  the  protector  of  the  stranger,  the  market-place,
the  truce,  is  the  forerunner  of  international  law  ;  because
it  alone  can  create  the  international  spirit,  the  inter-
national obligation;  it  alone  can  permanently  sustain
and  ensure  that  spirit.^

'  By  such  raper-nationalism  in  religion,  national  individualit j  is  not
obtenred,  but  rather  promoted.  We  require  a  world-religion  just  becanie
we  do  not  require,  nor  wish,  a  world  state.


622  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELI6I0K

It  is  this  function,  as  I  think,  which  the  greater
religions  have  more  or  less  clearly  perceived.  They
propose  to  bring  into  human  affairs  that  most  general
unity,  not  interfering  with  nor  displacing  any  more
special  undertaking,  without  which  no  such  special
undertaking — whether  of  art,  or  of  science,  or  of  law  —
is  worth  while,  being  without  promise  of  pemumence.

We  customarily  think  of  the  religious  institution  as
a  way  of  arranging  for  the  social  side  of  worship.
Worship  is  imperfect  unless  when  I  worship,  I  am  joining
the  race  in  worship.^  Instituted  religion  has  accordingly
made  worship  public  ;  at  its  best,  it  does  much  to  join
the  minds  of  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men  in  worship,
of  all  present  human  worshippers,  and  with  those  of
the  past  and  o£  the  future.  Further,  we  think  of  the
institution  as  an  educating  body,  or  as  propi^ting  the
religious  type  of  mind  by  that  social  imitation  we  were
speaking  of.  But  we  usually  fail,  as  I  think,  to  see
what  the  institution  does  to  justify  that  type  of  mind ;
namely,  that  it  brings  to  the  individual  soul  not  only  its
moral  ideal,  its  psychological  norm,  but  also  the  kind  of
world  wherein  such  a  mind  can  alone  rightly  assert  itself.
It  is  a  unified  and  responsible  world,  one  which  cares
for  the  individual  in  his  concrete  character,  and  will
bear  out  his  rightful  will  to  endure, — a  human  world
which  religion  itself  has  made.

It  is  a  sign  of  the  good  faith  of  the  institution  that

^  We  haTe  regarded  worship  in  iti  mystieal  aspect,  as  a  solitary
adrenture  of  the  soul :  but  we  hare  alto  noted  from  time  to  time  thai
before  the  mystio  may  make  his  lonely  flight  to  God,  he  most  assert  as
fully  as  possible  his  unity  with  his  human  spiritual  oontezt.  Unity  with
the  Absolute  becomes  significant  in  proportion  as  the  worshipper  is  first
one  with  the  spirit  of  Grod  as  already  established  in  the  world.


THE  UNIFYING  OF  BISTORT  523

it  brings  to  the  individual,  who  seeks  assurance  of  his
own  absolute  worth,  its  assertion  of  its  own  power  and
permanence.  It  encourages  him  to  prophesy,  only  in
so  far  as  it  itself  is  based  on  prophecy.  It  asserts  its
own  universal  scope  and  indestructibility  —  the  gates
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  If  this  is  a  true
assertion,  the  individual  may  always  knit  his  prophetic
action  to  that.  The  attitude  which  as  a  solitary  being
he  could  not  rightfully  assume  is  made  possible  to  him
by  this  external  agency  which  is  throwing  over  all
history  its  most  general  unity,  bringing  men  everywhere
to  a  singleness  of  mind  and  a  singleness  of  purpose.
Through  that  agency,  and  not  otherwise,  he  may  win,
in  the  language  of  religion,  his  (historic)  salvation,  the
forgiveness  of  his  ingrained  sin.

In  our  current  consciousness,  we  feel  little  need  of
these  external  assurances,  nor  of  the  institution  which
offers  them.  The  sense  of  sin  grows  foreign  to  us :  the
suggestion  that  we  any  longer  require  what  our  fathers
called  salvation  strikes  with  a  note  of  unreality.  We
feel  ourselves  morally  secure;  and  historically,  —  as
secure  as  need  be.  But  when  beneath  this  over-social-
ized surface  of  consciousness  we  penetrate  to  the  actual
basis  of  such  certainties  as  we  have,  our  self-respect,
our  belief  in  human  worth,  our  faith  in  the  soul's
stability  through  all  catastrophes  of  physical  nature,
and  in  the  integprity  of  history — this  history  of  ours
—  forever,  we  must  recognize  there  a  mass  of  actual
deed,  once  for  all  accomplished  under  the  assurances  of
historic  religion.  A  system  of  deed,  I  might  rather
say,  organized  about  a  prophetic  purpose  once  planted


524  THE  FRUITS  OF  RELIGION

in  history  and  now  perpetually  reproducing  itself  all
around  us.

The  work  of  positive  religion  is  largely  silent ;  like
the  work  of  positive  law,  it  is  as  g^reat  in  what  it
prevents  as  in  what  it  noisily  accomplishes  —  perfaj^
greater.  But  the  work  is  there,  and  if  we  are  just  we
shall  acknowledge  it  Our  confidences  with  regard  to
history  must  be  built  in  history  as  well  as  in  universal
thought,  —  in  both  of  these,  welded  together.  Unless
we  can  discern  at  its  silent  work  in  human  affairs  this
power,  self-<^onsciou8ly  eternal,  actively  communicating
its  own  scope  to  the  feeble  deeds,  the  painful  acquire-
ments, the  values,  the  loves  and  hopes  of  men,  we
have  no  right  to  such  faith  as  we  habitually  assume.
And  without  such  faith  there  is  for  us  no  valid  religion.


EXPLANATORY  NOTES  AND  ESSAYS


NOTE  ON  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS

IT  is  well  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  subconsciousness  is  not
an  endowment  but  an  incidental  acquisition,  due  to  strain
of  voluntary  attention.  It  is  a  by-product  of  determinedly
self-oonscious  life.  No  infant  has  a  subconsdousness:  no
adult  is  without  one.

Our  subconsciousness  at  any  time  may  be  roughly
described  as  that  remainder  of  consciousness  which  persists
outside  the  sphere  to  which  in  our  various  practical  efforts  we
deliberately  narrow  our  interest.  And  this  remainder  has  two
divisions  which  must  be  sharply  distinguished  in  thought,
though  in  fact  they  blend  into  one  another.

We  may  define  these  two  divisions  by  their  relation  to  the
voluntarily  conscious  self :  the  first  is  allied  with  it,  the  seo*
ond  is  more  or  less  hostile  to  it,  or  critical  of  it.  The  former
part,  the  allied  subconscious,  is  called  subconscious  chiefly  be-
cause it  is  not  being  thought  of,  though  it  is  being  thought
with.  It  contains  the  instincts  that  we  inherit  and  the  habits
we  form ;  also  the  memories  we  store,  and  all  the  system  of
ideas  with  which  we  do  our  apperoeiving.  It  oontoins  the
habits  of  appreciation  we  build  up,  and  the  habits  of  decision
—  in  short  our  *  character.'  It  is  an  active  organ  in  all  expe-
rience, and  can  at  any  time  become  an  object  of  reflective
scrutiny.  Though  many  an  element  of  memory,  of  attitude,
of  my  controlling  ideas  and  deeper  instincts,  may  evade
the  grasp  of  my  pointed  attention  at  any  moment,  there  is
nothing  here  that  is  essentially  inaccessible,  nothing  that  may
not  become  part  of  the  focus  of  consciousness.  It  is  not
'split-off'  from  the  central  stream  of  attention:  its  objects


528  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS

are  the  same  objects,  its  world  is  the  same  world,  with  that
of  the  artificial  or  central  self.^

The  other  aspect  of  subconsciousness,  the  critical,  is  the
part  to  which  the  name  is  more  properly  applied.  It  is  a
consciousness  of  objects  which  we,  the  artificial  person,  have
chosen  not  to  be  conscious  of.  It  is  the  unchosen  or  repressed,
marginal  life  of  the  mind,  maintaining  an  existence  of  protest,
like  a  sort  of  bad  conscience.  What  our  artificial  efforts
exclude  from  notice  is  not  utterly  excluded;  we  are  not  so  free
as  we  seem  in  the  self  we  make.  It  is  impossible  to  condemn
to  oblivion  any  small  voice  in  us  without  in  some  measure
being  conscious  of  that  voice ;  and  especially  if  we  condemn
on  less  than  full  conviction  we  cannot  help  being  aware  that
our  condemnation  is  hasty,  and  this  element  of  our  conscious-
ness remains  in  communication  with  the  excluded  strand,  and
keeps  it  alive,  as  it  were  surreptitiously.

Thus  it  is  that  old  habits  of  observation  continue  to  do
their  work  without  separate  urging.  Things  which  I  have
once  noticed,  or  collected,  or  otherwise  valued,  I  continue  sub-
consciously to  take  notice  of,  though  I  may  have  outgrown  the
interest,  or  may  have  become  ashamed  of  it.  There  is  an
extraordinary  cunning  and  minuteness  about  this  aspect  of
subconsciousness.  It  is  the  watch-dog  of  the  mind.  It  may  take
note  of  time,  observe  faces,  remember  the  numbers  on  houses
or  bank-bills,  the  names  of  streets,  the  turns  of  stairs,  passing
shadows,  flitting  expressions  of  the  eye  and  voice:  it  is  faith-
ful, as  the  photographic  plate  is  faithful,  to  slighter  impres-
sions than  the  artificial  self  can  discriminate.  For  doubtless
the  limits  of  voluntary  interest  have  reduced  the  fulness  of
the  reports  which  our  senses  may  make  to  the  artificial  self.
Our  eyes  and  ears  are  capable  of  far  more  than  we  can  now
get  from  them ;  the  remainder,  up  to  the  limit  of  their  sensi*
tivity,  may  still  be  kept  in  a  subconscious  record. But  again

^  Since  suboonioioasnew,  as  I  believe,  is  a  division  within  oonsoionsaesSy
the  proper  contrast  is  between  the  suboonseions  and  the  artificial  self,  not
between  the  saboonscioas  and  the  conscioos.


THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  529

we  most  say  that  this  faithful  and  relatively  meehanioal
observer  in  us  takes  note  of  nothing  that  has  not  at  some
previous  time  been  important  to  the  self-conscious  mind,
whether  of  the  individual  or  his  ancestors.  Its  world,  though
supplementary,  is  still  the  same  world  as  that  of  the  artifi-
cial self  .^

1  There  is  in  realit  j,  as  I  have  said,  no  sharp  line  between  the  ^  allied
aobconBciouBueM '  and  the  *  critical  saboonaciouBneM ' :  whether  any  given
experience,  noted  by  these  persistent  habits  of  observation,  becomes  criti-
cal, or  merges  itself  with  the  aUied  '  apperceiving  mass,'  is  a  question
chiefly  of  the  kind  of  exolosion  which  relegates  that  experience  to  sub-
consciousness. It  may  be  an  exclusion  of  antipathy  ;  it  may  be  an  exclu-
sion of  simple  limitation  of  interest  (in  which  case,  the  subconscious  crit-
icism amounts  only  to  this,  that  *  These  things  also  ought  to  be  taken
into  account ')  :  or  again,  it  may  be  an  almost  wholly  passive  exclusion.
Professor  Angier,  in  commenting  upon  this  note,  makes  this  distinction
very  clear  and  graphic.  He  writes  :  —

'^  As  I  take  it,  many  of  the  oconrrenoes  of  life  which  apparently  do
not  impress  explicit  consciousness  at  all,  toward  which  at  any  given  time
we  react  in  no  accepting  or  repressing  way  whatever,  slide  into  the  sub-
oonsoious  where  they  find  congenial  connections  and  become  part  of  the
reservoir  of  what  you  call  the  '  allied  subconsciousness.'  In  traveling,  for
instance,  I  imagine  that  many  of  the  scenes  through  which  we  go,  which
never  enter  the  focal  point  of  consciousness,  nevertheless  contribute  richly
to  the  final  attitude  with  which  our  travels  leave  us;  and  later,  in  recalling
these  travels,  they  furnish  a  background  for  our  memory  image  or  for
our  conversation.

**  Is  there  not  a  differenoe  between  those  things  which  we  have  ^chosen
not  to  be  conscious  of,''i.e.,  repressed,  and  those  things  which  have  simply
not  entered  the  field  of  explicit  choice  at  all  ?  This  seems  to  be  a  real
distinction.  Those  things  which  do  not  enter  the  field  of  choice,  but
nevertheless  casually  make  their  impression  on  the  subconscious,  do  not
necessarily,  perhaps  not  at  all,  constitute  part  of  the  critical  subconscious-
ness. To  my  mind  it  is  only  those  things  to  which  we  are  either  instinc-
tively or  through  deliberation  averse  that  become  our  subconscious  moni-
tor and  critic.

*'  It  seems  to  me  that  we  meet  two  types  of  personality  based  on  this
distinction :  one,  the  genial,  tolerant  man  who  impresses  us  as  reeking  with
a  rich  and  friendly  co-consciousness  which  gives  subtle  color  and  tone
to  all  his  sayings  and  doings;  and  the  other  one,  whose  helping  co-con-
sciousness is  meager,  but  whose  critical  or  antagonistio  oo-conscionsness
is  rich."


590  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS


This  proieitiiig  purt  of  ■abcwwrianinfai  has  great  Taria-
tioiis  in  its  Toliune  and  strength  as  compared  with  the  self-
oonscions  stream  ranning  along  beside  it.  It  has  its  periodi
of  fdness  and  of  emptiness;  it  has  its  own  methods  of
relief,  finding  its  way  back  to  the  central  self.  We  may
describe  briefly  the  drcomstances  that  fill  it  np ;  and  then

1.  Arefmousnesf.  Clearly,  whateyer  tightens  the  strain
of  conscioas  attention  will  increase  the  borden  of  the  snbcon-
scioQS.  The  natural  materialism  of  determined  action ;  dis
stem  selection  for  world-bnilding  purposes  of  fact  having  a
specified  degree  of  solidity  and  resistance ;  these  make  quick
work  of  all  trailing  ^  clouds  of  g^oiy,**  and  rel^;ate  them  to
the  subconscious  where  they  maintain  a  ghostly  ezistenoe.
What  men  call  sentiment  has  to  spend  much  of  its  life  in  this
Coventry :  it  has  little  chance  while  ^  business  is  business*"
—  and  probably  ought  to  have  little  chance.

Insistent  *  reasonableness/  i.e.,  strident  logical  pose  where
ideas  are  &r  in  adyance  of  possible  idea^connections,  richly
contributes  to  the  subconscious,  and  correspondingly  impov-
erishes  the  artificial  self.  Note  too  that  it  is  the  nature  of
reasonableness  of  this  sort  to  seem  to  itself  right  and  self-
sufficient:  the  circle  of  ideas  that  pass  censorship  becomes
fixed;  they  make  themselTes  a  closed  group.  The  Toice  of  the
excluded  margin  is  timid,  unarmed,  merely  advisory,  at  s
political  disadvantage.  It  is  easy  for  the  focus  to  become
tyrannical,  to  refuse  due  representation  to  the  counsels  of  the
subconscious;  so  that  a  parallel  stream  of  judgment  which
might  silentiy  mingle  with  and  modify  the  course  of  decision
is  cleanly  excluded  and  put  into  hoitility.  Thus  the  focal
center  of  life  hardens,  polishes  its  surface,  and  tends  to
perpetuate  its  own  quality.

Severe  mental  concentration  produces  apparent  oblivion  to
external  happenings ;  but  in  reality  a  division  of  mind  which
adds  to  the  subconscious. If  long  continued,  certain  segments


THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  531

of  memoiy  and  of  the  technique  of  common  living  may  be  split
off,  temporarily  or  permanently.

Moral  and  religions  strenuosity  has  the  same  result,  and
particularly  when  one  wages  war  against  an  entire  aspect  or
conception  of  oneself.  Dr.  Prince's  Miss  Beauchamp  shows
▼ery  well  a  type  of  zeal  which  must  result  in  highly  charged
subconsciousness.  As  a  child  ^*  her  mother  exhibited  a  great
dislike  to  her.  •  .  •  On  the  other  hand  she  herself  idealized
her  mother,  bestowing  upon  her  almost  morbid  affection :  and
believing  that  her  mother's  lack  of  affection  was  due  to  her
own  imperfections,  she  gave  herself  up  to  introspection,  and
concluded  that  if  she  could  only  purify  herself  and  make
herself  worthy,  her  mother's  affection  would  be  given  her."  ^
As  she  comes  under  Dr.  Prince's  observation  ^^she  is  possessed
of  a  conscientiousness  which  at  times  has  proved  embarrassing
to  her  friends.  It  is  carried  sometimes  to  a  degree  that  may
be  characterized  as  morbid.  For  instance,  while  in  college
she  was  the  recipient  of  a  scholarship;  consequently  she
considered  it  her  duty,  in  return  for  this  benefit,  so  diligently
to  apply  herself  to  her  studies  that  it  was  impossible  for
teacher  or  physician  to  enforce  sufficient  recreation,  or  even
the  rest  and  hygienic  measures  which  were  absolutely  neces-
sary to  keep  what  little  health  she  had."  Further  fragments
from  Dr.  Prince's  notes :  ^  morbid  pride  .  .  .  refinement  of
thought  and  feeling  beyond  the  ordinary  .  .  .  she  took
everything  intensely  •  .  .  mentally  and  morally  stubborn."
The  depth  and  coherence  of  Miss  Beauchamp's  subconscious
life  must  be  attributed  very  largely  to  this  extraordinary  will
together  with  the  equaUy  extraordinary  definition  of  its  own
problem.

This  is  not  to  condemn  the  strenuous  life ;  on  the  contrary,
only  through  strenuous  attention  can  the  standard  of  definition
and  &ctualness  be  set  to  which  it  is  the  aim  of  all  idea  to
conform;  I  only  point  out  the  inevitable  incident  of  that
strain.  Any  action  at  all,  any  dealing  with  things,  is  a  strain
^  Morton  Prince. The  Dissoeiation  of  a  Penonalitj,  oh.  iL


682  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS

outward,  mvolves  some  artificial  limitation  of  judgment,  some
OYer-inflnenoe  of  physical  standards,  and  wiU  require  compen-
sation* The  suboimscious  is  simply  the  internal  rq^ister  of
the  oompensation  required,  and  will  obviously  increase  in
fulness  with  the  degree  of  free>will  put  behind  the  action.

2.  Suppression  of  critical  commetU.  There  are  Tarious
ways  and  various  motives  by  which  our  spontaneous  criticism
of  people  and  things  gets  huddled  out  of  sight,  and  may  be  so
effectively  suppressed  as  to  become  subconscious.  Thus  we
incline  to  suppress  se(/^sriticism ;  the  self  of  us  which  ^*  knows
better*'  when  we  want  to  depart  from  common  sense  or
common  duty,  the  self  to  which  our  moral  gadflies  appeal  when
they  assume  that  every  man  knows  what  is  right,  and  come
toward  us  rather  with  indignation  than  with  persuasion ;  the
self  which  we  call  conscience  or  mother  wit;  this  self  is
capable  of  being  suppressed — that  is  to  say,  so  systematically
hushed  that  it  leams  its  place  and  ceases  to  interfere.  In
such  cases,  our  bad  oonsdenoe  does  literally  take  up  its  abode
in  subconsciousness.  We  suppress  also  criticisms  of  others,
of  institutions,  opinions,  etc. ;  we  choke  down  dislikes,  wrongs,
fears,  doubts,  scruples,  on  the  theory  of  our  artificial  self  when
it  holds  that  these  n^^ive  feelings  ought  not  to  exist
Theoretical  policy,  especially  social  policy,  must  in  the  main
be  affirmative  ;  succeeding  policy  must  be  blind  to  minor  hin-
drances ;  health  must  ignore  disease :  and  these  ^r  resolves
run  much  danger  of  building  up  a  critical  subconsciousness,  pro-
ducing a  bland  and  false  personality.  One  is  parted  from  the
truth  of  his  own  aversions.  One  b^ins  a  r^ime  of  duplicity,
and  may  end  by  losing  all  personal  grit  and  valency.  An
especial  case  of  this  suppression  is  that  of  the  knowledge
of  guilt  of  a  past  act  which  I  regard  as  unconf essable :
it  may  be  a  trivial  matter ;  or  it  may  be  a  criminal  record,  a
character  overcome  and  hidden  from  sight ;  or  it  may  be  no
moral  thing  at  all,  but  a  physical  or  mental  peculiarity,  or  a
defect  in  one's  pedigree  or  origin  which,  as  one  thinks,  ramply
must  not  be  known. Suppressions  of  this  sort  contribate


THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  633

richly  to  subconscioaflness,  and  incideiitally  to  the  clinic  of
the  psychiatrist

8.  Organic  growth.  The  assumption  that  the  artificial
self  is  sufficient  unto  itself  makes  difficult  the  entrance  of  new
ideas  into  consciousness,  especiaUy  of  new  attitudes  toward  life
as  a  whole  such  as  growth  brings.  Whatever  is  new  in  the
field  of  idea  is  still  weaker,  as  against  the  central  self,  than
the  usual  marginal  idea;  for  the  most  part  these  incipient
developments  can  gain  recognition  only  through  the  channels
of  dream,  imagination ;  they  so  &r  gain  the  conscious  ear  as  to
call  the  mind  away  from  actualities,  from  time  to  time,  to  a
world  of  vague  but  alluring  phantasms  which  turn  into  nothing
real  Hence  it  is  that  adolescence,  which  is  peculiarly  a  time
of  theory-grasping  as  well  as  of  growth,  is  subject  to  subcon-
scious accumulations  and  to  dreams,  and  so  to  more  or  less
disturbing  processes  of  relief.  On  the  other  hand,  these  new
ideas  have  this  advantage  over  other  types  of  subconscious
burden  that  they  are  waxing  in  force  rather  than  waning,  and
are  destined  at  some  time  or  other  to  find  their  way  to  the
center.

The  rejoining  of  the  artificial  self  with  the  subconscious
self  is  an  event  for  which  nature  has  not  failed  to  proride
certain  instinctive  methods.  For  each  of  these  ways  of  accu-
mulating there  is  a  way  of  discharging :  I  think  it  is  true
tiiat  all  of  the  major  rhythms  of  conscious  life  involve  some
rise  and  fall  in  the  subconscious  pressure.  I  wish  to  point
out  that  all  of  these  methods  of  relief  involve  finding  an
obfeet  which  is  common  to  the  conscious  and  the  sub-conscious
self.

1.  For  strenuousness  the  natural  remedy  is  a  general  low-
ering of  actirity,  repose.  Wherever  the  strains  of  artificiality
and  attention  can  be  released,  as  in  privacy  and  the  ease  of
friendly  intercourse,  the  subconscious  begins  to  find  its  way
back  to  the  focus.  This  type  of  relief  reaches  its  natural  end
in  sleep. In  sleep,  voluntary  attention  is  abolished ;  the  mind


534  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS

is  acting  on  no  theory  of  the  good,  and  no  theory  of  tteeU.
Bat  in  sleep  it  cannot  be  said  that  consciousness  is  abolished;
it  is  rather  the  case  that  consciousness  has  attached  itself  to
an  object  which  is  common  to  all  interests,  conscions  and  sub-
conscious, namely,  the  individual  self.  And  by  relating  them-
selves to  that  object,  without  interference  from  the  theoret-
ical will,  the  various  strands  of  mental  life  tend  to  resume
their  natural  relations  to  each  other.

2.  For  suppression  of  comment  the  natural  remedy  is  a
generally  heightened  activity,  excitement,  orgy,  passion.^
Passion  might  almost  be  defined  as  a  rapid  release  of  subcon-
scious strain  under  heightened  attention.  It  occurs  when  some
object  in  the  conscious  field  arouses  an  idea  belonging  to  that
strand  of  the  allied  subconsciousness  which  is  keeping  this
part  of  the  critical  subconsciousness  alive.  We  commonfy
observe  that  in  anger,  long  suppressed  comment  finds  its  way
to  the  surface :  criticisms  which  one  had  resolved  never  to
utter  come  to  the  fore  and  join  in  the  summary  destructive
flux.  More  accurately  speaking,  anger  is  the  flood  itself,
the  rapid  synthesis  of  the  disowned  ideas  with  the  idea  which
has  here  found  its  object.  But  any  agitation  tends  to  enlist
wider  and  wider  areas  of  mental  resource,  and  so  to  bring
subconsciousness  into  working  relations  again  with  the  artifi-
cial self,  just  as  by  aid  of  heat  or  solution  chemical  anions
may  take  place,  and  equilibria  be  established,  which  other-
wise would  remain  indefinitely  in  posse.  In  excitement,  one
passion  makes  opportunity  for  another ;  and  orgy  may  end,
not  only  in  general  exhaustion,  but  also  in  the  general  harmony
and  unity  of  the  entire  creature.  Thus,  amusement  and
recreation  do  their  part  in  relieving  subconscious  pressure.

8.  What  organic  growth  contributes  to  subconsciousness  is
a  kind  of  suppressed  comment ;  and  its  natural  relief  is  abo
a  kind  of  passion. This  passion  occurs  when  the  dreams,  in

^  There  is,  of  oonns,  no  tfcriot  ono-to-ODO  oorrespondonos  between
theis  types  of  relief  snd  the  types  of  aeenmnlntion  of  Btrain.  That
•appreaied  eomment  may  also  be  relieved  by  repose,  or  by  ehange.


2


THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  635

which  the  growing  motiye  had  been  finding  vagoe  expres-
I  sion,  *oome  real*;  i.e.,  when  in  the  waking  world  an  object

appears  which  at  the  same  time  recalls  and  satisfies  those
groping  ideas.  This,  of  coarse,  is  what  happens  in  *  falling
in  love.*

4.  But  beside  these  instinctive  methods  of  relief  there  is
another,  namely  that  of  deliberate  refiectUm.  Experience  in
this  matter,  as  in  all  matters,  brings  about  the  possibility  of
conscious  control  of  the  process  of  reuniting  the  disjoined
fragments  of  selfhood.  One  leams  to  recogniase  in  himself
the  malaise  of  subconscious  pressure,  and  to  turn  upon  him-
self with  the  demand,  ^^  Well,  what  is  the  matter  with  me."
Such  a  person  is  delivered  from  the  more  drastic  and  physi-
ological upheavals,  just  so  far  as  his  power  of  self-analysis
reaches*  If  he  can  find  the  idea  which  commands  both  the
conscious  and  the  subconscious,  he  can  do  intentionally  what
nature  does  instinctively.  Thus,  confession  and  self-confes-
sion relieve  the  strain  of  suppressed  comment,  and  in  such  wise
that  one  knows  what  has  happened  to  him  —  in  so  far,  with
better  result  than  by  the  way  of  passion.  The  deliberate
practice  of  sincerity  and  prizing  of  the  *  natural '  self  are
habits  which  to  some  extent  may  prevent  the  accumulation
of  rebellious  residues.  Resolute  facing  of  the  fear  or  the
doubt  which  d<^  one's  peace;  consciously  planned  occa-
sions for  meeting  and  removing  grounds  of  injury  or  dislike:
in  all  these  ways,  and  in  many  others,  consciousness  holds
in  its  own  power  the  methods  of  reunion  with  the  critical
subconsciousness.

But  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  complete  displacement  of
nature  by  art  in  this  matter:  the  squarely  reflective  restora-
tion of  selfhood  reaches  but  little  way.  It  is  but  a  process  of
seeking,  or  as  we  might  say,  of  prayer ;  it  cannot  surely  com-
mand the  reconciling  idea ;  and  even  so,  it  does  not  so  much
displace  the  natural  methods  of  repose,  excitement,  and  love
as  it  does  meet  these  half  way,  and  recognize  their  place  in
the  conscious  system  of  life.


536  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS

It  must  have  become  evident  that  the  subconscious  or  ^  sub-
liminal self  **  is  only  another  name  for  that  natural  self  of  whidi
we  have  been  speaking ;  the  self  which  in  effort  we  lose,  and
tend  to  harden  a  superficial  crust  against.  Whatever  releases
subconscious  ideas  into  central  consciousness  does  so  far  relieve
spiritual  fatigue ;  and  vice  versa,  whatever  relieves  this  fatigue
does  at  the  same  time  rejoin  these  two  partially  divided  aspects
of  conscious  life.  It  will  therefore  be  possible  —  though  of
no  great  advantage  —  to  express  the  meaning  of  worship  in
term  of  this  relation  between  subconsciousness  and  the  rest
of  consciousness.

Characteristic  of  worship  is  the  necessary  place  in  it  of  the
method  of  deliberate  reflection  ;  this  constitutes  the  active  part
of  worship,  or  prayer.  And  in  the  passive  side  of  worship,
the  mystic  experience  itself,  we  find  qualities  which  resemble
thoseof  all  the  ^natural 'modes  of  recovery,  —  rest,  excitement
and  love:  worship  is  a  natural  synthesis  of  all  of  these;  the
elevation  of  the  mystic  is  a  state  at  once  of  passion  and  of  peace.
This  might  be  inferred  apriori  from  the  fact  that  the  idea  of
Gk>d  is  one  to  which  no  item  of  consciousness,  whether  split
off  or  not,  can  get  out  of  relation ;  it  is  an  idea  which
belongs  permanently  to  that  self  which  stands  prior  to  the
divergence  between  the  artificial  and  the  subconscious.

The  religious  ecstasy  or  orgy  is  a  product  of  religious  spe-
cialization. That  is  to  say,  worship  ideally  speaking  is  capable
of  fulfilling  all  the  functions  of  the  other  means  of  redintegra-
ting selfhood,  whether  of  love,  or  of  amusement,  or  of  sleep
itself  (as  witness  the  exploits  in  comparative  sleeplessness
of  Madame  Guyon,  of  Philip  of  Alcantara,  and  of  many
another)  :  and  if  one  must,  or  will,  confine  himself  to  this  one
method  of  spiritual  recovery,  mystic  ecstasy  is  quite  normal.
We  avoid  it,  and  on  the  whole  prefer  to  avoid  it,  by  a  differ-
entiation of  worship  in  which  our  mystic  experience  is  diffused
among  the  several  more  instinctive  rhythms.  I  do  not  doubt
that  the  distrust  shown  by  certain  of  the  stricter  sects  toward
amusements,  especially  toward  dance  and  the  theater,  is  due


THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  537

not  80  much  to  the  alleged  inherent  sinfulness,  of  these  amuse-
ments, as  to  the  circumstance  that  they  actually  substitute  for,
and  so  diminish  the  intensity  of,  the  specifically  religious  mys-
ticism. It  is  a  clear  modem  instance  of  the  *  jealous  Ood' ;
and  this  jealousy  is  justified  in  so  &r  as  pleasure  is  disposed  to
ignore  its  dependence  upon  the  whole-idea  for  existence.

The  language  of  subconsciousness  need  not  misrepresent  the
facts  of  religious  experience.  With  the  descriptive  skill  of
James  or  of  Pratt  it  conveys  much  truth  which  could  hardly
otherwise  be  so  effectively  expressed.  But  it  almost  inevit-
ably misleadst  For  it  hardly  fails  to  suggest,  first,  a  division
that  does  not  exist ;  and  second,  a  superhuman  resource  which
is  different  from  the  resource  of  our  simple  waking  selves.

As  to  the  first  point,  we  must  insist  on  the  fact  that  there
is  no  subconsciousness  which  is  out  of  consciousness. The

*  allied  subconsciousness*  is  an  organ  of  consciousness ;  and  the
<  critical  subconsciousness'  is  present  to  the  *  allied  suboonscioua-
ness '  in  the  same  way  that  the  artificial  self  is  present. The

*  allied  subconsciousness'  is  simply  the  comprehensive  self
whose  object  is  ^  the  whole.'  After  many  years  of  observation,
Janet  finds  himself  doubting  whether  even  in  hysterical  patients
there  may  not  be  a  self  which  envisages  both  the  normal  and
the  dissociated  segments  of  consciousness.  He  thus  states  his
own  present  questionings:  ^^Does  not  the  hysteric  herself
possess  a  sort  of  insane  belief  which  makes  her  relinquish
certain  phenomena?  Up  to  what  point  is  she  sincere  in  her
declarations  of  ignorance  ?  Does  she  not  to  a  certain  extent
deceive  herself?"  etc.^  And  what  may  hold  good  in  such
abnormal  deepening  of  the  deft  between  the  artificial  self  and
subconsciousness,  I  cannot  doubt  to  be  true  of  our  normal
relation  to  subconsciousness  —  namely,  that  we  are  conscious
of  our  <  subconsciousness'  all  the  time.  The  subconscious  is
not  something  which  we  should  think  of  as  a  distinct  gland  of
psychical  life,  accumulating  its  own  stores  and  occasionally

1  SaboonfcioQS  Phenomena,  p.  66.


538  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS

overflowing  into  the  central  self.  The  subconscious  is  the
deposit  of  our  own  logical  sense,  our  own  value-consciousness
and  moral  judgment,  our  own  metaphysical  instinct,  in  short,  of
our  own  whol^idea,  in  its  unceasing  criticism  upon  the  judg-
ments of  our  partial,  strenuous,  and  artificial  self.  It  con-
tains the  opposite,  or  antithesis,  which  our  artificial  self  at  any
moment  needs  to  justify  it  and  make  it  completely  true ;  it
contains,  therefore,  the  next  turn  in  the  dialectic  of  experience :
— all  of  Hegel's  categories  may  be  conceived  to  spring  up  in
order  out  of  subconsciousness.

And  this  may  serve  to  correct  also  the  second  misconception
which  the  language  of  subconsciousness  arouses,  namely,  that  we
have  here  a  mysterious  and  superhuman  faculty  of  knowledge.
Not  that  it  leads  us  to  think  too  highly  of  our  capacities.
That  reflection  of  von  Hartmann's  is  hardly  too  sanguine,
howeyer  absurdly  it  is  expressed:  ^^Let  us  not  despair  at
having  a  mind  so  practical  and  so  lowly,  so  unpoetical  and  so
little  spiritual;  there  is  vrithin  the  innermost  sanctuary  of
each  of  us  a  marvelous  something  of  which  we  are  uncon-
scious, which  dreams  and  prays  while  we  labor  to  earn  our
daily  bread."  ^  Well,  so  there  is;  only,  we  are  not  uncon-
scious of  it.  Subconsciousness  has  indeed  infinite  resources,
but  they  are  oar  resources  —  they  are  the  resources  of  the
infinite  idea  such  as  we  in  our  normal  waking  capacity  do
rightfully  possess,  and  such  as  we  shall  in  time  learn  to
command.

1  Quoted  by  Hart,  Suboomoioui  Phenomena,  p.  100.


n


THE  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  IDEA  AND  VALUE
UNDERSTOOD  THROUGH  BIOLOGY.*

IT  is  a  besetting  fault  of  our  oonstnictive  thinking  to  over-
estimate  the  load  which  a  distinction  will  carry.  We
prove  that  conscience  is  uniquely  different  from  the  calculus
of  values  and  think  we  have  saved  ethics.  We  discover  tiiat
theoretical  judgments  and  judgments  of  appreciation  are  &irly
independent,  and  hasten  to  found  philosophies  of  religion  upon
the  breach.  With  these  and  other  dichotomies  we  renew
the  experience  that  unless  we  have  something  more  than  a
difference,  what  we  accomplish  is  simply  to  insulate  our  ethics
and  our  religion.  What  tempts  us  repeatedly  into  this  dead
comer  is,  I  believe,  the  conviction  that  mind  must  be  studied
on  its  own  ground :  whereas  the  truth  is  that  regarded  thus
intimately  and  ideally  the  objects  of  our  inner  experience
tend  to  fall  into  just  these  fruitless  disparities.' In  my  own

1  From  mn  article  pablishsd  in  Psjehologieal  Bolletiii,  Vol.  v,  No.  6
(May  15, 1908).

*  The  more  oontemporary  pByehology  exerts  itself  to  be  purely  experi-
ential, the  more  it  finds  itself  busied  in  listing  the  '  irredneible '  elements
of  the  mind.  This  is  true  particularly  of  German  psychology  where  good
judgment  is  less  likely  to  interfere  with  consistency  of  method.  It
might  save  some  trouble  to  observe  that  all  aspects  of  the  mind  as  pore  ex-
perience are  irreducible.  Pleasure  is  pleasure  ;  Begriff  is  Begriff ;  reason
is  reason;  nothing  is  identical  with  anything  else  —  not  even  with  the
aggregate  of  its  elements  ;  everything  is  simple  and  unique.  It  is  well
to  note  this  truth,  —  to  insist  on  it  is  to  spin  on  our  boot-heels.  An  ir-
reducible is  an  object  of  which  we  can  only  say  that  it  is  what  it  is ;  of
this  material  no  science  can  be  made.  The  tendency  which  isolates  these
objects  has  something  idealistic  about  it,  perhaps ;  but  since  it  has  no-
thing but  the  'given'  to  offer,  it  is  neoessarily  dogmatic  and  exclamatory.
Only  a  genuine  idealism  can  afford  to  be  thoroughly  materialistic  in  its
first  explanations.


610  IDEA  AND  VALUE

attempts  to  gain  relief  from  such  ritnationa  I  ha^e  found
myself  moving,  more  or  leas  clearly,  in  the  direction  of  phys-
ical theory.

I  have  come  to  believe  that  there  is  a  certain  inevitable
logic  in  this.  Our  inner  eiperienoes,  our  oughts,  our  happi^
nesses,  our  values,  even  our  pleasures  among  themselves,  must  as
objects  of  thought  remain  miscellaneous  furniture,  each  turning
its  back  to  the  other  in  default  of  common  understanding,
unless  we  can  bring  some  finely  indifferent  unit  of  order  and
comparison  into  them.  The  first  business  of  all  exjdanatiim
is  to  express  a  thing  in  terms  of  what  U  is  not — an  event  in
terms  of  its  cause,  truth  in  terms  of  process,  sensation  in
terms  of  motion.  Other  things  equal,  the  more  alien  in  nature
the  terms  in  which  a  thing  is  expressed  the  more  sucoessfol
the  explanation :  the  thing  has  its  roots  in  the  ufanost  comers
of  reality  — the  demonstration  is  complete.^  Now  nothing  b
■o  admirable  in  its  categorical  indifference  to  the  concerns  of
the  spirit  as  is  physical  nature.  It  has  no  member  either  in
the  psychical  movement  or  influenced  by  it.  It  is  a  seamless
garment  of  interweaving  threads  ;  it  is  what  the  malhemati-
cian  calls,  in  a  word,  a  closed  group,  and  the  physidst,  a  con*
servative  system.  This  complete  conceptual  independence  it
is  which  chiefly  qualifies  it  for  serving  as  a  terminus  of  explana-
tions for  the  peculiarities  of  spirit.  Its  alien  quality  (once  it
is  admitted  to  be  a  part  of  the  same  world  with  spirit)  insures
that  no  aspect  of  consciousness  will  be  unrepresented  in  the
physical  system ;  there  will  be  nothing  even  in  the  relation  of

^  Tha  difficulty  slwmjt  is  to  lee  that  suok  azplaoatioiit  explain.  To
axplain  a  thing  by  what  it  is  not  —  that  is  to  explain  one  myeteiy  hj
another.  Bat  is  there  nothing  illnniinating  aboat  that  ?  The  oompanj
whioh  miseries  are  said  to  loye  lightens  them  ;  mysteries  love  compaaj
alio»  and  for  a  similar  reason.  If  we  are  satisfied  to  look  no  longer  for
the  supports  of  the  earth  because  a  group  of  unsupported  planets  can  be
self-supporting  we  must  be  prepared  to  recognize  similar  relations  among
facts.  Every  datum,  taken  alone,  is  dark,  just  because  it  is  ultimata
This  stranding  upon  *  data '  is  empiricism's  weak  spot,  and  its  opportonitj.
The  thing  that  relieves  data  of  darknesn  is,  not  more  data  exactly,  but  the
gronp-form  into  whioh  data  assemble  themsslTSS.


IDEA  AND  VALUE  Ml

consciousness  to  its  world  of  objects  and  to  other  subjects
which  is  not  shown  in  its  field  hy  some  exact  metaphor.  That
is  to  say,  —  the  elements  of  consciousness  which  on  their  own
separate  ground  are  mutually  repellent,  find  themselves  mir-
rored in  a  homogeneous  world  no  part  of  which  can  get  out  of
relation  to  any  other,  and  from  which,  therefore,  if  we  have  the
key  to  the  metaphor,  those  relations  can  be  read  and  understood.

But  this  logical  hint  is  enforced  by  a  more  substantial  con-
sideration. It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  answer  to  any
question  will  be  found  in  the  context  of  the  phenomenon  that
calls  forth  the  question.  There  are  good  grounds  for  think-
ing that  whatever  plurality  the  mind  shows,  whatever  temporal
movement  and  flux,  is  due  to  its  entanglement  in  nature ;  or,
to  read  the  same  relation  from  the  other  end,  nature  may  be
the  temporal  and  plural  life  of  the  mind.  So  of  each  several
aspect  of  the  mind.  Conscience,  for  instance,  has  no  variety,  no
application,  no  career,  except  for  its  commerce  with  our  *  empiri-
cal '  instincts  and  desires ;  and  desire,  in  turn,  has  no  variety
nor  development,  except  in  the  toils  of  a  differentiating  organ-
ism. Very  probably,  also,  conscience  splits  off  from  desire
or  desire  from  conscience  on  some  rock  of  nature.  Hence
without  any  assumption  as  to  which  of  the  two,  nature  or
mind,  is  the  prime  mover  in  this  differentiating  process,  we
should  naturally  look  for  our  principles  of  synthesis  in  that
same  region  of  things  which  reveals  the  deanages.  Grenetic
surveys  have  always  the  advantage  of  showing  the  emergence
of  the  thing  in  its  *  natural '  relations  —  in  the  case  of  con-
science, for  instance,  it  will  be  found  in  the  company  of  those
desires  and  impulses  with  which  it  is  destined  to  concern
itself  as  regulator.  Nature  can  give  no  sign  of  conscience
except  in  the  midst  of  its  business.  We  have  not  first  to
deduce  the  thing  and  then  its  application ;  but  if  we  find  it  at
all,  we  shall  find  the  application  first  and  the  thing  in  the
heart  of  the  application.

Now  to  decipher  the  physical  substratum  of  mind,  what  we
most  need  is  a  distinction  of  categories. Not  every  aspect  of


542  ID£A  AND  VALUE

oonacioasneM  is  presented  in  the  physical  context  by  a  separate
organ  or  process  ;  we  mnst  be  ready  to  appeal  to  the  higher
physical  categories,  the  configurations  of  organs  and  processes,
accelerations  of  processes,  and  other  differentials  and  modifi-
cations of  energy.  What  natore  shows  ns  is  not  simply  a
metaphor  of  consciousness  (and  hardly  that — for  its  language
is  all  but  literal),  but  it  shows  us  a  finished  analysis  of
consciousness.  We  know  that  whereas  in  itself  pleasure  is
simple,  conscience  is  simple,  and  nature  is  simple,  the  attempt  to
express  one  in  terms  of  another  brings  out  the  subtleties  of  each ;
and  we  shall  not  expect  to  find  erery  unitary  mental  stats
marked  out  in  the  body  by  tangibly  colligated  physiological
phenomena.  We  should  be  guided  much  more  truly  by  the
principle  that  j^syc&ica/  categories  are  complementary  to  pkysi"
cal  categories.  The  first  aspect  of  a  psychical  one  will  be  a
physical  many  ;  this  physical  many  will  have  its  physical  unity
also,  but  that  unity  will  not  be  in  the  same  class  of  objects
with  the  many — will  be  found  in  physical  functions  which
are  the  more  derivative  in  proportion  as  the  psychical  cat^ory
is  more  substantial  The  unily  of  the  *  self'  may  thus  be  the
last  thing  for  which  the  simple  physical  expression  is  found
(no  pineal  body  among  other  bodies),  though  that  simple
expression  necessarily  exists.  The  processes  which  belong  to  a
self  are  naturally  more  widely  dispersed  and  more  various  than
those  which  belong  to  such  imperfect  and  fragmentary  unities
within  a  self  as  *  an  experience,'  *  an  idea,'  ^  a  pleasure,'  etc.  In
the  interpretation  of  ^t  freedom  of  consciousness  we  have  a
dear  case  of  the  complementary  nature  of  physical  and  psychi-
cal categories.  The  freedom  and  initiative  of  consciousness  is
represented  in  nature  by  the  obedient  r^ularity,  sometimes
called  the  n^ce^atfy,  of  physical  sequence.  This  is  theonly  basis
upon  which  the  relation  of  the  free  spirit  to  nature  can  be  made
intelligible.  In  a  machine  whose  parts  have  any  slack  or  lost
motion  the  eye  will  discover  the  origin  of  pushes  and  pulls  by
the  direction  of  the  slack.  But  in  a  machine  all  of  whose  con-
nections are  perfect,  so  that  there  is  not  even  infinitesimal  slack


IDEA  AND  VALUE  643

in  any  part,  it  is  impossible  for  observation  to  discover  whether
the  wheel  is  palling  the  piston  or  the  piston  pushing  the  wheel.
Nature  asa  mechanism  certainly  offers  no  visible  suggestion  as
to  the  seat  of  its  original  impulses ;  it  simply  goes  its  perfect
way ;  and  this  alone  it  is  which  enables  me  to  accept  unreservedly
the  testimony  of  consciousness  that  itself  is  the  active  and  origi-
nal thing  in  the  world,  all  else  being  ultimately  passi  ve.  With
this  understanding  the  chief  difficulty  in  all  biological  accounts
of  conscience  is  relieved  —  how,  namely,  out  of  natural  law,
that  is,  out  of  absolute  obedience,  can  come  the  dictator.  It  is
just  because  nature  is  the  region  of  perfect  obedience  that  the
dictator  has  to  '  come  out.'  In  all  strictness,  dictatorship  is
simply  the  permanent  outside  of  nature ;  and  nature  gives  birth
to  conscience  as  it  were,  by  way  of  confession.  What  we  see  in
nature  is  the  gradual  perfection  of  the  receiving  organ,  so  that
freedom  acquires  growing  significance  as  life  moves  on  ;  but
some  receiving  organ  is  always  there,  the  regular  is  the  contin-
uous signature  of  the  free.  We  have  therefore  no  separate
place  to  make  in  our  account  of  value  or  conscience  for  free-
dom, since  it  is  completely  expressed  in  the  character  which
makes  nature  nature.

The  term  *  idea '  will  play  the  fundamental  r81e  in  the
theory  I  have  to  propose,  and  it  will  be  desirable  to  sketch  its
physical  interpretation  before  attempting  the  further  ques-
tion of  the  nature  of  value-experience.  I  shall  attempt  in  the
end  to  show,  through  these  physical  expressions,  that  values
and  conscience  are  /unctions  in  the  life  of  ^  ideas^^  and  to
point  out  definitely,  in  the  same  language,  what  these  functions
are.  Our  disjointed  world  of  facts,  appreciations,  and  duties,
may  then  be  seen  in  some  intelligible  shape  and  connection  on
a  basis  other  than  metaphysical,  though  at  every  point  the
shapes  of  nature  are  but  the  intaglio  of  the  spirit.

I.  The  Biological  Equivalent  of  *  Idea  '

If  our  interpretation  of  freedom  is  valid,  the  fact  that  any
given  physiological  apparatus  works  ^mechanically'  creates


544  IDEA  AND  VALUE

no  premimptioli  that  it  b  uDacoompanied  by  oonscionmeBS.
ConscioiuneBs  is  not  introdaced  into  the  biological  series  at
the  point  where  mechanism  fails  to  meet  the  needs  of  adjust-
ment, because  there  is  no  such  point.  Hence  ^instincts,'
however  truly  explained  as  congeries  of  simple  automatisms  of
tropic  character,  may  at  the  same  time  represent  some  element
of  consciousness.  Such  an  element  would  necessarily  be  a
*  universal '  or  general  idea;  for  the  instinct  is  rehited  not  to
individual  objects,  but  to  a  type  or  class  of  objects,  in  sudi
wise  that  wfuUever  object  affords  the  proper  stimulus  releases
the  appropriate  action.  To  consciousness  the  stimulus  would
appear  not  as  *  this  individual  object*  but  rather  as*  a  specimen
of  this  kind  of  thing  *  toward  which  such  and  such  a  line  of
action  is  desirable.

The  repetition  of  the  stimulus  would  present  to  conscions-
ness  *  another  specimen  of  the  same  type,'  and  the  similarity
of  response  might  connect  itself  for  that  consciousness  with
some  quality  oonunon  to  the  two  particular  objects ;  but  we
who  look  on  can  see  that  the  identity  of  the  idea  lies  not
primarily  in  any  objective  characters  of  the  two  ei^riences,
but  rather  in  something  which  the  organism  carries  around
with  it,  and  which  exists  when  there  are  no  '  escperiences '  to
set  off  its  train  of  behavior.  I  wish  to  show  not  only  that  there
is  a  biological  equivalent  for  the  pennanent  identify  (some-
times called  the  *  timelessness ')  of  the  idea,  and  for  the  native
difference  between  an  idea  and  *•  an  experience,'  but  also  to
show  that  the  idea  has  a  more  continuous  presence  in  conscious-
ness than  the  experiences  in  which  it  is  subsumed  from  time
to  time.  An  idea  is  in  fact  never  absent  from  consciousness ;
the  prevalent  belief  that  it  vanishes  and  reappears  is  a  con-
fusion between  fche  idea  and  the  experience.  Secognitions  of
objects  are  intermittent ;  but  our  ideas,  it  should  be  evident,
are  not  what  we  think  of,  they  are  what  we  think  with.  Now
whatever  else  the  unity  of  a  consciousness  may  mean,  it  also
means  that  there  is  no  isolated  action  of  ideas,  but  that  I
think  with  all  of  them  at  once  in  each  moment,  though  the


IDEA  AND  VALUE  645

*  bearing'  of  any  given  idea  upon  any  given  experience  may
be  very  remote.

But  beside  the  ideas  that  correspond  to  instincts,  that  is,  to
the  various  modes  of  regular,  quasi-official  dealing  with  objects,
there  is  a  set  of  ideas  of  a  different  sort,  which  I  may  call  the
fidcUidefis^  such  as  the  idea  of  extension,  or  of  the  physical
continuum,  or  of  a  particular  friendship,  or  that  important
sjrmbolic  idea  *  the  whole  of  things/  These  do  not  correspond
to  any  outlinable  instincts ;  their  biological  expression  must
be  sought  elsewhere.  But  inasmuch  as  the  field-ideas  develop
in  close  concomitance  with  the  development  of  the  instincts,  the
nature  of  the  biological  expression  may  appear  by  considering
the  interaction  of  instinct-ideas  in  the  course  of  evolution.

The  evolution  of  ideas  in  its  most  general  biological  char-
acter may  be  summarized  as  a  matter  of  the  halandng  of  in-
stincta  —  that  is,  of  the  emergence  of  *  secondary '  or  counter-
instincts,  which  act  together  with  the  *  primary '  instincts  as
more  general  instincts  than  either  alone.  Such  a  pair  will  be
represented  in  consciousness  by  a  more  general  idea.  Now  we
have  to  note  that  eveiy  time  one  instinct  has  been  balanced
by  another,  consciousness  has  acquired  not  only  a  new  type
or  class  of  objects,  but  also  an  idea  of  much  greater  scope
than  that  corresponding  to  either  of  the  two  instincts  separ-
ately. Just  as  my  present  impulse  cannot  be  checked  by  the
suggestion  of  something  future  without  making  me  aware  not
merely  of  the  two  points  in  time,  but  more  or  less  dimly  of
the  stretch  of  time  between ;  so  the  generalized  habit  of  modify-
ing the  present  impulse  by  the  consideration  of  future  contin-
gencies cannot  be  established  without  making  the  idea  of  the
time-afield  a  correspondingly  firm  element  of  my  conscious
visti^  So  in  proportion  as  I  learn  to  modify  my  reflex  upon
what  is  here  by  the  suggestion  of  what  is  not  here,  the  idea
of  apace  becomes  a  mastered  range  of  mental  vision.  The
logic  of  the  process  is  this ;  that  whenever  an  x  meets  its  non-a^y
X  having  been  my  largest  class,  the  two  can  coexist  in  the  same
mind  only  as  parts  of  some  *  universe  of  discourse '  whose  scope


546  IDEA  AND  VALUE

will  in  general  be  Teiy  much  greater  than  x.  The  develop-
ment  of  an  inhibitcHry  instinct,  thei«f<Mre,  can  neyer  mean  the
letting  of  one  anggettion  againat  another  simply,  bat  it  meang
opening  a  whole  field  of  passible  variations  where  before  there
was  bat  one  fixed  line.  This  whole  prooeaa  of  balancing
instincts,  impulses,  suggestions  and  associations  means  that  the
mental  range  is  becoming  more  complete.  Man^s  peculiarity
in  biological  terms  is  his  extraordinary  balance  —  throughout
his  being  he  stands  on  two  feet.  It  is  this  same  peculiarity
which  in  psychical  terms  is  expressed  in  his  extraordinaiy
capacity  for  gripping  large  totals,  and  at  last  for  coming  to  use
the  category  *  the  whole.'  The  use  of  this  category  is  reason.^
Now  any  one  of  these  vista-  or  field-ideas,  as  we  may  call  them,
varies  greatly  in  vividness.  This  vividness  will  be  a  function
of  the  intensity  of  the  a^impulse  and  also  of  the  intensity  of
the  nonrx  suggestion.  The  consciousness  of  time,  for  instance,
is  nuzde  vivid  by  the  conflict  between  the  claims  of  a  pungent
present  and  a  pungent  future.  Let  me  suggest  that  a  virid
representation  of  a  future  moment  and  therewith  of  the  time-
field,  whether  voluntary  or  resultant,  stands  for  an  expendi-
ture of  actual  physical  energy;  and  that  the  continuous  and
easy  presence  of  future  and  past  to  our  vision  represents  a
high  level  of  potential  energy  in  the  nervous  elements  con-
cerned. In  general,  I  would  propose  that  the  extent  of  the
ideal-whole  in  whose  presence  a  conscious  being  lives  and  to
which  he  adjusts  his  action  is  biologically  represented  by  the
potential  energy  of  the  nervous  centers.

n.  Ths  Theory  of  V^lue-Exfebience

The  earliest  and  simplest  instincts  seem  to  be  of  such  sort
that  the  *  perception '  of  the  stimulus  and  the  ^  gratification '  of

^  The  effect  of  the  ooliiiter-initinct  in  developing  a  field-idea  shows
iteelf  in  the  phenomenon  of  hesUaHon.  Now  the  reenltant  of  two  instinets
if  just  as  determinate  at  the  aetion  of  one.  Hesitation  means  not  that
two  possibilities  interact,  but  that  a  range  of  possibilities  has  to  be  nm
OTsr  as  a  relatively  independent  object  Man's  fitness  for  reason  is
concomitant  with  his  pre-eminent  fitness  for  hesitation.


IDEA  AND  VALUE  547

the  instinct  are  one  and  the  same  process.  Dealing  with  its
object  either  by  contact  or  by  immediate  reaction  the  subsump-
tion  of  the  general  idea  is  the  satisfaction.  Despite  the
immense  veiling  of  the  phenomena  of  pleasure  and  pain  by
the  complexities  of  development,  -the  profuse  demarcation  of
states  of  consciousness  as  ^ideas'  which  are  neither  instinct-
ideas  nor  field-ideas  but  perhaps  fragments  thereof,  I  believe
it  can  be  shown  that  all  pleasure  is  still  of  the  nature  either
of  subsumption  (wherein  an  idea,  or  a  conceptual  whole,  is
applied  to  one  of  its  instances)  or  of  induction  (wherein  some
instance  or  group  of  instances  are  provided  with  a  conceptual
whole  which  covers  them).  The  joy  of  making  a  successful
induction  and  the  satisfaction  which  a  child  takes  in  applying
a  new  word,  are  typical  of  all  our  positive  values.

I  cannot  here  make  attempt  to  cover  the  field  of  value-
experience,  nor  to  account  for  all  the  well-known  anomalies  of
our  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain.  I  shall  review  simply  in
very  rough  outline  a  series  of  phenomena  which  seem  to
me  fundamental  in  the  sense  that  any  theory  which  will  explain
them  will  explain  the  rest  in  the  long  run.

1.  Pleasures  connected  immediately  with  the  senses  and
with  the  several  physiological  functions  have  their  marked
rhythmic  intervals ;  and  the  longer  the  period  of  intermittency,
the  greater,  in  general,  the  volume  of  the  pleasure  (Spencer).
This  dimension  of  pleasure  seems  to  be  a  function  of  the  nutri-
tion of  the  organs  concerned.

2.  Pleasure  is  itself  a  destructive  and  exhausting  process.
This  is  a  natural  inference  from  (1).  Pleasure  heightens
life  —  that  is,  it  quickens  expense ;  it  draws  living  to  a  focus
as  a  flame  creates  its  own  draught.  The  intensity  of  a  pleas-
ure varies  directly  with  the  rate  of  destructive  metabolism.

Pleasure  may  *  accompany  states  in  which  the  organism  is
being  built  up'  (Boyce,  and  many  others) ;  but  the  process  of
building  up  is  incidental  to  the  pleasure  itself,  a  biologically
fortunate  incident  indeed,  but  having  no  representation  in  con-
sciousness. The  actual  succoring  of  the  organism  occurs  later


548  IDEA  AND  VALUE

in  time  than  the  pleasure  and  affects  first  of  all  parts  quite
different  from  those  concerned  in  the  pleasure.  In  the  long
run  pleasure  is  normally  profitable  to  th^  organism ;  it  usually
accompanies  only  such  expense  as  the  body  is  happy  to  restore ;
the  drain  affects  primarily  funds  which  have  been  appropria-
ted for  that  particular  purpose ;  and  these  circumstances  have
something  to  do  with  differentiating  pleasurable  expense  from
painful  expense. But  per  se^  pleasure  is  a  drain.

This  is  a  clear  instance  of  the  complementary  relation
between  physical  and  psychical  categories  above  noticed.  As
an  experience,  pleasure  is  indeed  a  filling  up  of  the  cup,  the
supplying  of  a  need.  And  the  deeper  the  draft  upon  vital
resources,  the  g^reater  the  fulfilment  of  desire.  This  holds
true  to  the  limit.  Only  that  delight  can  ultimately  satisfy
and  fill  the  soul  which  drains  the  body  to  the  point  of
death.  Indeed,  all  joy  is  akin  to  death ;  the  fortunate  drone
unites  with  the  queen,  and  dies — a  rapport  symbolic  of
all  pleasure.

It  is,  in  part,  confusion  between  these  inverse  psychical  and
physical  categories  which  has  misled  so  many  of  the  best
observers  into  the  belief  that  pleasure  is  a  psychical  aocom«
paniment  of  physiological  construction.  It  is  extremely  doubt-
ful whether  such  construction  enters  into  consciousness  at  alL

8.  It  follows  from  (2)  that  the  expense  in  pleasure  is  not
confined  to  the  organ  immediately  concerned  with  the  object
which  is  the  occasion  of  the  pleasure.  To  a  certain  degree,
change  of  object  will  renew  pleasure,  and  variety  of  object
preserve  it ;  but  there  is  evidently  a  oonunon  store  which  every
pleasure  draws  upon,  independent  of  the  particular  organ  or
object.  A  person  thoroughly  exhausted  in  one  joy  is  ready
to  enjoy  nothing  else  but  Nirvana.

4.  The  quality,  *  pleasure,*  is  a  function  neither  of  the
special  nor  of  the  general  exhausting  process  alone,  but  of  some
relation  between  them.  Pleasure  is  at  the  same  time  a  central
and  a  peripheral  experience.

In  psychical  language,  pleasure  requires  attention. The


IDEA  AND  VALUE  549

physiological  design  of  consciousness  must  be  one  of  concen-
tration. However  wide  the  range  of  a  person's  affairs  his
whole  interest  must  be  recalled  to  the  simplest  experience  he
would  enjoy.  The  process  of  ^  becoming  absorbed/  let  us  say
in  music,  is  at  first  a  conflict  with  the  inertia  of  other  trends
of  interest :  they  must  all  fall  into  line  at  last.  The  inten*
sity  of  the  pleasure  depends  upon  the  perfection  of  the  focus,
that  is,  upon  the  absence  of  competition  among  objects  of
attention.  The  person  is  €dl  in  thepleasure^  no  matter  if  it
be  a  *  mere  '  sensation.

6.  But  if  it  is  important  for  the  perfection  of  the  experience
that  other  interests  cease  to  compete,  it  is  equally  important
that  they  continue  to  exist.  The  quantity  of  the  pleasure
depends  on  the  completeness  of  the  recall,  but  it  also  depends
on  the  presence  of  interests  to  be  recalled.  Pleasure  is  a  func-
tion not  simply  of  the  fact  of  focus,  but  also  of  the  amount  of
stuff  concerned  in  the  focusing.  In  this  respect,  different
pleasures,  so  far  from  being  competitive,  depend  each  one  on
the  existence  of  the  others  to  give  them  magnitude :  every  pleas-
ure has  one  dimension  which  varies  directly  with  the  number
of  instincts,  or  desires  of  possible  kinds  of  pleasure  —  and  not
simply  with  the  degree  of  differentiation,  but  with  the  ground
covered  by  the  differentiated  interests,  that  is,  with  the  range
of  the  objects.  In  other  words,  pleasure  is  a  function^  among
other  things^  of  the  idechhorizon  ;  any  given  pleasure  echoes
into  the  whole  cavern  of  a  self,  and  varies  in  quantity  with  the
volume  and  resonance  of  that  cavern.  Even  within  the  career
of  a  single  pleasure  it  is  noticeable  that  as  absorption  becomes
complete  and  the  circumference  of  the  circle  of  consciousness
begins  to  contract,  the  pleasure  has  passed  its  culmination,  and
will  tend  to  asero  until  the  interruption  of  another  object  of
attention  dissipates  it.

AU  this  points  to  the  hypothesis  that  in  all  pleasure  our
*  field-ideas'  are  at  work  (not  as  thought  of,  but  as  thinking).
The  *  circumference  of  consciousness '  is  a  variable  which  cor-
responds exactly  to  those  changes  in  the  vividness  of  the  field-


SBO  IDEA  AND  VALUE

ideas  which  we  sapposed  to  represent  a  certain  tension  or  poten-
tial in  the  centers.  And  this  tension,  we  said,  was  in  turn  a
function  of  the  competition  of  impulses.  For  example,  the
extension  of  time-vista  both  foward  and  backward  which
marked  the  earliest  economic  advances  of  mankind,  is  conccHn-
itant  with  the  growing  possibility  of  inhibiting  a  present
impulse  by  the  idea  of  a  future  value.  The  continuous  sub-
jection of  impulse  to  the  consent  of  all  the  possibilities  in  a
time-field  means  indeed  an  interference  with  pleasure  in  the
sense  that  each  claimant  for  attention  has  to  struggle  for  po9-
session  ;  but  it  means  that  every  object  which  gains  this  attri-
tion is  the  source  of  a  pleasure  whose  value  is  greater  than
that  of  an  undisputed  enjoyment  of  the  same  object  in  propor-
tion to  the  enhancement  of  the  time-idea.  In  physical  laa-
g^uage,  every  increase  of  the  potential  energy  of  the  centers
increases  all  conscious  values  in  the  same  proportion.

What  the  physiological  processes  are  which  play  themselves
ofF  in  the  actual  business  of  enjoyment,  I  can  here  do  no  more
than  hint.  All  pleasure  is  rhythmic  and  tends  to  self-main-
tenance. A  mood^  for  example,  which  is  a  value-experience  on
a  somewhat  roomy  and  deliberate  scale,  becomes  pleasurable  in
proportion  as  it  learns  the  arts  of  life,  as  melancholy  feeds  and
reproduces  itself  from  node  to  node  of  its  rhythm.  The  quality  we
call  *  pleasure '  is  deeply  connected  with  this  formal  character
of  the  processes  involved  (a  character  which  makes  of  them  pre-
cisely what  the  mathematicians  mean  by  a  *  group ').  On  the
conscious  side,  it  will  be  evident  by  a  little  observation,  that
the  change  which  occurs  when  a  trying  experience  after  repe-
tition becomes  pleasurable,  may  be  described  as  the  acquisition
of  an  idea  under  which  each  element  of  the  experience  is
Bubtnmable  as  it  rises.  When  for  instance  anxiety  in  a  given
situation  gives  way  to  confidence,  we  have  acquired  on  the
intellectuid  side,  vista^  and  on  the  practical  side  a  readiness  to
meet  with  appropriate  action  whatever  type  of  event  may  arise
in  the  course  of  the  experience.  So  with  a  mood :  it  is  impli-
citly a  Weltanschauung^  and  it  lives  by  the  process  of  corrob-


IDEA  AND  VALUE  561

orating  its  theory  of  things  in  the  events  that  pass  its  focus ;
in  this  commerce  of  Us  idea  with  the  instancee  of  life  lies  its
satisfaction,  be  it  a  gloom  or  a  glory.  I  propose  that  the  same
is  true  of  organic  pleasures.  In  them,  nature  has  embodied
in  structure  the  idea  concerned ;  she  has  solved  the  problem
of  that  particular  evil  for  us  (for  doubtless  all  the  destruc-
tion which  is  at  the  heart  of  consciousness  is  an  organic  prob-
lem) ;  and  the  idea  she  uses  will  be  most  difficult  to  drag  into
the  foreground  of  vision.  But  that  the  idea  b  present  in  phys-
iolc^cal  concentration,  and  can  in  time  be  read,  no  one  who
follows  the  spiritual  progeny  of  any  instinct  can  question.

My  thesis  then  is  simply  this :  that  all  pleasure  is  essentially
a  process  of  intercourse  between  an  idea  and  its  instance.
The  field-ideas  of  any  consciousness  will  be  concerned  in  all  of
its  pleasures  ;  and  each  of  these  pleasures  will  have  as  one  of
its  dimensions  a  quantity  which  varies  with  the  effective  range
of  its  total  field,  or,  biologically  speaking,  with  the  potential
energy  of  the  centers.

III.  The  Theory  of  Conscience

Since  Spencer,  much  has  been  done  by  way  of  distinguishing
conscience  from  those  types  of  inhibition  which  more  or  less
dosely  resemble  it  and  ally  themselves  with  it.  The  work  of
describing  psychologically  the  unique  characters  of  conscience
is  in  the  nature  of  the  case  always  unfinished  ;  but  it  will  be
sufficient  for  our  purposes  if,  by  way  of  a  phenomenology  of
conscience,  we  may  make  clear  the  separation  between  con-
science itself  and  the  load  which  conscience  carries  or  adopts.

The  load  is  the  relatively  changeable  aspect  of  conscience.
Every  individual  in  the  course  of  his  career  makes  numerous
changes  in  the  points  of  scruple  which  constitute  the  burden
or  application  of  his  conscience ;  the  race  has  done  the  same
thing  on  far  greater  scale.  Perhaps  the  first  burden  and
certainly  the  most  permanent  prot^g^  of  conscience  are  the
^  secondary  instincts '  —  but  they  are  not  conscience.  This
load  makes  use  of  all  accessible  means  of  support :  pains.


662  IDEA  AND  VALUE

punishments,  associations  of  approval  and  disapproval,  and  all
the  well-known  instmments  of  social  propagation,  so  that  in
the  contents  of  conscience  as  we  find  it  in  ourselves  there  are
motives  traceable  not  only  to  our  own  education  and  experi-
ence but  to  every  stage  of  our  historic  and  phylogenetic  jour-
ney, motives  in  which  the  aspirations  of  the  Orient,  or  even
the  sorrows  of  those  remote  pre-moral  ancestors  whom  Spencer
invokes,  are  among  the  comparatively  recent  relics.  But  all
this  is  something  other  than  conscience.  No  theory  indeed
is  complete  which  does  not  explain  the  circumstance,  remark-
able enough  in  itself,  that  conscience  has  the  capacity  of  ally-
ing itself  with  all  this  material  —  that  it  is  able  so  early  in
human  history  to  lend  effective  support  to  a  struggling
secondary  instinct,  and  to  turn  the  natural  disadvantage  of
the  remote  consideration  into  some  sort  of  equivalent  chance
for  survival  But  the  first  point  is  to  distinguish  the  thing
itself  from  all  its  adoptions ;  and  I  shall  resume  very  sum*
manly  what  seem  to  me  the  most  significant  points  in  that
separation.

1.  Conscience  has  nothing  to  do  primarily  with  the  way
we  feel  about  any  specifiable  kinds  of'  (iction.  For  it  is
a  more  central  affair  than  can  be  described  in  terms  of  a
connection  between  types  of  action  and  such  elements  of
experience  as  might  adhere,  by  association,  etc.,  directly  to
these  types.

Nothing  is  more  astonishing  in  the  earliest  history  of  the
moral  motive  than  the  speed  with  which  it  shakes  free  from
peripheral  lines  of  association  and  becomes  an  organic  attitude
to  action  in  general,  which  it  requires  some  use  of  subsuming
intelligence  to  apply  to  particular  kinds  of  action.  The  func-
tion of  those  third  parties  to  the  moral  situation  which  appear
so  early  in  moral  development  —  the  alleged  first  ancestor,
the  totem,  the  lawgiver,  etc  —  is  primarily  that  of  supporting
conscience  in  this  central  position,  the  position,  that  is,  of
relative  independence  of  the  *  types  of  action '  and  thereby  of
more  or  less  freely  variable  application  to  them. Psychologi-


IDEA  AND  VALUE  553

cally  expressed,  the  thought  of  an  action  has  to  pass  through
the  thought  of  this  third  party,  with  the  r^me  he  repre-
sents, before  that  action  or  kind  of  action  is  considered
right  or  wrong.

2.  The  painful  quality  which  we  attribute  to  the  motive
side  of  conscience  is  also  a  part  of  its  load ;  that  is,  it  is  adven-
titious. Conscience  is  necessarily  painful  only  in  so  far  as
all  hesitation,  or  the  halting  of  immediate  satisfaction,  is  pain-
ful. Whatever  traces  and  suggestions  of  past  pains  and
punishments  conscience  bears  with  it  must  be  referred  to  its
accretions,  not  to  its  nature.  The  sort  of  check  which
conscience  imposes  upon  action  is  more  nearly  like  that  which
some  inarticulate  presentiment  of  a  greater  good  might  impose
upon  a  definable  good.  But  strictly  speaking,  conscience  has
nothing  to  do  with  represented  pleasures  any  more  than  with
represented  pains,  nor  with  any  represented  utilities  of  an
inheritable  sort,  as  will  appear  from  the  following.

8.  Conscience  resembles  the  a^thetic  consciousness  in  being
a  continuous  source  of  new  requirements,  not  traceable  to  any
« lessons '  of  previous  experience.  If  it  were  the  record  in  us
of  experiences  of  any  sort  already  finished  and  organically
digested  it  would  tend  to  fading  rather  than  to  finesse.  But
nothing  more  than  conscience  is  subject  to  explorative  origi-
nation, and  to  the  sport  of  virtuosoship.

The  theory  of  the  biological  aspect  of  conscience  which  I
have  now  to  propose  is  simple.  It  depends  upon  the  theory
of  ideas  and  values  already  developed,  and  needs  but  one
further  preliminary,  —  the  proposition,  namely,  that  2aijjlux
in  consciousness  is,  or  may  become,  itself  an  object  of  or  factor
in  consciousness.

Just  as  we  have  impressions  not  only  of  distinct  static
objects,  as  stones  and  trees,  but  also  of  processes^  as  dawning
or  waning  of  light ;  so  we  have  awareness  not  alone  of  high
spirits  and  low  spirits,  but  ulso  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  spirits,
if  these  changes  are  sufficiently  rapid  ;  so  also,  of  the  flux  of
vigor,  of  the  loosening  of  attention,  etc.,  —  sometimes  even


564  IDEA  AND  VALUE

of  waking  or  falling  aaleep.  I  preanme  ibat  eveiy  flux  in
consciousness  is  in  some  measure  an  object  of  oonsdousnesa,
for  consciousness  is  by  definition,  *  that  r^on  in  which
appearance  and  reality  coincide  * ;  though  it  may  well  be  that
few  fluxes  are  separately  registered  and  noted.

Now  if  our  theory  of  yalues  is  sound,  the  most  significant
of  all  fluxes  in  any  consciousness  for  the  integrity  of  its  values
would  be  a  flux  in  the  effective  range  of  its  field-ideas ;  for  we
proposed  that  the  field-ideas  were  factors  in  every  particular
experience  of  value.  Physically,  every  pleasure  has  for  one
of  its  factors  a  coefficient  of  potential  tension  in  the  centers ;
and  the  potential  capacity  of  these  centers  has  been  very  grad-
ually extended  as  instincts  have  balanced  each  other,  the  most
sensitive  index  of  this  growth  being  the  range  of  effective
bearing  of  our  field-ideas  upon  the  immediate  business  of
living.  Any  act  which  rejects  the  bearing,  let  us  say  of  the
future  upon  the  present,  wilf uUy  obscuring  the  time-vista  and
tending  to  diminish  its  efficiency  in  consciousness,  will  strike
a  blow  at  the  degree  of  all  values  in  that  consciousness.  It
will  do  so,  moreover,  in  a  way  of  which  the  agent  can  at  the
time  have  no  inkling.

Conscience,  I  believe,  is  the  perception  of  this  differential;
that  is,  on  the  physical  side,  it  is  a  recognition  of  the  flux,
real  or  virtual,  of  potential  capacity  in  the  nervous  centers ;
on  the  side  of  consciousness,  it  is  a  sense  of  flux  in  the  valid
bearing,  or  efficiency,  of  my  fleld-ideas.  Or,  since  all  field-
ideas  in  the  same  consciousness  must  come,  as  we  have  said,
to  an  understanding  with  each  other,  so  that  they  act  as  parts
of  a  single  field  which  we  may  symbolize  abstractly  as  *•  the
whole,'  conscience  may  be  described  simply  as  the  perception
of  flux  in  the  awareness  of  the  whole.

In  this  description  the  word  perception  is  open  to  valid
objection,  inasmuch  as  the  consciousness  which  is  experiencing
the  flux  in  question  does  not  interpret  its  experience  in  terms
of  any  such  flux.  The  change  which  affects  *  ideas,*  conscious-
ness always  tries  to  interpret  as  a  change  in  ^  experiences,*


IDEA  AND  VALUE  556

referring  its  uneasiness  to  the  agency  of  mysterious  objects^  —
the  *  third  parties '  above  mentioned.  It  would  perhaps  be
better  to  say  not  that  the  flux  is  ^  perceived,'  but  that  this
actual  flux  has  become  a  separately  effective  agent  in  con-
sciousness, leaving  undetermined  how  consciousness,  in  its
more  or  less  bedevilled  efforts  to  construe  to  itself  what  is
happening,  shall  report  these  effects.  On  the  biological  side
the  language  seems  to  me  sufficiently  precise.  I  make  no
attempt  to  portray  to  my  mind  the  ultimate  physical  occur-
rences —  an  attempt  which  would  be  presumptuous  with  far
more  knowledge  of  these  processes  than  I  can  boast :  I  am
content  to  state  what  I  believe  to  be  the  true  gentis  of  the
event  itself.  To  say  that  we  are  aware  of  a  thing,  is  to  say,
biologically,  that  the  representative  of  the  thing  is  doing  some
work  within.  The  work  which  conscience  does,  we  thought
to  be  inhibitive  in  character.  Now  wherever  there  are  fiekl-
ideas  at  all,  there  are  fluxes  of  fleld-ideas  as  a  matter  of  course :
but  conscience  begins  when  iMsflux  begins  to  be  itself  effec-
tive^ through  whatever  apparatus.  Biologically,  therefore,  we
may  say  that  the  <  recognition '  of  the  flux  above  described
consists  in  a  resistance  to  a  negative  flux  wherein  the  capacity
of  the  centers  is  diminished.  The  biological  equivalent  of
conscience  is :  A  resistance  to  any  tendency  to  diminish  the
potential  capacity  of  the  nervous  centers.  If  this  supposition
is  valid,  it  should  at  least  accord  with  the  phenomena  of
conscience  which  we  have  brought  forward.

It  is  evident  that  conscience  would  from  the  start  be  inde-
pendent of  external  experiences  associated  with  any  special
*  types  of  action.'  Conscience  would  work  just  as  decisively
in  inhibiting  an  action  which  threatened  our  field-integrity  in
an  entirely  new  and  unheard-of  way,  as  it  would  in  the  case
of  a  thoroughly  conventional  mode  of  offence — perhaps  better.
But  any  external  sign  of  disapproval  upon  an  action  undesir-
able in  this  intimate  way  would  add  its  definite  ^  no '  to  the
less  definite  ^  no  *  of  conscience ;  and  any  considerable  group
of  such  tangible  corroborations  of  conscience  would  form  a


666  IDEA  AND  VALUE

body  of  foflions  which  even  to  skilled  psychological  ohsera^
tion,  if  it  were  of  the  preyalent  point-blank  yariety,  would
defy  analysis*  Conscience  pore  and  simple  is  distingnishahle
only  in  its  work  of  initiative  and  variation.

And  we  can  see  further  how  oonsdenoe  wonld  have  an
sesthetic  and  super-nsef ul  character.  As  a  sense  for  a  differ-
ential, it  would  vary  with  powers  of  discrimination  ;  it  would  be
a  function  of  ^fineness  of  fiber.*  It  is  entirely  conceivable
that  a  prodigy  of  conscience  should  appear  in  the  midst  of  a
relatively  rough-shod  oommunityy  which  could  not  be  the  case
if  conscience  were  the  vanishing  echo  of  an  already  fixed
racial  inheritance.  But  while  conscience  outstrips  utility,  it  is
not  hard  to  see  that  it  would  tend  to  be  useful.  For  the  field-
ideas  are  but  signs  of  the  adequacy  with  which  consciousness
presents  to  itself  its  world.  Conscience  at  any  time  stands
for  a  superabundance  of  adaptation.  But,  as  in  many  other
cases,  nature  has  had  to  adapt  herself  generously  because
there  was  no  way  whereby  she  could  adapt  just  enough  and
no  more.

Finally,  we  can  see  that  as  it  would  be  impossible  for  early
man  to  discover  the  nature  of  the  evil  that  threatened  him  in
his  troubles  of  conscience,  so  it  would  be  impossible  for  him
to  express  it  accurately  in  terms  of  any  known  good.  Its
voice  in  him,  until  he  seized  upon  the  sticks  and  straws  of
*  empirical'  corroborations,  would  be  chiefly  that  of  inarticu-
late resistance,  a  check  which  gave  no  clear  reason  for  its
presence,  a  categorical  imperative  or  forbiddal.  But  in  so
far  as  he  tried  to  make  plain  to  himself  the  uneasiness  at  his
center  he  wonld  have  to  connect  it  with  the  widest  objects  of
his  Weltanschauung  —  his  future,  his  ancestors,  and  his  spir-
its. For  these  remotest  objects  are  only  the  outpost  stakes
which  we  have  set  as  marks  of  the  widest  total  mental  ranges
we  have  thus  far  conquered.  The  sense  of  duty  as  a  strain
indicates  that  the  range  of  '  the  whole '  is  being  enlarged.
The  sense  of  pleasure  which  at  length  displaces  duty  in  that
same  type  of  action  may  mean  that  this  degree  of  totality  is


IDEA  AND  VALUE  667

now  secare.  But  unless  we  suppose  that  a  man's  mind  can
reach  a  complete  adequacy  of  view,  the  sense  of  duty  can
neyer,  as  Spencer  suggests,  be  expected  to  disappear.

The  final  test  of  any  such  theory  as  this  will  be  found  in  its
ability  to  explain  the  history  of  the  evolution  of  conscience.
This  immense  task  must  be  reserved.  What  I  have  here
aimed  to  do  has  been  accomplished  —  to  show  the  natural
relations  of  ideas,  values,  and  duties,  through  the  medium
of  their  common  biological  context


m


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  INDEPENDENT  REALITY'

r  it  has  been  the  fault  of  realism  to  gi^e  the  object  of
knowledge  an  independence  which  makes  it  meaningless,
it  can  be  no  sufficient  groond  for  idealism  as  a  positive  doc-
trine to  refute  a  meaningless  independence.  It  is  not  enongh
to  bring  forward  the  eyer-ready  ^*Ich  denke,  welches  alls
meine  Vorstellongen  begleiten  kann/'  or  Boyoe's  ^^Ich  will,
welches  aUemeineVorstellangeneinnehmenkann.'*  For  while
the  idealist  may  say,  after  the  mathematician's  fashion :  *  Give
me  any  object,  however  independent,  and  I  will  show  yon  an
ich-denke,  or  an  ich-will,  which  can  take  it  in,'  the  realist  may
always  rightly  reply:  ^Give  me  any  ich-denke,  or  ich-will,
however  capacious,  and  I  will  show  yon  an  object  whose  being
is  independent  of  that  very  thought.*

For  it  is  an  act  of  reflection  which  discovers  the  ich-denke
as  including  the  object ;  and  by  reflection  upon  your  reflec-
tion you  rediscover  the  primitive  relation  of  externality  between
your  mind  and  its  objects:  you  are  unable  to  make  an  idea
of  your  idea  except  by  recognizing  something  which  is  not
that  idea.

Now  philosophy  can  have  no  permanent  interest  in  a  game
of  who  shall  speak  last.  While  if  we  decide  the  matter  by
enquiring  who  has  spoken  first,  the  realist  carries  the  day :  the
*  first  intention '  of  the  mind  is  that  it  deak  with  objects  inde-
pendent of  its  own  thought  for  their  being.  And  no  matter
how  successful  you  may  be  in  showing  what  interest  the  sub-
ject may  have  in  the  objects  which  it  finds,  this  interest  is  so

'  Reprinted  in  part  from  nn  artiole  published  in  The  Philoeophieal
BeTiew,  Vol.  xix,  No.  3,  Mmj,  1910,  under  the  title,  **  How  Ideas  leeeh


n


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  559

far  secondary^  in  respect  to  tHe  existence  of  the  independent
objects,  that  it  would  be  precisely  the  same  interest  were
the  objects  as  different  as  can  be  imagined.  Your  *  ich-will '
has  no  power  to  determine  what  the  objects  shall  be ;  it  assumes
that  they  are  there  to  be  accepted.

That  the  original  and  naiVe  attitude  of  the  mind  to  its
objects  requires  to  be  interpreted,  we  must  assert  with  ideal-
ism. But  it  seems  clear  to  me  from  considerations  like  the
foregoing,  that  the  interpretation  cannot  be  so  readily  found
as  by  taking  the  object  up  bodily  into  the  subject  through
the  reflective  turn  so  typical  of  idealistic  reasoning.  The
idealist  reflection  shows  successfully  that  nothing  can  be  real
for  us  in  which  it  is  not  possible  to  trace  the  mark  of  ourselves
and  of  our  interests.  But  this  always  leaves  it  possible
that  the  same  objects  may  bear  other  marks  at  the  same  time ;
and  that  these  other  marks  are  the  defining  characters  of
their  objectivity.

^  The  whole  life  of  knowledge  can  best  be  understood,  I
believe,  as  an  intercourse  between  the  self  and  an  independent
reality.  An  analysis  of  cognitive  experience  should  show
what  this  means,  and  how  idealism  in  extending  the  I-am  to  the
entire  scope  of  the  I-think  is  rendering  meaningless  the  con-
ception of  selfhood.  Knowledge  implies  a  complete  breach,
at  some  point  or  region,  in  the  wall  of  the  self.  Let  us
consider  whether  any  such  region  can  be  defined.

There  are  reasons  for  looking  for  such  a  region  first  within
physical  experience.  Some  of  these  reasons  have  recentiy  been
put  forward  by  M.  Bergson.  Largely  the  same  reasons  were
touched  upon  by  Kant,  whose  uneasiness  about  empirical  ideal-
ism came  in  part  from  the  same  quarter ;  and  it  may  not  be  amiss
to  recall  briefly  these  familiar  considerations.  The  entire
weight  of  our  judgment  of  Wirklichkeit,  Kant  asserts,  hangs
upon  Wahmehmung.^  We  may  make  to  ourselves  concep-
tions as  we  please  of  things  according  to  the  categories  (for
1  Postulate  des  empiriflehen  Denkens  iiberhaopt


MO  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPEHDEKT

instance,  of  things  so  related  that  the  oonditi<m  of  one
carries  with  it  a  definite  condition  of  the  other  things)  ;  bat
from  tiiese  conceptions  we  can  never  know  what  actoai  things
stand  in  that  relation,  nor  can  we  understand  how  they  can
be  so  related,  until  we  refer  to  physical  experience.^  Of  oar
knowledge  of  change,  a  strong  point  with  M.  Bergson,  Klant
says,  that  in  order  to  represent  to  oarselves  Verandamng,
we  are  obliged  to  make  use  of  Bew^^ung,  or  change  in  space,
for  an  illustration :  without  this  we  cannot  make  even  the  gen-
eral meaning  of  change  clear  to  ourselves,  for  it  is  something
whose  possibility  is  quite  beyond  the  grasp  of  the  ^pure
understanding.'^  In  sum :  however  much  a  priori  knowledge
may  be  possible,  we  have  actually  no  working  ideas  at  all
without  '^  Wahmehmung,  mithin  Empfindung'^  and  this
dick  of  sensation  is  required  to  give  the  note  of  reality  to  any
part  of  the  system  of  experience,  categories  and  alL

But  as  with  idealists  generally,  so  with  Kant :  while  we  hear
him  speaking  boldly  about  *  external  reality'  in  quite  realistic
vein,  we  have  always  to  expect  from  him  the  annulling  stroke,
**  Yes  —  but  what  do  you  mean  by  external  reality  ?  "  Kant
has  not  failed  to  express  himself  on  this  point,  most  radically
of  course  in  the  *^  Widerlegnng  des  Idealismus."  The  reality
which  we  know  in  physical  experience,  he  says  in  effect,  is
outer,  not  only  in  the  two  senses  commonly  accepted  by  idealism,

^  The  following  sentanoei  from  the  Allgemeine  Anmerknngen  zam
System  der  GranddUze  are  noteworthy,  partly  beeanse  of  the  aaeof  the
expression,  <  objective  Bealitat '  instead  of  *  WbUichkeit,'  and  partly
because  Kant  is  speaking  of  the  reality  not  simply  of  indmdnal  things
but  of  the  categories  themselves  —  that  is,  of  things  Oi  conceived:  <<  Ee  ist
etwas  sehr  Bemerkungswttrdiges,  dass  wir  die  Mdglichkeit  keinea  Dingea
naohderblossenCategorie  einsehen  k6nnen,  sondern  immereine  Anschaa-
ung  bei  der  Hand  haben  mftssen,  urn  an  derselben  die  objective  Bealitfit
des  reinen  Verstandesbegriffs  danulegen.  .  .  .  Noeh  merkwttrdiger  aber
ist,  dass  wir,  am  die  Mdgliohkeit  der  Dinge  za  Folge  der  Categorien
su  Terstehen,  and  also  die  objectire  Realit&t  der  letzteren  darzntnn,  nicht
bloss  Anschauungen,  sondem  sogar  immer  aeussere  Anschanongen  bed&r>
fen "  (2d  ed.,  pp.  288,  291).

*  Allgemeine  Anmerkungen,  etc.,  2d  ed.,  p.  291.


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  561

namely,  (1)  that  objects  in  space  are  outer  to  each  other,  and
(2)  that  the  system  of  nature  confers  upon  some  objects
not  now  present  to  my  perception  the  same  reality  which  is
attributable  to  these  present:  but  also  in  a  further  sense  which
not  even  the  personal  ich-denke  can  engulf,  namely,  (3)  that
here  we  find  this  very  personal  self,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  peculiar
individual,  in  tiie  process  of  being  made.  As  a  knower  —  so
we  might  interpret  the  argument  —  I  am  as  a  whole  a  being
with  numerous  peculiarities :  I  have  not  only  a  time-span,  and
a  time-rate,  but  a  very  definite  and  particular  time-span  and
time-rate.  And  so  of  many  another  element  in  my  make-up
—  the  special  tension  of  my  desires,  the  numerical  coefficient
of  tenacity  in  my  attention,  and  the  like.  Now  if  these  pecu-
liarities require  explanation,  they  cannot  be  explained  by  any-
thing within  the  self,  because  they  affect  and  define  the  self  as
a  whole ;  but  the  truth  is  that  we  know  these  peculiarities  in
experience,  and  we  know  them  only  by  knowing  something
else  at  the  same  time,  namely,  an  outer  reality  which  is  meas-
uring itself  against  myself,  and  whose  point  of  contact  is  found
in  sensation.  I  have  no  peculiarities  which  are  not  first
peculiarities  of  something  not-myself .  Whatever  may  be  the
nature  of  this  reality,  here,  in  sensation,  I  see  as  it  were  my
own  measurements,  my  own  peculiarities  being  borne  in  to  me.
The  material  of  sense  is,  in  its  first  moment,  not-self-stuff ;
and  only  in  its  second  moment,  as  elaborated  in  my  forms  of
experiencing,  does  it  become  part  of  my  own  being.  The
physical  judgment,  then,  juts  out  into  the  idealistic  night  —  it
works  in  a  realm  where  selfhood  is  metabolic,  non-monadic.

The  essential  point  in  this  position  of  £[ant*s  might  be
formulated  in  this  way.  You,  the  idealist,  may  legitimately
attribute  to,  or  include  within,  any  self,  so  much  as  that  self
can  understand  and  reproduce,  and  no  more.  The  self,  at  your
own  rating,  is  to  be  defined  by  mastery,  by  self-<»nsoiousnes8,
by  self-sufficiency.  And  since  this  power  of  conscious  control
fades  out  as  it  approaches  the  particular,  and  never  penetrates
the  particular,  you  must  admit  a  final  limit  to  the  individual


662  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT

self  at  the  point  where  experience  becomes  puticolar,  that  is,
at  physical  experience.  Bat  xeality  has  always,  as  one  of  its
factors,  particularity :  whatever  we  think  of  as  real  we  endow
with  the  qualities  of  the  reality  which  phtys  apon  as  in  sensa-
tion, in  so  far  as  sensation  is  one  of  the  maxima  of  experience,
setting  the  standard  of  pungency,  definiteness,  completeness  of
detail,  determinateness  to  the  last  point  of  enquiry,  all-there-
ness ;  whatever  we  believe  real  we  r^;ard  as  continuous  in
these  respects  with  the  reality  thus  presentiy  touched,  and  in
such  wise  continuous  that  this  present  nuHnait  is  regarded  as
real  by  infection  from  or  derivation  from  the  rest  of  reality.
Thus  the  successive  points  of  our  contact  with  reality  arrange
themselves  in  what  we  call  a  *  history,^  a  succession  of  moments
marked  at  every  point  by  these  characters  of  particularity  and
surprise.  Moreover,  whatever  reality  the  self  has  is  meas-
ured by  the  prior  and  independent  reality  of  the  objects
with  which  it  deals ;  nor  do  we  finite  selves  ever  acquire  a
reality  which  can  subsist  apart  from  our  sensible  objects.
Dreams,  imaginations,  volitions,  may  be  regarded  as  our  several
degrees  of  experimentation  in  being  thus  self -eufficientiy  reaL
But  with  the  highest  success  of  these  experiments,  namely,  in
successful  action  known  to  be  such,  our  reality  remains  in  large
part  centripetal ;  we  continue  to  live  only  by  keeping  open  the
avenues  through  which  that  independent  bdng  ib  ccmmiuni-
cated  to  us.  Hence,  in  sum :  the  self  does  not  include  realily.
KeaUty  is  beyond  the  self ;  not  a  distinction  within  the  self.
What  we  can  claim  of  reality  is  a  point  of  contact,  a  surface
of  osmosis,  in  sensation :  this  is  the  border  between  the  reality
original,  and  the  derivative  reality  of  myself ;  it  is  *  the  imme-
diate '  and  also  ^  the  ultimate,*  the  last  point  within  and  the
first  point  without.  Our  experience  is  metaphysical  (or  per-
haps better,  metapsychical),  not  phenomenalistic ;  but  of  the
independent  reality  we  possess  only  the  *  that '  which  we
immediately  experience  as  we  experience  our  own  limit ;  we
possess  no  *  what*  whatever.  Such  is  the  Kantian  answer  to
empirical  idealism  of  physical  experience.


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  IKDEPEKDENT  668

In  recognizing  sensation  as  a  point  of  vital  contact  with  an
independent  reality  the  above  argument  seems  to  me  finaL
But  it  is  not  clear  to  me  that  this  reality  is  found  only  in
sensation ;  the  irrationalistic  conclusion  is  too  hasty.  It  may
or  may  not  be  true  that  ^  There  is  nothing  in  idea  which  was
not  previously  in  sense ' ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  *  There  is
nothing  in  sense  which  cannot  be  taken  up  into  idea.*  From
which  it  would  follow  that  we  may  have  not  only  sensations,
but  also  ideaa  of  independent  reality.  Whatever  objection
there  might  be  to  this  doctrine  would  seem  to  come  from
taking  the  distinction  between  idea  and  sensation,  or  imme-
diate experience,  in  too  ideal  and  artificial  a  manner.  The
fixed  gulf  between  idea  and  sensation  is  perhaps  as  great
as  any  chasm  in  nature  can  be ;  but  still  it  is  a  natural
chasm,  and  the  functional  relation  between  the  two  is  like-
wise natural.  What  this  relation  is  may  be  illustrated  by
a  political  analogy.^

The  state  is  an  effort  of  society  to  become  fully  self-consoiouB
and  self-controlling;  its  ideal  is  so  far  identical  with  that  of
the  individual  mind.  The  state  deals  with  its  natural  data  —
namely,  its  physical  and  economic  status,  its  customs  and
traditions — just  as  the  self  does  with  its  natural  data,  its
sensations  and  instincts:  —  it  turns  them  into  ideas.  The
state  caUs  its  own  ideas,  however,  by  the  name  of  *laws*  (or
institutions,  which  are  congeries  of  laws).  Now  a  law  is
always  either  an  experiment,  or  a  statement  of  the  conditions
under  which  experiments  must  be  carried  on.  The  rigidity
and  fixity  of  a  law  is  only  such  as  is  necessary  for  a  satisfactory

^  It  ii  Nmarkable  that  the  state  fainuhes  present  philosophy  with  so
few  analogiet.  For  the  state  ii  etill,  as  in  the  days  of  Plato,  the  most
perfect  Tisihle  example  of  the  mind  in  its  dealings  with  reality;  while
the  things  which  have  happened  in  politics,  and  in  our  nnderstanding  of
politics,  since  the  time  of  Plato,  onght  to  render  the  analogy  even  more
fruitful  for  us  than  it  was  for  him.  The  philosophie  value  of  analogy
as  a  prelude  to  exact  argument,  keeping  the  argument  proportionate
and  mutual,  has  increased  rather  than  diminished  with  the  multiplication
of  philosophic  diff erenoes.


564  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  IKDEFEKDENT

experiment.  In  order  to  know  how  life  works  we  most  pn>>
ceed  by  assuming  that  we  already  know,  and  holding  to  the
assumption  until  it  is  proven  wrong.  So  the  ideas  which  we
indiTiduals  make  are  either  experiments  or  conditions  of
experiment:  they  are  so  many  ways  of  assuming  that  we
already  know  reality.  Now  there  are  three  points  in  this
analogy  which  are  important  for  our  present  enquiry :

I.  The  law  is  not  something  else  than  the  custom  which  it
transforms  into  an  institution :  it  is  the  custom  itself  acquiring
the  power  of  speech  and  so  of  political  entity.

When  once  there  exists  such  a  thing  as  a  political  world,  a
world  wherein  modes  of  action  survive  at  last  only  by  convincing
some  established  organ  that  they  ought  to  survive,  then  eveiy
custom  is  bound  in  time  either  to  become  an  institution  or  to
disappear.  To  be  translated  into  law  is  only  the  process  of
entering  the  new  status,  of  acquiring  the  new  powers  of  self-
defence  and  self-maintenance.  So  the  idea  is  not  something
other  than  the  instinct  or  the  sensation*  It  is  the  identical
thing,  with  newly  acquired  powers  of  speech  and  of  influence
upon  action.  To  become  idea  is  the  fate  which  is  imposed
alike  upon  all  sensations  and  all  instincts  because  of  the  fact
that  there  is  such  a  forum  in  nature  as  a  *  mind.'

Hence,  while  we  may  have,  for  example,  ideas  of  things
static,  and  sensations  or  intuitions  of  things  changing ;  we
have  just  as  truly  sensations  of  things  static  and  ideas  of
things  changing  (it  being  understood  that  the  sensation
knows  not  what  it  is  sensation  of).  There  is  no  element
of  experience  present  to  sensation  which  is  not  also  present
to  idea.  The  idea  is  the  experience  made  politically  potent
with  reference  to  other  experiences;  it  is  the  experience
freed  from  the  barriers  of  its  historical  context,  able  to  com-
bine with  other  experiences  as  determinants  of  action,  without
regard  to  original  position  in  space  or  time.  The  idea  endows
the  experience  with  a  real  faculty  of  transposition,  akin  to  the
assumed  revolvableness  and  superposableness  of  the  geometri-


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  665

cal  magnitudes ;  and  nothing  else  than  this  new  capacity  of
relation  is  meant  by  the  fact  that  the  experience  appears  tp
a  mind.  Hence,  if  there  be  any  such  thing  as  an  immediate
experience  of  time,  there  will  necessarily  be  such  a  thing  as
conceptual  time  also ;  and  this  conceptual  time  will  not  be  a
different  time,  but  identically  the  same  time,  with  the  new
capacity  of  being  regarded  in  segments,  transposable,  compar
rable,  measurable.^

In  general,  the  idea  is  the  experience  itself,  made  an  active
part  of  the  conscious  unity  we  call  a  self,  understood  by  other
experiences,  and  understanding  them  in  turn.

n.  All  laws  are  subject  to  error  and  revision  except  the
laws  which  contain  the  conditions  of  experiment.

A  law  contains  besides  the  representation  of  a  custom  also  a
judgment,  or  enactment,  which  sets  that  custom  in  a  positive
position  in  the  public  life.  The  implied  judgment  may  be
thus  interpreted :  *^  In  this  enactment  the  custom,  or  impulse,
or  interest,  in  question  is  given  its  rightful  meaning,  force,  and
bearing  in  the  public  life  in  general.*'  This  judgment,  which
is  the  experimental  side  of  the  law,  may  be  in  error ;  and  its
error  can  be  corrected  only  by  the  same  reality  which  the  law
undertakes  to  entertain,  namely,  by  custom,  economic  fact  and
human  nature  as  found  in  the  tendencies,  customs,  and  feelings
of  the  populace.

The  constant  flux  and  revision  of  positive  law  is  (supposedly)
the  renewed  attempt  to  determine  the  true  political  interpre-
tation of  this  same  reality.  Whatever  scope  there  is  for
originality  in  public  life,  it  cannot  lie  in  the  invention  of  new
material  for  that  life,  but  only  in  the  mode  of  voicing  this
permanent  material. Hence  while  the  power  of  originality

1  It  seems  a  wholly  deplorable  misuse  of  laDgnage  to  say  that  because
eonoeptnal  time  or  metrical  time  is  artificial,  it  is  therefore  not  the  '  real '
time.  As  well  say,  because  the  family  as  now  instituted  is  an  artificial
family,  it  is  not  the  real  family.  It  may  not  be  the  ideal  family,  nor  the
original  family ;  but  I  know  not  where  to  look  for  the  '  real '  family  except
in  the  idea  of  families  -*-  as  they  are.


606  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPEKDENT

lies  with  the  sacceaaful  ntterer,  the  source  of  ongiiiality  itself
is  in  the  people,  in  their  dumb  feeling  of  wrong,  and  in  their
dumb  anticipation  of  the  direction  of  right.  They  are  the
social  sensation  and  primitiye  fact  They  are  the  primary
and  permanent  reality  which  in  correcting  the  errors  of  law,
constitntes  the  goal  and  object  of  all  original  lawHooaking.

Correspondingly,  in  the  individual  mind,  sensations  and
feelings  are  the  Demos.  All  ideas  are  subject  to  error,  with
the  exception  noted :  and  the  reality  which  corrects  them  is  met
in  sensation.  Further,  as  Bergson  rightly  says,  there  can  be
no  personal  originality  apart  from  this  Demos  of  experience.
The  best  originality  of  the  mind  is  but  the  truth  of  natore;  it
b  the  master  stroke  of  release,  the  rdease  of  nature  into  the
condition  of  idea.  But  what  is  thos  released  is  still  the  same
reality  which  was  present  to  sensation ;  were  it  any  other  the
intention  of  the  idea  itself  would  be  def eated«


III.  Laws  which  contain  the  general  conditions  of  experi-
ment, that  is,  the  laws  regarding  laws,  law-making,  law-cor-
recting, and  law-enforcing,  which  together  are  the  constitation
of  a  state,  are  not  subject  to  error  in  the  same  sense  in  which
the  positive  law  is  thus  subject,  and  so  not  subject  to  correction
in  the  same  sense.

This  part  of  the  law  differs  also  in  this  further  respect  from
the  positive  law :  That  it  does  not  seem  to  appear  as  part  of
the  reality  met  with  in  external  sensation,  in  the  original  &cts
of  society :  it  is  in  a  peculiar  way  the  state  itself,  it  is  the  new
thing  which  has  happened  to  make  all  the  work  of  social  self-
thinking  in  law  necessary.  We  might  say,  after  the  old
epistemological  formula:  the  customs  and  predicaments  of
natural  society  contain  all  the  subject-matter  of  law  —  except
the  political  constitution  itself.

Nevertheless,  constitutions  also  are  subject  to  secalar  evolu-
tion. There  are  such  things  as  unnatural  constitutions ;  hence
there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  natural  constitution.  Is  it  possible
that  in  the  datum  of  state  life  there  is  anything  which  might


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  567

serve  as  an  original  and  slow  corrective  to  the  constitution  ?
May  it  be  that  the  principles  of  administration  that  become
customary  in  the  &mily,  and  in  the  collective  meeting  of
economic  emergencies,  constitute  the  reality,  as  it  were  in  the
form  of  sensation,  which  the  state  announces  as  idea?  It
cannot  have  been  otherwise'  and  it  is  not  otherwise :  the  sense
for  authority  and  the  logic  of  authority  in  elemental  human
nature  is  authority  for  the  state  in  its  interpretation  of
authority.  The  constitution  of  the  state  is  the  state  itself,
and  yet  it  conforms  to  an  external  reality  which  is  part  of
the  datum  of  its  existence.  The  customs  to  which  it  gives
political  birth  are  already  in  their  crude  form,  (xdministered
customs.  Not  only  the  positive  part  of  the  law,  therefore,  but
the  law  of  the  constitution  itself,  the  relatively  a  priori  part
of  law,  has  its  external  object  in  experience  to  which  it  must
conform,  and  from  which  it  receives  continuous  instruction.

So  also  with  the  mind.  It  has  its  principles  of  experiment
which  are  not  subject  to  correction  and  error  as  are  its
common  predicates.  These  principles  of  experiment,  the
ideas  of  cause,  substance,  and  the  like,  are  the  mind  itself  in
its  dealings  with  its  sensations.  Nevertheless,  these  also  are
not  wholly  nor  primarily  internal.  They  are  first  part  of  the
reality  of  direct  experience.  For  this  experience  is  never
experience  of  physical  nature  alone:  it  is  experience  of
administered  nature.  The  mind  has  mind  as  part  of  its  real
object ;  and  its  ideas  of  ideas  are  not  originally  got  from  views
of  itself^  but  from  views  of  its  very  external  reality.

This  is  a  hard  saying ;  but  it  is  the  truth.  The  reality
which  we  touch  in  sensation  is  nature  known;  and  hence
nature  already  endowed  with  the  characters  of  the  idea.  The
objectivity  of  the  world  extends  to  its  space,  its  causality,  its
matter,  its  energy ;  and  we  have  no  other  system  of  nature
than  that  which  we  find  already  established  in  experience.
This  reality  which  we  experience  and  which  we  know  to  be
independent,  is  not  an  unknown  being,  giving  rise  to  sensation,

*  See  etjieoisUy  on  this  point,  6.  Tarde,  Let  txansformations  da  poniroir.


568  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT

and  so  to  physical  experience,  and  so  to  reflexiye  experience ;
but  it  is  a  full-fledged  worid  of  nature  and  thought.  Our
original  experience  is  just  as  truly  an  experience  of  other-mind
as  it  is  of  other-things ;  and  the  independence  of  the  other-mind^
and  of  the  other-things,  are  one  independence.

If  we  are  right,  then,  the  idea  reaches  independent  reality
in  the  same  way  that  sensation  reaches  it.  Experience  is
experience  of  independent  being,  known  both  in  sensation  and
in  idea  at  once.


So  far,  I  have  tried  to  state  and  iUustrate  a  doctrine,  not
to  prove  it.  But  it  is  capable  of  proof ;  and  the  proof  takes  the
form  of  the  historic  ontological  argument  The  ontological
argument  is  a  way  of  inferring  from  an  idea  to  a  reality.
**  Because  I  have  a  certain  idea,"  so  it  runs,  **>  there  must  be  a
reality  which  corresponds  to  it."  As  it  stands  it  certainly  can-
not apply  to  all  ideas.  To  apply  it,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish
first  between  the  ideas  which  are  hypothetical  in  character  and
expect  correction,  and  those  which  are  not  thus  tentative ;  this
distinction  we  have  already  sketched.  But  to  put  it  strictly ;
For  every  idea  which  expects  correction  there  is  another  idea
determining  how  that  correction  must  come,  and  hence  not
subject  to  correction  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  sense.
And  since  there  are  some  ideas  subject  to  correction,  there
must  also  be  some  ideas  or  idea  not  subject  to  correction  at  alL
In  the  rough,  these  stable  ideas  are  the  ideas  which  guide  my
constant  experimenting.  I  do  not  try  here  to  deduce  them,
nor  to  decide  whether  they  are  one  or  many.  We  know  well
enough  in  what  direction  to  look  for  them :  they  include  some
constant  elements  in  the  spatial,  substantial,  causal,  and  social
aspects  of  my  world.  But  the  point  which  I  wish  to  make,  and
which  constitutes  the  necessary  amendment  of  the  historic  onto-
logical argument  is  this :  These  ideas  guide  me  only  in  so
far  as  they  are  at  the  same  time  idea  and  experience^  the  idea
in  question  being  no  other  than  the  experience  recognized.

For  whatever  may  be  the  variable  and  whatever  may  be  the


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  669

constant  elements  in  my  present  idea,  that  portion  of  it  which
is  still  subject  to  error,  and  so  subject  to  correction,  is  expe-
rienced in  no  wise  differently  from  that  portion  of  it  which  is
not  subject  to  correction.  For  example,  in  so  far  as  I  experi*
ence  cause  at  all,  I  experience  it  all  as  one  real  fact,  and  there
is  no  type  of  error  to  which  this  idea  is  subject  which  can
refer  me  outside  the  precinct  of  this  same  objective  reality  for
its  truth.  Hence  we  may  say:  Whatever  idea  I  have  of
causality,  in  that  sense  there  is  a  real  causal  relation  between
things.  Or,  because  I  have  an  idea  of  space,  space  is  real.
Or,  again,  in  whatever  sense  I  can  think,  or  imagine,  or  deny
the  existence  of  a  fellow-mind,  in  that  sense  the  fellow-mind
is  real,  and  an  object  of  my  experience.

If  this  thesis  seems  incredible,  let  one  imagine  what  it  would
be  to  experience,  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner  conceivable,
another  mind  —  let  us  say  ^  to  be  within  another  mind  ' ;  let
him  then  compare  the  imagined  experience  with  his  present
experience  —  and  let  him  state,  if  he  can,  in  what  essential
respect  these  two  experiences  differ.  Until  such  statement  can
be  made,  I  need  not  hesitate  to  assert  as  I  have  done,  that  our
original  experience  of  independent  reality  is  an  experience  of
nature  known  by  an  independent  knower.  And  now  let  me
summarize  what  this  independence  amounts  to,  and  in  what
way  idealism  is  modified  by  admitting  it.


The  most  general  statement  that  can  be  made  is  this :  That
real  objects  are  independent  in  whatever  sense  we  can  imagine,  /
or  think,  or  enquire  about,  or  deny,  their  independence.  The
existence  of  *  the  independent  object'  is  in  fact  the  most  gene-
ral subject-matter  capable  of  ontological  proof.  The  independ-
ence of  any  object  is  the  independence  which  I  do  in  truth '
experience  in  it ;  and  if  I  wish  to  know  more  nearly  what  that
experience  amounts  to,  I  can  look  nowhere  but  to  those  ideas
which  refer  to  that  experience.  Let  me  return  for  a  moment
to  our  illustration.

The  independence  of  the  real  object,  in  the  case  of  the  state,


570  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPEKDENT

means  in  part  this :  That  nature  parsaes  her  way  in  spite  of
the  laws  if  the  hiws  are  wrong ;  but  that  if  the  laws  are  right,
she  pursues  her  way  more  easily.  If  this  be  true  her  independ-
ence is  limited.  The  laws,  in  fact,  are  organs  of  nature  at
the  same  time  that  they  are  organs  of  the  state.  And  because
this  is  so,  they  learn  to  express  the  veiy  independence  which
their  object  maintains.  Nothing  is  more  conspicuous  in  the
history  of  law  than  its  progress  in  the  definition  of  the  status
and  technique  of  an  independent  citizeniy ;  it  comes  to  confer
upon  them  a  kind  of  individual  separateness  of  being  which
they  originally  neither  had  nor  desired.  In  the  ideas  of  prop^
erty,  in  the  specialization  of  labor,  and  especially  in  the  use
of  money  (by  which  we  are  given  a  kind  of  solitude  in  the  use
of  goods  inconceivable  to  early  man),  the  state  seems  to  be
introducing  human  nature  to  its  own  independent  character,
and  so  giving  rise  to  more  of  that  independent  ferment  to
which  it  must  submit  its  own  demands.

And  now,  in  the  case  of  the  idea,  we  have  to  say  likewise,
that  the  idea  is  at  the  same  time  an  instrument  of  the  self  and
an  instrument  of  that  very,  reality  which  it  ia  rq;arding  as  its
object ;  and  that  the  idea  has  its  own  way  of  presenting
to  the  self  the  independence  of  that  object.  How  boldly
language  has  come  to  attribute  independence  to  the  various
objects  of  experience ;  how  thoroughly  *  substantive '  our  nouns
have  become  in  their  grammatical  relations;  how  unhes-
itatingly we  confer  a  kind  of  absolateness  upon  each  thing
named,  as  if  it  might  exist  in  its  own  right.  And  this
assumption,  as  it  is  meant,  receives  the  pragmatic  sanc-
tion :  it  works ;  it  continues  to  work  better  as  the  world
g^ws  old ;  and  it  alone  works.  It  works  because  it  is  the
truth  of  reality ;  because  it  successfully  expresses  not  alone  the
ultimate  condition  of  all  experiment,  trial,  and  error,  but  at
the  same  time  the  most  primitive  fact  of  experience  itself  —
the  experience  of  that  not-myself  which  is  permanently  mak-
ing me.  And  in  this  sense,  rather  than  in  the  reflective  sense,
the  truth  of  nature,  even  in  her  independence,  is  to  be  found


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  571

in  the  idea,  and  in  the  idea  alone.  The  real  independence  of  the
object  is  the  independence  which  I  learn  to  attribute  to  it ;  it
being  well  understood  that  it  is  not  a  matter  of  my  choice
whether  or  not  I  do  thus  attribute  independence  to  my  objects.
The  independence  is  a  matter  of  experience  first,  and  of  idea
afterward.  But  now,  more  specifically,  what  does  this  inde-
pendence mean  ?

It  means,  in  the  first  place,  priority  of  being.  Not  neces-
sarily temporal  priority  (though  this  is  part  of  it),  but  orig-
inality ;  the  kind  of  priority  which  I  instantly  experience  as
I  find  myself  being  made.  The  real  is  the  source  of  myself,
both  as  particular  being  through  my  historical  context,  and
as  a  being  with  ideas.  In  this  experience,  I  see  beyond
the  self  that  is  being  made :  my  knowledge  runs  out  in  advance
of  my  existence,  and  lays  hold  on  what  I  am  not.  It  is  at  this
point  that  idealism,  if  we  have  been  right  in  this  argument,  will
have  to  suffer  restatement.  We  cannot  identify  I-am  with
Lihink*  It  is  possible  to  experience  and  to  think  being  which
is  prior  to  me,  which  is  in  reality  not-me.  The  I-think  has  a
scope  which  exceeds  the  I-am  by  one  remove.

True,  there  is  nothing  in  what  I-think  which  can  be  excluded
from  me ;  what  I  know  is  in  the  process  of  becoming  me,  in
so  far  as  I  am  able  to  appropriate  it.  The  I-think  represents
the  explorative,  reaching-over  function  of  my  being ;  it  is  my
spiritual  metabolism  —  by  it  I  take  root  in  the  soil  and  breathe
in  the  air  of  the  conscious  world  beyond,  and  assimilate  it  to
myself.  Thus  though  all  reality  be  in  truth  spiritual,  the
finite  knower  knows  realistically ;  the  being  of  the  object  is
prior  to  his  own.

In  the  second  place,  independence  means  necessity  and
authority.  The  reality  is  that  which,  in  knowing,  I  cannot!
change,  that  which  corrects  my  errors,  and  that  which  deter-
mines how  error  shall  be  corrected.  My  objects  as  they  come
to  me  in  history  are  my  &te.  My  general  ^  will  to  be  rational  *
or  to  ^accept  the  will  of  the  world*  has  no  force  to  determine


572  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT

what  they  shall  be.  My  attitude  to  reality  as  it  particiilarly
is  (except  for  my  will  that  there  be  a  particular  realily)  is  not
one  of  constructiYe  willing,  bat  one  of  refusing  to  reject ;  and
I  oontinae  to  refnse  to  reject,  that  is,  to  ^hope'or  to ^belieye,'
in  part  because  I  know  the  ontological  relation  between  my  will
and  the  will  of  the  whole.  This  knowledge  does  not  abolish
the  authority  of  facts ;  it  makes  me  willing  to  accept  that
authority  and  to  win  what  power  is  possible  to  me  through
obedience  thereto.

There  is  a  third  aspect  of  the  independence  of  objects
which  is  a  mutual  (commutative)  independence,  and  which  is
best  illustrated  by  looking  at  our  state  from  the  other  end.
Griven  a  soTcreign,  the  several  inhabitants  of  a  territoty  are
more  independent  of  each  other  than  before,  or  else  less  so.
That  is,  —  some  distant  ones  are  brought  into  a  significance
which  they  had  otherwise  absolutely  lacked;  while  the  adja-
cent ones  are  able  to  ignore  the  proximity  of  one  another,  as
otherwise  would  be  impossible.  Perfect  sovereignty  makes
neighborhood  an  indifferoit  relatioit.  The  independence  of
each  other  which  citizens  thus  acquire  is  the  counterpart  of
the  nearest  approach  to  a  realistic  independence  which  the
world  of  knowledge  can  show.  The  kind  of  independence,
namely,  which  is  visible  in  particular  facts,  items  of  informa-
tion in  general,  contents  of  purely  arbitnuy  memory.  These
fragments  bear  upon  me  only  by  way  of  the  general  fact  of
sovereignty,  the  reality  to  which  we  belong  in  common ;  they
come  but  vaguely,  distantly,  and  by  virtue  of  the  habitualness
of  my  mind,  under  the  scope  of  my  will.  Thus  arises  the  third
meaning  which  independence  may  have:  To  say  that  an
object  is  independent  of  me  may  be  as  in(l)  and  (2)  the
other  way  of  saying  that  I  am  dependent  upon  it ;  or  it  may
mean  (8)  that  the  object  has  no  bearing  upon  my  other  present
objects  except  through  the  distant  medium  of  *  the  reality.'
In  this  tertiary  and  derived  sense,  independence  of  me  means
independence  of  myself  as  an  object  to  myself,  and  is  mutuaL
The  chair  which  I  do  not  want  I  can  put  out  of  the  room


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT  573

without  making  any  significant  difference  either  to  the  chair
or  to  the  other  chairs  in  the  room,  or  to  my  own  empirical  self.
This  is  the  freedom  of  parts  with  reference  to  each  other,
which  is  due  to  their  common  dependence  upon  some  absolute
third.

To  sum  up :  The  independence  of  the  object  is  such  as  is
correlative  to  my  various  types  of  dependence,  and  to  my  pecu-
liar type  of  independence.  The  idealist  is  always  right  in  .
turning  upon  the  realist  with  the  demand :  *  But  what  do  you  |
mean  by  independence  ?  "  The  realist  is  right  in  insisting  that  ;
an  allegation  of  meaning  in  answer  to  the  question  does  not
swallow  the  object  up  into  the  subject,  the  distinction  between
what  I  am  and  what  I  think  being  a  persistent  one  for  finite  '
subjects.  The  force  of  the  idealistic  criticism  of  realistic
epistemology  is  confined,  so  far,  to  showing  up  inconsistency
or  impossibility  of  thought.  And  we  return  thus  to  Spinoza's
definition  of  substance  as  ^That  which  is  by  itself  and  is
conceived  by  itself';  not  because  logic  controls  Nature,  but
because  logic  is  Nature,  in  the  only  form  in  which  Nature  can
now  be  approached  by  human  oonsoionsnesB.


IV

NOTE  ON  L£UBA*S  THEORY  OF  THE  NATURE  OF
THE  MYSTIC'S  LOVE  OF  GOD

IT  it  from  the  point  of  yiew  of  the  principle  of  alternation
that  I  would  jadge  the  theory  of  Leuba,  who  in  seyeral
well-known  articles  ^  has  done  much  to  supply  the  lack  of  a
psychology  of  the  mystic's  motive.  He  has  rightly  distin-
guished the  two  sides  of  this  motive.  The  ambitious  element
appears  to  him  as  a  fixed  necessity  for  moral  perfection,  a
**  tendency  to  the  universalization  of  action/'  amounting  in  some
persons  almost  to  hyperesthesia  of  the  moral  sensibility.  The
element  of  love  on  the  other  hand  appears  to  him  under  a  very
earthly  guise,  as  a  need  for  satisfying  the  instinctive  affections,
a  need  for  ^^  organic  enjoyment,"  in  which  a  thwarted  human
desire  finds  an  ideal  route  to  its  satisfaction.  The  divine  love,
on  this  basis,  is  a  form  of  the  pursuit  of  subjective  pleasure ;
no  wonder  that  it  seems  to  Leuba  to  be  inconsistent  with  that
other  fundamental  motive,  the  moral  ambition  so  often  expressed
in  the  severe  asceticism  of  the  mystic's  self-discipline;  no
wonder  that  the  mystic's  development  is  read  by  him  as  an
elimination  of  Eros,  a  conquering  of  love,  ^^areconstitution  of
the  individual  under  the  influence  of  the  disposition  toward
universalised  action,  wherein  he  may  reach  entire  deliverance
from  the  desires  of  the  natural  man."

I  cannot  but  believe  that  this  apparent  conflict  and  incom-
patibility of  motive  has  been  created  by  Leuba  himself,  through
the  view  he  takes  of  the  nature  of  the  divine  love.  At  the
same  time  Leuba  is  fundamentally  right  in  recording  the  con-

1  RsToe  philosophiqae,  toI.  64  (1902,  n),  pp.  1  If.  and  441  ff.;  voL
57  (1904, 1),  pp.  70  ff. Mind,  N.  s.,  vol.  14  (1906),  pp.  15-27,  etc


L£UBA*S  THEORY  676

trast  between  theae  two  motives :  iucompatible  they  are  not,
but  antithetical  they  surely  are.  And  it  is  easy  for  the
antithesis  to  become  an  antagonism  :  on  the  organic  level,  love
and  ambition  do  look  in  opposite  directions.  The  practically
obvious  thing  about  love  is  that  one  turns  away  from  work ;
and  the  motive  which  is  at  bottom  a  wholly  moral  demand  for
the  renewal  of  the  worth  of  work  may  easily  be  mistaken  for
a  denial  of  that  worth :  love,  ignoring  its  own  nature  as
transmuted  ambition,  enters  into  a  false  competition  with  duty.
And  duty  may  respond  by  forgetting  that  it  is  nothing  but
transmuted  love.  Thus  the  antithesis  becomes  a  practical
hostility  or  opposition,  creating  falsely  partisan  moral  philos-
ophies, rigoristic  on  one  hand,  epicurean  on  the  other.

This  apparent  conflict  which  is  evident  in  things  partial  is
also  possible  in  things  total :  it  entangles  the  mystic  not  less
and  not  more  than  other  men.  The  love  of  God  then  becomes
a  path  of  dissipation,  antagonizing  moral  ambition :  but  it  is
not  true  that  this  is  its  natural  character.  We  are  bound  to
define  the  motive  of  mysticism  by  its  normal  condition,  if  it
has  one  —  even  though  this  normal  condition  has  never  yet
been  realized.  And  we  are  still  more  bound  to  g^ve  the  mystics
credit  for  their  best  achievements,  and  for  their  deepest  dis-
criminations. No  one  who  reads  the  mystics  can  suppose  that
ihey  have  been  unaware  of  precisely  this  danger ;  nor  that
they  have  been  undiligent  in  guarding  against  it.  They  have
seen,  and  precisely  stated,  the  truth  that  the  highest  possi-
bilities of  experience  are  also  the  most  perilous.  Let  me
quote  a  passage  from  Tauler  on  this  point :

There  are  those  who  have  lost  their  way  in  the  spiritual  life,
beeause  they  have  undertaken  to  live  this  life  after  their  own  conceit,
without  the  direetion  of  Grod.  They  have  a  desire  to  taste  inward
spiritual  comfort ;  but  this  desire  (not  wholly  freed  from  sabjectirity )
becomes  in  them  a  veritable  spiritual  nnehastity :  for  it  is  nothing
other  than  a  natural  inclination  or  love  which  is  bent  and  crooked
inward  into  itself,  seeking  in  reality  its  awn  eamfortdblenesB.
Outwardly,  these  two  types  of  love,  the  natural  and  the  dirine,  are


ff76  LEUBA*S  TH£ORT

M  like  M  two  hain  of  the  hoad ;  bat  in  thttr  inward  meaning  tiiej
arewholljalien.  For  the  trae  loTer  of  God  offers  himeelfnpiHionj,
together  with  everything  he  hae  and  is  eapaUe  of;  and  cannot
tderate  the  thought  of  anj  other  appeasement  of  his  longing  tiiaa
the  ineffable  Good,  whioh  is  God  hinuelf .  The  others  £x.  their
minds  open  the  blessings  and  sweets  which  thej  demand  from  God,
and  if  they  fail  to  get  them  they  are  beside  themselTes  with  impatiffnca
and  violent  clamor.  What  they  desire  is  a  type  of  rest  and  comfort
natorally  pleasing  to  all  creatores:  andsochan  experience  is  poasiUe
to  any  person  who  knows  the  art  of  emptjring  himself  of  imaginations
and  impolses.  Let  a  man  but  separate  himself  from  all  contingencies
and  from  all  works,  and  there  will  come  over  him  in  this  state  of  empti-
ness a  peace  which  is  very  great,  lovely,  and  agreeable,  and  whieh  is
in  itself  no  sin  since  it  is  part  of  onr  homan  natare.  But  when  it
is  taken  for  a  veritable  possessing  of  God,  or  nnity  irith  God,  then  it
is  a  sin ;  for  it  is  in  reality  nothing  else  than  a  state  of  thorough
passivity  and  apathy  nntooched  by  the  power  from  on  high,  which
any  man  can  attain  without  special  grace  of  God.  It  is  a  purdy
negative  state  from  which  (if  one  in  arrogance  calls  it  divine)  nothing
follows  but  blindness,  failure  of  understanding,  and  a  disinclination
to  be  governed  by  the  rules  of  ordinary  righteousness.^

It  has  never  been  easy  for  human  natare  to  sustain  its  love
at  the  level  of  true  worship;  it  has  never  been  easy  to  keqi
integrity  in  presence  of  that  seductiye  movement  of  refleetioii
which  seizes  upon  an  experience  and  forgets  its  first  intention ;
there  is  a  statistical  certainty  of  some  lapee,  and  this,  if
Delacroix  is  right  is  precisely  the  thing  which  necessitates  the
long  agonies  of  the  second  stadium  of  the  mystic^s  life  cycle.
The  important  point,  however,  for  a  fair  scientific  theory  is
this :  that  mysticism  has  its  own  corrective  within  itself.  It
recurs  to  the  essential  identity  of  its  love  and  its  ambition.

To  know  that  the  love  of  God  is  of  the  same  substance  with
moral  ambition  decides  some  questions  about  the  psychological
nature  of  that  love.  But  it  does  not  decide  the  worth  of
Leuba's  thesis  that  it  has  dose  psychological  kinship  with
the  love  of  man  and  woman. It  would  be  neoeasary  in  a

1  Freely  taken  from  Predigtea,  n,  pp.  336-^39  (ed.  1841).


LEUBA'S  THEORY  677

complete  theory  to  show  the  wide  differenoeB  of  these  two  as
well  as  their  striking  likenesses ;  bnt  there  is  no  more  important
scientific  task  than  to  define  with  aocnracy  the  extent  of  this
likeness  so  universally  recognized  in  literature  and  history,  in
the  imagery  of  the  mystics  themselves.  To  my  mind  it  is  the
principle  of  alternation  which  defines  this  likeness.  Beyond
doubt,  the  mystic's  exaltation  sweeps  up  into  its  own  current
whatever  in  the  thousand-fold  alternate  swingings  of  human
nature  moves  in  its  own  direction,  —  not  as  their  product  but
as  their  master.  It  would  indeed  be  surprising  if  the  sexual
nature  of  man,  with  its  movement  away  from  the  sphere  of
deeds  to  the  sphere  of  substance,  with  its  strong  tide  away
from  the  particular  to  the  over-individual  and  racial,  with  its
suggestion  of  total,  infinite,  and  yet  immediate  worth,  did  not
more  quickly  and  completely  than  any  other  human  impulse
discover  in  worship  its  ultimate  meaning  and  law.  This  must
be  the  case :  not  because  the  love  of  God  is  at  bottom  sexual
love,  but  because  sexual  love  is  potentially  love  of  the  divine.
As  to  the  details  of  Leuba's  theory,  I  leave  them  to  be  dealt
with  by  his  competent  critic,  De  Montmorand.^  But  the  main
criticism  to  be  passed  upon  that  theory  is  only  that  it  is  not
the  whole  truth ;  and  in  this  case  anything  short  of  the  whole
truth  is  untrue.

The  whole  truth  lies  surely  in  this  direction  —  that  all  of
our  human  impulses  and  loves  are  akin.  And  the  psychology
of  mysticism  waits  less  for  an  analysis  of  the  love  of  God  than
for  an  analysis  of  all  other  human  desires.  It  is  not  this  love
but  those  that  need  explanation.  The  love  of  Grod  is  the  one
natural  instinct  of  man  :  worship  is  the  one  deed  which  answers
as  an  echo  aU  other  deeds  in  history.  Upon  one  point  the
psychologies  of  Plato,  Augustine,  and  Spinoza  are  agreed:
that  all  special  desires  are  refracted  desires  for  the  Absolute
Good.  We  modems  with  superior  analysis  have  not  yet
regained  in  our  own  tongue  these  results. We  need  to  know

1  RsTiM  philotophiqiie,  toI.  66  (1903),  pp.  382  ff.;  toI.  67  (1904),
pp.  242  if.;  Tol.  68  (1904),  pp.  602  ff. ;  vol.  60  (1906),  pp.  1  ff.


578  LEUBA'S  THEORY

the  **  laws  of  the  trusfonnation  and  equivalenoe"  of  desires
and  values:  then  we  shall  see  how  they  may  be  one  and  all,  not
suppressed  by,  but  paid  over  into  the  all-consuming  passion
of  religion.  Both  Leuba  and  his  critic  fall  into  the  error
of  supposing  that  in  the  perfecting  of  mysticism  some  side
of  human  nature  is  put  under,  some  dissociation  or  amnesia
has  been  accomplished,  so  that  the  *^ lower  centers''  never
again  assert  themselyes.  All  this  seems  foreign  to  the  facts.
Forall  reasons  I  should  prefer  to  think  that  in  mysticism  the
needs  of  sex,  together  with  all  other  needs,  are  understood
and  satisfied;  that  all  the  hundred  voices  of  human  desire
are  here  brought  to  unison.  With  this  understanding  and  not
otherwise  can  I  see  how  religion  is  to  fulfil  its  assumed  funo*
tions :  to  keep  from  mutual  estrang^nent  the  primitive  in  us
and  the  &r-civiliaed ;  to  offer  individual  souk  —  malformed
in  the  specialisttions  of  our  social  order,  or  mutilated  in  its
accidents  — the  possibility  of  complete  personality ;  to  unify
in  wish  and  wiU,  as  reason  does  in  principle,  the  whole  moral
existence  of  man.


INDEX


INDEX


ItAllMl


words  or  phrtMt  used  in  this  book  witli  spooial  m— ningi.


Boanty,  256, 420  f.,  451  £.,  491  f.

and  qnali^  (mo  also  Valno),  eh.


Absolutb,  ihe,  Ti.  183-206, 831, 401,

415,435,456,  472,  473  f.,  511.
Abrtraot  wuTenftl,  417  f .,  484.
AdolsMonoe,  538.
AffDOitieum,  192.
Ahura  Maidi^  829.
Allegory,  wo  Symbol.
Alternation,  principU  of,  5, 99,  395, 396,

405-4^,  450  n.,  458,  474,  57&
Altminn  (wo  alio  Egokm),  136, 496  ff.,

509
Ambidon,  359,  360,  367,  414, 422,  517,

574  f.
Analogy,  389,  390,  392,  563  n.
Anoeotor  worriiip,  231-282.
Anger,  127  n.,  584.
Angler,  R.  P.,  529  n.
Anunism,  230,  300,  317.
Anwlm,  307.
Antagonism,  509.
Anticipation  of  attainment  of  arts,  30,

31, 33, 198, 221  ff.,  238, 428-134, 437-

439,  512.
Antinomianism,  364,  400.
Apperoeptiye  mass,  127  f .,  285,  627.
Appreoiation,  judgments  of  (see  also

Valne),  68,  539.
Apricri,  tht  conente,  278, 437  n.
Aristotle,  433.
Arttfieiality,  the  artificial  m^f,  413  ff.,

420n.,  430, 431  f .,  434, 438, 454,  527  f .
ArU,  the, 14-26,  31,  103,  188,  150,

407  ff.,  427,  462-483,  513.
Asoetieism,  372-874, 509.
Assoeiatioo,  222  f .
Atheism,  225  f .,  323.
Attainment,  religions,  51,  58,  65, 428-

441. See 'anticipation <^ attain-
ment.'
Angnstine,  75,  307,  577.
Attention,  411  n.,  412  f.,  627  ff.,  549.
Authority,  zi,  SO,  229-280,  429,  571.
Automatism,  425.
Arenion,  532.

Baobhot,  456,  520.
Baldwin,  247.


zi,  also  np.  203  f.,  881,  464  n.
Bennett,  0.  A.,  403  n.
Bergson,  x,  25,  80  n.,  82-88, 122,  184»

559,  560,  566.
Berkeley,  194, 195,  246.
Bernard,  361.
Biology,  biologieal  method,  44-46,47,

542-546;  in  theory  of  ideas,  118  ff.,

120,  122,  235,  258, 543-557.
Body  (see  also  Mind  and  Body),  258,

333,372.
Boehme,  Jaoob.  368, 479.
BonaTontura,  8il.
Brahm,  102, 185, 186,  829.
Brahmanism,  338.
Brinton,  284.
Bruno,  361.
Buddha,  Buddhism,  5,  888,  887,  512,

520.

CATHSBimB  OF  SiXHA,  375.

CausaUty,  305,  307,  813,  518.
Certainty,  30  f .,  295  f .,  361  f .,  448  n.  f .,

454-456,  512.
Chanoe(see  also  Pluralism,  Probabil-
ity), 167, 462,  508.
Change,  84-^,  186-188, 560.
Changeless,  the,  1&3  ff.
Character,  134, 147, 190,  208,  255,463,

527.
Charity,  199.
Chesterton,  260.
Christ. Christianity (see also Jesus

Christ),  151,  224,  324,  830, 334, 337,

852,  378,  513,  520-524.
Coenesthesia,  892  f .
Commitment,  509.
Communication,  logio  of,  246,  272  f .,

294 ',  of  feeling,  77.
Qoncrttt  opriori,  see  Apnon.
Conorete  univenal,  406,  407,  413.
Conscienee  (see  also  Duty,  Morality,

Right),  551-557.
Contemplation,  383.
Continuity  (see  also  Disoontinuity ,  Lik^


582


INDEX


neM,  Norelty, TnditioD),  478  ff.,

484.
Comrention,  400,  417.
GonirenioB,  73,  38^.
Comolo^oftl  ai]fii]ii«Bt,  805.
GouDology,  518.
CowpeFf  426.
CiMtiom  286,  287,  808, 440,  457, 485,

561  f.
Creativity  (m6  also  Orinnality),  zrii,

23-26,  149, 150-162,  lOT,  208,  206  f.,

296,  299,  364, 440, 457-460, 469^484,

489.
Creed  (tee  alio  Dogma,  Kaowledsv,

Certainty),  3,  37,  39,  42,  70, 73, 189,

150.
Critioal  attttade,  416,  482,  682.
Criii€Mm,  philoeophieal,  48.

Dbatb,  231.

Deduction,  312,  477.

Deifioation,  388,  512.

Delaeioix,  394, 425  f .,  449  a.,  576.

DeMartee,  191  f.,  202,  246,  276,  814.

Detachment  from  particnlan  (aee  alio

Stoioum),  487  f .,  408  ff.,  509.
Dialectic,  60,  284,  800,  822  ff.,  412,

460.
Difference,  aooroe  of  (tee  also  CreatiT-

ity).  203,  481.
Diioonneotion, DiaooBtiBaity, 180,

398  ff.,  429.
Dogma,  457  f.,  466.
Dnaliem,  172,  406.
Duty  (aee  abo  Conarienot),  251,  414,

417.  427,  440,  556,  575.

EoKHABT,  371,  875,  891  n.,  480.

Ecstasy,  536.

Edncatioa,  religions  (sea  also  Raligion,

propagation  of),  522.
^goism,  and  altruism,  126, 186.
Sgciitic  revelatum^  430  n*
E2gypt,  religion  of,  232.
Emerson,  258,  383,  308  f .,  450.
Emotion,  see  Feeling,  Passion.
Empiricism  (see  a]soEzperienoe,Know-

ledge),  xrii,  112,  283,  295,  387  n.
Energy,  127;  potential,  546,  551, 554  f.
Enthusiasm,  609.
Epictetus,  377,  452.
Error,  277, 291, 292, 297, 320, 411, 459  f .,

565  ff.
Esoteric,  459.


ETanescenoe  of  religious  insight,  144;

and  of  social  experience,  243.
Enl,  134,  174  ff.,  200,  203,  206,  206,

218-226,  440, 485-514,  651.


Evolution, mental, ase Knowledge,

growth  of ;  see  alio  Religion,  ctoIu-

tion  of.
Experience,  215,  280,  281,  303,  310;

as source  of religious  knowledge,

see  Knowledge.
Explanation,  87,  126,  107,  252,  540.

Fact,  106,  187,  485,  515.

Faculty,  special,  62,  370  f .

Faith,  31,  62, 144, 148, 150,  2491, 440,

518.
FaU,  152, 181,  194,  834, 485,  516.
Fatigue,  41^-417,  536.
Fear,  72, 187, 145,  238,  234, 362.
Fechner,  468  f .,  470,  473.
Feeling  (see  also  Faith,  Fear,  Lots,

Passion,  Worship),  33,  S4-1S8  (em.

64  f.,  68  n  f.,  137),  148,  400,  437 ;

religion  of,  49; self-interpretaticB*

mistaken,  74.
Fenelon,  378  n.,  385,  395  n.  f.
Fetich,  289.

Fichte,  147, 158,  297,  333, 495.
Finite  situation,  50.
ForgiTcness,  177, 180,  383,  528.
Form  and  matter,  197,  108,  406, 452-

455.
Fortune  (see  also  Fate,  History,  Pnm-

dence),  485  ff.,  515  ff.
Francois  de  Salea,  428  n.
Freedom  (see  also  Necessity),  xii,  xri,

23,  24, 152,  173,  174,  299,  365, 412-

414,416  n.,  420, 437,483,  542,  546  n.
Friendship,  140, 452, 507.

OsxiuB,  448, 476, 488.

God,  ri,  52,  206,  206-22({,  295  f . ;  finite
and  infinite,  225-226.;  idea  of,  139,
141  f.,  146,  151,  152,  161,  216  f.,
223  f.,  294  f .,  299, 320-336, 459, 481  f . ;
incarnate,  aee  Incarnation;  lore  of,
see  LoTC  of  God;  personality,  226,
.323-336;  proofs  of,  302  ff.;  Talue  of,
136,  207-226 ;  will  of,  7,  498,  501 ;
work  of ,  XT,  6,  208  ff.,  440,  445-446,
515^24.

(3ods  and  spirits,  318  f.

Godf  emanx,  393  n.

Good  (see  also  Happinsss,  Pleasure,
Right,  Value),  195-197, 205, 405, 410,
413,  415  f.,  464,  577.

Greek  religion,  829,  334.

Grief  (see  also  Eril,  Sorrow,  Pain),  200,
223.

Groups,  dosed,  self -peipetnatiag,  468-
466/518, 540, 550.

Guyon,  Madams,  860,  804, 425  f.,  586.


IND£X


683


Habtmank,  K  Ton,  Sd,  538.

HappiDew,  195,  210,217-226,365,485-
514.

Hebrew  ralifirion,  282,  329.

Heeel,  x,  zii,  155,  195,  307,  503,  538.

Hell,  xiT,  47,  170,  268.

Henotheism,  325.

Herbert,  Georffe,  239.

Historical  reugion,  320,  446,  448,
519  ff.

Historio  yirtnes,  the,  522  f  .

Histor  J  (eee  also  Time),  562 ;  philoso-
phy of,  chh.  ii,  xzxi-zzxiii,  and  pp.
406  f .,  446 ;  (see  also  Religion,  eroln-
tion  of);  prinoiples  of  interpretation,
41,42,57,58,  180.

Hobbes,  504.

Hoffding,  H.,  18,  38,  91  f.,  353  d.

Holy  places,  239.

Holy  Spirit,  441,  478.

Horace,  506.

Howison,  290,  503.

Hugo  of  St.  Vietor,  379  d.

Hnme,  277  f.

Hypothesis,  214,  276  f.,  476.

Idba,  19,  44,  45-48,  63,  79-165,  198,
201  f.,  235, 258, 275-278, 807  f.,  315  f.,
450  f .,  54S^4S,  663-673  ;  action  the-
ory  of,  113  ff. ;  eirole-diagrams,  80  f.,
101 ;  finitnde  and  infinitude  of,  90  ff. ;
functions  of,  80,  94, 110,  112;  inde-
pendence of  feeling,  110  ff. ;  mean-
mg,  external,  117ff. ;  of  whole,  see
Whole  idea ;  permanence,  llOf. ;  rig-
idity and  change,  79  ff. ;  sjstam,  111,
119;  TiTidness,  117,546.

Idealism,  ▼,  z-xx,  44,  157-162,  169  f .,
195,  209,  2891,  314, 437 n.,  558-572.

Identity,  indiTidiial  (see  alao  Parsooal-
ity,  Self),  119,  260,  264.

Ignorance,  knowledge  of,  235.

lUnminatioa,  388, 449  n.

Imagination,  533,  562.

Imitotion,  403,  518  f.

Immanence,  326  ff.,  406.

Immediacy,  Immediate,  316, 366,  367,
390,  439  f .,  448  n.  f.

Immortality,  Fntnre  Life  (see  also  Self-
preserTation),49f.,52, 141, 144,  195,
210  f.,  282,  264,  366,  512,  514,  520  f .

Ineanataon,  211,  821,  330,  615-.524.

IndmrnideBoe,  28, 110  ff.,  120, 139-169,
273,  284, 314,  668-^2.

IndiYidnal,  Indtridnality  (see  also  Per-
sonaUty,  Self),  161, 255,417  ff.,  430  ff.,
445.

India,  102.


Induction,  237,  408,  409,  474-477.

Ineffable,  Ineffability  (see  also  Mys-
tery), 19,  848,  353,  363, 396.

InfallibiUty,  455.

Infinite,  19,  236,  376.

Inge,  430.

Inspiration,  8, 426,  445,  461,^5-.^^

Institution,  religions,  519  ff.

Instinct,  24  f.,  49,  50,  88,  128  f.,  151,
323,  341, 358,  420,  474, 483, 504, 527,
544  ff.,  551  f.

Intellect* (see  diso  Idea),  82,  98,  99.

Interest,  see  Pleasure,  Value,  WilL

International  law  and  religion,  521.

Jrretevant  universal,  193, 196,  200-221,
236-238.

Islam,  337,  520.

Jamu,  Wiixiam,  88, 89, 184,  185, 220,

247,  362  f .,  390, 428, 503, 537.
Janet,  537.

Jesus  Christ,  200,  205,  331,  367,  612.
JcTons,  F.  B.,  2aS  n.,  458.
Justice,  175-179,  205.

Eaut,  37,  60,  193, 195,  226,  276,  808,
420  n.,  559^562.

Karma,  383.

Knowledge,  191 ;  and  the  knowing  pro-
cess, 408-411  n.,  457  f. ;  experience
as  source  of,  154,  215,  217,  229-312 ;
powih  of,  5, 96-^9, 120,  458, 478  f.;
m  religion,  peculiar  dif&eulty  of,  32,
89,  51-64,  66-63,  74,  91.  98,  100,
142-144, 149 ;  in  religion,  how  poesi-
ble  (see  also  RcTelation),  yii,  liii,
xiT,  32,  37-52,  96,  109, 154  ff.,  229-
337 ;  loTe  of,  see  Reality,  interest  in ;
of  other  minds,  see  Social  experi-
ence ;  scientific  and  religious,  3,  31,
61,  96, 151,  409  n.,  452,  513 ;  theorj
of,  251^15, 558-673.

Lao  Tzb,  205, 224.

Law,  as  God,  334-886.

Leibnix,  246,  274  f  .

Leuba,  574-578.

Likeness,  475,  481.

Lippert,  11,  49.

Lileralitf  in  Bdigian,  3, 108, 149, 160,

296, 301  f.,  422,  515.
Lodce,  48, 242,  252.
LoTO,  135, 152,  206, 266  f.,  432 1, 437,

451,  507,  535,  577.
Lore  of  (3od,  123, 341,  859, 361, 366  U

375, 422-444, 435  f.,  513,  574-67a
LoTc  of  life,  202,  436, 437, 438.
LoTcjoy,  A.  O.,  324  b.


584


INDEX


Loyalty,  142,  148,  162,  226,  4S6-440,

499.
Loyola,  861.
Luther,  361,  888.

Maxtbruhok,  487  f .,  496, 610.

Ma^,237.

MaterialiBm,  417,  689  n.

MoDongaU,  W.,  886.

MoTaggart,  166,  207-226.

Mediaeval,  Mediaeyalinn,  878  n.,  480.

Mediation,  Mediator  (tee  also  Author-
ity, Historioal  religion,  Immediate),
xii,  ziz,  186,  280,  m  f  .,  877,  446.

Meditation,  872, 876  ff.

Metapathy,  72.

MeUphysiee,  209  f.,  214-216.

Blind  and  hody  (see  also  Body),  201,
261-265, 416, 64(HS43,  648.

MiiBcle,  148,  482,  517.

Mohammed  (lee  also  Idam),  612.

Molinoa,  884.

Monadiam,  244,  276,  297.

Moninn,  16^182,  298,  869.

Monotheinn,  824-826.

Mood,  660.

Moral  Irony,  494.

Morale  and  Religion,  20, 81, 61, 76, 146,
150, 166, 176, 177,  226,  296,  880-882,
841,  865,  418,  422-424,  427,  482  f.,
496,  612  £.,  662,  666,  674-67&

Miind»rberg,  158,  250,  262  n.,  288  n.

Myetery  (aee  also  Ineffable),  231,  238,
285  f .,  898.

MysUoa,  Mystioism  (aee  alao  NegatiTe
Aepect,  NegatiTe  Path),  zriii,  xiz,
53,  60,  61,  100,  106,  323,  827,  337,
S4I-Ulf  448,  490,  611  ff.,  636  f.,
674-578.

Myth,  149.

Natubs,  190,  288,  299,  804,  466,  617,
641 ;  as  loeos  of  meanings,  118  ;  aa
object  of  knowledge,  fee  Knowl-
edge; as  lonroe  of  knowledge  of
God,  2.30-316.

NeeeentT  (lee  alao  Freedom),  29, 162,
437,  462,  466,  542.

NegatiTe  aspect  of  religion  (see  alio
Mysticism,  NegatiTe  path,  Religion,
nniqueness  of),  6,  21  f.,  32,  327,
421.

NegatiTe  path,  355,  365,  369-388,  892,
427,  4.37  f .,  466.

NegatiTity  (see  also  Change),  188.

Nietzsche,  431  n.,  480,  482,  504,  518.

NoTclty  (see  also  Change,  CreatiTity),
167, 363  ff.,  448, 462.


Objxotititt,  102, 106, 186, 192  f.,  284,
307 f.,  343;  in  religion,  29,  30,  67,
78, 150, 162 ;  of  mind,  67, 136,  618.

Obligation  (see  also  Conscience,  Duty),
251.

Obeerration,  476  f.,  628.

Odes  of  Solomon,  462  ff .

Omar  Khayyam,  189,  828,  430.

Omnipotence,  608.

Ontological  argument,  301  ff.,  668  ff.

Optimism,  166, 182.

Orades,  364.

Orgy,  634.

Oriental  quality  in  religion,  149-151,
828,  873.

Originality  (see  also  Creativity),  29,
866,  447  f.,  460,  666  f.

Ortwald,  409  n.

Other-world  (see  also  Immortality),
6-10.

Paik  (see  also  EtU),  128  n.,  218, 491.

Palmer,  Frederic,  614  b.

Palmer,  G.  H.,  198, 396.

Panpsychism,  318.

Pantheism,  326.

Particular,  the,  286, 486-^24.

Pascal,  147.

Passion,  106, 128,  400,  584.

PassiTity,  162,  872,  882  ff.,  413,  419,
422,  426,  432,  437.

Peace  (see  also  Feeling,  Attainment).
66,  66,  72,  2ia

Perception,  85, 120, 121.

Persecution,  68.

Personal  religion  (see  alao  Myaticim),
336  f.

Personality  (see  also  Character,  Indi-
Tidual,  Self),  134,  150,  187,  226,
260  f.,  264,  266,  385-6,  425,  481,
486-^14,  632 ;  of  God,  see  God,  per-
sonality  of.

Pessunism,  see  ETil.  Optimism.

Petrie,  W.  M.  F.,  403  n.

Philip  of  Alcantara,  636.

Philosophy  and  religion,  see  Religion.

Physical  preparation,  372.

Plato,  483,  663  n.,  677.

Play,  151.

Pleasure,  127  ff.,  418^20  422,  429  n..
4.S6,  534,  547-651.

Plotinus,  329,  890  n.,  395  n.

Pluralism  (see  also  Monism.  Independ-
ence, Unfinishedness),  166  ff.,  292-
295,  298  f.,  859,  406,  416.

Poetry  in  religion  (see  also  Literality,
Symbol),  149. 150.  462.

Polytheism,  324-326.


INDEX


585


PotitiTe  Tdiffum  (lee  alao  Sstorieal  re-
ligion, Reugion,  partioiilar),  619  ff.

Postnlat*  (see  alio  Volimtarism),  146,
152,  153, 161,  251.

Potential,  lee  Energy.

Power,  loTe  of,  504, 509,  517 ;  in  Na-
tue,  216;  rapzeme,  216-222.

Pragmatic  method,  4, 6.  10, 165.

Pragmatism  (see  also  Absolnte,  Rela-
tinty,  Volnntarism),  x,  xiii-zviii,
46  f.,  69-72,  113  ff.,  139-162,  196,
201,206;  in  Cluna,  147 n.

Prajapati,102.

Pratt,  J.  6.,  38, 106,  537.

Prayer  (see  also  Worship),  152,  196,
249,  303,  876  f.,  428-441, 445  f.,  479.

Predioatea,  87,  96, 97  f .,  100-104,  820,
321, 458.

Prince,  Morton,  531.

ProbabiUty.  167,  214.

Prophecy,  445.

Prophtdc  eomdoutneMM^  48&-614  (cap.
503),  515-519.

Pioyidence,  446,  485,  516.

Ptondo-Dionysins,  355,  396  n.

Psychology,  43,  45.

Psychology  of  religion,  8,  18,  28-34,
54,  59, 145,  341-516.

Ptah  Hotep.  419,  505.

Pnigation,  372  ff.

QuAKTiTT  of  existence,  72, 440.
Qnietism,  382,  386.

RsALisM  (see  also  Independence),  xi,
282-290,  558-572.

Reality  (see  also  Absolnte,  Snbetance),
ziii,  112, 119,  147, 151, 161, 168, 184,
194, 198,  303-310, 489, 5^f,  512, 562,
571 ;  interest  in, '  purely  theoretical,'
115,  122  f.

Reason,  Reasoning  (see  also  Faith,
Feeling,  Knowledge,  Idea),  88,  96,
155,  530,  546.

Reconciliation,  237-239.

Redemption,  Redeemer  (see  also  Me£-
ation),  357,  520.

Reflexion,  470^75,  511.

Reflexive  turn,  the,  192  ff.,  281.

Relations,  inner  and  onter,  276, 298, 334.

ReUtivity  (see  also  Absolnte),  193,
411  n.,  414  n.

Religion  and  the  Arts  (see  also  Arts),
ii,  31,  103,  138;  and  morals,  see
Morals;  and  philosoohy,  304,  342;
anthoritatiTe,see  Authority,  Hjstoric
Religion;  erolution  of,  14-23,  41,
145, 154, 185, 229-240,  317-^7, 345,


458,  519  ff. ;  fniits  of  (see  also  Ood,
work  of),  chb.  ii,  ill,  xxx-xxxiii,  also
pp.  6,  237 ;  nature  of.  14, 31,  49,  57,
72  f..  105,  137,  141  f.,  153,  238  f.;
Particular,  pontire  (see  also  Institn-
tion.  Historical  religion),  xu,  xnu,
28,  519  ff. ;  propagation  of,  41,  42,
57,  78,  518  ff. ;  psychology  of,  see
I^ychology;  social  and  political  as-
pect of  (see  also  State),  6, 11, 12, 17,
31, 141,  152, 160,  212  f.,  237  f.,  347,
367,  402  f.,  448  n.,  454,  517  ff.,  578;
uniqueness,  supremacy  (see  also  Neg-
ative aspect),  22,  51.

Renaissance,  513.

Renunciation,  373, 501,  509.

Resentment,  145, 154,  224,  239.

Resignation,  499,  501.

RcTcUtion,  53,  54,  58,  148,  154,  229,
362,  433, 445, 447-461.

Rhythm,  891  ff.

Rickert,  158,  253.

Right,  193,  197, 251.

Rights,  23,  24;  zaligions,  486  ff.

Risk,  171, 179.

Rite,  ritual,  845.

Romantioisin,  416,  434.

Rousseau,  6,

Royce,  xii,  xxii,  158,  206,  246,  248. 249,
307,  351,  387  n.,498  f.,  503, 547, 568.

Rnysbroeok,  381.

Sabatibb,  a.,  38, 147.

Sacrifice,  347,  421.

Salvation  (see  also  Immortality),  16,

195, 198,  446, 451,  512  f.,  523.
Schleiermacher,  38, 64,  137.
Scholastics,  60,  61.
Schopenhauer,  166.
Science  (see  idso  Knowledge),  42, 178,

174  ff.,  513.
Scientific  reaction,  174.
Scriptures,  445-461.
8ein  and  BnmusUein,  208,  475  n.
Self  (see  also  Personality,  Substance),

194,  201  ff.,  241,  244-245,  253,  366,

412,  414,  430,  472,  483,  542,  561,

566  f . ;  as  source  of  change,  188  ff.
Self-consciousness,  150,  201,  235,  252,

296,  306,  322  n.,  359-360,  883,  419,

420,  422,  453,  470-477,  527,  561.
Self-assertion,  29,  146,  359-360,  367,

375, 419,  436, 438,  5aS  ff.
Self-preservation  (see  also  Immortality,

Love  of  life),  49,  106,  203,  366.
Self-righting,  175.
Sensation,  25, 155,  285,  286, 301  f .,  313,

561, 563.
