Hocus Pocus Junior: The Anatomy of Legerdemain (1658)
=====================================================
Hocus Pocus Junior — The Anatomy of Legerdemain, 1658 (5th) edition of the 1634 original, public domain. The first English book of conjuring; origin of the phrase "hocus pocus." Scan via Internet Archive.

T he Anatomy of 
LEGERDEMAIN. 


: I _— 1 
The Art of Jugling ſet forth in his proper colours, tul- 
ly,plainly,and exactly, ſo thatan ignorant perſon may #* 
thereby learn the full perfeRion of the ſame, 
aftera litrcle practiſe, 
Unto each. trick is added the Figure where it is need- 
. fall for Inſtruction. 
The fifth' Edition , with many Additions,. 
Prxftat nihili quam nihil facere. | 


iCO1trs * Doctu” 


> 


A 
LES 
(7 


> LONDON, 


Printed by G.Daw/on, and areto he fold by Thomas Vere,ar 
the Ange/ without Newgate, and Fr. Grove on Stew- Hill, 1 65 8, 


% 


% > p x* 
-- "IO Bn DL 


| I! Friis: 


LEAVE 4 


RD 
um i ff 


j 


By! 


M 
\ * Sl by Vo 


- — co g——_ 
-: Saba EEG an 


| | T he Anatomy of 0 


LEGERDEMAI N. 


The Art of Juglin fy, ſet Knit? - hisproper cal 
ly,plainly,and exactly; ſo that an ignorant perſon may *® 
thereby learn t þe Full perfection of the ſame, 
afrera litcle practiſe, | | ZN 
Unto end trick is added the Figure where it is need- 
's fall for Inſtruction. 
The fifth" Edition , with many Additions. 


, Przſtat nihili quam nihil facere. 


&> 


iCOitrs, Doctin'®): 


»> LONDON, 
Printed by G.Daw/on, and are to he fold by Thomas Vere,at 
the Ange/ without Newgate, and Fr.2c15; gu e£0n Snew- Hill, 165 8, 


_ a 7 ry 
on ALS 
—— — cect _ 


BRITAN 
NICYM 


het CN os 20s 30105 2919p D 
Ge DCE GID-CLIEENEED 


To the READER. 


Ms 


Ourteous Reader, doe you not 

wonder? if you do not well you 
may, to ſee ſo ſlight a Pams - 
phlet ſo quickly ft Vent. but light- 
ly come, and lightly g 20. it 1s a 
| Jugters term, and it wal befits 
ES the  ſabje&t. Would you know 

whence it firſtcame?why from Bartholomew Fair: 
would you know whither it's bent? for the Fair again ; 

it s a ſtragler, a wanderer, and as 1 ſaid,as it lightly 

comes, ſo it t lightly e gOCs . for it meanes to ſee, not onely 
Bartholomew Fair, but all the Fairs in the Kings 

dom alſo.&5 therfore in the front Hiccius Doccius is 

the Poſt-maſter & what he wants there, Tle give him 

here ; a word or two of command, a term of art, not fo . 
much ſubſtantial, as CY cumſtantial, Celeriter vade; 

over hedges and ditches, thorow thickand thin, to come 

to your Faires, Room for a Jugler all in poſt yer with 

a a deſi re to give yore fl full [atisfattion. If you like it then 

buy it and Tread it, if otherwiſe, leave it for them that 


liſt. 


Farewell. 


The ArT of 


LEGERDEMAIN 


DisCOVERE Þ. 


The eriginal of Legerdemain, and how it came firſt into 
this Kingaome. 


ST came firſt into the Kingdome by 
certain Egyptians, that weretran- 
(ported hither , who growing to 
numerous mulritudes , dilpeitcd 
themſelves thorow moſt parrs of 
the Kingdom: who being moſt cx- 
2S pertitthis Art, andin Palmcſtry, 

couicncd the people 1n all parts wherſoever they came. 
Now divers vagrant Engliſh joyning with them, 1n 
time learnt bo:h their language, aad coulening delufi- 
ons, whereby art length they werediſcovered,and there- 
upon the next in{uing Parliament, there was 2 Statr'c 
enacted:ihat whoſoever ſhould rraniport.an Aguptian, 
ſhould hayca fincimpoſed upon him ; m9:cover,tha 
VWelD 


— — — 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
whoſoever ſhould aſſume unto themſelves the names of 
£2yptiars, it ſhould be imputed unto them as fellony, 

1n (6 high a degree,that they might not have their Book 

granted unto them, which ſtatute was put in execution, |. 
and fince that time our Kingedome hath been well diſ-_. 
burdencd ofthole Agyptian Juglers. 


The Definition of the Art of Legerdemain, with its 
principall parts. | 


| 12 Kms: is an operation, whereby one may ſeem 

ro work wondertfull,impoſſible, & incredible things, 
by agility, nimbleneſle, and ſleightneſſe of hand, The 
parts of this Art are principally two. The firſt is inthe 
conveyance of Balls,Cards, Dice, Mony, 8&c. Theſe- 
cond is in Confederacy. | 


The endof the Art of Legerdemain. 


*He end of this Art is cither good or bad, accord- 
ingly as it is uſed: Good,and lawful when it is uſed 

at Feſtivals, and merry mectings to procure mirth : ' 
eſpecially it-it be done withont defire of eſtimation a- - 
bove what we are. Bad,and altogether unlawful, when 
it is uſed on purpale,to cozen,deceive,orforyain-glory + 
tO be eſteemed aboye what 1s mect and honeſt. 


The definition, or deſcripton of the Operator, 


Trſt, he muſt be one of an .impudent and audacious 

1pirir,ſo that he may ſer a good face uponthe matter. 

Secondly, he muſt have a nimble and cleanly con- 
Yeyances.. 


——— RO © 


_ Thirdly, 


-- —_ 


W Fw yi W F'TY 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered, 


. Thirdly, he muſt have ſtrange termes, and em- 
phaticall words, to grace and adorn his aQtions, and 
the moreto aſtonith the beholders. 

Fourthly, and laſtly, ſuch geſtures of body as may 
lead away the ſpectators eyes from a ſtrict and diligent 
bcholding his manner of conveyance, 


Of the play of the Balls, 
Tz Operator thus qualified muſt /haye his im- 


plements-of purpoſe to play withall : and firſt 
he muſt have three Cups, made of braſle , or Croo- 


CL re rr WI _—_— 


——_— 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
{ed lane plate : Theſe Cups muſt be ali of one ſize, 
and the bottome of each of them muſt be ſer alittle 
within the Cup; mark the followiug figure, for 
thereby they are truly repreſented, both inform and 
bienefle : it is noted with the letter B. Alſo he muſt 
have four balls made of Cork, about the bigneſle 
of ſma}l Nutmegs. Firſt he muſt practiſe to hold 
theſe Cork Balls, two or three of them at once in 
one hand, The beſt place, and the readieftto hold 
one Ball, is between the ball of rhe thumb and the 
palme of the hand ; bur 1t you hold more thanone 
at one time, between your fingers towards the bot- 
tromes. The place to-hold a: great Ball 1s between 
your two middle figgersz. Rememberinyour play al- 


waycs to keep the palm of your band downward : 
Atter you have once learned to hold theſe'Balls hand- 


Sorel have ſomcly, you may work divers ſtrange and delightful 
jcer fu v.i:h feats, | } 

wag + But whether you ſeem to caſt your Ball inthe air, 
thers play OT into yOUr MoUth, Or into your other hand, yer ſil] 
Randing with retain 1t in the ſame hand, ſtill remembring to keep 

el Nang» 

i before © the palm of your hand Cownward, and out of fight. 
tkem,burall Nowto begin. 


canes ro ont . He that is tO play muſt fit on the farther ſide of a 


Scmefexsmay Table, which muſt be covered with a Carpet : part- . 


wikmere {y to keep the Balls from rouling away, and part- 
grace ep? 1 to keep them from ratling : likewiſe he muſt ſer 


tormed Iitand-'/ 4 p | eq 
ins than &;- his hat in his lap, or fit in ſuch manner,' as that he 
17's may receive any thing into his lap,and ler him cauſe 

ie marner _q4 7 - : : . # 
of kokting the #1) £1is ſpectators to fit down : Then let him draw 


Cups wil con- his four Balls, and Jay three of them upon the table, 
cez]the B:li ( 2nd retain the fourth in his right hand ) and fay 
that youreiain O 3 


in your kand, Gentlemen, here are three Balls you ſee, 1. Meriden, 
: ; 2 .Benedic, 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered, 
> Benedic. and 3.Preſio Fohn, then let him draiy kis 
Cups, and hold them allthreein his right hand alto, 
ſaying, here are allo three Cups, ſaying, lee there's 
1 nothing in them, neither have they any talſe bor- 
tomes: Then ſay, ſce I will fet them all on arow, 
and clap rhem all on a row, and in clapping them 
down, convey the Ball that you retained under the 
middlemoſt Cup, ſaying as you fet them down, no- 
thing there, there, northere. 


(LIP , 


Then ſhew your hand, and ſay, Gentlemen you ce 
here is nothing: in my hands, and ſay, now to be- 
oin, and take up with your right hand one of the 
three Balls thar you laid down, and ſay, this is the 
ficſt, and with that ſeem to put it into your lefr 
hand, and preſently ſhut your left hand, and being 
ſhut, clap it unto your carc, ſaying, thisis forthe 
purging of the brain , Preſto be gone, then move 
both the outmoſt Cups noted with A.and B. with 
both your hands, ſaying, and there is nothing th:re, 


_ _—_ LL <a be A eee <—_ 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


not there , andinthe clappingthem downe,” convey - | 
rhe ball in your right hand underthe Cup noted B, 
Then with your right hand take up the ſecond Ball, 
and ſcem to putinto the left hand { butretain it ) ſhut- 
ring your left hand indue time - then clap your left 
hand unto your mouth, ſcem to ſup the ball,out of your 
hand; and make a faceas if you ſwallowed ir, then ſay, 
Preſto, and that's. gone on ſce, and with your right 
hand movethe Cup noted A, ſaying, And there is no» 
thing, and in cl-pping it down convey the ball, you 
retained,under it,ſo have you conveyed into each Cup 
a ball, | | | 


Then with your. right hand rake' up rhe third Ball, 
and ſeem to put it into your left hand; ſhutting itin 
due time, and then reach ir out from you , ſaying , 
wade couragions , and open your hand, and blow a 
blaſt, looking up as if you ſaw itflying away, and 
iay, paſſa couragions, andthat's gone: then take up the 
Cups one after another, and ſay, neyertheleſſe Gen- 
tlemen, there is one, there is two, and there is all 
three again: Then cover them -and ſay , ſee you 
Gentlemen, I will coyer themall again. . Then ſay, 
now the firſt, then_with your right hand take up 
the firſt Cup, and with your left hand take'up the 
Bak! that is underit, ſaying, fee, I take him out, and 
| In . 


wd yo 


mo > 8 v 


_ 


; nd mis 3) Wu 


T be Art of Legerdemain 4;ſcovered. 


in ſctting down the Cup again, convey the ball in. 
your right hand under] it, then with your right hand 
take the ball out of your lett hand, ſeem to pur it into 
your pocket (bur retain it)ſaying, wade, that's gonein- . 
tomy Pocket you ſce , then take up with your 
right hand the ſecond Cup, and with your left 
hind take the Ball from under it, and ſay (ee, I 
take this our fairly alſo, and in ſetting down the 
Cup , convey the Ball that you retained under it, 
and then with your right hand take the Ball out of 
your left, and ſeem to put it into your pocket, ( but 
retain)ſaying; Fubeo, and that's gone into my pocket : 
then with. your right hand take up thethird and laſt 
Cup, and with your left hand take the Ball fromun- 
der it, and ſay, here I take my laſt our, and in ſetting 
down the Cup, convey the Ballthat is in your right 
hand under it, and then with your right hand take the 
ball out of your left hand, and ſeem to put it into 


your pocket ( but retain it) and ſay,vade,tis gone in- 


ro my pocket ; then take up your Cups orderly, fay- 


ing, Gentlemen here 1s one you ſec, here is two, and ' 
here is all three again, and in ſetting down the Jaſt 
Cup noted A, convey the Ball that. you retainedin 
your hand under it. ... 


Then - 


"The Art of Legerdemain diſcover ed, 


Then take up one of the three balls with your 
right hand, and ſeem to purir under the Cup B. but 
retain it, and then ſay by the powder of experience, 


Fubeo, come away when I bid you under this Cup 
' A. then takeup B, andiay,fce you firs, he ſcornes to 


rtarry under this Cup, but is creptunder here : then 
take the Cup A. and they will wonder how it came 
thither. Then ſay Gentlemen, and. you ſee here is 
but one, and in ſetting it down, convey that in your 
righi hand under it, then with your right hand take 
up the ſecond Ball, and ſcem to put it into your 
lctt hand, ſhutting your left hand in due time; then ' 


Y - PAP ? 
[ \ \\ 


hold your faid left hand from off you, and pro- 
nounce theſe words, with a Revecaſtivocalopen your 
hand toſſing it up ) that's gone, then take up the 
Cup A. and fay, ſec here they arc got both together : 
Then ſay, here arc buttwo, and ſetting it down, con- 
vey 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered.” 
vey the ball you retained in your righthand unde: 
itt 


Then with your right hand take up rhe third ball, and 
ſcem to pur itinto your left hand, and ſhutting it in due 
time, ſaying this is my laſt ball, vade paſſa couragions, 
(open your hand then tofling it up and ſtaring afterit) 
and that's goneyou ſee, thentakeup the Cup A, and 
ſay,here they arc all three again. : 

Set your Cups then on arow 2gain,and under one 
| of them, as D. convey your fourth Ball which you 
retained in your hand, and lay the other three balls 


Then with your right hand take up the firſt ball, 
and ſcem to put it into; you left hind , - thutting 
your ſaid Jett hand in due time. then as if you were 
z ar dice, caſt your left hand at the cup D. and blow 
after it, ſaying, vage pa, and tis gonce,then take up 

- Cup D.and in 


Lina: 
CLapPn3 \ 


the Cup noted A,and<lap itupon 


Pr 


nt nr 11 Rr ERA Rr" > treo nr” ono op 


-_ 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
clapping it on, convey the Ball/ydu retained in your 
right h nd upon the top of the Cup D. 0» 


- — 
FLATS 
EOS / 
\ WO 
fp \\ 
/ \ 
/ | 
\ 
i an 
- * 
fy \ 
* *WR\ 
/ 


7 \ 
A \\ 3 


FA, 4 
i C/ I \\\\\" h 
PTE _ 
Then take up the ſecond Ball with yourright hand, 
and ſceme to pur it .into your left, ſhutting it in 
due time, as you did before : now in like manner 
ſeeme tro make the ſame to vaniſh with a word of com- 
mand, then take up the cup C.and clap ir uponthe cup 
A. and clapping it on, convey the Ball you retained 
in your right han, upon the top of the cup noted _ 
A. | 


T_ 


So then you have conveyed under eachcup aball* 
then rake up the third ball ſeerningro vaniſhir 25the 
two former, bur rerain it. then ſhew them under cach 
Cup one, which will beyc: 7 itrange, 


(2 


The! 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


Then take one Cup 1n your right hand, and clap it 
upon another, ſaying, ſee Gentlemen I will ſet you 
one cup upon another, and inclappingiron, convey 
the ball you retained in your right hand upon the 
trop of the lowermoſt Cup : mark the figure tollow- 


ng. 


Then take up one ball , and ſeem to caſt it in the 
aire, and ſtaring afterir , ſay vade, thats gone, then 
with your right hand take up the uppermoſt Cup, 
ſay, ſec here he 1s crept between my Cups, and in 
clapping it down. again, convey the ball that you re- 
tained under it. 


Then with your right hand take up the fecond bail 
and ſcem to put it into your lefthind, ſhutting it in 


Que time : then open your left hand ro fling [, Tay. 


wvaae, and that's gone, then with your rickr hand 
. take up the uppermoſt Cup,and ſry, do you fee Gen- 


_—_— = Oy eps, _ _ _—_ - - 
_— ono  <nv npedtns ts eta. _ a—— 62- &t 
«* 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
tlemen, they are ſnug'd like a young man, anda Maid 
inbedtogeiher, andinſerting it down convey the ball 
that you retain, 


Then with yourright hand take up thethird ball, and 
ſeem to putit in your left hand, bur ratainit, ſhutting 
your left hand in due time: then hold it from you, 
and then open your hand toſhing it up and gaping after 
it,ſay Mouxtifilede,mount, that's gone,and thenrake up 
the Cupandſay, here areallthree again. Then cover 
them again, and ſay, fingle is nothing, then clap 
the third Cup upon them , but double. is ſome- 


what. 


Then may you ſcem to pull all the three corks out 
of the top of the upper Cup, caufing them to yaniſh 
one after another, as I have ſufficientlie taught you 
before , which may be performed by thar one be 
that 


The Art of Legerderain diſcovered, 
that you retain in your right hand, 

And laſtly, take the uppermoſt Cup, and* ſer it 
down firft by it ſelf, then with both hands nimbly 
hoiſting the two other Cups, ſhuffle them oneupon 
another, and the balls will not fall out, and ſoir will 
be thought that you have pulled the three balls our 
of the bottomes of the two uppermoſt Cups, I could 
teach youto vary theſe feats a hundred waics, bur [ 
leave itto thoſerhar intend to follow the trade, 


How to make a great Ball ſeem to come throuzh a 
> TablemtoaC Ap. 
Erone of your Cups upon a Table, and take a 
\ Jgood big ſtoole-bal our of your pocket, and ſay, 
clapping your hand with the ball in ir under the 
Table, My maſters would you not think it a prettie 


erick that I ſhould make this ball come thorow the 
Table into the Cup : Then ſome one or other will 
take up the Cup. to ice if it be {o; then hold the ball 
berween your two middle fingers of your right 

2 hand. 


i 
: 
LL ——————_wA_Þw_w_ww_ﬀ 


£1. EEC A, ES IE ATI 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
hand,ftarc himin the face, and ſay, nay but you muſt 
rot move my Cup out ofits place, while I have {aid 
my. words of cemimand : with that fer your Cup in 
i:s former placc, ard in letting it down nimbly, con- 
vey the ball underit, and ſay, Heiferiuna nnnquam 
credo, wade conraziows: Now lee ( (ay Yif itbe there 
or not, which when they fee, they will imagine was 
conjured into it by vertue of your words, 


C/o very pretty tricks with Balls, 

Etain oc {inall Ball in your hand , and lay thr. 

other {mall Balls upon the Table: then wi . 
your right hand take up one of the three Bals, an. 
put into your kft hand, ſaying, Thereis one, then 
take up the {ccond,, and put that into-your lefthand 
2Wo, and therewith likewiſe pur the Ball you retained 
in your right hand, ſaying, And there is two ( yet you 
know there is three already) and ſhut your hand in 
due time: then take vp the third Ball in your right 
band, and clap your right hand unto the upper part 


of your Jeft arme, retaining the Ball firmly , pro- 


rounce theſe wores : ' Fsbeo celeriter, comeallinto my 
hand when I bid you. Then withdraw you right 
hand (holding the palmthereof downward) laying, 
that's gone Gentlemen: then open your left hand, and 
ſay, here are all three together,and lay them down on 
the T able, UE 4 1 

Another. 

"T Ake up one ofthe Palls in your right hand, and. 

= Put it into your left, holding it firmly be- 
tween your forefinger and thumb of your ſaid left 
hand, Then with your forecfinger and thumb of 
vour righ: hand, (bug be nimble) ſeem to oo 
| _ Ball 


— — — — 


mn nn nn 


The Art of Legerdemain «//covrred. 
Ball one of another, which you m-y coe by flipping 
the Ball that you rctained in your r29t band beaween 
the fotetinger and thi mb of the faui Tand, faying, 
thus by activity have Tlearn'd to co, out of one lit- 
tle bail for to make :wo : and all ora bigneſle, then lay 
all four bals upon the Table. 


Anz: ber. | 

FAVES your right hari take up one of the balls, 

and feem to pur it iro the left, bur retain it, 
ſhutting your left han :n duc time, and ſay, there is 
one : then hold your hind from you, Then with 
your right hand take up another, ſaying, here take 
another. Then pronounce thele words, Mercus mer- 
curus, by the power ot experience, Fubeo ; then open 
your left hand ſaying, that's gone , and then open 
your right hand and ſhew them both together, 


How to make a flone ſeem to vaniſh out of your hand. 


'Ou muſt haye a ſtone of a reaſonable bigneſle, 
ſuch as you may well hide in your hand, fitting 

in ſuch manner as I have formerly {aid, that you may 
receive any thing into your Jap, take this ſtone our 
of your pocker, ſaying, You ſce, Gentlemen, here is a 
ſtone, a miraculous ſtone: Wil you havei: vaniſh, 
waxe, or goc away inviſible, which being ſaid, with- 
draw your hardto the fide of the Table, letring the 
ſtone {lip down into your lap, in which time ſtare 
about you, iaying, chuſe you whether. Then reach 
out your han and fay ; Fortune variablis, lays in- 
eſtimabilis, Fubes, vade,vade,couragious. Opcn your 
hand, then roffing it up,and blow a blaſt, andlook up, 
ſaying, Doe you iccitisgoac. Yourlooking up will 
| make 


—_— —— 


7 he 4rt «f Legerderain diſcovered. 


make them to_look up, in whichtime you may take 
the ſtone 2gain inthe other hand, and ſlip it ito your 
pocket. 

Another. 


Ake your ſtone again out of yourpocket, ſaying 

here ir is once again, and I will give irunto any 

of you to hald, and reach your haud out unto them, 

and opening your hand ſay, Loe here itis. Then 

Bo aoilire ang WIEN - any One Is abour to take 1t,, withdraw your 

nimilleneſle of [and tO the fide of the Table, and make your con- 

hand you may yeyance as before, in which time ſav, Bur you muſt 

 Haces'in PLoMiſe me to take it quickly : Then yl ne lay, I 

toſtirand ra will; then reach your hand being {ut out unto 

=b-uryou 3s? him again, and while he ſtriverh, rainking rotakeit 
11 » 


and»: laſtto quickly, hold faſt, and ſiy, Yade couragiows, ſeleriter 


variſhmay, jade: in which time you take np the ſtone in the 
der ye ' ether hand, and hold it from you. Thenopen your 


be ſomeE:mi hand and ſay, loc, If youcan hojda pretty Lafle no 


liartharyou faſter, when you have her, I will not givea pin for 
deal withal. - 
your skill. : 


How 10 make a Card vaniſh, and find it againin a Nut, 


Ake what Card you will,. pill the printed paper 

A from off ir, and roll ithard up,and make a hole in 
a Nut, and take outthe kernell, and then thruſt in 
the Card, afterwards ſtop the hole of th: Nur neatly 
with wax, this Nut you muſt have in readineſſe abour 
you, and when you arc in your play ,. call for ſuch a 
Card as you incloſed in your Nut, orelſe haveone 
in a readineſſe, and ſay, You ſee Gentelemen here is 
ſuch a Card : then wet it, and pill of theprinred 
fide, roul it up, and in the uſual manner conyey ir 


away ; 


T he Art of Legerdemain covered. 


away : Then take your Nut out of your pocket, and 
give irunto one, and ſay,crackthat Nur, andtell me 


. if you can find the Card there, which being found will 


be thought very ſtrange. - 

Then have another ſuch like Nnt, but filled with 
Inke, and ſtopped after the ſame manner thar your 
other Nut was, and give that unto another, and bid 
him crack ir, and ſee what he can find in that, and fo 
ſoon as he hath cracked it,all the Ink will run about his 
mouth, which will moye more mirth and laughter than 


the former. 


How to ſeem to eat a Knife. 


Jy==* any one of your ſp:ators te accom- 
modate you with. a Knife, which when you 
have goiten, hold it in ſuch manner, as that you may 
cover the whole Knife with both your hands, the 
end of the haft excepted, and ſer the point of it un- 
to your cye, and ſay, ſome body ſtrike it in with his 
fiſt, but nv body will, becauſe it is ſo dangerous a 
thing : then ſer your hands-upon the Table, and 
looking about you, fay, why , waat will no body 
ftrike 1t in, in whichtimelet the Knife ſlip down into 
your lap. Then nimbly make as if you chop ir 
haſtilic into your mouth, or to hold itin one hand, 
and ſtrike it in with the other, { but nimblic ) th-n 
m:ke to or three ſoure faces, ſaying, ſome erink, 
ſome drink : or clfe you may fay,now ſome 0c pur 
his finger in my mouth, and pullirour 2gain 4 ome 
will fay, haply you will bite me, fay, no 1 will aſſure 
you. Then when he hath pur his finger into your 
mouth, he will pull it out and ſay, hereis nothing, 
( this time is ſufficient ro convey the Knife our of 
your Jap into your pocket ) ſay again, why, you 
have 


The Art of Legerdemain dſcovered. 
have your finger out again , did you think to pull the 
knife out : if thar ſhould be in my mourh, i: would 
kill me. The knife is here in my pocket, and with 
tnat take it our, and deliycr it again, | | 


How torap aWag on the kuuckles. 


Ake a ball and lay it on the Table, and holding 

a knife in one hand by the blade,deltre ſome body 
to take the ball that is upon the Table and lay it up- 
on the hafr of the knife, pretending that you will 
blow it thence invifibly , and when he 1s laying it on, 
take him a good rap on the knuckles. 


How to ſeem to ſwallow a long pudding made 
of Tinxe. 


1x His pudding muſt be made of Tin, it confiſteth 
it of twelve little hoops made Tape-wiſe, 1o that 
if they may almoſt fall one thorow another, and have 
| a piece of Canvas tyed over the biggeſt end thereof, 
| to the end jt may not hurt your reerh by haſtily qap- 
| Ping it into your mouth. The figure whereof fol- 
| loweth,and 1s marked with a letter A. 


hold this pudding(for fo itis calle} vrivately 1n your 
left hand, with the Canvas end uppc: aioft, and with 
your right hand take a Ball ourot your pocket , and 
{ay, 


The Art of Legerdemain- diſcovered. 
ſay, If there be any Maid that hath loft her maiaenhead, 
er old wiman that is half out of conceit with her ſelfe, be- 
cauſe her neighbours deem her n0t ſo young as ſhe wonld 
willingly ſeem tobe, let her ceme unto me, for this ball is 

preſent remedy: Then ſeem to put theball into your 

left hand, but let ir ſlip into your lap, and clap your 
pudding into your mouth, which will be thought to 
be the ball you ſhewed them : Then incline your head 
and open your mouth,and the pudding will ſlip down 
at its full length, which with your right hand you 
may ſtrike up into your mouth again : do thus f how 
or four times one after another, and the laſt time/you 
may diſcharge your mouth of it into your hand, and 
clap it into_your lap without any ſuſpition, fo that 
| you make two or three ſoure faces after it, as if it 
ſtuck in your throat, and if you practiſe to ſmite caſi- 
ly with _ firſt on each fide of your throat, thepud- 

ing will ſceme to chink, as if it werelying in your 
throat, Then fay, thus they ſwallow puddings in high 
Datch-land, they flip down their throats before their 
tecth can take poſſeſſion of them. 


| How to ſeem to cut ones noſe halfe off. 


Or the cffeRing of this feat, you muſt have a knife 
2 for the nonce, made witha gap in the midſt of the 
blade, as ir is demonſtrated in the following figure 
noted with the letter A. | 


The 4rt of Legerdemain diſcovered; 
Not that ta YOU uſt conceal the. notch with your finger, and 


fach feats as then wring it over the fleſhy part of your noſe, and 


chisit were ne your nEſe will ſeem as- it were halfe cur off with the. 
ceflary co hive ife | 

TT” 
ſpunge with 


—_— How to ſeem to pull « rope thorow your noſe. 


be retained : $ : 
privaccly. Ou'muſt have likewiſe for theeffeRing of thisde- 


lufton, an Implement on porpoſe. The figure 
whereof followeth- It may be made of two elder 
ſticks, thruſting our the pith,and afterward glued to- 
gether, the ends whereof muſt have a piece of cork cut 
hollow, and glued over them ::then muſt there be a 
little whipcord put thorow them, the ends whereof 
muſt come out at two holes made on the oumward: 
fide of cach elder ſtick, 


Pur this Trinket over the ficſhie part of your 
noſe, then pull one cnd of the rope, and afterwards 
the other, and it will be thought that the rope cometh 
quite thorow your noſc. 

How 


T he Art of L.egerdemain diſcovered. 
How to make « pile of counters ſeems to vaniſh thorow 
4 Table, 


Ou muſt have for the performing of this feat di- 

yers Counters, having holes cut out of the midſt 
of them, then they muſt be glued together ſo many 
of them,as they may make a caſe ſufficieut to contain 
a Die: then glue one whole Counter upon the top of 
them, ans have a box made of white Tinto fit them, 
bur let it be deeper then the glued pile of Counters, 
and 'makea cover for this box. Firſt put into the 
| box three looſe Counters, then put in the glued pile 
of counters with the hole uppernioſt, then put into 
the hole a Die, and laſtly three other looſe whole 
Counters and cover it. Draw this box of Counters, 
and ſay, Gentlemen here isa box of Barbary gold, it 
was lcft me asa Legacy by a deceaſed friend,upon 
condition I ſhould imploy it well and honeſtly. Now 
firs, it was ' my fortune as | was travelling,to be be- 
nighted,and ſo. forced to ſecke for lodging,and as it 
happened,I tooke into an houſe of entertainment, 
where called for my Ofteſſe,I drew my ſtock,and 
laid, what muſt give you mine Oſtefle for my mear, 
drink,and lodging this night My freind quoth ſhee, 
- you muſt give me three French Crownes; withthat 
I uncovered my box, and (ct it pponthe Table, ( it 
muſt. be done with che "mouth of thebox downward) 
took my box from off the Counters, and felivered 
her three from the top,ſaying,there they are, and caſt- 
ing my eye aſide, I ſpycd aprery lafle coming down 
rhe ſtaires; Sweet heart,faid I to her,what ſhall I give 
thee to lie with thee this night 2 ſhee replied, ' Sir for - 


three French Crownes you ſhall: then I thruſt my 
_ D 23 | box 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
box forward, and deliver her three from. the: bot-. 
rome, ſaying, there they are. But now ſaid I ro my 
Oſteſſe, Oſteſſe, what will you ſay, if with a trick I 
have, I make theſe, fixCrownes to-ferch allthe reſt 
thorow the Table 2 Sir quoth my Oſteſle,, you ſhall 
have your meat drink and lodging for nothing, and. 
faid the Laſs,thou ſhalt lye with me for nothing, Then. 
I uncovered them,ſaying, but firſt let us ſee whether 
they be hear or no, and ſheiv them, coveriug them a-- 
gain. Then( taking to thoſe fix Counters in my hand, 

otherlooſe Counters I have ready in my lap ) I knock 

my hand under the Table, ſaying, Yertute lapidis, mi- 

raculefs lapidis, jubes vade, celeritate vade. ThenT min- 

ele my Counters, as if they came tumbling thorow. 
the Table into my hand, atterward throw them on. 
the 'Fable, ſaying, there be the -Counters, then I rake 

the box up, prefſiug the fides of it, with my fore- 

finger and thumb (which will keep the glued pile of 
Counters from fliping out ) and let ſlip the glued 

Counters into my lap, and. ſay, there is none but a 

Die, caſting the empty box unto them, who ſhall have. 
all now my Ofteſſe or] - 


D 


A. the figure of the Box, BB. thelid of the Box, | 
C. the pile of- Counters glued together, E.the hole 
for the Dic, D.the Dies, 


Hom © 


T be dre of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


How. to ſeeme 10 put a ring thorow ones cheek, 
\ 
. | 
7 Ou muſt have two rings made of braſs, filyer or 
what you will,of one bignels,colour,and likeneſs, 
favingthat one muſt have anoxch cut through it, as it 
« is repreſented by the figure following note with X, 


The other muſt be whole without a notch; ſhew 
the whole ring ,. and conceal that which hath the 
notch, . andſay, now I will put this ring thorow my 
check, and privily ſhip the notch one over onefide of 
your mouth, and nimbly conycy the wholering into 
your ſleeve, or conceal itin your right hand: then 
rake a ſmall ſtick, which you may have inreadineſle, 
and ſlip the whole ring over it, holding your hand 
over it about the middje thereof, and bid ſome body 
hold both the ends of the ſtick faſt, and ſay, ſee this 
ring herein my check, it turnes round, and indeed it 
will ſeem to turn round if you ſtroak it nimbly with 
your fingers :and while you perceive them to faſten 
their eyes intentively upon that ring,. upona ſudden 
whip. it out, and ſmite upon the ſtick therewith in- 
ſtantly, concealing it,and whirling the other ring, you 
hold your hand over round about the ſtick, and it will 
be thought, that you have brought that ring upon the 
_ Rick which was bcfore upon your cheek, 

How - 


The Art of Leg erdemain diſcovered. 
How to ſeems to thurſt a bodkin into your forehead, 


Ou muſt have two Bodkins, the one made like 

unto the orher to outward appearance, but letthe 
blade of the one be madetoflip up into the haft : letrhe 
other bc a true Bodkin : Conceale the falſe one, and 
ſhew the truc, after char you have ſhewed it,convey it 
into your lap, Then take up the falſe one, and recli- 
ning your head, make as if you thruſt it yery ſtifle, 
making an ill-fayoured face all the while. If you hold 
a peece of ſpunge in your hand filled with ſome ſheeps 
bloud preſſing it out,the Bodkin being in yourfore. 
head, as it were up to the hilt, it will cauſe the more 
aſtoniſhmeut and admiration among the beholders, 
Inſtantly put up your Bodkin, and take your hand- 
kercher,and wipe off the blood, and ſay, Fubco, wade, 
wulmus 4 fropte. 


How to put a Lock upon ones mouth, 
Ou muſt have a Lock made for the nonce, the fi- 


; * Sum whereof followeth, the one fide of its bow. 
muſt be immoveable, as that marked with A. the 0- 
ther fide is noted with B. and muſt be pinned tothe 
body of the Lock,as may appear at E. I ſay,it muſt be 
ſo pinned,that it may play to and again with eale, This 
fide of the bow muſt have aleg as C. andthen turn 
into the Lock; this binding muſt have two notches 
filed onthe inner fide, which muſt be ſo ordered, that 
the one may lock or hold the two fides of the bow as 
cloſe together at the top as may be, the other notch 
to hold the ſaid parts of the bowes aproportionable 
diſtancea iunder, that being lotkt vpon rhe check, it 

| may 


« The Artof Legerdemain diſcovered. 
may neither pinch too hard,nor yet hold it ſo light 
ly that it may be drawn off; let there be then @ key 


The uſe of it. 


Ou may cauſe ſome one to hold oreteſter edge- 
long between his teeth, Take alſo another teſter 
and with your left hand proffer to ſct it edgelong be- 
tween a ſecond mans-tecth, pretending that your in» 
tent is to turn both into whether of their mouthes 


they ſhall defire,and that by vertue of your _— 
an 


— 


The 4rt of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
and circumſtances, which he ſhall no ſooner eſſay to 
doc, but you, holding your lock privatley in your 
right hand, with your forefinger over the leg C, may 
preſentlie ſlip it over the left fide of his cheek, and 
{ingle lock it, which you may doe by preſſing your 
faid finger a little down after ſome ftore of intreaties: 
the lock having hung on a while, produce your key 
by ſome deyice ( as by a confederate, or ſome carelefle 
perſon ) and unlock it, but immediately double lock 


Ir, for it will ſceme tobe a true lock, nor after ſight be 
ſuſpected for other. 


How to make it frec&e by the fire ſide. 


His feat cannot be perfomed at every time, but 
onelic in Winter, andat ſuch times as ſnow may 
be had, and hethat will ſhew it, muſt have in readineſs 
an handfull of ſalt. The time ſerving, and the party 
provided, let him call fora joynt-ſtool, a quart'por, 
a handful of ſnow, a little water, anda ſhort ſtaffe or 
ſtick, firſt let him poure alittle waterupon the trop of 
the ſtoole, and upon it let him ſet the quartpot, and 
putthe ſnow into the por, the ſalr alſo, bur privatelie, 
then let him hold the por faſt with his lefthand, and. 
take the ſhort ſtick in his right, and therewith churne 
the ſnow and fait in the por, asifone ſhould churne 
for butter,and in.halfe a quarter of an houre the pot will 
freeze ſo hard tothe ſtool, rhat you can ſcarcely with 
both hands pull it off from the ſtoole, there*s a natu- 
ral reaſon may be given, for this, which he thar is a 
Schollerneed not to ; betold,,gnd for a cummon Jug- 
ler't would not haye fo witc as to know, thereforel 
omit It. :: | 

7 How 


 Thedrt of Legerdewain diſcovered, 


How 10 breath fire out of ones month, 


”" He performance of this trick conſiſteth inthe roul- 

8 ing'of thetow. After you have madearoul in rea- 
dineſſe, call for a pipe of Tobacco, lighrit, and take a 
whiffe or two, you may ſtop it down with the end of 
your roule of tow, retaining it privately in your hand: 
then deliver the Pipe to ſome body clſc,and convey the 
tow into-your mouth :. then blow gently, and ſmoak 
and fire will come forth of your mouth, which you may 
continue as long as you pleaſe, by putting in moretow 
as it conſumeth. 


How to draw Ribbins of any colour out of your mouth, and 
zo deliver it by the yard. 


Y Ou muſt provide you divers ſorts of Ribbins, ſome 
A black, ſome blew, ſome green,ſome yellow : mea- 
ſure it, and at the end of eyery yard make a flip knor, 
then roule-cach couloured Ribvininto a ball by it (elf, 
and diſpoſe them abour you,that you may know readi- 
ly which to taken an inſtant. When you are called 
upon for {0 many yards of fucha colour, convey a ball 
of the ſame into your mouth, and draw it our, remem- 
bring how many knots have ſlipped at your tecth,then 
cut it off, and deliver it, 


How 'to make two Bells come into one hand, having put in- 
to each hand one. 


Ts feat muſt be performed with three Bells, you 
muſt put one Bell into yourleti ſleeve, then pur 
one bcll into one hind, and another Bell into the other 
hand (they wuſt be lirt!e morris bells) withdraw your 


hands, and privily convey the Bell in your Teft hand 
= in 


T he Artof Legerdemain diſcovered. 
intoyour right hand : Then ſtretch both your hands 
abroad, and bid two folkes hold your hands faſt, but 
firſt ſhake your hands, and ſay,doe you hear them, The 
Bell that is in your fleeve will not be known by the 
ratling, but tharitis in yourhand : Then ſay he now 
that is the arrenteſt Whoremaſter or Cuckold of you 
both, ſhall kaveboththe bells,and the other ſhall have 
none at all : open yourHandsthen,and ſhew them and it 
will be thought that you deal by Art Magick. 


Hiew to make a Fugling book, or a book of wazgary, 


Ou muſt provide a paper-book in oQavo, of what 
thickneſfle you pleaſe; firſt turne over ſeven leaves 
of it, and then upon both the open fides,draw or paint 
the pictures of flowers,thea turne over ſeven leaves 
more,and paintthe very ſame ; docthis until you have 
turned the book once quite over : Then um the tar- 
ther painted leaves, paſta little ſtay of paper or parch- 
ment one dire&ly over another : Then turne over the 
book again, and having turned every fix leafe,draw the 
picture of flower- de-Juces, and then paſte ſtayes of 
' parchment upon them as youdid upon the firſt , but 
theſe ſtayes muſt all of them be a little lower then the 
former, Then turneoverthe beok again, and after the 
fift leat throughout the book is turned, paint horns, 
doe thus until you have painted the book full of pi- 
ures, onely lerthere be one part of the leaves fair pa- 
per:having thus tinithed the book, when youuſe it hold 
itin your left hand,and with your right hand , your 
thumb fer upon the parchment ſtayes, ſhew them order- 
ly and nimbly, but witha bold and audacious counte- 
1.ance, for that muſt be the grace of all your riicks: ſay, 


this 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
this book is not painted thus as ſome of you may ſip- 
poſe, but iris'of ſuch aproperty,that whoſocver blow- 
c:h on it,it will give the repreſentation of whatſoever he 
is naturally addicted unto, and then turn the book, and 
May, ſee itsall fair paper. 


Bans Gees 01 Nuntins gnviſibils,or Hiceins Doccius 
as my Sentor calls it, 


\ / Cu muſt havethe-figure of a man made of wood, 

Y about the bigneſs af your little finger, as may ap- 
pear by the-figure noted C.D.the head whereof no- 
red with A.muſt be made totake off and put on at plea- 
ſure, by meanes of a wyer that isin the neck, marked 
with B.alfo you muſt have acloth cap with a little bag 
within to convey the head into. The bag muſt be neat- 

e made,thatir may not caſily be perceived;ſhew your 
man unto the companic, ſaying, ſce you here Gentle- 
men, this I call my Bow Genius,then ſhewhis cap,lay*+ 
ing,and this is his coat,ſay morcoyer,look 


ID EC ELD LEED Ie. > rot on tn 
H——— A — 


| 1 he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
01! now as ſtedfaſtly on him as you can,neverthelefſe T wil 
$8! couzenyou,for theretoream I come. Then hold your 
din! cap above your face, and take your manin your right. 
Wy! hand, and put his head thorow the hole ofthe cap, as 
your may ſceat F. ſaying,now he is ready to goe of a- 
ny meſſage I have to ſend him ; to Spain,1taly,or whi- 
ther I will:* but he muſt have ſomething to bear his 
_ charges,with that pull out your right hand from under 
the cap,and therewith the body {but privately putting 
your right hand into your pockct,as if you felt tor mo- 
ney, where you muſt leavethe body,and take out your 
hand,and ſay.there is three crowns: Now be gone,thea 
eurn the head abour,and lay;but he will look about him 
before he-gocs. Then ſay{ſctting your forefinger upon 
his crown) juſt as I thruſt my finger down, ſo he ſhall 
vaniſh, and therewith, by the aſſiſtance of your left hand 
that is under the cap, convey his head into the little bag 
' within the cap : then turn your cap abour, and ſay,ſee 
' here heis gone; then take-up your cap, and hold it up 
again,drawing the head our of the little bag,and ſay,het 
genius mens velociſsimusubi, and whiſtle: Then thurſt 
the head up thorow the hole of the cap, and holding the 
head by the wyer,turn itabuut; then preſently puthead 
and cap into your pocket. | 


BoxeStochauge Gram. 


M Ake one box of wood, Tinne, or Braſle : let the 
IVibotome fall a quarter of an inch intothe box,and 
elue thereona laying of Barly,or ſuch like grain : draw 
thebox with the bottome downwards,and {ay,Gcntle- 
men, I met a Country man going to buy Barly, and I 
:01d him I would (ell him a penniworth, alfo I would 
multiply one grain into ſo many buſhels as he ſhould 

| : | nced, 


T he Art of Legerdemain covered. 
need.thencaſt a Barly-corn into your box,and cover it 
with a hat,and 1n the covering it, turn the bottome up- 
fide down : then cauſe ſome body to bloiw on the har, 
then uncover ir,and they wil think ſtrangely of it. You 
may make another box of wood, like unto a bell, to 
hold ſo much juſt as your former box will;and make a 
bottome unto this box of ſhooe ſole leather, to thruſt 
into the bottome of the bell:then fill it with Barly,and 
thruſt up the leather bottome, for it will keepthe burly 
from falling out, take this box out of your pocket,and 
ſer it down gently upon the Table, and ſay, I will not 
cauſe all the Barly to goeout of my meaſure into my 
bell, then with a hat coverthe box that hath the Barly 
olewed untoit,and tn covering it,turn it with the barly 
downward : then ſay, firſt let us ſee whether there be 
nothing underthe bell,and clap it hard down upon the 
Table,ſo the weight of the barly will thruſt the bottom 
down.,then bid ſome one blow hardon the hat,thentake 
it up, where they will ſee nothing bur an emptic mca - 
ſure, then take up the bell,and all the barly will poure 
out, Sweep it then preſently into your har or lap, leſt 
their buſie prying may chance to diſcoycr your leather 
bottome. 


How to vaniſh a glaſſeof Ber. 


*Ake a low glaſſe, fill it reaſonable full of Beer, and 


take a ſ1xpence, and Jay it down uponthe Table, yur 5ncer 


and fer the glafſe of Beerupon it, and dipping your '9*" 


” 


finger into the Beer, ſay, whether is the ſixpence in 


1ſt 5 


 18:t:C 


5 Vith lom-. 


or under the glzſſe. Some will ſay, perhaps it is under : green fr 


then ſay, let's fee, and take up a: onceboth fixpence 


w2x,ard i 
you my col 


and glafle (hold the glaſic ſo that both your hands &a .y, 


may 


ICC” IT 
rnd 25 IRE 07 IR" 


_—_— _—— 


re EGO <IIn ee nent renee == I oy ALAS . 
hen 


Ow 
———_— 


: —_ Ape v 
4 — | —— - — a = 6 
j T_T TCO, ES, > CT 7 mo ” - "_— —_— Ot ar os 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
may quite hide it* andlctthe glaſſe ſlip plum downe in- 


to your lip,then make as if you threw it away,looking 
up afterit. Then ſeem to blow your nole,and let fall the 
fx pence upon the Table, ſaying, I am glad I have got 
my money again : but now (lay ) what is become of the 
glaſſe ? then leem totake it Out of your pocket, ſaying, 
I am a good fellow, and would not willingly loſe my 
liquor ? then drink it up. This 1san excellent trick if it 
be ſwiftly and neatly performed . Thongh you ſpill a 
part of the Bcer,itis no matter,neither is1t any diſgrace 
unto it, beſides you may pur it off very well, 


How to cut off a mans head, it is called the dccollation of 
John _ 

Ou muſt havea Table with two good wide holes 
towards one end, alſo a cloth on purpoſe to cover 
the Table with, ſo that the ſaid covering may hang to 


* the ground round about the Table ; alſo this covering 


mutt have two holes made in it,even with the holes of 
the Table, you mult alſo have aplatter of wood for the 
purpoſe, having a hole in the bottome to fit alſo unto 
the holes of the Table,and it muſt, as alſo the Table, be 
made to take intwo pieces : having theſe in readineſle, 
you muſt have two boyes ; the one muſt lie along upon 
the Table with his back upward, and he muſt put his 
head thorow the one hole of the Table,cloth and all; the 
other muſt fit under the Table,and put his head thorow 
the other hole of the Table, then put the platterabout his 
neck.to make the ſight more dreadful to behold, you 
may forme ſome loom about the necks of them, making 
{ſmall holes in them as it were veines, and be{mear it 
over with ſheeps bloud,putting ſome bloud "7 

ttle 


w &Cd 


The Art of Legerd emain «diſcovered. 
litcle bits of liver into theplatter, and ſet a chafing-diſh 
ot coales before the head, ſtrewing ſome brimſtone up- 


J—_—— 
(Nebaadtity 


ho. > = wha» x = Abad... 


onthe coales ; for this will makethe head ſeem ſo pale 

and wan, asifin very deed it were ſeparated from the 

body. The head may fetch a gaſpe or two, & it will be 

better. Let no body be preſent while you doe this,nci- 

ther when you have given cntrance , permit any to be 
. medling, nor let them tarry long. 


How to make the face of a child to appear in a 
pot of water. 


7Ou muſt get a ball madeof wood, and upon one 
half or ſide of ir, there muſt the face of a child be 


artificially carved : on the back-ſtde ofthis face there 
muſt be made a hole, bur nor very deep ; this hole 
muſt be filled with lead, to the end that it may (the ball 


being 


The Art of Legerdemain d;ſcovered, 
being caſt into the water ) (way the-tace uppermoſt 1 
then paint it liyely with oylic colours, and it is done. 
Note,thar it ought not to befull ſobig as a tennis ball, 
Call for a wine quart port filled with fair water up to 
the neck, having your face in a readineſs, concealed in 
your right hand,rake the pot in your left hand,and ſet ir 
onthe table,and ſay,ſce you Gentlemen, here is nothing 
in the pot but water, with that clap down the pot-lid 
with your right hand,and in clapping it down, ſlip the 
face into the pot, this you may doe without any the leaſt 
ſuſpition. Then cauic them all to ſtand offgand if they 
pleaſe,to mark you as narrowly as they can : with that 
put your hand into your pocket,and ſcem to take out a 
handful of powder,8: to ſtrew it over the por, ſaying, 
Surge celeriter, by the powder of exprience, ſurge, then 
bid them look what is there. Afterthe ſame manner 
may you make a Toad to appear, 'which will cauſe no 
ſmall admiration, | 


A device. whereby you may drink a Tunnell full of drink, 
_ avd afterwards ſeem to pour the ſame all ont of your 
eeve again. 


Ou muſt get adouble Tunnel;that is,two Tun- 

I nels ſodered one within the other,ſo that you may 
at the lirtle end pour a quantity of wine, water,or any li- 
quor. This Tunnel you muſt have ready filled before 
hand with wharſoever liquor you pleaſe : call for ſome 
of the ſame kind : then draw your Tunnel,and ſetting 
your middle finger unto. the botrome of it, bid ſome 
body, or elſe doc you your {elf pour irfull, and drink 
it up before them, and :urn the broad end of the Tun- 
n i] conward, i3ving. Gentlemen, all is gone, and 
in a tice turn your ſelf about, andinturning, pro- 
nounce 


coy |, Sw |} 9 VU > ( 2x % 


** 


T be Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
nounce {ometerms of art, withdraw your finger from 
the narrow end, and [et all the liquor our that was be- 
tween the Tunnels, and it will bethought to be thar 
which you drunk out of the Tunnel, and ſo you may 
perſwade them that it isthe very ſame. 


How to ſeem to make a tooth drop out with atouch 


Ou muſt have ſome great tooth in a readineſs,as the 

roothof a Hog,a Calf,or of an Horſezthis you muſt 
retain privately in your right hand, and with the ſame 
hand rake our of your pocket a ſmall cork-ball, and ha- 
ving uſed ſome Rhetorick to perſwade them tharit is of 
ſome excellent propertie, incline your head, and there - 
with touch ſome one of your farther teeth, and imme- 
diately ler the tooth that you held in your hand drop 
down, ſaying, and this is the faſhion of Mountebanks, 
Touch and take, 


Another conceit to procure langhter. 


YU 0 yourball in one hand, and the tooth inthe 0- 
ther, *and ſtretch your hands as far as you can one 
from the other, andif any will, lay a quart of wine with 
him, that you will not withdraw your hands, and yet 
will make both of them come into either hand which 
they pleale : It is no moreto doe, than tolay onedown 
uponthe Table ,and turn your ſelf round,and take it up 
with the other hand,and your wager is w6n, andit wil 
move no{mall laughter to ſee a fool ſo loſe his money. 


EF _ Bw 


0h AIR 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
Hiw to make two or three E gs dance upon 4 fuaffe, 


Rovide a good thick ſt:ffe abouttwo yardslong, 

three parts whereof ought to be made ſcoope-wite, 
or ha!t hollow, like a baſting- Ladle, the fourthpart 
muſt .erve forthe handle, Atthe end of the {coop muſt 
be mace a hole, and therein pur a broad pin abour the 
length of an egg, and ir is done, Reſt the handle of this 
ſtette againſt your right thigh, and hold it with your 
right hand ner tothe beginning of theſcoop, lay an 
Egg then into the ſcoop ot the ſtaffe, and turn your {elf 
round, bearing the ſtaffs now up, and anon : downe, with 
the ſcoop ſide of it alwaycs. upward, fo the Egg will 
tnmble trom one end of ihe icoop unto the other , and 
not fail out . After the ſame manner may you maketwo 
or three Eggs by a little practiſe to wamble one atter 
another, | 

A merry concet. 


JDEiver one peece of money with your left hand un- 
ro one, and to a ſecond perſon another, and offer a 
third to another, for he ſecing the other receive money 
will nor lightly refuſe : when he offereth rotake it , you 
may rap him on the fingers with a knife, or {@mewhar 
elic hcldin y our right hand, ſaying, that you knew by 
vertue of your boys genus, that he meant to- have kept 
it fiom you, 


How 10 knit an hard knot upon a handkercher, and to ſeem 
to undoe the fame with words. 


Ake one plain looſe knot, with the two corner 
cnds of a bandkercher, and ſecming to draw the 
{ame 


eG ho df. Boe. holds I AD . ho ad. 1... 2, 


T be Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. - 
ſame very hard, hold faſt the body of the ſaid handker- 
cher ( near to the knot) with your right hand, pulling 
the contrarie end with the left hand, which is thecorner 
ot that which you hold, Then cloſe up handſomely the 
knor, which will be yet fomewhar lJoole, and pull the 
handkercher ſo with your righthard, as the left hand 
end may be near to the knot : then will it ſcem to be a 
trueand firm knot. And to make it appear more afſu- 
redly ro be 1o indeed, ler a ſtranger pull at the end 
which you hold in yourlett hand, whilſt you hold taſt 


 theother in your right hand; and then holding the knor 


: O 
with your fore-finger and thumb,and the nether part of 


your hanckercher w'h your other fingers,as you holda 
briele,when you would withone hand flip up the knor, 
and lengthen your reines.. This done, turn your hand- 
kercher over the knor, wich thelett hand, in doing 
whercof,you muſt ſuddenly flip out the end or corner, 
putting up he knot of your hanckercher with your fore- 
finger and thumb, as you would put up the foreſaid 
knot of your bridle. T hen deliver the ſame ( covered 
ar.d wraptni.hin the midſt of your handkerchero one 
to hold t.ſt,and after the pronunciation of ſome words 
of Art,and wagers laid,take the handkercher and ſhake 
it,and it will be looſe, 


A nitable feat of Faſt and Looſe, namely, to pull three 
bead ſtones from off a Cord while you hoid faſt 
the ends thereof, without removing 
of your hands, 


- Aketwolittle whipcords of two foot long a piece, 
double them equallie, fo as there may appear 

four ends: T hen take thiee great bead-ſtones, rhe hole 
F'3 of 


hs ts AAA CE AUC RPE EIS a a I ar — Wan I no re I en ne 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
of the one of them being bigger than the reſt, and put 
one beadſtone upon the eye or bout of the onecord,and 
another on the other cord: then take the ſtone with 
the greateſt hole, and let both the bouts be hidden 
therein: which may bethe better done,if you pur the 
eyc ofthe one intothe eye of the other. Then pull the 
middlc bead upon the.ſame being doubled,over his fel- 
low, and fo will the beads fecem to be pur over thetwo. 
cords without partition, for holding faſt in each hand: 
the two ends of the two cords, you may toſſe them as 
you liſt, and make it ſceim manifeſt to the beholders, 
which may not ſee how you have doneit,that the bead- 
ſtones are put upon the cord without fraud: Then muſt, 
you ſecm to add more cffectual binding of thoſe bead- 
ſtones” to the ftring, and make one halt of a knot with 
one ofthe ends of cach fide, which is for no other pur- 
poſe, but that when the Beadſtones be taken away,the 


_ cords may be ſeen inthe caſe, which the beholders ſup- 


poſed them to be in betore. For when you have made 


. your half knot (which in any wiſe you may not double 


ro makea perfect knot) you muſt deliver into the hands 
of ſome ſtander by,thole two cords,namely, twa ends. 
evenly ſet inone hand, and two inthe other, and then 
with a'wager, and termes of Arr,begin to pull off your 
beadſtones, which it you handle nimbly,and in the end 
cauſe him to pull his two ends,the two cords will ſhew 
to be placed plainly, and the beadſtoncs to have come 
thorow the cords. 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
Toburn a thread, and to make it whole azain with the 
afhes thereof. 

G Xo two threads, or ſmall Laces, of onefoot in 

length a piece : roul up one of them round, which 


- will be then of the quantity ofa pea, beſtow the fame 


between your fore-finger and your thumb. Then take 
the other thread and hold ir forth at length betwixt the 
fore-finger andthumb of each hand, holding all your 
fingers daintily, as young Gentlewoman are taught to 
take up a morſ{c]l of meat. Then Jet one cutaſunder the 
{zmethread in the middle;' when that is done, pur the 
tops of your two thumbs together,and ſo ſhall you with 
leis ſuſpition receive the peice of thread which you 
hold in your right hand unto yourleft, without open- 
ing your left finger and thumb, then holding theſe two 
peices as you did the ſame before it was cut, let theſe 
two be cut alſo aſunderinthe midſt,and they conveyed 
as be{ore,untillthey be cut very ſhort,and then roul all 
thoſe ends together, and keep thar ball of ſhort threads 
before the other in your lett hand, and with a knife 
thruſt our the ſame into a candle, where you may hold 
it until the ſaid ball of ſhort thread be burnt to aſhes; 
Then pull back the knife with your right hand, and 
leave & aſhes with the other ball berwixt the fore-fin- 


\ ger and thumb of your left hand, and with thetwo 


thumbs and two fore- fingers together, ſeeming to take 
painesto rub the aſhes, untill yourthread be renewed, 
and draw out that thread at length, which you kept all 
this while betwixt your fore- finger andthumb. If you 
have Legerdemain to beſtow-the ſame ball of thread, 


and to change it from place to place betwixt your two ' 


fingers(as- may be cafily done)then it wlll ſeem very 
ſtrange. 
To 


-a Fn EE SD 
ba _ 
; ” ” . m- - s — 


"The A:t of Legerdemain dſeovered. ; 


To cut a Lace aſunder in the midſt, and to make it 
| whole ag 4im. 


| yrs a peice of the Loce which you mean to cut, 
or at the leaſt a pattern like the ſame, one inch and a 
half long, ano keeping 1 double privily i your left 
hand, berwixt ſome oft your fingers near tothe tops 
thereof , take the other Lace which you mean to cur, 
which you may hang about oncs neck, and draw down 
your ſaid left hand to the bout thereot and putting your _ 
own peice a little before the other({ the end, or rather 
the middle whereof, you muſt hide betwixt your fore- 
finger and thumb ) making rhe eye or bour which thall 
be ſeen, of your pattern, let ſome ſtander by cutthe {ume 
aſunder,and it wil be {urcly thought that the © her Lace 
is cut, which with words, 6 rubbing, and chifing ir. you 
ſhall ſeem to renew and make whole again. This if 1. be 
well handled,” will ſcem miraculous. 


How to ſeem ſuddenly to melt a peice of Coyn with words. 


Ou muſt have a box made of braſſe.or Crooked- 

Lane plate.a double box,and nor above five quar- 
ters of an inch deep : in the midſt muſt be the bottome, 
and both ends muſt hive covers to come over them, 
This box might be ſo neatly made, that each Jid might 
have a ſmall bolr artificially contrived ( which though 
I could make my (clt, neither by words nor fignres I 
can Ceſcribe) whereby the lids of the box might be lockt - 
taſt on, that none but miſter Jugler him elt knowes 


readily to open, In one end of this box have alwayes 


in rcadincfſe_ a reicmblance of moulten f1lver, which 
you 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


you may eaſily make,by mixing an equallquantity of 
linfoyl and quick- filver together, which you ſhall thus 
do : Fiiſt,pur your lintoyl in a crucible or Goldſmiths 
melting pot,melt it,and then take it trom the fire, and 
pur in your quick-ſi]ver, and (tirre both well rogether, 
and it is done, Now the oncen1 of your box being 
ready furnithed herewith, borrow a peice ot coyn of 
ſome or.einthe company, willing him to give itlome 
private mark, whereby he may know ir againto be his 
own, then put it into the other end of the box, inthe 
bottome whereot you may have a little wax to keep it 
from ratling. Thus you may ſeem by vertue of words 
to melt his money, and afterwards to give it againto 
the party whole as you reccived it from him, 


A divice whereby you may draw ſurdry liquors out of one 
ſecming weſſelt, all whic h ſhall be put in at one hole, 


and all drawn out of another. 


7Ou muſt cauſca veſſell of indifferent bigneſſeto be 
made in form ofa Tun, having rwo partitions, {0 
there wil be th ec {everal parts: A B.ſtgnifieth the firſt, 
CD theſecon?, and E F. thethird, upon the tap of 
this Tun muſt be taſt naticd apiece of wood rurned 
round, as G H. inthe center whereot muſt be erected 
a ſtile, whoſe top muſt be made into a ſcrew, in this 
wood muſt alſo be made three holes towaids the ctr- 
cumference each hole having a pipe inſerted ito it, 
which may extend them(ſclves one of etther into each 
veſſel,as you may ſce by the figure. I K. ſfignifierhrhe 
hiſt pipe, which reacheth intothe firſt pzrt, A R.L M. 
the ſecond pipe that extendeth it ſelf intothe ſecond 
part noted CD.NO. the third pipe that excenderh 


It 


F cach 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


it ſelf intorherhird part of E F. cach partalſo muſt have 
his vent, clſc you can neither fill nor empty it, theſe are 
marked with the letter P QR.upon the top of the fore- 
ſaid wood muſt be faſtened a peice of liquored leather, 
having three holes in itan{werable unto the holes of the 
wood, then upon the wood muſt be ſcruedanother 
ſnour, whereby to fill cach yeſlel with a ſeyeral liquor, 
V. the ſnouts, S T.a brafle plate whereunto the ſnout is 
ſodered, W, the ſcrue tharſcrued this ſnout upon the 
ſtile inthe turned wood G H. 


Laſtly , each veſſel muſt have its pipe whereout 
you may draw theconteined liquor , which you may 
ſee in the figure, and than muſt rhere be ſcrued over 
them another plate with ataper veſſel, ſo by turning 
it about from one hole to another, you may deliver 


ww FU M9 *% + 


T be Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


exch liquor apart , whither of them you pleaſe. 


Trick 
A wery ſtrange thick, whereby you may ſeem tocut a piece 
of Tape into four parts, and make it whole 


azain with words, 


Jo a pcice of. narrow white Tape about twoor 
three yards long; firſt preſent it to viewto any that 
may de11re it, then tic both the ends of it together, and 
take one {ide of itin one hand,and the other in the other 
hand, - ſo. that the knot may be about che midſt of one 
ſide, and uſing ſome circumſtantial words to beguile 
your ſpecator,turn one hand abouttowards your ſelf, 
and the other from you, fo ſhill you twiſt the Tape 
once, then clapthe ends together, and then if you flip 
your fore-finger andthumb of every hand between the 
Tapec,almoſt as one would hold a skein of thread to be 
wound, this will make one fold or twiſt as may appear 
in the firſt figure, where A.fignificth the twiſt or fold, 
B.the knot : then in like manner make a ſecond fold a- 
bout the line D C.as you may ſeeby the ſecond figure, 
where B.ſignificth the knor, C.the firſt fold, A.the (e- 
cond fold. Hold then your fore finger and thumb of 
your left hand upon the ſecond twiſt,and uponthe knot 
alſo, andthe tore-finger and thumb of your right hand 
upon the firſt fold C, and defire ſome one of your ſpe- 
&ators to cut all aſunder with a ſharp knife atrhe croſle 
bne E D. When it is cut, hold ſtill yourleft hand, and 
let all your ends fall yon hold in your right hand, for 
there will be a ſhew of cight ends, four above,and four 
below, and fo the ſtring will be thought to be cut into 
four parts;as may be {een by thethird figure,then gather 
upthe ends that you letfal into your left hand,and delt- 
. , G Bs 1 2Y 


LY 


T he ArtofLegerdemain diſcovered. 


yer two oftheends(ſceemin _= take them at randome\ 
unto two ſeverall perſons, ihe them to hold them 


a 


Faſt,ftll keeping your left hand fingers uponthe wits 
OI 


WW 


le) 


T he Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
or folds : then with your right and left hand (ſeem tv 
tumble and whafe all the ends rogether that you had in 
your left hand, twiſt our all the flips or pieces whichare 
three, as youm.y ſeear A.and B. inthe third figure; 
twiſt them al}, I ſay, into alittle ball, and conceal ur be- 


tween ſome of your fingers of your lefthand,andcram-. 


ble thereof on another confuſed heap : and after ſome 
words ſaid, with your right hand deliver this confuled 
heap unto one ofthe company, bidding him to hold it 
faſt ſaying, Hulla paſſa quicke couragions,fiat conjunt#10. 
Then bid them look on it, who while rhey are greedily 
looking afrerthe event, you m.iy with cate convey the 
ball or roul of ends into your pocket, fo will it be 
thought rhat you have madeir whole dy vertue of your 
words. An excellent trick if it be gracefully handled, 
and a trick «thatcoſt me more trouble ro find than al the 
reſt;rhis I have gone purpoſely to obſerve, but return- 
£d as wiſe as I went. 


A device how to multiply one face, and make it ſecmn to be 
an hundredor athouſand. 


His feat muſt be performed by a Looking-glaſſe 


made forthe nonce,:he figurewhetcof [ havefully 


deſcribed, withthe manner of making it,whichis thus : 
Firſt, make an hoop or philler of wood, horn, or ſuch 
like,about the wideneſſe of an Halt- Crown peice,inthe 
circumference,the thickneſſe of this hoop or philler let 
be abour a quarterof aninch, in the micdle of this hoop 
faſten a bottome of wood or braſle, 8 bore in a decent 
orcer divers {mall holes abour the bigneſle of ſmall 
peaſe, or phitches, then upon the one ſide of this bot- 
tone {ct in a piece of Chriſtal glaſle, and faſten it inthe 
G 2 


hoop 


- o—erwmat om - 
eee re os 
———<—x= —— E 


em 
- . PF 


BY 


—— 


oye 0s 49 OO rr Ir 7 


<A CAE EEE FRI IE Ir I IEEE I 
_ _ I Þ GE "JS 


Lge mm mrra___w—__n ECT REI 


OL 


The Art of Legerdernain diſcovered; 
hoop cloſe tothe bottome;then takeaquantity of quicke 
ſilver, and prepareit after this manner : Takc,I fay,a 
quanrtity,as an ounce or tio of quick- filver,and purto- 
it alictle falr,& ſtir them wel rogether,then pur ro chem 
ſome white-wine vinegar,and waſh and ſtir all together 
with a wooden flice, then pour away the vinegar, and 
waſh away the (alt with fair water madewarm,then pour 
away the water,an! put the quick- ſilver into a peice of 
white leather ,and bind ir up hard,and fo twiſt or ſtrain 
it out imo .an earthen pan,and it will be very bright and 
pure,rhen put ſo much of this prepared quick- ſ1]ver in- 
ro the phullct or foreſaid hoop as wil coyer the bottom 
then let into the hoop another peice of Chriſtal glaſle 
fitted thereto; 8 cement the ſides,that the quick-filver 
may not run out,and it is done. The figure whercof I 
have under-ſet; A repreſenteththe one fidethat giveth 
the form of one face to the beholders. Bthe other ſide 
that multiplicth the bcholders face, ſo oft as there are 
holes in the middle bottome,the uſe whereof I ſhall not . 


anſaſt upon, ſince he thar is verſt in the former feats wil 
berter concelve of himſelf to ule it, than my words can 


of 


cither direct or aſſiſt him. 


RIG porn. I AE ot & th. I. no db A. coo. A. So 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 


Of divers pretty Fugling knacks, 


'T Here are many feats able to beguile the ſimple,as to 
dcliver meal, pepper,ginger,or any powder out of 
your mouth after the eating of bread, which is done by 
retaining any of theſe things ſtuffed 1n a little paper or 
bladder, conveyed into your mouth, and grinding the 
ſame with your tecth. 7tem, a ruſhthorow a peice of 
trencher, having three holes, andatthe other fide inthe 
third hole, by reaſon of an hollow place madebetwixt 
them borh.ſo as the ſleight confiſteth in the turning of 
the plicce of Trencher. 


| Feats by conveyance of moneg. | 
Tt beſt placeto difpoſe of a piece of money , is in 
the palm of the hang.,and the beſt piece for conyey- 
ance is a Teſter,butwith practice all will be alike. 


A notable trick to transform a Counter into 4 Groat. 
Ake a Groat, or ſomeleſſe peice of money, and 


grind it very thin ar the one {1de, and take two 
Counters and grind them, the one on the one fide, the 


| Other on the other fide; gluethe ſmooth ſide ofthe 


Groattothe ſmooth ſide of one of the Counters, joy - 
ning them ſo cloſe together as may be,cſpecially atthe 
edges, which may be ſo filed, as they thallſeem tobe but 


- onepeice; to wit, one fide a Counter, the other ſidea 


Groat. Then take a little green wax, and lay it upon 
the ſmooth ſide of the one Counter, as it do not much 
diſcolour the Groat; and ſo will that Counter with the 
Groat cleayctogether, as though they were PRI 

ing 


— _-_ > ——— 
——— 
- . 


C 
07 —_ Ki - 2 
CE EE ER CEE CO PE IO vowarye; 
ou - G—— negn——oeene<m——e—e = = QI 


Rs One een —__"—_————_——_ 


The Art of Legerdemain dfcovered. 


being filed even withthe Groat and the other Counter, 
will ſeem (o like a perfect entire Counter, that though 
a ſtranger handle it, he ſhall not bewray itz then having 
a little rouched your forc-tinger,andthe thumb of your 
right hand with ſoft wax, rake therewith this counter- 
feit Counter , and lay ir down openly upon the palm 
of your left hand, in ſuch fort as an Auditor layeth 
down his Counters, wringing the ſame hard, ſo as you 
may leave the glued Counter withthe Groat apparent- 
ly 1n the palm of your lett hand,and the ſmooth fide of 
the waxed Counter will ſtick faſt upon your thumb by 
reaſon of the wax wherewith'it is ſmeared, and ſo you 
may- hide it at your ple ture, provided Þlwayes that 
you lay the waxed fide Cownward, and the glued fide 
upward:then cloſe your hand,and in or afterthe cloting 
thereof ruin the peice, and (o inſtead of a Counter 
(which they ſuppoſe ro bein your hand) you ſhall ſeem 
to have a Groat, tO the admiration of the beholders, if 


it be well handled, 


An excellent feat to make a 1wo- peuny peice lie plain 
in your hand, aud io be paſſedfrom thence 
when your liſt. 

pa a little red wax (but not roo thin) upon the nail 
of your longeſt finger, and ler a ſtranger put atwo 
penny peiecinto.the-palm of your hand, and thut your 
fiſt ſuddenly,and convey therwo-penny peice upon the 
wax,which with uſe you may ſo :ccomplith as no man 
ſhall perceive ir. Then ſay, 1:l:ff,caſil,FaFe, hit,mel,and 
ſuddenly open your hand, holding the tips of your fin- 
ers rather lower than higher then the palm of your 
nk: the beholders will wonder where 1t is —_—_ 
Then 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. | 
Then ſhut your hand ſuddenly again, and lay a wager 


whether it be there or no; and you may either leaveir 
there,or take it away with you at your pleaſure, 


How to transform any one [mall thing into another 
form by folding of paper. 


Ake a ſheet of paper and fold, or doublethe ſame, 

ſo as one fide be alittle longer than the other: Then 
put a Counter between the two leaves of the paper up 
to the middle of the top of the fold, holding the ſame fo 
as it be not perceived, and lay a Groat on the outſide 
thereof, right againſt the Counter,and fold it down to 
the end of te longer (ide: 8& whcn you nnfold it again 
the Groat will be where the Counter was, and the 
Counter where the Groat was,ſo as ſome will ſuppoſe 
that you have changed the money into a Counter, and 
with this many fears may be done. 


How to convey money *ut of one of your hands into the 
other by Legerdemain. 


JIrſt, you muſt hold open your right hand, and [ay 
therein a Teſter,or ſome big peice of money, then 


lay thereupon the rop of your long lei tinger,and uſe 
ſome words of Art,and uponthe \udden, flip your right 
hand from your tinger, wherewith you hez1d down the 
Teſter.and bending yout hand a very licle, you ſhall 
retain the. T: ſter ſtill therein, and ſuddenly drawing . 
your right hand thorow your left you ſhal ſeem to have 
left the Teſter there, eſpecially when you ſhut in due 
time your left hand. Which thu it may more plainly 
appear to be truly done,you. may takea knife,and ſeem 
to knock againſt, ſo as itſhall make a great ſound- bur 
SPY EE | inſteas - 


CY STIs ns ee er 2 nc Pan 


=o gue 


= 
a . + ag . ” 
, _ i 
At a ng ett as Sr Maine inanb tn Gant? NE OS IR -—_ 
»” ”» "_ ” Y : 


The Art of Legerdemain diſcovered. 
Inſtcad of knocking the peice in the left hand ( where 
noneis ) you ſhall hol4the point of the knife faſt with 
the lefr hand,- and knock agaiſt the Teſter held in the 
other hand,and it will be thought ro hir againſt the mo- 
ney in your left hand, Then after ſome.words of Art 
pronounced,open your hand,and when nothing is ſeen, 
It will be wondered at, how the Teſter came remoyed, 


How to make a ſixpence ſeem to fall thorow a Table, 


Ou muſt have an Handkercher about you, having 

a Counter neatly ſewed in one of the corners of it : 
take it out of your pocker, and defire ſome body to lend 
you a Teſter, and ſeem to wrap tt up in the midſt ofthe 
Handkercher, but retain it in your hand, and inſtead of 
ſo doing,” wrap the corner in the midſt that haththe 
Counter ſewed in it, and then bid them feel if itbe not 
there, which they wilkimagin to be no other than the 
Teſter that they lent you, then bid them lay it under a 
Hat upon the Table,and call for a Bafin of water, hold 
it under the Table,and knock,ſaying,Yade,come quick, 
and then let the ſixpence fall out of your hand intothe 
water, Then take up the hat,and take the Handkercher 
and ſhake it,ſaying.that is gone,then ſhew.them the mo- 
ney in the Baſin of water. 


How to ſeem to blow a fixpence out of anothir mans hand, 


E a ſixpence,blow on it, and clap it preſently ins 
to one of your ſpectators hands, bidding them to 
holdirt faſt: Then ask of him;if he be ſure he have ir,then 
to be certain, he will open his hand and look. Then ſay 


ro him nay, but if you let my breath goc off, oy 
"ER Es 


Hite nw VB ot CO FT), (Þ tas 66 UN 


Ll LAY } v5 


horn, wilunaginen 1s the Teſter: then (ay,he that kiſ- 
da pretty wenchlJaſ) in a corner, ſhall have both Te- quick. 


The drt of Legerdemain covered. 


. doit, Then take it our of his hand again, and blow on 


it,and ſtaring him inthe face, clap a piece of horn in his 
hand, and retainthe fixpence, ſhutting his hand your 
ſelf, Bid him hold his hand « duwnaers. ſlipthe Tefter 
between one of his cuffes. Then takethe.ſtonethat you 
ſhew feats with, and hold itunto his hand, ſaying, By 
wertue bereof, 1 wil and command the money to wan you 
hoid in your hand,vade now ſee:when they have looked, 
then they will think that it is changed by the vertue of 
your ſtone. Then take the horn again,and ſeem to caſt tt 
from you, retaining ir,and ſay,wade,and anon ſay, you 
have.your money again : He then will begin to marvel, 
and {ay, I have not;{ay thento him again, you.have,and 
I am fyre you have it:Is't not in your hand? ifit benort 
there, turn down one of your fleelves, foritisin one 1. 
amſure, where when. he findethir, he will not a little 
wonder . 


- 


Haw to deliver ta one man ſixpence, and to auother, 
axotber ſixpence,and to make both the Teſters 
come inio owe mans hand. | | 
Your finger 6 
gs . . muſt teruv' 
Ehiver -into- one- mans hand two Teſters eyen let wikw1x, fo 


DD inftcadof one,ſhutting his hand. immediately :then —_— de- 


take another Teſter, and have in readinels a;Ppeice of ,j4our a-y 
horn cut even with it, Clap the ſaid Teſter into his right.ſuſpiron. 


; + The hardpreſ- 
hand with the horn under it, ſtaying the tops of YOur-;,7 ofthemo- 


two middlemoſt fingers ſtifkeuponthe Teſter,fo bend- neyinthe' 


ing his hand alutle downward, draw your fingers to- mag waa = 


ward you,and they will ſlipthe Teſter out of his hand, j; ;, he band | 


and thut his hand preſently, who fecling the peice of when :t is nor, 
for a moment, 


thercfo.c be . 


L 


ſters 


7 bs Art of Leoerdemain. difcovtred.” 
fers in his hand, and the other ſhall haye none. This 
may alfo be performed withour a peice of horn, wring- 
ing cne_ Teſter in rhe palm of the hand, and raking it 
away with: your thumb being waxcd ; for the hard) 
wringing the rhoney in the hand wil make the party be-/ 
teive he hath it, when he hath rrnor, WY oy 


C enveoy.euct of Cards and Dice. 


"Here are muttitndes of delightful feats which may 
. be performed by an orderly placing, facing,ſhuf- 
ling.and cutting of:Cards uſually: played withal. Alſo 
4 number of. other ſtrahnge feats may be ſhewed by 
Cards and Dice,fuch 2s may be purpoſely niade, The 
Cards may be mage half of one print, and hilf of ano- 
ther ; ſo by holding them divers wayes, ſuncry things 
may be preſented each contrary to other. Forexample, 
with four of the ſame Cards purpoſely made,and hold- 
ing. them according'y, you ſhalt prefent eiglht.ſeveral 
things, Now forthe Dice, thecunning is1n forging 
them, anda ready retaining or throwing two among 
; three, or-one with two : they mult, I ſay, be forged big- 
ecr towards one ſidethan the other,' fo thar the weight 
of one fide may draw upthe other, Other:fome may- 
be made flatter, Being furniſhed with ſuch like, and ha- 
ving learned to retaine them handſomely and reacily, 
you may have the game at command, & know before- . 
hand what will be your caſt, and ſo vie —"_ Ir £00, - 
Moreover, for the Cards there aredivers o'her tricks, _ 
of which thoſethart are cheaters make continual practiſe, 
as,nippingthem,turning up one corner, marking them 
with little ſpots, -placing glafles behind thoſerthat are | 
gameſters,and in rings for the purpoſe, dumb _— of 
| ome. 


—_ 


_— 0  .'F""« 


s. * We f, 
T he Art of Legerdemain diſcoverea. 


* ſome ſanders by. Bur I will not ſtand on diſcovering 


theſe, tor in this oueroſening age thereare roo many fo 
expett herein,thattrhey maimainthemlelves better than 
many an honeſt man witha lawfull rrade and calling. 
Onely take this by the way, Thoſe that have money in 
their purles, . let them beware of Carding and Dicing, 
leſt they wiſh they had,when ir is too late. As formy 
own part Ile neverplay for thar TI am ſure of already : 
if any will play with me upon other rermes,I am {ure I 
ſhall loſe nothing by rhe bargain. 


Of Confederacie. 


GOme there arc that have ſaid I writnot ſufficiently 
of this part inthe former Edition; I rather think the 
cauſe was, they thoughtthey kad roo [irtle fortheir mo- 
ney. Nevertheleſs 1 will.to give every one their deſired 
coment, and deliver my mind more fully herein,and it 
may be which I moſt defire, they may learnto avoid 
the company of roving gameſters,cheaters;T mean, that 
frequent the high-waycs,and principal Townsand pla- 
ces of reſort thereabouts ;tor they are ofthe ſame man- 
ner,though for a worſer end. Firſt, therefore by this 
word Contederacic is meant,a kind of Combination, or 
making an agreement, or covenanting among ſundry 
perſons for the compliſhmenr ot one and the ſelf-ſame 
buſineſs : underſtand me aright ; all theſe being very 
well known cachto other (atleaſt the deſign,as may ap» 
pear by their agreement thereabour ) doe ſoeſtrange 
themſelves, as if they had never ſcen cach orher before, 
And to the end thar they might perform their deſign, 
not giving any the leaſt ſu'pitionto any of the beho]- 
ders,I wil give you an inſtance or two, whereby I ſhall 

2 give 


The Art of LegerJdemain diſcovered, 
give you ſufficient informationfor the moreready con- 
ceiving of every .par:icular 1n chisnature, when and 
whercioever you lee riicm pectorimed. 


How. tocaft a price of mony away, and to fixdit is azother 
mans mouth, pocket,or purſe, 


Gray Jngler calls for ſome onepeice of coin, as a 
teſter or aſhilling of any one in thecompany, he 
willeth him ro maik it with what mark he willy then he 
taketh it, and caſteth iraway,and comethro his confe- 
derate (who is turniſhed before-hand with the like picce 
of coin marked with the very ſame mark) and bids him 
deliver the mony our of his pocket, purle, .or if he ay 
the word, his mouth ; for this is concludcd of betoare- 
hand. Now this conftederatc, 10'makethe matter ſeem 
more ſtrarge, will ftumeand t:cr, askinghow he ſhould 
come by ir, till having found the mark, he will conteſſe 
ir: be none of his, wondring at his skill, how he ſhould 
{end it thither:and all the reſt be taken with a reall admi- 
ration of his extraordinary cunning. 


How by the ſound of a Counter philliped,to tell what fide u« 
uppermoſt, whether croſſe or ple. 


JF Ke Jugler drawes a Counter out of his pocket, 
and faith to the company , Sce here is a Counter, 

take it who pleaſe, and let him phillip it up, and I will 
by my cunning tell you whether crofle orpile be up- 
permoſt by the very ſound, for you ſhall hood- wink 
me. Now there are three, or four, or.more confederates 
inthe place, who ſeeming ſtrangers as well as the reſt, 
will be.very importunate to have the philipping it,and 


betore 


The Art of I egerdetnain df. overed, 
before one of theſe ſhall have it , who by ſome ſizn of 
the fingers or countenance { foreknownto the Jugler ) 
do give him in{o: mation atier hets demanded. Of the 
ſame narure 1s that trick formerly mentioned in the 
book, and called, The decollation of Fohs Baptiſt, 

To make one dance naked is atrick of the ſame n2- 
eure, forthe party before-hand is agreed to do it, and al- 
ſo the manner and-circumſtances': Sothatthe Jugler w 
blind the people,  pronounceth ſundry words to ſuch a 

erſon, hethen begins to rave like amad man, and puts 
Lis clothes off with a kind of violentcareleſsnefs,though 
God knowes,the party knowes as well what he doth,as 
your felt that reads it. |. | 

After the ſame manner ſha'l you know what mone 
anothet hath in his purſe,and caſting money intoapond, 
and finding it underaſtone-orthreſhold in another place, 
Alſo to make a piece of mony to leap out ot a cup and 
run to another, by meanes of a (mall hair faſtened tothe 
money, which hair the Confederate guideth, with a 
multitude of ſuch like ſtrange feats, which may ſeem 
impoſſible rotbe judgement ot the common people to 
be eff-&ed without the aſſiſtance of the devill,or ſome 
familiar, whichro nominare is neither needtul, nor will 
my occaſions permit 1o much leiſyreas ro doe it, 


How io make a bellowing noiſe like an Oxe, of 4 Dog and + 
Cat fighiing together, or of two Maſtiffes fighting 
together. 


dw I ſaw once or twice performed, and to my 
| knowledgenor above. It was aluſty young fellow 
that did it with a clothcaſt over his head, which reached 
down 20 his fect , alt wasto beguile the people, tor he | 
Pre- 


— 


The Art of Legetdemiain diſcovered. 
pretended that'this found came out of his belly, he had 
a fol] and ftrongwoice,and had praftiſed a gaod white, 
and another man of the like making may catily doe as 
much For his noſtrils he ſtopr with his tore-finger & 
thumb, and cloſed the other partof his hand over his 
mou*h,as 1 ſaw him onceuncaled. Another man I ſavy 
at the ſame tine, cat halfa'dozen quick charcol, but this 
is not-to be artempted:'by every one : For ſome c:innot 
eat their mear very hot, othersthere are that cannor a- 
way with meat except it be boyling hot, and rhey are 
of that diſpofition, I ſhould have ſaid rather conſtituti- 
on, that they will not ſtick rotake meat as ir is boyling . 
out of a pot withtheir bare hands and yet feelno eatra- 
ordinary heat, Fr, | 

I have here ſetdown, kind Reader,not onely all uſu- 
all fears that either my ſelf have ſeen or heard of, bur 
divers others alfo,which I am ſure were neverin print, 
nor as yet performed by any I could ever hear of ex- 
cept my {elf ; and all to givethee thy full coment : and 
take thus much from me, Itrhou rightly underſtand 
this,rhere is not a trick that any Juglerin the world can 
© ſhew thee, but thou ſhall be ableto conceive after what 
manner it is petformed, it he doe it by aſlighrot hand, 
and not by an unlawful anddeteſted mcanes. That there 
are (uch it is not to be doubted of, that do work by un- 
lawful meanes, and have, befidesrheir own natural en- 
dowments.the afliſtance of{omefamiliar, whereby they 
many times effe& ſuch miraculous things, as may well 
be admired by whomſoever ſhall cnher behold or hear 
tel] ot them.I could give an inftancein one, whole ta- 
ther,while he lived, was the greareft Jugler in Zxrgland, 
and uſed the afsiſtance of a familiar ; he lived a Tinker 
by-rrade,and uſed his feats.as atradeby rhe by; he lived 

as 


0 = 
« Sas © + 5 "E, —_ Y 
- th 4 . * #. +5 #-'S, "By £5 : 5 
oY te - 262. % nb y 3%. © 99 > = bs LACIE 
s 7 ras 4} , SES d . 
We. 4 q L , , 
: \ hae * - - — Fl 
"CY S bY 
Fo 
b 


ad Te <i. AF aaa | | 
5 ESTY ? ©: £35F< a a} 5. = # 4 
t C y 0 &/ - 


- 


+ \>,--2*De 7t 07.1.4 ena! Y |; 44k 
23 T was informed , alwayes betattered, and died for 
ought I con1d hear inthe ſame eſtate. I could here,as I 
haveinſtanced in this man, ſo give you his name,and 
where he liveth, bur becauſe he hath left the bad way,6c 
cloſe the betrer, becauſe he hath amended his life, and 
betook himſclfto an honeſt calling, I wil rather rejoyce 
at his good, than do him any the leaſt _—_ by na- 
ming him to be ſuchaone.If hs beany ask my name, 
ler them know, I am not bound torell them. If they ask | 
why I have writ this Pamphlet 2 iras'to delight” | 
let them excuſe me for the one, and thalllt me for the 
other, and it may be,if time will giveſo niuch leiſure, I 
wry hereafter ſpend my. wits upon ſome better$ub-. 
JEET. | , 4
