Men of the Deep Waters
William Hope Hodgson (1914)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/menofdeepwaters00hodg
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

B^i-;  \^;^^^<\\  mmmmm^^^ 


R 


iDiJ^flMin 


m 


1 

iff 

» 

i 

i 
t 

V. 

\ 

; 

^1 

f 

(; 


» 


// 


y 


V 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

RIVERSIDE 


FROM  THE  LIBRARY 

OF 
DH.  J.  LLOYD  EATON 


MEN  OF  THE  DEEP 
WATERS 


"DEEP    WATERS    OP    MYSTERIOUS    SEAS, 
AND    THE     GREAT    DEEP    OF    LIFE" 


BY 


WILLIAM    HOPE    HODGSON 

Author  of 

"The  Boats  of  the  'Glen  Carrig,'"  "The  House  on  the 

Borderland,"  « The  Night  Land,"  "  Carnacki,  the  Ghost  Finder," 

"  The  Ghost  Pirates,"  "  The  Luck  of  the  Strong," 


LONDON : 
HOLDEN    &    HARDINGHAM,    LTD. 


t 


if '3. 1 


COPYRIGHTED 

1906,  1907,  1907.   1907,  190S,  1910,   19U, 
1912,  1912,  1913,  1913, 

By  WILLIAM  HOPE  HODGSON 
In  the  United  States  of  America 

Copyrighted  in  Great  Britain 
All  rights  reserved 


First  Published 19^4 

Cheap  Edition      .        .        .         .        .        .        .         1921 


TO 

JACK 

(C.L.O.E.-B.) 
S\4^  Chum  of  Many    Years 


PREFACE 

Directly  afterwards,  a  shrill,  yelling  noise  seemed 
to  fill  the  whole  sky  w-ith  a  deafening,  piercing  sound. 
I  glanced  hastily  ov^er  the  port  quarter.  In  that 
direction  the  whole  surjace  oj  the  ocean  seemed  to  he 
torn  up  into  the  air  in  monstrous  clouds  oj  spray. 
The  yelHng  sound  passed  into  a  vast  scream,  and  the 
next  instant  the  cyclone  was  upon  us. 

"Through  the   Vortex  of  a  Cyclone,"   page   197. 


14  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

For  Wa-ha  !     I  am  hale, 

And  when  I  make  sail 

My  thundering  bulk  roars  over  the  tides, 

Roars  over  the  tides. 

And  everything  hides, 

Save  the  Albicore-fool !    a-splitting  his  sides — 

A  fish  kangaroo  a-jumping  the  tides. 

For  he's  naught  but  a  fish  and  a  half, 

Wa!    Ha! 
A  haddock  far  less  than  a  young  bull  calf  ! 

With  me  Wa  !   Ha  !   Ha  ! 
He  has  far  too  much  side 
For  a  bit  of  a  haddock  a-jump  in  the  tide  ! 

Yea,  I  am  the  Great  Bull  Whale  ! 
■  I  have  shattered  the  moon  when  asleep 
On  the  face  of  the  deep,  by  a  stroke  of  my  sweep 
I  have  shattered  its  features  pale. 
Like  the  voice  of  a  wandering  gale 
Is  the  smite  of  my  sounding  tail, 
For  Wa-ha  !     I  am  hale. 
And  when  I  make  sail 
My  thundering  bulk  roars  over  the  tide, 
Roars  over  the  tide. 
And  scatters  it  wide, 

And  laughs  at  the  moon  afloat  on  its  side — 
'Tis  naught  but  a  star  that  hath  died  ! 

For  'tis  naught  but  a  star  that  hath  died, 

Wa  !     Ha ! 
A  matter  of  cinders  afloat  in  the  Wide  ! 

With  me  Wa  !    Ha  !    Ha  ! 
It  has  far  too  much  side 
For  a  bit  of  a  cinder  afloat  in  the  tide  ! 


ON  THE   BRIDGE 

(The  8  to  12  watch,  and  ice  was  in  sight  at  nightfall) 

IN   MEMORY   OF 

APRIL   14,  1912. 

LAT.  41  deg.  16  min.  N. 

LONG.  50  deg.  14  min.  W. 

Two-bells  has  just  gone.  It  is  nine  o'clock.  You 
walk  to  wind'ard  and  sniff  anxiously.  Yes,  there  it 
is,  unmistakably,  the  never-to-be-forgotten  smell  of 
ice  ...  a  smell  as  indescribable  as  it  is  unmistakable. 

You  stare,  fiercely  anxious  (almost  incredibly 
anxious),  to  wind'ard,  and  sniff  again  and  again.  And 
you  never  cease  to  peer,  until  the  very  eye-balls  ache, 
and  you  curse  almost  insanely  because  some  door  has 
been  opened  and  lets  out  a  shaft  of  futile  and  dangerous 
light  across  the  gloom,  through  which  the  great  ship 
is  striding  across  the  miles. 

For  the  least  show  of  light  about  the  deck,  "  blinds  " 
the  officer  of  the  watch  temporarily,  and  makes  the 
darkness  of  the  night  a  double  curtain  of  gloom, 
threatening  hatefully.  You  curse,  and  'phone  angrily 
for  a  steward  to  go  along  and  have  the  door  shut  or 
the  window  covered,  as  the  case  may  be  ;  then  once 
again  to  the  dreadful  strain  of  watching. 

Just  try  to  take  it  all  in.     You  are,  perhaps,  only  a 

15 


16  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

young  man  of  twenty-six  or  twenty-eight,  and  3^ou 
are  in  sole  charge  of  that  great  bulk  of  life  and  wealth, 
thundering  on  across  the  miles.  One  hour  of  your 
watch  has  gone,  and  there  are  three  to  come,  and 
already  you  are  feeling  the  strain.  And  reason 
enough,  too  ;  for  though  the  bridge-telegraph  pointer 
stands  at  Half-Speed,  you  know  perfectly  well  that 
the  engine-room  has  its  private  orders,  and  speed  is 
not  cut  down  at  all. 

And  all  around,  to  wdnd'ard  and  to  loo'ard,  you 
can  see  the  gloom  pierced  dimly  in  this  place  and  that, 
everlastingly,  by  the  bursts  of  phosphorescence  from 
breaking  sea-crests.  Thousands  and  tens  of  thou- 
sands of  times  you  see  this  .  .  .  ahead,  and  upon  either 
beam.  And  you  sniff,  and  try  to  distinguish  between 
the  coldness  of  the  half-gale  and  the  peculiar  and 
what  I  might  term  the  "  personal,"  brutal,  ugly 
Chill-of-Death  that  comes  stealing  down  to  you  through 
the  night,  as  you  pass  some  ice-hill  in  the  darkness. 

And  then,  those  countless  bursts  of  dull  phosphor- 
escence, that  break  out  eternally  from  the  chaos  of  the 
unseen  waters  about  you,  become  suddenly  things  of 
threatening,  that  frighten  you  ;  for  any  one  of  them 
may  mean  broken  water  about  the  unseen  shore  of 
some  hidden  island  of  ice  in  the  night  .  .  .  some  half- 
submerged,  inert  Insensate  Monster-of-Ice,  lurking 
under  the  wash  of  the  seas,  trying  to  steal  unperceived 
athwart  your  hawse. 

You  raise  your  hand  instinctively  in  the  darkness, 
and  the  cry  "  Hard  a  Starboard  !  "  Htcrally  trembles 
on  your  lips  ;  and  then  you  are  saved  from  making  an 
over-anxious  spectacle  of  yourself ;  for  you  see  now 
that  the  particular  burst  of  phosphorescence  that  had 
seemed  so  pregnant  of  Ice,  is  nothing  more  than  any 
one  of  the  ten  thousand  other  bursts  of  sea-light,  that 


On  the  Bridge  17 

come  and  go  among  the  great  moundings  of  the  sea- 
foam  in  the  surrounding  night. 

And  yet  there  is  that  infernal  ice-smell  again,  and 
the  chill  that  I  have  called  tlie  Chill-of-Death,  is  steal- 
ing in  again  upon  you  from  some  unknown  quarter  of 
the  night.  You  send  word  forrard  to  the  look-outs, 
and  to  the  man  in  the  "  nest,"  and  redouble  your  own 
care  of  the  thousand  humans  \\dio  sleep  so  trustfully 
in  their  bunks  beneath  your  feet  .  .  .  trusting  you — 
a  young  man — \vith  their  lives  .  .  .  with  everything. 
They,  and  the  great  ship  that  strides  so  splendid  and 
blind  through  the  Night  and  the  Dangers  of  the  Night, 
are  all,  as  it  were,  in  the  hollow  of  your  hand  ...  a 
moment  of  inattention,  and  a  thousand  deaths  upon 
the  head  of  your  father's  son  !  Do  you  wonder  that 
you  watch,  v/ith  your  very  heart  seeming  dry  with 
anxiety,  on  such  a  night  as  this  ! 

Four  bells  !  Five  bells  !  Six  bells  !  And  now  there 
is  only  an  hour  to  go  ;  yet,  already,  you  have  nearly 
given  the  signal  three  times  to  the  Quartermaster  to 
"  port  "  or  "  starboard,"  as  the  case  may  be  ;  but 
each  time  the  conjured  terror  of  the  night,  the  dree, 
suggestive  foam-lights,  the  infernal  ice-smell,  and  the 
Chill-of-Death  have  proved  to  be  no  true  Prophets  of 
Disaster  in  your  track. 

Seven  bells  !  My  God  !  Even  as  the  sweet  silver 
sounds  wander  fore  and  aft  into  the  night,  and  are 
engulfed  by  the  gale,  you  see  something  close  upon  the 
starboard  bow.  ...  A  boil  of  phosphorescent  lights, 
over  some  low-lying,  sea-buried  thing  in  the  darkness. 
Your  night-glasses  are  glaring  at  it ;  and  then,  even 
before  the  various  look-outs  can  make  their  reports, 
you  KNOW.  "  My  God !  "  your  spirit  is  crying 
inside  of  you.  "  My  God  !  "  But  your  human  voice 
is  roaring  words  that  hold  life  and  death  for  a  thousand 


18  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

sleeping  souls  : — "  Hard  a  Starboard  !  "  "  Hard 
A  Starboard  !  "  The  man  in  the  Wheel-house  leaps 
at  your  cry  ...  at  the  fierce  intensity  of  it ;  and  then, 
with  a  momentary  loss  of  nerve,  whirls  the  wheel  the 
wrong  way.  You  make  one  jump,  and  are  into  the 
WTieel-house.  The  glass  is  tinkhng  all  about  you,  and 
you  do  not  know  in  that  instant  that  you  are  carr3ing 
the  frame  of  the  shattered  WTiecl-house  door  upon  your 
shoulders.  Your  fist  takes  the  frightened  helmsman 
under  the  jaw,  and  your  free  hand  grips  the  spokes, 
and  dashes  the  wheel  round  toward  you,  the  engine 
roaring,  away  in  its  appointed  place.  Your  junior  has 
already  flo^^Tl  to  his  post  at  the  telegraph,  and  the 
engine-room  is  answering  the  order  you  have  flung  at 
him  as  you  leapt  for  the  Wlieel-house.  But  You 
.  .  .  why,  you  are  staring,  half-mad,  through  the  night, 
watching  the  monster  bows  swing  to  port,  against  the 
mighty  background  of  the  night.  .  .  .  The  seconds 
are  the  beats  of  eternity,  in  that  brief,  tremendous 
time.  .  .  .  And  then,  aloud  to  the  wind  and  the  night, 
you  mutter,  "  Thank  God  !  "  For  she  has  swung  clear. 
And  below  j^ou  the  thousand  sleepers  sleep  on. 

A  fresh  Quartermaster  has  "  come  aft  "  (to  use  the 
old  term)  to  relieve  the  other,  and  you  stagger  out  of 
the  Wheel-house,  becoming  conscious  of  the  incon- 
venience of  the  broken  woodwork  around  you.  Some- 
one, se\'eral  people,  are  assisting  you  to  divest  your- 
self of  the  framework  of  the  door ;  and  your  junior 
has  a  queer  little  air  of  respect  for  you,  that,  somehow, 
the  darkness  is  not  capable  of  hiding. 

You  go  back  to  your  post  then  ;  but  perhaps  you 
feel  a  little  sick,  despite  a  certain  happy  elation  that 
stimulates  you. 

Eight  bells  !  And  your  brother  officer  comes  up 
to  reHeve  you.     The  usual  formula  is  gone  through, 


On  the  Bridge  19 

and  you  go  down  the  bridge  steps,  to  the  thousand 
sleeping  ones. 

Next  day  a  thousand  passengers  play  their  games 
and  read  their  books,  and  talk  their  talks  and  make 
their  usual  sweepstakes,  and  never  even  notice  that 
one  of  the  officers  is  a  little  weary-looking. 

The  carpenter  has  replaced  the  door  ;  and  a  certain 
Quartermaster  will  stand  no  more  at  the  wheel.  For 
the  rest,  all  goes  on  as  usual,  and  no  one  ever  knows. 
...  I  mean  no  one  outside  of  official  circles,  unless 
an  odd  rumour  leaks  out  through  the  stewards. 

And  a  certain  man  has  no  deaths  to  the  name  of  his 
father's  son. 

And  the  thousand  never  know.  Think  of  it,  you 
people  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  floating  palaces  of 
steel  and  electric  light.  And  let  your  benedictions 
fall  .silently  upon  the  quiet,  grave,  neatly-uniformed 
man  in  blue  upon  the  bridge.  You  have  trusted  him 
unthinkingly  with  your  lives  ;  and  not  once  in  ten 
thousand  times  has  he  ever  failed  you.  Do  you 
understand  better  now  ? 


THE  SEA  HORSES 


''An'  we's  under  the  sea,  b'ys. 
Where  the  Wild  Horses  go, 
Horses  wiv  tails 
As  big  as  ole  whales 
All  jiggin'  around  in  a  row, 
An'  when  you  ses  Whoa  I 
Them  divvils  does  go  1  " 


"  How  was  it  you  catched  my  one,  granfer  ?  "  asked 
Nebby,  as  he  had  asked  the  same  question  any  time 
during  the  past  week,  whenever  his  burty,  blue-guem- 
seyed  grandfather  crooned  out  the  old  Ballade  of  the 
Sea-Horses,  which,  however,  he  never  carried  past 
the  portion  given  above. 

"  Like  as  he  was  a  bit  weak,  Nebby  b'y ;  an'  I  gev 
him  a  smart  chp  wiv  the  axe,  'fore  he, could  bolt  off," 
explained  his  grandfather,  lying  \nth  inimitable 
gravity  and  relish. 

Nebby  dismounted  from  his  curious-looking  go- 
horse,  by  the  simple  method  of  dragging  it  forward 
from  between  his  legs.  He  examined  its  peculiar, 
unicorn-like  head,  and  at  last  put  his  finger  on  a 
bruised  indentation  in  the  black  paint  that  covered 
the  nose. 

"  'S  that  where  you  welted  him,  granfer  ?  "  he  asked, 
seriously. 

"  Aye,"  said  his  granfer  Zacchy,  taking  the  strangely- 
shaped  go-horse,  and  examining  the  contused  paint. 
"  Aye,  I  shore  hit  'm  a  turrible  welt." 

"  Are  he  dead,  granfer  ?  "  asked  the  boy. 

20 


The  Sea  Horses  21 

"  Well,"  said  the  burly  old  man,  feeling  the  go- 
horse  all  over  with  an  enormous  linger  and  thumb, 
"  betwixt  an'  between,  like."  Ho  opened  the  cleveil;/ 
hinged  mouth,  and  looked  at  the  bone  teeth  with  whicu 
he  had  fitted  it,  and  then  squinted  earnestly,  with  one 
eye,  dov/n  the  red-painted  throat.  "  Aye,"  he  re- 
peated, "  betwixt  an'  between.  Ncbby.  Don't  you 
never  let  'm  go  to  water,  b'y  ;  for  he'd  maybe  come 
alive  ag'in,  an'  ye'd  lose  'm  sure." 

Perhaps  old  Diver-Zacchy,  as  he  was  called  in  the 
little  sea- village,  was  thinking  that  water  would  prove 
unhealthy  to  the  glue,  with  which  he  had  fixed-on  the 
big  bonito's  tail,  at  what  he  termed  the  starn-end  of 
the  curious  looking  beast.  He  had  cut  the  whole  thing 
out  of  a  nice,  four-foot  by  ten-inch  piece  of  soft,  knot- 
less  yellow  pine  ;  and,  to  the  rear,  he  had  attached, 
thwart-ship,  the  afore-mentioned  bonito's  tail ;  for 
the  thing  was  no  ordinary  horse,  as  you  may  think  ; 
but  a  gen-u-ine  (as  Zacchy  described  it)  Sea-Horse, 
which  he  had  brought  up  from  the  sea  bottom  for  his 
small  grandson,  whilst  following  his  occupation  as  diver. 

The  animal  had  taken  him  many  a  long  hour  to 
carve,  and  had  been  made  during  his  spell-ohs,  between 
dives,  aboard  the  diving-barge.  The  creature  itself 
was  a  combined  production  of  his  own  extremely  fertile 
fancy,  plus  his  small  grandson's  Faith.  For  Zacchy 
had  manufactured  unending  and  peculiar  stories  of 
what  he  saw  daily  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  during 
many  a  winter's  evening,  Nebby  had  "cut  boats" 
around  the  big  stove,  whilst  the  old  man  smoked  and 
yarned  the  impossible  yarns  that  were  so  marvellously 
real  and  possible  to  the  boy.  And  of  all  the  tales  that 
the  old  diver  told  in  his  whimsical  fashion,  there  was 
none  that  so  stirred  Nebby's  feelings  as  the  one  about 
the  Sea-Horses. 


22  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

At  first  it  had  been  but  a  scrappy  and  a  fragmentary 
yarn,  suggested  as  like  as  not,  by  the  old  ballade 
which  Zacchy  so  often  hummed,  half-unconsciously. 
But  Nebby's  constant  questionings  had  provided  so 
many  suggestions  for  fresh  additions,  that  at  last  it 
took  nearly  the  whole  of  a  long  evening  for  the  Tale 
of  the  Sea-Horses  to  be  told  properly,  from  where  the 
first  Horse  was  seen  by  Zacchy,  eatin'  sea-grass  as 
nat'rel  as  ye  like,  to  where  Zacchy  had  seen  li'l  Martha 
Tullet's  b'y  ridin'  one  hke  a  reel  cow-puncher  ;  and 
from  that  tremendous  effort  of  imagination,  the  Horse 
Yarn  had  speedily  grown  to  include  every  child  that 
wended  the  Long  Road  out  of  the  \'illage. 

"  Shall  I  go  ridin'  them  Sea-Horses,  Granfer,  when 
I  dies  ?  "  Nebb}''  had  asked,  earnestly. 

"  Aye,"  Granfer  Zacchy  had  replied,  absently, 
pufiing  at  his  corn-cob.  "  Aye,  like's  not,  Nebby. 
Like  as  not." 

"  Mebbe  I'U  die  middlin'  soon,  Granfer  ?  "  Nebby 
had  suggested,  longingly.  "  There's  plenty  h'l  boys 
dies  'fore  they  gets  growed  up." 

"  Husht  !  b'y !  Husht  !  "  Granfer  had  said, 
wakening  suddenly  to  what  the  child  was  saying. 

Later,  when  Nebby  had  many  times  betrayed  his 
exceeding  high  requirement  of  death,  that  he  might 
ride  the  Sea-Horses  all  round  his  Granfer  at  work  on 
the  sea-bottom,  old  Zacchy  had  suddenly  evolved  a 
less  drastic  solution  of  the  difficulty. 

"  m  ketch  ye  one,  Nebby,  sure,"  he  said,  "  an'  ye 
kin  ride  it  round  the  kitchen." 

The  suggestion  pleased  Nebby  enormously,  and 
practically  nullified  his  impatience  regarding  the  date 
ol  his  death,  which  was  to  give  him  the  freedom  of  the 
sea  and  all  the  Sea-Horses  therein. 

For  a  long  month,  old  Zacchy  was  met  each  evening 


The  Sea  Horses  23 

by  a  small  and  earnest  boy,  desirous  of  learning 
whether  he  had  "  catched  one "  that  day,  or  not. 
Meanwhile,  Zaccliy  had  been  dealing  honestly  with 
that  four-foot  by  ten-inch  piece  of  yellow  pine,  already 
described.  He  had  carved  out  his  notion  of  what 
might  be  supposed  to  constitute  a  veritable  Sea-Horse, 
aided  in  his  invention  by  Nebby's  illuminating  ques- 
tions as  to  whether  Sea-Horses  had  tails  like  a  real 
horse  or  like  real  fishes  ;  did  they  wear  horse-shoes  ; 
did  they  bite  ? 

These  were  three  points  upon  which  Nebby's  curio- 
sity was  definite  ;  and  the  results  were  definite  enough 
in  the  finished  work  ;  for  Granfer  supplied  the  peculiar 
creature  with  "  reel  "  bone  teeth  and  a  workable  jaw  ; 
two  squat,  but  prodigious  legs,  near  what  he  termed 
the  "  bows  "  ;  whilst  to  the  "  starn  "  he  affixed  the 
bonito-tail  whicli  has  already  had  mention,  setting  it 
the  way  Dame  Nature  sets  it  on  the  bonito,  that  is, 
"thwart-ships,"  so  that  its  two  flukes  touched  the 
ground  when  the  go-horse  was  in  position,  and  thus 
steadied  it  admirably  with  this  hint  taken  direct  from 
the  workmanship  of  the  Great  Carpenter. 

There  came  a  day  when  the  horse  was  finished  and 
the  last  coat  of  paint  had  dried  smooth  and  hard. 
That  evening,  when  Nebby  came  running  to  meet 
Zacch}^  he  was  aware  of  his  Grandfather's  voice 
in  the  dusk,  shouting : — "  Whoa,  Mare  !  Whoa, 
Mare  !  "  followed  immediately  by  the  cracking  of  a 
whip. 

Nebby  shrilled  out  a  call,  and  raced  on,  mad  with 
excitement,  towards  the  noise.  He  knew  instantly 
that  at  last  Granfer  had  managed  to  catch  one  of  the 
wily  Sea-Horses.  Presumably  the  creature  was  some- 
what intractable  ;  for  when  Nebby  arrived,  he  found 
the  burly  form  of  Granfer  straining  back  tremendously 


24  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

upon  stout  reins,  which  Nebby  saw  vaguely  in  the  dusk 
were  attached  to  a  squat,  black  monster  : — 

"  Whoa,  Mare  !  "  roared  Granfcr,  and  lashed  the 
air  furiously  with  his  whip.  Nebby  shrieked  delight, 
and  ran  round  and  round,  whilst  Granfer  struggled 
with  the  animal. 

"  Hi !  Hi !  Hi !  "  shouted  Nebby,  dancing  from  foot 
to  foot.  "  YeVe  catched  'm,  Granfer  !  Ye've  catched 
'm,  Granfer  !  " 

"  Aye,"  said  Granfer,  whose  struggles  with  the 
creature  must  have  been  prodigious  ;  for  he  appeared 
to  pant.  ■'  She'll  go  quiet  now,  b'y.  Take  a  holt !  " 
And  he  handed  the  reins  and  the  whip  over  to  the 
excited,  but  half-fearful  Nebby.  "  Put  y'r  hand  on 
'er,  Neb,"  said  old  Zacchy.     "  That'U  quiet  'er." 

Nebby  did  so,  a  little  nervously,  and  drew  away  in 
a  moment. 

"  She's  all  wet  's  wet !  "  he  cried  out. 

"  Aye,"  said  Granfer,  striving  to  hide  the  delight 
\n    his    voice.     "  She'm  straight    up  from  the  water, 

This  was  quite  true  ;  it  was  the  final  artistic  effort 
of  Granfer's  imagination  ;  he  had  dipped  the  horse 
overside,  just  before  leaving  the  diving  barge.  He 
took  his  towel  from  his  pocket,  and  wiped  the  horse 
dowTi,  hissing  as  he  did  so. 

"  Now,  b'y,"  he  said,  "  welt  'er  good,  an'  make  her 
take  ye  home." 

Nebby  straddled  the  go-horse,  made  an  ineffectual 
effort  to  crack  the  whip,  shouted  : — "  Gee-up  !  Gee- 
up  !  "  And  was  off — two  small,  lean  bare  legs  twink- 
ling away  into  the  darkness  at  a  tremendous  rate, 
accompanied  by  shrill  and  recurrent  "  Gec-ups  !  " 

Granfer  Zacchy  stood  in  the  dusk,  laughing  happily, 
and  pulled  out  his  pipe.     He  filled  it  slowly,  and  as  he 


The  Sea  Horses  25 

applied  the  light,  he  heard  the  galloping  of  the  horse, 
returning.  Nebby  dashed  up,  and  circled  his  Granfer 
in  splendid  fashion,  singing  in  a  rather  breathless 
voice  : — 

"  An'  we's  under  the  sea,  b'ys. 
Where  the  Wild  Horses  go, 

Horses  wiv  tails 

As  big  as  ole  whales 
All  jiggin'  around  in  a  row, 
An'  when  you  ses  Whoa  ! 
Them  debbils  docs  go  !  " 

And  away  he  went  again  at  the  gallop. 

This  had  happened  a  week  earlier  ;  and  nov/  we  have 
Nebbj^  questioning  Granfer  Zacchy  as  to  whether  the 
Sea-Horse  is  really  alive  or  dead. 

"  Should  think  they  has  Sca-Horses  'n  heaven, 
Granfer  ?  "  said  Nebby,  thoughtfully,  as  he  once  more 
straddled  the  go-horse. 

"  Sure,"  said  Granfer  Zacchy. 

"  Is  Martha  Tullet's  li'l  b'y  gone  to  heaven  ?  "  asked 
Nebby. 

"  Sure,"  said  Granfer  again,  as  he  sucked  at  his  pipe. 

Nebby  was  silent  a  good  while,  thinking.  It  was 
obvious  that  he  confused  heaven  with  the  Domain  of 
the  Sea-Horses ;  for  had  not  Granfer  himself  seen 
Martha  Tullet's  li'l  b'y  riding  one  of  the  Sea-Horses. 
Nebby  had  told  Mrs.  Tullet  about  it  ;  but  she  had  only 
thrown  her  apron  over  her  head,  and  cried,  until  at 
last  Nebby  had  stolen  away,  feeling  rather  dumpy. 

"  Has  you  ever  seed  any  angels  wiv  wings  on  the 
Sea-Horses,  Granfer  ?  "  Nebby  asked,  presently ; 
determined  to  have  further  information  with  which  to 
assure  his  ideas. 

"  Aye,"  said  Granfer  Zacchy.  "  Shoals  of  'em. 
Shoals  of  'em,  b'y." 

Nebby  was  greatl}^  pleased. 


26  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  Could  they  ride  some,  Granfer  ?  "he  questioned. 

"  Sure,"  said  old  Zacchy,  reaching  for  his  pouch. 

"  As  good  's  me  ?  "  asked  Nebby,  anxiously. 

"  Middlin'  near.  Middlin'  near,  b'y,"  said  Granfer 
Zacchy.  "  \Miy,  Neb,"  he  continued,  waking  up 
with  a  sudden  relish  to  the  full  possibilities  of  the 
question,  "  thar's  some  of  them  lad}'  ayngels  as  c'ud 
do  back-somersaults  an'  never  take  a  throw,  b'y." 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  Granfer  Zacchy 's  conception 
of  a  lady  angel  had  been  formed  during  odd  visits 
to  the  circus.  But  Nebby  was  duly  impressed,  and 
bumped  his  head  badly  the  sarne  day,  trying  to  achieve 
the  rudiments  of  a  back-somersault. 


Some  evenings  later,  Nebby  came  running  to  meet 
old  Zacchy,  with  an  eager  question  : — 

"  Has  you  seed  Jane  Melly's  li'l  gel  ridin'  the  Horses, 
Granfer  ?  "  he  asked,  earnestly. 

"  Aye,"  said  Granfer.  Then,  realising  suddenly 
what  the  question  portended  :— 

"  \^^at's  wrong  wiv  Mrs.  Melly's  wee  gel  ?  "  he 
queried. 

"  Dead,"  said  Nebby,  calmly.  "  Mrs.  Kay  ses  it's 
the  fever  come  to  the  village  again,  Granfer." 

Nebby 's  voice  was  cheerful ;  for  the  fever  had 
visited  the  village  some  months  before,  and  Granfer 
Zacchy  had  taken  Nebb}'^  to  live  on  the  barge,  away 
from  danger  of  infection.  Nebby  had  enjoyed  it  all 
enormously,  and  had  often  prayed  God  since  to  send 
another  fe\'er,  with  its  attendant  possibilities  of  life 
again  aboard  the  diving-barge. 

"  Shall  we  live  in  the  barge,  Granfer  ?  "  he  asked, 
as  he  swung  along  with  the  old  man. 


The  Sea  Horses  27 

"  Ma^'bc  !  Maybe  !  "  said  old  Zacchy,  absently,  in 
a  somewhat  troubled  voice. 

Granfer  left  Nebby  in  the  kitchen,  and  went  on 
up  the  village  to  make  inquiries ;  the  result  was 
that  he  packed  Nebby's  clothes  and  toys  into  a  well- 
wash,ed  sugar-bag,  and  the  next  day  took  the  boy 
down  to  the  barge,  to  live.  But  whereas  Granfer 
walked,  carrying  the  sack  of  gear,  Nebby  rode  all  the 
way,  most  of  it  at  an  amazing  gallop.  He  even  rode 
daringly  do\\'n  the  narrow,  railless  gang-plank.  It 
is  true  that  Granfer  Zacchy  took  care  to  keep  close 
behind,  in  as  unobtrusive  a  fashion  as  possible  ;  but 
of  this,  or  the  need  of  such  watchfulness,  Nebby  was 
most  satisfactorily  ignorant.  He  was  welcomed  in  the 
heartiest  fashion  by  Ned,  the  pump-man,  and  Binny, 
who  attended  to  the  air-pipe  and  life-line  when  Granfer 
Zacchy  was  down  below. 


Life  aboard  the  diving-barge  was  a  very  happy 
time  for  Nebby.  It  was  a  happy  time  also  for  Gran- 
fer Zacchy  and  his  two  men  ;  for  the  child,  playing 
constantly  in  their  midst,  brought  back  to  them  an 
adumbrg,tion  of  their  youth.  There  was  only  one 
point  upon  which  there  arose  any  trouble,  and  that 
was  Nebby's  forgetfulness,  in  riding  across  the  air- 
tube,  when  he  was  exercising  his  Sea-Horse. 

Ned,  the  pump-man,  had  spoken  very  emphatically. 
to  Nebby  on  this  point,  and  Nebby  had  promised 
to  remember ;  but,  as  usual,  soon  forgot.  They 
had  taken  the  barge  outside  the  bar,  and  anchored 
her  over  the  buoy  that  marked  Granfer's  submarine 
operations.  The  day  was  gloriously  line,  and  so  long 
as  the  weather  remained  fixed,  they  meant  to  keep  the 


28  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

barge  out  there,  merely  sending  the  httle  punt  ashore 
for  pro\dsions. 

To  Nebby,  it  was  all  just  splendid  !  When  he  was 
not  riding  his  Sea-Horse,  he  was  talking  to  the  men, 
or  waiting  at  the  gangway  eagerly  for  Granfer's 
great  copper  head-piece  to  come  up  out  of  the  water, 
as  the  air-tube  and  hfe-line  were  slowly  drawn  aboard. 
Or  else  his  shrill  young  voice  was  sure  to  be  heard, 
as  he  leant  over  the  rail  and  peered  into  the  depths 
below,  singing  : — 

"  An'  we's  under  the  sea,  b'ys. 
Where  the  Wild  Horses  go, 
Horses  wiv  tails 
As  big  as  ole  whales 
All  jiggin'  around  in  a  row. 
An'  when  you  ses  Whoa  ! 
Them  debbils  does  go  !  " 

Possibly,  he  considered  it  as  some  kind  of  charm  with 
which  to  call  the  Sea-Horses  up  to  view. 

Each  time  the  boat  v/ent  ashore,  it  brought  sad 
news,  that  first  this  and  then  that  one  had  gone  the 
Long  Road ;  but  it  was  chiefly  the  children  that 
interested  Nebby.  Each  time  that  his  Granfer  came 
up  out  of  the  depths,  Nebby  would  dance  round  him 
impatiently,  until  the  big  helmet  was  unscrewed ; 
then  would  come  his  ine\-itable,  eager  question  : — 
Had  Granfer  seen  Carry  Andrew's  h'l  gel ;  or  had 
Granfer  seen  Marty's  li'l  b'y  riding  the  Sea-Horses  ? 
And  so  on. 

"  Sure,"  Granfer  would  reply ;  though,  several 
times,  it  was  his  first  intimation  that  the  child  men- 
tioned had  died  ;  the  news  having  reached  the  barge 
through  some  passing  boat,  whilst  he  was  on  the  sea- 
bottom. 


The  Sea  Horses  29 


"  Look  you,  Nebby  !  "  shouted  Ned,  the  pump- 
man, angrily.  "  I'll  shore  break  that  horse  of  yours 
up  for  kmdHn'  next  time  you  goes  steppin'  on  the 
air-pipe." 

It  was  all  too  true ;  Nebby  had  forgotten,  and 
done  it  again ;  but  whereas,  generally,  he  took  Ned's 
remonstrances  in  good  part,  and  promised  better 
things,  he  stood  now,  looking  with  angry  defiance 
at  the  man.  The  suggestion  that  his  Sea-Horse 
was  made  of  wood,  bred  in  him  a  tempest  of  bitterness. 
Never  for  one  moment  to  himself  had  he  allowed  so 
horrible  a  thought  to  enter  his  own  head ;  not  even 
when,  in  a  desperate  charge,  he  had  knocked  a  chip 
off  the  nose  of  the  Sea-Horse,  and  betrayed  the 
merciless  wood  below.  He  had  simply  refused  to 
look  particularly  at  the  place ;  his  fresh,  child's 
imagination  allowing  him  presently  to  grow  assured 
again  that  all  was  well ;  that  he  truly  rode  a  "  gen-u- 
ine "  Sea-Horse.  In  his  earnestness  of  determined 
make-believe,  he  had  even  avoided  showing  Granfer 
Zacchy  the  place,  and  asking  him  to  mend  it,  much 
as  he  wanted  it  mended.  Granfer  always  mended 
his  toys  for  him ;  but  this  could  not  be  mended. 
It  was  a  real  Sea-Horse  ;  -not  a  toy.  Nebby  resolutely 
averted  his  thoughts  from  the  possibility  of  any  other 
Belief ;  though  it  is  likely  that  such  mental  processes 
were  more  subconscious  than  conscious. 

And  now,  Ned  had  said  the  deadly  thing,  practically 
in  so  many  naked  words.  Nebby  trembled  with 
anger  and  a  furious  mortification  of  his  pride  of 
Sea-Horse-Ownership.  He  looked  round  swiftly  for 
the  surest  way  to  avenge  the  brutish  insult,  and  saw 


30  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  air-pipe  ;  the.  thing  around  which  the  bother  had 
been  made.  Yes,  that  would  make  Ned  angry  ! 
Nebby  turned  his  strange  steed,  and  charged  straight 
away  back  at  the  pipe.  There,  with  an  angry  and 
mahcious  dehberateness,  he  halted,  and  made  the 
big  front  hoofs  of  his  extraordinary  monster,  stamp 
upon  the  air-pipe. 

"  You  young  devil !  "  roared  Ned,  scarcely  able 
to  believe  the  thing  he  saw.     "  You  young  devil !  " 

Nebby  continued  to  stamp  the  big  hoofs  upon  the 
pipe,  glaring  with  fierce,  defiant,  blue  eyes  at  Ned. 
Whereupon,  Ned's  patience  arose  and  departed,  and 
Ned  himself  arrived  bodily  in  haste  and  with  con- 
siderable vigour.  He  gave  one  kick,  and  the  Sea- 
Horse  went  flying  across  the  deck,  and  crashed  into 
the  low  bulwarks.  Nebby  screamed ;  but  it  was 
far  more  a  scream  of  tremendous  anger,  than  of 
fear. 

"  I'll  heave  the  blamed  thing  over  the  side  !  "  said 
Ned,  and  ran  to  complete  his  dreadful  sacrilege. 
The  following  instant,  something  clasped  his  right 
leg,  and  small,  distinctly  sharp  teeth  bit  his  bare 
shin,  below  the  up-rolled  trousers.  Ned  yelled,  and 
sat  rapidly  and  luridly  upon  the  deck,  in  a  fashion 
calculated  to  shock  his  system,  in  every  sense  of 
the    word. 

Nebby  had  loosed  from  him,  the  instant  his  bite 
had  taken  effect ;  and  now  he  was  nursing  and  exam- 
ining the  black  monster  of  his  dreams  and  waking 
moments.  He  knelt  there,  near  the  bulwarks,  looking 
with  burning  eyes  of  anger  and  enormous  distress 
at  the  effects  of  Ned's  great  kick ;  for  Ned  wore  his 
bluchers  on  his  bare  feet.  Ned  himself  still  endured 
a  sitting  conjunction  with  the  deck  ;  he  had  hot  yet 
finished  expressing  himself ;    not  that  Nebby  was  in 


The  Sea  Horses  31 

the  least  interested  .  .  .  anger  and  distress  liad 
built  a  wall  of  fierce  indifference  about  his  heart.  He 
desired  chiefly  Ned's  death. 

If  Ned,  himself,  had  been  less  noisy,  he  would 
have  heard  Binny  even  earlier  than  he  did  ;  for  that 
sane  man  had  jumped  to  the  air-pump,  luckily  for 
Granfer  Zacchy,  and  was  now,  as  he  worked,  emptying 
his  soul  of  most  of  its  contents  upon  the  derelict 
Ned.  As  it  was,  Ned's  memory  and  ears  did  duty 
together,  and  he  remembered  that  he  had  committed 
the  last  '  crime  in  the  Pumpman's  Calendar  .  .  . 
he  had  left  the  pump,  whilst  his  diver  was  still  below 
water.  Powder  ignited  in  quite  a  considerable 
quantity  beneath  him,  could  scarcely  have  moved 
Ned  more  speedily.  He  gave  out  one  yell,  and  leaped 
for  the  pump  ;  at  the  same  instant  he  discovered  that 
Binny  was  there,  and  his  gasp  of  relief  was  as  vehement 
as  prayer.  He  remembered  his  leg,  and  concluded 
his  journey  to  the  pump,  with  a  limp.  Here,  with 
one  hand  he  pumped,  wdiilst  with  the  other,  he  in- 
vestigated Nebby's  teeth-marks.  He  found  that  the 
skin  was  barely  broken  ;  but  it  was  his  temper  that 
most  needed  mending  ;  and,  of  course,  it  had  been 
very  nauglity  of  Nebby  to  attempt  such  a  familiarity. 

Binny  was  drawing  in  the  life-Hne  and  air-pipe ; 
for  Granfer  Zacchy  was  ascending  the  long  rope- 
ladder,  that  led  up  from  the  sea-bottom,  to  learn 
what  had  caused  the  unprecedented  interruption  of 
his  air-supply. 

It  was  a  very  angry  Granfer  who,  presently,  having 
heard  a  fair  representation  of  the  facts,  applied  a 
wet  but  horny  hand  to  Nebby's  anatomy,  in  a  vigorous 
and  decided  manner.  Yet  Nebby  neither  cried  nor 
spoke  ;    he  merely  clung  on  tightly  to  the  Sea-Horse  ; 


32  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

and  Granfer  whacked  on.  At  last  Granfer  grew 
surprised  at  the  continued  absence  of  remonstrance 
on  Nebby's  part,  and  turned  that  young  man  the 
other  end  about,  to  discover  the  wherefore  of  so 
determined  a  silence. 

Nebby's  face  was  very  white,  and  tears  seemed 
perilously  near ;  yet  even  the  nearness  of  these, 
did  not  in  any  way  detract  from  the  expression  of 
unutterable  defiance  that  looked  out  at  Granfer  and 
all  the  world,  from  his  face.  Granfer  regarded  him 
for  a  few  moments  with  earnest  attention  and  doubt, 
and  decided  to  cease  whipping  that  atom  of  blue- 
eyed  stubbornness.  He  looked  at  the  Sea-Horse 
that  Nebby  clutched  so  tightly,  in  his  silence,  and 
perceived  the  way  to  make  Nebby  climb  down  .  .  . 
Nebby  must  go  and  beg  Ned's  pardon  for  trying  to 
eat  him  (Granfer  smothered  a  chuckle),  or  else  the 
Sea-Horse  would  be  taken  away. 

Nebby's  face,  however,  showed  no  change,  un- 
less it  was  that  the  blue  eyes  shone  with  a  fiercer 
defiance,  which  dried  out  of  them  that  suspicion  of 
tears.  Granfer  pondered  over  him,  and  had  a  fresh 
idea.  He  would  take  the  Sea-Horse  back  again 
to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  ;  and  it  would  then  come 
alive  once  more  and  swim  away,  and  Nebby  would 
never  see  it  again,  if  Nebby  did  not  go  at  once  to  Ned 
and  beg  Ned's  pardon,  that  very  minute.  Granfer 
was  prodigiously  stern. 

There  came,  perhaps,  the'  tiniest  flash  of  fright 
into  the  blue  eyes  ;  but  it  was  blurred  with  unbelief  ; 
and,  anyway,  it  had  no  power  at  that  stage  of  Nebby's 
temper  to  budge  him  from  his  throne  of  enormous 
anger.  He  decided,  v;ith  that  fierce  courage  of  the 
burner  of  boats,  that  if  Granfer  did  truly  do  such 
a    dreadful    thing,    he    (Nebby)    would    "kneel   down 


The  Sea  Horses  33 

proper  "  and  pray  God  to  kill  Ned.  An  added  relish 
of  vengeance  came  to  his  child's  mind.  ...  He 
would  kneel  down  in  front  of  Ned  ;  he  would  pray 
to  God  "  out  loud."  Ned  should  thus  learn  beforehand 
that  he  was  doomed. 

In  that  moment  of  inspired  Intention,  Nebby 
became  trebly  fixed  into  his  Aura  of  Implacable 
Anger.  He  voiced  his  added  grimness  of  heart  in 
the  most  tremendous  words  possible  : 

"  It's  wood !  "  said  Nebby,  glaring  at  Granfer, 
in  a  kind  of  fierce,  sick,  horrible  trium.ph.  "  It  carn't 
come  back  alive  again  !  " 

Then  he  burst  into  tears,  at  this  dreadful  act  of 
disillusionment,  and  wrenching  himself  free  from 
Granfer's  gently-detaining  hand,  he  dashed  away  aft, 
and  down  the  scuttle  into  the  cuddy,  where  for  an 
hour  he  hid  himself  under  a  bunk,  and  refused,  in 
dreary  silence,  any  suggestion  of  dinner. 

After  dinner,  however,  he  emerged,  tear-stained 
but  uiibroken.  He  had  brought  the  Sea-Horse  below 
with  him  ;  and  now,  as  the  three  men  watched  him, 
unobtrusively,  from  their  seats  around  the  little 
cuddy-table,  it  was  plain  to  them  that  Nebby  had 
some  definite  object  in  view,  which  he  was  attempting 
to  mask  under  an  attitude  of  superb  but  ineffectual 
casualness. 

"  B'y,"  said  Granfer  Zacchy,  in  a  very  stem  voice, 
"  come  you  an'  beg  Ned's  pard'n,  or  I'll  shore  take 
th'  Sea-Horse  down  wiv  me,  an'  you'll  never  see  'm 
no  more,  an'  I'll  never  ketch  ye  another,  Nebby." 

Nebby's  reply  was  an  attempted  dash  for  the 
scuttle-ladder ;  but  Granfer  reached  out  a  long  arm, 
that  might  have  been  described  as  possessing  the 
radius  of  the  small  cudd}^  As  a  result,  Nebby  was 
put  \vith  his  face  in  a  corner,  whilst  Granfer  Zacchy 

2 


34  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

laid  the  Sea-Horse  across  his  knees,  and  stroked  it 
meditatively^  as  he  smoked  a  restful  after-dinner  pipe. 

Presently,  he  knocked  out  his  pipe,  and,  reaching 
round,  brought  Nebby  to  stand  at  his  knee. 

"  Nebby,  b'y,"  he  said,  in  his  grave,  kindly  fashion, 
"  go  you  an'  beg  Ned's  pard'n,  an'  ye  shall  hev  this 
right  back  to  play  wiv." 

But  Nebb}'  had  not  been  given  time  yet  to  ease 
himself  clear  of  the  cloud  of  his  indignation  ;  and 
even  as  he  stood  there  by  Granfer,  he  could  see  the 
great  bruise  in  the  paint,  where  Ned's  blucher  had 
taken  effect  ;  and  the  broken  fluke  of  the  tail,  that 
had  been  smashed  when  the  poor  Sea-Horse  brought 
up  so  violently  against  the  low  bulwarks  of  the  barge. 

"  Ned's  a  wicked  pig  man  !  "  said  Nebby,  with  a 
fresh  intensity  of  anger  against  the  pump-hand. 

"  Hush,  b'y  !  "  said  Granfer,  with  real  sternness. 
"  Ye've  had  fair  chance  to  come  round,  an'  ye've 
not  took  it,  an'  now  I'll  read  ye  a  lesson  as  ye'll  shore 
mind  !  " 

He  stood  up,  and  put  the  Sea-Horse  under  his 
arm ;  then,  with  one  hand  on  Nebb3^'s  shoulder,  he 
went  to  the  ladder,  and  so  in  a  minute  they  were  all 
on  the  deck  of  the  barge.  Presently,  Granfer  was 
once  more  transformed  from  a  genial  and  burly  giant, 
into  an  indiarubbcr-covered  and  dome-ended  monster. 
Then,  with  a  slowness  and  solemnity  befitting  so  terrible 
an  execution  of  justice,  Granfer  made  a  fathom,  or 
so,  of  spunyard  fast  about  the  Sea-Horse's  neck, 
whilst  Nebby  looked  on,  white-faced. 

WTien  this  was  accomplished,  Granfer  stood  up 
and  marched  with  ponderous  steps  to  the  side,  the 
Sea-Horse  under  his  arm.  He  began  to  go  slowly 
down  the  wooden  rungs  of  the  rope-ladder,  and 
presently  there  were  only  his  shoulders  and  copper- 


The  Sea  Horses  85 

headpiece  visible.  Nebby  stared  down  in  an  an- 
guish ;  he  could  see  the  Sea-Horse  vaguely.  It 
seemed  to  waggle  in  the  crook  of  Granfer's  arm.  It 
was  surely  about  to  swim  away.  Then  Granfer's 
shoulders,  and  finally  his  great  copper  head  dis- 
appeared from  sight,  and  there  was  soon  only  the 
slight  working  of  the  ladder,  and  the  paying  out  of 
the  air-pipe  and  life-line,  to  tell  that  any  one  was 
down  there  in  all  that  greyness  of  the  water-dusk  ; 
for  Granfer  had  often  explained  to  Nebby  that  it 
was  always  "  evenin'  at  th'  sea-bottom." 

Nebby  sobbed  once  or  twice,  in  a  dry,  horrid  way, 
in  his  throat ;  then,  for  quite  half  an  hour,  he  lay 
fiat  on  his  stomach  in  the  gangway,  silent  and  watch- 
ful, staring  down  into  the  water.  Several  times  he 
felt  quite  sure  he  saw  something  swimming  with  a 
queer,  waggling  movement,  a  little  under  the  water  ; 
and  presently  he  started  to  sing  in  a  low  voice  : — 

"  An'   we's  under  the  sea,   b'ys, 
Where  the  Wild  Horses  go. 

Horses  wiv  tails      , 

As  big  as  ole  whales 
All  jiggin'  around  in  a  row, 
An'  when  you  ses  Whoa  ! 
Them  debbils  does  go  !  " 

But  it  seemed  to  have  no  power  to  charm  the 
Sea-Horse  up  to  the  surface  ;  and  he  fell  silent,  after 
singing  it  through,  maybe  a  dozen  times.  He  was 
waiting  for  Granfer.  He  had  a  vague  hope,  which 
grew,  that  Granfer  had  meant  to  tie  it  up  with  the 
spunyard,  so  that  it  could  not  swim  away  ;  and  perhaps 
Granfer  would  bring  it  up  with  him  when  he  came. 
Nebby  felt  that  he  would  really  beg  Ned's  pardon, 
if  only  Granfer  brought  the  Sea-Horse  up  with  him 
again. 

A  little  later,  there  came  the  signal  that  Granfer 


36  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

was  about  to  ascend,  and  Nebb}^  literally  trembled 
with  excitement,  as  the  life-line  and  air-pipe  came 
in  slowly,  hand  over  hand.  He  saw  the  big  dome  of 
the  helmet  come  vaguely  into  view,  with  the  line 
of  the  air-pipe  leading  down  at  the  usual  "  funny  " 
angle,  right  into  the  top  of  the  dome  (it  was  an  old 
type  of  helmet).  Then  the  helmet  broke  the  water, 
and  Nebby  could  not  see  anything,  because  the 
"  rimples  "  on  the  water  stopped  him  seeing.  Gran- 
fer's  big  shoulders  came  into  view,  and  then  sufficient 
of  him  for  Nebby  to  see  that  the  Sea-Horse  was  truly 
not  with  him.  Nebby  whitened.  Granfer  had  really 
let  the  Sea-Horse  go.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Granfer 
Zacchy  had  tethered  the  Sea-Horse  to  some  tough 
marine  weed-rootlets  at  the  sea-bottom,  so  as  to 
prevent  it  floating  traitorously  to  the  surface  ;  but 
to  Nebby  it  was  plain  only  that  the  Sea-Horse  had 
truly  "  come  alive  "  and  swum  away. 

Granfer  stepped  on  to  the  deck,  and  Binny  eased 
off  the  great  helmet,  whilst  Ned  ceased  his  last,  slow 
revolution  of  the  pump-handle. 

It  was  at  this  moment  that  Nebby  faced  round 
on  Ned,  with  a  white,  set,  Httle  face,  in  which  his 
blue  eyes  literally  blirned.  Ned  was  surely  doomed 
in  that  instant  !  And  then,  even  in  the  Moment  of 
his  Intention,  Nebby  heard  Granfer  say  to  Binny  : 
"  Aye,  I  moored  it  wiv  the  spunyarn  safe  enough." 
Nebby's  anger  lost  its  deadlincss  abruptly,  under 
the  sudden  sweet  chemistry  of  hope.  He  oscillated 
an  instant  between  a  new,  vague  thought,  and  his 
swiftly-lessening  requirement  of  vengeance.  The  new, 
vague  thought  became  less  vague,  and  he  swayed 
the  more  toward  it ;  and  so,  in  a  moment,  had  rid 
himself  of  his  Dignity,  and  run  across  to  Granfer 
Zacchy  : 


The  Sea  Horses  87 

"  Has  it  corned  alive,  Granfer  ?  "  he  asked,  breath- 
lessly, with  the  infinite  eagerness  and  expectancy  of 
a  child. 

"Aye  !  "  said  Granfer  Zacchy,  with  apparent 
sternness.  "  Ye've  sure  lost  it  now,  b'y.  'Tis  swim- 
min'  an'  swimmin'  roun'  an'  roiin'  all  the  time." 

Nebby's  eyes  shone  with  sudden  splendour,  as  the 
New  Idea  took  now  a  most  definite  form  in  his  young 
brain. 

Granfer,  looking  at  him  with  eyes  of  tremendous 
sternness,  was  quite  non-plussed  at  the  harmless 
effect  of  his  expectedly  annihilative  news  concerning 
the  final  and  obvious  lostness  of  the  Sea-Horse.  Yet, 
Nebby  said  never  a  word  to  give  Granfer  an  inkling 
of  the  stupendous  plan  that  was  settling  fast  in  his 
daring  child 's-mind.  He  opened  his  mouth  once  or 
twice  upon  a  further  question  ;  then  relapsed  into  the 
safety  of  silence  again,  as  though  instinctively  realising 
that  he  might  ask  something  that  would  make  Granfer 
suspicious. 

Presently,  Nebby  had  stolen  away  once  more  to 
the  gangway,  and  there,  lying  on  his  stomach,  he 
began  again  to  look  down  into  the  sea.  His  anger 
now  was  almost  entirely  submerged  in  the  great, 
glorious  New  Idea,  that  filled  him  with  such  tremendous 
exaltation  that  he  could  scarcely  lie  quiet,  or  cease  from 
singing  aloud  at  the  top  of  his  voice. 

A  few  moments  earlier,  he  had  meant  to  "  kneel 
down  proper  "  and  pray  God  "  out  loud  "  for  Ned 
to  be  killed  quickly  and  painfully  ;  but  now  all  was 
changed.  Though,  in  an  indifferent  sort  of  way,  in 
his  healthily-sa\'age  child 's-mind,  he  did  not  forgive 
Ned.  .  .  .  Ned's  sin  had,  of  course,  been  unfor- 
givable, presumably  "  for  ever  and  ever  and  ever  " 
— Certainly     until    to-morrow !      Meanwhile,     Nebby 


38  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

never  so  much  as  thought  of  him,  except  it  might 
be  as  one  whose  bewilderment  sliould  presently  be 
the  last  lustre  of  the  glory  of  his  (Nebby's)  proposed 
achievement.  Not  that  Nebby  thought  it  all  out 
like  this  into  separate  ideas ;  but  it  was  all  there  in 
that  young  and  surging  head  ...  in  what  I  might 
term  a  Chaos  of  Determination,  buoying  up  (as  it 
might  be  a  lonesome  craft)  one  clear,  vigorous  Idea. 

Granfer  Zacchy  went  down  twice  more  before 
evening,  and  each  time  that  he  returned,  Nebby 
questioned  him  earnestly  as  to  the  doings  of  the  Sea- 
Horse  ;  and  each  time,  Granfer  told  the  same  tale 
(in  accents  of  would-be  sternness)  that  the  Sca-Horse 
was  "  jest  swimmin'  roun'  an'  roun' ;  an'  maybe  ye 
wish  now  ye'd  begged  Ned's  pardon,  when  ye  was 
bid!" 

But,  in  his  heart,  Granfer  decided  that  the  Sea- 
Horse  might  be  safely  re-caught  on  the  morrow. 


That  night,  when  the  three  men  were  asleep  in 
the  little  cuddy,  Nebby's  small  figure  slipped  noise- 
lessly out  of  the  bunk  that  lay  below  Granfer  Zacchy's. 
He  flitted  silently  to  the  ladder,  and  stole  up  into  the 
warm  night,  his  shirt  (a  quaint  cut-down  of  Granfer's) 
softly  flicking  his  lean,  bare  legs,  as  he  moved  through 
the  darkness,  along  the  barge's  decks. 

Nebby  came  to  a  stop  where  Granfer's  diving- 
suit  was  hung  up  carefully  on  the  " .frame  "  ;  but  this 
was  not  what  Nebby  wanted.  He  stooped  to  the 
bottom  of  the  "  frame,"  and  pulled  up  the  small 
hatch  of  a  square  locker,  where  reposed  the  big, 
domed,  copper  helmet,  glimmering  dully  in  the  vague 
starlight. 


The  Sea  Horses  39 

Nebby  reached  into  the  locker,  and  lugged  the 
helmet  out  bodily,  hauling  with  both  hands  upon  the 
air-pipe.  He  carried  it  across  clumsily  to  the  gangway, 
the  air-pipe  unreeling  off  the  winch,  with  each  step 
that  he  took. 

He  found  the  helmet  too  clumsy  and  rotund  to 
lift  easily  on  to  his  own  curly  head,  and  so,  after  an 
attempt  or  two,  evolved  the  method  of  turning  the 
helmet  upon  its  side,  and  then  kneeHng  down  and 
thrusting  his  head  into  it ;  after  which,  with  a  pro- 
digious effort,  he  rose  victoriously  to  his  knees,  and 
began  to  fumble  himself  backwards  over  the  edge 
of  the  gangway,  on  to  the  wooden  rungs  of  Granfer's 
rope-ladder,  which  had  not  been  hauled  up.  He 
managed  a  firm  foot-hold  with  his  left  foot,  and  then 
with  his  right ;  and  so  began  to  descend,  slowly  and 
painfully,  the  great  helmet  rocking  clumsily  on  his 
small  shoulders. 

His  right  foot  touched  the  water  at  the  fourth 
rung,  and  he  paused,  bringing  the  other  foot  down 
beside  the  first.  The  water  was  pleasantly  warm, 
and  Nebby  hesitated  only  a  very  httle  while,  ere  he 
ventured  the  next  step.  Then  he  stopped  again, 
and  tried  to  look  down  into  the  water.  The  action 
swayed  the  big  helmet  backwards,  so  that — inside 
of  it — Nebby's  delightfully  impudent  little  nose 
received  a  bang  that  made  his  determined  blue  eyes 
water.  He  loosed  his  left  hand  from  the  ladder, 
holding  on  with  his  right,  and  tried  to  push  the  clumsy 
helmet  .forward  again  into  place. 

He  was,  as  you  will  understand,  up  to  his  knees 
in  the  water,  and  the  rung,  on  which  he  perched, 
was  slippery  with  that  pecuHar  slipperincss,  that 
wood  and  water  together  know  so  well  how  to  breed. 
One  of  Nebby's  bare   feet  slipped,   and  immediately 


40  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  other.  The  great  helmet  gave  a  prodigious 
wobble,  and  completed  the  danger ;  for  the  sudden 
strain  wrenched  his  grip  from  the  rope  between  the 
rungs.  There  was  a  muffled  little  cry  inside  the 
helmet,  and  Nebby  swung  a  small,  desperate  hand 
through  the  darkness  towards  the  ladder ;  but  it 
was  too  late  ;  he  was  falling.  There  was  a  splash  ; 
not  a  very  big  splash  for  so  big  a  boy's-heart  and 
courage  ;  and  no  one  heard  it,  or  the  little  bubbling 
squeak  that  came  out  of  the  depths  of  the  big  copper 
helmet.  And  then,  in  a  moment,  there  was  only 
the  vaguely  disturbed  surface  of  the  water,  and  the 
air-pipe  was  running  out  smoothly  and  swiftly  off  the 
drum. 


It  was  in  the  strange,  early-morning  light,  when 
the  lemon  and  gold-of-light  of  dawn  was  in  the  grey 
East,  that  Granfer  discovered  the  thing  which  had 
happened.  With  the  wakefulness  that  is  so  often 
an  asset  of  healthy  age,  he  had  turned-out  in  the 
early  hours,  to  fill  his  pipe,  and  had  discovered  that 
Nebby's  bunk  was  empty. 

He  went  swiftly  up  the  small  ladder.  On  the  deck, 
the  out-trailed  air-pipe  whispered  its  tale  in  silence, 
and  Granfer  rushed  to  it,  shouting  in  a  dreadful  voice 
for  Binny  and  Ned,  who  came  bounding  up,  sleepily, 
in  their  heavy  flannel  drawers. 

They  hauled  in  the  air-pipe,  swiftly  but  carefully  ; 
but  when  the  great  dome  of  the  helmet  came  up  to 
them,  there  was  no  Nebby  ;  only,  tangled  from  the 
thread  of  one  of  the  old-fashioned  thumb-screws, 
they  found  several  golden,  curly  strands  of  Nebby's 
hair. 


The  Sea  Horses  41 

Granfer,  his  great  muscular  hands  trcmbhng,  began 
to  get  into  his  rubber  suit,  the  two  men  helping  him, 
wordless.  Within  a  hundred  and  fifty  seconds,  he 
was  dwindling  away  down  under  the  quiet  sea  that 
spread,  all  grey  and  lemon-hued  and  utterly  calm, 
in  the  dawn.  Ned  was  turning  the  pump-handle,  and 
wiping  his  eyes  undisguisedly  from  time  to  time  with 
the  back  of  one  hairy,  disengaged  hand.  Binny,  who 
was  of  a  sterner  type,  though  no  less  warm-hearted, 
was  grimly  silent,  giving  his  whole  attention  to  the 
air-pipe  and  the  life-Hne ;  his  hand  delicate  upon 
the  line,  awaiting  the  signal.  He  could  tell  from  the 
feel  and  the  coming-up  and  going-out  of  the  pipe 
and  the  line,  that  Granfer  Zacchy  was  casting  round 
and  round,  in  ever  largening  circles  upon  the  sea- 
bottom. 

All  that  day,  Granfer  quartered  the  sea-bottom  ; 
staying  down  so  long  each  time,  that  at  last  Binny 
and  Ned  were  forced  to  remonstrate.  But  the  old 
man  turned  on  them,  and  snarled  in  a  kind  of  speech- 
less anger  and  agony  that  forced  them  to  be  silent 
and  let  him  go  his  own  gait. 

For  three  days,  Granfer  continued  his  search,  the 
sea  remaining  calm ;  but  found  nothing.  On  the 
fourth  day,  Granfer  Zacchy  was  forced  to  take  the 
barge  in  over  the  bar ;  for  t^e  wind  breezed  up  hard 
out  of  the  North,  and  blew  for  a  dreary  and  savage 
fortnight,  each  day  of  which  found  Granfer,  with 
Binny  and  Ned,  searching  the  shore  for  the  "  giving 
up  "  of  the  sea.  But  the  sea  had  one  of  its  secret 
moods,  and  gave  up  nothing. 

At  the  end  of  the  fortnight  of  heavy  weather,  it 
fell  calm,  and  they  took  the  barge  out  again,  to  start 
once  more  their  daily  work.  There  was  little  use 
now  in  searching   further  for  the  boy.     The  barge 


42  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

was  moored  again  over  the  old  spot,  and  Granfer 
descended  ;  and  the  first  thing  he  saw  in  the  grey 
half-hght  of  the  water,  was  the  Sea-Horse,  still  moored 
securely  by  the  length  of  spunyarn  to  the  rootlets  of 
heavy  weed  at  the  sea-bottom. 

The  sight  of  the  creature,  gave  old  Zacchy  a  dreadful 
feeling  ;  it  was,  at  once,  so  familiar  of  Nebby,  as  to 
give  him  the  sensation  and  unreasoning  impression 
that  the  "  b'y  "  must  be  surely  close  at  hand  ;  and 
yet,  at  the  same  time,  the  grotesque,  inanimate 
creature  was  the  visible  incarnation  of  the  Dire  Cause 
of  the  unspeakable  loneliness  and  desolation  that 
now  possessed  his  old  heart  so  utterly.  He  glared 
at  it,  through  the  thick  glass  of  his  helmet,  and  half 
raised  his  axe  to  strike  at  it.  Then,  with  a  sudden 
revulsion,  he  reached  out,  and  pulled  the  silent  go- 
horse  to  him,  and  hugged  it  madly,  as  if,  indeed,  it 
were  the  boy  himself. 

Presently,  old  Granfer  Zacchy  grew  calmer,  and 
turned  to  his  work  ;  3^et  a  hundred  times,  he  would 
find  himself  staring  round  in  the  watery  twilight 
towards  it— staring  eagerly  and  unreasoningly,  and 
actually  listening,  inside  his  helmet,  for  sounds  that 
the  eternal  silence  of  the  sea  might  never  bring 
through  its  dumb  waters,  that  are  Barriers  of  Silence 
about  the  lonesome  diver  in  the  strange  underworld 
of  the  waters.  And  then,  reahsing  freshly  that 
there  was  no  longer  One  who  might  make  the  so- 
craved-f  or 'sounds,  Granfer  would  turn  again,  grey- 
souled  and  lonely,  to  his  work.  Yet,  in  a  while,  he 
would  be  staring  and  listening  once  more. 

In  the  course  of  days,  old  Zacchy  grew  calmer  and 
more  resigned  ;  yet  he  kept  the  motionless  Sea-Horse 
tethered,  in  the  quiet  twilight  of  the  water,  to  the 
weed-rootlets    at    the    sea-bottom.    And   more    and 


The  Sea  Horses  43 

more,  he  grew  to  staring  round  at  it  ;  and  less  and 
less  did  it  seem  a  futile  or  an  unreasonable  thing  to  do. 

In  weeks,  the  habit  grew  to  such  an  extent,  that 
he  had  ceased  to  be  aware  of  it.  He  prolonged  his 
hours  under  water,  out  of  all  reason,  so  far  as  his 
health  was  concerned  ;  and  turned  queerly  "  dour  " 
when  Ned  and  Binny  remonstrated  with  him,  warning 
him  not  to  stay  down  so  long,  or  he  would  certainly 
have  to  pay  the  usual  penalty. 

Only  once  did  Granfer  say  a  word  in  explanation, 
and  then  it  was  obviously  an  unintentional  remark, 
jerked  out  of  him  by  the  intensity  of  his  feelings  : — 

"  Like  as  I  feel  'm  nigh  me,  w'en  I'm  below,"  he 
had  muttered,  in  a  half  coherent  fashion.  And  the 
two  men  understood ;  for  it  was  just  what  they  had 
vaguely  supposed.  They  had  no  reply  to  make  ;  and 
the  matter  dropped. 

Generally  now,  on  descending  each  morning,  Granfer 
would  stop  near  the  Sea-Horse,  and  "  look  it  over." 
Once,  he  discovered  that  the  bonito-tail  had  come 
unglued  ;  but  this  he  remedied  neatly,  by  lashing  it 
firmly  into  position  with  a  length  of  roping-twine. 
Sometimes,  he  would  pat  the  head  of  the  horse,  with 
one  great  hand,  and  mutter  a  quite  unconscious  : — 
"  Whoa,  mare  !  "  as  it  bobbed  silently  under  his  touch. 
Occasionally,  as  he  swayed  heavily  past  it,  in  his 
clumsy  dress, ,  the  slight  swirl  of  the  water  in  his 
"  wake  "  would  make  the  Horse  slue  round  uncannily 
towards  him  ;  and  thereafter,  it  would  swing  and 
oscillate  for  a  brief  time,  slowly  back  into  quietness  ; 
the  while  that  Granfer  would  stand  and  watch  it, 
unconsciously  straining  his  ears,  in  that  place  of 
no-sound. 

Two  months  passed  in  this  way,  and  Granfer  was 
vaguely  aware  that  his  health  was  failing  ;    but  the 


44  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

knowledge  brought  no  fear  to  him  ;  only  the  begin- 
nings of  an  indefinite  contentment — a  feeling  that 
maybe  he  would  be  "  soon  seein'  Nebby."  Yet  the 
thought  was  never  definitely  conscious  ;  nor  ever,  of 
course,  in  any  form,  phrased.  Yet  it  had  its  effect, 
in  the  vague  contentment  which  I  have  hinted  at, 
which  brought  a  new  sense  of  ease  round  Granfer's 
heart  ;  so  that,  one  day,  as  he  worked,  he  found  him- 
self crooning  unconsciously  the  old  Ballade  of  the 
Sea  Horses. 

He  stopped  on  the  instant,  all  an  ache  with  memory  ; 
then  turned  and  peered  towards  the  Sea-Horse,  which 
loomed,  a  vague  shadow,  silent  in  the  still  water. 
It  had  seemed  to  him,  in  that  moment,  that  he  had 
heard  a  subtile  echo  of  his  crooned  song,  in  the  quiet 
deeps  around  him.  Yet,  he  saw  nothing,  and  presently 
assured  himself  that  he  heard  nothing  ;  and  so  came 
round  again  upon  his  work. 

A  number  of  times  in  the  early  part  of  that  day, 
old  Granfer  caught  himself  crooning  the  old  Ballade, 
and  each  time  he  shut  his  lips  fiercely  on  the  sound, 
because  of  the  ache  of  memory  that  the  old  song  bred 
in  him  ;  but,  presently,  all  was  forgotten  in  an  intense 
listening  ;  for,  abruptly,  old  Zacchy  was  sure  that 
he  heard  the  song,  coming  from  somewhere  out  of 
the  eternal  twilight  of  the  waters.  He  slued  himself 
round,  trembUng,  and  stared  towards  the  Sea-Horse  ; 
but  there  was  nothing  new  to  be  seen,  neither  was  he 
any  more  sure  that  he  had  ever  heard  anything. 

Several  times  this  happened,  and  on  each  occasion 
Granfer  would  heave  himself  round  ponderously  in 
the  water,  and  listen  with  an  intensity  that  had  in  it, 
presently,  something  of  desperateness. 

In  the  late  afternoon  of  that  day,  Granfer  again 
heard    something ;     but    refused    now   to    credit    his 


The  Sea  Horses  45 

hearing,  and  continued  grimly  at  work.  And  then, 
suddenly,  there  was  no  longer  any  room  for  doubt 
...  a  shrill,  sweet  child's  voice  was  singing,  some- 
where among  the  grey  twilights  far  to  his  back.  He 
heard  it  with  astounding  clearness,  helmet  and  sur- 
rounding water  notwithstanding.  It  was  a  sound, 
indeed,  that  he  would  have  heard  through  all  the 
Mountains  of  Eternity.  He  stared  round,  shaking 
violently. 

The  sound  appeared  to  come  from  the  greyness  that 
dwelt  away  beyond  a  little  wood  of  submarine  growths, 
that  trailed  up  their  roots,  so  hushed  and  noiseless, 
out  of  a  near-by  vale  in  the  sea-bottom. 

As  Granfer  stared,  everything  about  him  darkened 
into  a  wonderful  and  rather  dreadful  Blackness. 
This  passed,  and  he  was  able  to  see  again  ;  but  some- 
how, as  it  might  be  said,  newly.  The  shrill,  sweet, 
childish  singing  had  ceased  ;  but  there  was  something 
beside  the  Sea-Horse  ...  a  little,  -  agile  figure,  that 
caused  the  Sea-Horse  to  bob  and  bound  at  its  moor- 
ings. And,  suddenly,  the  little  figure  was  astride  the 
Sea-Horse,  and  the  Horse  was  free,  and  two  twinkhng 
legs  urged  it  across  the  sea-bottom  towards  Granfer. 

Granfer  thought  that  he  stood  up,  and  ran  to  meet 
the  boy  ;  but  Nebby  dodged  him,  the  Sea-Horse  cur- 
vetting magnificently  ;  and  immediately  Nebby  began 
to  gallop  round  and  round  Granfer,  singing  : — 

"  An'  we's  under  the  sea,  b'ys. 
Where  the  Wild  Horses  go. 

Horses  wiv  tails 

As  big  as  ole  whales 
All  jiggin'  around  in  a  row. 
An'  when  you  ses  Whoa  1 
Them  debbils  dues  go  i  " 

The  voice  of  the  blue-eyed  mite  was  ineffably 
gleeful ;  and,  abruptly,  tremendous  youth  invaded 
Granfer,  and  a  glee  beyond  all  understanding. 


46  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 


On  the  deck  of  the  barge,  Ned  and  Binny  were  in 
great  doubt  and  trouble.  The  weather  had  been 
growing  heavy  and  threatening,  during  all  the  late 
afternoon ;  and  now  it  was  culminating  in  a  tre- 
mendous, black  squall,  which  was  coming  swiftly 
down  upon  them. 

Time  after  time,  Binny  had  attempted  to  signal 
Grant cr  Zacchy  to  come  up  ;  but  Grant er  had  taken 
a  turn  with  his  life-line  round  a  hump  of  rock  that 
protruded  out  of  the  sea-bottom  ;  so  that  Binny  was 
powerless  to  do  aught  ;  for  there  was  no  second  set 
of  diving  gear  aboard. 

All  that  the  two  men  could  do,  was  to  wait,  in 
deep  anxiety,  keeping  the  pump  going  steadily,  and 
standing-by'for  the  signal  that  was  never  to  come; 
for  by  that  time,  old  Granfer  Zacchy  was  sitting  very 
quiet  and  huddled  against  the  rock,  round  which  he 
had  hitched  his  line  to  prevent  Binny  from  signalling 
him,  as  Binny  had  become  prone  to  do,  when  Granfer 
stayed  below,  out  of  all  reason  and  wisdom. 

And  all  the  time,  Ned  kept  the  un-needed  pump 
going,  and  far  down  in  the  grey  depth,  the  air  came 
out  in  a  continual  series  of  bubbles,  around  the  big 
copper  helmet.  But  Granfer  was  breathing  an  air 
of  celestial  sweetness,  all  unwotting  and  un-needing 
of  the  air  that  Ned  laboured  faithfully  to  send  to 
him. 

The  squall  came  down  in  a  fierce  haze  of  rain  and 
foam,  and  the  ungainly  old  craft  swung  round,  jibbing 
heavily  at  her  kedge-rope,  which  gave  out  a  little 
twanging  sound,  that  was  lost  in  the  roar  of  the  wind. 
The  unheard  twanging  of  the  rope,  ended  suddenly 


The  Sea  Horses  47 

in  a  dull  thud,  as  it  parted  ;  and  the  bluff  old  barge 
fell  off,  broadside  on  to  the  weight  of  the  squall.  She 
drifted  with  astonishing  rapidity,  and  the  life-line 
and  the  air-pipe  flew  out,  with  a  buzz  of  the  unwinding 
drums,  and  parted,  with  two  differently  toned  reports, 
that' were  plain  in  an  instant's  lull  in  the  roaring  of 
the  squall. 

Binny  had  run  forrard  to  the  bows,  to  try  to  get 
over  another  kedge  ;  but  now  he  came  racing  aft 
again,  shouting.  Ned  still  pumped  on  mechanically, 
with  a  look  of  dull,  stunned  horror  in  his  eyes  ;  the 
pump  driving  a  useless  jet  of  air  through  the  broken 
remnant  of  the  air-pipe.  Already,  the  barge  was  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  to  leeward  of  the  diving-ground, 
and  the  men  could  do  no  more  than  hoist  the  foresail, 
and  try  to  head  her  in  safely  over  the  bar,  which  was 
now  right  under  their  lee. 

Down  in  the  sea,  old  Granfer  Zacchy  had  altered 
his  position  ;  the  jerk  upon  the  air-pipe  had  done 
that.  But  Granfer  was  well  enough  content  ;  not 
only  for  the  moment ;  but  for  Eternity  ;  for  as  Nebby 
rode  so  gleefully  round  and  round  him,  there  had 
come  a  change  in  all  things  ;  there  were  strange  and 
subtile  lights  in  all  the  grey  twilights  of  the  deep, 
that  seemed  to  lead  away  and  away  into  stupendous 
and  infinitely  beautiful  distances. 

"  Is  you  listenin',  Granfer  ?  "  Old  Zacchy  heard 
Nebby  say  ;  and  discovered  suddenly  that  Nebby 
was  insisting  that  he  should  race  him  across  the 
strangely  glorified  twilights,  that  bounded  them  now 
eternally. 

"  Sure,  b'y,"  said  Granfer  Zacchy,  undismayed ; 
and  Nebby  wheeled  his  charger. 

"  Gee-Up  !  "  shouted  Nebby,  excitedly,  and  his 
small   legs   began   to   twinkle   ahead   in   magnificent 


48  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

fashion ;  with  Granfer  running  a  cheerful  and 
dehberate  second. 

And  so  passed  Granfer  Zacchy  and  Nebby  into 
the  Land  where  httle  boys  may  ride  Sea-Horses  for 
ever,  and  where  Parting  becomes  one  of  the  Lost 
Sorrows. 

And  Nebby  led  the  way  at  a  splendid  gallop ; 
maybe,  for  all  that  I  have  any  right  to  know,  to  the 
very  Throne  of  the  Almighty,  singing,  shrill  and 
sweet  : — 

"  An'  we's  under  the  sea,  b'ys. 
Where  the  Wild  Horses  go. 

Horses  wiv  tails 

As  big  as  ole  whales 
All  jiggin'  around  in  a  row. 
An'  when  you  ses  Whoa  ! 
Them  debbils  does  go  !  " 

And  overhead  (was  it  oyily  a  dozen  fathoms  !) 
there  rushed  the  white-maned  horses  of  the  sea,  mad 
with  the  glory  of  the  storm,  and  tossing  ruthless 
from  crest  to  crest,  a  wooden  go-horse,  from  which 
trailed  a  length  of  broken  spunyarn. 


THE  DERELICT 

"  It's  the  Material,"  said  the  old  ship's  doctor.  .  .  . 
"  The  Material,  plus  the  Conditions  ;  and,  maybe," 
he  added  slowly,  "  a  third  factor — yes,  a  third  factor  ; 
but  there,  there.  ..."  He  broke  off  his  half- 
meditative  sentence,  and  began  to  charge  his  pipe. 

"  Go  on.  Doctor,"  we  said,  encouragingly,  and 
with  more  than  a  little  expectancy.  We  were  in  the 
smoke-room  of  the  Sand-a-lea,  running  across  the 
North  Atlantic  ;  and  the  Doctor  was  a  character. 
He  concluded  the  charging  of  his  pipe,  and  lit  it ; 
then  settled  himself,  and  began  to  express  himself 
more  fully  : — 

"  The  Material,"  he  said,  with  conviction,  "  is 
inevitably  the  medium  of  expression  of  the  Life-Force 
— the  fulcrum,  as  it  were  ;  lacking  which,  it  is  unable 
to  exert  itself,  or,  indeed,  to  express  itself  in  any  form 
or  fashion  that  would  be  intelligible  or  evident  to  us. 

"  So  potent  is  the  share  of  the  Material  in  the  pro- 
duction of  that  tiling  which  we  name  Life,  and  so 
eager  the  Life-Force  to  express  itself,  that  I  am  con- 
vinced it  would,  if  given  the  right  Conditions,  make 
itself  manifest  even  through  so  hopeless-seeming  a 
medium  as  a  simple  block  of  sawn  wood  ;  for  I  tell 
you,  gentlemen,  the  Life-Force  is  both  as  fiercely 
urgent  and  as  indiscriminate  as  Fire — the  Destructor  ; 
yet  which  some  are  now  growing  to  consider  the  very 

49 


50  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

essence  of  Life  rampant.  .  .  .  There  is  a  quaint 
seeming  paradox  there,"  he  concluded,  nodding  his 
old  grey  head. 

"  Yes,  Doctor,"  I  said.  "  In  brief,  your  argument 
is  that  Life  is  a  thing,  state,  fact,  or  element,  call-it- 
what-you-like,  which  requires  the  Material  through 
which  to  manifest  itself,  and  that  given  the  Material, 
plus  the  Conditions,  the  result  is  Life.  In  other 
words,  that  Life  is  an  evolved  product,  manifested 
through  Matter  and  bred  of  Conditions — eh  ?  " 

"  As  we  understand  the  word,"  said  the  old  Doctor. 
"  Though,  mind  you,  there  may  be  a  third  factor. 
But,  in  my  heart,  I  believe  that  it  is  a  matter  of 
chemistry  ;  Conditions  and  a  suitable  medium  ;  but 
given  the  Conditions,  the  Brute  is  so  almighty  that 
it  will  seize  upon  anything  through  which  to  manifest 
itself.  It  is  a  Force  generated  by  Conditions  ;  but 
nevertheless  this  does  not  bring  us  one  iota  nearer  to 
its  explanation,  any  more  than  to  the  explanation  of 
Electricity  or  Fire.  They  are,  all  three,  of  the  Outer 
Forces — Monsters  of  the  Void.  Nothing  we  can  do 
will  create  any  one  of  them  ;  our  power  is  merely  to  be 
able,  by  providing  the  Conditions,  to  make  each  one 
of  them  manifest  to  our  physical  senses.  Am  I 
clear  ?  " 

"  Yes,  Doctor,  in  a  way  you  are,"  I  said.  "  But 
I  don't  agree  with  you  ;  though  I  think  I  under- 
stand you.  Electricity  and  Fire  are  both  what  I 
might  call  natural  things  ;  but  Life  is  an.  abstract 
something— a  kind  of  all-permeating  Wakefulness. 
Oh,  I  can't  explain  it  ;  who  could  !  But  it's  spiritual ; 
not  just  a  thing  bred  out  of  a  Condition,  like  Fire,  as 
you  say,  or  Electricity.  It's  a  horrible  thought  of 
yours.     Life's  a  kind  of  spiritual  mystery  .  .  .  ." 

"  Easy,  my  boy  !  "  said  the  old  Doctor,    laughing 


The  Derelict  51 

gently  to  himself ;  "or  else  1  may  be  asking  you  to 
demonstrate  the  spiritual  mystery  of  life  of  the  limpet, 
or  the  crab,  shall  we  say." 

He  grinned  at  me,  with  ineffable  perverseness. 
"  Anyway,"  he  continued,  "  as  I  suppose  you've  all 
guessed,  I've  a  yarn  to  tell  you  in  support  of  my 
impression  that  Life  is  no  more  a  mystery  or  a  miracle 
than  Fire  or  Electricity.  But,  please  to  remember, 
gentlemen,  that  because  we've  succeeded  in  naming 
and  making  good  use  of  these  two  Forces,  they're 
just  as  much  mysteries,  fundamentally,  as  ever. 
And,  anyway,  the  thing  I'm  going  to  tell  you,  won't 
explain  the  mystery  of  Life  ;  but  only  give  you  one 
of  my  pegs  on  which  I  hang  my  feeling  that  Life  is,  as 
I  have  said,  a  Force  made  manifest  through  Con- 
ditions (that  is  to  say,  natural  Chemistry),  and  that  it 
can  take  for  its  purpose  and  Need,  the  most  incredible 
and  unlikely  Matter  ;  for  without  Matter,  it  cannot 
come  into  existence — it  cannot  become  manifest.  ,  .  ." 

"  I  don't  agree  with  you,  Doctor,"  I  interrupted. 
"  Your  theory  would  destroy  all  belief  in  life  after 
de?.th.     It  would.  .  .  ." 

"Hush,  sonny,"  said  the  old  man,  with  a  quiet 
little  smile  of  comprehension.  "  Hark  to  what  I've 
to  say  first  ;  and,  anyway,  what  objection  have  you 
to  material  life,  after  death  ;  and  if  you  object  to 
a  material  framework,  I  would  still  have  you  remember 
that  I  am  speaking  of  Life,  as  we  understand  the  word 
in  this  our  life.  Now  do  be  a  quiet  lad,  or  I'll  never 
be  done : — 

"  It  was  when  I  was  a  young  man,  and  that  is  a 
good  many  years  ago,  gentlemen.  I  had  passed  my 
examinations  ;  but  was  so  run  down  with  overwork, 
that  it  was  decided  that  I  had  better  take  a  trip  to 
sea.     I  was  by  no  means  well  off,  and  very  glad,  in 


52  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  end,  to  secure  a  nominal  post  as  Doctor  in  a  sailing 
passenger-clipper,  running  out  to  China. 

"  The  name  of  the  ship  was  the  Bheotptc,  and  soon 
after  I  had  got  all  my  gear  aboard,  she  cast  off,  and 
we  dropped  down  the  Thames,  and  next  day  were  well 
away  out  in  the  Channel. 

"  The  Captain's  name  was  Gannington,  a  very 
decent  man  ;  though  quite  illiterate.  The  First 
Mate,  Mr.  Berlies,  was  a  quiet,  sternish,  reserved  man, 
very  well-read.  The  Second  Mate,  Mr.  Selvern,  was, 
perhaps,  by  birth  and  upbringing,  the  most  socially 
cultured  of  the  three  ;  but  he  lacked  the  stamina 
and  indomitable  pluck  of  the  two  others.  He  was 
more  of  a  sensitive ;  and  emotionally  and  even 
mentally,  the  most  alert  man  of  the  three. 

"  On  our  way  out,  we  called  at  Madagascar,  where 
we  landed  some  of  our  passengers  ;  then  we  ran 
Eastward,  meaning  to  call  at  North  West  Cape  ;  but 
about  a  hundred  degrees  East,  we  encountered  very 
dreadful  weather,  which  carried  away  all  our  sails 
and  sprung  the  jibboom  and  fore  t 'gallant  mast. 

"  The  storm  carried  us  Northward  for  several 
hundred  miles,  and  when  it  dropped  us  finally,  we 
found  ourselves  in  a  very  bad  state.  The  ship  had 
been  strained,  and  had  taken  some  three  feet  of 
water  through  her  seams  ;  the  main  top-mast  had 
been  sprung,  in  addition  to  the  jibboom  and  fore 
t'gallant  mast ;  two  of  our  boats  had  gone,  as  also 
one  of  the  pigsties  (with  three  fine  pigs),  this  latter 
having  been  washed  overboard  but  some  half  hour 
before  the  wind  began  to  ease,  which  it  did  quickly  ; 
though  a  very  ugly  sea  ran  for  some  hours  after. 

"  The  wind  left  us  just  before  dark,  and  when 
morning  came,  it  brought  splendid  weather ;  a  calm, 
mildly  undulating  sea,  and  a  brilliant  sun,  with  no 


"  < 


The  Derelict  53 

wind.  It  showed  us  also  that  we  were  not  alone  ; 
for  about  two  miles  away  to  the  Westward,  was 
another  vessel,  which  Mr,  Selvern,  the  Second  Mate, 
pointed  out  to  me. 

That's  a  pretty  rum  looking  packet.  Doctor,' 
he  said,  and  handed  me  his  glass.  I  looked  through 
it,  at  the  other  vessel,  and  saw  what  he  meant  ;  at 
least,  I  thought  I  did. 

Yes,  Mr,  Selvern,'  I  said,  .'  she's  got  a  pretty 
old-fashioned  look  about  her.' 

He  laughed  at  me,  in  his  pleasant  way. 

It's  easy  to  see  you're  not  a  sailor,  Doctor,'  he 
remarked.  '  There's  a  dozen  rum  things  about  her. 
She's  a  derehct,  and  has  been  floating  round,  by  the 
look  of  her,  for  many  a  score  of  years.  Look  at  the 
shape  of  her  counter,  and  the  bows  and  cut-water. 
She's  as  old  as  the  hills,  as  you  might  say,  and  ought 
to  have  gone  down  to  Davy  Jones  a  long  time  ago. 
Look  at  the  growths  on  her,  and  the  thickness  of 
her  standing  rigging  ;  that's  all  salt  encrustations, 
I  fancy,  if  you  notice  the  white  colour.  She's  been 
a  small  barque  ;  but  don't  you  see  she's  not  a  yard 
left  aloft.  They've  all  dropped  out  of  the  slings  ; 
everything  rotted  away  ;  wonder  the  standing  rigging 
hasn't  gone  too.  I  wish  the  Old  Man  would  let  us 
take  the  boat,  and  have  a  look  at  her ;  she'd  be  well 
worth  it.' 

"  There  seemed  little  chance,  however,  of  this  ;  for 
all  hands  were  turned-to  and  kept  hard  at  it  all  day 
long,  repairing  the  damage  to  the  masts  and  gear, 
and  this  took  a  long  while,  as  you  may  think.  Part 
of  the  time,  I  gave  a  hand,  heaving  on  one  of  the 
deck-capstans ;  for  the  exercise  was  good  for  my 
liver.  Old  Captain  Gannington  approved,  and  I 
persuaded  him  to  come  along  and  try  some  of  the 


54  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

same   medicine,   which  he   did  ;    and  we  grew  very 
chummy  over  the  job. 

"  We  got  talking  about  the  derehct,  and  he  remarked 
how  lucky  we  were  not  to  have  run  full  tilt  on  to  her, 
in  the  darkness  ;  for  she  lay  right  away  to  leeward 
of  us,  according  to  the  way  that  we  had  been  drifting 
in  the  storm.  He  also  was  of  the  opinion  that  she 
had  a  strange  look  about  her,  and  that  she  was 
pretty  old  ;  but  on  this  latter  point,  he  plainly  had 
far  less  knowledge  than  the  Second  Mate  ;  for  he  was, 
as  I  have  said,  an  illiterate  man,  and  knew  nothing 
of  sea-craft,  beyond  what  experience  had  taught  him. 
He  lacked  the  book-knowledge  which  the  Second 
Mate  had,  of  vessels  previous  to  his  day,  which  it 
appeared  the  derelict  was. 

She's  an  old  'un,  Doctor,'  was  the  extent  of 
his  observations  in  this  direction. 

"  Yet,  when  I  mentioned  to  him  that  it  would 
be  interesting  to  go  aboard,  and  give  her  a  bit  of 
an  overhaul,  he  nodded  his  head,  as  if  the  idea  had 
been  already  in  his  mind,  and  accorded  with  his 
own  inclinations. 

Wlicn  the  work's  over.  Doctor,'  he  said.  '  Can't 
spare  the  men  now,  ye  know.  Got  to  get  all  ship- 
shape an'  ready  as  smart  as  we  can.  But  we'll  take 
my  gig,  an'  go  off  in  the  Second  Dog  Watch.  The 
glass  is  steady,  an'  it'll  be  a  bit  of  gam  for  us.' 

"  That  evening,  after  tea,  the  captain  gave  orders 
to  clear  the  gig  and  get  her  overboard.  Tlie  Second 
Mate  was  to  come  with  us,  and  the  Skipper  gave 
him  word  to  see  that  two  or  three  lamps  were  put 
into  the  boat,  as  it  would  soon  fall  dark.  A  little 
later,  we  were  pulling  across  the  calmness  of  the 
sea,  with  a  crew  of  six  at  the  oars,  and  making  very 
good  speed  of  it. 


The  Derelict  55 

"  Now,  gentlemen,  I  have  detailed  to  you  with 
great  exactness,  all  the  facts,  both  big  and  little, 
so  that  you  can  follow  step  by  step  each  incident 
in  this  extraordinary  affair  ;  and  I  want  you  now  to 
pay  the  closest  attention. 

"  I  was  sitting  in  the  stem-sheets,  with  the  Second 
Mate,  and  the  Captain,  who  was  steering  ;  and  as  we 
drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  stranger,  I  studied 
her  with  an  ever  growing  attention,  as,  indeed,  did 
Captain  Gannington  and  the  Second  Mate.  She 
was,  as  3'OU  know,  to  the  Westward  of  us,  and  the 
sunset  was  making  a  great  flame  of  red  light  to  the 
back  of  her,  so  that  she  showed  a  little  blurred  and 
indistinct,  by  reason  of  the  halation  of  the  light, 
which  almost  defeated  the  eye  in  any  attempt  to 
see  her  rotting  spars  and  standing-rigging,  submerged 
as  they  were  in  the  fiery  glory  of  the  sunset. 

"  It  was  because  of  this  effect  of  the  sunset,  that 
we  had  come  quite  close,  comparatively,  to  the 
derelict,  before  we  sav/  that  she  was  all  surrounded 
by  a  sort  of  curious  scum,  the  colour  of  which  was 
difficult  to  decide  upon,  by  reason  of  the  red  light 
that  was  in  the  atmosphere  ;  but  which  afterwards 
we  discovered  to  be  brown.  This  scum  spread  all 
about  the  old  vessel  for  many  hundreds  of  yards, 
in  a  huge,  irregular  patch,  a  great  stretch  of  which 
reached  out  to  the  Eastward,  upon  our  starboard 
side,  some  score,  or  so,  fathoms  away. 

"  '  Queer  stuff,'  said  Captain  Gannington,  leaning 
to  the  side,  and  looking  over.  '  Something  in  the 
cargo  as  'as  gone  rotten  an'  worked  out  through 
'er  seams.' 

"  '  Look  at  her  bows  and  stern,'  said  the  Second 
Mate  ;   '  just  look  at  the  growth  on  her.' 

"  There  were,  as  he  said,  great  dumpings  of  strange- 


56  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

looking  sea-fungi  under  the  bows  and  the  short 
counter  astern.  From  the  stump  of  her  jibboom 
and  her  cutwater,  great  beards  of  rime  and  marine- 
growths  hung  down^^•ard  into  the  scum  that  lield 
her  in.  Her  blank  starboard  side  was  presented  to 
us,  all  a  dead,  dirt^dsh  white,  streaked  and  mottled 
vaguely  with  dull  masses  of  heavier  colour. 

"  '  There's  a  steam  or  haze  rising  off  her,'  said 
the  Second  Mate,  speaking  again  ;  '  you  can  see  it 
against  the  light.     It  keeps  coming  and  going.     Look  !  ' 

"  I  saw  then  what  he  meant — a  faint  haze  or  steam, 
either  suspended  above  the  old  vessel,  or  rising  from 
her  ;   and  Captain  Gannington  saw  it  also  : — 

"  '  Spontaneous  combustion  !  '  he  exclaimed.  '  We'll 
'ave  to  watch  w'en  we  lift  the  'atches ;  'nless 
it's  some  poor  devil  that's  got  aboard  of  'er  ;  but 
that  ain't  Hkely.' 

"  We  were  now  within  a  couple  of  hundred  yards 
of  the  old  derehct,  and  had  entered  into  the  brown 
scum.  As  it  poured  off  the  lifted  oars,  I  heard  one 
of  the  men  mutter  to  himself : — '  dam  treacle  !  ' 
and,  indeed,  it  was  something  like  it.  As  the  boat 
continued  to  forge  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  old  ship, 
the  scum  grew  thicker  and  thicker  ;  so  that,  at  last, 
it  perceptibly  slowed  us. 

"  '  Give  way,  lads  !  Put  some  beef  to  it  !  '  sung 
out  Captain  Gannington  ;  and  thereafter  there  was 
no  sound,  except  the  panting  of  the  men,  and  the 
faint,  reiterated  suck,  suck,  of  the  sullen  brown 
scum  upon  the  oars,  as  the  boat  was  forced  ahead. 
As  we  went,  I  was  conscious  of  a  peculiar  smell  in 
the  evening  air,  and  whilst  I  had  no  doubt  that  the 
puddling  of  the  scum,  by  the  oars,  made  it  rise,  I 
felt  that  in  some  way,  it  was  vaguely  familiar ;  yet 
I  could  give  it  no  name. 


The  Derelict  57 

"  We  were  now  very  close  to  the  old  vessel,  and 
presently  she  was  high  above  us,  against  the  dying 
light.  The  Captain  called  out  then  to  : — '  in  with 
the  bow  oars,  and  stand-by  with  the  boat-hook,' 
which  was  done. 

"  '  Aboard  there  !  Ahoy  !  Aboard  there  !  Ahoy  !  ' 
shouted  Captain  Gannington ;  but  there  came  no 
answer,  only  the  flat  sound  of  his  voice  going  lost 
into  the  open  sea,  each  time  he  sung  out. 

"  '  Ahoy  !  Aboard  there  !  Ahoy  !  '  he  shouted, 
time  after  time  ;  but  there  was  only  the  weary  silence 
of  the  old  hulk  that  answered  us ;  and,  somehow 
as  he  shouted,  the  while  that  I  stared  up  half  ex- 
pectantly at  her,  a  queer  little  sense  of  oppression, 
that  amounted  almost  to  nervousness,  came  upon  me. 
It  passed ;  but  I  remember  how  I  was  suddenly 
aware  that  it  was  growing  dark.  Darkness  comes 
fairly  rapidly  in  the  tropics  ;  though  not  so  quickly 
as  many  fiction-writers  seem  to  think  ;  but  it  was  not 
that  the  coming  dusk  had  perceptibly  deepened  in 
that  brief  time,  of  only  a  few  moments,  but  rather 
that  my  nerves  had  made  me  suddenly  a  Httle  hyper- 
sensitive. I  mention  my  state  particularly ;  for  I 
am  not  a  nervy  man,  normally ;  and  my  abrupt 
touch  of  nerves  is  significant,  in  the  light  of  what 
happened. 

"  '  There's  no  one  aboard  there  !  '  said  Captain 
Gannington.  '  Give  way,  men !  '  For  the  boat's 
crew  had  instinctively  rested  on  their  oars,  as  the 
Captain  hailed  the  old  craft.  The  men  gave  way 
again ;  and  then  the  Second  Mate  called  out  ex- 
citedly : — '  Why,  look  there,  there's  our  pigsty  ! 
See,  it.'s  got  Bheotpte  painted  on  the  end.  It's  drifted 
down  here,  and  the  scum's  caught  it.  What  a 
blessed  wonder  ! ' 


58  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  It  was,  as  he  had  said,  our  pigsty  that  had  been 
washed  overboard  in  the  storm ;  and  most  extra- 
ordinary to  come  across  it  there. 

We'll  tow  it  off  with  us,  when  we  go,'  remarked 
the  Captain,  and  shouted  to  the  crew  to  get-down 'to 
their  oars ;  for  they  were  hardly  moving  the  boat, 
because  the  scum  was  so  thick,  close  in  around  the 
old  ship,  that  it  literally  clogged  the  boat  from  going 
ahead.  I  remember  that  it  struck  me,  in  a  half- 
conscious  sort  of  way,  as  curious  that  the  pigsty, 
containing  our  three  dead  pigs,  had  managed  to 
drift  in  so  far,  unaided,  whilst  we  could  scarcely 
manage  to  force  the  boat  in,  now  that  we  had  come 
right  into  the  scum.  But  the  thought  passed  from 
my  mind  ;  for  so  many  things  happened  within  the 
next  few  minutes. 

"  The  men  managed  to  bring  the  boat  in  alongside, 
within  a  couple  of  feet  of  the  derelict,  and  the  man 
with  the  boat-hook,  hooked  on. 

'Ave  ye  got  'old  there,  forrard  ?  '  asked  Captain 
Gannington. 

Yessir  !  '  said  the  bow-man  ;  and  as  he  spoke, 
there  came  a  queer  noise  of  tearing. 

"  '  Wliat's  that  ?  '  asked  the  Captain.     ' 

It's  tore,  Sir.  Tore  clean  away  !  '  said  the  man ; 
and  his  tone  showed  that  he  had  received  something 
of  a  shock. 

Get  a  hold  again  then  !  '  said  Captain  Gan- 
nington, irritably.  '  You  don't  s'pose  this  packet 
was  built  yesterday  !  Shove  the  hook  into  the  main 
chains.'  Tlie  man  did  so,  gingerly,  as  you  might 
say ;  for  it  seemed  to  me,  in  the  growing  dusk,  that 
he  put  no  strain  on  to  the  hook  ;  though,  of  course, 
there  was  no  need;  you  see,  the  boat  could  not 
go  very  far,  of  herself,  in  the  stuff  in  which  she  was 


The  Derelict  59 

embedded.  I  remember  thinking  this,  also,  as  I  looked 
up  at  the  bulging  side  of  the  old  vessel.  Then  I  heard 
Captain  Gannington's  voice  : — 

" '  Lord !  but  she's  old !  An'  what  a  colour, 
Doctor  !  She  don't  half  want  paint,  do  she  !  .  .  . 
Now  then,  somebody,  one  of  them  oars.' 

"  An  oar  was  passed  to  him,  and  he  leant  it  up 
against  the  ancient,  bulging  side  ;  then  he  paused, 
and  called  to  the  Second  Mate  to  light  a  couple  of 
the  lamps,  and  stand-by  to  pass  them  up  ;  for  dark- 
ness had  settled  down  now  upon  the  sea. 

"  The  Second  Mate  lit  two  of  the  lamps,  and  told 
one  of  the  men  to  light  a  third,  and  keep  it  handy 
m  the  boat ;  then  he  stepped  across,  with  a  lamp  in 
each  hand,  to  where  Captain  Gannington  stood  by 
the  oar  against  the  side  of  the  ship. 

"  '  Now,  my  lad,'  said  the  Captain,  to  the  man  who 
had  pulled  stroke,  '  up  with  you,  an'  we'll  pass  ye 
up  the  lamps.' 

"  The  man  jumped  to  obey ;  caught  the  oar,  and 
put  his  weight  upon  it,  and  as  he  did  so,  something 
seemed  to  give  a  little. 

"  '  Look  !  '  cried  out  the  Second  Mate,  and  pointed, 
lamp  in  hand  .  .  .  '  It's  sunk  in  !  ' 

"  This  was  true.  The  oar  had  made  quite  an 
indentation  into  the  bulging,  somewhat  slimy  side 
of  the  old  vessel. 

"  '  Mould,  I  reckon,'  said  Captain  Gannington,  bend- 
ing towards  the  derelict,  to  look.     Then,  to  the  man  : — 

"  '  Up  you  go,  my  lad,  and  be  smart.  .  .  .  Don't 
stand  there  waitin'  !  ' 

"  At  that,  the  man,  who  had  paused  a  moment  as 
he  felt  the  oar  give  beneath  his  weight,  began  to  shin 
up,  and  in  a  few  seconds  he  was  aboard,  and  leant 
out  over  the  rail  for  the  lamps.     These  were  passed 


60  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

up  to  him,  and  the  Captain  called  to  him  to  steady 
the  oar.  Then  Captain  Gannington  went,  calling 
to  me  to  follow,  and  after  me  the  Second  Mate. 

"  As  the  Captain  put  his  face  over  the  rail,  he 
gave  a  cry  of  astonishment  : — 

"  '  Mould,  by  gum  !  Mould.  .  .  .  Tons  of  it  !  .  .  . 
Good  Lord  !  ' 

"  As  I  heard  him  shout  that,  I  scrambled  the  more 
eagerly  after  him,   and  in  a  moment  or  two,   I  was 

able    to    see    what    he    meant Everywhere    that 

the  light  from  the  two  lamps  struck,  there  was  nothing 
but  smooth  great  masses  and  surfaces  of  a  dirty- 
white  mould. 

"  I  cHmbed  over  the  rail,  v,ith  the  Second  Mate 
close  behind,  and  stood  upon  the  mould-covered 
decks.  There  might  have  been  no  planking  beneath 
the  mould,  for  all  that  our  feet  could  feel.  It  gave 
under  our  tread,  with  a  spongy,  puddingy  feel. 
It  covered  the  deck-furniture  of  the  old  ship,  so 
that  the  shape  of  each  article  and  fitment  was  often 
no  more  than  suggested  through  it. 

"  Captain  Gannington  snatched  a  lamp  from  the 
man,  and  the  Second  Mate  reached  for  the  other. 
They  held  the  lamps  high,  and  we  all  stared.  It 
was  most  extraordinary,  and,  somehow,  most 
abominable.  I  can  think  of  no  other  word,  gentle- 
men, that  so  much  describes  the  predominant  feeling 
that  affected  me  at  the  moment. 

"  '  Good  Lord  !  '  said  Captain  Gannington,  several 
times.  '  Good  Lord  !  '  But  neither  the  Second  Mate 
nor  the  man  said  anything,  and  for  my  part  I  just 
stared,  and  at  the  same  time  began  to  smell  a  little 
at  the  air ;  for  there  was  again  a  vague  odour  of 
something  half  familiar,  that  somehow  brought  to 
me  a  sense  of  half-known  fright. 


The  Derelict  61 

"  I  turned  this  way  and  that,  staring,  as  I  have 
said.  Here  and  there,  the  mould  was  so  heavy  as 
to  entirely  disguise  what  lay  beneath ;  converting 
the  deck-fittings  into  indistinguishable  mounds  of 
mould,  all  dirty-white,  and  blotched  and  veined 
with  irregular,  dull  purplish  markings. 

"  There  was  a  strange  thing  about  the  mould, 
which  Captain  Gannington  drew  attention  to — it 
was  that  our  feet  did  not  crush  into  it  and  break  the 
surface,  as  might  have  been  expected ;  but  merely 
indented  it. 

"  '  Never  seen  nothin'  hke  it  before  !  .  .  .  Never  !  ' 
said  the  Captain,  after  having  stooped  with  his  lamp 
to  examine  the  mould  under  our  feet.  He  stamped 
with  his  heel,  and  the  stuff  gave  out  a  dull,  puddingy 
sound.  He  stooped  again,  with  a  quick  movement, 
and  stared,  holding  the  lamp  close  to  the  deck.  '  Blest, 
if  it  ain't  a  reg'lar  skin  to  it !  '  he  said. 

"  The  Second  Mate  and  the  man  and  I  all  stooped, 
and  looked  at  it.  The  Second  Mate  progged  it  with 
his  forefinger,  and  I  remember  I  rapped  it  several 
times  with  my  knuckles,  listening  to  the  dead  sound 
it  gave  out,  and  noticing  the  close,  firm  texture  of 
the  mould.  t 

"' '  Dough  !  '  said  the  Second  Mate.  '  It's  just 
like  blessed  dough  !  .  .  .  Pouf ! '  He  stood  up  with 
a  quick  movement.  '  I  could  fancy  it  stinks  a  bit,' 
he  said. 

"  As  he  said  this,  I  knew  suddenly  what  the  familiar 
thing  was,  in  the  vague  odour  that  hung  about  us 
— It  was  that  the  smell  had  something  animal-like 
in  it ;  something  of  the  same  smell,  only  heavier, 
that  you  will  smell  in  any  place  that  is  infested  with 
mice.  I  began  to  look  about  with  a  sudden  very 
real  uneasiness.  .  .  .  There   might   be   vast   numbers 


62  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

of  hungry  rats  aboard.  .  .  .  Tlicy  might  prove  ex- 
ceedingly dangerous,  if  in  a  starving  condition  ;  yet, 
as  3'ou  will  understand,  somehow  I  hesitated  to  put 
forward  my  idea  as  a  reason  for  caution ;  it  was 
too  fanciful. 

"  Captain  Gannington  had  begun  to  go  aft,  along 
the  mould-covered  maindeck,  with  the  Second  Mate  ; 
each  of  them  holding  his  lamp  high  up,  so  as  to  cast 
a  good  light  about  the  vessel.  I  turned  quickly  and 
followed  them,  the  man  with  me  keeping  close  to 
my  heels,  and  plainly  uneasy.  As  we  went,  I  became 
aware  that  there  was  a  feeling  of  moisture  in  the  air, 
and  I  remembered  the  slight  mist,  or  smoke,  above 
the  hulk,  which  had  made  Captain  Gannington  suggest 
spontaneous  combustion,  in  explanation. 

"  And  always,  as  we  went,  there  was  that  vague, 
animal  smell ;  and,  suddenly,  I  found  myself  wishing 
we  were  well  away  from  the  old  vessel. 

"  Abruptly,  after  a  few  paces,  the  Captain  stopped 
and  pointed  at  a  row  of  mould-hidden  shapes  on 
either  side  of  the  maindeck  .  .  .  '  Guns,'  he  said. 
'  Been  a  privateer  in  the  old  days,  I  guess  ;  maybe 
worse !  We'll  'ave  a  look  below,  Doctor ;  there 
may  be  something  worth  touchin'.  She's  older  than 
I  thought.  Mr,  Selvern  thinks  she's  about  three 
hundred  year  old  ;   but  I  scarce  think  it.' 

"  We  continued  our  way  aft,  and  I  remember  that 
I  found  myself  wall-cing  as  lightly  and  gingerly  as 
possible  ;  as  if  I  were  subconsciously  afraid  of  treading 
through  the  rotten,  mould-hid  decks.  I  think  the 
others  had  a  touch  of  the  same  feeling,  from  the 
way  that  the}^  walked.  Occasionally,  the  soft  mould 
would  grip  our  heels,  releasing  them  with  a  little, 
sullen  suck. 

"  The    Captain    forged    somewhat    ahead    of    the 


The  Derelict  63 

Second  Mate ;  and  I  know  tliat  the  suggestion 
he  had  made  himself,  that  perhaps  there  might 
be  something  below,  worth  the  carrying  away,  had 
stimulated  his  imagination.  The  Second  Mate  was, 
however,  beginning  to  feel  somewhat  the  same 
way  that  I  did ;  at  least,  I  have  that  impression. 
I  think,  if  it  had  not  been  for  what  I  might  truly 
describe  as  Captain  Gannington's  sturdy  courage, 
we  should  all  of  us  have  just  gone  back  over  the 
side  very  soon  ;  for  there  was  most  certainly  an 
unwholesome  feeling  abroad,  that  made  one  feel 
queerly  lacking  in  pluck  ;  and  you  will  soon  perceive 
that  this  feeling  was  justified. 

"  Just  as  the  Captain  reached  the  few,  mould- 
covered  steps,  leading  up  on  to  the  short  half-poop, 
I  was  suddenly  aware  that  the  feeling  of  moisture 
in  the  air  had  grown  very  much  more  definite.  It 
was  perceptible  now,  intermittently,  as  a  sort  of 
thin,  moist,  fog-like  vapour,  that  came  and  went 
oddly,  and  seemed  to  make  the  decks  a  little  in- 
distinct to  the  view,  this  time  and  that.  Once,  an 
odd  puff  of  it  beat  up  suddenly  from  somewhere, 
and  caught  me  in  the  face,  carrying  a  queer,  sickly, 
heavy  odour  with  it,  that  somehow  frightened  me 
strangely,  with  a  suggestion  of  a  waiting  and  half- 
comprehended  danger. 

"  We  had  followed  Captain  Gannington  up  the 
three,  mould-covered  steps,  and  now  went  slowly 
aft  along  the  raised  after-deck. 

"  By  the  mizzen-mast.  Captain  Gannington  paused, 
and  held  his  lantern  near  to  it.  .  .  . 

"  '  My  word.  Mister,'  he  said  to  the  Second  Mate, 
'  it's  fair  thickened  up  vvith  the  mould  i  why,  I'll 
g'antee  it's  close  on  four  foot  thick.'  He  shone  the 
light  down  to  where  it  met  the  deck.     '  Good  Lord  !  ' 


64  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

he  said,  '  look  at  the  sea-hce  on  it  !  '  I  stepped  up  ; 
and  it  was  as  he  had  said  ;  tlie  sea-Hce  were  thick 
upon  it,  some  of  them  huge  ;  not  less  than  the  size 
of  large  beetles,  and  all  a  clear,  colourless  shade, 
like  water,  exxept  where  there  were  little  spots  of  grey 
in  them,  evddentl}^  their  internal  organisms. 

"  '  I've  never  seen  the  like  of  them,  'cept  on  a 
live  cod  !  '  said  Captain  Gannington,  in  an  extremely 
puzzled  voice.  '  My  word  !  but  they're  whoppers  !  ' 
Then  he  passed  on  ;  but  a  few  paces  farther  aft,  he 
stopped  again,  and  held  his  lamp  near  to  the  mould- 
hidden  deck. 

"  '  Lord  bless  me,  Doctor !  '  he  called  out,  in  a 
low  voice,  '  did  ye  ever  see  the  like  of  that  ?  Why, 
it's  a  foot  long,  if  it's  a  hinch  !  ' 

"  I  stooped  over  his  shoulder,  and  saw  what  he 
meant ;  it  was  a  clear,  colourless  creature,  about  a 
foot  long,  and  about  eight  inches  high,  with  a  curved 
back  that  was  extraordinarily  narrow.  As  we  stared, 
all  in  a  group,  it  gave  a  queer  little  flick,  and  was 
gone. 

"  '  Jumped  !  '  said  the  Captain.  '  Well,  if  that 
ain't  a  giant  of  all  the  sea-lice  that  ever  I've  seen  ! 
I  guess  it's  jumped  twenty-foot  clear.'  He  straight- 
ened his  back,  and  scratched  his  head  a  moment, 
swinging  the  lantern  this  way  and  that  with  the 
other  hand,  and  staring  about  us.  '  \\^ot  are  they 
doin'  aboard  'ere  !  '  he  said.  '  You'll  see  'em  (little 
things)  on  fat  cod,  an'  such-like.  ...  I'm  blowed, 
Doctor,  if  I  understand.' 

"  He  held  his  lamp  towards  a  big  mound  of  the 
mould,  that  occupied  part  of  the  after  portion  of 
the  low  poop-deck,  a  little  foreside  of  where  there 
came  a  two-foot  high  '  break  '  to  a  kind  of .  second 
and  loftier  poop,   that  ran  away  aft  to  the  taffrail. 


The  Derelict  65 

The  mound  was  pretty  big,  several  feet  across,  and 
more  than  a  yard  high.  Captain  Gannington  walked 
up  to  it : — 

"  '  I  reck'n  this  's  the  scuttle,'  he  remarked,  and 
gave  it  a  heavy  kick.  The  only  result  was  a  deep 
indentation  into  the  huge,  whitish  hump  of  mould, 
as  if  he  had  driven  his  foot  into  a  mass  of  some 
doughy  substance.  Yet,  I  am  not  altogether  correct 
in  saying  that  this  was  the  only  result ;    for  a  certain 

other   thing   happened From   a   place   made   b^ 

the  Captain's  foot,  there  came  a  little  gush  of  a  pur- 
plish fluid,  accompanied  by  a  peculiar  smell,  that 
was,  and  was  not,  half-familiar.  Some  of  the  mould- 
like substance  had  stuck  to  the  toe  of  the  Captain's 
boot,  and  from  tliis,  likewise,  there  issued  a  sweat, 
as  it  were,  of  the  same  colour. 

"  '  Well !  '  said  Captain  Gannington,  in  surprise  ; 
and  drew  back  his  foot  to  make  another  kick  at  the 
hump  of  mould  ;  but  he  paused,  at  an  exclamation 
from  the  Second  Mate  : — 

"  '  Don't,  Sir  !  '  said  the  Second  Mate. 

"  I  glanced  at  him,  and  the  light  from  Captain 
Gannington's  lamp  showed  me  that  his  face  had  a 
bewildered,  half-frightened  look,  as  if  he  were  sud- 
denly and  unexpectedly  half-afraid  of  something, 
and  as  if  his  tongue  had  given  away  his  sudden  fright, 
without  any  intention  on  his  part  to  speak. 

"  The  Captain  also  turned  and  stared  at  him  : — 
Why,  Mister  ?  '  he  asked,  in  a  somewhat  puzzled 
voice,  through  which  there  sounded  just    the  vaguest 
hint  of  annoyance.     '  We've  got   to    shift  this  muck, 
if  we're  to  get  below.' 

"  I  looked  at  the  Second  Mate,  and  it  seemed  to 
me  that,  curiously  enough,  he  was  listening  less  to 
the  Captain,  than  to  some  other  sound. 


66  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  Suddenly,  he  said  in  a  queer  voice  : — '  Listen, 
everybod}-  !  ' 

"  Yet,  we  heard  nothing,  beyond  the  faint  murmur 
of  the  men  talking  together  in  the  boat  along- 
side. 

"' r  don't  hear  nothin','  said  Captain  Gannington, 
after  a  short  pause.     '  Do  you,  Doctor  ?  ' 
No,'  I  said. 

"  '  Wot  was  it  you  thought  you  heard  ?  '  asked 
the  Captain,  turning  again  to  the  Second  Mate. 
But  the  Second  Mate  shook  his  head,  in  a  curious, 
almost  irritable  way ;  as  if  the  Captain's  question 
interrupted  his  listening.  Captain  Gannington  stared 
a  moment  at  him ;  then  held  his  lantern  up,  and 
glanced  about  him,  almost  uneasily.  I  know  I 
felt  a  queer  sense  of  strain.  But  the  light  showed 
nothing,  beyond  the  greyish  dirty-white  of  the  mould 
in  all  directions. 

"  '  Mister  Selvern,'  said  the  Captain  at  last,  looking 
at  him,  '  don't  get  fancying  things.  Get  hold  of 
your  bloomin'  self.     Ye  know  ye  heard  nothin'  ?  ' 

"  '  I'm   quite   sure   I    heard   something.    Sir  !  '    said 

the    Second    Mate.     '  I    seemed    to    hear '     He 

broke  off   sharply,   and  appeared  to  listen,   with  an 
almost  painful  intensity. 

"  '  What  did  it  sound  hke  ?  '  I  asked. 

"  '  It's  all  right,  Doctor,'  said  Captain  Gannington, 
laughing  gently.  '  Ye  can  give  him  a  tonic  when 
we  get  back.     I'm  goin'  to  shift  this  stuff.' 

"  He  drew  back,  and  kicked  for  the  second  time 
at  the  ugly  mass,  which  he  took  to  hide  the  com- 
panionway.  The  result  of  his  kick  was  startUng  ; 
for  the  whole  thing  wobbled  sloppily,  like  a  mound 
of  unhealthy-looking  jelly. 

"  He  drew  his  foot  out  of   it,   quickly,   and  took 


The  Derelict  67 

a  step  backward,  staring,  and  holding  his  lamp  to- 
wards it  : — 

"  '  By  gum  !  '  he  said  ;  and  it  was  plain  that  he 
was  genuinely  startled,  '  the  blessed  thing's  gone  soft  !  ' 

"  The  man  had  run  back  several  steps  from  the 
suddenly  flaccid  mound,  and  looked  horribly  frightened. 
Though,  of  what,  I  am  sure  he  had  not  the  least 
idea.  The  Second  Mate  stood  where  he  was,  and 
stared.  For  my  part,  I  know  I  had  a  most  hideous 
uneasiness  upon  me.  The  Captain  continued  to 
hold  his  light  towards  the  wobbling  mound,  and 
stare  : —  ■ 

"  '  It's  gone  squashy  all  through  !  '  he  said.  '  There's 
no  scuttle  there.  There's  no  bally  woodwork  inside 
that  lot  !     Phoo  !  what  a  rum  smell !  ' 

"  He  walked  round  to  the  after-side  of  the  strange 
mound,  to  see  whether  there  might  be  some  signs 
of  an  opening  into  the  hull  at  the  back  of  the  great 
heap  of  mould-stuff.     And  then  : — 

"  '  Listen  !  '  said  the  Second  Mate,  again,  in  the 
strangest  sort  of  voice. 

"  Captain  Gannington  straightened  himself  up- 
right, and  there  succeeded  a  pause  of  the  most  in- 
tense quietness,  in  which  there  was  not  even  the 
hum  of  talk  from  the  men  alongside  in  the  boat. 
We  all  heard  it — a  kind  of  dull,  soft  Thud  !  Thud  ! 
Thud !  Thud !  somewhere  in  the  hull  under  us ; 
yet  so  vague  that  I  might  have  been  half  doubtful 
I  heard  it,  only  that  the  others  did  so,  too. 

"  Captain  Gannington  turned  suddenly  to  where 
the  man  stood  : — 

"  '  Tell    them '     he    began.     But    the     fellow 

cried  out  something,  and  pointed.  There  had  come 
a  strange  intensity  into  his  somewhat  unemotional 
face ;     so    that    the    Captain's    glance    followed    his 


68  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

action  instantly.  I  stared,  also,  as  you  may  think. 
It  was  the  great  mound,  at  which  the  man  was  pointing. 
I  saw  what  he  meant. 

"  From  the  two  gapes  made  in  the  mould-like 
stuff  by  Captain  Gannington's  boot,  the  purple  fluid 
was  jetting  out  in  a  queerly  regular  fashion,  almost 
as  if  it  were  being  forced  out  by  a  pump.  My  word  ! 
i>ut  I  stared  !  And  even  as  I  stared,  a  larger  jet 
squirted  out,  and  splashed  as  far  as  the  man,  spat- 
tering his  boots  and  trouser-legs. 

"  The  fellow  had  been  pretty  nervous  before,  in  a 
stolid,  ignorant  sort  of  way ;  and  his  funk  had  been 
growing  steadily  ;  but,  at  this,  he  simply  let  out  a 
yell,  and  turned  about  to  run.  He  paused  an  in- 
stant, as  if  a  sudden  fear  of  the  darkness  that  held 
the  decks,  between  him  and  the  boat,  had  taken 
•him.  He  snatched  at  the  Second  Mate's  lantern; 
tore  it  out  of  his  hand,  and  plunged  heavily  away 
over  the  vile  stretch  of  mould. 

"  Mr.  Selvern,  the  Second  Mate,  said  not  a  word  ; 
he  was  just  standing,  staring  at  the  strange-smelling 
twin  streams  of  dull  purple,  that  were  jetting  out 
from  the  wobbling  mound.  Captain  Gannington, 
however,  roared  an  order  to  the  man  to  come  back  ; 
but  the  man  plunged  on  and  on  across  the  mould, 
his  feet  seeming  to  be  clogged  by  the  stuff,  as  if  it 
had  grown  suddenly  soft.  He  zigzagged,  as  he  ran, 
the  lantern  swaying  in  wild  circles,  as  he  wrenched 
his  feet  free,  with  a  constant  plop,  plop  ;  and  I  could 
hear  his  frightened  gasps,  even  from  where  I  stood. 

"  '  Come  back  with  that  lamp  !  '  roared  the  Captain 
again  ;  but  still  the  man  took  no  notice,  and  Captain 
Gannington  was  silent  an  instant,  his  lips  working 
in  a  queer,  inarticulate  fashion  ;  as  if  he  were  stunned 
momentarily   by  the   very   violence   of  his   anger  at 


The  Derelict  69 

the  man's  insubordination.  And  in  the  silence,  I 
heard  the  sounds  again  : — Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  ! 
Thud  !  Quite  distinctly  now,  beating,  it  seemed 
suddenly  to  me,  right  down  under  my  feet,  but  deep. 

"  I  stared  down  at  the  mould  on  which  I  was 
standing,  with  a  quick,  disgusting  sense  of  the  terrible 
all  about  me  ;  then  I  looked  at  the  Captain,  and 
tried  to  say  something,  without  appearing  frightened. 
I  saw  that  he  had  turned  again  to  the  mound,  and 
all  the  anger  had  gone  out  of  his  face.  He  had  his 
lamp  out  towards  the  mound,  and  was  listening. 
There  was  a  further  moment  of  absolute  silence  ;  at 
least,  I  know  that  I  was  not  conscious  of  any  sound 
at  all,  in  all  the  world,  except  that  extraordinary 
Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  !  down  somewhere  in 
the  huge  bulk  under  us. 

"  The  Captain  shifted  his  feet,  with  a  sudden, 
nervous  movement ;  and  as  he  lifted  them,  the 
mould  went  plop  !  plop  !  He  looked  quickly  at 
me,  trying  to  smile,  as  if  he  were  not  thinking  anything 
very  much  about  it  : — '  What  do  you  make  of  it. 
Doctor  ?  '  he  said. 

"  '  I   think '    I   began.     But   the   Second   Mate 

interrupted  with  a  single  word  ;  his  voice  pitched  a 
little  high,  in  a  tone  that  made  us  both  stare  instantly 
at  him  : — 

"  '  Look  !  '  he  said,  and  pointed  at  the  mound. 
The  thing  was  all  of  a  slow  quiver.  A  strange  ripple 
ran  outward  from  it,  along  the  deck,  Hke  you  will 
see  a  ripple  run  inshore  out  of  a  calm  sea.  It  reached 
a  mound  a  little  fore-side  of  us,  which  I  had  supposed 
to  be  the  cabin-skylight  ;  and  in  a  moment,  the 
second  mound  sank  nearly  level  with  the  surrounding 
decks,  quivering  floppily  in  a  most  extraordinary 
fashion.     A  sudden,   quick  tremor  took  the  mould, 


70  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

right  under  the  Second  Mate,  and  he  gave  out  a 
hoarse  Httle  cry,  and  held  his  arms  out  on  each  side 
of  him,  to  keep  his  balance.  The  tremor  in  the 
mould,  spread,  and  Captain  Gannington  swayed,  and 
spread  his  feet,  with  a  sudden  curse  of  fright.  The 
Second  Mate  jumped  across  to  him,  and  caught 
him  by  the  wrist  : — 

"  '  The  boat.  Sir  !  '  he  said,  saying  the  very  thing 
that  I  had  lacked  the  pluck  to  say.  '  For  God's 
sake ' 

"  But  he  never  finished  ;  for  a  tremendous,  hoarse 
scream  cut  off  his  words.  They  hove  themselves 
round,  and  looked.  I  could  see  without  turning. 
The  man  who  had  run  from  us,  was  standing  in 
the  waist  of  the  ship,  about  a  fathom  from  the  star- 
board bulwarks.  He  w^as  swaying  from  side  to 
side,  and  screaming  in  a  dreadful  fashion.  He 
appeared  to  be  trying  to  lift  his  feet,  and  the  light 
from  his  swaying  lantern  showed  an  almost  incredible 
sight.  All  about  him  the  mould  was  in  active  move- 
ment. His  feet  had  sunk  out  of  sight.  The  stuff 
appeared  to  be  lapping  at  his  legs  ;  and  abruptly  his 
bare  flesh  showed.  The  hideous  stuff  had  rent  his 
trouser-legs  away,  as  if  they  were  paper.  He  gave 
out  a  simply  sickening  scream,  and,  with  a  vast  effort, 
wrenched  one  leg  free.  It  was  partly  destroyed. 
The  next  instant  he  pitched  face  downward,  and 
the  stuff  heaped  itself  upon  him,  as  if  it  were  actually 
alive,  with  a  dreadful  savage  life.  It  was  simply 
infernal.  The  man  had  gone  from  sight.  Where  he 
had  fallen  was  now  a  writhing,  elongated  mound, 
in  constant  and  horrible  increase,  as  the  mould  ap- 
peared to  move  towards  it  in  strange  ripples  from  all 
sides. 

"  Captain  Gannington  and  the  Second  Mate  were 


The  Derelict  71 

stone  silent,  in  amazed  and  incredulous  horror  ;  but 
I  had  begun  to  reach  towards  a  grotesque  and  terrific 
conclusion,  both  helped  and  hindered  by  my  pro- 
fessional training. 

"  From  the  men  in  the  boat  alongside,  there  was 
a  loud  shouting,  and  I  saw  two  of  their  faces  appear 
suddenly  above  the  rail.  They  showed  clearly,  a 
moment,  in  the  light  from  the  lamp  which  the  man 
had  snatched  from  Mr.  Selvern ;  for,  strangely 
enough,  this  lamp  was  standing  upright  and  un- 
harmed on  the  deck,  a  little  way  fore-side  of  that 
dreadful,  elongated,  growing  mound,  that  still  swayed 
and  writhed  with  an  incredible  horror.  The  lamp 
rose  and  fell  on  the  passing  ripples  of  the  mould, 
just — for  all  the  world — as  you  will  see  a  boat  rise 
and  fall  on  little  swells.  It  is  of  some  interest  to 
me  now,  psychologically,  to  remember  how  that 
rising  and  falling  lantern  brought  home  to  me,  more 
than  anything,  the  incomprehensible,,  dreadful  strange- 
ness of  it  all. 

"  The  men's  faces  disappeared,  with  sudden  yells, 
as  if  they  had  slipped,  or  been  suddenly  hurt ;  and 
there  was  a  fresh  uproar  of  shouting  from  the  boat. 
The  men  were  calling  to  us  to  come  away  ;  to  come 
away.  In  the  same  instant,  I  felt  my  left  boot 
drawn  suddenly  and  forcibly  downward,  with  a 
horrible,  painful  gripe.  .  I  wrenched  it  free,  with  a 
yell  of  angry  fear.  Forrard  of  us,  I  saw  that  the 
vile  surface  was  all  a-move  ;  and  abruptly  I  found 
myself  shouting  in  a  queer  frightened  voice  : — 

"  '  The  boat.  Captain  !     The  boat.  Captain  !  ' 

"  Captain  Gannington  stared  round  at  me,  over 
his  right  shoulder,  in  a  peculiar,  dull  way,  that  told 
me  he  was  utterly  dazed  with  bewilderment  and  the 
incomprehensibleness    of    it    all.     I    took    a    quick, 


72  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

clogged,  nervous  step  towards  him,  and  gripped  his 
arm  and  shook  it  fiercely. 

"  '  The  boat  !  '  I  shouted  at  him.  '  The  boat  ! 
For  God's  sake,  tell  the  men  to  bring  the  boat  aft  !  ' 

"  Then  the  mould  must  have  drawn  his  feet  down  ; 
for,  abruptly,  he  bellowed  fiercely  with  terror,  his 
momentary  apathy  giving  place  to  furious  energy. 
His  thick-set,  vastly  muscular  body  doubled  and 
writhed  with  his  enormous  effort,  and  he  struck  out 
madly,  dropping  the  lantern.  He  tore  his  feet  free, 
something  ripping  as  he  did  so.  The  reality  and  neces- 
sity of  the  situation  had  come  upon  him,  brutishly  real, 
and  he  was  roaring  to  the  men  in  the  boat  : — 

"  '  Bring  the  boat  aft  !  Bring  'er  aft  !  Bring 
'er  aft  !  ' 

"  The  Second  Mate  and  I  were  shouting  the  same 
thing,  madly. 

"  '  For  God's  sake  be  smart,  lads  !  '  roared  the 
Captain,  and  stooped  quickly  for  his  lamp,  which 
still  burned.  His  feet  were  gripped  again,  and  he 
hove  them  out,  blaspheming  breathlessly,  and  leaping 
a  yard  high  with  his  effort.  Then  he  made  a  run  for 
the  side,  wrenching  his  feet  free  at  each  step.  In 
the  same  instant,  the  Second  Mate  cried  out  some- 
thing, and  grabbed  at  the  Captain  : — 

"  '  It's  got  hold  of  my  feet  !  It's  got  hold  of  my 
feet  !  '  he  screamed.  His  feet  had  disappeared  up 
to  his  boot-tops  ;  and  Captain  Gannington  caught 
him  round  the  waist  with  his  powerful  left  arm, 
gave  a  mighty  heave,  and  the  next  instant  had  him 
free  ;   but  both  his  boot-soles  had  almost  gone. 

"  For  my  part,  I  jumped  madly  from  foot  to  foot, 
to  avoid  the  plucking  of  the  mould  ;  and  suddenly 
I  made  a  run  for  the  ship's  side.  But  before  I  could 
get  there,  a  queer  gape  came  in  the  mould,  between 


The  Derelict  73 

us  and  the  side,  at  least  a  couple  of  feet  wide,  and 
how  deep  I  don't  know.  It  closed  up  in  an  instant, 
and  all  the  mould,  where  the  gape  had  been,  went 
into  a  sort  of  flurry  of  horrible  ripplings,  so  that  I 
ran  back  from  it ;  for  I  did  not  dare  to  put  my  foot 
upon  it.     Then  the  Captain  was  shouting  at  me  : — 

"  '  Aft,  Doctor  !  Aft,  Doctor  !  This  way.  Doctor  ! 
Run  !  '  I  saw  then  that  he  had  passed  me,  and  was 
up  on  the  after,  raised  portion  of  the  poop.  He 
had  the  Second  Mate  thrown  like  a  sack,  all  loose 
and  quiet,  over  his  left  shoulder  ;  for  Mr.  Selvern 
had  fainted,  and  his  long  legs  flogged,  limp  and 
helpless,  against  the  Captain's  massive  knees  as  the 
Captain  ran.  I  saw,  with  a  queer,  unconscious 
noting  of  minor  details,  how  the  torn  soles  of  the 
Second  Mate's  boots  flapped  and  jigged,  as  the  Captain 
staggered  aft. 

"  '  Boat  ahoy  !  Boat  ahoy  !  Boat  ahoy  !  '  shouted 
the  Captain  ;  and  then  I  was  beside  him,  shouting 
also.  The  men  were  answering  with  loud  yells  of 
encouragement,  and  it  was  plain  they  were  working 
desperately  to  force  the  boat  aft,  through  the  thick 
scum  about  the  ship. 

"  We  reached  the  ancient,  mould-hid  taffrail, 
and  slewed  about,  breathlessly,  in  the  half -darkness, 
to  see  what  was  happening.  Captain  Gannington 
had  left  his  lantern  by  the  big  mound,  when  he  picked 
up  the  Second  Mate  ;  and  as  we  stood,  gasping,  we 
discovered  suddenly  that  all  the  mould  between  us 
and  the  light  was  full  of  movement.  Yet*-  the  part 
on  which  we  stood,  for  about  six  or  eight  feet  forrard 
of  us,  was  still  firm. 

"  Every  couple  of  seconds,  we  shouted  to  the  men 
to  hasten,  and  they  kept  on  calling  to  us  that  they 
would  be  with  us  in  an  instant.    And  all  the  time. 


74  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

we  watched  the  deck  of  that  dreadful  hulk,  feeling, 
for  my  part,  literally  sick  with  mad  suspense,  and 
ready  to  jump  overboard  into  that  filthy  scum  all 
about  us. 

"  Down  somewhere  in  the  huge  bulk  of  the  ship, 
there  was  all  the  time  that  extraordinary,  dull, 
ponderous  Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  !  growing 
ever  louder.  I  seemed  to  feel  the  whole  hull  of  the 
derelict  beginning  to  quiver  and  thrill  with  each 
dull  beat.  And  to  me,  with  the  grotesque  and 
monstrous  suspicion  of  what  made  that  noise,  it 
was,  at  once,  the  most  dreadful  and  incredible  sound 
I  have  ever  heard. 

"As  we  waited  desperately  for  the  boat,  I  scanned 
incessantly  so  much  of  the  grey-white  bulk  as  the 
lamp  showed.  The  whole  of  the  decks  seemed  to  be 
in  strange  movement.  Forrard  of  the  lamp,  I  could 
see,  indistinctly,  the  moundings  of  the  mould  sway- 
ing and  nodding  hideously,  beyond  the  circle  of  the 
brightest  ra37s.  Nearer,  and  full  in  the  glow  of  the 
lamp,  the  mound  which  should  have  indicated  the 
skylight,  was  swelling  steadily.  There  were  ugly, 
purple  veinings  on  it,  and  as  it  swelled,  it  seemed 
to  me  that  the  veinings  and  mottlings  on  it,  were 
becoming  plainer — rising,  as  though  embossed  upon 
it,  hke  you  will  see  the  veins  stand  out  on  the  body 
of  a  powerful,  full-blooded  horse.  It  was  most  extra- 
ordinary. The  mound  that  we  had  supposed  to 
cover  the  companion-way,  had  sunk  flat  with  the 
surrounding  mould,  and  I  could  not  see  that  it  jetted 
out  any  more  of  the  purplish  fluid. 

"  A  quaking  movement  of  the  mould  began,  away 
forrard  of  the  lamp,  and  came  flurr3dng  away  aft 
towards  us  ;  and  at  the  sight  of  that,  I  climbed  up 
on  to  the  spongy-feeling  taffrail,   and  yelled  afresh 


The  Derelict  75 

for  the  boat.  The  men  answered  with  a  shout,  which 
told  me  they  were  nearer  ;  but  the  beastly  scum  was 
so  thick  that  it  was  evidently  a  fight  to  move  the 
boat  at  all.  Beside  me,  Captain  Gannington  was 
shaking  the  Second  Mate  furiously,  and  the  man 
stirred  and  began  to  moan.  The  CaptaJn  shook 
him  again, 

"  '  Wake  up  !     Wake  up.  Mister  !  '  he  shouted. 

"  The  Second  Mate  staggered  out  of  the  Captain's 
arms,  and  collapsed  suddenly,  shrieking  : — '  My  feet  1 
Oh,  God !  My  feet  !  '  The  Captain  and  I  lugged 
him  up  off  the  mould,  and  got  him  into  a  sitting 
position  upon  the  taffrail,  where  he  kept  up  a  con- 
tinual moaning. 

"  '  Hold  'im,  Doctor,'  said  the  Captain,  and  whilst 
I  did  so,  he  ran  forrard  a  few  yards,  and  peered  down 
over  the  starboard  quarter  rail.  '  For  God's  sake, 
be  smart,  lads  !  Be  smart  !  Be  smart  !  '  he  shouted 
down  to  the  men  ;  and  they  answered  him,  breathless, 
from  close  at  hand  ;  yet  still  too  far  away  for  the  boat 
to  be  any  use  to  us  on  the  instant. 

"  1  was  holding  the  moaning,  half-unconscious 
officer,  and  staring  forrard  along  the  poop  decks. 
The  flurrying  of  the  mould  was  coming  aft,  slowly 
and  noiselessly.  And  then,  suddenly,  I  saw  some- 
thing closer  : — 

"  '  Look  out.  Captain  !  '  I  shouted  ;  and  even  as 
I  shouted,  the  mould  near  to  him  gave  a  sudden 
peculiar  slobber.  I  had  seen  a  ripple  stealing  to- 
wards him  through  the  horrible  stuff.  He  gave  an 
enormous,  clumsy  leap,  and  landed  near  to  us  on 
the  sound  part  of  the  mould ;  but  the  movement 
followed  him.  He  turned  and  faced  it,  swearing 
fiercely.  All  about  his  feet  there  came  abruptly 
Httle  gapings,  which  made  horrid  sucking  noises. 


76  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  '  Come  hack,  Captain  !  '  I  yelled.  '  Come  back, 
quick !  ' 

"  As  I  shouted,  a  ripple  came  at  his  feet — lipping 
at  them  ;  and  he  stamped  insanely  at  it,  and  leaped 
back,  his  boot  torn  half  off  his  foot.  He  swore  madly 
with  pain  and  anger,  and  jumped  swiftly  for  the  taffrail. 

"  '  Come  on.  Doctor  !  Over  we  go  !  '  he  called. 
Then  he  remembered  the  filthy  scum,  and  hesitated ; 
roaring  out  desperately  to  the  men  to  hurry.  I 
stared  down,  also. 

'"The  Second  Mate  ?  '  I  said. 

"  '  I'll  take  charge,  Doctor,'  said  Captain  Ganning- 
ton,  and  caught  hold  of  Mr.  Selvern.  As  he  spoke, 
I  thought  I  saw  something  beneath  us,  outlined 
against  the  scum.  I  leaned  out  over  the  stern,  and 
peered.     There  was  something  under  the  port  quarter. 

"  '  There's  something  down  there.  Captain  ! '  I  called, 
and  pointed  in  the  darkness. 

"  He  stooped  far  over,  and  stared. 

"  '  A  boat,  by  gum  !  A  Boat  ! '  he  yelled,  and 
began  to  wriggle  swiftly  along  the  taffrail,  dragging 
the  Second  Mate  after  him.     I  followed. 

"  '  A  boat  it  is,  sure  !  '  he  exclaimed,  a  few  moments 
later  ;  and,  picking  up  the  Second  Mate  clear  of  the 
rail,  he  hove  him  down  into  the  boat,  where  he  fell 
with  a  crash  into  the  bottom. 

"  '  Over  ye  go.  Doctor !  '  he  yelled  at  me,  and 
pulled  me  bodily  off  the  rail,  and  dropped  me  after 
the  officer.  As  he  did  so,  I  felt  the  whole  of  the 
ancient,  spongy  rail  give  a  peculiar,  sickening  quiver, 
and  begin  to  wobble.  I  fell  on  to  the  Second  Mate, 
and  the  Captain  came  after,  almost  in  the  same 
instant ;  but  fortunately,  he  landed  clear  of  us,  on 
to  the  fore  thwart,  which  broke  under  his  weight,  with 
a  loud  crack  and  splintering  of  wood. 


The  Derelict  77 

"  '  Thank  God  !  '  I  heard  him  mutter.  '  Thank 
God  !  .  .  .  I  guess  that  was  a  mighty  near  thing  to 
goin'  to  hell.' 

"  He  struck  a  match,  just  as  I  got  to  my  feet, 
and  between  us  we  got  the  Second  Mate  straightened 
out  on  one  of  the  after  thwarts.  We  shouted  to 
the  men  in  the  boat,  telling  thcni  where  we  were,  and 
saw  the  light  of  their  lantern  shining  round  the  star- 
board counter  of  the  derelict.  They  called  back  to 
us,  to  tell  us  they  were  doing  their  best  ;  and  then, 
whilst  we  waited.  Captain  Gannington  struck  another 
match,  and  began  to  overhaul  the  boat  we  had  dropped 
into.  She  was  a  modern,  two-bowed  boat,  and  on  the 
stern,  there  was  painted  '  Cyclone  Glasgow.'  She  was 
in  pretty  fair  condition,  and  had  evidently  drifted 
into  the  scum  and  been  held  by  it. 

"  Captain  Gannington  struck  several  matches, 
and  went  forrard  towards  the  derelict.  Suddenly 
he  called  to  me,  and  I  jumped  over  the  thwarts  to  him. 

"  '  Look,  Doctor,'  he  said ;  and  I  saw  what  he 
meant — a  mass  of  bones,  up  in  the  bows  of  the  boat. 
I  stooped  over  them,  and  looked.  There  were  the  bones 
of  at  least  three  people,  all  mixed  together,  in  an 
extraordinary  fashion,  and  quite  clean  and  dry.  I 
had  a  sudden  thought  concerning  the  bones  ;  but  I 
said  nothing  ;  for  my  thought  was  vague,  in  some 
ways,  and  concerned  the  grotesque  and  incredible 
suggestion  that  had  come  to  me,  as  to  the  cause  of 
that  ponderous,  dull  Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  !  Thud  ! 
that  beat  on  so  infernally  within  the  hull,  and  was 
plain  to  hear  even  now  that  we  had  got  off  the  vessel 
herself.  And  all  the  while,  you  know,  I  had  a  sick, 
horrible,  mental-picture  of  that  frightful  wriggling 
mound  aboard  the  hulk. 

"  As    Captain    Gannington   struck    a   final    match, 


78  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

I  saw  something  that  sickened  me,  and  the  Captain 
saw  it  in  the  same  instant.  The  match  went  out, 
and  he  fumbled  clumsily  for  another,  and  strirck 
it.  We  saw  the  thing  again.  We  had  not  been  mis- 
taken. ...  A  great  lip  of  grey- white  was  protruding 
in  over  the  edge  of  the  boat — a  great  lappet  of  the 
mould  was  coming  stealthily  towards  us  ;  a  live  mass 
of  the  very  hull  itself.  And  suddenly  Captain  Gan- 
nington  yelled  out,  in  so  many  words,  the  grotesque 
and  incredible  thing  I  was  thinking  : — 

"  '  She's  Alive  ! ' 

"  I  never  heard  such  a  sound  of  comprehensiofi 
and  terror  in  a  man's  voice.  The  very  horrified 
assurance  of  it,  made  actual  to  me  the  thing  that, 
before,  had  only  lurked  in  my  subconscious  mind. 
I  knew  he  was  right  ;  I  knew  that  the  explanation, 
my  reason  and  my  training,  both  repelled  and  reached 

towards,  was  the  true  one I  wonder  whether 

anyone  can  possibly  understand  our  feelings  in  that 
moment.  .  .  ,  The  unmitigable  horror  of  it,  and  the 
incredihleiiess. 

"  As  the  light  of  the  match  burned  up  fully,  I  saw 
that  the  mass  of  living  matter,  coming  "towards 
us,  was  streaked  and  veined  with  purple,  the  veins 
standing  out,  enormously  distended.  The  whole 
thing  quivered  continuously  to  each  ponderous  Thud  ! 
Thud !  Thud !  Thud !  of  that  gargantuan  organ 
that  pulsed  within  the  huge  grey-white  bulk.  The 
flame  of  the  match  reached  the  Captain's  fingers, 
and  there  came  to  me  a  little  sickly  whiff  of  burned 
flesh  ;  but  he  seemed  unconscious  of  any  pain.  Then 
the  flame  went  out,  in  a  brief  sizzle  ;  yet  at  the  last 
moment,  I  had  seen  an  extraordinary  raw  look, 
become  visible  upon  the  end  of  that  monstrous,  pro- 
truding lappet.     It  had  become  dewed  with  a  hideous. 


The  Derelict  79 

purplish  sweat.  And  with  the  darkness,  there  came 
a  sudden  charnel-hke  stench. 

"  I  heard  the  match-box  spHt  in  Captain  Ganning- 
ton's  hands,  as  he  wrenched  it  open.  Then  he  swore, 
in  a  queer  frightened  voice  ;  for  he  had  come  to  the 
end  of  his  matches.  He  turned  clumsily  in  the 
darkness,  and  tumbled  over  the  nearest  thwart, 
in  his  eagerness  to  get  to  the  stern  of  the  boat ;  and 
I  after  him  ;  for  we  knew  that  thing  was  coming 
towards  us  through  the  darkness ;  reaching  over 
that  piteous  mingled  heap  of  human  bones,  all  jumbled 
together  in  the  bows.  We  shouted  madly  to  the 
men,  and  for  answer  saw  the  bows  of  the  boat  emerge 
dimly  into  view,  round  the  starboard  counter  of  the 
derelict. 

"  '  Thank  God  !  '  I  gasped  out ;  but  Captain 
Gannington  yelled  to  them  to  show  a  light.  Yet 
this  they  could  not  do  ;  for  the  lamp  had  just  been 
stepped  on,  in  their  desperate  efforts  to  force  the 
boat  round  to  us. 

"  '  Quick  !   Quick  !  '  I  shouted. 

"  '  For  God's  sake  be  smart,  men  !  '  roared  the 
Captain  ;  and  both  of  us  faced  the  darkness  under 
the  port  counter,  out  of  which  we  knew  (but  could  not 
see)  the  thing  was  coming  towards  us. 

"  '  An  oar  !  Smart  now  ;  pass  me  an  oar  ! '  shouted 
the  Captain ;  and  reached  out  his  hands  through 
the  gloom  towards  the  oncoming  boat.  I  saw  a 
figure  stand  up  in  the  bows,  and  hold  something  out 
to  us,  across  the  intervening  yards  of  scum.  Captain 
Gannington  swept  his  hands  through  the  darkness, 
and  encountered  it. 

"  '  I've  got  it.  Let  go  there  !  '  he  said,  in  a  quick, 
tense  voice. 

"  In  the  same  instant,  the  boat  we  were  in,  was 


80  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

pressed  over  suddenly  to  starboard  by  some  tre- 
mendous weight.  Then  I  heard  the  Captain  shout: 
— '  Duck  y'r  head,  Doctor  ;  '  and  directly  afterwards 
he  swung  the  heavy,  fourteen-foot  ash  oar  round 
his  head,  and  struck  into  the  darkness.  There  came 
a  sudden  squelch,  and  he  struck  again,  with  a  savage 
grunt  of  fierce  energy.  At  the  second  blow,  the 
boat  righted,  with  a  slow  movement,  and  directly 
afterwards  the  other  boat  bumped  gently  into  ours. 

"  Captain  Gannington  dropped  the  oar,  and  spring- 
ing across  to  the  Second  Mate,  hove  him  up  off  the 
thwart,  and  pitched  him  with  knee  and  arms  clear 
in  over  the  bows  among  the  men  ;  then  he  shouted 
to  me  to  follow,  which  I  did,  and  he  came  after  me, 
bringing  the  oar  with  him.  We  carried  the  Second 
Mate  aft,  and  the  Captain  shouted  to  the  men  to  back 
the  boat  a  little  ;  then  they  got  her  bows  clear  of  the 
boat  we  had  just  left,  and  so  headed  out  through  the 
scum  for  the  open  sea. 

"  '  Where's  Tom  'Arrison  ?  '  gasped  one  of  the 
men,  in  the  midst  of  his  exertions.  He  happened 
to  be  Tom  Harrison's  particular  chum  ;  and  Captain 
Gannington  answered  him  briefly  enough  : — 
"  '  Dead  !  Pull  !  Don't  talk  !  ' 
"  Now,  difficult  as  it  had  been  to  force  the  boat 
through  the  scum  to  our  rescue,  the  difficulty  to  get 
clear  seemed  tenfold.  After  some  five  minutes  pulling, 
the  boat  seemed  hardly  to  have  moved  a  fathom, 
if  so  much  ;  and  a  quite  dreadful  fear  took  me  afresh  ; 
which   one   of   the   panting   men   put   suddenly   into 

words  : — 

"  '  It's  got  us  !  '  he  gasped  out  ;^  '  same  as'  poor 
Tom !  '  It  was  the  man  who  had  inquired  where 
Harrison  was. 

"  '  Shut  y'r  mouth  an'  pull ! '  roared  the  Captain. 


The  Derelict  81 

And  so  another  few  minutes  passed.  Abruptly,  it 
seemed  to  me  that  the  dull,  ponderous  Thud  !  Thud  ! 
Thud  !  Thud  !  came  more  plainly  through  the  dark, 
and  I  stared  intently  over  the  stern.  I  sickened 
a  little  ;  for  I  could  almost  swear  that  the  dark  mass 
of  the  monster  was  actually  Clearer  .  .  .  that  it  was 
coming  nearer  to  us  through  the  darkness.  Captain 
Gannington  must  have  had  the  same  thought ;  for 
after  a  brief  look  into  the  darkness,  he  made  one  jump 
to  the  stroke-oar,  and  began  to  double-bank  it. 

"  '  Get  forrid  under  the  thwarts,  Doctor  !  '  he  said 
to  me,  rather  breathlessly.  '  Get  in  the  bows,  an' 
see  if  you  can't  free  the  stuff  a  bit  round  the 
bows. ' 

"  I  did  as  he  told  me,  and  a  minute  later  I  was 
in  the  bows  of  the  boat,  puddling  the  scum  from  side 
to  side  with  the  boat-hook,  and  trying  to  break  up  the 
viscid,  clinging  muck.  A  heavy,  almost  animal-like 
odour  rose  off  it,  and  all  the  air  seemed  full  of  the 
deadening  smell.  I  shall  never  find  words  to  tell  any 
one  the  whole  horror  of  it  all — the  threat  that  seemed 
to  hang  in  the  very  air  around  us  ;  and,  but  a  little 
astern,  that  incredible  thing,  coming,  as  I  firmly 
believe,  nearer,  and  the  scum  holding  us  like  half 
melted  glue. 

"  The  minutes  passed  in  a  deadly,  eternal  fashion, 
and  I  kept  staring  back  astern  into  the  darkness ; 
but  never  ceasing  to  puddle  that  filthy  scum,  striking 
at  it  and  switching  it  from  side  to  side,  until  I  sweated. 

"  Abruptl}'',  Captain  Gannington  sang  out  : — 

"  •  We're  gaining,  lads.  Pull !  '  And  I  felt  the 
•boat  forge  ahead  perceptibly,  as  they  gave  way,  with 
renewed  hope  and  energ3^  There  was  soon  no  doubt 
of  it ;  for  presently  that  hideous  Thud !  Thud  ! 
Thud !      Thud !     had    grown   quite    dim    and   vague 


82  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

somewhere  astern,  and  I  could  no  longer  see  the  dere- 
hct ;  for  the  night  had  come  down,  tremendously  dark, 
and  all  the  sky  was  thick  overset  with  heavy  clouds. 
As  we  drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  edge  of  the  scum, 
the  boat  moved  more  and  more  freely,  until  suddenly 
we  emerged  with  a  clean,  sweet,  fresh  sound,  into  the 
open  sea. 

"  '  Thank  God  !  '  I  said  aloud,  and  drew  in  the 
boat-hook,  and  made  my  way  aft  again  to  where 
Captain  Gannington  now  sat  once  more  at  the  tiller.  I 
saw  him  looking  anxiously  up  at  the  sk}^  and  across 
to  where  the  lights  of  our  vessel  burned,  and  again  he 
would  seem  to  listen  intently ;  so  that  I  found  myself 
listening  also. 

"  '  What's  that.  Captain  ?  '  I  said  sharply  ;  for  it 
seemed  to  me  that  I  heard  a  sound  far  astern,  some- 
thing between  a  queer  whine  and  a  low  whistling. 
'  What's  that  ?  '    '  ■'■''' 

"  '  It's  wind,  Doctor,'  he  said,  in  a  low  voice.  *  I 
wish  to  God  we  were  aboard.' 

"  Then,  to  the  men  : — '  Pull !  Put  y'r  backs  into 
it,  or  ye'll  never  put  y'r  teeth  through  good  bread 
again  !  ' 

"  The  men  obeyed  nobly,  and  we  reached  the  vessel 
safely,  and  had  the  boat  safely  stowed,  before  the 
storm  came,  which  it  did  in  a  furious  white  smother 
out  of  the  West.  I  could  see  it  for  some  minutes 
beforehand,  tearing  the  sea,  in  the  gloom,  into  a  wall 
of  phosphorescent  foam  ;  and  as  it  came  nearer,  that 
peculiar  whining,  piping  sound,  grew  louder  and  louder, 
until  it  was  like  a  vast  steam  whistle,  rushing  towards 
us  across  the  sea. 

"  And  when  it  did  come,  we  got  it  very  heavy 
indeed  ;  so  that  the  morning  showed  us  nothing  but 
a  welter  of  white  seas ;    and  that  grim  derelict  was 


The  Derelict  83 

many  a  score  of  miles  away  in  the  smother,  lost  as 
utterly  as  our  hearts  could  wish  to  lose  her. 

"  When  I  came  to  examine  the  Second  Mate's  feet, 
I  found  them  in  a  very  extraordinary  condition. 
The  soles  of  them  had  the  appearance  of  having  been 
partly  digested.  I  know  of  no  other  word  that  so 
exactly  describes  their  condition  ;  and  the  agony  the 
man  suffered,  must  have  been  dreadful. 

"  Now,"  concluded  the  Doctor,  "  that  is  what  I  call 
a  case  in  point.  If  we  could  know  exactly  what  that 
old  vessel  had  originally  been  loaded  with,  and  the 
juxtaposition  of  the  various  articles  of  her  cargo,  plus 
the  heat  and  time  she  had  endured,  plus  one  or  two 
other  only  guessable  quantities,  we  should  have  solved 
the  chemistry  of  the  Life-Force,  gentlemen.  Not 
necessarily  the  origin,  mind  you  ;  but,  at  least,  we 
should  have  taken  a  big  step  on  the  way.  I've  often 
regretted  that  gale,  you  know — in  a  way,  that  is,  in 
a  way  !  It  was  a  most  amazing  discovery ;  but,  at 
the  time,  I  had  nothing  but  thankfulness  to  be  rid  of 
it.  .  .  .  A  most  amazing  chance.  I  often  think  of 
the  way  the  monster  woke  out  of  its  torpor.  .  .  . 
And  that  scum.  ,  .  .  The  dead  pigs  caught  in  it.  .  .  . 
I  fancy  that  was  a  grim  kind  of  net,  gentlemen.  .  .  . 
It  caught  many  things.  .  .  .  It  .  .  ." 

The  old  Doctor  sighed  and  nodded. 

"  If  I  could  have  had  her  bill  of  lading,"  he  said, 

his  eyes  full  of  regret.     "  If It  might  have  told 

me  something  to  help.  But,  anyway  .  .  .  ."  He 
began  to  fill  his  pipe  again.  ..."  I  suppose,"  he 
ended,  looking  round  at  us  gravely,  "  I  s'pose  we 
humans  are  an  ungrateful  lot  of  beggars,  at  the 
best !  .  .  .  But  .  .  .  but  what  a  chance  !  Wliat  a 
chance — eh  ?  " 


MY    HOUSE   SHALL   BE    CALLED 
THE    HOUSE    OF    PRAYER 

(An  incident  in  the  life  of  Father  Johnson,  Roman 
CathoHc    Priest.) 

"  And  the  Great  Deep  of  Life." 

Father  Johnson's  L-ish  village  is  not  Irish.  For 
some  unknown  reason  it  is  polyglot.  They  are,  as  one 
might  say,  a  most  extraordinary  family. 

I  took  my  friend,  James  Pelple,  down  with  me  for 
an  afternoon's  jaunt,  to  give  the  priest  a  call  in  his 
new  house  ;  for  he  had  moved  since  last  I  saw  him. 
Pelple  knew  of  Father  Johnson,  by  hearsay,  and  dis- 
approved strongly.  There  is  no  other  word  to 
describe  his  feelings. 

"  A  good  man,  yes,"  he  would  remark.  "  But  if 
all  you  tell  me,  and  half  of  what  I  hear  from  others, 
is  true,  he  is  much  too  lax.     His  ritual " 

"  I've  never  been  to  his  place,"  I  interrupted. 
"  I  know  him  only  as  the  man.  As  a  man,  I  love 
him,  as  you  know  ;  as  a  priest,  I  admire  him.  Con- 
cerning his  ritual,  I  know  nothing.  I  don't  believe 
he  is  the  man  to  be  unduly  lax  on  vital  points." 

"  Just  so !  Just  so !  "  said  Pelple.  "  /  know 
nothing ;    but  I've  heard  some  very  peculiar  things." 

I  smiled  to  myself.  Certainly,  Father  Johnson  has 
some  unusual  ways.     I  have  seen  him,  for  instance, 

.84 


The  House  of  Prayer  85 

when  we  have  been  alone,  forget  to  say  his  grace, 
until,  maybe,  he  had  eaten  one  dish.  Then,  remem- 
bering, he  would  touch  his  fingers  together,  and  say  : — 
"  Bless  this  food  to  me  "  (glancing  at  the  empty 
dish),  "  an'  I  thank  Thee  for  it  "  (looking  at  the  full 
one  in  front).  Then,  remembering  the  dish  yet  on 
the  stove  : — "  An'  that  too,  Lord,"  and  direct  the  Lord's 
attention  to  the  same,  by  a  backward  nod  of  his  head. 
Afterwards,  resuming  his  eating  and  talking,  in  the 
most  natural  fashion. 

"  I've  heard  that  he  allows  his  church  to  be  used 
for  some  very  extraordinary  purposes,"  continued 
Pelple.  "  I  cannot,  of  course,  credit  some  of  the 
things  I  hear ;  but  I  have  been  assured  that  the 
women  take  their  knitting  into  the  church  on  week- 
day evenings,  whilst  the  men  assemble  there,  as  to  a 
kind  of  rendezvous,  where  village  topics  are  allowed. 
I  consider  it  most  improper,  most  improper  !  Don't 
you? 

But  I  found  it  difficult  to  criticise  Father  Johnson. 
I  was  frankly  an  admirer,  as  I  am  to-day.  So  I  held 
my  peace,  assisted  by  an  elusive  movement  of  the 
head,  that  might  have  been  either  a  nod  or  a  negative. 
•  \Mien  we  reached  the  village,  and  asked  for  the 
priest's  new  house,  three  men  of  the  place  escorted 
us  there  in  state,  as  to  the  house  of  a  chieftain.  Reach- 
ing it,  two  of  them  pointed  to  him  through  the  window, 
where  he  sat  at  table,  smoking,  after  his  early  tea. 
The  third  man  would  have  accompanied  us  in  ;  but 
I  told  him  that  I  wanted  to  see  the  priest  alone  ; 
whereupon  they  all  went  happily.  To  have  need  to 
see  the  priest  alone,  was  a  need  that  each  and  all 
understood,  as  a  part  of  their  daily  lives. 

I  lifted  the  latch,  and  we  passed  in,  as  all  are  wel- 
come to  do  at  any  hour  of  the  day  or  night.     The 


86  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

door  of  his  house  opened  into  a  short  half-passage, 
and  I  could  see  direct  into  his  little  room,  out 
of  which  went  the  small  scullery-kitchen.  As  we 
entered,  I  heard  Sally,  his  servant-wench,  washing 
dishes  in  the  Uttle  scullery  ;  and  just  then  Father 
Johnson  called  out  to  her  : — "  Sally,  I'll  make  a  bet 
"wdth  ye." 

In  the  scullery,  I  heard  a  swift  rustling  and  a  sub- 
dued clatter,  and  knew  that  Sally  (having  heard 
that  preliminary  often  before)  was  stealthily  removing 
the  handles  of  the  knives  from  the  boihng  water. 
Then  her  repl}^ : — 

'.'  Did  y'r  riv'rence  sphake  ?  " 

"  I  did,  Sally,  colleen,"  said  the  priest's  voice. 
"  I'll  make  a  bet  with  ye,  Sally,  you've  the  handles 
av  thim  knives  over  hilt  in  the  hot  water — eh, 
SaUy  !  " 

And  then  Sally's  voice,  triumphant  : — 

"  Ye're  wrong,  y'r  riv'rence,  thim  knives  is  on  the 
■dhresser  !  " 

"  Aye,  Sally,"  said  Father  Johnson  ;  "  but  were 
they  not  in  the  hot  water  whin  I  sphoke  firrst  ?  " 

"  They  was,  y'r  riv'rence,"  said  Sally,  in  a  shamed 
voice  ;  just  as  she  had  been  making  the  same  con- 
fession for  the  past  seven  years.  And  then  the  priest 
had  a  little  fit  of  happy,  almost  silent  laughter,  puffing 
out  great  clouds  of  smoke  ;  in  the  midst  of  which  we 
walked  in  on  him. 

After  our  greetings,  which  the  priest  had  met  with 
that  strange  magnetism  of  heartiness,  that  had  left 
even  the  critical  Pelple  less  disapproving,  we  were 
set  down  to  a  tea,  which  we  simply  had  to  eat,  the 
priest  waiting  on  us  himself,  and  making  the  little 
meal  "go,"  as  you  might  say,  with  the  abundance  of 
his   energy    and   humour — telling    a   hundred   quaint 


The  House  of  Prayer  87 

tales  and  jests  of  the  country-side,  with  his  brogue 
making  points  of  laughter  where  more  formal  speech 
would  have  left  us  dull  and  untouched. 

The  meal  over,  the  priest  suggested  that  we  might 
like  to  accompany  him  down  to  his  chapel,  and  see 
whether  things  were  "  kapin'  happy,"  as  he  phrased 
it.  As  you  may  suppose,  we  were  quite  eager  to 
accept  his  invitation ;  for,  as  I  have  made  clear 
already,  I  had  never  been  down  to  his  place  before, 
and  I  had  heard  many  things — even  as  had  Pelple — 
about  his  chapel  and  his  methods. 

We  had  not  far  to  go.  On  the  way,  Father  John- 
son pointed  with  his  thumb  to  a  little  stone-built 
cabin,  very  small  and  crude,  which  I  learned  was 
rented  by  a  certain  old  Thomas  Cardallon,  who  was 
not  an  Irishman. 

"  Tom's  wife  died  last  week,"  said  the  priest, 
quietl}'.  "  He's  to  be  evicted  to-morrow  as  iver  is, 
if  he  cannot  fhind  the  rint." 

I  put  my  hand  into  my  pocket,  with  a  half  in- 
voluntary movement ;  but  he  shook  his  head,  as 
much  as  to  say  no  good  could  be  done  that  way. 
This  was  all,  and  we  were  past  the  small  hovel  in  a 
minute  ;  but  I  found  myself  looking  back  with  a 
sudden,  new  curiosity  at  the  little  rough-built  living- 
place,  that,  before,  had  been  only  one  poor  hut 
among  many ;  yet  was  now  instinct  to  me  with  a 
history  of  its  owti,  so  that  it  stood  out,  in  my  memory, 
from  the  others,  that  were  here  and  there  about,  as 
something  indicative  of  the  life-hope  and  striving  of 
two  poor  humans.  I  put  it  badly.  I  know ;  but  it 
was  just  such  a  jumble  of  vague  thoughts  and  emotions 
as  these,  that  stirred  in  my  mind.  I  had  reason  after- 
wards to  have  further  memory  of  the  cottage  and  its 
one-time  occupants. 


88  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

We  reached  the  chapel  very  soon;  but  when  we 
entered  I  stood  for  a  moment,  in  astonishment,  look- 
ing up  the  single  aisle  of  the  long  whitewashed  room. 
There  was  not  much  noise;  for,  as  I  discovered 
reverence  and  the  sense  of  the  Place,  held  power  all 
the  time;  moreover,  they  were  Father  Johnsons 
people.     I  looked  at  my  friend,  smiling,  I  fear. 

"Even  worse  than  Rumour  foretold,"  I  suggested 
in  a  low  voice  ;  but  he  made  no  reply  ;  for  he  appeared 
to  me  to  be  stifled  by  the  excess  of  his  astounded  dis- 
approval. The  priest  was  a  few  paces  before  us, 
where  we  had  made  our  involuntary  pause  m  the 
doorway  ;  and  he,  too,  came  to  a  stand,  and  looked 
at  the  scene,  unobserved. 

You  will  understand  that  there  was  cause  for  my 
astonishment,  and  even— as  many  will  agree-with 
the  strong  disapprobation  which  my  friend  was  feel- 
ing when  I  tell  you  that  there  was  an  auction  m  pro- 
press  within  the  House ;  for  within  the  doorway  to 
the  left,  was  a  pile  of  household  goods,  evidently 
from  the  cottage  of  one  of  the  very  poor.  In  front 
of  the  little  heap  was  an  old  man,  and  round  him,  m 
a  semicircle,  stood  a  number  of  the  villagers,  listening 
intently  to  the  old  man's  extohing  of  each  article  of 
his   household   gear,    which   he   was   putting   up   for 

"''My    House    shall    be    called '"     I    quoted 

softly  and  involuntarily  ;  but  less  with  any  blame 
in  my  heart,  than  a  great  wonder,  salted  by  a  vague 
shockedness.  The  priest,  still  standing  a  little  ^before 
me  caught  my  half  unconscious  quotation;  but  he 
only  said  "  Hush  !  "  so  gently  that  I  felt  suddenly 
ashamed  as  if  I  were  a  child  fumbling  with  the  Gar- 
ments of  Life,  which  the  priest  had  worn  upon  his 
shoulders  all  the  long  years. 


The  House  of  Prayer  89 

For  maybe  the  half  of  a  minute  longer,  we  stood 
staring  at  the  scene,  Father  Johnson  still  a  few  paces 
before  us  into  the  chapel. 

"  Tom  Cardallon,"  he  explained  presently,  over  his 
shoulder.  "  If  he  sold  outside,  the  officers  would  con- 
fiscate.    I  showed  ye  the  house  av  him,  as  we  passed." 

He  beckoned  us  to  join  the  group  of  villagers  round 
the  pitiful  pile  of  household  goods,  which  we  did, 
whilst  he  went  on  up  the  chapel,  speaking  a  word  here 
and  there  to  the  many  who  were  gathered  together 
in  companionship  for  the  quiet  hour  that  preceded 
the  evening  Rosary.  Some  were  praying ;  a  few 
were  sitting  quietly  in  restful  isolation  from  the 
world  of  reality  ;  many  of  the  women,  I  noticed,  were 
knitting,  or  sitting  making  butter  in  small  glass  jars, 
which  they  shook  constantly  in  their  hands.  The 
whole  scene,  in  the  soft  evening  light  that  came  in 
through  the  long  narrow  windows,  giving  me  an  extra- 
ordinary sense  of  restfulness  and  natural  humanity. 

I  turned  presently  from  my  viewing  of  the  general 
chapel,  to  the  particular  corner  where  I  stood  upon 
the  skirt  of  the  little  group  around  the  old  man.  I 
began  to  catch  the  drift  of  his  remarks,  uttered  in  a 
low  tone,  and  found  myself  edging  nearer,  to  hear 
more  plainly.  I  gathered — as  the  priest  had  told 
us — that  he  had  just  lost  his  wife,  after  a  long  illness 
which  had  run  them  hopelessly  into  debt.  Indeed, 
as  you  know,  the  eviction  from  the  little  hovel  was 
arranged  for  the  morrow,  if  the  old  man  could  not 
find  the  small  sum  which  would  make  it  possible 
for  him  to  stay  on  in  the  old  cottage,  where  he  had 
evidently  spent  many  very  happy  years. 

"  This  'ere,"  the  old  man  was  saying,  holding  up 
a  worn  saucepan,  "  wer'  one  as  my  missus  'as  cooked 
a  pow'r  o'  spuds  in." 


90  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

He  stopped,  and  turned  half  from  us  a  moment, 
with  a  queer  little  awkward  gesture,  as  if  looking 
round  for  something  that  he  knew  subconsciously 
he  was  not  in  search  of.  I  believe,  in  reality,  the 
movement  was  prompted  by  an  unrealised  desire  to 
avert  his  face  momentarily,  which  had  begun  to 
work,  as  memory  stirred  in  him.  He  faced  round 
again. 

"  Eh,"  he  continued,  "  she  wer'  great  on  chips  in 
batter,  she  wer'.  Me  'n  'er  used  ter  'ave  'em  every 
Sunday  night  as  ever  was.  Like  as  they  was  good 
to  sleep  on,  so  she  said.  An'  I  guess  they  was  all 
cooked  in  this  'ere  ole  pan." 

He  finished  his  curious  eulogy,  rather  lamely,  and 
pulled  out  his  old  red  handkerchief.  After  he  had 
blown  his  nose,  and  furtively  wiped  his  eyes,  he  used 
the  handkerchief  to  polish  the  interior  and  exterior 
of  the  pan  ;  after  which  he  held  it  up  once  more  to 
the  \dew  of  the  silent  and  sympathetic  crowd. 

"  What'U  ye  give  for  it  ?  "  he  asked,  looking  round 
anxiously  at  the  many  faces. 

"  Sixpence,"  said  a  low  voice,  and  the  old  man, 
after  a  quick  glance  round  the  crowd,  said  :  "  It's 
yours,  Mrs.  Mike  Callan,"  and  handed  it  across  to  a 
woman  in  the  front  of  the  crowd.  The  money  was 
paid  into  his  hand  in  coppers,  as  I  could  tell  by  the 
chink. 

I  looked  towards  the  purchaser,  feeling  that  I 
should  like  to  buy  back  the  saucepan,  and  return  it 
to  the  old  man.  This  way,  I  saw  Father  Johnson 
moving  here  and  there  through  the  little  crowd, 
with  a  calico  bag  in  his  hand.  From  this,  in  a  sur- 
reptitious manner,  he  drew  something  constantly — 
which  I  conceived,  by  the  faint  chinking,  to  be  money 
— and   distributed  it   to  a   man  here   and  a   woman 


The  House  of  Prayer  91 

there  among  the  onlookers,  accompanying  each  act 
with  a  few  whispered  words. 

I  understood  much  and  guessed  the  rest.  It  was 
obvious  that  the  people  had  little  money  to  spare  ; 
for  both  their  clothes  and  their  little  huts,  all  told 
of  an  utter  poverty.  This  poverty,  Father  Johnson 
was  remedying  for  the  occasion,  and  his  whispered 
words  were  probably  hints  concerning  the  articles  for 
which  to  bid,  and  the  amount  to  be  bid  for  each. 
This,  of  course,  is  only  a  guess ;  but  I  believe  that 
I  am  correct,  in  the  main. 

Once,  I  bid  for  a  little  old  crock,  offering  double 
or  treble  its  original  value  ;  but  the  old  man  took 
not  the  slightest  notice,  and  continued  to  offer  the 
article  to  bids  that  counted  pence  to  the  shihings 
of  my  offer.  I  was  astonished,  and  began  to  see 
newly,  if  I  may  put  it  in  that  way.  The  man  next 
to  me,  bid  fivepence  ;  then  turned  and  put  up  his 
finger,  shaking  his  head  in  a  friendly  fashion,  but 
warningty.  Evidently,  I  was  to  be  allowed  no  part 
in  this  function  of  neighbourly  help,  which  was 
ob\-iously  ordered  by  rules  of  which  I  lacked  a  funda- 
mental knowledge,  A  woman,  near  to  me,  made 
things  somewhat  clearer.  She  bent  my-wards,  and 
whispered  : 

"  'E'd  not  take  it  back  from  you.  Sir,  nor  the  price 
you  offered,  neither.  'E's  got  a  inderpendent  'eart, 
'e  'as.  Sir.     Poor  old  man." 

So  the  things  were  going  to  be  given  back,  after 
all.  I  wondered  how  they  would  arrange  the  return- 
ing. It  was  evident  that  he  had  no  conceiving  of 
the  intentions  of  his  neighbours  ;  for  the  emotion  of 
distress  was  too  plainly  writ  in  his  face,  with  each 
familiar  article  that  he  auctioned.  I  learned  after- 
wards  that   he   was   detained   in   chapel   by   Father 


92  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

Johnson  for  a  few  "  worrds,"  during  which  the  house- 
hold gear  was  replaced  in  his  cottage. 

^^^len  everything  else  had  been  sold,  there  re- 
mained only  a  poor  bundle  of  something,  done  up 
in  a  faded  shawl.  It  was  as  if  the  old  man  had  put 
off,  to  the  very  end,  the  selling  of  this.  Now,  he  got 
down  clumsily  on  to  his  knees,  and  began  to  undo 
the.  knots,  fumbling  stupidly,  and  bending  his  head 
low  over  the  bundle.  He  got  the  knots  undone  at 
last,  and  presently,  after  a  little  turning  over  of  the 
fev/  things,  in  a  way  that  I  perceived  to  be  more  a 
dumb  caressing,  than  because  he  sought  any  parti- 
cular article,  he  rose  to  his  feet,  holding  an  old  worn 
skirt. 

"  This  'ere,"  he  said,  slowly,  "  wer'  my  missus's 
best,  an'  she  wer'  very  spechul  'bout  it,  these  'ere 
thirty  year.  I  mind  w'en  she  first  wor'  it."  (His 
face  lined  a  moment  with  emotion,  grotesquely.) 
"  She  wer'  that  slim  's  she  hed  ter  put  a  tuck  in  ther 
waistban'  ;  not  that  it  'armed  it  ;  she  tuk  pertickler 
care,  an " 

I  lost  the  old  man's  low-voiced  explanation  at  this 
point ;  for  I  was  aware  suddenly  that  Father  Johnson 
was  almost  at  my  side.  I  glanced  an  instant  at  him  ; 
but  he  was  staring  at  the  old  man,  with  the  oddest 
expression  on  his  face.  I  noticed,  subconsciously, 
that  he  was  clenching  and  unclenching  his  hands 
rapidly.  Then  the  old  man's  quaver  caught  my  ear 
again : — 

"  It's  fine  an'  good  cloth,  an'  them  stain-marks 
couldn't  be  'elped.  As  she  said,  it  wer'  ther  Lord's 
will,  an'  she  mustn't  complain.  This  'ere  one  on  the  'em 
wer'  done  fifteen  year  back "  Again  my  atten- 
tion was  distracted.  I  caught  the  sharp  flip  of  a 
finger  and  thumb,  and  a  man  looked  round  and  sidled 


The  House  of  Prayer  93 

out  of  the  crowd,  up  to  Father  Johnson,  in  obedience 
to  his  signal. 

"  Sthop  ut,  Mike  !  Sthop  ut  this  instant  !  "  I 
heard  the  priest  whisper,  his  brogue  coming  out  strong, 
because  he  was  stirred.  "  Offer  tin  bob  for  the  lot, 
an'  sthop  ut ;    'tis  breakin'  the  hearts  av  us." 

He  handed  the  man  some  money,  and  Mike  bid 
for  the  shawl-full.  But,  even  then,  it  was  horrible  to 
see  old  Cardallon's  fight,  before  he  could  rehnquish 
the  garments  to  the  buyer. 

The  sale  was  over.  The  latter  part  of  it  had  been 
attended  by  an  ever  increasing  audience,  from  those 
who  at  first  had  been  content  to  sit  and  talk  and  rest 
quietly  on  the  benches  ;  and  who — coming  from  the 
outlying  districts — were  not  intimate  neighbours  of 
old  Tom.  As  they  broke  up  to  return  to  their  seats, 
I  saw  one  or  two  women  crying  openly. 

James  Pelple  and  I  stayed  for  the  service  of  the 
Rosary,  in  all  reverence,  though  of  another  persua- 
sion. Afterwards,  as  we  stood  in  the  doorway,  wait- 
ing for  Father  Johnson,  I  looked  across  at  him. 

"  Well  ?  "  I  queried,  "  a  den  of  thieves  ?  " 

But  Pelple,  "  the  Stickler,"  shook  his  head. 

"  A  wonderful  man,"  he  said,  "  a  wonderful  man.  I 
should  like  to  know  him  better." 

I  laughed  outright. 

"  So  you've  come  under  the  banner  too,"  I  said. 
"  I  wondered  whether  you  would."  And  just  then. 
Father  Johnson  joined  us  in  his  cassock,  and  we  began 
our  return  journey  to  his  house. 

On  the  way,  we  passed  the  door  of  Cardallon's 
cottage,  the  upper  half  of  which  was  open.  The  priest 
looked  in,  with  a  cheery  word,  and  we  joined  him. 
The  old  man  was  standing  in  the  centre  of  his 
hard-beaten  mud   floor,   staring  round  in  a  stunned, 


94  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

incredulous  fashion  at  all  his  restored  household  goods. 
He  looked  half-\'acantly  at  Father  Johnson,  the  tears 
running  slowly  down  his  wrinkled  face.  In  his  right 
hand,  he  held  the  little  bundle,  knotted  round  with 
the  faded  shawl. 

The  priest  stretched  a  hand  over  the  half-door,  and 
blessed  old  Tom  Cardallon  in  the  loveliest,  homeliest 
way,  that  stirred  me,  I  admit  frankly,  to  the  very 
depths. 

Then  he  turned  away,  and  we  resumed  our  walk, 
leaving  the  old  man  to  his  tears,  which  I  am 
convinced  were  signs,  in  part  at  least,  of  a  gentle 
happiness. 

"  He  would  not  take  the  money  from  us,"  said  the 
priest,  later.  "  But  do  ye  think  the  heart  av  him 
would  let  him  sind  back  the  gear  !  " 

I  looked  across  at  Pelple,  and  smiled  to  his  nod  ; 
for  I  knew  that  his  last  vague  questioning  was 
answered. 


FROM  THE  TIDELESS  SEA 

The  Captain  of  the  schooner  leant  over  the  rail,  and 
stared  for  a  moment,  intently. 

"  Pass  us  them  glasses,  Jock,"  he  said,  reaching 
a  hand  behind  him. 

Jock  left  the  wheel  for  an  instant,  and  ran  into 
the  little  companionway.  He  emerged  immediately 
with  a  pair  of  marine-glasses,  which  he  pushed  into 
the  waiting  hand. 

For  a  little,  the  Captain  inspected  the  object  through 
the  binoculars.  Then  he  lowered  them,  and  polished 
the  object  glasses. 

"  Seems  like  er  water-logged  barr'l  as  sumone's 
been  doin'  fancy  paintin'  on,"  he  remarked  after  a 
further  stare.  "  Shove  ther  'elm  do\vn  er  bit,  Jock, 
an'  we'll  'ave  er  closer  look  at  it." 

Jock  obeyed,  and  soon  the  schooner  bore  almost 
straight  for  the  object  which  held  the  Captain's 
attention.  Presently,  it  was  within  some  fifty  feet, 
and  the  Captain  sung  out  to  the  boy  in  the  caboose 
to  pass  along  the  boathook. 

Very  slowly,  the  schooner  drew  nearer,  for  the 
^^^nd  was  no  more  than  breathing  gently.  At  last 
the  cask  was  within  reach,  and  the  Captain  grappled 
at  it  with  the  boathook.  It  bobbed  in  the  calm 
water,  under  his  ministrations  ;  and,  for  a  moment, 
the  thing  seemed  likely  to  elude  him.     Then  he  had 

95 


96  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  hook  fast  in  a  bit  of  rotten-looking  rope  which 
was  attached  to  it.  He  did  not  attempt  to  Uft  it  by 
the  rope  ;  but  sung  out  to  the  boy  to  get  a  bowline 
round  it.  This  was  done,  and  the  two  of  them  hove 
it  up  on  to  the  deck. 

The  Captain  could  see  now,  that  the  thing  was  a 
small  water-breaker,  the  upper  part  of  which  was 
ornamented  with  the  remains  of  a  painted  name. 

"  H— M— E— B "    spelt   out   the   Captain   with 

difficulty,  and  scratched  his  head.  "  'ave  er  look  at 
this  'ere,  Jock.     See  wot  you  makes  of  it." 

Jock  bent  over  from  the  wheel,  expectorated,  and 
then  stared  at  the  breaker.  For  nearly  a  minute 
he  looked  at  it  in  silence. 

"  I'm  thinkin'  some  of  the  letterin's  washed  awa^" 
he  said  at  last,  with  considerable  deliberation.  "  I 
have  ma  doots  if  he'll  be  able  to  read  it. 

"  Hadn't  ye  no  better  knock  in  the  end  ?  "  he 
suggested,  after  a  further  period  of  pondering.  "  I'm 
thinkin'  3-6 '11  be  lang  comin'  at  them  contents  other- 
wise." 

"  It's  been  in  ther  water  er  thunderin'  long  time," 
remarked  the  Captain,  turning  the  bottom  side  up- 
wards.    "  Look  at  them  barnacles  !  " 

Then,  to  the  boy  : — 

"  Pass  erlong  ther  'atchet  outer  ther  locker." 

Wliilst  the  boy  was  away,  the  Captain  stood  the 
little  barrel  on^end,  and  kicked  away  some  of  the 
barnacles  from  the  underside.  With  them,  came 
away  a  great  shell  of  pitch.  He  bent,  and  inspected 
ft. 

"  Blest  if  ther  thing  ain't  been  pitched  !  "  he  said. 
"  This  'ere's  been  put  afloat  er  purpose,  an'  they've 
been  mighty  anxious  as  ther  stuff  in  it  shouldn't  be 
'armed." 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  97 

He  kicked  away  another  mass  of  the  bamacle- 
studded  pitch.  Then,  with  a  sudden  impulse,  he 
picked  up  the  whole  thing  and  shook  it  violently. 
It  gave  out  a  light,  dull,  thudding  sound,  as  though 
something  soft  and  small  were  within.  Then  the 
boy  came  with  the  hatchet. 

"  Stan'  clear  !  "  said  the  Captain,  and  raised  the 
implement.  The  next  instant,  he  had  driven  in  one 
end  of  the  barrel.  Eagerly,  he  stooped  forward. 
He  dived  his  hand  down  and  brought  out  a  little 
bundle  stitched  up  in  oilskin. 

"  I  don'  spect  as  it's  anytliin'  of  valley,"  he  re- 
marked. "  But  I  guess  as  there's  sumthin'  'ere  as 
'11  be  worth  tellin'  'bout  w'en  we  gets  'ome." 

He  slit  up  the  oilskin  as  he  spoke.  Underneath, 
there  was  another  covering  of  the  same  material, 
and  under  that  a  third.  Then  a  longish  bundle  done 
up  in  tarred  canvas.  This  was  removed,  and  a 
black,  cylindrical  shaped  case  disclosed  to  view. 
It  proved  to  be  a  tin  canister,  pitched  over.  Inside 
of  it,  neatly  wTapped  within  a  last  strip  of  oilskin, 
was  a  roll  of  papers,  which,  on  opening,  the  Captain 
found  to  be  covered  with  writing.  The  Captain 
shook  out  the  various  wrappings ;  but  found 
nothing  further.  He  handed  the  MS.  across  to 
Jock. 

"  More  'n  your  line  'n  mine,  I  guess,"  he  remarked. 
"  Jest  you  read  it  up,  an'  I'll  listen." 

He  turned  to  the  boy. 

"  Fetch  thef  dinner  erlong  'ere.  Me  an'  ther  Mate 
'11  'ave  it  comfertable  up  'ere,  an'  you  can  take  ther 
wheel.  .  .  .  Now  then,  Jock  !  " 

And,  presently,  Jock  began  to  read. 


98  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 


"The  Losing  of  the  Homehird" 

"The  'Oniebird /  "  exclaimed  the  Captain.  "  Why, 
she  were  lost  w'en  I  wer'  quite  a  young  feller.  Let 
me  see — seventy- three.  That  were  it.  Tail  end  er 
seventy-three  w'en  she  left  'ome,  an'  never  'eard 
of  since  ;  not  as  I  knows.  Go  a'ead  with  ther  yam, 
Jock." 

"It  is  Christmas  eve.  Two  years  ago  to-day,  we 
became  lost  to  the  world.  Two  years !  It  seems 
like  twenty  since  I  had  my  last  Christmas  in  Eng- 
land. Now,  I  suppose,  we  are  alread3/-  forgotten — • 
and  this  ship  is  but  one  more  among  the  missing  ! 
My  God  !  to  think  upon  our  loneliness  gives  me  a 
choking  feeling,  a  tightness  across  the  chest  ! 

"  I  am  writing  this  in  the  saloon  of  the  sailing 
ship,  Homehird,  and  writing  with  but  little  hope 
of  human  eye  ever  seeing  that  which  I  write  ;  for 
we  are  in  the  heart  of  the  dread  Sargasso  Sea — the 
Tideless  Sea  of  the  North  Atlantic.  From  the  stump 
of  our  mizzen  mast,  one  may  see,  spread  out  to  the 
far  horizon,  an  interminable  waste  of  weed — a  trea- 
cherous, silent  vastitude  of  slime  and  hideousness  ! 

"  On  our  port  side,  distant  some  seven  or  eight 
miles,  there  is  a  great,  shapeless,  discoloured  mass. 
No  one,  seeing  it  for  the  first  time,  would  suppose  it 
to  be  the  hull  of  a  long  lost  vessel.  It  bears  but 
little  resemblance  to  a  sea-going  craft,  because  of  a 
strange  superstructure  which  has  been  built  upon  it. 
An  examination  of  the  vessel  herself,  through  a  tele- 
scope, tells  one  that  she  is  unmistakably  ancient. 
Probably  a  hundred,  possibly  two  hundred,  years. 
Think  of  it  !  Two  hundred  years  in  the  midst  of  this 
desolation  !     It  is  an  eternity. 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  99 

"  At  first  wc  wondered  at  that  extraordinary- 
superstructure.  Later,  we  were  to  learn  its  use— 
and  prolit  by  the  teaching  of  hands  long  withered. 
It  is  inordinately  strange  that  we  should  have  come 
upon  this  sight  for  the  dead  !  Yet,  thought  suggests, 
that  there  may  be  many  such,  which  have  lain  here 
through  the  centuries  in  this  World  of  Desolation. 
I  had  not  imagined  that  the  earth  contained  so  much 
loneliness,  as  is  held  within  the  circle,  seen  from 
the  stump  of  our  shattered  mast.  Then  comes  the 
thought  that  I  might  wander  a  hundred  miles  in  any 
direction — and  still  be  lost. 

"  And  that  craft  yonder,  that  one  break  in  the 
monotony,  that  monument  of  a  few  men's  misery, 
serves  only  to  make  the  solitude  the  more  atrocious  ; 
for  she  is  a  very  effigy  of  terror,  telling  of  tragedies 
in  the  past,  and  to  come  ! 

"  And  now  to  get  back  to  the  beginnings  of  it; 
I  joined  the  Homehird,  as  a  passenger,  in  the  early 
part  of  November.  My  health  was  not  quite  the  thing, 
and  I  hoped  the  voyage  would  help  to  set  me  up. 
We  had  a  lot  of  dirty  weather  for  the  first  couple  of 
weeks  out,  the  wind  dead  ahead.  Then  we  got  a 
Southerly  slant,  that  carried  us  down  through  the 
forties ;  but  a  good  deal  more  to  the  Westward  than 
we  desired.  Here  we  ran  right  into  a  tremendous 
cyclonic  storm.  All  hands  were  called  to  shorten 
sail,  and  so  urgent  seemed  our  need,  that  the  very 
officers  went  aloft  to  help  make  up  the  sails,  leaving 
only  the  Captain  (who  had  taken  the  wheel)  and  myself 
upon  the  poop.  On  the  maindeck,  the  cook  was 
busy  letting  go  such  ropes  as  the  Mates  desired. 

"  Abruptly,  some  distance  ahead,  through  the 
vague  sea-mist,  but  rather  on  the  port  bow,  I  saw 
loom  up  a  great  black  wall  of  cloud. 


100  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  '  Look,  Captain  !  '  I  exclaimed ;  but  it  had 
vanished  before  I  had  finished  speaking.  A  mmu  e 
later    it    came    again,    and    this     time    the     Captam 

^^  -  ''o  mv  God  !  '  he  cried,  and  dropped  his  hands 
from  the  wheel.  He  leapt  into  the  companiomvay, 
and  seized  a  speaking  trumpet.     Then  out  on  deck. 

He  put  it  to  his  lips. 

'-Come   doN^from   aloft!     Come   down!     Come 
down  '  '  he  shouted.     And  suddenly  I  lost  his  voice 
in  a  terrific  mutter  of  sound  from  somewhere  to  port 
It  was  the  voice  of  the  storm-shoutmg     My  God  ! 
I  had   never  heard   anything  like   it!     It   ceased  as 
suddenly    as   it   had   begun,    and,    m    tlie   succeeding 
quietneJs,  I  heard  the  whining  of  the  ^-k-g-tackle 
through   the   blocks.     Then   came   ^  ^l^'^  .f^\?^^ 
bras,   upon   the    deck,    and   I    turned   quickly.     The 
Captain  had  thrown  down  the  trumpet,  and  sprung 
back  to  the  wheel.     I  glanced  aloft,  and  saw  that  many 
of  the  men  were  already  in  the  rigging,  and  racing 

down  Hke  cats.  .  , 

"  I  heard  the  Captain  draw  his  breath  with  a  qmck 

^^'^''  Hold  on  for  your  lives  !  '  he  shouted,  in  a  hoarse, 

unnatural  voice.  .    ,        -, 

'I  looked  at  him.  He  was  staring  to  windward 
with  a  fixed  stare  of  painful  intentness,  and  my  gaze 
followed  his.  I  saw,  not  four  hundred  yards  distant 
an  enormous  mass  of  foam  and  water  co^nmg  down 
upon  us.  In  the  same  instant,  I  caught  the  his.  of  it 
and  immediately  it  was  a  shriek,  so  intense  and 
awful,  that  I  cringed  impotently  with  sheer  teiror. 

"The  smother  of  water  and  foam  took  the  .hip 
a  little  foreside  of  the  beam,  and  the  wind  was  with 
it      Immediately,    the   vessel   rolled   over   on   to   her 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  loi 

side,    the    sea-froth    flying    over    her    in    tremendous 
cataracts. 

"  It  seemed  as  though  nothing  could  save  us. 
Over,  over  we  went,  until  I  was  swinging  against 
the  deck,  almost  as  against  the  side  of  a  house ;  for 
I  had  grasped  the  weather  rail  at  the  Captain's  warning. 
As  I  swung  there,  I  saw  a  strange  thing.  Before  me 
was  the  port  quarter  boat.  Abruptly,  the  canvas 
cover  was  flipped  clean  off  it,  as  though  by  a  vast, 
invisible  hand. 

"The  next  instant,  a  flurry  of  oars,  boats' masts 
and  odd  gear  flittered  up  into  the  air,  like  so  many 
feathers,  and  blew  to  leeward  and  was  lost  in  the 
roaring  chaos  of  foam.  The  boat,  herself,  lifted 
in  her  chocks,  and  suddenly  was  blown  clean  down 
on  to  the  main-deck,  where  she  lay  all  in  a  ruin  of  white- 
painted  timbers. 

"  A  minute  of  the  most  intense  suspense  passed  ; 
then,  suddenly,  the  ship  righted,  and  I  saw  that  the 
three  masts  had  carried  away.  Yet,  so  hugely  loud 
was  the  crying  of  the  storm,  that  no  sound  of  their 
breaking  had  reached  me. 

"  I  looked  tov/ards  the  wheel ;  but  no  one  was 
there.  Then  I  made  out  something  crumpled  up 
against  the  lee  rail.  I  struggled  across  to  it,  and 
found  that  it  was  the  Captain.  He  was  insensible, 
and  queerly  limp  in  his  rigiit  arm  and  leg.  I  looked 
round.  Several  of  the  men  were  crawling  aft  along 
the  poop.  I  beckoned  to  them,  and  pointed  to  the 
wheel,  and  then  to  the  Captain.  A  couple  of  them 
came  towards  me,  and  one  went  to  the  wheel.  Then 
I  made  out  through  the  spray  the  form  of  the  Second 
Mate.  He  had  several  more  of  the  men  with  him,  and 
they  had  a  coil  of  rope,  which  they  took  forrard.  I 
learnt  afterwards  that  they  were  hastening  to  get  out 


102  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

a  sea-anchor,  so  as  to  keep  the  ship's  head  towards 
the  wind. 

"  We  got  the  Captain  below,  and  into  his  bunk. 
There,  I  left  him  in  the  hands  of  his  daughter  and 
the  steward,  and  returned  on  deck. 

"  Presently,  the  Second  Mate  came  back,  and  with 
him  the  remainder  of  the  men.  I  found  then  that 
only  seven  had  been  saved  in  all.     The  rest  had  gone. 

"  The  day  passed  terribly — the  wind  getting  stronger 
hourly  ;  though,  at  its  worst,  it  was  nothing  hke  so 
tremendous  as  that  first  burst. 

"  The  night  came — a  night  of  terror,  with  the 
thunder  and  hiss  of  the  giant  seas  in  the  air  above 
us,  and  the  wind  bello^^dng  like  some  vast  Elemental 
beast. 

"  Then,  just  before  the  dawn,  the  wind  lulled,  al- 
most in  a  moment ;  the  ship  rolling  and  wallowing 
fearfully,  and  the  water  coming  aboard — hundreds 
of  tons  at  a  time.  Immediately  afterwards  it  caught 
us  again  ;  but  more  on  the  beam,  and  bearing  the 
vessel  over  on  to  her  side,  and  this  only  by  the  pressure 
of  the  element  upon  the  stark  hull.  As  we  came 
head  to  wind  again,  we  righted,  and  rode,  as  we  had 
for  hours,  amid  a  thousand  fantastic  hills  of  phos- 
phorescent flame. 

"  Again  the  wind  died — coming  again  after  a  longer 
pause,  and  then,  all  at  once,  leaving  us.  And  so, 
for  the  space  of  a  terrible  half  hour,  the  ship  lived 
through  the  most  awful,  windless  sea  that  can  be 
imagined.  There  was  no  doubting  but  that  we 
had  driven  right  ifito  the  calm  centre  of  the  cyclone 
— calm  only  so  far  as  lack  of  wind,  and  yet  more 
dangerous  a  thousand  times  than  the  most  furious 
hurricane  that  ever  blew. 

"  For  now  we  were  beset  by  the  stupendous  Pyra- 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  103 

midal  Sea  ;  a  sea  once  witnessed,  never  forgotten  ; 
a  sea  in  which  the  whole  bosom  of  the  ocean  is  pro- 
jected towards  heaven  in  monstrous  hills  of  water ; 
not  leaping  forward,  as  would  be  the  case  if  there  were 
wind  ;  but  hurling  upwards  in  jets  and  peaks  of  living 
brine,  and  falling  back  in  a  continuous  thunder  of 
foam. 

"  Imagine  this,  if  j^ou  can,  and  then  have  the  clouds 
break  away  suddenly  overhead,  and  the  moon  shine 
down  upon  that  hellish  turmoil,  and  you  will  have 
such  a  sight  as  has  been  given  to  mortals  but  seldom, 
save  with  death.  And  this  is  what  we  saw,  and  to 
my  mind  there  is  nothing  within  the  knowledge  of 
man  to  which  I  can  liken  it. 

"  Yet  we  lived  through  it,  and  through  the  wind 
that  came  later.  But  two  more  complete  days  and 
nights  had  passed,  before  the  storm  ceased  to  be  a 
terror  to  us,  and  then,  only  because  it  had  carried  us 
into  the  seaweed  laden  waters  of  the  vast  Sargasso 
Sea. 

"  Here,  the  great  billows  first  became  foamless ; 
and  dwindled  gradually  in  size  as  we  drifted  further 
among  the  floating  masses  of  weed.  Yet  the  wind 
was  still  furious,  so  that  the  ship  drove  on  steadily, 
sometimes  between  banks,  and  other  times  over 
them. 

"  For  a  day  and  a  night  we  drifted  thus ;  and 
then  astern  I  made  out  a  great  bank  of  weed,  vastly 
greater  than  any  which  hitherto  we  had  encountered. 
Upon  this,  the  wind  drove  us  stern  foremost,  so  that 
we  over-rode  it.  We  had  been  forced  some  distance 
across  it,  when  it  occurred  to  me  that  our  speed  was 
slackening.  I  guessed  presently  that  the  sea-anchor, 
ahead,  had  caught  in  the  weed,  and  was  holding. 
Even  as  I  surmised  tliis,   I  heard  from  beyond  the 


104  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

bows  a  faint,  droning,  twanging  sound,  blending  with 
the  roar  of  the  wind.  There  came  an  indistinct 
report,  and  the  ship  lurched  backwards  through  the 
weed.  The  hawser,  connecting  us  with  the  sea-anchor, 
had  parted. 

"  I  saw  the  Second  Mate  run  forrard  with  several 
men.  They  hauled  in  upon  the  hawser,  until  the 
broken  end  was  aboard.  In  the  meantime,  the 
ship,  having  nothing  ahead  to  keep  her  "  bows  on," 
began  to  slew  broadside  towards  the  wind.  I  saw  the 
men  attach  a  chain  to  the  end  of  the  broken  hawser ; 
then  the}^  paid  it  out  again,  and  the  ship's  head  came 
back  to  the  gale. 

"  When  the  Second  Mate  came  aft,  I  asked  him 
why  this  had  been  done,  and  he  explained  that  so 
long  as  the  vessel  was  end-on,  she  would  travel  over 
the  weed.  I  inquired  why  he  wished  her  to  go  over 
the  weed,  and  he  told  me  that  one  of  the  men  had 
made  out  what  appeared  to  be  clear  water  astern, 
and  that — could  we  gain  it — we  might  win  free. 

"  Through  the  whole  of  that  day,  we  moved  rear- 
wards across  the  great  bank  ;  yet,  so  far  from  the 
weed  appearing  to  show  signs  of  thinning,  it  grew 
steadily  thicker,  and,  as  it  became  denser,  so  did  our 
speed  slacken,  until  the  ship  was  barely  moving. 
And  so  the  night  found  us. 

"  The  following  morning  discovered  to  us  that 
we  were  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  a  great  expanse 
of  clear  water — apparently  the  open  sea  ;  but  un- 
fortunately the  wind  had  dropped  to  a  moderate 
breeze^  and  the  vessel  was  motionless,  deep  sunk  in 
the  weed  ;  great  tufts  of  which  rose  up  on  all  sides, 
to  within  a  few  feet  of  the  level  of  our  main-deck. 

"  A  man  was  sent  up  the  stump  of  the  mizzen,  to 
take  a  look  round.     From  there,  he  reported  that  he 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  105 

could  see  something,  that  might  be  weed,  across  the 
water ;  but  it  was  too  far  distant  for  him  to  be  in  any 
way  certain.  Immediately  afterwards,  he  called  out 
that  there  was  something,  away  on  our  port  beam  ; 
but  what  it  was,  he  could  not  say,  and  it  was  not  until 
a  telescope  was  brought  to  bear,  that  v/e  made  it  out 
to  be  the  hull  of  the  ancient  vessel  I  have  previously 
mentioned. 

"  A'fid  now,  the  Second  Mate  began  to  cast  about 
for  some  means  by  which  he  could  bring  the  ship  to 
the  clear  water  astern.  The  first  thing  which  he  did, 
was  to  bend  a  sail  to  a  spare  yard,  and  hoist  it  to  the 
top  of  the  mizzen  stump.  By  this  means,  he  was  able 
to  dispense  with  the  cable  towing  over  the  bows, 
which,  of  course,  helped  to  prevent  the  ship  from 
moving.  In  addition,  the  sail  would  prove  helpful 
to  force  the  vessel  across  the  weed.  Then  he  routed 
out  a  couple  of  kedges.  These,  he  bent  on  to  the 
ends  of  a  short  piece  of  cable,  and,  to  the  bight  of  this, 
the  end  of  a  long  coil  of  strong  rope. 

"After  that,  he  had  the  starboard  quarter  boat 
lowered  into  the  weed,  and  in  it  he  placed  the  two 
kedge  anchors.  The  end  of  another  length  of  rope, 
he  made  fast  to  the  boat's  painter.  This  done,  he 
took  four  of  the  men  with  him,  telKng  them  to  bring 
chain-hooks,  in  addition  to  the  oars — his  intention 
being  to  force  the  boat  through  the  weed,  until  he 
reached  the  clear  water.  There,  in  the  marge  of  the 
weed,  he  would  plant  the  two  anchors  in  the  thickest 
clumps  of  the  growth  ;  after  which  we  were  to  haul 
the  boat  back  to  the  ship,  by  means  of  the  rope  attached 
to  the  painter. 

"  '  Then,'  as  he  put  it,  '  we'll  take  the  kedge-rope 
to  the  capstan,  and  heave  her  out  of  this  blessed 
cabbage  heap  !  ' 

4* 


106  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  The  weed  proved  a  greater  obstacle  to  the  progress 
of  the  boat,  than,  I  think,  he  had  anticipated.  After 
half  an  hour's  work,  they  had  gone  scarcely  more  than 
some  two  hundred  feet  from  the  vessel ;  yet,  so  thick 
was  the  stuff,  that  no  sign  could  we  see  of  them,  save 
the  movement  they  made  among  the  weed,  as  they 
forced  the  boat  along. 

"  Another  quarter  of  an  hour  passed  away,  during 
which  the  three  men  left  upon  the  poop,  paid  (fut  the 
ropes  as  the  boat  forged  slowly  ahead.  All  at  once, 
I  heard  my  name  called.  Turning,  I  saw  the  Captain's 
daughter  in  the  companionway,  beckoning  to  me. 
I  walked  across  to  her. 

"  '  M}^  father  has  sent  me  up  to  know,  Mr.  Philips, 
how  they  are  getting  on  ? 

"  '  Very  slowl}^  Miss  Knowlcs,'  I  replied.  '  Very 
slowly  indeed.     The  weed  is  so  extraordinaril}^  thick.' 

"  She  nodded  intelhgently,  and  turned  to  descend  ; 
but  I  detained  her  a  moment. 

"  '  Your  father,  how  is  he  ?  '  I  asked. 

"  She  drew  her  breath  swiftly. 

"  '  Quite  himself,'  she  said  ;  '  but  so  dreadfully 
weak.     He ' 

"  An  outcry  from  one  of  the  men,  broke  across 
her  speech  :— 

"  '  Lord  'elp  us,  mates  !   wot  were  that  !  ' 

"  I  turned  sharpl}^  The  three  of  them  were  staring 
over  the  taffrail.  I  ran  towards  them,  and  Miss 
Knowles  followed. 

"  '  Hush  !  '  she  said,  abruptly.     '  Listen  !  ' 

"  I  stared  astern  to  where  I  knew  the  boat  to  be. 
The  weed  all  about  it  was  quaking  queerly — the 
movement  extending  far  beyond  the  radius  of  their 
hooks  and  oars.  Suddenly,  I  heard  the  Second 
Mate's  voice  : — 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  107 

"  '  Look  out,  lads  !     My  God,  look  out !  ' 

"  And  close  upon  this,  blending  almost  with  it, 
came  the  hoarse  scream  of  a  man  in  sudden  agony. 

"  I  saw  an  oar  come  up  into  view,  and  descend 
violently,  as  though  someone  struck  at  something 
with  it.     Then  the  Second  Mate's  voice,  shouting  : — 

" '  Aboard    there  !     Aboard    there  !     Haul    in    on 

the  rope  !     Haul  in  on  the  rope !  '     It  broke  off 

into  a  sharp  cry. 

"As  we  seized  hold  of  the  rope,  I  saw  the  weed 
hurled  in  all  directions,  and  a  great  crying  and  choking 
swept  to  us  over  the  brown  hideousness  around. 

"  '  Pull  !  '  I  yelled,  and  we  pulled.  The  rope 
tautened  ;   but  the  boat  never  moved. 

"  '  Tek  it  ter  ther  capsting  !  '  gasped  one  of  the  men. 

"  Even  as  he  spoke,  the  rope  slackened. 

"  '  It's  coming  !  '  cried  Miss  Knowles.  '  Pull  ! 
Oh  !   Pull !  ' 

"  She  had  hold  of  the  rope  along  with  us,  and 
together  we  hauled,  the  boat  yielding  to  our  strength 
with  surprising  ease. 

"  '  There  it  is  !  '  I  shouted,  and  then  I  let  go  of 
the  rope.     There  was  no  one  in  the  boat. 

"  For  the  half  of  a  minute,  we  stared,  dumfoundered. 
Then  my  gaze  wandered  astern  to  the  place  from 
which  we  had  plucked  it.  There  was  a  heaving  move- 
ment among  the  great  weed  masses.  I  saw  some- 
thing waver  up  aimlessly  against  the  sky ;  it  was 
sinuous,  and  it  flickered  once  or  twice  from  side  to 
side  ;  then  sank  back  among  the  growth,  before  I 
could  concentrate  my  attention  upon  it.- 

"  I  was  recalled  to  myself  by  a  sound  of  dry  sobbing. 
Miss  Knowles  was  kneeling  upon  the  deck,  her  hands 
clasped  round  one  of  the  iron  uprights  of  the  rail. 
She  seemed  momentarily  all  to  pieces. 


108  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  '  Come  !  Miss  Knowles,'  I  said,  gently.  '  You 
must  be  brave.  We  cannot  let  your  father  know  of 
this  in  his  present  state.' 

"  She  allowed  me  to  help  her  to  her  feet.  I  could 
feel  that  she  was  trembling  badly.  Then,  even  as 
I  sought  for  words  with  which  to  reassure  her,  there 
came  a  dull  thud  from  the  direction  of  the  com- 
panionwa}'.  We  looked  round.  On  the  deck,  face 
downward,  h'ing  half  in  and  half  out  of  the  scuttle, 
was  the  Captain.  Evidently,  he  had  witnessed  every- 
thing. j\Iiss  Knowles  gave  out  a  wild  cry,  and  ran  to 
her  father.  I  beckoned  to  one  of  the  men  to  help 
me,  and,  together,  we  carried  him  back  to  his  bunk. 
An  hour  later,  he  recovered  from  his  swoon.  He  was 
quite  calm,  though  very  weak,  and  e\'idently  in  con- 
siderable pain. 

"  Through  his  daughter,  he  made  known  to  me  that 
he  wished  me  to  take  the  reins  of  authority  in  his 
place.  This,  after  a  slight  demur,  I  decided  to  do ; 
for,  as  I  reassured  myself,  there  were  no  duties  re- 
quired of  me,  needing  any  special  knowledge  of  ship- 
craft.  The  vessel  was  fast ;  so  far  as  I  could  see, 
irrevocably  fast.  It  would  be  time  to  talk  of  freeing 
her,  when  the  Captain  was  well  enough  to  take  charge 
once  more. 

"  I  returned  on  deck,  and  made  known  to  the  men 
the  Captain's  wishes.  Then  I  chose  one  tp  act  as  a 
sort  of  bo 'sun  over  the  other  two,  and  to  him  I  gave 
orders  that  everything  should  be  put  to  rights  before 
the  night  came.  I  had  sufficient  sense  to  leave  him 
to  manage  matters  in  his  own  way  ;  for,  whereas  my 
knowledge  of  what  was  needful,  was  fragmentary, 
his  was  complete. 

"  By  this  time,  it  was  near  to  sunsetting,  and  it 
was   with    melancholy   feelings   that    I    watched   the 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  109 

great  hull  of  the  sun  plunge  lower.  For  awhile,  I 
paced  the  poop,  stopping  ever  and  anon  to  stare 
over  the  dreary  waste  by  which  we  were  surrounded. 
The  more  I  looked  about,  the  more  a  sense  of  lone- 
somencss  and  depression  and  fear  assailed  me.  I 
had  pondered  much  upon  the  dread  happening  of 
the  day,  and  all  my  ponderings  led  to  a  vital  ques- 
tioning : — WTiat  was  there  among  all  that  quiet 
weed,  which  had  come  upon  the  crew  of  the  boat, 
and  destroyed  them  ?  And  I  could  not  make  answer, 
and  the  weed  was  silent — dreadly  silent  ! 

"  The  sun  had  draw^n  very  near  to  the  dim  horizon, 
and  I  watched  it,  moodily,  as  it  splashed  great  clots 
of  red  fire  across  the  water  that  lay  stretched  into 
the  distance  across  our  stern.  Abruptly,  as  I  gazed, 
its  perfect  lower  edge  was  marred  by  an  irregular  shape. 
For  a  moment,  I  sta'  ed,  puzzled.  Then  I  fetched  a  pair 
of  glasses  from  the  holdfast  in  the  companion.  A 
glance  through  these,  and  I  knew  the  extent  of  our 
fate.  That  hne,  blotching  the  round  of  the  sun,  was 
the  conformation  of  another  enormous  weed  bank. 

"  I  remembered  that  the  man  had  reported  some- 
thing as  showing  across  the  water,  when  he  was  sent 
up  to  the  top  of  the  mizzen  stump  in  the  morning  ; 
but,  what  it  was,  he  had  been  unable  to  say.  The 
thought  flashed  into  my  mind  that  it  had  been  only 
just  \-isible  from  aloft  in  the  morning,  and  now  it  was 
in  sight  from  the  deck.  It  occurred  to  me  that  the 
wind  might  be  compacting  the  weed,  and  driving  the 
bank  which  surrounded  the  ship,  down  upon  a  larger 
portion.  Possibly,  the  clear  stretch  of  water  had 
been  but  a  temporary  rift  within  the  heart  of  the 
Sargasso  Sea.     It  seemed  only  too  probable. 

"  Thus  it  was  that  I  meditated,  and  so,  presently, 
the  night  found  me.     For  some  hours  further,  I  paced 


110  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  deck  in  the  darkness,  striving  to  understand  the 
incomprehensible ;  yet  with  no  better  result  than 
to  weary  myself  to  death.  Then,  somewhere  about 
midnight,  I  went  below  to  sleep. 

"  The  following  morning,  on  going  on  deck,  I 
found  that  the  stretch  of  clear  water  had  disappeared 
entirely,  during  the  night,  and  now,  so  far  as  the  eye 
could  reach,  there  was  nothing  but  a  stupendous 
desolation  of  weed, 

"  The  wind  had  dropped  completely,  and  no  sound 
came  from  all  that  weed-ridden  immensity.  We  had, 
in  truth,  reached  the  Cemetery  of  the  Ocean  ! 

"  The  day  passed  uneventfully  enough.  It  was 
only  when  I  served  out  some  food  to  the  men,  and 
one  of  them  asked  whether  they  could  have  a  few 
raisins,  that  I  remembered,  wdth  a  pang  of  sudden 
misery,  that  it  was  Christmas  day.  I  gave  them 
the  fruit,  as  they  desired,  and  they  spent  the  morning 
in  the  galley,  cooking  their  dinner.  Their  stolid 
indifference  to  the  late  terrible  happen'ngs,  appalled 
me  somewhat,  until  I  remembered  what  their  lives 
were,  and  had  been.  Poor  fellows !  One  of  them 
ventured  aft  at  dinner  time,  and  offered  me  a  slice 
of  what  he  called  '  plum  duff.'  He  brought  it  on  a 
plate  which  he  had  found  in  the  galley  and  scoured 
thoroughly  with  sand  and  water.  He  tendered  it 
shyly  enough,  and  I  took  it,  so  graciously  as  I  could, 
for  I  would  not  hurt  his  feelings  ;  though  the  very 
smell  of  the  stuff  was  an  abomination. 

"  During  the  afternoon,  I  brought  out  the  Captain's 
telescope,  and  made  a  thorough  examination  of  the 
ancient  hulk  on  our  port  beam.  Particularly  did  I  study 
the  extraordinary  superstructure  around  her  sides  ;  but 
could  not,  as  I  have  said  before,  conceive  of  its  use. 

"  The  evening,   I   spent   upon   the   poop,   my  eyes 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  ill 

searching  wearily  across  that  vile  quietness,  and  so, 
in  a  little,  the  night  came — Christmas  night,  sacred 
to  a  thousand  happy  memories.  I  found  myself 
dreaming  of  the  night  a  year  previous,  and,  for  a 
little  while,  I  forgot  what  was  before  me.  I  was 
recalled  suddenly — terribly.  A  voice  rose  out  of 
the  dark  which  hid  the  maindcck.  For  the  fraction 
of  an  instant,  it  expressed  surprise  ;  then  pain  and 
terror  leapt  into  it.  Abruptly,  it  seemed  to  come 
from  above,  and  then  from  somewhere  beyond  the 
ship,  and  so  in  a  moment  there  was  silence,  save  for 
a  rush  of  feet  and  the  bang  of  a  door  forrard. 

"  I  leapt  down  the  poop  ladder,  and  ran  along  the 
maindeck,  towards  the  fo'cas'le.  As  I  ran,  some- 
thing knocked  off  my  cap.  I  scarcely  noticed  it  then. 
I  reached  the  fo'cas'le,  and  caught  at  the  latch  of 
the  port  door.  I  Hfted  it  and  pushed  ;  but  the  door 
was  fastened. 

"  '  Inside  there  !  '  I  cried,  and  banged  upon  the 
panels  with  my  clenched  list. 

"  A  man's  voice  came,  incoherently. 

"  '  Open  the  door  !  '  I  shouted.     '  Open  the  door  !  ' 

"  '  Yes,  Sir— I'm  com— ming.  Sir,'  said  one  of 
them,  jerkily. 

"  I  heard  footsteps  stumble  across  the  planking. 
Then  a  hand  fumbled  at  the  fastening,  and  the  door 
flew  open  under  my  weight. 

"  The  man  who  had  opened  to  me,  started  back. 
He  held  a  flaring  slush-lamp  above  his  head,  and,  as 
I  entered,  he  thrust  it  forward.  .His  hand  was  trem- 
bling visibly,  and,  behind  him,  I  made  out  the  face 
of  one  of  his  mates,  the  brow  and  dirty,  clean-shaven 
upper  lip  drenched  with  sweat.  Tlie  man  who  held 
the  lamp,  opened  his  mouth,  and  gabbered  at  me  ; 
but,  for  a  moment,  no  sound  came. 


112  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  '  Wot — wot  were  it  ?  Wot  we-ere  it  ?  '  he  brought 
out  at  last,  \vith  a  gasp. 

"  The  man  behind,  came  to  his  side,  and  gesticulated. 

"  '  Wliat  was  what  ?  '  I  asked  sharply,  and  looking 
from  one  to  the  other.  '  \Vhere's  the  other  man  ? 
What  was  that  screaming  ?  ' 

"  The  second  man  drew  the  palm  of  his  hand  across 
his  brow  ;  then  flirted  his  fingers  deckwards. 

"  '  We  don't  know,  Sir !  We  don't  know !  It 
were  Jessop  !  Somethin's  took  'im  just  as  we  was 
comin'   forrid  !     We — we —     He — he — hark  !  ' 

"  His  head  came  forward  with  a  jerk  as  he  spoke, 
and  then,  for  a  space,  no  one  stirred.  A  minute 
passed,  and  I  was  about  to  speak,  when,  suddenly, 
from  somewhere  out  upon  the  deserted  maindeck, 
there  came  a  queer,  subdued  noise,  as  though  some- 
thing moved  stealthily  hither  and  thither.  The  man 
with  the  lamp  caught  me  by  the  sleeve,  and  then, 
with  an  abrupt  movement,  slammed  the  door  and 
fastened  it. 

"  '  That's  IT,  Sir  !  '  he  exclaimed,  with  a  note  of 
terror  and  conviction  in  his  voice. 

"  I  bade  him  be  silent,  while  I  listened  ;  but  no 
sound  came  to  us  through  the  door,  and  so  I  turned 
to  the  men  and  told  them  to  let  me  have  all  they  knew. 

"  It  was  little  enough.  They  had  been  sitting  in 
the  galley,  yarning,  until,  feeling  tired,  they  had 
decided  to  go  forrard  and  turn-in.  They  extin- 
guished the  light,  and  came  out  upon  the  deck,  closing 
the  door  behind  them.  Then,  just  as  they  turned 
to  go  forrard,  Jessop  gave  out  a  yell.  The  next 
instant  they  heard  him  screaming  in  the  air  above 
their  heads,  and,  reahsing  that  some  terrible  thing 
was  upon  them,  they  took  forthwith  to  their  heels, 
and  ran  for  the  security  of  the  fo'cas'le. 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  113 

"  Then  I  had  come. 

"  As  the  men  made  an  end  of  telHng  me,  I  thought 
I  heard  something  outside,  and  held  up  my  hand 
for  silence.  I  caught  the  sound  again.  Someone 
was  calling  my  name.  It  was  Miss  Knowles.  Likely 
enough  she  was  calling  me  to  supper — and  she  had 
no  knowledge  of  the  dread  thing  which  had  happened. 
I  sprang  to  the  door.  She  might  be  coming  along 
the  maindeck  in  search  of  me.  And  there  was  Some- 
thing out  there,  of  which  I  had  no  conception — some- 
thing unseen,  but  deadly  tangible  ! 

"  '  Stop,  Sir  !  '  shouted  the  men,  together  ;  but  T 
had  the  door  open. 

"  '  Mr.  Philips  !  '  came  the  girl's  voice  at  no  great 
distance.     '  Mr.  Philips  !  ' 

"  '  Coming,  Miss  Knowles  !  '  I  shouted,  and  snatched 
the  lamp  from  the  man's  hand. 

"  '  The  next  instant,  I  was  running  aft,  holding 
the  lamp  high,  and  glancing  fearfully  from  side  to 
side.  I  reached  the  place  where  the  mainmast  had 
been,  and  spied  the  girl  coming  towards  me. 

"  '  Go  back  !  '  I  shouted.     '  Go  back  !  ' 

"  She  turned  at  my  shout,  and  ran  for  the  poop 
ladder.  I  came  up  with  her,  and  followed  close  at 
her  heels.     On  the  poop,  she  turned  and  faced  me. 

"  '  What  is  it,  Mr.  Philips  ?  ' 

"  I  hesitated.     Then  : — 

"/I  don't  know!'  I  said. 

"  '  My  father  heard  something,'  she  began.  '  He 
sent  me.     He ' 

"  I  put  up  my  hand.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  had 
caught  again  the  sound  of  something  stirring  on  the 
maindeck. 

"  '  Quick  !  '  I  said  sharply.  '  Down  into  the 
cabin  !  '     And  she,  being  a  sensible  girl,  turned  and 


114  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

ran  down  without  waste  of  time.  I  followed,  closing 
and  fastening  the  companion-doors  behind  me. 

"  In  the  saloon,  we  had  a  whispered  talk,  and  I 
told  her  everything.  She  bore  up  bravely,  and  said 
nothing  ;  though  her  eyes  were  very  wide,  and  her 
face  pale.  Then  the  Captain's  voice  came  to  us  from 
the  adjoining  cabin. 

'"Is  Mr.  Philips  there,  Mary  ?  ' 

"  '  Yes,  father.' 

"  '  Bring  him  in.' 

"  I  went  in. 

"  '  \\Tiat  was  it,  Mr.  Philips  ?  '  he  asked,  collectedly. 

"  I  hesitated  ;  for  I  was  willing  to  spare  him  the 
ill  news  ;  but  he  looked  at  me  with  calm  eyes  for  a 
moment,  and  I  knew  that  it  was  useless  attempting 
to  deceive  him. 

"  '  Something  has  happened,  Mr.  Philips,'  he  said, 
quietly.     '  You  need  not  be  afraid  to  tell  me.' 

"  At  that,  I  told  him  so  much  as  I  knew,  he 
listening,  and  nodding  his  comprehension  of  the 
story. 

"  '  It  must  be  something  big,'  he  remarked,  when 
I  had  made  an  end.  '  And  yet  you  saw  nothing 
when  you  came  aft  ?  ' 

"'No,'  Ireplied. 

"  '  It  is  something  in  the  weed,'  he  went  on.  '  You 
will  have  to  keep  off  the  deck  at  night.' 

"  After  a  little  further  talk,  in  which  he  displayed 
a  calmness  that  amazed  me,  I  left  him,  and  went 
presently  to  my  berth. 

"  The  following  day,  I  took  the  two  men,  and, 
together,  we  made  a  thorough  search  through  the 
ship ;  but  found  nothing.  It  was  evident  to  me 
that  the  Captain  was  right.  There  was  some  dread 
Thing  hidden  within  the  weed.     I  went  to  the  side 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  115 

and     looked     down.     The    two    men    followed    me. 
Suddenly,  one  of  them  pointed. 

Look,  Sir  !  '  he  exclaimed.  '  Right  below  you, 
Sir  !     Two  eyes  like  blessed  great  saucers  !     Look  !  ' 

"  I  stared  ;  but  could  see  nothing.  The  man  left 
my  side,  and  ran  into  the  galley.  In  a  moment,  he 
was  back  with  a  great  lump  of  coal. 

Just  there.  Sir,'  he  said,  and  hove  it  down  into 
the  weed  immediately  beneath  where  we  stood. 

"  Too  late,  I  saw  the  thing  at  which  he  aimed — 
two  immense  eyes,  some  little  distance  below  the 
surface  of  the  weed.  I  knew  instantly  to  what  they 
belonged ;  for  I  had  seen  large  specimens  of  the 
octopus  some  years  previously,  during  a  cruise  in 
Australasian  waters. 

Look  out,  man  !  '  I  shouted,  and  caught  him 
by  the  arm.  '  It's  an  octopus  !  Jump  back  !  '  I 
sprang  down  on  to  the  deck.  In  the  same  instant, 
huge  masses  of  weed  were  hurled  in  all  directions, 
and  half  a  dozen  immense  tentacles  whirled  up  into 
the  air.  One  lapped  itself  about  his  neck.  I  caught 
his  leg  ;  but  he  was  torn  from  my  grasp,  and  I  tumbled 
backwards  on  to  the  deck.  I  heard  a  scream  from 
the  other  man  as  I  scrambled  to  my  feet.  I  looked 
to  where  he  had  been  ;  but  of  him  there  was  no  sign. 
Regardless  of  the  danger,  in  my  great  agitation,  I 
leapt  upon  the  rail,  and  gazed  down  with  frightened 
eyes.  Yet,  neither  of  him  nor  his  mate,  nor  the 
monster,  could  I  perceive  a  vestige. 

"  How  long  I  stood  there  staring  down  bewilderedly, 
I  cannot  say ;  certainly  some  minutes.  I  was  so 
bemazed  that  I  seemed  incapable  of  movement. 
Then,  all  at  once,  I  became  aware  that  a  light  quiver 
ran  across  the  weed,  and  the  next  instant,  something 
stole  up  out  of  the  depths  with  a  deadly  celerity. 


116  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

Well  it  was  for  me  that  I  had  seen  it  in  time,  else 
should  I  have  shared  the  fate  of  those  two — and  the 
others.  As  it  was,  I  saved  myself  only  by  leaping 
backwards  on  to  the  deck.  For  a  moment,  I  saw  the 
feeler  wave  above  the  rail  with  a  certain  apparent 
aimlessness  ;  then  it  sank  out  of  sight,  and  I  was  alone. 

"  An  hour  passed  before  I  could  summon  a  suffi- 
ciency of  courage  to  break  the  news  of  this  last  tragedy 
to  the  Captain  and  his  daughter,  and  when  I  had  made 
an  end,  I  returned  to  the  solitude  of  the  poop  ;  there 
to  brood  upon  the  hopelessness  of  our  position. 

"  As  I  paced  up  and  down,  I  caught  myself  glancing 
continuously  at  the  nearer  weed  tufts.  The  happen- 
ings of  the  past  two  days  had  shattered  m}?-  nerves, 
and  I  feared  every  moment  to  see  some  .^-lender  death- 
grapple  searching  over  the  rail  for  me.  Yet,  the 
poop,  being  very  much  higher  out  of  the  weed  than 
the  maindeck,  was  comparatively  safe  ;  though  only 
comparatively. 

"  Presently,  as  I  meandered  up  and  down,  my 
gaze  fell  upon  the  hulk  of  the  ancient  ship,  and,  in  a 
flash,  the  reason  for  that  great  superstructure  was 
borne  upon  me.  It  was  intended  as  a  protection 
against  the  dread  creatures  which  inhabited  the 
weed.  The  thought  came  to  me  that  I  would  attempt 
some  similar  means  of  protection  ;  for  the  feeling 
that,  at  any  moment,  I  might  be  caught  and  lifted 
out  into  that  slimy  wilderness,  was  not  to  be  borne. 
In  addition,  the  work  would  serve  to  occupy  my 
mind,  and  help  me  to  bear  up  against  the  intolerable 
sense  of  loneliness  which  assailed  me. 

"  I  resolved  that  I  would  lose  no  time,  and  so, 
after  some  thought  as  to  the  manner  in  which  I  should 
proceed,  I  routed  out  some  coils  of  rope  and  several 
sails.     Then  I  went  down  on  to  the  maindeck  and 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  117 

brought  up  an  armful  of  capstan  bars.  These  I 
lashed  vertically  to  the  rail  all  round  the  poop.  Then 
I  knotted  the  rope  to  each,  stretching  it  tightly 
between  them,  and  over  this  framework  stretched  the 
sails,  sewing  the  stout  canvas  to  the  rope,  by  means 
of  twine  and  some  great  needles  which  I  found  in  the 
Mate's  room. 

"It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  piece  of  work 
was  accomplished  immediately.  Indeed,  it  was  only 
after  three  days  of  hard  labour  that  I  got  the  poop 
completed.  Then  I  commenced  work  upon  the 
maindeck.  This  was  a  tremendous  undertaking,  and 
a  whole  fortnight  passed  before  I  had  the  entire 
length  of  it  enclosed  ;  for  I  had  to  be  continually  on 
the  watch  against  the  hidden  enemy.  Once,  I  was 
very  nearly  surprised,  and  saved  myself  only  by  a 
quick  leap.  Thereafter,  for  the  rest  of  that  day,  I 
did  no  more  work  ;  being  too  greatly  shaken  in  spirit. 
Yet,  on  the  following  morning,  I  recommenced,  and 
from  thence,  until  the  end,  I  was  not  molested. 

"  Once  the  work  was  roughly  completed,  I  felt  at 
ease  to  begin  and  perfect  it.  This  I  did,  by  tarring 
the  whole  of  the  sails  with  Stockholm  tar  ;  thereby 
making  them  stiff,  and  capable  of  resisting  the 
weather.  After  that,  I  added  many  fresh  uprights, 
and  much  strengthening  ropework,  and  finally  doubled 
the  sailcloth  with  additional  sails,  Uberally  smeared 
with  the  tar. 

"  In  this  manner,  the  whole  of  January  passed 
away,  and  a  part  of  February.  Then,  it  would  be  on 
the  last  day  of  the  month,  the  Captahi  sent  for  me, 
and  told  me,  without  any  preliminary  talk,  that  he 
was  dying.  I  looked  at  him  ;  but  said  nothing  ;  for 
I  had  known  long  that  it  was  so.  In  return,  he  stared 
back  with  a  strange  intentness,  as  though  he  would 


118  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

read  my  inmost  thoughts,  and  this  for  the  space  of 
perhaps  two  minutes. 

"  '  Mr.  Phihps,'  he  said  at  last,  '  I  may  be  dead 
by  this  time  to-morrow.  Has  it  ever  occurred  to 
you  that  my  daughter  will  be  alone  with  you  ?  ' 

"  '  Yes,  Captain  Knowles,'  I  replied,  quietly,  and 
waited. 

"  For  a  few  seconds,  he  remained  silent  ;  though, 
from  the  changing  expressions  of  his  face,  I  knew 
that  he  was  pondering  how  best  to  bring  forward  the 
thing  which  it  was  in  his  mind  to  say. 

"  '  You  are  a  gentleman '  he  began,  at  last. 

"  '  I  will  marry  her,'  I  said,  ending  the  sentence 
for  him. 

"  A  slight  flush  of  surprise  crept  into  his  face. 

"  '  You — you  have  thought  seriously  about  it  ?  ' 

"  '  1  have  thought  very  seriously,'  I  explained. 

"  '  Ah  !  '  he  said,  as  one  who  comprehends.  And 
then,  for  a  little,  he  lay  there  quietly.  It  was  plain 
to  me  that  memories  of  past  days  were  with  him. 
Presently,  he  came  out  of  his  dreams,  and  spoke, 
evidently  referring  to  my  marriage  with  his  daughter. 

"  '  It  is  the  only  thing,'  he  said,  in  a  level  voice. 

"  I  bowed,  and  after  that,  he  was  silent  again  for 
a  space.  In  a  little,  however,  he  turned  once  more 
to  me  : — 

"  '  Do  you — do  you  love  her  ?  ' 

"  His  tone  was  keenly  wistful,  and  a  sense  of  trouble 
lurked  in  his  eyes. 

"  '  She  will  be  my  wife,'  I  said,  simply  ;  and  he 
nodded. 

"  '  God  has  dealt  strangely  with  us,'  he  murmured 
presently,  as  though  to  himself. 

"  Abruptly,  he  bade  me  tell  her  to  come  in. 

"  And  then  he  married  us. 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  119 

"  Three  days  later,  he  was  dead,  and  we  were  alone. 

"  For  a  while,  my  wife  was  a  sad  woman  ;  but 
gradually  time  eased  her  of  the  bitterness  of  her 
grief. 

"  Then,  some  eight  months  after  our  marriage,  a 
new  interest  stole  into  her  life.  She  whispered  it 
to  me,  and  we,  who  had  borne  our  loneliness  un- 
complainingly, had  now  this  new  thing  to  which  to 
look  forward.  It  became  a  bond  between  us,  and 
bore  promise  of  some  companionship  as  we  grew  old. 
Old  !  At  the  idea  of  age,  a  sudden  flash  of  thought 
darted  like  lightfting  across  the  sky  of  my  mind  : — 
FOOD  !  Hitherto,  I  had  thought  of  myself,  almost 
as  of  one  already  dead,  and  had  cared  naught  for 
anything  beyond  the  immediate  troubles  which  each 
day  forced  upon  me.  The  loneliness  of  the  vast 
Weed  World  had  become  an  assurance  of  doom  to 
me,  which  had  clouded  and  dulled  my  faculties,  so 
that  I  had  grown  apathetic.  Yet,  immediately,  as  it 
seemed,  at  the  shy  whispering  of  my  wife,  was  all  this 
changed. 

"  That  very  hour,  I  began  a  systematic  search 
through  the  ship.  Among  the  cargo,  which  was  of 
a  '  general  '  nature,  I  discovered  large  quantities  of 
preserved  and  tinned  provisions,  all  of  which  I  put 
carefully  on  one  side.  I  continued  my  examination 
until  I  had  ransacked  the  whole  vessel.  The  business 
took  me  near  upon  six  months  to  complete,  and 
when  it  was  finished,  I  seized  paper,  and  made  calcu- 
lations, which  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  we  had 
sufficient  food  in  the  ship  to  preserve  life  in  three 
people  for  some  fifteen  to  seventeen  years.  I  could 
not  come  nearer  to  it  than  this  ;  for  I  had  no  means 
of  computing  the  quantity  the  child  would  need 
year  by  year.     Yet  it  is  sufficient  to  show  me  that 


120  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

seventeen  years  must  be  the  limit.     Seventeen  years  ! 

And  then 

"  Concerning  water,  I  am  not  troubled  ;  for  I  have 
rigged  a  great  sailcloth  tun-dish,  with  a  canvas  pipe 
into  the  tanks  ;  and  from  every  rain,  I  draw  a  supply, 
which  has  never  run  short. 

"  The  child  was  born  nearly  five  months  ago.  She 
is  a  fine  little  girl,  and  her  mother  seems  perfectly 
happy.  I  believe  I  could  be  quietly  happy  with  them, 
were  it  not  that  I  have  ever  in  mind  the  end  of  those 
seventeen  years.  True  !  we  may  be  dead  long  before 
then  ;  but,  if  not,  our  little  girl  will  be  in  her  teens 
— and  it  is  a  hungry  age. 

"  If  one  of  us  died — but  no  !  Much  may  happen 
in  seventeen  years.     I  will  wait. 

"  My  method  of  sending  this  clear  of  the  weed  is 
likely  to  succeed.  I  have  constructed  a  small  fire- 
balloon,  and  this  missive,  safely  enclosed  in  a  little 
barrel,  will  be  attached.  The  wind  will  carry  it  swiftly 
hence. 

"  Should  this  ever  reach  civilised  beings,  will  they 
see  that  it  is  forwarded  to  : — " 

(Here  followed  an  address,  which,  fpr  some  reason, 
had  been  roughly  obliterated.  Then  came  the 
signature  of  the  writer) 

"  Arthur  Samuel  PhHips." 

The  captain  of  the  schooner  looked  over  at  Jock, 
as  the  man  made  an  end  of  his  reading. 

"  Seventeen  years  pervisions,"  he  muttered  thought- 
fully. "  An'  this  'ere  were  written  sumthin'  like 
twenty-nine  years  ago  !  "  He  nodded  his  head  several 
times.  "  Poor  creatures  !  "  he  exclaimed.  "  It'd  be 
er  long  while,  Jock — a  long  while  !  " 


FROM  THE  TIDELESS  SEA 

{Fuithcr  News  of  the  "  Homebird  ") 

In  the  August  of  1902,  Captain  Bateman,  of  the 
schooner  Agnes,  picked  up  a  small  barrel,  upon  which 
was  painted  a  half  obliterated  word  ;  which,  finally, 
he  succeeded  in  deciphering  as  "  Homebird,"  the  name 
of  a  full-rigged  ship,  which  left  London  in  the  Novem- 
ber of  1873,  and  from  thenceforth  was  heard  of  no  more 
by  any  man. 

Captain  Bateman  opened  the  barrel,  and  discovered 
a  packet  of  Manuscript,  wrapped  in  oilskin.  This, 
on  exam'nation,  proved  to  be  an  account  of  the  losing 
of  the  Hcmebird  amid  the  desolate  wastes  of  the 
Sargasso  Sea.  The  papers  were  written  by  one, 
Arthur  Samuel  Philips,  a  passenger  in  the  ship  ;  and, 
from  them.  Captain  Bateman  was  enabled  to  gather 
that  the  ship,  mastless,  lay  in  the  very  heart  of  the 
dreaded  Sargasso  ;  and  that  all  of  the  crew  had  been 
lost — some  in  the  storm  which  drove  them  thither, 
and  some  in  attempts  to  free  the  ship  from  the  weed, 
which  locked  them  in  on  all  sides. 
.  Only  Mr.  Philips  and  the  Captain's  daughter  had 
been  left  alive,  and  they  tv.o,  the  dying  Captain  had 
married.  To  them  had  been  born  a  daughter,  and 
the  papers  ended  with  a  brief  but  touching  allusion 

121 


122  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

to  their  fear  that,  eventually,  they  must  run  short 
of  food. 

There  is  need  to  say  but  little  more.  The  account 
was  copied  into  most  of  the  papers  of  the  day,  and 
caused  widespread  comment.  There  was  even  some 
talk  of  fitting  out  a  rescue  expedition  ;  but  this  fell 
through,  owing  chiefly  to  lack  of  knowledge  of  the 
whereabouts  of  the  ship  in  all  the  vastness  of  the  im- 
mense Sargasso  Sea.  And  so,  graduall}',  the  matter 
has  slipped  into  the  background  of  the  Public's  memory. 

Now,  however,  interest  wiU  be  once  more  excited 
in  the  lonesome  fate  of  this  lost  trio  ;  for  a  second 
baiTel,  identical,  it  would  seem,  with  that  found  by 
Captain  Bateman,  has  been  picked  up  by  a  ^Ir.  Bolton, 
of  Baltimore,  master  of  a  small  brig,  engaged  in  the 
South  American  toast-trade.  In  this  barrel  was 
enclosed  a  further  message  from  Mr.  Philips — the 
fifth  that  he  has  sent  abroad  to  the  world  ;  but  the 
second,  third  and  fourth,  up  to  this  time,  have  not 
been  discovered. 

This  "  fifth  message  "  contains  a  vital  and  striking 
account  of  their  lives  during  the  year  1879,  and  stands 
unique  as  a  document  informed  with  human  lone- 
someness  and  longing.  I  have  seen  it,  and  read  it 
through,  with  the  most  intense  and  painful  interest. 
The  vrriting,  though  faint,  is  very  legible  ;  and  the 
whole  manuscript  bears  the  impress  of  the  same  hand 
and  mind  that  wrote  the  piteous  account  of  the  losing 
of  the  Homebird,  of  which  I  have  already  made  mention, 
and  with  which,  no  doubt,  many  are  well  acquainted. 

In  closing  this  Httle  explanatory  note,  I  am  stimu- 
lated to  wonder  whether,  somewhere,  at  some  time, 
those  three  missing  messages  ever  shall  be  found. 
And  then  there  may  be  others.  Wliat  stories  of  human, 
strenuous  fighting  with  Fate  may  they  not  contain. 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  123 

We  can  but  wait  and  wonder.  Nothing  more  may 
we  ever  learn  ;  for  what  is  this  one  Httle  tragedy 
among  the  uncounted  millions  that  the  silence  of  the 
sea  holds  so  remorselessly.  And  yet,  again,  news 
may  come  to  us  out  of  the  Unknown — out  of  the  lone- 
some silences  of  the  dread  Sargasso  Sea — the  loneliest 
and  the  most  inaccessible  place  of  all  the  lonesome  and 
inaccessible  places  of  this  earth. 
And  so  I  say,  let  us  wait.     W.  H.  H. 

THE  FIFTH  MESSAGE 

"  This  is  the  fifth  message  that  I  have  sent  abroad 
over  the  loathsome  surface  of  this  vast  Weed- World, 
praying  that  it  may  come  to  the  open  sea,  ere  the 
lifting  power  of  my  fire-balloon  be  gone,  and  yet,  if 
it  come  there — the  which  I  could  now  doubt — how 
shall  I  be  the  better  for  it  !  Yet  write  I  must,  or  go 
mad,  and  so  I  choose  to  write,  though  feeling  as  I 
write  that  no  living  creature,  save  it  be  the  giant 
octopi  that  live  in  the  weed  about  me,  will  ever  see 
the  thing  I  write. 

"  My  first  message  I  sent  out  on  Christmas  Eve, 
1875,  and  since  then,  each  eve  of  the  birth  of  Christ 
has  seen  a  message  go  skywards  upon  the  winds, 
towards  the  open  sea.  It  is  as  though  this  approaching 
time,  of  festivity  and  the  meeting  of  parted  loved  ones, 
overwhelms  me,  and  drives  away  the  half  apathetic 
peace  that  has  been  mine  through  spaces  of  these 
years  of  lonesomeness  ;  so  that  I  seclude  myself  from 
my  wife  and  the  Httle  one,  and  with  ink,  pen,  and 
paper,  tr}'  to  ease  my  heart  of  the  pent  emotions  that 
seem  at  times  to  threaten  to  burst  it. 

"It  is  now  six  completed  years  since  the  Weed- 
World  claimed  us  from  the  World  of  the  Living — 


124  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

sLx  years  away  from  our  brothers  and  sisters  of  the 
human  and  Hving  world — It  has  been  six  years  of 
Uving  in  a  grave  !  And  there  are  all  the  years  ahead  ! 
Oh  !  IMy  God  !  My  God  !  I  dare  not  think  upon 
them  !     I  must  control  myself 

"  And  then  there  is  the  little  one,  she  is  nearly  four 
and  a  half  now,  and  growing  wonderfully,  out  among 
these  wilds.  Four  and  a  half  years,  and  the  little 
woman  has  never  seen  a  human  face  besides  ours — 
think  of  it !  And  yet,  if  she  lives  four  and  forty  years, 
she  will  never  see  another.  .  .  .  Four  and  forty  years  ! 
It  is  foolishness  to  trouble  about  such  a  space  of 
time ;  for  the  future,  for  us,  ends  in  ten  years — 
eleven  at  the  utmost.  Our  food  will  last  no  longer 
than  that.  .  .  .  My  wife  does  not  know  ;  for  it  seems 
to  me  a  wicked  thing  to  add  unnecessarily  to  her 
punishment.  She  does  but  know  that  we  must  waste 
no  ounce  of  food-stuff,  and  for  the  rest  she  imagines 
that  the  most  of  the  cargo  is  of  an  edible  nature.  Per- 
haps, I  have  nurtured  this  belief.  If  anything  hap- 
pened to  me,  the  food  would  last  a  few  extra  3'ears ; 
but  my  wife  would  have  to  imagine  it  an  accident, 
else  would  each  bite  she  took  sicken  her. 

"  I  have  thought  often  and  long  upon  this  matter, 
yet  I  fear  to  leave  them  ;  for  who  knows  but  that 
their  very  lives  might  at  any  time  depend  upon  my 
strength,  more  pitifully,  perhaps,  than  upon  the  food 
which  they  must  come  at  last  to  lack.  No,  I  must  not 
bring  upon  them,  and  myself,  a  near  and  certain 
calamity,  to  defer  one  that,  though  it  seems  to  have 
but  little  less  certainty,  is  yet  at  a  further  distance. 

"  Until  lately,  nothing  has  happened  to  us  in  the 
past  four  years,  if  I  except  the  adventures  that  at- 
tended my  mad  attempt  to  cut  a  way  through  the 
surrounding    weed    to    freedom,    and    from   which   it 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  125 

pleased  God  that  I  and  those  witli  me  should  be 
preserved.*  Yet,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  year,  an 
adventure,  much  touched  witli  grimncss,  came  to 
us  most  unexpectedly,  in  a  fashion  quite  unthought 
of — an  adventure  that  has  brought  into  our  lives  a 
fresh  and  more  active  peril ;  for  now  I  have  learned 
that  the  weed  holds  other  terrors  besides  that  of  the 
giant  octopi. 

"  Indeed,  I  have  grown  to  believe  this  world  of  deso- 
lation capable  of  holding  any  horror,  as  well  it  might. 
Think  of  it — an  interminable  stretch  of  dank,  brown 
loneliness  in  all  directions,  to  the  distant  horizon ; 
a  place  where  monsters  of  the  deep  and  the  weed  have 
undisputed  reign  ;  where  never  an  enemy  may  fall 
upon  them  ;  but  from  which  they  may  strike  with 
sudden  deadliness !  No  human  can  ever  bring  an 
engine  of  destruction  to  bear  upon  them,  and  the 
humans  whose  fate  it  is  to  have  sight  of  them,  do  so 
only  from  the  decks  of  lonesome  derelicts,  whence 
they  stare  lonely  with  fear,  and  without  ability  to 
harm. 

"1  cannot  describe  it,  nor  can  any  hope  ever  to 
imagine  it !  ^^'hen  the  wind  falls,  a  vast  silence 
holds  us  girt,  from  horizon  to  horizon,  yet  it  is  a 
silence  through  which  one  seems  to  feel  the  pulse 
of  hidden  things  all  about  us,  watching  and  waiting 
— waiting  and  watching  ;  waiting  but  for  the  chance 
to  reach  forth  a  huge  and  sudden  death-grapple. 
...  It  is  no  use  !  I  cannot  bring  it  home  to  any  ; 
nor  shall  I  be  better  able  to  "convey  the  frightening 
sound  of  the  wind,  sweeping  across  these  vast,  quaking 
plains — the    shrill    whispering    of    the    weed-fronds, 

*  This  is  evidently  a  reference  to  something  which  Mr.  Philips 
has  set  forth  in  an  earlier  message — one  of  the  three  lost  mes- 
sages.—W.  H.  H. 


126  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

under  the  stirring  of  the  winds.  To  hear  it  irom 
beyond  our  canvas  screen,  is  hke  hstening  to  the 
uncounted  dead  of  tlie  might}'  Sargasso  waihng  their 
own  requiems.  Or  again,  my  fancy,  diseased  with 
mucJi  lonehness  and  brooding,  hkens  it  to  the  advancing 
rustle  of  armies  of  the  great  monsters  that  are  ahvays 
about  us — waiting. 

"  And  so  to  the  coming  of  this  new  terror  : — 
"  It  was  in  the  latter  end  of  October  that  we  first 
had  knowledge  of  it — a  tapping  in  the  night  time 
against  the  side  of  the  vessel,  below  the  water-line  ; 
a  noise  that  came  distinct,  yet  with  a  ghostly  strange- 
ness in  the  quietness  of  the  night.  It  was  on  a  Monday 
night  when  first  I  heard  it.  I  was  down  in  the  lazar- 
ette,  overhauling  our  stores,  and  suddenly  I  heard 
it — tap — tap — tap — against  the  outside  of  the  vessel 
upon  the  starboard  side,  and  below  the  water  line.  I 
stood  for  awhile  listening ;  but  could  not  discover 
what  it  was  that  should  come  a-tapping  against  our 
side,  away  out  here  in  this  lonesome  world  of  weed 
and  slime.  And  then,  as  I  stood  there  listening, 
the  tapping  ceased,  and  so  I  waited,  wondering,  and 
with  a  hateful  sense  of  fear,  weakening  my  manhood, 
and  taking  the  courage  out  of  my  heart.  .  .  . 

"  Abruptly,  it  recommenced ;  but  now  upon  the 
opposite  side  of  the  vessel,  and  as  it  continued,  I  fell 
into  a  little  sweat ;  for  it  seemed  to  me  that  some 
foul  thing  out  in  the  night  was  tapping  for  admittance. 
Tap — tap — tap — it  went,  and  continued,  and  there 
I  stood  listening,  and  so  gripped  about  with  frightened 
thoughts,  that  I  seemed  without  power  to  stir  myself ; 
for  the  spell  of  the  Weed- World,  and  the  fear  bred  of 
its  hidden  terrors  and  the  weight  and  dreeness  of  its 
loneliness  have  entered  into  my  marrow,  so  that  I 
could,    then   and   now,    believe   in   the   likelihood    of 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  127 

matters  which,  ashore  and  in  the  midst  of  my  fellows, 
I  might  laugh  at  in  contempt.  It  is  the  dire  lone- 
someness  of  this  strange  world  into  which  I  have 
entered,  that  serves  so  to  take  the  heart  out  of  a  man. 

"  And  so,  as  I  have  said,  I  stood  there  listening, 
and  full  of  frightened,  but  undefined,  thoughts  ;  and 
all  the  while  the  tapping  continued,  sometimes  with 
a  regular  insistence,  and  anon  with  a  quick  spas- 
modic tap,  tap,  tap-a-tap,  as  though  some  Thing, 
having  Intelligence,  signalled  to  me. 

"  Presently,  however,  I  shook  off  something  of 
the  fooHsh  friglit  that  had  taken  me,  and  moved 
over  to  the  place  from  which  the  tapping  seemed  to 
sound.  Coming  near  tc  it,  I  bent  my  head  down, 
close  to  the  side  of  the  vessel,  and  listened.  Thus,  I 
heard  the  noises  vv'ith  greater  plainness,  and  could 
distinguish  easih  ,  now,  that  something  knocked  with 
a  hard  object  rpon  the  outside  of  the  ship,  as  though 
someone  had  Veen  striking  her  iron  side  with  a  small 
hammer. 

"  Then,  ev^n  as  I  listened,  came  a  thunderous 
blow  close  t<^  my  ear,  so  loud  and  astonishing,  that  I 
leaped  side\\ja\'s  in  sheer  friglit.  Directly  afterwards 
there  came  d,  second  heavy  blow,  and  then  a  third, 
as  though  someone  had  struck  the  ship's  side  with  a 
heavy  sledge-hammer,  and  after  that,  a  space  of  silence, 
in  which  I  heard  Uiy  wife's  voice  at  the  trap  of  the 
lazarette,  calling  down  to  me  to  know  what  had 
happened  to  cause  so  great  a  noise. 

"  '  Hush,  My  Dear  !  '  I  whispered  ;  for  it  seemed 
to  me  that  the  thing  outside  might  hear  her  ;  though 
this  could  not  have  been  possible,  and  I  do  but  men- 
tion it  as  sliowing  how  the  noises  had  set  me  off  my 
natural  balance. 

"  At  my  v\hispercd  command,  my  wife  turned  her 


128  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

about  and  came  down  the  ladder  into  the  semi-darkness 
of  the  place. 

"  '  Wliat  is  it,  Arthur  ?  '  she  asked,  coming  across  to 
me,  and  slipping  her  hand  between  my  arm  and  side. 
"  As  though  in  reply  to  her  query,  there  came 
against  the  outside  of  the  ship,  a  fourth  tremendous 
blow,  filling  the  whole  of  the  lazarette  with  a  dull 
thunder. 

"  ISly  wife  gave  out  a  frightened  cr}^  and  sprang 
away  from  me  ;  but  the  next  instant,  she  was  back, 
and  gripping  hard  at  my  arm. 

"  '  What  is  it,  Arthui  ?  WTiat  is  it  ?  '  she  asked 
me  ;  her  voice,  though  no  more  than  a  frightened 
whisper,  easily  heard  in  the  :iucceeding  silence. 

"  '  I  don't  know,  Mary,'  I  replied,  trying  to  speak 

in  a  level  tone.     '  It's ' 

" '  There's  something  again,'  she  interrupted,  as 
the  minor  tapping  noises  recommenced 

"  For  about  a  minute,  we  stood  silent,  listening 
to  those  eerie  taps.  Then  my  wife  turned  to 
me : — 

"  '  Is  it  anything  dangerous,  Arthur — tell  me  ? 
I  promise  you  I  shall  be  brave." 

"  '  I  can't  possibly  say,  Mary,'  I  answered.  '  I 
can't  say  ;  but  I'm  going  up  on  deck  to  listen.  .  .  . 
Perhaps,'  I  paused  a  moment  to  think  ;  but  a  fifth 
tremendous  blow  against  the  ship's  side,  drove  what- 
ever I  v/as  going  to  say,  clean  from  me,  and  I  could 
do  no  more  than  stand  there,  frightened  and  bewil- 
dered, hstening  for  further  sounds.  After  a  short 
pause,  there  came  a  sixth  blow.  Then  my  wdfe 
caught  me  by  the  arm.  and  commenced  to  drag  me 
towards  the  ladder. 

"  '  Come  up  out  of  this  dark  place,  Arthur,'  she 
said.     '  I  shall  be  ill  if  we  stay  here  any  longer.     Per- 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  129 

haps  the — the  thing  outside  can  hear  us,  and  it  may 
stop  if  we  go  upstairs.' 

"  By  this,  my  wife  was  all  of  a  shake,  and  I  but 
little  better,  so  that  I  was  glad  to  follow  her  up  the 
ladder.  At  the  top,  we  paused  for  a  while  to  listen, 
bending-  down  over  the  open  hatchway.  A  space 
of,  maybe,  some  five  minutes  passed  away  in  silence  ; 
then  there  commenced  again  the  tapping  noises, 
the  sounds  coming  clearly  up  to  us  where  we  crouched. 
Presently,  they  ceased  once  more,  and  after  that, 
though  we  listened  for  a  further  space  of  some  ten 
minutes,  they  were  not  repeated.  Neither  were  there 
any  more  of  the  great  bangs. 

"  In  a  little,  I  led  m}/  wife  away  from  the  hatch, 
to  a  seat  in  the  saloon  ;  for  the  hatch  is  situated 
under  the  saloon  table.  After  that,  I  returned  to  the 
opening,  and  replaced  the  cover.  Then  I  went  into 
our  cabin- — the  one  wliich  had  been  the  Captain's, 
her  father, — and  brought  from  there  a  revolver,  of 
which  we  have  several.  This,  I  loaded  with  care, 
and  afterwards  placed  in  my  side  pocket. 

"  Having  done  this,  I  fetched  from  the  pantry,  where 
I  have  made  it  my  use  to  keep  such  things  at  hand, 
a  bull's-eye  lantern,  tlie  same  having  been  used  on 
dark  niglits  wlicn  clearing  up  the  ropes  from  the 
decks.  This,  I  lit,  and  afterwards  turned  the  dark- 
slide  to  cover  the  light.  Next,  I  slipped  off  my  boots  ; 
and  then,  as  an  afterthought,  I  reached  down  one  of 
the  long-handled  American  axes  from  the  rack  about 
the  mizzcnmast — these  being  keen  and  very  formid- 
able weapons. 

"  After  that,  I  had  to  calm,  my  wife  and  assure  her 
that  I  would  run  no  unnecessary  risks,  if,  indeed,  tliere 
were  any  risks  to  run  ;  though,  as  may  be  imagined, 
I  could  not  say  what  new  peril  might  not  be  upon 

5 


130  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

us.  And  then,  picking  up  the  lantern,  I  made  my 
wa}^  silently  on  stockinged  feet,  up  the  companion- 
way.  I  had  reached  the  top,  and  was  just  stepping 
out  on  to  the  deck,  when  something  caught  my  arm. 
I  turned  swiftl}',  and  perceived  that  my  wife  had 
followed  me  up  the  steps,  and  from  the  shaking  of  her 
hand  upon  my  arm,  I  gatliered  that  she  was  very  much 
agitated. 

'"Oh,  My  Dear,  My  Dear,  don't  go  !  don't  go  !  ' 
she  whispered,  eagerly.  '  Wait  until  it  is  daylight. 
Stay  below  to-night.  You  don't  know  what  may  be 
about  in  this  horrible  place.' 

"  I  put  the  lantern  and  the  axe  upon  the  deck 
beside  the  companion  ;  then  bent  towards  the  open- 
ing, and  took  her  into  my  arms,  soothing  her,  and 
stroking  her  hair  ;  yet  with  ever  an  alert  glance  to 
and  fro  along  the  indistinct  decks.  Presentl}^  she 
was  more  like  her  usual  self,  and  hstened  to  my 
reasoning,  that  she  would  do  better  to  stay  below, 
and  so,  in  a  Httle,  left  me,  ha\dng  made  me  promise 
afresh  that  I  would  be  very  wary  of  danger. 

"  When  she  had  gone,  I  picked  up  the  lantern  and 
the  axe,  and  made  my  way  cautiously  to  the  side  of 
the  vessel.  Here,  I  paused  and  listened  very  care- 
fully, being  just  above  that  spot  upon  the  port  side 
where  I  had  heard  the  greater  part  of  the  tapping, 
and  all  of  the  heavy  bangs  ;  yet,  though  I  listened, 
as  I  have  said,  with  much  attention,  there  was  no 
repetition  of  the  sounds. 

"  Presently,  I  rose  and  made  my  way  forrard 
to  the  break  of  the  poop.  Here,  bending  over  the 
rail  which  ran  across,  I  listened,  peering  along  the 
dim  maindccks  ;  but  could  neither  see  nor  hear  any- 
thing ;  not  that,  indeed,  I  had  any  reason  for  expecting 
to  see  or  hear  ought  unusual  aboard  of  the  vessel ; 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  131 

for  all  of  the  noises  had  come  from  over  the  side,  and, 
more  than  that,  from  beneath  the  water-line.  Yet 
in  the  state  of  mind  in  which  I  was,  I  had  less  use  for 
reason  than  fancy  ;  for  that  strange  thudding  and 
tapping,  out  here  in  the  midst  of  this  world  of  lone- 
liness, had  set  me  vaguely  imagining  unknowable 
terrors,  stealing  upon  me  from  every  shadow  that 
lay  upon  the  dimly-seen  decks. 

"  Then,  as  still  I  listened,  hesitating  to  go  down 
on  to  the  maindeck,  yet  too  dissatisfied  with  the 
result  of  my  peerings,  to  cease  from  my  search,  I  heard, 
faint  yet  clear  in  the  stillness  of  the  night,  the  tapping 
noises  recommence. 

"  I  took  my  weight  from  off  the  rail,  and  listened  ; 
but  I  could  no  longer  hear  them,  and  at  that,  I  leant 
forward  again  over  the  rail,  and  peered  down  on  to 
the  maindeck.  Immediately,  the  sounds  came  once 
more  to  me,  and  I  knew  now,  that  they  were  borne 
to  me  by  the  medium  of  the  rail,  which  conducted 
them  to  me  through  the  iron  stanchions  by  which  it 
is  fixed  to  the  vessel. 

"  At  that,  I  turned  and  went  aft  along  the  poop 
deck,  moving  very  warily  and  with  quietness.  I 
stopped  over  the  place  where  first  I  had  heard  the 
louder  noises,  and  stooped,  putting  my  ear  against 
the  rail.  Here,  the  sounds  came  to  me  with  great 
distinctness. 

"  For  a  little,  I  Hstened  ;  then  stood  up,  and  slid 
away  that  part  of  the  tarred  canvas-screen  which 
covers  the  port  opening  through  which  we  dump 
our  refuse  ;  they  being  made  here  for  convenience, 
one  upon  each  side  of  the  vessel.  Ihis,  I  did  very 
silently ;  then,  leaning  forward  through  the  open- 
ing, I  peered  down  into  the  dimness  of  the  weed. 
Even  as  I  did  so,  I  heard  plainly  below  me  a  heavy 


132  PJen  of  the  Deep  Waters 

thud,  muffled  and  dull  b}'  reason  of  the  intervening 
water,  against  the  iron  side  of  the  ship.  It  seemed 
to  me  that  there  was  some  disturbance  amid  the 
dark,  shadowy  masses  of  the  weed.  Then  I  had 
opened  the  dark-sHde  of  my  lantern,  and  sent  a  clear 
beam  of  light  down  into  the  blackness.  For  a  brief 
instant,  I  thought  I  perceived  a  multitude  of  things 
moving.  Yet,  bej^ond  that  they  were  oval  in  shape, 
and  showed  white  through  the  weed  fronds,  I  had 
no  clear  conception  of  an3'thing  ;  for  with  the  flash 
of  the  light,  they  vanished,  and  there  lay  beneath  me 
only  the  dark,  brown  masses  of  the  weed — demurely 
quiet. 

"But  an  impression  they  did  lea\^e  upon  my  over 
excited  imagination — an  impression  that  might  have 
been  due  to  morbidity,  bred  of  too  much  loneliness  ; 
but  nevertheless  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  had  seen 
momentarily  a  multitude  of  dead  white  faces,  upturned 
towards  me  among  the  meshes  of  the  weed. 

"  For  a  Httle,  I  leant  there,  staring  down  at  the 
circle  of  illumined  weed  ;  yet  with  my  thoughts  in 
such  a  turmoil  of  frightened  doubts  and  conjectures, 
that  my  physical  eyes  did  but  poor  work,  compared 
with  the  orb  that  looks  inward.  And  through  all  the 
chaos  of  my  mind  there  rose  up  weird  and  creepy 
memories — ghouls,  the  un-dead.  There  seemed  no- 
thing improbable,  in  that  moment,  in  associating 
the  terms  with  the  fears  that  v»'ere  besetting  me.  For 
no  man  may  dare  to  say  what  terrors  this  world  holds, 
until  he  has  become  lost  to  his  brother  men,  amid 
the  unspeakable  desolation  of  the  vast  and  slimy 
weed-plains  of  the  Sargasso  Sea. 

"  And  then,  as  I  leaned  there,  so  foolishly  exposing 
myself  to  those  dangers  which  I  had  learnt  did  truly 
exist,  mj''  eyes  caught  and  subconsciously  noted   the 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  133 

strange  and  subtle  undulation  which  always  foretells 
the  approach  of  one  of  the  giant  octopi.  Instantly, 
I  leapt  back,  and  whipped  the  tarred  canvas-cover 
across  the  opening,  and  so  stood  alone  there  in  the 
night,  glancing  frightenedly  before  and  behind  me, 
the  beam  from  my  lamp  casting  wavering  splashes 
of  light  to  and  fro  about  the  decks.  And  all  the  time, 
I  was  listening — listening  ;  for  it  seemed  to  me  that 
some  Terror  was  brooding  in  the  night,  that  might 
come  upon  us  at  any  moment  and  in  some  unimagined 
form. 

"  Then,  across  the  silence,  stole  a  whisper,  and 
I  turned  swiftly  towards  the  companionway.  My 
wife  was  there,  and  she  reached  out  her  arms  to  me, 
begging  me  to  come  below  into  safety.  As  the 
light  from  my  lantern  flashed  upon  her,  I  saw  that 
she  had  a  revolver  in  her  right  hand,  and  at  that, 
I  asked  her  what  she  had  it  for ;  whereupon  she 
informed  me  that  she  had  been  watching  over  me, 
through  the  whole  of  the  time  that  I  had  been  on 
deck,  save  for  the  httle  while  that  it  had  taken  her 
to  get  and  load  the  weapon. 

"  At  that,  as  may  be  imagined,  I  went  and  em- 
braced her  very  heartily,  kissing  her  for  the  love  that 
had  prompted  her  actions ;  and  then,  after  that,  we 
spoke  a  little  together  in  low  tones — she  asking 
that  I  should  come  down  and  fasten  up  the  com- 
panion-doors, and  I  demurring,  telling  her  that  I  felt 
too  unsettled  to  sleep  ;  but  would  rather  keep  watch 
about  the  poop  for  a  while  longer. 

"  Then,  even  as  we  discussed  the  matter,  I  motioned 
to  her  for  quietness.  In  tlie  succeeding  silence, 
she  heard  it,  as  well  as  I,  a  slow — tap  !  tap  !  tap  ! 
coming  steadily  along  the  dark  maindecks.  I  felt 
a  swift  vile  fear,  and  my  wife's  hold  upon  me  became 


134  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

very  tense,  despite  that  she  trembled  a  little.  I 
released  her  grip  from  my  arm,  and  made  to  go  to- 
wards the  break  of  the  poop  ;  but  she  was  after  me 
instanth^  praying  me  at  least  to  stay  where  I  was, 
if  I  would  not  go  below. 

"  Upon  that,  I  bade  her  very  sternly  to  release 
me,  and  go  dowTi  into  the  cabin  ;  though  all  the  while 
I  loved  her  for  her  very  soHcitudc.  But  she  disobeyed 
me,  asserting  very  stoutly,  though  in  a  whisper,  that 
if  I  went  into  danger,  she  would  go  with  me  ;  and  at 
that  I  hesitated ;  but  decided,  after  a  moment,  to 
go  no  further  than  the  break  of  the  poop,  and  not 
to  venture  on  to  the  maindeck. 

"  I  went  very  silently  to  the  break,  and  my  wife 
followed  me.  From  the  rail  across  the  break,  I  shone 
the  light  of  the  lantern  ;  but  could  neither  see  nor 
hear  anything ;  for  the  tapping  noise  had  ceased. 
Then  it  recommenced,  seeming  to  have  come  near  to 
the  port  side  of  the  stump  of  the  mainmast.  I  turned 
the  lantern  towards  it,  and,  for  one  brief  instant,  it 
seemed  to  me  that  I  saw  something  pale,  just  beyond 
the  brightness  of  my  light.  At  that,  I  raised  my 
pistol  and  fired,  and  my  wife  did  the  same,  though 
without  any  telling  on  my  part.  The  noise  of  the 
double  explosion  went  very  loud  and  hollow  sounding 
along  the  decks,  and  after  the  echoes  had  died  away, 
we  both  of  us  thought  we  heard  the  tapping  going  away 
forrard  again. 

"  After  that,  we  stayed  awhile,  listening  and  watch- 
ing ;  but  all  was  quiet,  and,  presently,  I  consented  to 
go  below  and  bar  up  the  companion,  as  my  wife  desired  ; 
for,  indeed,  there  was  much  sense  in  her  plea  of  the 
futility  of  m}^  sta3'ing  up  upon  the  deck-. 

"  The  night  passed  quietly  enough,  and  on  the  follow- 
ing morning,  I  made  a  very  careful  inspection  of  the 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  135 

vessel,  examining  the  decks,  the  weed  outside  of  tlie 
ship,  and  the  sides  of  her.  After  that,  I  removed  the 
hatclies,  and  went  down  into  the  holds  ;  but  could 
nowhere  lind  anything  of  an  unusual  nature. 

"  That  night,  just  as  we  were  making  an  end  of  our 
supper,  we  heard  three  tremendous  blows  given  against 
the  starboard  side  of  the  ship,  whereat,  I  sprang  to 
m}'  feet,  seized  and  lit  the  dark-lantern,  which  I  had 
kept  hand}',  and  ran  quickly  and  silently  up  on  to  the 
deck.  My  pistol,  I  had  already  in  my  pocket,  and  as 
I  had  soft  slippers  upon  my  feet,  I  needed  not  to  pause 
to  remove  my  footgear.  In  the  companionway,  I 
had  left  the  axe,  and  this  I  seized  as  I  went  up  the  steps. 

"  Reaching  the  deck,  I  moved  over  quietly  to  the 
side,  and  sHd  back  the  canvas  door ;  then  I  leant 
out  and  opened  the  slide  of  the  lantern,  letting  its  light 
play  upon  the  weed  in  the  direction  from  which  the 
bangs  had  seemed  to  proceed ;  but  nowhere  could 
I  perceive  anything  out  of  the  ordinary,  the  weed 
seeming  undisturbed.  And  so,  after  a  little,  I  drew 
in  my  head,  and  slid-to  the  door  in  the  canvas  screen ; 
for  it  was  but  wanton  folly  to  stand  long  exposed  to 
any  of  the  giant  octopi  that  might  chance  to  be  prowl- 
ing near,  beneath  the  curtain  of  the  weed. 

"  From  then,  until  m'dnight,  I  stayed  upon  the 
poop,  talking  much  in  a  quiet  voice  to  my  wife,  who 
had  followed  me  up  into  the  companion.  At  times, 
we  could  hear  the  knocking,  sometimes  against  one 
side  of  the  ship,  and  again  upon  the  other.  And, 
between  the  louder  knocks,  and  accompanying  them, 
would  sound  the  minor  tap,  tap,  tap-a-tap,  that  I 
had  first  heard. 

"  About  midnight,  feeling  that  I  could  do  nothing, 
and  no  harm  aj)pearing  to  result  to  us  from  the  unseen 
things  that  seemed  to  be  encirchng  us,  my  wife  and  I 


136  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

made  our  way  below  to  rest,  securely  barring  the  com- 
panion-doors behind  us. 

"It  would  be,  I  should  imagine,  about  two  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  that  I  was  aroused  from  a  somewhat 
troubled  sleep,  by  the  agonised  screaming  of  our  great 
boar,  away  forrard.  I  leant  up  upon  my  elbow,  and 
listened,  and  so  grew  speedily  wide  aw^ake.  I  sat  up, 
and  slid  from  my  bunk  to  the  floor.  I\Iy  wife,  as  I 
could  tell  from  her  breathing,  was  sleeping  peacefully, 
so  that  I  was  able  to  draw  on  a  few  clothes  without 
disturbing  her. 

"  Then,  having  Ut  the  dark-lantern,  and  turned  the 
slide  over  the  light,  I  took  the  axe  in  my  other  hand, 
and  hastened  towards  the  door  that  gives  out  of  the 
forrard  end  of  the  saloon,  on  to  the  maindcck,  beneath 
the  shelter  of  the  break  of  the  poop.  This  door,  I  had 
locked  before  turning-in,  and  now,  \'ery  noiselessly,  I 
unlocked  it,  and  turned  the  handle,  opening  the  door 
with  much  caution.  I  peered  out  along  the  dim  stretch 
of  the  maindeck  ;  but  could  see  nothing  ;  then  I  turned 
on  the  slide  of  the  lamp,  and  let  the  light  play  along 
the  decks  ;  but  still  nothing  unusual  was  revealed  to 
me. 

"  Away  forrard,  the  shrieking  of  the  pig  had  been 
succeeded  by  an  absolute  silence,  and  there  was  no- 
where any  noise,  if  I  except  an  occasional  odd  tap-a- 
tap,  which  seemed  to  come  from  the  side  of  the  ship. 
And  so,  taking  hold  of  my  courage,  I  stepped  out  on 
to  the  maindeck,  and  proceeded  slowly  forrard,  throw- 
ing the  beam  of  light  to  and  fro  continuously,  as  I 
walked. 

"  Abruptly,  I  heard  av/ay  in  the  bov.'s  of  the  ship 
a  sudden  multitudinous  tapping  and  scraping  and 
slithering  ;  and  so  loud  and  near  did  it  sound,  that  I 
was  brought  up  all  of  a  round-turn,  as  the  saying  is. 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  137 

For,  perhaps,  a  whole  minute,  I  stood  there  hesitating, 
and  playing  the  light  all  about  me,  not  knowing  but 
that  some  hateful  thing  might  leap  upon  me  from  out 
of  the  shadows. 

"  And  then,  suddenly,  I  remembered  that  I  had  left 
the  door  open  behind  me,  that  led  into  the  saloon,  so 
that,  were  there  any  deadly  thing  about  the  decks,  it 
might  chance  to  get  in  upon  my  wife  and  child  as  they 
slept.  At  the  thought,  I  turned  and  ran  swiftly  aft 
again,  and  in  through  the  door  to  my  cabin.  Here, 
I  made  sure  that  all  was  right  with  the  two  sleepers, 
and  after  that,  I  returned  to  the  deck,  shutting  the 
door,  and  locking  it  behind  me. 

"  And  now,  feeling  very  lonesome  out  there  upon  the 
dark  decks,  and  cut  off  in  a  way  from  a  retreat,  I  had 
need  of  all  my  manhood  to  aid  me  forrard  to  learn  the" 
wherefore  of  the  pig's  crying,  and  the  cause  of  that 
manifold  tapping.  Yet  go  I  did,  and  have  some  right 
to  be  proud  of  the  act ;  for  the  dreeness  and  lonesome- 
ness  and  the  cold  fear  of  the  Weed-World,  squeeze  the 
pluck  out  of  one  in  a  very  woeful  manner. 

"  As  I  approached  the  empty  fo'cas'le,  I  moved  with 
all  wariness,  swinging  the  light-  to  and  fro,  and  holding 
my  axe  very  handily,  and  the  heart  within  my  breast 
like  a  shape  of  water,  so  in  fear  was  I.  Yet,  I  came  at 
last  to  the  pig-sty,  and  so  discovered  a  dreadful  sight. 
The  pig,  a  huge  boar  of  twenty-score  pounds,  had  been 
dragged  out  on  to  the  deck,  and  lay  before  the  sty  with 
all  his  belly  ripped  up,  and  stone  dead.  The  iron  bars 
of  the  sty — great  bars  they  are  too — had  been  torn 
apart,  as  though  they  had  been  so  many  straws  ;  and, 
for  the  Test,  there  was  a  deal  of  blood  both  within  the 
sty  and  upon  the  decks. 

"  Yet,  I  did  not  stay  then  to  see  more  ;  for,  all  of 
a  sudden,  the  realisation  was  borne  upon  me  that  this 

5* 


138  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

was  the  work  of  some  monstrous  thing,  which  even 
at  that  moment  might  be  steahng  upon  me  ;  and, 
witli  the  thought,  an  overwhelming  fear  leapt  upon 
me,  overbearing  my  courage  ;  so  that  I  turned  and 
ran  for  the  shelter  of  the  saloon,  and  never  stopped 
until  the  stout  door  was  locked  between  me  and  that 
which  had  wrought  such  destruction  upon  the  pig. 
And  as  I  stood  there,  quivering  a  little  with  very 
fright,  I  kept  questioning  dumbly  as  to  what  manner 
of  wild-beast  thing  it  was  that  could  burst  asunder 
iron  bars,  and  rip  the  life  out  of  a  great  boar,  as  though 
it  were  of  no  more  account  than  a  kitten.  And  then 
more  vital  questions  : — How  did  it  get  aboard,  and 
where  had  it  hidden  ?  And  again  : — IVJiat  was  it  ? 
And  so  in  this  fashion  for  a  good  while,  until  I  had 
grown  something  more  calmed. 

"  But  through  all  the  remainder  of  that  night,  I 
slept  not  so  much  as  a  wink. 

"  Then  in  the  morning  when  my  wife  awoke,  1 1 
told  her  of  the  happenings  of  the  night ;  whereat 
she  turned  very  white,  and  fell  to  reproaching  me  for 
going  out  at  all  on  to  the  deck,  declaring  that  I  had  run 
needlessly  into  danger,  and  that,  at  least,  I  should 
not  have  left  her  alone,  sleeping  in  ignorance  of  what 
was  towards.  And  after  that,  she  fell  into  a  fit  of 
crying,  so  that  I  had  some  to-do  comforting  her.  Yet, 
when  she  had  come  back  to  calmness,  she  was  all  for 
accompanying  me  about  the  decks,  to  see  by  daylight 
what  had  indeed  befallen  in  the  night-time.  And  from 
this  decision,  I  could  not  turn  her ;  though  I  assured 
her  I  should  have  told  her  nothing,  had  it  not  been 
that  I  wished  to  warn  her  from  going  to  and  fro  between 
the  saloon  and  the  galley,  until  I  had  made  a  thorough 
search  about  the  decks.  Yet,  as  I  have  remarked,  I 
could  not  turn  her  from  her  purpose  of  accompanjdng 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  139 

me,  and  so  was  forced  to  let  her  come,  though  against 
my  desire. 

"  We  made  our  way  on  deck  through  the  door  that 
opens  under  the  break  of  the  poop,  my  wife  carrying 
her  loaded  revolver  half-clumsily  in  both  hands,  whilst 
I  had  mine  held  in  my  left,  and  the  long-handled  axe 
in  my  right — holding  it  very  readily. 

"  On  stepping  out  on  to  the  deck,  we  closed  the  door 
behind  us,  locking  it  and  removing  the  key  ;  for  we  had 
in  mind  our  sleeping  child.  Then  we  went  slowly 
forrard  along  the  decks,  glancing  about  warily.  As 
we  came  fore-side  of  the  pig-sty,  and  my  wife  saw  that 
which  lay  beyond  it,  she  let  out  a  little  exclamation  of 
horror,  shuddering  at  the  sight  of  the  mutilated  pig, 
as,  indeed,  well  she  might. 

"  For  my  part,  I  said  nothing  ;  but  glanced  with 
much  apprehension  about  us  ;  feeling  a  fresh  access 
of  fright ;  for  it  was  very  plain  to  me  that  the  boar 
had  been  molested  since  I  had  seen  it — the  head 
having  been  torn,  with  awful  might,  from  the  body  ; 
and  there  were,  besides,  other  new  and  ferocious 
wounds,  one  of  which  had  come  nigh  to  severing  the 
poor  brute's  body  in  half.  All  of  which  was  so  much 
additional  evidence  of  the  formidable  character  of  the 
monster,  or  ^lonstrosity,  that  had  attacked  the  animal. 

"I  did  not  delay  by  the  pig,  nor  attempt  to  touch 
it ;  but  beckoned  my  wife  to  follow  me  up  on  to  the 
fo'cas'le  head.  Here,  I  removed  the  canvas  cover 
from  the  small  skylight  which  lights  the  fo'cas'le 
beneath  ;  and,  after  that,  I  Ufted  off  the  heavy  top, 
letting  a  flood  of  light  down  into  the  gloomy  place. 
Then  I  leant  down  into  the  opening,  and  peered  about  ; 
but  could  discover  no  signs  of  any  lurking  thing,  and 
so  returned  to  the  maindeck,  and  made  an  entrance 
i  nto  the  fo'cas'le  through  the  starboard  doorway.    And 


140  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

now  I  made  a  more  minute  search  ;  but  discov'ered 
nothing,  beyond  the  mournful  array  of  sea-chests  that 
had  belonged  to  our  dead  crew. 

"  My  search  concluded,  I  hastened  out  from  the 
doleful  place,  into  the  daylight,  and  after  that  m.ade 
fast  the  door  again,  and  saw  to  it  that  the  one  upon 
the  port  side  was  also  securely  locked.  Then  I  went 
up  again  on  to  the  fo'cas'le  head,  and  replaced  the  sky- 
light-top and  the  canvas  cover,  battening  the  whole 
down  very  thoroughly. 

"  And  in  this  wise,  and  with  an  incredible  care,  did 
I  make  my  search  through  the  ship,  fastening  up  each 
place  behind  me,  so  that  I  should  be  certain  that  no 
Thing  was  pla3dng  some  dread  game  of  hide  and  seek 
with  me. 

"  Yet  I  found  nothing,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the 
grim  evidence  of  the  dead  and  mutilated  boar,  I  had 
been  like  to  have  thought  nothing  more  dreadful  than 
an  over  vi\dd  Imagination  had  roamed  the  decks  in 
the  darkness  of  the  past  night. 

"  That  I  had  reason  to  feel  puzzled,  may  be  the  better 
understood,  when  I  explain  that  I  had  examined  the 
whole  of  the  great,  tarred-canvas  screen,  which  I  have 
built  about  the  ship  as  a  protection  against  the  sudden 
tentacles  of  any  of  the  roaming  giant  octopi,  without 
discovering  any  torn  place  such  as  must  have  been 
made  if  any  conceivable  monster  had  climbed  aboard 
out  of  the  weed.  Also,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that 
the  ship  stands  many  feet  out  of  the  weed,  presenting 
only  her  smooth  iron  sides  to  anytliing  that  desires 
to  climb  aboard. 

"  And  yet  there  was  the  dead  pig,  l3dng  brutally 
torn  before  its  empty  sty !  An  undeniable  proof 
that,  to  go  out  upon  the  decks  after  dark,  was  to  run 
the  risk  of  meeting  a  liorrible  and  mysterious  death  ! 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  141 

"  Through  all  that  day,  I  pondered  over  this  new 
fear  that  had  come  upon  us,  and  particularly  upon 
the  monstrous  and  unearthly  power  that  had  torn  apart 
the  stout  iron  bars  of  the  sty,  and  so  ferociously 
wrenched  off  the  head  of  the  boar.  The  result  of  my 
pondering  was  that  I  removed  our  sleeping  belongings 
that  evening  from  the  cabin  to  the  iron  half-deck — a 
little,  four-bunked  house,  standing  fore-side  of  the 
stump  of  the  main  mast,  and  built  entirely  of  iron, 
even  to  the  single  door,  which  opens  out  of  the  after 
end. 

"  Along  with  our  sleeping  matters,  I  carried  forrard 
to  our  new  lodgings,  a  lamp,  and  oil,  also  the  dark- 
lantem,  a  couple  of  the  axes,  two  rifles,  and  all  of  the 
revolvers,  as  well  as  a  good  supply  of  ammunition. 
Then  I  bade  my  wife  forage  out  sufficient  provisions 
to  last  us  for  a  week,  if  need  be,  and  whilst  she  was  so 
busied,  I  cleaned  out  and  filled  the  water  breaker 
which  belonged  to  the  half-deck. 

"  At  half-past  six,  I  sent  my  wife  forrard  to  the  little 
iron  house,  with  the  baby,  and  then  I  locked  up  the 
saloon  and  all  of  the  cabin  doors,  finally  locking  after 
me  the  heavy,  teak  door  that  opened  out  under  the 
break  of  the  poop. 

"  Then  I  went  forrard  to  my  wife  and  child,  and  shut 
and  bolted  the  iron  door  of  the  half-deck  for  the  night. 
After  that,  I  went  round  and  saw  to  it  that  all  of  the 
iron  storm-doors,  that  shut  over  the  eight  ports  of  the 
house,  were  in  good  working  order,  and  so  we  sat  down, 
as  it  were,  to  await  the  night. 

"  By  eight  o'clock,  the  dusk  was  upon  us,  and 
before  half-past,  the  night  Liii  the  decks  from  my 
sight.  Then  I  shut  down  all  the  iron  port-flaps,  and 
screwed  them  up  securely,  and  after  that,  I  lit  the 
lamp. 


142  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  And  so  a  space  of  waiting  ensued,  during  which  I 
whispered  reassuringly  to  my  wife,  from  time  to  time, 
as  she  looked  across  at  me  from  her  seat  beside  the 
sleeping  child,  with  frightened  eyes,  and  a  very  white 
face  ;  for  somehow  there  had  come  upon  us  within  the 
last  hour,  a  sense  of  chilly  fright,  that  went  straight 
to  one's  heart,  robbing  one  vilely  of  pluck. 

"  A  little  later,  a  sudden  sound  broke  the  impressive 
silence — a  sudden  dull  thud  against  the  side  of  the 
ship  ;  and,  after  that,  there  came  a  succession  of  hea\^ 
blows,  seeming  to  be  struck  all  at  once  upon  every 
side  of  the  vessel ;  after  which  there  was  quietness 
for  maybe  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 

"  Then,  suddenly,  I  heard,  away  forrard,  a  tap,  tap, 
tap,  and  then  a  loud  rattling,  slurring  noise,  and  a 
loud  crash.  After  that,  I  heard  many  other  sounds, 
and  always  that  tap,  tap,  tap,  repeated  a  hundred 
times,  as  though  an  army  of  wooden-legged  men  were 
busied  all  about  the  decks  at  the  fore  end  of  the  ship. 

"  Presently,  there  came  to  me  the  sound  of  something 
coming  down  the  deck,  tap,  tap,  tap,  it  came.  It 
drew  near  to  the  house,  paused  for  nigh  a  minute  ; 
then  continued  away  aft  towards  the  saloon  : — tap, 
tap,  tap.  I  shivered  a  little,  and  then,  fell  half 
consciously  to  thanking  God  that  I  had  been  given 
wisdom  to  bring  my  wife  and  child  forrard  to  the 
security  of  the  iron  deck-house. 

"  About  a  minute  later,  I  heard  the  sound  of  a  heavy 
blow  struck  somewhere  away  aft ;  and  after  that  a 
second,  and  then  a  third,  and  seeming  by  the  sounds 
to  have  been  against  iron — the  iron  of  the  bulkshead 
that  runs  across  the  break  of  the  poop.  There  came 
the  noise  of  a  fourth  blow,  and  it  blended  into  the 
crash  of  broken  woodwork.  And  therewith,  I  had  a 
little  tense  quivering  inside  me  ;   for  the  little  one  and 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  143 

my  wife  miglit  have  been  sleeping  aft  there  at  that 
very  moment,  had  it  not  been  for  the  Providential 
thought  which  had  sent  us  forrard  to  the  half-deck. 

"  With  tlic  crash  of  the  broken  door,  away  aft, 
there  came,  from  forrard  of  us,  a  great  tumult  of  noises  ; 
and,  directly,  it  sounded  as  though  a  multitude  of 
wooden-legged  men  were  coming  down  the  decks  from 
forrard.  Tap,  tap,  tap  ;  tap-a-tap,  the  noises  came, 
and  drew  abreast  of  where  we  sat  in  the  house,  crouched 
and  holding  our  breaths,  for  fear  that  we  should  make 
some  noise  to  attract  that  which  was  without.  The 
sounds  passed  us,  and  went  tapping  away  aft,  and  I 
let  out  a  little  breath  of  sheer  easement.  Then,  as  a 
sudden  thought  came  to  me,  I  rose  and  turned  down 
the  lamp,  fearing  that  some  ray  from  it  might  be  seen 
from  beneath  the  door.  And  so,  for  the  space  of  an 
hour,  we  sat  wordless,  listening  to  the  sounds  which 
came  from  away  aft,  the  thud  of  heavy  blows,  the 
occasional  crash  of  wood,  and,  presently,  the  tap, 
tap,  tap,  again,  coming  forrard  towards  us. 

"  The  sounds  came  to  a  stop,  opposite  the  starboard 
side  of  the  house,  and,  for  a  full  minute,  there  was 
quietness.  Then  suddenly,  '  Boom  !  '  a  tremendous 
blow  had  been  struck  against  the  side  of  the  house. 
My  wife  gave  out  a  little  gasping  cry,  and  there  came  a 
second  blow  ;  and,  at  that,  the  child  awoke  and  began 
to  wail,  and  my  wife  was  put  to  it,  with  trying  to  soothe 
her  into  immediate  silence. 

"  A  third  blow  was  struck,  filling  the  little  house 
with  a  dull  thunder  of  sound,  and  then  I  heard  the 
tap,  tap,  tap,  move  round  to  the  after  end  of  the  house. 
There  came  a  pause,  and  then  a  great  blow  right  upon 
the  door.  I  grasped  the  rifle,  which  I  had  leant 
against  my  chair,  and  stood  up  ;  for  I  did  not  know 
but  that  the  thing  might  be  upon  us  in  a  moment,  so 


144  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

prodigious  was  the  force  of  the  blows  it  struck.  Once 
again  it  struck  the  door,  and  after  that  went  tap, 
tap,  tap,  round  to  the  port  side  of  the  house,  and  there 
struck  the  house  again  ;  but  now  I  had  more  ease  of 
mind  ;  for  it  was  its  direct  attack  upon  the  door,  that 
had  put  such  horrid  dread  into  my  heart. 

"  After  the  blows  upon  the  port  side  of  the  house, 
there  came  a  long  spell  of  silence,  as  though  the  thing 
outside  were  listening  ;  but,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  my 
wife  had  been  able  to  soothe  the  child,  so  that  no  sound 
from  us,  told  of  our  presence. 

"  Then,   at  last,   there   came  agam  the  sounds  :— 
tap,  tap,   tap,  as  the    voiceless    thing    moved    away 
forrard.     Presently,    I    heard    the    noises    cease    aft; 
and,   after  that,   there   came   a  multitudinous  tap-a- 
tapping,  coming  along  the  decks.     It  passed  the  house 
\\itiiout  so  much  as  a  pause,  and  receded  away  forrard. 
"  For  a  space  of  over  two  hours,  there  was  an  abso- 
lute sHence  ;    so  that  I  judged  that  we  were  now  no 
longer  in  danger  of  being  molested.     An  hour  later,  I 
whispered  to  my  wife  ;    but,  getting  no  reply,  knew 
that  she  had  fallen  into  a  doze,  and  so  I  sat  on,  Usten- 
ing  tensely  ;    yet  making  no  sort  of  noise  that  might 
attract  attention. 

"  Presently,  by  the  thin  line  of  light  from  beneath 
the  door,  I  saw  that  the  day  was  breaking  ;  and,  at 
that,  I  rose  stiffly,  and  commenced  to  unscrew  the  iron 
port-covers.  I  unscrewed  the  forrard  ones  first,  and 
looked  out  into  the  wan  dawn;  but  could  discover 
nothing  unusual  about  so  much  of  the  decks  as  I  could 
see  from  there. 

"  After  that,  I  went  round  and  opened  each,  as  I 
came  to  it,  in  its  turn  ;  but  it  was  not  until  I  had  un- 
covered the  port  which  gave  me  a  \dew  of  the  port 
side  of    the  after  maindeck,  that   I  j^discovered  any- 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  145 

thing  extraordinary.  Then  I  saw,  at  first  dimly,  but 
more  clearly  as  the  day  brightened,  that  the  door, 
leading  from  beneath  the  break  of  the  poop  into  the 
saloon,  had  been  broken  to  flinders,  some  of  which  lay 
scattered  upon  the  deck,  and  some  of  which  still  hung 
from  the  bent  hinges  ;  whilst  more,  no  doubt,  were 
strewed  in  the  passage  beyond  my  sight. 

"  Turning  from  the  port,  I  glanced  towards  my  wife, 
and  saw  that  she  lay  half  in  and  half  out  of  the  baby's 
bunk,  sleeping  with  her  head  beside  the  child's,  both 
upon  one  pillow.  At  the  sight,  a  great  wave  of  holy 
thankfulness  took  me,  that  we  had  been  so  wonder- 
full}'  spared  from  the  terrible  and  mysterious  danger 
that  had  stalked  the  decks  in  the  darkness  of  the  pre- 
ceding night.  Feeling  thus,  I  sto  e  across  the  floor 
of  the  house,  and  kissed  them  both  very  gently,  being 
full  of  tenderness,  yet  not  minded  to  waken  them. 
And,  after  that,  I  lay  down  in  one  of  the  bunks,  and 
slept  until  the  sun  was  high  in  the  heaven. 

"  V/hen  I  awoke,  my  wife  was  about  and  had  tended 
to  the  child  and  prepared  our  breakfast,  so  that  I 
had  naught  to  do  but  tumble  out  and  set  to,  the  which 
I  did  with  a  certain  keenness  of  appetite,  induced,  I 
doubt  not,  by  the  stress  of  the  night.  Whilst  we  ate, 
VN'e  discussed  the  peril  through  which  we  had  just 
passed  ;  but  without  coming  any  the  nearer  to  a  solu- 
tion of  the  \^'eird  mystery  of  the  Terror. 

"  Breakfast  over,  we  took  a  long  and  final  survey 
of  the  decks,  from  the  various  ports,  and  then  pre- 
pared to  sally  out.  This  we  did  with  instinctive 
caution  and  quietness,  both  of  us  armed  as  on  the 
previous  day.  The  door  of  tlie  half-deck  we  closed 
and  locked  behind  us,  thereby  ensuring  that  the  child 
was  open  to  no  danger  whilst  we  were  in  other  parts 
of  the  ship. 


146  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  After  a  quick  look  about  us,  we  proceeded  aft 
towards  the  shattered  door  beneath  the  break  of  the 
poop.  At  the  doorway,  we  stopped,  not  so  much 
with  the  intent  to  examine  the  broken  door,  as  because 
of  an  instinctive  and  natural  hesitation  to  go  forward 
into  the  saloon,  which  but  a  few  hours  previous  had 
been  visited  by  some  incredible  monster  or  monsters. 
Finally,  we  decided  to  go  up  upon  the  poop  and  peer 
down  through  the  skylight.  This  we  did,  lifting  the 
sides  of  the  dome  for  that  purpose  ;  yet  though  we 
peered  long  and  earnestly,  we  could  perceive  no  signs 
of  any  lurking  thing.  But  broken  woodwork  there 
appeared  to  be  in  plenty,  to  judge  by  the  scattered 
pieces. 

"  After  that,  I  unlocked  the  companion,  and  pushed 
back  the  big,  over-arching  slide.  Then,  silently,  we 
stole  down  the  steps  and  into  the  saloon.  Here, 
being  now  able  to  see  the  big  cabin  through  all  its 
length,  we  discovered  a  most  extraordinary  scene ; 
the  whole  place  appeared  to  be  wrecked  from  end  to 
end  ;  the  six  cabins  that  line  each  side  had  their  bulks- 
heading  driven  into  shards  and  slivers  of  broken  wood 
in  places.  Here,  a  door  would  be  standing  .untouched, 
whilst  the  bulkshead  beside  it  was  in  a  mass  of  flinders 
• — There  a  door  would  be  driven  completely  from  its 
hinges,  whilst  the  surrounding  woodwork  was  un- 
touched.    And  so  it  was,  wherever  we  looked. 

"  My  wife  made  to  go  towards  our  cabin  ;  but  I 
pulled  her  back,  and  went  forward  m3^self.  Here  the 
desolation  was  almost  as  great.  My  wife's  bunk- 
board  had  been  ripped  out,  whilst  the  supporting 
side-batten  of  mine  had  been  plucked  forth,  so  that 
all  the  bottom-boards  of  the  bunk  had  descended  to  the 
floor  in  a  cascade. 

"  But  it  was  neither  of  these  things  that  touched  us 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  147 

so  sharply,  as  the  fact  that  the  child's  little  swing  cot 
had  been  wrenched  from  its  standards,  and  flung  in  a 
tangled  mass  of  white-painted  iron-work  across  the 
cabin.  At  the  sight,  of  that,  I  glanced  across  at  my 
wife,  and  she  at  me,  her  face  grown  very  white.  Then 
down  she  slid  to  her  knees,  and  fell  to  crying  and  thank- 
ing God  together,  so  that  I  found  myself  beside  her  in  a 
moment,  with  a  very  humble  and  thankful  heart. 

"  Presently,  when  we  were  more  controlled,  we  left 
the  cabin,  and  fmished"  our  search.  The  pantry,  we 
discovered  to  be  entirely  untouched,  which,  .somehow, 
I  do  not  think  was  then  a  matter  of  great  surprise  to 
me  ;  for  I  had  ever  a  feehng  that  the  things  which  had 
broken  a  way  into  our  sleeping  cabin,  had  been  looking 
for  us. 

"  In  a  Httle  while,  we  left  the  wrecked  saloon  and 
cabins,  and  made  our  way  forrard  to  the  pigsty  ;  for 
I  was  anxious  to  see  whether  the  carcass  of  the  pig 
had  been  touched.  As  we  came  round  the  corner  of 
the  sty,  I  uttered  a  great  cry ;  for  there,  lying  upon 
the  deck,  on  its  back,  was  a  gigantic  crab,  so  vast 
in  size  that  I  had  not  conceived  so  huge  a  monster 
existed.  Brown  it  was  in  colour,  save  for  the  belly 
part,  which  was  of  a  light  yellow. 

"  One  of  its  pincer-claws,  or  mandibles,  had  been 
torn  off  in  the  fight  in  which  it  must  have  been  slain 
(for  it  was  all  disembowelled).  And  this  one  claw 
weighed  so  heavy  that  I  had  some  to-do  to  lift  it 
from  the  deck  ;  and  by  this  you  may  have  some  idea 
of  the  size  and  formidableness  of  the  creature  itself. 

"  Around  the  great  crab,  lay  half  a  dozen  smaller 
ones,  no  more  than  from  seven  or  eight  to  twenty  inches 
across,  and  all  white  in  colour,  save  for  an  occasional 
mottling  of  brown.  These  had  all  been  killed  by 
a  single   nip  of  an  enormous  mandible,    which  had  in 


148  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

every  case  srfiashed  them  almost  into  two  halves.  Of 
the  carcass  of  the  great  boar,  not  a  fragment  remained. 

"  And  so  was  the  mystery  solved  ;  and,  with  the 
solution,  departed  the  superstitious  terror  which  had 
suffocated  me  through  those  three  nights,  since  the 
tapping  had  commenced.  We  had  been  attacked  by 
a  wandering  shoal  of  giant  crabs,  which,  it  is  quite 
possible,  roam  across  the  weed  from  place  to  place, 
devouring  aught  that  comes  in  their  path. 

"  Whether  they  had  ever  boarded  a  ship  before, 
and  so,  perhaps,  developed  a  monstrous  lust  for  human 
flesh,  or  whether  their  attack  had  been  prompted  by 
curiosit}^,  I  cannot  possibly  say.  It  may  be  that, 
at  first,  they  mistook  the  hull  of  the  vessel  for  the 
body  of  some  dead  marine  monster,  and  hence  their 
blows  upon  her  sides,  by  which,  possibh^  thej^  were 
endeavouring  to  pierce  through  our  somewhat  un- 
usually tough  hide  ! 

"  Or,  again,  it  may  be  that  they  have  some  power 
of  scent,  by  means  of  which  they  were  able  to  smell 
our  presence  aboard  the  ship  ;  but  this  (as  they  made 
no  general  attack  upon  us  in  the  deck-house)  I  feel 
disinclined  to  regard  as  probable.  And  yet — I  do 
not  know.  Why  their  attack  upon  the  saloon,  and 
our  sleeping-cabin  ?  As  I  say,  I  cannot  tell,  and  so 
must  leave  it  there. 

"  The  way  in  which  they  came  aboard,  I  discovered 
that  same  day  ;  for,  having  learned  what  manner  of 
creature  it  was  that  had  attacked  us,  I  made  a  more 
intelligent  survey  of  the  sides  of  the  ship  ;  but  it  was 
not  until  I  came  to  the  extreme  bows,  that  I  saw  how 
they  had  managed.  Here,  I  found  that  some  of  the 
gear  of  the  broken  bowsprit  and  jibboom,  trailed  down 
on  to  the  weed,  and  as  I  had  not  extended  the  canvas- 
screen  across  the  heel  of  the  bowsprit,  the  monsters 


From  the  Tideless  Sea  149 

had  been  able  to  climb  up  the  gear,  and  thence 
aboard,  without  the  least  obstruction  being  opposed 
to  their  progress. 

"  This  state  of  affairs,  I  very  speedily  remedied  ; 
for,  with  a  few  strokes  of  my  axe,  I  cut  through  the 
gear,  allowing  it  to  drop  down  among  the  weed  ;  and 
after  that,  I  built  a  temporary  breastwork  of  wood 
across  the  gap,  between  the  two  ends  of  the  screen ; 
later  on  making  it  more  permanent. 

"  Since  that  time,  we  have  been  no  more  molested 
by  the  giant  crabs  ;  though  for  several  nights  after- 
wards, MC  heard  them  knocking  strangely  against 
our  sides.  Maybe,"  they  are  attracted  by  such  refuse 
as  we  are  forced  to  dump  overboard,  and  this  would 
explain  their  first  tappings  being  aft,  opposite  to  the 
lazarette  ;  for  it  is  from  the  openings  in  this 
part  of  the  canvas-screen  that  we  cast  our 
rubbish. 

"  Yet,  it  is  weeks  now  since  we  heard  aught  of 
them,  so  that  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  they  have 
betaken  themselves  elsewhere,  maybe  to  attack  some 
other  lonely  humans,  living  out  their  short  span  of 
life  aboard  some  lone  derelict,  lost  even  to  memory 
in  the  depth  of  this  vast  sea  of  weed  and  deadly 
creatures. 

"  I  shall  send  this  message  forth  on  its  journey, 
as  I  have  sent  the  other  four,  within  a  well-pitched 
barrel,  attached  to  a  small  fire  balloon.  The  shell 
of  the  severed  claw  of  the  monster  crab,  I  shall  en- 
close,* as  evidence  of  the  terrors  that  beset  us  in 
this  dreadful  place.  Should  this  message,  and  the  claw, 
ever  fall  into  human  hands,  let  them,  contemplating 
this  vast  mandible,  try  to  imagine  the  size  of  the  other 

*  Captain  Bolton  makes  no  mention  of  the  claw,  in  the  cover- 
ing letter  which  he  has  enclosed  with  the  MS. — W.    H.    H. 


150  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

crab  or  crabs  that  could  destroy  so  formidable  a  crea- 
ture as  the  one  to  which  this  claw  belonged. 

"  What  other  terrors  does  this  hideous  world  hold 
for  us  ? 

"  I  had  thought  of  inclosing,  along  with  the  claw, 
the  shell  of  one  of  the  white  smaller  crabs.  It  must 
have  been  some  of  these  movmg  in  the  weed  that 
night,  that  set  my  disordered  fancy  to  imagining  of 
ghouls  and  the  Un-Dead.  But,  on  thinking  it  over, 
I  shall  not  ;  for  to  do  so  would  be  to  illustrate  nothing 
that  needs  illustration,  and  it  would  but  increase 
needlessly  the  weight  which  the  balloon  will  have  to 
Hft. 

"  And  so  I  grow  wearied  of  writing.  The  night 
is  drawing  near,  and  I  have  little  more  to  tell.  I  am 
writing  this  in  the  saloon,  and,  though  I  have  mended 
and  carpentered  so  well  as  I  am  able,  nothing  I 
can  do  will  hide  the  traces  of  that  night  when  the 
vast    crabs    raided    through    these    cabins,    searching 

for — WHAT  ? 

"  There  is  nothing  more  to  say.  In  health,  I  am 
well,  and  so  is  my  wife  and  the  little  one,  but  .... 

"  I  must  have  myself  under  control,  and  be  patient. 
We  are  beyond  all  help,  and  must  bear  that  which 
is  before  us,  with  such  bravery  as  we  are  able.  And 
with  this,  I  end  ;  for  my  last  word  shall  not  be  one  of 
complaint. 

"  Arthur  Samuel  Philips." 

"  Christmas  Eve,  1879." 


THE    CAPTAIN    OF    THE    ONION    BOAT 

Big  John  Carlos,  captain  of  the  Santa,  stood  looking 
up  at  the  long  tapered  window  in  the  otherwise  great, 
grey  blank  of  the  convent  wall,  a  dozen  yards  away. 

The  wall  formed  the  background  of  the  quay,  and 
between  it  and  the  side  of  the  vessel  was  a  litter  of 
unloaded  gear  and  cargo.  The  Captain's  ■  face,  as  he 
stared  upward  at  that  one  lonesome  window,  had  an 
extraordinarily  set  expression  ;  and  his  Mate,  a  little 
lop-shouldered  man,  very  brown  and  lean,  watched 
him  over  the  coaming  of  the  main  hatchway,  with  a 
curious  grimace  of  half -sympathy  and  half -curiosity. 

"  Old  Man's  got  it  bad  as  ever,"  he  muttered,  in 
an  accent  and  language  that  spoke  of  the  larger  Eng- 
lish. He  transferred  his  gaze  from  the  silent  form  of 
the  skipper,  standing,  in  the  stern,  to  the  long  taper 
of  the  one  window  that  broke  the  towering  side  of  the 
convent. 

Presentl}',  the  thing  for  which  the  two  men  watched, 
came  into  view,  as  it  did  twice  daily,  at  morning  and 
evening — a  long  line  of  half-veiled  nuns,  who  were 
obviously  ascending  some  stairway  within  the  con- 
vent, on  to  which  this  solitary  window  threw  light. 

Most  of  the  women  went  by  the  window  quietly, 
with  faces  composed,  and  looking  before  them  ;  but 
here  and  there  a  young  nun  would  take  this  oppor- 
tunity to  glance  out  into   the  Carnal  World  which 

It  I 


152  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

they  had  renounced  for  ever.  Young,  beautiful  faces 
they  were,  that  looked  out  momentarily,  showing 
doubly  human,  because  of  the  cold  ascetic  garb  of 
renunciation  which  framed  them  ;  then  were  gone  on 
from  sight,  in  the  long,  steadily  moving  procession  of 
silent  figures. 

It  was  about  the  middle  of  the  procession,  after 
a  weary  line  of  seeming  mutes  had  gone  past,  that 
the  mate  saw  that  for  which  he  waited.  For,  sud- 
denly, the  great  body  of  the  Captain  stiffened  and 
became  rigid,  as  the  head  of  one  of  the  moving  figures 
turned  and  stared  out  on  to  the  quay.  The  Mate 
saw  her  face  clearly.  It  was  still  young  and  lovely, 
but  seemed  very  white  and  hopeless.  He  noted  the 
eager,  hungry  look  in  the  eyes  ;  and  then  the  wonder- 
ful way  in  which  they  lit  up,  as  with  a  strange  inward 
fire,  at  the  sight  of  the  big  man  standing  there  ;  and 
the  whole  face  seemed  to  quiver  into  living  emo- 
tion. Immediately  afterwards,  she  was  gone  past, 
and  more  mutes  were  making  the  gre}'',  ascending  line. 

"  Gord  !  that's  'er  !  "  said  the  Mate,  and  glanced 
towards  his  master.  The  face  of  the  big  skipper 
was  still  upturned  and  set  with  a  fixed,  intense  stare, 
as  though  even  now  he  saw  her  face  at  the  long  win- 
dow. His  body  was  yet  rigid  with  intensity,  and  his 
great  hands  gripped  tightly  the  front  of  his  slack 
jumper,  straining  it,  unconsciously  down  upon  his 
hips.  For  some  moments  longer  he  stood  like  this, 
lost  to  all  knowledge  except  the  tellings  of  his  memory, 
and  stunned  with  his  emotions.  Then  he  relaxed 
abruptly,  as  if  some  string  within  him  had  been  loosed, 
and  turned  towards  the  open  hatchway,  where  the 
Mate  bent  once  more  to  his  work. 

"  W'y  don't  'e  get  'er  out,"  the  Mate  remarked  to 
himself.     "  They've   bin   doin'    that   years    'n   years. 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     153 

from  w.ot  I  can  see  an'  'ear,  an'  breakin'  their  blessed 
'earts.  W'y  the  'ell  don't  'e  get  'er  out  !  It's  easy 
ter  see  she's  a  woman,  a  sight  more'n  a  bloomin' 
nun  !  "  In  all  of  which  the  little  crooked  shouldered 
Mate  showed  a  fund  of  common  sense  ;  but  likewise 
an  insufficient  ability  to  reaUse  how  thoroughly  a 
religious  belief  may  sometimes  prove  a  stumbling- 
block  in  the  pathway  to  mere  human  happiness. 

How  a  man  of  the  stamp  of  Big  John  Carlos  came 
to  be  running  an  onion  boat,  must  be  conjectured. 
His  name  is  explained  by  his  father  having  been  a 
Spaniard  and  his  mother  an  Englishwoman.  Origi- 
nally, Big  John  had  been  a  merchant,  of  a  kind, 
going  to  sea  in  his  own  ship,  and  trading  abroad. 

As  a  youth,  he  had  become  engaged  to  Marvonna 
Delia,  whose  father  had  owned  much  property,  farther 
up  the  coast.  Her  father  had  died,  and  she  had  been 
an  heiress,  sought  by  all  the  youths  about  ;  but  he — 
Big  John  Carlos — had  won  her. 

They  were  to  have  been  married  on  his  return  from 
his  next  trading  voyage  ;  but  the  report  went  home 
to  his  sweetheart  that  he  had  been  drowned  at  sea  ; 
and  indeed  he  had  truly  fallen  overboard  ;  but  had 
been  picked  up  by  a  China-bound  sailing-ship,  and 
had  been  a  httle  over  a  year  lost  to  his  friends,  before 
he  had  managed  to  reach  home,  to  carry  the  news 
that  he  still  lived.  For  this  was  before  the  days  of 
the  telegraph,  and  his  one  letter  had  gone  astray. 

When,  at  last,  he  reached  home,  it  was  to  find  sad 
changes.  His  sweetheart,  broken-hearted,  had  become 
a  nun  at  the  great  convent  of  St.  Sebastian's,  and 
had  endowed  it  with  all  her  wealth  and  lands.  What 
attempts  he  made  to  have  speech  with  her,  I  do  not 
know  ;  but  if  his  religious  scruples  had  allowed  her  to 
beg  her  to  renounce  her  vows  and  retirement,   and 


154  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

return  to  the  world  to  be  his  wife,  they  had  certainly 
been  unsuccessful ;  though  it  is  quite  conceivable 
that  no  word  had  ever  passed  between  them,  since 
she  had  put  the  world  behind  her. 

From  then  onward,  through  nine  long  years.  Big 
John  Carlos  had  traded  along  the  coast.  His  former 
business,  he  had  dropped,  and  now  he  wandered  from 
port  to  port  in  his  small  craft.  And  twice  in  every 
year,  he  would  come  alongside  of  the  little  wharf 
opposite  to  the  great,  grey  wall  of  the  convent,  and 
there  lie  for  a  week,  watching  year  by  year  that  long 
narrow  window  for  the  two  brief  glimpses  daily  of 
his  lost  sweetheart. 

After  a  week,  he  would  go.  It  was  always  a  week 
that  he  stayed  there  by  the  old  wharf.  Then,  as  if 
that  had  exhausted  his  strength — as  if  the  pain  of 
the  thing  had  grown  in  that  time  to  be  too  dreadful 
to  continue,  he  would  haul  out,  and  away,  whatever 
the  weather  or  the  state  of  trade.  All  of  this  the 
little  twisted  Mate  knew,  more  or  less  clearly  in  detail, 
having  learned  it  in  the  previous  visits,  which  he  had 
made  with  Big  John  Carlos  to  the  insignificant  port- 
where  the  convent  stood. 

And  she — what  can  the  young  nun  have  thought 
and  felt  ?  How  she  must  have  fought  to  endure  the 
grey  weary  months  between  the  far-apart  visits  ;  and 
day  by  day  glanced  out  of  the  tall  stair-window,  as 
she  passed  in  the  long,  mute  procession,  for  a  sight 
of  the  little  onion  boat  and  the  big  man  standing 
in  the  stern,  watching — tense  and  silent — for  that  one 
brief  glimpse  of  her,  as  she  passed  in  the  remorseless 
line  of  figures.  And  something  of  this  also,  the  little 
crooked-shouldered  Mate  had  realised,  vaguely,  and 
had  achieved  an  instant  though  angry  sympathy. 
But  his  point  of  view  was  limited  and  definite  : — "  Why 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     155 

the  'ell  don't  'e  get  'er  out  !  "  was  his  brief  formula. 
And  that  marked  the  limit  of  his  imagination,  and 
therefore  of  his  understanding. 

His  own  religious  beliefs  were  of  the  kind  that  are 
bred  in  the  docks  (London  docks,  in  his  case),  and 
fostered  in  dirty  fo'cas'les  ;  and  now  he  was  "  come 
down  to  this  onion  shuntin',''  as  he  would  have  worded 
it.  Yet,  whatever  his  religious  lack,  or  even  his  care- 
lessness on  a  point  of  ethics,  he  was  thoroughly  and 
masculinely  human. 

"  W'y  the  'ell "  he  began  again,  in  his  con- 
tinual grumble  to  himself  ;  and  had  no  power  to  con- 
ceive that  the  woman,  having  taken  a  certain  step, 
might  believe  that  step  to  be  unretraceable — that 
usage,  belief,  and  finally  (bred  of  these  two)  Con- 
science might  forbid  even  the  thought,  stamping  it 
as  a  crime  that  would  shut  her  out  from  the  Joy  of 
the  Everlasting. 

The  Joy  of  the  Everlasting  !  The  little  twisted 
man  would  have  grinned  at  you,  had  you  mentioned 
it.  "  W'y  the  'ell  don't  'e  get  'er  out  !  "  would  have 
been  his  reply,  accompanied  by  a  profuseness  of 
tobacco-juice. 

And  yet,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  heart  of  the 
woman  was,  even  this  long  while,  grown  strong  to 
do  battle  for  dear  Happiness — her  heart  that  had 
known,  silently  and  secreth^  and  dumbl}-,  all  along, 
the  unnatural  wickedness  of  her  outrage  of  her  Woman- 
hood. Visit  by  visit,  through  the  long  years,  her 
heart  must  have  grown  fiercely  strong  to  end  this 
torture  which  her  brain  (darkened  with  the  Clouds  of 
Belief)  had  put  upon  her,  to  endure  through  all  her 
life. 

And  so,  all  unknowingly,  because  of  the  loyal  brain 
that  laould  not  be  aware  of  the  growing  victory  of  her 


156  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

heart,  she  was  come  to.  a  condition  in  which  her  behefs 
held  her  no  more  than  if  they  had  been  cords  that  had 
rotted  upon  her,  as  indeed  they  might  be  said  to  have 
done.  That  she  was  free  to  come,  the  httle  Mate 
had  seen,  using  his  eyes  and  his  heart  and  his  wit. 
To  him,  it  was  merely  a  matter  of  wa3^s  and  means — 
physical.     "  W'y  the  'ell !  "  that  was  his  puzzle. 

Why  ?  With  an  angry  impatience,  that  came  near 
to  verging  upon  the  borderland  of  scorn,  the  little 
Mate  would  question  inwardly.  Was  Big  John  Carlos 
bit  wiv  them  religious  notions,  same  as  the  other 
dagoes  !  He  did  not  understand  the  complaint,  or 
how  it  was  achieved  ;  but  he  knew,  as  an  outside 
fact,  that  there^  was  something  of  that  kind  which 
infected  the  peoples  along  the  coasts  he  travelled. 
If  Big  John  were  not  troubled  in  this  way,  "  why  the 

'ell "     And  so  he  would  return  to  his  accustomed 

formula,  working  furiously,  in  sheer  irritation  of  mind: — 
"  If  'e  ain't  religious,  wot  is  it  ?  Carn't  'e  see  the 
way  'er  eyes  blessed  well  looks  at  'im  !.  Carn't  'e 
see  she's  mad  an'  double  mad  to  be  out  wiv  'im  !  " 

Why  did  not  John  Carlos  attempt  to  win  back  for 
himself  the  one  thing  that  he  desired  in  all  the  world  ? 
Maybe  (and  I  think  that  it  is  very  possible)  in  the 
early  years  of  his  return,  he  had  so  striven  ;  but  the 
young  nun,  shaken  with  the  enormousness  of  the 
thought,  hopelessly  weighted  with  her  vows,  had  not 
dared  to  think  upon  it — had  retreated  with  horror 
from  the  suggestion  ;  had  turned  with  an  intention 
of  double  ardour  to  seek  in  her  religious  duties,  the 
calm  and  sweetness,  the  peace  and  joy,  which  she  felt 
to  be  lost  to  her  forever  in  any  more  earthly  way. 

And  then  had  followed  the  long  years,  with  her 
heart  fighting  silently  and  secretly — secretly  almost 
from    herself — unto    victory.     And    the    man    (having 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     157 

lost  the  force  of  that  first  fierce  unpenting  of  his 
intention  to  win  her — and  mayhap  having  been 
repulsed,  as  it  would  seem  to  his  masculine  mind, 
hopelessly)  had  fallen  back  under  the  sway  of  the  re- 
ligious beliefs,  which  ruled  him  in  his  more  normal 
hours  ;  and  so,  year  by  year,  had  withheld  from  any 
further  attempt  to  win  her  ;  striving  to  content  his 
soul  with  those  two  brief  visits  each  year  to  the  old 
wharf  ;  each  time  to  endure  a  mad  week  of  those 
futile  watchings  for  his  bel  ived. 

Yet,  in  him,  as  in  the  woman,  there  had  been  going 
forward,  without  his  knowledge,  that  steady  disrup- 
tion of  religious  belief — the  rotting  and  decajang  of 
all  arbitrary  things,  before  the  primal  need  of  the 
human  heart  ;  so  that  the  olden  barriers  of  "  Im- 
possibility," were  now  but  as  shadows,  that  would  be 
gone  in  a  moment,  when  next  the  Force  of  his  Need 
should  urge  him  to  take  his  heart's  desire. 

His  first  attempt — if  there  had  ever  been  such — 
had  been  the  outcome  of  his  natural  want — his  Love — ; 
but  lacking  the  foundations  of  Sureness  of  Himself 
and  of  his  Power  to  withstand  the  Future.  Indeed, 
it  is  conceivable  that  had  he  succeeded  at  the  first, 
and  gained  his  desire,  the  two  of  them  would  have 
wilted  in  the  afterblast  of  thought  and  fear-of-the- 
hereafter,  and  in  the  Fires  of  Scruples  which  would 
have  burned  in  their  path  through  all  the  years. 

But  now,  whatever  they  might  do,  they  would 
do — if  it  ever  came  to  pass — with  a  calm  and  deter- 
mined Intention  ;  having  done  their  thinking  first, 
and  weighed  all  known  costs,  and  proved  their 
strength,  and  learned  the  utterness  of  their  need  to 
be  truly  greater  than  all  else  that  might  be  set  as 
balance  against  it.  And  because  of  this,  they  were 
ripe — wanting:    only    the    final    stimulus    to    set    into 


158  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

action  the  ready  Force  that  had  concentrated  through 
the  years. 

Yet,  strangely,  neither  the  man  nor  the  woman 
knew,  as  I  have  shown,  that  they  had  developed  to 
this.  Their  brains  refused  to  know  ;  their  Con- 
sciences looked,  each  with  its  blind  eye,  at  their  hearts, 
and  saw  nothing  to  give  cause  of  offence  to  the  ethical 
in  them  ;  or,  did  Conscience  catch  an  odd  glimpse, 
with  its  seeing  eye,  of  impossible  wickedness,  there 
followed  hours  of  imagined  repentance,  deep  and  pain- 
ful, resulting  in  a  double  assuredness,  within  the 
brain  (and  "  Manufactured  "  Parts)  of  a  conquered 
and  chastened  heart,  and  of  iiercer  resolutions  for 
the  future  Torture  of  Salvation.  But  always,  deep 
within,  the  unconquerable  heart  fought  for  victory 
that  was  each  year  more  assured. 

And  so,  as  you  have  already  seen,  these  two,  the 
man  and  the  woman,  were  but  waiting — the  man  for 
some  outward  stimulus,  to  put  into  action  all  the 
long-pent  force  in  him,  revealing  to  him  his  actual 
nature,  developed  and  changed  in  the  course  of  the 
long  years  of  pain,  until  he  should  be  scarcely  likely 
to  recognise  himself  in  the  first  moments  of  his  awaken- 
ing to  this  reality.  And  the  woman,  waiting,  sub- 
consciously, for  the  action  of  the  man  to  bring  her  to 
knowledge  of  the  realities — to  an  awaredness  of  the 
woman  she  had  become,  of  the  woman  into  which  she 
had  developed,  unable  any  more  to  endure  the  bondage 
of  aught  save  her  heart  that  leaped  to  the  ordering  of 
Mother  Nature.  Nay,  more,  fiercely  and  steadfastly 
eager  to  take  with  both  hands  the  forbidden  joy  of 
her  Natural  Birthright,  and  calm  and  resolute  and  un- 
blinking to  face  the  future,  with  its  unsolvable  problem 
of  the  Joy  of  the  Everlasting. 

And  thus  were  these  two  standing,  as  it  might  be 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     159 

said,  on  the  brink  of  their  destinies  ;  waiting,  with 
bUnded  eyes,  and  as  that  they  hstened  unknowingly 
for  the  coming  of  the  unknown  one  who  should  give 
the  little  push  forward,  and  so  cause  them  to  step 
over  the  borderland  into  all  natural  and  long  craved 
for  happiness. 

Who  would  be  That  One  ? 

"  W'y  the  'eh  don't  'e  get  'er  out  ?  "  the  Mate 
had.  asked  the  First  Hand,  who  knew  all  the  story, 
having  sailed  years  with  big  John  Carlos.  But  the 
First  Hand  had  raised  his  arms  in  horror,  and  made 
plain  in  broken  English  his  opinion  of  the  sacrilege, 
though  that  was  not  how  he  had  pronounced  it. 

"  Sacrilege  be  jiggered  !  "  the  Mate  had  replied, 
humping  his  twisted  shoulders.  "  I  s'pose  though 
there'd  be  a  'oly  rumpus,  hey  ?  " 

The  First  Hand  had  intimated  very  definitely 
that  there  would  be  a  "  rumpus,"  which,  the  Mate 
ferreted  out,  might  involve  some  very  unpleasant 
issues  both  for  the  man  and  the  woman  guilty  of  such 
a  thing.  The  First  Hand  spoke  (in  broken  English) 
as  if  he  were  the  Religious  Conscience  of  his  nation. 
Such  things  could  not  be  tolerated.  His  phraseology 
did  not  include  such  words  ;  but  he  was  sufficiently 
definite. 

"  Nice  'ealthy  lot  o'  savages,  you  !  "  the  Mate  had 
explained,  after  listening  to  much  intolerant  jabber- 
ing. "  Strike  me  !  If  you  ain't  canniballs  !  "  And 
straightway  saddled  on  to  the  unfortunate  Catholic 
Faith  the  sins  peculiar  to  a  hot-blooded  and  emotional 
People,  whose  enthusiasms  and  prejudices  would  have 
been  just  as  apparent,  had  they  been  called  forth  by 
some  other  force  than  their  Faith,  or  by  a  Faith 
differently  shaped  and  Denominated. 

It  was  the  little  crooked  Mate  who  was  speaking 


160  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

to  Big  John  Carlos,  in  the  evening  of  the  sixth  day 
of  their  stay  beside  the  old  wharf.  And  the  big  man 
was  listening,  in  a  stunned  kind  of  silence.  Through 
those  six  days  the  little  man  had  watched  the  morn- 
ing and  evening  tragedy,  and  the  sanity  of  his  free 
thoughts  had  been  as  a  yeast  in  him.  Now  he  was 
speaking,  unlading  all  the  things  that  he  liad  to 
say. 

"  W'y  the  'ell  don't  you  take  'er  out  ?  "  he  had 
asked  in  so  many  words.  And  to  him  it  had  seemed, 
that  very  evening,  that  the  woman's  eyes  had  been 
saying  the  same  thing  to  the  Captain,  as  she  looked 
her  brief,  dumb  agony  of  longing  across  the  little 
space  that  had  lain  between  ;  3^et  which,  as  it  were, 
was  in  verity  the  whole  width  of  Eternity.  And  now 
the  little  Mate  was  putting  it  all  into  definite  words 
— standing  there,  an  implement  of  Fate  or  Providence 
or  the  Devil,  according  to  the  way  that  you  may  look 
at  it,  his  twisted  shoulder  heaving  with  the  vehemence 
of  his  speech  : — 

"  You  didn't  orter  do  it,  Capting,"  he  said.  "  You're 
breakin'  'er  up,  an'  you're  breakin'  you  up  ;  an'  no 
good  to  it.  W'y  the  'ell  don't  you  do  somefink ! 
Rescue  'er,  or  keep  away.  If  it's  'ell  for  you,  it's  just  's 
much  'ell  for  'er  !  She'll  come  like  a  little  bloomin' 
bird.  See  'ow  she  looks  at  you.  She's  fair  askin' 
you  to  come  an'  take  'er  out  of  it  all — an'  you  just 
standin'  there  !     My  Gord  !  " 

"  What  can  1  do,"  said  the  Captain,  hoarsely  ;  and 
put  his  hands  suddenly  to  his  head.  He  did  not  ask 
a  question,  or  voice  any  hopelessness  ;  but  just  gave 
out  the  words,  as  so  many  sounds,  mechanically  ; 
for  he  was  choked,  suffocating  during  those  first  few 
moments,  with  the  vast  surge  of  hope  that  rose  and 
beat  upward  in  him,  as  the  little  twisted  Mate's  words 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     ici 

crashed  ruthlessly  through  the  shrouding  films  of 
Behef. 

And  suddenty  he  kneio.  He  knew  that  he  could 
do  this  thing  ;  that  all  scruples,  all  bonds  of  belief, 
of  usage,  of  blind  fears  for  the  future,  and  of  the 
Hereafter,  were  all  fallen  from  him,  as  so  much  futile 
dust.  Until  that  moment,  as  I  have  shown  to  you 
before,  he  had  not  known  that  he  could  do  it— had 
not  known  of  his  steady  and  silent  development.  But 
now,  suddenly,  all  his  soul  and  being,  lighted  with 
Hope,  he  looked  inward,  and  saw  himself,  as  the  man 
he  was — the  man  to  which  he  had  grown  and  come 
to  be.     He  knev/.     He  knew. 

"  Would  she  .  .  ,  would  she  ?  "  The  question 
came  unconsciously  from  his  lips ;  but  the  little 
twisted  man  took  it  up. 

"  Arsk  'er !  Arsk  'er !  "  he  said,  vehemently. 
"  I  knows  she'll  come.  I  seen  it  in  'er  eyes  to-night 
w'en  she  looked  out  at  you.  She  was  sayin'  as  plain 
as  your  'at,  '  W'y  the  'ell  don't  you  take  me  out  ? 
W'y  the  'ell  don't  you  ?  '  You  arsk  'er,  an'  she'll 
come  like  a  bird." 

The  little  Mate  spoke  with  the  eagerness  of  con- 
viction, and  indulged  in  no  depressing  knowledge 
of  incongruities.  "  Arsk  'er !  "  was  his  refrain. 
"  You  arsk  'er  !  " 

"  How  ?  "  said  the  Captain,  coming  suddenly  to 
realities. 

The  Uttle  man  halted,  and  stumbled  over  his 
unreadiness.  He  had  no  plan ;  nothing  but  his 
feelings.  He  sought  around  in  his  mind,  and  grasped 
at  an  idea. 

"  Write  it  on  an  'atch  cover,  wiv  chalk,"  he  said, 
triumphant.  "  Lean  tlie  'atch  cover  by  you.  W'en 
she  comes,  point  to  it,  'n  she'll  read  it." 

6 


162  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  Ha  !  "  said  the  Captain,  in  a  strange  voice,  as  if 
he  both  approved,  and,  at  the  same  time,  had  remem- 
bered something. 

"  Then  she'll  nod,"  continued  the  little  man.  "  No 
one  else  ever  looks  outer  that  winder,  scarcely,  not 
to  think  to  read  WTitin',  anpvay.  An'  you  can  cover 
it,  till  she's  due  to  show.  Then  we'll  plan  'ow  to  get 
'er  out." 

All  that  night,  Big  John  Carlos  paced  the  deck  of 
his  little  craft,  alone,  thinking,  and  thrilUng  with 
great  surges  of  hope  and  maddened  determination. 

In  the  morning,  he  put  the  plan  to  the  test ;  only 
that  he  wrote  the  question  on  the  hatch-cover  in 
pecuhar  words,  that  he  had  not  used  all  those  long 
grey  years  ;  for  he  made  use  of  a  quaint  but  simple 
transposition  of  letters,  which  had  been  a  kind  of 
love-language  between  them,  in  the  olden  days. 
This  was  why  he  had  called  "  Ha  !  "  so  strangely, 
being  minded  suddenly  of  it,  and  to  have  the  sweet- 
ness of  using  it  to  that  one  particular  purpose. 

Slowly,  the  line  of  grey  moving  figures  came  into 
view,  descending.  Big  John  Carlos  kept  the  hatch- 
cover  turned  to  him,  and  counted ;  for  well  he  knew 
just  when  she  would  appear.  The  one  hundred 
and  ninth  mute  would  pass,  and  the  one  hundred  and 
tenth  would  show  the  face  of  his  Beloved.  The  order 
never  changed  through  the  years,  in  that  changeless 
world  within. 

As  the  hundred  and  seventh  figure  passed  the 
narrow  window,  he  turned  the  hatch-cover,  so  that 
the  writing  was  exposed,  and  pointed  down  to  it,  so 
that  his  whole  attitude  should  direct  her  glance 
instantly  to  his  question,  that  she  might  have  some  " 
small  chance  to  read  it,  in  the  brief  moment  that 
was  hers  as  she  went  slowly  past  the  narrow  panes. 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     163 

The  hundred  and  ninth  figure  passed  down  from 
sight,  and  then  he  was  looking  dumbly  into  her  face, 
as  she  moved  into  view,  her  eyes  already  strained  to 
meet  his.  His  heart  was  beating  with  a  dull,  sicken- 
ing thudding,  and  there  seemed  just  the  faintest  of 
mists  before  his  vision  ;  but  he  knew  that  her  glance 
had  flown  eagerly  to  the  message,  and  that  her  white 
face  had  flashed  suddenly  to  a  greater  whiteness, 
disturbed  by  the  battle  of  scores  of  emotions  loosed  in 
one  second  of  time.  Then  she  was  gone  downward 
out  of  his  sight,  and  he  let  the  hatch-cover  fall,  gripping 
the  shrouds  with  his  left  hand. 

The  little  twisted  man  stole  up  to  him. 

"  She  saw,  Capting  !  She  'adn't  time  to  answer. 
Not  to  know  if  she  was  on  'er  'ead  or  'er  'eels.  Look 
out  to-night.  She'll  nod  then."  He  brought  it  all 
out  in  httle  whispered  jerks,  and  the  big  man,  wiping 
his  forehead,  nodded. 

Within  the  convent,  a  woman  (outwardly  a  nun) 
was  even  then  descending  the  stairs,  with  shaking 
knees,  and  a  brain  that  had  become  in  a  few  brief 
instants  a  raging  gulf  of  hope.  Before  she  had 
descended  three  steps  below  the  level  of  the  window, 
even  whilst  her  sight-memory  still  held  the  message 
out  for  her  brain  to  read  and  comprehend,  she  had 
realised  that  spiritually  she  was  clothed  only  with 
the  ashes  of  Behef  and  Fear  and  Faith.  The  original 
garment  had  become  charred  to  nothing  in  the  Fire 
of  Love  and  Pain,  with  which  the  years  had  enveloped 
her.  No  bond  held  her  ;  no  fear  held  her  ;  nothing 
in  all  the  world  mattered,  except  to  be  his  for  all  the 
rest  of  her  life.  She  took  and  realised  the  change 
in  her  character,  in  a  moment  of  time.  Eight  long 
years  had  the  yeast  of  love  been  working  in  her, 
which  had  bred  the  chemistry  of  pain ;    but  only  in 


164  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

that  instant  did  she  know  and  comprehend  that  she 
was  developed  so  extensively,  as  to  be  changed  utterly 
from  the  maid  of  eight  years  gone.  Yet,  in  the  next 
few  steps  she  took,  she  had  adapted  herself  to  the 
new  standpoint  of  her  fresh  knowledge  of  herself. 
She  had  no  pause  or  doubt ;  but  acknowledged  with 
an  utter  startled  joy  fulness  that  she  would  go — that 
all  was  as  nothing  to  her,  now,  except  that  she  go  to 
him.  Willing,  beyond  all  words  that  might  express 
her  willingness,  to  risk  (aye,  e^^en  to  exchange)  the 
unknown  Joy  of  the  Everlasting  for  this  certain  "  mess 
of  pottage  "  that  was  so  desired  of  her  hungry  heart. 
And  having  acknowledged  to  herself  that  she  was 
utterly  willing^  she  had  no  thought  of  anything  but 
to  pass  on  the  knowledge  of  her  altered  state  to  the 
man  who  would  be  waiting  there  in  the  little  onion 
boat  at  sunset. 

That  evening,  just  before  the  dusk.  Big  John  Carlos 
saw  the  hundred  and  tenth  grey  figure  nod  swiftly  to 
him,  in  passing  ;  and  he  held  tightly  to  the  shroud, 
until  the  suffocation  of  his  emotion  passed  from  him. 
.  After  all,  the  Rescue — if  it  can  be  named  by  a 
term  so  heroic — ^proved  a  ridiculously  easy  matter. 
It  was  the  spiritual  prison  that  had  held  the  Vvoman 
so  long — the  Physical  expression  of  the  same,  was 
easily  made  to  give  up  its  occupant. 

In  the  morning,  expectant,  she  read  in  her  fleeting 
glance  at  the  onion  boat,  a  message  written  on  the 
hatch-cover.  She  was  to  be  at  the  window  at  mid- 
night. That  evening,  as  she  ascended  in  the  long 
grey  line  of  mutes  for  the  last  weary  time,  she  nodded 
her  utter  agreement  and  assent. 

After  night  had  fallen  thickly  on  the  small,  deserted 
wharf,  the  little  twisted  Mate  and  the  Captain  reared 
a    ladder    against    the    convent    side.     B}^    midnight, 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     165 

they  had  cut  out  entirely  the  lead  framing  of  all  the 
lower  part  of  the  window. 

A  few  minutes  later,  the  woman  came.  The  Captain 
held  out  his  big  hands,  in  an  absolute  silence,  and 
hfted  the  trembling  figure  gently  down  on  to  the 
ladder.  He  steadied  her  firmly,  and  they  climbed 
down  to  the  wharf,  and  were  presently  aboard  the 
vessel,  with  no  word  yet  between  them  to  break  the 
ten  years  of  loneliness  and  silence  ;  for  it  was  ten 
years,  as  you  will  remember,  since  Big  John  Carlos 
had  sailed  on  that  voyage  of  dismay. 

And  now,  full  grown  man  and  woman,  they  stood 
near  to  each  other,  in  a  dream-quietness,  who  had 
lived  on  the  two  sides  of  Eternity  so  long.  And  still 
they  had  no  word.  Youth  and  Maiden  they  had 
parted  with  tears  ;  Man  and  Woman  they  met  in  a 
great  silence — too  grown  and  developed  to  have 
words  over-easily  at  such  a  moment-of-life.  Yet 
their  very  quiet,  held  a  speech  too  full  and  subtle, 
aye  and  subtile,  for  made-words  of  sound.  It  came 
from  them,  almost  as  it  were  a  soul-fragrance,  diffused 
around  them,  and  made  visible  only  in  the  quiet 
trembling  of  hands — that  reached  unknowing  unto 
the  hands  of  the  other.  For  the  two  were  full-grown, 
as  I  have  said,  and  had  come  nigh  to  the  complete 
awaredness  of  life,  and  the  tagte  of  the  brine  of  sorrow 
was  3'et  in  them.  They  had  been  ripened  in  the 
strange  t^^'in  Suns  of  Love  and  Pain— that  ripen  the 
unseen  fruit  of  the  soul.  Their  hands  met,  trembling, 
and  gripped  a  long,  long  while,  till  the  little  twisted 
Mate  came  stumbling  aft,  uneasy  to  be  gone.  Then 
the  big  man  and  the  fragile  woman  stood  apart,  the 
woman  dreaming,  while  the  big  man  went  to  give  the 
little  Mate  a  hand. 

Together,  the  two  men  \\-orked  to  get  the  sail  upon 


166  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  small  vessel,  and  the  ropes  cast  off.  They  left 
the  First  and  Second  Hands  sleeping.  Presently, 
\\dth  light  airs  from  the  land,  they  moved  outward  to 
the  sea. 

There  was  no  pursuit.  All  the  remainder  of  that 
night,  the  small  onion  boat  went  outward  into  the 
mystery  of  the  dark,  the  big  man  steering,  and  the 
woman  close  beside  him  ;  and  for  a  long  while  the 
constant  silence  of  communion. 

As  I  have  said,  there  was  no  pursuit,  and  at  dawn 
the  little  twisted  man  wondered.  He  searched  the 
empty  sea,  and  found  only  their  own  shadow  upon 
the  almost  calm  waters.  Perhaps  the  First  Hand 
had  held  a  wrong  impression.  The  Peoples  of  the 
Coast  may  have  been  shocked,  when  they  learned. 
Maybe  they  never  learned.  Convents,  like  other 
institutions,  can  keep  their  secrets,  odd  whiles. 
Possibly  this  was  one  of  those  times.  Perhaps  they 
remembered,  with  something  of  worldly  wisdom, 
that  they  held  the  Substance ;  wherefore  trouble 
overmuch  concerning  the  shadow — of  a  lost  nun. 
Certainly,  not  to  the  bringing  of  an  ill-name  upon 
their  long  holiness.  Surely,  Satan  can  be  trusted,  etc. 
We  can  all  finish  the  well-hackneyed  thought.  Or, 
maybe,  there  were  natural  human  hearts  in  diverse 
places,  that — knowing  something  of  the  history  of 
this  love-tale — ^held  sympathy  in  silence,  and  silence 
in  s^Tnpathy.     Is  this  too  much  to  hope  ? 

That  evening,  the  man  and  the  woman  stood  in 
the  stern,  looking  into  the  wake,  whilst  the  Second- 
Hand  steered.  Forrard,  in  the  growing  dusk,  there 
was  a  noise  of  scuffling.  The  little  humped  Mate  was 
having  a  slight  difference  of  opinion  with  the  First 
Hand,  who  had  incautiously  made  use  of  a  parallel 
word    for    "  Sacrilege,"    for    the    second    time.     The 


The  Captain  of  the  Onion  Boat     167 

scufifling  continued  ;    for   the    little    twisted  man  was 
emphatic  : — 

"  Sacrilege  be  jiggered  !     Wot  the  'ell " 

The  physical  sounds  of  his  opinion,  drowned  the 
monotonous  accompaniment  of  his  speech.  The  small 
craft  sailed  on  into  the  sunset,  and  the  two  in  the 
stern  stared  blindly  into  distances,  holding  hands 
like  two  little  children. 


THE  VOICE   IN  THE   NIGHT 

It  was  a  dark,  starless  night.  We  were  becalmed  in 
the  Northern  Pacific.  Our  exact  position  I  do  not 
know  ;  for  the  sun  had  been  hidden  during  the  course 
of  a  weary,  breathless  week,  by  a  thin  haze  which 
had  seemed  to  float  above  us,  about  the  height  of  our 
mastheads,  at  whiles  descending  and  shrouding  the 
surrounding  sea. 

With  there  being  no  wind,  we  had  steadied  the 
tiller,  and  I  was  the  only  man  on  deck.  The  crew, 
consisting  of  two  men  and  a  boy,  were  sleeping  forrard 
in  their  den  ;  while  Will — my  friend,  and  the  master 
of  our  little  craft — was  aft  in  his  bunk  on  the  port 
side  of  the  little  cabin. 

Suddenly,  from  out  of  the  surrounding  darkness, 
there  came  a  hail : — 

"  Schooner,  ahoy  !  " 

The  cry  was  so  unexpected  that  I  gave  no  immediate 
answer,  because  of  my  surprise. 

It  came  again — a  voice  curiously  throaty  and 
inhuman,  calling  from  somewhere  upon  the  dark  sea 
away  on  our  port  broadside  : — 

"  Schooner,  ahoy  !  " 

"  Hullo  !  "  I  sung  out,  having  gathered  my  wits 
somevv'hat.     "  What  are  you  ?     What  do  you  want  ?  " 

"  You  need  not  be  afraid,"  answered  the  queer 
voice,  h.aving  probably  noticed  some  trace  of  con- 
fusion in  my  tone.     "  I  am  only  an  old — man." 

i68 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  1G9 

The  pause  sounded  oddly  ;  but  it  was  only  after- 
wards that  it  came  back  to  me  with  any  significance. 

"  Why  don't  you  come  alongside,  then  ?  "  I  queried 
somewhat  snappishly  ;  for  I  liked  not  his  hinting  at 
my  having  been  a  trifle  shaken. 

"  I_l_can't.     It  wouldn't  be  safe.     I "     The 

voice  broke  off,  and  there  was  silence. 

"  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  I  asked,  growing  more 
and  more  astonished.  "  Why  not  safe  ?  Where  are 
you? 

I  listened  for  a  moment ;  but  there  came  no  answer. 
And  then,  a  sudden  indefinite  suspicion,  of  I  knew 
not  what,  coming  to  me,  I  stepped  swiftly  to  the 
binnacle,  and  took  out  the  lighted  lamp.  At  the 
same  time,  I  knocked  on  the  deck  with  my  heel  to 
waken  Will.  Then  I  was  back  at  the  side,  throwing 
the  yellow  funnel  of  light  out  into  the  silent  immensity 
beyond  our  rail.  As  I  did  so,  I  heard  a  slight,  muffled 
cry,  and  then  the  sound  of  a  splash,  as  though  some 
one  had  dipped  oars  abruptly.  Yet  I  cannot  say 
that  I  saw  anytliing  with  certainty  ;  save,  it  seemed 
to  me,  that  with  the  first  flash  of  the  light,  there  had 
been  something  upon  the  waters,  where  now  there  was 
nothing. 

"  Hullo,  there  !  "  I  called.     "  Wliat  foolery  is  this  !  " 

But  there  came  only  the  indistinct  sounds  of  a 
boat  being  pulled  away  into  the  night. 

Then  I  heard  Will's  voice,  from  the  direction  of 
the  after  scuttle  : — 

"  What's  up,  George  ?  " 

"  Come  here,  Will !  "  I  said. 

"  Wnat  is  it  ?"  he  asked,  coming  across  the  deck. 

I  told  him  the  queer  thing  which  had  happened. 
He  put  several  questions ;  then,  after  a  moment's 
silence,  he  raised  his  hands  to  his  hps,  and  hailed  : — 

6* 


170  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  Boat,  ahoy  !  " 

From  a  long  distance  away,  there  came  back  to 
us  a  faint  reply,  and  my  companion  repeated  his  call. 
Presently,  after  a  short  period  of  silence,  there  grew 
on  our  hearing  the  muffled  sound  of  oars  ;  at  which 
Will  hailed  again. 

This  time  there  was  a  reply  : — 

"  Put  away  the  Ught." 

"I'm  damned  if  I  will,"  I  muttered;  but  Will 
told  me  to  do  as  the  voice  bade,  and  I  shoved  it  douii 
under  the  bulwarks. 

"  Come  nearer,"  he  said,  and  the  oar-strokes  con- 
tinned.  Then,  when  apparently  some '  half-dozen 
fathoms  distant,  they  again  ceased. 

"  Come  alongside,"  exclaimed  Will.  "  There's 
nothing  to  be  frightened  of  aboard  here  !  " 

"  Promise  that  you  will  not  show  the  light  ?  " 

"Wliat's  to  do  with  you,"  I  burst  out,  "that 
you're  so  infernally  afraid  of  the  light  ?  " 

"  Because "  began  the  voice,  and  stopped  short. 

"  Because  what  ?  "  I  asked,  quickly. 

Will  put  his  hand  on  my  shoulder. 

"  Shut  up  a  minute,  old  man,"  he  said,  in  a  low 
voice.     "  Let  me  tackle  him." 

He  leant  more  over  the  rail. 

"  See  here.  Mister,"  he  said,  "  this  is  a  pretty  queer 
business,  you  coming  upon  us  like  this,  right  out  in 
the  middle  of  the  blessed  Pacific.  How  are  we  to 
know  what  sort  of  a  hanky-panky  trick  you're  up  to  ? 
You  say  there's  only  one  of  you.  How  are  we  to 
know,  unless  we  get  a  squint  at  you — eh  ?  What's 
your  objection  to  the  light,  anyway  ?  " 

As  he  finished,  I  heard  the  noise  of  the  oars  again,  and 
then  the  voice  came  ;  but  now  from  a  greater  distance, 
and  sounding  extremely  hopeless  and  pathetic. 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  171 

"  I  am  sorry — sorry  !  I  would  not  have  troubled 
you,  only  I  am  hungry,  and — so  is  she." 

The  voice  died  away,  and  the  sound  of  the  oars, 
dipping  irregularly,  was  borne  to  us. 

"  Stop  !  "  sung  out  Will.  "  I  don't  want  to  drive 
you  away.  Come  back  !  We'll  keep  the  light  hidden, 
if  you  don't  like  it." 

He  turned  to  me  : — 

"  It's  a  damned  queer  rig,  this  ;  but  I  think  there's 
nothing  to  be  afraid  of  ?  " 

There  was  a  question  in  his  tone,  and  I  replied. 

"  No,  I  think  the  poor  devil's  been  wrecked  around 
here,  and  gone  crazy." 

The  sound  of  the  oars  drew  nearer. 

"  Shove  that  'amp  back  in  the  binnacle,"  said  Will  ; 
then  he  leaned  over  the  rail,  and  hstened.  I  replaced 
the  lamp,  and  came  back  to  his  side.  The  dipping  of 
the  oars  ceased  some  dozen  yards  distant. 

"  Won't  you  come  alongside  now  ?  "  asked  Will  in 
an  even  voice.  "  I  have  had  the  lamp  put  back  in 
the  binnacle." 

"  I — I  cannot,"  replied  the  voice.  "  I  dare  not 
come  nearer.  I  dare  not  even  pay  you  for  the — the 
pro\dsions." 

"That's  all  right,"  said  Will,  and  hesitated. 
"  You're  welcome  to  as  much  grub  as  you  can 
take- "     Again  he  hesitated. 

"  You  are  very  good,"  exc  amed  the  voice.     "  May 

God,  Wlio  understands  everything,  'reward  you " 

It  broke  off  huskily. 

"The— the  lady?"  said  Will,  abruptly.  "Is 
she " 

"  I  have  left  her  behind  upon  the  island,"  came 
the  voice. 

"  What  island  ?  "  I  cut  in. 


172  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  I  know  not  its  name,"  returned  the  voice.     "  I 

would  to  God !  "  it  began,  and  checked  itself  as 

suddenly. 

"  Could  we  not  send  a  boat  for  her  ?  •"  asked  Will 
at  this  point. 

"  No  !  "  said  the  voice,  with  extraordinary  emphasis. 
"  My  God  !  No  !  "  There  was  a  moment's  pause  ; 
then  it  added,  in  a  tone  which  seemed  a  merited 
reproach  : — 

"  It  was  because  of  our  want  I  ventured — Because 
her  agony  tortured  me." 

"  I  am  a  forgetful  brute,"  exclaimed  Will.  "  Just 
wait  a  minute,  whoever  you  are,  and  I  wiU  bring  you 
up  something  at  once." 

In  a  couple  of  minutes  he  w^as  back  again,  and 
his  arms  were  full  of  various  edibles.  He  paused  at 
the  ral. 

"  Can't  you  come  alongside  for  them  ?  "  he  asked. 

"  No — I  dare  not,"  rephed  the  voice,  and  it  seemed 
to  me  that  in  its  tones  I  detected  a  note  of  stifled 
craving — ^as  though  the  owner  hushed  a  mortal  desire. 
It  came  to  me  then  in  a  flash,  that  the  poor  old 
creature  out  there  in  the  darkness,  was  suffering 
for  actual  need  of  that  which  Will  held  in  his  arms  ; 
and  yet,  because  of  some  unintelligible  dread,  refrain- 
ing from  dashing  to  the  side  of  our  Httle  schooner, 
and  receiving  it.  And  with  the  lightning-like  con- 
viction, there  came  the  knowledge  that  the  Invisible 
was  not  mad ;  but  sanely  facing  some  intolerable 
horror. 

"  Damn  it,  Will !  "  I  said,  full  of  many  feelings, 
over  which  predominated  a  vast  sympathy.  "  Get 
a  box.     We  must  float  off  the  stuff  to  him  in  it." 

This  we  did — propelling  it  away  from  the  vessel, 
out  into  the  darkness,  by  means  of  a  boathook.     In 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  173 

a  minute,  a  slight  cry  from  the  Invisible  came  to  us, 
and  we  knew  that  he  had  secured  the  box. 

A  little  later,  he  called  out  a  farewell  to  us,  and 
so  heartful  a  blessing,  that  I  am  sure  we  were  the 
better  for  it.  Then,  without  more  ado,  we  heard  the 
ply  of  oars  across  the  darkness. 

"  Pretty  soon  off,"  remarked  Will,  with  perhaps 
just  a  little  sense  of  injury. 

"  Wait,"  I  replied.  "  I  think  somehow  he'll  come 
back.  He  must  have  been  badly  needing  that 
food." 

"  And  the  lady,"  said  Will.  For  a  moment  he  was 
silent ;   then  he  continued  : — 

"  It's  the  queerest  thing  ever  I've  tumbled  across, 
since  I've  been  fishing." 

"  Yes,"  I  said,  and  fell  to  pondering. 
And  so  the  time  slipped  away — an  hour,  another, 
and  still  Will  stayed  with  me  ;    for  the  queer  adven- 
ture had  knocked  all  desire  for  sleep  out  of  him. 

The  third  hour  was  three  parts  through,  w^hen  we 
heard  again  the  sound  of  oars  across  the  silent  ocean. 
"  Listen  !  "  said  Will,  a  low  note  of  excitement  in 
his  voice. 

"  He's  coming,  just  as  I  thought,"  I  muttered. 
The  dipping  of  the  oars  grew  nearer,  and  I  noted 
that  the  strokes  were  firmer  and  longer.     The    food 
had  been  needed. 

They  came  to  a  stop  a  little  distance  off  the  broad- 
side, and  the  queer  voice  came  again  to  us  through 
the  darkness  : — 

"  Schooner,  ahoy  !  " 
"  That  you  ?  "  asked  Will. 

"  Yes,"  replied  the  voice.     "  I  left  you  suddenly  ; 
but— but  there  was  great  need." 
"  The  lady  ?  "  questioned  WUl. 


174  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  The — lady  is  grateful  now  on  earth.  She  will 
be  more  grateful  soon  in — in  heaven." 

Will  began  to  make  some  reply,  in  a  puzzled  voice  ; 
but  became  confused,  and  broke  off  short.  I  said 
nothing.  I  was  wondering  at  the  curious  pauses, 
and,  apart  from  my  wonder,  I  was  full  of  a  great 
sympathy. 

The  voice  continued  : — 

"  We — she  and  I,  have  talked,  as  we  shared  the 
result  of  God's  tenderness  and  yours " 

\\'ill  interposed  ;   but  without  coherence. 

"  I  beg  of  you  not  to — to  belittle  your  deed  of 
Christian  charity  this  night,"  said  the  voice.  "  Be 
sure  that  it  has  not  escaped  His  notice." 

It  stopped,  and  there  was  a  full  minute's  silence. 
Then  it  came  again  : — 

"  We  have  spoken  together  upon  that  which — 
which  has  befallen  us.  We  had  thought  to  go  out, 
without  telling  any,  of  the  terror  which  has  come 
into  our — lives.  She  is  with  me  in  believing  that 
to-night's  happenings  are  under  a  special  ruling,  and 
that  it  is  God's  wish  that  we  should  tell  to  you  all 
that  we  have  suffered  since — since " 

"  Yes  ?  "  said  Will,  soft],  . 

"  Since  the  sinking  of  the  '  Albatross.'  " 

"  Ah  !  "  I  exclaimed,  involuntarily.  "  She  left 
Newcastle  for  'Frisco  some  six  months  ago,  and 
hasn't  been  heard  of  since." 

"  Yes,"  answered  the  voice.  "  But  some  few 
degrees  to  the  North  of  the  line  she  was  caught  in 
a  terrible  storm,  and  dismasted.  When  the  day 
came,  it  was  found  that  she  was  leaking  badly,  and, 
presently,  it  falling  to  a  calm,  the  sailors  took  to  the 
boats,  leaving — leaving  a  3^oung  lady — ^my  fiancee 
— and  myself  upon  the  wreck. 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  175 

"  We  were  below,  gathering  together  a  few  of 
our  belongings,  when  they  left.  They  were  entirely 
callous,  through  fear,  and  when  we  came  up  upon 
the  decks,  we  saw  them  only  as  small  shapes  afar 
off  upon  the  horizon.  Yet  we  did  not  despair,  but 
set  to  work  and  constructed  a  small  raft.  Upon 
this  we  put  such  few  matters  as  it  would  hold,  in- 
cluding a  quantity  of  water  and  some  ship's  biscuit. 
Then,  the  vessel  being  very  deep  in  the  water,  we 
got  ourselves  on  to  the  raft,  and  pushed  off. 

"  It  was  later,  when  I  observed  that  we  seemed 
to  be  in  the  way  of  some  tide  or  current,  which  bore 
us  from  the  ship  at  an  angle  ;  so  that  in  the  course 
of  three  hours,  by  my  watch,  her  hull  became  invisible 
to  our  sight,  her  broken  masts  remaining  in  view  for 
a  somewhat  longer  period.  Then,  towards  evening, 
it  grew  misty,  and  so  through  the  night.  The  next 
day  we  were  still  encompassed  by  the  mist,  the  weather 
remaining  quiet. 

"  For  four  days,  we  drifted  through  this  strange 
haze,  until,  on  the  evening  of  the  fourth  day,  there 
grew  upon  our  ears  the  murmur  of  breakers  at  a 
distance.  Gradually  it  became  plainer,  and,  some- 
what after  midnight,  it  appeared  to  sound  upon  either 
hand  at  no  very  great  space.  The  raft  was  raised 
upon  a  swell  several  times,  and  then  we  were  in  smooth 
water,  and  the  noise  of  the  breakers  was  behind. 

"  When  the  morning  came,  we  found  that  we  were 
in  a  sort  of  great  lagoon  ;  but  of  this  we  noticed  httle 
at  the  time  ;  for  close  before  us,  through  the  enshroud- 
ing mist,  loomed  the  hull  of  a  large  sailing-vessel. 
With  one  accord,  we  fell  upon  our  knees  and  thanked 
God  ;  for  we  thought  that  here  was  an  end  to  our 
perils.     We  had  much  to  learn. 

"  The  raft  drew  near  to  the  ship,  and  we  shouted 


176  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

on  them,  to  take  us  aboard  ;  but  none  answered. 
P^esentl3^  the  raft  touched  against  the  side  of  the 
vessel,  and,  seeing  a  rope  hanging  do\A'n\vards,  I 
seized  it  and  began  to  chmb.  Yet  I  had  much  ado 
to  make  m}''  way  up,  because  of  a  kind  of  grey,  hchcn- 
ous  fungus,  which  had  seized  upon  the  rope,  and  which 
blotched  the  side  of  the  ship,  lividly. 

"  I  reached  the  rail,  and  clambered  over  it,  on 
to  the  deck.  Here,  I  saw  that  the  decks  were  covered, 
in  great  patches,  with  the  grey  masses,  some  of  them 
rising  into  nodules  several  feet  in  height  ;  but  at  the 
time,  I  thought  less  of  this  matter  than  of  the  possi- 
bility of  there  being  people  aboard  the  ship.  I  shouted ; 
but  none  answered.  Then  I  went  to  the  door  below 
the  poop  deck.  I  opened  it,  and  peered  in.  There 
was  a  great  smell  of  staleness,  so  that  I  knew  in  a 
moment  that  nothing  living  was  within,  and  with  the 
knowledge,  I  shut  the  door  quickly  ;  for  I  felt  suddenly 
lonely. 

"  I  went  back  to  the  side,  where  I  had  scrambled 
up.  My — my  sweetheart  was  still  sitting  quietly 
upon  the  raft.  Seeing  me  look  down,  she  called  up 
to  know  whether  there  were  any  aboard  of  the  ship. 
I  replied  that  the  vessel  had  the  appearance  of  having 
been  long  deserted  ;  but  that  if  she  would  wait  a 
little,  I  would  see  whether  there  was  anything  in  the 
shape  of  a  ladder,  by  which  she  could  ascend  to  the 
deck.  Then  we  would  make  a  search  through  the 
vessel  together.  A  little  later,  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  decks,  I  found  a  rope  side-ladder.  This  I  carried 
across,  and  a  minute  afterwards,  she  was  beside  me. 

"  Together,  we  explored  the  cabins  and  apartments 
in  the  after-part  of  the  ship  ;  but  nowhere  was  there 
any  sign  of  life.  Here  and  there,  within  the  cabins 
themselves,    we    came    across    odd    patches    of    that 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  177 

queer  fungus  ;  but  this,  as  my  sweetheart  said,  could 
be  cleansed  away. 

"  In  the  end,  having  assured  ourselves  that  the 
after  portion  of  the  vessel  was  empty,  we  picked  our 
ways  to  the  bows,  between  the  ugly  grey  nodules  of 
that  strange  growth  ;  and  here  we  made  a  further 
search,  which  told  us  that  tliere  was  indeed  none 
aboard  but  ourselves. 

"  This  being  now  beyond  any  doubt,  we  returned 
to  the  stern  of  the  ship,  and  proceeded  to  make  ourselves 
as  comfortable  as  possible.  Together,  we  cleared 
out  and  cleaned  two  of  the  cabins  ;  and,  after  that, 
I  made  examination  whether  there  was  anything 
eatable  in  the  ship.  This  I  soon  found  was  so,  and 
thanked  God  in  my  heart  for  His  goodness.  In  addi- 
tion to  this,  I  discovered  the  whereabouts  of  the 
freshwater  pump,  and  having  fixed  it,  I  found  the  water 
drinkable,  though  somewhat  unpleasant  to  the  taste. 

"  For  several  days,  we  stayed  aboard  the  ship, 
without  attempting  to  get  to  the  shore.  We  were 
busily  engaged  in  making  the  place  habitable.  Yet 
even  thus  early,  we  became  aware  that  our  lot  was 
even  less  to  be  desired  than  might  have  been  imagined  ; 
for  though,  as  a  first  step,  we  scraped  away  the  odd 
patches  of  growth  that  studded  the  floors  and  walls 
of  the  cabins  and  saloon,  yet  they  returned  almost 
to  their  original  size  within  the  space  of  twenty-four 
hours,  which  not  only  discouraged  us,  but  gave  us  a 
feeling  of  vague  unease. 

"  Still,  we  would  not  admit  ourselves  beaten,  so 
set  to  work  afresh,  and  not  only  scraped  away  the 
fungus,  but  soaked  the  places  where  it  had  been, 
with  carbolic,  a  can-full  of  which  I  had  found  in  the 
pantry.  Yet,  by  the  end  of  the  week,  the  growtli 
had   returned   in   full    strength,    and,    in   addition,    it 


178  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

had  spread  to  other  places,  as  though  our  touching 
it  had  allowed  germs  from  it  to  travel  elsewhere. 

"  On  the  seventh  morning,  my  sweetheart  woke  to 
find  a  small  patch  of  it  growing  on  her  pillow,  close 
to  her  face.  At  that,  she  came  to  me,  so  soon  as  she 
could  get  her  garments  upon  her.  I  was  in  the 
galley  at  the  time,  lighting  the  fire  for  breakfast. 

Come  here,  John,'  she  said,  and  led  me  aft. 
\Vhen  I  saw  the  thing  upon  her  pillow,  I  shuddered, 
and  then  and  there  we  agreed  to  go  right  out  of  the 
ship,  and  see  whether  we  could  not  fare  to  make  our- 
selves more  comfortable  ashore. 

"  Hurriedly,  we  gathered  together  our  few  belong- 
ings, and  even  among  these,  I  found  that  the  fungus 
had  been  at  work  ;  for  one  of  her  shawls  had  a  little 
lump  of  it  growing  near  one  edge.  I  threw  the  whole 
thing  over  the  side,  without  saying  anything  to  her. 

"  The  raft  was  still  alongside ;  but  it  was  too 
clumsy  to  guide,  and  I  lowered  down  a  small  boat 
that  hung  across  the  stern,  and  in  this  we  made  our 
way  to  the  shore.  Yet,  as  we  drew  near  to  it,  I 
became  gradually  aware  that  here  the  vile  fungus, 
which  had  driven  us  from  the  ship,  was  gro^^^ng  riot. 
In  places  it  rose  into  horrible,  fantastic  mounds, 
wh'ch  seemed  almost  to  quiver,  as  with  a  quiet  life, 
when  the  wind  blew  across  them.  Here  and  there, 
it  took  on  the  forms  of  vast  fingers,  and  in  others 
it  just  spread  out  flat  and  smooth  and  treacherous. 
Odd  places,  it  appeared  as  grotesque  stunted  trees, 

seeming  extraordinarily  kinked  and  gnarled The 

whole  quaking  vilely  at  times. 

"  At  first,  it  seemed  to  us  that  there  was  no  single 
portion  of  the  surrounding  shore  which  was  not 
hidden  beneath  the  masses  of  the  hideous  lichen  ; 
yet,  in  this,  I  found  we  were  mistaken  ;   for  somewhat 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  179 

later,  coasting  along  the  shore  at  a  little  distance, 
we  descried  a  smooth  white  patch  of  what  appeared 
to  be  find  sand,  and  there  we  landed.  It  was  not 
sand.  What  it  was,  I  do  not  know.  All  that  I  have 
observed,  is  that  upon  it,  the  fungus  will  not  grow  ; 
while  everywhere  else,  save  where  the  sand-like  earth 
wanders  oddly,  path-wise,  amid  the  grey  desolation  of 
the  lichen,  there  is  nothing  but  that  loathsome  gre5nicss. 

"  It  is  difficult  to  make  you  understand  how  cheered 
we  were  to  find  one  place  tliat  was  absolutely  free 
from  the  growth,  and  here  we  deposited  our  belongings. 
Then  we  went  back  to  the  ship  for  such  things  as  it 
seemed  to  us  we  should  need.  Among  other  matters, 
I  managed  to  bring  ashore  with  me  one  of  the  ship's 
sails,  with  which  I  constructed  two  small  tents,  which, 
though  exceedingly  rough-shaped,  served  the  purposes 
for  which  they  were  intended.  In  these,  we  lived 
and  stored  our  various  necessities,  and  thus  for  a  matter 
of  some  four  weeks,  all  went  smoothly  and  without 
particular  unhappiness.  Indeed,  I  may  say  with  much 
of  happiness for — for  we  were  together. 

"  It  was  on  the  thumb  of  her  right  hand,  that  the 
growth  first  shovv^ed.  It  was  only  a  small  circular 
spot,  much  like  a  little  grey  mole.  My  God  !  how 
the  fear  leapt  to  my  heart  when  she  showed  me  the 
place.  We  cleansed  it,  between  us,  washing  it  with 
carbolic  and  water.  In  the  morning  of  the  following 
day,  she  showed  her  hand  to  me  again.  The  grey 
warty  thing  had  returned.  For  a  little  wh  le,  we 
looked  at  one  another  in  silence.  Then,  still  wordless, 
we  started  again  to  remove  it.  In  the  midst  of  the 
operation,  she  spoke  suddenh/. 

"  '  Whafs  that  on  the  side  of  your  face.  Dear!" 
Her  voice  was  sharp  with  anxiety.  I  put  my  hand 
up  to  feel. 


180  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  '  There  !  Under  the  hair  by  your  ear. — A  little 
to  the  front  a  bit.'  My  finger  rested  upon  the  place, 
and  then  I  knew. 

"  '  Let  us  get  your  thumb  done  first,'  I  said.  And 
she  submitted,  only  because  she  was  afraid  to  touch 
me  until  it  was  cleansed.  I  finished  washing  and 
disinfecting  her  thumb,  and  then  she  turned  to  my 
face.  After  it  was  finished,  we  sat  together  and 
talked  awhile  of  many  things  ;  for  there  had  come 
into  our  lives  sudden,  very  terrible  thoughts.  We 
were,  all  at  once,  afraid  of  something  worse  than 
death.  We  spoke  of  loading  the  boat  with  provisions 
and  water,  and  making  our  way  out  on  to  the  sea  ; 
yet  we  were  helpless,  for  man}^  causes,  and — and  the 
growth  had  attacked  us  already.  We  decided  to 
stay.  God  would  do  with  us  what  was  His  will. 
We  v/ould  wait. 

"  A  month,  two  months,  three  months  passed,  and 
the  places  grew  somewhat,  and  there  had  come 
others.  Yet  we  fought  so  strenuously  with  'he 
fear,  that  its  headway  was  but  slow,  comparatively 
speaking. 

"  Occasionally,  we  ventured  off  to  the  ship  for 
such  stores  as  v/e  needed.  There,  we  found  that 
the  fungus  grew  persistently.  One  of  the  nodules 
on  the  maindeck  became  soon  as  high  as  my  head. 

"  We  had  now  given  up  all  thought  or  hope  of 
leaving  the  island.  We  had  :ealised  that  it  would 
be  unallowable  to  go  among  healthy  humans,  v,ith 
the  thing  from  which  we  were  suffering. 

"  With  this  determination  and  knowledge  in  our 
minds,  we  knew  that  we  should  have  to  husband  our 
food  and  water  ;  for  we  did  not  know,  at  that  time, 
but  tliat  we  should  possibly  live  for  many  years. 

"  This  reminds  me  that  I  have  told  you  that  I  am 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  181 

an  old  man.  Judged  by  years  this  is  not  so.  But — 
but " 

He  broke  off ;  then  continued  somcwha'.  abruptly  : — 

"  As  I  was  saying,  we  knew  that  we  should  have 
to  use  care  in  the  matter  of  food.  But  we  had  no 
idea  then  how  little  food  there  was  left,  of  which  to 
take  care.  It  was  a  week  later,  that  I  made  the 
discovery  that  all  the  other  bread  tanks — which  I 
had  supposed  full — were  empty,  and  that  (beyond 
odd  tins  of  vegetables  and  meat,  and  some  other 
matters)  we  had  nothing  on  which  to  depend,  but 
the  bread  in  the  tank  which  I  had  a' ready  opened. 

"  After  learning  this,  I  bestirred  myself  to  do 
what  I  could,  and  set  to  work  at  fishing  in  the  lagoon  ; 
but  v/ith  no  success.  At  this,  I  was  somewhat  in- 
clined to  feel  desperate,  until  the  thought  came  to 
me  to  try  outside  the  lagoon,  in  the  open  sea. 

"  Here,  at  times,  I  caught  odd  fish  ;  but,  so  infre- 
quently, that  they  proved  of  but  little  help  in  keeping 
us  from  the  liunger  which  threatened.  It  seemed 
to  me  that  our  deaths  were  hkely  to  come  by  hunger, 
and  not  by  the  growth  of  the  thing,  which  had  seized 
upon  our  bodies. 

"  We  were  in  this  state  of  mind  when  the  fourth 
month  wore  out.  Then  I  made  a  very  horrible  dis- 
covery'. One  morning,  a  little  before  midday,  I 
came  off  from  the  ship,  with  a  portion  of  the  biscuits 
which  were  left.  In  the  mouth  of  her  tent,  I  saw  my 
sweetlieart  sitting,  eating  sometliing. 

"  '  Wliat  is  it,  my  Dear  ?  '  I  called  out  as  I  leapt 
ashore.  Yet,  on  hearing  my  voice,  she  seemed  con- 
fused, and,  turning,  slyly  threw  something  towards 
the  edge  of  the  little  clearing.  It  fell  short,  and,  a  vague 
suspicion  having  arisen  within  me,  I  walked  across 
and  picked  it  up.     It  was  a  piece  of  the  grey  fungus. 


182  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  As  I  went  to  her,  with  it  in  my  hand,  she  turned 
deadly  pale  ;  then  a  rose  red. 

"  I  felt  strangely  dazed  and  frightened. 

"  '  My  Dear  !  My  Dear  !  '  I  said,  and  could  say 
no  more.  Yet,  at  m}^  words,  she  broke  down  and 
cried  bitterly.  Gradually,  as  she  calmed,  I  got  from 
her  the  news  that  she  had  tried  it  the  preceding 
day,  and — and  liked  it.  I  got  her  to  promise  on  her 
knees  not  to  touch  it  again,  however  great  our  hunger. 
After  she  had  promised,  she  told  me  that  the  desire 
for  it  had  come  suddenty,  and  that,  until  the  moment 
of  desire,  she  had  experienced  nothing  towards  it, 
but  the  most  extreme  repulsion. 

"  Later  in  the  day,  feeling  strangely  restless,  and 
much  shaken  with  the  thing  which  I  had  discovered, 
I  made  my  way  along  one  of  the  twisted  paths — formed 
by  the  white,  sand-hke  substance — which  led  among 
the  fungoid  growth.  I  had,  once  before,  ventured 
along  there  ;  but  not  to  any  great  distance.  This  time, 
being  involved  in  perplexing  thought,  I  went  much 
further  than  hitherto. 

"  Suddenly,  I  -was  called  to  myself,  by  a  queer 
hoarse  sound  on  m}'  left.  Turning  quickly,  I  saw 
that  there  was  movement  among  an  extraordinarily 
shaped  mass  of  fungus,  close  to  my  elbow.  It  was 
swaying  uneasily,  as  though  it  possessed  life  of  its 
own.  Abruptly,  as  I  stared,  the  thought  came  to 
me  that  the  thing  had  a  grotesque  resemblance  to  the 
figure  of  a  distorted  human  creature.  Even  as  the 
fancy  flashed  into  my  brain,  there  was  a  shght,  sicken- 
ing noise  of  tearing,  and  I  saw  that  one  of  the  branch- 
like arms  was  detaching  itself  from  the  surrounding 
grey  masses,  and  coming  towards  me.  The  head  of 
the  thing — a  shapeless  grey  ball,  inclined  in  my 
direction.     I  stood  stupidly,  and  the  vile  arm  brushed 


The  Voice  in  the  Night  183 

across  my  face.  I  gave  out  a  friglitencd  cry,  and 
ran  back  a  few  paces.  There  was  a  sweetish  taste 
upon  my  hps,  where  the  thing  had  touched  me.  I 
Hcked  them,  and  was  immediately  filled  with  an  in- 
human desire.  I  turned  and  seized  a  mass  of  the 
fungus.  Then  more,  and — more.  I  was  insatiable. 
In  the  midst  of  devouring,  the  remembrance  of  the 
morning's  discovery  swept  into  my  mazed  brain.  It 
was  sent  by  God.  I  dashed  the  fragment  I  held,  to 
the  ground.  Then,  utterly  wretched  and  feeling  a 
dreadful  guiltiness,  I  made  my  way  back  to  the  little 
encampment. 

"  I  think  she  knew,  by  some  marvellous  intuition 
which  love  must  have  given,  so  soon  as  she  set  eyes 
on  me.  Her  quiet  sympathy  made  it  easier  for  me, 
and  I  told  her  of  my  sudden  weakness  ;  yet  omitted 
to  mention  the  extraordinary  thing  which  had  gone 
before.     I  desired  to  spare  her  all  unnecessary  terror. 

"  But,  for  myself,  I  had  added  an  intolerable  know- 
ledge, to  breed  an  incessant  terror  in  my  brain  ; 
for  I  doubted  not  but  that  I  had  seen  the  end  of  one 
of  those  men  who  had  come  to  the  island  in  the  ship 
in  the  lagoon  ;  and  in  that  monstrous  ending,  I  had 
seen  our  own. 

"  Thereafter,  we  kept  from  the  abominable  food, 
though  the  desire  for  it  had  entered  into  our  blood. 
Yet,  our  drear  punishment  was  upon  us  ;  for,  day 
by  day,  with  monstrous  rapidity,  the  fungoid  growth 
took  hold  of  our  poor  bodies.  Nothing  we  could  do 
would  check  it  materially,  and  so — and  so — ^we  who 
had  been  human,  became — Well,  it  matters  less  each 
day.     Only — only  we  had  been  m^an  and  maid  ! 

"  And  day  by  day,  the  fight  is  more  dreadful,  to 
withstand  the  hunger-lust  for  the  terrible  lichen. 

"  A  week  ago  we  ate  ^  the  last  of  the  biscuit,  and 


184  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

since  that  time  I  have  caught  three  fish.  I  was  out 
here  fishing  to-night,  wlien  your  schooner  drifted 
upon  me  out  of  the  mist.  I  hailed  you.  You  know 
the  rest,  and  may  God,  out  of  His  great  heart,  bless 
you  for  your  goodness  to  a — a  couple  of  poor  outcast 
souls. 

There  was  the  dip  of  an  oar — another.  Then  the 
voice  came  again,  and  for  the  last  time,  sounding 
through  tiie  slight  surrounding  mist,  ghostly  and 
mournful. 

"  God  bless  you  !     Good-bye  !  " 

"  Good-bye,"  we  shouted  together,  hoarsely,  our 
hearts  full  of  many  emotions. 

I  glanced  about  me.  I  became  aware  that  the 
dawn  was  upon  us. 

The  sun  flung  a  stray  beam  across  the  hidden  sea  ; 
pierced  the  mist  dully,  and  ht  up  the  receding  boat 
■with  a  gloomy  fire.  Indistinctl}',  I  saw  something 
nodding  between  the  oars.  I  thought  of  a  sponge — 
a  great,  grey  nodding  sponge The  oars  con- 
tinued to  ply.  They  were  grey — ^as  was  the  boat — • 
and  my  eyes  searched  a  moment  vainly  for  the  con- 
junction of  hand  and  oar.  I\Iy  gaze  flashed  back 
to  the — head.  It  nodded  fonvard  as  the  oars  went 
backward  for  the  stroke.  Then  the  oars  were  dipped, 
the  boat  shot  out  of  the  patch  of  light,  and  the — the 
thing  went  nodding  into  the  mist. 


THROUGH  THE  VORTEX  OF  A  CYCLONE 

(The  Cyclone — "  The  most  fearful  enemy  which  the 
mariner's  perilous  calling  obliges  him  to  encounter.") 

It  was  in  the  middle  of  November  that  the  four- 
masted  barque,  Golconda,  came  down  from  Crockett 
and  anchored  off  Telegraph  Hill,  San  Francisco. 
She  was  loaded  with  grain,  and  was  homeward  bound 
round  Cape  Horn.  Five  days  later  she  was  towed 
out  through  the  Golden  Gates,  and  cast  loose  off  the 
Heads,  and  so  set  sail  upon  the  voj^'age  that  was  to 
come  so  near  to  being  her  last. 

For  a  fortnight  we  had  baffling  winds  ;  but  after 
that  time,  got  a  good  slant  that  carried  us  down  to 
within  a  couple  of  degrees  of  the  Line.  Here  it  left 
us,  and  over  a  week  passed  before  we  managed  to  tack 
and  drift  our  way  into  the  Southern  Hemisphere. 

About  five  degrees  South  of  the  Line,  we  met 
with  a  fair  wind  that  helped  us  Southward  another 
ten  or  twelve  degrees,  and  there,  early  one  morning, 
it  dropped  us,  ending  with  a  short,  but  violent,  thunder 
storm,  in  which,  so  frequent  were  the  lightning  flashes, 
that  I  managed  to  secure  a  picture  of  one,  whilst  in 
the  act  of  snapshotting  the  sea  and  clouds  upon  our 
port  side. 

During  the  day,  the  v/ind,  as  I  have  remarked, 
left  us  entirely,  and  we  lay  becalmed  under  a  blazing 

185 


186  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

hot  sun.  Wc  hauled  up  the  lower  sails  to  prevent 
them  from  chaling  as  the  \^essel  rolled  lazily  on  the 
scarce  perceptible  swells,  and  busied  ourselves,  as  is 
customary  on  such  occasions,  with  much  swabbing 
and  cleaning  of  paint-work. 

As  the  day  proceeded,  so  did  the  heat  seem  to  in- 
crease ;  the  atmosphere  lost  its  clear  look,  and  a 
low  haze  seemed  to  lie  about  the  ship  at  a  great  dis- 
tance. At  times,  the  air  seemed  to  have  about  it  a 
queer,  unbreathable  quality ;  so  that  one  caught 
oneself  breathing  with  a  sense  of  distress. 

And,  hour  by  hour,  as  the  day  moved  steadily  on- 
ward, the  sense  of  oppression  grew  ever  more  acute. 

Then,  it  was,  I  should  think,  about  three-thirty 
in  the  afternoon,  I  became  conscious  of  the  fact  that 
a  strange,  unnatural,  dull,  brick-red  glare  was  in  the 
sky.  Very  subtle  it  was,  and  I  could  not  say  that 
it  came  from  any  particular  place  ;  but  rather  it  seemed 
to  shine  in  the  atmosphere.  As  I  stood  looking  at  ity 
the  Mate  came  up  beside  me.  After  about  half  a 
minute,  he  gave  out  a  sudden  exclamation  : — 

"  Hark  !  "  he  said.     "  Did  you  hear  that  ?  " 

"  No,  Mr.  Jackson,"  I  rcphed.  "  What  was  it 
like  ?  " 

"  Listen  !  "  was  all  his  reply,  and  I  obeyed  ;  and 
so  perhaps  for  a  couple  of  minutes  we  stood  there 
in  silence. 

"  There  ! There    it    is    again  !  "    he    exclaimed, 

suddenly  ;  and  in  the  same  instant  I  heard  it  .  .  . 
a  sound  like  low,  strange  growling  far  away  in  the 
North-East.  It  lasted  for  about  fifteen  seconds, 
and  then  died  away  in  a  low,  hollow,  moaning  noise, 
that  sounded  indescribably  dree. 

After  that,  for  a  space  longer,  we  stood  listening  ; 
and  so,  at  last,  it  came  again  ...  a  far,  faint,  wild- 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone    187 

beast  growling,  away  over  the  North-Eastern  horizon. 
As  it  died  away,  with  that  strange  hollow  note,  the 
Mate  touched  my  arm  : — 

"  Go  and  call  the  Old  Man,"  he  said,  meaning 
the  Captain.  "  And  while  you're  down,  have  a  look 
at  the  barometer." 

In  both  of  these  matters  I  obeyed  him,  and  in  a 
few  moments  the  Captain  was  on  deck,  standing 
beside  the  Mate — listening. 

"  How's  the  glass  ?  "  asked  the  Mate,  as  I  came  up. 

"  Steady,"  I  answered,  and  at  that,  he  nodded 
his  head,  and  resumed  his  expectant  attitude.  Yet, 
though  we  s'ood  silent,  maybe  for  the  better  part 
of  half  an  hour,  there  came  no  further  repetition  of 
that  wehd,  far-off  growling,  and  so,  as  the  glass  was 
steady,  no  serious  not'ce  was  taken  of  the  matter. 

That  even  ng,  we  experienced  a  sunset  of  quite 
indescribable  gorgeousness,  which  had,  to  me,  an 
unnatural  glow  about  it,  especially  in  the  way  in 
v/hich  it  lit  up  the  surface  of  the  sea,  which  was,  at 
this  time,  stirred  by  a  slight  evening  breeze.  Evi- 
dently, the  Mate  was  of  the  opinion  that  it  foreboded 
something  in  the  way  of  ill  weather ;  for  he  gave 
orders  for  the  watch  on  deck  to  take  the  three  royals 
ofi  her. 

By  the  time  the  men  had  got  down  from  aloft, 
the  sun  had  set,  and  the  evening  w^as  fading  into 
dusk  ;  yet,  despite  that,  all  the  sky  to  the  North- 
East  was  full  of  the  most  vivid  red  and  orange ; 
this  being,  it  will  be  remembered,  the  direction  from 
which  we  had  heard  earher  that  sullen  growling. 

It  v\'as  somewhat  later,  I  remxcmber,  that  I  heard 
the  Mate  remark  to  the  Captain  that  we  were  in  for 
bad  weather,  and  that  it  was  his  belief  a  Cyclone 
was  coming  down  upon  us  ;    but  this,  the  Captain — 


188  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

who  was  quite  a  young  fellow — poo-poohed  ;  telling 
him  that  he  pinned  his  faith  to  the  barometer,  which 
was  perfectl}^  steady.  Yet,  I  could  see  that  the  Mate 
was  by  no  means  so  sure ;  but  forebore  to  press 
further  his  opinion  against  his  superior's. 

Presently,  as  the  night  came  down  upon  the  world, 
the  orange  tints  went  out  of  the  sky,  and  only  a 
sombre,  threatening  red  \\as  left,  with  a  strangely 
bright  rift  of  white  ight  running  horizontal!}^  across 
it,  about  twenty  degrees  above  the  l<lovth- Eastern 
horizon. 

This  lasted  for  nigh  on  to  half  an  hour,  and  so  did 
it  impress  the  crew  with  a  sense  of  something  im- 
pending, that  many  of  them  crouched,  staring  over 
the  port  rail,  until  long  after  it  had  faded  into  the 
general  grejmess. 

That  night,  I  recollect,  it  was  my  watch  on  deck 
from  midnight  until  four  in  the  morning.  When 
the  boy  came  down  to  wake  me,  he  told  me  that  it 
had  been  lightning  during  the  past  watch.  Even  as 
he  spoke,  a  bright,  bluish  glare  lit  up  the  port-hole  ; 
but  there  was  no  succeeding  thunder. 

I  sprang  hastily  from  my  bunk,  and  dressed  ;  then, 
seizing  my  camera,  ran  out  on  deck.  I  opened  the 
shutter,  and  the  next  instant — flash  !  a  great  stream 
of  electricit}^  sprang  out  of  the  zenith. 

Directly  afterwards,  the  Mate  called  to  me  from  the 
break  of  the  poop  to  know  whether  I  had  managed  to 
secure  that  one.  I  replied.  Yes,  I  thought  I  had,  and 
he  told  m.e  to  come  up  on  to  the  poop,  beside  him,  and 
have  a  further  try  from  there  ;  for  he,  the  Captain  and 
the  Second  Mate  were  much  interested  in  my  photo- 
graphic hobby,  and  did  all  in  their  pov^^er  to  aid  me  in 
the  securing  of  successful  si^aps. 

That  the  IMate  was  uneasy,  I  very  soon  perceived  ; 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     180 

for,  presently,  a  little  while  after  he  had  relieved  the 
Second  Mate,  he  ceased  his  pacing  of  the  poop 
deck,   and  came  and  leant  over  the  rail,  alongside  of 


me. 


I  wish  to  goodness  the  Old  Man  would  have 
her  shortened  right  down  to  lower  topsails,"  he  said,  a 
moment  later,  in  a  low  voice.  "  There's  some  rotten, 
dirty  weather  knocking  around.  I  can  smell  it." 
And  he  raised  his  head,  and  sniffed  at  the  air. 

"  Wh}/  not  shorten  her  down,  on  your  own  ?  "  I 
asked  him. 

"  Can't  !  "  he  repHed.  "  The  Old  Man's  left  orders 
n6t  to  touch  anything  ;    but  to  call  him  if  any  change 

occurs.     He  goes  too  d n  much  by  the  barometer, 

to  suit  mc,  and  won't  budge  a  rope's  end,  because  it's 
steady." 

All  this  time,  the  lightning  had  been  playing  at 
frequent  intervals  across  the  sky  ;  but  now  there  came 
several  gigantic  flashes,  seeming  extraordinarily  near 
to  the  vessel,  pouring  down  out  of  a  great  rift  in  the 
clouds — veritable  torrents  of  electric  fluid.  I  switched 
open  the  shutter  of  my  camera,  and  pointed  the  lens 
upward  ;  and  the  following  instant,  I  secured  a  magni- 
ficent photograph  of  a  great  flash,  which,  bursting  down 
from  the  same  rift,  divided  to  the  East  and  West  in  a 
sort  of  vast  electric  arch. 

For  perhaps  a  minute  afterwards,  we  waited,  think- 
ing that  such  a  flash  must  be  followed  by  thunder  ; 
but  none  came.  Instead,  from  the  darkness  to  the 
North-East,  there  sounded  a  faint,  far-drawn-out 
wailing  noise,  that  seemed  to  echo  queerly  across  the 
quiet  sea.     And  after  that,  silence. 

The  Mate  stood  upright,  and  faced  round  at  me. 

"  Do  you  know,"  he  said,  "  only  once  before  in  my 
life  have  I  heard  anything  like  that,   and  that  was 


190  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

before  the  Cyclone  in  which  the  Lancing,  and  the 
Eurasian  were  lost,  in  the  Indian  Ocean." 

"  Do  you  think  then  there's  really  any  danger  of  a 
Cyclone  now  ?  "  I  asked  him,  with  something  of  a 
little  thrill  of  excitement. 

"  I  think "  he  began,   and  then  stopped,   and 

swore  suddenly.  "  Look  !  "  he  said,  in  a  loud  voice. 
"  Look  !  '  Stalk  '  lightning,  as  I'm  a  living  man  !  " 
And  he  pointed  to  the  North-East.  "  Photograph 
that,  while  you've  got  the  chance  ;  you'll  never  have 
another  as  long  as  you  live  ! 

I  looked  in  the  direction  which  he  indicated,  and 
there,  sure  enough,  were  great,  pale,  flickering  streaks 
and  tongues  of  flame  rising  apparently  out  of  the  sea. 
They  remained  steady  for  some  ten  or  fifteen  seconds, 
and  in  that  time  I  was  able  to  take  a  snap  of  them. 

This  photograph,  as  I  discovered  when  I  came  to 
develop  the  negative,  has  not,  I  regret  to  say,  taken 
regard  of  a  strange,  indefinable  dull-red  glare  that 
lit  up  the  horizon  at  the  same  time  ;  but,  as  it  is, 
it  remains  to  me  a  treasured  record  of  a  form  of  elec- 
trical phenomenon  but  seldom  seen,  even  by  those 
whose  good,  or  ill,  fortune  has  allowed  them  to  come 
face  to  face  with  a  Cyclonic  Storm.  Before  leaving 
this  incident,  I  would  once  more  impress  upon  the 
reader  that  this  strange  lightning  was  not  descending 
from  the  atmosphere  ;    but  rising  from  the  sea. 

It  was  after  I  had  secured  this  last  snap,  that  the 
Mate  declared  it  to  be  his  conviction  that  a  great 
Cyclonic  Stonn  was  coming  down  upon  us  from  the 
North-East,  and,  with  that — for  about  the  twentieth 
time  that  watch — he  went  below  to  consult  the  baro- 
meter. 

He  came  back  in  about  ten  minutes,  to  say  that  it 
was  still  steady  ;    but   that   he  had   called   the   Old 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone    191 

Man,  and  told  him  about  the  upward  "  Stalk  "  light- 
ning ;  yet  the  Captain,  upon  hearing  from  him  that 
the  glass  was  still  steady,  had  refused  to  be  alarmed, 
but  had  promised  to  come  up  and  take  a  look  round. 
This,  in  a  while,  he  did  ;  but,  as  Fate  would  have  it, 
there  was  no  further  display  of  the  "  Stalk  "  lightning, 
and,  as  the  other  kind  had  now  become  no  more  than 
an  occasional  dull  glare  behind  the  clouds  to  the  North- 
East,  he  retired  once  more,  leaving  orders  to  be  called 
if  there  were  any  change  either  in  the  glass  or  the 
weather. 

With  the  sunrise  there  came  a  change,  a  low,  slow- 
moving  scud  driving  down  from  the  North-East,  and 
drifting  across  the  face  of  the  newly-risen  sun,  which 
was  shining  with  a  queer,  unnatural  glare.  Indeed, 
so  stormy  and  be-burred  looked  the  sun,  that  I  could 
have  applied  to  it  with  truth  the  line  : — 

"  And  the  red  Sun  all  bearded  with  the  Storm," 

to  describe  its  threatening  aspect. 

The  glass  also  showed  a  change  at  last,  rising  a  little 
for  a  short  while,  and  then  dropping  about  a  tenth, 
and,  at  that,  the  Mate  hurried  down  to  inform  the 
Skipper,  who  was  speedily  up  on  deck. 

He  had  the  fore  and  mizzen  t'gallants  taken  off  her  ; 
but  nothing  more  ;  for  he  declared  that  he  wasn't 
going  to  throw  away  a  fine  fair  wind  for  any  Old 
Woman's  fancies. 

Presently,  the  wind  began  to  freshen  ;  but  the 
orange-red  burr  about  the  sun  remained,  and  also  it 
seemed  to  mc  that  the  tint  of  the  water  had  a  "  bad 
weather  "  look  about  it.  I  mentioned  this  to  the  Mate, 
and  he  nodded  agreement  ;  but  said  nothing  in  so 
many  words,  for  the  Captain  was  standing  near. 

By  eight  bells  (4  a.m.)  the  wind  had  freshened  so 


192  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

much  that  we  were  lying  over  to  it,  with  a  big  cant 
of  the  decks,  and  making  a  good  twelve  knots,  under 
nothing  higher  than  the  main  t'gallant. 

We  were  relieved  by  the  other  watch,  and  went 
below  for  a  short  sleep.  At  eight  o'clock,  when  again 
I  came  on  deck,  I  found  that  the  sea  had  begun  to  rise 
somewhat  ;  but  that  otherwise  the  weather  was  much 
as  it  had  been  when  I  left  the  decks  ;  save  that  the 
sun  was  hidden  by  a  heavy  squall  to  windward,  which 
was  coming  down  upon  us. 

Some  fifteen  minutes  later,  it  struck  the  ship,  making 
the  foam  fly,  and  carrying  away  the  main  top-sail 
sheet.  Immediately  upon  this,  the  heavy  iron  ring 
in  the  clew  of  the  sail  began  to  thra§h  and  beat  about, 
as  the  sail  flapped  in  the  wind,  striking  great  blows 
against  the  steel  yard  ;  but  the  clewhne  was  manned, 
and  some  of  the  men  went  aloft  to  repair  the  damage, 
after  which  the  sail  was  once  more  sheeted  home,  and 
we  continued  to  carry  on. 

About  this  time,  the  Mate  sent  me  down  into  the 
saloon  to  take  another  look  at  the  glass,  and  I  found 
that  it  had  fallen  a  further  tenth.  When  I  reported 
this  to  him,  he  had  the  main  t'gallant  taken  in  ;  but 
hung  on  to  the  mainsail,  waiting  for  eight  bells,  when 
the  whole  crowd  would  be  on  deck  to  give  a  hand. 

By  that  time,  we  had  begun  to  ship  water,  and  most 
of  us  were  speedily  very  thoroughly  soused  ;  yet,  we 
got  the  sail  off  her,  and  she  rode  the  easier  for  the  relief. 

A  little  after  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  went  out 
on  deck  to  have  a  final  "  squint  "  at  the  weather,  before 
turning-in  for  a  short  sleep,  and  found  that  the  wind 
had  freshened  considerably,  the  seas  striking  the 
counter  of  the  vessel  at  times,  and  flying  to  a  consider- 
able height  in  foam. 

At  four  o'clock,  when  once  more  I  appeared  on  deck, 


i 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     193 

I  discovered  the  spray  flying  over  us  with  a  good  deal 
of  freedom,  and  the  solid  water  coming  aboard  occa- 
sionally in  odd  tons. 

Yet,  so  far  there  was,  io  a  sailorman,  nothing  worthy 
of  note,  in  the  severity  of  the  weather.  It  was  merely 
blowing  a  moderately  heavy  gale,  before  which,  under 
our  six  topsails  and  foresail,  we  were  making  a  good 
twelve  knots  an  hour  to  the  Southward.  Indeed,  it 
seemed  to  me,  at  this  time,  that  the  Captain  was  right 
in  his  belief  that  we  were  not  in  for  any  very  dirty 
weather,  and  I  said  as  much  to  the  Mate  ;  whereat 
he  laughed  somewhat  bitterly. 

"  Don't  you  make  any  sort  of  mistake  !  "  he  said, 
and  pointed  to  leeward,  where  continual  flashes  of 
lightning  darted  down  from  a  dark  bank  of  cloud. 
"  We're  already  within  the  borders  of  the  Cyclone. 
We  are  travelhng,  so  I  take  it,  about  a  knot  slower  an 
hour  to  the  South  than  the  bodily  forward  movement 
of  the  Storm  ;  so  that  you  may  reckon  it's  overtaking 
us  at  the  rate  of  something  hke  a  mile  an  hour.  Later 
on,  I  expect,  it'll  get  a  move  on  it,  and  then  a  torpedo 
boat  v/ouldn't  catch  it  !  This  bit  of  a  breeze  that  we're 
having  now  " — and  he  gestured  to  windward  with  his 
elbow — "  is  only  fluff — nothing  more  than  the  outer 
fringe  of  the  advancing  Cyclone  !  Keep  your  eye 
lifting  to  the  North-East,  and  keep  your  ears  open. 
Wait  until  you  hear  the  thing  yelling  at  you  as  loud  as 
a  million  mad  tigers  !  " 

He  came  to  a  pause,  and  knocked  the  ashes  out  of 
his  pipe  ;  then  he  slid  the  empty  "  weapon  "  int6  the 
side  pocket  of  his  long  oilskin  coat.  And  all  the  time, 
I  could  see  that  he  was  runiinaling. 

"  Mark  my  words,"  he  said,  at  last,  and  speaking 
with  great  dehbcration.  "  Within  twelve  liours  it'll 
be  upon  us  !  " 


194  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

He  shook  his  head  at  me.     Then  he  added  : — 

"  \Mthin  twelve  hours,  my  boy,  you  and  I  and  every 
other  soul  in  this  blessed  packet  may  be  down  there 
in  the  cold  !  "  And  the  brute  pointed  downward  into 
the  sea,  and  grinned  cheerfully  at  me. 

It  was  our  watch  that  night  from  eight  to  twelve  ; 
but,  except  that  the  wind  freshened  a  trifle,  hourly, 
nothing  of  note  occurred  during  our  watch.  The 
wind  was  just  blomng  a  good  fresh  gale,  and  giving  us 
all  we  wanted,  to  keep  the  ship  doing  her  best  under 
topsails  and  foresail. 

At  midnight,  I  went  below  for  a  sleep.  When  I 
was  called  at  four  o'clock,  I  found  a  very  different  state 
of  affairs.  The  day  had  broken,  and  showed  the  sea 
in  a  very  confused  state,  with  a  tendency  to  run  up 
into  heaps,  and  there  was  a  good  deal  less  -wind  ;  but 
what  struck  me  as  most  remarkable,  and  brought  home 
with  uncomfortable  force  the  Mate's  warning  of  the 
previous  day,  was  the  colour  of  the  sky,  which  seemed 
to  be  everywhere  one  great  glare  of  gloomy,  orange- 
coloured  light,  streaked  here  and  there  with  red.  So 
intense  was  this  glare  that  the  seas,  as  they  rose  clumsily 
into  heaps,  caught  and  reflected  the  light  in  an  extra- 
ordinarj^  manner,  shining  and  glittering  gloomily,  like 
vast  moving  mounds  of  liquid  flame.  The  whole  pre- 
senting an  effect  of  astounding  and  uncanny  grandeur. 

"  I  made  my  way  up  on  to  the  poop,  carrying'  my 
camera.     There,  I  met  the  Mate. 

"  You'll  not  want  that  pretty  little  box  of  j^ours," 
he  remarked,  and  tapped  my  camera.  "  I  guess  you'll 
find  a  coffm  more  useful." 

"  Then  it's  coming  ?  "  I  said. 

"  Look  !  "  was  all  his  reply,  and  he  pointed  into  the 
North-East. 

I  saw  in  an  instant  what  it  was  at  which  he  pointed. 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone      195 

It  was  a  great  black  wall  of  cloud  that  seemed  to  cover 
about  seven  points  of  the  horizon,  extending  almost 
from  North  to  East,  and  reaching  upward  some  fifteen 
degrees  towards  the  zenith.  The  intense,  solid  black- 
ness of  this  cloud  was  astonishing,  and  threatening  to 
the  beholder,  seeming,  indeed,  to  be  more  like  a  line 
of  great  black  cliffs  standing  out  of  the  sea,  than  a  mass 
of  thick  vapour. 

I  glanced  aloft,  and  saw  that  the  other  watch  were 
securing  the  mizzen  upper  topsail.  At  the  same 
moment,  the  Captain  appeared  on  deck,  and  walked 
over  to  the  Mate. 

"  Glass  has  dropped  another  tenth,  Mr.  Jackson," 
he  remarked,  and  glanced  to  windward.  "  I  think 
we'd  better  have  the  fore  and  main  upper  topsails 
off  her." 

Scarcely  had  he  given  the  order,  before  the  Mate 
was  down  on  the  maindeck,  shouting  : — "  Fore  and 
main  topsail  hal'yards  !  Lower  away !  Man  clew- 
lines and  spillinglines  !  "  So  eager  was  he  to  have  the 
sail  off  her. 

By  the  time  that  the  upper  topsails  were  furled, 
I  noted  that  the  red  glare  had  gone  out  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  sky  to  windward,  and  a  stifhsh  looking 
squall  was  bearing  down  upon  us.  Away  more  to  the 
North,  I  saw  that  the  black  rampart  of  cloud  had 
disappeared,  and,  in  place  thereof,  it  seemed  to  me  that 
the  clouds  in  that  quarter  were  assuming  a  hard, 
tufted  appearance,  and  changing  their  shapes  with 
surprising  rapidity. 

The  sea  also  at  this  time  was  remarkable,  acting 
uneasily,  and  hurling  up  queer  little  mounds  of  foam, 
which  the  passing  squall  caught  and  spread. 

All  these  points,  the  Mate  noted  ;  for  I  heard  him 
urging  the  Captain  to  take  in  the  foresail  and  mizzen 


196  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

lower  topsail.  Yet,  this,  the  Skipper  seemed  unwilling 
to  do  ;  but  finally  agreed  to  have  the  mizzen  topsail 
off  her.  Whilst  the  men  were  up  at  this,  the  wind 
dropped  abruptly  in  the  tail  of  the  squall,  the  vessel 
rolling  heavily,  and  taking  water  and  spray  with  every 
roll. 

Now,  I  want  the  Reader  to  try  and  understand 
exactly  how  matters  were  at  this  particular  and  crucial 
moment.  The  wind  had  dropped  entirely,  and,  with 
the  dropping  of  the  wind,  a  thousand  different  sounds 
broke  harshly  upon  the  ear,  sounding  almost  unnatural 
in  their  distinctness,  and  impressing  the  ear  with  a 
sense  of  discomfort.  With  each  roll  of  the  ship,  there 
came  a  chorus  of  creaks  and  groans  from  the  swaying 
masts  and  gear,  and  the  sails  slatted  with  a  damp, 
disagreeable  sound.  Beyond  the  ship,  there  was  the 
constant,  harsh  murmur  of  the  seas,  occasionally  chang- 
ing to  a  low  roar,  as  one  broke  near  us.  One  other 
sound  there  was  that  punctuated  all  these,  and  that 
was  the  loud,  slapping  blows  of  the  seas,  as  they  hove 
themselves  clumsily  against  the  slrip  ;  and,  for  the 
rest,  there  was  a  strange  sense  of  silence. 

Then,  as  sudden  as  the  report  of  a  heavy  gun,  a 
great  bellowing  came  out  of  the  North  and  East,  and 
died  away  into  a  series  of  monstrous  grumbles  of  sound. 
It  was  not  thunder.  It  was  the  Voice  of  the  approaching 
Cyclone. 

In  the  same  instant,  the  Mate  nudged  my  shoulder, 
and  pointed,  and  I  saw,  with  an  enormous  feeling  of 
surprise,  that  a  large  waterspout  had  formed  about 
four  hundred  yards  astern,  and  was  coming  towards 
us.  All  about  the  base  of  it,  the  sea  was  foaming  in 
a  strange  manner,  and  the  whole  thing  seemed  to  have 
a  curious  luminous  quality. 

Thinking  about  it  now,  I  cannot  say  that  I  perceived 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     197 

it  to  be  in  rotation  ;  but  nevertheless,  I  had  the  im- 
pression that  it  was  revolving  swiftly.  Its  general 
onward  motion  seemed  to  be  about  as  fast  as  would  be 
attained  by  a  well-manned  gig. 

I  remember,  in  the  first  moments  of  astonishment, 
as  I  watched  it,  hearing  the  ^Mate  shout  something 
to  the  Skipper  about  the  foresail,  then  I  realised 
suddenly  that  the  spout  was  coming  straight  for  the 
ship.  I  ran  hastily  to  the  taffrail,  raised  my  camera, 
and  snapped  it,  and  then,  as  it  seemed  to  tower  right 
up  above  me,  gigantic,  I  ran  backwards  in  sudden 
fright.  In  the  same  instant,  there  came  a  blinding 
flash  of  lightning,  almost  in  my  face,  followed  in- 
stantaneously by  a  tremendous  roar  of  thunder,  and  I 
saw  that  the  thing  had  burst  within  about  fifty  yards 
of  the  ship.  The  sea,  immediately  beneath  where  it 
had  been,  leapt  up  in  a  great  hummock  of  solid  water, 
and  foam,  as  though  something  as  great  as  a  house  had 
been  cast  into  the  ocean.  Then,  rushing  towards  us, 
it  struck  the  stern  of  the  vessel,  ilying  as  high  as  our 
topsail  yards  in  spray,  and  knocking  me  backwards 
on  to  the  deck. 

As  I  stood  up,  and  wiped  the  water  hurriedly  from 
my  camera,  I  heard  the  Mate  shout  out  to  know  if  I 
were  hurt,  and  then,  in  the  same  moment,  and  before  I 
could  reply,  he  cried  out  : — 

"  It's  coming  !  Up  helium  !  Up  helium  !  Look 
out  everybody  !     Hold  on  for  your  lives  !  " 

Directly  afterwards,  a  shrill,  yelling  noise  seemed 
to  fill  the  whole  sky  with  a  deafening,  piercing  sound. 
I  glanced  hastily  over  the  port  quarter.  In  iliat 
direction  the  whole  surface  of  the  ocean  seemed  to  be  torn 
up  into  the  air  in  monstrous  clouds  of  spray.  The 
yelling  sound  passed  into  a  vast  scream,  and  the  next 
instant  the  Cyclone  was  upon  us. 


198  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

Immediately,  the  air  was  so  full  of  flying  spray  that 
I  could  not  see  a  yard  before  me,  and  the  wind  slapped 
me  back  against  the  teak  companion,  pinning  me 
there  for  a  few  moments,  helpless.  The  ship  heeled 
over  to  a  terrible  angle,  so  that,  for  some  seconds,  I 
thought  we  were  going  to  capsize.  Then,  with  a 
sudden  lurch,  she  hove  herself  upright,  and  I  became 
able  to  see  about  me  a  little,  by  switching  the  water 
from  my  face,  and  shielding  my  eyes.  Near  to  me,  the 
helmsman — a  little  Dago — w^as  clinging  to  the  wheel, 
looking  like  nothing  so  much  as  a  drowned  monkey, 
and  palpably  frightened  to  such  an  extent  that  he  could 
hardly  stand  upright. 

From  him,  I  looked  round  at  so  much  of  the  vessel 
as  I  could  see,  and  up  at  the  spars,  and  so,  presently, 
I  discovered  how  it  was  that  she  had  righted.  The 
mizzen  topmast  was  gone  just  below  the  heel  of  the 
t'gallantmast,  and  the  fore  topmast  a  little  above 
the  cap.  The  main  topmast  alone  stood.  It  was  the 
losing  of  these  spars  which  had  eased  her,  and  allowed 
her  to  right  so  suddenly.  Marvellously  enough,  the 
foresail — a  small,  new.  No.  i  canvas  stormsail — 
had  stood  the  strain,  and  was  now  bellying  out,  with  a 
high  foot,  the  sheets  evidently  having  -urged  under 
the  wind  pressure.  What  was  more  extraordinary, 
was  that  the  fore  and  main  lower  topsails  were  stand- 
ing,* and  this,  despite  the  fact  that  the  bare  upper  spars 
on  both  the  fore  and  mizzen  masts,  had  been  carried 
away. 

*  I  suggest  the  existence  of  smaller  air  vortices  •within  the  Cyclone. 
By  air  vortices,  I  mean  vorticular  air  whorls — as  it  might  be  the 
upper  portions  of  uncompleted  waterspouts.  How  else  explain 
the  naked  mizzen  and  fore  topmasts  and  t'gallant  masts  being 
twisted  off  (as  later  appeared  to  have  been  the  case),  and  yet  the 
great  spread  of  the  lower  topsails  and  the  foresail  not  suffering  ? 
I  am  convinced  that  the  unequal  force  of  the  first  wind-burst  is 
only  thus  to  be  explained. 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     199 

And  now,  the  first  awful  burst  of  the  Cyclone  having 
passed  with  the  righting  of  the  vessel,  the  three  sails 
stood,  though  tested  to  their  utmost,  and  the  ship, 
under  the  tremendous  urging  force  oi  the  Storm,  was 
tearing  forward  at  a  high  speed  through  the  seas. 

I  glanced  down  now  at  myself  and  camera.  Both 
were  soaked  ;  yet,  as  I  discovered  later,  the  latter 
would  still  take  photographs.  I  struggled  forward 
to  the  break  of  the  poop,  and  stared  down  on  to  the 
maindeck.  The  seas  were  breaking  aboard  every 
moment,  and  the  spray  flying  over  us  continually  in 
huge  white  clouds.  And  in  my  ears  was  the  incessant, 
wild,  roaring-scream  of  the  monster  Whirl-Storm. 

Then  I  saw  the  Mate.  He  was  up  against  the  lee 
rail,  chopping  at  something  with  a  hatchet.  At  times 
the  water  left  him  visible  to  his  knees  ;  anon  he  was 
completely  submerged  ;  but  ever  there  was  the  whirl  of 
his  weapon  amid  the  chaos  of  water,  as  he  hacked  and 
cut  at  the  gear  that  held  the  mizzen  t 'gallant  mast 
crashing  against  the  side. 

I  saw  him  glance  round  once,  and  he  beckoned  with 
the  hatchet  to  a  couple  of  his  watch  who  were  fighting 
their  way  aft  along  the  streaming  decks.  He  did  not 
attempt  to  shout,  for  no  shout  could  have  been  heard 
in  the  incredible  roaring  of  the  wind.  Indeed,  so  vastly 
loud  was  the  noise  made  by  this  element,  that  I  had 
not  heard  even  the  topmasts  carry  away  ;  though  the 
sound  of  a  large  spar  breaking  will  make  as  great  a 
noise  as  the  report  of  a  big  gun.  The  next  instant,  I 
had  hrust  my  camera  into  one  of  the  hencoops  upon 
the  poop,  and  turned  to  struggle  aft  to  the  companion- 
way  ;  for  I  knew  it  was  no  use  going  to  the  Mate's  aid 
without  axes. 

Presently,  I  was  at  the  companion,  and  had  the  fast- 
enings undone  ;   then  I  opened  the  door,  and  sprang  in 


200  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

on  to  the  stairs.  I  slammed-to  the  door,  bolted  it, 
and  made  my  way  below,  and  so,  in  a  minute,  had 
possessed  myself  of  a  -oiiple  of  axes.  With  these,  I 
returned  to  the  poop,  fastening  the  companion  doors 
carefully  behind  me,  and,  in  a  little,  was  up  to  my  neck 
in  water  on  the  maindeck,  helping  to  clear  away  the 
wreckage.  The  second  axe,  I  had  pushed  into  the 
hands  of  one  of  the  men. 

Presently,  we  had  the  gear  cleared  away. 

Then  we  scrambled  awa}-  forrard  along  the  decks, 
through  the  boiling  swirls  of  water  and  foam  that 
swept  the  vessel,  as  the  seas  thundered  aboard  ;  and 
so  we  came  to  the  assistance  of  the  Second  Mate,  who 
was  desperately  busied,  along  with  some  of  his  watch, 
in  clearing  away  the  broken  foretopmast  and  yards 
that  were  held  by  their  gear,  thundering  against  the 
side  of  the  ship. 

Yet,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  we  were  to  manage 
this  piece  of  work,  without  coming  to  some  harm  ; 
for,  just  as  we  made  an  end  of  it,  an  enormous  sea 
swept  aboard,  and  dashed  one  of  the  men  against 
the  spare  topmast  that  was  lashed  along,  inside  the 
bulwarks,  below  the  pin-rail.  When  we  managed  to 
pull  the  poor  senseless  fellow  out  from  underneath  the 
spar,  where  the  sea  had  jammed  him,  we  found  that 
his  left  arm  and  collar-bone  were  broken.  W^e  took 
him  forrard  to  the  fo'cas'le,  and  there,  with  rough 
surgery,  made  him  so  comfortable  as  we  could  ;  after 
which  we  left  him,  but  half  conscious,  in  his  bunk. 

After  that,  several  wet,  weary  hours  were  spent  in 
rigging  rough  preventer-stays.  Then  the  rest  of  us, 
men  as  well  as  officers,  made  our  way  aft  to  the  poop  ; 
there  to  wait,  desperately  ready  to  cope  with  any 
emergency  where  our  poor,  futile  human  strength  might 
aid  to  our  salvation. 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     201 

With  great  difficulty,  the  Carpenter  had  managed 
to  sound  the  well,  and,  to  our  delight,  had  found  that 
we  were  not  making  an}/  water  ;  so  that  the  blows  of 
the  broken  spars  had  done  us  no  vital  harm. 

By  midday,  the  following  seas  had  risen  to  a  truly 
formidable  height,  and  two  hands  were  working  half 
naked  at  the  wheel ;  for  any  carelessness  in  steering 
would,  most  certainly,  have  had  horrible  consequences. 

In  the  course  of  the  afternoon,  the  r\i'ate  and  I 
went  down  into  the  saloon  to  get  something  to  eat, 
and  here,  out  of  the  deafening  roar  of  the  wind,  I 
managed  to  get  a  short  chat  with  my  senior  officer. 

Talking  about  the  waterspout  which  had  so  imme- 
diately preceded  the  first  rush  of  the  Cyclone,  I  made 
mention  of  its  luminous  appearance ;  to  which  he 
repHed  that  it  was  due  probably  to  a  vast  electric 
action  going  on  between  the  clouds  and  the  sea. 

After  that,  I  asked  him  why  the  Captain  did  not 
heave  to,  and  ride  the  Storm  out,  instead  of  running 
before  it,  and  risking  being  pooped,  or  broaching  to. 

To  this,  the  ^^.late  made  reply  that  we  were  right 
in  the  line  of  translation  ;  in  other  words,  that  we 
were  directly  in  the  track  of  the  vortex,  or  centre, 
of  the  Cyclone,  and  that  the  Skipper  was  doing  his 
best  to  edge  the  ship  to  leeward,  before  the  centre, 
with  the  awful  Pyramidal  Sea,  should  overtake  us. 

"If  we  can't  manage  to  get  out  of  the  way,"  he 
concluded,  grimly,  "  you'll  probably  have  a  chance  to 
photograph  something  that  you'll  never  have  time  to 
develop  !  " 

I  asked  him  how  he  kne\y  that  the  ship  was  directly 
in  the  track  of  the  vortex,  and  he  replied  that  the  facts 
that  the  wind  was  not  hauling,  but  getting  steadily 
worse,  with  the  barometer  constantly  falling,  were 
sure  signs. 

7* 


202  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

And  soon  after  that  we  returned  to  the  deck. 

As  I  have  said,  at  midday,  the  seas  were  truly 
formidable  ;  but  by  four  p.m.  they  were  so  much 
worse  that  it  was  impossible  to  pass  fore  or  aft  along 
the  decks,  the  water  breaking  aboard,  as  much  as  a 
hundred  tons  at  a  time,  and  sweeping  all  before  it. 

All  this  time,  the  roaring  and  howling  of  the  Cyclone 
was  so  incredibl}'^  loud,  that  no  word  spoken,  or  shouted, 
out  on  deck — even  though  right  into  one's  ear — could 
be  heard  distinctly,  so  that  the  utmost  we  could  do 
to  convey  ideas  to  one  another,  was  to  make  signs. 
And  so,  because  of  this,  and  to  get  for  a  little  out  of 
the  painful  and  exhausting  pressure  of  the  wind,  each 
of  the  officers  would,  in  turn  (sometimes  singly  and 
sometimes  two  at  once),  go  down  to  the  saloon,  for 
a  short  rest  and  smoke. 

It  was  in  one  of  those  brief  "  smoke-ohs  "  that  the 
Mate  told  me  the  vortex  of  the  Cyclone  was  probably 
within  about  eighty  or  a  hundred  miles  of  us,  and 
coming  down  on  us  at  something  hke  twenty  or  thirty 
knots  an  hour,  which— as  this  speed  enormously 
exceeded  ours — made  it  probable  that  it  would  be 
upon  us  before  midnight. 

"  Is  there  no  chance  of  getting  out  of  the  way  ?  " 
I  asked.  "  Couldn't  we  haul  her  up  a  trifie,  and 
cut  across  the  track  a  bit  quicker  than  we  are  doing  ?  ' ' 

"  Xo,"  replied  the  I\Iate,  and  shook  his  head, 
thoughtfully.  "  The  seas  would  make  a  clean  breach 
over  us,  if  we  tried  that.  It's  a  case  of  '  run  till 
you're  blind,  and  pray  till  you  bust  '  !  "  he  concluded 
with  a  certain  despondent  brutalness. 

I  nodded  assent ;  for  I  knew  that  it  was  true. 
And  after  that  we  were  silent.  A  few  minutes  later, 
we  went  up  on  deck.  There  we  found  that  the  wind 
had  increased,  and  blown  the  foresail  bodily  away  ; 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     203 

yet,  despite  the  greater  weight  of  the  wind,  there  had 
come  a  rift  in  the  clouds,  through  which  the  sun  was 
shining  with  a  queer  brightness. 

I  glanced  at  the  Mate,  and  smiled  ;  for  it  seemed 
to  me  a  good  omen  ;  but  he  shook  his  head,  as  one 
who  should  say  :  "  It  is  no  good  omen  ;  but  a  sign 
of  something  worse  coming." 

That  he  was  right  in  refusing  to  be  assured,  I  had 
speedy  proof  ;  for  within  ten  minutes  the  sun  had 
vanished,  and  the  clouds  seemed  to  be  right  down 
upon  our  mast-heads — great  bellying  webs  of  black 
vapour,  that  seemed  almost  to  mingle  with  the  flying 
clouds  of  foam  and  spray.  The  wind  appeared  to 
gain  strength  minute  by  minute,  rising  into  an  abomin- 
able scream,  so  piercing  at  times  as  to  seem  to  pain 
the  ear  drums. 

In  this  wise  an  hour  passed,  the  ship  racing  onward 
under  her  two  topsails,  seeming  to  have  lost  no  speed 
with  the  losing  of  the  foresail ;  though  it  is  possible  that 
she  was  more  under  water  forrard  than  she  had  been. 

Then,  about  five-thirty  p.m.,  I  heard  a  louder  roar 
in  the  air  above  us,  so  deep  and  tremendous  that  it 
seemed  to  daze  and  stun  one  ;  and,  in  the  same  in- 
stant, the  two  topsails  were  blown  out  of  the  bolt- 
ropes,  and  one  of  the  hen-coops  was  lifted  bodily 
off  the  poop,  and  hurled  into  the  air,  descending 
with  an  inaudible  crash  on  to  the  maindcck.  Luckily, 
it  was  not  the  one  into  which  I  had  thrust  my  camera. 

With  the  losing  of  the  topsails,  we  might  be  very 
truly  described  as  running  under  bare  poles  ;  for  now 
we  had  not  a  single  stitch  of  sail  set  anywhere.  Yet, 
so  furious  was  the  increasing  wind,  so  tremendous 
the  weight  of  it,  that  the  vessel,  though  urged  forward 
only  by  the  pressure  of  the  element  upon  her  naked 
spars  and  hull,  managed  to  keep  ahead  of  the  monstrous 


204  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

ft 

following  seas,  which  now  were  grown  to  truly  awesome 
proportions. 

The  next  hour  or  two,  I  remember  only  as  a  time 
that  spread  out  monotonously.  A  time  miserable 
and  dazing,  and  dominated  always  by  the  deafening, 
roaring  scream  of  the  Storm.  A  time  of  wetness  and 
dismalness,  in  which  I  knew,  more  than  saw,  that  the 
ship  wallowed  on  and  on  through  the  interminable 
seas.  And  so,  hour  by  hour,  the  wind  increased  as 
the  Vortex  of  the  C3/clone— the  "  Death-Patch  "— 
drew  nearer  and  ever  nearer. 

Night  came  on  early,  or,  if  not  night,  a  darkness 
that  was  fully  its  equivalent.  And  now  I  was  able 
to  see  how  tremendous  was  the  electric  action  that 
was  going  on  all  about  us.  There  seemed  to  be  no 
lightning  flashes  ;  but,  instead,  there  came  at  times 
across  the  darkness,  queer  luminous  shudders  of  light. 
I  am  not  acquainted  with  any  word  that  better  de- 
scribes this  extraordinary  electrical  phenomenon,  than 
"  shudders  "  of  light — broad,  dull  shudders  of  light, 
that  came  in  undefined  belts  across  the  black,  thunder- 
ous canopy  of  clouds,  which  seemed  so  low  that  our 
main-truck  must  have  "  puddled  "  them  with  every 
roll  of  the  ship. 

A  further  sign  of  electric  action  was  to  be  seen  in 
the  "  corpse  candles,"  which  ornamented  ever}'-  3^ard- 
arm.  Not  only  were  the}^  upon  the  ^^ard-anns  ;  but 
occasionally  several  at  a  time  would  glide  up  and 
down  one  or  more  of  the  fore  and  aft  stays,  at  whiles 
swinging  off  to  one  side  or  the  other,  as  the  ship  rolled. 
The  sight  having  in  it  a  distinct  touch  of  weirdness. 

It  was  an  hour  or  so  later,  I  believe  a  little  after 
nine  p.m.,  that  I  witnessed  the  most  striking  mani- 
festation of  electrical  action  that  I  have  ever  seen  ; 
this  being  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  display  of 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone      205 

Aurora  Borealis  lightning — a  sight  dree  and  almost 
frightening,  with  the  sense  of  unearthliness  and 
mystery  that  it  brings. 

I  want  you  to  be  very  clear  that  I  am  not  talking 
about  the  Northern  Lights — which,  indeed,  could 
never  be  seen  at  that  distance  to  the  Southward — ; 
but  of  an  extraordinary  electrical  phenomenon  which 
occurred  when  the  vortex  of  the  Cyclone  was  within 
some  twenty  or  thirty  miles  of  the  ship.  It  occurred 
suddenly.  First,  a  ripple  of  "  Stalk "  lightning 
showed  right  away  over  the  oncoming  seas  to  the 
Northward  ;  then,  abruptly,  a  red  glare  shone  out 
in  the  sky,  and,  immediately  afterwards,  vast  streamers 
of  greenish  flame  appeared  above  the  red  glare.  These 
lasted,  perhaps,  half  a  minute,  expanding  and  con- 
tracting over  the  sky  with  a  curious  quivering  motion. 
The  whole  forming  a  truly  awe-inspiring  spectacle. 

And  then,  slowl}^  the  whole  thing  faded,  and  only 
the  blackness  of  the  night  remained,  slit  in  all  directions 
by  the  phosphorescent  crests  of  the  seas. 

I  don't  know  whether  I  can  convey  to  you  any 
vivid  impression  of  our  case  and  chances  at  this 
time.  It  is  so  difficult— unless  one  had  been  through 
a  similar  experience — even  to  comprehend  fully  the 
incredible  loudness  of  the  wind.  Imagine  a  noise 
as  loud  as  the  loudest  thunder  3^ou  have  ever  heard  ; 
then  imagine  this  noise  to  last  hour  after  hour,  without 
intermission,  and  to  have  in  it  a  hideously  threatening 
hoarse  note,  and,  blending  with  this,  a  constant 
yelling  scream  that  rises  at  times  to  such  a  pitch  that 
the  very  ear  drums  seem  to  experience  pain,  and  then, 
perhaps,  3'ou  will  be  able  to  comprehend  merely  the 
amount  of  sound  that  has  to  be  endured  during  the 
passage  of  one  of  these  Storms.  And  then,  the  force 
of  the  wind  !     Have  you  ever  faced  a  wind  so  powerful 


206  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

that  it  splayed  your  lips  apart,  whether  you  would 
or  not,  la^dng  your  teeth  bare  to  view  ?  This  is  only 
a  little  thing  ;  but  it  may  help  you  to  conceive  some- 
thing of  the  strength  of  a  wind  that  will  play  such 
antics  with  one's  mouth.  The  sensation  it  gives  is 
extremely  disagreeable — a  sense  of  foolish  impotence, 
is  how  I  can  best  describe  it. 

Another  thing  ;  I  learned  that,  with  my  face  to 
the  wind,  I  could  not  breathe.  This  is  a  statement 
baldly  put ;  but  it  should  help  me  somewhat  in  my 
endeavour  to  bring  home  to  you  the  force  of  the  wind, 
as  exemplified  in  the  minor  details  of  my  experience. 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  wind's  power,  as  shown 
in  a  larger  way,  one  of  the  lifeboats  on  the  after  skids 
was  up-ended  against  the  mizzen  mast,  and  there 
crushed  fiat  by  the  wind,  as  though  a  monstrous 
invisible  hand  had  pinched  it.  Does  this  help  you  a 
little  to  gain  an  idea  of  wind-force  never  met  with  in 
a  thousand  ordinary  lives  ? 

Apart  from  the  wind,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  the  gigantic  seas  pitch  the  ship  about  in  a  most 
abominable  manner.  Indeed,  I  have  seen  the  stern 
of  a  ship  hove  up  to  such  a  height  that  I  could 
see  the  seas  ahead  over  the  fore  topsail  yards,  and 
when  I  explain  that  these  will  be  something  like  seventy 
to  eighty  feet  above  the  deck,  you  may  be  able  to 
imagine  what  manner  of  Sea  is  to  be  met  with  in  a 
great  Cyclonic  Storm. 

Regarding  this  matter  of  the  size  and  ferocity  of 
the  seas,  I  possess  a  photograph  that  was  taken  about 
ten  o'clock  at  night.  This  was  photographed  by  the 
aid  of  flashlight,  an  operation  in  which  the  Captain 
assisted  me.  We  filled  an  old,  percussion  pistol  with 
flashlight  powder,  with  an  air-cone  of  paper  down  the 
centre.     Then,  when  I  was  ready,  I  opened  the  shutter 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone      207 

of  the  camera,  and  pointed  it  over  the  stern  into  the 
darkness.  The  Captain  fired  the  pistol,  and,  in  the 
instantaneous  great  blaze  of  light  that  followed,  I  saw 
what  manner  of  sea  it  was  that  pursued  us.  To  say- 
it  was  a  mountain,  is  to  be  futile.  It  was  like  a  moving 
cliff. 

As  I  snapped-to  the  shutter  of  my  camera,  the 
question  flashed  into  my  brain  :  "  Are  we  going 
to  live  it  out,  after  all  ?  "  And,  suddenly,  it  came 
home  to  me  that  I  was  a  little  man  in  a  little  ship, 
in  the  midst  of  a  very  great  sea. 

And  then  fresh  knowledge  came  to  me  ;  I  knew, 
abruptl}'',  that  it  would  not  be  a  difficult  thing  to 
be  very  much  afraid.  The  knowledge  was  new,  and 
took  me  more  in  the  stomach  than  the  heart.  Afraid  ! 
I  had  been  in  so  many  storms  that  I  had  forgotten 
they  might  be  things  to  fear.  Hitherto,  my  sensation 
at  the  thought  of  bad  weather  had  been  chiefly  a 
feeling  of  annoyed  repugnance,  due  to  many  memories 
of  dismal  wet  nights,  in  wetter  oilskins  ;  with  every- 
thing about  the  vessel  reeldng  with  damp  and  cheerless 

discomfort.     But  fear No  !     A  sailor  has  no  more 

normal  fear  of  bad  weather,  thin  a  steeple-jack  fears 
height.  It  is,  as  you  might  say,  his  vocation.  And 
now  this  hateful  sense  of  insecurity  ! 

I  turned  from  the  taffrail,  and  hurried  below  to 
wipe  the  lens  and  cover  of  my  camera  ;  for  the  whole 
air  was  full  of  driving  spray,  that  soaked  everything, 
and  hurt  the  face  intolerably  ;  being  driven  with  such 
force  by  the  storm. 

Whilst  I  was  dr^dng  my  camera,  the  Mate  came 
down  for  a  minute's  breathing  space. 

"  Still  at  it  ?  "  he  said. 

"  Yes,"  I  replied,  and  I  noticed,  half-consciously, 
that  he  made  no  effort  to  light  his  pipe,  as  he^stood 


208  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

with  his  arm  crooked  over  an  empty,  brass  candle 
bracket. 

"  You'll  never  develop  them,"  he  remarked. 

"  Of  course  I  shall  !  "  I  replied,  half-irritably ; 
but  with  a  horrid  little  sense  of  chilliness  at  his  words, 
which  came  so  unaptly  upon  my  mind,  so  lately 
perturbed  by  uncomfortable  thoughts. 

"  You'll  see,"  he  replied,  with  a  sort  of  brutal  terse- 
ness.    "  We  shan't  be  above  water  by  midnight  !  " 

"  You  can't  tell,"  I  said.  "  What's  the  use  of 
meeting  trouble  !  Vessels  have  lived  through  worse 
than  this  ?  " 

"  Have  they  ?  "  he  said,  very  quietly.  "  Not 
many  vessels  have  lived  through  worse  than  what's 
to  come.  I  suppose  you  realise  we  expect  to  meet 
the  Centre  in  less  than  an  hour  ? 

"  Weil,"  I  replied,  "  anyway,  I  shall  go  on  taking 
photos.  I  guess  if  we  come  through  all  right,  I  shall 
have  something  to  show  people  ashore." 

He  laughed,  a  queer,  little,  bitter  laugh. 

"  You  may  as  well  do  that  as  anything  else,"  he 
said.  "  We  can't  do  anything  to  help  ourselves. 
If  we're  not  pooped*  before  the  Centre  reaches  us, 
IT'W  finish  us  in  quick  time  ! 

Then  that  cheerful  officer  of  mine  turned  slowly, 
and  made  his  way  on  deck,  leaving  me,  as  may  be 
imagined,  particularly  exhilarated  by  his  assurances. 
Presently,  I  followed,  and,  having  barred  the  com- 
panion-way behind  me,  struggled  forward  to  the 
break  of  the  poop,  clutching  blindly  at  any  holdfast 
in  the  darkness. 

And  so,  for  a  space,  we  waited  in  the  Storm — the 
wind  bellowing  fiendishly,  and  our  maindecks  one 
chaos  of  broken  water,  swirling  and  roaring  to  and  fro 
in  the  darkness. 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone      200 

It  was  a  little  later  that  some  one  plucked  me 
hard  by  the  sleeve,  and,  turning,  I  made  out  with 
difficulty  that  it  was  the  Captain,  trying  to  attract 
my  attention.  I  caught  his  wrist,  to  show  that  I 
comprehended  what  he  desired,  and,  af  that,  he 
dropped  on  his  hands  and  knees,  and  crawled  aft 
along  the  streaming  poop  deck,  I  following,  my 
camera  held  between  my  teeth  by  the  handle. 

He  reached  the  companion-way,  and  unbarred  the 
starboard  door  ;  then  crawled  through,  and  I  followed 
after  him.  I  fastened  the  door,  and  made  my  way, 
in  his  wake,  to  the  saloon.  Here  he  turned  to  me. 
He  was  a  curiously  devil-may-care  sort  of  man,  and 
I  found  that  he  had  brought  me  down  to  explain 
that  the  Vortex  would.be  upon  us  very  soon,  and  that 
I  should  have  the  chance  of  a  life-time  to  get  a  snap  of 
the  much  talked  of  Pyramidal  Sea.  And,  in  short, 
that  he  wished  me  to  have  everything  prepared,  and 
the  pistol  ready  loaded  with  flashlight  powder  ;  for, 
as  he  remarked  : 

"  //  we  get  through,  it'll  be  a  rare  curiosity  to 
show  some  of  those  unbelieving  devils  ashore." 

In  a  little,  we  had  everything  read}^  and  then  we 
made  our  way  once  more  up  on  deck  ;  the  Captain 
placing  the  pistol  in  the  pocket  of  his  silk  oilskin  coat. 

There,  together,  under  the  after  weather-cloth, 
we  waited.  The  Second  Mate,  I  could  not  see  ;  but 
occasionally  I  caught  a  vague  sight  of  the  First  Mate, 
standing    near    the    after    binnacle,*    and    obviously 

*  It  occurs  to  me  here,  as  showing  in  another  way  the  unusual 
wind-strength,  to  mention  that,  having  tried  in  vain  every  usual 
method  of  keeping  the  wind  from  b'ov.'ing  out  the  binnacle  lamps  ; 
such  as  stuffing  all  the  crevices  with  rags,  and  making  temporary 
shields  for  the  chimneys,  the  Skipper  had  at  last  resorted  to  a  tiny 
electric  watch  light,  which  he  fixed  in  the  binnacle,  and  which  now 
enabled  me  to  get  an  odd  vague  glimpse  of  the  Mate,  as  he  hovered 
near  the  compass. 


210  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

watching  the  steering.  Apart  from  the  puny  halo 
that  emanated  from  the  binnacle,  all  else  was  blind 
darkness,  save  for  the  phosphorescent  lights  of  the 
overhanging  crests  of  the  seas. 

And  above  us  and  around  us,  filling  all  the  sky 
with  sound,  was  the  incessant  mad  yowling  of  the 
Cyclone ;  the  noise  so  vast,  and  the  volume  and 
mass  of  the  wind  so  enormous  that  I  am  impressed 
now,  looking  back,  with  a  sense  of  ha\dng  been  in  a 
semi-stunned  condition  through  those  last  minutes. 

I  am  conscious  now  that  a  vague  time  passed.  A 
time  of  noise  and  wetness  and  lethargy  and  immense 
tiredness.  Abruptly,  a  tremendous  flash  of  lightning 
burst  through  the  clouds.  It  was  followed,  almost 
directly,  by  another,  which  seemed  to  rive  the  sky 
apart.  Then,  so  quickly  that  the  succeeding  thunder- 
clap was  audible  to  our  \vind-deafened  ears,  the  wind 
ceased,  and,  in  the  comparative,  but  hideously  un- 
natural, silence,  I  caught  the  Captain's  voice  shouting  : 

"  The    Vortex— quick  !  " 

Even  as  I  pointed  my  camera  over  the  rail,  and 
opened  the  shutter,  my  brain  was  working  with  a 
preternatural  avidity,  drinking  in  a  thousand  uncanny 
sounds  and  echoes  that  seemed  to  come  upon  me 
from  every  quarter,  brutally  distinct  against  the 
background  of  the  Cyclone's  distant  howling.  There 
were  the  harsh,  bursting,  frightening,  intermittent 
noises  of  the  seas,  making  tremendous,  slopping  crashes 
of  sound  ;  and,  mingling  with  these,  the  shrill,  hissing 
scream  of  the  foam  ;*  the  dismal  sounds,  that  suggested 
dankness,   of   water   swirling   over   our   decks ;     and 


*  A  description  absolute  and  without  exaggeration.  Who  that 
has  ever  heard  the  weird,  crisp  screaming  of  the  foam,  in  some 
momentary  lull  in  a  great  storm,  when  a  big  sea  has  reared  itself 
within  a  few  fathoms  of  one,  can  ever  forget  it  ? 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     211 

oddly,  the  faintly-heard  creaking  of  the  gear  and 
shattered  spars  ;  and  then — Flash,  in  the  same  in- 
stant in  which  I  had  taken  in  these  varied  impressions,, 
the  Captain  had  fired  the  pistol,  and  I  saw  the  Pyramidal 
Sea.  ...  A  sight  never  to  be  forgotten.  A  sight 
rather  for  the  Dead  than  the  Living.  A  sea  such  as 
I  could  never  have  imagined.  Boiling  and  bursting 
upward  in  monstrous  hillocks  of  water  and  foam  as 
big  as  houses.  I  heard,  without  knowing  I  heard,  the 
Captain's  expression  of  amazement.  Then  a  thun- 
derous roar  was  in  my  ears.  One  of  those  vast, 
flying  hills  of  water  had  struck  the  ship,  and,  for 
some  moments,  I  had  a  sickening  feeling  that  she 
was  sinking  beneath  me.  The  water  cleared,  and  I 
found  myself  clinging  to  the  iron  weather-cloth 
staunchion ;  the  weather-cloth  itself  had  gone.  I 
wiped  my  eyes,  and  coughed  dizzily  for  a  little ; 
then  I  stared  round  for  the  Captain.  I  could  see 
something  dimly  up  against  the  rail ;  something 
that  moved  and  stood  upright.  I  sung  out  to  know 
whether  it  was  the  Captain,  and  whether  he  was  all 
right  ?  To  which  he  replied,  heartily  enough,  but 
with  a  gasp,  that  he  was  all  right  so  far. 

From  him,  I  glanced  across  to  the  wheel.  There 
was  no  light  in  the  binnacle,  and,  later,  I  found  that 
it  had  been  washed  away,  and  with  it  one  of  the 
helmsmen.  The  other  man  also  was  gone  ;  but  we 
discovered  him,  nigh  an  hour  later,  jammed  half 
through  the  rail  that  ran  round  the  poop.  To  lee- 
ward, I  heard  the  Mate  singing  out  to  know  whether 
we  were  safe  ;  to  which  both  the  Captain  and  I  shouted 
a  reply,  so  as  to  assure  him.  It  was  then  I  became 
aware  that  my  camera  had  been  washed  out  of  my 
hands.  I  found  it  eventually  among  a  tangle  of 
ropes  and  gear  to  leeward. 


212  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

Again  and  again  the  great  hills  of  water  struck 
the  vessel,  seeming  to  rise  up  on  every  side  at  once — 
towering,  live  pyramids  of  brine,  in  the  darkness, 
hurling  upward  with  a  harsh  unceasing  roaring. 

From  her  taffrail  to  her  knight-heads,  the  ship 
was  swept,  fore  and  aft,  so  that  no  living  thing  could 
have  existed  for  a  moment  down  upon  the  main- 
deck,  which  was  practically  submerged.  Indeed, 
the  whole  vessel  seemed  at  times  to  be  lost  beneath 
the  chaos  of  water  that  thundered  down  and  over 
her  in  clouds  and  cataracts  of  brine  and  foam,  so 
that  each  moment  seemed  like  to  be  our  last. 

Occasionally,  I  would  hear  the  hoarse  voice  of  the 
Captain  or  the  Mate,  calling  through  the  gloom  to 
one  another,  or  to  the  figures  of  the  clinging  men. 
And  then  again  would  come  the  thunder  of  water,  as 
the  seas  burst  over  us.  x\nd  all  this  in  an  almost 
impenetrable  darkness,  save  when  some  unuatural 
glare  of  hghtning  sundered  the  clouds,  and  lit  up 
the  thirty-mile  cauldron  that  had  engulfed  us. 

And,  anon,  all  this  while,  round  about,  seeming 
to  come  from  every  point  of  the  horizon,  sounded 
a  vast,  but  distant,  bellowing  and  screaming  noise, 
that  I  caught  sometimes  above  the  harsh,  slopping 
roarings  of  the  bursting  water-hills  all  about  us. 
The  sound  appeared  now  to  be  growing  louder  upon 
our  port  beam.  It  was  the  Storm  circling  far  round 
us. 

Some  time  later,  there  sounded  an  intense  roar 
in  the  air  above  the  ship,  and  then  came  a  far-off 
shrieking,  that  grew  rapidly  into  a  mighty  whistling- 
scream,  and  a  minute  afterwards  a  most  tremendous 
gust  of  wind  struck  the  ship  on  her  port  side,  hurling 
her  over  on  to  her  starboard  broadside.  For  many 
minutes  she  lay  there,  her  decks  under  water. almost 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone      213 

up  to  the  coamings  of  the  hatches.*  Then  she  righted, 
sullenly  and  slowly,  freeing  herself  from,  maybe,  half 
a  thousand  tons  of  water. 

Again  there  came  a  short  period  of  windlessness, 
and  then  once  more  the  yelling  of  an  approaching 
gust.  It  struck  us  ;  but  now  the  vessel  had  paid  off 
before  the  wind,  and  she  was  not  again  forced  over  on 
to  her  side. 

From  now  on\vard,  we  drove  forward  over  vast 
seas,  with  the  Cyclone  bellowing  and  wailing  over 
us  in  one  unbroken  roar.  .  .  .  The  Vortex  had  passed, 
and,  could  we  but  last  out  a  few  more  hours,  then 
might  we  hope  to  win  through. 

With  the  return  of  the  wind,  the  Mate  and  one 
of  the  men  had  taken  the  wheel ;  but,  despite  the 
most  careful  steering,  we  were  pooped  several  times  ;t 
for  the  seas  were  hideously  broken  and  confused, 
we  being  still  in  the  wake  of  the  Vortex,  and  the 
wind  not  having  had  time  as  yet  to  smash  the  Pyra- 
midal Sea  into  the  more  regular  storm  waves,  which, 
though  huge  in  size,  give  a  vessel  a  chance  to  rise  to 
them.. 

It  was  later  that  some  of  us,  headed  by  the  Mate 
— who  had  relinquished  his  place  at  the  wheel  to 
one  of  the  men — ventured  down  on  to  the  main- 
deck  with  axes  and  knives,  to  clear  away  the  wreckage 
of  some  of  the  spars  which  wc  had  lost  in  the  Vortex. 
Many  a  grim  risk  was  run  in  that  hour  ;  but  we  cleared 

*  The  Second  Mate,  who  was  holding  to  the  rail  across  the  break 
of  the  poop,  gave  me  this  information  later  ;  he  being  in  a  posi- 
tion to  see  the  maindecks  at  the  tim-j. 

t  Possibly,  our  being  pooped  at  this  time,  was  due  chiefly  to 
the  fact  that  our  speed  through  the  water  had  diminished,  owing 
to  our  having  lost  more  of  our  spars  whilst  in  the  Vortex,  and  some 
of  the  gear  still  towing.  And  a  Mercy  our  sides  were  not  stove  a 
thousand  times  ! 


^14  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  wreck,  and  after  that,  scrambled  back,  dripping, 
to  the  poop,  where  the  Steward,  looking  woefully 
white  and  scared,  served  out  rum  to  us  from  a  wooden 
deck-bucket. 

It  was  decided  now  that  we  should  bring  her  head 
to  the  seas,  so  as  to  make  better  weather  of  it.  To 
reduce  the  risk  as  much  as  possible,  we  had  already 
put  out  two  fresh  oil-bags,  which  we  had  prepared, 
and  which,  indeed,  we  ought  to  have  done  earlier  ; 
for  though  they  were  being  constantly  washed  aboard 
again,  we  had  begun  at  once  to  take  less  water. 

Now,  we  took  a  hawser  from  the  bows,  outside  of 
everything,  and  right  away  aft  to  the  poop,  where 
we  bent  on  our  sea-anchor,  which  was  like  an  enormous 
log-bag,  or  drogue,  made  of  triple  canvas. 

We  bent  on  our  two  oil-bags  to  the  sea-anchor, 
and  then  dropped  the  whole  business  over  the  side. 
When  the  vessel  took  the  pull  ofjt,  we  put  down  our 
helm,  and  came  up  into  the  wind,  very  quick,  and 
without  taking  any  great  water.  And  a  risk  it  was  ; 
but  a  deal  less  than  some  we  had  come  through  already. 

Slowly,  with  an  undreamt  of  slowness,  the  re- 
mainder of  the  night  passed,  minute  by  minute,  and 
at  last  the  day  broke  in  a  weary  dawn  ;  the  sky  full 
of  a  stormy,  sickly  light.  On  every  side  tumbled  an 
interminable  chaos  of  seas.  And  the  vessel  her- 
self  !     A  wreck,  she  appeared.     The   mizzenmast 

had  gone,  some  dozen  feet  above  the  deck  ;  the  main 
topmast  had  gone,  and  so  had  the  jigger-topmast. 
I  struggled  forrard  to  the  break  of  the  poop,  and 
glanced  along  the  decks.  The  boats  had  gone.  All 
the  iron  scupper-doors  were  either  bent,  or  had  dis- 
appeared. On  the  starboard  side,  opposite  to  the 
stump  of  the  mizzenmast,  was  a  great  ragged  gap  in 
the  steel  bulwarks,  where  the  mast  must  have  struck. 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone      215 

when  it  carried  away.  In  several  other  places,  the 
t'gallant  rail  was  smashed  or  bent,  where  it  had  been 
struck  by  falling  spars.  The  side  of  the  teak  deck- 
house had  been  stove,  and  the  water  was  roaring  in 
and  out  with  each  roll  of  the  ship.  The  sheep-pen 
had  vanished,  and  so — as  I  discovered  later — had  the 
pigsty. 

Further  forrard,  my  glance  went,  and  I  saw  that 
the  sea  had  breached  the  bulkshead,  across  the  after 
end  of  the  fo'cas'le,  and,  with  each  biggish  sea  that 
we  shipped,  a  torrent  of  water  drove  in,  and  then 
flowed  out,  sometimes  bearing  with  it  an  odd  board, 
or  perhaps  a  man's  boot,  or  some  article  of  wearing 
apparel.  In  two  places  on  the  maindeck,  I  saw 
men's  sea-chests,  washing  to  and  fro  in  the  water 
that  streamed  over  the  deck.  And,  suddenly,  there 
came  into  my  mind  a  memory  of  the  poor  fellow 
who  had  broken  his  arm  when  we  were  cutting  loose 
the  wreck  of  the  fore-topmast. 

Already,  the  strength  of  the  Cyclone  was  spent, 
so  far,  at  least,  as  we  were  concerned  ;  and  I  was 
thinking  of  making  a  try  for  the  fo'cas'le,  when,  close 
beside  me,  I  heard  the  Mate's  voice.  I  turned,  with 
a  little  start.  He  had  evidently  noticed  the  breach 
in  the  bulkshead  ;  for  he  told  me  to  watch  a  chance, 
and  see  if  we  could  get  forrard. 

This,  we  did  ;  though  not  without  a  further  thorough 
sousing  ;  as  we  were  still  shipping  water  by  the  score 
of  tons.  Moreover,  the  risk  was  considerably  greater 
than  might  be  conceived ;  for  the  doorless  scupper- 
ports  offered  uncomfortable  facilities  for  gurgling  out 
into  the  ocean,  along  with  a  ton  or  two  of  brine  from 
the  decks. 

We  reached  the  fo'cas'le,  and  pulled  open  the 
lee  door.     We  stepped  inside.     It  was  like    stepping 


216  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

into  a  dank,  gloomy  cavern.  Water  was  dripping 
from  every  beam  and  staunchion.  We  struggled 
across  the  slippery  deck,  to  where  we  had  left  the 
sick  man  in  his  bunk.  In  the  dim  light,  we  saw  that 
man  and  bunk,  everything,  had  vanished ;  only 
the  bare  steel  sides  of  the  vessel  remained.  Every 
bunk  and  fitting  in  the  place  had  been  swept  away, 
and  all  of  the  men's  sea-chests.  Nothing  remained, 
save,  it  might  be,  an  odd  soaked  rag  of  clothing,  or  a 
sodden  bunk-board. 

The  Mate  and  I  looked  at  one  another,  in  silence. 

"  Poor  devil  !  "  he  said.  He  repeated  his  expres- 
sion of  pity,  staring  at  the  place  where  had  been 
the  bunk.  Then,  grave  of  face,  he  turned  to  go  out 
on  deck.  As  he  did  so,  a  heavier  sea  than  usual 
broke  aboard ;  flooded  roaring  along  the  decks, 
and  swept  in  through  the  broken  bulkshead  and  the 
lee  doorway.  It  swirled  round  the  sides,  caught  us, 
and  threw  us  down  in  a  heap  ;  then  swept  out  through 
the  breach  and  the  doorway,  carrying  the  Mate  with 
it.  He  managed  to  grasp  the  lintel  of  the  doorway, 
else,  I  do  believe,  he  would  have  gone  out  through 
one  of  the  open  scupper  traps.  A  doubly  hard  fate, 
after  having  come  safely  through  the  Cyclone. 

Outside  of  the  fo'cas'le,  I  saw  that  the  ladders 
leading  up  to  the  fo'cas'le  head  had  both  gone ; 
but  I  managed  to  scramble  up.  Here,  I  found  that 
both  anchors  had  been  washed  away,  and  the  rails 
all  round  ;    only  the  bare  staunchions  remaining. 

Beyond  the  bows,  the  jibboom  had  gone,  and  all 
the  gear  was  draggled  inboard  over  the  fo'cas'le  head, 
or  traihng  in  the  sea. 

We  made  our  way  aft,  and  reported  ;  then  the 
roll  was  called,  and  we  found  that  no  one  else  was 
missing,  besides  the  two  I  have  already  mentioned. 


Through  the  Vortex  of  a  Cyclone     217 

and  the  man  we  found  jammed  half  through  the 
poop  rails,  who  was  now  under  the  Steward's  care. 

From  that  time  on,  the  sea  went  down  steadily, 
until,  presently,  it  ceased  to  threaten  us,  and  we 
proceeded  to  get  the  ship  cleared  up  a  bit  ;  after 
which,  one  watch  turned-in  on  the  floor  of  the  saloon, 
and  the  other  was  told  to  "  stand  easy." 

Hour  by  hour,  through  that  da}/  and  the  next, 
the  sea  went  down,  until  it  was  difficult  to  believe 
that  we  had  so  lately  despaired  for  our  lives.  And 
so  the  second  evening  came,  calm  and  restful,  the 
wind  no  more  than  a  light  summer's  breeze,  and  the 
sea  calming  steadily. 

About  seven  bells  that  second  night,  a  big  steamer 
crossed  our  stern,  and  slowed  down  to  ask  us  if  we 
were  in  need  of  help  ;  for,  even  by  moonlight,  it 
was  easy  to  see  our  dismantled  condition.  This 
offer,  however,  the  Captain  refused  ;  and  with  many 
good  wishes,  the  big  vessel  swung  off  into  the  moon- 
wake,  and  so,  presently,  we  were  left  alone  in  the  quiet 
night  ;  safe  at  last,  and  rich  in  a  completed  experience. 


THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  DERELICT 

All  the  night  had  the  four-masted  ship,  Tarawak, 
lain  motionless  in  the  drift  of  the  Gulf  Stream  ;  for 
she  had  run  into  a  "  calm  patch  " — into  a  stark 
calm  which  had  lasted  now  for  two  days  and  nights. 

On  evcrj^  side,  had  it  been  light,  might  have  been 
seen  dense  masses  of  floating  gulf-weed,  studding 
the  ocean  even  to  the  distant  horizon.  In  places,  so 
large  were  the  weed-masses  that  they  formed  long, 
low  banks,  that  by  daylight,  might  have  been  mis- 
taken for  low-lying  land. 

Upon  the  lee  side  of  the  poop,  Duthie,  one  of  the 
'prentices,  leaned  with  his  elbows  upon  the  rail,  and 
stared  out  across  the  hidden  sea,  to  where  in  the 
Eastern  horizon  showed  the  first  pink  and  lemon 
streamers  of  the  dawn — faint,  delicate  streaks  and 
washes  of  colour. 

A  period  of  time  passed,  and  the  surface  of  the 
leeward  sea  began  to  show — a  great  expanse  of  grey, 
touched  with  odd,  wavering  belts  of  silver.  And 
everyAvhere  the  black  specks  and  islets  of  the  weed. 

Presently,  the  red  dome  of  the  sun  protruded 
itself  into  sight  above  the  dark  rim  of  the  horizon  ; 
and,  abruptly,  the  watching  Duthie  saw  something — 
a  great,  shapeless  bulk  that  lay  some  miles  away  to 
starboard,  and  showed  black  and  distinct  against 
the  gloomy  red  mass  of  the  rising  sun. 

218 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        219 

"  Something  in  sight  to  looard,  Sir,"  he  informed 
the  Mate,  who  was  leaning,  smoking,  over  the  rail 
that  ran  across  the  break  of  the  poop.  "  I  can't 
just  make  out  what  it  is." 

The  Mate  rose  from  his  easy  position,  stretched 
himself,  yawned,  and  came  across  to  the  boy. 

"  Whereabouts,  Toby  ?  "  he  asked,  wearily,  and 
yawning  again. 

"  There,  Sir,"  said  Duthie — alias  Toby — "  broad 
away  on  the  beam,  and  right  in  the  track  of  the  sun. 
It  looks  something  like  a  big  houseboat,  or  a  hay- 
stack." 

The  Mate  stared  in  the  direction  indicated,  and 
saw  the  thing  which  puzzled  the  boy,  and  immedi- 
ately the  tiredness  went  out  of  his  eyes  and  face. 

"  Pass  me  the  glasses  off  the  skylight,  Toby,"  he 
commanded,  and  the  youth  obeyed. 

After  the  Mate  had  examined  the  strange  object 
through  his  binoculars  for,  maybe,  a  minute,  he 
passed  them  to  Toby,  telling  him  to  take  a  "  squint," 
and  say  what  he  made  of  it. 

"  Looks  like  an  old  powder-hulk.  Sir,"  exclaimed 
the  lad,  after  awhile,  and  to  this  description  the 
Mate  nodded  agreement. 

Later,  when  the  sun  had  risen  somewhat,  they 
were  able  to  study  the  derelict  with  more  exactness. 
She  appeared  to  be  a  vessel  of  an  exceedingly  old 
type,  mastless,  and  upon  the  hull  of  which  had  been 
built  a  roof-like  superstructure ;  the  use  of  which 
they  could  not  determine.  She  was  lying  just  witliin 
the  borders  of  one  -of  the  weed-banks,  and  all  her 
side  was  splotched  with  a  greenish  growth. 

It  was  her  position,  within  the  borders  of  the 
weed,  that  suggested  to  the  puzzled  Mate,  how 
so    strange    and    unseaworthy    looking    a    craft    had 


220  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

come  so  far  abroad  into  the  greatness  of  the  ocean. 
For,  suddenl}^  it  occurred  to  him  that  she  was  neither 
more  nor  less  than  a  dereHct  from  the  vast  Sargasso 
Sea — a  vessel  that  had,  possibly,  been  lost  to  the 
world,  scores  and  scores  of  years  gone,  perhaps  hun- 
dreds. The  suggestion  touched  the  Mate's  thoughts 
with  solemnity,  and  he  fell  to  examining  the  ancient 
hulk  with  an  even  greater  interest,  and  pondering  on 
all  the  lonesome  and  awful  years  that  must  have  passed 
over  her,  as  she  had  lain  desolate  and  forgotten  in  that 
grim  cemetery  of  the  ocean. 

Through  all  that  day,  the  derelict  was  an  object 
of  the  most  intense  interest  to  those  aboard  the 
Tarawak,  ever}^  glass  in  the  ship  being  brought 
into  use  to  examine  her.  Yet,  though  within  no 
more  than  some  six  or  seven  miles  of  her,  the  Cap- 
tain refused  to  listen  to  the  Mate's  suggestions  that 
they  should  put  a  boat  into  the  water,  and  pay  the 
stranger  a  visit  ;  for  he  was  a  cautious  man,  and 
the  glass  warned  him  that  a  sudden  change  might 
be  expected  in  the  weather  ;  so  that  he  would  have 
no  one  leave  the  ship  on  any  unnecessary  business. 
But,  for  all  that  he  had  caution,  curiosity  was  by 
no  means  lacking  in  him,  and  his  telescope,  at  in- 
tervals, was  turned  on  the  ancient  hulk  through  all 
the  day. 

Then,  it  would  be  about  six  bells  in  the  second 
dog  watch,  a  sail  was  sighted  astern,  coming  up 
steadily  but  slowly.  By  eight  bells  they  were  able 
to  make  out  that  a  small  barque  was  bringing  the 
wind  with  her  ;  her  yards  squared,  and  every  stitch 
set.  Yet  the  night  had  advanced  apace,  and  it  was 
nigh  to  eleven  o'clock  before  the  wind  reached  those 
aboard  the  Tarawak.  When  at  last  it  arrived,  there 
was  a  slight  rustling  and  quaking  of  canvas,  and  odd 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        221 

creaks  here  and  there  in  the  darkness  amid  the  gear, 
as  each  portion  of  the  running  and  standing  rigging 
took  up  the  strain. 

Beneath  the  bows,  and  alongside,  there  came 
gentle  rippling  noises,  as  the  vessel  gathered  way  ; 
and  so,  for  the  better  part  of  the  next  hour,  they 
slid  through  the  water  at  something  less  than  a 
couple  of  knots  in  the  sixty  minutes. 

To  starboard  of  them,  they  could  see  the  red  light 
of  the  little  barque,  which  had  brought  up  the  wind 
with  her,  and  was  now  forging  slowly  ahead,  being 
better  able  evidently  than  the  big,  heavy  Tarawak 
to  take  advantage  of  so  slight  a  breeze. 

About  a  quarter  to  twelve,  just  after  the  relieving 
watch  had  been  roused,  lights  were  observed  to  be 
moving  to  and  fro  upon  the  small  barque,  and  by 
midnight  it  was  palpable  that,  through  some  cause 
or  other,  she  was  dropping  astern. 

When  the  Mate  arrived  on  deck  to  relieve  the 
Second,  the  latter  officer  informed  him  of  the  pos- 
sibility that  something  unusual  had  occurred  aboard 
the  barque,  telling  of  the  lights  about  her  decks,* 
and  how  that,  in  the  last  quarter  of  an  hour,  she 
had  begun  to  drop  astern. 

On  hearing  the  Second  Mate's  account,  the  First 
sent  one  of  the  'prentices  for  his  night-glasses,  and, 
when  they  were  brought,  studied  the  other  vessel 
intently,  that  is,  so  well  as  he  was  able  through  the 
darkness ;  for,  even  through  the  night-glasses,  she 
showed  only  as  a  vague  shape,  surmounted  by  the 
three  dim  towers  of  her  masts  and  sails. 
.'^Suddenly,    the   Mate   gave   ouL   a   sharp   exclama- 

*  Unshaded  lights  are  never  allowed  about  the  decks  at  night, 
as  they  are  likely  to  blind  the  vision  of  the  officer  of  the  watch. — 

W.  H.  H. 


222  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

tion  ;  for,  beyond  the  barque,  there  was  something 
else  shown  dimly  in  the  field  of  vision.  He  studied 
it  with  great  intentness,  ignoring  for  the  instant, 
the  Second's  queries  as  to  what  it  was  that  had  caused 
him  to  exclaim. 

All  at  once,  he  said,  with  a  little  note  of  excitement 
in  his  voice  : — 

"  The  derelict  !  The  barque's  run  into  the  weed 
around  that  old  hooker  !  " 

The  Second  ]\Iate  gave  a  mutter  of  surprised  assent, 
and  slapped  the  rail. 

"  That's  it  !  "  he  said.  "  That's  why  we're  passing 
her.  And  that  explains  the  lights.  If  they're  not 
fast  in  the  weed,  they've  probably  run  slap  into  the 
blessed  derelict  !  " 

"  One  thing,"  said  the  Mate,  lowering  his  glasses, 
and  beginning  to  fumble  for  his  pipe,  "  she  won't 
have  had  enough  way  on  her  to  do  much  damage." 

The  Second  Mate,  who  was  still  peering  through 
his  binoculars,  murmured  an  absent  agreement,  and 
continued  to  peer.  The  Mate,  for  his  part,  filled 
and  lit  his  pipe,  remarking  meanwhile  to  the  un- 
hearing  Second,  that  the  light  breeze  was  dropping. 

Abruptly,  the  Second  Mate  called  his  superior's 
attention,  and  in  the  same  instant,  so  it  seerhed, 
the  failing  wind  died  entirely  away,  the  sails  settling 
down  into  runl-des,  with  little  rustics  and  flutters  of 
sagging  canvas. 

"  What's  up  ?  "  asked  the  Mate,  and  raised  his 
glasses. 

"  There's  something  queer  going  on  over  yonder," 
said  the  Second.  "  Look  at  the  lights  moving  about, 
and Did  you  see  that  ?  " 

The  last  portion  of  his  remark  came  out  swiftly, 
with  a  sharp  accentuation  of  the  last  word. 


.     The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        223 

"  What  ?  "  asked  the  Mate,  staring  hard. 

"  They're  shooting,"  rephed  the  Second.  "  Look  ! 
There  again  !  " 

"  Rubbish  !  "  said  the  Mate,  a  mixture  of  un- 
beHef  and  doubt  in  his  voice. 

With  the  falUng  of  the  wind,  there  had  come  a 
great  silence  upon  the  sea.  And,  abruptly,  from  far 
across  the  water,  sounded  the  distant,  dullish  thud 
of  a  gun,  followed  almost  instantly  by  several  minute, 
but  sharply  defined,  reports,  like  the  cracking  of  a  whip 
out  in  the  darkness. 

"  Jove  !  "  cried  the  Mate,  "  I  believe  you're  right." 
He  paused  and  stared.  "  There  !  "  he  said.  "  I 
saw  the  flashes  then.  They're  firing  from  the  poop, 
I  believe.  ...  I  must  call  the  Old  Man." 

He  turned  and  ran  hastily  down  into  the  saloon, 
knocked  on  the  door  of  the  Captain's  cabin,  and 
entered.  He  turned  up  the  lamp,  and,  shaking  his 
superior  into  wakefulness,  told  him  of  the  thing  he 
believed  to  be  happening  aboard  the  barque  : — 

"  It's    mutin}^    Sir ;     they're    shooting    from    the 

poop.     We  ought   to   do   something "     The  Mate 

said  many  things,  breathlessly  ;  for  he  was  a  young 
man  ;  but  the  Captain  stopped  him,  with  a  quietly 
lifted  hand. 

"  I'll  be  up  with  yoit  in  a  minute,  Mr.  Johnson,"  he 
said,  and  the  Mate  took  the  hint,  and  ran  up  on  deck. 

Before  the  minute  had  passed,  the  Skipper  was 
on  the  poop,  and  staring  through  his  niglit-glasses 
at  the  barque  and  the  derelict.  Yet  now,  aboard 
of  the  barque,  the  lights  had  vanished,  and  there 
showed  no  more  the  flashes  of  discharging  weapons 
— only  there  remained  the  dull,  steady  red  glow  of 
the  port  sidelight  ;  and,  behind  it,  the  night-glasses 
showed  the  shadowy  outline  of  the  vessel. 


224  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

The  Captain  put  questions  to  the  Mates,  asking 
for  further  details. 

"  It  all  stopped  while  the  Mate  was  calling  you, 
Sir,"  explained  the  Second.  "  We  could  hear  the 
shots  quite  plainly." 

"  They  seemed  to  be  using  a  gun  as  well  as  their 
revolvers,"  interjected  the  Mate,  without  ceasing 
to  stare  into  the  darkness. 

For  awhile  the  three  of  them  continued  to  discuss 
the  matter,  whilst  down  on  the  maindeck  the  two 
watches  clustered  along  the  starboard  rail,  and  a  low 
hum  of  talk  rose,  fore  and  aft. 

Presently,  the  Captain  and  the  Mates  came  to  a 
decision.  If  there  had  been  a  mutiny,  it  had  been 
brought  to  its  conclusion,  whatever  that  conclusion 
might  be,  and  no  interference  from  those  aboard 
the  Tarawak,  at  that  period,  would  be  likely  to 
do  good.  They  were  utterly  in  the  dark — in  more 
ways  than  one — and,  for  all  they  knew,  there  might 
not  even  have  been  any  mutiny.  If  there  had  been 
a  mutiny,  and  Ihe  mutineers  had  won,  then  they  had 
done  their  worst ;  whilst  if  the  officers  had  won 
well  and  good.  They  had  managed  to  do  so  without 
help.  Of  course,  if  the  Tarawak  had  been  a  man- 
of-war  with  a  large  crew,  capable  of  mastering  any 
situation,  it  would  have  been  a  simple  matter  to 
send  a  powerful,  armed  boat's  crew  to  inquire  ; 
but  as  she  was  merely  a  merchant  vessel,  under- 
manned, as  is  the  modern  fashion,  they  must  go 
warily.  They  would  wait  for  the  morning,  and  signal. 
In  a  couple  of  hours  it  would  be  light.  Then  they 
would  be  guided  by  circumstances. 

The  Mate  Vv'alked  to  the  break  of  the  poop,  and 
sang  out  to  the  men  : — 

"  Now  then,   my  lads,   you'd   better   turn  in,  the 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        225 

watch  below,  and  have  a  sleep  ;    we  may  be  wanting 
you  by  five  bells." 

There  was  a  muttered  chorus  of  "  i,  i,  Sir,"  and 
some  of  the  men  began  to  go  forrard  to  the  fo'cas.'le  ; 
but  others  of  the  watch  below  rem^aihed,  their  curiosity 
overmastering  their  desire  for  sleep. 

On  the  poop,  the  three  officers  leaned  over  the 
starboard  rail,  chatting  in  a  desultory  fashion,  as 
they  waited  for  the  dawn.  At  some  little  distance 
hovered  Duthie,  who,  as  eldest  'prentice  just  out  of  his 
time,  had  been  given  the  post  of  acting  Third  Mate. 

Presently,  the  sky  to  starboard  began  to  lighten 
with  the  solemn  coming  of  the  dawn.  The  hght 
grew  and  strengthened,  and  the  eyes  of  those  in 
the  Tarawak  scanned  with  growing  intentness  that 
portion  of  the  horizon  where  showed  the  red  and 
dwindling  glow  of  the  barque's  sidelight. 

Then,  it  was  in  that  moment  when  all  the  world 
is  full  of  the  silence  of  the  dawn,  something  passed 
over  the  quiet  sea,  coming  out  of  the  East — a  very 
faint,  long-drawn-out,  screaming,  piping  noise.  It 
might  almost  have  been  the  cry  of  a  little  wind  wan- 
dering out  of  the  dawn  across  the  sea — a  ghostly, 
piping  skirl,  so  attenuated  and  elusive  was  it  ;  but 
there  was  in  it  a  weird,  almost  threatening  note,  that 
told  the  three  on  the  poop  it  was  no  wind  that  made 
so  dree  and  inhuman  a  sound. 

The  noise  ceased,  dying  out  in  an  indefinite,  mos- 
quito-like shrilling,  far  and  vague  and  minutely 
shrill.     And  so  came  the  silence  again 

"  I  heard  that,  last  night,  when  they  were  shoot- 
ing," said  the  Second  Mate,  speaking  very  slowly, 
and  looking  first  at  the  Skipper  and  then  at  the  Mate. 
"It  was  when  you  were  below,  caUing  the  Captain," 

he  added. 

8 


226  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  Ssh  !  "  said  the  Mate,  and  held  up  a  warning 
hand ;  but  though  they  hstened,  there  came  no 
further  sound  ;  and  so  they  fell  to  disjointed  ques- 
tionings, and  guessed  their  answers,  as  puzzled  men 
will.  And  ever  and  anon,  they  examined  the  barque 
through  their  glasses  ;  but  without  discovering  any- 
thing of  note,  save  that,  when  the  hght  grew  stronger, 
they  perceived  that  her  jibboom  had  struck  through 
the  superstructure  of  the  derelict,  tearing  a  considerable 
gap  therein. 

Presently,  when  the  day  had  sufficiently  advanced, 
the  Mate  sung  out  to  the  Third,  to  take  a  couple  of 
the  'prentices,  and  pass  up  the  signal  flags  and  the 
code  book.  This  was  done,  and  a  "  hoist  "  made  ; 
but  those  in  the  barque  took  not  the  sHghtest  heed  ; 
so  that  finally  the  Captain  bade  them  make  up  the 
flags  and  return  them  to  the  locker. 

After  that,  he  went  down  to  consult  the  glass, 
and  when  he  reappeared,  he  and  the  Mates  had  a 
short  discussion,  after  which,  orders  were  given  to 
hoist  out  the  starboard  life-boat.  This,  in  the  course 
of  half  an  hour,  they  managed  ;  and,  after  that, 
six  of  the  men  and  two  of  the  'prentices  were  ordered 
into 'her. 

Then  half  a  dozen  rifles  were  passed  down,  with 
ammunition,  and  the  same  number  of  cutlasses. 
These  were  all  apportioned  among  the  men,  much 
to  the  disgust  of  the  two  apprentices,  who  were 
aggrieved  that  they  should  be  passed  over ;  but 
their  feelings  altered  when  the  Mate  descended  into 
the  boat,  and  handed  them  each  a  loaded  revolver, 
warning  them,  however,  to  play  no  "  monkey  tricks  " 
with  the  weapons. 

Just  as  the  boat  was  about  to  push  off,  Duthie, 
the  eldest  'prentice,  came  scrambling  down  the  side 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        227 

ladder,  and  jumped  for  the  after  thwart.  He  landed, 
and  sat  down,  laying  the  rifle  which  he  had  brought, 
in  the  stern  ;  and,  after  that,  the  boat  put  off  for 
the  barque. 

There  were  now  ten  in  the  boat,  and  all  well  armed, 
so  that  the  Mate  had  a  certain  feeling  of  comfort 
that  he  would  be  able  to  meet  any  situation  that  was 
likely  to  arise. 

After  nearly  an  hour's  hard  pulling,  the  heavy 
boat  had  been  brought  within  some  two  hundred 
3^ards  of  the  barque,  and  the  Mate  sung  out  to  the 
men  to  lie  on  their  oars  for  a  minute.  Then  he 
stood  up  and  shoute'd  to  the  people  on  the  barque  ; 
but  though  he  repeated  his  cry  of  "  Ship  ahoy  !  " 
several  times,  there  came  no  reply. 

He  sat  down,  and  motioned  to  the  men  to  give 
way  again,  and  so  brought  the  boat  nearer  the  barque 
by/ another  hundred  yards.  Here,  he  hailed  again  ; 
but  still  receiving  no  reply,  he  stooped  for  his  binocu- 
lars, and  peered  for  awhile  through  them  at  the  two 
vessels — the  ancient  derelict,  and  the  modern  saiHng- 
vessel. 

The  latter  had  driven  clean  in  over  the  weed,  her 
stern  being  perhaps  some  two  score  yards  from  the 
edge  of  the  bank.  Her  jibboom,  as  I  have  already 
mentioned,  had  pierced  the  green-blotched  super- 
structure of  the  derelict,  so  that  her  cutwater  had 
come  very  close  to  the  grass-grown  side  of  the 
hulk. 

That  the  derelict  was  indeed  a  very  ancient  vessel, 
it  was  now  easy  to  see  ;  for  at  this  distance  the  Mate 
could  distinguish  which  v.'as  hull,  and  which  super- 
structure. Her  stern  rose  up  to  a  height  consider- 
ably above  her  bows,  and  possessed  galleries,  coming 
round  the  counter.     In   the  window  frames  some  of 


228  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  glass  still  remained  ;  but  others  were  securely 
shuttered,  and  some  missing,  frames  and  all,  leaving 
dark  holes  in  the  stern.  And  everjrwhere  grew  the 
dank,  green  growth,  giving  to  the  beholder  a  queer 
sense  of  repulsion.  Indeed,  there  was  that  about 
the  whole  of  the  ancient  craft,  that  repelled  in  a 
curious  way — something  elusive — a  remoteness  from 
humanity,  that  was  vaguely  abominable. 

The  Mate  put  down  his  binoculars,  and  drew  his 
revolver,  and,  at  the  action,  each  one  in  the  boat  gave 
an  instinctive  glance  to  his  own  weapon.  Then 
he  sung  out  to  them  to  give-way,  and  steered  straight 
for  the  weed.  The  boat  struck  it,  with  something  of 
a  sog  ;  and,  after  that,  they  advanced  slowly,  yard 
by  yard,  only  with  considerable  labour. 

They  reached  the  counter  of  the  barque,  and  the 
Mate  held  out  his  hand  for  an  oar.  This,  he  leaned 
up  against  the  side  of  the  vessel,  and  a  moment  later 
was  swarming  quickly  up  it.  He  grasped  the  rail, 
and  swung  himself  aboard  ;  then,  after  a  swift  glance 
fore  and  aft,  gripped  the  blade  of  the  oar,  to  steady  it, 
and  bade  the  rest  follow  as  quickly  as  possible,  which 
they  did,  the  last  man  bringing  up  the  painter  with 
him,  and  making  it  fast  to  a  cleat. 

Then  commenced  a  rapid  search  through  the  ship. 
In  several  places  about  the  maindeck  they  found 
broken  lamps,  and  aft  on  the  poop,  a  shot-gun,  three 
revolvers,  and  several  capstan-bars  lying  about  the 
poop-deck.  But  though  they  pried  into  every  possible 
corner,  lifting  the  hatches,  and  examining  the  lazarette, 
not  a  human  creature  was  to  be  found — the  barque 
was  absolutely  deserted. 

After  the  first  rapid  search,  the  Mate  called  his  men 
together  ;  for  there  was  an  uncomfortable  sense  of 
danger  in  the  air,  and  he  felt  that  it  would  be  better 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        229 

not  to  straggle.  Then,  he  led  the  way  forrard,  and 
went  up  on  to  the  t'gallant  fo'cas'le  head.  Here, 
finding  the  port  sidelight  still  burning,  he  bent  over 
the  screen,  as  it  were  mechanically,  hfted  the  lamp, 
opened  it,  and  blew  out  the  flame  ;  then  replaced  the 
affair  on  its  socket. 

After  that,  he  climbed  into  the  bows,  and  out  along 
the  jibboom,  beckoning  to  the  others  to  follow,  which 
they  did,  no  man  saying  a  word,  and  all  holding  their 
weapons  handily  ;  for  each  felt  the  oppressiveness  of 
the  Incomprehensible  about  them. 

The  Mate  reached  the  hole  in  the  great  superstruc- 
ture, and  passed  inside,  the  rest  following.  Here  they 
found  themselves  in  what  looked  something  like  a 
great,  gloomy  barracks,  the  floor  of  which  was  the  deck 
of  the  ancient  craft.  The  superstructure,  as  seen  from 
the  inside,  was  a  very  wonderful  piece  of  work,  being 
•beautifully  shored  and  fixed  ;  so  that  at  one  time  it 
must  have  possessed  immense  strength  ;  though  now 
it  was  all  rotted,  and  showed  many  a  gape  and  rip. 
In  one  place,  near  the  centre,  or  midships  part,  was  a 
sort  of  platform,  high  up,  which  the  Mate  conjectured 
might  have  been  used  as  a  "  look-out  "  ;  though  the 
reason  for  the  prodigious  superstructure  itself,  he  could 
not  imagine. 

Having  searched  the  decks  of  this  craft,  he  was 
preparing  to  go  below,  when,  suddenl}^  Duthie  caught 
him  by  the  sleeve,  and  whispered  to  him,  tensely,  to 
listen.  He  did  so,  and  heard  the  thing  that  had 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  youth — it  was  a  low, 
continuous  shrill  whining  that  was  rising  from  out  of 
the  dark  hull  beneath  their  feet,  and,  abruptly,  the 
Mate  was  aware  that  there  was  an  intensely  disagree- 
able animal-like  smell  in  the  air.  He  had  noticed  it, 
in  a  subconscious  fashion,  when  entering  through  the 


230  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

broken  superstructure  ;  but  now,  suddenly,  he  was 
auarcoiit. 

Then,  as  he  stood  there  hesitating,  the  whining 
noise  rose  all  at  once  into  a  piping,  screaming  squeal, 
that  filled  all  the  space  in  which  they  were  inclosed, 
with  an  awful,  inhuman  and  threatening  clamour. 
The  Mate  turned  and  shouted  at  the  top  of  his  voice 
to  the  rest,  to  retreat  to  the  barque,  and  he,  himself, 
after  a  further  quick  nervous  glance  round,  hurried 
towards  the  place  where  the  end  of  the  barque's 
jibboom  protruded  in  across  the  decks. 

He  waited,  with  strained  impatience,  glancing  ever 
behind  him,  until  all  were  off  the  derelict,  and  then 
sprang  swiftly  on  to  the  spar  that  was  their  bridge  to 
the  other  vessel.  Even  as  he  did  so,  the  squealing 
died  away  into  a  tiny  shrilling,  twittering  sound, 
that  made  him  glance  back  ;  for  the  suddenness  of  the 
quiet  was  as  effective  as  though  it  had  been  a  loud 
noise.  What  he  saw,  seemed  to  him  in  that  first  in- 
stant so  incredible  and  monstrous,  that  he  was  almost 
too  shaken  to  cry  out.  Then  he  raised  his  voice  in  a 
shout  of  warning  to  the  men,  and  a  frenzy  of  haste 
shook  him  in  every  fibre,  as  he  scrambled  back  to  the 
barque,  shouting  ever  to  the  men  to  get  into  the  boat. 
For  in  that  backward  glance,  he  had  seen  the  whole 
decks  of  the  derelict  a-move  with  living  things — giant 
rats,  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  them  ;  and 
so  in  a  flash  had  come  to  an  understanding  of  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  crew  of  the  barque. 

He  had  reached  the  fo'cas'le  head  now,  and  was 
running  for  the  steps,  and  behind  him,  making  all  the 
long  slanting  length  of  the  jibboom  black,  were  the 
rats,  racing  after  him.  He  made  one  leap  to  the  main- 
deck,  and  ran.  Behind,  sounded  a  queer,  multitu- 
dinous pattering  noise,  swiftly  surging  upon  him.     He 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        231 

reached  the  poop  steps,  and  as  he  sprang  up  them,  felt 
a  savage  bite  in  his  left  calf.  He  was  on  the  poop  deck 
now,  and  running  with  a  stagger.  A  score  of  great 
rats  leapt  around  him,  and  half  a  dozen  hung  grimly 
to  his  back,  whilst  the  one  that  had  gripped  his  calf, 
flogged  madly  from  side  to  side  as  he  raced  on.  He 
reached  the  rail,  gripped  it,  and  vaulted  clean  over 
and  down  into  the  weed. 

The  rest  were  already  in  the  boat,  and  strong  hands 
and  arms  hove  him  aboard,  whilst  the  others  of  the 
crew  sweated  in  getting  their  little  craft  round  from  the 
ship.  The  rats  still  clung  to  the  Mate  ;  but  a  few 
blows  with  a  cutlass  eased  him  of  his  murderous  burden. 
Above  them,  making  the  rails  and  half-round  of  the 
poop  black  and  alive,  raced  thousands  of  rats. 

The  boat  was  now  about  an  oar's  length  from  the 
barque,  and,  suddenly,  Duthie  screamed  out  that 
they  were  coming.  In  the  same  instant,  nearly  a 
hundred  of  the  largest  rats  launched  themselves  at 
the  boat.  Most  fell  short,  into  the  weed  ;  but  over  a 
score  reached  the  boat,  and  sprang  savagely  at  the 
men,  and  there  was  a  minute's  hard  slashing  and  smit- 
ing, before  the  brutes  were  destroyed. 

Once  more  the  men  resumed  their  task  of  urging 
their  way  through  the  weed,  and  so  in  a  minute  or  two, 
had  come  to  within  some  fathoms  of  the  edge,  work- 
ing desperately.  Then  a  fresh  terror  broke  upon  them. 
Those  rats  which  had  missed  their  leap,  were  now  all 
about  the  boat,  and  leaping  in  from  the  weed,  running 
up  the  oars,  and  scrambling  in  over  the  sides,  and,  as 
each  one  got  inboard,  straight  for  one  of  the  crew  it 
went ;  so  that  they  were  all  bitten  and  be-bled  in  a 
score  of  places. 

There  ensued  a  short  but  desperate  fight,  and  then, 
when  the  last  of  the  beasts  had  been  hacked  to  death, 


232  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  men  lay  once  more  to  the  task  of  heaving  the  boat 
clear  of  the  weed. 

A  minute  passed,  and  they  had  come  almost  to  the 
edge,  when  Duthie  cried  out,  to  look  ;  and  at  that,  all 
turned  to  stare  at  the  barque,  and  perceived  the  thing 
that  had  caused  the  'prentice  to  cry  out  ;  for  the  rats 
were  leaping  down  into  the  weed  in  black,  multitudes, 
making  the  great  weed-fronds  quiver,  as  thoy  hurled 
themselves  in  the  direction  of  the  boat.  In  an  in- 
credibly short  space  of  time,  all  the  weed  between  the 
boat  and  the  barque,  was  alive  with  the  little  monsters, 
coming  at  breakneck  speed. 

The  Mate  let  out  a  shout,  and,  snatching  an  oar  from 
one  of  the  men,  leapt  into  the  stern  of  the  boat,  and 
commenced  to  thrash  the  weed  with  it,  whilst  the  rest 
laboured  infernally  to  pluck  the  boat  forth  into  the  open 
sea.  Yet,  despite  their  mad  efforts,  and  the  death- 
dealing  blows  of  the  Mate's  great  fourteen-foot  oar, 
the  black,  living  mass  were  all  about  the  boat,  and 
scrambling  aboard  in  scores,  before  she  was  free  of  the 
weed.  As  the  boat  shot  into  the  clear  water,  the  Mate 
gave  out  a  great  curse,  and,  dropping  his  oar,  began  to 
pluck  the  brutes  from  his  body  with  his  bare  hands, 
casting  them  into  the  sea.  Yet,  fast  almost  as  he  freed 
himself,  others  sprang  upon  him,  so  that  in  another 
minute  he  was  like  to  have  been  pulled  down,  for  the 
boat  was  alive  and  swarming  with  the  pests,  but  that 
some  of  the  men  got  to  work  with  their  cutlasses,  and 
literally  slashed  the  brutes  to  pieces,  sometimes 
killing  several  with  a  single  blow.  x\nd  thus,  in  a 
while,  the  boat  was  freed  once  more  ;  though  it  was  a 
sorely  wounded  and  frightened  lot  of  men  that  manned 
her. 

The  Mate  himself  took  an  oar,  as  did  all  those  who 
were  able.     And  so  they  rowed  slowly  and  painfully 


The  Mystery  of  the  Derelict        233 

away  from  that  hateful  dereUct,  whose  crew  of  monsters 
even  then  made  the  weed  all  of  a-heave  with  hideous 
hfe. 

From  the  Tarawak  came  Urgent  signals  for  them  to 
haste  ;  by  which  the  Mate  knew  that  the  storm,  which 
the  Captain  had  feared,  must  be  coming  down  upon 
the  ship,  and  so  he  spurred  each  one  to  greater  en- 
deavour, until,  at  last,  they  were  under  the  shadow 
of  their  own  vessel,  with  very  thankful  hearts,  and 
bodies,  bleeding,  tired  and  faint. 

Slowly  and  painfully,  the  boat's  crew  scrambled 
up  the  side-ladder,  and  the  boat  was  hoisted  aboard  ; 
but  they  had  no  time  then  to  tell  their  tale  ;  for  the 
storm  was  upon  them. 

It  came  half  an  hour  later,  sweeping  down  in  a  cloud 
of  white  fury  from  the  Eastward,  and  blotting  out  all 
vestiges  of  the  mysterious  derelict  and  the  little  barque 
which  had  proved  her  victim.  And  after  that,  for  a 
weary  day  and  night,  they  battled  with  the  storm. 
When  it  passed,  nothing  was  to  be  seen,  either  of  the 
two  vessels  or  of  the  weed  which  had  studded  the  sea 
before  the  storm  ;  for  they  had  been  blown  many  a 
score  of  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  the  spot,  and  so 
had  no  further  chance — nor,  I  ween,  inclination — 
to  investigate  further  the  mystery  of  that  strange  old 
derelict  of  a  past  time,  and  her  habitants  of  rats. 

Yet,  many  a  time,  and  in  many  fo'cas'les  has  this 
story  been  told  ;  and  many  a  conjecture  has  been 
passed  as  to  how  came  that  ancient  craft  abroad 
there  in  the  ocean.  Some  have  suggested — as  indeed  I 
have  made  bold  to  put  forth  as  fact — that  she  must 
hayp  drifted  out  of  the  lonesome  Sargasso  Sea.  And, 
in  truth,  I  cannot  but  think  this  the  most  reasonable 
supposition.  Yet,  of  the  rats  that  evidently  dwelt 
in  her,   I   have   no   reasonable   explanation   to   offer. 

8* 


234  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

Wliether  they  were  true  ship's  rats,  or  a  species  that 
is  to  be  found  in  the  weed-haunted  plains  and  islets  of 
the  Sargasso  Sea,  I  cannot  say.  It  may  be  that  they 
are  the  descendants  of  rats  that  lived  in  ships  long 
centuries  lost  in  the  Weed  Sea,  and  which  have  learned 
to  live  among  the  weed,  forming  new  characteristics, 
and  developing  fresh  powers  and  instincts.  Yet,  I 
cannot  say  ;  for  I  speak  entirely  without  authority, 
and  do  but  tell  this  story  as  it  is  told  in  the  fo'cas'le 
of  many  an  old-time  sailing  ship — that  dark,  brine- 
tainted  place  where  the  young  men  learn  somewhat  of 
the  mysteries  of  the  all  mysterious  sea. 


THE   SHAMRAKEN   HOMEWARD- 
BOUNDER 

The  old  Shamraken,  sailing-ship,  had  been  many  days 
upon  the  waters.  She  was  old — older  than  her  masters, 
and  that  was  saying  a  good  deal.  She  seemed  in  no 
hurry,  as  she  lifted  her  bulging,  old,  wooden  sides 
through  the  seas.  What  need  for  hurry  !  She  would 
arrive  some  time,  in  some  fashion,  as  had  been  her 
habit  heretofore. 

Two  matters  were  especially  noticeable  among  her 
crew — who  were  also  her  masters —  ;  the  first  the  aged- 
ness  of  each  and  everyone  ;  the  second  the  family ^ 
sense  which  appeared  to  bind  them,  so  that  the  ship 
seemed  manned  by  a  crew,  all  of  whom  were  related 
one  to  the  other  ;  yet  it  was  not  so. 

A  strange  company  were  they,  each  man  bearded, 
aged  and  grizzled  ;  yet  there  was  nothing  of  the  in- 
humanity of  old  age  about  them,  save  it  might  be  in 
their  freedom  from  grumbling,  and  the  calm  content 
which  comes  only  to  those  in  whom  the  more  violent 
passions  have  died. 

Had  anything  to  be  done,  there  was  nothing  of  the 
growling,  inseparable  from  the  average  run  of  sailor 
men.  They  went  aloft  to  the  "job  " — whatever  it 
might  be — with  the  wise  submission  which  is  brought 
only  by  age  and  experience.  Their  work  was  gone 
through   with  a  certain  slow  pertinacity — a  sort  of 

235 


236  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

tired  steadfastness,  born  of  the  knowledge  that  such 
work  had  to  be  done.  Moreover,  their  hands  possessed 
the  ripe  skill  which  comes  onl}^  from  exceeding  prac- 
tice, and  which  went  far  to  make  amends  for  the  feeble- 
ness of  age.  Above  all,  their  movements,  slow  as  they 
might  be,  were  remorseless  in  their  lack  of  faltering. 
They  had  so  often  performed  the  same  kind  of  work, 
that  they  had  arrived,  by  the  selection  of  utility,  at 
the  shortest  and  most  simple  methods  of  doing  it. 

They  had,  as  I  have  said,  been  many  days  upon  the 
water,  though  I  am  not  sure  that  any  man  in  her  knew 
to  a  nicety  the  number  of  those  days.  Though  Skipper 
Abe  Tombes — addressed  usually  as  Skipper  Abe — may 
have  had  some  notion  ;  for  he  might  be  seen  at  times 
gravely  adjusting  a  prodigious  quadrant,  which  suggests 
that  he  kept  some  sort  of  record  of  time  and  place. 

Of  the  crew  of  the  Shamraken,  some  half  dozen  were 
seated,  working  placidly  at  such  matters  of  seaman- 
ship as  were  necessary.  Besides  these,  there  were 
others  about  the  decks.  A  couple  who  paced  the  lee 
side  of  the  main  deck,  smoking,  and  exchanging  an 
occasional  word.  One  who  sat  by  the  side  of  a  worker, 
and  made  odd  remarks  between  draws  at  his  pipe. 
Another,  out  upon  the  jibboom,  who  fished,  with  a 
line,  hook  and  white  rag,  for  bonito.  This  last  was 
Nuzzie,  the  ship's  boy.  He  was  grey-bearded,  and 
his  years  numbered  five  and  fifty.  A  boy  of  fifteen 
he  had  been,  when  he  joined  the  Shamraken,  and  "  boy  " 
he  was  still,  though  forty  years  had  passed  into  eternity, 
since  the  day  of  his  "  signing  on  "  ;  for  the  men  of  the 
Shamraken  lived  in  the  past,  and  thought  of  him  only 
as  the  "  boy  "  of  that  past. 

It  was  Nuzzie 's  watch  below — his  time  for  sleeping. 
This  might  have  been  said  also  of  the  other  three  men 
who  talked  and  smoked  ;   but  for  themselves  they  had 


The  Shararaken  Homeward -Bounder    237 

scarce  a  thought  of  sleep.     Healthy  age  sleeps  little, 
and  they  were  in  health,  though  so  ancient. 

Presently,  one  of  those  who  walked  the  lee  side  of 
the  main  deck,  chancing  to  cast  a  glance  forrard, 
observed  Nuzzie  still  to  be  out  upon  the  jibboom, 
jerking  his  hne  so  as  to  delude  some  foolish  bonito  into 
the  belief  that  the  white  rag  was  a  ilying-fish. 

The  smoker  nudged  his  companion. 

"  Time  thet  by  'ad  'is  sleep." 

"  i,  i,  mate,"  returned  the  other,  withdrawing  his 
pipe,  and  giving  a  steadfast  look  at  the  figure  seated 
out  upon  the  jibboom. 

For  the  half  of  a  minute  they  stood  there,  very 
effigies  of  Age's  implacable  determination  to  rule  rash 
Youth.  Their  pipes  were  held  in  their  hands,  and  the 
smoke  rose  up  in  little  eddies  from  the  smouldering 
contents  of  the  bowls. 

"  Thar's  no  tamin'  of  thet  b'y  !  "  said  the  first  man, 
looking  very  stern  and  determined.  Then  he  remem- 
bered his  pipe,  and  took  a  draw. 

"  B'ys  is  tur'ble  queer  critters,"  remarked  the 
second  man,  and  remembered  his  pipe  in  turn. 

"  Fishin'  w'en  'e  orter  be  sleepin',"  snorted  the 
first  man. 

"  B'ys  needs  a  tur'ble  lot  er  sleep,"  said  the  second 
man.  "  I  'member  w'en  I  wor  a  b'y.  I  reckon  it's 
ther  growin'." 

And  all  the  time  poor  Nuzzie  fished  on, 

"  Guess  I'll  jest  step  up  an'  tell  'im  ter  come  in  outer 
thet,"  exclaimed  the  first  man,  and  commenced  to 
walk  towards  the  steps  leading  up  on  to  the  fo'cas'le 
head. 

"  B'y  !  "  he  shouted,  as  soon  as  his  head  was  above 
the  level  of  the  fo'cas'le  deck.     "  B'y  !  " 

Nuzzie  looked  round,  at  the  second  call. 


238  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  Eh  ?"  he  sung  but. 

"  Yew  come  in  outer  that,"  shouted  the  older  man, 
in  the  somewhat  shrill  tone  which  age  had  brought  to 
his  voice.  "  Reckon  we'll  be  'avin'  yer  sleepin'  at  the 
wheel  ter  night." 

"  i,"  joined  in  the  second  man,  who  had  followed 
his  companion  up  on  to  the  fo'cas'le  head.  "  Come 
in,  b'y,  an'  get  ter  yer  bunk." 

"  Right,"  called  Nuzzie,  and  commenced  to  coil 
up  his  line.  It  was  evident  that  he  had  no  thought  of 
disobeying.  He  came  in  off  the  spar,  and  went  past 
them  without  a  word,  on  the  way  to  turn  in. 

They,  on  their  part,  went  down  slowly  off  the 
fo'cas'le  head,  and  resumed  their  walk  fore  and  aft 
along  the  lee  side  of  the  main  deck. 


"  I  reckon,  Zeph,"  said  the  man  who  sat  upon  the 
hatch  and  smoked,  "  I  reckon  as  Skipper  Abe's  'bout 
right.  We've  made  a  trifle  o'  dollars  outer  the  old 
'ooker,  an'  we  don't  get  no  younger." 

"  Ay,  thet's  so,  right  'nuff,"  returned  the  man  who 
sat  beside  him,  working  at  the  stropping  of  a  block. 

"  An'  it's  'bout  time's  we  got  inter  the  use  o'  bein' 
ashore,"  went  on  the  first  man,  who  was  named  Job. 

Zeph  gripped  the  block  between  his  knees,  and 
fumbled  in  his  hip  pocket  for  a  plug.  He  bit  off  a 
chew  and  replaced  the  plug. 

"  Seems  cur'ous  this  is  ther  last  trip,  w'en  yer  comes 
ter  think  uv  it,"  he  remarked,  chewing  steadily,  his 
chin  resting  on  his  hand. 

Job  took  two  or  three  deep  draws  at  his  pipe  before 
he  spoke. 

"  Reckon  it  had  ter  come  sumtime,"   he  said,  at 


The  Shamraken  Homeward -Bounder    239 

length.  "  I've  a  purty  Icetle  place  in  me  mind  w'er' 
I'm  goin'  ter  tie  up.  'Ave  yer  thought  erbout  it, 
Zeph  ?  " 

The  man  who  held  the  block  between  his  knees, 
shook  his  head,  and  stared  away  moodily  over  the  sea. 

"  Dunno,  Job,  as  I  know  what  I'll  do  w'en  ther 
old  'ooker's  sold,"  he  muttered.  "  Sence  M'ria  went, 
I  don't  seem  nohow  ter  care  'bout  bein'  'shore." 

"  I  never  'ad  no  wife,"  said  Job,  pressing  down  the 
burning  tobacco  in  the  bowl  of  his  pipe.  "  I  reckon 
seafarin'  men  don't  ought  ter  have  no  truck  with 
wives." 

"  Thet's  right  'nuff.  Job,  fer  yew.     Each  man  ter 

'is  taste.     I  wer'  tur'ble  fond  uv  M'ria "  he  broke 

off  short,  and  continued  to  stare  out  over  the  sea. 

"  I've  alius  thought  I'd  like  ter  settle  down  on  er 
farm  o'  me  own.  I  guess  the  dollars  I've  arned  '11 
do  the  trick,"  said  Job. 

Zeph  made  no  reply,  and,  for  a  time,  they  sat  there, 
neither  speaking. 

Presently,  from  the  door  of  the  fo'cas'le,  on  the  star- 
board side,  two  figures  emerged.  They  were  also  of 
the  "  watch  below."  If  anything,  they  seemed  older 
than  the  rest  of  those  about  the  decks  ;  their  beards, 
white,  save  for  the  stain  of  tobacco  juice,  came  nearly 
to  their  waists.  For  the  rest,  they  had  been  big  vigorous 
men  ;  but  were  now  sorely  bent  by  the  burden  of  their 
years.  They  came  aft,  walking  slowly.  As  they  came 
opposite  to  the  main  hatch,  Job  looked  up  and  spoke  — 

"  Say,  Nehemiah,  thar's  Zeph  here's  been  thinkin' 
'bout  M'ria,  an'  I  ain't  bin  able  ter  peek  'im  up  nohow." 

The  smaller  of  the  two  newcomers  shook  his  head 
slowly. 

"  We  hev  oor  trubbles,"  he  said,  "  We  hev  oor 
trubbles.     I  hed  mine  w'en  I  lost  my  datter's  gell. 


240  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

I  wor  powerful  took  \vi'  thet  gell,  she  wor  that  win- 
some ;  but  it  wor  hke  ter  be — it  wor  hke  ter  be,  an' 
Zeph's  hed  his  trubble  sence  then." 

"  M'ria  wer'  a  good  wife  ter  me,  she  wer',"  said 
Zeph,  speaking  slowly.  "  An'  now  th'  old  'ooker's 
goin',  I'm  feared  as  I'll  find  it  mighty  lonesome  ashore 
•  yon,"  and  he  waved  his  hand,  as  though  suggesting 
vaguely  that  the  shore  lay  anywhere  beyond  the  star- 
board rail. 

"  Ay,"  remarked  the  second  of  the  newcomers. 
"  It's  er  weary  thing  tu  me  as  th'  old  packet's  goin'. 
Six  and  sixty  year  hev  I  sailed  in  her.  Six  and  sixty 
year  \  "  He  nodded  his  head,  mournfully,  and  struck 
a  match  with  shak}'  hands. 

"  It's  like  ter  be,"  said  the  smaller  man.  "  It's 
like  ter  be." 

And,  with  that,  he  and  his  companion  moved  over 
to  the  spar  that  lay  along  under  the  starboard  bulwarks, 
and  there  seated  themselves,  to  smoke  and  meditate. 


Skipper  Abe,  and  Josh  Matthews,  the  First  Mate, 
were  standing  together  beside  the  rail  which  ran  across 
the  break  of  the  poop.  Like  the  rest  of  the  men  of  the 
Shamraken,  their  age  had  come  upon  them,  and  the 
frost  of  eternity  had  touched  their  beards  and 
hair. 

Skipper  Abe  was  speaking  : — 

"  It's  harder  'n  I'd  thought,"  he  said,  and  looked 
away  from  the  Mate,  staring  hard  along  the  worn, 
white-scoured  decks. 

"  Dunno  w'at  I'll  du,  Abe,  w'en  she's  gone,"  returned 
the  old  Mate.  "  She's  been  a  'ome  fer  us  these  sixty 
years  an'  more."     He  knocked  out  the  old  tobacco 


The  Shamraken  Homeward -Bounder    241 

from  his  pipe,  as  he  spoke,  and  began  to  cut  a  bowl- 
full  of  fresh. 

"  It's  them  durned  freights  !  "  exclaimed  th'e  Skipper. 
"  We're  jest  losin'  dollars  every  trip.  It's  them  steam 
packets  as  hes  knocked  Us  out." 

He  sighed  wearily,  and  bit  tenderly  at  his  plug. 

"She's  been  a  mighty  comfertable  ship,"  muttered 
Josh,  in  soliloquy.  "  An'  sence  thet  b'y  o'  mine  went, 
I  sumhow  thinks  less  o'  goin'  ashore  'n  I  used  ter.  I 
ain't  no  folk  left  on  all  thar  'arth." 

He  came  to  an  end,  and  began  with  his  old  trembling 
fingers  to  fill  his  pipe. 

Skipper  Abe  said  nothing.  He  appeared  to  be 
occupied  with  his  own  thoughts.  He  was  leaning  over 
the  rail  across  the  break  of  the  poop,  and  chewing 
steadily.  Presently,  he  straightened  himself  up  and 
walked  over  to  leeward.  He  expectorated,  after  which 
he  stood  there  for  a  few  moments,  taking  a  short  look 
round — the  result  of  half  a  century  of  habit.  Abruptly, 
he  sung  out  to  the  Mate.   ... 

"  Wat  d'yer  make  outer  it  ?  "  he  queried,  after  they 
had  stood  awhile,  peering. 

"  Dunno,  Abe,  less'n  it's  some  sort  o'  mist,  riz  up 
by  ther  'eat." 

Skipper  Abe  shook  his  head  ;  but  having  nothing 
better  to  suggest,  held  his  peace  for  awhile. 

Presently,  Josh  spoke  again  : — 

"  Mighty  cur'us,  Abe.     These  are  strange  parts." 

Skipper  Abe  nodded  his  assent,  and  continued  to 
stare  at  that  which  had  come  into  sight  upon  the 
lee  bow.  To  them,  as  they  looked,  it  seemed  that 
a  vast  wall  of  rose-coloured  mist  was  rising  towards 
the  zenith.  It  showed  nearly  ahead,  and  at  first 
had  seemed  no  more  than  a  bright  cloud  upon  the 
horizon  ;    but  already  had  reached  a  great  way  into 


242  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

the  air,  and  the  upper  edge  had  taken  on  wondrous 
flame-tints. 

"  It's  powerful  nice-lookin',''  said  Josh.  "  I've 
alius  'card  as  things  was  diff'rent  out  'n  these  parts." 

Presently,  as  the  Shamraken  drew  near  to  the 
mist,  it  appeared  to  those  aboard  that  it  filled  all 
the  sky  ahead  of  them,  being  spread  out  now  far  on 
either  bow.  And  so  in  a  while  they  entered  into  it, 
and,  at  once,  the  aspect  of  all  things  was  changed. 
.  .  .  The  mist,  in  great  rosy  wreaths,  floated  all 
about  them,  seeming  to  soften  and  beautify  every 
rope  and  spar,  so  that  the  old  ship  had  become,  as 
it  were,  a  fairy  craft  in  an  unknown  world. 

"  Never  seen  nothin'  like  it,  Abe— nothin'  !  "  said 
Josh.  "Ey!  but  it's  fine!  It's  fine!  Like  's  ef 
we'd  run  inter  ther  sunset." 

"  I'm  mazed,  just  mazed  !  "  exclaimed  Skipper 
Abe,  "  but  I'm  'gree'ble  as  it's  purty,  mighty  purty." 

For  a  further  while,  the  two  old  fellows  stood 
without  speech,  just  gazing  and  gazing.  With  their 
entering  into  the  mist,  they  had  come  into  a  greater 
quietness  than  had  been  theirs  out  upon  the  open 
sea.  It  was  as  though  the  mist  muffled  and  toned 
down  the  creak,  creak,  of  the  spars  and  gear  ;  and 
the  big,  foamless  seas  that  rolled  past  them,  seemed 
to  have  lost  something  of  their  harsh  whispering 
roar  of  greeting.  — 

"  Sort  o'  unarthly,  Abe,"  said  Josh,  later,  and 
speaking  but  little  above  a  whisper.  "  Like  as  ef 
yew  was  in  church." 

"Ay,"  replied  Skipper  Abe.  "It  don't  seem 
nat'rel." 

"  Shouldn't  think  as  'eaven  was  all  thet  diff'rent," 
whispered  Josh.  And  Skipper  Abe  said  nothing  in 
contradiction. 


The  Shamraken  Homeward -Bounder    243 


Sometime  later,  the  wind  began  to  fail,  and  it  was 
decided  that,  when  eight-bells  was  struck,  all  hands 
should  set  the  main  t'gallant.  Presently,  Nuzzie 
having  been  called  (for  he  was  the  only  one  aboard 
who  had  turned  in)  eight  bells  went,  and  all  hands 
put  aside  their  pipes,  and  prepared  to  tail  on  to  the 
ha'lyards  ;  yet  no  one  of  them  made  to  go  up  to 
loose  the  sail.  That  was  the  b'y's  job,  and  Nuzzie 
was  a  little  late  in  coming  out  on  deck.  When,  in 
a  minute,  he  appeared,  Skipper  Abe  spoke  sternly  to 
him. 

"  Up  now,  b'y,  an'  loose  thet  sail.  D'y  think  to 
let  er  grown  man  dew  suchlike  work  !  Shame  on 
yew  !  " 

And  Nuzzie,  the  grey-bearded  "  b'y  "  of  five  and 
fifty  years,  went  aloft  humbly,  as  he  was  bidden. 

Five  minutes  later,  he  sung  out  that  all  was  ready 
for  hoisting,  and  the  string  of  ancient  Ones  took  a 
strain  on  the  ha'lyards.  Then  Nehemiah,  being  the 
chaunty  man,  struck  up  in  his  shrill  quaver  : — 

"  Thar  wor  an  ole  farmer  in  Yorkshire  did  dwell." 

And  the  shrill  piping  of  the  ancient  throats  took 
up  the  refrain  : — 

"  Wi'  me  ay,  ay.  blow  thar  Ian'  down." 

Nehemiah  caught  up  the  story  : — 

"  'e  'ad  'n  ole  wife,  'n  'e  wished  'er  in  'ell." 

"  Give  us  some  time  ter  blow  thar  Ian'  down," 
came  the  quavering  chorus  of  old  voices. 

"  O,  thar  divvel  come  to  'im  one  day  at  thar 
plough,"  continued  old  Nehemiah  ;  and  the  crowd 
of  ancients  followed  up  with  the  refrain  : — "  Wi'  me 
ay.  ay,  blow  thar  Ian'  down." 


244  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  I've  corned  fer  th'  ole  woman,  I  mun  'ave  'er 
now,"  sang  Nehemiah.  And  again  the  refrain : — 
"  Give  us  some  time  ter  blow  thar  Ian'  down,"  shrilled 
out. 

And  so  on  to  the  last  couple  of  stanzas.  And  all 
about  them,  as  they  chaunteyed,  was  that  extra- 
ordinary, rose-tinted  mist  ;  which,  above,  blent  into 
a  marvellous  radiance  of  Hame-colour,  as  though, 
just  a  little  higher  than  their  mastheads,  the  sky 
was  one  red  ocean  of  silent  fire. 

"  Thar  wor  three  leetle  divvels  chained  up  ter 
thar  wall,"  sang  Nehemiah,  shrilly. 

"  Wi'  me  ay,  ay,  blow  thar  Ian'  down,"  came  the 
piping  chorus. 

"  She  tuk  off  'er  clog,  'n  she  walloped  'em  all," 
chaunted  old  Nehemiah,  and  again  followed  the 
wheezy,  age-old  refrain. 

"  These  three  leetle  divvels  fer  marcy  did  bawl," 
quavered  Nehemiah,  cocking  one  eye  upward  to  see 
whether  the  yard  was  nearly  mast-headed. 

"  Wi'  me  ay,  ay,  blow  thar  Ian'  down,"  came  the 
chorus. 

"  Chuck  out  this  ole  hag,  or  she'll  mur " 

"  Belay,"  sung  out  Josh,  cutting  across  the  old 
sea  song,  with  the  sharp  command.  The  chaunty 
had  ceased  with  the  first  note  of  the  Mate's  voice, 
and  a  couple  of  minutes  later,  the  ropes  were  coiled 
up,  and  the  old  fellows  back  to  their  occupations. 

It  is  true  that  eight  bells  had  gone,  and  that  the 
watch  was  supposed  to  be  changed ;  and  changed 
it  was,  so  far  as  the  wheel  and  look-out  were  con- 
cerned ;  but  otherwise  little  enough  difference  did 
it  make  to  those  sleep-proof  ancients.  The  only 
change  visible  in  the  men  about  the  deck,  was  that 
those  who  had  previousl}^  only  smoked,  now  smoked 


The  Shamraken  Homeward -Bounder    245 

and  worked  ;  while  those  who  had  hitherto  worked 
and  smoked,  now  only  smoked.  Thus  matters  went 
on  in  all  amity  ;  while  the  old  Shamraken  passed 
onward  like  a  rose-tinted  shadow  through  the  shining 
mist,  and  only  the  great,  silent,  lazy  seas  that  came 
at  her,  out  from  the  enshrouding  redness,  seemed 
aware  that  she  was  anything  more  than  the  shadow 
she  appeared. 

Presently,  Zeph  sung  out  to  Nuzzie  to  get  their 
tea  from  the  galley,  and  so,  in  a  little,  the  watch  below 
were  making  their  evening  meal.  They  ate  it  as 
they  sat  upon  the  hatch  or  spar,  as  the  chance  might 
be  ;  and,  as  they  ate,  they  talked  with  their  mates, 
of  the  watch  on  deck,  upon  the  matter  of  the  shining 
mist  into  which  they  had  plunged.  It  was  obvious, 
from  their  talk,  that  the  extraordinary  phenomenon 
had  impressed  them  vastly,  and  all  the  superstition 
in  them  seemed  to  have  been  waked  to  fuller  life. 
Zeph,  indeed,  made  no  bones  of  declaring  his  belief 
that  they  were  nigh  to  something  more  than  earthly. 
He  said  that  he  had  a  feeling  that  "  M'ria  "  was 
somewhere  near  to  him. 

"  Meanin'  ter  say  as  we've  come  purty  near  ter 
'eaven  ?  "  said  Nehemiah,  who  was  busy  thrumming 
a  paunch  mat,  for  chafing  gear. 

"  Dunno,"  replied  Zeph  ;  "  but  " — making  a  gesture 
towards  the  hidden  sky — "  yew'll  'low  as  it's  mighty 
wonderful,  'n  I  guess  ef  'tis  'eaven,  thar's  some  uv 
us  as  is  growin'  powerful  wearied  uv  'arth.  I  guess 
I'm  feelin'  peeky  fer  a  sight  uv  M'ria." 

Nehemiah  nodded  his  head  slowly,  and  the  nod 
seemed  to  run  round  the  group  of  white-haired  ancients. 

"  Reckon  my  datter's  gell  '11  be  thar,"  he  said, 
after  a  space  of  pondering.  "  Be  s'prisin'  ef  she  'n 
M'ria  'd  made  et  up  ter  know  one  anuther." 


246  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  M'ria  wer'  great  on  makin'  friends,"  remarked 
Zeph,  meditatively,  "  an  '  gells  wus  awful  friendly  wi' 
'er.     Seemed  as  she  hed  er  power  thet  way." 

"  I  never  'ad  no  wife,"  said  Job,  at  this  point, 
somewhat  irrelevantly.  It  was  a  fact  of  which  he 
was  proud,  and  he  made  a  frequent  boast  of  it. 

"  Thet's  naught  ter  cocker  thysel  on,  lad,"  ex- 
claimed one  of  the  white-beards,  who,  until  this  time, 
had  been  silent.  "  Thou'lt  find  less  folk  in  heaven 
t'  greet  thee." 

"  Thet's  trewth,  sure  'nuff,  Jock,"  assented 
Nehemiah,  and  fixed  a  stern  look  on  Job  ;  whereat 
Job  retired  into  silence. 

Presently,  at  three  bells.  Josh  came  along  and  told 
them  to  put  away  their  work  for  the  day. 


5 

The  second  dog  watch  came,  and  Nehemiah  and 
the  rest  of  his  side,  made  their  tea  out  upon  the 
main  hatch,  along  with  their  mates.  When  this  was 
finished,  as  though  by  common  agreement,  they 
went  every  one  and  sat  themselves  upon  the  pinrail 
running  along  under  the  t 'gallant  bulwarks  ;  there, 
with  their  elbows  upon  the  rail,  they  faced  outward 
to  gaze  their  full  at  the  mystery  of  colour  which 
had  wrapped  them  about.  From  time  to  time,  a  pipe 
would  be  removed,  and  some  slowly  evolved  thought 
given  an  utterance. 

Eight  bells  came  and  went  ;  but,  save  for  the 
changing  of  the  wheel  and  look-out,  none  moved  from 
his  place. 

Nine  o'clock,  and  the  night  came  down  upon  the 
sea  ;  but  to  tiiose  within  the  mist,  the  only  result 
was  a  deepening  of  the  rose  colour  into  an  intense 


The  Shamraken  Homeward -Bounder    247 

red,  which  seemed  to  shine  with  a  light  of  its  own 
creating.  Above  them,  the  unseen  sky  seemed  to 
be  one  vast  blaze  of  silent,  blood-tinted  flame. 

"  Filler  uv  cloud  by  day,  'n  er  piller  uv  fire  by 
night,"  muttered  Zeph  to  Nehemiah,  who  crouched 
near. 

"  I  reckon's  them's  Bible  words,"  said  Nehemiah. 

"  Dunno,"  replied  Zeph  ;  "  but  them's  thar  very 
words  as  I  heerd  passon  Myles  a  sayin'  w'en  thar 
timber  wor  afire  down  our  way.  'Twer'  mostly  smoke 
'n  daylight ;  but  et  tamed  ter  'n  etarnal  fire  w'en 
thar  night  comed." 

At  four  bells,  the  wheel  and  look-out  were  relieved, 
and  a  little  later,  Josh  and  Skipper  Abe  came  down 
on  to  the  main  deck. 

"  Tur'ble  queer,"  said  Skipper  Abe,  with  an  affecta- 
tion of  indifference. 

"  Aye,  'tes,  sure,"  said  Nehemiah. 

And  after  that,  the  two  old  men  sat  among  the 
others,  and  watched. 

At  five  bells,  half-past  ten,  there  was  a  murmur 
from  those  who  sat  nearest  to  the  bows,  and  a  cry 
from  the  man  on  the  look-out.  At  that,  the  atten- 
tion of  all  was  turned  to  a  point  nearly  right  ahead. 
At  this  particular  spot,  the  mist  seemed  to  be  glow- 
ing with  a  curious,  unearthly  red  brilliance  ;  and,  a 
minute  later,  there  burst  upon  their  vision  a  vast 
arch,  formed  of  blazing  red  clouds. 
.  At  the  sight,  each  and  every  one  cried  out  their 
amazement,  and  immediately  began  to  run  towards 
the  fo'cas'le  head.  Here  they  congregated  in  a 
clump,  the  Skipper  and  the  Male  among  them.  The 
arch  appeared  now  to  extend  its  arc  far  beyond  either 
bow,  so  that  the  ship  was  heading  to  pass  right  beneath 
it. 


248  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

"  'Tis  'eaven  fer  sure,"  murmured  Josh  to  himself ; 
but  Zeph  heard  him. 

"  Reckon  's  them's  ther  Gates  uv  Glory  thet  M'ria 
wus  alius  talkin'  'bout,"  he  rephed. 

"  Guess  I'll  see  thet  b'y  er  mine  in  er  little," 
muttered  Josh,  and  he  craned  forward,  his  eyes  very 
bright  and  eager. 

All  about  the  ship  was  a  great  quietness.  The 
wind  was  no  more  now  than  a  light  steady  breath 
upon  the  port  quarter  ;  but  from  right  ahead,  as 
though  issuing  from  the  mouth  of  the  radiant  arch, 
the  long-backed,  foamless  seas  rolled  up,  black  and 
oily. 

Suddenly,  amid  the  silence,  there  came  a  low 
musical  note,  rising  and  falling  like  the  moan  of  a 
distant  aeolian  harp.  The  sound  appeared  to  come 
from  the  direction  of  the  arch,  and  the  surrounding 
mist  seemed  to  catch  it  up  and  send  it  sobbing  and 
sobbing  in  low  echoes  away  into  the  redness  far  beyond 
sight. 

"  They'm  singin',"  cried  Zeph.  "M'ria  wer'  alius 
tur'ble  fond  uv  singin'.     Hark  ter " 

"  'Sh  !  "  interrupted  Josh.  "  Thet's  my  b'y  !  " 
His  shrill  old  voice  had  risen  almost  to  a  scream. 

"  It's  wunnerful — wunnerful ;  just  mazin'  !  "  ex- 
claimed Skipper  Abe. 

Zeph  had  gone  a  little  forrard  of  the  crowd.  He 
was  shading  his  eyes  with  his  hands,  and  staring 
intently,  his  expression  denoting  the  most  intense 
excitement. 

"  B'lieve  I  see  'er.  B'lieve  I  see  'er,"  he  was 
muttering  to  himself,  over  and  over  again. 

Behind  him,  two  of  the  old  men  were  steadying 
Nehemiah,  who  felt,  as  he  put  it,  "  a  bit  mazy  at  thar 
thought  o'  seein'  thet  gell." 


The  Shamraken  Homeward -Bounder    249 

Away  aft,  Nuzzie,  the  "  b'y,"  was  at  the  wheel. 
He  had  heard  the  moaning  ;  but,  being  no  more  than 
a  boy,  it  must  be  supposed  that  he  knew  nothing  of 
the  nearness  of  the  next  world,  which  was  so  evident 
to  the  men,  his  masters. 

A  matter  of  some  minutes  passed,  and  Job,  who 
had  in  mind  that  farm  upon  which  he  had  set  his 
heart,  ventured  to  suggest  that  heaven  was  less  near 
than  his  mates  supposed ;  but  no  one  seemed  to 
hear  him,  and  he  subsided  into  silence. 

It  was  the  better  part  of  an  hour  later,  and  near 
to  midnight,  when  a  murmur  among  the  watchers 
announced  that  a  fresh  matter  had  come  to  sight. 
They  were  yet  a  great  way  off  from  the  arch  ;  but 
still  the  thing  showed  clearly — a  prodigious  "umbel, 
of  a  deep,  burning  red  ;  but  the  crest  of  it  was  black, 
save  for  the  very  apex  which  shone  with  an  angry 
red  glitter. 

"  Thar  Throne  uv  God  !  "  cried  out  Zeph,  in  a 
loud  voice,  and  went  down  upon  his  knees.  The 
rest  of  the  old  men  followed  his  example,  and  even 
old  Nehemiah  made  a  great  effort  to  get  to  that 
position. 

"  Simly  we'm  a'most  'n  'eaven,"  he  muttered 
huskily. 

Skipper  Abe  got  to  his  feet,  with  an  abrupt  move- 
ment. He  had  never  heard  of  that  extraordinary 
electrical  phenomenon,  seen  once  perhaps  in  a  hundred 
years — the  "  Fiery  Tempest  "  which  precedes  certain 
great  Cyclonic  Storms  ;  but  his  experienced  eye  had 
suddenly  discovered  that  the  red-shining  umbel  was 
truly  a  low,  whirling  water-hill,  reflecting  the  red 
hght.  He  had  no  theoretical  knowledge  to  tell  him 
that  the  thing  was  produced  by  an  enonnous  air- 
vortice  ;    but  he  had  often  seen  a  water-spout  form. 


250  Men  of  the  Deep  Waters 

Yet,  he  was  still  undecided.  It  was  all  so  beyond 
him  ;  though,  certainly,  that  monstrous  gyrating 
hill  of  water,  sending  out  a  reflected  glitter  of  burning 
red,  appealed  to  him  as  having  no  place  in  his  ideas 
of  Heaven.  And  then,  even  as  he  hesitated,  came 
the  first,  wild-beast  bellow  of  the  coming  Cyclone. 
As  the  sound  smote  upon  their  ears,  the  old  men 
looked  at  one  another  with  bewildered,  frightened 
eyes. 

"  Reck'n  thet's  God  speakin',"  whispered  Zeph. 
"  Guess  we're  on'y  mis'rable  sinners." 

The  next  instant,  the  breath  of  the  Cyclone  was 
in  their  throats,  and  the  Shamraken,  homeward- 
bounder,  passed  in  through  the  everlasting  portals. 


GREY   SEAS   ARE  DREAMING  OF   MY   DEATH 

I  know  grey  seas  are  dreaming  of  my  death, 

Out  on  grey  plains  where  foam  is  lost  in  sleep. 

Where  one  damp  wind  wails  on  continually. 

And  no  life  lives  in  the  forgotten  air. 

Ayhie  !     Yoi  !    but  oh  1    the  mood  doth  change. 

The  sea  doth  lift  me  high  on  living  mountains  ; 

As  a  mother  guards  her  babe 

So  the  fierce  hills  round  me  range, 

And  a  Voice  goes  on  and  on  in  mighty  laughter — 

The  joyous  call  of  Strength  which  doth  enguard  me. 

Ayhie  !     Yoi  !     All  the  splendour  of  the  sea 

Doth  guard  me  from  the  slaughter. 

Oh  I     Men  in  weary  lands 

Lift  up  your  hearts  and  hands, 

And  weep  ye  are  not  me. 

Child  of  all  the  sea 

Out  upon  the  foam  among  the  fountains 

And  the  glory 

And  the  magic  of  this  water  world 

Where  in  childhood  I  was  hurled. 

Weep,  for  I  am  dying  in  my  glory  ; 

And  the  foam  swings  round  and  sings. 

And  the  great  seas  chaunt ;    and  the  whitened  hills  are  falling  ; 

And  I  am  dying  in  my  glory,  dying 

Dying,  dying,  dying • 


PRINTED   AT 

THE   CHAPEL   RIVER   PRESS, 

KINGSTON,    SURREY.
